 DOI: 10.1039/D0TC05010E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 957-966


M.
Dehghanipour
,

A.
Behjat
* and 

H.
Amrollahi Bioki


Department of Physics, Faculty of Science, Yazd University, Yazd, Iran. E-mail: abehjat@yazd.ac.ir

Photonics Research Group, Yazd University, Yazd, Iran

Received
22nd October 2020
, Accepted 1st December 2020
First published on 8th December 2020
Perovskite solar cells (PSCs), with their low cost and simple fabrication, have emerged as promising devices to solve global warming issues. In this study, tetrabutylammonium tetrafluoroborate (TBABF4) was used as a passivator to boost the performance and the stability of the fabricated PSCs. Through TBABF4 post-treatment, the perovskite film's grain boundaries were passivated, which caused a reduction of charge traps on the surface of the perovskite layer and served as interfacial engineering at the perovskite/hole transport layer (HTL) interface. It was found that TBABF4 can act as a source of TBA+ cations and cause the formation of a 2D/3D heterostructure layer, which increases the stability of PSCs. Indeed, the 2D/3D structure derived from TBABF4 solution plays the role of a shield layer to protect the surface of the perovskite layer from degradation and facilitates charge transport processes. The post-treatment of perovskite films is, thus, introduced as an approach to address both the stability and the performance of PSCs and as a step forward to commercialize PSCs.

In recent years, perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have emerged as a promising application to meet the energy demands of the world. The unique optoelectronic properties of perovskite materials and their low-cost fabrication have universally promoted them as appropriate candidates for producing solar cells. In the past decade, the goal of many researchers was the improvement of the photovoltaic (PV) performance of PSCs by suppressing charge recombination in the perovskite layers or at the perovskite/charge transport layers interfaces, tailoring the composition of the perovskite layers, passivating the grain boundaries and reducing the surface defects of perovskite films.

Perovskite materials are known to have a general ABX3 formula, wherein A is an organic cation (MA+(CH3NH2+), FA+(CH(NH2)2+)) or an inorganic cation (Cs+, Rb+) at the hexahedral vertices, B is a metal cation (Pb2+, Sn2+, Ge2+) in the center, and X is a halide anion (Cl−, Br−, I−, or SCN−) which coordinates the B cations. Among perovskite materials, MAPbI3 with a band gap of ≈1.55 eV is the most extensively used material in PSCs. The maximum PCE reported for MAPbI3-based PSCs is 21.2%, obtained through the modification of the electron transporting layers (ETLs). FAPbI3 is another perovskite material widely used as a light-harvesting layer in PSCs. Its desirability is due to the lower band gap of about ≈1.43 eV. This material has two perovskite phases, known as α and δ phases. The black α-phase of FAPbI3 perovskite is useful for PV application, while its yellow δ-phase, known as the non-perovskite phase, is not favorable. The partial substitution of Cs+, Rb+, and MA+ with FA+ has been introduced as an effective approach to stabilize the photoactive α-phase of FAPbI3 perovskite. A PCE of 23.4% was reported for FAPbI3-based PSCs. It was obtained by the incorporation of methylammonium chloride (MACl) into a FAPbI3 precursor solution.
Both pure MAPbI3 and FAPbI3 PSCs have achieved high PCE values, but they suffer from low intrinsic stability. The low stability disadvantage of PSCs should be addressed, and further efforts should be made to industrialize PSCs. Different ISOS standards, such as, dark storage (ISOS-D), thermal cycling (ISOS-T), and light-soaking (ISOS-L) have been considered to study the stability issue of PSCs. Saliba et al. showed that adding a small amount of Cs+ to the FA/MA perovskite would significantly improve the thermal and operational stability of PSCs. Afterwards, the A-site cation engineering of perovskite materials was developed for PSC stabilization. Researchers showed that adding Rb+, K+, or Gu+ to triple-cation Cs/FA/MA could further boost the PV performance and the stability of Cs/FA/MA PSCs.
Recently, the dimensional engineering of perovskite materials to form 2D/3D bi-layered structures on the top of 3D perovskites has served as a most promising approach to improving the efficiency and stability of PSCs. Hu et al., for the first time, combined 2D perovskite (PEA)2(MA)4Pb5I16 with 3D perovskite MAPbI3 to form a 2D/3D heterostructure. They showed that the 2D/3D approach could boost the performance and stability of 3D PSCs. Niu et al. compared different spacer ligands such as FBA, FPEA, BA and PEA to fabricate 2D perovskite (L)2(FA)n−1PbnI3n+1 (L refer to spacer ligands). They used FAPbI3 in 3D perovskite solar cells and deposited different 2D perovskites on the top of it. They also showed that FPEA-based 2D/3D PSCs have higher stability than other spacers. Yao et al. employed a 2D/3D bi-layered structure to improve both the efficiency and the stability of triple-cation PSCs. They incorporated n-propylammonium iodide (PAI) in the 3D perovskite layer.
Considering the above discussion, this research aims to fabricate highly stable and efficient PSCs. For this purpose, tetrabutylammonium tetrafluoroborate (TBABF4) is introduced as a source of TBA+ 2D cation for the post-treatment of a triple-cation Cs/FA/MA perovskite layer and the formation of a 2D/3D heterostructure layer. It has been found that TBABF4 can passivate the grain boundaries of perovskite layers and subsequently improve the PV performance of PSCs. The results show that, through TBABF4 post-treatment, surface defects and non-radiative charge recombination are decreased. Through the post-treatment approach practiced in this study, a considerable PCE of 17.02% is achieved, which is higher than that of 14.01% for control devices. Additionally, it has been observed that TBABF4-based PSCs are more resistant to heat and humidity than control devices. Overall, the results prove that TBABF4 post-treatment is a trustworthy approach for boosting the PCE and stability of PSCs through passivating the grain boundaries and reducing the trap-state density of perovskite films.

In this study, the PV properties and the stability of triple-cation PSCs were improved through the post-treatment of perovskite films with a TBABF4 solution. To this end, first, the effects of TBABF4 concentration and the post-annealing temperature of the treated perovskite film on its properties were studied to optimize the approach. Then, PSCs were fabricated via a two-step sequential deposition method (to find more details, see the Experimental section in the ESI). Fig. 1 presents a schematic diagram for the fabrication of PSCs without and with TBABF4 post-treatment (i.e., control devices and treated devices respectively).



Fig. 2a shows the UV-vis absorption spectra of the perovskite films treated with different concentrations of the TBABF4 solution. As it was observed, an increase in the concentration of the TBABF4 solution to 4 mg ml−1 would lead to a remarkable increase in the absorbance capacity of the corresponding perovskite film within the visible range. Further increase in the TBABF4 concentration, however, would lead to the reduction of the absorbance of the perovskite film step by step. Fig. 2b shows the UV-vis absorbance spectra of the perovskite film treated with 4 mg ml−1 of TBABF4 solution, followed by different post-annealing temperatures. From these spectra, it can be found that the post-annealing temperature of the treated film affected the optical properties of the perovskite film. As the results showed, the absorbance of the perovskite film was improved when the temperature of 70 °C was selected for the post-annealing process of the treated perovskite film. Also, from the absorbance spectra of the perovskite films with and without the post-treatment step, it is clear that TBABF4 treatment did not change the edge-absorption position of the perovskite film. In the literature, high absorbance by PSCs is usually attributed to the enlarged grain size of the perovskite, but there were no enlarged grains observed in the present study (Fig. 3). The question is, thus, why did the absorbance of the treated perovskite film increase? As deduced, the lower absorbance in the untreated perovskite film was due to the non-perovskite phase of FAPbI3 (δ-FAPbI3), which vanished after the post-treatment of the perovskite (Fig. 5a).

For a more profound study of the role of concentration and post-annealing temperature in the TBABF4 post-treatment approach, the surface morphology of different perovskite films was examined through top-view SEM images (Fig. 3). As it was found, at the annealing temperature of 100 °C for treated perovskite films by increasing the concentration of TBABF4 solution, the micromorphology of the corresponding perovskite film would change. In the case of the sample treated with a concentration of 4 mg ml−1, compared to other solution concentrations, a desirable film could be achieved for PV applications. As another observation, when the post-annealing temperature of the treated perovskite film increased from 70 °C (Fig. 3e) to 100 °C (Fig. 3b) and even to 130 °C (Fig. 3f), some wrinkles and pinholes appeared on the film, which would serve as centers for charge accumulation and were not favorable for PSCs. Fig. 3e clearly shows that, upon the TBABF4 post-treatment under the optimized conditions, i.e., 4 mg ml−1 solution of TBABF4 and a post-annealing temperature of 70 °C for the treated perovskite film, the grain boundaries (GBs) of the perovskite film were well passivated. This phenomenon led to a decrease of the trap density in the GBs, resulting in the decline of the monomolecular recombination and the improvement of the PV performance (Fig. 6). To support the results obtained from UV-vis and SEM measurements, HTL-free PSCs were fabricated with the TBABF4 post-treatment step. Then, the effects of the TBABF4 solution concentration and the post-annealing temperature of the treated perovskite films on the PV properties were carefully probed (for more details, see Fig. S1 and Table S1, ESI). The results shown in Fig. S1 (ESI) are in full agreement with the findings of this study.
To further study the effects of the TBABF4 additive on the morphology of the perovskite film, cross-sectional SEM and AFM were employed (Fig. 4). From the cross-sectional SEM images, it was found that the thickness of the mixed mp-TiO2/perovskite layer in both control and treated devices is about 500 nm. Besides, the root mean square (RMS) roughness of the perovskite film before and after treatment shows a reduction of 16.02 nm to 12.92 nm, indicating a better perovskite film with lower surface traps.
From here onwards, the fabricated perovskite films with and without optimized post-treatment step were labeled as ‘treated’ and ‘control’. In Fig. 5a, the XRD patterns of the control and the treated perovskite films are compared. The XRD characterizations show that, with the addition of the TBABF4 post-treatment step, the peak intensity of the perovskite layer in the orientation of (001), (111) and (002) clearly increased, resulting in improved perovskite crystallinity due to the perovskite treatment. This is consistent with the top-view SEM images (Fig. 3). As it can be seen in the XRD pattern of the control film, there are two PbI2 peaks at 12.56° and 38.56° as well as a light non-perovskite peak for the δ-FAPbI3 at 11.71°, none of which is desirable for PSCs. After the perovskite treatment with TBABF4, the PbI2 peaks were suppressed, and the δ-FAPbI3 peak completely vanished. Besides, in the XRD pattern of the treated perovskite film, a low-angle peak was observed at 7.28°, which might have belonged to the two-dimensional perovskite TBA2PbI4(BF4)4−x structure. As it was also observed, all the X-ray diffraction peaks of the treated perovskite film shifted toward lower angles, considering a slight expansion in the unit cell of the perovskite caused by the incorporation of larger TBA+ cations into the 3D perovskite crystal structure. For better insight, the (001) plane for the control and the treated films is presented in Fig. 5b. It can be concluded that the TBABF4 treatment caused the formation of a 2D/3D bi-layered structure on top of the 3D perovskite layer.
To further investigate the effect of TBABF4 post-treatment on the optical properties and the charge recombination processes of the perovskite films, steady-state photoluminescence (PL) measurements were conducted at the excitation wavelength of 405 nm. First, the PL spectra of the control and the treated perovskite films were measured on the FTO substrate (Fig. 5c). It was found that both perovskite films had a PL peak around 800 nm corresponding to the band gap of 1.55 eV. This was consistent with the previous reports for triple-cation perovskite solar cells. The PL intensity of the treated perovskite film was higher than that of the control perovskite film, which suggests the reduction of non-radiative recombination in the perovskite film due to the TBABF4 treatment. The suppressed non-radiative recombination in the treated perovskite layer also suggests surface defect passivation and GB passivation after the TBABF4 treatment (see Fig. 3).

To provide better insight, hole-only PSCs were fabricated with the configuration of FTO/PEDOT:PSS/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Au and the dark current–voltage (I–V) responses of the control and the treated hole-only devices were measured to calculate their trap density (Nt) (Fig. 7c and d). The Nt was determined as follows:

(1)
where
q is the electric charge, L (400 nm) is the thickness of the perovskite layer, εr is the relative dielectric constant of perovskite (εr = 47 for FAPbI3), ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, and VTFL is the trap-filled limit voltage. As it can be seen in Fig. 6, the VTFL values obtained for the control and the treated devices were 0.41 V and 0.3 V, respectively. The calculated hole trap density was also 2.83 × 1014 cm−3 for the control and 2.07 × 1014 cm−3 for the treated device, which was consistent with the higher PL peak intensity observed in the treated perovskite film (Fig. 5c). The inset of Fig. 5c shows the PL spectra of the control and the treated complete PSCs. It clearly shows a higher PL peak quenching in the treated PSCs, which implies the reduction of the charge recombination at the perovskite/HTL interface. The formation of a 2D/3D bi-layer due to the TBABF4 post-treatment approach facilitated the charge transfer process at the perovskite/HTL interface, and, as schematically shown in Fig. 7a, it blocked the charge recombination. This was consistent with the higher PL quenching observed in the treated devices (inset of Fig. 5c). This phenomenon explains the higher current-density in the treated PSCs than in the control PSCs (Fig. 6a). To provide evidence for this statement, the dark I–V responses of the control and the treated PSCs were measured (Fig. 7b). The dark current-density of the treated device was significantly lower than that of the control cells. This indicates that more photogenerated current would flow through the PSC to reduce direct shunting. It also suggests the suppressed charge recombination and leakage current in the treated PSCs.

The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the best-performing PSCs for the control and the treated devices are shown in Fig. 6a. The active area of all PSCs to record J–V curves was 8 mm2. The statistical PCE distribution of all the fabricated PSCs is presented in Fig. 6b, and all the other corresponding PV parameters are summarized in Table 1. A champion PCE of 14.01% was achieved for the control PSCs, with the open-circuit voltage (VOC), the short-circuit current density (JSC) and the fill factor (FF) of 0.96 V, 22.60 mA cm−2 and 64.5%, respectively. After the post-treatment step, a PCE of 17.02% was obtained with the VOC, JSC and FF of 0.99 V, 24.23 mA cm−2 and 71.2%, respectively. Besides, in Fig. 6d, the IPCE test was employed to show the JSC improvement. The obtained values of JSC from the IPCE spectra were 22.06 mA cm−2 and 23.40 mA cm−2 for the control and the treated PSCs, respectively, consistent with the average JSC value calculated from J–V curves (see Table 1). All the PV parameters of the treated devices were higher than those of the control devices. As earlier explained, the higher VOC obtained in the treated devices is due to the lower trap density in them and the reduced non-radiative recombination. Also, the higher JSC and FF for the treated devices are attributed to the suppressed charge recombination, blocked direct shunting, and suppressed non-perovskite δ-FAPbI3 phase caused by the formation of a 2D/3D bi-layered structure in the TBABF4 post-treatment step. In addition, the hysteresis phenomenon (HI (%) = ((PCEreverse − PCEforward)/PCEreverse) × 100%) of PSCs was studied as shown in Fig. 6c. It was found that in the treated PSCs, the hysteresis index (HI) value reduces to 5.5% from 12% of that of the control device. The lower HI in the treated PSCs may be due to the GB passivation of the perovskite layer (Fig. 3) and also the smoother perovskite layer (Fig. 4c and d), which reduces the non-radiative recombination, and facilitates charge transport processes at the perovskite/HTL interface.
Device

V
OC
 (V)

J
SC
 (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)

a 
V
OC: open-circuit voltage.
b 
J
SC: short-circuit current density.
c FF: fill factor.
d PCE: power conversion efficiency.

Control
Average
0.95
21.55
61.71
12.59
Best
0.96
22.60
64.50
14.01
Treated
Average
0.98
23.64
68.39
14.71
Best
0.99
24.23
71.20
17.02

As an important parameter, the stability of the PSCs was studied against humidity and heat. At first, the thermal stability (thermal cycling) of the control and the treated perovskite layers was monitored. For this purpose, the perovskite films were exposed to different temperatures of 85 °C, 100 °C, 120 °C, 140 °C and 160 °C. The perovskite films were held at each temperature for 30 minutes, and the UV-vis absorption spectra were measured. Then, the temperature was immediately increased for the next step. This process was repeated up to the temperature of 160 °C (see Fig. S2, ESI). There was a change observed in the edge-absorption (EDA) position of the control perovskite film when the temperature of the thermal stability test rose from 85 °C to 160 °C, suggesting a composition change in the control perovskite film. By contrast, no change was observed in the EDA position of the treated perovskite film. So, it can be deduced that the thermal stability of the treated PSCs is higher than that of the untreated PSCs.

To investigate the long-term humidity stability (ISOS-D protocols) of the control and the treated PSCs, four devices in each group were kept in a dry box with a humidity of <20% (Fig. 8e) and ambient air with a relative humidity of 20–45% (Fig. 8d). Fig. 8a shows the digital photographs of the control (top) and the treated (bottom) perovskite films during the stability test in ambient air. For both dry box and ambient air stability tests, the UV-vis absorbance spectra of the corresponding perovskite films were periodically measured (Fig. S3, ESI). After 1440 hours of storage inside the dry box, the treated PV devices retained about 90% of their initial efficiency, whereas a PCE loss of almost 30% occurred in the control devices. Also, in the case of the ambient air test, after 600 hours, the treated PSCs had better ambient air stability with a PCE loss of about 25%, as compared to the control PSCs which were degraded entirely during the ambient air test. The same trend was observed in the UV-vis absorbance spectra of the devices during the humidity tests (Fig. S3, ESI). The observed results on ambient air stability are supported by the static contact-angle measurements presented in Fig. 8b and c. As can be seen, the water droplet contact angle on the TBABF4 treated perovskite film is larger than that of the control film, indicating reduced hygroscopicity and improved water resistance in the treated films. The enhanced hydrophobicity behavior of the treated films is an important factor contributing to the improved stability of TBABF4-based PSCs. The stability test results bring one to the conviction that the stability improvement of treated PSCs is due to the formation of 2D/3D bi-layered and GB passivation, caused by the TBABF4 post-treatment approach. As reported by Castro-Méndez et al., the GBs in a perovskite layer are responsible for the unstable behavior of PSCs. A perovskite film in humidity undergoes a degradation process beginning from the surface, and the speed of degradation increases through GBs. GB passivation is, thus, introduced as an effective method to address the stability issue of PSCs.

In this study, triple-cation PSCs were fabricated, and their performance and stability were improved by using a TBABF4 salt solution for the post-treatment of the perovskite layer. The TBABF4 salt could serve as a source for the TBA+ cation to form a 2D/3D heterostructure layer on the top of a 3D perovskite layer. As it was found, TBABF4 treatment passivated the GBs and reduced the trap density at the perovskite/HTL interface, which improved the charge transport processes and reduced the charge recombination rate. There was also a shift to a lower angle in the XRD pattern of the treated perovskite film, which proved the formation of a 2D/3D structure. The results indicated that the presence of the 2D/3D layer on the top of the 3D perovskite film and the passivation of GBs were both the result of the TBABF4 post-treatment and the increased thermal and ambient air stability of PSCs. In brief, the TBABF4 post-treatment approach provides a simple way to enhance the PV parameters and the stability of PSCs.


There are no conflicts to declare.


The authors wish to thank the Iran National Science Foundation (INSF) for the financial support of this research (research proposal no. 96003879).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0tc05010e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021