 DOI: 10.1039/D1EE01463C
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 4599-4609


Donglin
Jia
,

Jingxuan
Chen
,

Xinyi
Mei
,

Wentao
Fan
,

Shuo
Luo
,

Mei
Yu
,

Jianhua
Liu
 and 

Xiaoliang
Zhang
*

School of Materials Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China. E-mail: Xiaoliang.zhang@buaa.edu.cn

Received
15th May 2021
, Accepted 6th July 2021
First published on 9th July 2021
Inorganic CsPbI3 perovskite quantum dots (PQDs) show high potential for photovoltaic applications. However, the surface matrix of the PQDs significantly suffers from deterioration during the purification process with antisolvent, significantly affecting their optoelectronic properties and stability. Herein, a “surface matrix curing” (SMC) strategy is introduced to restore the surface matrix of CsPbI3 PQDs. The PQD surface matrix with iodide vacancies was substantially restored using the nucleophilic substitution reaction of tert-butyl iodide (TBI) and nucleophile trioctylphosphine (TOP), which could produce sufficient iodide ions to fill in the iodide vacancies of the PQD surface matrix. With this strategy, the optoelectronic properties and stability of the PQDs were significantly improved. As a result, the PQD solar cell (PQDSC) yielded an improved power conversion efficiency of 16.21% (stabilized power output efficiency of 15.45%), which is the highest value among inorganic CsPbI3 PQDSCs. The improved photovoltaic performance in PQDSCs was attributed to significantly suppressed charge carrier recombination induced by the surface defects of the PQDs. This work provides important insights into the surface chemistry of PQDs and offers a new avenue to realize high-performing PQD optoelectronic devices.

Inorganic CsPbI3 perovskite quantum dots (PQDs) have high potential for photovoltaic applications due to their ideal bandgap energy, high defect tolerance and solution-processability. However, due to the ionic crystal characteristics of PQDs, the PQD surface matrix significantly suffers from deterioration during the purification process with antisolvent, significantly affecting its optoelectronic properties and stability. In this work, we successfully restored the PQD surface matrix using the unimolecular nucleophilic substitution (SN1) reaction of tert-butyl iodide (TBI) and nucleophile trioctylphosphine (TOP), which could introduce sufficient iodide ions to fill in the iodide vacancies of the PQD surface matrix. With this strategy, the optoelectronic properties and stability of the PQDs were significantly improved. As a result, the PQD solar cell (PQDSC) showed an improved power conversion efficiency of 16.21% (stabilized power output efficiency of 15.45%), which is the highest value among inorganic PQDSCs. The charge carrier dynamics within the PQDSCs were studied in-depth, which revealed that the trap-assisted charge carrier recombination was significantly diminished after restoring the PQD surface matrix, resulting in improved photovoltaic performance. This work provides a simple and facile way to improve the surface chemistry of PQDs to realize high-performing solar cells or other optoelectronic devices.


Inorganic CsPbX3 (X = Cl, Br or I) perovskite quantum dots (PQDs) have received considerable attention for optoelectronic applications, such as light-emitting diodes (LEDs), photodetectors, lasers and solar cells, due to their tunable bandgap energy (Eg), high defect tolerance, long fluorescence lifetime and facile synthesis process. Particularly, CsPbI3 PQDs have great potential for next-generation solar cells due to their ideal Eg, high light absorption coefficient and solution-processability. Importantly, compared with the bulk CsPbI3 perovskite, CsPbI3 PQDs possess better phase stability due to their controllable surface properties and surface strain caused by reducing the size of the perovskite. Since Swarnkar et al. reported α-CsPbI3 PQD solar cells (PQDSCs) with a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 10.77%, remarkable efforts, such as surface chemistry and composition engineering of PQDs, as well as device structure optimization of PQDSCs, were made to improve the photovoltaic performance and stability of PQDSCs. As such, the photovoltaic performance of CsPbI3 PQDSCs was significantly improved and high PCEs over 15% were obtained for all-inorganic PQDSCs.

High-quality CsPbI3 PQDs for photovoltaic applications were generally synthesized using a hot-injection method, and a large amount of antisolvent, such as methyl acetate (MeOAc), was utilized to separate and purify the PQDs from the reaction solution. Meanwhile, during the construction of PQDSCs, a PQD solid film was prepared using the layer-by-layer deposition approach, and the pristine PQDs capped with long-chain oleic acid/oleylamine (OA/OAm) ligands were treated with a short-ligand solution or MeOAc to replace the OA/OAm ligands, thereby enhancing the electronic coupling of the PQDs. Due to the ionic crystal characteristics of PQDs, the PQD surface matrix significantly suffers from deterioration during the antisolvent treatment, and surface defects were generally introduced at the PQD surface matrix, along with losing pristine OA/OAm ligands and thus forming iodide vacancies at the PQD surface matrix. These defects could accelerate nonradiative recombination and compromise the phase stability of the PQDs by offering access for moisture and oxygen attack. Therefore, during the deposition of PQD solid films, different molecules were explored as alternative ligands to passivate PQD surface defects and improve the electronic coupling of inter-PQDs, which in turn improved the phase stability of the PQDs and increased the charge carrier extraction of PQDSCs. However, very little attention was paid to diminish surface defects of PQDs before the preparation of PQD solid films, and these defects mainly resulted from the purification process using antisolvent MeOAc. Meanwhile, a deeper understanding of the surface properties of PQDs could provide more insights and guidance to improve the optoelectronic properties of PQDs for high-performing optoelectronic devices.
Herein, a “surface matrix curing” (SMC) strategy is introduced to adequately restore the surface matrix of CsPbI3 PQDs for high-performing solar cells. The PQD surface matrix with iodide vacancies produced during the purification process was effectively restored using a unimolecular nucleophilic substitution (SN1) reaction of tert-butyl iodide (TBI) and the nucleophile trioctylphosphine (TOP), which could introduce sufficient iodide ions to fill in the iodide vacancies of the PQD surface matrix. With this SMC strategy, the optoelectronic properties of the PQDs were significantly improved, and the nonradiative recombination induced by iodide vacancies was substantially diminished. As a result, the PQDSCs fabricated using the SMC-based PQDs yielded a high PCE of 16.21% (stabilized power output efficiency of 15.45%), which is the highest value among inorganic CsPbI3 PQDSCs. The charge carrier dynamics within the PQDSCs were studied in-depth, revealing that trap-assisted charge carrier recombination was significantly diminished after restoring the PQD surface matrix, resulting in improved photovoltaic performance. Finally, first-principles calculations were performed to fundamentally understand the SMC process of PQDs through the SN1 reaction and its effect on the surface properties of the PQDs.


Fig. 1a schematically presents the SMC treatment of CsPbI3 PQDs. The CsPbI3 PQDs were synthesized using the conventional hot-injection method and detailed information is described in the Experimental section in the ESI. The as-synthesized CsPbI3 PQDs capped with long-chain OA/OAm ligands were purified and separated from the reaction solution using MeOAc, which could wash away a large part of pristine OA/OAm ligands from the PQD surface, thus forming iodide vacancies at the PQD surface matrix. Such surface defects significantly deteriorate the optoelectronic properties and stability of the PQDs. To restore the massive iodide vacancies and obtain PQDs with high surface quality, various iodide sources (such as ionic or covalent reagents) could be used as potential candidates. However, because ionic iodide salts are mostly dissolved in strong polar solvents, it is very thorny to dissolve iodide salts in a non-polar solvent, such as hexane, which is required for the synthesis and stabilization of PQDs. In contrast, during the synthesis process of PQDs, covalent iodide sources with non-polar characteristics are more conducive to mixing and reacting with the PQDs. Meanwhile, the high strength of covalent C–I bonds of iodoalkanes generally makes the iodoalkane very inert, and therefore feasible strategies need to be taken to easily dissociate iodide ions from the iodoalkane. Herein, we used TBI as an effective iodine source for the SMC of PQDs because its central carbon has three alkyl substituents, which results in its corresponding carbocation showing lower energy, leading to easy stripping of iodide ions from the SN1 reaction. TOP was reported to be an efficient nucleophile and surfactant, which was utilized as an available nucleophile to substitute iodide ions of TBI.

For the SMC treatment of PQDs, we added TOP to a hexane solution containing 5% vol. of TBI, and used the mixed solution to dissolve the once-purified PQDs followed by carrying out subsequent secondary purification to obtain SMC-based PQDs. The detailed experiment is described in the Experimental section (ESI). During the SN1 reaction as shown in Scheme S1 (ESI), tert-butyltrioctylphosphonium cationic species ([TB–TOP]+) and iodide ions were massively generated, and thus sufficient iodide ions could be introduced onto the PQD surface matrix to restore the iodide vacancies.
The inset in Fig. 1b shows photographs of the TBI solution and the mixture of TBI and TOP (TBI·TOP) solution. The TBI solution shows a light brown color, which rapidly turned colorless after introducing TOP into the TBI solution. The change in the colors of the TBI and TBI·TOP solutions suggests that the SN1 reaction may happen, forming [TB–TOP]+ cationic species and free I−. To screen out the optimal TBI·TOP solution for the SMC of PQDs, fresh and aged hexane solutions of TBI·TOP with different ratios of TOP/TBI were prepared and investigated in-depth, and the results are summarized in Fig. S1 (ESI). We found that the fresh TBI·TOP solution with a TOP/TBI ratio of 1:500 was the most appropriate for the SMC of PQDs, and detailed discussions are given in Note S1 (ESI). Therefore, we adopted this solution as the main research object for the following investigations. Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopy measurements were carried out to study the SN1 reaction of TBI and TOP. As shown in the 31P NMR spectra in Fig. 1b, when a small amount of TOP is introduced into TBI (1:500), the characteristic peaks of free TOP completely disappeared and a new peak at ∼12.04 ppm is observed, corresponding to the feature of the [TB–TOP]+I− complex in an ionic form with a constitution of [C4P]+[Hal]−. The downward shift of the NMR signal to a lower frequency indicates a distinct decrease of electron density on the P atom, likely due to the donation of a lone-pair electron from the P atom to the tert-butyl group.

Fig. 1c shows the FT-IR spectra of the TBI, TOP and TBI·TOP solutions. The unique peaks at ∼1187 and ∼1272 cm−1 represent the C–P stretching of TOP. When the C atom of TBI binds to the P atom of TOP through the strong covalent bond in the [TB–TOP]+ complex, the peaks shift to higher wavenumbers of ∼1194 and ∼1275 cm−1, respectively, which resulted from the increased stretching vibration and decreased spatial symmetry of TOP after its interaction with the C atom of TBI. These results suggest that the SN1 reaction of TBI and TOP may start from the generation of iodide ions, which can be applied to restore iodide vacancies of the PQD surface matrix. After the SMC treatment, the PQDs show a more uniform cubic morphology and monodisperse distribution without agglomeration as shown in Fig. S2 (ESI).

Fig. 1d shows the light absorption and steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra of the pristine PQDs and the PQDs treated with TBI, TOP and TBI·TOP, and the insets present photographs of these PQD solutions. The pristine PQDs without any treatment were regarded as the control sample. No obvious difference in the light absorption edge and PL peak position is observed in these samples, indicating that the PQDs remain in a cubic crystal structure without any changes in the bandgap after the SMC treatment. However, the TBI·TOP-based PQDs show a somewhat smaller Stokes shift energy than that of the pristine PQDs (Fig. S3, ESI), revealing that the TBI·TOP treatment could optimize the crystal quality and thus decrease the surface defects of the PQDs. The difference in PL intensities was quantified by measuring the PL quantum yield (PLQY) as shown in Fig. 1e. After measuring multiple batches of samples, an average PLQY of ∼72.79% is obtained for the pristine PQDs, whereas the average PLQYs of the PQDs treated with TOP and TBI·TOP are significantly increased to ∼77.49% and ∼84.02%, respectively. The TBI·TOP-based PQDs possess the highest PL emission intensity, likely due to the decreased nonradiative recombination after the SMC treatment. The improved PL emission intensity of the TOP-based PQDs may be caused by TOP dissolving excessive components on the PQD surface, thus decreasing the surface defects of the PQDs. However, the average PLQY of the TBI-based PQDs is slightly lower than that of the pristine PQDs, which may be caused by the desorption of the weakly bound TBI molecules from the PQD surface during the dilution of the PQD solution, deteriorating the surface state of the PQDs. The number of surface defects of PQDs significantly affects their optoelectronic properties, where PQDs with fewer surface defects generally have a longer PL lifetime due to less nonradiative recombination. Therefore, a time-resolved PL decay (TRPL) measurement was further carried out for PQD films (Fig. 1f), and the film samples used for TRPL measurement were the same as those used for the fabrication of PQDSCs. As expected, among these samples, the TBI·TOP-based PQDs have the longest PL lifetime as summarized in Table S1 (ESI), which indicates that the iodide vacancies at the PQD surface were adequately restored, resulting in less nonradiative recombination. Meanwhile, the PL properties of the TBI-based PQDs are also improved, suggesting that TBI can to some extent restore the PQD surface matrix by filling in the iodide vacancies. These important results elucidate that by using the SMC treatment the optoelectronic properties of the PQDs are considerably improved after restoring the PQD surface matrix.
In addition to using TBI and TOP for SMC of PQDs, other nucleophiles and iodide sources (iodoethane and 2-iodopropane, which are prone to an SN2 reaction) were also studied, which shows that the nucleophilic substitution reaction using TBI and TOP based on the mild SN1 reaction is more feasible for the SMC of PQDs, as shown in Fig. S4 (ESI).
To obtain more details in terms of the improved optoelectronic properties of the PQDs after the SMC treatment, the PQDs were further characterized. X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the pristine, and TBI, TOP and TBI·TOP-based PQD solid films were measured as shown in Fig. 2a, which reveal that no significant difference can be observed in the XRD patterns, and these samples show a cubic-phase crystal structure. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements were performed to study the composition and surface chemistry of the PQDs as shown in Fig. 2b. The core-level Pb 4f peak moves toward higher binding energy after the TBI and TBI·TOP treatments, which may result from the increase of Pb–I species, with more iodide ions with lone electron pairs interacting with the under-coordinated Pb2+ at the PQD surface matrix. In contrast, the core-level Pb 4f peak of the TBI·TOP-based PQDs has higher binding energy than that of the TBI-based PQDs, indicating that more iodide ions may be attached at the PQD surface. However, the surface treatment did not introduce any new ligands bonding to the PQD surface, resulting in no changes of the core-level I 3d peak in the XPS spectra (Fig. 2c). We did not find any signal related to the core-level P 2p peak in the XPS spectra as shown in Fig. 2d, indicating that TOP did not anchor on the PQD surface during the SMC treatment. The molar ratio of I/Pb was also calculated based on the XPS results to understand the composition changes in the PQDs as summarized in Fig. 2e. After the SMC treatment, the ratio of I/Pb is overall increased, and values of 4.39, 4.35 and 4.41 are calculated for the TBI, TOP and TBI·TOP-based PQDs, respectively. For the TBI·TOP-based PQDs, the increased ratio of I/Pb is ascribed to filling in the iodide vacancies of the PQD surface matrix after the SMC treatment. TBI also shows some SMC capability for PQDs. Because TOP can dissolve excess under-coordinated Pb2+ from the PQD surface and thus reduce surface defects, the increased ratio of I/Pb in the TOP-based PQDs could be attributed to the decreased Pb content. The TBI·TOP-based PQDs also show the highest ratio of I/Cs among these samples as summarized in Fig. S5 (ESI). These important results further reveal that the iodide ions generated from the SN1 reaction of TBI and TOP successfully restored the PQD surface matrix by filling in the iodide vacancies at the PQD surface, resulting in improved optoelectronic properties of the PQDs.
FT-IR spectroscopy was employed to study the changes of the surface ligands of the PQDs as shown in Fig. S6 (ESI), which suggests that the SMC treatment did not affect the pristine surface ligands of the PQDs. Meanwhile, no signal of TOP is observed in FT-IR spectroscopy, indicating that TOP may only serve as a reactant for the SN1 nucleophilic substitution reaction rather than be attached to the PQD surface. The surface properties of PQDs significantly affect their energy levels, and thus the energy levels of the PQDs were measured (Fig. S7, ESI). Fig. 2f summarizes the energy levels of the pristine and TBI·TOP-based PQD solid films, and the energy level values of SnO2 and 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis (N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′ spirobifluorene (Spiro-OMeTAD) were obtained from the literature. It can be seen that the conduction band minimum (CBM) and the valence band maximum (VBM) positions of the TBI·TOP-based PQD solid film are slightly up-shifted than that of the pristine PQDs, resulting in more favorable energy level alignment within the PQDSCs. The favorable energy level alignment within a solar cell could facilitate charge carrier extraction, which will be discussed in the following section.

To study the photovoltaic applications of the surface matrix restored PQDs in solar cell devices, PQDSCs with a planar architecture of ITO/SnO2/PQDs/Spiro-OMeTAD/Ag were fabricated as shown in Fig. 3a, in which SnO2 and Spiro-OMeTAD refer to the electron transport layer (ETL) and hole transport layer (HTL), respectively. The cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of a full TBI·TOP-based PQDSC is shown in Fig. S8 (ESI). For comparison, conventional, and TBI and TOP-based PQDSCs were also fabricated.


Fig. 3b shows the photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) curves of the conventional, and TBI and TBI·TOP-based PQDSCs measured under AM 1.5G 100 mW cm−2 illumination, with summarized photovoltaic parameters being shown in Table 1. The conventional PQDSC fabricated using the pristine PQDs yields a moderate PCE of 13.20%. After applying the TBI-based PQDs for PQDSCs, a somewhat improved PCE of 13.76% is obtained. Importantly, the PQDSC fabricated using the TBI·TOP-based PQDs give a champion PCE of 16.21% with a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 17.71 mA cm−2, open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 1.27 V and fill factor (FF) of 0.72, which is the highest efficiency among inorganic CsPbI3 PQDSCs as summarized in Table S2 (ESI). We observed some hysteresis when recording the J–V curves with different voltage scanning directions as shown in Fig. S9 (ESI), which was generally observed in Spiro-OMeTAD-based PQDSCs. The TBI·TOP-based PQDSC with decreased surface defects shows a similar hysteresis phenomenon with a lower hysteresis index in comparison with the conventional PQDSC, but the causes of such hysteresis remain unascertained so far.
PQDSC device

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)
Control
1.21
17.46
0.63
13.20
TBI
1.22
17.53
0.64
13.76
TBI·TOP
1.27
17.71
0.72
16.21
The photovoltaic performance of the PQDSCs affected by the ratio of TOP/TBI during the SMC treatment was also studied, which shows that the ratio of TOP/TBI significantly affects the device performance. When using TOP alone to treat the PQDs, a low PCE of 7.62% is obtained in PQDSCs (Fig. S10, ESI), which might be because the TOP treatment could lead to the alteration of the morphology and surface structure of the PQDs through dissolving excess components of the PQD surface. The TOP-based PQD solid film may prefer to be deteriorated or degraded when being treated with MeOAc antisolvent during the layer-by-layer deposition of PQD solid films, thereby reducing the performance of PQDSCs. Meanwhile, the concentration screening reveals that the PQDSC with the best performance is obtained at a ratio of 1:500 of TOP/TBI for the SMC treatment of PQDs as summarized in Fig. S11 and Table S3 (ESI), which might be because the available iodide ions are ideal at such a ratio (Note S1, ESI). In contrast, larger or smaller TOP/TBI ratios could cause the dissociated iodide ions to be re-complexed by excessive TOP or the [TB–TOP]+ cationic species, respectively, which would reduce the number of free iodide ions to be introduced onto the PQD surface, thus weakening the SMC effect of the PQDs. Additionally, the content of TOP that is detrimental to the performance of PQDSCs is relatively low when the TOP/TBI ratio reaches 1:500, which is conducive to the normal operation of the devices.
We collected 21 cells fabricated from different branches for comparison of the device reproducibility. Fig. 3c shows the statistical PCEs of conventional, and TBI and TBI·TOP-based PQDSCs, and the statistics of other photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Fig. S12 (ESI). The results reveal that these PQDSCs are highly reproducible, and the TBI·TOP-based PQDSCs show the highest average PCEs with a value of 15.95 ± 0.25% with enhanced VOC and FF. Fig. 3d shows the incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectrum of the TBI·TOP-based PQDSC with the integrated JSC, which is consistent with the JSC obtained from the J–V measurements. The IPCE spectra of the conventional and TBI-based PQDSCs are shown in Fig. S13 (ESI), suggesting that these PQDSCs have good light absorption in the visible wavelength region. Fig. 3e presents the stabilized power output (SPO) of the TBI·TOP-based PQDSC, and a stabilized PCE of ∼15.45% is maintained. The stabilized PCEs of the conventional and TBI-based PQDSCs are 12.20% and 12.80%, respectively, as shown in Fig. S14 (ESI).
The crystal structure of CsPbI3 PQDs with high ionic vacancies is easily converted from the photoactive cubic phase (black phase) to the unfavorable orthorhombic phase (yellow phase), and the ionic vacancies could act as moisture and oxygen attacking sites to accelerate degradation of PQDs. Therefore, the stability of pristine, and TBI, TOP and TBI·TOP-based PQD solid films was evaluated under ambient conditions with a relative humidity (RH) of 25–35%. As summarized in Fig. S15 and S16 (ESI), the pristine and TBI-based PQD solid films begin to change into the yellow phase after aging for 10 days, and the TOP-based PQD solid film exhibits slightly better stability than that of the pristine and TBI-based PQD solid films. Importantly, almost no color change is observed in the TBI·TOP-based PQD solid films, which maintain the black phase after aging for 20 days. These results suggest that the stability of the PQDs is significantly improved after restoring the PQD surface matrix.
The high stability of PQDs may result in good stability of PQDSCs, and therefore the device stability of PQDSCs was also tested. Since the Ag electrode is easily oxidized under ambient conditions, which will affect the overall stability of the PQDSCs, therefore, Au was used as the back electrode. The PQDSCs were stored in a dry box with an RH of ∼10%. Fig. 3f shows the evolution of the normalized device PCE with the aging time, which shows that only 25% of the initial PCE is retained for the conventional PQDSC, while the TBI·TOP-based PQDSC retains ∼83% of its initial PCE after aging for 30 days (Fig. S17, ESI). Additionally, the storage stability of the TBI·TOP-based PQDSCs in a nitrogen atmosphere is also better than that of the conventional PQDSCs as shown in Fig. S18 (ESI). Moreover, the photostability of the PQDSCs was also measured under continuous 100 mW cm−2 illumination, which shows that, with continuous illumination for 100 h, the conventional PQDSC maintains only 10% of its initial PCE, while the TBI·TOP-based PQDSC maintains ∼65% of its initial PCE (Fig. S19, ESI). Therefore, the device stability of the PQDSCs is substantially improved by restoring the PQD surface matrix.

To fundamentally understand the causes leading to high performance in SMC-based PQDSCs, we analyzed the charge carrier collection and recombination within the PQDSCs. The PL spectra and the PLQYs of the PQD solid films were measured, which shows that the PL intensity of the TBI·TOP-based PQD solid film is twice that of the pristine PQD solid film (Fig. S20, ESI). Moreover, confocal PL mapping measurements were applied to in situ observe the PL emission distribution of the PQD solid films. As shown in Fig. 4a, the pristine PQD solid film shows an inhomogeneous crystal quality, and some PL quenching areas (black region) are randomly distributed in the film. The non-uniform PL intensity could be mainly attributed to the massive defects and agglomeration of PQDs (Fig. S2, ESI). In contrast, the TBI·TOP-based PQD solid film shows a much more homogeneous PL emission distribution as shown in Fig. 4b, suggesting that nonradiative recombination in such PQDs with improved quality is significantly restrained.

The transient photovoltage (TPV) of the PQDSCs was measured to gain more insight into the charge carrier recombination dynamics within the PQDSCs (Fig. 4c), and the TPV decay curve was fitted using a bi-exponential function (Table S4, ESI). A solar cell with less charge carrier recombination in the photoactive layer generally results in a long electron lifetime (or called a slow recombination rate of charge carriers). As expected, the TBI·TOP-based PQDSC shows a longer electron lifetime of 2.82 ms than that of the conventional PQDSC with an electron lifetime of 1.07 ms. The light intensity-dependent VOC of the PQDSCs was further studied to obtain more details concerning the charge carrier collection and recombination as shown in Fig. 4d. VOC as a function of light intensity can be represented using nkT/q, where n, k, T and q are the diode ideality factor, Boltzmann constant, Kelvin temperature and elementary charge, respectively. The diode ideality factors are calculated to be 1.81 and 1.46 for the conventional and TBI·TOP-based PQDSCs, respectively, which reveal that trap-assisted charge carrier recombination is substantially diminished in the TBI·TOP-based PQDSCs. The incident light intensity-dependent JSC also confirms that the charge extraction of the TBI·TOP-based PQDSC is improved (Fig. S21, ESI). These results could account for the improved VOC and FF in TBI·TOP-based PQDSCs.
Taking advantage of the significantly diminished trap-assisted charge carrier recombination in the TBI·TOP-PQDs, the photovoltaic performance of the PQDSCs was significantly improved. To further confirm such a conclusion and quantify the trap density (Ntrap) in the PQD solid films, the space charge limited current (SCLC) test was conducted for electron-only devices with an architecture of ITO/SnO2/PQD/PCBM/Ag as shown in Fig. 4e. Ntrap of the PQD solid films can be calculated using the following equation,
(1)
where
VTFL, L, ε0, εr and e are the trap-filled limit voltage, film thickness, vacuum permittivity, relative dielectric constant of the PQDs and elementary charge, respectively. The VTFL value was determined as the intersection of the tangent lines between the ohmic and the trap-filling zone as shown in Fig. 4e and f. As a result, the pristine PQD solid film shows a VTFLof ∼0.26 V and Ntrap of ∼0.89 × 1016 cm−3, while VTFL and Ntrap of the TBI·TOP-based PQD solid film are decreased to ∼0.15 V and ∼0.52 × 1016 cm−3, respectively. Therefore, these results are in good agreement with the optoelectronic measurements of the PQDs and the photovoltaic performance of the PQDSCs, revealing that the SMC treatment can significantly diminish the surface defects of PQDs induced by iodide vacancies.

Based on the above results, a model of charge carrier collection and recombination in the PQDSC was proposed to fundamentally understand the improved photovoltaic performance in the TBI·TOP-based PQDSCs. For conventional PQDSCs with a large number of iodide vacancies at the PQD surface, when the device is operated under illumination, these ionic vacancies could act as trap states to capture photogenerated charge carriers, thereby leading to VOC losses and lowering the device performance. Meanwhile, these ionic vacancies also offer access for humidity and oxygen to attack the PQDs, which accelerates the phase transition of the PQDs, thereby decreasing the stability of the PQDSCs as proposed in Fig. 4g. However, after curing the PQD surface matrix using TBI·TOP, these ionic vacancies are thoroughly diminished, resulting in decreased charge carrier recombination and structural degradation of the TBI·TOP-based PQDSCs. Moreover, the favorable energy level alignment of the TBI·TOP-based PQDs with Spiro-OMeTAD is beneficial to restrain interface recombination and facilitate charge carrier extraction (Fig. 4h).

To further understand the details of the SN1 reaction and its effect on the surface properties of the PQDs, first-principles calculations were carried out using density functional theory (DFT), and detailed information on the calculations is described in the ESI. The optimized TBI and TOP molecules were placed relatively close but did not form a C–P bond, and subsequently the structure optimization and energy calculation of the entire system were performed (Fig. 5a-I). As shown in Fig. 5a-II, after the structure optimization, the distance between the phosphorus atom of TOP and the carbon atom of TBI is shortened from the initial 2.042 Å to 1.537 Å, which is enough to form a C–P bond. Whereas, the distance between the iodide ion and the carbon atom of TBI is increased from 2.149 Å to 4.028 Å, which is not enough to form a C–I bond because the theoretical bond length of C–I is 2.15 Å. Moreover, we also calculated the electron localization function (ELF) of the optimized structure as shown in Fig. S22a (ESI). An obvious charge localization domain is observed within the bond region between the phosphorus atom of TOP and the carbon atom of TBI. In contrast, no charge domain between the iodine and the carbon atom of TBI is observed. The changes of bond-lengths and the distinction of the charge distribution suggest that a free iodide ion is formed and the pristine position of iodine of TBI is replaced by the TOP molecule, which is in good agreement with the NMR results (Fig. 1b). The charge transfer between TOP and TBI was quantified using Bader charge analysis, and the result shows that there is a charge transfer of 0.96e− from TOP to TBI, which resulted from the strong nucleophilicity of TOP. Meanwhile, the calculated energy of the final state of the TB–TOP system is decreased by 1.458 eV compared with that of the initial TBI–TOP system, indicating that the nucleophilic substitution reaction of TBI and TOP occurred thermodynamically. The formed free iodide ions could restore the PQD surface matrix with iodide vacancies as shown in Fig. 5a-III.

To study the effect of the SMC treatment on the surface properties of the PQDs, we constructed an iodide ion, TBI molecule and oleate ion anchored on the {001} lattice plane of CsI-terminated PQDs with an iodide vacancy and the optimized surface structures are presented in Fig. 5b–d. The reason for choosing a Cs–I terminated perovskite {001} surface slab is due to the Cs–I terminated perovskite surface allowing for OAm ligand substitution into the site of the Cs atom, which has been proved to be a more practical condition for the surface of PQDs. Meanwhile, the {001} surface is an outermost surface of PQDs in contact with exogenous substances. The binding energy (Ebinding) between the PQD surface and iodide ion or TBI molecule was calculated. Ebinding between the PQD surface and TBI molecule is 0.86 eV, which is much smaller than that of the I/PQD (2.74 eV) and OA/PQD (4.44 eV) systems. These results indicate that the iodide ions can spontaneously fill in the iodide vacancies rather than replace the pristine OA ligands, and it is difficult for the TBI molecule to bind onto the PQD surface due to the extremely low Ebinding between the PQD surface and TBI molecule. Importantly, after the structure optimization, the C–I bond length of TBI is expanded from the pristine 2.149 Å to 2.582 Å (Fig. 5b), making it difficult for the C–I bond to be maintained. Meanwhile, the bond length between the iodine atom of TBI and the lead atom of the PQDs is 3.091 Å, which is similar to the bond length between the iodide ion and the PQD surface (Fig. 5c).
In addition, as shown in the ELF plots of the TBI/PQD, I/PQD and OA/PQD systems, obvious charge delocalization domains are observed at the junctions between the absorbates and PQD surfaces (Fig. S22b–d, ESI), indicating that the binding nature of the adsorbates and PQDs is essentially ionic rather than covalent. Meanwhile, when the TBI molecule binds to the PQD surface, the charge density between the carbon and iodine atom of TBI is decreased, indicating that the pristine C–I covalent bond of TBI is deteriorated to some extent. These results indicate that TBI alone can also to some extent restore the PQD surface matrix with iodide vacancies, which also explains the reason for the slightly improved optoelectronic performance of the PQDs after the TBI treatment. Moreover, TOP is necessary to promote the breaking of the C–I covalent bond of TBI to produce enough iodide ions.
The electronic structure of the PQDs affected by the SMC treatment was further calculated to understand the improved optoelectronic properties of the PQDs after the SMC treatment. Fig. 5e shows the density of states (DOS) of the PQDs with an iodide vacancy, which shows that the iodide vacancy reduces the energy levels of the related states and forms shallow-level defects within the bandgap. These shallow-level defects significantly affect the optoelectronic properties of the PQDs and the photovoltaic performance of PQDSCs. However, after restoring the iodide vacancy, the energy levels of the PQDs are up-shifted and the defect states are thoroughly diminished (Fig. 5f).
These important experimental and calculated results reveal that the surface defects of the PQDs significantly affect the photovoltaic performance of PQDSCs. To quantify the defect-dependent photovoltaic performances, the photovoltaic performance affected by the defect density of PQD solid films was further simulated according to the literature. Fig. S23 (ESI) summarizes the model for the simulation and the simulated photovoltaic parameters, which shows that the device VOC is significantly affected by the defect density of the PQD solid films, which therefore determines the efficiency of the PQDSCs. Meanwhile, the carrier mobility of the PQD solid films significantly influences the FF of the PQDSCs. Therefore, to further realize high-performing PQDSCs, more studies need to be carried out to decrease the defect density and increase the carrier mobility of PQD solid films.
In addition to curing the surface matrix of CsPbI3 PQDs, the SMC strategy was also applied to cure the surface matrix of PQDs with other halide compositions. The results revealed that the optoelectronic properties of CsPbBr3 PQDs were also improved after introducing a mixture of tert-butyl bromide and TOP (TBBr·TOP) into the CsPbBr3 PQDs to restore the surface bromide vacancies (Fig. S24, ESI). Moreover, anion exchange from CsPbBr3 PQDs to CsPbBrxI3−x PQDs was also achieved after introducing TBI·TOP into the CsPbBr3 PQDs (Fig. S25 and Video S1, ESI). Therefore, we believe that the SMC strategy could be extended to a wide range of PQD materials toward different applications.

In summary, a feasible SMC strategy to restore the surface matrix of inorganic CsPbI3 PQDs has been demonstrated for high-performing solar cells. Through the SN1 reaction of TBI and TOP, the iodide vacancies of the PQD surface matrix can be effectively restored, therefore significantly reducing nonradiative recombination. Meanwhile, the optoelectronic properties and stability of the PQDs were significantly improved after the SMC treatment. Consequently, the PQDSCs yielded a PCE of 16.21% (stabilized power output efficiency of 15.45%), which is the highest value among inorganic CsPbI3 PQDSCs. The high photovoltaic performance in the SMC-based PQDSCs was attributed to the significantly diminished trap-assisted charge carrier recombination of surface matrix restored PQDs. Remarkably, benefiting from the surface matrix restored PQDs, the stability of PQDSCs was also substantially improved through inhibiting moisture from attacking the PQDs. This work provides an effective strategy to improve the surface chemistry of PQDs and other quantum dot materials to realize high-performance solar cells or other optoelectronic devices.


X. Z. and D. J. designed the research and experiments. D. J. and J. C. synthesized the CsPbI3 PQDs, and conducted XRD, FT-IR spectra, SEM image, light absorption and PL spectra measurements. D. J. fabricated the solar cells and measured the solar cell performance. X. M. conducted PLQY measurements. S. L. conducted TEM measurements. D. J. conducted DFT and SCAPS simulations. D. J. wrote the manuscript and prepared the figures. All authors contributed to the discussions and commented on the manuscript, and all authors reviewed the manuscript.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51872014), the Recruitment Program of Global Experts, Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities and the “111” project (B17002). This work was also supported by the HPC of Beihang University.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ee01463c
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021