 DOI: 10.1039/C2JM16018H
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 15050-15055

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Xinze
Luo
,

Fengyan
Li
,

Bingbing
Xu
*,

Zhixia
Sun
 and 

Lin
Xu
*

Key Laboratory of Polyoxometalates Science of Ministry of Education, College of Chemistry, Northeast Normal University, Changchun 130024, China. E-mail: linxu@nenu.edu.cn; xubb588@nenu.edu.cn; Fax: +86 431 8509 8760; Tel: +86 431 8509 8760

College of Chemistry and Biological Science, Yili Normal University, Yining 835000, China

Received
20th November 2011
, Accepted 25th May 2012
First published on 27th June 2012
A photovoltaic electrode consisting of polyoxometalate (SiW12) and zinc oxide (ZnO) was fabricated on indium tin oxide (ITO) glass by one-step electrodeposition. The addition of SiW12 strongly influences the morphology and crystallographic orientation of the ZnO. The photovoltaic properties of the ZnO film and the SiW12–ZnO composite films were investigated via solar cell assembly. Both transient photocurrent and current–voltage curve measurements demonstrate that the photocurrent and power conversion efficiency of the SiW12–ZnO composite film were markedly enhanced in comparison with that of the ZnO film. Based on the results of fluorescence quenching measurements, the enhanced photovoltaic effect should be attributed to the occurrence of the photoinduced electron transfer between polyoxometalate and ZnO, which increases the efficient dissociation of excited electron–hole pairs (excitons).

Solar energy, as the cleanest and least limited energy source, is seriously considered as an alternative to the conventional fossil fuels. Silicon-based solar cells, achieving a power conversion efficiency of around 24%, currently dominate the solar energy market. However, the high efficiency is offset by the high cost. To reduce the cost of the silicon solar cell, researchers are confronted with two major challenges: (i) to develop new photovoltaic materials which are cheap, nontoxic and also easy to manufacture; (ii) to fabricate low-cost solar cells with high efficiency in solar energy conversion.

In the last ten years, TiO2 nanoparticle films have been extensively investigated for dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) due to their high power conversion efficiency, while ZnO is another promising, but less explored wide band gap semiconductor oxide. The conduction band edge of both ZnO and TiO2 is located at approximately the same level while the electron mobility in ZnO is much higher. It is well-known that high mobility of the excited electrons is more favorable for the collection of photoinduced electrons. DSSCs built from ZnO nanoparticles show the second-highest efficiency after TiO2. The enhancement of photovoltaic response is still desired for realizing effective utilization of ZnO films. Since light absorption leads to the generation of excitons in a photovoltaic device, the efficient dissociation of strongly bound excitons into free charge carriers and the subsequent charge transfer should be crucial factors in obtaining substantial energy conversion efficiencies. Therefore, an intelligent strategy is to incorporate an electron accepting medium into the ZnO film to effectively retard the photo-excited electron–hole recombination and to tailor the charge transport properties.
Polyoxometalates (POMs), a class of metal–oxygen cluster compound with remarkable structural diversity and variety of chemical composition, have shown unique physicochemical properties and are used in various applications. In particular, POM anions are a good kind of electron acceptor and have the ability to promote the electron transfer rate of the semiconductor conduction band (CB) by trapping photogenerated electrons. Our group has recently developed two kinds of POM-modified photovoltaic electrode based on inorganic semiconductor TiO2 and organic semiconductor phthalocyanine. As an efficient electron scavenger, POMs facilitate photogenerated electron transfer from TiO2 or phthalocyanine to a collector electrode, which promotes the overall light-to-electricity conversion efficiency. Therefore, we consider that POMs are also a possibility to be used as the electron acceptors to transfer electrons from the CB of ZnO to an inert electrode. Such a donor–acceptor structure could retard effectively the fast charge pair recombination so as to enhance the photovoltaic response of ZnO.
As an extension of our work, herein, we fabricated a photosensitized electrode consisting of POMs (SiW12) and ZnO by an electrochemical deposition method. The electrochemical deposition allows precise control of the morphology and, more importantly, good electrical contact between SiW12–ZnO and conductive substrates. By using the SiW12–ZnO composite film as photoanodes for the solar cell, an overall power conversion efficiency of 0.70% was obtained. The power conversion efficiency in our fabricated device is higher than that reported in Cu2O–ZnO nanowire solar cells and DSSCs made from ZnO nanotips. The present research represents the first example of enhancing the photovoltaic response of ZnO photovoltaic materials with the assistance of POMs.

Keggin-type polyoxometalate of [(C4H9)4N]4SiW12O40 (SiW12) was prepared according to literature method. All reagents were of AR grade. The ITO substrates were thoroughly cleaned in an ultrasonic bath with acetone, a mixture of H2O:H2O2:NH4OH (1:1:1) and ethanol for 20 min prior to use.


The electrodeposition of ZnO was performed potentiostatically in a three-electrode cell with ITO-coated glass substrate as the working electrode, platinum as the counter electrode and a saturated calomel electrode (SCE) as the reference electrode. The electrodeposition of ZnO thin films was carried out at −1.100 mV (charge density was kept at 0.5–0.55 mA cm−2) for 90 min in a dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) mixed solution containing ZnCl2 (5 × 10−2 M) and KCl (5 × 10−2 M) at 130 °C. The electrolyte was saturated with bubbling oxygen 10 min before and during the experiment. The SiW12–ZnO films were also prepared by the electrodeposition method. Firstly, the electrodeposition solution was prepared by the addition of SiW12 into the above-mentioned ZnCl2–KCl mixture to reach the concentration of SiW12 as 1.0 × 10−3 mol L−1. Then the electrodeposition of SiW12–ZnO films was performed under the same potential and temperature as that in the preparation of ZnO thin films. During the electrodeposition, SiW12 and ZnO were deposited simultaneously on the surface of the ITO substrate and the deposited SiW12 was located in the interspace of crystal ZnO particles; this could be observed from the SEM images (Fig. 3). To detect the exact amount of ZnO in both ZnO films and SiW12–ZnO films, we determined the ZnO content by using an ethylenediaminetetraacetate (Na2EDTA) titration method, showing that the difference of the amount of ZnO in both cases is small (47.6 μg for pure ZnO film of 1 cm2, 44.5 μg for SiW12–ZnO film of 1 cm2). In addition, SiW12 anions could be reduced during the electrodeposition by a quasireversible reduction process as described by the following equation.
[SiW12O40]4− + e− = [SiW12O40]5−

UV-vis absorption spectra of the films were measured on a Cary 500 Scan UV-Vis-NIR spectrophotometer. FT-IR spectrograms were measured with a Perkin-Elmer 580B infrared spectrophotometer. X-ray diffraction patterns (XRD) of the deposited films were measured by a Rigaku D/max-IIB using Cu Kα radiation. Field-emission scanning electron microscopy (Hitachi S-4800 FEG-SEM) was used to investigate the surface morphology. The fluorescence spectra were measured on the FL900/FS920 steady-state fluorescence spectrometer. The fluorescence emission band is located at 620 nm upon excitation at 390 nm. Lifetime studies were performed on a FLSP920 Edinburgh Fluorescence Spectrometer. The surface photovoltage spectroscopy (SPS) measurement is carried out on a lab-made instrument, which constitutes a source of monochromatic light, a lock-in amplifier (SR830-DSP) with a light chopper (SR540) and a photovoltaic cell. The monochromator and the lock-in amplifier were interfaced to a computer. A 500 W xenon lamp (CHFXQ500 W, Global xenon lamp power) and a double-prism monochromator (Hilger and Watts, D300) provides monochromatic light. A low chopping frequency of ≈23 Hz was used. The construction of the photovoltaic cell was a sandwich-like structure of ITO–sample–ITO.


The current–time (I–t) curves of the SiW12–ZnO film were carried out by a CHI 660 electrochemical workstation (Shanghai Chenhua Instrument Corp., China) at room temperature. The archetypal solar cell device was fabricated using the as deposited film as the photoanode and a platinum foil as the counter electrode. The two electrodes each with an area of 1 cm2 were placed face to face at a distance of ca. 50 μm. Then the I−/I3−-based liquid electrolyte, which consists of 0.5 M KI and 0.05 M I2 in the solvent mixture of acetonitrile–glycol (4:1 by volume), was introduced by glass capillarity into the space between the two electrodes. A PLS-SXE300UV Xe lamp (Beijing Perfectlight Technology Corp., China) was used as an irradiation source. The distance from the source to the working electrode was about 60 cm. The average irradiation intensity reaching the composite films was measured to be about 5.15 mW cm−2. Keithley 2400 source meter was used to obtain the current–voltage (I–V) curves.



Fig. 1 shows the comparison of the UV-vis spectra of the SiW12, ZnO and SiW12–ZnO films. The deposition of ZnO onto ITO results in an obvious absorption below 380 nm, which is due to the band edge of ZnO. The absorption spectrum of SiW12–ZnO film (Fig. 1b) shows a little absorption in the visible region as compared with that of the pure ZnO film. When irradiated with light, the excited electrons on the conduction band of the ZnO could be transferred to the WO6 of SiW12; this caused little absorption in the visible range. In Fig. 1a, the visible light absorption of SiW12 actually originates from the intervalence charge transfer (IVCT) of W6+ ↔ W5+ (absorption band in visible range) instead of the charge transfer of O → W (absorption band in the UV range). Therefore, the visible light absorption of SiW12 did not contribute to the charge transfer of the photogenerated electrons from the ZnO conduction band to the WO6 of SiW12.


Fig. 2 shows the IR spectra of the bulk ZnO (a), SiW12 (b), and the SiW12–ZnO composite film (c). Curve b exhibits characteristic bands of SiW12 at 700–1100 cm−1. The peaks (curve b) observed at 798, 881, 918, 968 and 1008 cm−1 are assigned to υas(W–Oc–W), υas(W–Ob–W), υas(Si–Oa), υas(W–Od), and υs(W–Od), respectively (Oa, central tetrahedral oxygen; Ob, bridging oxygen of two octahedral sharing a corner; Oc, bridging oxygen sharing an edge; Od, terminal oxygen). In the IR spectrum of the SiW12–ZnO composite material, the typical peaks of a Keggin structure and ZnO are both observed at the same position, suggesting that the SiW12 and ZnO are co-deposited in the film.


Fig. 3 shows scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the electrochemically deposited ZnO and SiW12–ZnO films. The pure ZnO thin film consists of hexagonally shaped monolithic grains (Fig. 3a). The crystallites of ZnO were controlled by their anisotropic stability when in contact with the substrate. Correspondingly, the X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the film illuminates the preferential orientation of the ZnO crystallites with their c-axis being perpendicular to the substrate, as revealed from the significantly enhanced relative peak intensity for the (002) diffraction (Fig. 4, curve a). Fig. 3c shows the surface morphology of a SiW12–ZnO thin film electrodeposited under the identical conditions as for that of Fig. 3a, except SiW12 was added to the deposition bath. The addition of SiW12 resulted in a different morphology of the film. The SiW12–ZnO film shows less well-defined particles with rough surfaces. Correspondingly, the peak intensity of the (002) planes distinctly decreases for the film (Fig. 4, curve b). The intensity of the (002) peak is sensitive to the concentration of oxygen vacancies, i.e. indirectly to resistivity, and the best conducting films should ideally have a zero peak intensity of (002). This XRD result thus indicates that the electrochemically deposited SiW12–ZnO film electrode is promising to be used as a working electrode for solar cells. It should also be noted that the concentration of the SiW12 molecules in the deposition bath is rather lower than that of ZnCl2 (reaching to 50 times). A slight change of surface conditions caused by the doping with SiW12 molecules is sufficient to lead to the observed changes in the ZnO crystal growth.


A schematic structure of the proposed solar cell device based on the SiW12–ZnO film is shown in Fig. 5 and its photoelectrochemical properties are investigated. The photocurrent response experiments of the SiW12–ZnO film electrode have been carried out under Xe irradiation and the results are shown in Fig. 6. The applied potentials were 0 and 0.2 V versus a SCE electrode. The photocurrent of the SiW12–ZnO film increases with the electrode potential. Additionally, we observed an increase of ca. 70% in the photocurrent of the SiW12–ZnO film as compared to that of the pure ZnO film, indicating more facile electron transport for SiW12–ZnO than ZnO. The photocurrent transients are prompt, steady and reproducible during several on–off cycles of the Xe light irradiation. No overshoots were observed at the beginning and the end of the flash. This almost rectangular response indicates that no grain boundaries exist in the direction of electron diffusion. The grain boundaries produce deep traps to slow down the electron transport and many exist in the particulate electrode. It also suggests that the excited electrons are collected efficiently in the external circuit.


Fig. 7A shows the fluorescence emission spectra. Both films have a fluorescence emission band at 620 nm upon excitation at 390 nm.
The fluorescence intensity is clearly quenched in the SiW12–ZnO film, although the position and shape of the band remain the same. Thus, the photoinduced electron transfer from the ZnO to SiW12 clusters could be established from the fluorescence quenching. Actually, SiW12 acted as an efficient electron transfer mediator to transport photogenerated electrons to the collecting electrode surface, so that the photo-to-electric conversion efficiency of ZnO was promoted. To further confirm the electron quenching process, we carried out the time-resolved fluorescence decay measurements (see Fig. S1 in ESI) for both the SiW12–ZnO film and ZnO film. The decay for ZnO is found to fit into two exponentials, and the emission decay lifetimes are τ1 = 0.66 ns (83.37%) and τ2 = 2.23 ns (16.63%). In the measurements, the luminescence lifetimes for SiW12–ZnO film were too short to be detected, while the emission decay lifetimes of the ZnO film could be well observed at nanosecond scale; this is clearly indicative of the quenching of ZnO emission by the SiW12.
In addition, the surface photovoltage technique can provide important information about the carrier separation and transfer behavior at the surface or interface. Fig. 7B shows the SPS of the ZnO film (a) and the SiW12–ZnO film (b). The SiW12–ZnO film displays a stronger surface photovoltage response than the ZnO film. This phenomenon could be attributed to the fact that SiW12, as an electron pool, extracts the photoinduced electrons from the CB of the ZnO, which causes the effective separation of the electron–hole pairs generated in the ZnO. Meanwhile, it is noted that the band edge of ZnO has changed for the samples before and after composition with SiW12. This was attributed to the strong interactions between the ZnO and SiW12. The photoelectric conversion mechanism of the SiW12–ZnO film could be explained by the following processes: (1) the band-gap excitation from the valence band to the CB of ZnO under illumination, (2) electron transfer from the CB of ZnO to SiW12 and (3) electron transfer from SiW12 to the ITO electrode. In other words, the photogenerated electrons of ZnO can be extracted and transferred to SiW12, which effectively retards the fast charge pair recombination. The electron-transfer processes are schematically illustrated in Fig. 8.
To further investigate the photo-to-electric conversion efficiency of the film electrodes, the current–voltage (I–V) characteristic curve of the solar cell fabricated using the pure ZnO film (Fig. 9a) has been measured upon illumination. The solar cell fabricated using pure ZnO film shows a power conversion efficiency (η) of 0.18% with short-circuit current densities (Jsc) = 138 μA cm−2, open-circuit voltage (Voc) = 0.23 V, output power (Pmax) = 9.10 μW cm−2 and fill factor (ff) = 0.29. The I–V curves of the solar cells fabricated using SiW12–ZnO films with different deposition concentrations of SiW12 are shown in Fig. 9b–d. The power conversion efficiencies of the solar cells using 1 × 10−4, 5 × 10−4 and 1 × 10−3 mol L−1 SiW12 were 0.19%, 0.43% and 0.70%, respectively. The highest photovoltaic performance of 0.7% (Jsc = 441 μA cm−2, Voc = 0.32 V, Pmax = 36.43 μW cm−2 and ff = 0.26) was achieved for the sample of SiW12 deposition concentration of 1 × 10−3 mol L−1, which was much higher than that of the ZnO solar cell. It is worth noting that the conversion efficiency in this work is also higher than the nanowire architectural Cu2O–ZnO heterojunction solar cells (0.5%) and DSSC using well-aligned ZnO nanotip arrays (0.55%).

Table 1 presents a comparison of the results in this study. These results indicate that SiW12 plays the role of an efficient electron shuttle between the ZnO CB and the ITO electrode. The LUMO level of SiW12 (−4.6 eV) is lower than the CB level of ZnO (−4.19 eV)versus vacuum, thus suggesting that electron transfer from the ZnO CB to SiW12 is a favorable exothermic process. When the film electrode is fabricated with SiW12 and ZnO, the fast electron–hole recombination on the surface of ZnO can be retarded effectively, thus improving the photoelectrochemical performance. Although the resultant power conversion efficiency is still small in comparison with those optimum ZnO solar cells, polyoxometalate (SiW12) demonstrates the ability to promote the photocurrent response of ZnO via the photoinduced electron transfer from the ZnO to SiW12.
Sample

V
oc (V)

J
sc (μA cm−2)

P
max (μW cm−2)
ff

η (%)
(a)
0.23
138
9.10
0.29
0.18
(b)
0.30
188
10.11
0.18
0.19
(c)
0.35
315
22.52
0.21
0.43
(d)
0.32
441
36.43
0.26
0.70

In summary, SiW12–ZnO films have been grown on an ITO substrate using one-step electrodeposition for photovoltaic cells. I–V measurements indicated that the photocurrent response of the SiW12–ZnO film electrodes was strongly dependent on the SiW12 deposition concentration. A power conversion efficiency of 0.7% has been demonstrated with a SiW12 deposition concentration of 1 × 10−3 mol L−1. The SiW12–ZnO composite film electrode showed a higher photocurrent response and power conversion efficiency than the ZnO-only electrode. This can be attributed to the occurrence of the photoinduced electron transfer between SiW12 and ZnO, which increases the efficient dissociation of excitons. These results demonstrated that the introduction of SiW12 into a ZnO electrode is an effective approach to enhance the photoresponse. Improving the photovoltaic response by the combination of POMs and ZnO represents a promising strategy for developing advanced photovoltaic materials and for designing semiconductor photovoltaic devices.


The authors are thankful for the financial support from the Natural Science Foundation of China (grant no. 20731002, 20971019, and 21001021). This work was also supported financially by “the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities” and Open Project of State Key Laboratory of Supramolecular Structure and Materials (SKLSSM201109).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2jm16018h
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012