 DOI: 10.1039/C9CC05779J
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 12060-12063


Jinzi
Sun
,

Ying
Li
,

Jiankun
Sun
,

Zhijun
Zhu
*,

Yanling
Zhai
* and 

Shaojun
Dong


Department of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Qingdao University, 308 Ningxia Road, Qingdao, Shandong 266071, China. E-mail: zhuzhujun001@gmail.com; zhaiyanling@qdu.edu.cn

State Key Laboratory of Electroanalytical Chemistry, Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Changchun, Jilin 130022, China

University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui 230026, China

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100039, China

Received
25th July 2019
, Accepted 6th September 2019
First published on 6th September 2019
Self-powered electrofluorochromic devices (EFCDs) have attracted particular attention for smart windows of green buildings. In this work, we report a perovskite solar cell (PSC) driven self-powered EFCD. For the first time, electrochromic material polyoxometalates (POMs) and a fluorescent component are made into wet adhesives. A special design feature is that POMs and magnesium composed a battery powering the EFCD bleaching, and the device can be quickly coloured after connecting with the PSCs by the electrical power generated through solar energy conversion. Therefore, without any additional external bias, the fabricated EFCD undergoes an electrochromic transition from white semitransparent to dark blue-tinted, and under UV it presents reversible fluorescence switching between yellow and dark.

Electrofluorochromic devices (EFCDs) with reversible color changes offer great potential applications in signaling recognition, electrochromic displays, reversible optical memory and anti-glare mirrors. However, conventional electrochromic devices (ECDs) are usually operated under external power sources, which not only greatly hinder the independent operation of the devices, but also result in extra energy consumption. In this regard, a promising solution is to combine ECDs with an energy-harvesting system to design self-powered devices. Recently, to realize highly efficient energy harvest from surroundings, photovoltachromic cells (PVCCs) integrating electrochromic and photovoltaic functions have received increasing attention especially in energy-efficient smart windows. For example, Loo and co-workers reported a novel PVC window by integrating organic single-junction solar cells and a polymer-based electrochromic window. It can selectively capture near-ultraviolet photons to generate energy for lighting and heating purposes. Similarly, by assembling zinc oxide@bismuth oxyiodide (ZnO@BiOI) and Prussian blue as a photoanode and a photocathode, respectively, a solar-driven photoelectrochemical fuel cell was constructed for multifunctional applications in self-powered sensing, and energy conversion and storage.

As a new kind of PVCC, perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have been demonstrated as next generation PV materials and are particularly suitable for highly efficient photovoltaic (PV) devices, which possess fantastic optoelectronic properties including facile fabrication, strong visible absorption, and a prolonged photo-generated carrier diffusion length. With this in mind, it is reasonable to combine printable PSCs with ECDs to construct self-powered smart devices, in which PSCs harvest solar energy to drive the reversible color-switching of ECDs. Recently, Gigli designed a PSC-based multifunctional PVC device for the first time, in which PSCs supply energy to drive the coloration of electrochromic glazing with high self-adaptive transparency. Afterwards, by integrating a molybdenum trioxide/gold/molybdenum trioxide (MoO3/Au/MoO3) electrode with PSCs, Chai and co-workers reported transparent PVC supercapacitors for a smart window. However, there is still much space to improve the coloration efficiency, cycle stability, and so on. More importantly, until now, there was no report on PSC-powered electrochromic fluorescence-switching systems.
Herein, we present a PSC-powered EFCD holding dual functions of energy storage and electrochromism. Electrochromic material polyoxometalates (POMs) possess large electron-storage capability, wide absorption and high stability, enabling themselves to be an excellent controller of the fluorescence from Rhodamine 6G (Rh6G). Meanwhile, POMs and a Mg rod are used as the cathode and the anode, respectively, to construct a two-electrode battery due to their high redox potential difference. The electrolyte used in this work was propylene carbonate solution containing 2 mol L−1 of LiClO4. Connecting switch 1, fast discharging of the battery, corresponding to bleaching of the EFCD (denoted as “OFF”, Table S1, ESI), can be achieved. Fortunately, the bleached EFCD can be fully colored (denoted as “ON”) by connecting it with PSCs (switch 2), because POMs can be oxidized to white color by the high power produced by the PSCs under illumination. Significantly, the fluorescence of the fabricated self-powered EFCD can efficiently switch between “ON” and “OFF” by regulating the absorbance of the POM component through a related fluorescence quenching mechanism.
The general working principle of the self-powered EFCD is depicted in Scheme 1, including the discharge (I) and charge (II) steps. POMs were chosen as a controller to tune the fluorescence of Rh6G because of their prominent electrochromic properties and good spectral overlap between the absorption of POMs (500 nm–1000 nm) and the emission of Rh6G (around 600 nm). As shown in Fig. S1 (ESI), typical peaks of P–Oa, W–Od, W–Ob–W and W–Oc–W were observed, confirming the formation of POMs. The prepared wet adhesives (LY-POMs and Rh6G@SiO2) were used as an electrochromic layer. In step (I), POMs acted as the cathode and the Mg rod worked as the anode to form the two-electrode battery. As schematically shown in Scheme 1a and b, connecting switch 1, the high redox potential difference (ΔE, about 2.7 V) between Mg (−2.37 V) and POMs (0.4 V) forced Mg to release electrons, and at the same time POMs accepted the generated electrons and converted into reduced POMs (POMsRe). During this process, the color of POMs changed from white to dark blue, and the bright yellow-emissive EFCD was bleached to dark. The functioning mechanisms of the discharging process are illustrated as follows.
Anode:
Mg − 2e− → Mg2+, −2.37 V (vs. SHE)
(1)
Cathode:
POMsOx → POMsRe, 0.4 V (vs. SHE)
(2)
The overall cell reaction can be expressed as:
POMsOx + Mg → POMsRe + Mg2+
(3)
Subsequently, the bleached EFCD could recover to the initial state after connecting switch 2, because POMs can be oxidized by the high power generated from the PSCs under illumination. Current density–voltage (J–V) measurements were conducted under AM 1.5 G (about 100 mW cm−2) (Scheme 1c) and the summarized parameters of the photovoltaic are given in Table S2 (ESI), which showed the typical performance with an open circuit voltage (VOC) of 1.02 V, a fill factor (FF) of 61.7%, a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 16.48 mA cm−2, and a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 10.3%. Therefore, the good performance especially the high VOC makes it possible to design PSC-powered EFCDs, where PSCs provided sustainable energy to maintain the device with the desired color. Consequently, the EFCD luminescence-switching can be efficiently regulated.
As a special design, for the first time, we combined an electrochromic material and a fluorescent component into wet adhesives. It has been proven that POMs and amino acid would form ordered and rigid crystals at pH < 2 because of their strong hydrogen bond and electrostatic interactions. Therefore, the pH of the solution was kept at about 3 to facilitate the self-assembly of a soft crystal with a cross-linked network structure. In order to protect the dye (Rh6G) from photobleaching and photodegradation by the surrounding environment, the dye molecules were encapsulated into a silica matrix. The general morphology of the as-prepared Rh6G@SiO2 is shown in Fig. S2 (ESI); near-spherical structures were formed, and the average diameter of the nanospheres was estimated to be about 50 nm. After annealing, it presented brighter yellow emission (Fig. S3, ESI). Compared with pure Rh6G, there is no shift in the excitation and emission peaks, located at 566 nm and 600 nm, respectively (Fig. S4, ESI). Fig. 1a revealed the co-assembly of lysine (LY)-POMs/Rh6G@SiO2 wet adhesives, and a video recording the whole formation process is presented (Video S1, ESI). After addition of H3PO4, a white floccule immediately formed. Then the Rh6G@SiO2 solution was added to the mixed solution, and the pH value was adjusted to be about 3 with H3PO4. After slight shaking, the initial transparent solution turned turbid. The chemical structures of LY and POMs and their packing model are illustrated in Fig. 1c. In an acid solution (pH = 3), the main chain of LY can maintain its zwitterionic form, and LY and POMs could form cross-linked network superstructures through covalent binding self-assembly. Finally, the EFCD was fabricated by simply adhering the LY-POM/Rh6G@SiO2 wet adhesives onto the ITO electrode (Fig. 1b). Fig. S5 (ESI) shows the SEM images of the obtained LY-POM/Rh6G@SiO2 film, which revealed that the wet adhesives formed an interconnected structure by diffusing with each other.
To demonstrate the concept of a self-powered fluorescence switching system, we first investigated the energy storage properties of the Mg/POM battery. As clearly shown in Fig. 2a, different photocharging densities were obtained at current densities of 0.1, 0.2, 0.5, and 1.0 A m−2. The corresponding galvanostatic charge–discharge curves exhibited a non-ideal triangular shape, which illustrated typical pseudo-capacitance characteristics because of the redox reaction between Mg and POMs. When the cycle was operated at a small current density of 0.5 A m−2, the battery delivered high capacitances of about 23.5 mA h m−2 in the first 3 cycles (Fig. 2b). Fig. 2c reveals the discharge–charge cycling performance of the Mg/POM battery, and about 75% of the capacity can be retained after 50 cycles, demonstrating the possibility to integrate the battery with an energy-saving window into a self-powered system.
As an intelligent energy-saving window, the as-fabricated EFCDs enable automatic color changes during the discharging/charging processes. The reversible bleaching/coloring cycle of self-powered EFCDs is shown in Fig. 3a, while the inside images revealed the reversible fluorescence-switching under UV irradiation. Initially, without irradiation, the wet adhesive on ITO was white, and it turned bright yellow owing to the strong emission of Rh6G under UV excitation. When connecting switch 1 for 5 s, an apparent blue color was observed with the naked eye, and it turned dark blue after 13 s connection (Mode I in Fig. 3a). As a result, the fluorescence emission of the EFCD turned light yellow and finally was totally quenched. Then the device was colored again after connecting switch 2. As shown in Mode II, the EFCD presented light blue color for 20 s connection with PSCs, and recovered to the initial state after 60 s, accompanied by the recovered yellow fluorescence. The corresponding “ON” and “OFF” luminescence switching is given in Fig. 3b, which presented a high fluorescence contrast ratio of about 0.8. Generally, the fluorescence switching of this system occurred through photoluminescence quenching mechanisms including the inner filter effect (IFE) and fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET). The FRET efficiency E depends on the separation r of the donor and the acceptor,
where
R0 is the Förster distance. Therefore, the special cross-linked network structure of the fabricated wet adhesive efficiently enhanced the FRET efficiency with smaller r between the fixed pair of POMs and Rh6G. In addition, the good optical coupling between the emission spectra of Rh6G and the absorption spectra of POMs enhanced the effective IFE efficiency. Moreover, this luminescence switching between yellow and dark presents good reversibility, and there was no noticeable loss during 20 repeated cycles (Fig. 3c).

In summary, we have demonstrated a self-powered EFCD driven by PSCs. The PSCs can convert solar energy to electric energy with an output current density of 16.48 mA cm−2. In addition, we report a simple prototype of co-assembling an electrochromic material and a fluorescent component into supramolecular wet adhesives, resulting in enhanced FRET and IFE efficiency. Significantly, without any external power source, the EFCD is bleached through a discharging process of the Mg/POM battery, and then could recover to its initial state after being charged by PSCs. As a result, the fabricated EFCD undergoes electrochromic transition from white semitransparent to dark blue, and thus reversibly changes the fluorescence emission between yellow and dark. Therefore, it is foreseen that the proposed strategy is promising to initiate the practical applications of PSC-powered EFCDs in the fields of energy efficient buildings, independent and wearable electronics, and flexible displays.
The authors acknowledge the financial support from the National Natural Scientific Foundation of China (21804074), the Open Funds of the State Key Laboratory of Electroanalytical Chemistry (SKLEAC201906), and the Natural Scientific Foundation of Shandong Province (ZR2018BB051).

There are no conflicts to declare.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental, FTIR absorption spectrum of POMs, TEM images of Rh6G@SiO2 NPs, fluorescence images of Rh6G@SiO2, excitation and emission spectra of pure Rh6G and Rh6G@SiO2 NPs, SEM images of LY-POMs/Rh6G@SiO2, CVs of ITO/LY-POMs/Rh6G@SiO2 electrode, and photovoltaic parameters of the fabricated PSC, The video record of LY-POMs/Rh6G wet adhesive formation. See DOI: 10.1039/c9cc05779j
‡ These authors contributed equally.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019