 DOI: 10.1039/D1SE00751C
(Paper)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2021, 5, 3700-3704


Yue
Zhang
,

Yuxia
Han
,

Yanting
Xu
,

Guanghui
Yu
,

Yu
Miao
,

CaiYan
Gao
,

Xueqin
Zhou
*,

YanLin
Song
* and 

Ke-Jian
Jiang
*

School of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin, 300072, P. R. China. E-mail: zhouxueqin@tju.edu.cn

Key Laboratory of Green Printing, Institute of Chemistry, CAS, Beijing, 100190, P. R. China. E-mail: ylsong@iccas.ac.cn; kjjiang@iccas.ac.cn

NO. 17 Middle School, Beijing, 100124, P. R. China

Received
16th May 2021
, Accepted 23rd June 2021
First published on 23rd June 2021
The trap states at the surface and grain boundaries of perovskite films have a great influence on the photovoltaic performance and stability of perovskite solar cells (PSCs). Herein, lead sulfide (PbS) was introduced on the surface of perovskite films through in situ reaction with thioacetamide (TAA) in solution. With the PbS layer, the trap state density of the perovskite film was significantly reduced, and charge extraction efficiency was enhanced from perovskite to the external charge transport layer. In addition, it was found that the water-insoluble PbS layer could effectively protect the perovskite film from the moisture permeation. As a result, the perovskite solar cell exhibited a stable output efficiency of 22.04% with high stability.

Organic–inorganic lead halide perovskite materials have attracted tremendous attention due to their tunable bandgaps, high absorption coefficients, ambipolar charge mobility, and long carrier diffusion length. The solution processed perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have achieved a certified power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 25.5% from an initial 3.8% in only few years. The rapid development of PCE is ascribed to the perovskite composition optimization, process engineering, and defect passivation. To realize the commercial application of perovskite solar cells, long-term device stability related to moisture, heat, oxygen, light and electric field should be enhanced. The perovskites are ionic compounds, and numerous crystal defects can be easily formed at the surface and grain boundaries of the polycrystalline perovskite films from solution deposition and subsequent thermal annealing. In addition, moisture can permeate into perovskite films through the defects, accelerating the degradation of the perovskite device. Thus, the defect passivation is thought to be the most important means for efficient and stable PSCs.

In the past few years, many organic small molecules have been employed as passivation agents for perovskite solar cell devices. These molecules performed as electron acceptors or electron donors to passivate the charged defects by neutralizing the charge agents to enhance the device stability. However, the bonding between these organic passivation molecules and the perovskite surface is generally too weak to protect the material from attack by moisture and oxygen, and even enhance the film hydrophilcity due to the existence of polar groups in the molecules. On the other hand, very recently, wide-bandgap lead oxysalts have been applied to passivation layer in perovskite device by forming strong chemical bonds with perovskite films. With the incorporation of the water-insoluble PbSO4 layer, the moisture stability of perovskite solar cells was greatly enhanced. However, due to the insulating properties, the lead oxysalt layer should be thin enough without hindering the charge transfer from the perovskite to the external transport layer. In comparison with the wide-bandgap lead oxysalts, lead sulfide (PbS) could be an ideal choice as passivating agent for perovskite surface due to its semiconductive property, low water solubility, and high stability. In fact, PbS quantum dots (QDs) have been incorporated in the perovskite solar cells for improving the performance and stability of the devices, where the PbS functions as a hole transporter, or as an additive in the perovskite films to improve their crystallinity. Very recently, Zhao's group reported the surface passivation of the perovskite film through the formation of Pb–S bonding by using ammonium sulfide treatment. Here, we report a facile and effective solution method to incorporate PbS on the surface of perovskite films through thioacetamide (TAA) solution treatment. It was found that the resultant PbS layer could effectively passivate the surface defects of the perovskite film, and simultaneously protect the film from moisture ingress. As a result, the perovskite solar cells exhibited enhanced efficiency with high stability.


Fig. 1a illustrates the schematic procedure for the formation of PbS passivation layer. A FAPbI3 (FA: formamidinium)-based perovskite film was first coated on a SnO2/ITO glass substrate by a one-step method using chlorobenzene as antisolvent (see Experimental section in the ESI). The perovskite film was then immersed in TAA solution in a mixed solvent (chlorobenzene:isopropanol = 95:5 v/v) (1 mg ml−1) for 1 min at room temperature. In the solution, S2− anions were generated through hydrolysis of TAA, and then reacted with the uncoordinated Pb2+ on the surface of the perovskite film, leading to in situ formation of a PbS layer. Here, TAA is selected as a sulfide source due to its high solubility in the mixed solvent which could not dissolve the halide perovskite film. The reaction process is as follows:

CH3CSNH2 + 2H2O → CH3COOH + NH3 + H2S
(1)
Pb2+ + H2S → PbS + 2H+
(2)
The surface morphology of the perovskite film was characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and the results were shown in Fig. 1b and c. The pristine FAPbI3 perovskite film was densely packed with ∼800 nm grains, and the grain boundaries could be distinctly observed in the image. After the treatment for 1 min, the film surface was covered with a large number of small and uniformly dispersed particles, accompanied by unsharp grain boundaries. Prolonging the reaction time did not change the morphology obviously (Fig. S1). For comparison, we selected sodium sulfide (Na2S) as sulfur ion sources, and found that the reaction was extremely rapid between the perovskite and the S2− anions released directly from the sulfide in the solution. Upon the film dipping in the solution of Na2S, rod-shaped PbS crystals were rapidly formed with inhomogeneous distribution on the perovskite surface (Fig. S2). The results indicate that TAA could be a desirable sulfide source for the formation of PbS with uniform distribution with wide processing window. In the following experiments, the TAA treatment was carried out at the concentration (1 g ml−1) for 1 min for all the perovskite films (Fig. S3).
In order to further explore the interaction between the thioacetamide and perovskite, time-of-flight-secondary ion mass spectroscopy (ToF-SIMS) measurement was performed to probe the depth profiles of the atomic species in the perovskite film. As shown in Fig. S4, a certain amount of sulfur was observed to distribute within the perovskite film, and the maximum signal of PbS was observed just on the surface of the perovskite film, confirming the formation of lead sulfide. In addition, XPS was performed to confirm the formation of PbS, as shown in Fig. S5. The signals belonging to S 2p were observed in the TAA-treated sample and the Pb 4f core levels were also shifted to lower binding energy, which is similar to the result reported previously.
The X-ray diffraction (XRD) and UV-vis spectra were recorded to determine the impact of the TAA treatment on the perovskite films. As shown in Fig. 2a, the pristine perovskite film exhibits strong XRD peaks at 14.10° and 28.24°, corresponding to the (110) planes and (220) crystallographic phases of FAPbI3. In addition, a small peak at 12.80° for lead iodide was observed. After the TAA treatment, the peaks for the FAPbI3 remain unchanged, and a new peak was found at 30.20° with weak intensity, corresponding to (200) plane of PbS. In the meantime, the peak for lead iodide became weaken and almost disappeared after the treatment. The results implies that the PbS was derived from the reaction of the excess lead iodide on the pristine film and sulfur ions from TAA. Fig. 2b shows the UV-vis absorption spectra of the perovskite films with and without TAA treatment. Both the films exhibited quite similar absorption profile with band edge at ∼807 nm. In order to explore the effect of the TAA treatment on the optoelectronic behavior of the perovskite film, the steady state and transient photoluminescence (PL) characteristics were performed for the perovskite films coated on the glass. As shown in Fig. 2b, the PL intensity of the TAA-treated perovskite film is about 2 times higher than that of the pristine film. The result indicates that the perovskite surface defects were effectively passivated, and thus the trap-assisted recombination was reduced due to the formation of Pb–S bonding. The transient PL spectra in Fig. 2c shows that the TAA-treated perovskite film exhibited a long lifetime of 413 ns, which is about 3 times longer than that of the pristine film, further demonstrating reduced defects on the film after the passivation. On the contrary, when the spiro-OMeTAD was coated on the perovskite film, the TAA treated film exhibited a shorter lifetime of 65.65 ns as compared with the pristine film with a lifetime of 89.02 ns (Fig. 2d). The result suggests the hole extraction from the perovskite layer to spiro-OMeTAD layer was enhanced after the TAA treatment, which is expected to balance the holes and electrons transfer and reduce the charge recombination at the perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD interface.
To demonstrate the advantage of the TAA treatment in solar cells, PSCs were fabricated with an n–i–p planner architecture of glass/ITO/SnO2/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Au. A pristine perovskite film without TAA treatment was also employed as a control device for comparison. Fig. 3a shows the cross-sectional image of the device, where the PbS layer derived from the TAA treatment could not be observed due to its thin thickness. The photovoltaic metrics of the TAA-treated PSCs and the control PSCs (Fig. 3b) shows the average power conversion efficiency (PCE) values of the PSCs improved from 19.02 ± 0.59% for the control device to 21.60 ± 0.44% for the TAA-treated device. The improved PCE is mainly due to the increases of open-circuit voltage (Voc) and fill factor (FF) from 1.07 V to 1.11 V, from 0.73 to 0.78 respectively (Fig. S6), while the short-circuit current density (Jsc) is slightly increased for the TAA-treated device. Fig. 3c shows the forward scanned (FS) and the reverse scanned (RS) J–V curves of both the champion devices measured under one simulated sunlight, where the TAA-treated device exhibited a reversed PCE of 22.04%, with Jsc of 24.56 mA cm−2, Voc of 1.13 V, and FF of 79.26%, while the control device shows a reversed PCE of 19.24% with Jsc of 24.15 mA cm−2, Voc of 1.07 V, and FF of 74.44% (Fig. S7). Accordingly, the integrated Jsc from the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra (Fig. 3d) shows 24.01 mA cm−2 for the TAA-treated device and 23.42 mA cm−2 for the control device. There is a little difference between the integrated current obtained by EQE and the Jsc obtained from the J–V test, which is supposed to be the result of the different measurement conditions of EQE and J–V tests. The steady state output photocurrent density and efficiency of the control device and the TAA-treated device were shown in Fig. S8. The steady state current densities of 22.55 mA cm−2 for the TAA-treated device and 22.07 mA cm−2 for the control device, obtained under the constant bias voltage of 0.94 V for the TAA-treated device and 0.86 V for the control device, respectively. Their corresponding stable output efficiencies are 21.22% and 18.98%, respectively.
As mentioned above, the TAA treatment could passivate and reduce the surface defects of the perovskite film. To estimate and compare the trap state densities of the perovskite films before and after the TAA treatment, we fabricated a hole-only structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Au and calculated the trap densities (NT) by the means of space-charge-limited-current (SCLC) model in the dark. The NT was calculated according to the equation of NT = 2εrε0VTFL/qL2. The VTFL, which represents the onset voltage of trap filled limit, are 0.678 V and 0.847 V for the devices with and without the TAA treatment according to the Fig. 4a and b, respectively. The εr and ε0 are corresponded to the vacuum permittivity and the relative dielectric constant. The L is the thickness of FAPbI3 perovskite deposited on the substrate and the q is the charge of an electron. By calculation, the trap density of TAA-treated device is about 1.55 × 1015 cm−3, which is 20 percent lower than that (1.95 × 1015 cm−3) for the control device. To better elucidate the charge transport and recombination process, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurement was performed. The Nyquist plot of the control device and the TAA-treated was displayed in Fig. S9, which both tested under dark condition. It is noted that the main arc at low frequency region is related to the recombination process in device, and higher frequency is due to carriers transfer resistance. It is obvious that the cell with the TAA treatment exhibited a larger diameter value of the low-frequency arc, which indicates the charge recombination rate is much slower than the control device.
In order to compare the stability of the devices with and without the TAA treatment, we conducted long-term stability tests on both the devices with 10 parallel samples in a humid atmosphere (relative humidity ∼50 ± 10%). All the samples were tested without encapsulation. As shown in Fig. 5, the average PCE of control devices dropped to less than 60% of their initial PCE after 400 hours; however, the PCE of TAA-treated devices was much more stable, maintaining very high PCE retention (>90%) under the same conditions. Contact-angle measurements were conducted to determine the surface water resistance of the perovskite films with and without the TAA treatment. As shown in Fig. S10, the water-drop contact angle of the TAA-treated perovskite film is 91°, much larger than 51° for the control film. The results underline the formation of waterproof PbS layer. This means that the humidity stability of PSCs could be greatly enhanced after the TAA treatment. In addition, the thermal stability of the control and TAA-treated devices were tested for the devices with poly(triarylamine) as HTM. Unencapsulated devices were stored at 80 °C in an oven under ambient conditions. As shown in Fig. S11, the average PCE of control devices dropped to 75% of its initial PCE after 400 hours while the TAA-treated device maintained >80% of its initial efficiency.

In summary, we proposed a moderate and effective way to passivate the surface defects of perovskite through in situ formation of water insoluble PbS layer on perovskite surfaces. With the PbS layer, the trap state density of the perovskite film was significantly reduced, and charge extraction efficiency was enhanced from perovskite to the external charge transport layer. As a result, FAPbI3-based planar PSCs gave an over 22% PCE, in company with high humidity and thermal stability. This work could provide reference for commercial application of perovskite solar cells.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the National Nature Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 61874123, 91963212 and 51961145102 [BRICS project]), the National Key R&D Program of China (Grant No. 2018YFA0208501, 2018YFA0703200), K. C. Wong Education Foundation, Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences (BNLMS-CXXM-202005).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1se00751c
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021