 DOI: 10.1039/C9TA11892F
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 1457-1468


Hyeok-Chan
Kwon
,

Sunihl
Ma
,

Seong-Cheol
Yun
,

Gyumin
Jang
,

Hyunha
Yang
 and 

Jooho
Moon
*

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Yonsei University, 50 Yonsei-ro, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul 03722, Republic of Korea. E-mail: jmoon@yonsei.ac.kr

Received
29th October 2019
, Accepted 13th December 2019
First published on 16th December 2019
Developing large-area semitransparent solar modules is an essential step in the commercialization of semitransparent photovoltaic technologies. However, it has not yet benefited from the significant scientific advances in the field of perovskite solar cells, probably owing to the difficulties in achieving a highly uniform and large-scale semitransparent light absorber. Herein, a semitransparent solar module comprising anodized aluminum oxide (AAO) template-derived vertically aligned one-dimensional nanopillar CH3NH3PbI3−xClx perovskite is reported, which has a uniform semitransparent absorber with a large area of 40.8 cm2 and exhibits a geometrical fill factor of 95.6%. The AAO scaffold facilitates the formation of a homogeneous perovskite morphology and allows for reduced light reflection. The uniform nanopillar-structured perovskite-based device exhibits enhanced electrical properties owing to the restricted carrier path. Our optimized nanopillar-based semitransparent solar module with nine sub-cells shows a power conversion efficiency of 9.04% and an average visible-light transmittance of 30.2%, clearly exhibiting potential for practical power-generating window applications.

Semitransparent solar cells can improve the energy yield by being used as the top cell in tandem solar cells or power-generating solar windows. Tandem solar cells represent a highly effective approach for enhancing the efficiency of solar cells beyond the Shockley–Queisser limit of a single-junction device by adopting two or more absorbers with different band gaps for effective light harvesting. Additionally, semitransparent solar cells used for building-integrated photovoltaics and solar-powered vehicles have been intensely studied owing to their great potential for efficient power generation when deployed in windows, which are integral parts of buildings and automobiles. To realize semitransparent solar cells, the light-absorbing material should be fabricated into either an ultrathin or a microstructured layer for transmitting a certain portion of visible light. However, the transparency of the semitransparent solar cells is inversely proportional to the power-conversion efficiency (PCE), because less light absorption indicates a decrease in the short-circuit current density during solar-cell operation. Therefore, maximizing the charge-collection efficiency by selecting an efficient light absorber and/or its proper nanostructuring is required for achieving optimal efficiency as well as a certain degree of transparency. Additionally, an abundant-material and low-cost fabrication process is essential for minimizing the cost per watt and commercializing semitransparent solar windows.

Other issues that must be resolved for the commercialization of the semitransparent solar cells are the scalability for mass production and the fabrication of modules that are interconnected with separated stripes to overcome the relatively high sheet resistance of transparent conducting electrodes when the cell area is increased. Although solar modules with uniform and large-area opaque absorbers, such as Si, copper indium gallium selenide, dye-sensitized solar cells, polymers, and hybrid perovskite, have been demonstrated, realizing semitransparent solar modules poses a great challenge owing to the difficulty of producing an ultrathin or nanostructured uniform absorber layer in a large-scale cell.
Organic–inorganic metal halide perovskite solar cells, which were first reported in 2009 with a PCE of 3.8%, have since achieved a PCE of 25.2%. The superior properties of hybrid perovskite for photovoltaics, such its suitable band gap, high carrier mobility, long carrier diffusion length, and high absorption coefficient, make it a next-generation photovoltaic absorber. Moreover, perovskite solar cells can be fabricated using low-cost solution processes and are composed of earth-abundant elements. These excellent features allow the fabrication of high-performance and low-cost semitransparent perovskite solar cells for power-generating solar windows and tandem structures. With these considerations, various strategies for optimizing their efficiency and transparency have been pursued. In particular, researchers have focused on the nanostructuring of the perovskite layer for achieving transparency and high performance (a PCE of ∼10% with an average visible-light transmittance (AVT) of >30%), usually in the wavelength range of 400–800 nm. Among the methodologies for obtaining semitransparent absorbers, ultrathin and dense layer formation is the most common technique and requires special processing assistance during perovskite deposition, such as vacuum drying, gas-assisted drying, or anti-solvent dripping. However, these procedures are unsuitable for large-area module fabrication. Although the polystyrene-derived microstructure template technique allows the formation of a uniform semitransparent perovskite layer, the upscaling is hindered by the bottom-up fabrication nature. Self-assembled island or mesh-structured perovskites for better transparency have been suggested; however, these methods yield low-efficiency solar modules owing to the formation of a shunting path between the hole-transport layer (HTL) and the electron-transport layer (ETL). Thus far, there has been no feasible strategy for the fabrication of a large-area semitransparent perovskite solar module without a shunting path.
Herein, we report a semitransparent perovskite solar module based on a nanopillar-structured absorber using an AAO scaffold. The AAO scaffold allowed the formation of a uniform and large-area semitransparent perovskite film without pinholes. Our nanopillar perovskite structure exhibited a shorter transient photocurrent decay time and longer transient photovoltage decay time than two different planar structures (i.e., PbI2 and PbCl2 precursor-based devices), improving the charge-collection efficiency. An optical simulation, along with experimental verification, indicated that the nanopillar perovskite structure exhibited less reflectance in the wavelength range of 400–600 nm than the planar structure, leading to a relatively high PCE for a semitransparent perovskite solar module. Additionally, the hydrophobic AAO scaffold was capable of enhancing the stability of the full device against moisture. Under optimized laser-etching conditions, a nanopillar-structured semitransparent perovskite solar module with a size of 40.8 cm2 was successfully fabricated, exhibiting an AVT of 30.2% and a PCE of 9.04% with a geometrical fill factor (GFF) of 95.6%.

A schematic showing the AAO scaffold-based nanopillar perovskite semitransparent solar cell and a corresponding cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image are presented in Fig. 1a. First, a compact TiO2 (c-TiO2) layer was deposited on fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) glass via spin coating, followed by treatment with a TiCl4 solution. An Al film was thermally evaporated onto the c-TiO2/FTO/glass substrate, followed by anodization and pore widening, yielding AAO templates with vertically aligned one-dimensional (1D) pore structures with 66 nm diameter. The AAO template provides the advantage of high uniformity in a large area over 100 cm2, revealing the scale-up potential for real applications. A perovskite precursor solution containing methylammonium iodide (MAI) and PbCl2 at a ratio of 3:1 in N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) was spin-coated to form nanopillar-structured CH3NH3PbI3−xClx inside the AAO pores. The thickness of AAO and perovskite was chosen based on our previous work. When the perovskite thickness was higher than the AAO thickness, a highly rough overlayer formed, inducing haziness in the device. In addition, when the perovskite was thicker than AAO, significant J–V hysteresis behavior appeared. It was observed that the planar film showed lower ion migration resistance and higher ion capacitance by impedance spectroscopy, suggesting that the planar structured perovskite layer involved significant ion diffusion, causing J–V hysteresis. In addition, in most studies on semitransparent perovskite solar cells, an AVT of 30% is considered sufficient for commercial applications since the resulting cell looks quite transparent with the naked eye. Therefore, we have selected a thickness of 320 nm/250 nm for the AAO/perovskite, respectively, which can exhibit an AVT of around 30%. After the spiro-OMeTAD HTL was coated on the perovskite + AAO layer, the top electrode was deposited using either Au for opaque cells or MoOx/indium tin oxide (ITO) for fully semitransparent solar cells. Additional details regarding the fabrication process are presented in the Experimental section. Typically, one-step spin-coating perovskite deposition without special treatment results in the formation of a rough film with many pinholes or a needle-shaped morphology. One of the effective strategies for obtaining a uniform film without pinholes is template-assisted perovskite layer formation. When a template is used, the perovskite growth is physically confined inside the template pores during spin coating and annealing, preventing the segregation of the solution and unwanted needle-like growth. In our case, the perovskite grown inside the AAO pores exhibited a homogeneous microstructure without pinholes or needle-like grains when the surface of perovskite (Fig. S2a and b) and cross section of the full cell (Fig. 1a and S1a) were observed, even when fabricated via one-step spin coating. This implies that a uniform semitransparent perovskite absorber can be obtained using the one-step spin-coating method if a large-scale AAO template is available. Nevertheless, it should be noted that, during the spin-coating of the precursor solution onto the rectangular substrate, massive build-up in the corners usually occurs (i.e., 200–500% of the nominal thickness with respect to that at the center of the substrate). This poor uniformity is caused by the Bernoulli effect. When the substrate is spinning, an airfoil is created at the edge of the substrate and this longer air path results in acceleration of the air over the substrate. The acceleration in air flow on the top side creates a relative vacuum, raising the evaporation rate significantly. This phenomenon also occurred during spin-coating of the precursor solution onto a large sized AAO substrate of 7 × 7 cm2, causing the formation of a perovskite overlayer at the substrate corners. To eliminate or minimize the thickness build-up, we spin-coated the perovskite precursor solution at a reduced rotation speed, while a less concentrated precursor solution was used in order to mitigate the vacuum formed by the Bernoulli effect. The inset in Fig. 1b shows the one-step spin-coated nanopillar-structured perovskite film on the large-area AAO/FTO glass substrate of 7 × 7 cm2. The absorbance spectra obtained at nine different positions, as shown in Fig. 1b, were nearly identical, indicating the high uniformity of the large-area semitransparent perovskite film. In addition, the AAO-based nanopillar perovskite showed almost no difference between the specular and total transmittance spectra, in contrast to a planar film without the AAO template (Fig. S3a and b), indicating significantly reduced haziness. The uniform nanopillar-structured perovskite film with a smooth surface was capable of minimizing the diffusion of incoming light, making it appear clear, which is beneficial for window photovoltaic applications (Fig. S3c and d).

As the crystal quality of the resulting perovskite could be affected by whether the nanoporous scaffold is involved or not, crystallographic analysis was performed using XRD measurement. Fig. S4 shows the XRD spectra as a function of annealing time from 0 min (as-prepared) to 30 min for the perovskites with and without the AAO scaffold. Both the as-prepared samples revealed peaks at 14.42° and 28.46° assignable to the (110) and (220) planes of CH3NH3PbI3 and peaks at 15.96° and 31.88° corresponding to the (100) and (200) planes of CH3NH3PbCl3. The observed spectra well matched with the precursor films obtained from methylammonium iodide and lead chloride with a 3:1 ratio. At an annealing time of 12 min, however, the planar perovskite showed more intense CH3NH3PbI3 peaks than CH3NH3PbCl3 peaks as compared with the nanopillar perovskite inside the AAO scaffold. In addition, at an annealing time of 30 min, the planar structure showed no CH3NH3PbCl3 peaks, indicative of complete crystallization of the perovskite film, whereas the AAO scaffold-based nanopillar perovskite still exhibited peaks for CH3NH3PbCl3. This observation clearly demonstrated that the crystallization rate was retarded inside the AAO scaffold, which may affect the crystal quality of the resulting perovskite phase. When the mixed-halide PbCl2 + 3CH3NH3I precursor film is annealed, the final film of CH3NH3PbI3 forms without Cl incorporation because 2CH3NH3Cl is sublimed from the precursor film. When the precursor film infiltrated into the AAO scaffold is annealed, the sublimation of CH3NH3Cl could be hindered due to longer pathways to the limited external surface of the precursor film because the nanopillar structure has a higher thickness (t) than the planar structure under the conditions of the same perovskite phase volume (t = 250 nm for nanopillar and 192 nm for planar structured perovskite). When the crystallization rate is retarded, the defect density of the final film could be reduced according to a previous report. In this regard, Mott–Schottky measurements which allow us to observe the absorber defect density were additionally performed. Fig. S5 depicts the Mott–Schottky plots in which flat band potentials (VFB) are determined to be 1.18 V for the nanopillar cell and 1.11 V for the planar device. In perovskite solar cells, VFB is generally defined as the potential between the quasi Fermi level of the ETL and perovskite layer, expressed using:
VFB = EFn − Ep
where
EFn and Ep are the quasi Fermi level of the ETL and perovskite, respectively. The difference in Fermi level of the ETL for both devices is negligible since the two devices are constructed with identical ETL layers. Thus, the plausible change in VFB could be due to the difference in Ep. Since the defects in perovskite such as vacancies or interstitials could elevate the quasi Fermi level of the perovskite absorber, the less energetic offset between the quasi Fermi level of the ETL and perovskite absorber likely lowers the VFB in the planar perovskite device. As a result, the nanopillar perovskite grown within the nanoporous scaffold could have a lower defect density due to the retarded crystal growth than planar perovskite.

To compare the performance of the nanopillar-based semitransparent solar cells with that of their thin film-based counterparts, planar-structured devices using two different precursor solutions (with lead chloride or lead iodide as the Pb source for CH3NH3PbI3−xClx (MAPbI3−xClx) or CH3NH3PbI3 (MAPbI3), respectively) were fabricated. One-step spin coating was utilized to fabricate the planar MAPbI3−xClx cell with a configuration of Au/spiro-OMeTAD/perovskite/c-TiO2/FTO/glass, whereas the anti-solvent dripping method was employed to fabricate the planar MAPbI3 device, owing to the different coating characteristics.Fig. 1c and Table 1 present the current density–voltage (J–V) curves and performance parameters for three differently structured champion cells: nanopillar, planar MAPbI3−xClx, and planar MAPbI3. The nanopillar-structured cell showed excellent performance, with a high open-circuit voltage (VOC, 1.07 V) and fill factor (FF, 75%). The low short-circuit current density (JSC, 15.37 mA cm−2) compared with that of the conventional perovskite solar cell (>22 mA cm−2) likely originated from the smaller amount of light absorption of the semitransparent device with an AVT of 33.3% (in the wavelength range of 400–800 nm), as shown in Fig. 1d. Because the transparency is inversely proportional to the light absorption, enhancing the optical and electrical properties of semitransparent devices is paramount for achieving optimal efficiency while retaining the transparency to some extent. The planar MAPbI3−xClx semitransparent device exhibited significant drops in both the VOC and FF compared with the nanopillar-structured cell, which may have resulted from the increased recombination rate induced by the rough film with pinholes, as shown in Fig. S1b and S2c. To exclude the effect of the film microstructure, a uniform ultrathin planar MAPbI3 solar cell was fabricated (Fig. S1c and S2d). A VOC of 1.05 V and an FF of 76% were observed owing to the absence of pinholes. However, the current density of the planar MAPbI3 cell (14.57 mA cm−2) was lower than that of its nanopillar counterpart (15.37 mA cm−2), despite the similar AVTs (33.5% and 33.3% for planar MAPbI3 and nanopillar, respectively).
Device

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Nanopillar
Champion
1.07
15.37
75.08
12.32
Average
1.06 ± 0.01
14.89 ± 0.50
74.75 ± 0.51
11.80 ± 0.54
Planar MAPbI3−xClx
Champion
0.88
16.06
71.05
10.05
Average
0.87 ± 0.01
16.12 ± 0.27
70.99 ± 0.63
10.00 ± 0.08
Planar MAPbI3
Champion
1.05
14.57
76.03
11.65
Average
1.04 ± 0.01
14.28 ± 0.01
73.16 ± 10.45
10.88 ± 1.57
To elucidate the origin of the increased efficiency of the nanopillar-structured perovskite solar cell, the optical properties of the planar MAPbI3 and nanopillar structures were compared. Finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) method-based optical simulation allowed us to obtain an in-depth understanding of the effect of nanostructuring. The structural configurations of the nanopillar and planar structures used in the simulation are shown in Fig. 2a and b, respectively. The refractive indices of TiO2, perovskite, Al2O3, and spiro-OMeTAD were obtained from the literature, and those of FTO and glass were provided by the simulation software. All the structural features were determined via SEM analysis, and a plane wave in the wavelength range of 300–900 nm with an x-polarized electric field was normally incident from the bottom of the structure. Fig. S6 shows the simulated transmittance spectra of two differently structured devices, with perovskite thicknesses of 250 and 150 nm for the nanopillar and planar structures, respectively. The simulation results showed similar trends with the measured transmittance spectra (Fig. 1d). The discrepancy between the simulation and experimental results could be attributed to the different light incident positions in which light is irradiated from the FTO layer in the simulation whereas it is illuminated from the glass substrate in the experiment. Fig. 2c shows the simulated reflectance spectra for the two different devices with nanopillar and planar structures. The nanopillar-based device exhibited lower reflectance than its planar-based counterpart at all wavelengths, except for in the range of 660–785 nm. The experimentally measured reflectance well matched the simulation results (Fig. 2d). The lower reflectance of the nanopillar-structured perovskite is attributed to the gradual variation of the refractive index when the materials were composited at the nanoscale for the perovskite and AAO scaffold. The effective refractive index of this light-absorbing composite depends on the volume fraction of the mixture. Therefore, the effective refractive index (n) of AAO scaffold-based nanopillar perovskite is an intermediate value between the refractive indices of CH3NH3PbI3−xClx perovskite (n = 2.55) and amorphous Al2O3 (n = 1.68). Our nanopillar perovskite had a volume fraction of 0.4, as determined by analysis of the SEM image. The effective refractive index was determined to be 2.03 using the Maxwell–Garnett model. The absorber layer was sandwiched between the ETL (i.e., TiO2, n = 2.45) and the HTL (i.e., spiro-OMeTAD, n = 1.70). Replacing the planar perovskite absorber (n = 2.55) with the AAO scaffold-based nanopillar perovskite absorber (n = 2.03) causes a gradual variation in the refractive index when light is incident on the FTO glass, traveling from the ETL through the absorber to the HTL. The gradual change in the refractive index reduces the reflectance of the nanopillar perovskite device. This simulation result implies that the nanostructuring approach using various nanosized templates, such as mesoporous or 1D structures, is an effective strategy for improving the optical properties or performance of perovskite solar cells by controlling the volume ratio between the absorber and the template.
As shown in Fig. 2e, the nanopillar-structured cell exhibited a significantly higher external quantum efficiency (EQE) than its planar MAPbI3 counterpart. Considering that the solar spectral irradiance was the highest in the wavelength range of 450–650 nm (Fig. S7) and the perovskite was capable of readily absorbing light in the wavelength range below 550 nm, the reduced reflectance in the wavelength range of 450–650 nm for the nanopillar-structured perovskite (Fig. 2d) could be responsible for the higher light-harvesting-driven photocurrent density, as shown in Fig. 2e. However, the nanopillar device exhibited a higher EQE than the planar device in the wavelength range of 550–700 nm even though the nanopillar structure had higher reflectance. This indicates that another factor contributed to the enhanced photocurrent density of the nanopillar-structured perovskite solar cell.
The perovskite absorber structure could also affect the charge-carrier dynamics, which are closely related to the performance of solar cells. To investigate this, transient photovoltage and photocurrent measurements were performed under open-circuit and short-circuit conditions, respectively. A light source with an intensity of 10 mW cm−2 and a wavelength of 627 nm was used for both measurements, in which either the voltage or the current was recorded 100 ns immediately after the light was turned off (within 500 ns), as shown in Fig. 3a and b. The transient photovoltage is related to the carrier lifetime of the absorber and provides insight regarding the carrier-recombination rates in the device. As shown in Fig. 3a, the photovoltage decay time for the nanopillar perovskite was significantly longer than that for the planar MAPbI3 perovskite, indicating the reduced recombination rate. This might be related to the differences in crystal quality and defect density for the perovskites fabricated via different methods. When the perovskite grown from the precursor solution infiltrated into the AAO scaffold, the crystallization and growth were likely hindered compared with those induced by the antisolvent dripping method, reducing the defect density and recombination rate. The planar MAPbI3−xClx device exhibited faster photovoltage decay than the planar MAPbI3 device, indicating a significantly higher recombination rate. This may be due to the direct contact between the ETL and HTL caused by the pinholes.
Transient photocurrent measurement allowed us to obtain information regarding the charge transport and extraction rate of the device. The photocurrent decay curves of the three different structures are shown in Fig. 3b. The nanopillar perovskite-based device exhibited faster photocurrent decay than the planar MAPbI3−xClx structure. Even the pinhole-free planar MAPbI3 structure exhibited slower photocurrent decay than the nanopillar perovskite device. This suggests that the vertically aligned nanopillar structure was capable of enhancing the charge transport and extraction ability, which agrees well with the results of our previous study, in which 66 nm 1D nanostructured perovskite exhibited improvements in the carrier transport and extraction rate compared with planar-structured perovskite. The carrier-dynamics studies indicated that the nanopillar perovskite structure is a promising candidate for a highly efficient semitransparent perovskite solar module owing to the improved charge-collection efficiency due to the reduced recombination rate and enhanced charge transport/extraction rate, because the charge-collection is closely correlated to the charge carrier transport time and/or recombination lifetime.
Long-term stability against humidity is one of the key issues to be resolved for the commercialization of perovskite solar cells, because they are decomposed by humidity. The nanopillar-structured perovskite entrapped within the AAO scaffold may exhibit different humidity stability from the planar structure. Both the nanopillar and planar MAPbI3−xClx devices with a configuration of spiro-OMeTAD/perovskite(+AAO)/c-TiO2/FTO/glass were used for stability tests in a humid atmosphere while being stored at 25 °C under a relative humidity (RH) of 75%, as shown in Fig. 4a. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) results showed that the nanopillar and planar MAPbI3−xClx cells had different degradation rates. Both the as-prepared perovskite films exhibited strong (110) and (220) plane peaks of CH3NH3PbI3 at 14.27° and 28.59°, respectively (Fig. 4b and c). After 5 days of exposure to high humidity, the nanopillar-structured film showed only a slightly reduced (110) plane peak, as well as a small PbI2 peak at 13.05°, whereas a significant intensity reduction was observed for the planar MAPbI3−xClx. Because the roughness of planar MAPbI3−xClx might affect the degradation rate owing to the different interfaces exposed to moisture, a planar MAPbI3 sample was also tested (Fig. S8). After 5 days of storage, the PbI2 peak exhibited little intensity reduction, and a reduced peak of (110) perovskite was observed, whereas after 10 days, only PbI2 was detected. These results indicate that the nanopillar perovskite grown inside the AAO scaffold had better moisture stability than the planar structure. According to a previous report, the AAO scaffold has a hydrophobic nature. Fig. S9 shows the contact angle of water droplets placed on either TiO2/FTO glass or without AAO scaffold/TiO2/FTO glass. When the AAO scaffold was introduced, the contact angle increased from 40.1° to 59.3°, indicating the higher hydrophobicity of the AAO scaffold. The nanopillar perovskite is not only entrapped within hydrophobic AAO pores, but also has reduced grain boundaries. Because moisture can easily penetrate through the perovskite grain boundaries, it is expected that the nanopillar perovskite will be less vulnerable to moisture attack as compared to the planar structure. In particular, while lateral degradation of the perovskite film starting from the edge of the substrate is a critical problem for the planar structure, the nanopillar-structured configuration exhibited exceptionally slow degradation, indicating that the AAO template is a promising platform for a highly efficient semitransparent solar module with moisture stability.
Thermal stability is one of the challenging issues affecting PSCs, since it is difficult to avoid a temperature rise during solar cell operation. Therefore, the thermal stability of nanopillar and planar structured perovskite solar cells without encapsulation at 85 °C in ambient air was evaluated. As shown in Fig. S10, the nanopillar based device exhibited no reduction of the initial PCE after 130 min, whereas the planar structure counterpart showed a much lower PCE of 84.2%. The thermal stability of polycrystalline perovskite is dominated by surfaces or grain boundaries which are the sources of high defect density, because the degradation of perovskite appears to originate at the defect sites. As shown by Mott–Schottky analysis (Fig. S5), the nanopillar structured perovskite showed low defect density and reduced grain boundaries compared to planar structured perovskite. The reduced defect density indicates fewer surface defects that possibly induce thermal degradation of the perovskite material. Therefore, nanopillar structured perovskite exhibited better thermal stability.
For fabricating a solar module with multiple sub-cells on a substrate, three etching steps are needed to serially interconnect the sub-cells. Fig. 5a shows a schematic of the three etching steps: P1 etching for disconnecting the bottom electrode, P2 etching for forming the interconnecting region between the top and bottom electrodes of neighboring sub-cells, and P3 etching for disconnecting the top electrode. In all the three steps, the etched area becomes a dead area that plays a role only in the interconnection between the sub-cells without power generation; thus, minimizing this area is one of the key issues in fabricating the solar module. The laser-etching technique is a promising method for minimizing the dead area, allowing precise control of the etching position and alignment. With the optimized etching widths of 70, 180, and 80 μm for P1, P2, and P3 etching, respectively, we achieved a dead area 330 μm in width (Fig. 5b and c).
Controlling the laser power is also a crucial factor for successful etching. Although there are several previous reports using laser etching for the perovskite solar module, additional optimization is required because of the differences in laser wavelength, laser type, perovskite thickness, and especially the existence of the AAO template. P1 etching requires sufficient laser power for complete removal of the bottom electrode, whereas P3 etching requires minimum laser power for excavating down to the c-TiO2 ETL. In contrast, P2 etching should be carefully optimized to selectively etch the spiro-OMeTAD/perovskite + AAO layer while leaving the underlying bottom electrode undamaged. Although there have been reports on the P2 etching conditions, further optimization is necessary for the nanopillar-structured device, because there are likely to be differences in the perovskite thickness or morphology, together with the presence of the AAO scaffold. The sheet-resistance change of the remaining FTO/glass substrate after the spiro-OMeTAD/perovskite + AAO/c-TiO2 was etched away as a function of the laser power was examined to determine the laser-power threshold for avoiding damage to the FTO layer. A laser power between 30 and 90 μJ (with a pulse frequency of 50 kHz, scan speed of 1200 mm s−1, and etching line space of 0.03 mm) was selected for solar-module fabrication. The sheet resistance of the laser-etched FTO exhibited a slight increase when the laser power was >60 μJ, and a sharp increase was observed when the laser power was >80 μJ (Fig. S11). To determine the optimized laser-power conditions for our system, a mini-module comprising two sub-cells on a 2 × 2 cm2 substrate was fabricated (Fig. S12). The aperture area (i.e., the cell area exposed to illumination, including the active area and the dead area) was 1.58 cm2, and the laser power for P2 etching was varied among 35, 50, 65, and 80 μJ. The PCE of the mini-module was enhanced when the P2 etching laser power was increased to 65 μJ (Fig. 5d and Table S1). A laser power of <65 μJ was insufficient for removing the upper layer on top of the FTO, hindering the connection between the bottom and top electrodes, as shown in Fig. S13. However, when the power was increased to 80 μJ, reductions in the JSC and VOC were observed, possibly owing to the increased series resistance due to the excessive etching of FTO. Therefore, a 65 μJ power for P2 etching was considered as the optimal condition for minimizing the contact resistance and the damage to the FTO for the nanopillar absorber-based semitransparent device.
The laser scribing speed can also affect the contact resistance and FTO damage, both of which significantly influence the solar-module performance. The scribing speed can be controlled by varying the laser-scanning line interval. In this study, intervals of 0.02, 0.04, 0.06, and 0.08 mm were selected, as shown in Fig. S14. To quantitatively determine the contact resistance, the transfer-length method (TLM) was utilized. Here, 4.5 × 4.5 cm2 test cells with a configuration of spiro-OMeTAD/perovskite + AAO/c-TiO2/FTO/glass are fabricated, followed by laser scribing with different scanning line intervals and Au electrode deposition. The experimental conditions are described in detail in the Experimental section. The resistance as a function of the electrode distance was measured, as shown in Fig. S15, and the contact resistances were calculated for different laser-scanning line intervals. As shown in Fig. 5e, the contact resistance decreased when the scanning line interval was increased from 0.02 to 0.04 mm, possibly owing to the reduced FTO damage. However, when the scanning line interval increased to 0.08 mm, the contact resistance increased significantly, because the incomplete etching interrupted the contact between the electrodes. The effect of the laser scribing speed in P2 etching on the mini-module performance was also investigated. Here, the scanning line interval of 0.04 mm yields the best PCE (Fig. 5f and Table S2). In the J–V curve, the slope at VOC represents the series resistance. The steepest slope was observed for the 0.04 mm condition, indicating the best series connection for solar-module operation. Thus, the P2 laser scribing conditions were successfully optimized according to TLM analysis and the device performance parameters.
Nanopillar perovskite-based semitransparent solar modules with nine sub-cells were fabricated using the optimized conditions and a sputtered ITO top electrode. To minimize the damage to the spiro-OMeTAD layer during ITO sputtering, an MoOx buffer layer was thermally evaporated onto the spiro-OMeTAD layer, and a low sputtering power of 30 W was applied. The optimized ITO electrode exhibited a low sheet resistance of 23 Ω sq−1 and high transmittance (Fig. S16). Fig. 6a and Movie S1 present a photograph and video, respectively, of the fully semitransparent solar-module device with a large aperture area of 40.8 cm2, showing high transmittance and a clear-through view. This semitransparent solar module exhibited AVTs of 30.2% and 34.5% with and without the ITO top electrode, respectively, satisfying the requirements for window applications. The transparency and PCE can be easily controlled for various applications by using different AAO scaffolds and perovskite thicknesses, as demonstrated in our previous study. Our fully semitransparent perovskite solar module with nine sub-cells exhibited a VOC of 9.48 V, a JSC of 1.39 mA cm−2, an FF of 68.40%, and a PCE of 9.04%, as shown in the current–voltage (I–V) graph and table in Fig. 6c. The stabilized PCE was measured to evaluate the accuracy of the PCE value under a 7.27 V forward bias and 100 mW cm−2 illumination (Fig. S17). The stabilized PCE was measured to be 8.33%, which is similar to the PCE obtained from the I–V curve. To evaluate the performance of the semitransparent solar module in terms of the average visible light transmittance, efficiency, and module size, a comparison chart for large area semitransparent solar cells or modules is presented in Table S3. As our nanopillar-structured perovskite solar cells showed the best performance among those reported to date, our strategy clearly reveals the possibility that the use of the AAO scaffold allows us to produce the 1-D nanopillar structured perovskite, not only enabling the fabrication of a large area uniform semitransparent absorber based module, but also demonstrating the record-high device performance owing to the modulated electrical and optical properties. In particular, the AAO based 1-D nanopillar perovskite showed better crystallinity compared with the planar configuration, which led to facilitated charge transport and reduced recombination. Also, the 1-D nanopillar perovskite incorporated into the AAO scaffold can reduce the light reflectance by introducing the gradient refractive index variation in the multilayer configuration of ETL/AAO + perovskite/HTL. Furthermore, highly aligned P1, P2, and P3 etching was observed for all eight 330 μm-wide interconnecting areas (Fig. S18). The GFF was 95.6% (the ratio between the active area and the aperture area), which is the highest value among the reported perovskite solar modules. The J–V hysteresis behavior between the forward and backward voltage scans was also investigated. Only a slight hysteresis was observed at a dwell time of 50 ms (scan speed of 4.6 V s−1), in which the PCE was determined to be 8.09% for the reverse scan and 7.62% for the forward scan (Fig. S19). Fig. 6d presents the PCE statistics of 10 modules, indicating the high reproducibility of the AAO template-based nanopillar perovskite solar module. Furthermore, a preliminary stability test of the solar module without encapsulation revealed almost no degradation in the efficiency for almost 4 weeks of storage under dry-air conditions (Fig. S20). We demonstrated the viability of the nanopillar perovskite-based semitransparent solar module for laboratory-scale window applications, i.e., the operation of a toy car and a small fan (Movies S2 and S3). The results show that our fully semitransparent solar module can provide key insights for realizing real-world applications, such as power-generating windows for self-sustaining buildings and vehicles, as well as tandem solar cells.

A strategy for uniform large-area perovskite film formation using an AAO template was demonstrated, allowing for a highly efficient semitransparent perovskite solar module. The device with AAO scaffold-based nanopillar perovskite exhibited reduced reflectance compared with a planar structure, owing to the smaller effective refractive index of the periodically nanostructured AAO/perovskite layer, as confirmed by FDTD optical simulation and experiments. The nanopillar perovskite-based device exhibited faster transient photocurrent decay and slower transient photovoltage decay than planar structures owing to the vertically restricted carrier path and the high crystallinity of the perovskite inside the AAO scaffold, which enhanced the charge-collection efficiency. The nanopillar perovskite based device also showed better humidity stability than the planar structure under 75% RH, owing to the impeded moisture penetration and smaller amount of lateral diffusion, leading to a highly stable solar module. A semitransparent perovskite solar module fabricated under the optimized laser-etching conditions with an aperture area of 40.8 cm2 and nine sub-cells exhibited a PCE of 9.04%, an AVT of 30.2%, and a high GFF of 95.6%. Our AAO template-derived uniform large-area semitransparent perovskite solar module represents a key strategy for realizing practical power-generating window applications.


To fabricate the AAO-scaffold perovskite solar cells, an FTO/glass substrate was cleaned with acetone, distilled water, and ethanol for 10 min each using an ultrasonic bath, followed by O2 plasma treatment for 5 min. After being partially taped for bottom FTO electrode contact, a solution of titanium isopropoxide (0.6134 mL, 99.999%, Sigma-Aldrich) and HCl (84 μL) in ethanol (8 mL) was spin-coated at 3000 rpm for 30 s to form a c-TiO2 layer. Then, annealing was performed at 500 °C for 30 min using a box furnace. To obtain the AAO template on the c-TiO2 layer, an Al film (thickness of ∼270 nm) was thermally evaporated at a rate of 1 Å s−1 on a 4 × 6.5 cm2 substrate. For the anodization of the Al film, a 40 V direct-current voltage was applied in an oxalic acid solution (30.12 g of oxalic acid powder (Sigma-Aldrich) in 800 mL of deionized water) using a C cathode. After the anodization process, the Al was converted into a transparent nanoporous oxide layer, and then the substrate was rinsed with distilled water. A widening procedure was implemented by dipping the substrate in a phosphoric acid solution (20 mL of phosphoric acid (85 wt% in H2O, 99.99%, Sigma-Aldrich) in 545 mL of DI water) for 30 min. The AAO template substrate was post-annealed at 500 °C for 30 min to eliminate the organic residues. After cooling, the AAO substrates were treated with ultraviolet (UV) ozone for 30 min. Then, a 26 wt% perovskite precursor solution with a 3:1 molar ratio of MAI (CH3NH3I, 99.9%, Dyesol) to lead chloride (PbCl2, 99.999%, Sigma-Aldrich) in DMF (anhydrous 99.9%, Sigma-Aldrich) was spin-coated at 3000 rpm for 60 s after vacuum-assisted infiltration, followed by annealing at 105 °C for 105 min. An HTL solution containing 72 mg of 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-4-methoxyphenylamino)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (99.9%, Sigma-Aldrich) in 1 mL of chlorobenzene, along with 28.8 μL of 4-tert-butylpyridine and 17.6 μL of bis(trifluoromethane)-sulfonimide lithium salt solution (520 mg in acetonitrile), was spin-coated at 3000 rpm for 30 s. To fabricate the top electrode for the opaque module, a 70 nm Au layer was thermally evaporated onto the spiro-OMeTAD layer. For the 7 × 7 cm2 module with nine sub-cells, a 7 × 11 cm2 FTO substrate was used, on which eight lines 70 μm in width with an interval of 6.75 mm (P1 etching) were etched using a laser scribing system (μ-LAB, fiber laser, power of 20 W, wavelength of 1080 nm, Korthem Science, Korea) under the following conditions: a frequency of 50 kHz, a scan speed of 1200 mm s−1, a line interval of 0.04 mm, and a power of 80 μJ. After the same processes for c-TiO2, AAO fabrication, perovskite filling, and spiro-OMeTAD deposition, P2 etching with a 180 μm line width and various laser powers and line intervals was performed above the P1-etched module. To fabricate the fully semitransparent solar module with the ITO electrode, a 20 nm MoOx buffer layer was thermally evaporated onto the spiro-OMeTAD layer before the P2 etching procedure. After sputtering the 250 nm-thick ITO top electrode (1.3 mTorr of Ar, 30 W, 10000 s), P3 etching was performed to separate the sub-cells.


The nanostructures and microstructures of the device were examined using field-emission SEM (JSM-7001F, JEOL Ltd., Japan) and confocal laser scanning microscopy (OLS3000, Olympus, Japan), respectively. The specular transmittance of the samples was measured via UV-visible (UV-vis) spectroscopy (V-670, Jasco, Japan) at wavelengths between 350 and 900 nm. The total transmittance was determined using an integrating sphere (ARMN-735, Jasco, Japan) combined with the UV-vis spectroscopy system. The PCE was measured using a solar simulator (Sol3A Class AAA, Oriel Instrument, Irvine, USA) at 100 mW cm−2 (1 sun) using a Xe arc lamp equipped with an AM 1.5 G air mass sunlight filter. A metal mask with a 2 mm × 3 mm (0.06 cm2) hole was used to limit the active area. The scan rate was 480 mV s−1, with a delay time of 50 ms. For the solar module with nine sub-cells, the aperture area of 40.8 cm2 was defined as the overlapped region between the top ITO electrode and the bottom FTO electrode. The EQE was measured using a QEX 10 (PV measurements, Inc., Colorado, USA) in the wavelength range of 300–900 nm. The humidity–stability tests of the nanopillar cell and both types of planar cells were performed using an X-ray diffractometer (Rigaku Miniflex 600, The Woodlands, USA) after the cells were stored in a thermo-hygrostat at 25 °C and 75% RH for 0, 5, and 10 d. The TLM was implemented by measuring the resistance of the samples with differently spaced Au electrodes (1, 2, 3, and 4 mm) on the FTO/glass after laser-etching the spiro-OMeTAD/perovskite + AAO/c-TiO2/FTO/glass substrates. Four different laser-scanning line intervals (0.02, 0.04, 0.06, and 0.08 mm) were utilized to control the laser-etching speed. The transient photocurrent/voltage decay was measured using an electrochemical workstation (Zennium, Zahner, German) and a potentiostat (PP211, Zahner, German) in a transient recording module (TR8M, Zahner, German). Here, 627 nm-wavelength light with an intensity of 10 mW cm−2 controlled using a photosensor located in front of the cell was used.


Lumerical software (version 8.19.1584) was used for FDTD optical simulation based on Maxwell's equations. A simple two-dimensional simulation was performed, and the thickness of each layer was determined from the cross-sectional SEM images: 354 nm for FTO, 50 nm for TiO2, 350/250 nm for AAO/perovskite, 150 nm for the planar film, and 200 nm for spiro-OMeTAD. Perfectly matched layers (PMLs) on the top and bottom sides and a periodic boundary condition in the x-direction of the FDTD simulation region were applied. An x-polarized plane wave (Gaussian source) with a wavelength range of 300–900 nm was normally incident from the bottom side 300 nm below the FTO layer, and the transmittance and reflectance spectra were measured 100 nm above the spiro-OMeTAD layer and 350 nm below the FTO layer, respectively.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by a National Research Foundation (NRF) of Korea grant (No. 2012R1A3A2026417) funded by the Ministry of Science and ICT.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: SEM images, transmittance spectra, and XRD patterns of nanopillar and planar structured devices. Series and contact resistance, photo image, performance parameters, and optical microscope images for minimodule optimization. Stabilized PCE and shelf stability test for the semitransparent solar module. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta11892f
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020