 DOI: 10.1039/D0CY02266G
(Paper)
Catal. Sci. Technol., 2021, 11, 2745-2752


Wenhua
Li
,

Shule
Zhang
,

Qianqiao
Chen
* and 

Qin
Zhong
*

Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, 210094, People's Republic of China. E-mail: cqq@njust.edu.cn; zq304@njust.edu.cn

Received
24th November 2020
, Accepted 1st February 2021
First published on 1st February 2021
Doping of specific boron species in carbon frameworks plays an important role in enhancing the electrochemical properties of carbon. Herein, we prepared a tailored boron species-doped carbon nanotube (CNT) catalyst as the counter electrode (CE) of quantum dot sensitized solar cells (QDSSCs) by hydrothermal post-treatment of pre-oxidized CNTs. X-ray photoemission spectroscopy results show that boron is mainly present as oxygen-containing (C–O–B) and oxygen-free (C–B) boron in the sp2 carbon framework, so different levels of pre-oxidation treatments can control the content of oxygen-containing boron species and thus achieve controlled doping of boron species. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy shows that the optimized boron-doped CNTs (BCNT1) obtained a charge transfer resistance (Rct) as low as 2.17 Ω, indicating excellent reduction activity to Sn2− at the CE/electrolyte interface. The QDSSC based on the BCNT1 CE and CdS/CdSe photoanode achieves a power conversion efficiency of up to 4.55%, which is 3.10 times that of the pristine CNT CE. Our report confirms that tailorable boron doping is an effective strategy to enhance the activity of CNTs for Sn2− reduction.

Quantum dot-sensitized solar cells (QDSSCs) are clean, low-cost, and sustainable photovoltaic devices, and the structure of the QDSSCs is similar to that of the dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), including a quantum dot-sensitized TiO2 anode, a counter electrode (CE) and an electrolyte. QDSSCs have attracted extensive attention due to a theoretical power conversion efficiency of 44%, which is attributed to the quantum confinement effect, high extinction coefficient, multiexciton effect, and hot electron extraction of quantum dots (QDs). In the past few years, many efforts focused on the design and optimization of QD sensitizers have been made to improve the photovoltaic performance of QDSSCs. Recently, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of QDSSCs has reached as high as 13.71% through interface modification.

Besides photoanodes, the selection and optimization of electrolytes and CEs are equally important strategies to improve the photovoltaic performance of QDSSCs. To date, polysulfide (S2-/Sn2-) electrolyte is commonly used in QDSSCs as the optimal redox couple, because this redox couple can effectively stabilize the cadmium chalcogenide QD sensitizers and provide excellent photovoltaic performance. CEs play a crucial role in catalyzing and reducing the oxidized species. The traditional platinum CE has a strong bond to sulfide ions in the polysulfide electrolyte, which reduces the surface activity and stability of the electrode, so it exhibits poor electrocatalytic and reducing activity. After tremendous efforts of researchers, many efficient CEs have been investigated such as metal sulfides, ternary spinels, metal selenides,etc. to improve the PCE of QDSSCs.
Carbonaceous materials such as carbon nanotubes, carbon black, graphene, porous carbon, and activated carbon expand the range of CE materials due to low cost, relative durability, and excellent electrical conductivity. However, the performance of QDSSCs based on carbonaceous CEs is not remarkable enough, because their intrinsic characteristic of few active sites on sp2 carbon frameworks is not conducive to Sn2− reduction.
Heteroatom doping is an effective and simpler path to increase the number of active sites and optimize the electrocatalytic performance of carbonaceous materials. Many studies have confirmed that doping of N and S heteroatoms in carbonaceous CEs can reduce the charge transfer resistance at the interface of CE/electrolyte in QDSSCs to enhance Sn2− reduction. Alternatively, theoretical calculations and experimental results have revealed that electron-deficient boron (B) doping on the sp2 carbon frameworks can effectively modify their chemical activity and electrical properties. Currently, B-doped carbonaceous materials have been widely used in the oxygen reduction reaction, DSSCs, supercapacitors, electrochemical sensors, lithium-ion batteries (LIBs), sodium-ion batteries (SIBs), lithium–sulfur batteries, and so on. For instance, Yeh et al.considered that B doping can activate abundant free-flowing π electrons and enhance electrical conductivity with the increase of hole-type charge carriers; the prepared B-doped CNTs were used as CEs in DSSCs, which achieved a PCE of 7.17%. Yang et al. proposed that the B-doped carbon frameworks enhance the adsorption of polysulfide anions and play a positive role in improving the electrochemical performance of sulfur/carbon cathodes in lithium–sulfur batteries. Based on this, fabricating B-doped carbonaceous CEs is a promising path to obtain excellent photovoltaic performance of QDSSCs. Also, to our knowledge, the utilization of boron-doped carbonaceous materials as CEs for QDSSCs has never been investigated.
Significantly, few studies systematically reported the effect of B-doping species on electrocatalytic activity. Liu et al. reported the mechanisms of boron doping in LIBs and SIBs, and it is found that four different B-doping species (BC3, B4C, BC2O, and BCO2) were introduced into the sp2 framework. Among those B-doping species, it is considered that BC3 dopant species can improve the electrochemical activity and electrical conductivity of carbon in LIBs. However, in SIBs, BC2O and BCO2 dopant species increase the number of defects and active sites, improving the electrochemical performance. Moreover, Yun et al. believed that the improvement of electrical conductivity and the existence of abundant extrinsic defects together enhance the electrocatalytic performance of SIBs. Nevertheless, for QDSSCs, there are limited reports that discuss the effect of B-doping species on polysulfide reduction.
In this work, we report a facile synthesis of tailorable boron species-doped carbon catalysts by hydrothermal post-treatment of pre-oxidized CNTs. And, these catalysts were used as CEs for the first time to improve the photovoltaic performance of QDSSCs. Due to the low consumption and excellent physical and chemical properties of industrial CNTs, they were selected as the target materials in this report to confirm and explain the modification effect of boron doping on the electrocatalytic activity of the pristine carbon material in polysulfide electrolyte. There are two main types of boron (oxygen-containing boron species and oxygen-free boron species) in the sp2 carbon framework. To the best of our knowledge, the preparation methods reported usually involve controlling the concentration of the boron source to obtain different boron-doped carbon materials. Meanwhile, the boron-doping species obtained by this method are random, which is not conducive to further study the influence of boron-doping species on electrochemical performance.
We first performed experiments with CNTs of different pre-oxidation times to introduce more oxygen-containing functional groups on the CNT surface and then implemented the boron doping process. As a result, this report discusses and analyzes the relationship between boron-doping species and electrocatalytic performance in detail, and the PCE of QDSSCs based on optimal B-doped CNT CEs reached 4.55%. It is also noteworthy from a practical viewpoint that this provides a feasible method for efficiently applying low-cost industrial CNTs to QDSSCs.

Unless otherwise mentioned, all reagents (analytical grade) were purchased from Aladdin Reagent Co., Ltd. without further purification. Industrial multi-wall carbon nanotubes (CNTs: diameter: 3–15 μm; length: 15–30 μm) were obtained commercially from Turing Evolution Technology Co., Ltd. (Shenzhen, China). The ethanol and methanol solvents used in the experiment were purchased from Guangdong Guanghua Technology Co., Ltd., and deionized (DI) water was obtained through the experimental procedure. Fluorine-doped tin oxide glasses (FTO, square resistance: 6–8 Ω sq−1) purchased from OPV Technology Co., Ltd. (Yingkou, China) were used as substrates for the counter electrode and photoanode.


The pristine CNTs were sonicated in concentrated HNO3 solution for 2 h and 4 h, respectively, and then washed with DI water until a pH value of 7 was reached. Finally, the samples were vacuum dried at 60 °C for 24 h and these samples were marked as pre-CNT1 and pre-CNT2.


The pretreated CNTs were dispersed in a 0.1 M boric acid aqueous solution by sonication (ultrasonic cell pulverizer, Scientz-II D, Ningbo Scientz Biotechnology Co, LTD) for 10 min, and then the sample was transferred to a stainless-steel autoclave lined with Teflon for hydrothermal reaction at 180 °C for 24 h. After cooling to room temperature, the black precipitate was collected by centrifugation and washed alternately with DI water and ethanol until neutral, followed by vacuum dry overnight and grinding; the obtained samples were marked as BCNT1 and BCNT2, respectively. The specific synthesis procedures are shown in Fig. 1. As a comparison, pristine CNTs were hydrothermally treated by the same procedure, and the product was marked as BCNT0.


The prepared samples were deposited on the cleaned FTO substrate by the drop coating method for electrochemical characterization. First, the catalytic materials (2 mg mL−1) were uniformly dispersed in absolute ethanol by sonication for 10 min. Then, 60 μL of the catalyst slurry was dropwise dispersed onto the FTO glass 4 times to get an appropriate thickness.


The CdS/CdSe co-sensitized photoanodes were prepared according to the method reported in our previous study. QDSSCs are fabricated by using CdS/CdSe co-sensitized photoanodes, boron-doped CNT CEs, and a polysulfide electrolyte. Specifically, a photoanode and a CE were sealed into a sandwich structure by tapes, filling with a redox electrolyte consisting of 2 M Na2S, 2 M S, and 0.2 M KCl.


The crystal structure of the catalysts was investigated by powder X-ray diffraction (XRD, Purkinje XD-30 system, Cu Kα radiation). Raman spectra were recorded on a Sierra IM-52 Raman microscope (Snowy Range Instruments) with a laser wavelength of 785 nm. The element distribution of the catalyst was recorded by energy-dispersive spectroscopy (EDS, Hitachi S4800). The contact angle was measured using a JC2000D instrument. The photocurrent–voltage characteristics (J–V curves) of the QDSSCs were measured with an HGILX500 Technology (China) solar simulator under one-sun illumination (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2), and the solar simulator was calibrated using a standard crystalline silicon solar cell.


Typical XRD patterns of the boron-doped CNTs are displayed in Fig. 2a. Two clear diffraction peaks (2θ) located at 26° and 43° can be observed, corresponding to the (002) and (100) planes of graphitic carbon. Significantly, the position of the diffraction peak has not changed after boron doping, which indicates that boron doping does not affect the crystal structure of the CNTs obviously. In order to obtain more doping and defect information on the CNTs, the Raman spectra of the samples were characterized and shown in Fig. 2b. Three prominent peaks for the CNT-based catalysts located at ∼1294, ∼1586, and ∼2590 cm−1 are attributed to the D band, G band, and 2D band. The D band indicates the structural defects and disorder of the carbon framework, and the G band peak is assigned to an E2g mode of graphene associated with the vibration of sp2 bonded carbon atoms, while the 2D band is related to a double-resonant Raman process. As shown in Fig. 2c, the ratio of the D mode and G mode intensities (ID/IG) increases, while that of the 2D and G mode (I2D/IG) decreases with boron doping, accompanied by the slight up-shift of the G peaks; these are consistent with the reported literature results. Also, this indicates that boron-doped CNTs have been successfully prepared by the facile hydrothermal method, which provides convenient conditions for exploring the reduction activity of boron-doped CNTs for polysulfide electrolyte in QDSSCs.

Additionally, in order to intuitively reflect the successful doping of boron, an SEM image and its corresponding EDS elemental mapping images are provided in Fig. 2d–g. Fig. 2f shows that the boron is evenly dispersed on the surface of the CNTs. The contact angle (CA) can be used to characterize the infiltration of the electrolyte at the carbon material surface. As shown in Fig. 2h–k, the CAs for all samples are less than 90°, indicating that the solid surface can be infiltrated by the liquid, which facilitates sufficient contact between the CE material and the electrolyte. Significantly, BCNT0 showed a smaller CA compared to the CNTs, and the CA was further reduced as the degree of pre-oxidation increased, probably because the introduction of boron species and the increased content of oxygen species helped to improve the infiltration of the carbon material surface by the liquid phase.
To obtain information on the chemical bonding between carbon and boron in the carbon framework, X-ray photoemission spectroscopy (XPS) of BCNT1 was performed. The full spectrum of BCNT1 (Fig. S1) showed that boron was successfully doped into the carbon framework, however, the boron peak was weak due to the low content of 0.58 at%. The high-resolution C 1s spectrum (Fig. 3a) can be fitted into four peaks located at 283.9, 284.6, 285.6, and 288.7 eV, corresponding to the C–B, CC, C–C/C–O, and CO/C–O–B bonds, respectively. As shown in Fig. 3b, the peaks centered at 532.6 and 533.8 eV belong to the C–O and CO/B–O bonds. In conclusion, boron is mainly present in the carbon framework in the form of oxygen-containing and (C–O–B) oxygen-free boron bonds (C–B).

To assess the reduction activity of the electrode materials on the S2−/Sn2− electrolyte, cyclic voltammetry (CV) tests were carried out through a three-electrode system (Pt and Ag/AgCl electrodes) in a polysulfide electrolyte (0.1 M S, 0.1 M Na2S, and 0.1 M KCl) at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. Typically, peak-to-peak separation (Epp) and peak current density are prominent features for evaluating the electrocatalytic activity of materials. As shown in Fig. 4a, BCNT1 shows the highest reduction current density (3.55 mA cm−1) and the lowest Epp value (0.91 V), indicating excellent reduction activity to Sn2−. CV parameters for the different samples are presented in Fig. 4f.

Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and Tafel polarization tests were performed using symmetric cells consisting of two identical CEs to further investigate charge transfer processes. As shown in Fig. 4c, one semicircle can be observed in the Nyquist plots of each CE. Combined with the results of Bode spectra, the semicircle is related to charge transfer resistance (Rct) and capacitance of the solid/electrolyte interface, and the nonzero intercept of the real axis is the series impedance (Rs). The EIS parameters fitted by the ZSimpWin software are listed in Table 1, and the equivalent circuit is shown in Fig. 4c. BCNT1 CE exhibits the lowest Rct of 2.17 Ω with the introduction of boron atoms, indicating its excellent reduction activity to Sn2−. However, excessive oxidation treatment increased carbon framework defects and reduced electron transfer during the reduction process. The electron lifetime (τ) of the CE material participating in the reduction reaction can be obtained according to the formula τ = 1/2πfp, where fp is the peak frequency in Bode spectra. As shown in Fig. 4d, BCNT1 with the lowest τ value demonstrates the highest reduction reaction rate. Additionally, the exchange current density (J0) values obtained by extrapolating the linear region of the curve to the intercept at zero overpotential are summarized in Table 1. BCNT1 has the largest J0, and the others are in the following order: BCNT0 > BCNT2 > CNT. J0 can also be calculated according to the formula J0 = RT/nFRct, so J0 is inversely proportional to Rct. The results of the Tafel test further validate the EIS results. The excellent catalytic activity of BCNT1 may be related to the introduction of appropriate boron species in the carbon framework which improves the electrical conductivity and electrode surface infiltration into the electrolyte.
CEs

R
s (Ω)

R
ct (Ω)
CNT
23.23
36.03
BCNT0
20.89
5.69
BCNT1
19.95
2.17
BCNT2
19.81
14.58

The current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the QDSSCs assembled with CdS/CdSe QD-sensitized photoanodes and CNT-based CEs under one sunlight illumination (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−1) were obtained to further study the performance of the CEs (Fig. 5a). The photovoltaic parameters of the QDSSCs obtained from the J–V curves are summarized in Table 2, including short-circuit current density (Jsc), open-circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (FF), and PCE. Table 2 shows that boron doping caused a significant increase in the Jsc values, which may be due to the electron-deficient boron doping resulting in enhanced electron transport and thus increased reduction activity to Sn2−. Significantly, the BCNT1 CE-based QDSSC obtained a PCE of up to 4.55%, which is an improvement of nearly 209% compared to that of the pristine CNT CE. This also confirms that the photovoltaic performance of CNT CE-based QDSSCs can be greatly improved by controlled doping of boron elements.

CEs

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF
PCE (%)
CNT
8.34
0.45
0.40
1.47
BCNT0
15.10
0.48
0.52
3.80
BCNT1
17.40
0.52
0.52
4.55
BCNT2
11.80
0.45
0.42
2.22
Besides, the electrochemical stability of the CE material also greatly affects the application of QDSSCs. Multi-cycle successive CV tests of the CEs were performed with a three-electrode system at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1. The results (Fig. 5b–e) show that the shape of the curves remained unchanged after 50 successive CV scans, which confirmed the excellent electrochemical stability of the CNT-based CEs in the polysulfide electrolyte system.

In summary, we have developed a method for controlled doping of boron species by pre-oxidation of CNTs. Predictably, this method can also be used analogously for doping of other elements, such as N, P, S, etc. Meanwhile, the QDSSC based on the optimal boron-doped CNT CE achieved a PCE of up to 4.55%, mainly due to improved electron transport and excellent wettability to the electrolyte.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51578288), the Jiangsu Province Scientific and Technological Achievements into a Special Fund Project (BA2017095), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (30919011220), the Top-notch Academic Programs Project of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions, and a project by the Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0cy02266g
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021