 DOI: 10.1039/C6EE02544G
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3770-3782


Sagar Motilal
Jain
,

Zhen
Qiu
,

Leif
Häggman
,

Mohammad
Mirmohades
,

Malin B.
Johansson
,

Tomas
Edvinsson
* and 

Gerrit
Boschloo
*

Uppsala University, Department of Chemistry-Ångström Laboratory, Physical Chemistry, Box 523, SE 751 20, Uppsala, Sweden. E-mail: Gerrit.boschloo@kemi.uu.se

Department of Engineering Sciences, Solid State Physics, Uppsala University, Box 534, SE 751 21, Uppsala, Sweden. E-mail: Tomas.edvinsson@angstrom.uu.se

Received
31st August 2016
, Accepted 17th October 2016
First published on 17th October 2016
Films of the hybrid lead halide perovskite CH3NH3PbI3 were found to react with pyridine vapor at room temperature leading to complete bleaching of the film. In dry air or nitrogen atmosphere recrystallization takes place, leading to perovskite films with markedly improved optical and photovoltaic properties. The physical and chemical origin of the reversible bleaching and recrystallization mechanism was investigated using a variety of experimental techniques and quantum chemical calculations. The strong Lewis base pyridine attacks the CH3NH3PbI3. The mechanism can be understood from a frustrated Lewis pair formation with a partial electron donation of the lone-pair on nitrogen together with competitive bonding to other species as revealed by Raman spectroscopy and DFT calculations. The bleached phase consists of methylammonium iodide crystals and an amorphous phase of PbI2(pyridine)2. After spontaneous recrystallization the CH3NH3PbI3 thin films have remarkably improved photoluminescence, and solar cell performance increased from 9.5% for as-deposited films to more than 18% power conversion efficiency for recrystallized films in solar cells with planar geometry under AM1.5G illumination. Hysteresis was negligible and open-circuit potential was remarkably high, 1.15 V. The results show that complete recrystallization can be achieved with a simple room temperature pyridine vapor treatment of CH3NH3PbI3 films leading to high quality crystallinity films with drastically improved photovoltaic performance.

Lead halide-based perovskite solar cells are considered to be a very promising candidate for future large-scale photovoltaic applications, because of their potential for very low cost and the high efficiency that has been obtained for small devices after only a few years of research. There are, however, several severe challenges for these solar cells in terms of long-term stability, device hysteresis, and reproducibility. The findings in this work could significantly improve the quality and reproducibility perovskite films and solar cells by simple means. CH3NH3PbI3 thin films prepared by a simple one step solution-based methods often display undesired properties, such as poor surface coverage leading to pin-holes and other defects. After a room-temperature recrystallization method using pyridine vapor the quality of perovskite films is much improved: porosity largely disappears, photoluminescence is enhanced and solar cell devices show much increased performance. In this study poor CH3NH3PbI3 films, with solar cell efficiencies of 9.5% at best, were converted into excellent quality perovskite films by the pyridine vapor treatment, giving rise to solar cell devices with planar configuration yielding 18.5% efficiency with improved voltage up to 1.15 V and very little hysteresis in current–voltage characterization.


Lead halide based-perovskite solar cells (PSC) have recently emerged as a very promising photovoltaic system, with certified solar cell performance now surpassing 22%. They are a viable alternative to crystalline silicon, CdTe, or CIGS solar cells provided that stability and legislative toxicity issues can be solved. Lead halide perovskite thin films can be synthesized using both vapor-phase and low-temperature solution-based methods. The latter is ideally suited for low-cost large scale deposition methods, but solution processing is highly sensitive to ambient environment, where temperature, humidity, gas flow and concentration of precursors play a signification role.

In some labs, specific glove boxes are not cleaned since they produce better perovskite films than new glove boxes and reports on better performances with different nitrogen purging flows precursor concentration, spin-coating speeds, and substrate temperatures are frequently also reported. This reveals that the crystallization process is very sensitive to the conditions in the initial stage, which makes it difficult to control the final quality of the perovskite films and is detrimental for reproducibility on the lab-scale, which is problematic for comparison of fundamental properties as a function of material composition and very problematic for the device performance statistics for future large scale production. Solar cell performance relies on material properties of perovskites, including long charge carrier diffusion lengths, high absorption coefficients, and high photoluminescence quantum efficiency. Photoluminescence quantum efficiency is specifically important for the highest photovoltaic device performance approaching the Shockley–Queisser limit, and hence for decreasing non-radiative recombination. These properties depend critically on quality of perovskite film and thus on the sensitive synthesis conditions which constitutes the high crystallinity and reduced defects of these films. However, there still remains much room for further improvement since there exists significant heterogeneity in the polycrystalline films, and little is known about the defect chemistry. In our previous work particularly for planar type of PSCs similar to other studies, we observed incomplete conversion and non-uniform coverage of perovskite films for many synthesis conditions and has been regarded as the major factor resulting in decreased device performance. The planar-type device architecture is particularly interesting due to the simple cell configuration and possible low-temperature fabrication on flexible substrates. In addition, recent reports show that improved performance can be obtained for solution-processable planar PSCs.
Several efforts to improve the quality of lead halide perovskite films using post processing methods have been reported. Among these is the methylamine gas treatment that leads to optical bleaching of CH3NH3PbI3 films through a room-temperature phase transformation, followed by a recovery when the gas is removed. The resulting films had improved quality and yielded better PSC efficiencies. CH3NH2 gas is highly sensitive to humidity content and requires strict inert atmosphere for processing. Wakamiya and co-workers reported that in humidity and presence of excess CH3NH2 (g) irreversible [PbI4]2− structures are formed that have negative impact on the quality of perovskite films. A comparable reversible bleaching effect for CH3NH3PbI3 films was observed earlier for ammonia vapor, another Lewis base. In that study, however, no solar cell results were reported.
Here we report on a similar reversible bleaching effect of CH3NH3PbI3 induced by pyridine vapor. We demonstrate that bleaching under the influence of pyridine fully dissolves the crystals and that the subsequent recrystallization of the lead halide perovskite film results in high quality crystallinity and drastic improvement of the performance of solar cell devices. Pyridine treatment gives rise to perovskite films with more homogeneous and smooth surface morphology, enhanced crystallinity, improved light absorption and markedly improved photoluminescence, indicating a significant decrease of defect states. This results into remarkably increased power conversion efficiency for solar cells from 9.5% to above 18.5% for planar CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite devices with good reproducibility. Furthermore, we establish a mechanistic pathway, involving frustrated Lewis pairs, for the pyridine-induced recrystallization reaction on basis of experiments and quantum chemical calculations. We note that the use of pyridine as a passivating agent for hybrid lead halide perovskites was reported previously by Noel et al. They reported a mild surface treatment that healed surface states; no mention was made of a bleaching effect or recrystallization of the perovskite.
Pyridine vapor treatment is easily performed in ambient air atmosphere at room temperature. The recovery of film occurs spontaneously at room temperature when the pyridine source is removed. Pyridine post-treatment can be performed in ambient atmosphere and can possibly be a general method to improve the performance of perovskite solar cells.

CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite films by spin coating 34.5 wt% stoichiometric amounts of PbI2 and CH3NH3I in γ-butylactone as previously reported, and mentioned in more detail in the material preparation section. The substrates were plain glass for XRD and UV-visible, photoluminescence and Raman spectroscopy characterization and compact TiO2 coated FTO substrates for work function measurements and for preparation of solar cell devices with planar device architecture. The simple pyridine vapor treatment procedure is shown in Fig. 1. The dark colored CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite film bleaches completely within a minute to a dusky white upon exposure to pyridine vapor at room temperature. When the film is removed from the pyridine vapor, the bleached film recovers slowly, in the order tens of minutes at room temperature. A video of this process is provided in supporting information. We found that quality of the final CH3NH3PbI3 film formed is affected by the humidity in ambient air. To avoid the influence of water, the recovery process in this study was done at room temperature in a dry box equipped with a continuous nitrogen flow, unless noted otherwise. The recovery in air with low humidity (<30%) was similar to that in nitrogen.

The UV-visible spectra shows optical band gap of 1.59 eV (absorption onset wavelength 778 nm) for the CH3NH3PbI3 films, typical of the tetragonal CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite. The pyridine-bleached film is white and light-scattering, which results in an offset of the baseline of the absorption spectrum (Fig. 2) (since absorbance is calculated from the specular transmittance). In contrast, the bleached phases obtained on exposing CH3NH3PbI3 films to NH3 (g) or CH3NH2 (g) were reported to be fully transparent. We propose that the light-scattering effect is due to formation of CH3NH3I crystals, on basis of XRD analysis, which will be discussed later.
It is evident that the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite absorption disappears completely in the pyridine-induced bleached state. There is, however, an absorption onset at about 400 nm. For comparison, PbI2 thin film has an absorption onset at ca. 522 nm. To further explore the absorption in the UV-region, reflectance spectra were recorded for the bleached film (Fig. S1, ESI), which showed a pronounced minimum at 360 nm. This corresponds well with the reported absorption maximum of the PbI2(pyridine)2 complex. Notably, the absorption of PbI2 films also decreased when exposed to pyridine vapor (Fig. S2, ESI), due for formation of this complex.
The recovered CH3NH3PbI3 film shows identical optical bandgap (1.59 eV) as the as-deposited film, but has a stronger absorption. The increase in absorbance and upward shifting of the whole spectrum indicates the formation of larger crystals of perovskite that give some light-scattering. The maximum absorbance that can be measured is limited by pinholes in the film. The as-deposited film has an absorbance limit of 2, indicative of about 1% pinholes, while the pyridine recovered film has a limit of 3, corresponding to 0.1% pinholes, which is a significant improvement in film coverage.
XRD studies were performed to monitor crystalline transformations during the pyridine vapor treatment, see Fig. 3. The as-prepared CH3NH3PbI3 shows a main peak at 14.2° 2θ which is characteristic of the CH3NH3PbI3 [001] lattice distance in the tetragonal crystal structure, with further peaks at 20.0°, 23.6°, 24.6°, 28.5°, 31.9°, 35.0°, 40.6°, and 43.2° corresponding to the reflections from [200], [211], [202], [220], [310], [312], [224], and [314] of the perovskite.
The presence of some PbI2 follows from small XRD peaks at 2θ = 12.5 θ° and 56.0 θ°. This is a typical problem assigned to incomplete conversion of CH3NH3PbI3 in thin films. For comparison, the XRD pattern of a spin-coated PbI2 film is shown in Fig. 3, showing a main peak at 12.5° (2θ), and additional peaks at 34.3°, 39.5°, and 52.3° that are assigned to [001], [012], [003], and [004] lattice planes of the 2H polytype PbI2, respectively.
On exposing the CH3NH3PbI3 film to pyridine vapor (1–3 minutes) the bleached film gives XRD reflections at 9, 19 and 29°, indicative of the formation of CH3NH3I crystals. For comparison, the XRD pattern of CH3NH3I powder is also shown in Fig. 3. The XRD peaks at 12.5° of PbI2 and at 14.2° due to CH3NH3PbI3 are not present, demonstrating the collapse of a crystalline PbI6 framework. Most likely an amorphous PbI2–pyridine complex is formed. Some small intensity peaks at higher angle of 24.5 θ° and 40.51 θ° could indicate the presence of a small amount of CH3NH3PbI3 in the [202] and [224] orientations. In addition, the small peaks at 38.9° and 57.07° could indicate a trace of PbI2 in the sample.
Recovered CH3NH3PbI3 films show increased crystallinity, as is evident from a 10-fold increase in the main diffraction peak, Fig. 3. A slight decrease in the peak width indicates increase in crystal size, but the main effect is a higher crystallinity of the sample. PbI2 peaks present in the as-deposited CH3NH3PbI3 film have disappeared.
Surface morphology of the as-deposited CH3NH3PbI3 films and pyridine treated and recovered CH3NH3PbI3 films was evaluated by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The as-deposited CH3NH3PbI3 films appear rough, inhomogeneous and rather porous, see Fig. 4. The apparent grain size is in the order of 300–500 nm. The recrystallized CH3NH3PbI3 film after exposure to pyridine shows a much smoother and homogeneous surface, with reduced porosity. The CH3NH3PbI3 grains display a larger average size of ∼1 μm and appear compact and well-interconnected. This suggests a decrease in the amount of trap states, structural defects and grain boundaries that can act as recombination centers and as sites susceptible to attack by moisture.
Raman spectroscopy was utilized to obtain insight into the pyridine-induced bleaching and recrystallization process, see Fig. 5. The as-prepared CH3NH3PbI3 film shows the typical features of the CH3NH3PbI3, with Pb–I bending at 71 cm−1, Pb–I stretching at 94 cm−1 and the CH3NH3+ libration mode at 111 cm−1. The bleached film shows a substantial decrease in intensity of the inorganic cage features at 50, 71 cm−1 and 94 cm−1 complying with a substantial degradation of the PbI6 framework and hence the CH3NH3PbI3 crystalline structure. The simultaneous appearance of the CH3NH3+ libration mode and adsorbed pyridine mode indicates the pyridine is associated closely to alignment of CH3NH3+ groups and thus also assists in stabilizing a more optimal condition for recrystallization into a more ordered phase. The pyridine peak disappears with time at the same time as the Raman peaks due to CH3NH3PbI3 become stronger. The recrystallization process can be followed by the relative enhanced intensity of the Raman spectrum of recovered CH3NH3PbI3 film i.e. band at 71 cm−1 (Pb–I bending), 94 cm−1 (Pb–I stretching) associated 111 cm−1 (CH3NH3+ libration mode) and the appearance of new band at 145 cm−1 associated with ordering of CH3NH3+ groups, indicates enhanced crystallinity, likely related to crystal growth and more oriented material on the μm scale as also seen in the XRD data. No peaks related to adsorbed pyridine are observed for the recovered CH3NH3PbI3, showing that the intercalation of pyridine in the perovskite framework is fully reversible.
During the pyridine-bleaching and recrystallization process two additional peaks appear in the Raman spectra of the intermediate phase (the marked yellow region in Fig. 5a) at 34 and 49 cm−1. These peaks can be attributed to plumbates (PbI3− and PbI64−) where we find Raman peaks at 35 and 43 cm−1 for isolated PbI3− and 48 cm−1 for PbI64− clusters in Iinear response DFT calculations using the scalar-relativistic Stuttgart–Dresden potential and the HSE06 functional. This is also consistent with a previous report finding isolated plumbates in alkylammonium halides while isolated planar PbI42− showing lower wavenumber response (18 and 23 cm−1) in the calculations and should thus be partially bonded if present in the intermediate phase.
The Raman spectra of pyridine in the bleached phase give information about the bonding by comparing the Raman spectrum of pure pyridine vapor and pyridine interacting with CH3NH3PbI3 (Fig. 5b). A shift of 11 cm−1 is found for the symmetric ring breathing mode involving nitrogen. The pyridine shows fingerprint vibrations at 991 and 1029 cm−1; where the 991 cm−1 is the ν(N–C) breathing mode while 1029 cm−1 is the hydrogen wagging on the ring. When interacting with CH3NH3PbI3, the ν(N–C) breathing mode shifts from 991 to 1002 cm−1 while the band at 1029 cm−1 remains unperturbed revealing a bonding via the nitrogen group on the pyridine ring. To investigate the different possible bonding situations, DFT calculations of the corresponding Raman shifts were performed. Pyridine bonding via the nitrogen to the CH3NH3+ ion gives a negative shift of 32 cm−1. The other two possibilities are the well-known halogen elimination reaction of pyridine and pyridine bonding to Pb2+. In the halogen elimination reaction, the halogen anion is predominately protonated neutralizing the charge on the halogen where the pyridine interaction and shows a shift of 5 cm−1. Calculated frequency shifts from Lewis base–acid pair formation of the nitrogen in pyridine to iodide coordinated Pb2+ show a larger response (20 cm−1) while bonding to hydrogen bonded iodide a smaller shift. This is a strong indication that the nitrogen is not fully bonded to a Lewis acid but steric hindered where iodide interaction competed with a pure Lewis pair interaction and thus sterically hindered and only partially bonded in agreement with a frustrated Lewis pair effect,
The DFT results reveal that a full bonding via a Lewis pair formation would generate larger Raman shifts than the ones that can be observed in the experiments. Our DFT calculations reveal that a possible candidate for this is the pyridine interaction with iodide that is charge compensated with a proton or hydrogen bonded as in the halogen elimination reaction using pyridine. The situation found in experiments and comparison with the theoretical shifts thus point to a frustrated bonding situation with several possible interactions with stable bond formations, where pyridine on one hand is able to bond to iodine that is charge compensated via hydrogen bonds from either isolated protons or protons attached to the hydrogen in the CH3NH3+ (MA+) ion and on the other hand an interaction with Pb2+ exposed surfaces and pyridine–(PbIn)(2−n) plumbate complexes.
Here, several trans and cis configurations were founds to be stable in our DFT calculations and comply also with the low wavenumber vibrations in the Raman spectra of the intermediate phase as well as previously reported larger cis and trans Pb2I4 pyridine4-complexes in a bleached phase of PbI2.
On the basis of electronic structure calculations, we have investigated how the possible interactions between the organic cations and the inorganic counterpart affect the vibrational frequency and the Raman intensity of vibration spectra. For slightly larger clusters, the lone pair on nitrogen forms a stable interaction with both MA+ and exposed Pb2+ as calculated using the HSE06 hybrid-functional with the Stuttgart–Dresden scalar relativistic pseudo-potentials. The shifts in the Raman vibrations calculated with linear response DFT for the different situations however, show a more substantial shift (80–100 cm−1) compared to the observed 11 cm−1 shift reveals that the interaction in the experimental system is weaker and again complies with the formation of a frustrated Lewis pair in smaller plumbates where the competitive bonding situation prevent a full Lewis acid and base interaction.
The experimental XRD, Raman, and UV-visible spectroscopy, together with the theoretical assessments and the control experiments in the supplementary materials allow us to identify the crucial intermediates in the process and a possible formulation of an overall reaction mechanism. The first contact with pyridine generates partial electron donation from pyridine forming a weak H-bonded intermediate with the Lewis acid CH3NH3+ as indicated by the relatively small shift of 11 cm−1 for the symmetric pyridine breathing in the Raman spectroscopy.
Further experiments (Fig. S5, ESI) were performed in order to explore the precise mechanism for the interaction of the pyridine on CH3NH3PbI3 film. PbI2 powder was mixed in liquid pyridine and found it to be completely soluble. CH3NH3I powder, however, precipitates as white powder when mixed with pyridine. When as-prepared CH3NH3PbI3 powder was suspended in pyridine, a precipitate with white crystals of CH3NH3I is formed (Fig. S5(b), ESI). These experiments support the formation of CH3NH3I crystals during the pyridine induced bleaching of CH3NH3PbI3.
The bleaching of CH3NH3PbI3 in the presence of pyridine (pyr) vapor resembles the bleaching of PbI2, which has been described in detail:
PbI + 2pyr ⇆ PbI2(pyr)2
(1)
In this process the typical yellow color of PbI
2 is lost and a colorless compound with a linear chain structure is formed. Also a 1:1 adduct was proposed, but this could not be isolated. We propose that a similar reaction can take place in CH3NH3PbI3 in the presence of pyridine. The overall reaction is:

CH3NH3PbI3 + 2pyr ⇆ PbI2(pyr) + CH3NH3I
(2)
Support for this reaction comes from the UV-visible spectrum of the bleached state, which shows a absorption at 365 nm in the UV range characteristic of PbI
2(pyr)2, as well as XRD that gives evidence for the formation of CH3NH3I. Quantum chemical calculations give indications that such a reaction could be mediated through the following reactions:

CH3NH3Pbl3 + pyr ⇆ [CH3NH2⋯H⋯pyr]+ + [PbI3]−
(3)
CH3NH3PbI3 + pyr ⇆ CH3NH2 + HI⋯pyr + PbI2
(4)
Both these reactions effectively isolate methylammonium from the perovskite, and open the material up for complexation of pyridine with PbI
x species. The first contact with pyridine generates partial electron donation from pyridine forming a weak H-bonded intermediate with the Lewis acid CH3NH3+ as indicated by the relatively small shift of 11 cm−1 for the symmetric pyridine breathing in the Raman spectroscopy.

The XRD from the bleached phase also show the presence of intermediate CH3NH3I crystals and Raman show low wavenumber vibrations consistent with isolated PbIn clusters.
DFT calculations show a stable formation of a pyridine–CH3NH3+ interaction both in gas phase and in self-consistent reaction field DFT corresponding to pyridine environment. Here, one hydrogen is transferred to the pyridine with a N–H distance of 1.033 Å, compared to the 1.029 Å in the CH3NH2 adduct to be compared with the N–H distance of 1.117 Å in the original CH3NH3+ before hydrogen transfer.
Both the formation of CH3NH3I species as observed in the XRD is bound to generated iodide deficient species in the bleached phase consisting of [PbIn–m]−(n−m−2) species that has ligand coordination sites open for interaction with the lone pair in pyridine. The lead-iodide species can be PbI4−2 (planar) or PbI6−4 (plumbates) or mixture of both present in the form of quantum dots interspersed into the CH3NH3I matrix. The methylamine groups linked to the pyridine through H-bonding interactions this can then form ordered structures aligning the lead-iodide species. Upon evaporation of pyridine, the now more ordered lead-iodide species can again form the perovskite phase via replacement of the nitrogen lone-pair with iodide upon evaporation of pyridine forming large ordered crystals showing the largely enhanced luminescence and photovoltaic properties, as will be discussed below.
Photoluminescence (PL) measurements are an important in-situ evaluation tools to monitor semiconductor film quality, where a strong PL response indicates a high-quality crystalline material. The steady-state PL signal for perovskite films was monitored in real time while the film was exposed to pyridine vapor. The excitation light (532 nm) had a penetration length of about 80 nm, much less than the thickness of the perovskite films.
We found a two-fold increase in PL-intensity for recrystallized CH3NH3PbI3 film compared to the as-prepared film (Fig. 6a) when the recovery process was done in ambient air. The PL maximum shifted slightly from 775 nm initially to 769 nm after recovery. This shift is consistent for the CH3NH3PbI3 samples prepare on glass substrate (Fig. S2, ESI)
For the CH3NH3PbI3 samples prepared on glass/compact TiO2, (Fig. 6), the increase in PL intensity demonstrates a larger fraction of radiative recombination and thus a decreased fraction of non-radiative recombination, indicative of improvement of the semiconductor material due to a decrease in defects. The slight blue-shift of the PL maximum cannot be explained from the crystal size that increases after the pyridine treatment (this would rather result in a red shift). Instead it could be due to removal of low-lying trap states in the perovskite. The narrowing of the PL-peak from 48 nm to 35 nm at FWHM can be correlated to the formation of larger crystal after pyridine treatment.
The intermediate PL spectra in the initial stages of recrystallization show a huge PL-enhancement and an additional shoulder around 700 nm. The precise origin of this shoulder is uncertain at this stage but can originate in the formation of X-ray amorphous CH3NH3PbI3 quantum dots formed as intermediate species during the recovery process of CH3NH3PbI3. In our previous work, we monitored similar abnormal enhancement in PL-intensity for intermediate steps during transformation of PbI2 to CH3NH3PbI3 that we attributed to quantum dots. Alternatively, the shoulder around 700 nm could be due to the formation of (PbI4)2− and (PbI6)4− plumbate species as an intermediate phase, for which evidence is found in the Raman spectra at 35 and 49 cm−1.
The partial pressure of a gaseous species that adsorbs to a semiconductor surface can be inferred by monitoring the PL signal, thus forming the basis for a novel chemical sensor. An interesting application of surface-adsorbate-induced changes in the PL intensity has been described in a series of publications by Ellis et al. and references therein.
High resolution photoluminescence mapping was further used to characterize the CH3NH3PbI3 film. The sample was mounted on a 200 nm step-size movable stage and excited by 1 micrometer diameter laser spot. Spatial resolution of 200 nm was achieved by super sampling and deconvolution of the signal (Fig. 7).
More uniform and higher photoluminescence behavior was found for the recovered CH3NH3PbI3 with lower standard deviation and evidence for relatively larger crystals. Photoluminescence emission properties on perovskite films are in agreement with surface morphology (SEM) and correlate with solar cell device performance. We observed that the increased photoluminescence intensity of the CH3NH3PbI3 films recovered in a N2 dry box (about ten-fold) is markedly higher compared to the PL-intensity represented in Fig. 6 for films recovered in ambient atmosphere.
Time-correlated single photon counting (TCSPC) was used to further investigate as-deposited CH3NH3PbI3 and pyridine recovered CH3NH3PbI3 films deposited in compact TiO2/glass substrate, see Fig. 8. A much higher initial photoluminescence intensity (by a factor of ∼6) is found for recrystallized films. This further emphasizes the improved quality of these films. Biphasic kinetics traces are observed for both samples, with a fast component ∼100 ps, likely correlated to the 70 ps laser pulse, and a slower component of ∼10 ns, which probably reflects the lifetime of the free charge carriers in the film. The fast component could possibly indicate rapid trap filling. Since the films were deposited on TiO2 for this study to resemble the situation on solar cells, quenching of the photoluminescence due to electron injection into the TiO2 is a possibility. This process could be on the ns-timescale. For a good quality CH3NH3PbI3 films CH3NH3PbI3 films Wehrenfennig et al. obtained lifetime of 6 ns. In our case a lifetime of about 10 ns for the CH3NH3PbI3 film for pyridine treated film was observed.
Kelvin probe measurements were performed to probe work function, surface photovoltage change of CH3NH3PbI3 thin films and the effect of pyridine treatment. For measurements CH3NH3PbI3 films were prepared on FTO/c-TiO2 substrate. When kept in the dark, the as-prepared CH3NH3PbI3 film had a work function (WF) of 4.06 eV, which changed to 4.98 eV after pyridine treatment and recrystallization. The very large difference of 0.92 eV probably represents the change of the perovskite semiconductor from a film with n-type character to one with p-type character after pyridine treatment.
Furthermore, Kelvin probe measurements were done in dark and different light intensity conditions to monitor the work function change. This is useful to estimate surface photovoltage (SPV), Which is SPV = WF(dark) − WF(illumination or light). From Fig. 9, SPV of as prepared CH3NH3PbI3 film and pyridine treated film is −0.09 eV and 0.05 eV respectively. These changes are very small and shows that there is no significant band bending at the perovskite/air interface. The work function mapping of 600 μm surface area (Fig. 9a and b) on as prepared as well pyridine treated CH3NH3PbI3 films shows average WF = 4.30 eV and 5.21 eV respectively. From the work function mapping of 600 μm × 600 μm surface area the variation in surface photovoltage was found decreased for pyridine treated films as compared to the as-deposited films. This shows a more homogenous distribution of surface photovoltage for pyridine treated CH3NH3PbI3 films. The different batches of CH3NH3PbI3 films were used for Fig. 9a–c, which may explain the difference in the work function values obtained for mapping and under different light intensity. Nevertheless, the relative trend is similar.
Planar thin film solar cells were prepared on FTO substrates with a compact layer of TiO2 (∼30–40 nm) prepared by spray pyrolysis. Spiro-MeOTAD was used as the p-type contact for the solar cells. All devices were prepared without the use of antireflective coating. The thickness of the recrystallized CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite layers measured with a step profiler and SEM cross-section (Fig. 10b) was about ∼650 nm, which is relatively thick for a one-step spin-coated perovskite film. All devices were measured under simulated sunlight with an intensity of 1000 W m−2 and a scan rate 30 mV s−1, with scan direction in current–voltage (IV) characterization from open circuit potential to 0 V and reverse to assess hysteresis effects. Anomalous hysteresis in IV-curves as well as and device statistics are important to report to in case of perovskite solar cells, where hysteresis and sample variations can be large.
The champion device for the as-prepared CH3NH3PbI3 shows a PCE of 9.5%, with open-circuit potential (VOC) of 0.80 V, short-circuit photocurrent density (JSC) of 19 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 0.63. There is noticeable hysteresis, on the reverse scan (0 V to VOC) the PCE is lowered to 8.2% with a FF of 0.54 (Fig. 10c). A remarkable improvement of solar cell performance is found after the pyridine-induced recrystallization (Fig. 10d). The efficiency of the champion device is increased to 18.5%, which is among the top values reported for CH3NH3PbI3-based solar cells. Furthermore, a very high VOC is obtained, 1.15 V, which is an improvement of as much as 0.35 V compared to the as-deposited films. Also JSC is improved to 22 mA cm−2, and FF to 0.73. Finally, the hysteresis effect is substantially reduced, with a PCE on backward scan of 17.9%. Table 1 summarized the performance of the champion cells. At a lower scan speed of 10 mV s−1, the PCE remains unaffected with no change in current and voltage (Fig. S6, ESI). The average device efficiency of pyridine-treated solar cells (n = 48) was more than 15% (see Fig. S6 and Table S2 in ESI).
Sample, scan direction

J
SC (mA cm−2)
PCE (%)

V
OC (V)
FF
FF, fill factor; JSC, short circuit current density; PCE, power conversion efficiency, VOC, open circuit voltage.
CH3NH3Pbl3
Forward scan
19.1
9.5
0.80
0.63
Backward scan
19.1
8.2
0.80
0.54
Pyridine treated CH3NH3Pbl3
Forward scan
22.0
18.5
1.15
0.73
Backward scan
22.0
17.9
1.15
0.71
The excellent performance of the pyridine vapor recrystallized CH3NH3PbI3-solar cells can be attributed to the improved quality of the perovskite films. Defects and porosity are effectively removed, leading to less recombination losses in the bulk of the material as well as at the contacts, which leads to the very high VOC values that are obtained. Our method led to relatively thick perovskite films (∼650 nm), which also may be advantageous for solar cell performance. The recrystallized film is denser and more crystalline, which likely leads to better charge transport properties, which are reflected in the improved fill factor.

In summary, we have developed and mechanistically investigated a pyridine vapor-recrystallization method for hybrid lead halide perovskite films. We demonstrate that treatment of perovskite films with the Lewis-base pyridine results in formation of frustrated Lewis pairs and formation of a bleached intermediate phase, which spontaneously recrystallizes when the vapor is removed. The approach leads to perovskite films with increased crystallinity, reduced porosity and a decreased concentration of electronic trap states, resulting in significantly improved photoluminescence and photovoltaic properties. Planar CH3NH3PbI3 solar cell devices with high reproducibility and performance up to 18.5% with very high open circuit potentials, 1.15 V, and negligible hysteresis were obtained. The simple methods used promises low processing costs and easy implementation for improving planar CH3NH3PbI3 solar cell devices, and potentially hybrid lead halide perovskite films in general. Moreover, as the recrystallization involves room temperature processing, it is compatible with fabrication of solar cells on flexible substrates.


The CH3NH3I powder was prepared according to the reported procedure. To prepare CH3NH3PbI3, readily synthesized CH3NH3I (0.395 g) and PbI2 (1.157 g, 99% Aldrich) were mixed in γ-butyrolactone (1 mL, 99% Aldrich) at 60 °C for 3 hours with stirring.


Samples were prepared by spin coating as prepared CH3NH3PbI3, readily synthesized CH3NH3I (0.395 g) and PbI2 (1.157 g, 99% Aldrich) were mixed in γ-butyrolactone (2 mL, 0.99% Aldrich) at 60 °C for 3 hours with stirring. The substrates used were microscope glass for characterization or on FTO-coated glass (TEC 15, Pilkington), with TiO2 compact layer prepared by spray pyrolysis of Ti-isopropoxide for solar cell device. The composition of hole transport material (HTM) was 0.170 M 2,2′,7,7′tetrakis-(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenyl-amine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene(spiro-MeOTAD, Merck) 0.064 M bis(trifluoromethane) sulfonimide lithium salt (LiTFSI, 99.95%, Aldrich) and 0.198 M 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP, 96%, Aldrich) in the mixed solvent of chlorobenzene (99.8%, Aldrich) and acetonitrile (99.8%, Aldrich) (chlorobenzene:acetonitrile 5.1:0.1 v/v). The CH3NH3PbI3-sensitized TiO2 films were coated with HTM solution using spin-coating method at 4000 rpm. For the counter electrode, a 60 nm-thick Ag was deposited on the top of the HTM over layer by a thermal evaporation; the perovskite film thickness was measured by alpha-step IQ surface profiler (KLA Tencor).

The pyridine induced bleaching of CH3NH3PbI3 was carried out in ambient environment (humidity >20%) (see Video 1 in ESI), while the recovery of the bleached phase was done inside a dry box equipped with continuous N2 gas flow (humidity <11%).
To mimic the device architecture CH3NH3PbI3 film were prepared on compact TiO2 on FTO for Kelvin probe measurements and SEM surface morphology. XRD, UV-visible, photoluminescence, and Raman measurements were done on CH3NH3PbI3 films prepared on glass substrates. Time-correlated single photon counting (TCSPC) was performed on samples on compact TiO2/glass.

X-ray diffraction (XRD) was performed with a Siemens diffractometer D5000 using CuKα radiation and Diffrac plus XRD commander software. The instrument was set in “detector scan” mode, and the acquisition was done in θ–2θ° mode for every 0.02 θ increment over the Bragg angle range of 10–60 2θ°.


Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) was performed on a Zeiss (Gemini 1550) microscope having a field emission (FE) electron source and an in-lens detector for secondary electrons. Top view images were recorded using a high tension of 10 kV.


UV-vis-NIR spectra were carried on a Varian Cary 5000 UV-vis-NIR spectrophotometer in absorbance mode. The bare glass substrate was used as reference background.


Raman spectroscopy measurements were measured with a Renishaw inVia Raman spectrometer with 1 cm−1 resolution using a frequency-doubled YAG laser (532 nm) and 1800 lines per mm grating. A 50× objective was used and gave a laser spot with 1–3 μm diameter with 0.01–1 mW intensity on the sample depending on measurement mode. A notch filter was used for the Rayleigh (Plasma) line of the 532 nm laser, cutting 10 cm−1 into the Stokes part of the spectra. For each sample, 50 spectra were recorded in the range 10–400 cm−1 with no apparent change in the spectra during the cycles. OMHPs were coated on microscope glass substrates.


Steady-state emission measurements steady-state emission measurements were obtained on a Fluorolog-3 instrument (Horiba Jobin Yvon) equipped with double grating excitation and emission monochromators and a 450 W. The PL mapping was measured on glass/c-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3 in the Raman setup with the same specifications as above but with neutral density filters added to adjust the maximum PL intensity below the detection threshold so a full relative intensity count could be achieved.


For detailed description of the experimental setup, refer ref. 47 and 48. Briefly, the sample was excited on the perovskite side with 77.1 ps pulses of 404.6 nm or 470 nm from a picosecond diode laser (Edinburgh Instruments, EPL-405). The laser pulse energy was ca. 15 pJ and was attenuated even further to reach the desired count rate of ca. 1%. This ensures low enough excitation to avoid Auger recombination in OIHPs and that the results are free from pulse pile-up. Measurements where done in reverse mode at 5–10 MHz and under magic angle polarization. A cutoff filter (OG650) was used to block stray excitation light. No monochromator was used, i.e. all wavelengths transmitted by the cutoff filter were collected, increasing the instrumental sensitivity.


Vibrating Kelvin Probe (probe diameter ¼ 2 mm) (KP Technology, UK) was used to determine the surface potential. Samples were prepared by depositing perovskite films (thickness around 500 nm) on FTO glass. SPV measurements in ambient were done under illumination from a 150-W quartz tungsten halogen lamp, where the intensity was varied linearly by controlling the power supplied to the lamp. Using an optical fiber and lens, light beam falls on the perovskite surface at an angle of 45 (with respect to the sample surface) to illuminate the whole surface area. This configuration allowed us to do the illumination and probing from the same side, that is, perovskite: air interface side. For each category, the measurements were done on different spots and different samples and the average value is reported. The work function of the Kelvin probe was calibrated by a freshly cleaned highly ordered gold surface.


A patterned FTO-coated glass (15 Ω sq−1, Aldrich) was etched by Zn powder and 2 M HCl diluted in deionized water. Subsequently, the substrates were cleaned with detergent diluted in deionized water, rinsed with deionized water, acetone and ethanol, and dried with clean dry air. A compact blocking layer of TiO2 (40 nm, c-TiO2) was deposited onto fluorine doped SnO2 (FTO, Pilkington, TEC8) substrate by spray pyrolysis using a 20 mM titanium di-isopropoxide bis (acetylacetonate) solution (Aldrich) at 500 °C.


The etched FTO substrates with the compact n-type layer of TiO2 (c-TiO2). The hot solution of CH3NH3PbI3 as prepared following procedure mention in sample preparation spin coated on FTO substrates at 4000 rpm for 30 s, and dried at 100 °C for 30 minutes. The hole transporter spiro-MeOTAD prepared as mention in ref. 10 was deposited by spin-coating at 1500 rpm for 20 second as described before. To prepare the post-bleaching solar cells the as prepared CH3NH3PbI3 films were exposed to pyridine vapors till the film becomes colorless the bleached phase is recovered in a control environment at room temperature under continuous N2 gas flow for optimized 30 minutes time to form high quality CH3NH3PbI3 films. Finally, 130–150 nm thick silver electrodes were deposited on top of the devices by thermal evaporation at 10−6 bar, through a shadow mask.


The light source of a solar simulator for measuring the current–voltage (J–V) characteristics was a 300 W solar simulator (Newport) calibrated to a 1000 W m−2 light intensity at the 1.5 AM Global condition by a certified silicon solar cell (Fraunhofer ISE). The electrical data were recorded with a computer controlled digital source-meter (Keithley Model 2401) with the scan direction from the open circuit to the short-circuit and reverse at a scan rate of 30 mV s−1. The solar cells were masked during the measurement with a metal mask with a square aperture of 0.125 cm2.


The DFT calculations were performed with Gaussian09 using the HSE06 hybrid functional and the Stuttgart–Dresden scalar relativistic pseudo-potentials in gas phase and in a self-consistent reaction field environment corresponding to pyridine. All structures where optimized into electronic ground state before subsequent linear response DFT were applied to obtain the theoretical vibration spectra.


Dr S. M. Jain proposed and planned the experiments, prepared samples for characterization, performed XRD, UV-visible, CH3NH3PbI3 device fabrication and optimization, efficiency measurements, data plotting as well spectroscopic analysis and wrote most of the manuscript; Z. Qui performed SEM measurements; L. Häggman performed SEM and provided lab services, Dr M. Mirmohades performed time resolved single photon counting measurements, Dr M. Johansson performed Kelvin probe measurements; Dr T. Edvinsson performed Resonance Raman, photoluminescence and mapping measurements, DFT calculations, participated in analysis and writing the manuscript; Prof. G. Boschloo participated analysis, writing and editing the manuscript and supervised the project.


We thank the Swedish Energy Agency, the STandUP for Energy program, the Swedish Research Council (VR), the Göran Gustafsson Foundation, and the Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation for financial support and also would like to acknowledge Welsh Assembly Government funded Sêr Cymru Solar Project and Prof. James Durrant (Imperial college, London) and Prof. Lars Kloo (KTH, Stockholm) for valuable suggestions and discussions.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ee02544g
‡ SPECIFIC, College of Engineering, Swansea University Bay Campus, Fabian Way, SA1 8EN Swansea, UK.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016