 DOI: 10.1039/C3RA41574K
(Communication)
RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 9185-9188

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Erika
Kozma
*,

Dariusz
Kotowski
,

Silvia
Luzzati
,

Marinella
Catellani
,

Fabio
Bertini
,

Antonino
Famulari
 and 

Guido
Raos


CNR Institute of Macromolecular Studies, Via Bassini 15, 20133 Milan, Italy. E-mail: erika.kozma@ismac.cnr.it; Fax: +39 02 70636400; Tel: +39 02 23699357

Politecnico di Milano, Department of Chemistry, Materials and Chemical Engineering “Giulio Natta”, Via Mancinelli 7, 20131 Milan, Italy

Received
2nd April 2013
, Accepted 23rd April 2013
First published on 24th April 2013
The bay-substitution of perylene diimide molecules with fused aromatic rings affects both the core structure and the aggregation properties. The photovoltaic performance of P3HT:perylene diimide solar cells show efficiencies twofold higher than the best result obtained in the literature for similar devices.

Organic solar cells offer the possibility to develop cost effective photovoltaic devices by means of a renewable and clean energy source. Remarkable power conversion efficiencies surpassing 8% have been achieved in bulk heterojunction (BHJ) configured solar cells by blending π-conjugated polymer electron donors with fullerene electron acceptors. Among the semiconducting donor polymers, P3HT is a typical benchmark p-type material, with high hole mobility, suitable morphological properties and good commercial availability. The fullerene derivatives are the dominant acceptors for BHJ solar cells, as they are characterized by outstanding electron affinity and charge transport, but they are non-ideal materials due to their weak absorption and high commercial value, which is a drawback in industrial applications. Thus, the development of alternative acceptor materials that exhibit favourable electron transporting and good sunlight absorption is very important. Perylene diimides (PDIs) are suitable candidates as acceptors in polymeric solar cells, although PDI molecules were particularly used in dye-sensitized solar cells and in vacuum deposited bilayer solar cells, rather than for BHJ devices.

PDI molecules, in addition to exceptional thermal and photochemical stability, exhibit large optical absorption in the visible to near-infrared spectral region, they irradiate fluorescence with quantum yields near unity and show significant charge transport properties. Despite such promising properties, the photovoltaic parameters of solution processed BHJ solar cells that use PDIs are far below the theoretically expected values.
Several research groups have explored the reason for the low efficiencies of PDI based solar cells. A number of studies have been devoted to elucidate charge photogeneration in polymer/PDIs devices. It was found that the photovoltaic conversion is limited by the aggregated PDI domains, which are acting as exciton traps. Therefore, the design of perylene based molecules should be oriented to create structures with relatively reduced π–π stacking, which contributes to the formation of smaller domains, and thus, to larger donor–acceptor interface area, allowing excitons to quickly reach a heterojunction.
The chemical properties of PDI building block, such as the solid-state packing or HOMO and LUMO energy levels, can be easily and specifically tailored either by introduction of the appropriate substituents at the imide positions or at the perylene core positions. Usually, the N-positions of the PDIs are substituted with alkyl chains, preferably branched chains, in order to get high solubility, whereas the core positions are available for any functional groups.
Recently a PDI molecule, containing alkyl substituents, on the imide and on 2,5,8,11-core positions, in blend with P3HT gave an efficiency of 0.5%, which represents the best result obtained for P3HT/PDI based solar cells. It was suggested that the bulky alkyl side chains present on the PDI core hinder the P3HT polymer phase rearrangement, limiting to some extent the photovoltaic parameters.
Herein, the effect of the perylene core substitution with fused aromatic rings on the photophysical and photovoltaic parameters is described. The unusual behaviour in the solid state of PDI-2 and PDI-3 (Fig. 1), with respect to un-substituted PDI-1 molecule, has a strong impact on device performances.
The synthetic route of molecules PDI-1, PDI-2 and PDI-3, is described in the Fig. 1 and 3, ESI. The new molecules PDI-2 and PDI-3, possess good solubility in common organic solvents, and exhibit thermal stability up to 400 °C, with 5% weight loss (Fig. 4, ESI).
Long-range non-bonding π–π intermolecular interactions, have a strong impact on the molecular self-organization of PDI in the solid state. These noncovalent interactions enhance the electronic communication between adjacent chromophores, which mediates the electron and/or the energy transfer and thus strongly influence the photovoltaic performances in solar cells.
In order to get suitable perylene based materials with low aggregation properties for photovoltaic applications, the π–π intermolecular interaction has to be reduced. PDI-2 and PDI-3 have been designed with this purpose: the fused aromatic rings in bay position lead to a twisted perylene plane and create a strong steric hindrance. This decreases the π–π stacking and leads almost to an isolation of the π systems in the solid state, which was observed only for core tetrasubstituted perylenes.
The theoretical calculations show that PDI-1 core, with no substituents in the bay positions, is nearly planar. Our quantum chemical calculations for PDI-2 and PDI-3 show low energy molecular conformations characterised by a twisted perylene core with dihedral angles around 19° and by out of plane fused aromatic rings with dihedral angles of about 55° (PDI-2) and 63° (PDI-3), clearly preventing a close contact of neighbouring PDI planes (Fig. 5 and 6, ESI).
The DSC measurements give additional proofs regarding the poor organization in the solid state, since a crystallization peak is clearly observed for PDI-1, while no thermal events are present for PDI-2 and PDI-3 (Fig. 7, ESI).
The optical properties of bay substituted and un-substituted PDIs (Fig. 8, ESI) are significantly different comparing the solution and the solid state (Fig. 2). In solution, PDI-1 is characterized by two absorption bands at 525 nm and 489 nm which are assigned to the 0-0 and 0-1 electronic transitions. Passing from solution to solid state, the relative intensity of these absorption bands reverses, the spectra becomes more broadened and there is a loss of the fine vibronic structure. All these features indicate that the PDI-1 molecular scaffolds allow π–π intermolecular interactions, inducing molecular aggregation.
While the UV-Vis spectrum of PDI-1 film is red shifted and broadened compared to the solution, for PDI-2 and PDI-3 there is only a small shift of 5 and 1 nm, indicating very weak intermolecular interaction in the film. The spectroscopic feature of PDI-2 and PDI-3 can be associated to the twisted structure of the perylene core induced by the steric hindrance of the fused aromatic substituents.
The photoluminescence (PL) spectra bring further evidences which prove the above findings. The PL spectrum of PDI-1 film has a broad, vibronic free, bathochromic shifted band (about 80 nm) with respect to the solution. The red shift around 615 nm is a result of the optical excitation of the perylene diimide aggregates which activates the excimer species. In contrast, the PL spectra of PDI-2 and PDI-3, in solution and film are substantially identical suggesting the absence of any strong π–π interactions.
Cyclic voltammetry (CV) was used to measure the reduction potentials of the new PDI molecules (Fig. 9, ESI). The HOMO and LUMO energy levels were calculated from the electrochemical potentials and the optical electronic absorption. Since the HOMO and LUMO energy levels reported in the literature for P3HT are typically −5.0 eV and −3.0 eV, it is clear that the HOMO and LUMO energy levels of PDIs are suitable to drive efficiently exciton dissociation at the P3HT/PDIs interfaces (Table 1).
Sample

E
red
0(V)

E
red
1/2(V)

E
red
p (V)
HOMO (eV)
LUMO (eV)

E
g
opt (eV)

a 
E
red
0-onset reduction potential; Ered1/2-halfway reduction potential; Eredp-peak reduction potential; HOMO = Egopt + LUMO; LUMO = −e(Ered1/2 + 4.4); Egopt-optical energy band gap (calculated from the onset of the absorption).

PDI-1
−0.65
−0.73
−0.89
−5.79
−3.67
2.12
PDI-2
−0.61
−0.67
−0.75
−5.79
−3.73
2.06
PDI-3
−0.59
−0.77
−0.80
−5.55
−3.63
1.92
Moreover, the photoluminescence quenching in P3HT/PDIs blends provide a hint for photoinduced charge transfer between the donor polymer and the acceptor PDI (Fig. 9, ESI).
The P3HT blends with PDI-2 or PDI-3 showed good filming properties, as observed by optical microscopy (Fig. 10, ESI). The photovoltaic properties were investigated by fabricating solar cells with an ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PDI/Ca/Al structure (Fig. 11 and 12, ESI). The active layers containing PDI-2 and PDI-3 were deposited from o-dichlorobenzene and solvent annealed. Using this processing procedure, the P3HT:PDI-1 blend leads to the formation of PDI-1 microcrystallites and extended phase segregations. To lower the phase segregation of these films, the deposition from chlorobenzene followed by a temperature annealing was done. The blends nano-morphology, as probed from the PL measurements on the optimised active layers, suggest that phase segregation is more pronounced in PDI-1 based blend respect to PDI-2 and PDI-3 based devices (Fig. 9, ESI).

Fig. 3 shows device characteristics of P3HT:PDIs solar cells, with a 1:2 (w/w) donor/acceptor composition. The photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table 2.
Sample

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF
PCE (%)

a 
J
SC-short circuit current; VOC-open circuit voltage; FF-fill factor; PCE-power conversion efficiency.

P3HT:PDI-1
0.95
0.40
0.33
0.13
P3HT:PDI-2
2.91
0.60
0.52
0.91
P3HT:PDI-3
2.86
0.67
0.50
0.96
The PV characteristics of P3HT:PDI-1 devices are in agreement to previously reported results obtained with an analogous PDI, while the solar cells with PDI-2 and PDI-3 show better performances with PCEs approaching 1%, a clear improvement compared to other P3HT/PDIs solar cells.
The poor PV characteristics of P3HT:PDI-1 solar cells are related, like the previous results, to PDI tendency to crystallize in the polymeric blends leading to large scale segregations. The improvements of PDI-2 and PDI-3 solar cell characteristics are irrespective from the device deposition and the processing methods (Fig. 11 and 12, ESI) and can be correlated with the chemical structure and the peculiar intermolecular π–π stacking of the two new PDI.
It is possible to draw some correlation between the structure of the new PDI molecules and their operation in solar cells with P3HT on the basis of the spectroscopic experiments and the theoretical evidences previously discussed. The morphological characterization of P3HT:PDIs blend to discern the structural behaviour of these perylenes in the solid state will be presented elsewhere.
The IPCE and the JSC of P3HT/PDI-2 and P3HT/PDI-3 devices drastically increase compared to PDI-1 based solar cell. On the basis of the recorded UV-Vis absorption spectra of the active layers (ESI-10), it is reasonable to suppose that changes in absorption cross sections play a minor role for understanding the enhancement of the photocurrent in PDI-2 and PDI-3 based blend devices. The improvements of the photocurrents are thus related to the efficiencies of exciton harvesting at the P3HT/PDI interfaces, of charge photo-generation and collection to the electrodes.
The crystallization of PDI-2 and PDI-3 is nearly absent due to the lack of the π–π interactions, as suggested by the spectroscopic and computational studies, therefore exciton trapping should be diminished in the active layers. Moreover, the photoluminescence spectra of the PDI-2 and PDI-3 blends (Fig. 9, ESI) suggests a reduction of the P3HT/PDI nano-phase segregation. As a consequence, it is expected that in PDI-2 and PDI-3 blends the exciton harvesting yield is improved, thus contributing to the enhancement of charge generation.
Among the various reasons that may affect charge photo-generation, the separation distance between the donor and acceptor components at the interface has been proposed. It was shown that small separation distances facilitate the formation of a stable CT state (CT exciton) leading to inefficient charge carrier separation. In PDI-2 and PDI-3 molecules the π–π interaction was indeed heavily reduced by introducing the fused aromatic rings in bay positions, therefore in the P3HT blend the separation distance at the polymer/PDI is likely increasing. Accordingly, less bounded CT excitons should be formed, favouring the charge separation. Moreover, for PDI-2 and PDI-3, twisted structures are formed and a higher dimensionality is achieved in the polymeric blends, which can also lead to an increase of the charge separation at the donor–acceptor interface.
The FF parameter is also improves substantially from PDI-1 to PDI-2 and PDI-3 solar cells. This bring further support for a better charge carrier separation in PDI-2 and PDI-3 blend, and suggests a more effective and balanced charge carrier collection in these devices.
Finally, the reduction of the VOC in PDI-1, compared to PDI-2 and PDI-3 based solar cells, is not justified by the corresponding LUMO energy levels of the acceptor molecules. It was proposed that in BHJ solar cells, the Voc should scale to the energy position of the CT state. Therefore, the observed reduction of the Voc, in PDI-1 solar cells, seems to be consistent to the previously suggested higher CT exciton binding energy in PDI-1, as compared to PDI-2 and PDI-2 blends.

Perylene based molecules PDI-2 and PDI-3 were designed and used as electron transporters in organic solar cells in blends with P3HT. These materials possess interesting optical and structural features, revealing extremely weak π–π interactions between the perylene planes, which is an interesting feature, since PDIs are well known for their strong intermolecular packing properties. P3HT/PDI solar cells with efficiencies approaching 1% have been fabricated, which is a clear improvement over those present in literature for similar devices.


This work has been supported by the E.U. Marie Curie Reintegration project grant “DAMASCO” FP7-PEOPLE-2010-RG-268229, by the Fondazione Cariplo (project “PLENOS”, Ref 2011-0349) by Accordo Quadro between Regione Lombardia and CNR – Cluster Project ‘Energy’ n° 17348, by Regione Lombardia and CILEA-CINECA through a LISA Initiative (Laboratory for Interdisciplinary Advanced Simulation) 2012 grant.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental procedures, DSC, TGA, computational details, photovoltaic solar cells. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ra41574k
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013