 DOI: 10.1039/C6TA03121H
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 10223-10230


Jie
Cao
,

Feng
Wang
,

Hui
Yu
,

Yang
Zhou
,

Haipeng
Lu
,

Ni
Zhao
* and 

Ching-Ping
Wong
*

Department of Electronic Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, New Territories, Hong Kong, China. E-mail: nzhao@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

School of Materials Science and Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia 30332, USA

Received
15th April 2016
, Accepted 30th May 2016
First published on 1st June 2016
Two-step sequential deposition has been widely used for the fabrication of organolead halide perovskites due to its efficient pore-filling in mesostructured perovskite solar cells (PSCs) and great controllability of the perovskite film morphology. However, due to the limited diffusivity of the organic salt, it is often difficult to fully convert a >150 nm compact PbI2 precursor film to perovskite during a sequential deposition process. Consequently, the uncontrollable amount of remnant PbI2 may not only affect the device reproducibility but also harm the air stability of the perovskite films. In this work, we developed a new method to synthesize PbI2 thin films with nano-pores and tunable crystal sizes. We found that the porous structure and small crystal size of the synthesized PbI2 can facilitate its conversion to CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite, resulting in a PbI2-free and highly oriented perovskite film. PSCs based on such perovskite films exhibit superior power conversion efficiencies as compared to the ones synthesized from compact PbI2 films; more importantly, the stability of the perovskite films and PSCs has been greatly improved.

Organolead halide perovskites have recently emerged as fascinating light harvesting materials, benefiting from their simple fabrication process and excellent electronic properties. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) has been rapidly improved from 3.8% (ref. 5) to 22.1% (ref. 6) within the past several years. Generally, four methods have been developed to fabricate high-quality perovskite films: one-step solution spin-coating, two-step sequential deposition, dual-source evaporation and vapor-assisted deposition. Among these methods, sequential deposition, involving a first step of deposition of lead iodide (PbI2) onto a TiO2-coated (mesoporous TiO2 or compact TiO2) substrate by spin-coating and a second step of conversion of PbI2 to CH3NH3PbI3 (MAPbI3) perovskite when the PbI2 film is immersed in or loaded with methylammonium iodide (MAI) solution, is attractive due to its efficient pore-filling in the mesostructured PSCs and the controllability over the morphology of the perovskite films. However, the film compactness and easy crystallization of PbI2 raise the challenge of full conversion of PbI2 to MAPbI3, resulting in the presence of uncontrollable PbI2 residues in perovskite films, which can affect the long-term stability of perovskite films. On the other hand, the sequentially deposited perovskite films usually possess lower crystallinity as compared to those produced from the one-step solution spin-coating method.

Several strategies have been developed to address the problem of remnant PbI2. For example, Han et al. used dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), instead of N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF), as the solvent for PbI2 (ref. 23) and managed to obtain an amorphous PbI2-based compound that can be completely converted to MAPbI3 perovskite. Choy et al. and Zhu et al. introduced additives to PbI2 precursor solution to tune the PbI2 morphology and achieve full conversion of PbI2. Vak et al. prepared PbI2 films by a gas-quenching treatment to enhance the conversion of PbI2 to MAPbI3 in the process of roll-to-roll fabrication. All these methods focused on the full conversion of PbI2 through optimization of the PbI2 film morphology, while the crystallinity of the perovskite films has yet to be improved.
Herein, we developed a new method that not only fully converts PbI2 to perovskite but also produces highly oriented perovskite films. We synthesized PbI2 thin films from a precursor mixture of Pb(CH3COO)2 (PbAc2) and MAI with the mixing molar ratio of 1:2 (hereafter abbreviated as PbAc2 + 2MAI). Nanoscale pores are produced during the precursor reaction by release of the thermally unstable methylammonium acetate (MAAc); while the crystallization process of the porous PbI2 (p-PbI2) film can be controlled by varying the annealing temperature. Different from the previously reported one-step solution spin-coating method where PbAc2 was used directly as a precursor for the reaction of perovskites on planar substrates, our process is developed particularly for the sequential deposition of perovskite films in mesostructured PSCs. Based on the synthesized p-PbI2 films, we fabricated stable and highly oriented MAPbI3 perovskite films. Such perovskite films also exhibit significantly improved photovoltaic performance as compared to the ones produced from the conventional two-step sequential coating method.

The p-PbI2 and perovskite films were fabricated on mesoporous TiO2 (m-TiO2) coated FTO substrates. Scheme 1 displays the formation process of p-PbI2 films. After spin-coating of the PbAc2 + 2MAI precursor solution onto the substrate, a pristine transparent film with pale yellow color was formed. When the film was annealed at 80 °C, its color changed to dark brown in 2 min, indicating the formation of a new phase, which we refer to as an “intermediate” phase. Further annealing the film for 1.5 h turned the color of the intermediate phase to transparent yellow, forming the p-PbI2 film. The purity of the PbI2 phase was confirmed with X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements (Fig. 1a). It can be seen that the p-PbI2 film exhibits an almost identical XRD pattern as the crystalline PbI2 film (c-PbI2) fabricated directly from the spin-coating of PbI2 solution in DMF. We further compared the morphology of the p-PbI2 and c-PbI2 films using scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Fig. 1b and d show the SEM images of the top surface of p-PbI2 and c-PbI2 films, respectively. In the p-PbI2 film, pores with tens of nanometer sizes can be clearly viewed; while such pores are not present in the c-PbI2 film. To check whether the nano-pores are distributed throughout the entire p-PbI2 film, we peeled off the film from the substrate (Fig. 1f) and examined its reverse side using SEM. Fig. 1c shows that there are significant amount of pores on the reverse side of the p-PbI2 film. On the other hand, the reverse side of the c-PbI2 film has a highly compact morphology with aggregated grains (Fig. 1e). Clearly, the reaction process of PbAc2 + 2MAI leads to volume contraction, probably due to the formation of a gas phase.

To understand the formation mechanism of the p-PbI2 films, we monitored the phase evolution of the PbAc2 + 2MAI precursor film by performing XRD on the film at different annealing stages. Because of the high moisture-sensitivity of the precursor reaction, a 300 nm-thick layer of poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) was coated onto the films prior to the XRD measurement to retard water penetration. As shown in Fig. 2, the XRD pattern of the pristine PbAc2 + 2MAI film exhibits a strong peak corresponding to the (110) crystal planes of MAPbI3, indicating the rapid formation of a perovskite phase during the XRD measurements in air (note that the color of the precursor film also changed after the XRD measurement). In the XRD pattern of the precursor film annealed for 2 min, two additional peaks (at 6.9° and 10.3°) appeared, suggesting the presence of PbAc2 (corresponding to the 10.3° peak) and an intermediate phase (corresponding to the 6.9° peak). When the film was further annealed for 1.5 h, the 6.9° and 10.3° peaks and all the perovskite-related peaks disappeared, and the XRD pattern of the film suggested a pure PbI2 phase. To explain the above phase variation, we propose a reaction process as that shown in Scheme 2. The initial reaction of PbAc2 + 2MAI (reaction (1)) results in the formation of the intermediate phase, PbAc2, MAI and MAAc. If water molecules are present, a MAPbI3 perovskite phase may form, as studies have shown that moisture could accelerate the grain growth of MAPbI3 perovskite. During the prolonged annealing process, reaction (2) occurs, leading to formation of PbI2. The pores observed in the p-PbI2 film may be induced during the release of MAAc in both reactions (1) and (2). Accordingly, the crystallization of PbI2 and the morphology of the p-PbI2 films (pore density) can be controlled by adjusting the release rate of MAAc at different annealing temperatures.

In order to obtain the optimized pore density and crystal size for the p-PbI2 films, the pristine PbAc2 + 2MAI films were annealed at different temperatures ranging from 70 °C to 130 °C. As shown in Fig. 3, pores only exist in the PbI2 films annealed at low temperature. The crystal sizes of the p-PbI2 films were estimated from the XRD patterns (Fig. S1) using the Scherrer equation, and the results are summarized in Table 1. The crystal size of p-PbI2 annealed below 70 °C was smaller than that of the optimized c-PbI2 treated with the commonly used annealing procedures. On the other hand, for the higher temperature annealed p-PbI2 films, the crystal size becomes considerably larger. The relatively small PbI2 crystals possibly resulted from the decomposition (reaction (2)) of the corresponding small perovskite crystals formed in reaction (1). Furthermore, the p-PbI2 films with larger PbI2 crystals were obtained when the annealing temperature was increased. Meanwhile, PSCs based on the p-PbI2 films obtained from different annealing temperatures were fabricated. A higher PCE was achieved in the device based on the 70 °C-annealed p-PbI2 films (Fig. S2), which was attributed to a higher fill factor (FF) and open circuit voltage (Voc). It is worth mentioning that forming the p-PbI2 films at an annealing temperature lower than 70 °C is extremely hard as the release of MAAc and the decomposition of the intermediate phase become difficult.

Precursor
Annealing temperature (°C)/annealing time (min)
Crystal size (nm)
p-PbI2
130/90
63.340
100/90
41.589
70/90
24.089
c-PbI2
70/30
38.676
40/3 → 100/5
36.325

We now turn to compare the conversion processes of p-PbI2 and c-PbI2 films to perovskite films. As shown in Fig. 4a and b, when loaded with MAI solution, the color of p-PbI2 films changes within 10 s, much faster than the conversion of the c-PbI2 films (>40 s), indicating a rapid diffusion of MAI in the p-PbI2 network that initiates a faster perovskite reaction. Furthermore, as shown in Fig. 4c, a highly crystalline PbI2-free perovskite film exhibiting a strong preferred orientation along (110) crystal planes was obtained from the p-PbI2 precursor film, whereas PbI2 residues can be found in the perovskite films fabricated from c-PbI2. The enhanced crystallinity of perovskite films can be related to the unique structure of p-PbI2, in which the large amount of pores allow the formation of a CH3NH3I-rich environment during the reaction of perovskite, thus creating a condition that is favourable for the growth of large MAPbI3 perovskite crystals.

Based on the perovskite films produced from p-PbI2 and c-PbI2, PSCs with a FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/perovskite/spiro-MeOTAD/Au structure were fabricated (Fig. 4d), and their corresponding performances are presented in Fig. 5. For the PSCs fabricated from p-PbI2, an average Voc of 1.046 ± 0.014 V, a short circuit current density (Jsc) of 22.50 ± 0.55 mA cm−2, and a FF of 64.17 ± 1.25% were achieved, resulting in an average PCE of 15.10 ± 0.54%, whereas for the PSCs fabricated from c-PbI2, the corresponding parameters were a Voc of 0.934 ± 0.013 V, a Jsc of 21.84 ± 0.62 mA cm−2, a FF of 55.73 ± 2.11%, and a PCE of 11.39 ± 0.41%. We note that the PCEs of the “control devices”, i.e., PSCs based on c-PbI2, were somewhat lower than those reported for the same device structure, mainly due to the reduction in FF. This is probably associated with the unpassivated surface states of the m-TiO2 layer, promoting charge recombination or charge trapping at the interface. (Our planar PSCs with a FTO/c-TiO2/perovskite/spiro-MeOTAD/Au structure show a high FF above 70%.) We also note that the devices fabricated from p-PbI2 and c-PbI2 both showed hysteresis in J–V curves (Fig. S3), which may also result from charge/ion trapping at the interface between the m-TiO2 and perovskite layers. Finally, it is worth mentioning that our perovskite fabrication process is designed particularly for sequential deposition on mesostructured substrates and is different from the previously reported one-step spin-coating method using PbAc2 as a precursor to directly synthesize perovskites. We applied the one-step method to fabricate mesostructured PSCs and obtained rather low Jsc and FF (Table S1), possibly due to the poor pore filling and coverage of perovskite in mesostructured PSCs.
We also compared the stability of the perovskite films and devices upon air exposure (humidity level: 50–60%). In this measurement, perovskite films were exposed to air for different amounts of time, and the spiro-MeOTAD and Au layers were deposited on the perovskite films right before the I–V testing of the devices to exclude the aging effect of the spiro-MeOTAD. As shown in Fig. 5e, the p-PbI2 synthesized perovskite films show no color change after exposure to air for 30 days, whereas the c-PbI2 synthesized perovskite films exhibit clear color degradation after 7 days (similar to the previous work by Choy et al.). Furthermore, the devices based on p-PbI2 maintained over 80% of their initial PCE after 30 days (Fig. 5f and S4), while the efficiency of the devices based on c-PbI2 dropped to less than 10% of its original value after the same period. The stability results confirmed the finding of a recent study that remnant PbI2 has a detrimental effect on the stability of perovskite solar cells. It is also worth mentioning that the long annealing process (1.5 hours) of p-PbI2 ensures the complete elimination of DMF, which may be also beneficial to the air-stability of perovskite films.
The J–V characteristics suggest that the prominent improvement in PCE of p-PbI2-produced cells mainly resulted from the increased Voc and FF. To find out the underlying mechanism of the improved PCE, the series resistance (Rs) and the shunt resistance (Rsh) of PSCs were estimated from the J–V curves under dark conditions (Table 2). The calculation results indicate that the improved performance is mainly due to the decrease in the Rs of the PSCs, dropping from 20.39 ± 1.91 Ω cm2 for c-PbI2 to 5.81 ± 0.69 Ω cm2 for p-PbI2. This resistance drop may originate from (1) the removal of excess PbI2 from the perovskite/m-TiO2 interface improving the electron extraction from perovskite to m-TiO2, and (2) the enhancement of the crystallinity of the perovskite films, facilitating charge transport.
Precursor

R
s (Ω cm2)

R
sh (kΩ cm2)
p-PbI2
5.81 ± 0.69
311 ± 23
c-PbI2
20.39 ± 1.91
219 ± 36
To gain further insight into the improvement of the device performance, transient photovoltage (TPV) and external quantum efficiency (EQE) characterization was performed on the devices fabricated from p-PbI2 and c-PbI2. The Voc of PSCs is related with the carrier lifetime (or in other words, carrier recombination rate), and TPV characterisation is a convenient method to determine the dynamics of the recombination process of free charge carriers.Fig. 6a plots the light intensity dependence of Voc of the PSCs fabricated from p-PbI2 and c-PbI2. Two slopes for each curve are identified, likely corresponding to two recombination mechanisms: trap-assisted recombination mechanism and bimolecular recombination mechanism. It can be assumed that the density of states (DOS), including surface and bulk traps, is exponentially distributed in the devices, as shown in the inset of Fig. 6a. Thus, the slope in the low light intensity (smaller than 2 mW cm−2) can be related to trap-assisted recombination mechanism involving electrons filled in the deep-level trap states, whereas the smaller slope under high light intensity (larger than 2 mW cm−2) is dominated by bimolecular recombination. In general, lower trap density should result in a steeper increase of Voc with light intensity because electrons can quickly fill up the traps. Therefore, the smaller curve slope in the c-PbI2 case than that in the p-PbI2 case under low light intensity suggests more deep traps in the former, likely due to the presence of the remnant PbI2. Fig. 6b indicates that the recombination rate Kr of the PSCs fabricated from p-PbI2 is slightly lower than that of those fabricated from c-PbI2. EQE spectra (Fig. S5) indicate a very small difference between the two curves, which confirmed the small difference in Jsc between the PSCs fabricated from p-PbI2 and c-PbI2.

TiO2 paste and CH3NH3I were purchased from Dyesol. All other chemicals were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and used as received unless stated otherwise. FTO (DHS-FTO22–15N, HeptaChroma) substrates were cleaned with deionized water, acetone, 2-propanol in sequence, followed by an oxygen plasma treatment for 1.5 min. A compact TiO2 (c-TiO2) layer was deposited onto the cleaned FTO substrate by spin-coating a mildly acidic solution of titanium isopropoxide in ethanol (consisting of 0.9 mL titanium isopropoxide and 100 μL 37% HCl solution in 15 mL ethanol) at 5000 rpm for 25 s, which was heated at 200 °C for 10 min on a hotplate, and then annealed at 500 °C for 1 h in an oven. A mesoporous TiO2 (m-TiO2) layer was then spin-coated on the c-TiO2 layer at 5000 rpm for 40 s using the TiO2 paste diluted in ethanol (weight ratio 1:7). After drying at 125 °C for 10 min, the m-TiO2 films were annealed at 550 °C for 1 h. The m-TiO2 films were then immersed in 40 mM TiCl4 aqueous solution at 70 °C for 25 min. These TiCl4-treated m-TiO2 films were then sequentially rinsed with deionized water, dried in air, and finally annealed at 500 °C for 30 min. The completed m-TiO2 substrates were then transferred to a glovebox for perovskite fabrication. For c-PbI2, 1 M PbI2 (dissolved in N,N-dimethylformamide, DMF) precursor solution was spin-coated on the m-TiO2 substrates at 3000 rpm for 5 s and 6000 rpm for 10 s, followed by annealing at 40 °C for 3 min and then 100 °C for 5 min; for p-PbI2, 1 M Pb(CH3COO)2 + 2CH3NH3I (the molar ratio of Pb(CH3COO)2 to CH3NH3I was 1:2, and also dissolved in DMF) precursor solution was spin-coated on the m-TiO2 substrates at 3000 rpm for 5 s and 6000 rpm for 10 s, and annealed below 70 °C for 90 min until p-PbI2 films were obtained. After cooling to room temperature, 150 μL 6 mg mL−1 CH3NH3I in 2-propanol solution was loaded on the c-PbI2 or p-PbI2 films by using a pipette, which was then spun at 4000 rpm for 20 s and dried at 100 °C for 10 min. The spiro-MeOTAD solution was then spin-coated on the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite layer at 4000 rpm for 30 s. The spiro-MeOTAD solution was prepared by dissolving 72.3 mg spiro-MeOTAD, 28.8 μL 4-tert-butylpyridine and 17.5 μL lithium-bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (Li-TFSI) solution (520 mg Li-TFSI in 1 mL acetonitrile) in 1 mL chlorobenzene. Finally, an 80-nm thick gold layer was deposited onto the spiro-MeOTAD layer through thermal evaporation.


The crystal phases of the films were identified by an X-ray diffraction system with a Rigaku ru-300 diffractometer using CuKα1 irradiation (λ = 1.5406 Å). The morphologies of the films and the cross-section of device structure were observed using HR-FESEM (FEI, Quanta 400). The current density–voltage (J–V) curves were measured (Keithley Instruments, 2612 Series Source Meter) under simulated AM 1.5 sunlight (100 mW cm−2) generated by a 94011A-ES Sol series solar simulator. For transient photovoltage decay measurements, a white light bias was generated from a halogen lamp, and the light intensity was adjusted using a neutral density filter. A Newport LQD635-03C laser diode was used to generate transient light illumination on the devices, and the light intensity of the pulsed light was modulated using a continuously variable filter to keep voltage perturbation constant (10 mV). The anode and cathode of the device were connected across a 1 MΩ load resistor and connected to a Tektronix TDS 3014C oscilloscope. The external quantum efficiency was measured using a Keithley 2400 Source Meter under monochromatic illumination, which was generated by passing a light beam from a 250 W quartz tungsten halogen lamp into a Newport 74215 Oriel Cornerstone 260 1/4 m monochromator. A calibrated silicon diode with a known spectral response was used as reference.


In summary, we have developed a new method for the complete conversion of PbI2 to organolead triiodide perovskites in a two-step sequential deposition process. The method utilizes PbAc2 + 2MAI as the precursor and creates nanoscale pores in PbI2 films (p-PbI2) during the removal of the thermally unstable reaction product, MAAc, from the films. The porous structure and small crystal size of the synthesized p-PbI2 facilitate an efficient conversion of PbI2 to CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite, resulting in a highly oriented and PbI2-free perovskite film with a strong preferred orientation of (110) crystal planes. The use of the new porous PbI2 precursor results in a significant improvement in the average and champion power conversion efficiency and a remarkable improvement in device stability. Moreover, we investigated the underlying mechanism of the improved performance of the PSCs and observed that a PbI2-free and crystallinity-enhanced perovskite film exhibits a considerably smaller Rs in the PSCs and less trap states. The methodology developed in this study can be extended to other material systems to control the morphology and crystallization of perovskite films, enabling further performance improvement for devices made from sequential deposition.


The authors gratefully acknowledge the funding from the Research Grants Council of Hong Kong (Grant No. T23–407/13-N), National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 61205036) and Shun Hing Institute of Advanced Engineering (Grant no. 8115041).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta03121h
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016