 DOI: 10.1039/C2NR31440A
(Communication)
Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 4954-4959

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Luhui
Zhang
,

Enzheng
Shi
,

Chunyan
Ji
,

Zhen
Li
,

Peixu
Li
,

Yuanyuan
Shang
,

Yibin
Li
,

Jinquan
Wei
,

Kunlin
Wang
,

Hongwei
Zhu
,

Dehai
Wu
 and 

Anyuan
Cao
*

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, College of Engineering, Peking University, Beijing 100871, P. R. China. E-mail: anyuan@pku.edu.cn

Key Laboratory for Advanced Materials Processing Technology and Department of Mechanical Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, P. R. China

Centre for Composite Materials and Structures, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin 150080, P. R. China

Received
8th June 2012
, Accepted 27th June 2012
First published on 29th June 2012
Electrode materials are key components for fiber solar cells, and when combined with active layers (for light absorption and charge generation) in appropriate ways, they enable design and fabrication of efficient and innovative device structures. Here, we apply carbon nanotube yarns as counter electrodes in combination with CdSe nanowire-grafted primary electrodes (Ti wire) for making fiber and fabric-shaped photoelectrochemical cells with power conversion efficiencies in the range 1% to 2.9%. The spun-twist long nanotube yarns possess both good electrical conductivity and mechanical flexibility compared to conventional metal wires or carbon fibers, which facilitate fabrication of solar cells with versatile configurations. A unique feature of our process is that instead of making individual fiber cells, we directly weave single or multiple nanotube yarns with primary electrodes into a functional fabric. Our results demonstrate promising applications of semiconducting nanowires and carbon nanotubes in woven photovoltaics.

Research on fiber-shaped solar cells in recent time has yielded promising power conversion efficiencies in the range of 1–7%, with good device stability and flexibility. A fiber cell basically involves a primary electrode supporting active layers (e.g. organic materials, dye-sensitized layers) and a metal wire placed in parallel or twisted around as counter electrode. Its one-dimensional structure as well as mechanical flexibility allow further integration of many fibers into functional fabric that may be used as wearable electronics and flexible power-supply cloth for residential or military purposes. To this end, there are many possible ways to construct fabric solar cells from individual fibers or from respective electrode materials, which have not been thoroughly investigated. There have been a few examples in developing mesh-like electrodes by applying TiO2 colloids or electrochemical anodization of TiO2 nanotube arrays on a woven Ti or metal mesh, however, they still require a Pt foil as counter electrode thus limiting the device flexibility. A similar mesh electrode adopted a hybrid woven structure consisting of both metal and polymer wires on which the organic active layer and back electrode were deposited. More recently, Zou's group placed Ti and stainless steel wires in parallel with an alternating side-by-side arrangement to form a bifacial electrode configuration. Most of the previous approaches focused on the fabrication of mesh electrodes for further deposition of active layers.

Here, we fabricated CdSe nanowire-grafted Ti wire and carbon nanotube (CNT) based primary and counter electrodes, and constructed them into efficient fiber and fabric photoelectrochemical cells. Both CdSe nanowires and CNTs can be assembled into one-dimensional macroscopic structures, which facilitate subsequent processes of twisting and intertwining. Specifically, we synthesized CdSe nanowire arrays along the surface of a Ti wire with wire lengths on the order of 10 cm. Because CdSe has a suitable band-gap (1.74 eV) for visible light absorption and large aspect-ratio nanowires are favorable for directional charge transport, they form an active layer around the Ti wire underneath (primary electrode). Nanowire arrays have proven to be an effective structure in bulk-heterojunction or photoelectrochemical cells. On the other hand, we spun CNTs into a long continuous yarn (length > 10 cm) to replace conventional metal wires as counter electrode. The yarn diameters were maintained under 100 μm to ensure high flexibility. The electrical conductivity and mechanical strength of CNT yarns can be tailored by the spinning technique and elemental doping. Even though CNTs in the form of thin films have been successfully applied to fiber solar cells as transparent electrodes, there have been only a few reports employing CNT yarns as cell-electrodes although they are more robust with enhanced conductivity.
In this paper, we report fiber and fabric-shaped photoelectrochemical cells containing CNT yarns as counter electrodes. We show that versatile device configurations are possible by intertwining the yarns with CdSe–Ti primary electrodes in different ways. One unique feature of our process is that we fabricate primary and counter electrodes separately both in wire form, and then directly weave these two electrodes into a fabric cell. In preliminary results, we have obtained power conversion efficiencies of 2.9% for individual fiber cells (twisted by a yarn electrode) and efficiencies of more than 1% for woven fabric cells. Our results demonstrate that semiconducting nanowires and carbon yarns can make woven photovoltaics and show comparable efficiencies with general fiber cells (∼3%).
The primary electrode was prepared by growing a layer of CdSe nanowires with tunable lengths (10–40 μm) around a thin Ti wire, as reported in our previous work. The counter electrode, a CNT yarn, was fabricated by spin-twisting a chemical vapor deposition (CVD) produced CNT film consisting of mostly single-walled nanotubes (see Experimental for details). The yarns typically have lengths of 10 cm or more and diameters of 30 to 100 μm (determined by the film size for spinning), and contain tightly twisted CNT bundles (ESI, Fig. S1). During the spinning process, ethanol was added onto the yarns to induce further densification by solvent evaporation. This resulted in strong CNT yarns with tensile strengths of more than 200 MPa and an electrical resistivity of 6 × 10−4 to 10−3 Ω cm (Fig. S1).
We have tested fiber-shaped and fabric-shaped solar cells by combining the CNT yarns and CdSe nanowires grown on Ti wires with different configurations, as illustrated in Fig. 1. In the fiber cell under conventional design, a CNT yarn was twisted around a CdSe-grafted Ti wire at controlled pitch. This structure is similar to previously reported dye-sensitized fiber cells twisted by a Pt wire, except that here we adopted CdSe nanowires (versus TiO2) as the active layer and the CNT yarn (versus Pt wire) as the counter electrode. To make fabric cells, a Ti wire was bent into S-shape to form parallel segments and then grew CdSe nanowires, after that multiple CNT yarns or a single long yarn was interlaced between those segments, creating a network with many cross-junctions between the Ti wire and CNT yarns (Fig. 1a). In all above cases, a liquid polysulfide electrolyte was then infiltrated into the porous CdSe nanowire arrays to make photoelectrochemical cells that would be ready for testing. From the energy diagram, before adding the electrolyte, the CNT fiber can form a Schottky junction with CdSe nanowires, while the Ti wire can form an ohmic contact with CdSe nanowires. After adding the electrolyte, they form photoelectrochemical cells and the electrolyte improves the transport of the carriers. The electrons are transferred to the Ti wire, while the holes are carried by the electrolyte to the CNT yarn through redox reactions (S2− to S22− ions) (Fig. 1b).

Fig. 2a shows the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of a fiber section before electrolyte infiltration, in which a CNT yarn is twisted around CdSe nanowires grown on a Ti wire. From the wire edge, lawn-like vertical nanowires with diameters of ∼100 nm protruding along the radial direction can be seen (Fig. 2b). The bottom ends of nanowires are grafted to the Ti wire very well through a polycrystalline layer at their interface formed during the CVD process. The CNT yarn has a diameter of 40 μm and a uniform twisting pitch of about 3 mm along the Ti wire. Due to the flexibility of the yarn, it makes a conformal contact on the Ti wire and its bottom part is actually partially embedded into the CdSe nanowire arrays (Fig. 2c and d). To confirm that the CNT yarn could serve as the counter electrode for this fiber structure, we performed solar cell tests on several fibers and recorded current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics under standard illumination conditions (AM 1.5, 100 mW cm−2). Without electrolyte, a solar cell in dry state showed certain photoresponse under illumination, but with very weak current density because the CNT yarn forms heterojunction with the CdSe nanowires by small contact area. After adding the polysulfide electrolyte containing 2 M Na2S, KOH and S in water onto the primary electrode, we observed significantly boosted performance in this cell with an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.65 V, a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 8.25 mA cm−2, a fill factor of 55%, and an efficiency of 2.9% (Fig. 2e). The power conversion efficiency (2.9%) is calculated by the converted electrical energy to the incident photo-energy corresponding to the area of active materials. The area of active materials is calculated by the illuminated CdSe–Ti wire length (1.1 cm) multiplying its diameter (260 μm). The excitons are generated in the CdSe nanowires under illumination. The electrons from the excited state of the CdSe nanowire are transferred to the Ti wire at the CdSe nanowire–Ti wire interface, while the holes are carried by the electrolyte to the CNT yarn through redox reactions (S2− to S22− ions) at the electrolyte–CdSe nanowires interface. The electrolyte enhances the process of the holes extraction a lot, thus the cell efficiency improves greatly. The diode behavior in the dark and relatively large fill factor (55%) indicate that we have made a reasonably good fiber cell, and the CNT yarn serves as an effective counter electrode. In comparison, previously we have reported a Ti wire-supported CdSe nanowire solar cell by wrapping a thin CNT film as electrode, which showed cell efficiencies of 1–2% as well as relatively lower fill factors. Here, the advantages of CNT yarns possibly include reduced electrode resistance due to yarn densification (80 Ω for the yarn and 400 Ω per square for the film) and more exposed nanowire areas (therefore more light absorption) than the fiber covered by the CNT film all around. Furthermore, we tested a control sample (a 1.3 cm long CdSe–Ti wire) with a Pt wire electrode (250 μm in diameter) twisted in a similar way as the CNT yarn, which showed a Voc of 0.33 V, a Jsc of 8.50 mA cm−2 and a cell efficiency of only 0.64% (Fig. 2e). Compared to the CNT yarn, the Pt wire yields a comparable value of Jsc yet reduced Voc and fill factor (23%). The Pt wire with relatively larger diameter (250 μm) is not as soft as the CNT yarn, and is not easy to be twisted around the Ti wire in a conformal way. We therefore postulate that the lower flexibility of the Pt wire is one of the underlying factors for the observed different cell performances. From the incident photon to electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectrum, the spectral response of our fiber cell locates within the wavelength range of 400 to 710 nm, corresponding to the band-gap absorption by CdSe (1.74 eV) (Fig. 2f).
Next, we demonstrate that the CNT yarns can be directly woven with primary electrodes to make fabric cells in various configurations. In the first device configuration, multiple CNT yarns were embedded into the parallel segments of a S-shaped Ti wire with CdSe nanowires grown on its surface. For example, one of the devices was made by 5 CNT yarns interlaced with 5 Ti wire segments in perpendicular at an even distance (d) of about 5 mm and a total Ti wire length of 9.7 cm (Fig. 3a). Each section of the yarn was suspended between Ti wires in straight form like a freestanding string with its two ends fixed on the Ti wire. SEM characterization shows that the yarn goes across the Ti wire from the back or front sides, creating contact areas at the cross-junctions (Fig. 3b). The intersection contact area is about 0.01 mm2 which is very small while the cell area is two thousand times larger (0.24 cm2), thus minimizing the blocking of incident light by the counter electrode compared with the twisted fiber structure. In this structure, parallel CNT yarns collect photo-generated charge carriers (holes) from the CdSe nanowires and electrolyte at the intersections and transport them collectively to the external circuit. The fabric solar cells have several advantages: (1) the inter-yarn distance (d) is tunable and the distance among the Ti wires can also be accommodated easily before we grow the CdSe nanowires, thus, the void areas can be controlled; (2) by controlling the void area, the transparence of devices can be adjusted. That is useful for different application, for example, using for the window area; (3) the different void areas can induce different flexibility for the devices.

J–V characteristics of the fabric cell shown in Fig. 3a have been measured in the dark and light conditions (90 mW cm−2), respectively. After adding the polysulfide electrolyte containing 2 M Na2S, KOH and S in water, this cell shows a Voc of 0.45 V, a Jsc of 6.58 mA cm−2 and an efficiency of 1.24% (Fig. 3c). The active cell area was the area of active light-absorbing materials and was calculated as the product of the CdSe–Ti wire diameter (245 μm) and its light-illuminating length (9.7 cm) for obtaining the cell efficiency (the area of the CNT yarn is not counted in). Compared to the fiber cell efficiency of 2.9% shown in Fig. 2, the fabric cell efficiency is reduced possibly because most part of the CNT yarns are suspended between primary electrodes rather than making a direct contact like in twisted fiber cells. Although the dark curve shows evident diode property, current leakage at the reverse bias still exists indicating low barrier shunt resistance at the CdSe–CNT interface. We changed the inter-yarn distance (d) in the range of 1 to 5 mm, and did not find strong dependence of the cell performance on such distances. A fabric cell with an average 1.2 mm yarn distance shows a similar J–V curve with an efficiency of 1.17% (Fig. 3c). Because the liquid electrolyte can transport ions along the Ti wire effectively, it seems that the distance between the CNT yarn electrodes is not a critical factor for this type of fabric cell in our studied range. Therefore, it might be possible to tailor the separation between yarn electrodes while maintaining the fabric cell performance.
In addition to the yarn distance, the number of yarns embedded in the fabric may influence the cell efficiency as well. To study this effect, we fabricated a solar cell by positioning four parallel CNT yarns as positive electrodes that can work either individually or in arbitrary combination (inset of Fig. 3d). Initially, all four yarns were connected as a common counter electrode, resulting in a cell efficiency of 1.34%. Then, one of the electrodes (labeled as #1) was removed while the remaining three were still connected. The current density dropped slightly and the cell efficiency decreased to 1.23% correspondingly. Removing one more yarn and the cell with two yarn electrodes (#3 and #4) showed a further reduction of efficiency to about 1.07% (Fig. 3d). Reducing the number of yarn electrodes to a half of the original stage (4 yarns down to 2 yarns) caused a modest decrease of cell efficiency (by ∼20%). Continuing such a process, the cell efficiency when tested with only one yarn, however, decreased significantly (<0.3%) compared to previous tests with two or more yarns.
The above results indicate that the cell performance is not very sensitive to the number of yarns for a yarn number of >2. To remove factors such as the size variation of yarns and non-uniform contact to primary electrodes during cell fabrication, we carried out tests in a reversed yarn-removal sequence again and compared J–V curves of predefined configurations with all yarn electrodes (#1 through #4), three electrodes (#1, #2, #3) and two electrodes (#1, #2), respectively (Fig. 3e). Similarly, the current density dropped from 6.85 to 5.68 mA cm−2, and the efficiency decreased from 1.60% to 1.24% from 4 down to 2 yarns. Although the yarn electrodes #1 and #2 are positioned on the right side of the fabric (inset of Fig. 3d), our results imply that they are able to collect charge carriers from far away primary electrodes when the yarns there (#3, #4) do not work.
Finally, our fabric cells also can be made into other modified structures, such as a fabric woven between a single long CNT yarn and a bent Ti wire. A continuous yarn with a length of 14 cm was entangled with a 14.2 cm long CdSe–Ti wire bent into 5 nearly parallel segments such that the yarn sections were suspended between the Ti wire segments in perpendicular (Fig. 4a). In this case, a single yarn serves as the counter electrode to collect all charge carriers generated along the primary electrode, rather than multiple yarns used in the former configuration. SEM images show that the CNT yarns make good contact with the Ti wire at their intersections, and form loops around the outmost wire segments (Fig. 4b and c). Two such fabric cells with different primary electrode lengths (L) of 14.2 and 10.3 cm show similar J–V characteristics (Voc = 0.44–0.46 V, Jsc = 4.9–5.6 mA cm−2) and efficiencies of 1.12% and 1.04%, respectively (Fig. 4d). Given that counter electrodes based on multiple parallel CNT yarns have yielded efficiencies of 1.17% and 1.24% (Fig. 3c), the two different fabric configurations studied here actually show similar cell performance.
In conclusion, we demonstrated promising applications of CNT yarns as flexible electrodes for making fiber and fabric-shaped solar cells. Fiber cells twisted by CNT yarns in conventional design yielded cell efficiencies up to 2.9%. Furthermore, fabric cells were made by combining CNT yarns as counter electrodes with CdSe-grafted Ti wires as primary electrodes, in different configurations based on a single long yarn or multiple parallel yarns, achieving cell efficiencies above 1% currently. Our work provides a simple way to construct fabric photoelectrochemical cells by directly weaving CNT yarns with semiconducting nanowires into various cell structures.

CdSe nanowire arrays were synthesized by the chemical vapor deposition (CVD) process which was carried out in a tube furnace with a 1 inch diameter quartz tube. About 10 milligrams of source powder (CdSe, 10 μm, 99.99%, Aldrich) was placed in an alumina boat and then loaded into the center of the CVD furnace. A Ti wire (cut length = 10–15 cm, purchased from Shanghai Gioray Metal Material Co., Ltd) with a surface oxide layer removed was bent into a specific shape to use as the growth substrate, and pre-coated by a 10 nm thick Au film through plasma sputtering at a current of 20 mA for 30 seconds. The Ti wire was placed in the downstream side of the CdSe source, with a distance of about 15 cm, and suspended in the gas flow for growing CdSe nanowires all around the Ti wire. Before heating, the quartz tube was purged with Ar flow at a rate of 200 sccm for 10 minutes. After that, the furnace was heated to 780 °C in 30 minutes. During the growth process, H2/Ar gas (volume ratio of H2 is 15%) was flowed at a constant rate of 100 sccm through the quartz tube and bubbled out from a water container connected to the outlet of the furnace. The growth period was typically 10 to 30 minutes. After reaction, CdSe nanowire arrays with lengths of 10 to 40 μm were grown on the Ti wire. We generally use CdSe nanowires grown for 30 minutes with lengths of 30–40 μm to fabricate photoelectrochemical cells.


CNT films were prepared using a floating catalyst CVD process in a tube furnace. A liquid carbon source containing ferrocene dissolved in xylenes at a certain concentration was introduced into the quartz tube through a capillary tube, then vaporized at a temperature of about 220 °C. The vapor was carried to the reaction zone by a gas mixture of Ar (2500 sccm) and H2 (600 sccm). The CNT growth temperature was set as 1160 °C. Spiderweb-like thin films of CNTs were collected at the downstream end from a nickel foil adhered to the inner wall of the quartz tube. Typically, as-grown films consist of mainly single-walled CNTs forming a network.


We selected as-grown CNT films with a length of >10 cm to spin continuous yarns by the conventional spinning technique. One end of the film was connected onto the rotating shaft of an electric motor and the other end was fixed to a metal block. The motor was rotated at a constant speed of 100 rpm to twist the initially flat film to a thin tight yarn. The spinning process generally took about 5 minutes. During the process, droplets of ethanol were added to the yarn to induce further densification by solvent evaporation. The yarns typically have diameters of 30–100 μm with a resistivity of 6 × 10−4 to 10−3 Ω cm.


Ti wires with CdSe nanowires grown on the surface were used as primary electrodes. A CdSe–Ti wire segment with a length of a few centimeters was suspended. A CNT yarn was gently twisted around the wire at a screw-pitch of about 3 mm, forming good contact with the CdSe nanowires. We removed CdSe nanowires from two ends of the Ti wire to expose the inside Ti for electrical wiring as primary electrode. The ends of the twisted CNT yarn were connected to silver paste as counter electrode. For control cell, a 250 μm diameter Pt wire was twisted to the Ti wire in a similar way to CNT yarns.


(1) Fabric cells containing multiple CNT yarn electrodes. Several CNT yarns with lengths of 3–5 cm were directly woven with a CdSe–Ti wire bent into S-shape by manual operation. Those yarns were interlaced into the parallel Ti wire segments in sequence to form an aligned array, and the distance between adjacent yarns was set in the range of 1–5 mm. Each yarn was fixed at its two ends by silver paste and wired together to a silver wire as counter electrode. CNT yarns were arranged in perpendicular to the Ti wire segments they contact. The lengths of Ti wires used as primary electrode were in the range of 4–15 cm.

(2) Fabric cells containing a single CNT yarn electrode. A long CNT yarn (>10 cm in length) was intertwined with a S-shape CdSe–Ti wire from one end to the other end, being perpendicular to the Ti segments it crosses and forming loops around the outmost segments. Both distances between the Ti segments and CNT yarns were controlled in a similar range (5 to 10 mm). This device configuration could be regarded as two one-dimensional fiber electrodes (Ti wire and CNT yarn in S-shape, respectively) mutually twisted together into a fabric.

The morphology and structure of CdSe nanowires, CNT yarns and their fabrics were characterized by SEM (Hitachi S4800) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) (F30). Mechanical properties of CNT yarns were analysed by a single column instrument (Instron 5843 equipped with a 10 N load cell) in tension at a set speed of 1 mm min−1. A thin Au film catalyst for CdSe growth was coated onto the surface of Ti wires by plasma sputtering (QUORUM K550X). Solar cell tests were carried out by a solar simulator (Newport Thermo Oriel 91195A) under AM 1.5G conditions at an illumination intensity of 90–100 mW cm−2, calibrated by a standard Si solar cell (91150 V). The CNT yarns were wired as the positive electrode and the Ti wire as the negative electrode. The fiber and fabric cells were placed on a glass slide and a liquid electrolyte containing 2 M Na2S, 2 M KOH and 2 M S dissolved in water was infiltrated into the nanowire arrays along the Ti wire by capillary action. All current–voltage data were recorded by a Keithley 2635A. The IPCE of fiber solar cells was measured using an IPCE test station (Qtest station 2000) equipped with a Digikrom monochromator and a DSP lock-in amplifier (Stanford Research Systems-SR830).


This work is supported by the National Science Foundation of China (NSFC) under the grant number of 51072005.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2nr31440a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012