 DOI: 10.1039/C4CP04965A
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 4137-4145


Ting
Ji
,

Licheng
Tan
,

Xiaotian
Hu
,

Yanfeng
Dai
 and 

Yiwang
Chen
*

College of Chemistry/Institute of Polymers, Nanchang University, 999 Xuefu Avenue, Nanchang 330031, China. E-mail: ywchen@ncu.edu.cn; Fax: +86 791 83969561; Tel: +86 791 83969562

Jiangxi Provincial Key Laboratory of New Energy Chemistry, Nanchang University, 999 Xuefu Avenue, Nanchang 330031, China

Received
29th October 2014
, Accepted 16th December 2014
First published on 22nd December 2014
Sulfonated carbon nanotubes (S-CNTs) and sulfonated graphene (S-Gra) with superior dispersibility were successfully prepared to modify poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) for applications in polymer solar cells (PSCs). The synergetic effect between S-CNTs/S-Gra and PEDOT:PSS could remove excess insulating PSS chains leading to an obvious phase separation between the PEDOT and PSS chains, which allows the formation of more conductive PEDOT channels. The PEDOT:PSS (Clevios PH 4083):S-CNTs with well-matched work function, favorable morphology, optimized hydrophobicity and superior hole mobility is demonstrated to be an excellent hole transport layer (HTL) for PSCs. However, the PEDOT:PSS (Clevios PH 4083) modified by sulfonated graphene with stacked and wrinkled lamellae as an HTL renders a rough morphology and has a negative impact on the morphology of the active layer, consequently resulting in a poor device performance. Excitingly, PEDOT:PSS (Clevios PH 1000) modified with S-Gra shows high conductivity, because the sulfonated graphene lamellae contribute to the connection between the insulator and conductive PEDOT islands and improves the charge conduction. The PH1000:S-Gra with multiple layers presents excellent electrical conductive properties and a high transmittance (sheet resistance of ∼45 Ω sq−1 and transmittance of ∼85.5% at 550 nm), which possess great potential for its application as a transparent conductive and flexible electrode in organic electronics.

Organic photovoltaics (OPVs) are receiving considerable attention due to their potential for environmentally-friendly, low-cost energy harvesting, solution processable and printable, portable and renewable energy sources. In the last few years, high performance polymer solar cells (PSCs) based on bulk heterojunction (BHJ) structures have been reported with efficiencies up to 10%, which provides the impetus for next generation organic photovoltaic devices; thus, leading to 4th generation (4G) hybrid solar cells and their successful commercialization. The research field of PSCs has diversified into at least three overlapping fractions: high power conversion efficiency, stability and compatibility to printing or roll-to-roll technique, which are the most crucial considerations for the commercialization of PSCs.

Polymer solar cells consist of a photoactive layer, interfacial buffer layers, and electrodes. Photoinduced charge generation and dissociation are mainly dominated by the optical and electrical properties of the active layer; thus, substantial efforts are underway in the scientific community to improve the optical absorption and charge generation in the photoactive layer. Moreover, the fabrication of efficient interfacial transporting layers (ITLs), which can be used between the active layer and the electrodes requires equal scientific endeavor because the charge transport-extraction process critically depends on ITLs. Adequate ITLs can prevent the recombination of electrons and holes by providing selectivity and fast carrier transportation efficiency; thus, they have a direct effect on the overall performance of OPVs. Several key factors, such as transparency, conductivity, passivation property, film morphology, stability, and solution-processability, have been considered for the use of these promising interfacial layers.
The conducting polymer, poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) with a high work function (5.2 eV) has been most commonly used as a hole transport layer (HTL) in PSCs to improve hole collection at the anode. However, PEDOT:PSS has several problems, including high acidity, hygroscopic properties and inhomogeneous electrical properties, resulting in poor long-term stability. Promising replacements and currently heavily investigated substitutes for PEDOT:PSS come from the class of transition metal oxides (MO) including MoO3, V2O5, NiO, SbO3 and WO3. The normal methods of depositing these metal oxides films are the expensive vacuum techniques that are incompatible with the low-cost solution-processable and roll-to-roll processed PSCs. Over the past few years, considerable effort has been expended in the search for new solution-processed HTL with potential improvement on the hole transport and collection, particularly at the anode interface. However, the performance is still limited.
The amazing processability of PEDOT:PSS endows it with great growth prospects. Thus, another potential method to obtain a solution-processed anode interfacial layer is to modify PEDOT:PSS to overcome the weaknesses of PEDOT:PSS, such as low electrical conductivity and poor adherence with the substrate or active layer, which frequently results in devices with low efficiency. Several techniques have been employed to improve the PEDOT:PSS features, for instance, post-deposition treatment or use of additives in the precursor solution such as glycol and glycerol. Natasha et al. reported that the sheet resistance of the modified PEDOT:PSS with hexafluoroacetone (HFA) decreased and its positive charge carrier injection/collection improved. In addition, pre- and/or post-treatment with various materials, including organic polar solvents, surfactants, salts, and acids, have also been found to enhance the conductivity (σdc) of PEDOT:PSS by two to three orders of magnitude. Moreover, PEDOT:PSS treated with 100% sulfuric acid showed a high conductivity (σdc = 4380 S cm−1), which was comparable to that of indium tin oxide (ITO) (5000 S cm−1). In addition, the effects of using additives on the surface tension of PEDOT:PSS solutions and the electrical properties of the resulting films, which arise from morphological changes have also been studied.
Recently, carbon materials, including carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and graphene, have attracted great attention due to their excellent electrical, optical, chemical, and mechanical properties. CNTs and graphene offer good durability and flexibility, ease of processing, low reflectance, natural color, and stable transparency along the entire visible light spectrum. Transistor devices based on random single-walled carbon nanotube (SWCNT) network films show much higher mobility (ca. ∼100 cm2 V−1 s−1) than those based on polymers. The mobility of transistors with aligned SWCNTs arrays even reaches 2000 cm2 V−1 s−1. To a certain extent, compositing of CNTs and PEDOT:PSS is able to complement both of their disadvantages. On one hand, the addition of conductive CNTs can remove excess insulating PSS and build bridges or networks to connect the conductive PEDOT grains. On the other hand, the conductive nature of PEDOT:PSS among CNTs networks can decrease the contact resistance of CNTs, which is induced by tube–tube junctions. Nevertheless, CNTs have an intrinsic problem of insolubility in most of the solvents; thus, many approaches have been carried out in the last decade to overcome this limitation. The oxidation of CNTs and grafting of polymers onto CNTs are the most widely utilized methods to improve the solubility of CNTs in different solvents. Yun et al. explored the effect of different CNT oxidation approaches on the properties of a PEDOT:PSS/CNTs composite film such as surface roughness, work function, surface energy, optical transparency and conductivity. Studies on the application of CNTs, PEDOT:PSS and/or CNT/PEDOT:PSS composites as electrodes in organic light emitting diodes (OLED) and catalytic counter electrodes (CCE) in dye sensitized solar cells (DSSC) have been reported.
In this work, the carbon materials were functionalized by concentrated sulfuric acid, resulting in sulfonated carbon nanotubes (S-CNTs) and sulfonated graphene (S-Gra), which were used to modify PEDOT:PSS at different concentrations. The synergetic effect between sulfonated carbon materials and PEDOT:PSS could remove excess insulating PSS chains leading to obvious phase separation between the PEDOT and PSS chains, which allows the formation of more conductive PEDOT channels, and consequently enhances the conductivity of the composites. The polymer solar cells performances based on PEDOT:PSS (Clevios PH 4083) and sulfonated carbon materials as hole transport layers demonstrated that PEDOT:PSS:S-CNTs provided a proper interfaces due to the favorable morphology and improved conductivity in comparison to PEDOT:PSS:S-Gra. Moreover, PEDOT:PSS (Clevios PH 1000) modified by sulfonated graphene with high conductivity and transparency were also demonstrated to show great potential for applications in organic electronics such as transparent conductive and flexible electrodes.

Pristine carbon nanotubes (P-CNTs) and graphene (purchased from Sigma Aldrich) were sulfonated with concentrated sulfuric acid (see ESI). Then, P-CNTs, S-CNTs and S-Gra were dispersed in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO, 1 mg mL−1) through a 1 h ultrasonic treatment. For the post-treatments, the P-CNTs, S-CNTs and S-Gra dispersions were added into PEDOT:PSS (Clevios PH 4083, purchased from Heraeus Ltd.) aqueous solutions, and the weight ratios of various carbon materials in the PEDOT:PSS were 0.1%, 0.2%, and 0.4%, respectively. To make a comparison, DMSO solvent was also immersed in PEDOT:PSS with the same volume ratios as the carbon material dispersion. These samples were named as PEDOT:PSS:P-CNTs, PEDOT:PSS:S-CNTs, PEDOT:PSS:S-Gra, and PEDOT:PSS:DMSO, respectively. Besides, P-CNTs, S-CNTs and S-Gra with 1% weight ratio were added into a PEDOT:PSS (Clevios PH 1000, purchased from Heraeus Ltd.) aqueous solution, and then they were filtered using a hydrophilic syringe filter (0.45 μm) to remove the large-size particles. The samples were denoted as PH1000:P-CNTs, PH1000:S-CNTs and PH1000:S-Gra, respectively.


Polymer solar cells were fabricated on glass substrates. ITO-coated glass substrates were first cleaned by ultrasonic agitation in acetone, detergent, deionized water, and isopropanol sequentially, followed by drying with a nitrogen flow and UV treatment for 20 min. After cleaning, PEDOT:PSS:P-CNTs, PEDOT:PSS:S-CNTs, and PEDOT:PSS:S-Gra aqueous solutions with various weight ratios (0.1%, 0.2%, and 0.4%) were spin-coated on the ITO-coated glass substrates at a speed of 4000 rpm for 60 s. The thickness of the modified PEDOT:PSS film was measured by a surface profilometer to be about 30 nm. The composite films were annealed at 140 °C for 15 min in ambient air. The regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl) (P3HT, 20 mg, Mw = 48300 g mol−1, head-to-tail, regioregularity > 90%, Rieke Metals, Inc.) and [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM, 20 mg, 99.5% purity, Nano-C) were dissolved in a 1,2-dichlorobenzene solution (P3HT:PCBM, 1:1 w/w). Then, the P3HT:PCBM blend was spin-coated on top of the composite layers, and naturally cooled in a glove box for 2 h, and then thermally annealed at 150 °C for 10 min. Finally, 7 nm LiF and 100 nm Al were deposited by thermal evaporation through a shadow mask to form an active area of 4 mm. The PH1000:P-CNTs, PH1000:S-CNTs and PH1000:S-Gra aqueous solutions were spin-coated on glass substrates at a speed of 2000 rpm for 60 s, and then they were annealed at 140 °C for 20 min in ambient air.


The light source was calibrated using silicon reference cells with an AM 1.5 global solar simulator (intensity of 100 mW cm−2). The current–voltage (J–V) characteristics were recorded using a Keithley 2400 source meter (Abet Solar Simulator Sun2000). All of the measurements were performed under ambient atmosphere at room temperature.


Due to the existing the shortcomings of the pristine carbon materials, such as insolubility and low dispersibility in solvents, severe aggregation and inherently poor compatibility with conductive polymer, the pristine carbon nanotubes (P-CNTs) and graphene were functionalized by concentrated sulfuric acid, and sulfonated carbon nanotubes (S-CNTs) and sulfonated graphene (S-Gra) were obtained. The resultant S-CNTs and S-Gra were investigated by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), Raman spectroscopy, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), energy dispersive spectrometry (EDS) and X-ray diffraction (XRD), as shown in Fig. S1 (ESI). The FT-IR and EDS analysis illustrate that sulfonic acid (–SO3H) groups were covalently bonded to the carbon materials. The content of elemental sulfur (S) in S-CNTs and S-Gra were estimated to be 2.35 atom% and 1.08 atom%, respectively, by XPS. The Raman spectra of the carbon materials showed slight changes in ID/IG ratio before and after the sulfonation treatment. Likewise, the corresponding XRD patterns and TEM microscopic characterization also proved that the sulfonated carbon materials with dramatic morphological changes were obtained by functionalization. Furthermore, the sulfonated carbon materials exhibited better dispersibility, as shown by SEM images in Fig. S2 (ESI).

The incorporation of sulfonated carbon materials may overcome the weaknesses of PEDOT:PSS, such as low electrical conductivity, which may be beneficial for the application of composite films as a solution-processed hole transport layer (HTL) in polymer solar cells. The device structures with different modified PEDOT:PSS films as HTL are shown in Fig. 1. The PEDOT:PSS solution treated with S-CNTs, P-CNTs and S-Gra at different ratios were spin-coated on top of ITO substrates at 4000 rpm min−1. The J–V curves acquired at AM 1.5 illumination for the ITO/HTL/P3HT:PCBM/LiF/Al devices are shown in Fig. 1, and the corresponding photovoltaic characteristics are listed in Table 1. The control P3HT:PCBM bulk heterojunction device (with pristine PEDOT:PSS) showed a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 8.95 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.58 V, and a fill factor (FF) of 0.60, resulting in a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 3.15%. To exclude the possibility of the solvent effect of dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) on device performance, a reference device was also fabricated by spin-coating PEDOT:PSS treated with pure DMSO solvent on the top of ITO substrates. The different volume DMSO-treated devices show almost the same performance as the control. From the results of the photovoltaic characteristics of the modified PEDOT:PSS by S-CNTs, P-CNTs, and S-Gra with different weight ratios, a superior photovoltaic performance is observed in the device based on PEDOT:PSS treated by the sulfonated carbon materials (S-CNTs and S-Gra) at 0.2% weight ratio. When the substrate was spin-coated from the PEDOT:PSS solution with the added sulfonated carbon materials with a high weight ratio, the film-forming property of the solution became weaker, resulting in a rough and discontinuous interface. In addition, the device showed the best photovoltaic performance with PCE values of up to 3.91%, Jsc of 10.49 mA cm−2, Voc of 0.58 V, and FF of 64.1%. For the devices based on the modified PEDOT:PSS:S-CNTs (0.2%), the average device efficiency was more than 3.9% (as shown in ESI, Fig. S3), which shows the good reproducibility of this method. Nevertheless, the insertion of PEDOT:PSS:P-CNTs and PEDOT:PSS:S-Gra as an HTL does not remarkably improve the photovoltaic performance. The device based on PEDOT:PSS:P-CNTs (0.2%) exhibits poor device performance with a Voc of 0.59 V, Jsc of 7.15 mA cm−2, FF of 62.4%, PCE of 2.63%, and the device based on PEDOT:PSS/S-Gra (0.2%) has a Voc of 0.57 V, Jsc of 7.95 mA cm−2, FF of 62.9%, and PCE of 2.90%. The abovementioned results indicate that the device with PEDOT:PSS:S-CNTs (0.2%) as an HTL presents a superior photovoltaic performance due to a higher current density and FF than those of PEDOT:PSS:P-CNTs (0.2%) and PEDOT:PSS:S-Gra (0.2%). From the corresponding dark J–V characteristics shown in Fig. 1, it can be inferred that the device with PEDOT:PSS:P-CNTs (0.2%) and PEDOT:PSS:S-Gra (0.2%) exhibits a higher leakage current with respect to that of PEDOT:PSS:S-CNTs (0.2%), the data of which is consistent with the photovoltaic performance (lower current density and FF), and indicates that the PEDOT:PSS modified with P-CNTs and S-Gra may not form uniform and useful interfacial layer morphologies due to the agglomerative pristine CNTs, and stacked and crumpled lamellar graphene in the PEDOT:PSS. Fig. 1 also displays log J vs. logV plots for the Mott-Gurney SCLC fitting of the hole-only devices (ITO/modified PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/MoO3/Ag), measured at ambient temperature. Compared to the pristine PEDOT:PSS (only 7.86 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1), the hole mobility of PEDOT:PSS:S-CNTs is remarkably enhanced to 3.58 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1, with about a five-fold increase, which indicates that the PEDOT:PSS modified by S-CNTs could also reduce the charge transport barrier and suppress the charge recombination, consequently resulting in the improvement of PCE. The hole mobilities of PEDOT:PSS:P-CNTs (0.2%) and PEDOT:PSS:S-Gra (0.2%) are 8.56 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 4.93 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively, which are lower than that of PEDOT:PSS:S-CNTs (0.2%) based on hole-only devices by the SCLC method. Therefore, one-dimensional sulfonated carbon nanotubes as an interface layer possesses an advantage over pristine CNTs and the two-dimensional plane structure sulfonated graphene. In addition, the PEDOT:PSS treated with sulfonated carbon materials at 2% weight ratio displays the best device performance.
Hole transport layers (%)

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)

a All values represent averages from twelve 4 mm2 devices on a single chip, and the areas were tested with an aperture.
b Best device PCE.

PEDOT:PSS
0.58 ± 0.02
8.95 ± 0.12
60.7 ± 0.32
3.15 ± 0.09 (3.20)
PEDOT:PSS:DMSO (1)
0.57 ± 0.02
8.54 ± 0.15
63.0 ± 0.36
3.10 ± 0.11 (3.15)
PEDOT:PSS:DMSO (2)
0.57 ± 0.03
8.87 ± 0.13
60.5 ± 0.12
3.10 ± 0.12 (3.14)
PEDOT:PSS:DMSO (4)
0.58 ± 0.03
8.77 ± 0.02
62.1 ± 0.20
3.15 ± 0.10 (3.16)
PEDOT:PSS:S-CNTs (0.1)
0.57 ± 0.02
9.05 ± 0.04
62.9 ± 0.21
3.24 ± 0.10 (3.28)
PEDOT:PSS:S-CNTs (0.2)
0.58 ± 0.03
10.49 ± 0.05
64.1 ± 0.35
3.91 ± 0.03 (3.96)
PEDOT:PSS:S-CNTs (0.4)
0.58 ± 0.02
8.51 ± 0.06
55.4 ± 1.10
2.75 ± 0.08 (2.80)
PEDOT:PSS:P-CNTs (0.1)
0.56 ± 0.02
8.36 ± 0.11
60.5 ± 0.26
2.83 ± 0.12 (2.85)
PEDOT:PSS:P-CNTs (0.2)
0.59 ± 0.02
7.15 ± 0.14
62.4 ± 0.30
2.63 ± 0.11 (2.70)
PEDOT:PSS:P-CNTs (0.4)
0.56 ± 0.03
8.45 ± 0.12
50.8 ± 0.28
2.42 ± 0.08 (2.51)
PEDOT:PSS:S-Gra (0.1)
0.59 ± 0.02
7.52 ± 0.13
61.0 ± 0.19
2.70 ± 0.13 (2.76)
PEDOT:PSS:S-Gra (0.2)
0.57 ± 0.03
7.95 ± 0.12
62.9 ± 0.15
2.90 ± 0.11 (2.96)
PEDOT:PSS:S-Gra (0.4)
0.59 ± 0.02
6.67 ± 0.14
60.0 ± 0.28
2.40 ± 0.12 (2.50)
The comparative ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) spectra of the pristine and modified PEDOT:PSS and the energy level diagram of the device are shown in Fig. 2. In contrast to the pristine PEDOT:PSS (−5.21 eV), the work function of PEDOT:PSS:S-CNTs, PEDOT:PSS:DMSO, PEDOT:PSS:P-CNTs and PEDOT:PSS:S-Gra are −5.10 eV, −5.12 eV, −5.27 eV and −5.30 eV, respectively, without obvious changes. It can be seen that the valence band energy levels of PEDOT:PSS:S-CNTs (−5.10 eV) is slightly higher than the HOMO energy level of the P3HT donor (−5.20 eV), and the low injection barrier between the PEDOT:PSS:S-CNTs and P3HT may favor the holes to be readily injected into PEDOT:PSS:S-CNTs for collection by the ITO electrode. Moreover, PEDOT:PSS:P-CNTs and PEDOT:PSS:S-Gra show slightly lower valence band energy levels than the HOMO energy level of the donor, which may result in poor hole mobility and collection. The optical transmittance spectra of the pristine and modified PEDOT:PSS films on the ITO glass in the visible region (wavelength between 400 and 800 nm) are also shown in Fig. 2. The pristine PEDOT:PSS and PEDOT:PSS:S-CNTs films present the same transmittance value (∼90.5% at 550 nm), revealing that the PEDOT:PSS film modified by S-CNTs as an HTL could not affect the light absorption for the active layer. However, P-CNTs and S-Gra added into PEDOT:PSS impairs their transmittance, which leads to the lower short-circuit current density. The conductivities of the pristine and modified PEDOT:PSS films exhibiting a linear relationship with the applied voltage, as shown in Fig. 2, are compared from the slopes of the curve. It can be seen that the conductivities of the modified PEDOT:PSS are extremely enhanced for the PEDOT:PSS:S-Gra film by the incorporation of sulfonated carbon materials. The reason may be that the stacked sulfonated graphene with a lamellar structure took the place of the insulating excess PSS and provided bridges or networks among the insulator and conductive PEDOT:PSS grains, which will be discussed in detail in a later section. Although PEDOT:PSS:S-Gra shows the highest conductivity compared to the other modified PEDOT:PSS, it must be noted that the device performance based on PEDOT:PSS:S-Gra as an HTL was inferior, compared with the PEDOT:PSS:S-CNTs. The stacked and crumpled lamellar graphene in the PEDOT:PSS resulted in a rough morphology, which was unfavorable to form uniform active heterojunctions.
To strengthen the aforementioned interpretation and obtain further information for the improvement in device performance, the morphology of the pristine and modified PEDOT:PSS was investigated by scanning electron microscopy (SEM), as shown in Fig. S4 (ESI). Taking into consideration the solvent effect of DMSO, the PEDOT:PSS:DMSO also was investigated to make a comparison; it was observed that DMSO makes unobvious changes on the morphology of PEDOT:PSS. The surface of the PEDOT:PSS:S-CNTs is uniform and smooth. However, the PEDOT:PSS modified by pristine CNTs has an irregular surface because of the agglomeration phenomenon. Moreover, PEDOT:PSS:S-Gra may form a severe uneven morphology due to lamellar S-Gra stacks in the PEDOT:PSS solution, which may result in a large current leakage (Fig. 1). To complement the aforementioned morphological changes, the transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of the pristine and modified PEDOT:PSS films were also investigated, as shown in Fig. 3. DMSO was also added into the PEDOT:PSS solution to exclude the solvent effect. In general, PEDOT:PSS grains consist of a PEDOT-rich core and PSS-rich shell. The pristine PEDOT:PSS has a smooth surface without phase separation and obvious agglomerated grains (or particles). The DMSO and carbon material modification enlarge the PEDOT grains. More importantly, in the PEDOT:PSS:S-CNTs, the shape of the dark PEDOT grains becomes a long stretched network in larger area, which is in agreement with the subsequent atomic force microscopic (AFM) images in Fig. 4, allowing the formation of more conductive PEDOT:PSS channels. Moreover, the PEDOT:PSS:S-CNTs had an obvious phase separation with bigger PEDOT grains. However, in PEDOT:PSS:S-Gra, the big and stacked lamellar sulfonated graphene can be found, without obvious phase separation and agglomerated PEDOT:PSS grains. Because the strong π–π stacking interaction of graphene induces the –SO3H groups to ineffectively insert into the lamellar structure of graphene, the resultant sulfonated graphene (S-Gra) had only small amounts of –SO3H groups attached to the edge of graphene. The weaker synergetic effect between the S-Gra and PEDOT:PSS particles led to the poor dispersibility of S-Gra in PEDOT:PSS solution, consequently resulting in the rough morphology. In addition, the rough morphology of the interface layer also has an effect on the active morphology, and it even induces changes to some extent. As shown in Fig. S5 (ESI), the surface morphology of P3HT:PCBM based on PEDOT:PSS:S-Gra becomes very rough. The root mean square (RMS) value increases to 3.98 nm from 2.80 nm in comparison to the active layer on top of the pristine PEDOT:PSS. The RMS of the active layer based on PEDOT:PSS:S-CNTs is 1.32 nm. The rougher active layer is unfavorable for the device performance. It renders insufficient phase separation of the heterojunction for exciton disassociation. Therefore, it is clear that the inferior device performance based on PEDOT:PSS:S-Gra as an HTL could be proved from the morphological analysis.
The role of PEDOT:PSS:S-CNTs as an HTL in the enhancement of device performance and the interactions between S-CNTs and PEDOT:PSS were analyzed in-depth. Fig. 4 shows the atomic force microscopy (AFM) topography and phase images of the pristine and modified PEDOT:PSS, respectively. In general, a spin-coated PEDOT:PSS solid film consists of PEDOT:PSS grains, with a hydrophobic and highly conductive PEDOT-rich core and a hydrophilic insulating PSS-rich shell. The pristine PEDOT:PSS shows a typical morphology, in which the bright (positive) and dark (negative) phase shifts correspond to the PEDOT-rich grains and PSS-rich grains, respectively, and the size of the disconnected conducting PEDOT-rich grains is small. For PEDOT:PSS:DMSO, PEDOT:PSS:P-CNTs and PEDOT:PSS:S-CNTs, the size and area of the PEDOT-rich grains become bigger than that of pristine PEDOT:PSS. Moreover, the bright PEDOT-rich grains in the PEDOT:PSS:S-CNTs transforms from the isolated and small domains to large stretched and continuous domains, while the dark PSS-rich regions become smaller with a distinct phase separation, indicating that the surrounding insulating PSS barrier is thinner. In comparison to PEDOT:PSS:P-CNTs, there are synergetic effects between the –SO3H groups of S-CNTs and PEDOT:PSS, which weaken the interaction effect between the two components of PEDOT:PSS. The addition of S-CNTs into PEDOT:PSS can further give rise to the depletion of the insulating PSS and formation of compact conductive PEDOT-rich granular networks, which generates larger contact areas among the better oriented and continuous PEDOT-rich grains, consequently improving the conducting pathways for carriers.
The interaction between the S-CNTs and PEDOT:PSS would also improve the hydrophobicity of the modified PEDOT:PSS, as shown in Fig. S6 (ESI). The optimized hydrophobicity of PEDOT:PSS:S-CNTs could result in better interface contact between the modified PEDOT:PSS and active layer, which would boost the device performance. The assumption of PSS depletion from the PEDOT:PSS film before and after film treatment with S-CNTs was further supported by X-ray photoemission spectroscopy (XPS) and UV absorption spectra. Fig. 5 presents the sulfur (S) 2p spectra and UV absorption spectra of the pristine and modified PEDOT:PSS films. The higher binding energy peaks at 169.0 eV and 167.8 eV and the lower binding energy peaks at 164.6 eV and 163.4 eV correspond to the sulfur atoms in PSS and PEDOT, respectively. By comparing the peak intensity of PSS and PEDOT for the pristine and modified PEDOT:PSS films, the ratios of PSS/PEDOT can be calculated from the area ratios of S 2p1/2 and S 2p3/2 peaks in PSS and PEDOT, respectively, which are listed in Table S1 (ESI). For the pristine PEDOT:PSS, the PSS/PEDOT ratio is about 11.0. After the addition of P-CNTs and S-CNTs, the PSS/PEDOT molar ratios at the surface are reduced in different degrees. For PEDOT:PSS:P-CNTs, the PSS/PEDOT ratio is reduced to 8.6, which is nearly the same result as the DMSO treatment. Because there is no obvious synergetic effect between PEDOT:PSS and pristine CNTs, the depletion of PSS chains may be due to the solvent effect of DMSO. The PSS/PEDOT ratio of PEDOT:PSS:S-CNTs is about 7.5 and the PSS content is markedly reduced by 31.8%, as calculated from the XPS peaks. The reduction of PSS could be further confirmed by the UV absorption spectra in Fig. 5. It can be seen that the intensity of the two absorption bands that originated from the aromatic rings of PSS decreased sharply after S-CNTs treatment, which effectively illustrates that the depletion of the hydrophilic and insulating PSS chains is attributed to the synergetic effect between S-CNTs and PEDOT:PSS. Because one-dimensional tubular S-CNTs have outstanding mechanical property, they could break the PSS chains attached to the PEDOT and impair their interaction. Moreover, the PEDOT molecules responsible for conduction in the blend are more uniformly distributed and continuous through the entire PEDOT:PSS film. Therefore, the depletion of the insulating PSS chains leads to an obvious phase separation between the PEDOT and PSS chains, which allows for the formation of more conductive PEDOT channels, thus improving the conductivity. In addition to the optimization of conductivity, the variations in the PSS/PEDOT ratios at the surface of the modified PEDOT:PSS films play an important role in altering the interfacial layer morphology, which is in accordance with the aforementioned observations.
As mentioned previously, the increase of the PEDOT ratio in the PEDOT:PSS:S-CNTs could also be observed in the Raman spectra, as shown in Fig. 6. The strong 1442 cm−1 band of PEDOT is attributable to the ring C–C stretching vibration originating from neutral parts existing between the localized elementary excitations such as positive polarons or bipolarons generated upon doping. The peaks centered at 1508 cm−1 and 1570 cm−1 are assigned to the CC asymmetric stretching vibrations in accordance with the thiophene rings in the middle and at the end of the chains, respectively. The bands observed at 1255, 1367, 1505, 1539 and 1569 cm−1 are associated with PEDOT on the basis of the spectrum of PEDOT. Upon the modification of S-CNTs, these bands clearly increase in intensity. Moreover, no PSS bands are observed. Thus, the increase could be illustrated by the fact that the addition of S-CNTs in the PEDOT:PSS film could promote the PSS depletion, resulting in the increase of the components of conductive PEDOT on the film surface. From the detailed analysis of these spectra, it has been observed that the peak position, peak width and intensity of the bands at 1539 and 1569 cm−1 in PEDOT:PSS:S-CNTs show a small shift and increase, compared with the pristine PEDOT:PSS, indicating the existence of interactions between the S-CNTs and PEDOT:PSS.
Taking into account the increase in the conductivity of the PEDOT:PSS solution treated with sulfonated carbon materials, the properties of the PEDOT:PSS (Clevious PH 1000) aqueous solution after the addition of S-CNTs and S-Gra were also investigated. The TEM and SEM images of the PH1000 films treated with a 1% weight ratio are shown in Fig. S7 (ESI). The PH1000:DMSO film was also studied to exclude the effect of the solvent. The morphology of the modified PH1000:DMSO is smooth and uniform, and wrinkled graphene lamellae can be found in the PH1000:S-Gra. Moreover, the effects of the incorporation of S-CNTs and S-Gra on the sheet resistance and transmittance of the modified PH1000 films were also studied, as shown in Fig. 7. It can be seen that the sheet resistances of PH1000:S-CNTs and PH1000:S-Gra greatly decrease, which are lower than the PH1000 and PH1000:DMSO. The PH1000:S-CNTs and PH1000:S-Gra possess sheet resistances of about 81.8 and 45 Ω sq−1 with the transmittance of 85.3% and 85.5% at 550 nm, respectively. In general, the transmittance of a transparent nanostructured metallic thin film is calculated using the following relationship:
(1)
where
σOp (λ) is the optical conductivity and σDC is the direct current (DC) conductivity of the film. Here, the ratio of σDC/σOp can be regarded as a figure of merit (FoM). The high values indicate that the transparent conductive electrodes possess desirable properties. The PH1000:S-Gra film on a glass substrate exhibited σDC/σOp ≈ 51.6, which was greater than that for the PH1000 film on a glass substrate (σDC/σOp ≈ 16.3), as shown in Table S2 (ESI). For PH1000:S-CNTs, the improvement in conductivity could also be attributed to the depletion of the insulting PSS chains and conductive PEDOT aggregation due to the synergetic effect between S-CNTs and PEDOT:PSS. For PH1000:S-Gra, aside from the synergetic effect between S-Gra and PEDOT:PSS on the conductivity enhancement, the highly conductive sulfonated graphene lamellae may offer direct charge transport templates and build bridges or networks to connect the insulator and conductive PEDOT islands in the composites, resulting in a great improvement in the conductivity of PH1000:S-Gra. Moreover, the UV absorption spectra (in Fig. S8, ESI) of PH1000:S-CNTs and PH1000:S-Gra also demonstrated the depletion of PSS, in comparison to the pristine PH1000. These findings suggest that the different concentrations of PEDOT:PSS (Clevios PH 4083 and Clevios PH 1000) treated with sulfonated carbon materials both present prominent electrical properties and high transmittance. Moreover, the PH1000:S-Gra, with high transmittance and low sheet resistance due to the function of S-Gra as bridges for offering continuous conducting pathways for electrons, is more suitable for applications as transparent conductive electrodes, which will be studied in detail later.


PEDOT:PSS modified by sulfonated carbon nanotubes (S-CNTs) and sulfonated graphene (S-Gra) with sulfonic acid groups were initially investigated. The synergetic interaction of S-CNTs and S-Gra with PEDOT:PSS could remove excess insulating and hydrophilic PSS chains to generate obvious phase separation between the PEDOT and PSS chains, resulting in more conductive PEDOT channels, which favors the enhancement of conductivity of PEDOT:PSS. Moreover, the conductive sulfonated graphene lamellae in the PEDOT:PSS:S-Gra composites may offer direct charge transport templates and build bridges or networks to connect the insulator and conductive PEDOT islands, and thus remarkably improve the conductivity further. The modified PEDOT:PSS:S-CNTs composites with well-matched work function, favorable morphology, optimized hydrophobicity, proper conductivity and higher hole mobility have been demonstrated to be an excellent hole transport layer (HTL) for polymer solar cells, showing the best photovoltaic performance with PCE values of up to 3.91%, Jsc of 10.49 mA cm−2, Voc of 0.58 V, and FF of 64.1%. However, the performance of the device based on PEDOT:PSS:S-Gra as an HTL was inferior because the PEDOT:PSS modified with S-Gra formed a severe uneven morphology attributed to the stacked and crumpled graphene lamellae in the PEDOT:PSS, which may impair current generation. Significantly, the modified PH1000:S-Gra composites with multiple layers can have sheet resistances of 45 Ω sq−1 and a transparency of over 85% at 550 nm, which may be applied in organic electronics as conductive and flexible electrodes.


The financial supports for this work are provided by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51273088 and 51302130), National Basic Research Program of China (973 Program 2014CB260409), National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars (51425304) and Doctoral Programs Foundation of Ministry of Education of China (Grants 20133601110004 and 20133601120006). Ting Ji and Licheng Tan contributed equally to this work.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details such as the synthesis methods for the sulfonated carbon nanotubes and sulfonated graphene; the work function measurement of the pristine and modified PEDOT:PSS films; space-charge-limited-current (SCLC) mobility measurement; the carbon material characterization date; the SEM images of P-CNTs and S-CNTs in DMSO; the SEM images and the contact angle of the pristine and modified PEDOT:PSS films; the AFM images of active layer based on PEDOT:PSS, PEDOT:PSS:S-CNTs, and PEDOT:PSS:S-Gra; the SEM and TEM images and UV absorption spectra of the pristine and modified PH1000 films; superficial PSS/PEDOT ratios of the pristine and modified PEDOT:PSS films. See DOI: 10.1039/c4cp04965a
This journal is © the Owner Societies 2015