 DOI: 10.1039/C7NR06982K
(Communication)
Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 19031-19038


Janardan
Dagar
,

Guido
Scavia
,

Manuela
Scarselli
,

Silvia
Destri
,

Maurizio
De Crescenzi
 and 

Thomas M.
Brown
*

CHOSE (Centre for Hybrid and Organic Solar Energy), Department of Electronic Engineering, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Via del Politecnico 1, 00133 Rome, Italy. E-mail: thomas.brown@uniroma2.it

CNR – ISMAC (Istituto per lo Studio delle Macromolecole), via Corti 12, 20133 Milano, Italy

Department of Physics, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Via della Ricerca Scientifica 1, 00133 Rome, Italy

Received
19th September 2017
, Accepted 19th November 2017
First published on 20th November 2017
Here we present for the first time polymer solar cells that incorporate biological material that show state of the art efficiencies in excess of 8%. The performance of inverted polymer solar cells was improved significantly after deposition of ZnO nanoparticles (ZnO-NPs) together with a thin deoxyribonucleic acid nanolayer and used as an electron extraction layer (EEL). The ZnO-NPs/DNA double layer improved the rectifying ratio, shunt resistance of the cells as well as lowering the work function of the electron-collecting contact. Importantly, the ZnO-NPs/DNA bilayer enhanced the power conversion efficiency of cells considerably compared to cells with EELs made of only DNA (improvement of 56% in relative terms) or only ZnO-NPs (improvement of 19% in relative terms) reaching a best power conversion efficiency of 8.5%. The ZnO-NPs/DNA double layer cells also outperformed ones made with one of the most efficient previous synthetic composite EELs (i.e. ZnO/PEIE(poly(ethyleneimine)-ethoxylated)). Since all fabrication procedures were carried out at low (<150 °C) or room temperature, we have applied the findings to flexible substrates as well as on glass obtaining a high PCE of 7.2%. The solar cells with the biological/metal–oxide composite EELs also delivered an improvement in the stability (∼20% in relative term) compared to that with ZnO-NPs only. All these findings show that natural materials, in this case DNA, the premium biological material, can be incorporated in organic semiconductor devices in tandem with inorganic devices delivering uncompromising levels of performance as well as significant improvements.

Numerous efforts have been focused on improving the performance of polymer solar cells. Many have been centered on of the identification of effective electron transport/extraction layers (ETLs/EELs) of different types including metals, metal oxides, fluorides, caesium carbonate, fullerene derivatives, conjugated polyelectrolytes poly(ethyleneimine) (PEI) or poly(ethyleneimine)-ethoxylated (PEIE). DNA and its derivatives have also been recently incorporated in solar cells as single layer EELs. DNA has also already been used to improve the performance of other organic semiconductor devices such as organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs), and organic field effect transistors (OFETs). One of the most commonly used EELs in the inverted architecture (i.e. that with the ETL deposited over the bottom transparent contact) is that made of ZnO, due to its high optical transparency, high electron mobility and low temperature processability. ZnO is often deposited in the form of nanoparticles (NPs) delivering an effective EEL at low temperature. Nevertheless, the performance of cells may suffer from surface defects, found at the interface of ZnO-NPs and adjacent layers, as well ITO/ZnO-NPs possessing an electron affinity which is higher than that of the PC70BM acceptor molecule whose LUMO lies ∼4.0–4.3 eV from the vacuum level. To fix these problems and enhance further the performance of solar cells, bilayer cathodes have been developed. Here for the first time, we introduced 1–6 nm thick DNA nanolayer over the ZnO-NPs layer to develop ZnO-NPs/DNA composite EEL to enhance the performance of polymer solar cells compared to EELs made of only DNA (improvement of 56% in relative terms) or only ZnO-NPs (improvement of 19% in relative terms) reaching state of the art average power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of 8.3% and a best of 8.5%. Low temperature (<150 °C) and easy fabrication processes enabled us to transfer all layers from glass to flexible (PET i.e. polyethylene terephthalate) substrates successfully. Furthermore, we note that both ZnO-NPs and the DNA salt we used here were dissolved in an ecofriendly solvent mixture of water and ethanol.


The structure of our cell was ITO/ZnO-NPs/DNA/PTB7:PC70BM/MoO3/Ag as shown in Fig. 1(a). The active blend consisted of PTB7 [poly[[4,8-bis[(2-ethylhexyl)oxy]benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl][3-fluoro-2-[(2-ethylhexyl)carbonyl]thieno[3,4-b]thiophenediyl]]] as donor polymer and PC70BM [[6,6]-phenyl-C70-butyric acid methyl ester] as acceptor. The hole extraction layer consisted of MoO3 layer. We used ZnO-NPs dispersion which is commercially available. The ZnO-NPs layer was deposited by spin coating from a dispersion of nanoparticles of average particle size ≤40 nm in water and ethanol (see Experimental section), over pre-cleaned ITO/glass or PET substrates. In addition, we introduced over the ZnO-NPs layer one of DNA in its “natural” fibre-like salt with Na, with the phosphate backbone being negatively charged with balancing Na+ (or H+) for neutrality, resulting from the isolation from salmon fish, which is soluble in methanol and water. DNA enables the fabrication of solar cells at room temperature.

The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the best cell for inverted PTB7:PC70BM solar cells with different interlayers including DNA, ZnO-NPs, and DNA coated ZnO-NPs, measured under AM1.5G, 1000 W m−2 solar illumination are shown in Fig. 1(b) along with those JV characteristics without any interlayer (“ITO only”). The average values of PV parameters, including short circuit current (Jsc), open circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (FF) and power conversion efficiency (PCE) have been summarized in Table 1 and Fig. S1. The device with only DNA layer gives a PCE = 5.3% improving the PCE considerably compared to the ITO-only case (PCE = 3.46%). ZnO-NPs interlayer delivers a cell with an even better PCE = 7.0%. It is when combining both ZnO-NPs and DNA in ZnO-NPs/DNA composite bilayer EEL that leads to the most dramatic enhancement up to a value of 8.3% and a maximum of 8.5% power conversion efficiency. In addition to these interlayers, we noted that inverting the order of deposition of DNA/ZnO-NPs bilayers leads to better efficiency compared to the single layer only (either DNA or ZnO-NPs): cells with DNA covered by ZnO-NPs (i.e. ITO/DNA/ZnO-NPs EELs) deliver a maximum PCE of 8.3%. We have fabricated the same solar cell architecture, inserting DNA over ZnO-NPs layer with 12 different cells and obtained consistent results. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra of the solar cell devices are displayed in Fig. S2, with the highest peak in the 80% to 90% range, yielding consistent results with the Jsc, confirmed by calculating integrated Jsc value.
Electron transport interlayers

J
sc [mA cm−2]

V
oc [V]
FF. [% ]
PCE. [%]
ITO only
17.63 ± 0.03
0.392 ± 0.031
50.06 ± 1.46
3.46 ± 0.37 (3.7)
ITO/DNA
15.56 ± 0.08
0.667 ± 0.007
51.47 ± 0.86
5.33 ± 0.13 (5.5)
ITO/PEIE
16.43 ± 0.10
0.699 ± 0.014
65.02 ± 1.27
7.47 ± 0.26 (7.7)
ITO/ZnO-NPs
16.55 ± 0.10
0.697 ± 0.004
60.63 ± 1.16
7.00 ± 0.13 (7.1)
ITO/ZnO-NPs/PEIE
16.79 ± 0.15
0.723 ± 0.005
66.47 ± 0.60
8.07 ± 0.04 (8.1)
ITO/DNA/ZnO-NPs
17.17 ± 0.14
0.717 ± 0.010
66.22 ± 0.74
8.16 ± 0.17 (8.3)
ITO/ZnO-NPs/DNA
18.90 ± 0.05
0.712 ± 0.005
61.71 ± 0.82
8.31 ± 0.13 (8.5)
PET_ITO/ZnO-NPs/DNA
16.92 ± 0.26
0.716 ± 0.006
58.29 ± 0.30
7.06 ± 0.18 (7.2)

Fig. 1(c) shows the dark J–V curves for the same cells. The highest on/off current ratio (from +1 V/−1 V) is 1.6 × 103 belongs indeed to the ZnO-NPs/DNA bilayer which is significantly greater even than that of the cell with the common ZnO-NPs only EEL (2.7 × 102). The ITO/ZnO-NPs/DNA bilayer cell not only exhibits the highest rectification behavior but also the lowest reverse current of all cells confirming the high quality of the electron extracting electrode. We have also fabricated solar cells with ITO/PEIE and ITO/ZnO-NPs/PEIE electron-extracting contacts in the same batch of experiments for comparison. Table 1 shows that the ITO/ZnO-NPs/DNA EEL is the best performing EEL of the lot.
Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) and Scanning Tunneling Microscopy (STM) measurements were carried out to investigate the surface morphology and roughness of various different interlayers including DNA, ZnO-NPs and ZnO-NPs/DNA over the ITO substrate. As shown in Fig. 2(a), the corrugated and typical lamellae surface morphology was observed for bare ITO (“ITO only”) with a root mean square (rms) surface roughness of 2.1 nm. The deposition of DNA does not change the roughness value (Fig. 2(b)) since it is very thin (1–6 nm) and conformal as measured by STM. The ZnO surface consists of a uniform film of nano-sized particles (see Fig. 2(c)) with a rms value of 11 nm. Higher spatially-resolved image of the same surface is provided in Fig. 2(e) through STM microscopy, where the ZnO particle size dimension is about 10 nm. The ZnO-NPs surface morphology after DNA deposition through STM, shows more elongated structures, due to the presence of DNA (see Fig. 2(e) and (f)). Even more elongated structures were visible in our previous study of DNA covering ITO instead of ZnO-NPs. The surface roughness of ITO/ZnO-NPs/DNA bilayer was 9.3 nm which is a little lower than that of ZnO-NPs only (11 nm). The DNA coverage may thus smoothen in part the surface reducing the exposure of surface defects present on the ZnO-NPs film surface. The STM images (Fig. 2(e) and (f)) gave a similar trend in the roughness since the rms values are 2.71 nm and 1.73 nm, respectively and they confirm a global leveling of the ZnO-NPs surface due to the DNA deposition. Fig. 2(h), reports the STS (Scanning Tunneling Spectroscopy) response on the ITO/ZnO-NPs substrate before and after DNA deposition. The tunneling current vs. voltage curve measured on ITO/ZnO-NPs layer (empty hexagon) shows that the sample has a lower conductance in all the applied voltage range studied. This conductance increases in the same range after DNA deposition (red (1) and black (2) circles). The inset of the figure reports the corresponding dI/dV derivative vs. voltage curves that evidence two prominent features which are completely absent in the ZnO-NPs only substrate. The appearance of these contributions indicates that upon DNA deposition a local modification of the energy band structure of the ZnO-NPs/DNA interface took place, as evidenced by the structures located around −2.5 eV and +1.8 eV assigned to the electronic states of the DNA. In addition, we note from the symmetry of the dI/dV curves with respect of the Fermi level (located at zero voltage of the spectrum), that the interface modification produces a marked increase of the tunneling current and globally favors both the injection and extraction of carriers at the interface.
An important reason behind the improvement in performance of solar cells with insertion of the additional layer in our composite EELs is the lowering of the overall work function of the electron collecting electrode as occurs also when using other cathodes such as Ca and Ba.We measured the contact potential difference (CPD) of ITO/DNA, ITO/ZnO-NPs and ITO/ZnO-NPs/DNA using Kelvin probe (KP) measurements and compared to that of a clean bare ITO surface as reported in Fig. 3(a). The work function was estimated by assigning the value of 4.7 eV to the work function of ITO as determined from previous KP measurements on ITO calibrated utilizing a highly oriented pyrolytic graphite surface. We measured a decrease of the work function of the ITO electrode from 4.7 eV to 4.45 eV after DNA nanolayer incorporation, similarly to what observed when DNA is deposited over a metal such as Au, Al etc. leading to higher rectification and improved cell performance. The lowering of work function is even greater when the ZnO-NPs layer is deposited over ITO (from 4.7 eV to 4.3 eV). Importantly, the work function is lowered further (reaching the lowest value of 4.25 eV) after deposition of DNA nanolayer over the ZnO-NPs layer (i.e. ITO/ZnO-NPs/DNA). A similar effect also took place when the DNA nanolayer was placed below the ZnO-NPs (4.27 eV for the DNA/ZnO double layer), being lower than ZnO or DNA only samples although not as low as the ITO/ZnO-NPs/DNA case. We note from Fig. 3b that the lowering of the work function of the ITO/ZnO-NPs/DNA electron collecting electrode matches the values found in the literature for the electron affinity of PC70BM (∼4.0–4.3 eV) and is furthest away from that of hole transport layer and anode (MoO3/Ag) as displayed in the simplified energy band diagram of Fig. 3(b). As a result, the difference generated between energy levels of the hole-collecting MoO3/Ag and electron-collecting ITO/ZnO-NPs/DNA contacts results in an increased built-in potential which plays an important role in charge collection and considerably enhances the Voc. In fact the measured Voc = 0.71 V is the highest for the cell with the composite cathode confirming the trend found between Voc and work function differences in a systematic study when using more conventional contacts. The lowering of the work function when DNA is used together with ZnO-NPs also leads to enhanced tunnelling currents found in STS spectroscopy (see Fig. 2(h)).
The picture described above is supported from analysing dark current density curves of Fig. 1(c) where the cells with the electron extracting electrodes with the lowest work functions possess the highest turn-on voltages (e.g. voltages for which the current is 0.1 mA cm−2): significant charge injection in sandwich structures like these only occurs after applying voltages greater than the built in potential which in turn scales with the work function of the contact until pinning occurs. The benefits of the composite EEL also include (see Fig. 3(c)) a better series resistance (Rs goes from 8.29 Ω cm2 to 5.93 Ω cm2) as well as a significant improvement in shunt resistance (Rsh goes from 1.27 kΩ cm2 for ZnO-NPs only EELs to 2.94 kΩ cm2 for ZnO-NPs/DNA EEL). On the one hand the fact that the Jsc is higher in the ZnO/DNA (18.9 mA cm−2) device compared to the DNA/ZnO device (17.17 mA cm−2) contributes to the lower FF since ohmic losses are greater with higher photocurrents. Secondly, Rs and Rsh are calculated at the axes only, and do not follow the shape of the curves at the maximum power points. The contribution of these two factors can explain the lower FF. The short circuit current (Jsc) of the ITO may be higher than the ITO/DNA EEL, even though the built in potential is lower, because of a better contact resistance (and lower Rs as shown in Fig. 3(c)). Thus, not only the bilayer improves carrier extraction but may also provide better hole blocking behaviour as is also evident in the high rectifying ratios of Fig. 1c. The positive electron-extracting properties of ZnO-NPs stems from an electron affinity that matches well that of the PCBM whilst at the same time guarantees some hole blocking behaviour due to a high ionization potential. As discussed previously, the shift of the work function to lower values arising from the deposition of the DNA layer has been attributed mainly to the formation of an interfacial dipole with the phosphate anions in the DNA at its origin. The DNA used in this study is a sodium DNA complex having polar groups Na+ which neutralize PO3− (phosphate anions). The DNA-contained anions can react with the indium and tin ions at the surface of the ITO to form complexes that can lower the work function of such materials, a likely outcome being able to occur also with Zn. Thus, the ZnO-NPs/DNA double layer leads to even better matching of the electron-conducting levels of the EEL with that of PCBM compared to the neat counterparts. A better coverage may also ensure blocking behaviour as described previously. Apart from the change in work function and in possible blocking behavior of the differing EELs affecting the performance of the cells, one needs to consider that some morphological change may also occur. In fact, the morphology of the PTB7:PC71BM blend not only depends on different solvents and additives of the blend ink but also on the surface onto which the films are deposited. For example, the morphology of the PTB7:PC70BM blend can differ to different degrees when PEIE is deposited on top of bare ZnO-NPs. Although to what extent each contribution affects photovoltaic performance is difficult to quantify, the effect of the EELs on order can be focus of future investigations. Note that the bilayer based solar devices also delivered an improvement in the stability of un-encapsulated cells left in air (see shelf life plots in Fig. S3). We calculated that the PCE decrease was ∼41% for the ZnO-NPs/DNA solar cells after 30 days in air whereas it was 62% lower for the ZnO-NPs cells. The improvement in stability of ZnO-NPs/DNA based solar cells is due to a smaller lowering of FF and Voc compared to those of ZnO-NPs based devices. Although we do not have other correlated experiments, the evidence points to the composite layers retaining their extracting/blocking properties more effectively in time.
We also fabricated a set of devices on flexible PET substrates. The J–V characteristics of the best cell for inverted PTB7:PC70BM solar cells with the composite ZnO-NPs/DNA bilayer EEL on PET/ITO is shown in Fig. 4(a) together with the curves of the same cell architecture on glass. The average values of PV parameters of DNA coated ZnO-NPs bilayer on both glass and flexible substrates were compared and summarized in Table 1 and Fig. S1. The PCE of the best flexible cells was 7.2% (which is comparable to that obtained on rigid substrates). The EQE spectra of the solar cell devices with both glass and PET substrates are shown in Fig. 4(b) The EQE value for flexible substrate based device peaks at ∼75% at around 450 nm wavelength, not as high as the glass counterparts, furthermore the EQE was reduced significantly below 400 nm where the PET absorbs more than its glass counterpart.
In conclusion, the performance of PTB7:PC70BM inverted solar cells was improved after successfully incorporating a composite ZnO-NPs/DNA electron-extracting layer between the ITO bottom contact and the blend photoactive layer. It led to a lowering of the work function compared to ITO/DNA and ITO/ZnO-NPs only layer as measured by Kelvin probe. The surface morphology measurements (AFM and STM) show reduction in surface roughness of ITO/ZnO-NPs layer after the deposition of the DNA nanolayer. The ITO/ZnO-NPs/DNA also leads to the highest shunt resistances as well as rectification ratios. As a result, the power conversion efficiency of the cells was the highest, i.e. a maximum PCE of 8.5% which corresponded to a ∼19% increment compared to solar cells with a ZnO-NPs EEL layer only. This is the first instance ever reported where any transport layer incorporating biological material (in our case DNA which is a naturally occurring premium biological genetic material) reaches state of the art efficiencies which are of real practical interest (PCE > 8%) thus elevating transport layers with biological matter to the level of synthetic ones. We also report that ZnO/DNA bilayer leads to even better performance (improvement of 5% in power conversion efficiency, PCE, in relative terms) compared to the most efficient composite EELs (ZnO/PEIE) for polymer solar cells. Furthermore, DNA over ZnO does not need any further annealing treatment compared to other EEL such as PEIE which are annealed at temperatures reaching up to 150 °C. This has allowed us to successfully apply the whole process to flexible substrates, obtaining an efficiency of 7.2%. Furthermore, the casting from water/alcohol solvents also suggests a convenient and ecofriendly processes for the formation of very efficient electron extraction layers. We have also shown that DNA/ZnO bilayer leads to better air stability compared to just ZnO-NPs layer based solar cell devices. In the future, DNA can be further functionalized with targeted molecular groups or ions over the ZnO layer that can improve the performance of the device further and pave the way for future studies and concepts in polymer-based optoelectronic devices such as bio-detectors and medical sensors, an expanding field with great potential for the future.

DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid sodium salt from salmon testes, molecular mass of 1.3 × 106 Da (∼2000 base pair)) was purchased from Sigma Aldrich. Zinc oxide, dispersion nanoparticles (ZnO-NPs) of the average particle size less than 40 nm and with 20 wt% concentration in water was also purchased from Sigma Aldrich. PEIE (Polyethylenimine, 80% Ethoxylated,Mw 70000g, Aldrich) was diluted in 2-methoxyethanol (0.2 wt%). PTB7, poly[[4,8-bis[(2-ethylhexyl)oxy]benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl][3-fluoro-2-[(2 ethylhexyl)carbonyl]thieno[3,4-b]thiophenediyl]] and PC70BM, [6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester, (99.99%) and PC60BM were purchased from Solarmer and Solenne BV, respectively. Molybdenum oxide (MoO3, 99.98% powder), ortho-xylene and silver (Ag, wire Z 99.99%) were purchased from Sigma Aldrich.


In the process of inverted solar cell device fabrication, at first ITO glass-covered substrates (Kintec −8 Ω □−1), patterned with wet-etching in hydrobromic acid (HBr) and cleaned in ultrasonic bath in acetone and isopropanol for 10 min with each solvent. For the fabrication of ITO/ZnO NPs/DNA/PTB7:PC70BM/MoO3/Ag solar cells, at first ZnO-NPs solution for the thin film deposition was prepared by diluting 200 μl ZnO-NPs dispersion in 20 ml ethanol in air which was further stirred overnight at room temperature. ZnO-NPs thin film was deposited on ITO coated glass/PET substrate by spin-coating at spin speed of 2500 rpm which was carried out and then annealed at 140 °C for 20 minutes in air. The PEIE solution was spin coated over ITO and ITO/ZnO-NPs substrates at 5000 rpm for 60 seconds in air. The PEIE underwent thermal annealing at 140 °C for 10 min in air. The DNA solution was prepared first by dissolving 5 mg DNA fibers in 0.5 ml of deionized water until the solution becomes transparent and then 4.5 ml of methanol was added to dilute it to be 1 mg ml−1 concentration. After overnight stirring at room temperature, the DNA solution was filtered using a 0.2 μm PVDF filter (NB: it is important to use this type of filter to obtain the films discussed in this article; the use of PTFE or polypropylene filters with the same pore size instead, resulted in DNA films with different optical and thickness properties) and then spin-coated on ITO coated glass substrate at spin speed of 3000 rpm over the ZnO-NPs thin film in air. The prepared ITO/ZnO-NPs/DNA samples were left in vacuum overnight for drying (we note from Kelvin probe measurements that work function of the electrodes changes if these samples are left in air so drying/inert atmosphere fabrication is important) after that samples were directly transferred in inert gas atmosphere. From AFM and transmittance measurements (not shown), it is clear that both layers (ZnO-NPs and DNA) are present after deposition of both layers even if both are soluble in the similar solvent. The active layer of polymer contents PTB7:PC70BM (1:1.5) dissolved in ortho-xylene and 3% v/v of 1,8-diiodooctane (DIO) was spin coated in inert gas atmosphere first at 500 rpm for 80 seconds, leading further to 1500 rpm for next 10 seconds for obtaining 80 nm thickness which was confirmed by profilometer (Dektak 150). The coated films were kept in vacuum for 20 minutes drying. At the end all substrates were transferred in the metal evaporator where MoO3 (hole extracting interlayer) and silver top contact were thermally evaporated through a shadow mask at pressures below 10−6 mbar for a final thickness of 5 nm and 100 nm respectively. Each substrate contained 4 devices of 0.1 cm2 area.


The surface morphology of all interlayers (DNA, ZnO-NPs and DNA coated ZnO-NPs bilayer) along ITO only were measured in inert atmosphere using AFM technique. All samples were prepared by spin coating over the pre-cleaned ITO substrates. AFM images have been obtained with a commercial AFM (NTMDT NTEGRA) in tapping mode with cantilever frequency of 140–390 kHz (NSG10).


The conduction band energy levels (WFs) of the bare ITO electrode and after deposition of various different interfacial layers including DNA, ZnO-NPs and DNA coated ZnO-NPs bilayer were measured using Kelvin probe microscopy in inert atmosphere. KPFM measurements in this study have been performed using the AFM NTMDT operating in amplitude detection mode with a Vpp applied of 100 mV. A cantilever with a conductive TiN tip (calibrated with HOPG) (NSG01/TiN) have been used. The compensation voltage needed to nullify the AC voltage generates the contact potential map (CP). The average CP have been then calculated for each surface scan. For each sample, five different areas have been scanned and a mean of these five CP's values have been calculated as representative of the final sample CP. Note that great care was taken in ensuring transport and measurements of the samples was carried out in inert nitrogen atmosphere. When KP measurements were instead performed in air, the readings led to significantly higher values of the work function, especially for the DNA samples, due to the hygroscopic nature of the surface (and must thus be avoided).


The STM measurements were carried out under ultra-high vacuum conditions (base pressure ∼4 × 10−10 mbar) at room temperature (by using an Omicron system), using etched W (tungsten) tip tips. The samples were inserted in the UHV chamber immediately just after their preparation to prevent from the contamination and degradation due to air exposure. The topography images reported were acquired in constant current mode and the images presented were obtained from unfiltered data apart from rigid plane subtraction. Scanning tunneling spectroscopy (STS) data were acquired with the same the apparatus. In this operation mode the tunneling current was registered as a function of the applied bias (I vs. V) while acquiring the topography images. The feedback loop was disabled for short time and the set-point current, which regulated the tip–sample distance, remained unchanged during the voltage scan. The I–V curves were collected over grids of points equally spaced on the scanned sample area and the spectra reported were averaged over a set of several curves.


Solar cell electrical characteristics were measured in air with a Keithley2420 source meter under an AM1.5G Class A ABET solar simulator at an intensity of 1000 W m−2 calibrated with an ECO Pyranometer MS-602 at room temperature. The voltage step, scan speed and delay time for data point scans were fixed at 20 mV, 1 s, and 200 ms respectively. Forward and reverse sweeps gave negligible hysteresis. Cells were masked with 0.1 cm2 black tapes during measurements. The EQE measurements were performed in air using IPCE (incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency) system (IPCE-LS200, Dyers) which has been calibrated using UV-enhanced Si detector (Thorlabs, 250–1100 nm).


There are no conflicts to declare.


We thank Dario Di Carlo Rasi, Dr Andrea Zampetti, Matteo Gasbarri, Sergio Alexis Castro Hermosa, Dr Luca La Notte, Dr Giampaolo Susanna, Dr Francesca Brunetti, Prof Andrea Reale and Prof Aldo Di Carlo for useful discussions. We thank MIUR for PRIN 2012 (2012A4Z2RY) “AQUASOL” (Celle solari polimeriche processabili da mezzi acquosi: dai materiali ai moduli fotovoltaici) and the EU CHEETAH project for financial support.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Average data plots of different interlayer based PTB7/PC70BM solar cell devices together with EQE spectra. The stability measurements of the best solar cell devices. Summarized data table of all electron extraction/transport layer based solar cell devices. See DOI: 10.1039/c7nr06982k
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017