 DOI: 10.1039/C7TC01934C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 8059-8070


Christian Mark
Pelicano
* and 

Hisao
Yanagi


Graduate School of Materials Science, Nara Institute of Science and Technology, 8916-5 Takayama, Ikoma, Nara 630-0192, Japan. E-mail: christian.pelicano.ce0@ms.naist.jp

Received
4th May 2017
, Accepted 15th June 2017
First published on 16th June 2017
A strategic low temperature oxidation of Zn thin films in water is presented to fabricate nanostructured ZnO as an electron transporting layer in efficient solid-state perovskite solar cells (glass/ITO/ZnO/perovskite/P3HT/Ag) for the first time. By controlling the oxidation time and temperature, novel nanostructured surface morphologies including platelets, rods, honeycomb structures and fibrous wires composed of particles are obtained. Nanostructures formed in longer reaction times show reduced concentration of surface defects improving the possible recombination losses in solar cells. The perovskite solar cell based on room temperature oxidized fibrous ZnO nanostructures exhibited a respectable maximum efficiency of 3.62%. This efficiency is improved up to 5.96% by utilizing the pointed nanorod morphology generated by oxidation at a growth temperature of 90 °C for 8 h. Most of the fabricated solar cells based on rod-like structures show higher efficiencies, weaker hysteresis behavior and good stability owing to the enhanced electronic properties and interfacial area between ZnO and the active layer. These results highlight the potential of wet oxidized nanostructured ZnO as an electron selective layer for low cost, sustainable and large-scale production of flexible perovskite solar cells.

The development of thin-film solar cells utilizing an organic–inorganic perovskite compound as a light absorber has recently generated enormous attention in the photovoltaic research field due to their remarkable efficiencies. These can be attributed to the superb photovoltaic properties of lead halide perovskites, such as strong absorption in a broad range of the visible spectrum, small excitonic binding energy of around ∼2 meV, long charge diffusion length of 100–1000 nm, high charge carrier mobilities, and tunable band gap over the range of 1.1–2.3 eV. Additionally, perovskite solar cells can be manufactured using low cost and simple solution processes at low temperature, which can result in large-scale production by continuous and high throughput roll-to-roll methods. The structure of the organic–inorganic perovskites is AMX3, where A is a cation (CH3NH3+, NHCHNH3+, Cs+), M is an inorganic divalent or trivalent cation (Pb2+, Sn2+, Bi3+, Sb3+) and X is a negatively charged halide (I−, Br−, Cl−). To date, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of perovskite solar cells has increased significantly from 3.8% in 2009 to the recently certified value of 22.1% in 2016.

Most state-of-the-art perovskite solar cells utilize compact or mesoporous TiO2 as the electron-transporting layer. This layer also blocks the generated holes from the perovskite and prevents the hole-transporting layer from reaching the conductive oxide electrode. The conduction band level of TiO2 is highly compatible with that of perovskite in such a way that fast electron injection from the active layer is possible. However, its low electron mobility (0.1–4 cm2 V s−1) leads to high electron recombination and unbalanced charge transport in perovskite solar cells. High temperature sintering (T > 400 °C) is also normally required to attain the conducting phase of TiO2. These reasons hinder the application of TiO2 in flexible photovoltaic devices through roll-to-toll processing. Hence, replacement materials for TiO2 need to be explored in order to realize stable, efficient and flexible solar cell devices. A promising alternative is ZnO, which is another n-type semiconductor that has equally excellent optoelectronic features. It has a wide band gap of 3.37 eV and high electron mobility ranging from 200–300 cm2 V s−1 for the bulk material and about 1000 cm2 V s−1 for single crystalline nanowires, which are several orders of magnitude higher than that of TiO2. Moreover, high quality ZnO films can be solution processed by different growth techniques at low temperature to form various surface morphologies. The earliest reported solid-state perovskite solar cell, which is based on ZnO nanorods grown by chemical bath deposition, showed a PCE below 3% on PET/ITO substrates and up to 9% on FTO/glass substrates. Nanostructured ZnO grown by electrochemical deposition was also used for perovskite solar cells with a PCE of 10.28%. Liu and Kelly demonstrated that spin-coated ZnO colloidal nanoparticles can be utilized as an electron transporting layer on perovskite devices, which resulted in a PCE of 15.7%. Mahmood et al. have obtained an efficient perovskite solar cell based on hydrothermally grown high aspect ratio N-doped ZnO nanorods with a PCE of 16.1%. However, all these previously reported ZnO growth methods involved toxic chemical reagents including polymeric coatings that could serve as impurities, sophisticated and expensive equipment, and elevated temperature systems. Thus, the challenge now is to develop a low cost, environmentally friendly and energy efficient technique to produce ZnO nanostructures that are compatible for sustainable large-scale production of perovskite solar cells.
Herein, we present the formation of nanostructured ZnO from Zn thin films by wet oxidation in water and its application as an electron transporting layer in perovskite solar cells for the first time. This technique offers a facile, low temperature (T < 100 °C), environmentally friendly and economical route for fabrication of different ZnO surface morphologies. Only ultrapure water is utilized to induce nanostructure growth from Zn thin films; thus, contamination problems can be avoided. Surface architectures are modified by varying the growth time and temperature. To establish the potential of wet oxidized ZnO as an electron transporting layer, we fabricated a simple device with a configuration of glass/ITO/ZnO/perovskite/P3HT/Ag, resulting in a respectable PCEmax of ≈6% with low hysteresis and excellent stability. Based on the literature, our PCEmax of ≈6% is either higher or comparable with other studies that used P3HT as the hole-transporting layer and ZnO (or TiO2) as the electron-transporting layer as shown in Table S1 (ESI). Based on these results, we establish that simple oxidation of Zn in water could produce high quality ZnO nanostructures that can be utilized not only for future photovoltaics, but also in other ZnO-based electronic devices.

Indium tin oxide (ITO)-coated glass substrates (15 Ω sq−1, 0.80 mm thick, Luminescence Tech. Corp.) were etched from regions under the anode contact by HCl and zinc paste. The substrates were then cleaned sequentially with detergent, distilled water, acetone and methanol for 15 min each in an ultrasonic bath. After drying, the substrates were treated by a UV ozone cleaner for 10 min to remove organic impurities. Prior to Zn thin film vacuum deposition, a 0.25 M zinc acetate (Zn(CH3COO)2, Wako) in methanol:water (10:1) solution was spin coated onto a cleaned ITO-glass substrate at 1500 rpm for 30 s. The films were dried first at 100 °C for 15 min and then annealed at 350 °C for 20 min to form a ZnO compact layer. Zn thin films were then deposited on top of the ZnO compact layer samples by a vacuum evaporator (JEOL JEE-400) at a base pressure of 4 × 10−4 Pa. The thermally evaporated Zn thin films were subsequently immersed in ultrapure water at varying temperatures (room temperature, 50 °C, 70 °C, and 90 °C) for 2–24 h to form nanostructured ZnO. The wet oxidized ZnO samples were washed with water and then dried at 350 °C for 1 h. Finally, the glass/ITO/ZnO samples were transferred to a nitrogen-filled glove box for film deposition.


The CH3NH3PbI3 layer was deposited on top of ZnO nanostructures using fast deposition crystallization as reported in the literature. The perovskite precursor solution (45 wt%) was prepared by mixing 1.2 mmol of PbI2 (99.999%, Wako) and 1.2 mmol of CH3NH3I (98.0%, Wako) in 1 mL of anhydrous N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF, Wako). 60 μL of perovskite precursor solution was spin coated onto the substrates for 30 s. The substrates were spun at 5000 rpm and after 4–6 seconds, 150 μL of toluene was quickly dropped onto the center of the substrate, followed by thermal annealing at 70 °C for 10 min. After cooling at room temperature, 60 μL of P3HT (Sigma Aldrich) in chlorobenzene (15 mg mL−1, Wako) was spin-coated at 1500 rpm for 120 s. For complete drying of the P3HT layer, the samples were then stored in a nitrogen-filled glove box for 12 h under dark conditions. Finally, 50 nm Ag electrodes were deposited by thermal evaporation under a base pressure of 2 × 10−4 Pa. The active area of the devices is 0.09 cm2. The solar cell devices were completed by putting silver paste in the electrode areas and stored again under vacuum to dry up before measurements.


Surface and cross-sectional morphologies were investigated by a low vacuum scanning electron microscope (SEM, Hitachi SU6600). The focused ion beam-assisted (Hitachi FB2200) cross sectional SEM images and EDX analysis were observed using an ultra high-resolution field emission scanning electron microscope (UHR FE-SEM, Hitachi SU9900) at 5 kV. TEM and high-resolution TEM images were obtained using JEOL JEM-3100FEF at 300 kV. The XRD patterns were recorded on a Rigaku X-ray diffractometer (RINT-TTR III) with CuKα radiation (λ = 1.5418 Å). The optical transmission and absorption spectra of the films were measured on a UV-Vis spectrophotometer (JASCO V-530). PL spectra were obtained under ultraviolet excitation (λex = 365 nm) using a high-pressure mercury-vapour light source (Olympus BH2-RFL-T3) coupled with a microscope (Olympus BX51) and a CCD spectrometer (Hamamatsu PMA-12). Current–voltage (J–V) curves were recorded from a Keithley 2611B System Source Meter unit under AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2, Bunko-keiki, CEP-2000RP). The external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra were obtained under illumination of monochromatic light using the same system at an intensity of 1.25 mW cm−2.


The effect of growth time on the resulting nanostructures after wet oxidation of the Zn thin film in water was examined at a constant growth temperature of 90 °C, as shown in the SEM images in Fig. 1. Their corresponding cross-sectional images are shown as inset. First, a 30 nm compact layer made up of small ZnO nanocrystals was spin-coated on an indium tin oxide-coated glass substrate. This layer serves a dual function as a nucleation point for the Zn thin film and a compact hole-blocking layer. The surface morphology of the Zn thin film deposited on top of the ZnO seed layer is shown in Fig. 1(a). The Zn thin film is composed of hexagonal nanoplatelets with a diameter of ∼90 nm and thickness of ∼100 nm. Larger hexagonal ZnO nanoplatelets with a mean diameter of ∼200 nm and thickness of ∼300 nm were obtained after 2 h of wet oxidation. The lattice matching between Zn and the ZnO crystals possibly directed the ZnO to follow the nanoplatelet architecture of the Zn thin film. The substantial increase in diameter indicates that an Ostwald ripening process occurred, wherein the smaller nanoparticles seen in Fig. 1a coalesced with the existing nanoplatelets during the wet oxidation process (Fig. 2a). Increasing the reaction time to 4 h initiated the growth of rod-like structures on certain nanoplatelet regions as seen in Fig. 1(c). At this moment, the dissolution of ZnO starts reducing the thickness of these nanostructures to 250 nm. When the growth time was increased to 8 h, the nanoplatelets were fully converted into pointed nanorods as seen in the inset cross-sectional image of Fig. 1d. These nanorods have a diameter of about ∼180 nm and an average length of ∼200 nm. This preferential growth orientation of ZnO crystals along the c-axis is due to its well-known reconstruction of the high-surface energy polar (001) plane. As ZnO molecules are generated in the solution, the negatively charged O2− terminated (00) plane favorably adsorb onto the Zn2+ terminated (001) plane of the existing ZnO layer, driving the formation of 1D ZnO nanorods. Moreover, by further extending the oxidation time to 16 h and 24 h, honeycomb nanostructures with small hollow tubes and collapsed nanostructures with rough surface developed, respectively (Fig. 1e and f). At this point, ZnO dissolution becomes the dominant reaction and natural selective etching occurs along the (001) plane of each ZnO crystal. The rough surface of collapsed nanostructures could be attributed to the subsequent dissolution and recrystallization of ZnO crystals. It should be noted that the film thickness of both samples has reduced extensively, exposing the underlying ZnO seed layer. This phenomenon could be observed clearly for the sample oxidized for 24 h which is caused by the massive dissolution of the existing layers at a prolonged oxidation time.

A simple wet corrosion process can explain the growth mechanism of the formation of ZnO nanostructures from Zn nanoplatelets in water, as shown in Fig. 2a. The anodic reaction takes place at the poorly oxygenated or strained regions of Zn nanoplatelets and releases Zn2+ ions in water as expressed in eqn (1):
Zn(S) → Zn(aq)2+ + 2e−
(1)
The ultrapure water used is weakly acidic to alkaline in nature (pH = 6.5–7.5). In this instance, the anodic dissolution of Zn develops sufficient energy to split water directly as in eqn (2):
2H2O(l) + 2e− → H2 + 2OH−
(2)
In addition, the corrosion of Zn takes place in an open system and water contains dissolved oxygen that could be simultaneously reduced by consuming electrons from an oxidation reaction (eqn (3)):
O2(g) + 2H2O(l) + 4e− → 4OH−
(3)
Finally, when the amount of Zn2+ and OH− ions reached the supersaturation point of ZnO, hydrolysis of ZnO nuclei in the solution occurred as shown in eqn (4):
Zn(aq)2+ + 2OH(aq)− → ZnO + H2O
(4)

Fig. 3a shows the X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the Zn thin films wet oxidized after 2, 4, 8, 16 and 24 h at a constant growth temperature of 90 °C. All the diffraction patterns exhibited four major reflection peaks at 2θ = 31.70°, 34.45°, 36.3°, and 47.60°, corresponding to the (100), (002), (101) and (102) planes of the hexagonal wurtzite crystal structure of ZnO. No impurities were detected except for the underlying indium-tin oxide layer. It can be seen that the intensity of the (002) peak gradually intensified starting from 2 h to 8 h suggesting the preferential growth of ZnO nanostructures along the c-axis, as wet oxidation proceeds. This was confirmed by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and high-resolution (HRTEM) images of an individual pointed ZnO nanorod, as shown in Fig. 3b and c.
The single ZnO nanorod has a diameter of 175 nm and possesses a high quality single-crystalline structure based on the selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern in the inset of Fig. 3b. Fig. 3c demonstrates that the nanorod has a lattice fringe separation of 0.26 nm, which corresponds to the d-spacing of the (001) planes. This confirms its preferential growth along the [001] direction. However, prolonged oxidation treatment of 16–24 h resulted in a decrease in the intensity of the ZnO peaks (blue and black lines in Fig. 3a) indicating a reduction in the concentration of the ZnO layer and verifying our assumption of massive ZnO dissolution in this duration. The (002) peak intensity noticeably weakened as well, which confirms the inherent selective etching process on the (001) planes of ZnO nanorods and the development of honeycomb and collapsed nanostructures.
The optical transmission spectra of the bare ITO and wet oxidized ZnO nanostructures are presented in Fig. S1a in the ESI. The samples displayed enhanced transmittance from 70.8% at 600 nm for the 2 h-sample to the maximum value of 87.5% for both the 16 h and 24 h wet oxidized samples. The lower transmittance for the platelet and rod-like nanostructures is associated with the Rayleigh scattering of light due to their tilted orientation that originated from the Zn thin film morphology. The improved transmittance at longer reaction time is related to the reduced film thickness of the samples as described earlier. Furthermore, the 8–24 h wet oxidized samples have higher transmittance than the bare ITO at wavelengths >600 nm, which could be attributed to the anti-reflection feature of nanostructured ZnO. This property of ZnO promotes sufficient light harvesting that leads to higher photocurrent generation and efficient perovskite solar cells. Fig. S1b (ESI) shows the photoluminescence of the ZnO nanostructures formed at different oxidation times. Under an excitation wavelength of 365 nm at room temperature, all the samples exhibited visible emissions including blue PL centered at 450 nm (2.75 eV) and orange-red peak emission centered at 650 nm (1.90 eV). Zeng et al. revealed that the blue emission originated from the radiative transition of electrons from the local interstitial zinc (Zni) level to the valence band. On the other hand, deep level oxygen interstitials (Oi) trigger orange-red emission. Both emission peaks were quenched as the oxidation time was increased, indicating that the concentrations of zinc and oxygen interstitials similarly dropped as oxidation progresses. This reduction of defect concentration suggests that the carrier recombination in solar cells could be partly eliminated by utilizing nanostructured ZnO grown at an extended oxidation period.
To evaluate the preliminary charge transfer capability of wet oxidized ZnO, the steady-state photoluminescence of glass/ITO/perovskite, glass/ITO/8 h-ZnO/perovskite and glass/ITO/perovskite/P3HT is presented in Fig. 4a. The strong PL emission peak around ∼770 nm confirms the high structural quality of the perovskite film formed using fast crystallization deposition. Perovskite emission was quenched by almost ∼50% when it was deposited on pointed ZnO nanorods, demonstrating that wet oxidized ZnO could extract electrons effectively. A perovskite/P3HT bilayer reveals a stronger PL quenching than ZnO, which is consistent with previous reports. The energy level diagram and schematic illustration with a cross-sectional image of the perovskite solar cell based on the wet oxidized ZnO nanostructures are shown in Fig. 4b and c. The device consists of glass/ITO/ZnO seed layer-ZnO nanostructures/CH3NH3PbI3/P3HT/Ag, wherein the wet oxidized ZnO and P3HT work as the electron and hole selective layers, respectively.

Fig. 5 shows the cross-sectional elemental mapping obtained by energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) analysis. The Zn signal follows both the shape of the compact ZnO seed layer and the pointed ZnO nanorods. The Pb and I elements are seen to be well distributed three-dimensionally onto the pointed ZnO nanorods. The strong C signal corresponds to the P3HT film and some to the perovskite layer. The estimated thicknesses for each layer are as follows: 200 nm-ZnO nanorods, 250 nm-CH3NH3PbI3, 100 nm-P3HT and 50 nm-Ag.
Fig. S2a and b in the ESI display the XRD pattern and absorbance spectrum of the perovskite film deposited on top of pointed ZnO nanorods. Most of the diffraction peaks can be indexed to the tetragonal crystal structure of CH3NH3PbI3 having a (110) plane preferred orientation. A small peak at 2θ = 12.7° denotes the presence of unreacted PbI2, and peaks corresponding to ZnO and the ITO/glass substrate can also be observed. Additionally, the ZnO/CH3NH3PbI3 bilayer shows a broad range of light absorption from 350 nm to 800 nm. The calculated direct band gap of CH3NH3PbI3 from absorption edge analysis is about 1.56 eV.

Fig. 6 and Table S2 in the ESI present the photovoltaic parameters and statistical results of wet oxidized ZnO-based perovskite solar cells, plotted as a function of oxidation time and scan direction. The corresponding photocurrent (J)–voltage (V) curves under simulated AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2) are shown in Fig. 7a. Perovskite solar cells based on ZnO nanorods, which are grown after wet oxidation for 8 h, exhibited the highest short circuit current density (Jsc) of 16.46 mA cm−2, an open circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.82, a fill factor (FF) of 44.2, a maximum PCE (PCEmax) of 5.96% and an average PCE (PCEave) of 5.28%. The 16 h- and 24 h-ZnO based solar cells followed with PCEave of 4.00% and 2.94%, and PCEmax of 4.42% and 3.40%, respectively. It can be seen that the Voc dramatically increased from 0.51 V to around 0.80 V for the 4 h to 8–24 h ZnO based devices. This could be attributed to suppressed recombination losses from the enhanced electron-transport properties within the rod and honeycomb nanostructures. The relatively low Voc of the devices could be due to the utilization of P3HT as the hole-transporting layer, since it has a higher HOMO level (−5.0 eV) than spiro-MeOTAD (−5.22 eV). On the other hand, the 2 h-ZnO based device exhibited the lowest PCEave of 2.04% and PCEmax of 2.77% followed by the 4 h-ZnO based device with PCEave of 2.88% and PCEmax of 3.24%. The planar surface architecture of the 2 h-ZnO device possibly reduced the effective interfacial area between the perovskite film and ZnO leading to more recombination and relatively low Jsc and FF values of 13 mA cm−2 and 0.30–0.35, respectively. The increase in Jsc values from the 2 h to 8 h-ZnO based solar cell (from 13 to 18 mA cm−2) can be related to the larger surface area of the nanostructured layer resulting in better perovskite infiltration, shorter path length for electron transfer and higher FF values. Another possible reason is the reduced recombination due to the smaller amount of defect concentration on the surface of the nanostructured layers grown at longer oxidation times, as stated earlier. However, the continued oxidation up to 24 h, which led to the massive dissolution of ZnO, significantly affected the Jsc values and decreased them to around 9 mA cm−2. The exposed ZnO seed layer in some areas of the 24 h-ZnO based device functions as the only electron-transporting layer left, which is not enough for efficient electron extraction and transfer.
As shown in Fig. 6, the 2–4 h ZnO based devices demonstrate strong hysteresis, whereas the 8–24 h ZnO based devices reveal weak hysteresis, as indicated by the difference in their efficiencies measured in the forward and reverse scan directions. Currently, the origin of the hysteresis effect is still under debate, but the dominant proposed mechanism is the ionic defect migration within the perovskite film. These intrinsic ionic defects include vacancies and interstitials of Pb2+, I− and CH3NH3+ (MA+) ions. Under an applied electrical field, these charged defects travel towards their appropriate electrodes and create a p–i–n like junction within the active layer. Through forward bias, this junction arises to a complementary electronic contact for charge extraction. Conversely, this has a negative effect during reverse bias. This explains the higher PCE measurements recorded for most fabricated devices in the forward scan direction, as shown in Fig. 6. Moreover, De Bastiani et al. established the importance of electron extraction, which mainly depends on the nature of the perovskite/transporting layer interface and thin film polarization condition. They found that the phenyl-C61-butyric acid methylester (PCBM) layer is chemically doped through the diffusion of I− ions from the perovskite film. This process creates electrostatic traps and hinders the iodide back diffusion/drift stabilizing the open circuit voltage and suppressing hysteresis. Herein, the perovskite layer could not easily diffuse into the large platelet-like nanostructures of the 2 h- and 4 h-ZnO samples. This prevents ionic interaction between the ZnO and perovskite layers, allowing the ionic defects to move freely within the active layer, resulting in the observed hysteresis (Fig. 6).

Fig. 7b presents the normalized external quantum efficiencies (EQE) of the devices. The 8 h-ZnO nanorod based solar cell displayed the highest EQE over the entire wavelength range, which is in agreement with the trend for Jsc in Fig. 6. The onset of photocurrent is around λ = 800 nm for all the devices, which is consistent with the calculated band gap of the CH3NH3PbI3 layer. Furthermore, the absorption edge of P3HT possibly caused the EQE peak at around λ = 660 nm. The EQE spectra also showed a notch at around λ = 620 nm which could be due to the reduced contribution from P3HT after the formation of excitons.Fig. 8a–d shows the preliminary stability test for the 8 h-ZnO based solar cell over a 40 day period. An increasing trend over time can be observed for the Voc, FF and PCE values. All devices attained their highest efficiencies after 15–20 days under vacuum at room temperature. On the 25th day of storage, the hysteresis effect became almost negligible. It should be noted that the devices were completed by annealing the perovskite precursor at a moderately low temperature of 70 °C and the P3HT layer is slowly dried at room temperature for 12 h, before silver electrode deposition. As these solution-processed layers gradually dry up, enhanced interfacial area between them develops over time. This was verified by examining the focused ion-beam (FIB)-assisted cross-sectional SEM images of the ZnO nanorod based-solar cell taken on the 1st day and 40th day after fabrication, as illustrated in Fig. 8e and f.
The freshly prepared device (Fig. 8e) shows that the perovskite film partially covered the nanorods resulting in the formation of voids between the layers. These voids caused the high series resistance of the solar cell devices (Rs = 180–300 Ω cm2) leading to low fill factor values in spite of relatively high shunt resistance values (Rsh = 1.0 × 103 to 2.9 × 103 Ω cm2). After 40 days of storage, the pinholes can no longer be observed and the perovskite has fully permeated into the ZnO nanorods (Fig. 8f). However, the Jsc values were reduced steadily after 10 days and the hysteresis behavior became more evident due to the noticeable degradation of the Ag electrode. This corrosion of the Ag electrode is attributed to the formation of silver iodide (AgI) from the reaction of silver and iodine-containing volatile compounds (MAI and/or HI). These volatile compounds are produced from the degradation of perovskite due to its reaction with water in air. Subsequently, the compounds could diffuse through the pinholes in P3HT and consequently corrode the Ag electrode.

It has been well established that the growth temperature dictates the resulting morphologies of ZnO nanostructures. To examine the influence of oxidation temperature, the Zn thin films were immersed in water under different oxidation temperatures (room temperature, 50 °C, 70 °C and water vapor) at a constant growth time of 8 h. Fig. 9 shows the surface morphologies and XRD patterns of the resulting ZnO nanostructures grown at increasing oxidation temperature. At room temperature, the platelet-like structure of the Zn thin film developed into nanoparticles with diameters ranging from 10–20 nm. It can be seen that these nanoparticles tend to align, forming fiber-like structures parallel to the substrate, as shown in Fig. 9a. The formation of nanoparticles could be possibly related to the lower kinetic energy and slower diffusion rate of ZnO molecules to form rod-like structures in a low temperature and surfactant-free system. Owing to their low kinetic energies, these nanoparticles could not exceed the free energy barrier of the (001) plane to promote growth in the axial direction and tend to aggregate to minimize their surface energies. Fig. 9b shows that nanorods with a rounded tip having a mean diameter of 100 nm started to grow at an oxidation temperature of 50 °C. These nanorods have a low aspect ratio and are composed of aggregated nanoparticles resulting in a relatively planar surface morphology of the overall film. The visible presence of nanoparticles indicates that their acquired energy at this given temperature (50 °C) is still not sufficient to form well-faceted rod-like structures. Increasing the growth temperature to 70 °C resulted in the development of pointed nanorods, as shown in Fig. 9c. These nanorods have a smaller mean diameter of about 115 nm but have almost the same morphology as the nanorods produced at 90 °C. Fig. 9d shows that when the Zn thin film was oxidized by water vapor, clustered nanorods and the underlying ZnO seed layer were observed. The nanorods were evidently longer, with a mean diameter of about 140 nm. The exposure of the underlying seed layer could be associated with the high temperature of steam, which subsequently damages and removes the initial ZnO nanostructures formed during wet oxidation.


Fig. 9e shows the XRD patterns of the Zn thin films wet oxidized for 8 h at different oxidation temperatures. The diffraction peaks positioned at 2θ = 31.85°, 34.45°, 36.3°, and 47.70° can be indexed to the hexagonal wurtzite phase of ZnO. Similarly, no characteristic peaks from impurities are detected except for those of the underlying ITO/glass cathode. This indicates that the Zn thin film can be fully converted to ZnO even at low water temperatures. ZnO nanoparticles formed at room temperature exhibited a (101) plane preferred orientation or growth along the a-axis. This is in agreement with Fig. 9a, wherein fibrous structures parallel to the substrate developed through the aggregation of nanoparticles. The (002) plane became the dominant peak starting at 50 °C which signifies the appearance of rod-like structures. However, the intensity of the ZnO peaks visibly decreased after vapor oxidation implying a reduction in ZnO concentration on the substrate. This result supports the presence of holes and exposure of the underlying ZnO seed layer in Fig. 9d. Fig. S3a and b in the ESI present the optical transmission and photoluminescence spectra of wet oxidized ZnO nanostructures grown under different temperatures for 8 h. The room temperature-oxidized sample displayed the highest transmittance of 90.6%, whereas the vapor-oxidized sample exhibited a comparable transmittance of 82.3% with the 90 °C sample (at 600 nm). All the samples demonstrate similar violet-blue and orange-red emissions but are noticeably quenched at lower temperatures, as shown in Fig. S3b (ESI). This could be attributed to the lower kinetic energy of the system resulting in a decrease in the concentration of both zinc and oxygen interstitials on the surface of ZnO nanostructures. The vapor-oxidized sample also matches the PL emission intensity of the 90 °C sample.

Table 1 summarizes the photovoltaic parameters for both scanning directions and the statistical results of perovskite solar cells based on ZnO nanostructures grown at different growth temperature. Fig. 10a and b present the photocurrent (J)–voltage (V) curves and EQE spectra of the corresponding solar cells. The solar cell device based on ZnO nanorods grown at 90 °C still has the highest maximum efficiency, followed by the vapor oxidized ZnO-based device with PCEmax of 5.03% and PCEave of 3.73%, and 70 °C-ZnO based device with PCEmax of 4.11% and PCEave of 3.64%. These three devices are based on rod-like structures, which are established to be advantageous for better perovskite permeation and interfacial area resulting in higher Jsc values (Table 1). The 50 °C-ZnO based solar cell showed the strongest hysteresis and presented the lowest PCEave of 2.45% with a PCEmax of 4.01%. This low performance of the 50 °C-ZnO based solar cell could likewise be attributed to its planar surface configuration, preventing the perovskite layer from diffusing into the ZnO film. Consequently, this leads to charge carrier recombination and relatively low average Jsc and Voc values of 13 mA cm−2 and 0.375–0.475 V, respectively. This result further confirms that the electrical contact between the perovskite and electron-transporting layer is critical for high performance and suppression of hysteresis. Interestingly, the perovskite solar cell based on fibrous ZnO grown at room temperature displayed a respectable PCEave of 2.85% and PCEmax of 3.62%. This solar cell demonstrates a higher average Voc of 0.60 V but lower average Jsc of 12.65 mA cm−2 compared to the 50 °C-ZnO based solar cell. The higher Voc is possibly due to the penetration of the perovskite film between the spaces of fiber-like structures, whereas the lower Jsc values could be due to the discontinuity of the same structures normal to the substrate leading to a higher recombination before carrier collection to the cathode. Finally, the Jsc trend from the EQE spectra of the solar cells (Fig. 10b), based on nanostructured ZnO grown at different oxidation temperatures, confirms the Jsc trend observed in Table 1. The 90 °C-ZnO based solar cell still exhibits the highest EQE over the entire wavelength range followed by the 50 °C-, 70 °C-, and vapor-oxidized ZnO based devices. Thus, based on these results we found that the optimum oxidation temperature for wet oxidation in water is 90 °C.
Temperature [°C]
Scan direction

J
sc [mA cm−2]

V
oc [eV]
FF
PCEave [%]
PCEmax [%]
RT
Forward
14.5
0.643
0.39
2.85
3.62
Reverse
13.2
0.548
0.39
2.65
2.80
50
Forward
15.5
0.703
0.37
1.90
4.01
Reverse
15.7
0.638
0.37
2.45
3.75
70
Forward
16.4
0.674
0.37
3.64
4.11
Reverse
14.8
0.637
0.39
3.29
3.64
90
Forward
15.8
0.832
0.41
5.28
5.96
Reverse
18.0
0.780
0.42
5.46
5.91
Vapor
Forward
16.1
0.815
0.38
3.73
5.03
Reverse
15.8
0.614
0.36
3.30
3.50

We developed a facile synthesis method employing a simple oxidation of Zn thin films in water to produce nanostructured ZnO as an electron transporting layer in perovskite solar cells. This technique eliminates the need for any growth directing agents or complex equipment. By varying the water temperature and growth time, various surface morphologies such as particles, fibers, rods, tubes and platelets having different preferential growth orientations were obtained. A fabricated perovskite solar cell based on pointed ZnO nanorods, which are generated at 90 °C for 8 h of wet oxidation in water, exhibited the highest PCE of 5.96% and average PCE of 5.46% with weak hysteresis. This sample also displayed the highest EQE over the whole wavelength range among all the fabricated devices. The development of rod-like structures led to better perovskite penetration and effective interfacial area, which resulted in reduced charge carrier path length and increased photovoltaic parameters. All devices have shown good stability over time reaching their maximum efficiencies after 15–20 days of storage due to the slow drying of the solution-processed layers. We believe that through the optimization of Zn thin film and perovskite deposition, as well as the use of better hole-transporting layer and electrodes, much higher efficiencies can be achieved. These results suggest that the oxidation of Zn thin films in water can produce highly crystalline nanostructured ZnO which can be utilized not only in photovoltaics but also in other optoelectronic devices.


The authors gratefully acknowledge Mr S. Katao, Mr K. Miyake, Ms S. Fujita and Nara Institute of Science and Technology for their experimental support. The authors also thank Dr Donnabelle Balela for her past contributions relating to wet oxidation research.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7tc01934c
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017