 DOI: 10.1039/C4RA02554G
(Paper)
RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 23807-23814

Jianhua Han,
Zhifeng Liu*,
Xuerong Zheng,
Keying Guo,
Xueqi Zhang,
Tiantian Hong,
Bo Wang and 
Junqi Liu

School of Materials Science and Engineering, Tianjin Chengjian University, 300384, Tianjin, China. E-mail: tjulzf@163.com; Fax: +86 2223085110; Tel: +86 2223085236

School of Materials Science and Engineering, Key Laboratory of Advanced Ceramics and Machining Technology of Ministry of Education, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300072, China

Received
24th March 2014
, Accepted 2nd May 2014
First published on 7th May 2014
Efficient hybrid solid-state solar cells based on novel trilaminar ZnO/ZnS/Sb2S3 nanotube arrays (NTs) and poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) are fabricated by using a buffer layer using ZnS and surface modification using a sensitizer layer (Sb2S3). Vertically aligned trilaminar ZnO/ZnS/Sb2S3 nanotube arrays (NTs) were directly grown on an indium-doped tin oxide (ITO) substrate via a low-cost hydrothermal chemical conversion method based on ion exchange, which is easy to be manipulated and can form uniform structures without destroying the original morphology. The ZnO/ZnS/Sb2S3/P3HT hybrid solar cell exhibited an improved short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 5.57 mA cm−2, open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 440 mV, giving rise to a power conversion efficiency of 1.32%. The trilaminar architecture is able to suppress carrier recombination and increase electron collection efficiency via (i) increasing photon absorption through a sensitizer layer (Sb2S3), (ii) forming a buffer layer (ZnS) on the surface of ZnO NTs in the chemical conversion process and (iii) a better energy level alignment in the ZnO/ZnS/Sb2S3/P3HT.

Hybrid solar cells combining organic conductive polymers and inorganic nanocrystals have been developed in recent years as a potentially strong alternative to all-organic solar cells in the market of photovoltaic (PV) devices by virtue of their high optical absorption, low production cost, easy fabrication and major payback. As an outstanding all-solid-state organic hole-conducting polymer, poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) has attracted significant attention as a promising alternative to a conventional liquid electrolyte, while is disadvantageous for the development of hybrid solar cells due to its dye desorption, solvent evaporation, cell degradation and high temperature instability.

Nanostructured inorganic semiconductors that have been used in hybrid solar cells include wide band gap semiconductors such as TiO2 and ZnO employed as ordered electron acceptors/transporters and absorbing materials such as narrow band-gap semiconductors. One-dimensional (1D) ZnO nanostructures such as ZnO nanotube arrays (NTs) are expected to provide direct and continuous pathways for charge transport. However, bare ZnO NT photoelectrode absorption is limited to the UV region due to the large band gap, which restricts its practical applications. To enhance the absorption of incident photons in the visible range, ZnO NTs are coupled with sensitizers such as organic dyes or inorganic semiconductor materials such as light absorbing components so that a good spectral match with the blue and red regions of solar radiation could be achieved. Inorganic semiconductors (such as PbS, CdS, CdSe (ref. 16–18) and Sb2S3 (ref. 19)) offer many advantages such as high extinction coefficient and capability of optical absorption tailoring over a wider wavelength range. Sb2S3 as one of metal chalcogenides is attractive among these sensitizers. It has a high optical absorption coefficient (7.3 × 104 cm−1 at 600 nm) and a suitable energy band gap of 1.7–1.9 eV, which is well suited for capturing visible light photons. Combining light-absorbing thin films of Sb2S3 with 1D nanocrystalline ZnO NTs and interpenetrating hole conductors P3HT enables greatly improved solar conversion efficiencies.
In this work, novel trilaminar ZnO/ZnS/Sb2S3 NTs first prepared via a low-cost hydrothermal chemical conversion method, are able to suppress carrier recombination and increase electron collection efficiency via (i) increasing photon absorption through a sensitizer layer (Sb2S3), (ii) forming a buffer layer (ZnS) on the surface of ZnO NTs in the chemical conversion process, and (iii) a better energy level alignment in the ZnO/ZnS/Sb2S3/P3HT. Besides, as we all know, most traditional methods used for the fabrication of core/shell nanoarrays are governed by a cluster growth mechanism, which might introduce more defects to the samples. Being different from conventional methods, the hydrothermal chemical conversion method is based on the ion-by-ion growth mechanism that enables the growth of a conformal layer without destroying the original morphology, which can decrease defects of the products and enhance the light-harvesting ability, thus improving solar conversion efficiencies. Strikingly, the inorganic–organic hybrid solar cell (ITO/ZnO/ZnS/Sb2S3/P3HT/Pt) based on ZnO/ZnS/Sb2S3 NTs exhibits an improved short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 5.57 mA cm−2 and an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 440 mV, giving rise to a power conversion efficiency of 1.32% under AM 1.5 G illumination. This novel concept of utilizing trilaminar core/shell nanoarrays in the design of hybrid solar cells paves the way to new strategies for improving the efficiency of solar cells.

The synthesis of ZnO NRs involves substrate pretreatment and hydrothermal growth. First, rinsed indium tin oxide (ITO) glass substrates were ultrasonicated for 0.5 h in acetone, isopropyl alcohol and absolute ethanol in sequence. Then, a seed layer was deposited onto an ITO glass by a sol–gel and dip-coating method. Next, the ZnO NRs were annealed at 400 °C in air for 1 h, followed by incubation in a mixed solution of 0.05 M zinc nitrate and 0.05 M hexamethylenetetramine (HMTA) at 90 °C for 4 h. The obtained samples were subsequently washed with distilled water and finally dried in air.


First, the ZnO/ZnS NTs were synthesized by a chemical etching process. ZnO/ZnS NTs were prepared by immersing the ZnO NRs in aqueous solutions containing 0.1 M thioacetamide (TAA) at 90 °C for 1 h and 7 h. Subsequently, the as-prepared films were washed with distilled water and dried in air. Then, the ZnO/ZnS/Sb2S3 core/shell NTs were fabricated by a chemical conversion process using the as-obtained ZnO/ZnS NTs on conducting glass substrates as reactive templates. 6 mg of antimony chloride (SbCl3) was dissolved in 25 mL absolute ethyl alcohol. ZnO/Sb2S3 NTs and ZnO/ZnS/Sb2S3 NTs were prepared by immersing the ZnO/ZnS NTs in the above solution, kept for 4 h and 2 h at 35 °C, respectively. The samples were then washed with distilled water and absolute ethanol and finally dried in air.


The ZnO/ZnS/Sb2S3 NTs and ZnO/Sb2S3 NTs films were spin-coated at 2500 rpm for 60 s with a regioregular P3HT (poly-3-hexylthiophene) chlorobenzene solution. The above cycle was repeated several times in order to achieve the compact fill of P3HT. Then, the all-solid-state inorganic–organic hybrid solar cells could be assembled by covering with platinum (Pt) sheet as counter electrodes.


The morphology of the samples was observed using a HITACHI S-4800I field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM). The structure of the samples was detected using transmission electron microscopy (JEOL 2100F TEM at an accelerating voltage 200 keV) equipped with an EDS detector. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis of the nanostructures was performed using a Rigaku D/max-2500 using Cu Kα radiation (λ = 0.154059 nm). The optical absorbance of samples was examined using a DU-8B UV/VIS double-beam spectrophotometer. The photocurrent of the samples was measured under irradiation of a xenon lamp (100 mW cm−2) with global AM 1.5 condition.


The reaction process of ZnO/ZnS/Sb2S3 NTs is schematically illustrated in Fig. 1. First, ZnO NRs are synthesized on ITO substrates in the first-step hydrothermal reaction, as shown in Fig. 1(a). When the conducting glass (ITO) substrate coated with ZnO NRs is immersed into a 0.1 M TAA solution, the sulfidation reaction of ZnO NRs takes place in which TAA hydrolyzes and forms H2S gas due to the large difference between the solubility product constants (Ksp) of ZnO (6.8 × 10−17) and ZnS (2.93 × 10−25), which makes it a practical way to directly convert ZnO to ZnS (eqn (1)–(3)). The further reaction of ZnO with H2S on the surface of the NRs leads to the formation of a ZnS layer, as shown in Fig. 1(b). The further reaction of ZnO with S2− on the whole surface of the NRs leads to the formation of a uniform shell of ZnS surrounding ZnO when the reaction time reaches 7 h. The following chemical reactions occur:


CH3CSNH2 + H2O → CH3CONH2 + H2S

(1)

H2S → 2H+ + S2−

(2)

ZnO + S2− + H2O → ZnS + 2OH−

(3)
As the reaction continues, more ZnS is generated and it covers the ZnO NRs forming ZnO/ZnS core/shell heterojunctions. Finally, ZnO/ZnS/Sb2S3 core/shell NTs are obtained by replacing zinc atoms by antimony cations (Fig. 1(c)). The ZnS layer is partially converted to Sb2S3 shell by the metal cation exchange process. The Sb2S3 shell is obtained by replacing a part of Zn2+ by Sb3+ owing to the large differences in Ksp between ZnS (2.93 × 10−25) and Sb2S3 (2.9 × 10−59); thus, the ZnS shell is partially converted to the Sb2S3 shell by the metal cation exchange process (eqn (6)). In this step, the ZnO/ZnS/Sb2S3 NTs could be obtained by using ZnO/ZnS nanoarrays as reactive templates and a buffer layer of ZnS, and a binary sensitizer layer of Sb2S3 is formed at the same time. The Ksp constants of ZnO, ZnS and Sb2S3 are listed in Table 1. The feasibilities of these chemical conversion reactions are studied by thermodynamic deduction. Based on the law of thermodynamics and the given constants listed in Table 2, the ΔG and Kθ (equilibrium constant) values of the reactions are calculated by the following equations:

ΔG = G(product) − G(reactant)

(4)

ΔG = −RTlnKθ

(5)
3ZnS + 2SbCl3 → Sb2S3 + 3ZnCl2

ΔG = −111.544 kJ mol−1, Kθ = 1.042

(6)

ZnO + 2H+ → Zn2+ + H2O

(7)
Metallic sulfide
ZnO
ZnS
Sb2S3
Ksp
6.8 × 10−17
2.93 × 10−25
2.9 × 10−59
Gibbs free energy (kJ mol−1)
Zn2+
−147.06
ZnCl2
−396.398
ZnS
−201.29
SbCl3
−323.69
Sb2S3
−173.6
It is known that chemical reactions occur spontaneously when ΔG < 0 and Kθ > 1. Apparently, all the reactions listed above can proceed at low temperature and under mild conditions.
It should be noted that the pH value of the preparation process of ZnO/ZnS NTs is about 5. As an amphoteric oxide, ZnO NRs can react with H+ in acid solution, and the product is a soluble salt (eqn (7)). The chemical etching process takes place as soon as ZnO NRs are immersed into the acid solution. While the nonpolar planes parallel to c-axis are the most stable planes with a lower surface energy, the (002) of a wurtzite ZnO crystal is a polar plane with high surface energy, which is instable; hence, the etching process is selective and mainly focuses on the inner NRs. The etching rate of the polar plane (the top plane of ZnO) is faster than that of nonpolar planes (the lateral plane of ZnO). With the increasing etching time, the depth of the NTs increased gradually. Finally, the ZnO/ZnS/Sb2S3 core/shell NTs were prepared successfully.
To study the forming process of ZnO/ZnS NTs, ZnO NRs were immersed in a 0.1 M TAA solution for different times, and the samples were tested by transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Fig. 2(a) and (b) shows the TEM image of 1 h ZnO/ZnS NTs and 7 h ZnO/ZnS NTs, respectively; it can be seen that the ZnO NRs were converted to ZnO/ZnS NTs after the above reaction. Based on the TEM images of ZnO NRs in the TAA solution at 1 h and 7 h, the schematic illustration for the formation process of ZnO/ZnS NT is shown in Fig. 2(c). It can be seen that after being etched in the TAA solution for 1 h, a tiny hollow structure was formed in the top part of the NT. Nevertheless, when the etching time reached 7 h, the diameter and length of NT were increased obviously, and the nanotube was observed clearly. It can be concluded that as the etching time increased, the depth of the NT gradually increased. In this step, ZnO NRs were converted to the ZnO/ZnS NTs.
The product of ZnO/ZnS/Sb2S3 NTs obtained from the chemical conversion method was characterized by SEM. Fig. 3(a) shows a top-view SEM image of the as-obtained ZnO NRs on ITO glass. The low-magnification SEM image shows the general morphology of the sample; the substrate is covered with a large-scale array of highly ordered ZnO NRs, which are dense and uniform over the entire area. From a closer side view observation (inset of Fig. 3(a)), it can be seen clearly that these nanowires are smooth, and the diameter of the ZnO NRs is about 120 nm. Fig. 3(b) shows a low-magnification SEM image of the top view of the target product ZnO/ZnS/Sb2S3 core/shell NTs. It can be seen that vertically well-aligned ZnO/ZnS/Sb2S3 core/shell NTs were also uniformly covered on the substrate on a large scale, indicating that the reaction is based on ion exchange without destroying the original backbone. From the high-magnification SEM image (inset of Fig. 3(b)), some nanoparticles accumulated on the top of the NTs so that the nozzle of the NTs is blocked. The diameter of the NTs is measured to be approximately 130 nm, which is similar to the diameter of ZnO NRs. Fig. 3(c) and (d) displays the cross-sectional SEM images of ZnO NRs and ZnO/ZnS/Sb2S3 NTs; it can be seen that the length of both ZnO NRs and ZnO/ZnS/Sb2S3 NTs are 1.3–1.4 μm. It is clearly demonstrated that the length of ZnO NRs is similar to that of ZnO/ZnS/Sb2S3 NTs; the length of NRs does not change after chemical conversion.
Fig. 4 gives the XRD patterns of the ZnO (a) and ZnO/ZnS/Sb2S3 core/shell NTs (b). The corresponding XRD pattern of ZnO NRs is shown in Fig. 4(a); in comparison to the standard ZnO diffraction pattern (JCPDS file no. 36-1451), the as-obtained ZnO NRs mainly grow along the (002) direction. Fig. 4(b) presents the XRD pattern of the ZnO/ZnS/Sb2S3 core/shell NTs. Corresponding to the diffraction peaks of the ZnO NRs in curve (a), those in curve (b) with 2θ values around 35.6°, 53.0° could be observed, which can be indexed to the (108), (531) plane of ZnS (JCPDS file no. 12-0688) and Sb2S3 (JCPDS file no. 42-1393), respectively. All peaks of ZnO, ZnS and Sb2S3 were reflected in curve (b), indicating only partial conversion of the ZnS layer to Sb2S3. These results provide credible evidence for the chemical composition of the ZnO/ZnS/Sb2S3 NTs and further confirm that the ZnS buffer layer partially transforms to the Sb2S3 shell, indicating that the trilaminar ZnO/ZnS/Sb2S3 NTs are prepared successfully, and the ZnS buffer layer still exists.
Fig. 5(a) shows a bright-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) elemental mapping image of a ZnO/ZnS/Sb2S3 core/shell NT at low magnification. It can be seen clearly that the core of the dark region is covered with two types of different shells of the light region, and the ZnO/ZnS/Sb2S3 core/shell NT is a trilaminar-tube-like nanostructure. The wall thickness of the ZnO/ZnS/Sb2S3 core/shell NT is about 15 nm. The NT nanostructure surface appears very rough and is covered by many nanoparticles. Fig. 5(b)–(e) depict the elemental distribution maps (S, Sb, Zn and O, respectively) performed using an energy-filtered TEM technique across the NT in Fig. 5(a). It is found that O and Zn distributed almost uniformly across the inwall of the NT and Sb are homogeneously distributed through the surface of the NT, while S accumulates unanimously in the middle of the trilaminar-tube-like nanostructure. Taken together, the results of the STEM elemental mapping image and the corresponding XRD pattern in Fig. 4(b) suggest that the trilaminar ZnO/ZnS/Sb2S3 NTs are prepared successfully, in which ZnO is the hollow core, Sb2S3 is the shell with ZnS distributed unanimously in the middle of the trilaminar-tube-like nanostructure.
The detailed microstructure information of an individual ZnO/ZnS/Sb2S3 core/shell NT is obtained through TEM studies accompanied by selected area electron diffraction (SAED). A typical TEM image of the ZnO/ZnS/Sb2S3 core/shell NTs in Fig. 6(a) confirms that the ZnO/ZnS/Sb2S3 core/shell NT is a trilaminar-tube-like nanostructure, in which ZnO is the hollow core, Sb2S3 is the shell with the ZnS buffer layer distributed unanimously in the middle of the trilaminar-tube-like nanostructure. It is clear that the core of the dark region is covered with two types of different shells of the light region. The NTs have a uniform diameter of 130 nm, and the surface of the NTs appears to be very coarse, and many nanoparticles are observed on the surface. The high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) image taken between the shell and inwall of the NT in Fig. 6(a) is shown in Fig. 6(b). The HRTEM image shows the dark/light/light contrast along the radial direction, indicating that these ZnO/ZnS/Sb2S3 core/shell nanostructures are actually nanotubes. Also, the HRTEM image clearly reveals three distinct sets of lattice fringes of 0.26 nm, 0.25 nm and 0.17 nm, which can be, respectively, assigned to ZnO, ZnS and Sb2S3. The inset of Fig. 6(b) shows SAED patterns of the ZnO/ZnS/Sb2S3 core/shell NT, recorded by specifically focusing at the wall of the NT. The image indicates that the core/shell NT is a polycrystal with good crystallinity.
The optical properties of ZnO NRs and ZnO/ZnS/Sb2S3 core/shell NTs were evaluated by UV-vis absorption spectroscopy, as shown in Fig. 7. The spectra of ZnO NRs show that they absorb mainly in the UV range with a wavelength below 410 nm due to their large band gap (ZnO NRs 3.37 eV). Compared with the visible light absorption of ZnO NRs, the ZnO/ZnS/Sb2S3 core/shell NTs show a red shift, which indicates an enhancement in visible light absorption. After hydrothermal chemical conversion, the color of the samples turns faint yellow, indicating that Sb2S3 was coated on the surface of ZnO, as shown in the inset of Fig. 7.
The inorganic–organic hybrid solar cells based on ZnO/ZnS/Sb2S3 core/shell NTs were assembled using P3HT as a hole conductor. For ZnO/ZnS/Sb2S3/P3HT/Pt hybrid solar cells, ZnO provides an electron transport pathway, ZnS serves as a buffer layer to optimize the band configuration of the structure, Sb2S3 is used as a sensitizer, P3HT serves as a hole conductor and light absorber and Pt serves as the counter electrode. Fig. 8 shows the current density–voltage (J–V) curve for the samples tested under the irradiation of simulated sunlight (AM 1.5 G, 100 mW cm−2). The parameters of the inorganic–organic hybrid solar cells based on ZnO/ZnS/Sb2S3 core/shell NTs are summarized in Table 3. During photocurrent measurements, the power conversion efficiency of cell is calculated by the following equations:

η = (VocJscFF)/Pin

(8)

FF = VoptJopt/VocJsc

(9)
where
Pin is the power of incident white light, FF is the fill factor, Vopt and Jopt are the voltage and current for maximum power output, and Voc and Jsc are the open-circuit photovoltage and short-circuit photocurrent, respectively. The solar cell based on ZnO/ZnS/Sb2S3 core/shell NTs exhibits a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 5.57 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 440 mV, and a fill factor (FF) of 0.54, leading to a power conversion efficiency (η) of 1.32%.

Photoelectrode
Voc (mV)
Jsc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
η (%)
ZnO/Sb2S3
401
4.98
51
1.02
ZnO/ZnS/Sb2S3
440
5.57
54
1.32
It is believed that the optimized performance of hybrid solar cells is attributed to three major factors: efficiency of light harvesting, accelerated charge transfer due to interfacial contact reinforcement, and good band alignment at the interface among ZnO/ZnS/Sb2S3 core/shell NTs. For the ZnO/ZnS/Sb2S3 core/shell NTs structure, high-efficiency light harvesting can be obtained by fabricating well-aligned NTs as the photoelectrode. The light transfer process is shown in Fig. 9. Sb2S3 nanoparticles on the NT surface can improve the light utilization efficiency by reflecting unabsorbed photons back into NTs, which is beneficial for the full utilization of incident light. Meanwhile, as a high light absorption coefficient in the visible region materials, a layer of accumulated Sb2S3 nanoparticles can trap relatively more photons, and thus a larger amount of photons would be utilized by the ZnO/ZnS/Sb2S3 core/shell NTs for producing electron/hole pairs. Also, vertical ZnO arrays grown on the ITO glass can directly transport the photoinduced electrons with high speed, taking full advantage of the excellent carrier transport performance of as-obtained samples.
Besides the effect of light utilization on photoelectric performance, the rate of photoinduced electron injection and transmission are the linchpin factors of hybrid solar cells. Nevertheless, in ZnO/Sb2S3-based hybrid solar cells, it has been revealed that high-surface state density existed in the heterostructure between ZnO and Sb2S3, which resulted in a high recombination rate at the interface. Inspiringly, buffering techniques are often used to inhibit the formation of interface traps and defect states that act as recombination centers in solution-grown junctions, which can suppress electron recombination at the interface. The ZnS buffer layer can enhance device performance by avoiding an undesirable shunt path and widening the depletion width that extends the lifetime of the electrons in the absorber layer and minimizes collection loss by tunneling and recombination. Thus, a remarkable enhancement of cell efficiency was achieved by combining ZnO/Sb2S3 with a ZnS buffer layer.
In the ITO/ZnO/ZnS/Sb2S3/P3HT/Pt hybrid solar cells, ZnS is the buffer layer, Sb2S3 is the inorganic sensitizer, and P3HT is both a hole conductor and light absorber. The energy band structure of ITO/ZnO/ZnS/Sb2S3/P3HT is schematically illustrated in Fig. 10. The lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) level of P3HT is higher than the conduction band edge of Sb2S3. Hence, electron injection from the LUMO of P3HT into the conduction band of Sb2S3 is energetically favorable; thus, the gradient energy band structure is very efficient for enhancing the separation and transmission of photoinduced electrons. Moreover, the valance band of Sb2S3 is lower than the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) level of both P3HT, and the valance band of ZnS is lower than that of Sb2S3, ensuring hole transport from Sb2S3 to P3HT and from ZnS to Sb2S3. Sb2S3 and ZnS act as a blocking layer by hindering the transfer of holes from P3HT to ZnS and of holes from Sb2S3 to ZnO. This gradient energy structure reduces the recombination of hole/electron and increases charge lifetime. In other words, both the ZnS buffer layer and Sb2S3 sensitizer layer can promote the separation of photoinduced electrons and holes, which remarkably decreases the dark current and is beneficial for power conversion efficiency. Consequently, the appropriate matching of the energy band structures of ZnO/ZnS/Sb2S3/P3HT can improve the efficiency of transfer and separation of the photoinduced carriers, thus increasing power conversion efficiency.
In order to investigate the function of the ZnS buffer layer, Sb2S3-sensitized ZnO without the ZnS buffer layer was prepared by immersing the ZnO/ZnS NTs in an SbCl3 solution and keeping it for 4 h at 35 °C, and the solar cell was assembled by using ZnO/Sb2S3 as the photoanode. Fig. S1 shows the XRD patterns of ZnO/Sb2S3 (a) and ZnO/ZnS/Sb2S3 (b); it can be seen that the ZnO/Sb2S3 NTs were fabricated successfully. The solar cell based on ZnO/Sb2S3 arrays exhibits a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 4.98 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 401 mV, and a fill factor (FF) of 0.51, leading to a power conversion efficiency (η) of 1.02% (Fig. S2). The power conversion efficiency of 1.32% was obtained using ZnO/ZnS/Sb2S3 arrays as the photoelectrode, which was about 22.7% higher than that of using ZnO/Sb2S3 arrays as the photoelectrode. It is believed that the photoelectric performance of the core/shell photoanode can be enhanced by the introduction a buffer layer, because the buffer layer can hamper electron/hole recombination, thus improving power conversion efficiency. To study the charge transport properties of ZnO/Sb2S3 NTs and ZnO/ZnS/Sb2S3 NTs, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was carried out using an electrochemical workstation. As is obvious, the process of (i) back electron injection from ZnO to the sensitizer and (ii) back electron injection from ZnO to the electrolyte were considered as key factors of charge transport performance. Fig. 11 shows the electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) of ZnO/Sb2S3 NTs and ZnO/ZnS/Sb2S3 NTs; the spectra have revealed much faster electron transport and much less recombination, resulting in more efficient carrier collection, for the ZnO/ZnS/Sb2S3 NTs than for ZnO/Sb2S3 NTs. It can be concluded that the buffer layer of ZnS can increase interface resistance, and thus the recombination of electron and hole was reduced significantly.
It should be noted that although the photovoltaic performance in our system is still inferior to the best inorganic–organic heterojunction solar cell system. The utilization of uniform trilaminar ZnO/ZnS/Sb2S3 nanotube arrays prepared via a low-cost hydrothermal chemical conversion method based on ion exchange opens up an alternative way for the design of next-generation solar cells. In this method, a buffer layer (ZnS) and sensitizer layer (Sb2S3) were formed on the surface of ZnO nanoarrays at the same time in the chemical conversion process, and this method is easy to be manipulated to produce uniform morphology. Further studies are under investigation to improve the cell performances of the prepared solar cell such as by changing the thickness of the buffer and sensitizer layers and transmission and recombination of photoexcited electrons, which will be published elsewhere.

Vertically aligned trilaminar ZnO/ZnS/Sb2S3 NTs arrays and ZnO/Sb2S3 NTs arrays were directly grown on the indium-doped tin oxide (ITO) substrate via a low-cost hydrothermal method using ZnO NRs as templates. The chemical conversion method based on ion exchange for the fabrication of well-aligned ZnO-based core/shell nanoarrays is easy to be manipulated and forms uniform structures without destroying the original morphology. The large difference in the solubility product constant plays a critical role in the chemical conversion process. Then, hybrid solar cells based on ZnO/ZnS/Sb2S3 NTs arrays and ZnO/Sb2S3 NTs arrays were constructed, and their photoelectric performance was studied. The power conversion efficiency of ITO/ZnO/ZnS/Sb2S3/P3HT/Pt solid-state solar cell is up to 1.32% owing to the improved absorption spectrum and the appropriate gradient energy gap structure. Such trilaminar ZnO/ZnS/Sb2S3 NTs architecture may lead to effective light absorption and increase the electrically active interfacial area among the ZnO, ZnS buffer layer, and Sb2S3 sensitizer, as well as effective dissociation of excitons and transport charge carriers. This novel concept of utilizing trilaminar core/shell nanoarrays in the design of hybrid solar cells paves the way to new strategies for improving the efficiency of solar cells.


The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from Nation Nature Science Foundation of China (51102174).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c4ra02554g
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014