 DOI: 10.1039/D1TC03246A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 12920-12927


Hui
Duan
,

Xin
Li
,

Yue
Gou
,

Haoyan
Wang
,

Lin
Fan
,

Yanli
Chen
,

Jinghai
Yang
,

Lili
Yang
* and 

Fengyou
Wang
*

Key Laboratory of Functional Materials Physics and Chemistry of the Ministry of Education, Jilin Normal University, Changchun 130103, China. E-mail: llyang1980@126.com; wfy@jlnu.edu.cn

National Demonstration Center for Experimental Physics Education, Jilin Normal University, Siping 136000, China

Key Laboratory of Preparation and Application of Environmental Friendly Materials, Ministry of Education, Jilin Normal University, Changchun 130103, China

Received
12th July 2021
, Accepted 5th August 2021
First published on 5th August 2021
Perovskite solar cells without electron transport layers (ETL-free PSCs) have the advantages of low manufacturing costs and simple processes and have attracted wide attention. However, compared to the performance of devices with ETLs, that reported for ETL-free PSCs remains unsatisfactory. Owing to the lack of an ETL, the indium tin oxide (ITO)/perovskite interface energy level does not match and the interface charge recombination is particularly serious, resulting in poor device performance. This issue was solved in this study by implementing electric field engineering on ETL-free PSCs via a simple, low-cost, and non-toxic inorganic acid treatment (IAT). This IAT can modulate the interfacial electric field by adjusting the work function of ITO and optimizing the energy-level structure at the ITO/perovskite interface. Simultaneously, a dipole layer is formed at the ITO/perovskite interface, which enhances the interfacial electric field. Moreover, the inorganic acid radical can serve as a template to modulate the growth of the perovskite layer. Therefore, these three benefits suppress the electron–hole recombination and favor the interfacial charge transfer, increasing the power conversion efficiency of ETL-free PSCs from 14.05% to 19.32%. This approach is anticipated to serve as a general method for ETL-free architecture design in perovskite photovoltaic applications.

Broad attention has been paid to perovskite solar cells (PSCs) because it took a decade for their power conversion efficiency (PCE) to increase from the initial 3.8% to the current 25.5%. Because the electron transport layer (ETL) has the disadvantages of being energy-intensive and complex, it is necessary to invent PSCs without ETLs (ETL-free PSCs) with a simple structure and low production cost. However, judging from the pioneering studies, current ETL-free PSCs experience the problem of low PCE, which needs to be solved.

If the device lacks an ETL, a large electron energy barrier (ΔEe: the difference between the conduction band minimum (CBM) of the perovskite and the Fermi level (EF) of the transparent conductive oxide (TCO)) impedes the transport across the TCO/perovskite interface, and the energy barrier for blocking holes (ΔEh: the difference between the valence band maximum (VBM) of the perovskite and EF of the TCO electrode) is very small, which leads to unfavorable band bending and mismatched energy levels. This imperfect band structure weakens the interfacial electric field, hindering the charge transfer and causing serious charge recombination, thereby degrading the performance of ETL-free PSCs. Therefore, reducing or completely eliminating this electronic barrier by appropriately regulating the interfacial electric field is a promising means of achieving efficient ETL-free PSCs. Previously, several organic interface layers were incorporated to minimize ΔEe. For example, Ge et al. used a polar non-conjugated small molecule electrolyte layer [4,4-(((methyl(4-sulphonatobutyl)ammonio)bis(propane-3,1-diyl))bis(dimethyl ammoniumdiyl))bis-(butane-1-sulfonate)] to reduce the work function (WF) (4.70 eV) of ITO by (0.97 eV), which can yield a substrate that matches the energy level of the perovskite more accurately. Using this substrate, efficient ETL-free PSCs were obtained.Huang et al. used a methylammonium acetate ionic liquid to treat the ITO surface, which decreased the WF and enabled in situ band bending in the perovskite semiconductor. The in situ band bending facilitated the charge collection and hindered the interfacial charge recombination, resulting in the highest power conversion efficiency to date of ETL-free PSCs. However, the synthetic route to obtain the above-mentioned materials is difficult and relatively complicated and requires a large amount of organic solvents, which increases the cost and pollutes the environment.
In this study, a novel inorganic solution (hypophosphorous acid, H3PO2) treatment was developed to comprehensively modulate the electric-field of the ITO/perovskite interface. EF of the ITO was adjusted toward the CBM of the perovskite, which decreased the ΔEh from 0.8 to 0.1 eV, increased the ΔEe from 0.7 to 1.4 eV, improved the photogenerated charge transfer, and effectively blocked the holes at the ITO/perovskite interface. Therefore, the charge recombination was effectively reduced. As an additional benefit, we found that a dipole layer was formed on the H3PO2 treated ITO (HAT-ITO) surface, which not only strengthened the built-in field of the interface, but also served as a template for the growth of the perovskite layer. This two-fold interfacial electric-field modulation greatly increased the fill factor (FF), short circuit current density (Jsc), and open circuit voltage (Voc), which increased the PCE of the device from 14.05% to 19.32%.

Hypophosphorous acid (H3PO2) is easily soluble in hot water, ethanol, and ether and is a strong reducing agent. Therefore, it can chemically react with ITO, which is shown in Fig. S1 (ESI). An immersion experiment was designed to treat the ITO surface directly (Fig. 1a). First, we explored the optical properties of the HAT-ITO using an ultraviolet–visible spectrophotometer. The results presented in Fig. 1b demonstrate that the optical transmittances of the control-ITO and HAT-ITO are almost the same. Fig. 1c shows the X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the control-ITO and HAT-ITO at room temperature. All the samples exhibit typical ITO peaks, especially the (220) peak at 30.30°. Compared with the control ITO, the peak of HAT-ITO is basically unchanged, which indicates that H3PO2 treatment does not alter the physicochemical structure of ITO. In addition, the Hall effect measurements show that the resistivities of the control-ITO and HAT-ITO are almost the same, implying that the H3PO2 treatment does not sacrifice the electrical characteristics of the ITO electrode, which can meet the device requirements (Fig. 1d). The surface morphology and roughness changes of the HAT-ITO were examined using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (Fig. 1e and f) and atomic force microscopy (AFM) (Fig. 1g and h). For the control ITO, massive small grains are observed with small roughness. The roughness of HAT-ITO increases slightly, and some agglomerations appear. These findings also prove that H3PO2 can reduce the ITO surface, making the ITO surface anisotropically etched.

We then evaluated the surface energy levels of the ITO substrates. Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) characterization shows that the WF of control-ITO (4.70 eV) was reduced to 4.00 eV after H3PO2 treatment (Fig. 2a). The WF reduction leads to a better band alignment of the ITO and perovskite, which is conducive to the application of the device. To explore the cause of the WF decrease of the HAT-ITO substrate, we performed X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) of the control-ITO and HAT-ITO, respectively (Fig. 2b). The peaks of the In 3d core levels move toward lower binding energies after H3PO2 modification, which means that ITO gains electrons and is reduced by H3PO2. The reduced ITO creates a screening effect, decreasing the binding energy between the nucleus and orbital electrons, and thereby reducing the WF of the ITO substrates.
We combined the absorption spectra (Fig. S2a, b and Fig. 2c, d) and UPS measurements (Fig. 2e, f and h, i) to reveal the energy level distribution of the ITO/perovskite interface. The bandgaps (Eg) of the control-ITO-perovskite and HAT-ITO-perovskite are both 1.59 eV. For the control-ITO-perovskite, the WF at 20 nm, 200 nm, and 400 nm is 4.7 eV, 4.58 eV, and 4.52 eV; it can be concluded that as the thickness increases, the WF decreases, which illustrates the downward energy level bending (Fig. 2g). The valence band onsets (EVB) in Fig. 2f can also result in downward energy level bending. The downward energy level bending accelerates the hole capture at the border and hinders the electron transfer, which decreases the PCE of the ETL-free PSCs.
However, for the HAT-ITO-perovskite, as the thickness increases, the WF increases; that is, the WF at 20 nm, 200 nm, and 400 nm is 4.09 eV, 4.21, and 4.27 eV, respectively. This WF variation shows an upward energy level bending (Fig. 2j), which is also exhibited by EVB in Fig. 2i. Correspondingly, ΔEe decreases from 0.8 to 0.1 eV and ΔEh increases from 0.7 to 1.4 eV. Upward energy level bending accelerates the electron transfer and suppresses the interface recombination, which is a key point for achieving high-performance ETL-free PSCs.
Next, we explored the morphologies of the grown control-ITO-perovskite and HAT-ITO-perovskite. The SEM images (Fig. 3a and b) of the control-ITO-perovskite and HAT-ITO-perovskite films show that the perovskite films grown on different substrates have similar grain sizes, which can also be determined from the particle size histogram (Fig. S3, ESI). However, the XRD intensities of the control-ITO-perovskite and HAT-ITO-perovskite are different, indicating a distinct crystallization (Fig. 3c). Therefore, we further performed cross-sectional SEM to identify the crystallization within the bulk of the perovskite films. Surprisingly, the control-ITO-perovskite film shows a stratification structure and many small grains exist within the bulk of the film. In contrast, the HAT-ITO-perovskite film exhibits crystal grains with a columnar character from the bottom to the top (Fig. 3d and e). These improved columnar grains directly connect the ETL, and HTL offers benefits for charge transport in the perovskite layer.
The improved crystallization inevitably reduces the defect density. To gain insight into the carrier recombination within the perovskite films, we tested the transient photovoltages of the films. After performing curve fitting, we found an increased decay time of 103 μs for the HAT-ITO-perovskite film, which indicates reduced recombination compared with the time of 78 μs for the control-ITO-perovskite film (Fig. 3f). In addition, the space charge limited current (SCLC) was used to determine the trap state density (Fig. 3g and h). The trap density of the HAT-ITO-perovskite film is 1.82 × 1016 cm−3, which is lower than that of the control-ITO-perovskite film (8.62 × 1016 cm−3). The trap density reduction can be attributed to the lower grain boundary density. To explore why the HAT-ITO substrates can regulate grain growth, we first tested the contact-angle measurements of the perovskite precursor (Fig. 3i and j). The derived contact angles were 15.7° and 37.5° for the control-ITO and HAT-ITO, respectively, which indicates that H3PO2 modification reduces the wettability of the ITO surface. We speculate that the reduced wettability of the HAT-ITO surface is one of the reasons for the improved crystallization because it can reduce the nucleation density of the perovskite precursor during the crystallization process, increasing the perovskite grain size. Another reason for the improved crystallization is discussed in the following section.
XPS was used to study the chemical states of the elements and the content of the surface functional groups of the ITO substrates. As shown in Fig. 4a, the control ITO has no photoelectron emission peak corresponding to P 2p. The HAT-ITO has a P 2p signal peak at a binding energy of 133.5 eV, confirming the successful modification of P-containing species on the ITO surface. When the ITO is treated by H3PO2, PO23− is evenly arranged on the surface of the ITO film because it is not physically mixed, but rather chemically anchored on the ITO surface. Therefore, when the perovskite is spin-coated onto the HAT-ITO, PO23− interacts with Pb2+ in the perovskite precursor and affects the nucleation process of the perovskite. The interaction between PO23− and Pb2+ was verified by XPS. In Fig. 4b, the Pb 4f peaks of the control-ITO-perovskite are located at 142.7 eV and 137.8 eV, whereas the Pb 4f peak of the HAT-ITO-perovskite shifts to a high binding energy, which indicates that Pb2+ interacts with PO23−. Therefore, the perovskite growth model can be depicted as follows: when the perovskite precursor is deposited on the HAT-ITO, the surface PO23− can act as a template to bond with the cations of the precursor, and the Pb2+ can preferentially assemble on the PO23− template because it has stronger electronegativity than MA+. The special surface condition causes the perovskite to grow in a preferred direction, leading to a columnar character for the crystal grains from the bottom to the top. Moreover, the ordered arrangement of positive and negative charges at the HAT-ITO/perovskite interface can create a dipole layer, which is different from the interface layer processing in previous reports. The in situ dipole layer promotes electron transport and inhibits interface charge recombination (Fig. 4c). We used photoluminescence (PL) and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) spectroscopy to probe the charge transfer of the devices (Fig. 4d, e and Table S1, ESI). Compared with the control-ITO-perovskite film, greater PL quenching and faster PL decay are observed in the HAT-ITO-perovskite film, improving the electron extraction capacity of the HAT-ITO.
To verify that HAT-ITO can improve the PSC performance, we prepared ETL-free PSCs (Fig. 5a and b). By obtaining the Mott–Schottky curves under dark conditions, the built-in potential of the HAT-ITO-device was estimated to be 1.06 V (Fig. 5c). This value was greater than that of the control ITO device (0.95 V). Therefore, HAT-ITO devices should have less carrier recombination and higher VOC.

Fig. 5d and Table 1 present the J–V curves and photovoltaic parameters, respectively. The reverse-scan (R-S) PCE of the control-ITO-device is 14.05% (forward scan (F-S): PCE = 13.84%). The HAT-ITO device shows significantly improved performance with a PCE of 19.32% (F-S: PCE = 19.31%). Due to the electron transmission efficiency improvement, Jsc increases from 20.09 mA cm−2 to 22.40 mA cm−2. The HAT-ITO substrate is more conducive to the growth of the perovskite, producing a perovskite film with fewer grain boundaries and a lower density of trap states, effectively reducing the carrier recombination and greatly improving the FF and Voc of the device. In addition, we explored the reproducibility of these devices. Fig. 5e summarizes the PCEs of the 20 devices (10 control-ITO-devices and 10 HAT-ITO-devices). The HAT-ITO-device exhibits an average PCE of 17.89%, whereas the control-ITO-device yields an average PCE of only 12.16%. The histograms of the Voc, Jsc, and FF of the device based on control-ITO and HAT-ITO are displayed in Fig. S4 (ESI), respectively, which indicate that the HAT-ITO cells have a better repeatability.
Sample

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Control ITO
R-S
0.99
20.36
70.00
14.05
F-S
0.98
20.09
70.30
13.84
HAT-ITO
R-S
1.10
22.56
77.85
19.32
F-S
1.10
22.40
78.37
19.31
The charge extraction can also be demonstrated by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (Fig. S5, ESI). Compared with the control-ITO-device, the HAT-ITO-device has a higher recombination resistance (Rrec) and a lower charge transfer resistance (Rtr), which indicates that the HAT-ITO device has a lower recombination rate and the electrons at the ITO/perovskite interface can be efficiently transferred. The above results indicate that the growth of columnar-grained perovskites on HAT-ITO is the reason for the Rs reduction and FF increase.

Fig. 5f shows the external quantum efficiency (EQE) as a function of wavelength. The EQE of the HAT-ITO-device is obviously higher than that of the control-ITO-device in the 360–820 spectral region, which means that the enhanced electric field is more conducive to the extraction of photogenerated charges and reduces the recombination losses. The suppressed charge recombination can be further observed through open-circuit voltage decay (OCVD) measurements, as shown in Fig. 5g. The OCVD of the HAT-ITO-PSCs is much slower than that of the control-ITO-PSCs, which indicates that compared with the control-ITO-device, the HAT-ITO-device has a lower interface recombination rate and longer carrier lifetime.
To realize the industrialization of PSC devices, in addition to the PCE, the device stability must be addressed. Fig. S6 (ESI) shows the maximum power point voltage (Vmpp) of the control-ITO-device and HAT-ITO-device under continuous light. The HAT-ITO device shows a stronger current density under one-sun soaking for 200 s, and the current of the HAT-ITO-device changes very little, which results in better irradiation stability. It is well known that PSCs are very sensitive to humid conditions, which can also decompose and denature perovskite materials. The stability of the control-ITO-PSCs and HAT-ITO-PSCs (30 days, 30% humidity, T = 25 °C) was examined (Fig. S7, ESI). Better performance (88% of the pristine PCE) is observed for the HAT-ITO device. The columnar grains were resistant to moisture penetration during aging. For the control-ITO device, the performance is only 60% of that of the original PCE. Fig. 5h shows the J–V curves (in the dark) of the control-ITO-device and HAT-ITO-device. The results show that, compared with the control-ITO-device, the leakage current of the HAT-ITO-device is lower, which shows that the HAT-ITO can prevent current leakage and improve the photovoltaic performance.

In conclusion, low-cost, highly efficient, and easily produced HAT-ITO-ETL-free PSCs were fabricated in this study, and the underlying carrier transport behavior was demonstrated. We comprehensively modulated the bandgap alignment of the ITO/perovskite interface by facile H3PO2 treatment, which adjusted the WF of ITO from 4.7 eV to 4.0 eV. In turn, an ITO/perovskite interface with better ohmic contact was obtained. In addition, a dipole layer was formed on the HAT-ITO surface, which not only strengthened the built-in field of the ITO/perovskite interface, but also served as a template for the ordered growth of the perovskite layer. With this two-fold interfacial electric-field modulation, the PCE of the ETL-free PSCs was enhanced from 14.05% (control-ITO-cells) to 19.32% (HAT-ITO-cells), which is even a state-of-the-art PCE for regular MAPbI3 solar cells with an ETL. We believe that this low-cost and facile method could provide a promising means of developing efficient and flexible ETL-free PSCs.


There are no conflicts to declare.


The authors gratefully acknowledge the support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 61775081, 11904127, 22075101, 61904066), the Program for the Development of Science and Technology of Jilin Province (Item No. 20200801032GH, 20190103002JH), and The Thirteenth Five Year Program for Science and Technology of Education Department of Jilin Province (Item No. JJKH20200417KJ, JJKH20210440KJ).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1tc03246a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021