 DOI: 10.1039/C003040F
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 3259-3261

Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical Terms


Jhong-Sian
Wu
,

Yen-Ju
Cheng
*,

Martin
Dubosc
,

Chao-Hsiang
Hsieh
,

Chin-Yen
Chang
 and 

Chain-Shu
Hsu
*

Department of Applied Chemistry, National Chiao Tung University, 1001 Ta Hsueh Road, Hsin-Chu, 30010 Taiwan. E-mail: yjcheng@mail.nctu.edu.tw; cshsu@mail.nctu.edu.tw

Received
12th February 2010
, Accepted 1st April 2010
First published on
14th April 2010

We report here two novel 2,7-fluorene- and 2,7-carbazole-based conjugated polymers PFDCTBT and PCDCTBT containing ladder-type heptacyclic structures with forced planarity. PCDTBT shows excellent solubility, low band gap and high hole mobility, leading to a power conversion efficiency of 3.7%.

Over the past few years, tremendous research effort has been made on all-solution processed polymer solar cells (PSCs) in order to realize low-cost, light-weight, large-area and flexible photovoltaic devices. PSCs based on the concept of bulk heterojunction (BHJ) are the most widely adopted device architecture to ensure maximum internal donor–acceptor (D–A) interfacial area for efficient charge separation. To achieve high efficiency of PSCs, the most critical challenge at the molecular level is to develop p-type conjugated polymers that simultaneously possess (1) sufficient solubility to guarantee solution processability and miscibility with an n-type material, (2) low band gap (LBG) for strong and broad absorption spectrum to capture more solar photons and (3) high hole mobility for efficient charge transport. The most effective approach to produce a LBG polymer is to incorporate electron-rich donor and electron-deficient acceptor segments along the conjugated polymer backbone. Tricyclic 2,7-fluorene and 2,7-carbazole units have emerged as promising electron-rich building blocks to construct D–A polymers because their derivatives are shown to have deep-lying HOMO energy levels and good hole-transporting properties which are crucial prerequisites to achieve high open-circuit voltages (Voc) and short circuit currents (Jsc), respectively. Besides, the electron-rich thiophene unit is the most important key element ubiquitously incorporated into D–A conjugated polymers to adjust the optical and electronic properties to optimal levels. For instance, alternating copolymers poly(2,7-fluorene-alt-dithienylbenzothiadiazole) (PFDTBT) and poly(2,7-carbazole-alt-dithienylbenzothiadiazole) (PCDTBT) have been proven to be a promising class of p-type photoactive materials for application in PSCs (Scheme 1). In addition to the D–A strategy, forced planarization by covalently fastening adjacent aromatic units in the polymer backbone strengthens the parallel p-orbital interactions to elongate effective conjugation length and facilitate π-electron delocalization, providing an effective way to reduce the band gap. Moreover, coplanar geometries and rigid structures can suppress the rotational disorder around interannular single bonds and lower the reorganization energy, which in turn enhances the intrinsic charge mobility. However, too strong inter-chain π–π stacking interactions arising from the high degree of coplanarity tend to make the polyaromatic conjugated polymers insoluble and unprocessable. In this communication, we wish to report two novel D–A copolymers poly(fluorene-dicyclopentathiophene-alt-benzothiadiazole) (PFDCTBT) and poly(carbazole-dicyclopentathiophene-alt-benzothiadiazole) (PCDCTBT). Both polymers were designed based on the skeletons of the well-known PFDTBT and PCDTBT polymers in order to fully take advantage of their excellent properties. The structural uniqueness of PFDCTBT and PCDCTBT is that the 3-positions of two outer thiophenes are covalently tied with the 3,6-position of central fluorene or carbazole cores by a carbon bridge, forming two cyclopentadienyl (CP) rings embedded in a multi-fused heptacyclic structure (Scheme 1). Two additional substituents attached at the CP rings allow for tailoring the intermolecular interactions without causing twisting between the adjacent units, making the resulting polymers highly soluble. A preliminary test of the photovoltaic performance based on these polymers shows promise for solar cell applications.

The synthesis of the monomers M1 and M2 is depicted in Scheme 2. 2,7-Diboronic esters fluorene 1a and carbazole 1b were reacted with ethyl 2-bromothiophene-3-carboxylate 2 by Suzuki coupling to obtain compounds 3a and 3b respectively. Double nucleophilic addition of freshly prepared 4-(2-ethylhexyloxy)phenyl magnesium bromide 4 to the ester groups of 3 led to the formation of benzylic alcohol 5 which was subjected to intramolecular annulation through acid-mediated Friedel–Crafts reaction to furnish the fused heptacyclic arene 6. Because of the strong nitrogen-directing effect of the carbazole to facilitate the regioselective cyclization, 6b was obtained in nearly quantitative yield of 97% in the presence of AcOH, whereas using stronger acids H2SO4/AcOH was required to generate 6a in a moderate yield of 52%. Carbazole-based 6b can be efficiently lithiated by t-butyllithium through deprotonation followed by reacting with trimethyltin chloride to afford the distannyl M2. However, fluorene-based 6a was brominated to yield compound 7 which was then lithiated to obtain distannyl M1. M1 and M2 were copolymerized with the acceptor 4,7-dibromo-2,1,3-benzothiadiazole 8 by Stille coupling to give PFDCTBT (Mn = 8.5 kDa, PDI = 1.89) and PCDCTBT (Mn = 8.2 kDa, PDI = 1.59), respectively. Thanks to the branched 2-ethylhexyloxy side chains as the solubilizing groups, both polymers show excellent solubilities in common organic solvents, such as chloroform, toluene, dichlorobenzene, overcoming the planarity–solubility tradeoff to facilitate their processability.
The thermal stability was analyzed by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA). PFDCTBT and PCDCTBT exhibited sufficiently high decomposition temperatures (Td) of 410 °C and 434 °C, respectively, indicating that carbazole-based PCDCTBT is thermally more stable than fluorene-based PFDCTBT (Fig. S1, ESI).
Both PFDCTBT and PCDCTBT exhibited two characteristic bands in the absorption spectra (Fig. 1). The shorter wavelength absorbance comes from the π–π* transition of the heptacyclic units, while the lower energy band is attributed to the intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) between the electron-rich and the benzothiadiazole segments. Compared to PFDCTBT showing the absorption maxima at 411 nm and 580 nm in the thin film, PCDCTBT exhibited a similar absorption maximum at 412 nm but a bathochromic shift of the ICT band at 607 nm. In addition, the optical band gaps (Egopt) deduced from the onset of absorption in the solid state are determined to be 1.76 eV (703 nm) for PFDCTBT and 1.66 eV (746 nm) for PCDCTBT. These results suggest that the donating strength of carbazole is stronger than that of the fluorene moiety, shifting the ICT band of PCDCTBT to lower energy. It should be emphasized that PFDCTBT and PCDCTBT have more red-shifted absorption spectra and smaller band gaps in comparison with their corresponding non-fused PFDTBT (Egopt = 1.87 eV) and PCDTBT (Egopt = 1.88 eV) analogues, demonstrating that the electron coupling between the rigidified donor and the acceptor units is enhanced. Because two 4-(2-ethylhexyloxy)phenyl moieties substituted at the carbon of CP rings may dilute strong intermolecular π–π interactions, the profiles of absorption spectra of PFDCTBT and PCDCTBT are essentially unchanged with slight broadening of the bands and red shift of the band edges from the solution state to the solid state. This result implies the amorphous nature of the polymers which can be further confirmed by no obvious thermal transition in the differential scanning calorimetry measurements (Fig. S2, ESI). It is worth noting that the intensities of the shorter wavelength bands of both polymers in the solid state are apparently stronger than those in the solution state, which also suggests that the rigid and coplanar heptacyclic units can enhance their light absorption ability in the solid state.
Cyclic voltammetry (CV) was employed to examine the electrochemical properties (Fig. 2). Both polymers showed a stable and reversible p-doping/n-doping process in the cathodic and anodic scans. The HOMO levels being estimated to be −5.32 eV for PFDCTBT and −5.38 eV for PCDCTBT are in an ideal range to assure better air-stability and greater attainable Voc in the final device. The LUMO energy levels are approximately located at −3.55 eV for PFDCTBT and −3.61 eV for PCDCTBT, which are positioned 0.2–0.3 eV above the LUMO level of the PC71BM acceptor (3.8 eV) to ensure energetically favorable electron transfer. This can be unambiguously evidenced by the complete photoluminescence quenching in the film of the PFDCTBT/PC71BM and PCDCTBT/PC71BM (1:2, w/w) blends (Fig. S3, ESI).
Despite their amorphous nature, PFDCTBT and PCDCTBT show good hole transporting properties due to their rigid and coplanar structures. Based on the space-charge-limited current (SCLC) method, PFDCTBT and PCDCTBT exhibited high hole mobilities within the same order of magnitude (2.5 × 10−4 cm2/Vs and 1 × 10−4 cm2/Vs, respectively). On the basis of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/polymer:PC71BM(1:2, w/w)/Ca/Al configuration, bulk heterojunction solar cells were fabricated and characterized under simulated 100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5 G illumination. The current density–voltage characteristics of the devices are shown in Fig. 3. Without extensive optimization, the preliminary photovoltaic performance based on PFDCTBT already showed a Jsc of 9.5 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.77 V, a fill factor (FF) of 0.38, leading to a decent PCE of 2.8%. More encouragingly, the device using PCDCTBT as the p-type material delivered superior performance with a Jsc of 10.7 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.80 V, a FF of 0.43, improving the PCE to 3.7%.
To further evaluate the hole mobility in the BHJ active layer, hole-only devices (ITO/PEDOT:PSS/polymer:PC71BM (1:2, w/w)/Au) were fabricated. It is found that the hole mobility of the PCDCTBT/PC71BM composite (4 × 10−4 cm2/Vs) is higher than that of the PFDCTBT/PC71BM (5 × 10−5 cm2/Vs) blend under the same fabrication conditions. The enhanced hole mobility of the PCDCTBT/PC71BM active layer might be responsible for its better photovoltaic performance over the PFDCTBT-based device. It is also noteworthy that the surface roughness of the PCDCTBT/PC71BM blend observed by AFM is larger than that of the PFDCTBT/PC71BM blend (Fig. S4, ESI).
In summary, by utilization of facile Friedel–Crafts cyclization, we have successfully synthesized two well-designed heptacyclic monomers M1 and M2 in which two outer thiophene subunits are covalently fastened to the central 2,7-fluorene and 2,7-carbazole cores, respectively. Rigid, coplanar and electron-rich M1 and M2 were copolymerized with the electron-deficient benzothiadiazole acceptor by Stille coupling to afford two novel D–A polymers PFDCTBT and PCDCTBT, respectively. Through such a simple and straightforward engineering of molecular structures, PFDCTBT and PCDCTBT simultaneously possess excellent solubilities for solution-processability, low band gaps with suitable position of HOMO/LUMO energy levels, and high hole mobilities, leading to promising PCEs of 2.8% and 3.7%, respectively. We anticipate that further improvement of device performance is highly achievable through carefully optimizing the processing conditions which are ongoing in our laboratory.
This work is supported by the National Science Council and “Aim for the Top University Plan” of the National Chiao Tung University and Ministry of Education, Taiwan.
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details. See DOI: 10.1039/c003040f
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010