 DOI: 10.1039/C3NR01564E
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 6992-6998

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Xianwei
Zeng
,

Dehua
Xiong
,

Wenjun
Zhang
,

Liqun
Ming
,

Zhen
Xu
,

Zhanfeng
Huang
,

Mingkui
Wang
,

Wei
Chen
* and 

Yi-Bing
Cheng


Michael Grätzel Centre for Mesoscopic Solar Cells, Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics and College of Optoelectronic Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, P. R. China. E-mail: wnlochenwei@mail.hust.edu.cn; Fax: +86 27 8779 3867; Tel: +86 27 8779 3524

Department of Materials Engineering, Monash University, Melbourne, Victoria 3800, Australia

Received
29th March 2013
, Accepted 15th May 2013
First published on 17th May 2013
In this paper, low-cost counter electrodes (CEs) based on water-soluble multiwall carbon nanotube (MWCNT) and Cu2ZnSnSe4 nanoparticle (CZTSe NP) composites have been successfully introduced into a quantum dot-sensitized solar cell (QDSC) system. Suitable surface modification allows the MWCNTs and CZTSe NPs to be homogeneously dispersed in water, facilitating the subsequent low-temperature spray deposition of high quality composite films with different composite ratios. The electrochemical catalytic activity of the composite CEs has been critically compared by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy and Tafel-polarization analysis. It is found that the composite CE at the MWCNT:CZTSe ratio of 0.1 offers the best performance, leading to an optimal solar cell efficiency of 4.60%, which is 50.8% higher than that of the Pt reference CE. The as-demonstrated higher catalytic activity of the composite CEs compared to their single components could be ascribed to the combination of the fast electron transport of the MWCNTs and the high catalytic activity of CZTSe NPs.

Featuring low cost, tunable band gaps, high molar extinction coefficient and high theoretical power conversation (44%), quantum dot-sensitized solar cells (QDSCs) have attracted more and more attention. Recently, great efforts have been dedicated to optimizing the components of a QDSC device in order to promote its efficiency. To date, Mn-doped CdS/CdSe sensitized solar cells and CdSe sensitized solar cells using ex situ routes achieved the highest efficiencies of about 5.4%. However, these record values still lag far behind that of dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs), which share a similar cell structure and working mechanism to QDSCs but have achieved more competitive efficiencies of up to 12.3%. A great limitation arises from the mismatch between the counter electrode (CE) materials and the generally used polysulfide electrolyte in a QDSC device. An ideal CE, possessing high catalytic activity as well as good conductivity, plays an important role in decreasing the overpotential for interfacial catalytic reactions. As a consequence, it can have a large affect on all of the performance parameters of the QDSC device, such as photocurrent density, fill factor and photovoltage. At the current time in this research field, the development of effective CE materials holds great significance.

A platinum (Pt) CE, as a standard CE material in DSC, is inappropriate in QDSC systems owing to the chemisorption of sulphur compounds on the Pt surface which induces poisoning effects. Other CE materials, such as Au, Cu2S, carbon, CoS, PbS, CoS/CuS, conducting polymers, and Cu2S–reduced graphene oxide composites,etc. have been reported. Among them, Cu2S has been demonstrated to be efficient and cost-effective, and is commonly used in high efficiency QDSCs. However, Cu2S is chemically unstable, which has been proved in the development history of thin film solar cells. Therefore, in the commercialized product, Cu2S is replaced by the more stable Cu–In–Ga–Se,S as a light-absorbing material. Recently Cu2ZnSnS(Se)4 components, which are low-cost and have low-toxicity, are suggested to be very promising as the next alternatives. It is reasonable to explore these Cu2S derivatives as alternative CEs with better catalytic activity and improved stability in QDSCs. In fact, Cu2ZnSnS4 (CZTS), Cu2ZnSnSe4 (CZTSe) and Cu2SnS3 have been successfully applied in QDSC systems. Our previously reported nanoporous CZTSe CE produced very good catalytic activity leading to a promising efficiency (4.35%) of the QDSC, whilst the densely packed CZTS CE showed much poorer performance. It is strongly suspected that the electrical resistance of the CZTS(Se) film may act as a critical limiting factor. A similar observation has also been reported in using a CZTS(Se) film as the CE in DSCs, in which a CE film with ultrathin thickness showed much higher performance than the thicker one.
Therefore, as an extension to this research, in this paper we designed a multiwall carbon nanotube (MWCNT)–CZTSe composite CE with the purpose of taking the advantages from both components, namely, good conductivity of the one-dimensional MWCNTs acting as fast electron transfer pathways, and the high catalytic activity of CZTSe nanoparticles (NPs) with large surface area promoting electron exchange at the catalyst–electrolyte interface. With this purpose in mind, QDSCs based on composite CEs with different MWCNT:CZTSe weight ratios have been compared. The best performance was finally achieved at the MWCNT:CZTSe ratio of 0.1, with the optimal efficiency of 4.6%, which is much superior to the CEs made of each single component and the Pt reference.

In order to obtain a homogenous film with good adhesion stress on the FTO glass substrate, suitable surface modification of the raw materials is required to obtain a well dispersed composite solution for subsequent spray deposition. The whole process is schematically illustrated in Scheme 1. The commercial MWCNTs (from Shenzhen Nanotech Port Co. Ltd) were hard to disperse in both hydrophilic and hydrophobic solutions. We treated the raw material according to a standard procedure to make its surface hydrophilic as follows: Firstly, raw MWCNTs were dispersed in a 3:1 mixture of 98% H2SO4 and 78% HNO3 and refluxed while stirring vigorously for 3 h at 120 °C. Through this step, the graphitic sp2 carbons on the surface of MWCNTs were carboxyl-functionalized, which was confirmed by the Fourier Transform Infra Red (FTIR) spectra shown in Fig. S1. Then, after cooling down to room temperature, the oxidized MWCNTs were further filtered by suction filtration, and washed thoroughly with deionized water until a pH value close to 6–7 was reached. Finally, the surface modified MWCNTs could be stably dispersed in water for several days without evident aggregation, which is distinct from the behavior of the raw MWCNTs (Fig. 1a).

CZTSe NPs were prepared in a similar way to the method outlined in our previous paper. The surface of freshly prepared CZTSe NPs was capped with hydrophobic oleylamine (OLA) groups, which causes the CZTSe NPs to be poorly dispersed in water (Fig. 1b). Hydrophilic surface modification is required to make the CZTSe NPs compatible with the water-soluble MWCNTs. Exchanging OLA with pyridine (Py) groups could be achieved by refluxing OLA-capped CZTSe in pyridine at 90 °C under argon for 12 h. The effectiveness of this step has been confirmed by the FTIR spectra shown in Fig. S2.
The py-capped CZTSe NPs were precipitated with hexane and collected by centrifugation. The precipitate could be then dissolved well in deionized water (Fig. 1b).
The MWCNT–CZTSe composite aqueous solutions with different MWCNT:CZTSe weight ratios were obtained by simply mixing the MWCNT aqueous solution and py-capped CZTSe aqueous solution. The two parts were compatible and could be stably dispersed in water for several days (Fig. 1c).

The as-prepared MWCNT–CZTSe composite solutions with different weight ratios were sprayed onto FTO glasses (7 Ω square−1, Pilkington, TEC 7) to form homogenous films with a controlled thickness of 600 nm, which were then dried in a vacuum drying oven at 150 °C for 2 hours, to be used as the CEs. The as-deposited CEs with MWCNT:CZTSe ratios of 0.5, 0.2, 0.1 and 0.05 in the aqueous precursors are hereafter denoted as MWCNT–CZTSe (0.5), MWCNT–CZTSe (0.2), MWCNT–CZTSe (0.1), and MWCNT–CZTSe (0.05), respectively. A typical optical image of the composite CE is shown in the middle panel of Fig. S3. Pt-coated FTO glass prepared by pyrolysis of H2PtCl6 was used as the reference CE.

For photoanode fabrication, a 100 nm thick TiO2 dense underlayer was firstly deposited onto a FTO glass substrate by spray pyrolysis of an ethanol solution of titanium diisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate). Then, a mesoporous TiO2 active layer with the thickness of ∼10 μm made of hydrothermally prepared anatase nanorods (Fig. S4, see the ESI) was deposited on top of the dense layer by screen printing. After the film was pre-sintered at 450 °C for 30 minutes, treated using 40 mM TiCl4 solution and sintered again at 500 °C for 30 minutes, it was sensitized with CdSe QDs by repeating the standard successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR) procedure for 8 cycles, plus 2 cycles of ZnS modification. The film with a size of 4 × 4 mm2 as shown in Fig. S3 was used as the photoanode.
QDSCs were made by sandwiching the as-prepared CEs and the photoanodes using Surlyn films as the spacers. The aqueous polysulfide electrolyte containing 2 M Na2S, 2 M S and 0.2 M KCl was introduced into the cell through a hole via vacuum backfilling. After the cells were sealed, the conducting wires were soldered together with the FTO glasses to reduce the contact resistance. A typical image of the completed solar cell is shown in the right panel of Fig. S3. The symmetrical cells for electrochemical measurements were assembled by two identical MWCNT, CZTSe, MWCNT–CZTSe composite and Pt electrodes, using the same electrolyte as that for QDSCs.

The morphology of the nanomaterials was characterized using scanning electron microscopy (SEM, FEI Sirion 200) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM, FEI, Tecnai-20). A Raman scattering spectrum was detected with a Jobin Yvon HR800 Raman scattering system. X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were obtained using a PANalytical B. V. X-ray diffraction system. The film thickness was determined using a Veeco Dektak 150 surface profiler system. The photocurrent–voltage characteristic curves were measured using a Newport AM 1.5G solar simulator (Model 91192) at a light intensity of 100 mW cm−2, calibrated using a standard silicon reference cell. The active area for solar cell testing is 4 × 4 mm2. A slightly larger square mask was used to prevent scattering light. The electrochemical measurements were done using a Zahner CIMPS-2 system. For the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) analysis, the test frequency range was set between 10 mHz and 1 MHz. The bias potential was set at zero with an AC amplitude of 10 mV. For the Tafel-polarization analysis, the scan rate was set at 50 mV s−1.


The high-purity crystal phase and proper elemental composition of the CZTSe NPs have been identified using the Raman spectrum (Fig. S5) and energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) characterization (Fig. S6 and S7). The XRD patterns of MWCNTs, CZTSe and their composite films are shown in Fig. 2. The peak located at 26.09° owing to the (002) diffraction signal of the MWCNTs could be clearly identified in the composite films with a high content of MWCNTs (MWCNT–CZTSe (0.5) for example).

The SEM images of the MWCNTs, CZTSe and their composite films are depicted in Fig. 3. The MWCNTs are observed to be ∼30 nm in diameter and several microns in length. Surface modification of MWCNTs allows the fabrication of the spray-deposited porous film as shown in Fig. 3a with a suitably high adhesion stress on the FTO substrate. The CZTSe NPs with an average diameter of ∼20 nm were found to be homogeneously dispersed in the matrix of MWCNTs in the composite films (Fig. 3b–e). The uniformity of elemental distributions in the composite films has been further confirmed using elemental EDX mapping, as shown in Fig. S7. Both components in the composite films are surface hydrophilic, making their good interpenetration possible. It is suggested that surface groups like –COOH promote interaction of the modified MWCNTs with the CZTSe NPs. Note that the film made of py-capped CZTSe NPs (Fig. 3f) is highly porous as freshly deposited, not like the film made of OLA-capped CZTSe NPs in our previous report, the porous structure of which is hard to expose without high temperature calcination. The porous structure of the CE films, providing a large inner surface area, is suggested to be beneficial for fluent ionic diffusion and therefore promotes the interfacial catalytic reaction towards the polysulfide electrolyte.
Photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) curves of the QDSCs using MWCNTs, CZTSe, MWCNT–CZTSe composites and Pt as CEs are shown in Fig. 4. The obtained photovoltaic parameters including the short-circuit current density (Jsc), open circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (FF) and efficiency (η) are summarized in Table 1. An optimal efficiency of 4.60% has been achieved by the MWCNT–CZTSe (0.1) composite CE, showing a significant improvement over each of the single component CEs and the Pt reference CE. Improvements were not only reflected by the remarkably higher Jsc, but also the notably higher FF (see Table 1). It is found that the MWCNT CE produces the worst performance; both Jsc (13.4 mA cm−2) and FF (0.35) are the lowest among the compared samples, reflecting that it has the worst catalytic activity. The second worst is the Pt CE with a Jsc of 13.8 mA cm−2 and FF of 0.41. The CZTSe CE exhibits a decent performance with Jsc of 16.36 mA cm−2 and FF of 0.44, which are much better than our previous report on low temperature treated OLA-capped CZTSe CE. This also reflects the importance of replacing a large molecular surface capping agent on the CZTSe with smaller ones, which are easier to evaporate away by post-thermal treatment. For composite CEs with different blending ratios, it can be found that by increasing the MWCNT content, Jsc at first increases and reaches a maximum of 17.04 mA cm−2 at the MWCNT:CZTSe weight ratio of 0.1, and then gradually decreases, while FF follows the same tendency. These tendencies will be explained later by a proposed “composite charge transmission” model with supporting data from EIS and Tafel plot analysis.
Sample

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF

η (%)

R
s (Ω)

R
ct (Ω)

C
d (μF)

Z
w (Ω)
MWCNT
0.51
13.40
0.35
2.39
9.07
35.3
1.03
146.2
MWCNT–CZTSe (0.5)
0.53
13.62
0.44
3.17
9.28
22.1
2.11
30.3
MWCNT–CZTSe (0.2)
0.53
15.47
0.48
3.94
9.42
15.6
3.12
22.7
MWCNT–CZTSe (0.1)
0.53
17.04
0.51
4.60
7.96
2.5
8.3
13.6
MWCNT–CZTSe (0.05)
0.53
16.43
0.47
4.09
8.26
8.4
5.2
47.1
CZTSe
0.53
16.36
0.44
3.80
9.32
18.1
4.4
55.0
Pt
0.54
13.80
0.41
3.06
7.4
380.3
3.9
—
EIS was used for investigating the charge transfer process and evaluating the catalytic activity of the compared CEs. The symmetrical cells fabricated with two identical CEs were used for EIS characterization. The test results are shown in Fig. 5. By fitting with a suitable equivalent circuit model shown as the inset in Fig. 5a, the EIS parameters are summarized and listed in Table 1, including the series resistance associated with the catalyst layer-covered FTO substrate (Rs), the charge transfer resistance (Rct), the capacitance of the electrical double layer (Cd) at the solid–electrolyte interface, and the Warburg diffusion impedance of S22−/S2− ions within the electrolyte (Zw). The tendencies of Rs, Rct, Zw depending upon the MWCNT:CZTSe weight ratio are highlighted in Fig. 5c.
It is worth noting that both Rct and Zw reach their lowest points at the MWCNT:CZTSe weight ratio of 0.1 (Fig. 5c), which is consistent with the highest Jsc and FF of the corresponding QDSC device (Table 1). This phenomenon could be understood as follows: (1) it is suggested that Rct is inversely proportional to the catalytic activity of the CE, and the highest catalytic activity of the MWCNT–CZTSe (0.1) composite CE accordingly results in higher Jsc than the others; (2) both Rct and Zw could be incorporated into the classic one-diode model of a solar cell as part of the total series resistance Rs, total, according to which, a smaller Rs,total will result in higher FF of the solar cell. As the sum of Rct and Zw of MWCNT–CZTSe (0.1) composite CE is the lowest among the compared samples, it is not a surprise to find that the corresponding solar cell possesses the highest FF.
The question which arises is, from the material point of view, why Rct and Zw of the composite CE were optimized at the MWCNT:CZTSe weight ratio of 0.1? We proposed a “composite charge transmission” model as schematically shown in Scheme 2 to explain, emphasizing the effect of the composite CEs' structural differences on the electron transport and ionic diffusion of the electrolyte in the 3D network of the porous CEs.
Electron transport is mostly reflected by the value of Rct. As the ratio of MWCNTs:CZTSe in the composite CEs increases from 0, 0.05 to 0.1, their Rct becomes gradually smaller. This should be ascribed to the positive effect of the MWCNTs in the composite CEs serving as an electron transport highway (as indicated by the solid-line arrow in Scheme 2) shuttling electrons to the sulfide active CZTSe catalyst sites. This is the case in the highly efficient Cu2S–reduced graphene oxide composite CE in QDSC as reported in the literature. This assumption is quite plausible because the 1D MWCNT has high conductivity and the length of a single MWCNT (several microns) is much longer than the composite CE's thickness (∼600 nm).
On further increasing the ratio of MWCNTs:CZTSe in the composite CEs from 0.1, 0.2, 0.5 to pure MWCNTs, the Rct of these CEs becomes gradually larger. It is suggested that too many MWCNTs in the composite CEs (for example, MWCNTs:CZTSe = 0.2, 0.5) will introduce and amplify the negative impacts of MWCNTs. Such negative impacts could be derived from two aspects: (1) the catalytic activity of pure MWCNTs is much worse than that of CZTSe NPs, as proved by their Rct. More MWCNTs will lead to a decrease in the total number of catalytically active sites in the composite CEs; (2) too many MWCNTs will induce the formation of too hollow a film structure, blocking the continuous electron transport network of CZTSe in the composite CEs (as denoted by the dash-line arrow in Scheme 2), which will hinder the composite electron transport in the composite CEs. As shown in Fig. 3b and c, lots of CZTSe clusters are isolated by the MWCNTs. From Fig. 5c, it can be also seen that there is an abnormal change in the Rs value when the MWCNT:CZTSe ratio increases from 0.1 to 0.2 (see Table 1). Rs, reflecting the body resistance of the catalyst layer, gradually decreases for composite CEs with MWCNT:CZTSe ratios increasing from 0, 0.05 to 0.1. However, this tendency breaks at the MWCNT:CZTSe ratio of more than 0.2. This phenomenon also suggests a reversal of the MWCNTs’ impact from positive to negative on the composite electron transport in composite CEs.
The electrolyte ionic diffusion is reflected by the value of Zw. As the ratio of MWCNTs:CZTSe in the composite CEs increases from 0 to 0.1, Zw becomes gradually smaller, which should be due to the film structure becoming more hollow (Fig. 3d–f) which benefits the fluent ionic diffusion of electrolyte. On further increasing the MWCNT:CZTSe ratio to values higher than 0.2, Zw becomes inversely larger. This should be ascribed to the lower affinity of MWCNTs for the polysulfide electrolyte than the chalcogenide compound CZTSe.
To elucidate the results more clearly, Tafel-polarization measurements were also conducted. Fig. 5d presents the Tafel curves of the dummy cells similar to those used in the EIS measurements. It shows the logarithmic current density (log J) as a function of the voltage (U). The curve of MWCNT–CZTSe (0.1) exhibits the largest slope of the studied electrodes, indicating that the MWCNT–CZTSe (0.1) CE has a higher exchange current density (J0) and superior catalytic activity towards polysulfide electrolyte compared to the others. The slopes of the tested curves are observed to follow the sequence of MWCNT–CZTSe (0.1) > MWCNT–CZTSe (0.05) > MWCNT–CZTSe (0.2) > CZTSe > MWCNT–CZTSe (0.5) > Pt > MWCNTs, corresponding to their relative orders of catalytic activity. These results are reasonable since according to eqn (1), J0 is inversely proportional to Rct, as listed in Table 1, the values of which follow an inverse of the sequence for J0.
(1)
Herein,
R is the gas constant, T being the temperature, F being the Faraday constant and n being the number of electrons exchanged in the reaction at the electrolyte interface.

Furthermore, the limiting diffusion current density (Jlim) is determined by the diffusion of the redox couple (Sn2−/S2−) in the electrolyte. The MWCNT–CZTSe (0.1) CE shows a higher Jlim, demonstrating that the MWCNT–CZTSe (0.1) CE has a larger diffusion coefficient (D) based on eqn (2). The result could also be related to the smaller Zw of the MWCNT–CZTSe (0.1) CE, proving that the porosity of the CE effects the electrolyte diffusion.
(2)
Where
D is the diffusion coefficient of the Sn2−, l is the spacer thickness, n is the number of electrons involved in the reduction of Sn2− at the electrode, F is the Faraday constant, and C is the Sn2− concentration.


In summary, we have successfully prepared MWCNT–CZTSe composite films by a facile spray deposition technique and introduced them as highly efficient CEs in a QDSC system. Suitable surface modification allows the two components, MWCNTs and CZTSe, to be homogeneously dispersed in water and provides the resultant porous CE films with high uniformity. Judicious design of the blending ratio of MWCNTs and CZTSe in the composite CEs plays a critical role in excavating the potentials of the two components for catalytic reaction towards the polysulfide electrolyte and optimizing the solar cells' performance. On the basis of electrochemical characterizations, a “composite charge transmission” model has been proposed to explain the tuning of the catalytic activity of the composite CEs depending on the blending ratios, assuming that the MWCNTs provide fast electron transfer paths in combination with fast interfacial electron exchange through the catalytic active surface of the CZTSe NPs. The MWCNT–CZTSe (0.1) CE achieved an optimal power conversion efficiency as high as 4.60%, which is an improvement of 50.8% compared to the traditional Pt CE with an efficiency of 3.05%. The use of cost-effective MWCNT–CZTSe composite CEs as an alternative to noble Pt, in combination with the facile low-temperature spray deposition method, promotes the possibility of developing low-cost, scalable and highly efficient QDSCs.


The authors would like to express sincere thanks for the financial support of the National Natural Science Foundation (21103058), 973 Program of China (2011CBA00703), Natural Science Foundation of Hubei Province (2011CDB033) and Basic Scientific Research Funds for Central Colleges (2010QN024). We also thank the Analytical and Testing Center of Huazhong University Science & Technology for the sample measurements.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Photographs, SEM, Raman, EDX and EDX-mapping results. See DOI: 10.1039/c3nr01564e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013