 DOI: 10.1039/C8TA12224E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 4145-4152


Guodong
Xu
,

Lie
Chen
*,

Hui
Lei
,

Zhihui
Liao
,

Nan
Yi
,

Jinliang
Liu
 and 

Yiwang
Chen
*

College of Chemistry/Institute of Polymers and Energy Chemistry (IPEC), Nanchang University, Nanchang 330031, P. R. China. E-mail: chenlie@ncu.edu.cn; ywchen@ncu.edu.cn; Fax: +86 791 83969561; Tel: +86 791 83968703

Received
18th December 2018
, Accepted 28th January 2019
First published on 1st February 2019
Alkylsilyl-fused copolymers are promising candidates for organic solar cells (OSCs), however, the unfavorable morphology in the active layer usually suffers from a low fill factor (FF) even upon various post-treatments. In this work, we employed the rational design of alkylsilyl-fused copolymers other than post-treatment to optimize the morphology of the active layer. By introducing the planar thiazolo[5,4-d]thiazole (TZ) unit into alkylsilyl-fused copolymers, a new copolymer donor PBDS-TZ was developed for PSCs. The σ*(Si)–π*(C) bond interaction and electron-affinity of TZ effectively downshifted the energy levels of PBDS-TZ, ensuring that it matches well with the excellent acceptor IT-4F with deeper energy levels. More importantly, without extra post-treatment, a desirable micromorphology with a vertical phase separation was readily achieved in the as-cast active layer, thanks to the intrinsic feature of the PBDS-TZ donor material. Eventually, a notable PCE of 12.01%, with a high FF of 73.1% and JSC of 20.45 mA cm−2 was obtained for the devices based on PBDS-TZ:IT-4F. These results demonstrated that rational design of conductive materials to achieve an intrinsically favorable morphology is more critical than the post-treatment for high performance PSCs.

Organic solar cells (OSCs) have attracted much attention in recent years, because of their low cost, solution preparation, flexibility and other excellent optoelectronic properties. The bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) OSC structure normally includes a p-type semiconductor as the donor and an n-type semiconductor as the acceptor. For fullerene derivatives as acceptors, the costly synthesis and purification, weak absorption, limited energy level variability, and poor morphology stability constrain their further development. Compared with fullerene derivatives, novel non-fullerene acceptors (NFAs) have emerged as promising alternatives, due to their low costs, readily controllable energy levels, excellent optical absorption properties, and ease of synthesis and purification. In recent years, OSCs based on NFAs have made breakthrough progress, and the best performance of OSCs has achieved a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 14.57% and 17.85% based on single and tandem device structures, respectively.

To achieve high performance OSCs, wide bandgap (WBG) donor–acceptor (D–A) polymers are normally chosen as donor materials for NFAs, due to their suitable energy levels and complementary light absorption to NFAs. In 2008, the benzodithiophene (BDT) unit was first fused in copolymer donors and became the most successful building block. The BDT unit with a rigid and planar conjugated structure enables the resulting polymers to easily have highly tunable energy levels and high hole mobility. So far, most of the high-performance donor materials are based on the BDT unit or functional group substituted BDT. Recently, silicon-fused BDT constructed copolymers, such as J71 and PBDS-T, exhibited high performance when used as donor materials in OSCs. The σ*(Si)–π* bond interaction could cause the downshift of the molecular energy level of the copolymer to enhance the open-circuit voltage (VOC). In addition, the Si-fused BDT unit with high planarity of the backbone could effectively improve the crystallinity of polymers.
IT-4F is an excellent acceptor with good crystallinity and high absorption coefficients, becoming one of the most excellent OSC acceptors for fullerene-free devices in recent years. However, due to the low LUMO level of IT-4F, only a few polymer donors can match well with it. Despite the ability of alkylsilyl to downshift energy levels, the HOMO levels of all the alkylsilyl BDT functionalized copolymers are not low enough, delivering poor device performance when blended with IT-4F. Hence, exploring copolymer donor materials with deeper HOMO energy levels is beneficial for the further development of non-fullerene OSCs. More depressively, devices based on alkylsilyl BDT functionalized copolymers usually exhibit a low fill factor (FF). In fact, the micromorphology of the active layer has a significant influence on the (short-circuit current) JSC and FF.
The vertical component distribution and phase separated domain size in the BHJ active layer, and coordination between component crystallinity significantly affect exciton dissociation, charge transport and charge combination, and thereby the ultimate device performance. However, elaborate micromorphology control is a sophisticated task. An ideal bicontinuous interpenetrating network morphology in the BHJ active layer is hard to achieve. Usually, additional physical post-treatments, for example, thermal annealing and solvent annealing in the BHJ active layer, are the most-used methods to optimize the micromorphology of the active layer. However, such additional physical treatments caused unexpected instability during the practical device operation. Actually, the appropriate micromorphology in the BHJ active layer is determined by the intrinsic features of the active layer materials (donor and acceptor). Therefore, to substantially improve the micromorphology, we should go back to rational design of materials for high performance active layers.
The thiazolo[5,4-d]thiazole (TZ) unit with excellent planarity and electron-withdrawing properties has been reported to construct donor materials for PSCs. Due to the favorable morphology when blended with NFAs, a high FF of ∼75% was achieved for the OSC devices with a TZ-based copolymer donor. Inspired by this, we combine the TZ unit with the alkylsilyl BDT block to develop a new copolymer donor PBDS-TZ for PSCs. Benefitting from the σ*(Si)–π*(C) bond interaction and electron-withdrawing TZ, copolymer PBDS-TZ shows a low-lying HOMO level, which can match well with that of IT-4F. More importantly, an appropriate micromorphology with a vertical component distribution in the BHJ active layer is achieved, leading to a notable PCE of 12.01% with a high FF of 73.1% and JSC of 20.45 mA cm−2.

Poly-2-(5-(4,8-bis(5-(tributylsilyl)thiophen)benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophen)-4-(2-ethylhexyl)thiophen-2-yl)-5-(4-(2-ethylhexyl)thiophen-2-yl)-3a,6a-dihydrothiazolo[5,4-d]thiazole (PBDS-TZ) was synthesized by a simple Stille-coupling reaction (Fig. 1a). More details of the synthetic route of PBDS-TZ are presented in Fig. S1 in the ESI. The copolymer can be readily processed from common solvents, such as chloroform (CF), chlorobenzene (CB), etc. Gel permeation chromatography measured the number-average molecular weight (Mn) of PBDS-TZ to be 37.3 kDa with a polydispersity index (PDI) of 1.91. The decomposition temperature of PBDS-TZ is over 350 °C (TGA, Fig. S1 is provided in the ESI).

The structural geometries of PBDS-TZ were determined by density functional theory (DFT) at the B3LYP/6-31G level (Fig. 1b). To simplify the calculation processes, the methyl group was used to replace the side chains. From the optimized model, the dihedral angles of two adjacent thiophene units are +15.6° and +2.8°, respectively. It is seen from the side view of the polymer that the backbone forms a planar π-conjugation, and the total D–A unit coplanar dihedral angle is only +18.4°. Such planar π-conjugation not only can facilitate charge transport along the backbone, but also can favor a tight π–π stacking in the film, which is another desirable character for an excellent polymer donor material.

Fig. 2a shows the ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) absorption spectra of PBDS-TZ in solution and in films. The PBDS-TZ film shows a wide absorption range between 400 nm and 640 nm, and the maximum absorption peak is at 550 nm. The optical bandgap of PBDS-TZ is calculated to be 1.95 eV from the absorption edge of 636 nm, indicating that PBDS-TZ is a wide band gap polymer. From the figure we can also see that PBDS-TZ has good absorption complementary to the IT-4F acceptor. In addition, a distinct shoulder peak at ∼580 nm can be observed for PBDS-TZ both in solution and the film state, indicating that the intrinsic ordered packing in the polymer is due to the planar structure. The maximum extinction coefficient of the PBDS-TZ (at 550 nm) and IT-4F (at 722 nm) films is calculated to be 1.13 × 105 cm−1 and 1.06 × 105 cm−1, respectively (Fig. 2b). The high extinction coefficient of the active layer is crucial to the contribution to the photoelectric current. The highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) level (EHOMO) of PBDS-TZ from the onset of oxidation is calculated to be −5.41 eV from electrochemical cyclic voltammetry spectra (CV) (Fig. 2c). The lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) level (ELUMO) is calculated to be −3.46 eV, which is deduced from the HOMO level and optical bandgap (Fig. 2d). Compared to most copolymers based on the BDT unit, PBDS-TZ exhibits an obvious down-shift of the energy level, originating from the σ*(Si)–π*(C) bond interaction. In addition, the HOMO level of PBDS-TZ decreases relative to that of our previously reported alkylsilyl functionalized copolymer PBDS-T (5.41 vs. 5.35 eV). The lower HOMO level would ensure that the polymer PBDS-TZ matches with the IT-4F acceptor with a low LUMO level, beneficial for obtaining high VOC.
OSCs with the inverted conjugation of ITO (indium tin oxide)/ZnO/PBDS-TZ:IT-4F/MoO3/Ag were fabricated (Fig. 3a). The data of the OSC device are summarized in Tables 1 and S1. The detailed device fabrication process has been provided in the ESI.  In general, thermal annealing (TA) treatment of the devices can efficiently improve the performance of non-fullerene OSCs. To further optimize the device performance, we investigated the device performances with thermal annealing (TA) at various temperatures. As shown in Fig. 3b, without TA treatment, the device shows excellent performance, with a PCE of 10.76%, a VOC of 0.807 V, a JSC of 19.30 mA cm−2 and a FF of 69.1%. Notably, the devices based on the as-cast PBDS-TZ blend film even show a much higher FF than those based on J71 with and without TA treatment. The comparison of the device parameters based on PBDS-TZ and J71 is provided in Fig. 3 and S2. The dramatically improved FF indicated that an intrinsically favorable morphology has been obtained in the as-cast active layer by rational design of the polymer donor. Thanks to the low HOMO level of PBDS-TZ, the VOC of the PBDS-TZ:IT-4F-based device is higher than that of the J71:IT-4F based device. For the device with 60 °C TA treatment, the PCE is slightly improved to 11.18% with a VOC of 0.807 V, a JSC of 19.45 mA cm−2 and a FF of 71.4%. On further increasing the TA temperature to 90 °C, the device exhibits the best PCE of 12.01%, with a VOC of 0.805 V, a JSC of 20.42 mA cm−2 and a FF of 73.1%. It can be found that TA treatment of the devices mainly contributes to an enhancement of JSC and FF values. When the TA temperature is increased to 120 °C, the device performance shows an obvious decrease with a PCE of 10.2%. As far as we know, most devices based on IT-4F as the acceptor usually show the best performance with thermal annealing at high temperatures of 120–150 °C. However, most flexible substrates can't be annealed at such high temperature. Therefore, the polymer donor with low temperature thermal annealing realized high device performance is very desirable for future large-scale flexible device preparation. Table 1 and Fig. 3c show that the external quantum efficiency (EQE) of the OSC devices with 60 °C and 90 °C TA treatment is higher than that of the device without TA treatment and 120 °C TA treatment. The JSC values are calculated by integration of the EQE curves, and show a good correspondence with the observed JSC values in the J–V curves.
TA treatment

V
OC [V]

J
SC [mA cm−2]
FF [%]
PCE [%]

a The averages for photovoltaic parameters of each device are given in parentheses with mean variation obtained from 10 devices, and the ± refers to the standard deviation.
b Best device PCE.

—
0.807 ± 0.005
19.10 ± 0.37
68.4 ± 0.54
10.76 (10.54 ± 0.26)
60 °C
0.805 ± 0.003
19.20 ± 0.42
71.2 ± 0.37
11.18 (10.91 ± 0.28)
90 °C
0.804 ± 0.004
20.05 ± 0.41
73.1 ± 0.47
12.01 (11.81 ± 0.34)
120 °C
0.795 ± 0.003
18.53 ± 0.45
67.8 ± 0.51
10.20 (9.98 ± 0.27)
From Table 1 and Fig. 3b and 3c, we can see that the JSC of the device with TA treatment shows a slight improvement. The UV-vis spectra of the films with different TA treatments are presented in Fig. S3. For all the neat and blend films, TA treatment has little influence on the absorption, indicating that all the films have packed so well in the as-cast films. The unchanged absorption profiles also infer that the improved JSC caused by TA treatment is not from the improved light absorption of the blend. More interestingly, compared with that of the neat PBDS-TZ film, the shoulder at ∼580 nm in the PBDS-TZ:IT-4F blend film has been obviously improved with the intensity even higher than the maximum peak at 550 nm of the PBDS-TZ neat film. This demonstrates that IT-4F does not disturb the molecular arrangement but promotes the lamellar stacking in the PBDS-TZ donor instead. Therefore, an improved micromorphology of the active layer may contribute to the enhanced JSC value (discussed later).
The charge transfer of the copolymer donor:IT-4F blend films with various temperatures of TA was measured by the photoluminescence (PL) spectra, as shown in Fig. S4. The PBDS-TZ and IT-4F neat films show an emission maximum wavelength at 550 nm and 710 nm, respectively. For all blend films, at excitation wavelengths of 520 nm and 700 nm, where PBDS-TZ and IT-4F absorb most respectively, all of the PL of the blend films was quenched sharply, indicating that the photo-excited excitons could efficiently dissociate between the donor and acceptor. After exciton dissociation, charge carrier transport is also a key factor to affect the JSC. The balance of the hole and electron mobility is an essential factor which can be evaluated by the space charge limited current (SCLC) model. The details of hole mobility (μh) and electron mobility (μe) are summarized in Fig. 4a and b and Table S2. Without TA treatment, the μh/μe value in the device is 1.89. Upon 90 °C TA treatment, μh/μe decreases to 1.85. The more balanced hole/electron mobility upon the TA treatment contributes to the increase of FF and JSC. To further explore the TA treatment impact on the exciton dissociation and charge collection process for the OSC devices, the photocurrent (Jph) dependence on the effective voltage (Veff) is demonstrated in Fig. 4c and d. Jph is close to the saturation current (Jsat) at large Veff (Veff ≥ 2 V), which means that more photo-excitons are dissociated into free carries and collected by corresponding electrodes. The Jph/Jsat ratio can be estimated by the charge dissociation probability (P(E,T)). The Jph/Jsat ratio is 95.7% for the as-cast film and 96.3% for the TA treated film under short-circuit conditions. The increased P(E,T) means that more excitons are dissociated and collected by the electrode, leading to the improvement in JSC of the device with TA treatment. The linearity of Jph depends on Plight with an S value close to 1 indicating weak bimolecular recombination in this device. The S values are 0.99 and 1.01 for the as-cast and TA treatment devices, respectively (Fig. 4d). This means that both of the devices exhibit very weak bimolecular recombination.
Both enhanced JSC and FF values are found in these devices based on PBDS-TZ, implying that an optimized morphology has been established in the active blend film. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) measurements are carried out to investigate the morphology of the blend films, as shown in Fig. 5. In Fig. 5a, the root-mean-square (RMS) roughness of the as-cast blend film is 2.92 nm and an interpenetrating network can be clearly detected. This suggests that a favorable morphology has been formed in the as-cast film, originating from the intrinsic feature of the PBDS-TZ:IT-4F. Upon TA treatment at 60 °C and 90 °C (Fig. 5b and c), the surfaces of the blend films become smoother, as evidenced by the gradually decreased RMS with the temperature increasing. In addition, the micromorphologies of the TA treated films are more homogeneous, especially for the film treated at 90 °C. Such optimized micromorphology of the blend film contributes to the improved FF and JSC. On further increasing the TA temperature to 120 °C, the donor and acceptor tend to aggregate together with larger size domains (compared to films with TA treatment at 60 °C and 90 °C), leading to a decrease of device performance. The morphology evolution is also consistent with the observation from TEM.
Apart from the smooth and fine interpenetrating network, a vertical phase separation is also crucial for a high performance active layer. Contact angle (CA) measurements are used for qualitative analysis of the content of components on the top surface of the films, as presented in Fig. S6, and the detailed information is summarized in Table S3. The contact angle and surface energy of PBDS-TZ and IT-4F neat films are 110.11° and 101.5°, and 17.03 mJ m−2 and 19.93 mJ m−2, respectively. The contact angle of the blend film without TA treatment is 110.20°, which is close to that of the PBDS-TZ film. This means the enrichment of the PBDS-TZ donor on the top surface of the blend film without TA treatment. For the inverted device, the enrichment of the donor near the anode is beneficial for hole transport and electron blocking. A similar phenomenon is also observed for the TA treated samples.
To obtain deeper insight into the vertical phase separation of the blend films, dynamic X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (DXPS) is performed to verify the elemental composition in the blend film, as shown in Fig. 6 and S7. The silicon and fluorine atoms are used as the characteristic elements of PBDS-TZ and IT-4F in blend films, respectively. As presented in Tables S3 and S4, the content of silicon and fluorine atoms on the surface of blend films without TA treatment is 3.66% and 1.26%, respectively. During 200 s etching (etching thickness about 30–40 nm), the content of silicon atoms gradually decreases, while the content of fluorine atoms gradually increases. Then the contents of both the atoms keep constant at about 2.70% and 1.70% in the bulk of blend films. The higher loading of silicon atoms and lower loading of fluorine atoms on the surface of the blend film than in the bulk of the blend film confirm the enrichment of the PBDS-TZ donor on the surface of the blend film, in good agreement with the CA results. Similar phenomena can be observed for the TA treated sample. Due to the limitation of the measurement, the components on the bottom of the blend film are difficult to evaluate. Since the PBDS-TZ donor accumulates on the surface of blend films, it's no doubt that there is enrichment of the IT-4F acceptor on the bottom of the blend films, due to the fact that the total mass ratio of the donor and acceptor in the blend film has been fixed. The formation of the vertical phase separation can also be verified by the slightly increased content of the acceptor and decreased content of the donor in the TA treated film during 400 s etching.
In order to further verify the vertical phase separation formed in the blend film, conventional devices are also fabricated according to the structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/active layer/PDINO/Al. The details of conventional devices are provided in Table S5 and Fig. S8. The performance parameters of conventional devices are significantly lower inverted ones. The best performance with TA treatment is only 8.34%, with a VOC of 0.800 V, a JSC of 17.1 mA cm−2, and a FF of 61.0%. Note that the VOC of the conventional device is the same as that of the inverted one. Therefore, the reduced PCE results from the sharply reduced JSC and FF. This is because the accumulation of PBDS-TZ on the top surface and IT-4F on the bottom of the blend film seriously hinders the injection of holes and electrons into their corresponding electrodes.

In summary, we rationally design and synthesize a novel D–A conjugated copolymer PBDS-TZ based on a silicon alkyl substituted BDT unit and a planar TZ unit. The σ*(Si)–π*(C) bond interaction and electron-affinity of the TZ unit guarantee the copolymer with a deep HOMO level. At the same time, the TZ unit induces a planar geometry of PBDS-TZ to facilitate charge transport. Without extra post-treatment, a desirable micromorphology with a vertical phase separation has already been achieved in the as-cast active layer. PBDS-TZ shows good complementary light absorption to IT-4F, and a notable efficiency of 12.01% with a high FF of 73.1% and JSC of 20.45 mA cm−2 is achieved. These results demonstrated that rational design of conductive materials to achieve an intrinsically favorable morphology is more critical than the post-treatment for high performance PSCs.


The authors declare no competing financial interest.


L. C. thanks the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) (51673092, 51473075 and 21762029) for financial support. Y. C. also thanks the National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars (51425304) for financial support.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta12224e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019