 DOI: 10.1039/C9TC06578D
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 5467-5475


Quanzeng
Zhang
,

Shaobing
Xiong
,

Jazib
Ali
,

Kun
Qian
,

Yu
Li
,

Wei
Feng
,

Hailin
Hu
,

Jingnan
Song
* and 

Feng
Liu
*

School of Physics and Astronomy, and Collaborative Innovation Center of IFSA (CICIFSA), Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 200240, Shanghai, China. E-mail: sjn199319@sjtu.edu.cn; fengliu82@sjtu.edu.cn

Key Laboratory of Polar Materials and Devices, Ministry of Education, East China Normal University, 200241 Shanghai, P. R. China

School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, and Center for Advanced Electronic Materials and Devices, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 200240, Shanghai, China

State Key Laboratory of Fluorinated Materials, Zibo City, Shandong 256401, China

Instituto de Energías Renovables, Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico, Mexico

Received
2nd December 2019
, Accepted 24th February 2020
First published on 24th February 2020
The solution-processed perovskite films inevitably induce defects, adversely affecting the device performance and environmental stability. Motivated by the small molecular passivation agents, a systematic work is carried out to reveal the role of P4VP polymer in perovskite solar cells. The introduction of P4VP polymer can reduce the defects at the surfaces and grain boundaries by coordinating with undercoordinated lead sites. The substantially reduced defect density leads to reduced non-radiative recombination, and extended electron diffusion length. Furthermore, a good match of energy levels at the perovskite/PCBM interface is achieved, which favors efficient electron extraction and suppresses the hole transfer. As a result, the power conversion efficiency increases from 17.46% to 20.02% after defect-passivation and improved energy level alignment with a significantly enhanced fill factor of 82.61% and improved open circuit voltage of 1.09. In addition, the non-encapsulated devices exhibit enhanced moisture stability (60 ± 5% humidity) and thermal stability (85 °C) after P4VP incorporation.

Recent progress has witnessed the rapid development of three-dimensional (3D) perovskite solar cells with device efficiencies from 3.8% in 2009 up to the current certified results of 25.2%, which is attributed to many advances in composition engineering, morphology control, and interface engineering. However, the long-term instability towards moisture, heat, and light is a big issue for perovskite solar cells, thus slowing down the commercialization. Generally, the perovskite films are fabricated by solution-processing methods and low-temperature treatment, thus unavoidably inducing many defects at surfaces and grain boundaries. These defects will become charge carrier trap centers and cause non-radiative recombination, thus significantly impairing the photo-physical properties of perovskite films and resulting in poor device performance. Furthermore, the defects at surfaces and grain boundaries make the perovskite film more vulnerable to water and oxygen, triggering the degradation of the perovskite film and its corresponding device performance.

To tackle the defect-induced poor device performance and device instability, many attempts have been made, which utilize ideas such as the improvement of crystallinity and grain sizes, introduction of Lewis base electron donors (e.g., pyridine, thiophene, and fullerenes) to passivate the defects, and interface modification to improve the energy level alignment. Small molecules, such as pyridine and thiophene, have been proved to be effective passivation agents by providing the lone pair electrons to coordinate with the under-coordinated Pb sites. Compared to small molecules, polymers (e.g., poly(propylene carbonate) (PPC)) can form more stable and reliable interactions with the perovskite grains and could construct cross-linked grains to improve the film stability, as has been reported by Yang Yang's group. Additionally, another polymer poly-4-vinylpyridine (P4VP) contains a commonly used passivation agent, the pyridine moiety, thus allowing the P4VP polymer to show a similar defect-passivation effect to that of pyridine, that is, the lone pair electrons of nitrogen in P4VP could coordinate with the under-coordinated Pb sites.
These motivations have inspired our work, in which we introduced a P4VP interlayer to passivate the defects at the surfaces and grain boundaries and improve the energy level alignments at the perovskite/transport layer interface. The optical characterizations demonstrate that P4VP-modified perovskite films exhibit suppressed non-radiative recombination and efficient charge extraction, resulting in a strikingly increased electron diffusion length. The defect density, charge transfer and recombination dynamics were investigated by the space charge limited current (SCLC), electronic impedance spectra (EIS) and transient photovoltage (TPV), further confirming that P4VP could effectively passivate the surface defects. Furthermore, a good interfacial energy level alignment was achieved after the incorporation of the P4VP polymer, which is verified by ultraviolet photoemission spectra (UPS). The synergistic effect of reduced defect density and good energy level alignment contributes to highly efficient and stable perovskite solar cells, with a champion efficiency of 20.02%. The significant improvement of device performances was mainly ascribed to the greatly improved fill factor (FF) of 82.61% and open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.09 V. In addition, the non-encapsulated devices exhibit enhanced moisture stability (60 ± 5% humidity) and thermal stability (85 °C), suggesting that the hydrophobic properties of the P4VP interlayer can efficiently improve the device stability.


Fig. 1a and b present the top-view scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of perovskite films without and with P4VP modification. Here, we denote the reference perovskite film without P4VP passivation as the control and the perovskite film with X mg ml−1 P4VP modification as P4VP@X. The control film exhibits a smooth and compact morphology with widely distributed grain sizes. After P4VP modification, the grain boundaries were linked together by the P4VP polymer, and most of the smaller grains were merged with each other. Furthermore, the effect of the P4VP interface layer on the crystallinity of perovskite films was estimated by the X-ray diffraction technique, with results shown in Fig. 1c. It can be observed that the XRD diffraction peaks have a negligible difference, demonstrating an ignorable influence of the P4VP interface layer on the crystallization behavior of perovskite films.

The effects of the P4VP interface layer on the capability of carrier recombination and extraction are analyzed by the steady-state photoluminescence (PL) and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) spectra of bare perovskite films and PCBM quenched perovskite films. As shown in Fig. 1d, the PL spectrum of the P4VP@0.10 film exhibits a much higher intensity than that of the control sample. This implies that non-radiative recombination is effectively suppressed by the P4VP interface layer. The TRPL results (Fig. 1e and Table S1, ESI) exhibit some differences in the carrier lifetime between the control and P4VP@0.10 films. By fitting the TRPL spectra with a bi-exponential function, the extracted carrier lifetime for the P4VP@0.10 film is 22.67 ns, which is much longer than that of the control film (13.14 ns). The prolonged carrier lifetime was attributed to the decreased trap density and reduced non-radiative recombination due to the P4VP-induced defect-passivation. When the perovskite film was covered with a PCBM layer, the PL intensity and carrier lifetime were substantially reduced, with fitted lifetimes of 2.44 ns and 2.17 ns for the control and P4VP@0.10 films (Fig. S1, ESI), respectively. The efficient PL quenching and shortened carrier lifetime for the P4VP@0.10 film suggests a more efficient charge carrier extraction at the perovskite (P4VP)/PCBM interface. Subsequently, the carrier diffusion length (LD) could be extracted by the following equation.
(1)
where
d is the thickness of the perovskite film, τ is the carrier lifetime, and τquench is the quenched lifetime. The calculated diffusion lengths are 622 and 955 nm for the control and P4VP@0.10 films, respectively (Table 1). The estimated longer diffusion length for the P4VP@0.10 film reveals that P4VP can effectively passivate the defects, thus creating superb pathways for long distance charge transport, resulting in enhanced device performance.

Thickness of perovskite film (nm)

τ (ns)

τ
quench (ns)

L
D (nm)
Control
330 ± 10
13.14
2.44
622 ± 18
P4VP@0.10
345 ± 10
22.67
2.17
955 ± 28
Charge recombination and transport kinetics play an important role in device performance, and we analyzed these properties using dark current–voltage (J–V) curves, space charge limited current (SCLC), electronic impedance spectroscopy (EIS), and transient photovoltage (TPV) characterization. Shown in Fig. 2a are the dark J–V curves of the control and P4VP@0.10 devices. The significantly reduced dark current in the negative voltage region suggested that the P4VP interface layer could effectively prevent the leakage current. The steep current increase at the medium voltage region indicates efficient carrier injection in the P4VP-modified devices. The ideality factor n was further extracted from the dark J–V curves using the equation below.
(2)
where
n is the ideality factor and Jd is the dark current. Fig. 2b shows the voltage-dependent ideality factor profiles for the control and P4VP@0.10 devices, which exhibit a similar trend. The actual ideality factor can be determined from the plateau in the n–V curves, that is, 1.98 for the control device and 1.54 for the P4VP@0.10 device. The significantly reduced ideality factor suggests the suppression of trap assisted recombination in the P4VP-modified devices, which is favorable for improving the Voc. At the low voltage region, the ideality factor is larger than 2, which may be ascribed to the defect-coupling-induced recombination and shunt resistance. The relatively larger decreasing rate of the ideality factor for P4VP@0.10 devices indicates a high shunt resistance. At the high voltage region, the series resistance leads to the dramatically increased ideality factor relative to the minimum n value. Compared with the control device, the ideality factor of the P4VP-modified device exhibits a relatively lower increasing rate, suggesting a relatively lower series resistance. These results suggest that the P4VP interface could reduce the non-radiative recombination and series resistance, as well as increase the shunt resistance, thus improving the FF and Voc.

To compliment the dark J–V characterizations, SCLC measurements were conducted to determine the trap density in the perovskite films, which were based on the electron-only devices (ITO/SnO2/MAPbI3/(P4VP)/PCBM/Al), with results shown in Fig. 2c. The trap density was determined by the trap-filled limit voltage using the following equation:
(3)
where
VTFL is the onset voltage of the trap-filled limited region, ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, εr is the relative dielectric constant, and L is the thickness of the film. The calculated trap density for the control and P4VP-modified perovskite films is 1.21 × 1016 cm−3, and 8.67 × 1015 cm−3, respectively. The relatively lower trap density in the P4VP-modified film indicates that the incorporation of P4VP could effectively passivate the defects due to the Lewis acid–base interaction between the nitrogen atom in P4VP and the under-coordinated Pb2+ sites. These results further provide evidence for the improved Voc.

The electronic impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were carried out to gain in-depth understanding of the charge transport dynamics in solar cells. In general, EIS spectra for PSCs show a single high frequency semicircular response in the dark light situation with an extra low frequency semicircle appearing under illumination. Fig. 2d provides the Nyquist plots of the control and P4VP@0.10-based devices, which were performed in dark conditions with frequencies ranging from 100 Hz to 10 MHz. By fitting the impedance spectra with the equivalent circuit as shown in the inset of Fig. 2d, we can extract the series resistance Rs and charge transport resistance Rct. The values of Rs for the control and P4VP@0.10 devices are 33.82 Ω and 28.11 Ω, respectively, which indicated that the P4VP interface layer could effectively modify the interface contact and thus reduce the contact resistance. The extracted charge transport resistances Rct for the control and P4VP@0.10 devices are 578 Ω and 508 Ω, respectively. The relatively lower Rct in the P4VP@0.10 devices signifies better charge transport, which could explain the improved FF in the P4VP-modified devices. Then, the transient photovoltage (TPV) measurements were carried out to elucidate the recombination dynamics, with the derived recombination lifetimes shown in Fig. 2e. Generally, the technique of TPV decay can provide more information about carrier dynamics, through which we can learn about the charge recombination rate. The relatively longer carrier recombination lifetimes for the P4VP@0.10-based device indicate a slower charge recombination rate due to the reduced defect density, which has been evidenced by the SCLC results.
To determine the electronic structures of the perovskite films, ultraviolet photoelectron spectra (UPS) were carried out, with results shown in Fig. 3. From the secondary electron cutoff spectrum, we observed a change in work function from 4.14 eV to 3.87 eV after the incorporation of the P4VP interface layer. Meanwhile, the valence band maximum with respect to the Fermi level (EF) in the P4VP@0.10 film was also shifted relative to the control film. Combining the UV-vis absorption spectra (Fig. S2, ESI) and UPS results, the energy-level diagrams of the control and P4VP@0.10 films were constructed (Fig. 3b). The enlarged conduction band (Ec) offset and valence band offset (Ev) between the P4VP@0.10 perovskite film and PCBM are expected to facilitate effective electron extraction and hole blocking, which are favorable for improving photovoltaic performance, especially the fill factor (FF). In comparison with the control film, the Ev shifted by about 80 meV toward the vacuum level (Evac), and the EF shifts by a further 190 meV toward the conduction band, which indicates a more n-type nature for the P4VP@0.10 perovskite film. Such shifts in Evac and EF are likely to originate from the change in the ratio of the PbI-terminated surface to the organic-terminated surface, which have been reported by previous researchers. Generally, PbI-terminated surfaces exhibit lower Ev and EF than that of organic-terminated surfaces. Therefore, the introduction of P4VP allows a larger faction of the surface to be terminated with P4VP organic polymer. Based on the above results, we propose a possible trap state type and passivation mechanism. As shown in Fig. 3c, the loss of iodides results in some under-coordinated Pb atoms at the surface of the perovskite film, which are likely to act as non-radiative recombination centers and impair the device performance. When the P4VP interface layer was capped on the perovskite film, the I-vacancies are significantly reduced due to the electrostatic interaction between the negative N atom in the P4VP and positive Pb2+ (Fig. 3d). Therefore, this case is expected to allow the surface to be terminated with some organic polymer, which is in good agreement with the UPS results. The lower level of I-vacancies in the P4VP@0.10 film allows the reduced defect density and reduced non-radiative recombination, further increasing the carrier lifetime and enhancing the carrier diffusion length, which is evidenced by the data presented above.
To study the impact of P4VP modification on the photovoltaic performance, we fabricated inverted planar perovskite solar cells with a device structure shown in Fig. S3 (ESI) (device structure: ITO/PTAA/MAPbI3/(P4VP)/PCBM/Al). Fig. 4a shows the photocurrent density (J–V) curves of perovskite solar cells with and without P4VP passivation, and the corresponding device parameters are summarized in Table 2. The control device shows the low photoelectric conversion efficiency (PCE) of 17.46% due to the low open-circuit voltage (Voc), and fill factor (FF). Such low device parameters were attributed to the high defect density and enhanced non-radiative recombination in the perovskite film. After P4VP passivation, we achieved a champion device at the optimal P4VP concentration of 0.10 mg ml−1, which yielded a PCE of 20.02% with improved Voc of 1.09 V and FF of 82.61% (Fig. 4b). Fig. 4c shows the external quantum efficiency (EQE) of the control and champion devices. The short circuit current density (Jsc) integrated from the EQE is consistent with that derived from J–V measurements. To check the illumination stability, the steady-state PCE and current density output of the control and champion devices were measured at the maximum power point (0.86 V for control and 0.94 V for P4VP@0.10), with results shown in Fig. 4d. It can be observed that the steady-state output PCE increased from 17.22% to 19.91% after P4VP modification. In addition, the much more stable output of the P4VP-modified devices suggests the improved continuous illumination stability. The device reproducibility was assessed by fabricating more than 50 cells for the control and P4VP@0.10, respectively; the histograms of the average PCE and FF are shown in Fig. 4e and f (we show the histograms of the corresponding Jsc and Voc in Fig. S4, ESI). The average PCE for the control and P4VP@0.10 devices are 16.27% and 18.60%, respectively, which were mainly ascribed to the significantly enhanced FF.

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF (%)
PCE (max.) (%)
Control
21.45
1.06
76.82
17.46
P4VP@0.05
22.02
1.08
80.29
19.09
P4VP@0.10
22.23
1.09
82.61
20.02
P4VP@0.15
21.44
1.04
81.83
18.24
P4VP@0.20
20.26
1.06
79.75
16.93
In addition to the enhanced efficiency, we carried out a series of stability tests to evaluate the effect of P4VP on the device stability under different conditions, which are displayed in Fig. S5 (ESI) and Fig. 5. First, we compare the storage stability of devices by leaving non-encapsulated devices in a glovebox. As shown in Fig. S5 (ESI), the control device degrades to ∼55% of its initial performance after 30 days storage. In comparison, the P4VP-modified devices retained 95% efficiency up to 30 days of tracking, suggesting enhanced storage stability. Then, the humidity stability of the devices is monitored by placing the non-encapsulated devices in ambient air with a relative humidity of 60 ± 5%, with the time-dependent evolution of normalized device PCEs shown in Fig. 5a. It can be noted that the P4VP@0.10-based device demonstrates excellent humidity stability, with 80% efficiency remaining after 500 h. Under the same conditions, that of the control device dropped to 48%. The inset of Fig. 5a provides the water contact angles of the control and P4VP@0.10 perovskite films. The increased contract angle for the P4VP-modified perovskite film confirms the enhanced hydrophobic properties, thus preventing the humidity to penetrate into the perovskite films. This result could account for the enhanced humidity stability after P4VP modification. Furthermore, the thermal stability of unsealed devices is monitored by continuous annealing of the devices at 85 °C under a nitrogen atmosphere for 200 h (Fig. 5b). It can be observed that the P4VP@0.10-based device exhibits a superior thermal stability than that of the control device, which maintains 78% of its initial PCE after continuous annealing for 200 h. These results demonstrate that the P4VP interface layer can not only promote the photovoltaic performance but also improve the device stability.

To conclude, we demonstrate that the introduction of a P4VP polymer into the perovskite/PCBM interface is an effective method to improve both the device performance and stability. The incorporation of the P4VP polymer is found to passivate the defects, leading to reduced defect density and suppressed non-radiative recombination, thus giving rise to improvement of Voc. Moreover, after P4VP introduction, the energy level alignment at the perovskite/PCBM interfaces was successfully modulated, thus favoring efficient charge carrier transfer from perovskite to PCBM, which could account for the significantly improved FF. As a result, the P4VP-modified perovskite solar cells achieve a PCE of 20.02% compared to that of the control device which had 17.46% efficiency, which is mainly attributed to the drastically improved FF and Voc. Furthermore, the P4VP-modified devices exhibit enhanced moisture stability and thermal stability, with 80% of the initial PCE being retained after storage in ambient air (60 ± 5% humidity) for 500 h and 78% of the initial PCE being retained after continuous heat treatment at 85 °C for 200 h.


The hole transport layer poly(bis(4-phenyl)(2,4,6-trimethylphenyl)amine) (PTAA, Xi'an Polymer Light Technology Corp.) was prepared by dissolving 2 mg PTAA in 1 ml chlorobenzene (CB, 99.8%, Acros) solvent. The perovskite precursor solution was prepared by dissolving lead iodide (PbI2, 98%, TCI) and methylammonium iodide (MAI, 99.998%, Deysol) with a molar ratio of 1.08 in mixed N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF, 99.8%, Acros) and dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO, 99.8%, Acros) (9:1 v/v ratio). Poly-4-vinylpyridine (P4VP, 46.7k Mw, American Dye Source, Inc.) solutions with different concentrations were prepared by dissolving in isopropanol (IPA, 99.8%, Acros). PC61BM (99.5%, Nano-C) with a concentration of 20 mg mL−1 was dissolved in CB.


Patterned ITO glass substrates (sheet resistance ≤10 Ω cm−2) were cleaned consecutively in acetone, detergent, deionized water, and isopropanol ultrasonic baths, and then dried at 70 °C overnight. After 15 min UV-ozone treatment, the PTAA solution was spin coated on the substrate at 5000 rpm for 30 s and annealed at 150 °C for 10 min. To improve the wetting properties of the perovskite precursor solution, the PTAA film was pre-wetted by spinning 70 μl DMF at 4000 rpm for 10 s. Subsequently, the perovskite precursor solution was spin coated at 4000 rpm for 30 s, and then the anti-solvent chlorobenzene was dropped onto the films at 22 s before the end of the spin-coating step, followed by a thermal annealing treatment at 100 °C for 10 min. After the film cooled to room temperature, the P4VP solution was spin coated on the perovskite film at 5000 rpm for 30 s. Then, the PCBM solution was spin coated at 1000 rpm for 60 s to form a 80 nm electron transporting layer. Finally, the sample was transferred into a vacuum chamber for further deposition of Al (100 nm) to finish the device fabrication process.


The SEM images were measured using a Zeiss Ultra Plus Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope (FE-SEM). X-ray diffraction was performed with Cu Kα radiation using a diffractometer (Empyrean) to evaluate the crystallinity. UV-vis absorption spectra were measured using a Lambda 750 instrument by PerkinElmer. The steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra were recorded using a spectrophotometer (Jobin Yvon LabRAM HR 800UV), with an excitation wavelength of 325 nm. Time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) spectra were checked by a time-resolved fluorescence spectrofluorometer, with the excitation wavelength of 480 nm. UPS analysis was conducted on an ultrahigh vacuum surface analysis system (X-ray photoelectron spectrometer) with unfiltered He I (21.22 eV) as the excitation source.


The photovoltaic device performance was analyzed using a Keithley 2400 instrument under simulated AM1.5G sunlight at 100 mW cm−2, which was calibrated by a standard monocrystalline silicon solar cell. The photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) curves were measured in the glovebox from both forward and reverse scan directions. To calibrate the short current Jsc, the external quantum efficiency (EQE) of the solar cells were measured using a device with a lock-in amplifier coupled with a monochromator. The steady-state output of PCE and short current were recorded under constant bias voltage operation that corresponds to maximum power. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was conducted using a precision impedance analyzer (Agilent 4294 A) with the frequency range from 100 Hz to 10 MHz in dark conditions. For the device stability, the non-encapsulated devices were stored in a nitrogen-filled glovebox, under ambient air with a humidity of 55–65%, and with continuous annealing at 85 °C in a nitrogen atmosphere, to investigate the storage stability, humidity stability, and thermal stability, respectively.


There are no conflicts of interest to declare.


This work was financially supported by the Young 1000 Talent Program of China, the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) (No. 51973110, 21734009, 21905102, and 61805138), beamline 7.3.3 and 11.0.1.2 at the Advanced Light Source, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, which was supported by the DOE, Office of Science, and Office of Basic Energy Sciences.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9tc06578d
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020