 DOI: 10.1039/D1TC00327E
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 8395-8465


Nasir Mahmood
Abbasi
,

Yao
Xiao
,

Li
Zhang
,

Ling
Peng
,

Yanhong
Duo
,

Lude
Wang
,

Peng
Yin
,

Yanqi
Ge
,

Haiyong
Zhu
,

Bing
Zhang
,

Ni
Xie
*,

Yanmin
Duan
*,

Bing
Wang
* and 

Han
Zhang
*

Key Laboratory of Optoelectronic Devices and Systems of Ministry of Education and Guangdong Province College of Physics and Optoelectronic Engineering Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, P. R. China. E-mail: xn100@szu.edu.cn; wangbing@szu.edu.cn; hzhang@szu.edu.cn

Wenzhou Key Laboratory of Micro-nano Optoelectronic Devices, Wenzhou University, Wenzhou 325035, P. R. China. E-mail: ymduan@wzu.edu.cn

Received
23rd January 2021
, Accepted 23rd May 2021
First published on 18th June 2021
Due to the increasing market demand for graphene-based devices, van der Waals heterostructures based on 2D materials have increased rapidly worldwide during the last decade. Graphene-based applications are inadequate in some electronic devices such as field-effect transistors (FETs) and solar cells devices due to its intrinsic zero bandgap and complex mechanistic approach in related chemistry. Thus, it is highly desired to fill the gap and devote efforts to explore other 2D materials further, especially bi- and tri-elemental 2D materials, such as layered metal chalcogenides (LMDCs), metal oxides, and hexagonal boron nitride (hBN). During the past few years, a different research group contributed to improving the quality and performance of the mentioned 2D materials. Still, due to some deficiencies such as low conductivity and poor bandgap, there is a need to develop and investigate alternative materials. Recently, MXenes, which are compounds obtained due to the chemical delamination of quaternary or (ternary) layered nitrides or carbides, have been found as a great class of 2D elemental materials. The complex bonding in the MXene family (a mixture of metallic and covalent bonds) and other characteristics such as atomic stacking, electronic structures, surface terminal groups, and different synthetic routes are responsible for their unique properties such as hydrophilicity and metallicity, and they are predicted to have high elastic moduli in a single compound. On behalf of the rich chemistry and unique morphologies, MXene derivatives have delivered efficient sensors, energy storage materials, catalysts, and water purification materials. Although there is a great demand for MXene-based derivatives, there is further demand for their improvement such as the long-term stability, large scale production, as well as deposition and surface roughness, which create hurdles in their commercialization. Titanium-based MXene (Ti3C2Tx and Ti2CTx) heterostructures with other 2D nanomaterials are highly desired to solve the surface roughness problems and long-term stability as well as an alternative to overcome the deficiency of the scalable production of MXenes. The existence of different active functionalities (–O, –OH, –F, etc.) on the surface of Ti3C2Tx and Ti2CTx can be helpful for interacting with other 2D layered materials in the presence of solvents to fabricate heterostructures after using various deposition techniques such as spin coating, dip coating, and drop-casting for practical device fabrication processes. In the presence of weak interaction between the host (MXene derivatives) and guest (other nanostructures 2D materials), the intrinsic characteristics of both can be largely preserved for efficient energy storage applications. In this paper, we present a comprehensive literature library of the various strategies of 2D titanium-based MXenes such as Ti3C2Tx and Ti2CTx for the fabrication of their heterostructures with 2D materials using various deposition techniques and the application of the resultant structures in the fields of optoelectronics, catalysis, and energy storage devices.

Recently, nanostructures of low dimensions (0D, 1D, or 2D) have attracted much more attention because of their special electrical and biocompatible properties. Notably, the 2D nanomaterial is in developmental stages, and their explored characteristics make them unique from other nanomaterials such as zero and one-dimensional nanomaterials in case of academic and industrial research. For instance, as a 2D material, graphene has a series of extraordinary, mechanical, electronic, and thermal properties. However, the practical use of 2D graphene (GR) is limited in various phases of electronic devices such as field-effect transistors (FETs) due to lack of its apparent chemistry and null bandgap values.

There is a need for research into additional elementary 2D materials, including metal oxides, hexagonal boron nitride (BN), and layered metal chalcogenides (LMDCs) and hydroxides, which are a mixture of two or more compositional elements. In addition, transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) including MoS2, MoSe2, WS2, and WSe2 have peculiar optical properties and a series of demanding uses in optoelectronics, catalysis, sensing, and energy storage devices such as supercapacitors. Furthermore, the 2D TMDs, single-layer molybdenum disulfide (MoS2), function as a direct-bandgap semiconductor but its other characteristics such as nominal carrier mobility value in the range from 60–200 cm2 V−1 s−1 makes it lower in magnitude compared with graphene, and is not very useful for practical applications. On the other hand, black phosphorus (BP) displays an inherently reasonable bandgap, an amplified value of carrier mobility (103 cm2 V−1 s−1), and a unique puckered structure. However, when exposed to air, the BP-based electronic devices undergo a rapid degradation in their performance due to the chemical instability of the material. Due to the presence of the problem mentioned above and shortcomings in well-known 2D materials, it has become the need of the hour and market demand to explore 2D semiconductors that have a set of properties including high carrier mobility, stability at ambient conditions, light-harvesting ability, a moderate energy gap, and facile and reproducible practical access.
To overcome the problems mentioned above, during the past few years, transition metal carbides, nitrides, and carbonitrides (MXenes) have become new additions to the family of 2D nanostructures. Recently, among 2D materials, the MXene family is considered as an active research field and successfully investigated materials. The MAX phases, the starting material of MXene, present a strong interaction through bonding, avoiding their cleavage through other mechanical approaches or shearing, which make MXenes unique from other 2D materials. Therefore, the exfoliation process of 2D structures (MXenes) from independently attached solids (MAX phases) is made possible for the first time as a result of the chemical exfoliation approach.
The commonly used formula of MXene is Mn+1XnTz or M1.33XTz (n = 1, 2, or 3), where M represents a transition metal (TM), and X symbolizes N and C. The M–X interaction have a combination of metallic, covalent, and ionic shares, M–A interactions are decently metallic, and Tz denotes abundant surface functionalities, including (mainly hydroxyl (–OH), oxygen (–O), and fluorine (–F) groups. These groups are responsible for controllable flexible inter-layer spacing and excellent conductivity, and these parameters are accountable for enhancing the electrochemical redox kinetics and charge transport kinetics. Compared to other 2D materials, including TMDCs and graphene, MXene derivative such as Ti3C2Tx possess a high value of metallic conductivities (∼6000–8000 S cm−1) and hydrophilic surfaces. The presence of these characteristics makes MXenes favorable candidates in energy storage devices, catalysis, electromagnetic interference shielding, transparent, conducting thin films, water desalination, and many other applications.
Thus, the combination of these multi-directional properties in MXenes makes them different from other 2D layered materials including graphite, metal oxides, and transition metal dichalcogenides, which are assembled through weak van der Waals interactions. Despite the increasing worldwide demand for Mxene-based materials, there is a still deficiency of well-organized evidence on the study related to the stability of structures, surface roughness, and improvement in the synthetic protocol of MXenes. In order to overcome the obstacles (such as stability and surface roughness) for more efficient results and practical application of MXenes, the preparation of MXene heterostructures might be a good idea. Recently, MXene-based van der Waals heterostructures have garnered a great demand globally in the field of photovoltaics, catalysis, and energy storage devices and are growing as quickly as the interest in graphene's initial period during 2006. During the last few years, there has been a satisfying level of advancement in the development techniques of MXenes and their van der Waals heterostructures that are increasingly being used to assemble sophisticated devices and materials available to more and more research groups.
Different research groups have been recently working on 2D MXenes based on various van der Waals (vdW) heterostructures. To minimize the problems such as the long-term stability and surface roughness, 2D MXene derivatives can also be assembled with three different morphologies containing distinct mixed-dimensional heterostructures, namely, 2D MXene-0D material, 2D MXene-1D material, and 2D MXene-2D material, to get heterostructures with efficient multifunctional properties.
It is the need of the h to develop efficient Ti3C2Tx- and Ti2CTx-based heterostructures with other 2D materials applicable for energy storage devices. The most commonly used 2D materials have many unique features such as high electronic conductivity, high power, flexibility, and strength. GR-based electrodes show reliable values of electrical conductivity and mechanical strength but display only modest potentials since they are only stored on the surface. They show little influence over the composition, which is affected by a reduction in the conductivity due to different surface functional groups. On the other hand, TMDCs have high initial capacities. Still, their energy is lost due to the conversion reaction during the first discharge cycle. TMDC-based electrodes have better cycling stability when cycling is limited to the range of the reversible intercalation reaction but the power value drops significantly. In addition, although some TMDCs have high electronic conductivity, many of the phases are semiconducting. The presence of multiple characteristics such as redox activity in intercalation reactions has a lot of working potential, and TMO is applied as an efficient candidate for cathodes. However, since oxides have a low electronic conductivity, they must be mixed with a conductive additive to boost their efficiency. During the last decade, Ti3C2Tx and Ti2CTx have been explored as 2D materials with unique properties, including ease of large-scale synthesis in water, high conductivity, metallic and semiconducting characteristics, hydrophilicity, excellent chemical stability, and environmental friendliness. Furthermore, due to the abundance of surface-terminated functionalities, they can be easily functionalized or used for developing heterostructures with other materials. The synthetic conditions and surface chemistry strongly influence the electrochemical properties of Ti3C2Tx and Ti2CTx MXenes; methods for controlling their surface terminations must be established to reduce the irreversible energy. However, fabricating electrodes that incorporate all these excellent characteristics in a single structure, such as stacking monolayers of different 2D materials and using scalable assembly or self-assembly, is a challenge. Individual 2D materials can be mixed in heterostructure electrodes by alternating layers of different 2D materials to address these limitations. MXene (Ti3C2Tx and Ti2CTx) phases have high electronic conductivity and mechanical power, and due to the pseudocapacitive mechanism, they can store a large amount of charge and after the formation of heterostructures with other 2D layered materials, the surface area is improved, which can improve the energy storing capacity of the fabricated device. When the individual layers are assembled into stacked 2D layered material-based heterostructures, a synergistic property enhancement can be accomplished by combining the metallic electrical conductivity of Ti3C2Tx and Ti2CTx with other 2D layered materials (TMDCs, GR, BP, TMO) to improve the conductivity as well as surface area.
In this review article, we collect the updated advancements related to 2D Ti3C2Tx and Ti2CTx MXenes and their heterostructures for multidirectional applications. The credits and appreciations go to different research scientists working in nanotechnology and material sciences worldwide for their valuable contribution to the scientific literature. A significant number of review articles on the synthesis/exfoliation of MXenes from different MAX faces have been published. The published data have produced a broad range of 2D MXene-based nanomaterials in different morphologies/geometries, such as quantum dots, nanoflakes, nanosheets, and nanoribbons with multi-direction applications. Highlighting the most recent developments and choosing articles that are relevant and best characterize the vital concepts is our primary objective in this article. While selecting this review article's title, we have tried to avoid overlapping with other published review articles on the same field as much as possible. This review article provides a currently available detailed literature library of the various deposition strategies of 2D Ti-based MXene (Ti3C2Tx and Ti2CTx) nanomaterials to develop their assemblies with 2D material layered materials (TMDs, GR, BP, and BN) into heterostructures. Finally, the applications of MXene-based macrostructures (formed as a result of functionalization on 2D Ti-based MXenes) in various practical areas of research such as optoelectronics, catalysis, and energy storage devices are reviewed.

Numerous transfer approaches have been originally reported in multiple published manuscripts. The heterojunction based on GR-0D, display the distinctive gathering the strategy initiated by the transference of synthetic based approach of graphene onto a selected standard substrate (e.g., SiO2, flexible like polymer), surveyed by epitaxial evolution of minor organic molecules, layer-by-layer flat pack, or dip/spin-coating of quantum spots from solution. The fabrication of GR-3D-based heterostructures can generally be attained through the straight transference of GR onto 3D unpackaged materials. However, GR and 1D nanotubes/nanowires can be further made complex due to the subtle transference process of both the materials. The accurate transference of a solitary nanowire or even smooth nanowire arrays through different transfer approaches has been established, significantly simplifying their hybridization process with GR. Usually, the mentioned transfer-assisted construction approach is adaptable, and maximum of the testified GR-based heterostructure materials are fabricated with this approach. Different techniques used for the preparation of heterostructures through various deposition techniques are illustrated in Fig. 1, keeping in mind the idea of graphene-based heterostructures.

The same ideology is applied for the preparation of MXene (Ti3C2Tx and Ti2CTx)-based heterostructures with 2D layered materials are described in the following sections.
Various 2D layered materials such as TMDCs, GR and its oxides, metal oxides (MO), and BP as well as some other 2D nanomaterials represent the alluring prospects for the preparation process of effective energy storage devices and sensitive sensors because of their exceptional material characteristics, which arise from their inherent structures. 2D materials are commonly used in fascinating interdisciplinary fields of study such as materials science, chemistry, biological science, and the medical industry. A range of 2D nanomaterials with controlled physicochemical features, surface load, forms, and dimensions have shown significant progress in synthetic methodologies. Nanomaterial energy storage is significant due to its layered structure and highly reactive surface, including enhanced chemical, physical, and biological characteristics. For catalysis and energy storage devices network in the optoelectronic field, surface geometry and high conductivity are important parameters. Recently, MXenes, considered as new blood in the form of 2D transition metal carbides, nitrides, or carbonitrides, were added for the first time to the 2D nanomaterials family by Prof. Gogotsi and co-workers in 2011. The Ti3C2Tx MXene's layer-dependent optical properties, high metal conductivity (∼6000–8000 S cm−1), and hydrophilic surface provide a lot of flexibility for researchers when designing a plasmon and electronic sensor detection system. MXenes have also proven their multipotency and are excellent medicines in biomedical sensing, making them an invaluable candidate for sensors emerging in the biomedical field. It is important to know about the general characteristics of 2D materials before the preparation of various heterostructures. Some important features of different 2D materials including MXenes are summarized in Table 1.
No.
Type of 2D material
Invention year
Composition and structure
Materials/bandgap (eV)
Carrier mobility (cm2 V−1 s−1)/conductivity (S cm−1)
Biocompatibility behavior

In vivo biodegradability behavior
Major methods of preparation
Major application
Ref.
1
MXene (Ti3C2Tx and TiC2X)
2011
Layer structure
Metallic and semiconductor/0.9 for TiC2X
/6760 and 9880
Yes
Yes
Top down and bottom-up exfoliation-based synthesis
Electronics and photonics devices, gas and bio-sensors; thermal, and mechanical applications; electrochemical energy storage applications

12 and 22

2
Graphene (RGO)
2004
Carbon; hexagonal honeycomb structure
Semimetal/0
2 × 105
Yes
No, need further functionalization for the preparation of biodegradable material
Exfoliation based synthesis (liquid, mechanical, and chemical), template-based and template free approaches
Electronics and photonics devices, gas and bio-sensors; thermal, and mechanical applications; electrochemical energy storage applications

66–71

3
MoS2
2010
Molybdenum–sulphur TMDCs; a hexagonal structure having Mo and S2 atoms positioned at irregular corners
Semiconductor/1.2–1.8
10–200
Yes
No, need further functionalization for the preparation of biodegradable material
Exfoliation based synthesis (liquid, mechanical, and chemical), template-based and template free approaches
Supercapicator; photodetector; memory device

62–65

Photovoltaic device, chemical sensing
4
WS2
2012
Tungsten, sulphur WS2 having geometry like planar structures
Semiconductor/1.3–2.1
1000
Yes
No, need further functionalization for the preparation of biodegradable material
Exfoliation based synthesis (liquid, mechanical, and chemical), template-based and template free approaches
Photocatalysts and optoelectronics such as field-effect transistors and solar cells

64 and 76–79

5
WSe2
2012
Tungsten, selenium (WSe2); hexagonal geometry-like structure due to the location of W and Se2 atoms at alternating corners
Semiconductor/1.2–1.7
140–500
Yes
No, need further functionalization for the preparation of biodegradable material
Mechanical exfoliation process, chemical vapor deposition process
Photovoltaic; photoelectrochemical (PEC) devices, FET

70 and 80–82

6
Nano-sheets based on hexagonal boron nitride (h-BNNS)
2004
Boron nitride having the hexagonal honeycomb-like structure
Insulator/∼5.9
—
Yes
No, need further functionalization for the preparation of biodegradable material
Exfoliation based synthesis (liquid, mechanical, and chemical), template-based and template free approaches
Nanoelectronics-ultrathin insulating films, catalysis

67, 69 and 83–88

7
Black phosphorus (BP)
2014
Puckered structure and three crystalline-shaped geometries: simple cubic, orthorhombic, and rhombohedral
Semiconductor/0.3–2.0
1000
Yes
Yes
Different top-down and bottom-up approaches were developed for the synthesis of BP based nanomaterial
Solar cells; energy storage devices, photodetection devices

7, 63 and 72


The MXene layers do not act as a conductive stabilizer to ease the flow of ion and electron and as a starting material to avoid the aggregation of TMO-based nanocrystals. The TMO-based nanocrystals function as a linker to prevent the layers of MXene from restacking throughout the material and the process related to the extraction/insertion of lithium, thus inspiring the strategy of interfacial interaction and protecting the active sites. Owing to the exceptional synergistic effect among the two substrates, the TMO/MXene heterostructures display higher efficient results and may be categorized as encouraging and reliable applicants for anodic-type nanostructure materials in future-generation energy storage devices.

In 2018, Cui and coworkers projected (MXene and semiconductor-based heterostructures, array of 2D MXene nanosheets) a new strategy to manufacture the TiO2-based mesoporous layers by gathering the TiO2 nanoparticles and the 2D Ti3C2TX MXene nanosheets. This method is highly applicable for the coating process of the aqueous solution on the macroporous substrate's surface. Fig. 2 represents the MXene nanolayered material, which delivers a reliable 2D platform for the deposition process of TiO2-based nanoparticles.
Furthermore, the diffusion of TiO2 NPs toward the macropore type structures of the ceramic-like support nanosheet becomes smooth during sol coating. Temporarily, the nanolayers of MXenes (with μm size range lateral dimension) would cover the possible macroporous deficiencies on the ceramic support, thereby diminishing the requirement of the mesoporous form of the layer on the macroporous target substrate. The hollow-type fiber-based coatings and disc membranes were invented using dip-coating and spin-coating, respectively.
To get a well-organized mesoporous-type TiO2–MXene membrane, the layered films were dehydrated and aged for a time duration of 12 h at a temperature of 60 °C in a microwave oven and after that heated in the open atmosphere at a temperature of 400 °C with a heating and cooling variation rate of 0.5 °C min−1. TiO2–MXene-based hollow layers of the fiber with a length of approximately 7 cm and an outer exterior area of roughly 8.8 cm2 were prepared via the dip-coating strategy. The resultant sols were self-assembled via the dip-coating approach on the outer surface of the four-channel α-Al2O3 hollow-type fiber by the successful optimization of the coating time and withdrawal speed to 1 cm/s and the drying time of 1 h (at a temperature of 40 °C).
After continuously repeating the mentioned processes four more times, the sol coated form of the hollow-type fiber was treated via calcination in an open atmosphere at 400 °C for 4 h with a variation rate limit of 0.5 °C min−1 from heating and cooling. The morphology of MXene nanosheets was categorized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and atomic force microscopy (AFM)image, and the descriptions are mentioned in Fig. 3(a) and (b). The average size distribution was about 500 nm with a thickness of 1–2 nm, demonstrating a monolayer or double-layered structure of MXene.
In addition, the TEM images were obtained to perceive the size/shape and the uniform dispersion process of the bulk TiO2 structures and the heterostructure of the TiO2–MXene based hydrosols. Fig. 3(c) and (d) show that the TiO2 NPs with monolayer subdivision size of about 5 nm were homogeneously detached in the original solution.
The dynamic light scattering (DLS) results (15 nm average particle size dispersal) show that only a few TiO2 NPs accumulate in the solution due to the van der Waals forces of attraction between the TiO2 NPs, which would not disturb the development of the uniform coating.
By addition (1 wt% of the mentioned MXene nanolayers in the TiO2 sol), the TiO2 NPs were continuously coated on the surface of the 2D MXene nanolayers without any substantial morphology variation in both the MXene and TiO2-based form of NPs (Fig. 3(e) and (f)).
The presence of fluorine on the surface of MXenes exterior, primarily unblocked and substituted by oxygen(–O–), is temporarily converted from fluorine by the alternative analysis of TiO2–MXene-based heterostructures by incorporating the hydrothermal technique, and is temporarily converted from MXene to TiO2.
The mentioned findings verified a robust and scalable methodology for unindustrialized superior mesoporous-based heterostructure membranes of TiO2–MXene. Taking advantage of the ‘floor title’ effect of the familiar 2D nanolayers of the MXene structure, the sol infiltration process of TiO2 NPs (which are directed toward thin layer defects and high transfer resistance) was found to be an effective strategy. The discussed hollow fiber-based membranes display a reproducible and highly valuable filtration efficiency, with a cutoff molecular weight value of ∼22000 Da and pure water flux of more than 90 L m2 h−1 bar−1, presenting a wide potential range for the practical application of these innovative mesoporous thin layered structures.
The above-mentioned heterostructure is a multifunctional catalyst that is closely connected with the adsorption of polysulfides, increased efficiency and movement linked to the conversion of polysulfides, high specific surface area, and conductivity results of heterostructures in situ (TiO2–Ti3C2Tx). The homogeneously dispersed TiO2 structures on the surface of MXene sheets work as a capturing hub to restrain the polysulfide form; the hetero-interface guarantees the speedy dispersion of the fastened polysulfide species from TiO2 to MXene, and the surface of the MXene layers finished with oxygen functionalities is useful with high catalytic activity toward the transformation of polysulfide. As established in Fig. 4(a), the designed TiO2 nanoparticles (NPs) used as the adsorption hubs for capturing the lithium polysulfides (LiPSs) and the hetero-interface assure the plane dispersion of LiPSs from TiO2 to MXene for more conversion. It is noted that during the oxidation phenomenon, the MXene layers are incompletely altered into the TiO2 NPs through well-behaved handling, in combination with the sustained 2D geometry with reliable conductivity, and high surface area, yielding the active exchange efficiency of the LiPSs. The TiO2–Ti3C2Tx heterostructure was manufactured in situ due to the partial oxidation of Ti3C2Tx using a hydrothermal approach at a temperature of 180 °C.

Fig. 4(b) represents the TEM image of Ti3C2Tx NSs with definite edges and a spotless surface. The designated specific area electron diffraction (SAED) patterns (Fig. 4(b) inset) represent a hexagonal shape atomic organization, in agreement with the prior published data for Ti3C2Tx NSs.
The TiO2–MXene-based heterostructures have enormous surface area, durable LiPSs’ binding capability, as well as high conductivity and electrocatalytic activity.
After the production process of hydrothermal oxidation, well-dispersed TiO2 NPs may originate on the surface of MXene, which can be confirmed by the presence of (101), (200), and (105) plane deflection of anatase TiO2 shown in the SAED pattern image (small inset portion of Fig. 4(c)). The high-resolution transmission electron microscope (HRTEM) image of TiO2 represents a spindle-like shape, and the closely analyzed interface among the (101) plane of TiO2 and the (0110) plane of Ti3C2Tx can be detected in Fig. 4(d).
The TiO2 NPs consistently dispersed on the surface of MXenes afford frequent robust LiPSs’ capturing ability. Simultaneously, the interface point of the heterostructures confirms the smooth dispersion of LiPSs on the MXene structure with an unusual catalytic movement to appreciate the fast transformation. Therefore, the collected between the layer created by TiO2–MXene heterostructures and conductive GR excellently prevents the LiPSs’ from transporting and advances the consumption of sulfur and moves toward an extraordinary cyclic steadiness. These findings validated a balanced suggestion related to the catalysts in the Li–S structures of the energy storage devices to improve the functioning, excluding the sulfur consumption and cycling stability phenomenon. The performance has a crucial role in supporting Li–S battery commercialization.
Furthermore, such heterostructures can be similarly used to develop highly-efficient catalysts in numerous chemical reactions and uses, such as metal–air batteries and fuel cells. Recently, among 2D materials, MXenes have been shown great attention by the research community due to their metallic based conductivity range and highly reversible surface-based oxidation and reduction phenomenon. The unique characteristics such as the packing density (4 g cm−3), high metallic conductivity (up to 8000 S cm−1), and redox chemistry with tunable functionality at the metal oxide surfaces/hydroxide count as the most prominent characteristics of Ti3C2Tx. These properties are enable high specific volumetric capacitances, high-rate performance in the range of 1000–1500 F cm−3, and great cycling-based stability value in acidic electrolytes. The pseudocapacitive nature of MXenes make it possible for them to function in the destructive potential type window, afterward merging it with additional constructive pseudocapacitive-based nanomaterials that can enlarge the voltage window of operation.
Among various pseudocapacitive materials, the author introduced ruthenium oxide (RuO2) as the positive working electrode due to its sizeable proton-induced pseudocapacitance, high conductivity, and overpotential range for oxygen evolution reaction in the acidic medium. The development method of an irrigated fabric pseudocapacitor was further confirmed by connecting to negative Ti3C2Tx electrodes with positive RuO2 in the acidic network of electrolytes.
3D-structured carbon fabric (CF) offers strong electrical conductivity, which is also applicable in a given region for many electrode-based nanomaterials. The presence of conductive carbon fiber (CNF) between the 2D material layers can boost the charge transport process, which can improve the heterostructure-based system rate efficiency and energy density if CNFs are properly arranged between the layers of a 2D material, with several advantages. First, good transport channels can be preserved integrally during rapid electrolyte penetration and long-range transfer of ions; they significantly contribute to the high performance of the assembled batteries. Second, CNF can, at the same time, function as a supporting pillar of carbon layers and play an important role in the rapid transfer of electrons. Therefore, CF was selected as the target substrate for the straightforward deposition process of RuO2 and MXene without any surface pretreatment process or application of conductive additives or binders. The all-pseudocapacitive-type irregular devices engaging 2D materials, i.e., metal oxides (MO2) and metal carbides, could provide a novel pathway in MXene-based potential growth process strategies. The 3D texture of CF (Fig. 5(a), Panel 1) disregards the necessity of introducing the binders and simplifies the bond of electroactive nanomaterials; consequently, the mass loading growth percentage of active nanomaterials in a specific area increases. Furthermore, CFS are stable chemically and have been established as a well-matched substrate for the lamination process of multidirectional nanomaterials compared to metal-based current collectors.
CFs with the abovementioned characteristics are model candidates for the suggested irregular device network. Later, it was selected as an electrically conductive type substrate-based material to load the species of Ti3C2Tx MXene using the drop-casting technique (Fig. 5(a), Panel 2). As presented in Panel 3 (Fig. 5(a)), the hydrous form of RuO2 is uniformly fabricated by introducing the hydrothermal process on the CF surface, whereas ruthenium chloride (RuCl3) is presented as a metal-based precursor material with various ratios of mass loading %. The all-pseudocapacitive type disproportionate capacitor was then gathered by the loading process of the Ti3C2Tx/CF negative electrode system and the RuO2/CF positive electrode in an acidic electrolyte (Panel 4, Fig. 5(a)).
As revealed in Fig. 5(b) and (d), both Ti3C2Tx and RuO2 were homogeneously placed over the whole, deprotecting the surface position of the carbon-based fabric surfaces. RuO2 units were found to be tightly bound on the separate carbon-based fiber layers, as represented in the SEM image of Fig. 5(c).
Correspondingly, the Ti3C2Tx structures were homogeneously deposited on the surface of carbon-based nanofibers, which is again observed from the SEM micrograph, as represented in Fig. 5(e).
Finally, the construction of all asymmetric pseudocapacitive supercapacitors merges the hydrous RuO2 electrodes and Ti3C2Tx MXene on the surface of carbon fabric. The broadest stated voltage window for the electrochemical approach is based on capacitors with the electrode of MXene in an aqueous electrolyte. These findings showed that all-pseudocapacitive devices based on MXene–RuO2-based heterostructures are promising for usage in aqueous electrolytes, providing an extended voltage window and amplified value of energy density.
Zinc oxide (ZnO), as the prominent striking functional nanomaterials, is has been widely applied in optoelectronics, optics, and sensors due to its piezoelectric, semiconducting, and pyroelectric characteristics. Recently, the appropriateness of ZnO NPs for practical potential-based applications such as supercapacitor electrode-based nanostructures has been initially validated due to its versatile electrochemical movement, environment-friendly nature, and abundance.
It has been analyzed that the combination process of ZnO nanomaterials and conductive substrates (such as 2D graphene structure and its derivatives) could propose an amplified surface area for enhanced electrode–electrolyte contact, instantaneously favoring the process of electron transport and easing ion dissemination, thus displaying improved supercapacitive characters. Various efforts to assemble ZnO and GR have been undertaken to obtain mixture materials with highly-efficient supercapacitors.
Considering the reliable value of the electrical conductivity value of Ti3C2 nanosheets, the exceptional chemical-based stability process, and facile grounding of ZnO, it is interesting to pursue a well-organized fabrication approach and versatile uses of Ti3C2/ZnO composite structures for supercapacitors.
The abovementioned characteristics highly recommend the direct precipitation-based approach and a consequent heat-dealing procedure to familiarize ZnO NPs into 2D Ti3C2 nanolayers and form a sandwich-like construction. In the Ti3C2/ZnO-based nanocomposite, ZnO NPs are homogeneously detached on the top surface and between the layer of the Ti3C2 nanosheets, leading to improved revelation of the dynamic surface positions of the electrolyte. Temporarily, the intimate interaction process between ZnO NPs and the Ti3C2 substrate simplifies the electron transport phenomenon within the entire electrode.
The synthetic strategy of Ti3AlC2 and Ti3C2 is given in the additional information. The Ti3C2/ZnO-based composite network was equipped by a direct approach such as precipitation and a successive heat-treatment procedure. Primarily, 100 mg Ti3C2 in about 100 mL of deionized water (DI) was magnetically stirred for a time duration of 0.5 h to obtain a standardized suspension. Before this, 98 mg NaOH and 73 mg Zn (NO3)2·6H2O were added slowly to Ti3C2 under continuous stirring. After 2 h, the subsequent hasty was cleaned with DI water until the pH value is moved toward a neutral position 7 and followed with ethanol solvent three times. Lastly, the artefact was continuously heated at a temperature of 100 °C for a time duration of 3 h in a stable atmosphere under an Ar heater's influence. For the preparation of ZnO NPs, the adopted strategy is similar to that of the Ti3C2/ZnO-based composite, except for the addition process of Ti3C2 MXene.
The SEM and TEM images were used to study the size and shape of all the materials. Fig. 6(a) and (b) show the SEM images of the Ti3C2 MXene and Ti3C2/ZnO composite structures, respectively. From Fig. 6(a), it is confirmed that the etched form of Ti3C2 acts a multilayer-based microstructure, and the thin layered structures are undoubtedly detached from each other as that for the Ti3AlC2 powder form.
From Fig. 6(b), it can be perceived that ZnONPs are consistently attached to the top surface and between the layer of the Ti3C2 layers, which efficiently encumbers the restacking process of Ti3C2 nanosheets and develops a sandwich-like arrangement. The TEM and HRTEM images of the Ti3C2/ZnO combined structure are revealed in Fig. 6(c) and (d). As Fig. 6(c) signifies, ZnONPs are widely and uniformly dispersed on the Ti3C2 nanosheets, which is confirmed by the SEM images of the Ti3C2/ZnO combined structure and further exemplifies the robust interaction among the ZnO NPs and Ti3C2 nanosheets, even after the successful completion of the ultrasonication process.
Expectedly, the resultant nanocomposite-based Ti3C2/ZnO structures display high capacitance, reliable rate performance, and long-period cycle stability when applied as supercapacitor-based electrodes. Consequently, it is supposed that the nanocomposite of the metal oxide/2D layered material has practical potential performance as an electrode material in supercapacitors. Ti3C2/ZnO-based material with an exact sandwich-like arrangement was virtually invented directly using the precipitation-based technique and the following heat-treatment method. Furthermore, this easy approach could be prolonged for the preparation process based on the combination of other transition metal oxides/2D layered composite structures. The surface functionalities of MXenes permit good solubility in various solvents, including strong polar organic solvents and water. Thus, MXenes include a dominant exclusive mixture of the characteristics of graphene and graphene oxide. MXenes similarly retain striking performances, for instance, exceptionally easy lithium transport and mechanical elasticity, which makes them perfect 2D materials for potential applications.
Hybridizing TMO nanostructures and MXene nanosheets in a solid construction is of extreme importance since it can assimilate the two constituents' exceptional characteristics and applications harmoniously. Lately, different research groups have made efforts to associate the TMO (e.g., Fe3O4 or MnO2) NPs with a weighted, thick layer of the MXene-based film structure. In this hybrid substance, only the dense thin layer's location was based on the MXene; thus, a significant segment of the complex dimensions of MXenes could have NPs based on TMO.
Xu et al. established the flat pack of the TMO nanocrystal, plus SnO2 nanowires and TiO2 nanorods, on the surface of the MXene sheets based on van der Waals interactions. This approach is simple, lucrative, highly proficient, and can be easily organized by the value of the packing density related to the TMO nanocrystals on the surface MXene nanolayers. Consequently, the qualities of the associated modules are sufficiently involved in the TMO/MXene-based heterostructures. The nanolayered structures of MXenes were obtained from an aqueous solution through vacuum filtration and instantaneously transferred to THF while wet. After that, the TiO2 nanorods or SnO2 nanowires were added at various mass ratios, i.e., 40:60, 70:30, and 85:15. The diverse solutions were sonicated at 40 W for 8 h in an argon environment. After sonication, the physical products were removed by complete vacuum filtration, washed by THF, vacuum-dried, and preserved in a glove box under an inert atmosphere before use.
Suppose the nanolayers in MXenes and TMO nanostructures differ in the THF solvent. In that case, the TMO can be deposited on the top surfaces by van der Waals interactions, which decreases the latter's volume of surface energy and ensures that the heterostructures are stabilized such as micelles.
The entire assembly procedure of TMOs is typically random on the 2D surface materials as it improves the process of free energy reduction. In addition, without requiring participation, the whole process can be carried out under environmental conditions. The scheme for the normal dispersion of MXene nanocrystals is shown in Fig. 7(a). Combining the SnO2 nanowires and TiO2 nanorods with the nanosheets of MXene in THF solvent under various mass ratios makes it possible to prepare several heterostructures.
It is evident that at a comparatively small mass ratio of TMO/MXene, such as 40:60, the TMO-based nanoscale structures are only lightly positioned on the top surface of the MXene nanolayers.
It is noted that the distribution process of the TMO-based nanomaterial is unvarying and thick when the mass ratio of TMO/MXene is appropriate (70:30), which shelters the entire top surface area of the MXene nanolayers. After addition, the more the TMOs (i.e., 85:15), the more thorough coating on the nanosheets of MXene. For subsequent electrochemical tests, the mass ratio 70:30 of TMO/MXene heterostructures was selected. Unlike the formerly reported mixtures of TMO/MXene that were inhomogeneous and demonstrated difficulty in regulating the spreading procedure of TMOs, it was noted that both SnO2 nanowires and TiO2 nanorods were homogeneously dispersed on the side of the top surface of the MXene sheets (Fig. 7(b) and (e)).
The constant dispersion development of TMOs contents is mostly ascribed to the non-selective process of van der Waals interfaces. It is noted that the one-step organization process is beneficial, and the effectiveness is highly adequate to produce almost all TMO-based nanomaterials assembled on the top nanolayers surface position of the MXene species (Fig. 7(c) and (f)). The equivalent HRTEM image confirms that the lattice fringe spacings of the heterostructures reveal 0.34 and 0.35 nm spacing, which is equivalent to the (110) and (101) planes of rutile TiO2 and anatase SnO2, respectively (Fig. 7(d) and (g)). This specifies that the TMO nanostructures with a crystalline nature are well-maintained.
Chen et al., in another study, have elaborately intended to break down the advanced electrostatic self-assembly method for solar-powered transformation processes of CO2 with Ti3C2 QD/Cu2O nanowires (NWs) and Cu heterostructures. MXene QDs are a new addition to the family of 0D nanostructures, which have freshly attracted substantial research curiosity due to their exclusive characteristics.
The abovementioned findings add considerable weight to their practical usage. It is noted that T3C2 QDs significantly improve the photocatalytic action and the steadiness of Cu2O NWs. The combined effect of 0D T3C2 QDs and 1D Cu2O NWs was further revealed, and the imageinduced transformation instrument was supplementarily exposed based on the computational approach such as density functional theory (DFT). As demonstrated in Fig. 8, Ti3AlC2 powder was first treated in retorts with HF solvent to etch away the Al layers; Ti3C2 nanolayers were obtained with surface moieties (a composition of –O, –F, and –OH) with substituted aluminium (Al). On exposure to robust ultrasonication processes in a protected environment, the Ti3C2 nanolayered structures were fragmented into Ti3C2 microsheets. Lastly, functionalized Ti3C2 QDs were obtained by hydrothermally cutting the sheets of Ti3C2 and protecting them with polyethylenimine (PEI).
Similar to various types of nanostructures, semiconductor nanowires have both extended quick charge transport distances and optical paths for well-organized light captivation, ensuring an assortment of photogenerated charge carriers before they combine. Cu2O NWs are anticipated to work in light harvesting. The critical achievements of the Cu(OH)2 NW/Cu network are shown in Fig. 8; the anodization of the Cu network in a simple solution and the red Cu2O NW/Cu web, which contains an inert atmosphere at a temperature of 550 °C after calcination in N2, were carried out. As shown by the SEM images, Cu2O NWs have a diameter of approximately ≈500 nm and a permeable surface (Fig. 9(a) and (b)).
After the surface position of the negatively active charged Cu2O NWs was preserved with poly(sodium 4-styrene sulfonate) (PSS), Ti3C2 QDs embedded with positively charged PEI were organized through an electrostatic process onto the Cu2O NWs, establishing the hierarchical Ti3C2 QDs/Cu2O NWs/Cu heterostructure.
Polyethylenimine (PEI) and PSS molecules are entirely excluded by the following calcination procedure under an inert atmosphere, separating Ti3C2 QDs and Cu2O NWs in close contact. Coating by Ti3C2 QDs does not noticeably change the full size and shape of the Cu2O NWs but protects their permeable planes (Fig. 9(c) and (d)). The Ti3C2 sheets/Cu2O NWs/Cu heterostructure has also been invented via the deposition of Ti3C2 sheets (≈200 × 300 nm) on Cu2O NWs, which is demonstrated by the SEM images (Fig. 9(e) and (f)). The Cu2O NWs/Cu network was added into the solution form of PSS (1% volume in ethanol solvent) for 120 min at a temperature of 90 °C, systematically washing with solvent ethanol several times, and dehydrated with a moderate N2-based inert stream.
PSS-based Cu2O NWs/Cu species were absorbed into the surface of positively charged PEI-based Ti3C2 QDs solutions with various concentrations for 24 h under the influence of the ambient atmosphere, then rinsed with DI water, and after that, dried under an N2 stream. Lastly, the well-organized heterostructure resulting from the combination of Ti3C2 QDs/Cu2O NWs/Cu based electrode material was calcined under an inert atmosphere at a temperature of 200 °C for 60 min. The Ti3C2 sheets/Cu2O NWs/Cu heterostructure-based electrode was prepared likewise, excluding the Ti3C2 sheet solution.
In summary, the presence of Ti3C2 QDs can increase the stability in Cu2O NWs substantially, with a significant improvement in charging, carrier density, charge transfer, light adsorption processes, and decrease charge recombination and belt bending edge.

Researchers have discovered the importance of carbon nanostructure in optoelectronics. For example, nanotubes (CNTs), CNTs/silicon, and Gr have revolutionized the field. Due to unique silicon properties such as reasonable bandgap value, both physical and chemical characteristics, and inexpensiveness as well as environmental friendliness, the formed structure of MXene/Si van der Waals-based heterostructures (use of Ti3C2TX MXene on a substrate based on n-type silicon (n-Si)) was used to produce vertical intersection photoelectric devices. This perpendicular assembly is suitable for the photon-induced carriers' departure and transmission phase.

A colloidal solution based on Ti3C2TX was drop-cast and dried in open air on an n-type silicon wafer substrate, as shown in Fig. 10(a). Fig. 10(b) demonstrates a Ti3C2TX/nSi-based van der Waals heterostructure. It is possible to create a Schottky interaction between the metallic Ti3C2TX carbide and n-Si. A strong electrical field was formed in n-Si, which was detached by the imageinduced carriers upon exposure to light and recombined with an exterior circuit to induce electrical signals.
In Fig. 10(c), the band energy of the non-equilibrium state Schottky junction generated due to the Ti3C2TX/n-Si heterostructure is defined. V0 and Φb built-in represent the potential value and height of the barrier, respectively. The existence of different qVbi values between the Ti3C2TX and EFSi (n-Si Fermi level) working functions is customary for implementing photon injection. The vibrant electron–hole space-charge region was disconnected through V0; therefore, the holes and electron transportation to Ti3C2TX and the metal backbone system of the electrode, respectively, produced n-Si. The transmittance vs. wavelength curve of the Ti3C2TX-based film at various Ti3C2TX MXene-based colloidal solution concentration values is also shown in Fig. 10(d).
By correcting the Ti3C2TX colloidal solution's concentration value, an equilibrium between the transmittance and conductivity of the Ti3C2TX-based thin film can be reached. The unit prepared from Ti3C2TX/n-Si JSC and VOC using 10 μL Ti3C2TX-based colloidal solution of different concentrations is shown in Fig. 10(e). The Ti3C2TX/n-Si unit demonstrated a minute increase in the VOC on increasing the Ti3C2TX colloidal solution concentration. The Ti3C2TX/n-Si unit showed a strong photovoltaic improvement at 10 μL of the colloidal solution of Ti3C2TX (2 mg mL−1) (Fig. 10(f)).
It was noticed that the built-in electrical field became superior as the thickness of the Ti3C2TX layer increased. The Ti3C2TX/nSi-based device invented by the colloidal solution based on Ti3C2TX MXene was not comparable with the shortened, equivalent Schottky junction-based device circuit (Fig. 10(f)). Fig. 10(g) shows the dark current–voltage features of the Ti3C2TX/n-Si fabricated unit. Ti3C2TX/n-Si showed thick films with low reverse current device. In addition to the Ti3C2TX depth mechanism, the I–V curve in Fig. 10(g) from 0.2 to 0.4 V was fitted to measure the definition factor (n) of the Ti3C2TX/nSi-based van der Waals heterostructure. As shown in Fig. 10(h), thin film I has a healthier transmittance compared to a denser film as it requires additional photon species to allow it to form products of more charge transporters.
The resistance value of the Ti3C2TX/n-Si heterostructure network interface categorization had a negative impact on the Ti3C2TX/n-Si application framework's JSC and VOC. The built-in electric field is unable to effectively isolate the produced photon pairs into holes and electrons throughout. As a consequence, the heterostructure approach based on Ti3C2TX/n-Si invented by Ti3C2TX colloid solutions has an advanced imageresponse potential at 2.0 mg mL−1 concentration.
Zhang et al. developed a well-ordered Sn4+ ion on the surface of conductive Ti3C2 MXene by introducing the simple liquid-phase immersion process based on electrostatic and ion-exchange interactions. Ti3C2 acts as the buffer sheet for cooperative volume shrinkage/development during the electrochemical reaction phase, the medium for providing ion-change sites, and the extremely conductive matrix network for an outstanding rate performance performance of the nano-composites. Also, in the nanocomposites' synthetic strategies, the PVP stabilizer plays a vital role, ensuring a uniform distribution of the nanoparticles (NPs) on the alkali-Ti3C2 matrix and preventing their aggregation. The chief manufacturing procedure for PVP-Sn(IV)@Ti3C2 nano-composites is shown in Fig. 11(a). The first step involved the immersion of Ti3AlC2 powder in 40% HF solution for a time duration of 24 h at 25 °C, which can complete the selective etching process of the aluminium (Al) layers and substitute them with other reactive functionalities (fluorine, hydroxyl). The alkalization process is completed after the dehydration process of –OH-functionalized Ti3C2TX; Ti3C2 MXene was preserved in 1 M LiOH basic solution for a time duration of 24 h to increase the spacing between the layers.
Subsequently, by adding DI water to remove the residual alkali, the alkalized Ti3C2 (alk-Ti3C2) was washed several times (multiple washing to get in the range of pH 8–9). The completed wet residues (alk-Ti3C2) were dehydrated by retention at 80 °C for 12 h. Alk-Ti3C2 MXene was then absorbed into the 1 M SnCl 4 solution at 25 °C for the effective preparation phase for PVP-Sn(IV)@Ti3C2 based nanocomposites; 0.1 g of PVP was at the same time softened into the solution and stimulated for 24 h. Finally, PVP-Sn(IV)@Ti3C2 nanocomposites were obtained after the centrifugation phase from a diverse solution shaded by reliable residue product drying at 24 h temperatures of 80 °C. After the loading phase of Sn4+ material, the SEM image was used to inspect the difference in the sample size and form. The SEM image of the composite Sn(IV)@Ti3C2 invented without the participation of PVP species is represented in Fig. 11(b). Several asymmetric, clustered, and incompletely tough NPs can be seen on the alk-Ti3C2 matrix surface so that the invented composites of Sn(IV)@Ti3C2 undergo a large volume variance and successive decrease when used as an anode type material for LIBs. To solve this problem, surfactants are widely used as they can reduce the nanoscale particle size and prevent the aggregation of composite materials.
Thus, as the surfactant/stabilizer in the SnCl4 solution, PVP was supplementary. The SEM images of the PVP-Sn(IV)@Ti3C2-based nanocomposite system are shown in Fig. 11(c) and (d), indicating that abundant NPs are distributed on the surface site of alk-Ti3C2. In the PVP-Sn(IV)@ Ti3C2 composite sample, no agglomerated and rigid particles similar to Sn(IV)@Ti3C2 (Fig. 11(b)) can be initiated. The proper introduction and use of PVP, which decreases the interface tension forces and reduces the unvarying circulation of NPs in the alk-Ti3C2 matrix, is responsible for all the variations in the morphology involved. The TEM image is useful in detecting the complete microstructure morphology. The Sn(IV) nanocomplex is rod-like and homogeneously distributed, as shown in Fig. 11(e), which is in agreement with the results of the SEM image (Fig. 11(c) and (d)). The narrow inset left-hand bottom of Fig. 15(e) verifies the size distribution approach of the anchored Sn(IV) nanocomplex particles with a diameter varying from 5 to 10 nm. In the HRTEM image, there are no lattice fringes of the Sn(IV)-centered nano complex particles (Fig. 11(f)), which again represent the unclear geometry of the Sn(IV) nanocomplex structure.

Fig. 11(f) verifies that the fringe layout is limited to 0.228 nm and 0.214 nm, which can be indexed to (104) and (105) Ti3C2 MXene planes, respectively. The inset in Fig. 11(f) shows the fast Fourier transform (FFT) pattern of the PVP-Sn(IV)@Ti3C2 composite. The periodic diffraction circle resembles the Ti3C2 MXene backbone with various layers.
Analytical energy-dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) has been used to check the elemental composition of the composites. The STEM image of PVP-Sn(IV)@Ti3C2 indicates a clear thin layered geometry (Fig. 11(g)). The elemental mapping of Ti can determine the uniform dispersal method of the nanocomplex Sn(IV) on the matrix surface, O, and Sn (Fig. 11(h)–(j)). In summary, the future of these synthetic strategies will be supportive for the maturation of other functional ultramodern materials based on MXenes.

Two-dimensional (2D) nanomaterials, for example, TMO/hydroxides, GR, MXenes, and TMDCs, have been extensively examined as dynamic materials in energy storage uses due to their ability of expansion for binder-free electrodes with improved capacitance.

MXenes have attracted great attention from the scientific community for numerous applications, such as in supercapacitors, Na-ion and Li-ion batteries, electromagnetic intrusion shielding, discriminating ion sieving, as well as cellular imaging. Metallic conductivity, layer thickness, and hydrophilic nature make MXenes an efficient and capable candidate for supercapacitors due to its enormous value of volumetric-based capacitance compared to formerly described devices. For example, titanium carbide (Ti3C2Tx) films displayed 900 F cm−3 volumetric capacitance, brilliant cyclability and rate performance, and 245 F g−1 gravimetric capacitance, which is still required to be improved. However, one drawback of the electrodes is their low surface area for electrolytes.
GR is a very popular carbon-based 2D layered material that has been extensively applied as an electrode material for supercapacitors. GR is a suitable candidate for the production of electronic devices such as micro-supercapacitors, transistors, GR-based sensors, and biosensors, due to the presence of specific properties, such as electric, mechanical, optic, single energy belt structure, and high electron mobility. Different volumes of graphene solutions were sprayed on glass lamella to obtain various graphene planes to determine the effect of temperature on the thin film of GR.
Current up to 150 °C is nearly constant but the value of current gradually increases between 1.8 and 10 times and reduces the resistance sharply. The temperature effect also affects samples with the lower GR planes. It may probably be due to the reasons. One explanation is that the solvent solution that remained between the graphene flakes is evaporated. Due to the 2D geometry of graphene with a honeycomb structure, with every carbon atom being fitted in the perpendicular direction of the three strong covalent σ-bonds, and with the closest carbon atoms well as a weak van der Waals π-bond. The carbon bond with the solvent occurs at a perpendicular plane when graphene planes and the concerned solvent are similar. The solvent evaporates between the graphene planes using a temperature such that the planes become condensed and there is more interaction between the planes. The closer the flakes and the closer the touch between the flakes, the greater the amount of the solution. The transient current thus increases, and the resistance decreases.
Another explanation for the increase is the percolation effect. Percolation is a physics term that refers to fluid motion through porous materials. Furthermore, the percolation threshold is a mathematical concept; there is no relation between the consistent components below the percolation threshold. The percolation threshold is the amount of time it takes for the components to interact, and it occurs above the percolation threshold.
The percolation threshold phenomenon can also be demonstrated in the case of graphene planes. According to the percolation threshold, graphene planes are scattered near each other. Still, when the temperature rises above 150 °C, GR planes find themselves at the interaction threshold, and as the temperature rises, the connection between the planes becomes stronger. Then, a current jump occurs on the I–T curve, which represents the percolation threshold phenomenon. The current mechanism changes as a result of this phenomenon, and the transient current rises. With decreasing sample thickness, the current jump increases. Increased temperature allows the graphene planes to come closer to each other, allowing more current to move through, and this rise happens progressively in samples with lower thickness.
If the restacking process of the 2D graphene nanosheets is considered, this fluctuation can be evaded by making layers with more open structures that may afford additional corridor space for storing purpose and carriage of electrolyte ions. By preventing the self-stacking of MXene/GR, improved performance can be obtained. In recent times, Feng et al. fabricated MXene/GR-based flexible thin-film layers using a vacuum-based filtration approach. Fabricated electrodes network were accumulated into flexible all-solid-state type supercapacitors and displayed a value of volumetric capacitance of the order of 216 F cm−3.
Gogotsi et al. established a modest technique to formulate MXene/rGO-based flexible thin films by self-assembly by considering electrostatic positively charged carrying graphene oxide and negatively charged MXene. Well-aligned order among the MXene layers was obtained by implanting reduced graphene oxide (rGO) nanosheets, which helped to avoid the self-restacking of the MXene nanolayers. It simplified the fast dispersion and transference of electrolytes. Fig. 12(a) schematically demonstrates the manufacture of the flexible MXene/rGO composite films, taking into account the electrostatic-based uniform organization. First, the rGO nanolayers were fitted with hydrazine to minimize graphene oxide (GO) temperature to 90 °C for 24 h.
MXene/rGO hybrid fabricated electrodes were arranged via the electrostatic self-assembly procedure. Characteristically, under stirring, poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride) (PDDA)-altered rGO (G-PDDA) suspension was added dropwise into 20 mL suspension of MXene with 0.5 mg mL−1 concentration. The blend was subsequently subjected to consecutive sonication (10 min), filtration (with the application of a large DI water polypropylene layer), and dehydration (12 h of vacuum), contributing to the flexibility and independence of the MXene/rGO films.
After different amounts (0.2 mL, 1 mL, and 2.2 mL) of G-PDDA-based suspension were added, the composition varied, such as M/G-1%, M/G-5%, and M/G-10%. For assessment, the pure MXene-based thin film was found to have no rGO.
The SEM and TEM images were obtained for the MXene/rGO hybrid films (Fig. 12(b) and (c)). A substantial fold morphology was found in both the pure MXene and hybrid form of the MXene/rGO films. The layered and well-aligned structure was observed in the cross-sectional SEM of MXene (Fig. 12(d)). After the outline of the fabricated films made from rGO nanosheets, MXene/rGO did not show any noticeable change in the layered structure (Fig. 12(e)). Fig. 12(f) exhibits the assembly of the nanolayers and indicates the negligible self-restacking process in the MXene nanolayers. To show that the change in the space between the layers detected in the TEM image is statistically significant, XRD patterns were achieved for original MXene and the hybrid structure of MXene/rGO (Fig. 12(g)). In an alternative study, Nedil et al. arranged the multilayer (ML) form of Ti3C2Tx particles in 50% aqueous HF solution to abstract the Al contents from the MAX phase precursors, i.e., Ti3AlC2 (Fig. 13(a)). The colloidal solution of a nominated weight of the delaminated form of Ti3C2Tx MXene particles was prepared. After that, particles based on ML Ti3C2Tx were separated into ethanol for a time span of 60 min via sonication. After successfully completing the probe sonication process, the resultant dispersion was subjected to centrifugation at 3500 rpm for 30 min at 25–30 °C. After the successful completion of the centrifugation process, the supernatant liquid was composed of the centrifuged product. Different amounts of the supernatant liquid were added to the required mass of pristine defect-free (df) nanoplatelet solution graphene (0.05 mg mL−1) and Ti3C2Tx MXene (1.16 mg mL−1). Electrohydrodynamic atomization (EHDA) deposition procedure was applied for the deposition process of sandwich-form of Ti3C2Tx/graphene thin films on a glass substrate. In particular, the supernatant liquid was stored in the pump of the syringes and sucked during the process. In order to detect different approaches of EHDA, both for graphene flakes and Ti3C2Tx dispersions, different flow rates were used in the range of the fluctuating potential. A steady meniscus was detected at zero potential. When the voltage range was amplified to 3.08 kV, stable cone-jet modes were alleged for the deposition process of Ti3C2Tx, while it was set at a potential value of 6.30 kV for constant deposition based on graphene nanoflakes. In order to achieve the composite Ti3C2Tx/GR-based thin films, firm cone-jet mode was applied (Fig. 13(b)). The top surface of the substrate had been sluiced with ethanol solvent before the deposition process and then treated for dehydration. To check the protected deposition area for graphene and Ti3C2Tx MXene from the dispersion at the steady cone-jet, the stand-off setup was reformed from 1 to 4 cm to check the protected deposition area for graphene. The nozzle was adjusted laterally with a run-on speed range of 2.2 mm/s, while a stand-off distance of 1.5 and 1 cm was maintained to cover the area of 22 cm2 for GR and Ti3C2Tx, respectively.
With various proportions of graphene concentrations to vintage manufactured films made of 5–10 constant GR and Ti3C2Tx layers, this replacement deposition was replicated many times (Fig. 13(c)). The manufactured film was then reinforced under vacuum (103 mbar) for 2 h at 200 °C. Fig. 14(a) shows an illustrative TEM image of the df-GR nanoflakes with their corresponding SAED pattern shown in the tiny inset on the top left of the figure and showing their crystalline behavior (the hexagonal crystal structure of the nanoflakes is preserved). Fig. 14(b) is a 3D section view of the df-graphene nanoflake AFM image deposited on the SiO2 substrate surface, where the deposited film thickness is about 0.1 nm. The distinctive top-view SEM image of the fallen Ti3C2Tx-based thin films and composite Ti3C2Tx/graphene is shown in Fig. 14(c) and (d). The composite is analyzed to display the surface's incessant and uniform morphology compared to Ti3C2Tx alone. As it is cleared, the surface irregularity of the models declines significantly after the successful integration process of graphene, where an uneven surface is attained (Fig. 14(c)). This is most likely because of the mechanism of graphene nanoflakes filling up the Ti3C2Tx surface basins (pin-holes). As a matter of fact, as shown in Fig. 14(e), the AFM image reveals the existence of pin-holes that share a typical depth in the nm size range array, which were completely filled after the efficient graphene nanoflake deposition process. Fig. 14(f) is a demonstrative TEM image of the Ti3C2Tx MXene nanoflakes first obtained from the creative substrate and treated with sonication for TEM analysis. The nanoflakes represents few symbols of microscopic faults, such as nanopores. The subsequent composite of MXene/rGO competently improves the electrical conductivity (2261 S cm−1) by controlling MXene as well as rGo. During addition, the rGO nanolayers extant amongst the MXene nanosheets worked as conductive inserts while snowballing the space between the layer of MXene, giving unhampered channels for electrolytes and confirming the high-rate performance.

Thanks to their fascinating high densities and long lifespan, electrochemical studies are becoming very popular. Due to the high demand for moveable and wearable technology, current research focuses on enlightening the energy thickness of electrochemical capacitors with their per unit of volume. The carbon-dependent electrons nevertheless demonstrate a volumetric potential for commercial equipment of approximately 60 F cm−3. However, high capacitance capacitors (1000–1500 F cm−3) can be produced using hydrated RuO2. Its wide-ranging applications are, however, constrained by high costs.

Gogotsi et al. industrialized the irregular filtration technique, which involves aqueous suspensions to attain the sandwich-like assembly of CNTs and MXenes. The fabricated MXene/CNT paper is free-standing and tremendously flexible. The fabricated article showed tremendously improved capacitance and performance as an electrode as compared to pure MXene.

Fig. 15(a) shows a method to fabricate the paper sandwich-like composite MXene/CNT electrodes. For the fabrication, the MXene flakes’ colloidal solution was subjected to vacuum-assisted filtration (Ti3C2Tx nanoflakes). After that, a CNT nanolayer was successfully laminated at its top, and the repetition of this procedure was done many times to crop the composite paper electrodes. All paper-based as-fabricated films showed depths in the range of 2–3 μm (Fig. 15(b)). Moreover, in the absence of visible damage to their assembly, the paper reported its work on 5 mm diameter glass bars, demonstrating their tremendous flexibility and strength (Fig. 15(c)).
As described above, Ti3C2Tx was shielded before mixing with the CNTs. For size ranging from nanometers to micrometers and from single layer MXene to multiple nanometer MXene layers, the latter displayed lateral magnitudes (Fig. 15(d) and (e)).
It can be assumed that it is different with a paper density of 3.2 g cm−3. Electrolyte ions were limited from coming into contact with the Ti3C2Tx nanoflakes due to such a dense area, restricting its electrochemically-dependent performance performance (Fig. 15(f)). After assimilating the CNTs into the Ti3C2Tx MXene, the projected increase in positioning among the Ti3C2T x nanoflakes was practical (Fig. 15(g) and (h)).
If MXene/CNT composites can be compared with sandwich-like paper, they can influence an improved and well-arranged assembly of MXene and CNT layers (Fig. 15(i)). The sandwich-like structure MXene/SWCNT papers restrained a very high capacitance value of about 390 F cm−3 with a scan rate of 2 mV s−1. However, it showed no degradation phenomenon even after the completion of 10000 cycles. The performance can be further improved by refining the geometry of the composite, the MXene/CNT mass ratio, and the thickness of the corresponding layers.
In an additional study, lithium–sulfur-based (Li–S) energy storage systems are among the most supportive applicants that could meet the emerging market demands by retaining a theoretical energy density value of about 2500 W h kg−1, which is about 3–5 times more advanced than ultra-modern Li-ion batteries. Furthermore, as a reactive nanomaterial, elemental sulfur has the benefit of being inexpensive, abundant, and environmentally robust.
Nevertheless, because of unsolved subjects that remain after several years of discovery, Li–S batteries are yet to be commercialized. The existence of the thiosulfate/polythionate functional group on the surface of the MXene nanolayers showed that the –OH groups are responsible for the redox activities of polysulfide as a result of functionalization, which is somewhat close to the previously mentioned analysis in the case of graphene oxide and metal oxide. Multiwalled CNTs with an approximate diameter of approximately 8 nm were complementary to the delaminated product of MXenes in chlorosulfonic acid for the preparation step of composite structures, and the range for the filtration process was found. Stereotypically, both the CNTs and MXene were treated via the stirring process in 10 mL chlorosulfonic acid for a time duration of 12 h, after which they were filtered on a membrane composed of anodic aluminium oxide (AAO) and dehydrated at a temperature of 80 °C. Approximately 10% CNT content was added for each Ti2C MXene and Ti3C2 to create the composite structure, and approximately 20% CNTs were combined with Ti3 CNTs. The resulting composite structures based on sulfur S/CNT-MXene were prepared for 12 h under the influence of the ambient atmosphere at 155 °C via an easy melt-diffusion-based method.
Compared to the meso/microporous carbonic base nanomaterials, the surface area of the MXene phases is not excellent, as constrained by the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) technique (Fig. 16(a)). However, it is predictable to occupy an extraordinary surface area site with a delaminated product of multilayer MXene nanosheets. Due to the presence of van der Waals interaction upon removal of the delaminating solvent residues, this key parameter can be accredited to the restacking phase of the nanolayers. In Li–S batteries, the surface area of the host material plays an excellent role in chemical interaction.
Nazar et al. built a porous design due to sandwich the contents of MXene with nanolayer carbon nanotubes (CNTs) (Fig. 16(b)). The presence of the CNTs contents further facilitates the transportation process of charge between the nanosheets, which is crucial for the development process of highly efficient Li–S sulfur-loading batteries.
The acid resistance of the Ti2C MXene phase was justified by the XRD study, which showed no apparent variance in the crystallinity after the nanolayers were saturated in acid for a period of 12 h (Fig. 16(c)). The SEM image shown in Fig. 16(d) shows that the CNTs in the MXene layers are very well detached. The presence of the CNT material between the MXene nanosheets further improves the electronic conductivity significantly the nanolayers. Testing the S/CNT-Ti3C2 electrode, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy verified that the decreased resistance was similar to that of the CNT-free material. Melt dispersal achieved a significantly higher content of sulfur in the S/CNT-MXene due to the improved surface area position and absorbency (Fig. 16(f)), in the absence of any significant sulfur aggregation (Fig. 16(e)). A permeable, electronically conductive network with a high polysulfide adsorption process ratio was created by mixing small amounts of CNTs between the layers of MXene, enabling sulfur as a host material with the genius of long-term cycling efficiency and disappearing rates of at least 0.043% per cycle for up to 1200 cycles. Besides, a reliable performance performance with the sulfur content up to 5.5 mg cm−2 for available high-load-based electrodes was achieved.
It is believed that further improvements in the hybrid structure of the films based on MXene-based materials and their electrochemical properties may enlighten the development in future applications. Such applications, i.e., convenient and microsized assimilated energy storage devices may have ultrahigh properties such as volumetric capacitances and rate performances. Moreover, these consequences are probable to the discovery of a new class of nanomaterials for an extensive diversity of submissions in thin-film based electronics.

Amongst the different classes of discovered 2D nanomaterials, group III–VI members consist of thin layered semiconducting materials such as (GaTe, GaSe, and InSe) have lately fascinated ample consideration due to their outstanding optoelectronic and electrical characteristics. Dissimilar from the structure of transition-metal dichalcogenide (TMD)-based material, which show an indirect bandgap, the members of group III–VI layered semiconducting characteristics-containing materials represent the direct bandgaps’ self-determination of wideness, differentiating them as exceptional optoelectronic nanomaterials.


In particular, due to its high chemical stability, comprehensive spectral response, high carrier versatility, and narrow bandgap, InSe is being increasingly used in photoelectronic processes (1.26 eV). Here, Lee et al. implemented a highly efficient few-layer InSe-based photodetector (PD) with an electrode network based on MXene (Ti2CTx). Different steps were involved during the preparation process of the electrode system. Firstly, the prepared solution of the exfoliated form of the Ti2CTx nanoflakes was treated with spin-coating on the SiO2/Si substrate with a size limit of about 285 nm. After drying the sample, a mechanical transfer approach was applied to transfer the few-layer nanoflake of Ti2CTx with about a size range of ∼5 nm with great width and attached mechanically onto the surface of an exfoliated form of the InSe nanolayers (∼20 nm) on the surface of the SiO2/Si substrate. To design the concerned electrode device, electron beam lithography (EBL) was implemented, and thin layer gold (Au) was deposited, consuming an electron-beam vaporization network. Subsequently, after all the successful steps for the resultant product, the InSe/Ti2CTx FET was obtained. Electron-beam lithography (EBL) and mechanical transfer technique are helpful for the preparation of vertically-stacked based field effect transistor (FET), i.e., InSe/Ti2CTx. The schematic in Fig. 17(a) establishes the manufacturing process of the InSe/Ti2CTx heterostructures electrode (EBL).

Polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) is positioned at the high surface of the InSe/Ti2CTx-based FET in the first step. Afterward, an EBL method is applied to the channel level, and for the minor gravure, inductively coupled plasma (ICP) could be applied to adjust the thickness of Ti2CTx (Fig. 17(b)–(g)). Ti2CTx MXene was deprotected by implementing an etching method based on plasma, which does not affect the layers of InSe and which the AFM image in Fig. 17(h) further justifies.
Finally, the channel-based content is shifted from Ti2CTx MXene to InSe, and the transition bending in Fig. 17(i) further justifies this. There is no obvious modification mechanism during the ICP etching process of the characteristics of Ti2CTx (Fig. 17j–m). The PMMA layers are then separated to achieve an InSe/Ti2CTx-based PD with a channel length of about 250 nm.
In short, it advocates the use of 2D Ti2CTx MXenes layers as powerful electrode-based materials with quick reaction time and great photoresponsivity to ensure the upcoming combined optoelectronic applications. The high metallic conductivity of 2D Ti2CTx can be widely used in addition as a potential electrode material with a rich plasmonic geometry to improve the material quality of imagedetectors.

Due to its high theoretical capacity value, phosphorus (P), as an efficient candidate, works as an anode material for sodium ion batteries (SIBs), with about 2596 mA h g−1 specific capacity of the Na3P alloy and zero electrode potential, which is highly efficient compared to other currently available anodic nanomaterials based on SIBs. Though P is applied as an alloying-type SIBs anode material, its efficiency related to electrochemical enhancement undergoes large volume expansion phenomenon and insulated type properties during the electrochemical-based redox approach.

The combination of P with other electrically conductive material such as carbon is measured as an efficient approach to overcome the disadvantages of poor structural stability and low electrochemical-based redox kinetics. Therefore, the author has documented a useful electrostatic process for manufacturing highly theoretical molecular-level heterostructures with BP layers on Ti3C2 (PDDA-BP/Ti3C2) with stable electronic conductivity, flexibility, and abundant reactive sites. In addition to advancing the electronegativity value of the BP nanolayers, the functionalization process of the cationic polymeric surfactant poly(diallyldimethyl ammonium chloride) (PDDA) on BP also protects them from the process of oxidation in water, with great stability and uniform dispersion. Due to the direct interaction of both the mechanisms, the parallelly positioned 2D interlayer space provides an appropriate diffusion path for the ions, which enhances the electrochemical efficiency. The combined structure of PDDA-BP/Ti3C2 nanolayered heterostructure was prepared via an electrostatic attraction method termed as molecular type organization or uniform organization. Usually, suspension materials based on ex-Ti3C2 and PDDA-BP with a high rate capability of about 1.7:1 are instantaneously released into a collecting chamber controllably. After the process of addition of the two solutions is completed, the mixed solution is sonicated for 60 min and then treated for a further 12 h with stirring, filtered after application of a thin JinTeng layer membrane with abundant DI water, and then freeze-dried for 24 h to obtain the heterostructure.
The PDDA-BP/ex-Ti3C2 film was produced in 2019 by Yin et al. The heterostructures based on PDDA-BP/Ti3C2 were identified. The fitted materials with different ratios of PDDA-BP/Ti3C2 heterostructures were prepared and represented as PDDA-BP/Ti3C2-1, PDDA-BP/Ti3C2-2, and PDDA-BP/Ti3C2-3. The structures were differentiated due to the accurate control of the suspension of ex-Ti3C2 and PDDA-BP with excellent feeding rates of 1.2:1, 1.7:1, and 2.2:1. Mixed hybrid BP-Ti3C2 are often prepared for characterization by combining suspensions based on ex-Ti3C2 and ex-BP below the comparable mass ratio of the material. The PDDA-BP/Ti3C2 heterostructures were obtained by a flocculation-based strategy of exfoliated Ti3C2 (ex-Ti3C2) layers and PDDA-containing exfoliated layers of BP (PDDA-BP) layers with dissimilar charge distribution positions (Fig. 18(a)).
The monodispersed nanolayer suspension form is transformed to a layer-structured product (Fig. 18(b), inset). After successfully completing the vacuum filtration process, it can be easily transformed into a flexible film form (Fig. 18(c), inset). The SEM cross-sectional image (Fig. 18(b)) shows a lamellar geometry as a predictable layer-by-layer (LBL) assembly phase of the combined structure of nanolayer PDDA-BP and ex-Ti3C2. The TEM image (Fig. 18(c)) enables the ultra-thin form of nanolayer PDDA-BP to be homogeneously distributed with some wrinkles in the crystal clear ex-Ti3C2 nanosheets. The in-plane diffraction pattern and the separate sharp deflection positions are correspondingly classified as ex-Ti3C2 and PDDA-BP nanolayers in the ED configuration (Fig. 18(d)). The AFM image shows a typical assembly phase of both the thin-layered nanosheet types in Fig. 18(e) and (f).
The lamellar structure of the heterostructures is also exposed by the XRD pattern (Fig. 18(g)). The position of the peaks at 4.0°, 7.9°, 20.2°, 24.3°, and 28.1° could be assigned to (001), (002), (005), (006), and (007) planes of the thin-layered geometry of Ti3C2. There are supplementary sharp peaks at 16.7°, 26.4°, 34.1°, 34.9°, and 52.1°, conforming to (020), (021), (040), (111), and (060) diffraction peaks of BP. The molecular-level form of the heterostructure with an arranged weighted structure guarantees close interaction among Ti3C2 and BP in a smart way to improve the properties of both the structures.

The speedy evolution in energy stresses and increased concern about universal environmental issues suggest a crucial examination of new and clean energies and their storage systems. Recently, 2D layered transition metal dichalcogenides have fascinated interest in electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) because of their captivating geometry and related properties.

Among them, molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) has been extensively used as a promising electrocatalyst for HER due to its satisfactory Gibbs free energy, which is related to the hydrogen adsorption process (DGH* ¼ þ0.08 eV on the unsaturated Mo or S edges). In addition, it represents a robust aptitude for accepting electrons via elemental abundance as well as weak van der Waals interactions. Both the experimental and theoretical results have exposed that the HER efficiency of MoS2 is mostly due to the active site positions rather than the stable basal planes. MoS2 has a low value of intrinsic conductivity, which overturns its charge transfer process and restricts the HER activity. For this purpose, an adaptable approach through the coupling process of MoS2 with other electrically conductive nanomaterials has been approved. Qiu's group has recently prepared hierarchical nanohybrid structures of MoS2/Ti3C2@C and the combined effect of the few-layered MoS2, Ti3C2 MXene, and carbon nanoplating for improved HER activity has been identified. However, the Ti3C2 MXenes are unbalanced in the network, as mentioned earlier, demanding a shield by carbon nanoplating. Keeping the abovementioned problems in mind, scientists have developed the in situ evolution of vertically-upright 2D MoS2 nanolayers on the planar surface of Ti3C2 nanolayers to develop constant 2D–2D hierarchical heterostructures. Taking advantage of the loose thin layer geometry and the effect of strong internal interactive forces, the MoS2/Ti3C2 heterostructures attain a massive improvement in their HER performance. Layered MoS2/Ti3C2 ordered heterostructures were prepared by a facile hydrothermal technique. Characteristically, 1 mmol of Na2MoO4·2H2O, 5 mmol of thiourea, and a certain quantity of Ti3C2 (the mass of Ti3C2 varies between 0%, 1%, 5%, 10%, and 20% of the mass of Na2MoO4·2H2O) were added to 60 mL of purified water and stirred for 30 min at 25 °C. Then, the different solutions were transferred to an 80 mL Teflon-coated autoclave system and heated at 180 °C for one day. Afterward, a black color precipitate was obtained via centrifugation; the process was repeated thrice with distilled water and ethanol, and the supernatant liquid was discarded. Then, the product was dehydrated at 60 °C in a vacuum oven for 12 h. Among all the prepared samples, MoS2/Ti3C2-5% exhibited the best and reliable electrocatalytic activity; herein, MoS2/Ti3C2 is denoted by MoS2/Ti3C2-5%. Fig. 19(a) schematically demonstrates the preparation procedure of the MoS2/Ti3C2 heterostructures. SEM categorized the shape engineering and size of the microstructures of the MoS2/Ti3C2 heterostructures.

Fig. 19(b) displays an overall SEM image of bare Ti3C2. It is clear that the nanolayers were produced during the HF-based etching step, justifying the efficient elimination of aluminium (Al) between the layers of Ti3AlC2. The obtained Ti3C2 unveiled an accordion-shaped multilayer geometry with a flat surface and a loose interspace (Fig. 19(c)), approaching an exfoliated lamellar graphite. An archetypal SEM image of the MoS2/Ti3C2 based heterostructures is shown in Fig. 19(d), revealing that the uniform surface of Ti3C2 became rather coarse and patchy.
A close observation exposed that the MoS2 nanolayers were systematically protected and cultivated on the Ti3C2 nanolayers (Fig. 19(e)). The shaped close 2D–2D heterostructure form of MoS2/Ti3C2 permits the phenomenon of direct charge transfer among MoS2 and Ti3C2, thus enhancing the electrocatalytic efficiency. Elemental mapping was carried out to review the distribution of elements in the MoS2/Ti3C2-based heterostructures. As exhibited in Fig. 19(f), elemental Ti, Mo, C, S, and O were found to be consistently dispersed over the complete heterostructure. The existence of O is owed to the inevitable oxidation process of MoS2 and oxygen-containing functionalities on the surface of Ti3C2.
This discussion validated the direct fusion of the MoS2/Ti3C2 heterostructures by a facile hydrothermal technique, which permits the in situ evolution of the MoS2-based nanolayers position to be vertical on the planar surface of the Ti3C2 nanolayers. The mentioned findings represent that the heterostructures of MoS2/Ti2CT2 are promising electrode materials for highly efficient and flexible metal-ion batteries.

Heterostructures associated with MXene and TMDs has been predicted to have tunable geometry and band structures. These unique characteristics have intrigued their application in new upcoming electronic devices. Keeping in mind the future demand of MXene-based heterostructures, MoS2-decorated Ti3C2 was introduced by Wu et al. as an electrode material, which greatly increased the volume of sodium-ion batteries (SIB).

In another study, Xu et al. used the Ti2C(OH)xFy precursors as new electrode materials with WSe2 and analyzed the substantially decreased Schottky barrier distance between WSe2 and the electrode. Regarding this advancement, the synthesis of WS2/Ti3C2Tx-based heterostructures is still under development. The basic material characteristics of this newly-developed structure are still under study. A schematic of the direct deposition lamination process of WS2 on the surface of Si/SiO2 (300 nm)-based substrates is shown in Fig. 20(a). An optical microscopic image of a shortened triangular shape WS2 nanoflake deposited without Ti3C2Tx is shown in Fig. 20(b).
The light purple difference produced indicates a nanoflake volume of 1 L, which can be further confirmed by its single excitonic photoluminescence (PL) intensity band (discussed in the following sections). The evolution process of WS2 flakes on the surface of Ti3C2Tx MXene strongly depends on the deposition-related pressure and the distance (D) of the sample base (D). Fig. 20(c) and (d) correspondingly show the difference in the deposited WS2 flakes' surface morphology and the Ti3C2Tx MXene at a pressure of 200 and 250 Torr.
At a minor pressure value of about 200 Torr, the growth rate of the nanoflake around the MXene is fairly minor. At high-pressure values of 250 (Fig. 20(d)) and 350 Torr (Fig. 20(e)–(h)), larger sized nanoflakes with few nanolayers can be detected. The growth phenomenon of WS2 nanoflakes also powerfully depends on D. The image of nanoflakes with D = 9 cm, 9.5 cm, 10 cm, and 10.5 cm is shown separately in Fig. 20(e)–(h).
At a short value of D (9 cm) (Fig. 20(e)), the WS2 nanoflakes grow rapidly, while at larger D values (10.5–11 cm), larger sized WS2 nanoflakes with 1 L volume and few layered structures can be attained (Fig. 20(g) and (h)). On the top surface of the MXene surface, the growth phenomenon of the WS2 nanoflakes is also studied. Fig. 20(i)–(k) depicts three traditional SEM images. Fig. 20(i) shows a situation in which WS2 flakes are produced on the flat surface of Ti3C2Tx nanoflake scattered on the substrate and is eventually homogeneously covered by the top surface. The evidence strongly recommends that the WS2 flakes on the top surface of the Ti3C2Tx MXene flake can nucleate and expand without any obstacles.

Fig. 20(j) is comparable to WS2 with a terrace-like boundary morphology formed on the Ti3C2Tx MXene flake surface. In the image, both upper and adjacent sides of the terrace-like edges are sheltered by the thin layers of WS2. The evaporation of Ti3C2Tx boundaries in Fig. 20(i) and (j) shows that WS2 shelters the entire adjacent side. Fig. 20(k) shows a rather contradictory feature from Fig. 20(j): despite the laminated WS2 flakes on the lateral side of the Ti3C2Tx nanoflake, on the upper and adjacent sideways, numerous minor petals are also grown.
A conceivable development structure based on Fig. 20(i)–(k) is predicted and schematically represented in Fig. 20(l). In summary, in this facile developed system, a bilayer form of Ti3C2Tx nanoflake exists on the top surface of the target substrate. The Ti3C2Tx nanoflake works as a non-uniform nucleation mediator, similar to additional predecessors such as BN and graphene practically applied in the progression of 1 L volume of the WS2/MoS2 nanoflakes.
In summary, the engineered 2D transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), Ti3C2Tx (MXenes), and their heterostructures can be applied as outstanding candidates in storage devices and solar energy conversion applications.

The FETs network-based on TMD and Schottky interactions are shaped along the channel and the source/drain electrode; thus, the limiting distance at the junction borders has an important effect on the polarity and performance of such strategies. Therefore, for TMD-based nanodevices, appropriate electrode networks are mandatory.

Graphene is an semi-metal substance that is used as an essential material in 2D electrical devices because of its exceptional value and lightness. Duan et al. reported a first vertically-stacked FET of graphene-MoS2, which displays a high on–off ratio and high current density when graphene is employed as a tunable basis electrode. Herein, the graphene-based electrode network has been more comprehensively confirmed and found to display better electrical efficiency than other metal electrodes. In another report, Lee and colleagues developed the MoS2-based flexible and translucent FETs, where graphene was applied as a gate electrode and the boron nitride (BN) network functions as a dielectric thin layer, enabling the FETs to be integrated with additional 2D electronic components. However, an electric field shows a great impact on the work function phenomenon of graphene and can be changed accordingly, which controls the Schottky barrier elevation.
The geometry of the graphene cone band means that the height of the existing barrier does not change significantly in the presence of high gate voltages due to the presence of graphene's Fermi level far away from the Dirac point, which occurs in the region where the states' enormous density exists. 2D graphene has comparatively small working function value (almost 4.6 eV) and its limited tuning range indicates that it is primarily used in the FET electrode systems based on the n-channel network.
The newly-discovered developing 2D MXene nanomaterials are considered as a new addition to the 2D family and are attracting much attention nowadays. MXenes are now widely known for their respectable conductivity and extraordinary efficiency in lithium ion battery applications in the recent years. MXenes are also regarded as possible candidates in the 2D FET system.
Halim et al. argued that in the visible to infrared range, Ti3C2 thin films produced through the deposition process and subsequent etching stages can achieve 90% light transmission value, which is a beneficial feature for translucent electrodes. However, research achievement has rarely been identified in the application of MXenes in the network of 2D electrodes. Consequently, Fig. 21(a) shows the complete technique for the synthesis of Ti2C(OH)xFy lakes from the precursor, i.e., Ti2AlC, to highlight the use of MXene-based materials.
After completing the HF treatment of MAX phase precursor Ti2AlC, the Al species among the Ti2C nanolayers was successfully removed due to the HF-based etching process and substituted with surface functionalities, Ti2C(OH)xFy nanoflakes were attained by successful mechanical exfoliation. The tape exfoliation process fabricated thin layer nanoflakes of Ti2C(OH)xFy MXene. After that, it was studied with an optical microscope on the polymeric bilayer system of SiO2/Si substrates coated with polyvinyl alcohol (PVA/PMMA).
Nanoflower MoS2 and WSe2 were then instinctually treated on a 285 nm SiO2/p+ doped substratum for the exfoliation process. The atomic structure and internal morphology of the as-fabricated Ti2C(OH)xFy nanoflakes was examined by TEM, as represented in Fig. 21(b). The HRTEM image and the adjacent SAED image indicate that the crystallinity (hexagonal symmetry) of the hexagonal grid design is preserved by the Ti2C(OH)xFy nanoflakes with an α grid parameter of about 0.31 nm during the synthetic process.
The absence of Al element signal was noted addition during EDX spectroscopy for Ti2C(OH)xFy nanoflakes, confirming the successful removal of Al after the HF treatment. The presence of O and F signals may be due to the presence of surface functional groups of –F and –OH, formed as a result of the efficient etching of Al.

Fig. 21(c) shows the AFM image of the as-fabricated form of the Ti2C(OH)xFy nanoflake; the optical microscopic image in the inset presents the flakes' surface morphology. After completing the exfoliation process, thicker Ti2C(OH)xFy nanoflakes with a size of (≈20–30 nm) are successfully attained with a scale bar of numerous micrometers, which works as a reliable candidate for the fabrication process of the device.
On Ti2C(OH)xFy nano-flake, the hall voltage curve is agreed to list its electric properties for electrode-based applications. The Hall's voltage is successfully measured with the system shown in Fig. 21d as a main purpose of the various magnetic fields (B).
The conductivity is as high as 0.026 S of nanoflake Ti2C(OH)xFy. In addition, using a four-sample method that is much smaller than the previously recorded Graphene-Cr intersection values, the Ti2C(OH)XFy nanoflakes and Cr species are calculated to have a value of ∼0.243 μm for each species. Ti2C(OH)xFy can be predicted as an outstanding electrode material in TMD-based interface networks due to its extraordinary conductivity, minor metal link resistance, and small Schottky barrier value for both MoS2 and WSe2.
Unlike graphene (4.6 eV), 2D electronic devices based on WSe2 and MoS2 FETs with Ti2C(OH)xFy electrodes have an advanced working feature value (≈4.98 eV) and (ii) a low Schottky barrier for both MoS2 and WSe2, making them favorable candidates as 2D electrodes in harmonizing metal oxide semiconductor (MOS) inverters.
In summary, for improving the long-term stability and multifunctional applications, Ti3C2Tx and Ti2CTx MXene derivatives are assembled with other nanomaterials such as 0D, 1D, and 2D materials for heterostructure preparation using different deposition techniques. The semiconductor industry then obtains an alternative material that reduces the barrier to develop ultra-thin large-area membranes for channels. 2D MXenes (including Ti3C2Tx and Ti2CTx) were successfully combined with three different mixed-dimensional heterostructure geometries, namely 2D–0D (metal oxide quantum dots), 2D–1D (single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNT) and inorganic semiconductor nanowires), and 2D–2D (semiconducting single-walled carbon nanotubes) (2D material including GR, TMDCs, group IIIA-VIA semiconductor). Due to the existence of surface functional groups, Ti3C2Tx and Ti2CTx have been investigated as 2D materials with specific properties, such as the ease of large-scale synthesis in water, high conductivity, metallic and semiconducting characteristics, hydrophilicity, excellent chemical stability, and environment friendly nature, and can develop the van der Waals heterostructures due to the presence of surface functional groups. In some cases, due to the low interaction between MXene and its derivatives in these heterostructures, such as various 2D sheets, NPs, and nanowires (NWs), it is possible to combine the benefits and eliminate the drawbacks of the individual MXene materials, which have high mobility, tunable narrow bandgap, and mechanical strength but also have new functionalities due to their porous structure. The interconnection of 2D MXene nanosheets in heterostructure formation provides abundant electron transport routes, allowing for ion transport and diffusion. These characteristics are critical for well-organized energy conversion and storage materials. Furthermore, the intrinsic properties of MXenes have been largely preserved, making it a reliable and efficient method of protecting 2D MXene products from environmental oxidation. Some important applications of Ti3C2Tx and Ti2CTx MXene-based mixed dimensional heterostructures in the fields of photovoltaics, catalysis, and energy storage devices are listed in the application section.

Intensive efforts have been dedicated to both the synthesis and discovery of the essential properties of MXene-based 2D nanostructures, encompassing storage stability, solubility characteristics in organic solvents, thermal, rheological, electronic, physical, and powered properties. In addition to the mentioned uses, translucent conducting electrode networks with viscosities range from 5 to 70 nm and extraordinary efficiency have also been prepared based on Ti3C2Tx flakes using diverse fabrication procedures, including spray coating and spin coating, and drop-casting.

Due to their high value of conductivities, similar to the developed thin films, they have considerable potential to substitute old exclusive transparent conducting electrodes, yielding a diverse range of optoelectronic and electronic devices, such as transistors, supercapacitors, solar cells, and photodetectors.

In the last decade, photodetectors have found a broad range of uses, simplified via fiber and data communications due to the explosion in information, data transfer, and distribution requirements. Subjects such as the Internet of Things (IoT), a simulated intelligence network and virtual credibility, among other Internet demands, are particularly important for data center processes to achieve extraordinary value for bandwidth. High-speed, very sensitive identification is typically satisfied by p-type-intrinsic-n-type (PIN) photodiodes, metal–semiconductor–metal (MSM), avalanche photodiodes (APD), or metal-graphene-metal photodetectors. MSM-based photodetectors, however, have higher value of dark currents, I(dark), and therefore, a higher noise range, which is associated with PINs and APDs. However, numerous methods have been found to diminish I(dark), for e.g., by importing a wider bandgap semiconductor such as AlGaAs to address the Schottky crossover altitudes of metal–semiconductor borders. Launching a final density compact size value of semiconductor conditions and industrially narrowed transporter gases separate the injected negative charge species from the metal surface.

For all the mentioned strategies, the high responsivity value needs greater absorption areas. However, the system's total surface area limits the bandwidth by increasing the RC time coefficients and the transport times for the assembly of electrical supplies. Therefore, a tradeoff is needed based on its different uses.

The MXene family is considered as a new member to the class of 2D materials. In MXenes, many technical aspects have recently been exposed, mainly because they represent hydrophilic characteristics but are quite conductive. The supplementary aspect is the facile strategy by which huge amounts of inert aqueous forms of colloidal suspensions are prepared.

In this context, five diverse MXene nanolayers, i.e., Mo2CTx, Ti3C2Tx, Nb2CTx, T2CTx, and V2CTx, were first manufactured from their parent MAX phase precursors. Their morphological, mechanical, and steady-state optical properties are discussed. Between the five selected candidates of MXene derivatives, Ti3C2Tx is selected as a standard system due to its relative stability against oxidation, moderately high free carrier density, and value of electrical conductivity. In principle, due to not possessing high dark currents, nanostructured materials showing conductivity value similar to metals are not favored for photodetector applications. During the last decade, MXenes have been widely used practically, attaining diverse aspects and highest values. Bahram et al. showed that highly organized patterning, imperfect by the photolithography technique, is conceivable. The suspension of MXene is deposited on the GaAs substrates by spin-coating and lifted off by the simple use of an organic solvent such as acetone. The graphical representations of the fabrication procedures and the prepared devices combined with the energy band drawings are displayed in Fig. 22. The procedure applied successfully, displayed schematically in Fig. 22, is approved under ambient conditions, and produced devices with the feature size of the order of 2 μm. However, the working device considered here shows superior gaps among the contacts. The outcomes discussed here confirm that this low-cost, facile, robust, and scalable approach results in photodetectors that are as decent as and, in most characteristics, more effective than other materials such as Ti/Au-based electrode networks. Ti3C2Tz MXene was selected because it is by far the most studied and thus has widely explored characteristics.
Ti3AlC2 MAX stage precursors (Fig. 22(a)) have been printed and delaminated for the system manufacturing process (Fig. 22(b)). It is then established on the GaAs substratum surface (Fig. 22(c)) and industrialized by photoresist and contact lithography methods (Fig. 22). A spin-coating process was used to deposit the colloidal suspension on the target suspender's surface (Fig. 22(e)).
Lastly, the photoresist was detached after dipping the resultant device in acetone solvent (Fig. 22(f)), producing two MXene pads having 2 μm spacing, as shown in the SEM image in Fig. 22(g). The sharpness of the corners and edges is remarkable, which represents that the resolution power of the mentioned approach is limited by the lithography technique; the mentioned findings are efficient and highly organized than prior works.
The consequences described below confirmed that this low-cost, facile, scalable procedure produced photodetectors that were efficient and reliable and, with the highest figures of merit (FOM), better than other materials made-up of the Ti/Au-based electrode system. This is prominent since nothing more advanced than a spin-coater—apart from a mask aligner—is appropriate.
The energy band representation of the prepared MX–S–MX device system is shown in Fig. 22(h) under the influence of a moderate bias, and under considerable external influence in Fig. 22(i). The Ti/Au–GaAs–Ti/Au metal–semiconductor–metal (MSM) device network was likely obtained from the familiar mask arrangement and lithographic approach for the MX-based device system network to allow side-by-side evaluations.

Fig. 23(a) and (g) is associated with the current-tension (I–V) optical response of indistinguishable structure devices, in which MXene is located in the left-hand column-based arrangement and the other AU-based electrode in the right-hand-side column configuration, in the absence of light and at varying wavelengths of 532, 780, and 830 nm. The wavelength λ of 532 nm and 780 nm was used to highlight the contact transmittance; 830 nm can be applied to efficient-speed, short-range optical tele/data infrastructure strategies. Fig. 23 indicates that Ti3C2Tx, which is equal to 0.2 Na for Ti/Au MSM, is Dark Power, 0.6 Na for wavelength (533 nm) and 0.9 Na for wavelength (533 nm) and 0.9 Na for MSM (780 and 830 nm). The gaps between the cathode-anode system of about 5, 15, and 35 μm were correspondingly invented in the direction of the MXene semi-conductor intersection to investigate Idark machines. I(dark) was shown to be the magnitude of the distance and comparatively independent of the potential applied. Hence the strength of noise, an extraordinary five orders of degree variation in photocurrent value are noticed at 8 V bias below the brightness by an optical power 0.34 μW.
An optical power versus photocurrent assessment is shown in Fig. 23 for wavelength λ = 532 and 830 nm, at numerous biases. The optical response is significantly advanced by replacing Au with MXene, mainly for λ = 830 nm, where an enhanced improvement is detected at 8 V bias. Lastly, MXenes, including Ti3C2Tz applied herein, represent the exclusive characteristic that the value of their work function can be tuned from 2.14 to 5.65 eV by different means, such as hole injection or surface termination by –O–, –F, or –Cl. This delivers a broader range compared to different metallic structures applied in metal–semiconductor–metal (MSM)-based detectors. The quantum efficiency value of MXene–GaAs–MXene and Ti/Au MSM at the maximum wavelength of 830 nm is 42 and 11% at maximum analyzed bias (8 V). On the other hand, the 280 mA W−1 responsivity value is observed under 8 V bias at 830 nm in case of MXene–GaAs–MXene, which is comparatively better than the responsivity value of ≈72 mA W−1 of the Ti/Au-device. Significantly, it was observed that the MX–S–MX based photodetectors showed values of quantum efficiency (QEs) that are generally 1.5–3 times greater than those of the Ti/Au MSM heterostructured materials.
In addition, the evidence that ohmic contacts can be molded by appropriate surface functionalities on MXene is relatively tempting for the micro and nanoelectronics industry.

Exploring MXenes as a new class of 2D material in optoelectronics has been frequently stated. To date, in order to arrive at the potential uses in optoelectronics based on graphene (Gr) and carbon nanotubes (CNTs), scientists have explored the properties of Gr/silicon and CNTs/silicon arrangement.

Silicon has several reliable and good properties such as stable physical and chemical characteristics, suitable bandgap, inexpensiveness, and environment friendliness. Gao et al. studied the features of van der Waals heterostructures based using Ti3C2TX MXene on n-type silicon (n-Si) as the target substrate. After examining the characteristics of Ti3C2TX/n-Si based heterostructures, the improvement in the mentioned structure to prepare the vertical junction photoelectrical devices is highly desired. Ti3C2TX MXene has an excessive crossing effect on van der Waals heterostructures based on Ti3C2TX/n-Si. Eventhough the transmittance of Ti3C2TX reduced after increasing the quantity of the thin layer, the junction transport in the Ti3C2TX/n-Si heterostructure device and the conductivity were amplified. The junction outcome is also subjective to hardening condition, temperature, and partial voltage. Based on the evidence mentioned above for Schottky's crossover, which is created due to Ti3C2TX/n-Si heterostructures, scientists have invented an autonomous, vertical junction system. The Schottky effect gradually improved as the temperature increases. Nevertheless, as represented in Fig. 24(a), the converse current is gradually enhanced due to the increasing temperature; at the same time, the value of applied voltage is reversed. The mentioned consequences strongly indicated that the current concentration is subjugated by thermal-based excitation processes alternatively with the Schottky junction effect. Fig. 24(b) represents the I–V curves developed as a result of Schottky junction diode slowly at 25–30 °C under the influence of air before and after the process of vacuum annealing at a temperature of 200 °C for a time duration of 1200 min. The ideal impacts and barriers to the Ti3C2TX/n-Si Schottky heterostructures before and after are 3.10 and 0.48 eV, 2.53 and 0.53 eV. The ideal factor reduced value of current and after the annealing process suggested that the annealing method removed the shortcoming of the boundary in the Ti3C2TX/n-Si film. Also, the process of annealing related to Ti3C2TX MXene under the influence of Ar could successfully eliminate the reactive functionalities of (–F) from the structure. Referring to the published scientific data, the original Ti3C2 surface shows a higher work function value as compared to Ti3C2 functionalized with F. Therefore, the Schottky barrier of the Ti3C2TX/n-Si heterostructure after the process of annealing is greater than that before. This reflection shows that by controlling the arrangement of reactive terminal groups on the surface of MXenes, the presence of Schottky barriers present between Si and MXenes can be improved. As shown in Fig. 24(c), the I–V curves with simulative daylight for the Ti3C2TX/n-Si heterostructure system are evaluated under illumination intensity values in the range of 40.4 to 106.4 mW cm−2. As the system has been brightened by implementing a robust lighting method, the value of the photocurrent increased. The severe Iph/Idark ratio of the Ti3C2TX/n-Si-based heterostructure system at zero-bias potential is presented in Fig. 24(d) with frequent illumination intensity values. The ratio of Iph/Idark can influence the zero-bias potential value to be 105. The heterostructures developed as a result of van der Waals forces between Ti3C2TX/n-Si devices can then be invented as reliable self-driven photoelectric detectors.
The vertical configuration is sufficient for the exit and transmission of photon-mediated transporters. The dimensions are analyzed to mean that Ti3C2TX MXene has a stable working function value of 4.37 eV and can, as a result of van der Waals forces, create a Schottky contact with n-Si at 25–30 °C. This heterostructure device Ti3C2TX/n-Si-based Schottky junction barrier can deliver a short circuit current density 12.9 mA cm−2 and an open circuit voltage 0.34 V under 100 mW cm−2 brilliance. Finally, the self-driven photodetector based on Ti3C2TX/n-Si heterostructures with a current Iph/Idark ratio of ≈105, 26.95 mA W−1 responsivity, 1.67 ms recovery time, and 0.84 ms reaction time was successfully developed.

The Ti2CTx (MXene) thin layer photodetector (PD) is advantageous for the carriers, designed to direct high value-based system performance. Ti2CTx can be used to design a morphology of nanoribbon arrays (a plasmonic grating geometry) to advance the performance performance of the avalanche-based photodetectors of the InSe/Ti2CTx heterostructures, which can enhance the photodetectors’ light absorption phenomenon. Lee et al. prepared the InSe/Ti2CTx-based heterostructures and checked their photodetector applications. Fig. 25(a) shows the InSe/Ti2CTx-based electrode works as a PD under the influence of light illumination. The heterostructures’ disparity was analyzed as a primary drain voltage parameter in the dark current (Fig. 25(b)). With a rise in the drain voltage value, the value of dark current progressively enhanced and was saturated at a potential value of ∼1.3 V. Afterward, with additional enhanced drain voltage value, the intensity value of the dark current was enhanced, which is due to the carrier increase under the influence of high applied voltage.

As a key parameter, the linearly increasing current level in its saturation settings can be accredited to influence the process of ionization with hot carriers within the InSe channels. Also analyzed is the relationship between ln(V) and ln(1–1/M); M is the repetition component of the charge carrier, measured as M = I/Isat, where the current value observed at 1.3 V potential is Isat. The inset (top right) in Fig. 25 shows that the interaction between ln(1–1/M) and ln(V) is progressively linear, indicating the existence of electron and hole pairs as a result of avalanche transporter growth. When the drain voltage is higher than 1.3 V and the electric response value is about 52 kV cm−1, then the carrier multiplication effect decreases. The influence of the drainage current progresses under blue light with a wavelength of 405 nm, as depicted in Fig. 25(c).
In particular, the value of avalanche increases and reaches a maximum of 500. The time-determined findings in Fig. 25(d) display the immediate-increasing time (<2 ms) as well as dropping time (25 ms). The response time is higher than the 2D material-based photodetectors already mentioned, possibly due to the defective material boundary process, due to the transmission and patterning manner during device manufacture. Inset is the optimization process of the device production, which may be required to enlarge the response time frame. Kelvin Force Microscopy Probe (KPFM) was used to monitor the InSe/Ti2CTx avalanche PD (APD) tape construction and to guide the Ti2CTx and InSe heightening of the Fermi level (Fig. 25(e)). Fermi values are estimated to be at 4.9 and 4.4 eV for both Ti2CTx and InSe, which are in agreement with previously recorded data values.
Although MXene shows a great light-to-heat performance, the photothermal effect of Ti2CTx MXene is not directly connected in the developed devices with avalanche multiplication effect. On the other hand, photothermoelectrical effects will take part in the photocurrent system in the light's design to increase the renewal efficiencies and various Seeback factor coefficients in case both of the InSe and Ti2CTx MXene; this requires further developmental research in the future. The Schottky barrier between MXene and InSe nanoflake of the Ti2CTx electrode network amounts to 0.7 eV. The Schottky junction is superior to the dark current value and uses a high drainage voltage that can contribute to the avalanche outcome. The schematic representation of the InSe/Ti2CTx heterostructure electrode-based PD band geometry under positive effects is shown in Fig. 25(f).
The extreme range of values of the electric field fast-tracks the photoexcited transporters toward high energy level; consequently, supplementary pairs based on electron–hole pair are stimulated by transporter development, which improve the value of the drain current.
As shown in Fig. 25(g), the both the attractive undecorated APD electrode (InSe/Ti2CTx, left hand side) and the InSe/Ti2CTx APD (P-InSe/Ti2CTx, right hand side) were instantaneously invented with similar contents of Ti2CTx and InSe nanoflakes. The SEM data for the devices is shown in Fig. 25(h). Fig. 25(i) shows the transfer curves (dry current function as a main function of the gate voltage).
Both the decorated and undecorated InSe/Ti2CTx heterostructure electrodes for APDs display similar values of dark current curves; nevertheless, after light illumination, approximately three times advanced value of current was observed for the P-InSe/Ti2CTx APD as compared with undecorated APD, signifying the increase in the photoresponse induced by the Ti2CTx MXene nanoribbon arrays. APD shows a strong (more than 3 orders) light-to-dark current, the energetic ratio of 0 V gate voltage, with the P-InSe/Ti2CTx heterostructure APD. The time-determined dimension consequences are represented in Fig. 25(j), demonstrating the better photoresponse behavior of the electrode where P-InSe/Ti2CTx heterostructure works as APD. The P-InSe/Ti2CTx heterostructure reaction times are 0.5 and 0.8 ms, respectively, as shown in Fig. 25(k). The visible range-to-NIR array is exposed to increasing potential in Fig. 25(l).
Comparatively, unconventional current is detected for the decorated APD below the influencing illumination due to the low dark current, representing advanced affinity to light. InSe's photoresponse is high in the visible range; in addition, the photo response behavior in the NIR segment can also be strongly enhanced due to the presence of MXene Ti2CTx with the plasmonic geometry. It is noticed that as compared with the heterostructure, the InSe/Ti2CTx electrode works as APD in the absence of the plasmonic geometry-based response, the heterostructure P-InSe/Ti2CTx APD device (Fig. 25(l)) displays robust photoresponse and an extremely low value of power density. Fig. 25(m) represents the value of photocurrent disparity of various electrodes. Responsivities (R) calculated using Fig. 25(m) are displayed in Fig. 25(n). Fig. 27(n) displays that in the light absorption saturation process of the InSe nanolayers, with the increase in the incident strength, the responsivity values decreases. Due to the presence of a higher photocurrent, the P-InSe/Ti2CTx APD gives higher responsivity. The highest photoresponsivity value of 1 × 105 A W−1 was achieved for the patterned InSe/Ti2CTx APD under blue light irradiation. Fig. 25(o) shows that the highest detectivity range is 7.3 × 1012 Jones, and short photoresponse time (∼0.8 ms) was achieved below a wavelength of 405 nm light illumination for the decorated InSe/Ti2CTx APD. Due to the growth of the incident light power, the photocurrent value gradually grows; also, the heterostructure layers decorated by InSe/Ti2CTx are often higher than the modified photocurrents. The details of the device performance based on MXene-based 2D heterostructures for photodetectors is summarized in the photovoltaics section (Table 2a).
MXene-based 2D heterostructures and applications
Serial number
Major field
Layer structure
Device performance
Application
Ref

Table 2a

Photovoltaics
MXene–GaAs–MXene
Quantum efficiency 42%
Photodetectors

238

Responsivity value 280 mA W−1
Ti/Au MSM
Quantum efficiency 11%
Photodetectors

238

Responsivity value ≈72 mA W−1
Ti3C2TX/n-Si
Short circuit current density 12.9 mA
Photodetectors

129

Open circuit voltage 0.34 V
Iph/Idark ratio of ≈105
26.95 mA W−1 responsivity
Recovery time 1.67 ms
0.84 ms reaction time
InSe/Ti2CTx
Lower dark current (3 nA)
Photodetectors

171

Responsivity value 1 × 105 A W−1
Highest detectivity range is 7.3 × 1012 Jones
Short photoresponse time (∼0.8 ms)
Ti3C2Tx–Si heterojunction
Power conversion efficiency 11%
Solar cell

253

Ti3C2Tx MXene/n + np + –Si solar cell
Power conversion efficiency 11.5%
Solar cell

254


Table 2b

Catalysis
TiO2/Ti3C2
The average output value of O2 between 0.07 mL h per day
Water splitting

284

H2 between 0.15 mL h every second time
The ratio between H2 and O2 = 2:1
Applied bias photon-to-current efficiency = 1.47%
Ti3C2NPs/CdS
The H2-generating activity of 14342 mmol h−1 g−1
Water splitting

283

Quantum efficiency of 40.1% at 420 nm
Amazing factor of 136.6
Ti3C2 QDs/Cu2O NWs/Cu
Methanol production value of 153.38 ppm cm−2
Reduction of CO2 to methanol

120

Carrier density ND of Cu2O NWs/Cu is 1.09 × 1019 cm−3
ND of Ti3C2 sheets/Cu2O NWs/Cu is 1.89 × 1019 cm−3
ND of Ti3C2 QDs/Cu2O NWs/Cu is 2.75 × 1019 cm−3

Table 2c

Energy storage
Ti3C2
Reversible capacity 96.2 mA h g−1 at 0.5C after 300 cycles
Li ion batteries

140

Ti3C2/CNT
Reversible capacity 428.1 mA h g−1 at 0.5C after 300 cycles
Porous Ti3C2Tx (p-Ti3C2Tx)
Capacity value of p-Ti3C2Tx was 110 mA h g−1 at the current rate of 0.5C
Li ion batteries

329

Capacity value of p-Ti3C2Tx/CNTs was 790 mA h g−1 at the current rate of 0.5C

p-Ti3C2Tx/CNTs
Capacity value of p-Ti3C2Tx/CNTs ≈1250 mA h g−1 was attained at a cycling rate of 0.1C
Ti3C2/TiO2
Capacity value of 209 or 176 mA h g−1 at various current density values, such as 500 or 1000 mA g−1, after 200 cycles
Li ion batteries

74

Ti3C2Tx–50 wt% Fe2O3
Specific capacity of ∼270 mA h g−1 at 1C (∼203 mA h g−1 based on the composite) and rate performance of 100 mA h g−1 at 10C
Li ion batteries

352

MXene (Ti3C2Tx)/TiO2
Lithium–sulfur batteries deliver 800 mA h g−1 at 2C after 1000 cycles
Lithium–sulfur (Li–S) batteries

90

3D Ti3C2Tx
Reversible capacity ≈330 mA h g−1 at a current rate of 2.5C after completing 1000 cycles
Na-Ion batteries

139

Poly(diallyldimethyl ammoniumchloride) PDDA-BP/Ti3C2
Capacity value of 1112 mA h g−1 with a value of current density about 0.1 A g−1, within the 2000 cycle range
Na-Ion batteries

10

Ti3C2Tx/rGO
1 M PVA/H2SO4 electrolyte
Supercapacitors

402

Capacitance 2.4 mF cm−2 at a potential of 2 mV s−1, volumetric capacitance value is calculated to be about 80 F cm−3
Ti3C2Tx/rGO
6 M KOH electrolyte
Supercapacitors
Volumetric capacitance 370 F cm−3
Gravimetric capacitance 405 F g−1
High energy density of 63 mW h cm−3 at a power density of 0.06 W cm−3
10000 charge/discharge cycles
3D micro-supercapacitors (MSCs) Ti3C2Tx/rGO
PVA-H2SO4 gel electrolyte
Supercapacitors

406

Specific capacitance of 34.6 mF cm−2
Scan rate of 1 mV s−1
Cycling efficiency with capacitance preservation of up to 91%
Number of cycles 15000 cycles specific capacitance security of 81.7%.
Ti3C2Tx/SWCNT
1 M MgSO4 aqueous solution is employed as the electrolyte volumetric capacitance of about 350 F cm−3
Supercapacitors

160

Current density 5 A g−1
Number of cycles 10000
Ti3C2Tx/CNTs
Electrolyte: organic electrolyte (1 M TEABF4 in acetonitrile
Supercapacitor

138

Capacitance: 245 F cm−3 (85 F g−1) at 2 mV s−1
Capacitance retention at 100 mV s−1
Ti3C2Tx/RuO2
Electrolyte: 1 M H2SO4
Supercapacitor

101

Capacitance: specific capacitance value of 388 F g−1 (10 mV s−1 scan rate value)
Effective current density value of 20 A g−1 over several 20000 cycles

Solar based energy, is a new class of energy foundation up till now, is inappropriately incomplete by admittance to sunlight. Integrating solar cells with energy storage instruments is considered as a capable method to meet the everyday energy requirements in the form of solar energy outside the obligatory limitations of sunlight availability.


This original solar cell category was created based on a heterojunction charged by a translucent conducting layer of an n-type silicone (n-Si) wafer and an electrode made of MXene. In resolving the charge carriers' re-joining, a thin layer of innate silicon dioxide (SiO2) exhibits significant characteristics. It is highly desired and needs time to develop a cheap, solution-processable solar cell based on a Ti3C2Tx-on-Si based heterojunction with preliminary productivities of ≈5% under the influence of replicated AM 1.5 full solar illumination. In addition, the PV efficacy of the as-synthesized Ti3C2Tx-on-Si based solar cells can be increased to 9% by integrating the simple chemical-dependent handling method in the form of HCl and AuCl3. Following HCl treatment, it has been concluded that the surface doping effect of the MXene layers, resulting in an improved conductivity value, significantly improves the charging process properties of the established devices.

Subsequently, the suitable use of a thin layer based on anti-reflection means that the typical competence is greater than 10% (according to the measuring records from more than 15 devices), with a high power conversion efficiency (PCE) approaching 11%, which represents the high value of the repeatable scheme of the solar cell.
This work adds a new class based on 2D Ti3C2Tx (MXene) and Si-based heterojunction to the exceptional solar cell family. The floating method can be applied to manufacture the heterojunction with an SiO2 nanolayer of insignificant viscosity (as represented in Fig. 26(a)) since the Ti3C2Tx films could be removed from the Si substrate immediately after the elimination process of the thermal oxide layer.
In comparison, the thin-layered shape of SiO2, due to the oxidation process induced by the presence of traces of moisture, could be forged when the substratum Si, containing a wet portion of Ti3C2Tx/MCE, is put in a vacuum-based oven at a temperature of 75 °C. Consequently, a Ti3C2Tx/SiO2/Si junction boundary would be designed at 25 °C, as represented in Fig. 26(b).

Fig. 26(c) and (d) show the complete photovoltaic output of the ready devices by floating and oven transfer with typical J–V curves. The short-circuit dependent current density value (Jsc) decreased (range from 10.86 to 22.77 mA cm−2) with an intensely better open-circuit voltage (Voc) (range from 0.319 to 0.525 V) and fill factor (FF) (range from 0.319 to 0.525 V) with the creation of the SiO2 layer between the Si and Ti3C2Tx electrode (0.17–0.35). Consequently, the instrument's effectiveness with a thin layer of SiO2 was enhanced by about seven times compared to solar cells with the absence of oxide-based thin layer (4.20% vs. 0.58%).
It is not possible to distinguish the HF-treated electrodes' transmittance value over 8 d while the sheet resistance value snowballs after 4 d (as represented in Fig. 26(e)). As shown in Fig. 26(f), the efficacy of the instrument subsequently intensified the manufacturing process from 4.6% to 5.2% after 2 d, after which a decrease to 4.5% after 8 d of observation in an open atmosphere at 25 °C.
The increased expertise after 2 d can be correlated with the production of nanolayers of metal oxide (MO) (namely, TiO2). Previous reports have shown that the MO-based nanolayers can be used in heterostructured solar cells of carbon nanotube/Si as an anti-reflecting coating and a qualified carrier dopant.
Nevertheless, additional reduction in the efficient result of the device over 8 d was due to the enhanced development process of SiO2, TiO2, and carbon produced by the oxidation process. As associated with the initial competence of Gr/Si (1.5%) and perovskite-based solar cells (3.8%) in their first published results, the as-fabricated Ti3C2Tx/Si solar cells have before now displayed comparable efficiencies.
The J–V curves of an archetypal device constructed by introducing the oven-based approach under the influence of light and dark environments are represented in Fig. 26(g) and (h), correspondingly. The native layer of silicon oxide among the Si and clear electrically conducting electrode system can advance the connection excellence by overcoming the charge recombination process.
The as-prepared working instrument's power alteration ability is close to 5%, which can be further improved to over 9% by following the two-step chemical treatment (2% HCl and AuCl3) and over 10% by adding an anti-reflective thin layer. More outstandingly, in spite of the mentioned findings resulting from the unique effort to construct such kinds of solar cells, the initial productivity found in this effort was the remarkably high efficiency of about 11% with brilliant repeatable results. Lastly, it is expected that the future upgradation of different aspects of this newly-developed class of solar cells will allow conceivable commercial processes of this front-line machinery.

MXene-based derivatives in the area of photovoltaic engineering devices have rarely been examined. Kang et al. developed the Ti3C2Tx MXene-silicon-based van der Waals heterostructure for the ultrafast perpendicular junction-based photodetector strategies. The MXene Ti3C2Tx is the Schottky interface at the MXene/n-Si Ti3C2Tx border (Fig. 27(a)). Ti3C2Tx MXene supports the photogenic base-charging carrier departure and passage but not only as a transparent electrode when added to the Ti3C2Tx MXene/n-Si heterostructures. Also, 2D Ti3C2Tx MXene has meaningful additional conducting performance relative to solution-derived graphene; thus, it can be used for an effective work with the contact material in solar cells. In addition, the 2D Ti3C2Tx MXene is substantially better than derived graphene.

The delaminated Ti3C2Tx MXene is then used to cast deeply doped n+ surface of a heterostructure-dependent solar cell based on n + np + –Si. The combined structure based solar cell attains an inspiring value of fill factor (FF), short-circuit based current density (Jsc), and open-circuit based voltage (Voc) by diminishing the contact resistance value and combining the development by preventing alternative transporters out from the high-mixture contact section (Fig. 27(b)).

Fig. 27(c) represents the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the Ti3C2Tx MXene/n + np + –Si-based heterostructured solar cells upon AM1.5 G illumination previously and subsequently the RTA at dissimilar temperatures values such as 100, 200, 300, and 400 °C under the influence of an Ar atmosphere. PCE 9.53% with Jsc = 36.89 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.55 V, and FF = 46.79% is seen in the Ti3C2Tx MXene/n+ np + –Si-based solar heterostructured cell before the rapid thermal annealing (RTA) process. The unit's performance steadily increased up to 300 °C of the RTA temperature and then deteriorated when the temperature was slowly increased to 400 °C. The device was treated for the process of demolition at 300 °C, representing the uppermost PCE of ≈11.5% with Jsc = 36.70 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.54 V, and FF = 57.99%. Up to 300 °C of RTA temperature, the conductivity value of the Ti3C2Tx MXene film steadily increased. It was observed that after the adjustment phase at 400 °C, the Ti3C2Tx MXene film's conductivity value rapidly decreased; the results observed indicate that the MXene Ti3C2Tx film is unstable at higher temperatures. Besides, the resistance (Rs) cell series for the Ti3C2Tx MXene contact Si solar cell system was modeled by extracting the slope value from the dV/dln I versus I plots before and after RTA (Fig. 27(d)). Before and after RTA treatment, the system process at different temperatures (100, 200, 300, and 400 °C) gives cell resistance Rs values of 4.90, 4.22, 2.53, 2.38, and 2.78 Ω, correspondingly. Among all the mentioned temperatures values, the 300 °C annealed device represents the lowest value of sheet resistance, Rs. The interaction between the metal and Si, and the tension between Si and the interactive metal layers, also instigates the Rs of a solar cell. Without disrupting the open-circuit dependent voltage, the high Rs will minimize the short-circuit current value. Optical characterizations have been found to achieve the greater vision of the outstanding solar cell efficiency of Ti3C2Tx MXene-interacted Si cells.
As shown in Fig. 27(e), within the wavelength range from 400 to 1000 nm, n + np + –Si has limited replication and high absorption process value. It may be due to the pyramidal surfaces with SiNx ARCs competently catching light and aligning the Ti3C2Tx MXene to touch inner reflection-based surfaces, allowing the light to spontaneously transform back into Si to enhance the absorption process. A delaminated few layered Si solar cell coated with Ti3C2Tx MXene shows an extremely high PCE of about 11.5%.
The Ohmic contact development process between metallic Ti3C2Tx MXene and a deeply doped Si-based surface reduces the value of contact resistance. It overcomes the charge carrier recombination phenomenon, thereby contributing to the excellent Voc and Jsc. RTA enhances electrical contact between Ti3C2Tx MXene and Si and not only decreases the sheet resistance of the Ti3C2Tx MXene-based thin films but also refines the resistance of the cell series (Rs) and provides a PCE of up to 11.5% with 20% growth in the fill factor (FF), which is found to be an extraordinary value (Fig. 27(f)). In addition, the above findings also address the physics leading to electrical contact across the boundaries of MXene and Si during the development process of the remarkable performance performance of MXene-contacted Si solar cells, which is dangerous for the further enhancement of comparable MXene-based contact devices. The details of device performance based on MXene-based 2D heterostructures for solar cells is summarized in the photovoltaics section (Table 2a).

The elegant chemical approach and exclusive morphological engineering recommend the MXene derivatives for sensors, energy storage, water purification, and catalytic applications.

Specifically, the thin layered geometries of MXenes permit the speedy transport and storage of ions. They are subsequently extensively studied as electrodes of supercapacitors and metal-ion-based energy storage devices. Electrochemical reactions such as HER, oxygen evolution (OER), and oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) work as the keystones of various renewable energy sources such as metal–air batteries, water electrolysis, and fuel cells. To replace the rare noble metal-based catalysts, the scalable application of these listed advanced technologies provides an opportunity for producing strong, stable, and cheap catalysts.
Keeping in mind the benefit of the synergic effects, the composites of transition metal and N-doped graphitic carbon-based ingredients form one main group of electrocatalysts, which are nominated for OER, HER, and ORR. Seeing the effectual charge transfer kinetics of MXenes and their metallic characteristics, it is fascinating that the cross of N-doped carbon materials and MXenes can be applied as new catalysts with even greater performance. Some of the common methods used for the production of energy and storage devices are discussed in the following sections.

There is an urgent need to develop novel and environment-friendly clean energy networks, besides their well-equipped storage systems. Hydrogen is projected to be a wide potential future technology-based energy source because of its environment friendliness, renewability, and high efficiency. Predominantly, the maintainable conversion and storage processes of recurrent wind and solar energies as sources of hydrogen due to the electrolysis of water are ideal and attractive solutions to these mentioned problems.

Platinum (Pt)-based emerging nanomaterials are effective and widely used catalysts for the electrochemical hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) with approximately zero over-potential. Still, the high market price and insufficient reserves of Pt greatly limit its extensive use.
To date, though massive development has been done in the area of emerging earth-abundant co-catalysts, numerous main drawbacks, rising from the inherent characteristics of recently applied co-catalysts, are still present. (i) There is a great deficiency of plentiful surface terminal functionalities to facilitate strong binding with photocatalysts for characteristics such as long-term stability and fast interfacial charge transfer; (ii) Owing to the destruction of the p-conjugated system and poor semiconducting/insulating conductivity, there is an inefficient flow of electrons within the co-catalysts (for instance, GO); (iii) objectionable free energy from Gibbs for the growth of H2; (iv) due to the absence of hydrophilic functionalities, there is insufficient interaction with water molecules; and (v) unpredictability and/or obligation of an moisture-free environment (such as hydrogenases and their mimics). Consequently, it is extremely necessary to explore a novel class of materials as alternative co-catalysts that can overcome these disadvantages. During the last decade, MXenes, a novel class of over sixty 2D nitrides, metal carbides, and carbonitrides, have introduced a wide range of potential electrode materials such as (Li)-ion batteries and supercapacitors.
In particular, their illustrious properties make them extremely capable for resolving the above highlighted issues as follows. (i) The presence of frequent hydrophilic characteristics containing terminal group functionalities (–OH and –O) on the surface of MXenes make them easily available for strong interaction with numerous semiconductor materials; (ii) the outstanding metallic conductivity value of MXenes guarantees effective transportation of charge; (iii) the unprotected terminal species in the form of metal sites (such as Nb, Ti, or V) on the surface of MXenes might provide favorable redox reactivity as compared to carbon materials; (iv) the presence of frequent hydrophilic-based functionalities on the surface of MXene encourages its robust communication with aqueous solution; and (v) MXene can promote its working as a stable ingredient in aqueous solutions. On account of the aforementioned special properties and the characteristics of the 2D MXene family, MXene is expected to be an excellent photocatalytic material in the future. In 2018, Zhang et al. prepared Ti3C2 MXene NPs and applied them to metal oxide/Ti3C2-based heterostructured photoanodes. The heterostructure based on TiO2/Ti3C2 showed significantly improved photoactivity response value for PEC water splitting in the presence of heavy interfacial contact and improved charge loss.
Raman spectroscopy is used before and after the loading phase of Ti3C2 to analyze the band structure of TiO2. The high peak intensity can be attributed to the Raman rutile TiO2 bands at 233, 445, and 610 cm−1 (Fig. 28a). After the complete deposition process of Ti3C2 NPs, a newly generated peak equivalent to Ti3C2 MXene was detected at 143 cm−1, which supports the development of the TiO2/Ti3C2 heterostructure. For Ti3C2NPs, the peak index of electron spin resonance (ESR) at 2,1, 2,0, and 1,95 signifies unpaired electrons caused by the surface defects (Fig. 28(b)). After the coupling of TiO2 NPs, the disappearance of these peaks indicates the possible path related to the transfer of charge around the boundaries of the heterostructure.
XPS is used for the study of TiO2/Ti3C2-based heterostructures' surface settings and oxidation state. It is noted that the peak intensity value of Ti 2p3/2 and Ti 2p1/2 moved to a lower binding energy level when compared with the original TiO2 NPs (Fig. 28(c)), which identifies the TiO2 reduction process as defined in the published literature.
Robust relations between Ti3C2 and TiO2 are the explanation for the entry of Ti 3p. The significant Ti–OH-amplified species at 532.2 eV unambiguously describes the improved hydrophilicity characteristics of TIO2/Ti3C2, an important parameter for PEC water electrolysis, concerning the O 1s spectrum (Fig. 28(d)).
The initial TiO2 curves and the dissimilar quantity of Ti3C2 NPs are demonstrated in Fig. 28(e) photocurrent-voltage (I–V) curves. Under the influence of the AM 1.5 irradiation process, the original TiO2 NPs only display reasonable movement. In contrast, all the concerned samples with the contents of Ti3C2 NPs yield better photoactivities.
It is noteworthy that a super-high photocurrent density (194 mA cm−2) at 1.23 V compared to RHE is generated with a lamination process of 100 mL Ti3C2, which is about 6 times higher compared to the original TiO2 arrays (0.3 mg mL−1). The photochemically dependent water splitting process shows H2 and O2 production and is the key product of the lamination process. Pure TiO2/Ti3C2 photoanode produces an average output value of O2 between 0.07 mL h per day and H2 between 0.15 mL h every second time. The 2:1 ratio between H2 and O2 provides successful evidence for the reaction of water splitting. In addition, the applied bias photon-to-current efficiency (ABPE) is intended.
As exposed in Fig. 28f, the extreme worth of ABPE of TiO2/Ti3C2 heterostructures geometry is 1.47%, which is approximately 6 times more efficient as compared to original TiO2 (0.27%).
In another study, Qiao et al. used density functional theory (DFT) for the determining process to find the potential usage of Ti3C2 MXene as a source of H2 generation co-catalyst. The published literature investigated a balanced project and synthetic strategies of Ti3C2 quantum dots on behalf of the abovementioned computational evidence. It combined them with a selected photocatalyst, CdS, to effectively produce H2 photocatalytically. Also, both the experimental methods and theoretical evidence were employed to investigate the authenticity of this high activity source. Based on theoretical investigations, it was determined that due to the ineffective HER activity and unfavorable EF, both the pristine Ti3C2 and F-terminated Ti3C2 are not very suitable applicants for H2 production.
On the other hand, O-terminal group on Ti3C2 is predicted to be an effective candidate as a co-catalyst, measured from the unresolved HER activity, exceptional metallic based conductivity, and anticipated Fermi level EF. The study proceeded as follows: firstly, the Ti3C2 NPs were familiarized into the Cd aqueous solution (Ac)2; during the process, the cations of Cd2 þ were effortlessly adsorbed on several –O terminal groups. Formerly, the source of organic sulfur, thiourea, was mixed into the resultant suspension form and created an interaction with Cd2 þ. After the overall process, the subsequent prepared mixture/suspension was subjected to the hydrothermal treatment. Throughout this procedure, most of the –F terminal groups present on the surface of Ti3C2 NPs were substituted by reactive functional groups such as O/–OH, and the thiourea species disintegrated gradually to set free the traces of S2 anions into the solution form. The resulting S2 anions interacted with the Cd2 μ cations that were settled gradually on the Ti3C2 NPs surface, which led to the formation and development of CdS NPs on the Ti3C2 surface. The temporary interaction between these traces of S2 anions also resulted in the unnecessary cations Cd2 β, which further produced the pure form of CdS nanoparticles from a similar nucleation method (CdS NPs).
Then, the combined structure of both CdS/Ti3C2 was developed in a well-organized way and the resultant nanoparticles of CdS and Ti3C2 form a huge cauliflower-like geometry of sub-microsphere (SMS) structures. Extraordinarily, the coupling of Ti3C2NPs with CdS species is certainly central to an extraordinary improvement in the overall photocatalytic process. As exhibited in Fig. 29(a), bulk CdS (CT0) represents a brief photocatalytic activity value of 105 mmol h−1 g−1. On the other hand, after the loading process of a small amount of Ti3C2 NPs (0.05 wt%), there is an increase in the photocatalytic movement in the range from CT0.05 to 993 mmol h−1 g−1. With the increasing content of Ti3C2 NPs, the photocatalytic phenomenon of Ti3C2-based CdS was progressively increased. Unexpectedly, an enormous photocatalytic H2-generating activity of 14342 mmol h−1 g−1 was attained on CT2.5, above that of CT0 by an amazing factor of 136.6.
In contrast, under similar experimental conditions and applied contents (2.5 wt%), NiS, Ni, and MoS2-engaged CdS, SMS (Ni–CdS, NiS–CdS, and MoS2–CdS) represent extremely low values of photocatalytic activities of 12,953, 8,649, and 6,183 mmol h−1 g−1, correspondingly (Fig. 29(a)). From the abovementioned evidence, NPs of Ti3C2 have been confirmed to have the most reliable, active, and easily approachable co-catalysts. To improve the vision into the control of associated characteristics of Ti3C2 on the concerned photocatalytic action of the composite CdS/Ti3C2, a sequence of studies was undertaken. At the initial stage, the dimensions of the co-catalyst and the effect of its surface area on the photocatalytic activity was analyzed. The increase in the surface area, as shown in Fig. 29(b), gradually increases the photocatalytic activities following the loading of the ingredients (Ti3C2-E, Ti3C2-5000, and Ti3C2 NP). The main reason behind Ti3C2's smaller and higher visible energy positions is its fast access to reactants and stronger coupling with CdS. The interaction of the co-catalyst's active functional group with CdS/Ti3C2 heterostructure's photocatalytic activity is also discussed. Ti3C2 NPs were subjected to hydrothermal treatment to minimize the number of –F terminations. The surface variance of hydrospatial (HT)-Ti3C2 NPs (56.7 m2 g−1) is very small compared to the surface of the Ti3C2 NPs (120.1 m2 g−1) but the photocatalytic activity of 1,527 mmol h−1 g−1 is favored by HT-Ti3C2 NPs compared to the Ti3C2 NPs (Fig. 29(c)) (1.105 mmol h−1 g−1).
It might be due to the –O/–OH that replace the –F on Ti3C2 NPs, which results in enhanced density value of the working active sites (–O end group), in contrast with after hydrothermal treatment, where the surface area is decreased. On the basis of the above experimental consequences, a photocatalytic mechanistic approach representing the surprisingly enhanced photocatalytic H2-generating phenomenon of CT2.5 is highlighted in Fig. 29(d). Since the original Fermi levels (EF) of O-ended Ti3C2 (1.88 V versus standard hydrogen electrode (SHE)) is less negative than that of n-type CdS contents (slightly lesser than its CB location of 0.91 V versus SHE), the presence of a close interaction between Ti3C2 and CdS in CT2.5 is responsible for the transportation of charge from CdS to Ti3C2. As a result, the value of EF for Ti3C2 increases above the possible hydrogen evolution (0.00V versus SHE) value and the stability value of EF in the heterostructured network system CdS/Ti3C2.
A similar case was described by Jakob et al. Temporarily, the restrained positive ion capacity persists in CdS quite near the combined structure CdS/Ti3C2 border, where a layer of space charge is molded, and the valence band (VB) and covalent band (CB) of CdS are set as ‘upward’. Hence, a Schottky junction boundary is developed among CdS and Ti3C2 structures. In the presence of visible-light (λ ≥ 420 nm) radiation, the negatively charged species (e−) are excited from the lower VB level to the higher CB position of CdS. Because of the condensed thickness of the space charge layer, i.e., primary nano-sized particles of CdS, the ‘upward’ twisting of the higher order CB and lower position VB for CdS layer is also restricted (Fig. 29(d)).
In 2018, Wang and coauthor industrialized a facile hydrothermal method to provide an effective route for the in situ development of MoS2 nanolayers placed vertically on the planar shape nanolayers Ti3C2 to form hierarchical heterostructures. Keeping in mind the advantages from the uncompleted layer geometry and the robust interfacial link effect, the subsequent MoS2/Ti3C2-based heterostructure geometries can attain a massive improvement in the HER activity associated with the bulk nanosheets of MoS2. The MoS2/Ti3C2 heterostructures show much lower charge transmission-based resistance value of 14.74 U than that of the original MoS2 (187.3 U), signifying the faster interfacial charge transfer.
The abovementioned findings represent that the outstanding conductive layer of Ti3C2 functions as an effective promoter and a rapid charge transfer source. It is probably due to the strong interfacial coupling of Ti3C2Tx Mxene with MoS2 species, which significantly increases the electrode system's charge transfer.
Furthermore, the value of the catalytic current density obtained by the heterostructure MoS2/Ti3C2 heterostructure at an overpotential value of ∼400 mV is approximately 6.2 times higher than that of bulk MoS2 nanosheets. On behalf on the mentioned evidence, it is believed that the Ti3C2 MXene nanosheets can be applied as a strong candidate for the development of magnificent electrocatalysts for water splitting.
In summary, these findings validate the potential of newly-developed earth-abundant class of MXene materials to construct low-cost and highly efficient photocatalysts/photoelectrodes. There is a great demand for large-scale and maintainable solar hydrogen production through the photocatalytic water splitting(ws) process. Moreover, for the long-term successful operation of the ws process, there is a need to introduce stable earth-abundant and highly active co-catalysts to substitute the expensive and scarce platinum species. The details of the device performance based on MXene-based 2D heterostructures for water splitting are summarized in the catalysis section (Table 2b).

The excessive emission and accumulation of CO2 are the dangerous to the life on Earth. Consequently, several efforts have been undertaken to convert CO2 into renewable and green fuels. Recently, semiconductor-based catalysts have functioned as advanced materials for the efficient photoelectrochemical (PEC) and photocatalytic reduction of CO2. Among them, p-type Cu2O nanostructures, which appropriately occupy a conduction band, which has additional negative characteristics as compared to the potential redox value of CO2 and value of bandgap of not more than (≈2.2 eV) to ensure comprehensive absorption process of light, have been broadly discovered for the photoinduced adaptation of CO2. Nonetheless, the major inadequacy of Cu2O-based nanomaterials is the fact that it rapidly undergoes redox reaction after interaction with the photoinduced charge carriers. Different strategies have been developed in the past decade to protect the surface sites of Cu2O by integration with some protecting and conducting layer, such as carbon-based material such as CNTs, hierarchical metals, or other semiconducting material. These approaches, though, necessitate the difficult or expensive fabrication. Recently, multiple techniques have disclosed MXenes' possible uses in photocatalysis. For example, Ti3C2 nanosheet has been actively used as an effectual co-catalyst on the surface of TiO2, CdS, C3N4, ZnS, or Bi2WO6 to enhance their photocatalytic activities.

Ti3C2 QD/Cu2O nano-structures (NWs), based on a widespread electrostatic organizational process for solar-driven CO2 conversion processes, have been synthesized by Peng and coworkers with a planned decoration. It is also shown to increase the photocatalytic behavior and consistency of Cu2O NWs considerably with T3C2 QDs. As shown in Fig. 30(a), the photocurrent of the heterostructured Ti3C2 QDs/Cu2O NWs/Cu is the most efficient amongst the three mentioned heterostructures, in the form of better light absorption, charge departure, and transport simplified by Ti3C2 QDs. Furthermore, the photostability of Ti3C2 QDs/Cu2O NWs/Cu is also found to be extraordinary compared to the other heterostructures (Fig. 30(a)). The poor stability of bare Cu2O NWs is possibly due the easy oxidation process in open atmosphere, which significantly limits their practical applications. Keeping the problem in mind, the conducted experimental approach involves the protection of Ti3C2 and recommends that Cu2O NWs have better contact with Ti3C2 QDs than the Ti3C2 sheets.
As shown in Fig. 30(b), an initial rise in the Ti3C2 QD concentration gradually increased the photocurrent value. Still, a very high level was not entirely suitable because Ti3C2 QDs prevented the Cu2O NWs from adsorbing very weakly. The photostability phenomenon is also gradually increased due to the increasing concentration of Ti3C2 QD until it reaches a plateau.
The efficiency value of all the three abovementioned Cu2O-based photocatalysts applied for CO2 photoreduction was assessed over a time duration of 6 h. The heterostructure based on Ti3C2 QDs/Cu2O NWs/Cu affords the maximum methanol production with a concentration value of 153.38 ppm cm−2, which is relatively 8.25 times more than that obtained from the combined structure of Cu2O NWs/Cu-based heterostructure and 2.15 times of that obtained from the heterostructure of Ti3C2 nanosheets/Cu2O NWs/Cu. The carrier density (ND) value of Ti3C2 QDs/Cu2O NWs/Cu is 2.75 × 1019 cm−3, which is higher than the ND value of Ti3C2 sheets/Cu2O NWs/Cu (1.89 × 1019 cm−3) and Cu2O NWs/Cu (1.09 × 1019 cm−3). This is all possibly due to the presence of conductive Ti3C2 nanosheets with Cu2O NWs.
To comprehend the devices’ fundamental improvement of the efficiency by the synergistic addition effect of Ti3C2 QDs and Cu2O NWs, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was studied.
As Fig. 30(c) shows, the loading transfer resistance of Ti3C2 QDs/Cu2O NWs/Cu is minimum relative to the other two heterostructures structures, namely, Cu2O NWs/Cu and Ti3C2 sheets/Cu2O NWs/Cu, showing, in comparison to those of the two others, the radius of the previous semicircle in the continuum of EIS, which clarifies the small curve. The Mott–Schottky (M–S) curve attained as a result of the photoelectrochemical measurement process under the influence of illumination created by simulated solar light is represented in Fig. 30(d).
The negative value of the slope represents the association between 1/C2 (where C represents the value of capacitance), and the value of the practical potential shows the p-type based semiconducting value of Cu2O.
The flat value of the band potentials values of the Cu2O NWs/Cu, Ti3C2 sheets/Cu2O NWs/Cu, and Ti3C2 QDs/Cu2O NWs/Cu, explained via the direct inference of 1/C2, are 0.59, 0.56, and 0.52 V (vs. reversible based hydrogen electrode (RHE)), correspondingly. The mentioned findings propose that Ti3C2 QDs provide a superficial reduction in the band twisting edge value at the connection point with the Cu2O NWs. The enhanced CO2 reduction performance performance of the Ti3C2 QDs/Cu2O NWs/Cu is owing to the abilities of Ti3C2 QDs to allow charge transfer, reduction band bending edge, and upsurge in the value of carrier density. The details of the device performance based on MXene-based 2D heterostructures for catalysis for the reduction of CO2 to methanol is mentioned in Table 2b.
In summary, it is validated that Ti3C2 QDs meaningfully advance the stability of Cu2O NWs and significantly recover the value of their photocatalytic efficiency as a result of the excellent phenomenon of charge transfer, carrier density, charge transport, and light adsorption process. MXene QDs were discovered as a novel 0D material, which have recently attracted significant research interest due to their exclusive characteristics. The mentioned findings provide a new path to their future uses.

Lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) have been seen as a competitive research field over the last decade. They are known as a dominant power base for widespread mini-electric vehicles and consumer electronics. Consequently, emerging new efficient electrodes with required power, compactness, and energy density, besides a long-term life cycle, are immediately required. For high-performance Li-ion batteries and outside the Li-ion energy storage systems, many electrode materials have been proposed. In the recent years, 2D layered nanomaterials such as graphene, WS2, and SnS2 have been recommended for the addition or removal of Li+ in LIBs. High power density can only be achieved in systems with rapid ion and electron transport. Still, because of the limited lattice space in bulk electrodes, ion movement is often constrained, resulting in slow charge–discharge processes and rapid electrode failure. The rated output is further limited by typical battery cathode materials (oxides). However, there are still some intrinsic issues. Due to its low energy density, slow charging time, shorter life cycle, and security issues, the current LIBs are inadequate to meet the increasing power and energy demands for advanced electronic devices. In reality, 2D materials are attractive in LIBs for the following reasons: cathodes and anodes. First, the wide spacing between the layers allows Li+ to be intercalated and decrease the diffusion distance of Li+. Second, many 2D materials such as graphene, MXene, and TMDCs are metallic and have a high conductivity, which promotes transport costs and improves the rate of performance. Third, 2D materials are more capable of lithium storage than their bulk counterparts due to the combined advantages of easy structural engineering (surface, flaw, doping or edge) and a wide surface area.


Considering the easy access to market and their metallic characteristics, the exclusive thin layered geometry, and multidirectional nature, computational studies have shown that Ti3C2 MXene displays a minor barrier (0.07 eV) for the diffusion process of Li+ as compared to graphite interlayers (0.3 eV). On behalf of the abovementioned characteristics, Ti3C2 is a promising substitute compared to the graphite anodes in LIBs. Nevertheless, the obtained thin layers of Ti3C2 are frequently functionalized with OH or/and F moieties, which favors a high-value diffusion barrier and reduces the value of conductivity. Among various conductive materials, CNTs are an extraordinary class of nanomaterials, which are predicted to simplify the kinetic study of electrochemical reactions because of their electronic transport properties and high feature ratio. Thus, keeping in mind the characteristics of CNTs, it is highly possible that their small dimensions can take part as active materials to recover the value of conductivity and efficiency of LIBs. Layered composite structures of WS2/CNTs, MoS2/CNTs, and graphene/CNTs are described and applied as anode materials for refining both the discharge capacity and stability. The electrochemical performance performance of pure Ti3C2 and Ti3C2/composites CNTs was confirmed through coin cells. In the voltage range of 0.05–3.0 V, Fig. 31a reveals the CV results of the Ti3C2/CNTs heterostructures in a fixed ratio (1:1). Two peaks at 0.65 and 1.1 V are observed during the first period of rotation.

The first peak represents the establishment process of moderately reversible interphase of (SEI) the solid electrolyte layer, and the subsequent peak may be credited to some titanium-based oxides or reaction of Li+ with Ti3C2.
Two wide peaks based on the reversible oxidation route located at 2.0 V and 1.8 V are related to the active Li+ reaction process with titanium(IV)-based composite during the subsequent cycle process. The electrochemical process based on the mechanistic approach can be illustrated as follows.
Ti3C2 + xLi+ + xe− ↔ Ti3C2Lix

Fig. 31(b) shows the potential value against the capacity profiles due to the composite structure of Ti3C2/CNTs (1:1) in a series of cycles (1st, 5th, 10th, and 20th) at a current rate value of 0.5C. Together with the CV effect, two plateaus are found in the very initial curve of expulsion with two different potentials, 0.7 V and 1.2 V. In addition, the first curve represents extraordinary charge and discharge capacities value of 403.5 and 642.5 mA h g−1, correspondingly. The decrease in the value of the unchangeable capacity is usually measured to be due to various irreversible procedures, irrespective of the degradation of the electrolyte and establishment of the solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) layer. In the mentioned cycles, the evidence obtained as a result of overlapping the discharge process-charge curves represent a positive symbol for the stability of the electrode. The cycling performance of the Ti3C2/CNT heterostructure with different weight ratios of the Ti3C2 to CNTs material at 1C is the maximum power value of the composite Ti3C2/CNTs structure ratio after 200 cycles (1:1). It is noticeable that a large quantity of CNTs or Ti3C2 in the composites are responsible for the lesser capacity or poor electrical conductivity; correspondingly, both the ingredients represent a confrontational outcome on the electrochemical properties. These pieces of evidence are further supported by some published data elsewhere; the optimized mass ratio value of the Ti3C2 MXene nanolayers ingredients to CNTs was found to be 1:1.Fig. 31(c) shows the cycling performance of the composite paper of Ti3C2/CNTs (1:1) and the original Ti3C2 film at a value of 0.5C. For the initial Ti3C2 and the composite structure of Ti3C2/CNTs elsewhere for 300 cycles, the discharge power value is maintained above 96.2 and 428.1 mA h g−1. The synergistic effect of Ti3C2/CNTs is responsible for the higher release rate, where the accumulation of CNTs has a significant influence on the electrical conductivity value of the composite structure. The evaluation of the discharge power values for CNT material in the original at 0.5C states, however, that the value of 94.2 mA h g−1, which is far less than that of the combined Ti3C2/CNT composite (428.1 mA h g−1), was retained after the completion of 70 cycles. Fig. 31(d) reflects the bare Ti3C2 cycling output and the combined heterostructure of Ti3C2/CNTs (1:1) at a varying current rate value. Interestingly, the combined composition of the mixtures of the Ti3C2/CNT heterostructure defines the well-improved cyclic capacity retention results at different current rates between 0.1 and 2C compared to the original Ti3C2 MXene film. The Ti3C2/CNT heterostructure discharge power values are 713.2, 543.1, 407.7, 320.6, and 218.2 mA h g−1 at various current rates such as 0.1C, 0.2C, 0.5C, 1C and 2C, respectively. Moreover, it is observed that when the value of the current density reverses to the initial stage, i.e., 0.1C, the composite electrode Ti3C2/CNTs recovers its earlier reversible standards, suggesting its excellent reversibility. The greater cycling stability, high capacity, and the value of rate performance can be credited to the subsequent parameters. Also, the presence of space between the layers of Ti3C2 is filled by CNTs, which is responsible for enhancing the composite electrode's conductivity. As a result, Li ions can be easily transported to the internal part of the film and interact with the concerned energetic nanomaterials according to the location needed. Therefore, a reasonable capacity value and excellent cycling stability can be obtained. Gogotsi et al. advanced mesoporous MXene (p-MXene) flakes p-Ti3C2Tx electrodes with larger and more open structures and precise surface areas compared to their pristine counterparts, which displayed better capacity for Li-ion storage associated with the less-porous Ti3C2Tx/CNT films. The electrochemical characteristics of the p-Ti3C2Tx films (5 mm-thick) were assessed by studying Li-ion half cells, where the films applied were as an operating electrode material and the Li metal represents both the working and counter electrodes. The lithiation and delithiation peaks' occurrence indicates a more capacitive performance-based efficiency in the cyclic voltammetry (CV) profiles of the p-Ti3C2Tx/CNT heterostructures (Fig. 31(e)). Also, the reversible baseline Li capacity value of p-Ti3C2Tx was 110 mA h g−1 at a current rate of 0.5C, whereas that of the original Ti3C2Tx films were 35 mA h g−1 (Fig. 31(f)). It is further noted that the first-cycle capacity was reached after the addition of 10 wt% CNTs at 790 mA h g−1 (Fig. 31(f)). The capacity value was first released after the first cycle phase before increasing continuously until it reached 500 mA h g−1 after the completion of 100 cycles.

The capacity value of ≈500 mA h g−1 is significantly advanced after increasing the 100 cycles to a 0.5C current rate value than ≈110 mA h g−1 for p-Ti3C2Tx in the absence of the CNT material (Fig. 31(f)) or ≈220 mA h g−1 for the combined structure of the Ti3C2Tx/CNT film, where the MXene material is not porous (Fig. 31(f)).
These implications show that the p-Ti3C2Tx and CNT porous structures' combined phase will lead to improved MXene Li capacities significantly. It is noted that the influence of the CNTs ingredients on the entire capacity value of the composite type paper is insignificant because of their low size content and imperfect capacity. The combination of p-Ti3C2Tx/CNT electrodes showed a reliable value of the specific capacities even when moving toward high current rates (Fig. 31(g) and (h)). At a cycling rate value of 0.1C, a capacity value of ≈650 mA h g−1 was accomplished. It was observed that the value of capacity was gradually reduced with increasing cycling rates. Still, it happened progressively, for instance, the capacity value of ≈110 mA h g−1 at 60C and ≈230 mA h g−1 at 10C were acquired.
On the other hand, for the pre-cycling process combined structure of p-Ti3C2Tx/CNT-based heterostructured electrode material, an extraordinary capacity value of ≈1250 mA h g−1 was attained at a cycling rate of 0.1C, which released ≈330 mA h g−1 after increasing the cycling rate value of 10C. These standards and parameters are much more advanced as compared to Li titanate material at analogous cycling rate values, representing the larger Li-ion-based storage characteristics of p-Ti3C2Tx. Nevertheless, the abovementioned reported values for the p-Ti3C2Tx/CNT-based heterostructured films at all the rates are significantly surpassed relative to any stated values before in the literature. The significant rise in the capacity value is accredited to the presence of porous p-Ti3C2Tx flakes, responsible for the greater Li ion adsorption and the increase in the storage capacity.
These explanations are not clear; it is hereby shown that the cycle based on the charge/discharge curves are far more suggestive of the supercapacitor-based devices as compared to typical Li-ion-based energy storage devices. Also, any circuit in which the electrodes specified are supposed to be applied has to deal with this reality, such as in Li-ion-based condensers or cross devices.
At a cycling rate of 0.1C, a high-capacity value of ≈1250 mA h g−1 was calculated, and extraordinary capacity retention value by the composite electrode p-Ti3C2Tx/CNT at extraordinary current densities was attained. In addition, the developed chemical etching technique can be applied to other newly developed MXenes, such as Nb2CTx and V2CTx, to yield a family of absorbent MXene assemblies. Consequently, the mentioned findings deliver a facile and robust, yet actual and large scale, technique to advance the properties (both chemical and physical) of MXenes, the additional family of 2D material.

The hybridization process of nanolayer MXene and TMO-based nanostructures in a definite design is, thus, of the highest value since it can participate in the exceptional characteristics of the presence of two contributors in a corresponding way. Numerous results have been established and combined successfully with thin films based on thick MXene and TMO (e.g. Fe3O4 or MnO2).

The NPs of TMO can only be deposited on the exterior surfaces of a thick layer of MXene film in this hybrid-based structural framework, leaving a substantial content of the active areas that remain inefficiently applied in MXenes. In an additional study, Zhao et al. applied the hydrothermal approach for the successful hybridization process of NiCo2O4 nanoplatelets with MXene nanosheets.
However, in that case, in the MXene nanolayers' defects, the precursor base cations should be stored by means of electrostatic connections, where they are nucleated and then crystallized and cultivated in the morphology of the asymmetrical nanoplatelet form. Consequently, the size, shape, and assembly of the oxide NPs is unable to be controlled. Furthermore, MXenes would be oxidized in a facile way under the influence of oxygen liquefied in aqueous solutions via the hydrothermal approach.

In 2018, Xu et al. applied the van der Waals interactions approach and developed the self-assembly strategy of TMO nanostructures on the top surface site of MXene (Ti3C2) nanolayers. According to the published data, the mentioned information on the regular fabrication of 2D material-based heterostructures containing individual MXene nanolayers decorated with numerous TMO nanomaterials, including TiO2 nanorods, have been rarely reported. The lithium-ion storage features of the heterostructures based on TiO2/MXene can be explained by adding the CV dimensions. Fig. 32(a) displays three initial designs at a scan speed of 0.1 mV s−1 in the 0.01–3 V vs. Li/Li+ range. The first scan peak shows a possible decrease of ≈1.71 V and the oxidation peak is ≈2.05 V. This decrease is related to the lithium insertion/extraction in the anatase lattice. It is worth noting that the reduction and change in these peaks occurred at the resulting scan curves. The decrease in the peak intensity is an indicator of irreversible reactions. In contrast, the difference in the peak intensity reflects the conversion reactions; the two cases indicate a two-phase mechanical approach during the process of insertions and extractions based on lithium for the following equation.
TiO2 + xLi + xe− ↔ LixTiO2
Also, two narrow peaks and two wide area cathodic peaks at a potential value of ≈0.75 and 1.5 V in the region of the first scan region and a small anodic peak potential value at ≈1.9 V were also observed. The tiny anodic peak resembles the removal step of the MXene nanolayers from the surface of the Li-based species.
 Next, the heterostructure stability, i.e., of TiO2/MXene, particularly at high levels, is assessed by the cycle tests' value, as shown in Fig. 32(b).

After completing 200 cycles, the TiO2/MXene-based heterostructure form delivered an outstanding capacity value of 209 or 176 mA h g−1 at various current density values, such as 500 or 1000 mA g−1. A capacity value of up to 138 mA h g−1 was still observed even after completing the 2000 mA g−1 rapid cycling process. To confirm the superiority of the heterostructures based on TiO2/(Ti3C2)MXene, their cycle efficiency was correlated with those of the MXene nanolayers and TiO2 nanorods (Fig. 32(c)).
It is evident that after the effective achievement of 200 cycles, the two controller anodes correspondingly distribute the values of capacities of 48 and 167 mA h g−1 at a current density value of 500 mA g−1, which is far less than the observed value of the TiO2/MXene heterostructure.
In Fig. 32(d), their values related to rate capabilities are also compared and presented. The heterostructures based on TiO2/MXene have capacities that are as large as 272, 250, 233, 204, 175, and 140 mA h g−1 after the cycling at various current density values, such as 50, 100, 200, 500, 1000, and 2000 mA g−1, respectively, which are relatively sophisticated compared to those of their participant (MXene nanolayers and TiO2 nanorods).
If the current density value is changed to 50 mA g−1, the power value automatically changes to 277 mA h g−1. The TiO2/MXene heterostructures should be based on both the upward blocks' stable electrochemical efficiency value through the formwork and functional collaboration. The Nyquist curves resulting from electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) are equivalent to those in Fig. 32(e). All the listed Nyquist curves represent a single arc within the high-frequency array and an inclined line within the small-frequency value, which conforms to the charge-transmission based resistance (Rct) mechanism of lithium (W) solid-state dissemination, respectively. As the structure matches an Rct value of 83 Ω, which is greater than the MXene nanolayer value (51 Ω), the semicircle diameter value belongs to TiO2 nanorods, screening a greater resistance value due to the previous transfer of charge. Electronic-based resistance (Rs) value due to the heterostructures of TiO2/MXene, put between tidy MXene nanosheets and TiO2 nanorods, confirms the electrical conductivity value of the character displayed for the MXene nanolayers. Subsequently, after the TiO2 nanostructures were accumulated on the surface of MXene nanolayers, and a conductive system is developed, thus simplifying the transportation process of the charged species i.e., ions and electrons subsequent in a mainly condensed Rct worth of 30 Ω74-. The electrochemical efficiency value of the TiO2/MXene-based heterostructures is also correlated with a variety of additional TiO2-based anodes, containing numerous TiO2/graphene, as well as the lately described TiO2 based nanomaterial including the 3D form of TiO2−δ layers, TiO2/graphene walnut-like permeable core/shell structure, TiO2-based mesoporous type nanomaterials, TiO2 resonating spheres, and anatase TiO2-based crystals. Fig. 32f shows the stable and high percentage efficiency in heterostructures based on TiO2/MXene, explaining its potential uses clearly as a highly efficient lithium-ion storage network, as an effective anode-based structural material.
The electrochemical process-based efficiency value of the heterostructures based on SnO2 and MXene-based heterostructures is also assessed. The greater high-rate efficiency value of the SnO2/MXene-based heterostructure material also vindicates the distinctive structural strategy by introducing the MXene nanolayers as a 2D source for potential uses.
The successive preparation of heterostructures based on TiO2/MXene displays superior high-rate performance short of demanding any advanced process of post-treatment, such as binder/electrolyte optimization or surface encapsulation, and may be classified in the list of reliable candidates working as for the material applied as anodes for future generation highly-efficient and high-energy LIBs.

Features such as long life and high energy density-based Li-ion batteries (LIB) have become a demanding subject in recent times, particularly for energy storage devices and developing electric vehicles. Extensive investigations have discovered a novel electrode material for LIBs. For LIB applications to the emerging capable anode-based nanomaterials, rendering the inert form of the heterostructures based on MXene/Transition Metal Oxide (TMO) while retaining the geometry, the significance of electrical conductivity, and refining its diffusion is crucial. The 2D sheet-like structure of Ti3C2Tx (MXene) can be used as a metal oxide (MO) support substrate or in a sandwich-like geometrical arrangement. The combination process of the MO material with Ti3C2Tx MXene can overcome the disadvantages of the volume production of the MO species during the entire Li addition and extraction development process, resulting in enhanced rate capabilities and cyclability.

The Fe2O3-graphite-based composite structure preparation method for LIB as the anode material was documented by Wang et al.via the ball-milling (BM) approach. Due to the interaction between high conductivity and stable cyclability offered by MXene and high lithium storage power, the combined structure of Ti3C2Tx-25 wt and 2D Fe2O3/MXene NP-based heterostructure material can be striking anode materials for lithium-ion batteries (LIBs). Compared to composites arranged by the wet sonification or hydrothermal method on the surface of Ti3C2Tx nanolayers with a minimum MXene oxidation phase, the %Fe2O3 produced by the BM process results in a smooth dispersion of the Fe2O3 NPs.
Also, the prepared combined Ti3C2Tx/Fe2O3 structure established a minimum restacking method for the nanolayers and a higher level of an accurate surface area. In Fig. 33(a), the CV curves for Ti3C2Tx/Fe2O3-dependent combined structures at a scan rate of 0.2 mV s−1 are shown. The separate redox peak values at 0.85 and 1.9 V vs. Li+/Li, consistent with the reduction of Fe(III) to Fe(0) and Li addition phase into the Fe2O3 structure, correspondingly, are defined by the above structure. The load/discharge curves in the voltage plateau shown in Fig. 33(b) show the cyclic voltammogram (CV) redox peaks.
The charge/discharge arc process was used for the prepared combined structure; the quantity, as mentioned earlier for the first few cycles, was primarily monitored by the Fe2O3 conversion reaction's characteristic voltage profile, where the sloping voltage and the voltage plateau can be seen at the end position of the charge/discharge cycles. Importantly, after the 50-cycle process, the properties mentioned earlier were still present for BM25 and BM50, as shown in Fig. 33(c) and (d) but the voltage outlines discussed for Ti3C2Tx MXene indicated that both the materials were subsidized to changeable capacity value by the participants.
The results mentioned above strongly recommend that both participants benefit from the Ti3C2Tx/Fe2O3-based structure achieved by the BM method, enabling them to synergistically show highly efficient Li-ion storage power, rate capability mechanism, and good cycling stability. Therefore, the above findings provide a clear and effective development strategy for the preparation of the combined structure based on MXene/transition metal oxide for the anode of the Li-ion battery.
The overall reversible, fundamental capacity value of ∼270 mA h g−1 at 1C for Ti3C2Tx-50wt% Fe2O3 and the output value of about 100 mA g−1 at 10C were among the features mentioned earlier for the joint structure Ti3C2Tx/Fe2O3. The above findings will open the door for high performance and stable development of LIB electrochemical heterostructures based on MXene/transition metal oxides. The details of the device performance of MXene-based 2D heterostructures for Li ion batteries is summarized in the catalysis section (Table 2c).

Lithium–sulfur (Li–S)-based energy storing devices are promising next-generation energy storage networks because of the compensations of high theoretical energy density, cost, and environment-friendly behavior of sulfur.

Nevertheless, the practical demand of Li–S-based energy-storing batteries are still unmet due to the presence of some fundamental obstacles, such as the insulating behavior of the sulfur contents and the produced lithium sulfides (Li2S) species, and the unfavorable shuttle effect of the LiPSs intermediates throughout the process of cycling.
The shuttle effect damages the reactive nanomaterials and promotes anode corrosion, which leads to fast capacity fading and small faradaic efficiency or current efficiency.
Carbon contents with a high value of electrical conductivity, permeable geometry, and measured size have been dedicated to the project as sulfur hosts or inter-layers to limit the LiPSs to the cathode region. However, the poor linkage between polar lipids and non-polar carbon decreases the long-range cycling performance. The chemical preparation process for LIPSs with transition metal oxides of the opposite form, including TiO2 and MnO2, is an accessible method to reduce the movement of LIPSs through polar-polar interactions.
Recently, excessive potential values in energy storage-based applications have been recorded because of its exceptional conductivity, 2D-based geometry, and acidic surface. However, the restacking nature of the MXene-based nanolayers and the predictable overview of the enormous quantities of F-terminal functionalities on the top surface for LiPSs capture and catalytic conversion throughout the MXene material significantly limit the whole operation of the reactive functional surface. Thus, the manageable working phenomenon of the MXene surface is crucial for enhancing its efficiency and efficacy for high-efficiency Li–S based energy-storing battery devices.

The unfavorable transport in Li–S batteries' mostly results from the flexibility of the soluble contents of polysulfide intermediates and their inactive conversion kinetics. Yang et al. prepared a multifunctional catalyst with diverse qualities such as robust polysulfides (PSs), adsorption height, high specific surface area, superior polysulfide alteration activity, and electron conductivity of the in situ functionalization process of the TiO2–MXene (Ti3C2Tx) heterostructures. The changes in Ti3C2Tx to TiO2 can be determined by the hydrothermally-dependent oxidation time. The Ti3C2Tx distribution phase is revealed to the range from black to cloudy-white colors (inset in Fig. 34(a)–(e)). Ti3C2Tx samples (x h), where x represents the oxidation period, are shown separately. As shown in Fig. 34(a), Ti3C2Tx NSs display a well-organized surface, which results in some small NPs developing on its surface after 2 h of oxidation (Fig. 34(b)). It was found that the growth phase of the NPs was increasing after the oxidation cycles were increased, and the size of the NPs increased more rapidly (Fig. 34(c) and (d)). After this, oxidation was increased for approximately 8 h after the full disintegration of Ti3C2Tx NSs into combined uneven NPs (Fig. 34(e)).

The changes in the composition of Ti3C2Tx may be observed in the XRD patterns during this phase (Fig. 34(f)). Ti3C2Tx shows an apparent (0002) peak that results from Ti4C2Tx NSs' fractional stacking method.
The diffraction peaks are then obtained at 25.3° and 47°, showing the planes (101) and (200) of TiO2 NPs, which subsequently moved to a low angle of the (0002) peak of Ti3C2Tx MXene, showing a restacking phase of Ti3C2Tx NSs, which was regulated by the production of TiO2 NPs in its surface region.
To estimate the adsorption ability of the TiO2–Ti3C2Tx heterostructure toward the LiPSs, an adsorption-based investigation was carried out by the addition of diverse samples having similar weight of 5 mg into closed vials containing Li2S6 (volume 60 μL, concentration 0.1 M) diluted in 1,2-dimethoxyethane (DME) (volume is 5 mL).
As shown in Fig. 35(a), the adsorption-based capacity of LiPSs steadily increased after the oxidation period was increased from 0–8 h. The sample material with a corrosion period of 4 h nearly colored the LiPS solution and the further increase in the oxidation time does not exhibit excessive fluctuations. In a detailed investigation, using the chemical substance-based interaction process in the presence of LiPSs, the cells established by the sulfur contents function as the cathodes at various time intervals such as Ti3C2Tx (0 h) and Ti3C2Tx (4 h), which were accumulated and estimated (Fig. 35(b)).
The S 2p cathode XPS spectrum with Ti3C2Tx (0 h), which completed the cycling process, reflected the highest levels of element S8 and the combined structures of sulfate/polythionate/thiosulfate after the cycling procedure had been completed. However, two additional peaks at different potentials of 163.4 and 162.3 eV due to sulfur interactions with TiO2 and the Ti3C2Tx acid surface region of Lewis, were evident during the cathode association phase with Ti3C2Tx (4 h).
To further disclose the conversion procedure of LiPSs on the TiO2–Ti3C2Tx heterostructure-based surface region, the symmetrical form of cells created by the TiO2–Ti3C2Tx heterostructure varied with GN as the electrode material was accumulated with the concerned electrolyte comprising Li2S6. The CV curves in the voltage window of −0.7 to 0.7 V at a scanning rate of 10 mV s−1 are presented in Fig. 35(c).
The symmetrical cell displays more exhaustive redox peaks in the presence of Ti3C2Tx (4 h) contents compared to other time intervals such as Ti3C2Tx (0 h) and Ti3C2Tx (0 h) at 8 h. Furthermore, pure GR representative of the well-structured composition and surface properties that allow for an efficient platform for the use of sulfur material enable a reasonable balance between the adsorption process of the LiPSs and its surface conversion.
The TiO2–Ti3C2Tx heterostructure can efficiently increase the trapping height and conversion-based kinetics process of LiPSs. Fig. 35(d) represents the cross-sectional area of the SEM image, which estimates the wideness of the space between the layer to be ≈4 μm, and the small insets (top left and bottom right) obtained as a result of the EDX mappings of Ti and O indicate an even spreading of the TiO2–Ti3C2Tx heterostructure in the interlayer. The regularly-distributed TiO2 nanostructures on the MXene nanolayers are central to restricting the polysulfide content. The heterointerface safeguards rapid dispersion from TiO2 to MXene of the fastened polysulfide species and the oxygen-terminated surface of MXene provides an optimized environment with high catalytic activity.
TiO2–MXene heterostructures were employed in the fractional oxidation of Ti3C2Tx NSs. They showed the benefits of robust LiPSs trapping height, large surface size region, high conductivity, and electrocatalytic activity. The frequently dispersed TiO2 NPs on the surface of MXene provide many full LiPS trapping hubs. The heterostructure boundaries ensure highly efficient catalytic activity for the even diffusion process of LiPSs MXene to understand the efficient conversion efficiency. Thus, the accumulated interlayer created by the heterostructures of TiO2–MXene and GN effectively block the transfer process of the LiPSs and, in the meantime, advance the application of sulfur contents, which is necessary for a highly efficient cyclic stability value.
The modified lithium–sulfur-based energy-saving batteries show 800 mA h g−1 capacity value at 2C and a low value of capacity decay of 0.028% per cycle over 1000 cycles at a current capacity value of 2C. Even after the loading of the high contents of sulfur, i.e., 5.1 mg cm−2, the capacity holding value of 93% after the completion of 200 cycles was still preserved. In summary, it is concluded that the abovementioned findings open a new vision into the project of highly-efficient catalyst materials with functional chemical constituents and customize the surface chemical approach to control the polysulfide contents in Li–S-based energy storage batteries. The details of the device performance of MXene-based 2D heterostructures for Li ion batteries is summarized in the catalysis section (Table 2c).

Na-ion has been getting much more attention as an alternate material to the existing Li-ion-based energy storage batteries because of its suitable and reliable value of energy density value, low cost, and abundance of sodium salts species on Earth. The combination of a macroporous structure and a reliable value of conductivity associated with the 3D structure as microporous film MXenes makes them favorable applicants for electrochemical and Na-ion storage applications.

It is also essential to note that MXenes display a mechanistic approach based on pseudocapacitive Na-ion storage material, which reduces their advanced Na-ion capacity compared to other storage devices such as double-layer electrode material and provides a relatively higher rate of efficiency compared to bulk faradaic electrode material forms.

Gogotsi et al. developed binder-free and free-standing films that are directly used as anodes without any current assembling place, and their electrochemical performance was verified in a two-electrode cell system in the presence of Na foil as the standard material for the counter electrode.

A few cathodic/anodic peaks positioned at about 0.8/1.4 V versus sodium (Na)/sodium ion (Na+), conforming to the (Na+) addition/withdrawal from the surface region of the electrodes, are detected due to the 3D MXene-based film structure of the CV curves (Fig. 36(a)). Their width indicates a non-diffusion imperfect and pseudocapacitive mechanistic approach of Na+ storage at the surface of the MXene-based nanoflake structure, which is a constructive arrangement with the aforementioned published reports on MXene materials.
In the first term period of CVs, the existence of irreversible cathodic peaks, which can be certified to establish a solid-state type electrolyte boundary, is monitored for all these 3D structures of the MXene-based film electrodes. In addition, the irreversible reaction of Na+ with the reactive functionalities (F, OH, and O) has a position restricted between the layers of the MXene material on the surface and/or water molecules. The presence of 0.8/1.4 V ratio, the charge–discharge plateaus fit reliably with the detailed redox peak intensity in the CV graph at the current rate value of 0.25C, as shown in Fig. 36(a). Fig. 36(b) contrasts the rate output values of the three different MXene-based film 3D shapes. The Mo2CTx film was completed with a reversible capacity value of ≈370 mA h g−1, and correlated with ≈330 and 340 mA h g−1 for the Ti3C2Tx and V2CTx film electrodes, respectively, at a current rate of 0.25C. Both these films showed exceptional retention of capacity by maximizing the value of the existing charges.
Ti3C2Tx, Mo2CTx, and V2CTx had the corresponding power values of 120, 125, and 170 mA h g−1 at a special current rate of about 25C. It is noted that among all the 3D films listed, V2CTx displays reliable value of rate efficiency, which is credited to the primary spacing between its layers. The charge and discharge arcs of the 3D Ti3C2Tx film electrode are displayed in Fig. 36(c) at different current rate values.
These structures disappear at a value that supports the pseudocapacitive storage phenomenon of Na+ in MXenes. A similar approach are also detected for 3D V2CTx and Mo2CTx film-based electrode system, making their assembly favorable for Na-ion storage applications. The comparative study of Na+ storage ability of the 3D microporous structures of the MXene-based thin films with supplementary nanostructure materials is represented in Fig. 36(d).
The abovementioned 3D MXene-based thin films represent the enhanced gravimetric efficiency compared to many other published reports such as carbon-based materials in the shape of banana peels, porous carbon nanofibers, graphene/MoS2 papers, etc. The 1000-cycle consistency of the MXene macroporous film material with a current rate of 2.5C is defined in Fig. 36(e). Previously, the value of discharge capacities for Ti3C2Tx, V2CTx, and Mo2CTx were ≈390, 470, and 400 mA h g−1, correspondingly. Also, the charging values of the thin-film electrodes Ti3C2Tx, V2CTx, and Mo2CTx were ≈210, 260, and 210 mA h g−1, respectively. The Coulombic efficiency values of the abovementioned MXenes were measured to be 53.8%, 55.3%, and 51.2%, respectively, which are more than the previous system of film electrodes of the Ti3C2Tx/CNT system (total ≈40%).
After the overall discussion, it is concluded that the preliminary values based on irreversible capacities are largely accredited to the forward type reaction among the electrolyte species and the MXene nanoflakes.
Some development in the Coulombic efficiency can be credited to the partial exclusion of the surface functionalities attached on the MXenes due to the thermal annealing process during the fabrication process. Supplementary development can be accomplished by enhancing the surface chemical characteristics of MXenes. In particular, the 3D macroporous structure of Ti3C2Tx films achieves a consistent gravimetric storage performance for the Ti3C2Tx multilayered Ti3C2Tx particulate 18, and the hybrid thin films (CNT) for the Ti3C2Tx permeable Ti3C2Tx/carbon nanotubes (PDTC), which matches closely with the 3D-based macroporous structure. This can also be due to the increased electrolyte affinity by increasing the distance between the layers during the cycling processes at the active sites.
The V2CTx film represented a reliable value of stability, perhaps due to its enhanced preliminary spacing between the layer. All the mentioned 3D structures of MXene-based films show excellent stability for complete 1000 cycles. The Coulombic efficacy reached nearly 100% and without the apparent variation in its pseudocapacitive (high capacitance and high-rate capability) Na-ion storage performance. After completing 1000 cycles, the values of capacity stored by Ti3C2Tx, V2CTx, and Mo2CTx were ≈295, 310, and 290 mA h g−1, correspondingly. In short, 2D Ti3C2Tx MXene nanoflakes were uniformly distributed on the surface of the polymer and as a result, 3D-based macroporous structures were developed via a sacrificial template-based method.
The Ti3C2Tx hollow form spherical structures were stable and could be smoothly removed in solvents such as ethanol and water, signifying their possible usage in biomedical and environmental research areas. Due to the good interactions between the formed sphere structure and the metallic conductivity value for Ti3C2Tx MXene, the prepared 3D macroporous film structure of Ti3C2Tx was singular, flexible, and highly conductive. 3D MXene films have also been effectively prepared with additional design and arrangements except for Ti3C2Tx, such as V2CTx and Mo2CTx. The above 3D shape of the MXene-based films was directly applied as an anode material for the storage of Na ions; no binders or existing collectors were found. For 3D Ti3C2Tx, V2CTx, and Mo2CTx film-based electrodes device, with lower charge-rate capacities of 0.25C, reversible capabilities such as ≈330, 340, and 370 mA h g−1, respectively, were achieved, with an enormous performative and cycling constant value. After completing 1000 cycles, 3D Ti3C2Tx, V2CTx, and Mo2CTx were found to have recyclable capacity values of ≈295, 310, and 290 mA h g−1 at the current rate of 2.5C. The results were significantly improved compared with the values achieved with the multilayer shape of MXenes and hybrid MXene/CTN structures.

Phosphorus (P) is a reliable and promising contender as an anode material in sodium-ion batteries (SIBs) owing to its great theoretical capacity value of 2596 mA h g−1 by establishing the Na3P alloy and small electrode potential value, which virtually surpasses any supplementary SIB anode constituents currently accessible. Recently, P was applied as one of the emerging anode materials for SIBs; its electrochemical efficiency works as a constructive step for improvement as it seriously suffers from poor structural stability and insulation-based properties. Since the pioneering contribution by Yang and coworkers, P has been extensively examined as an SIB-based anode type material by merging P species with the electrically conductive matrix.

Many reports have published in favor of chemical attachment between both the participants such as P and carbon (C) medium with a reinforced interaction phenomenon, which can significantly advance the electrochemical cycle stability and decrease the potential value.
For instance, Song et al. equipped a long-term robust hybrid structure based on P-CNT by developing the P–O–C bond interactions to reinforce the contact forces between CNTs and the P species, greatly enhancing the worth of conductivity and providing a suitable environment to tolerate the large volume expansion, maintaining a constant value of capacity of about 91% after the completion of 100 cycles. Though the abovementioned directions demonstrate an extraordinary role in enhancing the energy storage capacity, the mega energy storage capacity is still challengeable and needs the attention of scientists worldwide to enhance the cycle stability and structural stability because of P's liquidation process.
The thin-layered structure of black phosphorus (BP) is forecast as the most stable allotrope type of P, which can quickly assess the exfoliation method and have a nanosheet phosphorene morphology with few levels.
It is shown that the single-layer form of the Ti3C2 nanosheet shows an enormous conductivity value of ∼6.76 × 105 S m−1. Temporarily, the diffusion barriers of the Na+ ion on terminal functionalities such as –F,–O, and –OH of Ti3C2 are measured to be 0.19, 0.2, and 0.013 eV, correspondingly, representing that greater diffusion kinetics is due to Na+ because of the existence of reactive functionalities on the surface of Ti3C2 MXene.
The high conductivity value and flexible properties of Ti3C2, the high value of theoretical capacity associated with BP, and also typically thin layered geometry of both BP and Ti3C2, are highly predictable, which is an exceptional molecular-level heterostructure connection between Ti3C2 MXene and BP species, which may have enhanced specific capacity value and long lifespan. Herein, the author reports an elaborately electrostatic magnetism-based approach to sensibly project molecular-level (PDDA-BP/Ti3C2) heterostructures based on the layered structure of BP with high theoretical capacity and Ti3C2 MXene with a high value of electronic conductivity, flexibility, and plentiful reactive functionalities. The functionalization process of cationic organic molecules, i.e., poly(diallyldimethyl ammonium chloride) (PDDA) (a polymeric surfactant) on the surface of BP does not only advance the electronegativity of the BP nanolayers but nevertheless also protects the BP layers from the process of oxidation in water, with attractive stability and dispersion. Due to both the components' direct interaction process, the 2D interlayer-based distance positioned in the parallel direction provides an appropriate path for the diffusion of ions, and consequently has significantly attractive efficiency in the electrochemical process.
The PDDA-BP/Ti3C2-based heterostructure material used as an electrode, therefore, represents an outstanding capacity value of 1112 mA h g−1 with a value of current density about 0.1 A g−1 and an extreme cycling stability value of 658 mA h g−1 with just 0.05% per cycle within the 2000 cycle range at a current density of 1.0 A g−1. It shows that the heterostructured electrode of PDDA-BP/Ti3C2 exhibits a highly organized structure that initially preserves the monodispersed state of BP quantum dots (BPQD) within Ti3C2 after the several cycles. Moreover, it validates the strong interactions between BP and Ti3C2, which could strongly subordinate the binding energy and enable the sodiation procedure according to the DFT calculations' limitation. The associated atomic-scale mechanistic study and the results of the reactive functionalities of Ti3C2 MXene on the redox-type phenomenon based on the sodiation/desodiation process are highly examined. This PDDA-BP/Ti3C2-based heterostructure is effective at achieving a synergistic effect, making it a promising candidate for next-generation high-performance sodium-ion batteries. The details of the device performance of the MXene-based 2D heterostructures for Li-ion batteries is summarized in the catalysis section (Table 2c).

In future electronic devices, supercapacitors (SCs) have been widely recognized as a hot candidate for energy storage devices over the last decade because of their reliable power density and long cycle life due to the Li-ion-based battery system. The contraction of the microelectronic device network and the appearance of an independent setup for a diverse range of uses, such as the IOT and wearable sensing applications, necessitate the progress of collective framework on-chip storing results. As a consequence, the development of flexible and bendable device systems that can offer critical power system to the abovementioned electronic units, nanorobots, and microsensors have outstanding demand in the future. Recently, thin-film or micro batteries were demanded and applied in small level energy storing devices but they usually suffer from imperfect cycle-life and nominal value of the power density.

Electrochemical capacitors, also termed as supercapacitors, are mostly famous due to ion adsorption (electrochemical double layer capacitors) or quick surface redox reactions to store energy (pseudocapacitors). When high power delivery or uptake is needed, they may supplement or replace batteries in electrical energy storage and harvesting applications. Supercapacitors are promising energy storage devices that have high power density (∼103 W kg−1), fast charge/discharge rates (∼1 s), long cycling life (∼104 cycles), and are safe to use. According to the Ragone plot, supercapacitors have a much higher power density than traditional capacitors and batteries, making them very useful in areas where high power density is required, such as transportation, lighting, and elevators. Supercapacitors, on the other hand, have a lower energy density than batteries. As a result, achieving a proper balance between the power density and energy density is one of the most difficult tasks in supercapacitor science. Recent developments in understanding charge storage mechanisms and the production of advanced nanostructured materials have resulted in a significant improvement in the performance. The discovery that ion desolvation occurs in pores smaller than the solvated ions has resulted in higher capacitance for electrochemical double layer capacitors using conductive carbon-based heterostructure electrodes with subnanometer pores, as well as the possibility of developing high-energy density devices with a variety of electrolytes. The use of pseudocapacitive nanomaterials such as oxides, nitrides, and polymers in combination with the new generation of nanostructured lithium electrodes has taken the electrochemical capacitors' energy density closer to that of batteries. In this situation, electrochemical microscale capacitors, also referred to as micro-supercapacitors (MSCs), have a longer cycle life and sophisticated power density value than the network of batteries, likely due to fast electron–ion kinetics and maintainable electrode components. A diverse range of fabrication strategies have been successfully used in academic and industrial laboratories, and various electrode materials are discovered for manufacturing sophisticated MSCs devices. Carbon-based MSCs have been invented by introducing triggered carbon, carbide-derived carbon, carbon nanotubes, graphenes, and onion-like carbon. Further, numerous micro-pseudocapacitors having materials including and conducting polymers such as polypyrrole, polyaniline, poly(3,4-ethylene dioxythiophene) and transition metal oxides (MnO2) have also been tested in the last decade. The presence of metallic and semiconducting titanium-based MXenes (Ti3C2Tx and Ti2CTx) and the reasonable surface area in the form of heterostructures with other 2D layered materials can be favorable for the adsorption of ions and quick surface redox reactions to store energy. The use of titanium-based MXenes (Ti3C2Tx and Ti2CTx) in heterostructures with other 2D layered materials such as graphene, TMDCs, and BP will advance the micro-electrochemical capacitors, allowing for more versatile and adaptable devices and some common ones are listed in the subsequent sections.

Graphene oxide (GO) has a unique set of properties derived from the functional oxygen groups added during chemical graphite exfoliation. GO's wide-range, thin-film deposition, and solubility in various solvents, provides a route to GO-based electronics and optoelectronics. GO/rgO is desirable for flexible and bendable thin-film electronics and optoelectronics as the components of these systems are constructed on plastic or paper-like platforms thanks to their processing advantages and special features, such as mechanical stability, as well as electrical and optical tuning properties. GO/rGO sheets can be assembled into layered network structures similar to carbon nanotube electronics, which can also be used as “polycrystalline” films, in which the individual “crystals” are the individual sheets of GO/rGO.

Two techniques can be implemented to make exfoliated graphite or reduced graphene oxide (RGO) competitive and distinguish it from the bulk counterpart, including creating more efficient routes for reducing GO and appropriate methods for exfoliating graphite to large layers of graphite or single-layer graphite with good quality. Shape engineering can change the electrical and optical properties of GO, which are strongly influenced by their chemical and atomic structure. The covalent oxygen functional groups in GO gives it incredible mechanical strength at the molecular level. The existence of functional groups also means that the electronic structure of graphene has been altered. As a result of the chemical composition of GO, which can be chemically, thermally, or electrochemically engineered, its optoelectronic properties can be tuned. While GO and rGO lack the relativistic charge-carrier transport and other condensed-matter effects seen in nearly ideal graphene, their accessibility, ease of processing, and versatility make them appealing for both fundamental research and potential applications in the area of photovoltaics, catalysis, and energy storage devices.
Among the abovementioned methods, laser-based methods deal with an easy construction approach developed for MSCs. For instance, EI-Kady et al. established the large-scale synthetic approach for the preparation process of reduced graphene oxide (rGO) MSCs by introducing the laser scribing strategy. Asymmetric interlinking micro-supercapacitors are formed by the laser cutting of an rGO-type thin film in another approach. Another research used laser cutting of an rGO film to create a symmetric interdigitated micro-supercapacitor. Due to its low electronic conductivity (15–30 S cm−1), rGO-based symmetric devices have a small areal capacitance (0.08–0.5 mF cm−2 and a standard thickness in the range of 1 m); thus, combining it with a more conductive material can improve the overall device performance.
To overcome the abovementioned problem, Gogotsi et al. invented current collector-free Ti3C2Tx MXene micro-supercapacitor (MSCs), using a spray-coating approach using the direct laser ablation process. Ti3C2Tx-MXene possesses a hydrophilic surface and has a metallic conductivity value (≈6700 S cm−1), which enables the transfer of the electrons towards plasmonic noble metal current collectors. Also, Ti3C2Tx-MXene as a suitable material for volumetric energy storage is pushed by a rising packing density of up to ≈4.0 g cm−3. In the aqueous electrolyte system, Ti3C2Tx-MXene well-organized MSCs belong to a partial voltage window (0.6 V) because Ti3C2Tx-MXene appears to be oxidized at a higher anode potential value (for example, 0.8 V in asymmetric 2-electrode-based configuration). An irregular electrode input-private material is used to avoid limiting the voltage window associated with Ti3C2Tx-MXene as a positive electrode material. Moreover, to discover the benefit of the interdigitated strategy, the researcher developed an asymmetric sandwich-type structure of MSC encompassed of spray-treated rGO and Ti3C2Tx. The irregular MSC displays an extended degree of elasticity even after bending and winding to 90°, withstanding 10000 charge–discharge cycles and showing a reliable value of capacitance storage when equated to the symmetric device strategy. Both rGO and Ti3C2Tx scatterings were scattered onto a transparent flexible polyethene terephthalate (PET)-based substrate in the presence of 1 M PVA/H2SO4 electrolyte. A hot air gun is used exclusively to dry each sprayed layer to make the process smooth, while inhibiting the coffee-ring product in uniform and well-organized coatings. During the overall coating process, the main targeting mission is to manage the uniform spray process separately between two different materials for the development of an asymmetric interdigitate. The two considered device configurations, specifically the interdigitated (coplanar) layout and the sandwich-like (cofacial) 2D nanosheets of rGO and Ti3C2Tx, as shown in Fig. 37(a). In the boundary region of interdigitated configuration, both the MXene and rGO nanosheets exist in the same plane, the thin layers rGO and MXene face adversaries on the other side in the sandwich-like configuration portion (Fig. 37(b)). A numerical image of the developed 14-finger MSC-based device system is shown in Fig. 37(c). The increase in the fingers allows the various colors of the networks of the electrode to be identified (Fig. 37(d)). It is observed that Ti3C2Tx-MXene has an extended density value as compared to rGO; Ti3C2Tx is lighter as compare to rGO-based thin films when an equal quantity of mass per unit area. In addition, it can be seen that the well-organized form of the electrode network with a uniform spacing represents the reliability of the developed process of fabrication.
The study of the interlocking arrangement and the width spacing of the fingers reflects a top-surface view SEM image of the formed 14-finger MSC (Fig. 37(f)). The finger-width of ∼900 μm and the inter-finger spacing value of about ∼400 μm were determined from the SEM image. The bunch coating method's resolution limit may depend on the mask project category used for the production process. The electrode system's dimensions are limited by the hard mask used in the established strategy to generate the asymmetric micro-supercapacitors. However, utilizing electron beam lithography or photolithography approaches associated with a sputtering-based lamination-based method, it is conceivable to achieve the planned feature dimensions. From the SEM images' cross-sectional area, the thickness value was determined to be about 300 nm (Fig. 37(e), bottom).
Because of their wide range of applications without any charge collecting position either at the top or lowest stage, these established thin layers of electrodes are adequate, smart, and display unique properties. This phenomenon is somewhat distinct from other MSCs that are typically employed in current collectors.
After that, the electrochemical performance of the MSC in two-electrode configuration was confirmed, introducing the Ti3C2Tx-MXene and rGO species as the source of the network of negative and positive electrodes, correspondingly. Fig. 38(a) shows that the MSC functions belong to a rectangular CV curve at a voltage window range of 1 V, indicating the decent capacitive value of the two electrode-based network materials. The value of the system's areal capacitance is built in the range of 2.4 mF cm−2 at a potential of 2 mV s−1, and the conforming volumetric capacitance value is calculated to be about 80 F cm−3 (Fig. 38(b)). The cell voltage window's circulation process with the working potential in the range of 0.5 to 1 V for the positive electrode (rGO) and the negative electrode (Ti3C2Tx) operating in the potential range of 0 to 0.5 V is observed. The CV calculation process is conducted at a limited scan rate of 2 mV s−1 so that the process concerned with the reduction of Ti3C2Tx at a potential of 0 V (Fig. 38(c)).
When the symmetric Ti3C2Tx inter-digitated MSC system is verified, a voltage window of about 0.6 V was conceivable, allowing the narrow potential window of the balanced configuration phase to be displayed beforehand. These implications confirm that the possible window's entire site can be amplified to 1 V by introducing the rGO material as the positive terminal-based electrode material. The irregular interlink MSC, which consumes the prolonged voltage window, reflects a sufficient energy density value compared to the same power density value (Fig. 38(d)).
Due to the increased scan rate values, the symmetric structure of the device system is marginally improved as compared to the asymmetric one. This MXene-based asymmetric micro-supercapacitor works within a 1 V voltage window and retains 97% of its initial capacitance after 10000 cycles, with an energy density of 8.6 mW h cm−3 and a power density of 0.2 W cm−3. Furthermore, when mechanically bent, these micro-supercapacitors display a high degree of flexibility. It is demonstrated that using Ti3C2Tx as the negative electrode and rGO as the positive electrode in asymmetric architectures is a promising strategy for both the energy and power densities of micro-supercapacitors, based on the ability of Ti3C2Tx-MXene electrodes to work at negative potentials in aqueous electrolytes.
In another study, GAO et al. prepared highly efficient micro-supercapacitors (MSCs) with a 3D structure to deliver a reliable method to advance the energy storage capability. They introduce the 3D MXene-rGO-based heterostructure aerogels as a useful electrode material to produce and organize the self-healable MSCs unit. Since the combination of electrodes with 3D geometry is typically quickly destroyed in everyday applications under mechanical distortion, the formed self-healing 3D MSC-based system contains an aerogel network electrode heterostructure based on the Ti3C2Tx/rGO heterostructure by covering it with the self-healing polyurethane material as an external shell (Fig. 39(a)). The measures of the self-healable 3D structure from the MSC device is represented in Fig. 39(b). Firstly, the 3D system based on the MXene-rGO heterostructure aerogel was designed by applying the laser cutting approach to develop the design of the interlink designs. Then, the MXene-rGO heterostructure network's fabricated structure was arranged with a solid phase electrolyte system composed of the PVA-H2SO4 gel. Finally, a self-healing and highly industrially compatible material, carboxylated polyurethane (PU) surfactant, was selected, which acts as the 3D MSC device's outer shell to provide the entire machinery with self-healing characteristics. The PU supermolecular network involves a wide range of interfacial hydrogen bonding networks, which help give the source of the material self-healing characteristics. Also, the PVA-based gel is also a self-adhesive substance and reflects a certain degree of the self-healing phenomenon. More prominently, the 3D electrode geometry provides an adequate track in a precise way for the reconnection process of the disconnected electrodes. The PU shell will effectively restore the device's performance after effectively guiding the reconnection process of the separated sections of the 3D electrode network concerned, positioned at appropriate locations (Fig. 39(c)).
The stable presence of the MXene-GO heterostructure's well-organized dispersion process delivers an opportunity to fabricate the heterostructure-based aerogels by introducing the ice-template-based approach.

Fig. 39(d) indicates that a few hundred nanometers are concentrated in the adjacent scale dispersal of MXene contents. This size distribution is slightly smaller than the GO nanosheets' size, which favors MXene nanosheets devoted to GO's surface location. The pressure-strain curve of the original rGO aerogel and MXene-rGO aerogel heterostructure is shown in Fig. 39(e), which shows that the MXene input is unable to extinguish the original rGO-based aerogel geometry but amplifies the mechanical properties.
A broad area-specific capacitance of 34.6 mF cm−2 with a scan rate of about 1 mV s−1 and a cycling efficiency with capacitance retention up to 91% over a cycle range of about 15000 cycles is transported by the MSC system based on the 3D MXene-rGO heterostructure-based aerogel. After completing the fifth turn of healing, the 3D shape of the MSC system demonstrates an exceptional self-healing potential with a value of specific capacitance retention of 81.7%. The abovementioned 3D MSC device-based self-healable characteristics can deliver a technique for designing and developing future devices with extended specifications such as long-life multidirectional electronic devices to acquire maintainable growth.
Supercapacitors (SCs) have been developed as active applicants in energy storage strategies because of their long cycle life and high power density associated with Li-ionbatteries. The electrical energy produced by the solar cell-based devices can be stored first by energy storage devices such as batteries or supercapacitors and then used if there is a deficiency of sunlight. Furthermore, to avail the rapidly accumulative necessity of wearable/moveable electronics devices, for e.g., hand-held devices and supple sensor set up, the growth of all-solid-state flexible energy foundations is required. As a result, after the successful merger of the rGO/Ti3C2Tx heterostructure-based solid-state SCs based on thin films with a thin-layer based solar cell, all-solid-state versatile integrated co-cathode energy conversion and storage devices (ECSDs) can be prepared.Fig. 40(a) represents the fabrication, by flexible and bendable static SC, of solar cells centered on a thin foil with a possible open circuit value of 2.5 V, under the influence of sunlight. The working is based on a single device arrangement to generate a collective energy conversion and storage system, in which the combination of the PVA/KOH gel helped as the solid-state-based electrolyte. The digital images capture the set-up of the combined ECSD and are shown in Fig. 40(b). As schematically illustrated in Fig. 40(c), a unified working circuit containing the co-cathode method dependent ECSD, voltage and current regulator was constructed for efficient energy storage and adaptation of the device.
The working voltage and the best functioning value for the thin film solar cell produced with illumination before/after the ECSD output indicates that the solar cell's performance is not visibly degraded. Thus, the flexible integrated co-cathode ECSDs are coordinated after the successful fusion of the thin-film solid-state SCs with a thin-layer solar-cell foundation.
The created thin-film-based solar cell system operated, for example, under the influence of sunlight as the power reservoir to supply energy for the red light-emitting diode (LED) and supercapacitor (SC) (Fig. 40(d)); when the source light was turned off, the SC in turn helped as the energy basis for the LED device (Fig. 40(e)).
The combined structure of rGO/(Ti3C2Tx few-layer) and presence on the surface of Ti3C2Tx of the trace number of functional groups (still existing without elimination) indicate a constructive effect on the electrochemical performance of the electrodes. Through the co-cathode-based technique for ECSD construction, flexible SCs based on rGO/Ti3C2Tx thin films have been combined with thin-film solar cell devices. The developed SCs were transported with a high volumetric energy density value of 63 mW h cm−3 at a high-power density value of 67 mW cm−3 and at higher power density 2786 mW cm−3, a lower value of power density of 30 mW h cm−3 was obtained. The setup of the prepared ECSDs had an extended cycle life, without any unfavorable conditions arising after the completion of 10000 cycles at a current density of 5 A g−1. The process was performed in 6 M KOH aqueous solution as an electrolyte. The combined ECSD set-up provided a variety of likely possibilities for the growth of wearable and mobile electronic equipment. For the electrode system's electrochemical performance-based preparation, the rGO/(Ti3C2Tx) heterostructures and incomplete surface terminal feature groups on the top surface of Ti3C2Tx may also be affected.

Electrochemical capacitors have appealing applications due to their long cycle lives and high power densities. With increasing demand for wearable and moveable electronics, a new investigation has focused mainly on increasing the value of energy density per unit volume of electrochemical capacitors. However, the volumetric capacitance values of carbon-containing electrodes are incomplete at about 60 F cm−3 for marketable instruments and devices, and at most beneficial in the noted value of 300 F cm−3 for small-density permeable carbon (about 0.5–1 g cm−3).

Though the efficient value of capacitance in the range of 1000–1500 F cm−3 can be attained for hydrous ruthenium oxide (RuO2), its high market price restricts its diverse uses. MXenes, with a facile, large scale, and efficient hierarchical geometry is well-known as an emerging material and can be used in potential practical applications. However, to date, there has been a deficiency of MXene-based composites in the literature. Gogotsi et al. suggested a facile method for developing bendable and flexible sandwich-like heterostructures of the MXene/CNT sandwich-like electrodes through the variation in the CNT and MXene dispersion filtration process. The thin layer films with an onion-like carbon (OLC) morphology and condensed and decreased graphene rGO type were also made up and compared with the contents of CNTs. The electrochemical efficiency was substantially improved by the sandwich-like heterostructured electrode network as associated with those of the original MXene structure and miscellaneous MXene/CNT heterostructure papers. They were recognized as operating electrodes at a concentration of 1 M MgSO4 aqueous electrolyte solution to estimate the electrochemical base efficiency of the Ti3C2Tx and Ti3C2Tx/CNT heterostructure-based papers by implementing a three-electrode irregular network with a standard Ag/AgCl style electrode device. The CV curves of the heterostructure network and the original Ti3C2Tx MXene-based electrode systems are shown in Fig. 41(a) and (b). Polypropylene membranes are introduced as separators and a 1 M MgSO4 aqueous solution were employed as the electrolyte. It is inferred from the results mentioned above that the shape of the CV outlines at a potential of 20 mV s−1 for all the Ti3C2Tx/CNT paper heterostructures shows an affinity for more rectangular geometry as compared with that of the original Ti3C2Tx paper electrode network shape, representing enhanced capacitive behavior and minimizing the resistance value. It was observed that the process focused on the electrochemical efficiency of the sandwich-like heterostructure of the Ti3C2Tx/CNT papers was much better for both the composite network framework comprising MWCNT and SWCNT compared to that of the random miscellaneous articles.
In the rate efficiency value of these described electrode network structures, a fairly similar pattern was also practical (Fig. 41(c)). Compared to pure Ti3C2Tx papers, all the heterostructures of the Ti3C2Tx/CNT-based heterostructure papers showed an extremely high value of gravimetric capacitances and enormous output rate; the finest standards were obtained from the structure of sandwich-like papers. A capacitance value of 150 F g−1 was obtained for the Ti3C2Tx/multi-wall carbon nanotube (MWCNT) heterostructure at a potential value of 2 mV s−1. The capacitance value of 117 F g−1 was limited, even at a rate of 200 mV s−1, which was almost 130% higher than that of Ti3C2Tx paper at a similar rate.

Fig. 41(e) and (f) demonstrates the sandwich-like Ti3C2Tx/CNT heterostructure articles' galvanostatic-based cycling efficiency. The Ti3C2Tx/SWCNT sandwich-like paper provided a volumetric capacitance value of about ∼350 F cm−3 at an accurate density value of 5 A g−1, without decomposition of any kind after completion of 10000 cycles. A smooth volumetric capacitance of about 300 F cm−3 was obtained for the sandwich-like heterostructures of Ti3C2Tx/MWCNT paper at a current density as extraordinary as 10 A g−1. Furthermore, the mentioned value was amplified even more to about 350 F cm−3 after the completion of 10000 cycles. This increase in the capacitance value can be credited to the progressively enhanced availability of the slit pores’ size distribution between the MXene nanoflakes during the cycling process. Otherwise, there is a scope for further upgradation of this structure. These proven findings identify a substantial development in the volumetric capacitance value and exceptional rate performance of Ti3C2Tx/CNT heterostructures based on the sandwich-like electrodes. Compared to the carbon-based electrode system, the volumetric capacitance values in the sandwich-like combined structure shape of the Ti3C2Tx/CNT paper were substantially advanced, such as the activated carbon range (60–100 F cm−3), carbide-dependent carbon network (180 F cm−3), graphene-based conductive electrodes network (≈260 F cm−3), and Gr/CNT-based composite system (165 F cm−3), particularly at extremely high rates. The organizational process based on LbL is the popular sandwich-like structured system for the nanostructures.
To validate the simplification of the discontinuous filtration process to yield the sandwich-like geometry with inspiring electrochemical energy-increasing properties, uniform sandwich-like structures of the Ti3C2Tx MXene nanoflakes with the mixed dimensional form of 0D, onion-like carbon (OLC), and 2D rGO are arranged and characterized by the brilliant rate efficiency of the mentioned nanostructures, as represented in Fig. 41(d).
In short, a simple, alternating filtration technique was used to obtain the aqueous suspensions of the sandwich-like array of MXenes and CNTs. MXene/CNT papers' subsequent combined framework works in an exceptionally free-standing and an extremely fluid and flexible manner. When introduced as an electrode material in devices based on supercapacitors, the sandwich-like geometry of the heterostructure papers based on MXene/CNT showed significantly extended volumetric capacitance value and outstanding rate output value compared to pristine MXene and arbitrarily distributed heterostructure papers based on MXene/CNT.
MXenes 2D carbides have shown outstanding capacitance values in aqueous electrolytes in a narrow window, which confines both the power and energy density values. The composite-based material was prepared after the mixing process based on a heterogeneous mixture of multiwalled carbon nanotubes of about 20 wt% (MWCNT C100 with delaminated Ti3C2 MXene, Graphic strength), which has a specifically designed surface area of the order of 175 m2 g−1. The as-prepared Ti3C2Tx MXene, the delaminated form of Ti3C2Tx MXene and the composite CNT/Ti3C2Tx were treated in a glass tube for the filtering process on polypropylene-based membranes and then rolled into thin film-based electrode materials on Teflon membranes. The films are quickly detached from the membrane surface after the filtered product becomes dry to successfully obtain the freestanding Ti3C2Tx, d-Ti3C2Tx, and CNT-Ti3C2Tx films short of the folder.
Applying a razor style sharp blade, the formed electrode material was arranged into thin films with ∼25 mm2 rectangular form. The dimensions were studied using electron microscopy; the heterostructured film density values based on pristine Ti3C2Tx, d-Ti3C2Tx, and the combined CNT-Ti3C2Tx structure were found to be 2.3 g cm−3, 3.0 g cm−3, and 2.9 g cm−3, correspondingly.Fig. 42 displays the cross-sectional SEM images of the developed electrode structure nanomaterials. The synthesized MXene clay, designated as Ti3C2TX, is represented in Fig. 42(a).
The MXene nanosheets can be tuned, establishing a freestanding flexible electrode network. The d-MXene electrode network with completely deliminated-Ti3C2TX (Fig. 42(b)) was prepared to refine the electrochemical efficiency by improving the extended specific type surface area (SSA) obtained from the process of delamination.
The SSA values for the multilayered form of Ti3C2 were 23 m2 g−1 and 98 m2 g−1 for d-Ti3C2 measured elsewhere in the literature using sorption analysis method based on nitrogen gas.Fig. 42(c) and (d) shows the cross-sectional SEM micrograph of the CNT-Ti3C2TX-based electrode network combined structure, where CNTs are scattered between the thin layers of Ti3C2 layers. Besides stopping the restacking process, the addition of small amounts of CNT is identified to increase the electrical conductivity of the electrode material. The energy storage device was examined by copying the in situ patterns of XRD at various voltage values (Fig. 42(e)).
The assessment of various designs shows that depending on the constant value of applied voltage, two dissimilar intensity sets of Bragg peaks are obtained and phase change of the redox peaks appears in the CV (Fig. 42(f)).
This displays that deintercalation/intercalation procedures show a changeable two-phase mechanistic approach, which is different from the enlightened and incessant intercalation type process formerly monitored in the case of MXene-based nanomaterials in metal-ion capacitors and aqueous supercapacitors. By applying the (00l) diffraction planes of Ti3C2 MXene, in which there are distinctive spaces between the layers, Ghidiu et al. indexed each set of the monitored Bragg peaks. Furthermore, on account of the evidence obtained from the deflection angle (002) Bragg peaks (Fig. 42(g)), it is believed that the potential range from 0.8 V to 0.5 V is 1.3 Å, which is greater than the potential above 0.5 V and is closer to the phase of intercalation and de-intercalation of ions from the electrolyte species into the Ti3C2Tx MXene species.
The electrochemical activity of MXene (Ti3C2Tx) has been studied as an electrochemical capacitor electrode in an organic electrolyte (1 M TEABF4 in acetonitrile) network. For the as-shaped Ti3C2Tx MXene clay, capacitance value up to 32 F g−1 was achieved and improved to 85 F g−1 due to the delamination process and the addition of small carbon nanotubes material. Carbon nanotubes were used as an additive to boost the ion accessibility to the active material, resulting in a 3-fold increase in the Ti3C2Tx capacitance, up to 85 F g−1 and 245 F cm−3 at 2 mV s−1. The CNT/Ti3C2Tx electrodes have a good rate performance as well as a long cycle life.

Electrochemical energy storage devices have lately increased the cumulative attention worldwide, thanks to a high demand from electronics, textiles, renewable energy generators, and electrical automobiles. The power and energy density capacity of any energy storage setup/device is administered by the central charge storage-based mechanistic approach and the linked kinetic approach at the electrolyte/electrode interface. Energy storing devices such as batteries, for instance, use reactions based on reversible redox approach connecting the transportable metal ion inserted into the unpackaged electrode-based structure material. Consequently, they display high energy density value, better than the zero power density because of the slow dispersal-organized procedures. Furthermore, the basic nature of electrochemical double-layer capacitors (EDLCs), also known as supercapacitors for energy storage, show fast and efficient results of charge–discharge (CD) speeds, high power densities, and long and stable cycles, making them a strong candidate applicable in enormous power storage in batteries.

By following the electrostatic adsorption technique of electrolyte ions on the extraordinary surface area of carbonaceous materials without the use of any charge transfer path, EDLCs store the electron and holes (charge) so that their total ability is damaged by the surface area of the electrolyte-based ionic species. The charging species are stored separately at a high value of the charge–discharge phenomenon by pseudocapacitive structured materials, such as conducting polymers or MO (by following reversible-dependent surface redox reactions). In addition, it is concluded that pseudocapacitive materials can have an energy density value comparable to batteries, thereby showing a power density value equal to EDLCs. However, the power density and generation of conformist pseudocapacitive nanomaterials are limited by the poor cycling stability and low electronic conductivity.
MXenes are recently emerging 2D metal nanomaterials with a wide range of possible applications, particularly in the field of energy storage devices. The hydrophilic characteristics of MXene combined with their redox surface reactions and metallic conductivity values are crucial to a high-value pseudocapacitive energy storage network. However, due to the possibility of oxidation at high anodic potentials, symmetric MXene supercapacitors have a voltage window of about 0.6 V. During the last decade, titanium carbide (Ti3C2Tx) MXene has been successfully applied to generate an all-pseudocapacitive asymmetric device alongside the negatives of potential in acidic electrolytes by combining it with positive electrodes such as ruthenium oxide (RuO2). This device operates at a voltage window of approximately 1.5 V, which is doubled in power. In addition to the proton-favored pseudocapacitance, balancing the working potential windows for both the RuO2 and MXene greatly improved the system's efficiency. As shown in Fig. 43(a), the RuO2/CF CV curves represent a pair of pseudocapacitive RuO2 peaks in the selected window (0–0.9 V vs. Ag/AgCl). In both RuO2/CF and Ti3C2Tx/CF electrodes, the capacitive-type effective kinetic value shows the rapid surface-based redox chemical reactions responsible for the efficient results of the fabricated devices. In Fig. 43(b), the galvanostatic centered charge/discharge curves closely reflect the symmetrical geometry as triangular-shaped arcs with an intense redox value with a potential of 0.3 V. Even at an exceptional current density value of 20 A g−1, the Ohmic drop value (sum of energy losses in the electrolyte) is small/minor, indicating the decent conductivity value associated with the electrodes of the RuO2/CF heterostructure.
The RuO2 electrode has a specific capacitance value of 388 F g−1 (10 mV s−1 scan rate value). It records up to 355 F g−1 with a potential capacitance value of 100 mV s−1, which corresponds to a retention rate of 91% (Fig. 43(c)). At 1 M H2SO4 concentration, the long-period cycling test was performed at a practical current density value of 20 A g−1 over several 20000 cycles (Fig. 43(d)), showing that 88% of the preliminary capacitance value was reserved, thus maintaining 100% Coulombic efficacy. As discovered in the high-level frequency region of the Nyquist plot, with combined resistive value contributions from electrode-based materials, the electrolyte resistance value and current collectors originated from the resistance of 6 (inset of Fig. 43(d)). These findings strongly recommended that the pseudocapacitive negative MXene-based electrodes can theoretically substitute carbon-based materials in asymmetric electrochemical capacitors, resulting in increased energy density value.
In summary, the manufacturing process of supercapacitors of the all-pseudocapacitive form is addressed by joining hydrous RuO2 electrodes and Ti3C2Tx MXene on the carbon-based fabric surface. This is the broadest specified voltage window for electrochemical capacitors sharing the MXene-based electrode network in the aqueous form of the electrolyte network. The resulting potential (RuO2/Ti3C2Tx) electrode windows were measured separately in the voltage window of 1.5 and an energy density value of 37 and 45 μW h cm−2 at associated power density values of 40 and 6 mW cm−2.
Recently, another successful candidate that can be used with MXenes in supercapacitor preparation is ZnO. Its magnificent activities as a functional material due to its semiconducting nature, such as piezoelectric and pyroelectric properties, are widely used in optics, optoelectronics, and sensors. The excellent chemical stability and strong electrical conductivity of the Ti3C2 sheets as well as the simple preparation of ZnO will make the Ti3C2/ZnO composite an active candidate for supercapacitors. The details of the device performance of MXene-based 2D heterostructures for Li ion batteries is summarized in the catalysis section (Table 2c).

In summary, MXene derivatives such as Ti3C2Tx and Ti2CTx have reached a mature stage after more than ten years of intensive worldwide efforts. Ti3C2Tx and Ti2CTx MXene derivatives are assembled with other nanomaterials such as 0D, 1D, and 2D materials for heterostructure preparation using different deposition techniques to overcome the long-term stability issues and for multifunctional applications. An alternative material is then obtained that minimizes the barriers to develop ultra-thin large-area membranes in the semiconductor industry for channels. Some derivatives such as 2D MXene (including Ti3C2Tx) have been assembled with three other distinct mixed-dimensional heterostructure geometries, namely, 2D–0D (the 0D materials consist of metal oxide quantum dots), 2D–1D (the 1D class includes single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs and inorganic semiconductor nanowires)), and 2D–2D (the 1D class includes semiconducting single-walled carbon nanotubes) (2D materials including GR, TMDCs, and group IIIA–VIA semiconductors). Ti3C2Tx and Ti2CTx have been explored as 2D materials with unique properties, including ease of large-scale synthesis in water, high conductivity, metallic and semiconducting characteristics, hydrophilicity, excellent chemical stability, environmental friendliness, and the ability to form van der Waals heterostructures due to the presence of surface functional groups. In case of low interaction between an MXene and its partners such as various 2D sheets, NPs, and nanowires (NWs) in these heterostructures, it is possible to combine the advantages and eliminate the disadvantages of the individual MXene materials, which contain high mobility, tunable narrow bandgap, and mechanical power but also have new functionalities due to their porous structure. These pores allow the transport and diffusion of ions, and the interconnection of 2D MXene nanosheets in heterostructure formation provides abundant electron transport routes. For well-organized energy conversion and storage materials, these attributes are essential. Also, the intrinsic properties of MXenes have mainly been retained and is a reliable and efficient method of shielding the products of 2D MXenes from environmental oxidation. Besides, MXene 2D materials are porous in nature, and the porous structures used in electrodes for batteries/supercapacitors and catalytic applications are discussed and some important findings are as follows:

(1) Heterostructures based on Ti3C2Tx and Ti2CTx have proved to be promising building blocks for high-power electronic/optoelectronics assembly and provide realistic strategies for overcoming MXene's internal restrictions. It is undeniably the case that 2D material application would be led by Ti3C2Tx and Ti2CTx related heterostructures. Although significant progress has been made in this emerging area of science, many unanswered problems and challenges remain.
Thus, we may infer from the above discussion that while 2D MXenes may have practical applications in electronic devices, MXene-based heterostructures may be useful for energy conversion/storage and other catalytic applications where porous large-scale heterostructures are needed. However, for its practical applications, the processing techniques of MXene-based heterostructures are not sufficient and there is much more to do to enhance the long-term reliability of the fabricated heterostructure devices based on MXenes. In addition, time is also required to create 3D MXene-based heterostructures in an enhanced manner that can be useful for large-area heterostructures for electronic conductivity, efficient storage, and sensing protocols for large-scale nanotechnology applications. In addition, after applying techniques such as spin coating, drop-casting, and spray coating for potential technological applications, the role of the solvent and other parameters for enhancing the synthetic protocol and assembly of MXene-based heterostructures needs to be further explored. Chemical exfoliation of the MAX phase gives titanium-based MXenes, i.e., Ti3C2Tx and Ti2CTx, which can be used to make MXene-based thin films with low-cost bulk processing, ease of deposition, and tunable optoelectronic properties. The chemical flexibility of MXene is a distinguishing feature of the material, allowing it to be dissolved in a variety of solvents, incorporated into composites, and its properties to be tailored over a wide range. Solution-based deposition of Ti3C2Tx and Ti2CTx and Ti3C2Tx and Ti2CTx-based composite thin films can be done in several ways, allowing transparent conductors, sensors, field emitters, photovoltaics, and memory devices to be made without lithographic processing. However, Ti3C2Tx and Ti2CTx-based transparent conductors need more work to compete with state-of-the-art materials; their low cost and high amount deposition make them attractive for potential industrial applications.
(2) MXene (Ti3C2Tx and Ti2CTx) is a cutting-edge forum for studying the engineering, physics, chemistry, and materials science of unique 2D structures, as well as a path toward realizing carbon-based thin-film technology. Researchers from various disciplines can continue to work together to discover the potential of Ti3C2Tx and Ti2CTx in thin film electronics and optoelectronics, which can open up exciting opportunities for the exploration of photonic devices such as electroluminescent cells, photodetectors, and photovoltaics. The high signal-to-noise ratio and extremely high sensitivity toward certain chemicals make molecular sensing very promising. Selectivity for specific molecules and stability against repeated adsorption and desorption cycles are important considerations for practical applications. Since Ti3C2Tx and Ti2CTx are compatible with polymers and ceramics, they can create usable composite materials from both electrically-passive and active host materials. While this field is still in its early stages, the combination of Ti3C2Tx and Ti2CTx-based materials with organic or inorganic materials should continue to open up many fresh and exciting possibilities.
(3) Overall, MXene derivatives with other dimensional semiconductors have been extensively incorporated in titanium-based MXene studies and is one of the leading subjects in the coming years. It offers a new technique to combine positive characteristics of both Ti3C2Tx and Ti2CTx and other materials in an arbitrary manner. Moreover, these heterostructures can provide more new interaction modes with external stimuli by the proper selection of the material, as demonstrated for Ti3C2Tx with other 2D materials, such as graphene, carbon nanotubes (CNTs), and black phosphorous (BP). We assume that a thriving hotspot research would be formed with mixed dimensional (MD) materials, which could be useful for outstanding application of MXenes and eventually result in significant breakthroughs in new physics/nanotechnology/materials sciences/chemistry and commercialization of graphics equipment. Meanwhile, research on the heterostructures of Ti3C2Tx/Ti2CTx-based MD can be a reference for other novel 2D crystals of MXene derivatives outside the Ti3C2Tx/Ti2CTx framework.
FETs
Field-effect transistors
LMDCs
Layered metal chalcogenides
hBN
Hexagonal boron nitride
vdW
van der Waals
TMDCs
Transition metal dichalcogenides
BP
Black phosphorus
TM
Transition metal
GR
Graphene
TMO
Transition metal oxide
TiO2
Titanium oxide
AFM
Atomic force microscopy
TEM
transmission electron microscopy
SEM
Scanning electron microscope
DLS
Dynamic light scattering
LiPSs
Lithium polysulfides
SAED
Specific area electron diffraction
HRTEM
High resolution transmission electron microscope
CF
Carbon fabric
RuCl3
Ruthenium chloride
RuO2
Ruthenium oxide
ZnO
Zinc oxide
PEI
Polyethylenimine
PSS
Poly(sodium-4-styrene sulfonate)
NPs
Nanoparticles
rGO
Reduced graphene oxide
PDDA
Poly(diallyldimethylammonium)chloride
EHDA
Electrohydrodynamic atomization
AAO
Anodic aluminium oxide
BET
Brunauer–Emmett–Teller
CNT
Carbon nanotube
EBL
Electron-beam lithography
PMMA
Poly methyl methacrylate
ICP
Inductively coupled plasma
SIBs
Sodium ion batteries
BP
Black phosphorene
HER
Hydrogen evolution reaction
IoT
Internet of things
PIN
p-Type-intrinsic–n-type
MSM
Metal–semiconductor–metal
APD
Photodiodes

V
oc

Open-circuit voltage
ECSDs
Energy conversion and storage devices
LED
Light-emitting diode
SC
Supercapacitor
EQE
External quantum efficiency
PCE
Power conversion efficiency
RTA
Rapid thermal annealing process
FF
Fill factor

J
sc

Current density

R
s

Cell series
OER
Oxygen evolution reaction
ORR
Oxygen reduction reaction
VB
Valance band
CB
Covalent band
M–S
Mott–Schottky
RHE
Reversible based hydrogen electrode
LIBs
Lithium-ion batteries
EIS
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy

R
s

Electronic-based resistance

R
ct

Charge-transmission based resistance
CV
Cyclic voltammogram
Li2S
Lithium sulfides
BPQD
BP quantum dots
MSCs
Micro-supercapacitors
GO
Graphene oxide
rGO
Reduced graphene oxide
PU
Polyurethane
MWCNT
Multi-wall carbon nanotubes
EDLCs
Electrochemical double-layer capacitors
CD
Charge–discharge

The authors declare no conflicts of interest.


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021