 DOI: 10.1039/D0TA07282F
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 19768-19787


Zhiyuan
Cao
,

Chengbo
Li
,

Xiaoyu
Deng
,

Shurong
Wang
,

Yuan
Yuan
,

Yuanming
Chen
,

Zhi
Wang
,

Yaqing
Liu
,

Liming
Ding
* and 

Feng
Hao
*

School of Materials and Energy, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, 610054, China. E-mail: haofeng@uestc.edu.cn

Shanxi Province Key Laboratory of Functional Nanocomposites, North University of China, Taiyuan 030051, China

Center for Excellence in Nanoscience (CAS), Key Laboratory of Nanosystem and Hierarchical Fabrication (CAS), National Center for Nanoscience and Technology, Beijing 100190, China. E-mail: ding@nanoctr.cn

Received
26th July 2020
, Accepted 27th August 2020
First published on 29th August 2020
Carrier transport layers have been recognized as a key factor to determine the performance of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) by dominating the charge carrier extraction, transport and recombination process. Metal oxides have been widely used as electron transport layers (ETLs) in PSCs for high performance and stability, of which TiO2 and SnO2 are the most popular choices. However, the large-scale implementation of TiO2 and SnO2 ETLs is hindered by their own deficiencies, such as low electron mobility, poor stability against UV light and surface defects. Therefore, binary and ternary metal oxide alternatives have been widely investigated recently. Here, we review the recent advances of these metal oxide ETLs in PSCs with a special focus on the nanostructuring, elemental doping, surface modification, and multi-layer ETLs and large-scale fabrication of these ETLs. Furthermore, the state-of-the-art progress towards high-efficiency and stable PSCs using these novel ETLs is summarized and future perspectives are discussed.
Zhiyuan Cao
Zhiyuan Cao received his BS degree from the School of Materials and Energy at the University of Electronic Science and Technology of China (UESTC) in 2020. He is currently a master's student in Prof. Feng Hao's group at the School of Materials and Energy at the UESTC. His current research focuses on perovskite materials and solar cells.
Chengbo Li
Chengbo Li received his BS degree from the School of Materials Science and Engineering at the Southwest University of Science and Technology (SWUST) in 2018. He is currently a master's student in Prof. Feng Hao's group at the School of Materials and Energy at the University of Electronic Science and Technology of China (UESTC). His current research focuses on perovskite materials and solar cells.
Liming Ding
Liming Ding obtained his PhD from the University of Science and Technology of China. He started his research on OSCs and PLEDs in the Olle Inganäs Lab in 1998. Later on, he worked with Frank Karasz and Tom Russell at PSE, UMASS Amherst. He joined Konarka as a Senior Scientist in 2008. In 2010, he joined the National Center for Nanoscience and Technology as a full Professor. His research includes perovskite solar cells, organic solar cells and photodetectors.
Feng Hao
Feng Hao received his PhD degree from Tsinghua University in 2012. Then he moved to Northwestern University as a postdoctoral fellow for four years in the Department of Chemistry. He is now a full professor in the School of Materials and Energy at the University of Electronic Science and Technology of China (UESTC). Currently his research focuses on perovskite solar cells and photonic materials.

Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have attracted great attention in the photovoltaic field recently due to the excellent properties of perovskites, such as high absorption coefficient, long diffusion length of charge carriers, high carrier mobility and tunable bandgap. They have been considered to be a potential contender of silicon and inorganic thin film solar cells in the future photovoltaic market. The certified power conversion efficiency (PCE) of PSCs has rocketed to 25.2% in 2019, which is on par with that of silicon semiconductor solar cells.

Generally, a perovskite layer is sandwiched between an electron transfer layer (ETL) and a hole transfer layer (HTL) in a PSC device to absorb photons and generate electron–hole pairs. Followed by the photoexcitation, the ETL accepts electrons generated from the perovskite layer and transports them to the electrode. It is critical to effectively separate photogenerated carriers and transport them to the carrier transfer layer before recombination. Therefore, the ETLs affect the photovoltaic performance of PSCs by dominating the charge carrier extraction, transport and recombination process. Inorganic n-type semiconductors are promising ETLs for highly efficient and stable PSCs, especially metal oxides (like TiO2, SnO2 and ZnO). Recently, metal oxide ETLs have enabled record certified PCEs of PSCs. For an ideal ETL, the following requirements should be satisfied: (1) the conduction band minimum (CBM) of the ETLs ought to be well-matched with that of the perovskite layers to facilitate the electron extraction and transport. Meanwhile, the valence band maximum (VBM) of ETLs should be lower than that of perovskites for effectively blocking holes, thus suppressing the carrier recombination. The energy levels of various metal oxide ETLs are summarized in Fig. 1. (2) High electron mobility is favored for ETLs. The electron mobility of the ETL influences the balanced flux of electrons and holes transported to the ETL and HTL, respectively. High electron mobility will mitigate charge accumulation at the interface and reduce the probability of charge recombination. (3) The ETLs should possess adequate light transmittance to ensure sufficient light harvesting of the perovskite layers. Meanwhile, ultraviolet tolerance should also be considered to ensure the stability of perovskite when exposed to sunlight. (4) ETLs should form good contact with perovskite layers. The ETL morphology plays a key role in facilitating the crystallization of perovskite layers and reducing the trap states at the ETL/perovskite interface. (5) The ETL should be nonhygroscopic to resist the invasion of moisture, which is important for the long-term stability of the PSC device.
Currently, TiO2 and SnO2 are undoubtedly the most popular metal oxide ETLs in PSCs with superior photovoltaic performance. In terms of the energy level of TiO2, as demonstrated in Fig. 1, the CBM is located at −4.1 eV with a large bandgap of 3.1 eV. Due to its favorable conduction band position, wide bandgap, long carrier lifetime and low-cost preparation, TiO2 has been widely used as the ETL for PSCs from 2009. However, TiO2 shows a low electron mobility of 0.1–4 cm2 V−1 s−1, implying inefficient carrier transportation. Meanwhile, the trap states below the conduction band of TiO2 would capture photogenerated carriers and induce severe non-radiative recombination, which has been recognized as the main source of the notorious J–V hysteresis behavior of TiO2-based PSCs. Furthermore, TiO2-based PSCs often exhibit ultraviolet (UV) light instability under sustained illumination due to the generated oxygen vacancies at the TiO2 surface. Besides, TiO2 is an efficient UV-active photocatalyst, which could accelerate the degradation of perovskite layers. As for SnO2, it has a larger bandgap (3.8 eV) and higher electron mobility (240 cm2 V−1 s−1) than TiO2. Nevertheless, lots of Sn dangling bonds exist on the SnO2 surface, which would react with oxygen and water under ambient conditions. Meanwhile, these dangling bonds would trap the electrons from perovskite layers and induce non-radiative recombination, thus limiting the achievable PCE for SnO2-based PSCs.
On account of these disadvantages of TiO2 and SnO2, massive metal oxides have been widely investigated for higher efficiency and stability PSCs. The recent PCE evolution of PSCs with various metal oxide ETLs is presented in Fig. 2. In this review, recent advances of these novel binary metal oxides (ZnO, In2O3, Nb2O5, and WOx) and ternary oxides (Zn2SnO4, BaSnO3, and SrTiO3) as ETLs are presented. The optimization strategies of these oxide ETLs are comprehensively discussed, including nanostructuring, elemental doping, surface modification and multi-layer configuration. The stability issue and large-scale fabrication of these metal oxide ETLs are also analyzed. Future perspectives for improving the performance and stability of metal oxide-based PSCs are discussed and outlined.

The n-type semiconductor ZnO with a large band gap (∼3.4 eV) is a promising alternative for TiO2 considering its conduction and valence band position similar to that of TiO2 and higher electron mobility (200–205 cm2 V−1 s−1 for ZnO). Besides, ZnO possesses excellent transmittance within the range of visible light wavelength. Notably, ZnO can crystallize at a low temperature, which means a lower cost of fabrication and potential application in flexible PSC devices. ZnO with various nanostructures, such as nanosheets, nanorods, and nanowalls, has been investigated. There are still some barriers to the practical application of ZnO. For instance, serious charge recombination occurs at the interface of ZnO/perovskite layers which will hamper the charge transfer and the attainable PCEs. Besides, ZnO has poor chemical stability owing to the hydroxyl (–OH) radicals reacting with perovskite and thus decomposing perovskite into MAI, PbI2 and H2O. Cations could easily be deprotonated by –OH radicals in ZnO ETLs and then escape from the perovskite layer. Therefore, it is necessary to insert an interlayer between the ZnO ETL and perovskite layer to mitigate the degradation rate or modify the ZnO surface for a better stability of ZnO-based PSCs. To avoid the instability caused by the deprotonation of the methylammonium (MA) cation, Schutt et al. replaced the MA cation with formamidinium (FA) and cesium (Cs) cations. The substitution of organic amine components endows the ZnO-based device with better thermal stability than that of the SnO2 and TiO2 based device. Zhang et al. applied Metal–Organic-Framework (MOF)-derived ZnO as the ETL for efficient PSCs (Fig. 3a). The MOF-derived ZnO based device achieved a PCE of 18.1% with negligible hysteresis. The performance improvement was due to enhanced charge extraction and reduced trap state density. The perovskite successfully infiltrated into the pores of MOF-derived ZnO polyhedra, which was beneficial for light harvesting and charge transportation properties. In addition, Zheng et al. fabricated efficient PSCs with a nano-sized ZnO array ETL with more than 72% of the initial PCE still maintained after 250 days of storage under 40% RH conditions (Fig. 3b). In particular, compared with the fresh CH3NH3PbI3/ZnO thin film, the stored film maintained a relatively fast photogenerated carrier transfer ability.

The typical n-type semiconductor Cr2O3 also has been studied as the ETL for PSCs. Dong et al. used a facile solvothermal reaction to fabricate amorphous dispersible Cr2O3 nanosheets. The Cr2O3 ETL showed high transmittance and enhanced charge extraction/transportation properties. Besides, the CBM of Cr2O3 (−3.9 eV) matched well with that of perovskite, and the VBM (−7.4 eV) was much lower than that of perovskite. As a result, the Cr2O3-based PSC yielded a promising PCE of 16.23%. Moreover, In2O3 is reported as a potential ETL in efficient PSCs because of its wide bandgap (∼3.7–3.9 eV), high electron mobility (>10 cm2 V−1 s−1) and good transparency. Chen et al. introduced a low-temperature solution-processed In2O3 thin film as the ETL for efficient PSCs. The In2O3 film was spin-cast with good film morphology, a well-tuned band structure, and improved electron selective capacity. The champion PCE of the In2O3-based device was increased to 15.30%. It's noteworthy that the as-prepared In2O3 films exhibited relatively lower photocatalytic activity compared with TiO2, which was due to the higher optical bandgap and less ultraviolet absorption of In2O3 films. Hence, the In2O3-based device without encapsulation retained 94% of the maximum PCE after exposure in a dark environment for three months. Yoon et al. obtained a pinhole-free In2O3 film via spin-coating an In(NO3)3·xH2O precursor solution on top of the ITO and a thermal decomposition process. The In2O3 thin film showed high conductivity (2.49 × 10−4 S cm−1) and low surface roughness (7.33 nm). Another oxide, Nb2O5, is a relatively wide bandgap semiconductor (∼3.4 eV) with high chemical stability and similar electronic properties to those of TiO2. Gu et al. developed the spin-coated Nb2O5 thin films as the ETL for efficient PSCs. The Nb2O5-based device obtained an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.02 V and a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 21.63 mA cm−2, which were associated with the suitable CB position, high optical transparency and reduced charge recombination at the ETL/perovskite interface. Previously, Ling et al. used a convenient radio frequency magnetron sputtering technique to form an amorphous Nb2O5 film at room temperature. The CB position of the Nb2O5 film matched well with that of the MAPbI3 perovskite layer. Benefiting from the high mobility and conductivity of the amorphous Nb2O5 film, the device yielded a champion PCE of 17.2%. Furthermore, WOx is also considered a potential ETL candidate with large bandgap (3.1 eV), high electron mobility (10–20 cm2 V−1 s−1) and high chemical stability. Recently, Chen et al. reported a pretty low temperature (50 °C) process to deposit nanocrystalline WOx ETLs. WOx was obtained through the reaction of tungsten chloride with hexanol. The use of hexanol was found to increase the Fermi level of the WOx ETL and suppress charge recombination in the PSC device. In particular, the (FAPbI3)1−x(MAPbBr3)x perovskite device with the WOx ETL achieved a record high PCE of 20.77% with notably improved Voc and fill factor (FF). Alternatively, constructing the Fe2O3 ETL is a good strategy to improve the device stability. Hu et al. first employed hematite (α-Fe2O3) as the ETL in planar PSCs. They found that the α-Fe2O3 ETL could achieve higher built-in potential across the perovskite layer, leading to more efficient charge extraction and less charge recombination compared with TiO2 based devices. Moreover, the α-Fe2O3 device showed good stability after 30 days with exposure to ambient air, owing to the improved perovskite films deposited on α-Fe2O3 than on TiO2 substrates.

In addition to binary metal oxides, some ternary metal oxides with superior electronic and optical properties have been exploited as ETLs for efficient PSCs. They have a tunable band structure and are chemically stable even under extreme conditions. Zn2SnO4 is an n-type semiconductor with a large bandgap (3.6 eV), high electron mobility (10–15 cm2 V−1 s−1) and a relatively low refractive index of 2.0 compared with TiO2. Zn2SnO4 with different microstructures has been explored to improve the performance of PSCs. Shin et al. developed highly dispersed Zn2SnO4 nanoparticles for highly efficient flexible PSCs. The Zn2SnO4 based device showed excellent flexibility with a PCE of 14.85%. Wu et al. reported a solution process to synthesize uniform and dense Zn2SnO4 thin films in PSCs and realized a PCE of 16.38%. It has been found that the Zn2SnO4 film is beneficial for the deposition of high-quality MAPbI3 layer with increased crystallinity and a smoother surface. Given the low refractive index of Zn2SnO4, the optical transmittance of the device was improved remarkably. Besides, Zn2SnO4 exhibited good hole-blocking capability and a well-aligned CB position, enhancing the charge extraction and collection. Jung et al. utilized a similar solution method to deposit amorphous Zn2SnO4 films (Fig. 3c). The amorphous Zn2SnO4 film as the ETL facilitated charge transport and reduced carrier recombination, resulting in a champion PCE of 20.02% with FAMAPbI3 perovskite as the light harvester. Moreover, both the stability and hysteresis behavior of PSCs were improved by using Zn2SnO4 as the ETL. Recently, Zheng et al. used a simple hydrothermal method to form a mesoscopic Zn2SnO4 layer, which showed good charge transfer and extraction performance. The best PCE of the mesoscopic Zn2SnO4-based device reached 18.32%.

Inorganic perovskite-structured metal oxides are also applicable as ETLs in PSCs. SrTiO3 has a wide bandgap similar to that of TiO2 and higher electron mobility (∼5–8 cm2 V−1 s−1). In 2014, Bera et al. first applied mesoporous SrTiO3 as the ETL in PSCs with a PCE of 6.97%. The SrTiO3-based device showed an improved Voc (1.01 V) compared with that of the TiO2-based device (0.81 V). Note that the utilization of SrTiO3 induced a dense perovskite film with large grains and full surface coverage. Subsequently, Neophytou et al. developed a low-temperature process to deposit SrTiO3 ETLs for efficient and stable PSCs (Fig. 3d and e). The SrTiO3-based device achieved a PCE of 19% with improved stability, retaining 80% of the initial PCE after illumination under white light for 1000 h. Furthermore, Shin et al. developed a superoxide colloidal solution route to prepare a La-doped BaSnO3 ETL at 300 °C (Fig. 3f). The La-doped BaSnO3 device showed a steady-state PCE of 21.2%. The superior performance of the modified device was attributed to the effective electron injection and high electron density due to La doping. Moreover, the modified device retained 93% of the initial PCE after 1000 h of illumination. As for BaTiO3, Okamoto et al. combined it with TiO2 to form a BaTiO3/TiO2 mesoporous double layer ETL and a PCE of 12.4% was achieved. The BaTiO3/TiO2 bilayer ETL could promote perovskite crystallization, leading to a larger MAPbI3 crystal size and fewer grain boundaries, thus suppressing charge recombination. More recently, Ye et al. exploited NaTaO3 as an alternative ETL in PSCs. The NaTaO3 ETL could effectively suppress the degradation of the perovskite layer when exposed to UV irradiation. The NaTaO3 device yielded a high PCE of 21.07% and retained more than 80% of the initial PCE after 240 min of UV irradiation in air. Apart from NaTaO3, Guo et al. applied ZnTiO3 in planar PSCs. Due to the excellent chemical stability and poor photocatalysis of ZnTiO3, the best device showed a stabilized PCE of 19.8% with improved photostability. The ZnTiO3 device retained 90% of its original PCE after 100 h of UV soaking. Besides, PbTiO3 has also been utilized as the ETL in PSCs. Wang et al. tuned the ferroelectric polarization of the PbTiO3 layer to increase the device photocurrent and PCE. It was found that appropriate PbTiO3 ferroelectric layer regulation could improve electron extraction and inhibit charge recombination. The optimized device achieved a PCE of 12.28%.
Besides, Pang et al. synthesized the Zn2Ti3O8 nanoparticles by an ion-exchange method. It was observed that the perovskite films on Zn2Ti3O8 ETLs showed excellent crystallization properties and reduced defects and grain boundaries. The Zn2Ti3O8 ETL showed a deep conduction band and thus facilitated electron transfer from the ETL to the perovskite layer. As a result, the Zn2Ti3O8 device exhibited the best PCE of 17.21% with eliminated hysteresis.

Constructing metal oxide ETLs with nanostructures is conducive to improving the performance of PSCs. So far, various nanostructures of metal oxides, such as nanosheets, nanorods, and nanowells, have been synthesized and used as the ETL for efficient PSCs, with similar characteristics of affording highly effective charge transport channels and providing plenty of space for the infiltration of perovskite. Xu et al. fabricated ordered ZnO nanorods (NRs) as the ETL by introducing [6,6]-phenyl C61 butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) into ZnO NRs and obtained a PCE of 11.67%. The ordered ZnO NRs provided direct channels for electron transfer and reduced the transmission distance of the electrons. Besides, PCBM modification increased the roughness of the ZnO NR surface and thus improved the loading of perovskite on ZnO NRs. Chandrasekhar et al. applied nitrogen-doped graphene/ZnO nanorod nanocomposites as the ETL with a PCE of 16.82% (Fig. 4a). The perovskite films deposited on the ZnO NR ETL showed complete surface coverage and high crystallinity. Li et al. modified ZnO NRs by using aluminum chloride (AlCl3) and ammonia (NH3·H2O) to achieve a PCE of 12.1%. Such treatment produced more space for the loading of perovskite, and enhanced the light absorption of the device. Apart from ZnO NRs, ZnO nanosheets (ZnO NSs) have also been applied as the ETL for highly efficient and hysteresis-free PSCs by Mahmood et al. Electrospraying was used to deposit ZnO NSs (Fig. 4b). The ZnO NS based PSCs exhibited a PCE of 15.91% without hysteresis. Subsequently, Mahmood et al. used a low-temperature hydrothermal method to fabricated ZnO nanodisks and nanowells (Fig. 4c and d). The nanowell device achieved a maximum PCE of 16.65%, higher than that of ZnO nanodisks and mesoporous films. The ZnO nanowells with numerous holes were found to grow perpendicular to the substrate. This unique configuration provided a large surface area, which was beneficial for the infiltration of perovskite into the ZnO nanowells and efficient charge transfer at the interface between the ETL and perovskite layers.

Furthermore, other metal oxide nanostructures have also been investigated. Luo et al. deposited unusual Fe2O3 nanoislands, which were in situ grown on the compact Fe2O3 layers to act as the ETL (Fig. 4e). The PSCs based on Fe2O3 nanoislands showed an excellent PCE of 18.2% on account of the sufficient light transmittance, improved charge extraction and reduced charge recombination. Wang et al. developed a low-temperature solution method to fabricate Nb2O5 nanoparticles. The Nb2O5 nanoparticle device achieved the best PCE of 20.22% with a Voc of 1.19 V. The Nb2O5 ETL showed well-matched band alignment with perovskite thus enhancing charge extraction at the interface and reducing the electron injection energy barrier. In this way, the Nb2O5 nanoparticle device reduced energy loss during electron transfer from perovskite to the ETL, and thus improved the performance of the device. Notably, the PSC device showed high UV stability simultaneously and retained 93% of the initial Jsc after exposure to UV light for 10 h. Sun et al. reported a facile peroxide-precipitate method to prepare well-dispersed BaSnO3 nanoparticles. The BaSnO3 nanoparticles were used as the ETL and achieved an improvement in the PCE (nearly 12%) compared with the TiO2 device (Fig. 4f). The enhanced electron transfer at the BaSnO3/perovskite interface and reduced charge recombination has been verified. Wang et al. combined SrTiO3 nanoparticles with graphene as an efficient ETL (Fig. 4g). The device achieved a PCE of 10% and the Jsc was boosted from 12.42 to 18.08 mA cm−2 compared with that of the mesoporous-SrTiO3 device, which was associated with faster charge transfer. Moreover, Liu et al. reported a facile hydrothermal method to prepare Zn2SnO4 nanoparticles (Fig. 4h). The Zn2SnO4-based device achieved the best PCE of 17.7%. It was found that the Zn2SnO4 nanoparticle ETL facilitated efficient charge transfer and injection at the ETL/perovskite interface. Zn2SnO4 nanorod as an ETL was also investigated. Tavakoli et al. used the ultrasonic spray pyrolysis technique to deposit Zn2SnO4 nanorod arrays on top of FTO glass. The best Zn2SnO4 nanorod based device achieved a PCE of 18.24% and a high Jsc of 23.8 mA cm−2. And these devices exhibited better charge extraction capacity and reduced hysteresis compared to the Zn2SnO4 planar devices.
Core–shell structure metal oxides have also been widely investigated as ETLs in PSCs and can combine the advantage of core materials and shell materials (such as high electron mobility and excellent energy level alignment) to achieve outstanding device performance. Zhang et al. used core–shell TiO2@BaTiO3 nanoparticles to replace the mesoporous TiO2 nanoparticle layers (Fig. 4i). The BaTiO3 shell layer was in good contact with the MAPbI3 layer, thus decreasing the number of charge recombination centers. Moreover, the BaTiO3 could suppress aggregation of TiO2 nanoparticles and change the TiO2 layer to a loose structure, which helps in the formation of a porous PbI2 layer. The porous PbI2 layer could sufficiently react with MAI solution to obtain a high-quality perovskite layer with better optical absorption. As a result, an average PCE of 13.76% was achieved due to improved carrier separation and suppressed charge recombination. Wang et al. modified ZnO nanorod arrays with ZnSe from a successive ion layer adsorption and reaction method (Fig. 4j). The device with ZnSe modification achieved a 27% improved PCE due to the well-aligned energy band and improved charge transfer efficiency. Besides, the air stability of the device with ZnSe modification was improved significantly, with a more than 80% retention of the initial PCE after being placed in the ambient environment for 168 h, while the pristine device retained only less than 40% of its initial PCE. In another study, Li et al. synthesized the core–shell ZnO@SnO2 nanoparticles by a facile solvothermal method. The size of the particle was 8.1 nm with a SnO2 shell thickness of 3.4 nm, and its electron mobility was seven times higher than that of pristine SnO2 (Fig. 4k). The SnO2 shell provided a well-matched energy level alignment for efficient electron injection and the core ZnO contributed to a high electron mobility. The PSC with the core–shell ZnO@SnO2 nanoparticle ETL exhibited a PCE of 14.35%. Zhong et al. reported a novel ZnO@TiO2 nanorod array ETL which was prepared in the ambient atmosphere (Fig. 4l). The PCE of the ZnO@TiO2 device was 50.46% higher than that of the single ZnO layer device due to improved ETL/perovskite interface contact and suppressed charge recombination. Notably, the ZnO@TiO2 device retained more than 83% of its initial PCE after storage for 168 h while the pristine one just retained less than 50%. This was because the TiO2 shell served as a buffer layer to avoid the direct contact between ZnO and the perovskite, and thus inhibited the decomposition of the perovskite film.

Element doping is an effective method to enhance the electronic properties of metal oxide semiconductors. It has been observed that doping ZnO with suitable elements can improve its electron mobility and energy level alignment, thereby achieving efficient charge transport. Khan et al. used the low-temperature processed Al-doped ZnO nanoparticles as the ETL in PSCs. The Al dopant effectively lowered the series resistance and reduced the carrier recombination at the ETL/perovskite interface. The device with Al-doped ZnO showed the best PCE of 13.91%. Likewise, Tseng et al. prepared an Al-doped ZnO thin film by a sputtering method and used it as the ETL to fabricate PSCs with the best PCE of 17.6%. The performance improvement was associated with higher conductivity and better band matching with the perovskite layer. In particular, Al doping could improve the resistance toward acid of the ZnO film considering the formed AlO4 unit had a positive charge when a Zn was replaced by an Al (Fig. 5a). Besides, Zheng et al. reported a dense and uniform ZnO nanopillar ETL via doping the halogen I−, resulting in a high PCE up to 18.2%. It was found that I− can regulate the crystal growth of ZnO, leading to a low-aspect-ratio and compact nanopillar aligned structure. Generally, the PSC performance was improved due to the well-matched energy level, enhanced electron extraction and retarded charge recombination at the ETL/perovskite interface (Fig. 5b). What's more, Cs+ and Li+ are introduced into the bulk of the ZnO layer. The Li-doped ZnO layer induced a remarkable PCE of 18.02%, along with a reduction in hysteresis and a dramatic improvement of the device stability. It was noteworthy that the Cs+ and Li+ dopants reduced the ZnO trap density (Fig. 5c). Similarly, Mahmud et al. used a Li-doped ZnO ETL to fabricate highly efficient MA0.57FA0.38Rb0.05PbI3 PSCs with a PCE of 16.14%. The doped Li+ mainly existed in the lattice space, which passivated the defects in the ZnO layer concurrently. The devices with Li+-doped ZnO exhibited weak current leakage and excellent charge extraction. Besides, Li+ doping downshifted the Fermi level of ZnO by 30 meV, which in turn enhanced the electron injection driven force. Azmi et al. synthetically investigated the alkali metal doped ZnO ETLs. The devices with K+-doped ZnO showed the best PCE of 19.90%, higher than that of Li+-doped ZnO (17.80%) and Na+-doped ZnO (18.90%). It was found that the doped K+, Li+ and Na+ could significantly induce the reduction of surface defect density and surface hydroxyl group content (Fig. 5d). Notably, the built-in potential of the ZnO–K based device was 0.05 V higher than that of the pristine ZnO based device (Fig. 5e and f). Obviously, K+ doping significantly enhanced the Fermi energy level of ZnO, leading to an enhanced internal electric field, which was conducive to charge extraction in the devices. Moreover, K+-doped ZnO exhibited more than two times higher electron mobility than the control ZnO. The stability of the K+-doped devices was also improved, retaining 91% of their initial PCE after 800 h of storage, while the pristine devices retained only 36%.

Ni-doped α-Fe2O3 was synthesized as the ETL in PSCs with a PCE of 14.2%. The Ni dopant could increase the electron conductivity and induce a downshift of the CBM of the α-Fe2O3, thus facilitating electron injection from the perovskite layer to the ETL. A Zn+-doped Nb2O5 film was prepared through a low-temperature solution-combustion method and used as the ETL in PSCs with the best PCE of 17.70%. Moreover, Zn+-doped Nb2O5-based devices retained 80% of the initial PCE after being placed in air for 20 days. Shin et al. reported a superoxide colloidal solution route to synthesize La-doped BaSnO3 and used it as the ETL in PSCs with a competitive PCE of 21.2%. The superior performance was ascribed to the high electron mobility and excellent electronic structure of La-doped BaSnO3. Besides, La-doped BaSnO3 based PSCs retained 93% of its initial PCE after illumination for 1000 h. Furthermore, Tsvetkov et al. tuned the CBM position of SrTiO3 by Nb doping. The Nb dopant significantly induced a downward shift of the CBM for improved electron injection. The best PCE of 20.2% was obtained for the device with Nb-doped SrTiO3.

Surface modification, especially the self-assembled monolayer (SAM) via the electric dipole effect has been widely applied in high performance PSCs (Fig. 6a). Owing to the functional hydrophobicity and the feature of high electric dipole, SAM modification could yield large perovskite grains without pinholes, which enhances the internal electric field and facilitates the charge extraction. Generally, the anchoring groups in SAM, such as carboxyl, phosphonic, sulfonic, and silane groups, have high affinity to the ETL and can bond well with the ETL surface. Zhang et al. used 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium hexafluorophosphate as the interfacial modifier between the ZnO and MAPbI3 layer. The electron extraction was accelerated by suitable energy level alignment (Fig. 6b). Some polymers, such as poly-vinylpyrrolidone (PVP) (Fig. 6c), could mitigate the degradation of perovskite on account of the reduced formation of –OH radicals with H2O. Meanwhile, the polymer-modified surface provides better adhesion and wettability. Zuo et al. modified ZnO with 3-aminopropanoic acid (C3) for a higher crystallinity (Fig. 6d and e). The deposition of C3-SAM would decrease the dipole moment via flexing the vacuum energy level.

Additionally, SAM can passivate the defects (e.g., surface defects, oxygen-vacancy defects and ionic defects) of perovskite. Liu et al. combined SAM with the self-form solvent annealing (SFSA) method to reduce grain boundary and surface defects. The surface modification of methoxy silane SAM successfully restrained the O defects by forming strong O–Si bonding; meanwhile, the special SFSA approach induced large crystallization grains and inhibited decomposition of the perovskite film (Fig. 6f and g). Therefore, the use of SAM can deactivate the localized positive ions at the interface, which is a promising method to relieve J–V hysteresis. The potential causes include ion migration, mismatched charge transfer, capacitance effect, defect traps and ferroelectricity. Some photovoltaic performances of PSC devices with SAMs are summarized in Table 1.
SAM
Device structure

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)
Ref.
C60
FTO/WOx/C60/MAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
0.93
22.15
0.78
16.07

75

C3-SAM
ITO/ZnO/C3-SAM/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/MoO3/Ag
1.07
22.51
0.65
15.67

153

JTCA
ITO/ZnO/JTCA/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
1.13
21.72
0.76
18.82

62

T2CA
ITO/ZnO/T2CA/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
1.09
21.34
0.73
17.07

62

APTES
ITO/ZnO/APTES/perovskite/PTAA/Au
1.09
22.54
0.75
18.34

146

[EMIM]PF6
FTO/ZnO/[EMIM]PF6/MAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
1.00
19.16
0.71
13.50

141

Graphene
FTO/NG-ZnO/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-MeOTAD/Ag
1.02
21.98
0.75
16.82

119

Graphene
ITO/MLG-ZnO/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
1.15
23.42
0.78
21.03

154

Except for forming a SAM, some other method can also optimize the surface of metal oxide ETLs. It has been recognized that ZnO nanostructure ETLs suffered severe performance degradation due to the surface defects (e.g., hydroxyl groups and oxygen vacancies). Modification with Li+, Al3+, and Cs+, or organic materials has been reported to obstruct direct contact with perovskite and improve the PCE. Zhang et al. passivated O vacancies by chlorination interaction (Fig. 7a). Notably, the increase in short-wavelength external quantum efficiency at short wavelengths can be attributed to the reduction of charge recombination centers, which was consistent with the photoluminescence (PL) peak at 530 nm (Fig. 7b). The trap state density was decreased from 1.61 × 1016 cm−3 to 1.41 × 1016 cm−3 after chlorination treatment (Fig. 7c). Chen et al. deposited ZnS on the ZnO substrate to improve the ambient stability and device efficiency (Fig. 7d). The S atoms in ZnS could coordinate with Pb2+ ions and form a Zn–S–Pb interface, thus passivating the basic surface of ZnO and decreasing the deprotonation of MA+ in perovskite. The sulfidation degree of about 450 °C displayed well-matched energy levels (Fig. 7e). In addition to chlorination and sulfidation, UV–O3 and annealing treatment were utilized to decrease the deep trap states (VO+) of the ZnO layer (Fig. 7f). The interstitial O ion (Oi), acting as an electron scattering center, can be adjusted simultaneously to retard the perovskite decomposition and improve device stability. More recently, Pang et al. employed a UV–O3 treatment to prepare the CeOx ETL. The PCE of the treated CeOx ETL device (14.63%) was much higher than that of the control ETL device (9.08%). The enhanced performance relied on the improved CeOx film quality which enhanced the light absorption and suppressed charge recombination.

Multi-layer design of ETLs is also a potential approach to obtain efficient PSCs. Compared with single layer ETLs, multi-layer ETLs can combine the strengths of two materials to achieve excellent interface contact and high charge mobility. For instance, Apostolopoulou et al. prepared a TiOx/In2O3 bilayer ETL and found that the energy level of In2O3 matches well with that of perovskite. Its higher conduction band edge provides sufficient electron transfer driven force from perovskite to the ETL. Besides, In2O3 passivates the TiO2 surface defects. These all clarify that TiOx/In2O3 has more excellent performance than single-layer TiOx. Likewise, Chen et al. also introduced a TiOx/In2O3 bilayer structure ETL into PSCs. The addition of a TiOx layer can effectively attenuate the pinhole effect of In2O3 films to improve the hole blocking capacity of the ETL. Garcia et al. combined ZnO nanorods with TiO2 nanoparticles and found that the surface defects of ZnO were reduced after TiO2 modification. Compared with the monolayer, the charge transfer of the bilayer improved (Fig. 8a). In another study, You et al. formed a TiO2/WO3 bilayer ETL by inserting a compact TiO2 layer under the WO3 layer to achieve a PCE of 20.14%. Compared with WO3, the VBM of TiO2 was lower, which hinders the hole transfer from the perovskite layer to the ETL. The lower CBM of WO3 ensured the effective charge extraction from perovskite to the ETL (Fig. 8b). In addition, Jiang et al. prepared a Nb2O5/TiO2 bilayer ETL, in which the addition of Nb2O5 improved the electron mobility and electrical conductivity of the ETL. The Nb2O5/TiO2 films had a flat surface, which was beneficial for growing high-quality perovskite films as well as reducing surface defects. Recently, Wang et al. fabricated a bilayer ETL consisting of an amorphous WOx layer and a SnO2 layer. The WOx/SnO2 device achieved a PCE of 20.52%. Similar to In2O3, the dense and uniform WOx layer effectively blocked holes through the pinholes and cracks of SnO2. Besides, the WOx layer with a suitable energy level and high electron mobility ensured effective charge extraction and transportation (Fig. 8c and d). Zhang et al. spin-coated a Nb2O5 passivation layer on the top of the ZnO layer. The Nb2O5 layer passivates the surface defects of ZnO. On the other hand, it can effectively avoid the direct contact between ZnO and perovskite to prevent the decomposition of perovskites. Notably, the perovskite layer deposited on the Nb2O5 layer exhibited a much smoother and continuous morphology with larger grain size than that deposited on ZnO layer (Fig. 8e). What's more, Tai et al. modified the ZnO layer with an ultra-thin Zn2SnO4 layer. On the one hand, the Zn2SnO4 layer prevented the direct contact between the perovskite films and ZnO, eliminating the instability issue. On the other hand, Zn2SnO4 passivated ZnO surface defects and improved charge extraction and transfer at the perovskite/ETL interface (Fig. 8f and g). Benefiting from these advantages, the ZnO/Zn2SnO4 device achieved a PCE as high as 18.3% and retained over 97% of the initial PCE after storage in ambient air for 45 days. Besides, Ma et al. applied TiOx on the ZnO surface to improve the perovskite/ZnO interface stabilization and reduce charge recombination. High-performance devices based on the TiOx/ZnO bilayer ETL with 19.34% PCE and improved stability were realized. It was observed that the oxygen vacancies and surface hydroxyl groups on the ZnO surface were effectively passivated by TiOx. Subsequently, the same group further modified the TiOx/ZnO bilayer ETL with PCBM, yielding a PCE up to 20.71%. In 2016, Ke et al. used a TiO2/ZnS bilayer ETL with a cascade conduction band structure in PSCs. The TiO2/ZnS bilayer ETL effectively suppressed charge recombination and promoted electron transfer. The champion device with the FASnI3 perovskite layer achieved a PCE of 5.27%. Similarly, Chavan et al. fabricated a ZnS buffer layer on top of the TiO2 surface using the atomic layer deposition (ALD) technique. The ZnS layer acted as an effective buffer barrier between the TiO2 layer and perovskite layer and retarded charge recombination at the interface. Hence, the devices with the TiO2/ZnS bilayer ETL exhibited better PCE (18.85%) than the devices without the ZnS layer (17.90%). Besides, Ito et al. inserted an Sb2S3 layer between the TiO2 layer and perovskite absorber layer. The PCE of the TiO2/Sb2S3 based devices improved from 4.82% to 5.03%. The Sb2S3 layer could prohibit charge extraction from the I− to the CB of TiO2, leading to enhanced charge recombination and decreased open-circuit voltage. However, the block effect of the Sb2S3 layer could improve the stability of the perovskite layer. The photovoltaic performances of some PSC devices with multi-layer ETLs are summarized in Table 2.

ETLs
Device structure

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)
Ref.
TiOx/In2O3
ITO/TiOx/In2O3/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag
1.05
20.58
0.74
15.97

68

TiO2/WO3
FTO/TiO2/WO3/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag
1.09
23.54
0.79
20.14

165

Nb2O5/TiO2
FTO/Nb2O5–TiO2/MAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
1.04
20.49
0.72
15.25

166

ZnO/TiOx/PC61BM
ITO/ZnO–TiOx/PC61BM/MA1−yFAyPbI3−xClx/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag
1.08
24.15
0.74
19.34

170

ZnO/TiOx/PC61BM
ITO/ZnO–TiOx/PC61BM/MA1−yFAyPbI3−xClx/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag
1.11
24.30
0.77
20.71

171

WOx/SnO2
ITO/WOx/SnO2/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag
1.11
23.01
0.80
20.52

167

ZnO/SnO2
ITO/ZnO/SnO2/MAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag
1.15
21.74
0.76
19.1

174

ZnO/Zn2SnO4
AZO/ZnO/ZTO/PCBM/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
1.07
23.2
0.74
18.3

169

ZnO/CeOx
FTO/ZnO/CeOx/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
1.09
23.64
0.76
19.52

175

The ambient stability has also been improved owing to the shielding effect of the multi-layer structure. Mahmoudi et al. achieved the best PCE of 20.6% and long-term stability (300 days) in the ambient atmosphere via using a mesoporous Al2O3/graphene (mp-AG) ETL and Ag-reduced graphene oxide (Ag-rGO)/MAPbI3−xClx perovskite layer. The mp-AG ETL could eliminate adverse contact between the electrode and perovskite and reduce the shunt paths (Fig. 9a). Significantly, the trap density (Nt) of mp-AG (3.78 × 1015 cm−3) was half that of TiO2 (7.56 × 1015 cm−3) (Fig. 9b). Lately, Cao et al. covered the ZnO layer with MgO and protonated ethanolamine (EA) to achieve the best PCE up to 21.1% with eliminated hysteresis (Fig. 9c). The disappearance of the absorption peaks of –OH (3687 and 1382 cm−1) and emergence of the absorption peak of –NH3+ (1509 cm−1) revealed the successful protonation process of EA (Fig. 9d). In particular, no hysteresis was observed on the modified devices due to improved electron extraction and collection. Fang et al. reported the surface modification of PCBM by the additional CeOx layer and achieved high electron mobility and chemical stability. With the assistance of short-chain acetylacetone, the CeOx enabled better solubility in opposite polarity solvents (e.g., methanol and chlorobenzene) and more fluent charge transfer than in long-chain oleic acid (Fig. 9e). Note that the signal intensity of Ag+ and I− ions was much lower in the PCBM/CeOx device than in PCBM devices, which directly proved the effectual chemical shielding effect (Fig. 9f and g). Similarly, Xing et al. also used PC61BM/CeOx bilayer ETLs with a PCE of 17.35%. The result of sheet resistance (Rsh) and charge transfer resistance (Rct) from the impedance measurements indicated that the PCBM/CeOx bilayer strengthened the ohmic contact between the ETL and perovskite layer (Fig. 9h).

It is imperative to improve the long-term stability of PSCs with high efficiency. The degradation of perovskite is affected by various factors, including moisture, heat, UV light, oxygen and ion migration. When moisture invades perovskite layers, hybrid perovskites will degrade into their original constituents. The presence of water will quickly destroy the perovskite structure and induce a serious decrease of light absorption. It has been widely recognized that high temperature will accelerate the decomposition of perovskite. Driven by the thermodynamics, MA ions will escape from the lattice, leaving behind inorganic components and some by-products. Many attempts have been made to enhance the stability of PSCs. Some optimization strategies for the ETLs are listed in Table 3. Zhao et al. ameliorated the device thermal stability through adding Al dopants into the ZnO ETL. The perovskite layer based on the Al-doped ZnO substrate remained active after being treated at 100 °C for 90 min. The improvement of thermal stability is deemed to be derived from the reduction of the Lewis acid–base reaction between the ETL and perovskite. Separately, Hou et al. introduced a PCBM on top of the α-Fe2O3 ETL. The PCBM/α-Fe2O3 ETL based devices showed improved stability compared with the pristine α-Fe2O3 devices, retaining 95% of the initial PCE after 45 days of storage in the dark with humid air. The introduction of the PCBM could improve the crystallinity of the perovskite film to resist the intrusion of moisture to a certain extent. Similarly, Guo et al. optimized the In2O3 ETL processed by a low temperature combustion solution and modified with PCBM. With the existence of PCBM, the In2O3 based device retained 75% of its initial PCE after being placed in a glovebox for 120 days. Tavakoli et al. inserted monolayer graphene at the ZnO/perovskite interface. The presence of graphene could prevent the perovskite films from being decomposed at elevated temperatures (Fig. 10a). And then they passivated the surface defects of the perovskite film by using 3-(pentafluorophenyl)-propionamide (PFPA). Benefiting from monolayer graphene and PFPA modification, the device retained 93% of its initial PCE after 300 h under continuous light soaking. Si et al. deposited an ultra-thin Al2O3 insulating layer with a thickness of 4 Å at the ZnO/perovskite interface by atomic layer deposition. The Al2O3 layer separated ZnO and the perovskite layer to decrease the interaction in the device, in which the Al2O3 layer protected the perovskite from degradation. This protection was confirmed by significant color change, from the initial brown to the final yellow after heat treatment. Besides, the thicker Al2O3 layer showed more efficient protection. The Al2O3 (4 cycles) based devices maintained almost invariable PCE after 12 days of exposure at room temperature with 20% humidity. Besides, Brinkmann et al. reported an Al-doped ZnO (AZO)/SnO2 bilayer ETL. The SnO2 layer formed a dense gas permeation barrier to hinder the erosion of moisture and prevented the egress of decomposition products of the perovskite (Fig. 10b). Similarly, Meng et al. applied a CeOx/ZnO ETL in a PSC to improve the moisture, UV, and thermal stability by improving the chemical environment of the ZnO surface. The CeOx/ZnO device retained 90% of its initial PCE after 600 h in a humid environment, whereas the ZnO device only retained less than 45%. It was revealed that the application of CeOx could efficiently passivate the defects of ZnO inducing the enhancement of the PSC moisture stability. Besides, the modified device only lost 5% of the original PCE after 150 h at 85 °C in an inert atmosphere, while the unmodified device lost about 40%. The excellent thermal stability of the modified device could be associated with the improved chemical environment of the ZnO surface. La-doped BaSnO3 was also used for stability improvement by Shin et al. They conducted a light stability test under 1-sun illumination for 120 h (Fig. 10c and d). The test confirmed that the La-doped BaSnO3 (LBSO) based device showed a better resistance against photodegradation than the TiO2. And the LBSO device retained 93% of its original PCE after 1000 h, which outclassed the TiO2 based device (Fig. 10e).

Device structure
Stability
PCE (%)
Ref.
Glass/Al–ZnO/MAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
88% for 144 h, 20 °C, 20% RH
12.6

181

FTO/α-Fe2O3/PCBM/MAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
95% for 45 days, dark, room temperature, 40% RH
14.2

182

ITO/In2O3/PCBM/MA1−yFAyPbI3−xClx/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag
75% for 120 days in a glovebox, 30% RH
18.12

69

FTO/MLG/ZnO/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
93% for 300 h, room temperature, N2 atmosphere
21.03

154

FTO/ZnO/Al2O3/TiO2/MAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
Without any significant drop after 12 days, room temperature, 20% RH
15.55

183

FTO/ZnO/CeOx/MAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
90% for 600 h, room temperature, 45% RH
19.5

175

FTO/NiMgLiO/MAPbI3/PCBM/CeOx/Ag
Slight increase after 30 days, 30% RH, dark
18.7

177


Large-scale fabrication is a critical factor to impel the commercial application of PSCs. Many technologies have been developed to fabricate large-area TiO2 and SnO2 ETLs. For instance, Kim et al. reported an electro-spray deposition (ESD) system for preparing the mesoporous TiO2 ETL. The EDS system applied high voltage to the metal capillary containing the precursor to obtain extremely small droplets with high charge state. And then, a film with high quality could be obtained by spraying these highly charged droplets (Fig. 11a). Besides, Han et al. used an electrostatic self-assembly approach to fabricate large-scale SnO2 ETLs. The dense and uniform SnO2 ETL was deposited by electrostatic interaction between SnO2 colloids and PAH (Fig. 11b). The devices with active areas of 25 and 100 cm2 yielded PCEs of 15.3 and 14.0%, respectively. These technologies should also be considered for metal oxide ETLs beyond TiO2 and SnO2. Currently, only a few studies have reported the large-area preparation of these metal oxide alternatives. In 2015, Hwang et al. first prepared a fully printed PSC with a PCE of 11.96% via the slot-die coating method. By the slot-die method, they obtained a ZnO ETL and doped P3HT. Simultaneously, the hot slot-die coating of MAI was employed to promote the conversion of PbI2 to perovskite and thus obtain the well-developed perovskite films (Fig. 11c). This result demonstrated the feasibility of preparing a large area perovskite layer on the ZnO substrate. Separately, Li et al. introduced an inkjet manipulated approach to control the growth process of perovskite films. A uniform perovskite film with a large grain size and fewer grain boundaries was deposited by subtly controlling the micro-droplets of inkjet-printing. The large area (2.02 cm2) device yielded a high PCE of 17.74%. The enhanced performance was attributed to the optimized perovskite film morphology. Recently, Liu et al. investigated an all-inorganic PSC with high efficiency and good thermal stability by combining CsPbI2Br perovskite with the NiOx HTL and Nb2O5 ETL. The device with a large area (5 cm2) achieved a PCE of 11.2% (Fig. 11d). The excellent performance was ascribed to the reduced trap-state density and improved charge transfer capacity.


The ETLs for high performance PSCs generally possess a suitable energy level position and resistance to light, heat and moisture. Metal oxides are regarded as promising candidates. In this review, we have summarized the recent advances of various metal oxides (binary metal oxides such as ZnO and In2O3 and ternary metal oxides such as ZnSnO4 and SrTiO3) beyond TiO2 and SnO2 in high-performance and stable PSCs. These metal oxide ETLs have achieved great advances in photovoltaic performance of PSCs. However, considering the unwanted surface defects and trap states, nonaligned energy level, and deficient mobility of most metal oxides, diversified ETL engineering strategies are proposed to optimize the electronic and optical properties, including nanostructure design, elemental doping, SAM modification, surface modification and multi-layer ETL design. In addition, large-scale fabrication requires more attention with the booming development of PSCs. Various deposition technologies (inkjet printing, screen printing, etc.) should be further developed to promote the commercial application of PSCs.

However, some challenges are still open to exploration in these novel metal oxide ETLs. Firstly, the intrinsic electronic properties, high trap states and imperfect interface contact with perovskite of metal oxides tend to hinder the improvement of device efficiency. For instance, ZnO suffers from poor chemical stability and severe charge recombination. Thus, developing metal oxides with high charge mobility, fewer trap states and well-matched energy level alignment for balanced charge flux and highly efficient charge transfer through proper structure design and interface engineering can be an effective pathway to reduce energy loss and enhance device performance.
Secondly, improving the stability of PSCs under light, moisture, heat and UV irradiation also deserves more attention. It is necessary to develop functional metal oxide ETLs with hydrophobicity, high thermal stability and wide bandgap for this purpose. These specific metal oxides can enhance the long-term stability of the devices under light illumination or heat or in a humid environment to a certain degree. Besides, combining the multilayer of metal oxide ETLs (e.g., ZnO/TiO2 and Nb2O5/TiO2) is conducive to suppressing the decomposition of perovskite by avoiding direct contact between the ETL and perovskite layer and mitigates the drawbacks caused by a monolayer.
Thirdly, the suppression of non-radiative recombination at the ETL/perovskite interface is worthy of further in-depth investigation by a combination of theoretical calculation and characterization methods. Future improvement of the interface between the ETL and perovskite layers for suppressing non-radiative recombination and reducing the energy loss is highly necessary to promote the voltage output of PSCs.
Finally, reformative metal oxide ETLs in low-dimensional and flexible PSCs have scarcely been reported. The roll-to-roll continuous production of PSCs would heavily rely on the control of the dimensions and electronic properties of ETLs. At present, Zn2SnO4 has broad prospects in the application of flexible devices and can be expanded on large-scale flexible devices. In addition, large-scale fabrication is a key factor to realizing PSCs' commercial application. The low-cost printing of ETLs is also a future trend. Therefore, development of various deposition methods to fabricate uniform and pinhole-free ETLs is important to prepare large-area PSCs. We believe that the discussed metal oxide ETL engineering strategies can serve as guidance for judicious ETL design in practical application in PSCs as well as other optoelectronic devices.

The author declares no conflict of interest.


This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China NSFC (51702038), the Sichuan Science and Technology Program (2020YFG0061) and the Recruitment Program for Young Professionals. Z. Wang acknowledges the Opening Project of Shanxi Province Key Laboratory of Functional Nanocomposites (NFCM201801). L. Ding acknowledges the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2017YFA0206600) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51773045, 21572041, 21772030 and 51922032) for financial support.


† These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020