 DOI: 10.1039/D1TA00768H
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 10419-10426


Wilman
Septina
,

Christopher P.
Muzzillo
,

Craig L.
Perkins
,

Anne Curtis
Giovanelli
,

Thomas
West
,

Kenta K.
Ohtaki
,

Hope A.
Ishii
,

John P.
Bradley
,

Kai
Zhu
 and 

Nicolas
Gaillard
*

Hawaii Natural Energy Institute, University of Hawaii, 1680 East-West Rd Post 109, Honolulu, HI 96822, USA. E-mail: ngaillar@hawaii.edu

National Renewable Energy Laboratory, 15013 Denver W Pkwy, Golden, CO 80401, USA

Hawaii Institute of Geophysics & Planetology, University of Hawaii, Honolulu, Hawaii 96822, USA

Received
26th January 2021
, Accepted 7th April 2021
First published on 9th April 2021
We report an efficiency enhancement of solution-processed CuIn(S,Se)2 (CISSe) thin film solar cells via in situ incorporation of Al2O3. These films were produced using inks containing CuCl, InCl3, AlNO3 (Al/Al + In: 0.1) and thiourea dissolved in methanol. After spin coating of these solutions in air, samples were subjected to a selenization process. Auger electron spectroscopy depth-profiling analysis showed that Al is evenly distributed throughout the bulk of the film. Transmission electron microscopy revealed that AlNO3 precursor reacted with oxygen to form nanosized amorphous Al2O3 grains located within the bulk and grain boundaries of CISSe, as well as at both the top and bottom interfaces. Power conversion efficiency (PCE) as high as 11.6% (JSC: 35.8 mA cm−2, VOC: 518 mV, FF: 62.2%, no anti-reflection coating) was achieved with Al–CISSe solar cell devices integrated with CdS (chemical bath deposition, thickness: 80 nm) and ZnO/ITO bilayers (sputtered, thickness: 300 nm). The average PCE (10.1%, 〈JSC〉: 34.5 mA cm−2, 〈VOC〉: 491 mV, 〈FF〉: 59.8%) was nearly 4% (absolute) higher than that measured on CISSe baseline cells fabricated from solutions without Al (〈PCE〉 = 6.4%, 〈JSC〉: 32.8 mA cm−2, 〈VOC〉: 410 mV, 〈FF〉: 47.3%). This in situ Al2O3 incorporation is speculated to play a role in the enhancement of the VOC and FF of the devices through passivation of defects in CISSe reducing interface and bulk recombination, as evidenced by a reduced defect density and an increased activation energy of the dominant recombination mechanism from capacitance and temperature-dependent VOC measurements, respectively.

Thin film solar cells, in particular CuInGaSe2 (CIGSe) chalcopyrites, offer some of the most efficient materials for light conversion to electricity with relatively low raw materials usage and production costs compared to crystalline silicon (c-Si). As of 2019, CIGSe record efficiency has achieved 23.4% efficiency, a value comparable to that achieved with c-Si solar cells. Despite these attributes, the market share of CIGSe photovoltaics is still relatively low, below 2%. In principle, numerous pathways exist to elevate chalcopyrite photovoltaics to be more competitive and appealing in the energy market, including increasing module durability, lowering fabrication costs, selecting cheaper constituents, and/or increasing cell efficiency.

In recent years, passivating CIGSe surfaces with dielectric materials to further boost efficiency has gained a lot of attention. In particular, coating CIGSe with a thin layer of Al2O3 using atomic layer deposition (ALD) processes was shown to decrease interface recombination and resulted in improved efficiency, a strategy borrowed from silicon solar cell technologies where dielectric passivation layers (SiNx, SiO2, Al2O3) are applied at the front or rear surfaces of the silicon wafer. Passivation with Al2O3 has also been applied successfully to other thin film absorbers such as Cu2ZnSnSe4 (CZTSe) and CdTe, leading to chemical and/or field-effect passivations. For chemical passivation, Al2O3 layers have been shown to reduce the total number of electrically active defects at the semiconductor surface, which in turn lowers surface recombination velocities. For field-effect passivation, since the passivating materials have high-densities of fixed charge, a built-in electric field is created at the semiconductor surface, driving minority carriers into the space-charge region.
In this paper, we report for the first time on an in situ incorporation of Al2O3 in solution-processed CuIn(S,Se)2 (CISSe) thin film solar cells with significant efficiency enhancement. These films were produced using inks containing CuCl, InCl3, AlNO3 (Al/Al + In: 0.1) and thiourea dissolved in methanol. The inks were spin coated onto molybdenum-coated glass substrates in air, followed by a selenization step. Instead of alloying directly with CISSe, our study showed that Al formed amorphous nanosized-Al2O3 covering parts of the film top and bottom surfaces as well as embedded into the bulk. Power conversion efficiency (PCE) as high as 11.6% was measured on Al–CISSe solar cell devices, a value significantly higher than that measured on CISSe baseline cells fabricated with an identical process but without Al (PCE of champion cell: 8.3%). This PCE improvement, which stemmed primarily from an increase in both open-circuit voltages (VOC) and fill factors (FF), confirms the beneficial contribution of Al2O3 to defect passivation. By eliminating the need for an extra deposition step in a vacuum chamber before or after the absorber synthesis, this in situ incorporation technique greatly simplifies processing and could be extended to several absorber classes and other dielectric passivation layers.

The Al-containing ink precursor was made by sequential addition of 0.30 M (0.164 g) InCl3 (99.999%, Sigma Aldrich), 0.03 M (0.028 g) AlNO3 (99.997%, Sigma Aldrich), 1.77 M (0.337 g) thiourea (≥99.0%, Sigma Aldrich), and 0.26 M (0.064 g) CuCl (≥99.995%, Sigma Aldrich) into 2.5 ml of methanol (HPLC Grade, Fisher Chemical). The metallic ratios of the Al-containing ink were Cu/(In + Al) = 0.8, Al/(Al + In) = 0.1, and thiourea/(Cu + In + Al) = 3.0. The ink was ultrasonicated for 10 minutes between the addition of each chemical. After the addition of CuCl, the ink was stirred at 65 °C for 30 min until a clear solution was obtained. Apart from the addition of InCl3 which was done in N2-filled glove box (O2 < 0.1 ppm, moisture < 0.5 ppm), all other chemicals were added in air. The Al-free CISSe ink precursor was made following the same recipe, except than no AlNO3 was added to the solution (Cu/In) = 0.8, thiourea/(Cu + In) = 3.0.


Inks were deposited by spin coating onto soda-lime glass substrates coated with DC-sputtered 800 nm thick Mo films. Prior to spin coating, the Mo substrates were further cleaned by consecutive sonication in acetone, methanol, and deionized water, each for 10 min, and then dried under N2 stream. Inks were filtered with a 0.45 μm syringe-filter (Minisart RC25). In the spin coating deposition process, 80 μl of ink was dropped onto the substrate and spun at 2000 rpm for 45 s. The spin-coated film was then annealed for 3 min on a hot plate set at 350 °C (actual sample surface temperature at equilibrium: 250 °C) and allowed to cool down naturally. Both the coating and annealing were performed in air. These processes were repeated 10 times to increase thickness. The as-deposited film was then placed into a vacuum furnace in the presence of 50 mg Se powder. The furnace was evacuated and purged with N2 three times and finally backfield with N2 at 300 mTorr. Samples were first heated at 100 °C for 30 min to remove any leftover solvent, and finally selenized at 550 °C for 10 min (ramping rate of 25 °C min−1), before cooling naturally to room temperature.


No KCN etching was performed on the absorbers prior to device fabrication. An 80 nm CdS layer was deposited onto the absorbers by chemical bath deposition (CBD). In a typical CBD process, a solution containing mixture of CdSO4 (0.015 M), NH4OH (7.2 M), and thiourea (1.5 M) dissolved in deionized water (293 ml) was poured into a water bath previously heated at 85 °C, followed by immersion of the absorbers for 8 min. The CdS-coated absorbers were then annealed in air for 7 min in a laboratory oven (Fisher Scientific Isotemp 500 Series) set at 120 °C. The solar cell devices were completed with RF-sputtered of undoped ZnO (i-ZnO, room temperature, 200 nm) and In2O3/SnO2 90/10 wt% (ITO, 200 °C, 100 nm). The total area of each cell (0.12 cm2) was defined by the diameter of circular holes of the shadow mask used during the ITO deposition. No metallic grids nor anti reflective coatings were used in this experiment. All cells underwent an additional 2 min long heat treatment in air on a hot plate set at 225 °C (actual sample surface temperature at equilibrium: 150 °C).


Thermogravimetric and differential scanning calorimetry (TG-DSC) analysis of the liquid inks was performed using a TA Instrument Q600 Simultaneous TG/DSC instrument at a heating rate of 5 °C min−1 to 600 °C under nitrogen flow (100 ml min−1). Morphologies of the films were examined using a Hitachi S-4800-I field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM). Crystal structures of the fabricated films were evaluated by X-ray diffraction (XRD) using a Bruker D8 Advance X-ray diffractometer equipped with a copper cathode outputting a wavelength of 1.54056 Å. Raman spectra were obtained using a confocal Raman microscope (Witec, alpha R300) equipped with a 532 nm laser. Cross section elemental maps were generated via energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX, 10 kV, 3.2 nA) using a Helios NanoLab 660 dual-beam focused ion beam instrument (FIB-SEM, FEI/Thermo Fisher) equipped with an X-Max N80 SDD-EDX detector (Oxford Instruments). A trench was milled using a 30 kV Ga+ focused ion beam and EDX maps taken on the exposed cross section surface. Additionally, an electron transparent thin section was prepared using the FIB-SEM for subsequent scanning transmission electron microscope (STEM) analyses. STEM images and EDX measurements (300 kV) were conducted on a High-base Titan G2 (Scanning) Transmission Electron Microscope (FEI/Thermo Fisher) equipped with a solid-state Si(Li) EDX detector (Genesis 4000, EDAX). Auger electron spectroscopy (AES) depth-profiles were measured using a Physical Electronics PHI 670 scanning Auger microscope with a 5 kV, 20 nA electron beam and a 3 kV beam of Ar+ for sputtering. Auger results were quantified using sensitivity factors derived from a CIGSe film of known composition according to a previously described procedure. Default sensitivity factors were used for aluminum, sulfur, molybdenum, and oxygen. AES was chosen over EDX to characterize Al-containing samples since the X-ray spectra of Al and Se exhibit some overlap (Al-Kα: 1.486, Se-Lα: 1.379). Diffuse reflectance measurement was performed using a PerkinElmer Lambda 750S spectrometer equipped with an integrating sphere.


Current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the solar cell devices were measured using a temperature-controlled stage at 25 °C under simulated AM1.5G irradiation provided by a 1000 W solar simulator equipped with a Xe bulb and an AM1.5G filter (Newport, 91192-1000). The power output of the solar simulator was adjusted using an NREL-calibrated Si photodiode. The ITO was contacted with indium-coated Kelvin probes. External quantum efficiency (EQE) was measured with system equipped with a 75 W Xe lamp. The monochromatic beam was focused to a 1 mm × 2.5 mm area and chopped at 31 Hz. Temperature-dependent open circuit voltage (VOC–T) were performed using a cryostat cooled with liquid-He and equipped with a Lake Shore 335-temperature controller. The devices were illuminated using a white LED lamp which illumination (1 sun) was adjusted until the devices short-circuit current density (JSC) matched that measured with the 1000 W solar simulator (AM1.5G illumination). Capacitance–voltage (C–V) measurements were performed at room temperature in dark at 10 kHz and AC voltage of 50 mV using a Biologic SP-200 potentiostat equipped for impedance analysis. The DC bias voltage was swept from 0.6 to −1.5 V, and carrier concentration was extracted using a dielectric constant of 13.6.


TG-DSC analyses were performed to the Al-containing ink to assess its thermal decomposition behavior (Fig. 1). In the low temperature region (<100 °C), DSC showed an endothermic peak at 37.5 °C coinciding with a significant weight loss from TG (∼60%), corresponding most likely to the evaporation of methanol. The loss of methanol prior to its boiling point (64.7 °C) should be caused by its high volatility coupled with the fact that the measurement was performed from a small amount of sample under nitrogen gas flow. Further weight loss was observed in the TG up to 100 °C (∼10%) accompanied by weak endothermic peaks between 88.7 °C and 105 °C, presumably caused by the evaporation of residual water dissolved in the solvent. Further weight loss with an endothermic peak at 223.5 °C was detected, which is the typical decomposition temperature of thiourea (TU) and metal–TU complexes preceding the formation of CuInS2. It has been reported that the metal cations are stabilized as metal–TU complexes (e.g., Cu(TU)3Cl, In(TU)3Cl3) in the presence of TU for a wide range of solvents, and the formation of CuInS2 nanocrystalline domains was proposed to proceed through thermal decomposition of those complexes. The endothermic peak of 294.6 °C accounting for 3% mass loss from the TG is presumed to be caused by regeneration of HNCS gases. Above this temperature, a gradual decrease of the mass was detected, which was caused by decomposition of the leftover hydrocarbon in the ink. It is worth noting that DSC from the aluminum-containing ink showed a weak exothermic peak at 503 °C which was not observed from the Al-free ink (Fig. S1). As a reference, Ito et al. showed a formation of CuInxAl1−xS2 by sulfurizing metallic precursors above 500 °C in which they observed an enhancement of Al-interdiffusion in the alloy as the temperature increased. In addition, another report showed that Cu(In,Al)Se2 alloys only formed at temperatures above 480 °C, preceded by the formation of CuInSe2. Therefore, although the detected peak from DSC was considerably weak, we speculate the endothermic process could be due to the release of the heat from partial formation of Cu(In,Al)S2 alloy under the experimental conditions used during TG-DSC analysis.


Fig. 2a shows XRD spectra of as-deposited and selenized films fabricated with the Al-containing ink. The as-deposited film showed broad peaks at 27.79° and 46.61° assigned to (103) and (220/204) reflections of the chalcopyrite phase of CuInS2, in agreement with its Raman spectrum (Fig. S2). The rather weak intensities imply that the as-deposited film had a low crystallinity. After selenization at 550 °C, the (103) and (220/204)-peaks measured on the absorber made from ink containing aluminum (described as Al–CISSe) are left-shifted to 26.77° and 44.44° due to the replacement of the sulfur atoms with selenium. The peaks also become more intense as a result of grain growth during the high-temperature selenization process. The cross sectional SEM image presented in Fig. S3a of a 1.3 micron-thick Al–CISSe absorber confirms the high degree of crystallinity of the film after selenization, as evidenced by the size of the grains (up to 1 micron across) and the lack of void space. A 300 nm thick MoSe2 layer, observed and measured in SEM imaging and detected in the XRD spectrum, was also formed due to partial selenization of the Mo substrate.
To understand the effect of Al-incorporation to the chalcopyrite, (112)-orientation of the selenized film is compared in Fig. 2b to those fabricated from the Al-free ink (described as CISSe). In general, replacement of a heavier atom with a lighter one in the same group, in this case In with Al, would induce a shift toward a higher angle due to a shrinkage of the lattice. However, a small shift of the peak toward a lower angle was observed for Al–CISSe (2θ: 26.77°) relative to CISSe (2θ: 26.79°). The absence of any right shift in the XRD spectra could indicate negligible Al-alloying in CISSe. Based on AES analysis (Fig. 3), the Se/(S + Se) ratio of Al–CISSe and CISSe in the bulk were 0.91 and 0.90, respectively. As a reference, the (112) peak of CuInSe2 and CuInS2 are located at 2θ of 26.65° (JCPDS 87-2265) and 27.86° (JCPDS 65-2732), respectively. Therefore, assuming a linear relation between Se/(S + Se) ratio and the peak-shift on the CuIn(S,Se)2 system following Vegard's law, Se/(S + Se) ratio of 0.91 and 0.90 would give a Δ2θ of 0.01°, a value very close to the one measured from XRD (0.02°). Although the values being compared are small, we conclude the 0.02° left-peak shift is most probably due to the slightly higher selenium content in the Al–CISSe, ruling out alloying of aluminum in CISSe to form Cu(In,Al)Se2 in our experiment.
The AES spectrum of the Al–CISSe also shows that Al is distributed throughout the film with an Al-rich composition observed at the surface. The ratio of Al/(Al + In) in the bulk is estimated to be 0.12 which is close to the intended ratio from the ink (∼0.1). Oxygen at the surface observed for both Al–CISSe (Fig. 3) and CISSe (Fig. S4) might come partially from residual organic adsorbates during sample handling. It is worth noting that the increase in [O] at the surface of Al–CISSe coincides with an increase in [Al], and a substantial amount of [O] remains throughout the bulk of the film. In contrast, the CISSe film had a negligible [O] content in the bulk (Fig. S4). While metallic-Al is highly unlikely to form in our process, Al–O containing compounds such as Al2O3 or Al(OH)3 could be formed during either the spin coating of the film (from the reaction of Al-salt with residual water in the ink) or during the hot plate annealing step (performed in air). Indeed, EDX mapping of the Al–CISSe film confirmed the presence of AlOx grains at the surface and the bulk (Fig. S5).
The Al–CISSe sample were examined by TEM to further characterize AlOx species in the selenized films (Fig. 4). The STEM-BF image in Fig. 4a reveals several bright spots dispersed throughout the film, suggesting the presence of different compounds other than CISSe. These bright spots are particularly obvious at the bottom area of the CISSe film where smaller grains formed (Fig. S6). These segregated compounds were found to be as big as ∼200 nm across, as evident in Fig. 4b. A point EDX analysis performed in the bright region in Fig. 4b revealed an Al/O atomic-ratio of 0.65, a value very close to stoichiometric Al2O3 (Al/O: 0.67). An electron diffraction pattern performed on the same bright spot shows a halo ring feature, revealing the lack of long-range ordering. In contrast, well-defined diffraction spots were observed on the CISSe grain next to the bright spot (dark region in Fig. 4b). Therefore, we conclude that the Al–CISSe films fabricated with our molecular ink process are made of highly crystalline CISSe with isolated amorphous Al2O3 grains dispersed throughout. The amorphous nature of the Al2O3 explains the absence of any additional compounds other than chalcopyrite detected in the XRD (Fig. 2a) and Raman (Fig. S2) analyses. Higher magnification images reveal the presence of nanometer sized amorphous Al2O3 (∼3–15 nm) covering parts of the absorber top surface (Fig. 4c) as well as at the grain boundaries (Fig. 4d). The detection of both aluminum and oxygen throughout the bulk by AES implies that nano-scale amorphous Al2O3 is present over the entirety of the Al–CISSe film, although only few remarkable spots are observed in the TEM micrograph.
Photovoltaic devices were then fabricated by chemical bath deposition of a CdS layer onto the absorbers, followed by sputtering of a ZnO/ITO bilayer. Fig. 5a shows the statistical distribution of photovoltaic performances from the Al–CISSe solar cells fabricated from multiple batches (total number of devices: 22). Photovoltaic performance of CISSe solar cells fabricated through similar methods are also shown for comparison (total number of devices: 18). Overall, PCE of Al–CISSe devices are consistently higher than that of CISSe. Al–CISSe devices had PCE ranging from 9.1% to a maximum efficiency of 11.6% (champion Al–CISSe cell: JSC = 35.8 mA cm−2, VOC = 518 mV, FF = 62.2%, no anti reflective coating) with an average PCE of 10.1%, whereas CISSe devices showed PCE from 5.5% to a maximum of 8.3% (champion CISSe cell: JSC = 34.5 mA cm−2, VOC = 424 mV, FF = 56.0%) and an average PCE of 6.4%. Fig. 5b shows the photocurrent density–voltage curves from the champion Al–CISSe and CISSe devices. Shunt resistances (RSh), estimated using a one-diode model, were three times higher in Al–CISSe (428.3 Ω cm2) compared to CISSe (125.1 Ω cm2), whereas series resistances were found to be relatively comparable (3.6 Ω cm2 and 2.8 Ω cm2 for CISSe and Al–CISSe, respectively). The average JSC of Al–CISSe devices (34.5 mA cm−2) was found to be slightly higher compared to that of the CISSe devices (32.8 mA cm−2), as seen from the increased EQE in almost entire wavelength range (Fig. 5c). The electronic (as measured by EQE) and optical (as measured by diffuse reflectance, Fig. S7) bandgaps of Al–CISSe (EEQE = 1.01 eV, Ereflec. = 1.01 eV) and CISSe (EEQE = 1.03 eV, Ereflec. = 1.01 eV) where found to be nearly identical, confirming that Al does not alloy with CISSe to form Cu(In,Al)Se2 in our experiment.
The Al–CISSe devices had significantly superior VOC (〈VOC(Al–CISSe)〉/〈VOC(CISSe)〉 = 1.2) and FF (〈FF(Al–CISSe)〉/〈FF(CISSe)〉= 1.26) compared to CISSe devices, as expected from the appreciably higher RSh. We speculate that Al2O3 plays a role in the enhancement of the photovoltaic properties by passivating defects and reducing interface recombination, as already reported on other thin film materials coated with Al2O3 layers either at the top or the back interface (CIGSe, CZTSe, CdTe). With our approach, nanometer-sized amorphous Al2O3 is present not only at the top and bottom interfaces of CISSe (Fig. 4a and c), but also in the film bulk and at grain boundaries (Fig. 4d).
To confirm our hypothesis on the passivation of CISSe with in situ incorporated Al2O3, C–V measurements were carried out on three Al–CISSe and three CISSe devices. Fig. 6 shows the apparent doping density (NCV) vs. depletion width extracted according to methods reported in the literature. It is can be observed that Al–CISSe devices have lower NCV compared to CISSe. At 0 V, the average NCV of Al–CISSe was estimated to be 3.14 × 1015 cm−3, while the CISSe devices had an average NCV of 7.40 × 1015 cm−3. Since bulk and interface defects are responsive to C–V measurement, the lower NCV of Al–CISSe implies a reduced overall defect density of CISSe with the presence of Al2O3. Previous reports on ALD-Al2O3 passivated CIGSe and CZTSSe solar cells also showed reduced doping density from C–V measurements consistent with our results. Apart from the reduced defect density, the space charge region (SCR) is wider in Al–CISSe devices (average SCR = 0.48 μm) than that in CISSe devices (average SCR = 0.34 μm). This contributed to the increased EQE (see Fig. 5c) and therefore the JSC of Al–CISSe devices. Since the Al2O3 was detected throughout the absorber, we conclude that the extended SCR is a direct indicator of the passivation of defects in the CISSe bulk.
In addition, the relatively low doping density in Al–CISSe suggests that Cd (from CdS) is allowed to diffuse into CISSe despite the presence of Al2O3. It is known that some extent of Cd and/or Zn inter-diffusions in CIGSe cells are favorable to lower the doping (from ∼1017 cm−3 to ∼1015–1016 cm−3), leading to wider SCR. However, a recent study by Werner et al. on CIGSe coated with ALD-Al2O3 suggest that an exceedingly thick Al2O3 passivation layer prevents Cd and Zn diffusions. As such, CIGSe with a high doping density (in the range of 1017 cm−3) was obtained when coated with 20 nm-thick Al2O3, while coating the CIGSe with ultra-thin Al2O3 (∼1 nm) resulted in doping density of 1016 cm−3. In our case, Al2O3 nano-particles can be rather large, yet they are sparsely dispersed on the CISSe top and bottom surfaces and the bulk, as seen in Fig. 4. We speculate that this feature allowed Cd to diffuse into the uncoated regions of the CISSe sub-surface. Therefore, we hypothesize that the localized nature of Al2O3 formed with our approach allowed the CISSe films to have doping density optimal for charge collection and, at the same time, passivated defects, resulting in superior photovoltaic properties.
Finally, the activation energy (EA) of the dominant recombination mechanism in Al–CISSe (PCE = 9.47%, JSC = 32.5 mA cm−2, VOC = 479 mV, FF = 63.05%) and CISSe (PCE = 6.19%, JSC = 31.5 mA cm−2, VOC = 429 mV, FF = 47.50%) devices was investigated via VOC–T measurements. These values were estimated by extrapolating the linear portion of VOC–T in the high temperature region to 0 K. As presented in Fig. 7, a difference of 70 mV in activation energy was observed between Al–CISSe (EA = 1.06 eV) and CISSe (EA = 0.99 eV), indicating that interface recombination is more severe in the CISSe devices than it is in the Al–CISSe devices. Using the results obtained from both VOC–T and C–V measurements, we conclude our in situ Al2O3 incorporation process reduces defect density in the absorber (as evidenced by a widening of SCR) as well as at the junction with CdS (as demonstrated by an increase in EA).

We report a fabrication of CISSe thin film incorporated with amorphous Al2O3 by selenization of spin coated precursor film prepared from a molecular ink containing salts of Cu, In, Al, and thiourea dissolved in methanol. XRD, AES and TEM analyses of the film showed that amorphous Al2O3 were sparsely formed on the top and bottom surfaces and at bulk and grain boundaries of CISSe. The solar cell fabricated from such film had a maximum efficiency of 11.6% without anti-reflection, a value significantly higher than that of solar cells made from the ink without the addition of Al. The improvements stemmed primarily from increased VOC as well as FF. Defect passivation via in situ formed Al2O3 is thought to play a major role in the improvement of the solar cell performance through decreased interface and bulk recombination. Future efforts will be focused on increasing the concentration and dispersion of Al2O3 in CISSe with this in situ method to further reduce defect densities and improve efficiency. Complementary analysis is required to conclude if the mechanism reported on ALD-coated Al2O3 layers applies also to nanoparticles as created with our in situ approach. Nevertheless, this promising in situ passivation approach could be extended to other chalcogenide materials synthesized by the molecular-ink approach.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was funded by the U.S. Department of Energy under contract DE-EE0008085 and the Office of Naval Research Asia Pacific Research Initiative for Sustainable Energy Systems (APRISES) under contract N00014-19-1-2159. The authors acknowledge the assistance of Dr Godwin Severa for the TG-DSC measurement. The authors would also like to thank Dr Przemyslaw Dera for his assistance in the XRD measurement. This work was authored in part by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory, operated by Alliance for Sustainable Energy, LLC, for the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) under Contract No. DE-AC36-08GO28308. Funding provided by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy, Hydrogen and Fuel Cell Technology Office. The views expressed in the article do not necessarily represent the views of the DOE or the U.S. Government. The U.S. Government retains and the publisher, by accepting the article for publication, acknowledges that the U.S. Government retains a nonexclusive, paid-up, irrevocable, worldwide license to publish or reproduce the published form of this work, or allow others to do so, for U.S. Government purposes.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ta00768h
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021