 DOI: 10.1039/C7NR04069E
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 13983-13989


Kyu-Tae
Lee
,

Ji-Yun
Jang
,

Sang Jin
Park
,

Song Ah
Ok
 and 

Hui Joon
Park
*

Department of Materials Science Engineering, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois 61801, USA

Department of Energy Systems Research, Ajou University, Suwon 16499, South Korea. E-mail: huijoon@ajou.ac.kr

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Ajou University, Suwon 16499, South Korea

Received
7th June 2017
, Accepted 24th August 2017
First published on 25th August 2017
See-through perovskite solar cells with high efficiency and iridescent colors are demonstrated by employing a multilayer dielectric mirror. A certain amount of visible light is used for wide color gamut semitransparent color generation, which can be easily tuned by changing an angle of incidence, and a wide range of visible light is efficiently reflected back toward a photoactive layer of the perovskite solar cells by the dielectric mirror for highly efficient light-harvesting performance, thus achieving 10.12% power conversion efficiency. We also rigorously examine how the number of pairs in the multilayer dielectric mirror affects optical properties of the colored semitransparent perovskite solar cells. The described approach can open the door to a large number of applications such as building-integrated photovoltaics, self-powered wearable electronics and power-generating color filters for energy-efficient display systems.

Organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite (PVSK) semiconductors have shown great promise in a wide variety of optoelectronic devices, including solar cells, light-emitting diodes and photodiodes, due to their unique characteristics such as a direct bandgap, high carrier mobility, low exciton binding energy, strong absorptions over a broad wavelength range and a long carrier diffusion length. In addition, they can be simply prepared via a solution process at room temperature, thus allowing them to be highly compatible with advanced manufacturing methods, including roll-to-roll printing technology for large scale production. In particular, these intriguing features of the PVSK material lead to over 22% power conversion efficiency (PCE) for a single-junction PVSK solar cell, which surpasses that of thin-film solar cells. In order to achieve such a high PCE, a photoactive layer of the PVSK solar cells needs to be optically thick enough to completely absorb a wide range of the solar spectrum. However, this leads to a dull and unattractive appearance of the PVSK solar cells, thereby dramatically limiting their potential applications in building-integrated photovoltaics (BIPV), self-powered fashionable wearable devices and energy-saving display systems.

Various approaches to neutral-colored see-through PVSK solar cells have been demonstrated by creating arrays of discontinuous dewetted PVSK microstructures and utilizing transparent electrodes based on metallic nanowires, graphenes and transparent conductive oxides. Although near-neutral-color semitransparent PVSK solar cells can be used for power-generating windows and highly efficient tandem solar cells, there is also a strong need to develop PVSK solar cells with vivid colors, thus opening up a variety of potential applications such as decorative solar panels for building envelopes and automobile surfaces, wearable devices, and power-generating color filters for self-powered displays. However, it has been found to be more challenging to create colored PVSK solar cells since the PVSK semiconductor shows a broad range absorption at visible frequencies, thus resulting in reddish-brown colors. There have been attempts to develop multi-colored PVSK solar cells that exploited photonic and plasmonic resonances in nanostructures or controlled the band gap of PVSK by a chemical management. Various reflective and transmissive colors could be produced with electric power generation by these strategies, however the absorption loss in metals that composed the microcavity and nanostructures for color control was not negligible in the visible wavelength range, greatly reducing PCE, and the strong absorption characteristics of the PVSK semiconductor over a broad range of wavelengths highly limited the color tunability when controlling the band gap of the PVSK material. Although a porous multilayered scaffold within the photoactive layer, which created a bandgap in the visible wavelength range for color generation, was integrated with an electrode of the PVSK solar cells, the PCE was still greatly limited by the macroscopic porosity that led to a scattering loss. Moreover, by utilizing the aforementioned approaches, the color could only be tuned by varying either the dimensions of those structures or the PVSK band gap, thus a variety of color generation at the same time in a single device architecture would not be possible. Consequently, it is still necessary to develop a new way of producing the desired semitransparent colors in a different manner with improved electrical performance characteristics.
Here, we demonstrate highly efficient semitransparent PVSK solar cells producing iridescent colors by incorporating a multilayer dielectric mirror. The light in the broad visible wavelength range is effectively reflected back to the photoactive layer for efficient light harvesting, leading to 10.12% PCE, and the semitransparent colors, produced by utilizing a certain proportion of visible light, can be easily tuned by varying the angle of incidence, which is ascribed to angle-sensitive properties of the dielectric mirror. Additionally, the effect of the number of pairs in the dielectric mirror structure on the optical properties of the PVSK solar cells is explored. We believe that the strategy described in this work can be widely adopted for various areas such as aesthetic solar panels, energy-efficient display technologies, wearable electronic and optoelectronic devices, and self-powered wavelength-selective optoelectronic devices.


Fig. 1(a) depicts a schematic diagram of colored semitransparent PVSK solar cell, where an angle-sensitive multilayer dielectric mirror is integrated at the anode, consisting of indium-tin oxide (ITO)/zinc oxide (ZnO)/phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM)/PVSK/NiOx/ITO/dielectric mirror on a glass substrate. The multilayer dielectric mirror structure comprises multiple alternating layers of transparent materials with high and low refractive indices, which functions as a highly reflective planar one-dimensional (1D) photonic crystal (PhC) to form a photonic bandgap in the visible wavelength regime. Silicon dioxide (SiO2, n = 1.48) and titanium dioxide (TiO2, n = 2.39) are selected as low and high index media in the dielectric mirror design. As the PVSK semiconductor strongly absorbs the light below 550 nm wavelength, the dielectric mirror structure, integrated with the anode of the PVSK solar cells, is designed to create band edges at 550 and 750 nm so that the light beyond 550 nm wavelength can be strongly reflected back to the PVSK layer for efficiently harvesting the light of the longer wavelength range. 105 and 65 nm of SiO2 and TiO2 are used as the thickness of each layer to fulfill a quarter wavelength , allowing many reflected light waves to constructively interfere at a center wavelength (λc; 625 nm), of a high reflection window with a bandwidth  of ∼200 nm. Fig. S1(a) shows the simulated transmission spectra of the dielectric mirror at oblique angles of incidence from 0° to 75° for transverse magnetic (TM) polarization where a magnetic field is perpendicular to the plane of incidence, displaying good agreement with measured profiles as shown in Fig. S1(b). The simulated profiles are obtained by using a transfer matrix method, and the experimental spectral responses with different angles of incidence are measured by employing a spectrometer (V-770 UV-Visible-Near Infrared Spectrophotometer, JASCO). The simulated and measured transmission spectra for transverse electric (TE) polarization, where an electric field is perpendicular to the plane of incidence, are also provided in Fig. S1(c) and (d). The discrepancy between the measured and the simulated spectra could be attributed to either the slight absorption of TiO2 in the visible wavelength range or different thicknesses of each layer. With the increasing angle of incidence, the center wavelength shifts toward the shorter wavelength regime.

Fig. S2 provides illustrations of the calculated color coordinates from both the simulated and measured transmission spectra for TM and TE polarizations described on the CIE 1931 chromaticity diagram, where square, circle, triangle, rhombus, hexagon and star correspond to 0°, 15°, 30°, 45°, 60° and 75°, respectively. As the optical properties of the multilayer dielectric mirror structure are fairly sensitive with respect to the angles of incidence, the transmission spectra and the corresponding color spaces vary with the increasing angle of incidence. The photographs of the fabricated multilayer dielectric mirror taken under the TM- and TE-polarized light illumination are provided in Fig. S2(b) and (d), which match well with the colors investigated in the chromaticity diagram. As the multilayer mirror structure shows high transmission at shorter wavelengths, the resulting colors mostly remain in a bluish color region. Refractive indices of all the materials used in the semitransparent iridescent PVKS solar cells are measured by using a spectroscopic ellipsometer (Elli-SE, Ellipso Technology Co.), and are provided in Fig. S3.
The designed thickness of the PVSK photoactive layer is 80 nm that cannot fully absorb light in the visible wavelength range so that a small proportion of the visible spectrum is used to generate semitransparent colors. As the multilayer dielectric mirror strongly reflects the light ranging from 550 nm to 750 nm wavelength, and the PVSK semiconductor has a large absorption coefficient at wavelengths below 450 nm, the light between 450 nm and 550 nm wavelength is utilized to produce the colors. This can be clearly observed in the simulated spectral transmittance curves of the colored semitransparent PVSK solar cells at normal incidence as shown in Fig. 1(b) and (d) presenting shallow transmission peaks around 500 nm. The simulated profiles are in good agreement with the measured transmission spectra shown in Fig. 1(c) and (e). At normal incidence, the light from 400 nm to 550 nm wavelength is transmitted for the color generation, yielding a cyan color. Under TM polarization conditions (Fig. 1(b) and (c)), a violet color appears at small oblique angles of incidence since the spectral curve shows that around 10% of transmitted light at a shorter wavelength below 450 nm is used to create the colors. As the angle of incidence further increases, the spectral responses move toward the shorter wavelength range that allows both the bluish and the reddish wavelength regions to be encompassed, thus leading to a magenta color. At a very large angle of incidence, the light beyond 600 nm wavelength with the highly suppressed shorter wavelength ranges is used to produce the colors, yielding orange and red colors. On the other hand, the spectral transmittance curves for TE polarization (Fig. 1(d) and (e)) show a less sensitive performance particularly in the longer wavelength ranges than those for TM polarization, generating not reddish but magenta colors at large oblique angles of incidence. Average visible transmittance (AVT) values, which are calculated from 400 nm to 800 nm, of the simulated (measured) profiles are 12.0% (17.4%), 13.2% (17.1%), 17.0% (18.7%), 23.0% (22.4%), 28.8% (35.2%) and 26.7% (28.1%) for 0°, 15°, 30°, 45°, 60° and 75° for TM polarization, respectively. The corresponding AVT values for TE polarization are 12.0% (17.0%), 11.9% (17.6%), 12.1% (17.8%), 11.6% (18.1%), 10.3% (16.9%) and 7.7% (12.3%) for 0°, 15°, 30°, 45°, 60° and 75°, respectively.

Fig. 2(a, b) and (c, d) depict the chromaticity of the resulting colors on the CIE 1931 chromaticity diagram for TM and TE polarizations, presenting similar colors estimated from the spectral responses above. The optical images of the fabricated colored semitransparent PVSK solar cells at several tilting angles of incidence are provided in Fig. 2(b) and (d), both of which coincide with the estimated colors described on the CIE 1931 chromaticity diagram. For reference, simulated angle-resolved reflection spectra for TM and TE polarizations and the corresponding color coordinates are given in Fig. S4.
It should be noted that a greenish color can also be achieved by exploiting a dielectric mirror where the photonic bandgap is created in the longer wavelength range. For example, if the center wavelength of the multilayer dielectric mirror is designed at 770 nm, which is enabled by using 80 nm-thick TiO2 and 130 nm-thick SiO2, the light between 500 nm and 600 nm wavelengths can be transmitted, thus producing the greenish color. The simulated spectral transmittance curves and the corresponding chromaticity investigations are provided in Fig. S5.

Fig. 3(a) presents the simulated transmission spectra of the proposed colored semitransparent PVSK solar cells with the different number of pair of alternating layers in the dielectric mirror at normal incidence. It is apparent that the light at a longer wavelength between 550 nm and 750 nm is transmitted without the multilayer dielectric mirror, while it is highly reflected with increasing the number of pair in the dielectric mirror, which is ascribed to the strong optical interference effect. Fig. 3(c) and (d) describe the simulated spectral transmittance curves with the different number of pair in the multilayer dielectric mirror at 75° for TM and TE polarizations, respectively. As the photonic bandgap of the dielectric mirror moves toward the shorter wavelength range with increasing the angle of incidence, longer wavelengths are able to be transmitted, which can be used for color generation, instead of reflecting back to the PVSK photoactive layer from the dielectric mirror. The effects of both the number of pair of alternating layers in the dielectric mirror and the angle of incidence on the chromaticity of the resulting colors are depicted on the CIE 1931 chromaticity diagram (Fig. 3(b)). Without the multilayer dielectric mirror at the anode, the color remains orange at normal incidence (black square) and 75° for TM (blue square) and TE polarizations (green square). With increasing the number of pair in the dielectric mirror, the angle-variant optical properties of the dielectric mirror become significant, thereby yielding a wide color gamut.
Current density (J) and voltage (V) characteristics and external quantum efficiency (EQE) of the proposed see-through PVSK solar cell with vivid colors (having a 4 layer-paired dielectric mirror) are provided in Fig. 4(a) and (d), respectively. 16.02 mA cm−2 short-circuit current density (Jsc), 1.09 V open-circuit voltage (Voc) and 0.58 fill factor (FF) are achieved under AM 1.5G 100 mW cm−2 illumination conditions, thus yielding over 10% PCE. J–V characteristics of our solar cells show negligible hysteresis depending on scan directions, indicating the stable operation of the device (Fig. S6). The Jsc value slightly decreases as the angle of incidence increases (e.g. 45° angle: 14.66 mA cm−2, 60° angle: 13.97 mA cm−2; J was corrected by the cos(angle of incidence) value to consider the change of the effective area with the angle of incidence), and this is due to the angle-dependent optical properties of the dielectric mirror, which induce the spectral change of absorption in the photoactive layer, and thus EQE, according to the angle of incidence as shown in Fig. S7(a) and (b).

Fig. 4(c) displays how absorption spectra in the PVSK photoactive layer are influenced by the pairs of the dielectric mirror. As can be seen from the figure, the calculated absorption in the photoactive layer is greatly enhanced at 550 nm and 700 nm with the dielectric mirror since the interference effects become stronger with increasing the number of pair in the dielectric mirror, thus leading to higher reflection for solar energy harvesting, whereas incident light cannot be strongly reflected back to the photoactive layer without the multilayer dielectric mirror (black). Fig. 4(b) presents the intensity distributions of the electric field in the solar cell structures without and with the dielectric mirror that has 4 pairs. It is evident that there is no strong field intensity concentration in the PVSK photoactive layer (white dotted region) without the dielectric mirror, while it is observed that the dielectric mirror allows the optical field to be fairly focused at both 550 nm and 700 nm, which match well with the peak positions in the absorption profile as shown in Fig. 4(c).
Compared with the calculated absorption spectra, slightly increased signals and the shift of two dominant peaks to a longer wavelength region are observed in the measured EQE spectra (Fig. 4(d)), due to the thickness deviation of the PVSK layer in the fabricated device (∼100 nm), however a similar trend does not affect any conclusions here. The PCE of the solar cell without the dielectric mirror is 7.97% (Jsc of 12.60 mA cm−2 with similar Voc and FF to those with the mirror). Additionally, a solar cell structure, of which the opaque metal layer (100 nm-thick Ag) providing high reflection is added to the anode side (glass/Ag/ITO/NiOx/PVSK/PCBM/ZnO/ITO), is also prepared for a comparison with that with the dielectric mirror, and a Jsc value of 16.77 mA cm−2 is obtained from its J–V characteristics (corresponding EQE in Fig. S8). It is important to note that the integration of the dielectric mirror at the anode of the PVSK solar cell structure leads to not only semitransparency with wider color gamut but enhanced electrical performance characteristics.

In summary, we have demonstrated dual-function PVSK solar cells, where the multilayer dielectric mirror was incorporated at the anode of the structure, thus producing see-through iridescent colors and simultaneously generating electricity with high efficiency. The spectral transmittance curves, the chromaticity of the resulting colors and the electrical performances of the colorful semitransparent PVSK solar cells are thoroughly investigated. Finally, the dependence of the optical features on the number of pair in the multilayer dielectric mirror is studied.


Acetone, isopropyl alcohol (IPA), and deionized (DI) water were sequentially used to clean the glass substrates via ultrasonication. TiO2 and SiO2 were sequentially deposited on the substrate using an e-beam evaporator for the multilayered dielectric mirror. On top of the multilayered structure, a 200 nm-thick ITO layer was deposited by DC sputtering (ULDiS-4540SV, ULVAC) with 1200 W power and 3 Å s−1 deposition rate conditions and without substrate heating. There was no post-heat treatment of the ITO layer. The sheet resistance of the ITO layer was 25 Ω sq.−1 NiOx nanoparticle (NP) solution was spin-cast on the ITO layer and annealed at 150 °C for 10 min. After annealing, the sample was transferred to a nitrogen box. To synthesize NiOx NPs, Ni(NO3)2·6H2O (0.025 mol) was dissolved in 5 ml DI water, and then stirred for 10 min. After that, a polyethylene glycol (PEG) solution, in which 1.5 g PEG was dissolved in 5 ml DI water, was added into Ni(NO3)2·6H2O solution drop by drop, and then the solution was stirred for 15 min. The pH of the solution was adjusted to 10 by further adding a NaOH solution (0.05 mol NaOH dissolved in 5 ml DI water), and it was stirred for 15 min. After filtering the solution, the precipitate was dried at 80 °C for 8 h, and then annealed at 285 °C for 120 min in a furnace. NiOx NPs were dispersed in DI water to obtain NiOx NP solution. CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite solution was prepared by dissolving PbI2 (Sigma Aldrich) and CH3NH3I (1:1 molar ratio) in a solvent mixture of γ-butyrolactone (GBL) and dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) (7:3 v/v) for a total concentration of 0.7 M under a N2 atmosphere. The solution was stirred at 70 °C for at least 12 h before being used. Then, spin-casting the solution along with toluene drop-casting was carried out to achieve a uniform perovskite layer. PCBM (20 mg ml−1 in chlorobenzene, ∼30 nm) was then spin-cast on the top of the perovskite layer and a ZnO layer (∼70 nm) was added by spin-casting ZnO NP solution (Sigma Aldrich) on PCBM as an electron transport layer (ETL). Finally, a 200 nm-thick ITO layer was deposited by DC sputtering using the same conditions as the bottom ITO layer deposition through a shadow mask for the top contact.


Simulations based on the transfer matrix method were carried out in order to explore spectral transmittance/reflectance curves at the oblique angles of incidence, electric field intensity distributions into the structure, and absorption spectra in the PVSK photoactive layer. A spectrometer (V-770 UV-Visible-Near Infrared Spectrophotometer, JASCO) was used to obtain the angle-resolved transmission spectra. The experimental setup for angular dependent measurements is described in Fig. S9. The refractive indices of the materials used in the semitransparent perovskite solar cells were measured by using an ellipsometer (Elli-SE, Ellipso Technology Co.). A solar simulator (PEC-L01, Peccell Technologies, Inc.) with an AM 1.5G filter was used to provide 100 mW cm−2 of illumination on the PV cells with the intensity calibrated using a Si photodiode, equipped with an infrared cut-off filter (KG5) to reduce spectral mismatch, and an opaque metal mask was utilized to reduce the influence of the scattered light. J–V characteristics were obtained using an Ivium technology Ivium compactstat by scanning the J–V curves at a 0.05 V s−1 scan rate. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) was measured under short-circuit conditions using an ABET Technology 10500 solar simulator as the light source and a SPECTRO Mmac-200 as the light solution.


There are no conflicts of interest to declare.


This work was supported by the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Energy (MOTIE, 10051565) and the Korea Display Research Corporation (KDRC) support program for the development of future devices technology for display industry. This work was partially supported by the Ajou university research fund.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7nr04069e
‡ These authors contributed equally.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017