 DOI: 10.1039/C4EE02990A
(Communication)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 520-525


Jingbo
Zhao
,

Yunke
Li
,

Haoran
Lin
,

Yuhang
Liu
,

Kui
Jiang
,

Cheng
Mu
,

Tingxuan
Ma
,

Joshua Yuk
Lin Lai
,

Huawei
Hu
,

Demei
Yu
 and 

He
Yan
*

Department of Chemistry, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Hong Kong. E-mail: hyan@ust.hk

HKUST-Shenzhen Research Institute, No. 9 Yuexing 1st RD, Hi-tech Park, Nanshan, Shenzhen 518057, China

Joint School of Sustainable Development and MOE Key Lab for Non-Equilibrium Synthesis and Modulation of Condensed Matter, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049, P R China

Received
19th September 2014
, Accepted 30th October 2014
First published on 30th October 2014
Here we report high-performance small molecule acceptor (SMA)-based organic solar cells (OSCs) enabled by the combination of a difluorobenzothiadiazole donor polymer named PffBT4T-2DT and a SMA named SF-PDI2. It is found that SF-PDI2 matches particularly well with PffBT4T-2DT and non-fullerene OSCs with an impressive VOC of 0.98 V, and a high power conversion efficiency of 6.3% is achieved. Our study shows that PffBT4T-2DT is a promising donor material for SMA-based OSCs, and the selection of a matching SMA is also important to achieve the best OSC performance.

Sunlight is the only renewable resource capable of meeting society's long-term energy needs. Conventional crystalline Si solar cells can achieve high efficiencies but are produced using costly and energy-consuming processes. In contrast, organic solar cells can be manufactured using high-throughput roll-to-roll printing methods and are considered a truly environmentally friendly solar cell technology. However, best-efficiency organic solar cells solely rely on fullerene derivatives that are costly to synthesize and purify and that also have other drawbacks such as poor absorption properties. For this reason, non-fullerene organic solar cells based on small molecule acceptors are actively explored as the alternative to fullerene-containing organic solar cells. State-of-the-art small molecule acceptor-based organic solar cells consist of a polymer donor and a small molecule acceptor. Although extensive research has been focused on developing new small molecule acceptors, limited options of polymer donors have been explored. In this work, we utilize a difluorobenzothiadiazole-based donor polymer and achieved small molecule acceptor organic solar cells with a power conversion efficiency of 6.3%, which is a new record of solution-processed non-fullerene organic solar cells reported to date. Our study provides a new material combination strategy, based on which high-efficiency non-fullerene organic solar cells can be achieved.


Conventional bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) organic solar cells (OSCs) are based on a polymer or small molecule material as an electron donor and a fullerene derivative as an electron acceptor. Compared to inorganic solar cells, OSCs offer many attractive features, including light weight, mechanical flexibility and short energy payback time. The performance of fullerene-based OSCs has also been improving steadily with power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) approaching 10% for single junction OSCs. Despite the essential role of fullerenes in achieving high-performance OSCs, fullerene acceptors have several drawbacks, including poor light absorption, high-cost production and purification. For this reason, small molecule acceptor (SMA)-based OSCs have attracted considerable attention due to the easy tunability of the electronic and optical properties of SMA materials. The performance of solution-processed SMA-based OSCs has been historically low but has been improving progressively during the past few years. There have been many reports of SMA-based OSCs achieving PCEs ranging from 3.0% to 4.5% until a recent study, which reported a PCE of 5.9%.

To date, considerable research effort in SMA-based OSCs has been focused on developing various SMA materials. Only limited options of polymers have been explored as the donor for SMA-based OSCs, which include P3HT and thieno[3,4-b]thiophene based polymers (e.g. PBDTTT-C-T, PTB7-Th). To achieve the best performance for SMA-based OSCs, it is also highly important to select suitable donor polymers, which play a critical role in determining the morphology and open circuit voltage (VOC) of OSCs. Among the various donor polymers developed for polymer:fullerene OSCs, difluorobenzothiadiazole (ffBT)-based polymers have been demonstrated to exhibit many advantages. For example, the difluorination of the benzothiadiazole unit not only increases the crystallinity and hole transport ability of the polymer, but also lowers the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) level of the polymer, and thus increases the VOC of OSCs. In a recent report, a ffBT- and quaterthiophene-based polymer was shown to exhibit not only high space charge limited current (SCLC) mobility in the vertical direction of the film but also high organic field-effect transistor (OFET) mobilities in the horizontal direction, indicating that the ffBT polymer can form an excellent 3D charge-transporting network. These features make ffBT-based polymers one of the most attractive classes of donor polymers for polymer fullerene OSCs. However, ffBT polymers are not yet explored as donors for SMA-based OSCs.
In this study, we report high-efficiency SMA-based OSCs enabled by a previously reported ffBT-based donor polymer, which is named here as PffBT4T-2DT. To achieve the highest PCE, it is highly important to select a SMA that matches well with the donor polymer in terms of both electronic and optical properties. Two perylenediimide (PDI)-based SMAs were selected in our study to match with PffBT4T-2DT. When PffBT4T-2DT was combined with diPDI, which is a type of commonly used high-performance SMA, a reasonably high PCE of 5.4% was obtained. Interestingly, when PffBT4T-2DT was combined with SF-PDI2, which is a known yet not widely used SMA (previous best performance of SF-PDI2-based cell was ∼2.4%), an impressively high VOC of 0.98 V was obtained, which, combined with reasonably good short circuit current density (JSC) and fill factor (FF), led to a PCE of 6.3%. This is the highest value of PCE reported for solution-processed non-fullerene OSCs in the literature to date. This high performance was achieved without using any additives or interlayers, which would simplify the processing and optimizations of OSCs. The high VOC of PffBT4T-2DT:SF-PDI2-based cells can be attributed to the high-lying lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) level of SF-PDI2 compared to the HOMO level of PffBT4T-2DT. Importantly, the VOC loss of PffBT4T-2DT:SF-PDI2-based OSCs is only 0.67 V, which is among the lowest values of VOC losses for OSCs. Our results demonstrate the advantage of using SMAs to tune the energy level of the acceptor, and thus achieve a high VOC unattainable by combining the same polymer with fullerene acceptors.
The structures and energy levels of polymers and SMAs used in this study are shown in Fig. 1. Inverted structure BHJ OSCs were fabricated following the sequence of indium tin oxide (ITO)/ZnO/polymer:SMA/V2O5/Al. The J–V characteristics of the devices are shown in Fig. 2a, and the performance parameters of the OSCs are summarized in Table 1. To better understand the high-efficiency PffBT4T-2DT:SF-PDI2-based OSCs, we also investigated OSCs based on SF-PDI2 and PTB7-Th, which belongs to the thieno[3,4-b]thiophene polymer family that is commonly used in SMA-based OSCs. These results show that PffBT4T-2DT:SF-PDI2 is the best-performing material combination and that the matching between the donor polymer and SMA is important to achieve the best performance. While replacing SF-PDI2 with diPDI reduces the OSC performance from 6.3% to 5.4%, replacing PffBT4T-2DT with PTB7-Th resulted in an even more significant decrease in PCE to 3.0%. In the following section, we will first discuss the performances of PffBT4T-2DT:SF-PDI2 and PffBT4T-2DT:diPDI-based cells, followed by a comparative study of PffBT4T-2DT:SF-PDI2 and PTB7-Th:SF-PDI2 cells.

V
OC [V]

J
SC [mA cm−2]
FF
PCE [%]
Best PCE [%]
PffBT4T-2DT:SF-PDI2
0.98 ± 0.01
10.7 ± 0.4
0.57 ± 0.01
6.0 ± 0.3
6.3
PffBT4T-2DT:diPDI
0.84 ± 0.01
11.4 ± 0.9
0.53 ± 0.02
5.1 ± 0.3
5.4
PTB7-Th:SF-PDI2
1.00 ± 0.01
7.4 ± 0.2
0.39 ± 0.01
2.9 ± 0.1
3.0
There are several reasons why we chose SF-PDI2 to match with PffBT4T-2DT. Firstly, SF-PDI2 has a relatively high-lying LUMO level among reported PDI-based SMAs because of the spiro-fluorene (SF) bridge. The bulky SF bridge of SF-PDI2 also effectively reduces intermolecular aggregation, and thus allows SF-PDI2 to form films without any excessive crystallization. Furthermore, the electron transport ability of SF-PDI2 is reasonably good among reported PDI dimers, and, as a result, the FF achieved by P3HT:SF-PDI2-based OSCs was as high as 65%.
Compared to PffBT4T-2DT:diPDI-based cells, the high PCE of PffBT4T-2DT:SF-PDI2-based cells can be partially explained by their high VOC, which can be attributed to the high-lying LUMO level (−3.83 eV) of SF-PDI2 over diPDI (−3.96 eV). The difference in the LUMO values between SF-PDI2 and diPDI (0.13 eV) correlates well with the difference in the VOC of the corresponding OSCs (0.14 V). Importantly, the VOC of 0.98 V, achieved by PffBT4T-2DT:SF-PDI2, is more than 200 mV higher than that of PffBT4T-2DT:fullerene-based cells. This shows an important advantage of SMA over fullerene-based OSCs as the LUMO level of SMA materials can be more easily tuned, which provides a powerful tool to maximize the VOC and minimize the VOC loss of OSCs by finding the best matching SMA.
In terms of optical properties, the absorption of PffBT4T-2DT is complementary to that of SF-PDI2 or diPDI (Fig. 2b and c). While the absorption of PffBT4T-2DT covers the 600–750 nm range, the absorption of SF-PDI2 or diPDI mainly covers the 400–600 nm range. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra of the corresponding devices are shown in Fig. 2d. It can be seen that the EQE is in the range of 45–55% between 450 and 700 nm, indicating that both donor and acceptor materials contribute to JSC. This is another attractive feature of SMA-based OSCs as the optical properties of SMA materials can be readily tuned such that the donor and acceptor can cover different regions of the solar spectrum.
The morphology of PffBT4T-2DT:SF-PDI2 and PffBT4T-2DT:diPDI blend films were characterized by atomic force microscopy (AFM). The height and phase images were shown in Fig. 3. It can be seen that the surface of both PffBT4T-2DT-based blend films exhibit features of about 20–30 nm. Photoluminescence (PL) intensity of the blend films were also measured and compared with the neat polymer film (Fig. 3). The PL quenching efficiency in both PffBT4T-2DT:SF-PDI2 and PffBT4T-2DT:diPDI blends for PffBT4T-2DT are ∼93%, indicating that there is efficient exciton dissociation at the donor–acceptor interface. While AFM only probes the surface topography of the film, the high PL quenching efficiency indicates that there is good intermixing in the blend between the donor and acceptor materials.
A high-performing BHJ film should exhibit several features. In addition to small domain size and high PL quenching efficiency, it is also important to form an efficient interpenetrating charge transporting network with reasonably good hole and electron mobilities. Hole-only and electron-only devices using PffBT4T-2DT:SF-PDI2 or PffBT4T-2DT:diPDI were fabricated. Both the hole and electron mobilities were estimated using the SCLC method. The results are summarized in Table 2. It is clear that both blends exhibit higher hole mobilities than electron mobilities. The unbalanced hole and electron mobility is a common problem for SMA-based OSCs as SMAs typically exhibit lower electron mobilities than the hole mobilities of donor polymers. For example, the electron mobility in the recently reported high-efficiency SMA-based OSC was 3.32 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1. In comparison, the electron mobility of PffBT4T-2DT:SF-PDI2 is reasonably good, whereas the electron mobility of PffBT4T-2DT:diPDI is significantly lower, which could contribute to the lower FF of PffBT4T-2DT:diPDI-based OSCs.
Hole mobility [cm2 V−1 s−1]
Electron mobility [cm2 V−1 s−1]
PffBT4T-2DT:SF-PDI2
2.3 × 10−3
1.8 × 10−4
PffBT4T-2DT:diPDI
1.2 × 10−3
7.8 × 10−5
To understand the dramatic performance decrease of PTB7-Th:SF-PDI2versus PffBT4T-2DT:SF-PDI2 cells, PL quenching experiment was conducted to investigate the exciton harvesting efficiency of the blends. The PL spectra of PTB7-Th:SF-PDI2, PffBT4T-2DT:SF-PDI2 blends and corresponding pure polymer films are shown in Fig. 3. For the blend film of PffBT4T-2DT:SF-PDI2, the PL quenching efficiencies of the polymer and SMA are 93% (Fig. 3a) and >96% (Fig. S1), respectively, which suggests that exciton harvesting in the PffBT4T-2DT:SF-PDI2 blend is highly efficient. However, for PTB7-Th:SF-PDI2, the PL emission of PTB7-Th remains relatively strong in the blend film (Fig. 3c). The PL quenching efficiency of PTB7-Th in PTB7-Th:SF-PDI2 is calculated to be ∼79% compared with 93% for PffBT4T-2DT in the PffBT4T-2DT:SF-PDI2 blend. The lower PL quenching efficiency of PTB7-Th:SF-PDI2 is due to, among other reasons, the relatively large domain size of the PTB7-Th:SF-PDI2 blend film. AFM images of the PTB7-Th:SF-PDI2 blend films exhibit feature sizes of about 50–60 nm, while the blend films of PffBT4T-2DT:SF-PDI2 exhibit feature sizes of only 20–30 nm. Further studies were carried out by plotting the photocurrent density (Jph, defined as JL − JD, where JL and JD are the current densities under illumination and in the dark, respectively) as a function of effective voltage (Veff, defined as V0 − V, where V0 is the voltage at which Jph is zero.), as shown in Fig. 4a following previously reported protocols. The calculated charge dissociation probabilities P(E,T) for the devices of PffBT4T-2DT:SF-PDI2 and PTB7-Th:SF-PDI2 are 79% and 49%, respectively, which is another factor that contributes to the lower EQE of PTB7-Th:SF-PDI2-based OSCs. As discussed in previous studies, lower charge dissociation probability is related to stronger germinate recombination at the donor–acceptor interface in BHJ blend film. Lastly, light intensity dependent JSC data are shown in Fig. 4b. The relationship between JSC and light intensity can be described by the formula of JSC ∝ PS. If all free carriers are swept out and collected at the electrodes prior to recombination, S should be equal to 1. On the other hand, an S value of <1 indicates some extent of bimolecular recombination. The calculated S values for PffBT4T-2DT:SF-PDI2 and PTB7-Th:SF-PDI2 devices are 0.95 and 0.92, respectively. From these data, the bimolecular recombination in PffBT4T-2DT:SF-PDI2 is quite weak, whereas that in PTB7-Th:SF-PDI2 is slightly stronger. All these factors provide a reasonably good explanation why PTB7-Th:SF-PDI2 does not perform as efficiently as PffBT4T-2DT:SF-PDI2, which again indicates the importance of matching SF-PDI2 with a suitable donor polymer.
Furthermore, the favourable BHJ morphology and good OSC performances for PffBT4T-2DT-based cells were achieved by processing the warm solution of the PffBT4T-2DT:SMA blends without using any additives. To provide some context, the commonly reported SMA-based OSCs were fabricated by spin-casting the room temperature solution of the blend, which often contains 0.4–5.0% of single or binary additives such as 1,8-diiodooctane (DIO) and 1-chloronaphthalene (CN). For polymer:fullerene OSCs, the effects of DIO have been well studied. In some cases, DIO can enhance the aggregation of the polymer as DIO is a poor solvent for the polymer. Another possible effect of DIO is the reduction of the fullerene domain size because DIO is a good solvent for PC71BM. For SMA-based OSCs, although the use of additives is not uncommon, the detailed reasons for how additives enhance device performance are not completely clear. In principle, the exact mechanism of how additive works could be material-dependent. It depends on the aggregation properties of the polymer and the relative solubility of the SMA in the additives and the processing solvent. One possible hypothesis proposed was that the DIO additive takes a long time to dry and increases the crystallinity of the SMA, which is beneficial for charge transport and OSC performance. Recently, specially tailored binary additives, including both DIO and CN, were developed and studied to achieve excellent SMA OSC performances. Similar binary additives were also used in the best-efficiency SMA-based OSCs. Our current study offers a different and simpler approach (without using any additives) to obtain reasonably high-performing polymer:SMA BHJ films, which are characterized by small domain sizes and high PL quenching efficiencies. It is interesting to note that the hole mobility of PffBT4T-2DT in the SMA blend is reasonably high even without using any additives. This can be attributed to the excellent charge transport ability of the PffBT4T-2DT polymer, caused by the very strong interchain aggregation of the polymer in solution.
In conclusion, we demonstrate SMA-based OSCs with PCEs ranging from 5.4% to 6.3% enabled by a ffBT-based donor polymer (PffBT4T-2DT). The best efficiency (6.3%) was achieved by matching PffBT4T-2DT with a known yet not widely used SMA named SF-PDI2 that exhibits a high-lying LUMO level, thus enabling an impressively high VOC of 0.98 V, which is the main reason why PffBT4T-2DT:SF-PDI2 yielded higher efficiency than PffBT4T-2DT:diPDI-based cells. Both the PffBT4T-2DT-based blends exhibit relatively smooth blend morphology and highly efficient PL quenching, which are important to achieve high JSC and efficiencies. Our comparative study shows that replacing PffBT4T-2DT with PTB7-Th caused a significant decrease in cell efficiency due to the several reasons, including less favourable morphology and less efficient PL quenching of the PTB7-Th:SF-PDI2 blend. In addition, the favourable BHJ morphology of PffBT4T-2DT-based blends was achieved by processing the warm solution of PffBT4T-2DT:SMA without using any additives, which could simplify the device fabrication and optimization for SMA-based OSCs. Our study shows that PffBT4T-2DT is a promising donor polymer for SMA-based OSCs and that appropriate matching between the polymer and SMA is important to achieve SMA-based OSCs with high VOC, JSC and PCE.

The work described in this paper was partially supported by the National Basic Research Program of China (973 Program; 2013CB834701), the Hong Kong Innovation and Technology Commission (ITS/354/12), the Hong Kong Research Grants Council (T23-407/13 N, N_HKUST623/13, and 606012) and the National Science Foundation of China (#21374090).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Materials and methods, Fig. S1 to S7 and Table S1 to S2 are included. See DOI: 10.1039/c4ee02990a
‡ These authors contributed equally.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015