 DOI: 10.1039/D2TC04225H
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 18303-18311


Rui
Su
,

Xudong
Yang
,

Wenxi
Ji
,

Taoyi
Zhang
,

Longgui
Zhang
,

Ailian
Wang
,

Zhixuan
Jiang
,

Qiaoyun
Chen
,

Yi
Zhou
* and 

Bo
Song
*

Laboratory of Advanced Optoelectronic Materials, Suzhou Key Laboratory of Novel Semiconductor-optoelectronics Materials and Devices, College of Chemistry, Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, Soochow University, Suzhou 215123, China. E-mail: songbo@suda.edu.cn; yizhou@suda.edu.cn; Tel: +86 (0) 512 65882507

Sinopec (Beijing) Research Institute of Chemical Industry Co., Ltd, Beijing 100013, P. R. China

Received
5th October 2022
, Accepted 26th November 2022
First published on 2nd December 2022
The defects at the surface and grain boundary of perovskite films are detrimental to constructing highly stable and efficient perovskite solar cells (Pero-SCs). Here, we propose a facile additive-associated antisolvent engineering (AAE) method to acquire high-quality perovskite films. The additives and antisolvent adopt in the current study are zwitterionic taurine and chlorobenzene. It has been proven that the AAE method can slow down the nucleation process during thermal annealing and consequently passivate the defects of perovskite films via coordination and hydrogen bonding. After being treated with AAE, the champion power conversion efficiency of p–i–n Pero-SCs based on Cs0.05(FA0.92MA0.08)0.95Pb(I0.92Br0.08)3 is improved from 19.73% to 22.54%. Concomitantly, the device stability is also improved. Being stored in a glovebox filled with N2, the unencapsulated Pero-SCs treated with AAE maintain 80% and 94% of the initial PCEs in 2500 h at 70 °C and in 3200 h at room temperature, respectively.

Metal halide perovskite solar cells (Pero-SCs) are regarded as competitive candidates for future photovoltaic applications. Antisolvent engineering on mixed-cation halide perovskite films has become a widely used method because of the record PCEs of Pero-SCs resulting from this method. The perovskite films undergo a fast crystallization process, during which Pb-correlated defects and vacancies are inevitably left at the surface and crystal grain boundaries. The other I− correlated defects include undercoordinated I−, volatile I anion (VI), and I0 (I2) defects. These defects are responsible for the nonradiative recombination and ion migration and reduced performance and stability of Pero-SCs. In addition, the requisite post-heating serves as another source for defects due to the evaporation of low boiling point MA+ and residual solvents.

It has been proven that defects are mendable by doping a small amount of additives in the perovskite precursor. Quite a few additives have been explored, which can be carried out by chloride and bromide, Lewis acid/base, metal cations/anionic groups, and polymers. For example, Noel et al. employed thiophene and pyridine to post treat the perovskite films and the defects were passivated by forming a Lewis adduct with undercoordinated Pb2+ ions. Gu et al. reported that histamine (HA) as an additive also works well to reduce the surface trap density, which is explained by the strong interaction between –NH2 within HA and halide. By far, the additives are usually pre doped in the perovskite precursor and affect the crystal growth by forming certain adducts before annealing (thermally or solvently). It has been proven that surface passivation after the preparation of perovskite films works efficiently to improve the stability of Pero-SCs. Michael Grätzel et al. introduced ethylammonium iodide (EAI) as surface passivation agents at the perovskite/HTL interface, the atomic-level passivation mechanism of ammonium salts renders devices with excellent long-term stability. Merging these two treatments into one operation will definitely simplify the preparation of perovskite film and might bring improved performance and stability of the corresponding Pero-SCs. Very recently, Ma et al. added a passivation agent (indigo) into the antisolvent for perovskite engineering, and thus, defect passivation and solvent annealing of perovskite films are realized in one operation.
Inspired by this study, we presently proposed an additive-associated antisolvent engineering (AAE) method to acquire high-quality perovskite films. In the current study, the zwitterion taurine was introduced into the antisolvent used for solvent engineering. Taurine is an amino sulfonic acid and occurs naturally in animal and human bodies. Although taurine is not preadded to the precursor solution of perovskite, it still works efficiently to slow down the nucleation process during thermal annealing and consequently leads to passivation of the Pb2+ and I− defects in the perovskite films. Compared to the Pero-SCs treated with normal solvent engineering, the Pero-SCs treated with AAE showed a greatly improved performance, and the champion PCE was improved from 19.73% to 22.54%. Moreover, the PCE decay with time was suppressed owing to defect passivation by AAE. Being stored in a glovebox filled with N2, the unencapsulated Pero-SCs treated with AAE maintained 80% and 94% of the initial PCEs in 2500 h at 70 °C and in 3200 h at room temperature, respectively.


Fig. 1a illustrates the AAE procedure, where taurine and chlorobenzene (CB) were employed as additives and antisolvent in solvent engineering. The CB solution of taurine was quickly spin-coated on the substrate immediately after preparation of the precursor film. The details of device fabrication are described in the Experimental section in the ESI. We conducted optical microscopy measurements to investigate the role of taurine in the perovskite nucleation and growth process. The pictures were recorded right after dripping the CB solution onto the perovskite precursor films. As shown in Fig. 1b, for the perovskite films treated with normal antisolvent engineering (NAE), a number of dark dots were observed immediately after the addition of CB solution. While for the perovskite films treated with AAE, the dark dots appeared approximately 10 s after the addition of the CB solution. In addition, the dark dots that appeared on the perovskite precursor film treated with AAE were much smaller and uniform compared to that treated with NAE. The as-prepared films were further treated at 70 °C for 5 min and then 100 °C for 10 min to remove the residual solvent and induce crystal growth. Both the films treated with AAE and NAE were transparent, and they both underwent a color change from yellow to dark-brown and then to black during thermal annealing. The difference is that the films treated with AAE apparently took more time to complete the crystallization (phase transition). When heated at 70 °C, the films treated with NAE turned yellow in 30 s and turned black in another 30 s. In contrast, the films treated with AAE remained transparent for 30 s, turned dark brown for another 30 s, and turned black for an additional 60 s. Pictural information about the color change is shown in Fig. S1 (ESI). These results suggest that the addition of taurine slowed the crystallization process, which may be attributed to the coordination interaction of –SO3H with the perovskite precursor. Presumably, an intermediate complex was formed, which makes the crystallization kinetically difficult since the position of –SO3H needs to be replaced within this process. A plausible mechanism (Fig. 1c) is proposed based on the experimental facts: the electron-donating sulfonic group can work as a Lewis base to interact with the Pb2+ precursor via SO⋯Pb2+ coordination bonds, which can increase the activation energy of nucleation and passivate the defects in perovskite. These results are consistent with previous investigations showing that Lewis bases/acids can both slow down the annealing process.

The surface morphology of perovskite films was employed to compare the effect of NAE and AAE on the crystallization. As shown in Fig. 2a and b, the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images showed that the AAE-treated perovskite films have more uniformly and closely stacked crystal grains. The average grain sizes analyzed from the SEM images were 118 and 225 nm (inset of SEM images) for the perovskite films treated with the NAE and AAE methods, respectively. We further employed atomic force microscopy (AFM) to study the surface roughness and morphology of the resulting perovskite films (Fig. 2c and d). AFM results also showed that the grain size of the AAE-treated perovskite films is increased, which is in good agreement with SEM results. Moreover, we found that the surface roughness in the perovskite films is reduced from 26.6 to 19.2 nm by including the taurine additive, providing a smoother interface in contact with the electron transporting layer (ETL). Varying the taurine (0, 0.5, 1, 2, 3 mg mL−1) content in CB solution (labeled as NAE, AAE-0.5, AAE-1, AAE-2, AAE-3) did not cause a difference in diffraction peaks, as shown in Fig. 2e. The (110) peak intensity was markedly stronger than the (100). It should be reasonable to explain the relatively stronger diffraction intensity of (110) by the oriented growth on this plane by consuming the neighboring randomly oriented grains. When varying the concentration of taurine in CB (Ctaurine) solution, a maximum emerged at Ctaurine = 1 mg mL−1, and the full width half-maximum (FWHM, Fig. 2f) appeared at a minimum value, both of which indicate that a perovskite film with relatively higher quality and larger grain size were formed under this condition. The crystallinity decreases when using high concentrations of taurine can be explained by the effect of taurine on the crystal growth of perovskite. According to the Arrhenius equation, crystallization kinetics are inversely exponentially proportional to the activation energy (Ea) at constant temperature. Taurine forms coordinate interactions with PbI2 in the perovskite precursor, and the interaction slows the crystallization process, which results in an increase in Ea. When an appropriate amount of taurine is added, the taurine can interact with the perovskite precursor during crystal growth to enhance crystallinity and induce the preferred orientation. However, the intensity decreases when Ctaurine increases to 3 mg mL−1, possibly due to the accumulation of excess taurine molecules that limit the growth process of grains to some extent. The SEM images of perovskite films with different Ctaurines have also been tested, and the corresponding results are shown in Fig. S2 (ESI). The grain size increased when Ctaurine increased from 0 to 1 mg mL−1 and decreased when Ctaurine further increased to 1–3 mg mL−1.
Taurine contains an amino group (–NH2) and a sulfonic acid group (–SO3H). The electron density distribution of taurine was simulated by density functional theory (DFT). As shown in Fig. 3a, the –NH2 and –SO3H groups are located in the positive and negative electrostatic potential regions, respectively. These groups can participate in the coordination of Pb2+ in the perovskite. –SO3H has a negative potential and hence can interact with the uncoordinated Pb2+via the oxygen lone pairs of electrons. Taurine does not undergo any phase transformation or decomposition at temperatures ≤300 °C, as determined by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA, Fig. S3, ESI). The temperature applied throughout the study was far below 300 °C, and therefore, taurine should remain in the perovskite films even after thermal annealing.
To further analyze the surface chemical composition changes of the perovskite film and the chemical interaction between taurine and perovskite, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) spectra of the perovskite films treated with NAE and AAE were obtained. The binding energy was calibrated using the C 1s line at 284.8 eV, and it was observed that the characteristic binding energy peaks of Pb (Pb 4f7/2, Pb 4f5/2) and I (I 3d5/2, I 3d3/2) shifted to lower binding energies than those in the perovskite films treated with NAE (Fig. 3b). This shift is caused by a change in the electron cloud density, which indicates that there is an interaction between taurine and perovskite, further suggesting that the perovskite surface can be electrostatically passivated by taurine. The shift of the N 1s XPS spectra (Fig. S4, ESI) between the perovskite films treated with NAE and AAE, respectively, suggests that N atoms in taurine can donate the lone pair electrons to undercoordinated Pb2+ ions in the perovskite, thereby providing a passivating effect to the perovskite films. From these results, it is reasonable to consider that the charged defects in the perovskite film have been passivated by taurine with –NH2 and –SO3H functional groups. The specific interaction between taurine and PbI2 was investigated by Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), and spectra of taurine and a mixture of taurine + PbI2 were recorded in Fig. S5 (ESI). As shown in Fig. 3c, the peak located at 1612 cm−1 is assigned to the bending vibration of N–H, and it shifted to 1617 cm−1 for the mixture of taurine + PbI2, indicating there is an interaction between taurine and perovskite. The peaks located at 1218 and 1184 cm−1 are assigned to the stretching vibrations of SO. In the mixture, these two peaks shifted to 1215 and 1181 cm−1, respectively. The two peaks shifted to lower wavenumbers, implying that SO should coordinate with Pb2+via the lone unpaired electron of oxygen, which is consistent with the strong interaction between the sulfonic group of the DMSO molecule and the Pb2+ in the perovskite precursor. Based on these results, Fig. 3d depicts a schematic illustration of the defect passivation mechanism for the AAE treatment.
Furthermore, the Urbach energy (EU) is often used to compare the electronic disorder in perovskite films and was evaluated according to the absorption coefficient curves. The EU values of the NAE- and AAE-treated perovskite films were 131 to 125 meV, respectively. As shown in Fig. 4a, the relatively low EU for AAE-treated perovskite should be attributed to defect passivation caused by taurine. Steady-state photoluminescence (PL) and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) decay measurements were collected to study the defect passivation effect and carrier lifetimes of AAE. As shown in Fig. 4b, the PL intensity of perovskite treated with AAE was higher than that treated with NAE, which implies that the nonradiative recombination in the perovskite films was effectively suppressed. Fig. S6 (ESI) shows the PL of perovskite films treated with AAE, where Ctaurine was varied. Confocal fluorescence microscopy (CLSM) also confirmed the steady-state PL results in a relatively large scanning range, as shown in Fig. 4c. Apparently, the AAE-treated perovskite films showed a stronger and more uniform distribution of PL intensity than the NAE-treated perovskite films. TRPL measurements were carried out to explore the charge recombination kinetics in perovskite films (Fig. 4d). The TRPL was fitted using a biexponential function and the fast (τ1, f1) and slow (τ2, f1) decays were assigned to the nonradiative recombination due to the defect traps and the radiative decay, respectively. The detailed parameters are listed in Table 1. Specifically, we noticed that the AAE-treated perovskite films exhibited a significantly reduced fast decay component (f1 decreased from 18.65% to 4.18%), and τ2 increased from 253.13 to 390.10 ns. In addition, the AAE-treated perovskite films presented a longer average carrier lifetime (τave) of τave = 374.18 ns than τave = 207.38 ns for the NAE-treated perovskite films. The enhancements of both PL intensity and carrier lifetimes indicated that the defects in perovskite films can be effectively passivated by the AAE treatment. The work functions (WFs) of perovskite films were determined using ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS). As shown in Fig. 4e and f, the WF decreased from 4.12 to 4.08 eV after the AAE treatment. The WF difference between perovskite and C60 became smaller, which facilitates the charge transfer.

τ
1 (ns)

f
1 (%)

τ
2 (ns)

f
2 (%)

τ
ave (ns)
NAE
7.83
18.65
253.13
81.35
207.38
AAE
23.46
4.18
390.10
95.82
374.18
The AAE method was applied to p–i–n Pero-SCs with the configuration of ITO/PTAA/Cs0.05(FA0.92MA0.08)0.95Pb (I0.92Br0.08)3/C60/BCP/Ag (illustrated in Fig. 5a). The cross-sectional SEM images of Pero-SCs are shown in Fig. S7 (ESI). The thicknesses of the perovskite layer are approximately 634 nm, and almost no change in the thickness of the perovskite film with respect to the NAE or AAE-treated was observed. The AAE-treated perovskite films showed a highly crystalline perovskite absorber layer with larger grains in the thickness direction, which is beneficial to charge transport within the corresponding devices. As discussed previously, the perovksite films showed the best quality when Ctaurine = 1 mg mL−1. We confirmed that the optimal concentration of Ctaurine is also 1 mg mL−1 according to the current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the Pero-SCs. The corresponding J–V curves and detailed photovoltaic parameters are presented in Fig. S8 and Table S1 (ESI).
Statistical analyses were conducted to better study the performance improvements resulting from the AAE treatment. Fig. 5b shows a histogram plot based on 80 devices for each group. The average PCEs of Pero-SCs treated with NAE and AAE were 19.40% to 21.37%, the detailed photovoltaic parameters are listed in Table 2. The statistical results reveal that the AAE-treated devices are much more reproducible than the NAE-treated devices. The typical J–V curves corresponding to the champion PCEs are shown in Fig. 5c. For the Pero-SCs treated with AAE, a champion PCE of 22.54% with a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 24.72 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 1.13 V, and a fill factor (FF) of 80.2% was achieved. In contrast, the Pero-SCs treated with NAE obtained a PCE of 19.73%, with a JSC of 23.94 mA cm−2, a VOC of 1.07 V and an FF of 77.0%.

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)

J
int (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
NAE
1.07 ± 0.01
23.51 ± 0.27
23.60
76.5 ± 1.2
19.40 ± 0.22
AAE
1.12 ± 0.01
23.92 ± 0.21
23.82
79.9 ± 0.7
21.37 ± 0.16
The corresponding external quantum efficiency (EQE) curves of the Pero-SCs with champion PCEs are presented in Fig. 5d. The integrated current densities (Jint) obtained from the integration of the EQE curves are consistent with the JSC measured from the J–V curves (average mismatch is below 5%, as shown in Table 2). The enhanced JSC is likely due to the enhancement in charge extraction and transport capabilities. The quality improvement of the perovskite films with AAE treatment was also reflected by the reduced hysteresis. Fig. 5e shows the J–V curves in different scanning directions for the Pero-SCs treated with AAE and NAE (the detailed statistics are shown in Table S2, ESI). The hysteresis index (HI) of the Pero-SCs treated with NAE and AAE was 0.10 to 0.04, respectively. Additionally, Fig. 5f shows the stabilized output of 19.18% and 21.72% for the Pero-SCs treated with NAE and AAE, which indicates that the AAE treatment can reinforce the light stability of Pero-SCs to some extent.
To interpret the effect of AAE on the performance of Pero-SCs, a series of characterizations were carried out. To further investigate the charge-carrier behavior in the Pero-SCs, we examined the VOC dependence on the light intensity, as shown in Fig. 6a. Under the open-circuit condition, VOC can be expressed as a function of light intensity (P):
(1)
where
n is the ideality factor representing the rate of charge carrier recombination, kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the Kelvin temperature, and q is the unit electron charge. By plotting VOCversus lnP, the slope of Pero-SCs treated with NAE showed a slope of 1.40 kBT/q, whereas the device treated with AAE showed a smaller slope of 1.23 kBT/q, indicating effective suppression in the nonradiative recombination process. As Jph is linearly correlated with light intensity (Fig. S9, ESI), the slope close to 1 suggests that the mono-molecular recombination is negligible. The dark J–V curves of electron-only devices and hole-only devices were employed to evaluate the trap density (Nt) via a space-charge-limited current (SCLC) model (Fig. 6b and Fig. S10, ESI). Electron-only have a device configuration of ITO/SnO2/perovskite/C60/Ag. The J–V curves are processed by logarithm to obtain the trap-filled limit voltage (VTFL), and Nt can be calculated by the following equation:

(2)
where
L stands for the thickness of the perovskite layer, q is the elementary charge, ε is the relative permittivity constant and ε0 is the vacuum dielectric constant. The VTFL values of the devices treated with NAE and AAE are 0.192 and 0.138 V, Nt significantly decreases from 1.13 × 1015 to 4.7 × 1014 cm−3, which verifies that the AAE can effectively passivate the defects in perovskite films.

Transient photovoltage (TPV) and Transient photovoltage (TPC) were employed to investigate the charge-carrier dynamic in Pero-SCs (Fig. 6c and Fig. S11, ESI). The recombination lifetimes (τR) were 0.43 and 7.62 μs for the Pero-SCs treated with NAE and AAE, respectively. A relatively longer τR for Pero-SCs treated with AAE is in good agreement with the improved VOC. According to the previous discussion, we know that AAE can definitely influence the quality of perovskite. It is possible that the interfacial charge transportation can also be boosted, especially at the upper interface of perovskite, where the AAE directly interacts. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) analysis provided very good proof for the assumption. The Nyquist plots and the corresponding equivalent circuit used for simulation are shown in Fig. 6d, and the detailed parameters are listed in Table S3 (ESI). The Pero-SCs treated with NAE and AAE showed similar series resistance (Rs) values, both are close to 30 Ω, which makes it easy to understand that both have similar device configurations. The charge transfer resistances (Rtr) were quite different, and Rtr for the Pero-SCs treated with NAE and AAE were 178.1 and 33.2 Ω, respectively. The reduced Rtr suggests that AAE treatment improves the charge extraction capability between the interfaces and thereby facilitates a higher FF for the corresponding devices. These results are further confirmed by the dark J–V curves (see Fig. S12, ESI). The Pero-SCs treated with AAE have a relatively low saturation current density, which is responsible for the suppressed charge recombination due to the trap intensities and a larger VOC in the solar cells.
Finally, the stability issue was addressed. Note that all the Pero-SCs were unencapsulated and stored in different conditions, and the PCE evolution was recorded frequently during the test. First, the Pero-SCs treated with AAE showed an excellent thermal tolerance, and the devices maintained 80% of the initial PCE when kept in a glovebox filled with N2 at 70 °C for 2500 h. As shown in Fig. 7a, under the same conditions, the Pero-SCs treated with NAE retained 34% of the initial PCE. The detailed parameters indicate that the PCE decrease is mainly because of the decrease in JSC and FF (Fig. S13, ESI), which can be attributed to the morphology changes in the perovskite films.
Second, the device stability in controlled humidity was tested. As shown in Fig. 7b, the PCE of Pero-SCs treated with NAE dropped very quickly down to 18% of the initial value in 1000 h under a relative humidity (RH) of 40–50% at room temperature, while under the same conditions, the Pero-SCs treated with AAE still retained 60% of the initial PCE. The greatly enhanced stability in humid environments should also be explained by the improved quality of the perovskite. It can be observed by the naked eye that the perovskite films treated with AAE were darker than those treated with NAE, both exposed to an atmosphere with RH = 50–70% at room temperature for 30 days (Fig. S14, ESI).
Third, the uncapsulated Pero-SCs treated with AAE showed surprisingly high stability at room temperature. As shown in Fig. 7c, the Pero-SCs maintained 94% of the initial PCE after being stored in a glovebox filled with N2 for 3200 h. The average decay rate is 0.05%/day, one of the best reported rates to date. Under the same conditions, the Pero-SCs treated with NAE only maintained 72% of the initial PCE. Without a doubt, this should also be attributed to the improvement in the quality of perovskite films due to the AAE treatment. Moreover, the damp heat stability test was performed by placing the devices on a hotplate at 70 °C under a relative humidity (RH) of 50–60% environment. The device with AAE treatment maintained >60% of the initial PCE after >800 h, while the device without AAE treatment retained merely approximately 33% of the initial PCE. The light-soaking test was evaluated by placing the device under one sun illumination and N2 atmosphere. After 500 h, the device with AAE treatment retained 90% of its initial PCE, while the device without AAE treatment remained 73% of the initial PCE. The damp heat and light soaking stability results have been added in ESI as Fig. S15 and S16.

On the basis of popular antisolvent engineering, we proposed an AAE approach to treat perovskite precursor films, in which a zwitterion taurine was introduced as an additive. The functional groups –NH2 and –SO3H in taurine separately interact with I and Pb atoms in the precursor and thus slow down the crystalization process of perovskite, consequently leading to improvement of perovskite films. The p–i–n Pero-SCs treated with AAE achieved a competitive PCE of 22.54%, which should be attributed to the optimization of the nucleation process and defect passivation effects of AAE treatment. More importantly, the Pero-SCs treated with AAE showed greatly enhanced stability compared to the Pero-SCs treated with NAE. The unencapsulated device maintained 94% of the initial PCE and was stored in a glovebox filled with N2 at room temperature for 3200 h. The Pero-SCs treated with AAE also showed much improved tolerance to heat and humidity. We believe that the AAE approach with adaptable additives might supply a new avenue for achieving high-quality perovskite films.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51673139, 91633301), Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions, State and Local Joint Engineering Laboratory for Novel Functional Polymeric Materials, Collaborative Innovation Center of Suzhou Nano Science and Technology.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2tc04225h
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022