 DOI: 10.1039/C3NR04828D
(Communication)
Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 678-682


Su-Young
Son
,

Yong-Jin
Noh
,

Changsuk
Bok
,

Sungho
Lee
,

Byoung Gak
Kim
*,

Seok-In
Na
* and 

Han-Ik
Joh
*

Carbon Convergence Materials Research Center, Institute of Advanced Composite Materials, Korea Institute of Science and Technology, San 101, Eunha-ri, Bongdoung-eup, Wanju-gun, Jeollabuk-do 565-905, Korea. E-mail: hijoh@kist.re.kr

Professional Graduate School of Flexible and Printable Electronics and Polymer Materials Fusion Research Center, Chonbuk National University, 664-14, Deokjin-dong, Deokjin-gu, Jeonju-si, Jeollabuk-do 561-756, Korea. E-mail: nsi12@jbnu.ac.kr

Advanced Materials Division, Korea Research Institute of Chemical Technology, 141 Gajeongro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 305-600, Korea. E-mail: bgkim@krict.re.kr

Received
10th September 2013
, Accepted 25th September 2013
First published on 8th October 2013
Through a catalyst- and transfer-free process, we fabricated indium tin oxide (ITO)-free organic solar cells (OSCs) using a carbon nanosheet (CNS) with properties similar to graphene. The morphological and electrical properties of the CNS derived from a polymer of intrinsic microporosity-1 (PIM-1), which is mainly composed of several aromatic hydrocarbons and cycloalkanes, can be easily controlled by adjusting the polymer concentration. The CNSs, which are prepared by simple spin-coating and heat-treatment on a quartz substrate, are directly used as the electrodes of ITO-free OSCs, showing a high efficiency of approximately 1.922% under 100 mW cm−2 illumination and air mass 1.5 G conditions. This catalyst- and transfer-free approach is highly desirable for electrodes in organic electronics.

Graphene, which is composed of carbon atoms arranged in a two-dimensional honeycomb lattice, has numerous outstanding properties such as high electrical mobility, excellent optical transparency, and good flexibility. Due to these properties, graphene has attracted considerable interest in recent years for use as electrodes in organic electronics. Among these electronics, bulk heterojunction organic solar cells (OSCs), which are solution-processed with large-area coverage, light weight, and mechanical flexibility, have been proposed as a promising application of graphene in place of the highly expensive and scarcely available indium tin oxide (ITO) electrodes.

Two commonly used methods to synthesize graphene are chemical exfoliation and chemical vapor deposition (CVD). Chemically exfoliated graphene is obtained by a reduction process of exfoliated graphite oxide in solution. Although chemical exfoliation is an efficient way to produce graphene in bulk quantity, many oxygen-containing functional groups such as carboxyl, hydroxyl, and ketone groups are not completely eliminated and lead to increased resistance of graphene. On the other hand, graphene synthesized by the CVD method, which deposits hydrocarbon gas on a metal catalyst at high temperatures, exhibits high quality and large-area features. However, artificial defects such as wrinkles, cracks, and pinholes can be formed in CVD-grown graphene during metal elimination and the transfer processes onto target substrates. For these reasons, several research groups have reported alternative methods to synthesize graphene without a catalyst or transfer processes. For example, catalyst-free processing of graphene grown on sapphire and hexagonal boron nitride substrates, which are stable at over 1400 °C and show a 98% lattice match between graphene and the substrate, respectively, has been recently introduced. Large-area films composed of nanographene flakes exhibited low-quality characteristics even though the nanographene can be synthesized on various substrates using plasma enhanced CVD. Transfer-free processes of graphene grown using metal catalysts are also reported. However, the used metals must be eliminated to be used in various applications, leading to the degradation of graphene properties.
In our previous studies, we reported a catalyst- and transfer-free process for forming a carbon nanosheet (CNS) with properties similar to graphene using a polyacrylonitrile (PAN) polymer and a small molecular pitch extracted from petroleum. The PAN- and pitch-derived CNSs were obtained through three steps: spin-coating of PAN or pitch, cyclization, and carbonization. Among these steps, cyclization is a key process because the open ring structure (PAN polymer) and small molecules (pitch) should be converted to the ladder structure through this step, resulting in a six-membered ring of carbon atoms. Therefore, there is a great need for a cyclization-free process to synthesize the CNS because the quality of the CNS sensitively depends on the cyclization conditions, such as temperature, ramping rate, and oxygen contents. We report herein an advanced approach for both the synthesis of the CNS and the direct application of the resulting CNS as the alternative electrode materials of ITO for OSCs.
To form the CNS without the cyclization process, we synthesized a polymer with a rigid ladder-like backbone, namely a polymer of intrinsic microporosity-1 (PIM-1), as shown in Fig. S1a.1H nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectra showed that the polymer was well synthesized as our expected structure (Fig. S1b). The molecular weight and distributions of PIM-1 analyzed by gel-permeation chromatography exhibited 34000 g mol−1 of a number-average molar mass and a polydispersity index of 2.4. Scheme 1 presents a schematic illustration of the fabrication sequence for ITO-free OSCs with CNSs derived from PIM-1. The CNS was simply prepared by carbonization of a thin polymer film on a quartz substrate that was obtained by spin-coating the polymer solution. The transparent and conductive CNS on the quartz substrate is directly used as the electrodes of ITO-free OSCs.
The thickness and surface morphology of the CNS as a function of PIM-1 concentration were measured by atomic force microscopy (AFM) as shown in Fig. 1a and S2, respectively. The thickness of the CNSs was approximately proportional to the PIM-1 concentration with a linear relationship. Interestingly, the surface morphology and roughness of all CNSs were uniform regardless of the concentration, indicating a full-covered film and a flat surface to suppress the possibility of leakage current and shorts in the OSCs. The sheet resistance (Rsheet) of the CNS, measured by a four-point probe, was in the range from 12.1 to 1.5 kΩ sq−1 (Fig. 1b). The electrical conductivity of the CNS can be calculated as follows: σ (S cm−1) = 1/(Rsheet × t), where σ is the conductivity and t is the thickness of the CNS. The conductivity of the CNS exhibited over 500 S cm−1 in all concentration ranges of PIM-1, indicating that these values are relatively superior to those of chemically converted graphene and transparent graphene-constructed films (TGFs) achieved by the thermal reaction of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons.Fig. 1c shows the optical transmittance spectra of the CNS as a function of PIM-1 concentration measured by UV-VIS spectroscopy. The transparency of the CNSs on the quartz substrate could be easily adjusted by controlling the PIM-1 film thickness as a function of the polymer concentration. The transmittances of CNSs at a wavelength of 550 nm were ∼88% at 0.1 wt%, ∼77% at 0.2 wt%, ∼70% at 0.3 wt%, ∼62% at 0.4 wt%, ∼57% at 0.5 wt%, and ∼51% at 0.6 wt%, respectively. As shown in the inset of Fig. 1c, the red-letter “KIST” lying behind the CNS on the quartz with approximately 70% transmittance was clearly observed. In the UV-VIS spectra, minimum values of the transmittance at approximately 270 nm were observed regardless of the PIM-1 concentration, indicating that the CNSs converted from PIM-1 have a graphitic structure.
To observe the graphitic structure of the CNSs, we performed high-resolution transmittance electron microscopy (HR-TEM) analysis of the CNSs as shown in Fig. 2. Interestingly, the graphitic structure of the CNSs depends on the PIM-1 concentration even though the CNSs were carbonized under identical temperature conditions. At 0.2 wt% PIM-1 polymer solutions, curvy and short graphene layers started to be observed in the CNSs, while the CNSs converted from 0.1 wt% PIM-1 polymer solution exhibited an amorphous structure. The ordered and tightly packed graphene layers for the CNSs synthesized using the PIM-1 solutions in the range from 0.3 to 0.6 wt% were easily observed. Considering the phenomena that the graphene layers were observed in the CNSs prepared using a relatively high polymer concentration, it is certain that the formation and orientation of the graphene layers rely on the interaction between the polymer chains and their affinity against the surface of the substrate. First, the PIM-1 polymer chains are randomly aligned in the spin-coated polymer film. Then, the chains might be oriented through any features, such as edge-on, face-on, or tiled alignment, when the polymer film was carbonized. In the case of the thin polymer film, it is too hard to move or orient between the chains due to the interaction between the chain and the substrate. However, with thick polymer films, the other polymer chains, except for some polymer chains that interact between these chains and the substrate, can be easily moved to form the packed graphene layers that are aligned in different directions along the film or that overlapped with each chain to form a graphitic network. This process improves the intermolecular condensation and forms the networks at relatively low temperatures using catalyst-free processes compared to the 2-dimensional carbon materials with graphitic structure.
The structural composition of the CNSs was investigated by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). Interestingly, the CNSs consisted of carbon and oxygen atoms after carbonization of the spin-coated PIM-1 films as shown in Table S1. The samples, especially when using concentrations of PIM-1 greater than 0.4 wt%, consisted of over approximately 98% carbon, except for some Si atoms detected from the substrates. The atomic concentration of nitrogen and oxygen in all CNSs were 0 and approximately 1.0%, respectively, indicating that the atoms in the PIM-1 polymer chain were mostly eliminated through the heat treatment. The weight loss of the PIM-1 polymer is approximately 94.3% during carbonization at 1200 °C as shown in Fig. S3. The C1s and O1s spectra of the CNS from 0.3 wt% PIM-1 are shown in Fig. 3a and b. The C1s spectrum consisted of a primary peak and two weak peaks at binding energies of 284.6, 285.9, and 289.4 eV, which can be assigned to the C–C (sp2 carbon), C–O, and O–CO bonds, respectively. The O1s spectrum revealed two peaks at 532.3 and 533.2 eV, corresponding to the C–O and O–CO bonds, respectively. The electronic properties, namely the work function (WF), of the CNS as a function of polymer concentrations were investigated using ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy as shown in Fig. 3c. The WFs of the CNSs were slightly decreased with increasing polymer concentrations. The WFs of the CNSs were in the range of 4.50 to 4.58 eV, which were similar to TGF (4.50 eV) prepared using polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. Hence, it is reasonable to confirm that the CNS on a quartz substrate exhibited a suitable WF to be used as an ITO alternative electrode in OSCs.
To demonstrate how the CNSs can function as anodes, ITO-free OSCs are fabricated as shown in Scheme 1 (detailed in the ESI). Fig. 4 exhibits the photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) curves of the OSCs under 100 mW cm−2 illumination with air mass (AM) 1.5 G conditions and detailed device-performances, such as open-circuit voltage (Voc), short-circuit current density (Jsc), fill factor (FF), and power conversion efficiency (PCE), are summarized in Table 1. Voc for all CNSs showed relatively identical values because the Voc is highly related to the difference between the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital of the acceptor and the highest occupied molecular orbital of the donor for bulk heterojunction.Jsc values decreased with increasing PIM-1 concentrations except for the CNS from 0.1 wt% PIM-1 that showed the minimum Jsc probably due to the considerably high Rsheet than other CNSs. FF values tended to increase with increasing the concentration. It has been well documented that FF is closely related to the series (Rs) or shunt (Rsh) resistance of the diode curve. The Rs and Rsh values decreased and increased with increasing the concentration, respectively, as shown in Fig. S4. Interestingly, these resistances of the CNSs sharply improved up to 0.3 wt% PIM-1 and then gently improved over 0.3 wt% PIM-1. This result might be due to the facts that (1) the Rsheet of CNSs decreased with increasing PIM-1 concentrations or CNS-thicknesses, (2) over 0.3 wt% PIM-1, the CNSs started to have ordered and tightly packed graphene layers, and (3) the CNSs converted from 0.3 to 0.6 wt% PIM-1 still showed partially graphitic structures, which can be confirmed by Raman spectra and optical images (Fig. S5). As a result, the 0.6 wt% PIM-1 based device showed the maximum FF of 57.89%. However, it might be a complementary relationship between the resistances and the transmittance in OSCs. An increase in the thickness of the transparent electrodes led to a decrease in both the resistances and the transmittance. Thus, the thickness of the electrodes should be suitably tuned to optimize the PCE of the OSCs. As a result, our OSC with 0.3 wt% converted CNS anode performed at a high efficiency of ∼1.922%. In the case of the ITO-based OSC, the cell-efficiency is higher than that of our ITO-free OSC with the CNS anodes because of the lower resistances and higher transmittance of ITO. However, our CNS anodes perform at a relatively good cell-efficiency compared to the reduced graphene oxide (0.1–1.01%), the CVD-grown graphene (1.23–1.97%), and TGF anodes (0.29–0.68%).

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
0.1 wt% PIM-1
0.607
4.840
26.73
0.786
0.2 wt% PIM-1
0.601
7.407
30.54
1.360
0.3 wt% PIM-1
0.611
7.016
44.86
1.922
0.4 wt% PIM-1
0.605
6.381
49.38
1.907
0.5 wt% PIM-1
0.585
5.668
56.35
1.870
0.6 wt% PIM-1
0.586
5.373
57.89
1.823
ITO
0.616
8.825
64.43
3.473

In conclusion, we have synthesized a CNS converted from a PIM-1 polymer using a one-step process and directly fabricated OSCs on the CNS as transparent conducting electrodes. The CNS was formed by carbonization of a thin polymer film on a quartz substrate because the synthesized PIM-1 polymer has a rigid ladder-like structure. The electrical, optical, and structural properties of the CNS can be easily controlled by changing the PIM-1 concentration. ITO-free OSCs using a CNS as a novel and cost-effective transparent conducting electrode presented a high cell efficiency of ∼1.922%. Therefore, although the CNS electrodes should be modified to exhibit the PCE as much as the ITO-based OSCs, they are likely to be a practicable material as a transparent electrode for organic optoelectronics.


The authors acknowledge the financial supports of this work from the Korea Institute of Science and Technology, the Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT and Future Planning (NRF-2013R1A1A1011880), Republic of Korea. The authors declare no competing financial interest.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Detailed experimental methods; chemical structure and 1H NMR spectra; AFM images; TGA spectra; shunt and series resistances; Raman spectra and optical images; atomic contents of the CNSs. See DOI: 10.1039/c3nr04828d
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014