 DOI: 10.1039/C3NR06363A
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 4204-4210


Yoon Hee
Jang
 and 

Dong Ha
Kim
*

Department of Chemistry, Global Top 5 Research Program, Ewha Womans University, 52, Ewhayeodae-gil, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul, 120-750, South Korea. E-mail: dhkim@ewha.ac.kr

Received
1st December 2013
, Accepted 14th January 2014
First published on 20th January 2014
Periodic organic–inorganic multilayer films are constructed by stepwise alternate build-up of UV-stabilized poly(styrene-block-vinylpyridine) block copolymer inverse micelles and poly(styrene-block-ethylene oxide) block copolymer layers containing inorganic moieties at the polar core blocks. The layered block copolymer inverse micelle films show strong reflective color and well-defined photonic stop bands in the entire wavelength region from visible to near IR, which can be fine-tuned by controlling the inner architectures, i.e., the periodic size of the layered structure. The layered block copolymer films are integrated into the back-side of counter electrodes as a light reflection layer and thereby an enhancement ratio of ∼11% in the cell efficiency is achieved, which can be attributed to the increased light harvesting by the sensitized dye molecules. Tailoring the inner structure of the photonic band gap multilayers, the wavelength of reflected light can be adjusted to the wavelength of dye absorption, leading to a noticeable enhancement in photocurrent and power conversion efficiency.

Since the environmental issues regarding global warming have come to the fore, a need for generating renewable energies by photovoltaic technologies has been emphasized all over the world. As third-generation photovoltaic systems, dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) have gained tremendous interest as potential photovoltaic devices for solar to energy conversion owing to their relatively low fabrication cost and high power conversion efficiency (PCE). DSSC technologies have made rapid progress in recent years through finding new materials and structure innovations. As one of the breakthroughs, the solution-processable organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite-absorber based solar cells exhibit superior efficiency of approximately 15 percent under standard AM 1.5G illumination, by virtue of absorbing over a broad spectral range of light, from visible to near infrared (near-IR) wavelengths.

Judging by this advance, incident photon management, which is one more way to increase the PCE in solar cells, is a crucial factor to enhance the light harvesting efficiency (LHE). The many attempts for enhancing the LHE in DSSC systems have been executed in diverse directions. (1) Light scattering: large sized colloid particles were incorporated into the cell as a diffuse scattering layer to increase the effective optical path length by photon scattering. More recently, hierarchically structured building blocks have received considerable attention as photoanodes in DSSCs due to their unique structure effect of higher dye loading via large surface area, superior light scattering ability, and fast charge transport, which achieve a synergy effect. (2) Enhanced surface plasmon resonance (SPR) fields: SPR supported by the use of metallic nanostructures led to enhanced light absorption and photocurrent generation. (3) Light trapping: the conventional way for achieving light trapping is the use of geometrical optics, such as mirrors and surface grating in thin film silicon solar cells, or a new approach to successfully enhance the light trapping includes the introduction of optical waveguides such as photonic crystals. In particular, it has been reported that various dimensions and types of photonic crystals can be simply introduced into DSSCs to enhance the LHE at a specific range of wavelengths. Colodrero et al. fabricated nanoparticle-based porous 1-dimensional (1D) photonic crystals, which were coupled to a dye-sensitized TiO2 electrode. As a result, the PCE was enhanced by 18% (from 3.9% to 4.6%) due to amplified light absorption at the photonic band gap frequency. Guldin et al. prepared 3-dimensional (3D) TiO2 inverse opals and integrated them into a mesoporous TiO2 underlayer as an optically active 3D photonic crystal overlayer. The integration of photonic crystals increased the photogenerated current by 9.3% (from 4.3 mA cm−2 to 4.7 mA cm−2) and broadened the light harvesting capability of DSSCs. A novel structure, consisting of a thick TiO2 nanoparticle layer and a thin TiO2 nanotube photonic crystal layer, was designed by Guo et al. A maximum enhancement in PCE of 39.5% (from 4.99% to 6.96%) was achieved by the best matching of its reflectance maximum to dye absorption. Lee and co-workers developed a solid-state DSSC fabricated with a Bragg stack-functionalized counter electrode, which was prepared via alternating deposition of organized mesoporous TiO2 and colloidal SiO2 layers on the non-conducting side of the counter electrode. The LHE and photocurrent were maximized by reflecting unabsorbed photons back to the device, resulting in an enhancement of the PCE of 22.2% (from 5.4% to 6.6%).
The unique property of block copolymer (BCP) self-assembly has enabled self-assembled BCP structures to be exploited as promising platforms for inventing various dimensional photonic crystals. More specifically, the periodic size and composition of photonic crystals can be simply controlled by modulating the self-assembly parameters, such as the volume fractions of the constituent blocks, the segment size, and the strength of the interaction between the blocks. Kang et al. generated robust photonic crystal gels by swelling the poly(styrene-block-2-vinylpyridine) (PS-b-P2VP) BCP with modest-molecular weight. The swollen PS-b-P2VP film exhibited stop bands in the visible regime and was fixed by infiltrating SiO2 into the polar P2VP domains. In this study, we introduce a new class of organic–inorganic 1D photonic crystals exhibiting stop bands in a specific wavelength range, which was created by stepwise layer-by-layer deposition of UV-crosslinked BCP inverse micelle layers. These simple yet novel 1D layered BCP films have been introduced into the back-side of counter electrodes as light reflectors in DSSC systems.

All chemicals were used as provided without further purification. Poly(styrene-block-2-vinylpyridine) (PS-b-P2VP, MPSn = 50 Kg mol−1, MP2VPn = 16.5 Kg mol−1, Mw/Mn = 1.09), poly(styrene-block-4-vinylpyridine) (PS-b-P4VP, MPSn = 41 Kg mol−1, MP4VPn = 24 Kg mol−1, Mw/Mn = 1.09), and poly(styrene-block-ethylene oxide) (PS-b-PEO, MPSn = 10 Kg mol−1, MPEOn = 11.5 Kg mol−1, Mw/Mn = 1.09) BCPs were purchased from Polymer Source Inc. and used as received. 1,4-Dioxane, concentrated hydrochloric acid (HCl, 37%), and isopropyl alcohol (IPA) were purchased from Daejung Chemicals & Metals Co., Ltd. and used without further purification. Titanium tetraisopropoxide (TTIP) and silver nitrate (AgNO3) was purchased from Sigma Aldrich.


PS-b-P4VP (denoted as S4VP) was dissolved in toluene and stirred at 70 °C for 2 hours to yield a clear solution of inverse micelles composed of a PS corona and a P4VP core with a concentration of 1 wt% or 2 wt%. A homogeneous solution of PS-b-PEO (denoted as SEO) in 1,4-dioxane with a concentration of 1 wt% was prepared by stirring at room-temperature for 2 hours. As prepared TiO2 sol–gel precursor (TTIP:HCl:IPA = 0.71 g:0.25 g:5 mL) was mixed with the SEO solution (60/40 vol%) and stirred vigorously overnight.


The first layer of S4VP was prepared from 1 wt% or 2 wt% S4VP solution on a solid substrate by spin coating at 1000 rpm for 60 seconds and stabilized by exposing to UV light with a wavelength of 254 nm with a dose of 25 J cm−2 (XX-15S; UVP Inc.) for 1 hour in a vacuum. Then, the second layer of SEO/TiO2 was prepared from 1 wt% SEO/TiO2 (60/40 vol%) solution on the stabilized S4VP layer by spin coating at 1500 rpm for 60 seconds and exposed to UV light (λ = 254 nm) under vacuum conditions for 1 hour. To fabricate multilayered BCP structures, the procedures described above were repeated.


Fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO, 2.2 mm thick with a sheet resistance of 6–9 Ohms sq−1) glass pieces were washed by sonication in acetone, IPA, and distilled water baths sequentially for half an hour. Nanocrystalline TiO2 (nc-TiO2) nanoparticles prepared from Degussa P25, ethyl cellulose, α-terpineol, and ethanol were deposited on the FTO glass substrate by using a doctor blade and heating at 125 °C for 6 minutes and 500 °C for 1 hour. Prior to dye adsorption, the sintered nc-TiO2 film was treated with TiCl4 (40 mM) and exposed to oxygen plasma for 10 minutes under given conditions of 50 sccm (standard cubic centimeters per minute) and 100 W. Subsequently, the nc-TiO2 film was sensitized with ruthenium dye (cis-diisothiocyanato-bis(2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylato) ruthenium(II) bis(tetrabutylammonium), N-719, Solaronix) by soaking in 0.2 mM dye/ethanol solution for 24 hours.


According to the fabrication method, the 1D layered BCP structures were fabricated on the opposite side of platinum (Pt, average thickness of 2.8 nm) sputtered FTO glass. Working and counter electrodes were assembled by insertion of spacers (50 μm thick hot-melt sealing foil, SX1170-25, Solaronix) and an ionic liquid electrolyte, 0.60 M BMIM-I, 0.03 M I2, 0.50 M TBP, and 0.10 M GTC in acetonitrile/valeronitrile 85/15 (v/v) (no. ES-0004), purchased from io.li.tec (Germany), was then injected into the small gap between the two electrodes driven by capillary force. The current density versus voltage (J–V) response of the DSSCs was measured under simulated AM 1.5G illumination with an intensity of 100 mW cm−2 using a POLARONIX® K3000 Solar Cell I–V Measurement System. The exposed photoactive area for the DSSCs was 0.25 cm2.


Atomic force microscopy (AFM) images were obtained using a Dimension 3100 scanning force microscope in tapping mode (Digital Instrument). Cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images were obtained with a JEOL JSM6700-F. Spectroscopic ellipsometry (SEMG-1000, Nanoview Co.), which was operated at an incidence angle of 70° with a halogen light source with a wavelength range from 350 to 850 nm, was used to measure the refractive indices and thicknesses of each layer. UV-Vis absorption or transmittance spectra were plotted by a UV-Vis-NIR spectrometer (Cary 5000, Varian Inc.).


Organic–inorganic hybrid periodic layered structures, which were composed of polymer and TiO2, were prepared by stepwise build-up of photo-crosslinkable PS-b-P4VP (denoted as S4VP) and PS-b-PEO (denoted as SEO) containing TiO2 sol–gel precursor in an alternating fashion. The whole fabrication process for a 1D layered structure with well-defined periodicity assisted by BCP layer-by-layer assembly is schematically illustrated in Scheme 1. As shown in Scheme 1, one cycle was comprised of four-stages: the S4VP homogeneous solution was spin coated onto a solid substrate to develop a thin BCP inverse micelle film (stage 1); the S4VP inverse micelle layer was subsequently exposed to UV light to stabilize the film (stage 2); the relatively thick second layer, consisting of TiO2 arrays, was constructed by consecutive adsorption from a SEO solution containing 40 vol% TiO2 sol–gel precursor on the S4VP layer (stage 3) followed by UV-stabilization (stage 4). The formation of 1D stacked multilayer films was achieved by repeating stages 1 to 4.

The topographies of each constituting layer were investigated by atomic force microscopy (AFM). As shown in Fig. 1(a), the upper and lower parts display the surface morphologies of the 1 wt% S4VP layers and SEO/TiO2 (60/40 vol%) layers after UV exposure for 1 hour, respectively. With the increase in the number of layers, the surface texture of each layer was conserved without any alterations, such as collapse or aggregation, while the roughness was slightly increased. Stepwise deposition of stabilized BCP films was also confirmed by cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM). In Fig. 1(b), ten-layers consisting of the relatively thin S4VP layers and thick SEO/TiO2 layers were observed, indicating that the hybrid BCP films were successfully stacked through UV-stabilization and subsequent layer deposition. However, the S4VP layer seems to look far thinner than the actual thickness because of the similar secondary electron release properties between two repeated layers, although a certain amount of TiO2 was included in the hybrid SEO layer. It is thus worth noting that stabilization of BCP films by UV exposure induces photo-crosslinking and this process is a crucial factor to prevent segmental mobility or solubility of the BCP film during consecutive adsorption. The distinct and representative advantage of this process is that BCP-based 1D structures with manifold inner architectures and compositions can be formed. Hybrid layered BCP structures containing silver nanoparticles as the inorganic component were also fabricated in the same manner and their optical properties were also compared (refer to ESI).
On the basis of this procedure, 1D BCP-based layered structures with photonic band gaps were obtained and their periodic size was tuned by controlling the inner architectures. To give rise to a difference in the refractive index of each layer, high volume contents of TiO2 sol–gel precursors were included in the SEO layer. The SEO layer with 40 vol% TiO2 sol–gel precursor was used as the high refractive index layer (n ≈ 1.8) and a pristine S4VP layer was used as the low refractive index layer (n ≈ 1.64). An appropriate thickness of each layer was simply tuned ranging from tens to hundreds of nanometers depending on the concentration of the solution and rate of spin coating. The thickness of the pure S4VP layer was adjusted by varying the concentrations of the polymer solutions and the values obtained from 1 wt% and 2 wt% solutions were about 36 nm and 78 nm, respectively. The thickness of the SEO/TiO2 layer was set at about 80 nm under certain conditions (such as a particular volume fraction of TiO2 sol–gel and spin speed). With the refractive index (n) and proper thickness (d) of each layer, the Bragg reflectance peak (λmax) can be easily estimated according to following eqn (1).
λmax = 2(n1d1 + n2d2)
(1)
The calculated λmax was 406 nm for BCP layered structures composed of 1 wt% S4VP and SEO/TiO2 repetition layers. To evaluate the reflectivity of the films, transmittance spectra were measured (Fig. 2). As predicted, a transmission dip appeared at around 410 nm corresponding to the Bragg peak (Fig. 2(a)). When the number of stacked layers increases, the transmission dip becomes more intense and is clearly seen due to the proper optical thickness between the higher and lower-index layers. The tuning of the specific wavelength of the transmission dip with respect to the Bragg reflectance peak can be realized by changing the periodicity of the periodic multilayer. Keeping the conditions of the SEO/TiO2 layer the same, the concentration of the S4VP solution was increased from 1 wt% to 2 wt%. It is observed that the transmission dip was red-shifted to around 540 nm as shown in Fig. 2(b), which complies with the above mentioned equation. The stepwise layer-by-layer fabrication method for stabilized BCP multilayers might be a promising way to fabricate 1D photonic structures with flexible stop bands in the whole wavelength range.
In terms of the organization of the high-index SEO/TiO2 layer, the SEO polymer may lower the refractive index of the layer compared to pure TiO2 (n ≈ 2.4). A comparative experimental study was carried out by depositing a pure TiO2 layer onto an organic S4VP layer instead of a SEO/TiO2 layer. The thickness of the pure TiO2 layer, for the desired λmax, was adjusted to ∼40 nm by controlling the spin speed and concentration of sol–gel precursors. The formation of Bragg stack layers consisting of S4VP (1%) and TiO2 is assessed in the cross-sectional SEM image (inset of Fig. 3). The inorganic TiO2 layer was clearly distinct from the organic S4VP layer due to the high index contrast between the two alternating layers. When the thickness of the organic layer was adjusted to ∼80 nm, which was obtained from a 2 wt% solution of the S4VP polymer, a transmission dip was observed at around 450 nm, which corresponds to the calculated λmax (Fig. 3). This result indicates that organic–inorganic Bragg stacks with visible stop bands can be realized. Importantly, it is noted that the relatively low-index hybrid organic/TiO2 (i.e., SEO/TiO2) layer on behalf of pure TiO2 also sufficiently manifests the photonic band gap in the Bragg stack.
The multilayered BCP films described above were introduced into the back-side of the counter electrodes in DSSCs to demonstrate the light reflection properties of the multilayered BCP films depending on their photonic stop bands. Photographs of the Pt coated FTO with and without BCP 1D photonic structures are provided in Fig. 4(a). The multilayered BCP films show characteristic reflective colors and transmission dips were also clearly observed on the back-side of FTO (Fig. 4), which suggests that a BCP 1D photonic structure with appropriate thickness and periodicity can be used as a light reflector in DSSCs to increase the light harvesting capability. Scheme 2 illustrates the configuration of the DSSCs: N719 dye-sensitized nc-TiO2 film as the working electrode and Pt-coated FTO containing ten-layers of BCP 1D photonic band gap structures (Pt/FTO/PBG) at the other side of the counter electrodes were assembled, and then the iodide/triiodide redox couple were injected as the hole transporter. The performances of the DSSCs equipped with different counter electrodes were measured under simulated sunlight with an illumination intensity of 100 mW cm−2. The other parameters such as the thickness of the nc-TiO2 film (∼4 μm), the sputtered Pt (∼2.8 nm), photo active area (0.25 cm2), and cell assembly conditions were fixed to investigate the effect of the light reflection by PBG structures. Although the overall efficiency of the devices investigated in this study was relatively low, to maximize the light reflection effect, a thin nc-TiO2 film was used instead of a thicker one that may absorb most of the incoming light.

Fig. 5 shows the current density versus voltage (J–V) characteristic curves for three different devices and the values of the corresponding photovoltaic parameters (open-circuit voltage (Voc), short-circuit current density (Jsc), fill factor (FF), and overall conversion efficiency (η)) are summarized in Table 1. As shown in the cell characteristics, the Voc and FF exhibit similar values, while the Jsc was significantly increased for the cases where PBG structures were attached to the counter electrode. It is interesting to note that the Jsc was systematically increased with increasing the periodic size of the PBG structures, leading to an enhancement in the power conversion efficiency. In the case of Pt/FTO/PBG (2%), the noticeable enhancement in Jsc is probably caused by a better match between the wavelength of dye absorption, ranging from 500 to 600 nm, and that of the light reflected by the PBG (2%) structures (Fig. 4(b)). Consequently, the Jsc and efficiency reach maximum enhancements of 10.7% and 10.9% with respect to cells with pristine Pt counter electrodes, respectively. It is worth noting that the enhanced Jsc can be attributed to the additional contribution of reflected light from the layered 1D PBG structures, leading to an increase in the number of effective photons for electron–hole generation by the dye molecules.
Sample

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF

η (%)

a Average over a large number of cells (more than 5–7 cells) for three kinds of counter electrode.

Pt/FTO
0.745 (±0.003)
7.96 (±0.04)
66.8 (±0.19)
3.96 (±0.02)
Pt/FTO/PBG (1%)
0.746 (±0.005)
8.18 (±0.06)
66.3 (±0.38)
4.04 (±0.02)
Pt/FTO/PBG (2%)
0.751 (±0.005)
8.80 (±0.07)
66.3 (±0.23)
4.37 (±0.01)
In order to prove that the photocurrent improvement is caused by the effective utilization of incoming light via the PBG multilayer, incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) measurements were performed. As shown in Fig. 6(a), DSSCs containing PBG structures attached to the counter electrode, specifically the Pt/FTO/PBG (2%) counter electrode, exhibit a higher IPCE than the control device with a pristine Pt counter electrode over the whole wavelength range. The IPCE enhancement ratio (ΔIPCE/IPCE, %) of the PBG structure coupled DSSCs with respect to normal DSSCs clearly shows that the wavelength-dependent enhancement corresponds well with the reflection wavelength of the photonic structures (Fig. 6(b)). The relatively weak IPCE enhancement of the DSSCs composed of the Pt/FTO/PBG (1%) counter electrode is mainly observed in the range of 350–450 nm with a peak at around 400 nm, which is in accordance with the maximum reflection of the PBG (1%) structures. On the other hand, the DSSCs composed of the Pt/FTO/PBG (2%) counter electrode show marked IPCE enhancement in the range of 500–600 nm as well as in the lower wavelength region (350–400 nm), which is most consistent with reflection feature of PBG (2%) structures as shown in Fig. 4(b). Incidentally, the enhancement at longer wavelengths (above 600 nm) could be a manifestation of the poor signal-to-noise ratio in this spectral region. From the IPCE measurements, it is concluded that the photocurrent improvement in DSSCs consisting of the PBG structure attached counter electrodes might be attributed to the increased dye absorption of reflected light.
Considering the adsorption of dye molecules onto TiO2 NPs, the lower porosity of the current polymer-based 1D photonic structures compared with inorganic-based 1D Bragg stacks or opal structures may be the main structural limitation or detrimental problem in coupling the PBG layer directly onto the TiO2 photoanode. To circumvent this, the PBG layer was introduced into the counter electrode and such a configuration may lead to optical losses caused by the electrolyte and Pt layer. This is a critical issue for the back reflection of light to maximize the light harvesting. However, Lee et al. recently reported that an inorganic-based Bragg stack layer was deposited onto the non-conducting side of the counter electrode to eliminate the disadvantages associated with direct deposition onto photoanodes. The dense Bragg stack configured with alternating mesoporous TiO2 and colloidal SiO2 layers incorporated onto a TiO2 photoanode hinders the complete infiltration of electrolyte and increases the resistance throughout the cell, thereby resulting in significantly smaller Voc and FF compared to DSSCs equipped with Bragg stack functionalized counter electrodes. On the other hand, it is interesting to note that similar enhancement of photocurrent was observed for both types of DSSCs. Thus, a sufficient amount of light could be reflected by the Bragg stack layer deposited on the rear surface of the counter electrode and the LHE was increased although optical losses occurred.

In conclusion, we have demonstrated the synergistic effect of a new class of 1D PBG structures as a light reflection layer in DSSCs, where the 1D layered structures were fabricated via a BCP-based layer-by-layer self-assembly process. Successive alternate stacking of S4VP and SEO/TiO2 layers was achieved by using UV-stabilization in between the deposition of each layer. These multilayered BCP films have specific photonic stop bands that can be tailored by simply controlling the periodic lattice parameters. The BCP 1D PBG structures were simply introduced into the counter electrodes as light reflectors, and thus-fabricated cell efficiency was improved. For the DSSCs containing the PBG structure composed of S4VP (2%) and SEO/TiO2 layers at the counter electrode, an enhancement of up to 11% in the overall PCE was achieved compared with reference devices, which is comparable with the degree of efficiency enhancement induced by conventional inorganic-based PBG structures. Such an enhancement was mainly ascribed to increased light harvesting by the dye, which arose from the light reflection effects of the BCP-based hybrid PBG structures at specific wavelengths. Furthermore, we note that this approach can be generalized and applied to other optical sensory devices and energy devices by easily changing the inner architectures and compositions.


The authors thank Mr Jaeyoon Park and Prof. Unyong Jeong at Yonsei University for the measurement of film thicknesses, Mr Ho Yeon Kim and Prof. Du Yeol Ryu at Yonsei University for the measurement of reflective index, and Prof. Kyungkon Kim at Ewha Womans University for IPCE measurements. The authors specially thank Dr Myunghwan Byun and Prof. Zhiqun Lin at Georgia Institute of Technology and Prof. Jun Hyuk Moon at Sogang University for fruitful discussions. This work was supported by the National Research Foundation (NRF) of Korea Grant funded by the Korean Government (2011-0030255; 2011-0029409).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: The characterization of hybrid layered BCP structures composed of S2VP and S4VP/Ag alternating layers is included. See DOI: 10.1039/c3nr06363a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014