 DOI: 10.1039/C2JM35199D
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 24067-24074

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Wenfeng
Zhang
,

Haitao
Wang
,

Boxue
Chen
,

Xianghong
Bi
,

Swaminathan
Venkatesan
,

Qiquan
Qiao
 and 

Shangfeng
Yang
*

Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at Microscale, CAS Key Laboratory of Materials for Energy Conversion & Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Science and Technology of China (USTC), Hefei 230026, China. E-mail: sfyang@ustc.edu.cn; Fax: +86 (551)3601 750; Tel: +86 (551)3601 750

Center for Advanced Photovoltaics, Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, South Dakota State University, Brookings, SD 57007, USA

Received
3rd August 2012
, Accepted 27th September 2012
First published on 27th September 2012
An amphiphilic surfactant oleamide was incorporated into P3HT:PCBM bulk heterojunction polymer solar cells (BHJ-PSCs) as a novel cathode buffer layer (CBL) for the first time by doping in the P3HT:PCBM photoactive layer followed by self-assembly. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the annealed P3HT:PCBM/oleamide BHJ-PSC device is enhanced by ∼28% at the optimum oleamide doping ratio of 2.5%, which is primarily due to the increase of fill factor (FF) by ∼22%. The surface morphologies of the oleamide-incorporated P3HT:PCBM photoactive films were studied by transmission electron microscopy (TEM), atomic force microscopy (AFM), and scanning Kelvin probe microscopy (SKPM), revealing that oleamide molecules initially doped in the P3HT:PCBM layer may undergo self-assembly and migrate to the top surface of the P3HT:PCBM layer, leading to the formation of a cathode buffer layer (CBL) as an interfacial dipole layer between the photoactive layer and Al cathode electrode. Such an oleamide interfacial dipole layer lowers the work function of Al, thus the energy level offset between the work function of Al and the LUMO level of the PCBM acceptor is decreased, facilitating the electron extraction by the Al cathode. Furthermore, we found that the crystallinity of P3HT upon the incorporation of oleamide was almost unchanged according to X-ray diffraction (XRD) characterization. It is noteworthy that, this phenomenon is completely different from the case of the previously reported analogous surfactant oleic acid, which was doped in the P3HT:PCBM photoactive layer and led to the efficiency enhancement as well due to the increased crystallinity of P3HT, suggesting the strong influence of the terminal group of the surfactant on its function in P3HT:PCBM BHJ-PSC devices.

Polymer solar cells (PSCs) have emerged as a potential option to meet the growing need of renewable energy sources. The bulk heterojunction (BHJ) structure as a popular and efficient architecture of PSCs comprises an interpenetrating network of a conjugated polymer donor such as poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl) (P3HT) and a soluble fullerene acceptor that is typically [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) as the photoactive layer. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of BHJ-PSCs based on the solution-processable blend of P3HT and PCBM has reached up to 5%. To improve PCE of BHJ-PSCs, the optimization of electrical contacts between the active layer and electrodes is as important as the other applicable strategies such as the development of novel low-bandgap polymer donors. Since the electrical contacts between the active layer and electrodes are determinative for efficient charge transport and extraction, the incorporation of buffer layers or interfacial layers has been demonstrated as one of the effective methods to achieve maximum performance by inducing interfacial charge redistribution, geometry modifications and/or chemical reactions. Specifically, cathode buffer layers (CBLs), which are utilized between the active layer and cathode, have been extensively investigated in recent years to improve the efficiency of negative charge collection and extraction. The reported materials of CBLs include alkali metal compounds such as LiF, metal oxides (e.g. TiOx), organic materials including low-molecular weight molecules and polymers, and self-assembled monolayers. In particular, self-assembled monolayer CBLs have been incorporated into BHJ-PSCs either by spin-coating or by doping in active layers followed by self-assembly (i.e., the so-called spontaneous vertical phase separation). The latter approach is unique because only one single-step solution processing is required to fabricate both the active layer and CBLs. For instance, Chen and Chien found that a thin CBL of poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) was formed by adding up to 5 wt% PEG to the P3HT:PCBM solution followed by spontaneous migration of PEG to the active layer surface, resulting in improved efficiency of electron collection and consequently enhanced PCE. Besides, fullerene end-capped PEG has been recently reported to form a CBL via self-assembly, leading to both enhanced device performance and higher thermal stability. Among the non-polymer CBL organic materials, a fullerene derivative with a fluorocarbon chain (F-PCBM) was introduced into the P3HT:PCBM devices in the same self-assembly fashion which resulted in enhanced efficiency that was mainly attributed to the increase of fill factor (FF).

The use of various surfactants in BHJ-PSCs with different functions has recently been attracting considerable interest as well. While surfactants were widely used as additives in poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):polystyrene sulfonic acid (PEDOT:PSS) that acts as an anode buffer layer between the active layer and ITO anode, there have been few reports on successful use of surfactants as dopants in active layers or CBLs. Cao et al. reported that doping a P3HT:PCBM active layer with oleic acid (OA) resulted in dramatic enhancement of PCE because OA could facilitate heteromolecular mixing of P3HT and PCBM in the solution and induce the molecular local ordering and rearrangement of donor–acceptor phases. Thus a higher crystallinity of P3HT in the photoactive layer films was achieved. Jen et al. applied different ZnO-based CBLs which were modified by self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) of different saturated carboxylic acids with various dipoles and terminal groups R–COOH (R = –C11H22SH, –C11H23 or –C14F29) and found that carboxylic acid can tune the contact property between ZnO and the cathode due to different interactions of the hydrophobic terminal groups with metal. Note that in this study the carboxylic acid surfactant acts as a CBL in conjunction with ZnO and only the role of the hydrophobic aliphatic terminal group on the function of the surfactant was revealed. Thus two open questions still exist and should be addressed: (1) Could amphiphilic surfactants independently behave as CBLs for BHJ-PSCs? (2) Would the hydrophilic terminal group affect the function of the surfactant?
In this paper, an amphiphilic surfactant oleamide was incorporated into P3HT:PCBM BHJ-PSCs as a novel CBL for the first time. Oleamide was initially doped in the P3HT:PCBM solution and then migrated to the P3HT:PCBM active layer surface via self-assembly, resulting in a significant enhancement in efficiency. The formation of the oleamide self-assembled CBL was confirmed by various microscopic measurements. Based on the comparative study with the previously reported analogous surfactant oleic acid (OA), which has the same aliphatic group (–C17H33) as oleamide, the role of the hydrophilic terminal group on the function of the surfactant was revealed.

The ITO glass substrate with a sheet resistance of 8 Ω □−1 was purchased from Shenzhen Nan Bo Group, China. Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):polystyrene sulfonic acid (PEDOT:PSS, Baytron P) was obtained from SCM Industrial Chemical Co., Ltd. Poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and (6,6)-phenyl-C61 butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) were bought from Luminescence Technology Corp. and Nichem Fine Technology Co., Ltd, respectively. Oleamide (C18H35NO, ≥99%) and oleic acid (C18H34O2, ≥99%) were purchased from Aldrich.


Our detailed fabrication procedure of the P3HT:PCBM BHJ-PSCs has been reported recently. In brief, the ITO-coated glass substrate was first cleaned with a detergent, then ultrasonicated in acetone and isopropanol, and subsequently dried in an oven overnight. A thin film (∼45 nm thick) of PEDOT:PSS (Baytron P) was spin-coated onto the ITO substrate and then annealed at 120 °C for 30 min. The P3HT:PCBM (1:0.8 w/w) blend was dissolved in chlorobenzene by stirring at 40 °C until all materials dissolved, and oleamide was added into the blend solution in a certain weight ratio which varied from 0.009:1:0.8 to 0.09:1:0.8 (oleamide:P3HT:PCBM), corresponding to the doping ratio of oleamide ranging from 0.5% to 5% (wt%) to the P3HT:PCBM blend (see Table 1). The oleamide:P3HT:PCBM blend solution was ultrasonicated for 30 s to ensure thorough mixing, which was then spin-coated onto the PEDOT:PSS layer affording a thin film with a thickness of ∼80 nm. Both solution processing and film preparation were carried out in air. The device was then transferred into a vacuum chamber (∼10−5 Torr) where the Al electrode (∼100 nm thick) was deposited through a shadow mask to define the device active area (2 × 5 mm2). Finally, thermal annealing was carried out at 150 °C for 10 min inside a vacuum drying oven. For comparison, analogous devices of oleic acid (OA):P3HT:PCBM (0.045:1:0.8 and 0.09:1:0.8 w/w, corresponding to the OA doping ratio of 2.5 and 5 wt%) were also prepared and measured under identical conditions.

Composition of the photoactive layer
Doping ratio of oleamide

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
ΔPCE

R
s (Ω cm2)

R
sh (Ω cm2)

a Oleamide:P3HT:PCBM = X mg:1 mg:0.8 mg, X = 0, 0.009, 0.0225, 0.045, and 0.090.
b Doping ratio of oleamide (wt%) = X/(1 + 0.8).
c ΔPCE is the enhancement of PCE relative to the reference P3HT:PCBM BHJ-PSCs.

0:1:0.8 (ref.)
0%
0.62 ± 0.005
10.21 ± 0.22
49 ± 1
3.09 ± 0.13
—
15.1
297
0.009:1:0.8
0.5%
0.64 ± 0.004
10.11 ± 0.16
56 ± 1
3.62 ± 0.14
17%
9.9
385
0.0225:1:0.8
1.25%
0.64 ± 0.005
9.94 ± 0.28
58 ± 1
3.75 ± 0.16
21%
9.8
409
0.045:1:0.8
2.5%
0.64 ± 0.004
10.29 ± 0.20
60 ± 1.5
3.94 ± 0.19
28%
9.6
409
0.090:1:0.8
5%
0.62 ± 0.007
9.32 ± 0.27
54 ± 1
3.11 ± 0.18
1%
12.6
318

PCE was measured under simulated AM 1.5 irradiation (100 mW cm−2) using a standard xenon-lamp-based solar simulator (Oriel Sol 3A, USA), whose illumination intensity was calibrated by a monocrystalline silicon reference cell (Oriel P/N 91150V, with KG-5 visible color filter) calibrated by National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL). The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics were measured with a Keithley 2400 source meter. All the measurements were carried out in air and a mask with well-defined area size of 10.0 mm2 was attached onto the cell to define the effective area so as to ensure accurate measurement. Six to ten devices were fabricated independently under each experimental condition and measured to ensure the consistency of the data, and the average results were used in the following discussions.

Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images were obtained on a JEOL-2100F transmission electron microscope (JEOL Ltd., Japan) operated at an accelerating voltage of 200 kV. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) measurements were performed using a Digital Instruments system and AFM images were obtained in contact mode on a Veeco DI-Innova scanning probe microscope. The thickness of the oleamide layer was estimated by either AFM measurement or a KLA-Tencor P6 surface profilometer using a sharp blade to generate ∼10 μm wide gaps. Scanning Kelvin probe microscopy (SKPM) measurements were carried out on a Veeco DI-MultiMode V scanning probe microscope using SKPM mode. All samples were measured by the same tip to avoid any change in the work function of the tip. X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were measured at X-ray Diffraction and Scattering Beamline (U7B), National Synchrotron Radiation Laboratory (NSRL) in Hefei, China. The wavelength used was 0.154 nm.

As an amide of the unsaturated aliphatic acid oleic acid (OA), oleamide has been commercially used in both polymer industry and nonmetal fabrication as a plastic additive, since it can readily migrate to the surface of the polymer films via self-assembly and thus prohibit the adhesion of polymer films. Such a facile self-assembly behavior of oleamide stimulates us to investigate in the present work whether oleamide can form the self-assembly layer in BHJ-PSC devices or not.

Oleamide was added into the P3HT:PCBM blend solution with weight ratios varying from 0.009:1:0.8 to 0.09:1:0.8 (oleamide:P3HT:PCBM), corresponding to the doping ratio of oleamide ranging from 0.5% to 5% (wt%) to the P3HT:PCBM blend (see Table 1). Using oleamide:P3HT:PCBM blends as the photoactive layers, ITO/PEDOT:PSS/oleamide:P3HT:PCBM/Al BHJ-PSC devices were fabricated in air (Scheme 1). The current density–voltage (J–V) curves of oleamide:P3HT:PCBM BHJ-PSC devices fabricated at different oleamide doping ratios are compared in Fig. 1 and the measured parameters (short-circuit current (Jsc), open-circuit voltage (Voc), FF, and PCE) are summarized in Table 1. The reference P3HT:PCBM BHJ-PSC device without oleamide (ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/Al) exhibited a PCE of 3.09%, which is comparable to the reported values with devices fabricated under similar conditions (chlorobenzene as the solvent). When a small amount of oleamide was incorporated into the devices, dramatic enhancements of PCE were observed from 3.62%, 3.75%, to 3.94% with the increase of the oleamide doping ratio from 0.5, 1.25, to 2.5 wt%, respectively. However, with the further increase of the oleamide doping ratio to 5 wt%, the PCE of the oleamide-incorporated device decreases to 3.11% which is comparable to that of the reference device (see Table 1). As a result, the PCE of the oleamide:P3HT:PCBM device shows the maximum (3.94%) at the optimum oleamide doping ratio of 2.5 wt%, which has a ca. 28% enhancement compared to that of the reference P3HT:PCBM device.
All photovoltaic parameters including Voc, Jsc and FF as well as series resistance (Rs) and shunt resistance (Rsh) are analyzed and compared in Table 1 in order to reveal the factors accounting for the increased PCE with the incorporation of oleamide. The dependence of the enhancement ratio of each parameter determining PCE on the oleamide doping ratio is shown in Fig. 2. Evidently, with the increase of the oleamide doping ratio from 0.5 to 2.5 wt%, both Voc and Jsc of oleamide-incorporated P3HT:PCBM devices exhibit slight changes (<±3%) compared to the reference P3HT:PCBM device, whereas FF increases dramatically from 49% to 60% (ca. 22% enhancement) at the optimum oleamide doping ratio of 2.5 wt%. Besides, the obvious decrease of Rs and increase of Rsh are consistent with the increase of FF. When the oleamide doping ratio further increases to 5 wt%, Voc remains unchanged, while FF increases by ∼10% along with the decrease of Jsc by ∼9%. Thus there seems to be a trade-off between FF and Jsc, and as a result the PCE of the 5 wt% oleamide-incorporated device is comparable to that of the reference device. It is well known that, among the determinative parameters of PCE, Voc is primarily correlated with the difference between the donor HOMO level and acceptor LUMO level. Jsc is dependent not only on the multiplication of the photo-induced charge carrier density and the charge carrier mobility within the active material but also on the interface properties between the active layers and the electrodes. FF is determined by charge carriers reaching the electrodes, when the built-in field is lowered toward the open circuit voltage. Numerous reports demonstrated that, unlike Voc and Jsc, FF is more sensitive to the photoactive layer–electrode interface. These results suggest that, despite the low doping ratio, the incorporation of oleamide in the P3HT:PCBM active layer causes a strong influence on the P3HT:PCBM photoactive layer–Al electrode interface as discussed below.

In order to elucidate the role of oleamide on the enhancement of device efficiency, we first studied surface morphologies of the oleamide-incorporated and reference P3HT:PCBM photoactive films using transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and atomic force microscopy (AFM). Fig. 3I presents TEM images of oleamide:P3HT:PCBM films (images b–e) prepared with different oleamide doping ratios in comparison with that of the reference P3HT:PCBM film (image a). As clearly seen from the TEM images, the reference P3HT:PCBM film shows the discernible microphase separation structure (image a). In the oleamide-incorporated P3HT:PCBM films with very low oleamide doping ratios (0.5–2.5 wt%), the microphase separation structures become more indistinct (images b–d), suggesting that either oleamide molecules interrupt the microphase separation behavior of P3HT:PCBM molecules in the same photoactive layer or the surface of the P3HT:PCBM layer is covered by oleamide molecules. When the oleamide doping ratio increases to 5 wt%, some aggregation domains appear clearly (image e). Since the performance of the 5 wt% oleamide-incorporated P3HT:PCBM BHJ-PSC device is comparable to that of the reference device as mentioned above, the strong interruption of the microphase separation behavior of P3HT:PCBM molecules by oleamide molecules seems unlikely otherwise a considerable change of PCE would be observed as previously reported in the literature. Therefore, a more likely reason is that the surface of the P3HT:PCBM layer is covered by oleamide molecules, which consequently act as a CBL between the P3HT:PCBM photoactive layer and Al cathode leading to the enhancement in efficiency of the device. Such a presumption can be intuitively understood by considering the facile self-assembly and migration behavior of oleamide molecules as reported popularly in both polymer industry and nonmetal fabrication processes. Accordingly, the aggregation domains observed in the 5 wt% oleamide-incorporated device can be attributed to the self-assembly aggregation of oleamide molecules after migrating to the surface of the P3HT:PCBM layer, which is however not observed in the devices with much lower oleamide doping ratios (0.5–2.5 wt%) due to the uniform distribution of oleamide molecules on the surface of the P3HT:PCBM active layer (see Scheme 1).

The surface morphologies of the P3HT:PCBM photoactive films with and without oleamide were further measured by AFM in contact mode (Fig. 3II). The surface morphology of the reference P3HT:PCBM film (image f) shows clearly P3HT-rich and PCBM-rich domains due to their microphase separation behavior, and the film surface is quite smooth with a roughness of around 1.70 nm. After the incorporation of oleamide, however, the domain feature resulted from the microphase separation of P3HT:PCBM molecules becomes less discernible, and different surface morphologies with decreased roughness (0.86, 0.88, 0.83 and 0.97 nm for oleamide doping ratios 0.5, 1.25, 2.5, and 5 wt%, respectively) are observed (images g–j), indicating further that the incorporation of oleamide affects the morphology of the P3HT:PCBM photoactive film. According to the above presumption that oleamide molecules initially doped in the P3HT:PCBM film may migrate to the surface of the P3HT:PCBM film via the facile self-assembly and form a CBL eventually, the change of the surface morphology with decreased roughness after the incorporation of oleamide can be interpreted by the formation of the oleamide CBL covering the surface of the P3HT:PCBM layer, which is even smoother because of the amphiphilic property of oleamide molecules as the surfactant.
The above presumption of formation of the oleamide CBL via self-assembly after doping in active layers was experimentally confirmed by scanning Kelvin probe microscopy (SKPM) measurements, which can directly visualize interfacial dipole upon the incorporation of oleamide. As illustrated in Fig. 4, surface potentials over the reference P3HT:PCBM of 2.5 wt% and 5 wt% oleamide-incorporated P3HT:PCBM layers are all uniform. Surface potential of the oleamide-incorporated films is about 100 and 350 mV more positive than that of the reference P3HT:PCBM film, respectively. This result proved unambiguously the existence of the oleamide CBL. Very recently SKPM has been used to probe interfacial dipole induced by different CBLs for BHJ-PSCs, and the direction of dipole moment can be simply deduced from the value of surface potential change upon the incorporation of CBL. In our case, the ca. 100 and 350 mV positive shifts of the surface potential upon the incorporation of 2.5 wt% and 5 wt% oleamide compared to the reference P3HT:PCBM film suggest that an oleamide-induced microscopic electric dipole moment exists with the positive charge end pointing toward the Al electrode and the negative charge end pointing toward the P3HT:PCBM photoactive layer. The formation of the oleamide CBL should be the reason that leads to the efficiency enhancement of the BHJ-PSC devices, and the detailed mechanism is discussed below.
With the formation of the oleamide CBL confirmed experimentally, it is important to investigate the thickness of the oleamide CBL in order to understand its role on the performance of the device. Since the roughness of the P3HT:PCBM photoactive film determined above is quite small (<1.70 nm), it is possible to estimate the thicknesses of the oleamide CBL on the surface of the P3HT:PCBM active layer directly by subtracting the sum of the thicknesses of the P3HT:PCBM/oleamide bilayers with that of the single P3HT:PCBM layer measured by AFM (see ESI, Fig. S1). Accordingly the thicknesses of the oleamide CBL are estimated to be ∼4 nm and ∼16 nm for the oleamide doping ratio of 2.5 wt% and 5 wt%, respectively. It has been reported that many low-molecular weight organic molecules and polymers function as CBLs for different BHJ-PSCs with a typical thickness of 1–10 nm, which is the prerequisite especially for the non-conductive CBL materials. In our case, on the basis of the dependence of the efficiency enhancement ratio on the oleamide doping ratio, it is concluded that a relatively thin oleamide CBL is more beneficial for the performance of the P3HT:PCBM device and a 4 nm thickness resulted from 2.5 wt% oleamide doping is optimum. Surprisingly, even under an overloading of oleamide at 5 wt% doping ratio affording 16 nm thickness of the oleamide CBL, the influence of electron transport and extraction by oleamide molecules expected from its insulating nature and obvious aggregations on the surface of the P3HT:PCBM active layer seems still tolerable, as proved by the comparable PCE of the devices with and without 5 wt% oleamide incorporation.

The effects of CBLs based on polymers and low-molecular weight organic molecules have been well established in a number of previous reports. It is well known that charge collection efficiency of BHJ-PSC devices is primarily determined by not only the electrodes but also the interfaces. For the standard reference ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/Al devices, there is a significant energy level offset (0.3 eV) between the work function of Al (4.3 eV) and the LUMO level of the PCBM acceptor (4.0 eV), resulting in the unfavorable electron extraction. Considering the electron extraction which occurs at the interface between the active layer and cathode electrode, ideally the maximum efficiency of electron extraction can be achieved when the work function of the cathode is aligned with the LUMO level of the acceptor so as to form an ohmic contact. The first utilization of a LiF CBL in poly(2-methoxy-5-(3′,7′-dimethyloctyloxy))-p-phenylene vinylene (MDMO-PPV):PCBM BHJ-PSCs leading to enhanced performance was interpreted by the formation of a dipole layer that can lower the metal work function and consequently a better energy level alignment at the organic–Al interface. A non-conjugated polymer poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) was applied as a CBL by Zhang et al., resulting in an increase in PCE of the P3HT:PCBM BHJ-PSC device by 50%. The role of PEO was proposed to increase the built-in-potential and thus to improve charge transport. More recently, by incorporating alcohol/water-soluble poly[(9,9-bis(3′-(N,N-dimethylamino) propyl)-2,7-fluorene)-alt-2,7-(9,9-dioctylfluorene)] (PFN) via spin-coating as a CBL in the BHJ-PSC device based on [6,6]-phenyl C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM) and thieno[3,4-b]-thiophene/benzodithiophene (PTB7), Wu et al. have achieved a certified PCE as high as 8.37% with simultaneous enhancements of Jsc, Voc, and FF. The reason for the improvement in device performance by the PFN CBL was interpreted by the combined effects of enhanced built-in potential across the device due to the existence of an interface dipole, improved charge-transport properties, elimination of the buildup of space charge, and reduced recombination loss caused by increased built-in field and charge carrier mobility. Fullerene end-capped poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) was also reported to form a CBL via self-assembly, resulting in significant enhancement of device performance, which was mainly attributed to the increase of Voc and FF due to the generation of the interfacial dipole moment and the improved vertical morphology of the P3HT:PCBM active layer with uniform distribution of PCBM crystallites in the P3HT matrix, respectively. As for the non-polymer CBL organic material, F-PCBM was introduced as a CBL into the P3HT:PCBM devices via self-assembly as well, leading to enhanced efficiency which is attributed mainly to the increase of FF. The improvement in device performance was interpreted by the modified interface between the P3HT:PCBM active layer and Al cathode electrode originated from the dipole moment of F-PCBM, thus improving energy level matching of PCBM and the Al electrode and lowering the electron injection barrier between PCBM and Al.

Given that oleamide molecules induce the microscopic electric dipole moment with the positive charge end pointing toward the Al electrode as concluded from the above SKPM study, we propose that, similar to the cases of aforementioned different types of CBLs such as PEO, PFN, PEG and F-PCBM, the formation of the dipole layer induced by the oleamide CBL lowers the work function of Al, thus the energy level offset between the work function of Al and the LUMO level of PCBM is decreased, facilitating electron extraction by the Al cathode. This mechanism is strongly supported by our experimental finding of oleamide-incorporated devices that, among the three determinative parameters of PCE (Voc, Jsc, and FF), the dramatic increase of FF dominantly contributes to the enhancement of PCE. Since FF is determined by charge carriers reaching the electrodes and sensitive to the photoactive layer–electrode interface, the increase of FF with the incorporation of oleamide provides a solid proof on the modified interface between the P3HT:PCBM active layer and the Al electrode. Note that, for all of reported devices containing the aforementioned different types of CBLs such as PEO, PFN, PEG and F-PCBM, FF always increases at different extents no matter whether Voc and/or Jsc increases simultaneously or not.

X-ray diffraction (XRD) has been commonly used for investigating the crystallinity of photoactive films including P3HT:PCBM.Fig. 5 presents the XRD pattern of the 2.5 wt% oleamide incorporated P3HT:PCBM film in comparison with that of the reference P3HT:PCBM film. Evidently, the diffraction peak at 2θ = 5.4°, which corresponds to the interchain spacing in P3HT crystalline grains associated with the interdigitated alkyl chains, is almost identical in terms of the diffraction angle and peak intensity for both films. This result indicates that the incorporation of oleamide into the P3HT:PCBM layer does not lead to any detectable change in the crystallinity of P3HT. The little influence of oleamide on the crystallinity of P3HT can be rationalized by considering that oleamide molecules form a CBL by migrating to the surface of the P3HT:PCBM photoactive layer instead of residing within that layer and thus their contacts with the P3HT:PCBM molecules are localized at their interface.

It should be noted that, in ref. 17 Cao et al. doped an analogous surfactant oleic acid, which has the same aliphatic group (–C17H33) as oleamide, into the P3HT:PCBM solution with a much higher doping ratio (2 μl OA per mg P3HT, ∼179 wt% to P3HT), and observed a dramatic enhancement of PCE (from 3.1% to 4.3%). Based on the obvious increase of the intensity of the XRD diffraction peak at 2θ = 5.4°, the authors proposed that the function of OA was to facilitate heteromolecular mixing of P3HT and PCBM in the solution and to induce the molecular local ordering and rearrangement of donor–acceptor phases, and consequently contribute to an improved crystallinity of P3HT. However, this conclusion could not be drawn in our present study of oleamide. Although the method of incorporating oleamide into the P3HT:PCBM solution is similar to that for OA used in ref. 17 and both oleamide and OA result in the efficiency enhancement of P3HT:PCBM devices, obviously the functions of oleamide and OA appear completely different.
To compare further the function of oleamide and OA, comparative OA-incorporated P3HT:PCBM devices with exactly the same doping ratio of 2.5 or 5 wt% (∼4.5 or 9 wt% to P3HT) to that of oleamide were also fabricated and measured under identical conditions in our present work. The obtained PCE of the OA (2.5 wt% doping):P3HT:PCBM device (3.20%) is only slightly enhanced compared to that of the reference P3HT:PCBM device (3.09%) and significantly much lower than that of the 2.5 wt% oleamide-incorporated device (3.94%). With the increase of OA doping ratio to 5 wt%, the PCE of the corresponding device (3.23%) barely changes compared to that of the 2.5 wt% OA-incorporated device, which is however slightly higher than that of the 5 wt% oleamide-incorporated device (see ESI, Fig. S2 and Table S1). These results further confirm our conclusion that the functions of oleamide and OA are completely different: although both oleamide and OA are initially doped in the P3HT:PCBM solution in the same ratio, oleamide molecules form a CBL by migrating to the surface of the P3HT:PCBM photoactive layer whereas OA molecules reside within that layer and may evaporate during thermal annealing treatment instead. Obviously, the peculiarly facile self-assembling ability of oleamide accounts for that difference. As a matter of fact, oleamide is an amide of OA with the same aliphatic group (–C17H33) and their only difference in the molecular structure is the hydrophilic terminal group, which is an amide group (–CONH2) for oleamide and a carboxy group (–COOH) for OA. The completely different functions of oleamide and OA found in the present study reveal clearly the role of the hydrophilic terminal group on the function of the surfactant in P3HT:PCBM BHJ-PSC devices. Such a conclusion has not been reported before and is to be further checked in other types of BHJ-PSC devices based on other photoactive molecules and other surfactants, which are underway in our labs.

In summary, for the first time an amphiphilic surfactant oleamide was incorporated into P3HT:PCBM BHJ-PSCs as a novel CBL by doping in the photoactive layer followed by self-assembly. The incorporation of the oleamide CBL leads to the dramatic enhancement of the device efficiency by ∼28% at the optimum oleamide doping ratio of 2.5%. The enhancement of PCE is primarily caused by the increase of FF. The studies of surface morphologies of the oleamide-incorporated P3HT:PCBM photoactive films by TEM, AFM, and SKPM revealed that oleamide molecules initially doped in the P3HT:PCBM layer may undergo self-assembly and migrate to the surface of the P3HT:PCBM layer, leading to the formation of a CBL that functioned as an interfacial dipole layer between the photoactive layer and Al electrode. The optimum thickness of the oleamide CBL is determined to be 4 nm corresponding to 2.5 wt% oleamide doping. The effect of the oleamide CBL on efficiency enhancement as well but proposed to be as follows: the oleamide interfacial dipole layer lowers the work function of Al, thus the energy level offset between the work function of Al and the LUMO level of the PCBM acceptor is decreased, facilitating the electron extraction by the Al electrode. Finally, XRD characterization of the oleamide-incorporated P3HT:PCBM photoactive films revealed that the crystallinity of P3HT upon the incorporation of oleamide was almost unchanged. This phenomenon is completely different from the case of the analogous surfactant OA, for which the doping in the P3HT:PCBM photoactive layer led to the efficiency enhancement as well but the effect was to increase the crystallinity of P3HT. The completely different functions of oleamide and OA suggest the strong influence of the hydrophilic terminal group of the surfactant on its function in the P3HT:PCBM BHJ-PSC device. Thus our study provides a new insight into surfactant chemistry. As the first successful application of a plastic additive in PSCs, the effectiveness of oleamide commonly used in the polymer industry as a novel CBL opens up a new avenue for interface engineering in PSCs, which provides a facile and versatile strategy for achieving maximized performance in PSCs.


S. Y. thanks the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (nos 90921013, 21132007), “100 Talents Programme of CAS” from Chinese Academy of Sciences, USTC-NSRL Association Funding (KY2060140003), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (WK2060140005), Key Laboratory of Novel Thin Film Solar Cells (KF201103), Chinese Academy of Sciences, and National Basic Research Program of China (2010CB923300, 2011CB921400). Q. Q acknowledges the financial supports from the US NSF CAREER award (ECCS-0950731) and South Dakota Board of Regent CRGP.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Determination of the thickness of the oleamide CBL by AFM, J–V curves and photovoltaic parameters of OA:P3HT:PCBM BHJ-PSC devices, etc. See DOI: 10.1039/c2jm35199d
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012