 DOI: 10.1039/C3RA43680B
(Review Article)
RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 23909-23923


Matteo
Alonzi
,

Daniela
Lanari
,

Assunta
Marrocchi
*,

Chiara
Petrucci
 and 

Luigi
Vaccaro
*

Dipartimento di Chimica, Università degli Studi di Perugia, via Elce di Sotto 8, 06123 Perugia, Italy. E-mail: luigi.vaccaro@unipg.it; assunta.marrocchi@unipg.it; Fax: +39 0755855560

Dipartimento di Chimica e Tecnologia del Farmaco, Università degli Studi di Perugia, via del Liceo 1, 06123 Perugia, Italy

Received
16th July 2013
, Accepted 23rd September 2013
First published on 25th September 2013
Surface immobilization of conjugated polymers to functionalized surfaces by their end-point to afford polymer brushes would be an interesting alternative for high-performance, long-term operation organic (opto)electronics, possibly helping charge injection and charge transport processes which are crucial for many devices. In this review we focus on the recent developments in the synthesis of conjugated semiconducting polymer brushes via a surface-initiated “grafting from” approach, along with their key physical/morphological properties, and their response in organic (opto)electronic devices.

The seminal discovery of the electrical conductivity of polyacetylene in its doped form has triggered huge interest in (semi)conductive π-conjugated polymers and has generated a fast-growing area of research on synthetic metals. Thus, over the past decades an enormous number of these materials have been designed, synthesized, and characterized, and successful (opto)electronic devices incorporating them as thin-films are slowly moving to commercialization.

The technological possibilities offered by (opto)electronics based on π-conjugated polymer films are broad, since it enables light weight, large area, and mechanically flexible devices, which can be easily manufactured at low temperatures by solution-casting or printing techniques.
The performance and lifetime of organic (opto)electronic devices critically depend on the solid-state organization of the polymer molecules, and hence, on the deposition history of their thin films. For instance, most unfunctionalized conjugated polymers have a poor solubility in most solvents commonly used for casting films due to their exceedingly strong π–π interactions between chains, especially when featuring a high molecular weight. Even conjugated polymers modified by adding solubilizing side chains/groups to confer processability, which usually comes at a cost to polymer charge transport properties, may have strong intermolecular forces, and tend to aggregate. Therefore, achieving a full polymer dissolution, thus enabling better film morphology control, is not necessarily trivial. Furthermore, even small differences in the way a conjugated polymer is dissolved into solution may alter the chain conformation, which in turn affects the interchain interactions and, ultimately, the electronic behaviour in the resulting film. Cast films of polymers are also susceptible to degradation by physical processes of abrasion, delamination, thermal expansion/contraction, and stress from bending.
Another factor greatly affecting device response/durability is the polymer interface with traditional electronic components made of metal or conductive oxide, and/or interaction with other constituents in the multicomponent architectures. Indeed, in organic (opto)electronics, all charge carriers within an organic semiconductor must be injected from the anode and cathode metal electrodes. Note also that for organic photovoltaic devices charge transfer as well as carrier recombination processes occur across donor–acceptor interfaces in a bulk heterojunction structure.
For all these reasons, considerable research efforts are currently devoted to the development of methods for forming covalently attached (semi)conductive polymer layers on surfaces.
Surface grafted polymers are more robust than thin-films as the polymer chains are covalently anchored to the substrate, hence providing the required stability for subsequent device fabrication and resulting applications. Further, the formation of layers of conjugated polymers with tunable thickness may be allowed, exhibiting nominally perpendicular orientation of the chains to the planar surface. This is likely the preferred orientation for maximizing charge transport in organic semiconductors, as very recently Scholes and coworkers demonstrated that intramolecular hole/electron transport is faster than intermolecular hopping between chains. Additionally, using surface-grafted polymers as interfacial layer in organic electronic devices may result in improved rates of charge injection due to the nature of covalent attachment of conjugated polymer to the conducting oxide.
Another appealing aspect of anchored polymer films is that they are fully compatible with a diverse range of technologically relevant organic/polymeric/inorganic planar as well as concave/convex substrates including gold, silicon, cellulose, chitosan, polyaniline, polystyrene, nylon, indium tin oxide (ITO), single-/multi-walled nanotubes, and nanographene.
While surface-grafting can be achieved by allowing end-functionalized bulk polymer to adsorb onto a surface with some affinity or reactivity, this approach (known as “grafting to”, Fig. 1a) faces certain serious limitations. First, the use of reactive anchor groups for the surface attachment of the polymers imposes some rather strict limitations on the choices of the functional groups available for the incorporation into the polymer. One of the reasons for this restriction is that the functional groups of the polymers may compete with the anchor moieties for surface sites. Next, in order to obtain a fast and complete surface attachment reaction with a high surface density of chains covalently bound to the substrate, rather reactive anchoring groups are required. These groups, however, tend not to tolerate a simultaneous presence of a large variety of functional groups in the polymer. A further complication inherent to “grafting to” processes is an intrinsic limitation of the film thickness, and accordingly the number of functional groups per surface area which can be obtained by using such approach. This limitation has both kinetics and thermodynamic origins. With increasing coverage of the surface with attached chains the polymer concentration at interfaces quickly becomes larger than that in solution. Additional chains, which are to become attached to the surface, must diffuse against this concentration gradient that increases along with grafting density of the attached polymer. Such diffusion slows down the immobilization reaction at the surface further and further as the reaction proceeds, thus decreasing the rate of attachment. Furthermore it should be noted that a dense packing is limited by the entropy penalty associated with it; excluded volume interactions force crowded polymers into unfavourable stretched (also referred to as “brush-like”) conformations that are not compensated by the modest free energy gain of the “grafting to” reaction.
As a result of these limitations, the “grafting from” route (Fig. 1b) has become the preferred option for the synthesis of a range of chemically diverse polymer brushes. This versatile approach uses a self-assembled monolayer (SAM) to initiate a in situ polymerization to generate the polymer brush. This is referred to as surface-initiated polymerization (SIP). As the chains are growing from the surface, the only limit to the chain growth is the diffusion of the monomer to the growing end, and very thick brushes (up to thousand of nanometers) can be formed with a high graft density.
An intermediate approach, “grafting through” polymerization, involves the immobilization at the surface of polymerizable units which, in turn, are copolymerized with other monomers in the surrounding medium. As shown in Fig. 1c, firstly a functionalized polymer (growing chain) reacts with a suitable surface site (i.e. the polymerizable unit), but then the polymerization and film growth proceed by adding further monomer to chain that grows away from the surface. This method may outperform in principle “grafting to” polymerization provided that the surface-bound polymer layer grows uniformly during the polymerization process.
A number of detailed reviews dealing with several aspects of brush polymer research have been recently published.
Our review is meant to offer an overview on the development of conjugated polymer brushes via surface-initiated “grafted from” approach, as well as the applications of these surface-tethered polymers in organic (opto)electronics. The topic has been further constrained to focus on papers dealing with the case of semiconducting polymer systems.
The review is organized into two sections. First, an overview is given of the nickel and palladium based cross-coupling methodologies employing organometallic reagents as key intermediates, which stand as the most satisfactory synthetic routes to date. Next, other polymerization methodologies will be summarized, having the potential to contribute as well. Key chemical–physical properties of the produced covalently bound thin-films of π-conjugated semiconducting polymer brushes, along with findings related to (opto)electronic devices incorporating them will be highlighted and discussed in each section.

Controlled/living polymerization reactions, i.e. techniques featuring low chain-transfer/termination rates compared to that of polymerization, are particularly attractive for the preparation of polymer brushes following the “grafting from” strategy, as they allow accurate control over brush thickness, chemical composition and architectures. Examples include reversible addition–fragmentation chain transfer (RAFT), atom transfer radical polymerization (ATRP), nitroxide-mediated radical polymerization (NMRP), ring-opening metathesis polymerization (ROMP), Suzuki, and Yamamoto polycondensation, and Kumada catalyst-transfer polymerization method (KCTP).

With respect to π-conjugated polymers, most of the polymer brushes produced by the “grafting from” approach, however, are prepared using the Kumada-type catalyst transfer chain growth polymerization of McCullough et al. and Yokozawa et al.
Generally speaking, the first step of this polymerization involves the preparation of the catalytic M(0) species (typically M = Ni or Pd) from the catalyst precursor ML2Cl2 through the addition of two molecules of AB-type monomer (1 in Scheme 1), yielding a symmetrical bis-organometal compound (1a). Next, the reductive elimination of the latter results in the immediate formation of an associated pair of M(0) and the dimer 1b. The dimer 1b undergoes fast oxidative addition to the metal center, thus generating the new organometal compound 1c, in view of the fact that the formation of the complex [M(0)·1b] eliminates potential separation of M(0) from 1b. Subsequently, growth of the polymer chain occurs by insertion of one monomer at a time, and the ML2 moiety is always bound to the polymer chain as end-group.
Thus, Kiriy and coworkers reported on the surface-initiated polycondensation of 2-bromo-5-chloromagnesio-3-alkyl-2-bromothiophene 1 (Scheme 2) through a chain-growth mechanism, allowing to achieve regioregular head-to-tail (HT) poly-3-hexylthiophene (P3HT, a benchmark material for organic electronics) brushes. Note that the authors first explored the possibility of employing the Ni(dppp)Cl2 (dppp = diphenylphosphinopropane) catalyst for the surface initiated polymerization of 1, which it was known to fulfil the requirements for a chain growth mechanism.
To this end, they turned their attention to Ni(dppp)2 (i.e. the Ni(0) analogous to Ni(dppp)Cl2) for the coupling with poly(4-bromostyrene) (PS-Br). Note here that the direct coupling of Ni(0) complexes with arylhalides would be one of the most straightforward and economical routes to the key organonickel initiator. Unfortunately, such Ni(0) complex is not sufficiently reactive towards non-activated arylhalides, therefore the authors investigated the use of the more reactive Ni(PPh3)4. The issues of the Ni(PPh3)4-mediated polycondensation mechanism and regioregularity of the polymerization products were therefore addressed, using bromobenzene (PhBr) as small molecule model of poly(4-bromostyrene) (PS–Br). Thus, Ni(PPh3)4 was allowed to react with Ph–Br giving (PPh3)2Ni(Ph)Br 2a within a few hours at room temperature. Next, the polymerization of the pure monomer 1, prepared by equimolar amounts of 2-bromo-3-hexyl-5-iodothiophene and t-BuMgCl, was performed at room temperature for 4 h in the presence of 1.67 mol% of (PPh3)2Ni(Ph)Br 2a. The polymerization reaction mixture containing the active chains P3HT–Ni(II)Br 3a was quenched with 5 M hydrochloric acid, as proposed by Yokozawa et al. and washed with methanol. P3HT was isolated with ∼70% yield (feed ratio 1:2a = 60:1, conversion of 1 ∼ 80%), and a regioregularity up to 95%. The combination of 1H-NMR and MALDI-TOF analyses indicated that the majority of the chains were “ideally” Ph/H terminated (67%), along with a smaller though significant amount of Ph/Br (13%) and H/H (20%) termination. Note that these two latter indicate the presence of salient chain-transfer or termination processes. Gel Permeation Chromatography (GPC) analysis showed that the number-average molecular weight of the resulting P3HT (Mn = 4100 g mol−1) was lower than expected for living polymerization (Mn,living = 8000 g mol−1) but much higher than could be predicted for a step-growth polycondensation (Mn,step = 830 g mol−1). A relatively high polydispersity index (PDI, 1.9) was obtained. All these results indicated that the polymerization begun from the (PPh3)2Ni(Ph)Br initiator, and proceeded with a chain growth mechanism. However, this reaction was not so controlled as the nearly living Ni(dppp)Cl2-catalyzed polymerization. Importantly, it was demonstrated a positive effect on the control of the polymerization process by lowering the reaction temperature from room temperature to 0 °C. Indeed, the reaction mixture obtained upon polymerization of 1 in the presence of 3.56 mol% of (PPh3)2Ni(Ph)Br (feed ratio 1:2a = 28:1, conversion of 1 ∼ 95%) at 0 °C for 6 h contained the majority of chains Ph-terminated (i.e. 78% of Ph/H and 20% of Ph/Br end groups), alongside a small amount of H/H (2%) termination, as indicated by the MALDI-TOF mass spectra. P3HT prepared under these conditions exhibited a molecular weight of Mn = 5500 g mol−1 with PDI = 1.44, and a head-to-tail content of ∼100%. On these basis, as above mentioned, the authors developed a procedure to grow brushes of regioregular HT P3HT via surface-initiated polycondensation of 1 from poly(4-bromostyrene)-coated silicon wafers (Scheme 2). PS–Br layers were spin-coated onto silicon wafer, covered by 2 nm thick poly(glycidyl methacrylate) (PGMA) adhesive layer, and photo-crosslinked before polymerization to ensure their insolubility while keeping them swellable in suitable solvents for PS–Br. Treatment of the films with Ni(PPh3)4 solution easily afforded the films containing a Ph–Ni(Ph3P)2–Br macroinitiator 2b having an aryl moiety attached to the surface and a bromide group reactive towards Grignard reagents. The subsequent Surface Initiated (SI) polymerization performed in THF at 0 °C proceeded selectively from the immobilized initiator and not in the bulk solution. According to this method, regioregular HT P3HT brushes were obtained, the maximal reachable thickness of which exceeded 50 nm. The UV-Vis spectra of such P3HT brushes recorded in different solvents revealed their solvatochromism. It is also interesting to note that although solvents suitable for P3HT (e.g. THF, toluene, xylene, CHCl3) caused a significant blue-shift of the λmax, some shoulders at 500–600 nm still remained, thus indicating a transition from twisted to more planar conformations. These findings imply a conformational freedom of the tethered HT P3HT chains. Within the same study, Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) revealed a relatively low swellability (∼62%) of the P3HT brushes in xylene vapors, which was attributed to the rather high rigidity of the polythiophene backbone and/or a high grafting density of the brush. In addition, P3HT brushes were found to exhibit a lamellar morphology in AFM images, although the starting PGMA/PS–Br anchoring layers displayed featureless morphology. The authors attributed the observed structuring to the amphiphilic nature of P3HT and to the strong tendencies of polythiophenes to form rod-like semicrystalline aggregates due to π-stacking interactions. Further, it was demonstrated the increasing of the thickness of the grafted P3HT layers with the thickening of the PS–Br layer. This was ascribed to the fact that the polycondensation did not proceed only from the topmost layer of the initiating PS–Br films, but also deeply inside the (swollen) cross-linked PS–Br matrix, and even very internal layers of the initiating films are accessible for the polymerization reagents, thus contributing to the grafting process, as confirmed by ellipsometry, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, Rutherford backscattering spectroscopy, and conductive mode atomic force microscopy. The process followed a kind of interpenetrated network model in which relatively short P3HT grafts (∼10 nm) emanate from long and crosslinked poly(4-bromostyrene) chains (Fig. 2).
Notably, this approach led to mechanically robust polymer thin-films, stable against delamination. Also, the films showed high electrical conductivity in the FeCl3-doped state (up to 2 S s−1).
As an extension of the previous studies, Kiriy and coworkers prepared P3HT brushes in a similar way, but they replaced PS–Br for poly(4-vinylpyridine)-block-poly(4-iodostyrene, P4VP-b-PS(I)) (Scheme 3), bearing in mind that well-defined block copolymers constitute an attractive option for nano-patterning. Note that patterned structures of conjugated polymers are of significant interest for possible applications in optoelectronics. Importantly, P4VP-b-PS(I) strongly adheres to a variety of polar substrates, including silicon wafers, glass and metal oxide surfaces due to the polarity of the P4VP block forming moderately stretched PS-I brushes. The authors exploited this binding activity to graft P4VP75-b-PS(I)313 block copolymer (∼8 nm; PV4P) to Si-wafers and glass-slides. Nanopatterned P4VP75-b-PS(I)313-g-P3HT brushes were realized by spin casting a micellar dispersion of P4VP75-b-PS(I)313 onto Si-wafers followed by activation of this latter with Ni(PPh3)4 catalyst. The subsequent placement of the activated brushes 6 into the monomer 1 solution led to selective Kumada catalyst transfer polycondensation of the monomer from solution.
The maximum reachable thickness of the composite P4VP75-b-PS(I)313-g-P3HT film was between 30 and 50 nm. AFM measurements clearly revealed nanostructures with a height of undulations of ∼6 nm as well as mean distance between centres of micelles of ∼45 nm. Importantly, this method gave nanostructured brushes with the pattern independent on the solvent applied since the chains were firmly tethered in the segregated state.
The authors also fabricated bulk heterojunction polymer solar cells from P4VP-b-PS(I)-g-P3HT brushes in combination with C60. The devices gave a maximum efficiency η of 0.01%, using the cell structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P4VP-b-PS(I)-g-P3HT:C60/BiPhen/Al (Voc = 0.2 V, Jsc = 0.2 mA cm−2, FF = 25%). The poor photovoltaic properties of P4VP-b-PS(I)-g-P3HT brushes were ascribed to the their penetrated network structure, which seemed unsuitable for charge-separation. One of the main drawbacks was the existence of an ∼1.5 nm thick insulating P4VP layer.
In a further contribution, Kiriy and coworkers investigated an approach to P3HT brushes via surface-initiated Kumada catalyst transfer polycondensation using silica (nano)particles bearing immobilized Ni-catalysts supported by nitrogen and phosphorous bidentate ligands (e.g.7 and 8 in Scheme 4), instead of PS–Br (Scheme 4).
Thus, to establish the applicability of 2,2′-bypyridyl (bypy) as the supporting ligand, the polymerization of 2-bromo-5-chloromagnesio-3-hexylthiophene (1) was first performed in the presence of Ni(bypy)Cl2 in THF, leading to highly regioregular head-to-tail P3HT. The chain-growth nature of the polymerization was revealed by a gradual growth of the Mn with polymerization time. Moderate dispersities were achieved (PDI = 1.4–1.6).
Next, a model initiator Ph–Ni(bypy)–Br (9a) was prepared from diethylbipyridylnickel (Et2Nibypy, 7) and bromobenzene. Again, the polycondensation of 1 afforded regioregular P3HT and allowed moderate control over the molecular weight, and dispersities of ∼1.4–1.6. 1H-NMR analysis of the obtained P3HT indicated a significant amount (>35%) of H/Br terminated P3HT besides the Ph/H chain growth product. Since a comparison of these results with previous literature data for Ni(dppp)Cl2-catalyzed polymerizations allowed for the conclusion that this latter complex was outperforming other catalysts, the authors focused on bidentate phosphorous ligands, i.e. 1,3-bis-diphenylphosphinopropane (dppp, 8). A ligand exchange strategy was applied to prepare Ph–Ni(dppp)–Br initiator 10a from Ph–Ni(bypy)–Br (Scheme 4). The Ph–Ni(dppp)–Br mediated polycondensation of 2-bromo-5-chloromagnesio-3-alkyl-2-bromothiophene 1 led to regioregular HT P3HT with a fair good control of the molecular weight for polymerization degrees lower than 100, as indicated by the near linear dependence of the Mn on monomer conversion. Importantly, this approach allowed to grow P3HT with polydispersities falling into the same range as those achievable by using Ni(dppp)Cl2 as catalyst (1.1–1.2).
Further, 1H-NMR analysis showed that all the chains are Ph/H terminated, thus revealing the absence of chain termination and re-initiation processes. Based on these findings, and others, 2-bromo-5-chloromagnesio-3-hexylthiophene (1) was polymerized through surface initiated Kumada polycondensation carried out at room temperature from monodisperse organosilica particles (∼460 nm-diameter) immobilizing Ph–Ni(dppp)–Br (10b), as shown in Scheme 4. This resulted in hairy particles (μ-P3HT) with dense end-tethered arrays of chains. Interestingly, much less than 10% of unbound P3HT was formed, which reflected a good selectivity of the grafting-from the particles. It was found that the Mn values increased linearly with the monomer conversion, thus indicating that the polymerization followed the chain-growth mechanism. A per-graft polymerization degree up to 250 could be achieved (Mn = 43000 g mol−1, PDI = 1.1–1.2). Notably, the P3HT within the μ-P3HT particles was found to exhibit strongly altered optical properties as compared to the untethered counterparts. Particularly, the absorption/fluorescence spectra of the former were strongly red-shifted (Δλabs, Δλem ∼ 170 nm) and structured relative to the latter, which was attributed to a significant planarization of the conjugated backbone and interchain aggregation within the densely grafted P3HT chains, resulting in efficient delocalization of the π-conjugated electrons. This effect could be tuned by changing the surface curvature (or size) of the supporting particle. Indeed, the grafting of P3HT from nanoscale organosilica particles was performed and the properties of the resulting HT regioregular (97%) hairy P3HT nanoparticles (Mn ∼ 4000 g mol−1) were investigated. Thus, the nano-P3HT particles were found to exhibit an excellent solubility in THF of up to 25–30 g L−1 at room temperature without signs of aggregation, which was attributed to a branched nature of the prepared product. The optical properties of the nano-P3HT particles in THF and chloroform solutions were very similar to ones for linear untethered P3HT samples. This reflected that no overcrowding effects occur when P3HT chains are attached to the core of a very high surface curvature (small-sized particles). On the other hand, the absorption of a film of the nano-P3HT particles was significantly blue-shifted and less intense compared to the absorption of the film with the same thickness made from a P3HT sample with Mn = 8000 g mol−1, which was ascribed to the relatively low per-graft DP (∼24) of P3HT. Finally, the hairy P3HT nanoparticles exhibited good film-forming properties, and were successfully implemented as donors in bulk heterojunction solar cells. The devices prepared in combination with 1-(3-methoxycarbonyl)propyl-1-phenyl[6,6]C61 (PCBM) showed a power conversion efficiency of 1.8–2.3% (Jsc = 5.5–6.8 mA cm−2; Voc = 0.6–0.62 V; FF = 55–58%).
More recently, Kiriy and coworkers studied the surface-initiated Kumada polymerization reaction of 2-bromo-7-chloromagnesio-9,9-dioctylfluorene (12) into the important blue emitting poly(9,10)dioctylfluorene (PFO) from functionalized organosilica microparticles (Scheme 5). Monodisperse silica particles (∼880 nm-diameter) having ∼10 nm thick organosilica shells were therefore prepared via sequential sol–gel hydrolysis of tetramethyl orthosilicates and [2-(4-bromophenyl)-ethyl]triethoxysilane. Initiating sites were developed by the treatment of the particles consecutively by Et2Ni(bipy) and dppe (1,2-bis(diphenylphosphino)ethane, 11) instead of dppp. The dppe ligand was chosen because dppe-based complexes exhibit a good solubility, which is important to prevent aggregation of the particles at the catalyst immobilization step. Next, monomer was added to the dispersion of the activated particles and the polymerization was performed at room temperature for 40 min to afford particles having PFO shells (μ-PFO). A quantitative analysis of the reaction mixture obtained after the separation of the μ-PFO particles revealed the monomer conversion of ∼30%. Unbound PFO (Mn = 31000 g mol−1, PDI = 2.3) was also formed, with the ratio between the bound and unbound PFO of 1:4, which indicates a low selectivity of the grafting process (20%). GPC analysis showed Mn ∼ 17000 g mol−1, and PDI ∼ 1.65. Interestingly, a high grafting density was demonstrated, which resulted in a strong tendency of the tethered PFO chains to adopt planar and ordered conformations even in solution compared to free PFO.
Next, by the same approach, Kiriy and co-workers prepared microparticle supported conjugated polyelectrolyte brushes using 2-bromo-5-chloromagnesio-3-(1-bromohex-6-yl)thiophene (13) as the monomer (Scheme 6). Thus, poly(3-bromohexylthiophene) was selectively grown from monodisperse organosilica microparticles (∼880 nm-diameter) by surface initiated Kumada polycondensation reaction at room temperature for 1 h.
It is noteworthy to mention here that the presence of a bromine in the side group of the monomer did not affect the course of polymerization, which paves the way for the preparation of diverse functionalized conjugated polymer brushes. The resulting product (μP3BrHT) was then treated with potassium phthalimide followed by reductive hydrolysis with hydrazine hydrate to give μP3NH2HT brushes featuring ionizable amino groups. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) measurements revealed an increase of the mean particle diameter from ∼880 nm for starting organosilica particles up to ∼930 nm (μP3BrHT) and to ∼950 nm (μP3NH2HT). Further, although the surface of the starting organosilica particles was very smooth, it resulted much rougher after the grafting of P3BrHT and even more rougher after polymer analogous transformation. In addition, the grafted material was distributed rather homogeneously over the whole area of the particles. UV-vis/fluorescence data were collected in different media as well as at different pH, and indicated a dependence of μP3NH2HT optical properties on the surrounding environment, which might allow these materials for use in sensor applications. For instance, absorption spectra of μP3NH2HT particles showed much less structuring in the presence of different acids thus suggesting that interactions with the acids distort the structural order of the grafted conjugated polymer chains. Furthermore, dispersions of the μP3NH2HT particles in THF and in water at pH = 6 exhibited rather similar fluorescence intensity, whereas sulphuric acid and methane sulfonic acid substantially quenched the fluorescence.
Very recently, Kiriy and coworkers reported the first example of SI-KCTP of tetrafunctional AB 2-monomers (15 in Schemes 7 and 8) for the preparation of π-conjugated microporous polymers grafted from organosilica microparticles. An essential feature in the AB 2-monomer design is that it comprises two π-conjugated subunits, each subunit ideally acting as a AB monomer. This ensures in principle that under KCTP conditions, each AB subunit is independently polymerized on the chain growth manner leading to the conjugated polymer network. Further, the presence of the spiro-orthocarbonate bridge in the monomer structure ensures the formation of cross-linking points (i.e. microporosity) between conjugated strands at every repeating unit.

Scheme 7 shows the synthetic route to the monomer 15, involving as key steps the treatment of the monomer precursor 14 with two equivalents of butyllithium at −78 °C followed by the addition of MgBr2. Interestingly, the dilithiation step was found to be highly regioselective, leading to the introduction of only one lithium into each AB subunit. This was ascribed to the fact that the first lithiation lowered the reactivity of a subunit towards BuLi, and therefore the second lithium was introduced predominantly in a different subunit.
The surface initiated polymerization process of AB 2-monomer 15 (Scheme 8) was carried out from organosilica particles (∼880 nm-diameter), following a protocol similar to that used for μP3NH2HT brushes (vide supra).
SEM measurements indicated that the maximal reachable thickness of the immobilized conjugated micropolymer (μ-CMP) film was ∼30 nm. The porosity of this latter was somewhat lower than that of the corresponding bulk polymer, with a specific surface area of 158 m2 g−1vs. 463 m2 g−1. This was attributed to a lowered rigidity of two-dimensional networks (thin-films) compared to their three-dimensional counterparts (bulk).
In 2009, Locklin and coworkers reported an alternative methodology based on the Kumada-type catalyst transfer polycondensation to the formation of brushes of two widely used electroactive polymers, i.e. poly(thiophene) (PT) and poly(p-phenylene) (PPh), directly from surface-bound initiators (Scheme 9). To this end, they functionalized gold surfaces with monolayers of a thienyl bromide moiety by using 6-(5-bromothiophen-2-yl)hexane-1-thiol. The monolayers subsequently underwent addition with Ni(COD)(PPh3)2 complex (COD = 1,5-cyclooctadiene), generated in situ upon addition of four equivalents of PPh3 to a solution (0.05 wt%) of Ni(COD)2. Note here that Ni(COD)(PPh3)2 complex was found to be more reactive than the coordinately saturated Ni(PPh3)4. Next, the activated surfaces were immersed in a THF solution of 2-iodo-5-chloromagnesio-3-hexylthiophene 1 (or 1-iodo-4-chloromagnesio-benzene, 16) monomer, and the polymerization was performed at room temperature to afford PT (or PPh) brushes. After polymerization, a small amount of polymer was generally observed in solution (vide supra). Cyclic voltammetry (CV) indicated a 14 nm PT and a 42 nm PPh brush grown using this technique. In addition, the SI-KTCP formed films on gold showed a uniform and globular morphology, with a rms (route-mean square deviation) roughness of 3.9 nm.
As an extension of the previous study, Locklin and co-workers tackled the problem of steric bulk in the surface-initiated Kumada polycondensation by attempting the polymerization of a series of 1-iodo-4-chloromagnesio monomers with alkoxy side chains featuring varying length (i.e. from unsubstituted to hexyl) (Schemes 10 and 11). The aryl bromide monolayer used to synthesize the supported initiator was prepared by using a four-step procedure (Scheme 10) which begins with the magnesium–halogen exchange on 2,5-dibromothiophene (17) followed by alkylation of the resulting aryl Grignard with allyl bromide (18). Subsequent hydrosilylation of the alkene 19 using H2PtCl6 as catalyst yielded a chlorosilane 20 bearing an alkyl chain terminated with the reactive thienyl bromide unit. Finally, immersion of activated silicon oxide surfaces in a toluene solution of the chlorosilane resulted in the desired surface bound species.
Next, the monolayers underwent addition with Ni(COD)(dppe) complex, generated in situ from Ni(COD)2 and one equivalent of dppe. The resulting surface-bound catalyst system was then used to polymerize the diverse Grignard monomers prepared from the corresponding 1,4-diiodobenzenes, resulting in surface-bound poly(p-phenylenes) (Scheme 11). Interestingly it was found that the thickness, morphology, and surface coverage of the polymer films markedly depended on the size of the alkoxy substituent on the aryl monomer. Indeed, unsubstituted/small side chain-substituted monomers were more easily polymerized from the surface, thus resulting in thicker polymer films (Table 1). AFM data revealed that PPh films exhibited a globular morphology which was uniform over large areas (rms = 7.9 nm). Similarly, the methoxy-substituted poly(p-phenylene) (PDMP) showed a remarkably smooth, regular morphology (rms = 3.1 nm), whereas the ethoxy-substitution (PDEP) produced an unusual surface morphology consisting of isolated islands of complete coverage between which regions of lower coverage were present (rms = 6.0 nm). Finally, the hexyl-substitution (PDHP) gave a film morphology featuring only sparsely distributed islands of polymer (rms = 2.4 nm).
Polymer
R
Film thickness (nm)

a Determined by ellipsometry.

PPh
H
26.4 ± 0.1
PDMP
Methyl
17.0 ± 0.1
PDEP
Ethyl
12 ± 1
PDHP
Hexyl
4.8 ± 0.1
Further, in the same study the authors demonstrated that the addition of LiCl salt to the Kumada polycondensation reaction mixture led to smoother polymer films. This was attributed to the ability of LiCl in breaking up aggregated Grignard species in solution, thus increasing their nucleophilicity.
To contribute in determining scope and limitations of the SI polycondensation, more recently Locklin and coworkers synthesized several (aryl) Ni(II)–Br KCTP initiators on various planar substrates, and investigated the initiator density, homogeneity, and stability. Uniform 40–65 nm thick poly(3-methylthiophene) (P3MT) films from functionalized silica and indium tin oxide (ITO) surface were fabricated using 2-bromo-5-chloromagnesio-3-methyl-2-bromothiophene (21) as a monomer (Scheme 12), thus highlighting the feasibility of the KCTP approach.
Very recently Luscombe and coworkers used SI KCTP reaction in the synthesis of grafted poly(3-methylthiophene) film on the surface of ITO (Scheme 13). An initiator monolayer was firstly formed by treating the ITO substrates with a 4-chloro-3-methyl-benzylphosphonic acid solution. The initiator-modified substrates were then immersed in a in situ generated Ni(COD)(PPh3)2 (vide supra) solution followed by ligand-exchange with dppp. The polymerization was initiated by the addition of the Grignard functionalized 3-methylthiophene monomer 21. Notably, varying monomer solution concentrations (from 0.03 M to 0.18 M) were used, to investigate the possibility of tuning the film thickness accordingly. Indeed, AFM profilometry data indicated that the average thickness linearly increased from ∼30 nm at 0.03 M monomer concentration to ∼50 nm at 0.05 M monomer concentration to ∼80 nm at 0.09 M monomer concentration. Note that these thickness has been previously found optimal for interlayer films in both organic solar cells and light emitting diodes. Further, when a 0.18 M monomer concentration were employed a ∼265 nm average film thickness was measured. However, large polymer aggregates were observed in the topography images, thus suggesting that the polymerization is no longer controlled at this monomer concentration. The authors claimed that one of the main reasons for the thickness dependence on monomer concentration might be the steric effect of the initiated chains on the diffusion of reaction components. Indeed, when the surface-grafted polymer chain length achieves a certain level, monomer diffusion to the reaction site may be reduced, yet this phenomenon can be reduced by using higher monomer concentration. The synthesized films underwent extensive characterization, and were shown to be stable and robust, thus leading to practical importance in device applications. Electrochemical oxidative doping of these films could be achieved and maintained even after the sample was removed from potential control, which may afford the possibility of tuning the work function in thinner P3MT films and increase ionization feature tunability in thicker films, leading to varying potential in optoelectronic applications.
Palladium complexes have also been successfully employed for the synthesis of π-conjugated polymer brushes. For instance, Kiriy and coworkers reported the first surface initiated palladium catalyzed Suzuki-type catalyst transfer polycondensation to graft and pattern semiconducting and fluorescent poly[9,9-bis(2-ethylhexyl)fluorene] (PF2/6) (Scheme 14). This work used [2-(4-bromophenyl)ethyl] chlorodimethylsilane (1 nm), and lightly crosslinked PS–Br (1 nm, 10 nm) films as precursors of surface-bound initiators. These were allowed to react with the highly active catalyst [Pd(PtBu3)2] in toluene at 70 °C. The authors tentatively proposed the structure sketched in Scheme 14 for the resulting surface-bound initiator. To perform the surface-initiated polymerization, the substrates with the initiator layer were exposed to a THF solution of 7-bromo-9,9-bis(2-ethylhexyl)-9H-fluoren-2-ylboric acid ester (22) in the presence of aqueous sodium carbonate solution, and allowed to react under stirring at room temperature for 1–3 h. Importantly, the grafting process developed selectively on the surface, and no detectable amounts of polymer were formed in solution. The procedure resulted in uniform and smooth (rms = 1.1 nm) PF2/6 films with thickness up to 100 nm, as revealed by AFM data. Notably, an increase of the anchoring PS–Br layer thickness (from 1 to 10 nm) led to only small effect on the grafting process, thus suggesting that the polycondensation occurs only from the topmost part of the PS–Br film, in contrast to what the same group reported previously for SI-Kumada-type polycondensation (vide supra). The absorption/emission spectra of the grafted polymer films in the dry state as well as in different solvents were comparable to those for unbound high molecular weight PF2/6. Further, the authors verified the applicability of SI-Suzuki chain growth polymerization for the preparation of PF2/6 patterns. To this end, they used a type of colloidal lithography in which sub-micrometer hydrogel particles were arranged on silicon wafers by dip coating and used as a mask. After hydrophobization of the “unmasked” surface with octadecylsilane and removal of the hydrogel particles, the silane was adsorbed onto the remaining hydrophilic spots to successfully afford a quasi-periodic hexagonal array of round shaped disks (∼1 nm-diameter). Subsequent treatment of these samples with Pd-catalyst and monomer solution resulted in selective polyfluorene grafting up to ∼100 nm thickness.
More recently, Locklin and co-workers reported on the synthesis of poly-3-methylthiophene grafted from ITO-coated glass substrates functionalized with (4-bromobenzyl)phosphonic acid monolayers by palladium mediated surface-initiated Kumada catalyst polymerization (Scheme 15). The authors used [Pd(PtBu3)2] catalyst for the coupling with the monolayer, which resulted in a surface coverage of 1.1 × 1014 initiators per cm2 (55% yield, CV data), more than double that achievable for surface-bound Ni-based initiators under the same conditions. Next, the placement of the above activated surfaces into a 2-bromo-3-methyl-5-chloromagnesiothiophene monomer (21) solution (THF, 0.2 M) at 40 °C led to selective SI-Suzuki catalyst transfer polycondensation proceeding through the chain growth manner, thus affording target poly-3-methylthiophene brushes of considerable thickness (>100 nm). Finally, the authors proved the anisotropy of the P3MT films by using polarized UV-vis spectroscopy, with p-polarized light showing a much greater absorbance than that of s-polarized light at an angle of incidence of 45 °C, which indicated a degree of orientation perpendicular to the substrate.
Very recently, Bielawsky and co-workers reported the first synthesis of poly(p-phenylene) ethynylene (PPE) brushes via a modified Stille-type catalyst-transfer polymerization. Note here that PPEs are an important and versatile family of π-conjugated polymers, which have found use in light emitting diodes, solar cells, thin film transistors, among other applications.
The issue of the polycondensation mechanism was addressed in bulk conditions, using a stannylated monomer, (2,5-bis(2-ethylhexyloxy)-(4-iodophenyl)ethynyl)tributylstannane (23) (Scheme 16). Thus, for instance, treatment of the latter ([monomer]0 = 0.02 M) with copper iodide (20 mol%), PPh3 (20 mol%), and PhPd(t-Bu3P)Br initiator (2 mol%) in THF at 25 °C afforded PPE 24 in 94% yield within 3 h. Importantly, the isolated polymer exhibited a Mn value (14.4 kDa) close to that theoretically expected (17.8 kDa) assuming quantitative initiation and complete consumption of monomer, and a low PDI (1.47). Also, it was found that the Mn values increased linearly with the monomer conversion as well as with the feed ratio of monomer to the Pd catalyst, while PDI remained nearly constant throughout the polymerization. All these findings indicated that the polymerization followed the chain-growth mechanism.
The authors shifted therefore their attention towards the investigation of surface initiated polymerization of (2,5-bis(2-ethylhexyloxy)-(4-iodophenyl)ethynyl)tributylstannane 23 (Scheme 17). To this end, spherical silica particles (∼200 nm-diameter) were functionalized using [2-(4-bromophenyl)-ethyl]triethoxysilane to afford SiO2–PhBr (3.6 mmol m−2 grafting density), which was reacted with an excess of Pd(PtBu3)2 in toluene at 70 °C for 3 h. The resulting Ph–Pd(PtBu3)–Br macroinitiator was stirred for 8 h in the presence of the monomer, copper iodide (20 mol%) and PPh3 (20 mol%) in THF at 50 °C to afford SiO2–24 particles (62% yield, Mn of 24.5 kDa).
A chain extension experiment was also performed, by adding a fresh feed of monomer to an unquenched solution of SiO2–24, allowing to react for 8 h, and subsequently quenching the reaction mixture with dilute aqueous HCl.
Size exclusion chromatography revealed that the Mn of the resulting PPE brushes was doubled as measured from aliquots quenched before and after the second monomer addition, thus suggesting the chain growth mechanism was operating.

For the preparation of surface-grafted polymers, oxidative coupling polymerizations, which do not require any leaving groups or the removal of the by-products from the resulting polymer, may have advantages for large-scale preparation. In 2006, for instance, Miyauchi and co-workers reported the FeCl3 promoted grafting from polymerization using modified ITO spherical particles to yield P3HT brushes (Scheme 18). In this contribution, the hydroxyl groups on the ITO surface were silanized with 3-aminopropyl(triethoxy)silane (APS, 25), and, subsequently, thiophene rings were introduced through a condensation reaction between the ending amino-groups of surface-bound APS and the carboxyl groups of thiophene-3-acetic acid 26. The SI oxidative polymerization performed in the presence of FeCl3 using 3-hexylthiophene (27, HT) as a monomer, proceeded from the resulting immobilized initiator to afford P3HT grafted from ITO particles. The amount of the grafted P3HT was found to increase with the reaction time as well as 3HT/ITO/mass ratio, with a maximum reported value of 2.8 weight%. The temperature dependence of the conductivity for the P3HT-grafted ITO particles was also investigated. The authors found that the conductivity at room temperature decreased with an increase of the grafting ratio, which was attributed to a wrapping effect of P3HT molecules over ITO particles, as well as to the uniform dispersion effect of particles in the polymer matrix. In addition, a slight decrease of conductivity with increase in temperature was observed when the grafted amount of P3HT was 1.6 wt%, which further confirmed the existence of the wrapping structure.

Rothberg and Ng reported on the grafting of P3HT from a TiO2 nanotube surface created on periodically anodized aluminium oxide (AAO). In this work the authors modified nanoporous TiO2 surfaces with monolayers of a thienyl moiety by reaction of 2-(3-triethoxysilyl) propylthiophene (28) with the available surface hydroxyl functional groups (Scheme 19).
The (regiorandom) P3HT was synthesized directly at room temperature (24 h-reaction) from the monolayers using 3-hexylthiophene (27) as the monomer and FeCl3 as stoichiometric catalyst. Interestingly, SEM images clearly showed a uniform coating of conjugated polymers attached on the oxide walls to give an ordered nanoporous network. A polymer thickness in the range 10–30 nm was estimated by means of a control experiment carried out by creating P3HT from flat SiO2 surface of silicon wafer.
Another example of FeCl3-mediated surface-initiated oxidative polymerization was reported by Yang and co-workers (Scheme 20) who prepared P3HT grafted uniformly from carbon nanotubes. A multistep synthetic approach led to the functionalization of multiwalled carbon nanotube surfaces with monolayers of a thienyl moiety. The P3HT was synthesized at 2 °C from the monolayers using 3-hexylthiophene (27) as the monomer in the presence of FeCl3.
The resulting P3HT brushes dispersed well in common organic solvent, and featured an head-to-tail regioregularity of 80%. Film thicknesses up to 8.3 nm were obtained. In addition, there was found no difference between the photoluminescence peaks' position of P3HT grafted on CNTs and the neat P3HT with the same molecular weight, whereas modifications of polymer energy gap was observed, indicating variation of vibronic levels arising from the grafting. Interestingly, P3HT-g-CNT were shown to enhance the photovoltaic power conversion efficiency of pure P3HT polymer by six fold in bilayer structures with PCBM, thus suggesting that π-conjugated polymers grafted on CNTs may be very useful for optoelectronic applications.
Finally, in 2007 Carter and coworkers reported the surface-initiated tungsten-catalyzed metathesis polymerization of 5-decyne from the alkyne-functionalized silicon wafer surfaces, yielding brushes of poly(1,2-dibutylacetylene) with a thickness up to 41 nm (Scheme 21). The functionalization of surfaces (SiO2 surface layer) was accomplished by using a silane coupling agent, O-(propagyloxy)-N-(triethoxysilylpropyl) urethane (29). The silane coupling agent was covalently attached to the substrate by heating these latter in a 2 wt% solution of 29 in toluene. Subsequent reaction of the functionalized surface with 5-decyne in the presence of a catalytic amount of tungsten hexachloride/tetraphenyl tin (WCl6/Ph4Sn), and under microwave irradiation at 150 °C for 30 min, afforded the silica-bound poly(1,2-dibutylacetilene). The uncontrolled nature of the polymerisation led to higher molecular weight distribution and hence large polydispersities of the polymer chain lengths. As a consequence, the polymerization resulted in a rougher film surface relative to the alkyne-functionalized surface, as indicated by AFM analyses (rms = 6.8 nm and 0.3 nm, respectively). This technique features synthetic versatility, as the poly(1,2-dibutylacetylene) brushes present unsaturated functionality that is available for subsequent modification.

Methods for covalently immobilize conjugated polymers on e.g. metals/metal oxide electrical contacts, are of great interest as a pathway towards optimization of organic electronic devices in terms of charge injection/harvesting/transport.

To date, the metal-mediated cross-coupling polycondensation reactions (e.g. surface-initiated Kumada catalyst transfer polymerization, Suzuki and Stille-type reactions) are the most promising techniques, allowing accurate control over brush thickness, chemical composition and architectures.
A significant step forward for the preparation of conjugated polymer brushes has been reported by Kiriy. From this work, 40–70 nm thick regioregular HT semiconducting poly(3-hexylthiophene) brushes have been grown by KCTP approach from surface immobilized Ni(II) poly-4-bromostyrene macroinitiators.
Since then, a strong chemistry effort in the development of surface-initiated polymerization techniques has been made, and advanced syntheses of surface-bound semiconducting polymers have also been successful in producing diverse tailor-made functionalized systems, with (tunable) thicknesses >100 nm. Notably, such anchored polymer films have been found to be fully compatible with a diverse range of technologically relevant substrates including gold, silicon, indium tin oxide (ITO), nanotubes. A great deal of fundamental work is still required at this stage, in order for the possible applications of these surface grafted films in organic electronics to become viable.
† The device power conversion efficiency (η) is defined by the equation: η = (VocJscFF)/Pin, where Voc is the open circuit voltage, Jsc is the short circuit current (mA cm−2), FF is the fill factor, and P0 is the power of incident light source (mW cm−2).
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013