 DOI: 10.1039/D2EE00726F
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 2937-2947


Yilin
Chang
,

Xiangwei
Zhu
,

Yanan
Shi
,

Yanan
Liu
,

Ke
Meng
,

Yanxun
Li
,

Jingwei
Xue
,

Lingyun
Zhu
,

Jianqi
Zhang
,

Huiqiong
Zhou
,

Wei
Ma
,

Zhixiang
Wei
 and 

Kun
Lu
*

CAS Key Laboratory of Nanosystem and Hierarchical Fabrication, CAS Center for Excellence in Nanoscience, National Center for Nanoscience and Technology, Beijing 100190, P. R. China. E-mail: lvk@nanoctr.cn

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, P. R. China

College of Textiles & Clothing, State Key Laboratory of Bio-Fibers and Eco-Textiles, Qingdao University, Qingdao, 266071, China

State Key Laboratory for Mechanical Behavior of Materials, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049, P. R. China

Received
4th March 2022
, Accepted 31st May 2022
First published on 1st June 2022
For a long time, regulating the phase separation of all-small-molecule organic solar cells (ASM-OCSs) to achieve the ideal phase morphology has been a challenging problem in the field, in particular for the system composed of non-fullerene acceptors. In this work, we have constructed two small-molecule donors (ZR-SiO and ZR-SiO-EH) with low surface tensions by introducing siloxane. Based on the difference in the surface tension between a donor and an acceptor (Y6), an appropriate morphology with nanoscale phase separation was achieved in the blend system by regulating the intermolecular compatibility, thus effectively enhancing the photovoltaic performance of the corresponding ASM-OSCs. In particular, the ZR-SiO-EH:Y6 system exhibited a nanoscale bicontinuous interpenetrating network with a small domain size and face-on molecular stacking, which guarantees effective exciton dissociation and efficient charge transport even in the mixed region. In addition, the ordered molecular orientation, optimized morphology, and reduced energy offset between donors and acceptors reduce the non-radiative energy loss to 0.2 eV, leading to a high open circuit voltage of 0.87 V for ASM-OSCs. As a result, the ZR-SiO-EH:Y6 based device exhibited a high power conversion efficiency of 16.4%. These results demonstrate that regulating the intermolecular compatibility by siloxane to obtain ordered phase separation morphology provides an efficient method for designing high performance ASM-OSCs.

With the innovation of material systems and the development of device engineering, the power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of organic solar cells (OSCs) have made remarkable breakthroughs. Compared with polymer solar cells, solution-processed all-small-molecule organic solar cells (ASM-OSCs) have great potential for applications because of their definite molecular structure and device repeatability. However, morphology regulation and optimization have always been a key challenge in the performance development of ASM-OSCs. Herein, we have used the traditional alkyl chain and siloxane with a low surface tension to effectively control the intermolecular interaction between donors and acceptors, and then realize the ideal phase separation morphology and ordered molecular stacking, finally obtaining a recorded PCE of 16.4% for binary ASM-OSCs.


After two decades of in-depth research in organic solar cells (OSCs), researchers have developed a number of interrelated material systems, promoting the rapid development of the organic photovoltaic field. Specifically, the development of non-fullerene acceptors (NFAs), represented by ITIC-series and Y-series small molecules, has provided a series of unprecedented breakthroughs in the performances of OSCs. Meanwhile, the commercial production and application of OSCs are getting closer to reality. For the large-scale production of organic semiconductors, lowering the production cost and avoiding the disparity between the different batches of materials have become the focus of attention. Compared with polymers, small molecules can cope with these practical problems in the production process more effectively by virtue of their inherent structural advantages. However, the performance of all-small-molecule OSCs (ASM-OSCs) still lags behind those of polymer-based systems. This gap can be attributed mainly to the fact that it is difficult for the all-small-molecule active layer to form an interpenetrating network morphology of donors/acceptors like that of the polymer-based system.

It has always been difficult to control the phase separation of the ASM system. There are two main reasons for this. On the one hand, as the key components of high-performance ASM-OSCs, small molecule donors usually have similar chemical elements and molecule structures like NFAs. As a result, homogeneous morphologies tend to appear in the blend of the donor and acceptor without appropriate phase separation. On the other hand, considering the need for efficient charge transport, some fused-ring units with excellent planarity, such as benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene (BDT), naphtho[1,2-b:5,6-b′]dithiophene (NDT), dithieno[2,3-d:2′,3′-d′]benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene (DTBDT), etc., are often utilized for the construction of small-molecule organic semiconductor materials. These units have not only improved the molecular stacking and enhanced the intermolecular π–π interactions but also inevitably strengthened their own crystallinities in the meantime. Therefore, large-scale phase aggregation often occurs in the ASM systems. To date, some mature treatments such as mixed solvents, the introduction of additives, solvent/thermal annealing, and ternary approach have been proven very useful in adjusting the phase morphology of the ASM systems. However, how to achieve the appropriate phase separation morphology in the all-small-molecule system by modifying the intrinsic characters of donors/acceptors is of great research value and significance for the innovative development and continuous breakthrough of ASM-OSCs in the future.
Among the various physical and chemical characteristics of organic semiconductor materials, surface tension is undoubtedly the most direct one that affects the compatibility of donors and acceptors. The compatibility is an essential driving force for the phase separation of the bulk-heterojunctions. Therefore, it is worth discussing whether the phase separation of the ASM system can be controlled by modulating the surface tension of small molecule donors/acceptors. In this literature, we have observed that a unique functional group, siloxane, can reduce the surface tensions of polysiloxanes due to its hydrophobic properties. Siloxane was initially introduced to the field of organic field-effect transistors by Bao's group as a side chain in a conjugated polymer, which can effectively enhance the charge transport by inducing a denser π–π stacking distance. Subsequent studies found that the introduction of siloxane can effectively reduce the surface tension of organic semiconductor materials. Later, siloxane was also introduced to the field of organic photovoltaics. During the construction of the donor polymer with siloxane-terminated side chains, Chen's group found another critical role of siloxane that they are able to initiate a more favorite face-on orientation for highly efficient hole transport in a vertical direction. As a result, the film thickness processing window of siloxane-based polymer solar cells was effectively enlarged. Then, they as well as Peng's group carried out a series of novel observations on the development of siloxane-based organic photovoltaic materials, but these studies mainly focused on the polymer donors and NFAs. Introducing siloxane to the small molecule donor to realize the difference in the surface tension with NFAs and then investigating the effect of this approach on the control of phase separation and phase morphology for the ASM system are well worth in-depth exploration for the field.
In this work, two small molecule donors, ZR-SiO and ZR-SiO-EH, were designed and synthesized by introducing siloxane into thiophene side chains on both sides of the DTBDT unit (Fig. 1a). At the same time, we also synthesized another small molecule, ZR-C8, with an ordinary alkyl chain (octyl) at the same position as ZR-SiO. The ZR-C8:Y6 system can only provide an unsatisfactory power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 12.2% due to excellent compatibility between ZR-C8 and Y6. Benefiting from the less compatibility of the ZR-SiO:Y6 system, the morphology and charge transport have been effectively improved while the charge recombination has been significantly inhibited, finally delivering an admirable PCE of 16.0%. For the further optimized ZR-SiO-EH:Y6 system, the introduction of siloxane can still greatly reduce the surface tension of ZR-SiO-EH, thus providing a sufficient driving force for the phase separation. Meanwhile, branched isooctyl chains have played a crucial role in regulating molecular stacking, and a face-on dominant stacking mode has been achieved for ZR-SiO-EH. Consequently, an interpenetrating network morphology with nanoscale phase separation as well as a highly ordered stacking structure for both donors and acceptors enable a high PCE of 16.4%, a low non-radiative energy loss of 0.2 eV and the highest open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 0.87 V for the ZR-SiO-EH:Y6 based device, which is among the top values of the PCE for the reported ASM-OSCs so far (as shown in Table S1, ESI).

Two kinds of ZR-series small molecule donors (ZR-SiO and ZR-SiO-EH) containing siloxane have been designed with the chemical structures as shown in Fig. 1a. Moreover, another DTBDT-based small molecule donor with linear alkyl side chains, ZR-C8, was also synthesized as the control molecule. Siloxane can be easily introduced into the conjugated thiophene side chains of the DTBDT unit via butyl lithium, 6-bromohx-1-ene, and the Karstedt catalyst. However, compared with ZR-C8, ZR-SiO has shown relatively poor solubility, reducing its processability during the preparation of the active layer film. So, to enhance the solubility of the small molecule containing siloxane, we have also introduced a branched alkyl chain into the β position of the thiophene unit, located on either side of the DTBDT unit. Then, a new small molecule donor, ZR-SiO-EH, with excellent solubility even in the presence of siloxane, has been synthesized. The synthesis procedures of three small-molecule donors are shown in the ESI.

The optical absorption properties of ZR-C8, ZR-SiO and ZR-SiO-EH were investigated using an ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) spectrophotometer. In the chloroform solution state, three small molecules have almost identical absorption spectra (Fig. 1b). Meanwhile, in the film state, significant red shifts (ca. 80 nm) were observed for all the three materials, indicating the existence of strong intermolecular interactions in these small molecules (Fig. 1c). However, there were apparent discrepancies in the main absorption peaks of the three materials. Specifically, all the three small molecules have both D–A and shoulder peaks but with different intensities. For ZR-C8, the intensity of the peak at 620 nm is almost the same as that of the D–A peak at 578 nm. For ZR-SiO, both the shoulder and D–A peaks have slightly red-shifted compared with ZR-C8. The D–A peak and shoulder peak have shifted to 582 nm and 630 nm, respectively, and the intensity of the shoulder peak is obviously stronger than that of the D–A peak. For ZR-SiO-EH, the positions of shoulder and D–A peaks are nearly the same as those of ZR-C8, but the intensity of the shoulder peak is much higher than that of ZR-C8. The difference in the shoulder peak means that the introduction of siloxane can effectively regulate the molecular interactions of small molecule donors. The electrochemical energy levels of the three small molecules were measured by the cyclic voltammetry (CV) method. The oxidation and reduction potentials of each material can be obtained from the corresponding curve shown in Fig. S2 (ESI). Then, the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) levels of each small molecule were calculated as −5.30/−3.52 eV for ZR-C8, −5.38/−3.50 eV for ZR-SiO, and −5.40/−3.48 eV for ZR-SiO-EH (Fig. 1d and Table S2, ESI), according to the established formulas: EHOMO = −e(EOX − EFc/Fc+ + 4.8) and ELUMO = −e(ERE − EFc/Fc+ + 4.8). It is evident that the introduction of siloxane has effectively reduced the HOMO energy level of the corresponding small molecule, which is confirmed by theoretical calculations and ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) results (Fig. S3, S4 and Table S3, ESI). Predictably, the lower HOMO levels enable the ZR-SiO-based and ZR-SiO-EH-based devices to deliver much higher open-circuit voltage (VOC).
The hole transport properties of three small molecules were investigated by the method of space-charge limited current (SCLC) with the device structure of ITO/poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS)/small molecule/Au. By fitting the current density–voltage (J–V) curves shown in Fig. S5 (ESI), the hole mobilities (μhs) for ZR-C8, ZR-SiO, and ZR-SiO-EH can be calculated as 3.52 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, 4.46 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, and 6.92 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 (Table S4, ESI), respectively. For small-molecule donors, the hole mobility is often determined by crystallinity and molecular stacking modes. Grazing-incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) is therefore used to reveal their relationship. From the diffraction patterns of three pure materials (Fig. 1a and Fig. S6, ESI), we can clearly see that both ZR-C8 and ZR-SiO have edge-on-dominated molecular stacking modes. However, the crystallinity of ZR-SiO is stronger than that of ZR-C8, mainly because of the existence of the diffraction spots on both sides of the qz-axis. As a result, ZR-SiO has shown a higher hole mobility than ZR-C8. For ZR-SiO-EH, the dominating stacking mode revealed through the diffraction pattern is face-on, with the ratio of face-on to edge-on reaching 3:2 (Fig. S7, ESI), thereby contributing to the significant improvement of its hole mobility in a vertical direction.

The surface tensions (γ) of donor and acceptor molecules can be obtained by measuring the contact angles (CAs) of droplets with different polarities on the surface of the corresponding films. Fig. 2a and Table S5 (ESI) show the CAs of water and diiodomethane droplets on the surfaces of ZR-C8, ZR-SiO, ZR-SiO-EH, and Y6 pure films. Then, using the Wu model derived from Young's equation, the γ values of the four materials can be calculated as 42.4, 36.2, 34.6, and 41.6 mN m−1, respectively. These results show that the surface tension of ZR-C8 with ordinary alkyl side chains is very close to that of Y6. According to the Flory–Huggins theory, the interaction parameter (χ) between ZR-C8 and Y6 is just 0.001, indicating that they have extraordinary compatibility. Meanwhile, the surface tensions of ZR-SiO and ZR-SiO-EH have been effectively reduced by the introduction of siloxane, and the corresponding χ values of the donor and Y6 are increased to 0.19 and 0.32, respectively. The increased χ value indicates the poor compatibility between the donor and acceptor, which also provides a driving force for the morphology regulation of the D/A blend film. In addition, differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) was used to calculate Flory–Huggins interaction parameters and evaluate the compatibility. The DSC thermograms of the pure materials and the blend films are shown in Fig. 2b and Fig. S8 (ESI). The melting points (Tm) of ZR-C8 and ZR-SiO are 237.7 and 253.9 °C, and the increased Tm indicated the stronger intermolecular interaction caused by siloxane. In addition, the introduction of a branched alkyl chain has reduced the Tm of ZR-SiO-EH to 190.9 and 195.8 °C. The appearance of two Tms may be due to two different molecular stacking modes (face-on and edge-on). By further analyzing the difference of Tm and melting enthalpy (ΔHm) after mixing, the Nishi–Wang equation was used to calculate the Flory–Huggins interaction parameter between two components of the blend. The χ values between the donor and Y6 were 0.11 for ZR-C8:Y6, 0.75 for ZR-SiO:Y6, and 1.74 for ZR-SiO-EH:Y6 (Table S6, ESI). It can also be seen visually from Fig. 2b that there is only one melting peak for the blend films of ZR-C8 and Y6, while ZR-SiO and ZR-SiO-EH show their respective melting peaks of the donor and acceptor after mixing with Y6. Enlarged DSC curves are seen in Fig. S8 (ESI). Such a trend is consistent with the result of the Flory–Huggins interaction parameter, confirming that the introduction of siloxane can effectively regulate the compatibility between the donor and Y6.


In our previous studies on ZR-series molecules, Y6 (Fig. S1, ESI) was generally chosen as the paired acceptor. In this work, to highlight the influence of the introduction of siloxane on the photovoltaic performance of the corresponding small molecule donor, we selected the same acceptor and the conventional device structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/active layer/PNDIT-F3N/Ag was employed. By finely adjusting a series of processing methods, such as the D/A ratio, active layer thickness, type and amount of additive, and temperature and time of thermal annealing, the optimal performances of the three all-small-molecule systems can be finally obtained. The detailed device performances under different optimization conditions are given in Tables S7–S9 (ESI). For the ZR-C8:Y6-based device, a moderate PCE of 12.2% was obtained. However, for the ZR-SiO:Y6-based device, a very encouraging PCE of 16.0% was successfully achieved. Three parameters of VOC, short-circuit current density (JSC), and fill factor (FF) were all significantly improved compared with the ZR-C8:Y6 system. Meanwhile, for the ZR-SiO-EH:Y6-based device, its optimal performance was somewhat better than that of the ZR-SiO:Y6-based system. Finally, a significant breakthrough on the PCE (16.4%) for the ASM-OSCs was successfully achieved, which is among the top values of the PCE for ASM-OSCs reported to date. The corresponding performance parameters for these systems are given in Table 1, and the J–V curves of the optimal devices for the three systems are shown in Fig. 3a. Fig. 3b shows the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra of the optimal devices for each system. The integrated JSC values obtained from these curves are 24.3 mA cm−2 for ZR-C8:Y6, 24.9 mA cm−2 for ZR-SiO:Y6, and 24.4 mA cm−2 for ZR-SiO-EH:Y6. The errors between these values and the corresponding values measured from the J–V curves are less than 5%, indicating the reliability of the measured device performance. The comparison results for the optimized ZR-SiO-EH:Y6-based device from third-party laboratories and with a mask are summarized in Fig. S9 and Table S10 (ESI).

Donors

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)

J
SC
 (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
The average parameters were obtained from 20 independent cells.a The calculated JSC values from the EQE curves.
ZR-C8
0.829 (0.828 ± 0.004)
25.0 (24.8 ± 0.5)
24.3
58.8 (58.3 ± 1.4)
12.2 (11.8 ± 0.3)
ZR-SiO
0.852 (0.852 ± 0.003)
26.0 (26.0 ± 0.3)
24.9
72.3 (71.4 ± 0.8)
16.0 (15.8 ± 0.2)
ZR-SiO-EH
0.870 (0.864 ± 0.002)
25.6 (25.4 ± 0.3)
24.4
73.7 (73.3 ± 0.8)
16.4 (16.1 ± 0.1)

To better understand the exciton dissociation and charge generation properties of the three kinds of devices and to further reveal the reasons for the improvement of JSC and FF, the photocurrent density (Jph) was plotted as a function of the effective voltage (Veff), as shown in Fig. 3c. Jph is defined as JL–JD, where JL and JD are the current densities under illumination (L) and in the dark (D), respectively. Veff is defined as the difference between V0 and Va, where V0 is the voltage at Jph = 0 and Va is the applied bias voltage. When Veff reaches 2 V, the saturation current density (Jsat) is obtained by assuming that the excitons are completely dissociated into free charge carriers and collected by the electrode at this high voltage. The exciton dissociation efficiency (ηdiss) and charge collection efficiency (ηcoll) of the devices can be calculated by the Jph/Jsat values under short-circuit and maximum power output conditions, respectively (Table S11, ESI). Compared with the ZR-C8:Y6-based device (ηdiss of 95.39% and ηcoll of 73.60%), both ZR-SiO:Y6-based and ZR-SiO-EH:Y6-based devices displayed much higher ηdiss (96.89% and 97.63%) and ηcoll (84.38% and 87.15%). Remarkably, the relatively higher ηcoll of the ZR-SiO-EH:Y6-based device can be confirmed by the subsequent discussion on charge dynamics.

The charge recombination mechanism can be studied by investigating the correlation between JSC/VOC and the incident light intensity (Plight) of the corresponding device. JSC follows a power-law dependence on the Plight, expressed as JSC ∝ (Plight)α. The closer the exponential factor (α) is to 1, the lower the probability of bimolecular recombination and the higher the charge collection efficiency. Trap-assisted recombination can be distinguished according to the ideality factor (n) of the device by establishing the semi-logarithmic relationship between VOC and Plight. This correlation conforms to the function of VOC ∝ nkT/qln(Plight), where k, T, and q denote the Boltzmann constant, the temperature in Kelvin, and the elementary charge, respectively. As shown in Fig. 3d and e, the α and n values of the ZR-SiO-EH:Y6-based device are 0.984 and 1.07, which are closer to 1 than those of the ZR-C8:Y6-based device (α = 0.972 and n = 1.25) and ZR-SiO:Y6-based device (α = 0.978 and n = 1.17), indicating that the bimolecular and geminate recombination can be effectively inhibited.
Moreover, we also tested the transient photovoltage (TPV) to further analyze the charge recombination characteristics. The carrier lifetimes (τ) of the three systems can be obtained from TPV decay dynamics under open circuit conditions (Fig. 3f). Compared with the τ value of 7.08 μs for the ZR-C8:Y6 system, ZR-SiO and ZR-SiO-EH systems have shown much longer τ values of 19.01 and 21.07 μs, respectively. The long carrier lifetime also means less charge recombination. These results were further verified by studying the molecular stacking and morphology. The SCLC method was used to estimate the charge transport capability. The hole-only devices still adopted the structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/active layer/Au, and the electron-only device of Al/active layer/Al was used to test the electron mobility (μe). The ZR-C8:Y6 system shows the low and unbalanced charge mobilities among the three systems resulting in severe charge recombination and low FF. Meanwhile, ZR-SiO and ZR-SiO-EH systems exhibit much higher mobilities and relatively balanced charge transport (Fig. S10 and Table S4, ESI). The difference is mainly due to the favorable molecular stacking and morphology, which will be discussed later.

The detailed energy losses are investigated further to explore the recombination of charge carriers and the underlying reasons for the VOC increase. According to the Shockley–Queisser (SQ) limit, the Eloss in OSCs can be divided into three parts:Eloss = Eg − qVOC = ΔE1 + ΔE2 + ΔE3, where Eg is the photovoltaic energy bandgap extracted from the derivation of the EQEPV curve. ΔE1 is the energy loss due to the radiative recombination above the optical gap, which is unavoidable for any sort of solar cells. As all three devices are fabricated with the same acceptor Y6, the values of ΔE1 (0.26 eV) are nearly identical. ΔE2 arises due to the radiative recombination loss below the bandgap. A small ΔE2 of 0.06 eV was obtained for each of these three devices, which means that the radiative recombination loss is insignificant. The third part ΔE3 is caused by the non-radiative recombination and can be calculated by ΔE3 = −kBTln(EQEEL), where EQEEL represents the radiative quantum efficiency of the solar cell under dark-current conditions. As shown in Fig. 3i and Table 2, the ΔE3 values of ZR-C8:Y6, ZR-SiO:Y6, and ZR-SiO-EH:Y6 blends are 0.237, 0.217, and 0.200 eV, respectively. Accordingly, these three systems have exhibited increasingly high VOCs. As previously shown, the introduction of siloxane can reduce the HOMO level of the donor. We also tested the ionization potential (IP) of the three donors by UPS and confirmed that the introduction of siloxane could reduce the IP of the donor. In addition, ZR-SiO-EH showed the lowest IP because the introduction of the branched alkyl chain can further twist the conjugate skeleton (Fig. S3 and S4, ESI). According to the Mulliken theory, the charge transfer (CT) state energy (ECT) is close to the ‘effective gap’ between the ionization potential of the donor and the electron affinity energy (EA) of the acceptor. The reduced energetic offset between the donor and acceptor can increase the ECT and further reduce the non-radiative recombination loss. The Fourier transform photocurrent spectroscopy external quantum efficiency (FTPS-EQE) spectra of three blend films were used to calculate the Urbach energy, which is a quantitative measure of the energy disorder of the system. A conventional device structure was employed, and the Urbach energy was calculated by exponentially fitting the tail of the FTPS-EQE spectra following the equation:
Donors

E
pvg (eV)
EQEEL (%)

qV
SQOC (eV)

qV
radOC (eV)

E
loss (eV)
ΔE1 (eV)
ΔE2 (eV)
ΔE3 (eV)

V
CalOC (eV)

a The optical bandgap (Epvg) was determined from the derivatives of the EQE curve and the mean peak energy (calculated by the ESI eqn (S8)).

ZR-C8
1.386
1.04 × 10−2
1.126
1.065
0.558
0.260
0.061
0.237
0.828
ZR-SiO
1.384
2.29 × 10−2
1.125
1.065
0.537
0.260
0.060
0.217
0.848
ZR-SiO-EH
1.385
4.46 × 10−2
1.125
1.067
0.518
0.260
0.058
0.200
0.868
The blend film of ZR-SiO-EH:Y6 showed the smallest Urbach energy of 22.90 meV among all the systems (Fig. 3g). A lower Urbach energy indicates a smaller degree of energy disorder and lower non-radiation recombination. Considering that the three systems used the same acceptor, the differences in the intermolecular interactions between the donor and acceptor lead to differences in molecular orientation and stacking. And the ordered molecular orientation in the blend film is beneficial to obtaining a small degree of energy disorder.
In addition to the Urbach energy, the morphology can also affect the non-radiative recombination and hence the voltage losses. An ideal morphology includes the optimized domain size, domain purity, and D/A interface, which also significantly affect the EQEEL of the devices. As shown in Fig. 3h, the ZR-SiO-EH:Y6-based device showed the highest EQEEL of 4.46 × 10−4 and the calculated ΔE3 is 0.2 eV, which is lower than 0.237 eV for ZR-C8:Y6 and 0.217 eV for ZR-SiO:Y6-based devices. Combined with the results of the above charge dynamics and the Urbach energy, it can be concluded that more ordered molecular orientation and optimized morphologies are essential for the reduction of non-radiative energy loss.

The crystallinity and stacking modes of the donor/acceptor at different depths of the active layer were investigated in detail using angle-dependent GIWAXS. The grazing-incidence angle α = 0.12° (<αsi = 0.15°, αsi is a critical angle of the Si substrate) was selected to detect the surface structure information of the blend film so as to reduce the interference of the surface roughness on the scattering strength. When the grazing-incidence angle is set to 0.18° (>αsi), the X-ray can pass through the entire depth of the film into the substrate, showing the average structure of the whole film. As mentioned above, the average aggregation of the three small-molecule donors and Y6 was obtained by detecting the pure films with a grazing angle of 0.18° (Fig. 1a and Fig. S11, ESI). By comparing the positions of the diffraction peaks of the pure and blend films, the vertical phase distribution can be judged (Fig. S12, ESI). First, in the diffraction pattern of the ZR-C8:Y6 blend film at 0.12° in Fig. 4a, only the diffraction peaks of ZR-C8 can be clearly distinguished. Specifically, the first-order diffraction peak (100) and second-order diffraction peak (200) attributed to the ZR-C8 molecule are found in the out-of-plane direction, and the π–π stacking peak (010) also attributed to the ZR-C8 molecule can be seen in the in-plane direction. However, it is extremely tough for Y6 to discern the diffraction peaks in both the in-plane and out-of-plane directions. With the increase of the incident angle, the (100) peak in the in-plane direction and (010) peak in the out-of-plane attributed to Y6 can be found, while the (200) peak of Y6 in the in-plane has been weakened. The decrease of the crystallinity of Y6 can be attributed to the excellent compatibility and almost the same surface tension between ZR-C8 and Y6. Atomic force microscopy-infrared spectroscopy (AFM-IR) (Fig. 4d–f and Fig. S13, ESI) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) (Fig. S14 and Table S12, ESI) further confirmed that, although Y6 has dispersed on the surface, it did not form an ordered aggregation. At the same time, the excellent compatibility leads to the failure of obtaining the distinct phase separation between the donor and acceptor, which will definitely affect the charge generation, recombination, and transport.

In contrast, due to the poor compatibility between ZR-SiO and Y6, they can still exhibit their own ordered and non-interfering stacking modes in the blend film. As shown in Fig. 4b, the distinct h00 lamellar diffractions and π–π stacking diffractions of ZR-SiO and Y6 can be observed on the surface of the blend film (the incident angle is 0.12°), and the diffraction patterns remain unchanged with the increase of incident angles (0.15° and 0.18°). The intrinsic stacking modes of the two molecules, the edge-on mode for ZR-SiO and face-on mode for Y6, also help them form their pure domains. The highly efficient transport of holes and electrons along the ordered donor and acceptor structures may be the key to the exceptional increase in JSC and FF for the ZR-SiO:Y6 system. For the ZR-SiO-EH:Y6 blend film, the diffraction patterns (Fig. 4c) at three incident angles are basically the same. Specifically, the π–π stacking peaks attributed to both ZR-SiO-EH and Y6 can be found in the out-of-plane direction, and the lamellar stacking peaks attributed to ZR-SiO-EH and Y6 molecules can be found in the in-plane direction. In addition, we also note that the (100) peak and (200) peak attributed to ZR-SiO-EH have existed in the three patterns, but the in-plane π–π stacking peak that characterizes the edge-on mode has disappeared. From the above discussion, we can conclude that ZR-SiO-EH and Y6 are orderly distributed in the surface layer and bulk phase of the corresponding film. It is also important to note that ZR-SiO-EH behaves like Y6, mainly found in a face-on stacking mode. Such a stacking mode has played a crucial role in improving the charge transport efficiency in the vertical direction and inhibiting the charge recombination probability of the blending system. AFM-IR and AFM tests (Fig. 4d–f and Fig. S15, ESI) show that the domain sizes formed by ZR-SiO-EH and Y6 are smaller than those by ZR-C8:Y6 and ZR-SiO:Y6, and they have aggregated to form a continuous interpenetration network structure, highly conducive to exciton dissociation and charge transport. Even in the mixing region where the donor and acceptor are blended, independent charge transport channels can also be formed in the vertical direction because of the poor compatibility and the similar molecular stacking mode.
For a better understanding of the phase separation and phase purity of the blending films, transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and transmission resonance soft X-ray scattering (R-SoXS) were applied to confirm the above inference further. The molecular aggregation characteristics of the blend films before and after treatment were also measured by TEM. As can be seen from Fig. 5a–f, due to the difference in the compatibility between the donor and acceptor, the distinct phase separation is difficult to be observed in the as-cast blend film of ZR-C8:Y6, but can be seen in ZR-SiO:Y6 and ZR-SiO-EH:Y6 systems. After the post-treatment, the ZR-C8:Y6 system exhibits the largest domain size due to molecular aggregation, while the domain sizes of ZR-SiO:Y6 and ZR-SiO-EH:Y6 do not change significantly. The nanoscale phase separation observed from TEM characterization is consistent with the R-SoXS data. The high scattering contrast of organic materials was obtained when the X-ray energy was 284.2 eV. As shown in Fig. 5g and Table S13 (ESI), the domain sizes of ZR-C8:Y6, ZR-SiO:Y6 and ZR-SiO-EH:Y6 are about 257, 153 and 112 nm, respectively. As expected, when the domain size is smaller and the domain purity is higher, the interfaces between the donor and acceptor are increased, which is conducive to exciton dissociation and charge transport. This conclusion is well proved in the ZR-SiO:Y6 system (the domain purity is 1). To our surprise, the ZR-SiO-EH:Y6 system can achieve high device performance even at a low domain purity (0.81) with a smaller domain size (112 nm). Combined with the above molecular crystallinity differences, we put forward the following model (Fig. 5h and i) to explain this special phenomenon reasonably. Different from the mixed region of ZR-C8:Y6 where the molecular stacking of Y6 is found to be disordered, the mixed region of ZR-SiO-EH:Y6 presents ordered molecular stacking. The donor and acceptor phase region form an interpenetrating network structure in which the mixed region is closed inside. This molecular stacking model not only increases the interface between the donor and acceptor, and realizes more charge transport channels, but also reduces the energy disorder of the system. It is the optimized morphology that enables the significantly enhanced overall performance for the ZR-SiO-EH:Y6 system.
Moreover, considering the effect of the device structure on device stability, conventional (ITO/PEDOT:PSS/active layer/PNDIT-F3N/Ag) and inverted (ITO/ZnO/active layer/MoO3/Ag) structures were used to test the light and thermal stabilities of the devices. To investigate the thermal stability of the device, the prepared device was continuously heated at 80 °C. Because small molecules are more susceptible to thermal motion, the thermal stability of the ASM systems is usually not excellent. However, to our surprise, in the inverted device structure, the three ASM systems can maintain more than 80% of the initial performance even at 80 °C for 400 h, displaying excellent thermal stability (Fig. S16, ESI). Compared with the excellent thermal stability, the light stability of the ASM devices is not satisfactory. As shown in Fig. S16c and d (ESI), the inverted device exhibits better light stability under continuous illumination, in which ZR-SiO-EH:Y6 can maintain 80% of the initial performance under 43 h illumination. However, the device performance decays to about 60% of the initial performance after about 150 h of continuous illumination.

In summary, we have designed and synthesized a group of small molecule donors containing siloxane. We found that the introduction of siloxane can effectively reduce the surface tensions of donor materials and adjust the compatibility between donors and NFAs, thus providing a driving force for the phase separation between these small molecules. The efficient phase separation structure is helpful in forming pure aggregated domains for both donor and acceptor materials, constructing independent channels for efficient charge separation and transport. We also found that the stacking mode of small molecule donors can be modulated as that of NFAs by further optimization of the molecule structure while maintaining a low surface tension. Also, the same stacking mode enables efficient charge transport in the mixed-phase region beyond the pure phase region for donors and acceptors, even when the domain purity is reduced. In addition, the introduction of siloxane can also effectively reduce the non-radiative energy loss, and the further optimization of molecular stacking and morphology can reduce the non-radiative energy loss of ZR-SiO-EH:Y6 to 0.2 eV, resulting in a high VOC of 0.87 V and a PCE of 16.4% for ASM-OSCs. Our work on siloxane-based small molecule donors has provided an ideal model for the regulation of the phase separation and phase morphology of ASM-OSCs. Also, we hope that this work will stimulate the enthusiasm of research in the related fields and a series of breakthroughs in the performances of ASM-OSCs will be achieved in the future.


Y. C., X. Z. and K. L. conceived the idea. Y. C. synthesized the materials and characterized their properties. Y. C. and X. Z. fabricated and characterized the devices. Y. S. performed the TEM measurements. Y. L. helped Y. C. in performing the CA measurements. K. M. performed the AFM measurements. Y. L. performed the TPV measurements supervised by H. Z. J. X. performed the R-SoXS measurements supervised by W. M. L. Z. helped in the theoretical calculation and energy losses. J. Z. performed the GIWAXS measurements. Y. C. and X. Z. discussed the results and prepared the paper. K. L. and Z. W. supervised the project. All the authors commented on the paper.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 21822503 and 51973043), the Youth Innovation Promotion Association CAS and the Chinese Academy of Sciences (121E32KYSB20190021). The authors thank Aimin Zhang from Shandong University (Testing and Manufacturing Center for Advanced Materials) for help with AFM-IR measurements. X-ray data were acquired at beamlines 7.3.3 and 11.0.1.2 at the Advanced Light Source, which is supported by the Director, Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, of the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231. The authors also thank Chenhui Zhu at the beamline 7.3.3, and Cheng Wang at the beamline 11.0.1.2 for assistance with data acquisition.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ee00726f
‡ These authors contributed equally.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022