 DOI: 10.1039/D0TC03753B
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 14066-14074


Yuxiang
Wang
,

Xinan
Shi
,

Gang
Wang
,

Junye
Tong
 and 

Daocheng
Pan
*

State Key Laboratory of Rare Earth Resource Utilization, Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 5625 Renmin Street, Changchun, Jilin 130022, China. E-mail: pan@ciac.ac.cn; Fax: +86-431-85262544; Tel: +86-431-85262544

University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui 230026, China

Center for Advanced Optoelectronic Functional Materials Research, and Key Laboratory of UV-Emitting Materials and Technology of Ministry of Education, Northeast Normal University, 5268 Renmin Street, Changchun, China

Received
7th August 2020
, Accepted 7th September 2020
First published on 8th September 2020
Recently, the binary BiI3 semiconductor has emerged as a novel and potential absorbing material for thin film solar cells. In this work, high-quality BiI3 thin films are obtained by a two-step method via iodization of BiSI precursor thin films at low temperatures. The BiSI precursor solution is made via a Bi(OH)3/I2/butylamine/CS2 method. After the iodization process, the BiSI thin film transforms into a large-grain BiI3 absorber layer. The grain size of the BiI3 thin film is more than 1 μm, which leads to a low density of defects. It is worth-noticing that all of the procedures are conducted in open air. The temperature and duration of the iodization process are systematically investigated. By selecting V2O5 and ZnO as a hole extraction layer and an electron transport layer, an all-inorganic BiI3 thin film solar cell with a structure of ITO/V2O5/BiI3/ZnO/Ag is fabricated, yielding a power conversion efficiency of 1.33%, along with an open-circuit voltage of 601 mV, a short-circuit current density of 5.57 mA cm−2 and a fill factor of 39.87%. The un-encapsulated device shows excellent stability, and the performance decreases by only 8.1% after 100 days of storage in dry air.

The photovoltaic power plays an extremely important role in the family of renewable energy. During the past decade, organic–inorganic halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have been extensively investigated due to their excellent photovoltaic properties. Researchers are devoted to achieve large-grain and pinhole-free absorbing thin films. Their power conversion efficiency (PCE) has developed rapidly, and their certified PCE has been raised to 25.2%.9. Since most of the PSCs exhibit poor stability, more and more all-inorganic perovskite solar cells with better stability have started to emerge. Furthermore, due to the toxicity of Pb, searching for a non-toxic alternative perovskite absorbing material has become a new research topic, and many lead-free halide materials with good intrinsic stability have been reported. With a chemical similarity to Pb, Bi is regarded as a promising candidate for manufacturing optoelectronic devices. Recently, bismuth-based halide materials have attracted great attention owing to their excellent optoelectronic performance.

BiI3 has a band gap of approximately 1.8 eV and a high absorption coefficient of more than 105 cm−1 in the visible spectral region, which makes it suitable for use as a photovoltaic material in thin film solar cells. The first photovoltaic device related to BiI3 was an organic solar cell with a fullerene-based light absorber prepared in 2013, where BiI3 acted as a hole transport material (HTM). In 2015, BiI3 was first used as a active absorber layer, based on a planar heterojunction solar cell reported by Lehner et al. with a PCE of 0.32%. Since the performances of most perovskite solar cells mainly depend on the morphology and the crystallinity of the absorber layer, many efforts have been made to enhance the quality of the BiI3 thin film. BiI3 is highly soluble in a variety of polar solvents, and thus the film morphology can be improved by solvent-vapor-assisted annealing. The PCE was increased to 1.0% by Hamdeh et al. by using the dimethylformamide (DMF) solvent vapor annealing method. Tiwari et al. used a poly(9,9-di-n-octylfluorenyl-2,7-diyl) (F8) hole-transport material instead of polytriarylamine (PTAA). The improvement in device performance was not only because this polymer offers a better match to the valence band maximum (VBM) of BiI3, but also because of the high quality BiI3 thin films formed by annealing the Bi2S3 thin films in iodine vapor. More recently, a BiSI interlayer between the BiI3 absorber layer and the electron-transport layer was used as an electron acceptor and thus intercepting the photo-generated electrons in BiI3 before they could decay back to the ground state, achieving a PCE of 1.21%. The devices described above all have a planar structure. Besides improving the morphology and the grain size of the thin films, there is another way to enhance the efficiency of BiI3 devices by fabricating 3D-heterojunction BiI3 thin film solar cells. Fan's and Zhao's groups fabricated BiI3 thin film solar cells by using spiro-OMeTAD and PCBM as the hole and electron transport layer materials, respectively. In these two studies, discontinuous BiI3 thin films with some pinholes were fabricated, thus organic spiro-OMeTAD and PCBM were used to fill the gaps and form smooth 3D-heterojunction solar cells. These 3D-heterojunction solar cells exhibit strong light absorption and effective carrier transport and collection, and thus they have achieved encouraging efficiencies of 1.45% and 1.5%, respectively. In our work, we used a two-step method to fabricate smooth and pinhole-free BiI3 thin films by iodization of the BiSI precursor thin film, which enables us to fabricate a planar BiI3 thin film solar cell by using inorganic V2O5 and ZnO as the hole and electron transport layers. Our all-inorganic and planar solar cell device consisting of glass/ITO/V2O5/BiI3/ZnO/Ag has a better stability compared with 3D-heterojunction solar cells.
Herein, we developed a two-step approach to fabricate high-quality BiI3 thin films with a grain size of more than 1 μm by iodization of BiSI thin films. We noted that most of the BiI3 thin films reported in the literature were directly deposited by spin-casting BiI3 DMF or DMSO solution, and thus it is difficult to achieve continuous BiI3 absorber thin films due to an extremely fast crystallization rate. To overcome this drawback, a continuous BiSI thin film is first fabricated by a spin-coating and annealing process. A BiSI precursor solution is prepared by dissolving Bi(OH)3 and iodine in a mixture of butylamine and carbon disulfide. Moreover, BiSI is an air-stable and low-toxic material, and has potential for PV application. Continuous and large-grain BiI3 thin films are achieved immediately after iodization. Inorganic and stable V2O5 and ZnO thin films are selected as the hole-extraction layer and the electron-transport layer, respectively. To date, there are few reports on all-inorganic BiI3 solar cells.

Bismuth hydroxide (Bi(OH)3, 99%), iodine (I2, 99.8%), carbon disulfide (CS2, 99.9%) and n-butylamine (CH3(CH2)3NH2, 99%) were purchased from Aladdin. N,N-Dimethylformamide (HCON(CH3)2, 99.8%) and 2-propanol ((CH3)2CHOH 99.5%) were obtained from Alfa Aesar. Vanadium oxide (V2O5, 99%), acetic acid (CH3COOH, AR) and chloroform (CHCl3, AR) were bought from Beijing Chemical Works. All chemicals were used directly without any further treatment.


First, 80 mg V2O5, 2 mL of acetic acid, and 2 mL of n-butylamine were slowly mixed under magnetic stirring at room temperature. Then the mixture was heated to 80 °C until all the solid dissolved. After cooling down, 2-propanol was added to the solution. Finally, the V2O5 precursor solution was diluted to 4 mg mL−1, followed by centrifugation at 12000 rpm for 5 min before spin-coating. All the procedures were performed under air.


The BiSI precursor solution (0.55 M) was prepared via a metal hydroxide/iodine/butylamine/CS2 method. 1.04 g (4.0 mmol) Bi(OH)3 and 0.507 g (2.0 mmol) iodine were loaded into a solution containing 1.2 mL of CS2 (20 mmol), 2.0 mL of butylamine (20 mmol), and DMF/chloroform (the volume ratio was 3:1). The mixture was stirred on a 70 °C hot plate until all the solid fully dissolved, followed by centrifugation at 12000 rpm for 5 min. Finally, a clear red solution was obtained (see Fig. S1, ESI).


The BiSI precursor solution was spun on substrates at a speed of 2000 rpm for 15 s, followed by thermal annealing on a 250 °C hot plate for 2 min in open air. A BiSI thin film with a thickness of approximately 230 nm was obtained by a single spin-coating process. Then the step described above was repeated four times to achieve the required thickness.

To obtain BiI3 thin films, the BiSI thin films were loaded into a weighing bottle (∅60 × 40 mm) with 2 mmol iodine, and then they were put on a 150 °C hot plate for 30 min. After this iodization procedure, the BiSI thin films fully transformed into BiI3 (see Fig. S1, ESI).

Solar cells were constructed with an architecture of ITO/V2O5/BiI3/ZnO/Ag. First, patterned ITO glass substrates (20 × 20 × 0.5 mm) were washed successively with deionized water and ethanol by ultrasonic treatment (for 20 min), and then they were dried under a nitrogen flow. The V2O5 precursor solution was spin-coated on the ITO substrates at 2000 rpm for 20 s and then was annealed at 300 °C for 10 min in ambient air. After cooling down, the BiSI solution was spin-coated onto the ITO/V2O5 substrates. After the iodization process, ITO/V2O5/BiI3 samples were obtained.

Immediately, the films were transferred into a sputtering chamber to deposit the intrinsic ZnO (∼50 nm) layer by radio frequency-sputtering. After that, the top Ag electrodes were thermally evaporated using a steel shadow mask. Solar cell devices with an area of 9 mm2 were finally achieved.

XRD patterns were recorded using a Bruker D8 Advance X-ray diffractometer. Raman spectrum was recorded with a 532 nm diode laser excitation source using a Horiba T64000 spectrometer. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images were captured on a Hitachi S-4800 electron microscope equipped with an energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) analyzer (Bruker AXS XFlash Detector 4010). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) spectra were recorded on a Thermo ESCALAB 250 X-ray photoelectron spectrometer at room temperature using an Al Kα X-ray source, with the binding energy calibrated by the C 1s peak (284.6 eV). UV-vis absorption spectrum was recorded on a Shimadzu UV-3600 spectrometer. PL spectrum was measured on a Hitachi F-7000 spectrophotometer equipped with a 475 nm diode laser as the excitation source. Luminescence decay curve was obtained from a Lecroy Wave Runner 6100 digital oscilloscope (1 GHz) using a tunable laser (pulse width 1/4 4 ns, gate 1/4 50 ns) as the excitation source (Continuum Sunlite OPO). The thickness of the thin film was measured using a step profiler (AMBIOS, XP-100). J–V measurement was conducted under the standard test conditions (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2, Abet Sun 2000 solar simulator) using a Keithley 2400 source meter with a Zolix I–V testing software. C–V curve was measured with an Agilent E4890A instrument in the dark. Note that a frequency of 100 kHz and an ac amplitude of 50 mV were applied for the C–V measurement. External quantum efficiency (EQE) spectrum was recorded on a Zolix SCS100 QE system. The conductivity the BiI3 thin film was determined using an ET9000 Hall effect system (Eastchanging Technologies Inc.).


Similar to most perovskite thin films, it is difficult to obtain large-grain and smooth BiI3 thin films by direct spin-coating of DMF or DMSO solution of BiI3 without using an anti-solvent. Furthermore, the BiI3 precursor solution cannot be repeatedly spin-coated to obtain a BiI3 active layer with micron thickness since the as-deposited BiI3 thin film will be destroyed by the following spin-coating process. Therefore, we choose the Bi(OH)3/I2/butylamine/CS2 route to prepare the BiSI precursor solution, and then achieve a high-quality BiI3 thin film by the post-iodization process, which was inspired by Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 thin film solar cells. First, the BiSI thin film was fabricated by spin-casting Bi(OH)3/I2/butylamine/CS2 solution, followed by an annealing process. After iodization, the BiSI thin film fully turns into a continuous and large-grain BiI3 thin film. This conversion process from a BiSI thin film to a BiI3 thin film was confirmed by X-ray diffraction (XRD) and Raman and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS).


Fig. 1a shows two XRD patterns of the thin films before and after iodization. It was found that the pattern of the BiSI thin film matches well with that of the standard orthorhombic BiSI (PDF #43-0652), and no impurity peaks are observed. After the iodization process, orthorhombic BiSI transforms completely into rhombohedral BiI3 (PDF#48-1795). The characteristic diffraction peaks of the BiI3 thin film locate at 12.8, 25.8, 27.0, 35.2 and 41.5°, corresponding to the (003), (021), (113), (116) and (300) planes, respectively. The preference of the (003) plane corresponds to 12.8°, indicating that the BiI3 thin film has a high degree of orientation along the c-axis of the unit cell. Besides, the XRD peak intensities of the BiI3 thin film are obviously stronger than those of the BiSI thin film, revealing that crystallinity can be promoted during the iodization process. In order to further confirm the presence of BiI3, Raman spectroscopic investigation was also conducted, as shown in Fig. 1b. The characteristic Raman peaks of BiI3 appear at 70, 83, 109, and 161 cm−1. These results are consistent with those of the previously calculated and reported Raman spectra for BiI3. Among them, the Raman peak at 109 cm−1 (Ag) is the main characteristic peak of BiI3.
Furthermore, the conversion from a BiSI thin film to a BiI3 thin film was verified by the XPS spectra, as shown in Fig. 1c and d. The co-existence of Bi, S and I elements in the BiSI thin film was clearly observed. The XPS peaks at 158.5 eV and 163.5 eV correspond to Bi 4f, while the peaks at 618.5 eV and 630.0 eV are the characteristic peaks of I 3d. After iodization, the XPS peak positions of the Bi3+ and I− ions remain nearly unchanged, whereas the XPS peak at 161 eV vanishes completely, which is assigned to S 2p. These results revealed that the BiSI thin film can fully turn into a BiI3 thin film upon iodization.

Fig. 2 shows the top-view and cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the BiSI and BiI3 thin films. It can be seen from Fig. 2a and c that the iodization process drastically influences the film morphology. Before iodization, the BiSI thin film consisting of BiSI nanorods has no penetrating holes, which are fatal to the solar cell performance. After iodization, a large-grain and continuous BiI3 active layer film with an average thickness of 1300 nm is obtained. On this basis, the film after iodination is still relatively flat, with larger grains and higher crystallinity, which is consistent with the XRD results shown in Fig. 1a. This suggested that the iodization process makes the film more suited to act as an active layer in solar cells. We notice that the film quality is strongly affected by the iodization temperature and the duration. It is known that a film morphology with a large grain size, less pinholes, and a compact surface is crucial to obtaining a high photovoltaic performance. First, the effects of the iodization temperature on the morphology and the crystal size of the BiI3 thin films were investigated. From the SEM images in Fig. 3a–f, we found that the grain size shows an improvement with the increasing iodization temperature, indicating higher crystallinity, which is also confirmed by the XRD data shown in Fig. S2 (ESI). The film morphologies shown in Fig. 3a and b exhibit poorly crystallized grains, attributed to the relatively low iodization temperature (125 °C). When the temperature increases to 150 °C (Fig. 3c and d), the grain growth is promoted significantly, leading to pinhole closure. On further increasing the temperature to 175 °C (Fig. 3e and f), the grain size becomes larger. But at the same time, penetrating holes start to appear as seen in the cross-sectional view SEM image, which are fatal to the cell performance. Also more pinholes can be seen from the top-view SEM image. So we choose 150 °C as the optimal iodization temperature. Besides, the iodization time is an important factor for the film morphology and the grain size. We also compared the SEM images with different iodination times from 15 to 45 min (see Fig. S3, ESI). Finally, we choose 150 °C and 30 min as the best iodization treatment conditions. The resulting BiI3 thin films show less pinholes and a decent grain size.
Next, we investigated the optical properties of the BiI3 thin film. First, the UV-vis absorption spectrum and the Tauc plot of the BiI3 thin film are presented in Fig. 4a and b. The indirect band gap of BiI3 was evaluated to be 1.83 eV, which is close to the value reported by Hamdeh. Owing to the ambient air deposition, it is believed that the surface of BiI3 could be partially oxidized to BiOI, which is also proved by the XPS spectrum, as shown in Fig. S4 (ESI). Then the steady-state photoluminescence (PL) and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) spectra were examined, as shown in Fig. 5a and b. The PL peak of the BiI3 thin film locates at approximately 710 nm, similar to the previously reported value in the literature. The PL decay curve was collected at the same wavelength, fitting with a bi-exponential equation, and the average lifetime was calculated to be 1.64 ns. The carrier lifetime is related to the crystal quality and the defect concentration. The longer the lifetime, the higher the separation probability of the electron–hole pairs. And a long carrier lifetime indicates that the probability of electron–hole separation increases, and thus the trap density will be reduced. This acts as a consequence of reduced non-radiative recombination and charge accumulation caused by the reduced grain boundaries. BiI3 is known to exhibit a short electron–hole lifetime of ∼200 ps, which indicates difficulty in efficient separation of the carrier, thus greatly limiting the photovoltaic performance. According to the previous study, the different deposition methods for BiI3 thin films such as spin-coating and the physical vapor method cannot change the carrier lifetime. However, in our two-step-deposited film, the lifetime is significantly longer than those of the BiI3 thin films fabricated by a one-step method, and the result is similar to that reported by Tiwari et al. Perhaps this is due to the high crystal quality of the BiI3 films.
Moreover, the C–V curve of the BiI3 thin film solar cell with a device structure of ITO/V2O5/BiI3/ZnO/Ag is measured to detect the net carrier concentration (see Fig. 5c). From the intercept of 1/C2vs. V, the built-in potential is estimated to be 0.73 V. According to the Mott–Schottky equation, the net carrier concentration can be calculated using the following function:
N = 2/(qKsε0A2[d(1/C2)/dV])
where
N, q, Ks, ε0 and A represent the net carrier concentration, the electron charge, the semiconductor dielectric constant, the vacuum permittivity, and the device area, respectively. Since the BiI3 film has a high degree of orientation along the c-axis, the semiconductor dielectric constant is 8.6 according to the reported value. The net carrier concentration of the BiI3 thin film is calculated to be 3.21 × 1013 cm−3, close to the concentration of an intrinsic state, indicating that the obtained BiI3 film has few defects at the grain boundaries. The low defect concentration is beneficial for enhancing the device performance. Furthermore, the hall effect measurement confirmed the weak p-type conductivity of the BiI3 thin film.

To evaluate the photovoltaic performance of the BiI3 thin films, all-inorganic thin film solar cells with a structure of ITO/V2O5/BiI3/ZnO/Ag are fabricated. The devices are prepared on pre-patterned ITO substrates. A shadow mask was used to perform the top metal contact, and the area of the single solar cell device was 0.09 cm2 (Fig. S5, ESI). Due to the high environmental stability of inorganic materials, all-inorganic devices are more suited to solve the instability issues which occur in organic/inorganic hybrid ones. The average thickness of the BiI3 absorber layer is around 1300 nm. The schematic diagram and the energy level alignment of the device are illustrated in Fig. 6a and b. The related energy level positions are obtained from the reported data. Due to the low electron collection at the BiI3/TiO2 interface, we choose ZnO as an electron transport layer because its conduction band position is close to that of BiI3. On the other hand, we choose V2O5 as a hole-extraction-layer in our devices, which is widely used in organic solar cells to substitute PEDOT:PSS. The conduction band (CB) and the valence band (VB) positions of V2O5 are very low, and its Fermi level is close to the CB, indicating the n-type behavior. The role of V2O5 in hole extraction is different from that of the common p-type hole-transport layer, such as NiO. However, it is similar to that of MoO3, which is also considered as the n-type hole-extraction-layer. Because of the significantly deeper valence band edge, the charge transport at the MoO3/organic-semiconductor is realized via the MoO3 gap states, instead of the VB. Similarly, in our device, the hole-transport of the V2O5/BiI3 interface is realized via the hole extraction from the VB of BiI3 through the low-lying gap states of V2O5. In this process, the energy barrier is dependent on the energy difference between the VB of BiI3 and the gap states of V2O5.
The V2O5 thin film is prepared by a sol–gel method in open air. Recently, we found that many types of metal oxides can dissolve in a butyric acid/n-butylamine mixture, forming a variety of precursor solutions. In this work, we found that V2O5 powder can dissolve in a mixture of acetic acid and n-butylamine, forming a clear sol–gel solution. Therefore, we can fabricate a V2O5 thin film by an acetic acid/butylamine/V2O5 solution approach. After the annealing process, a smooth V2O5 thin film can be prepared. As shown in Fig. S6a (ESI), the V2O5 thin film with a thickness of 10 nm has high transparency in the visible light region. Using Tauc plot analysis (see Fig. S6b, ESI), the indirect band gap of V2O5 is evaluated to be 2.25 eV. From the V 2p XPS spectrum shown in Fig. 7, we can see that the binding energy of the V (2p3/2) core level is 516.97 eV, in accordance with the previous reports of the XPS data on V2O5 single crystals. Moreover, it was found that V5+ are partially reduced to V4+ upon air exposure, which lowers the Fermi level, the CB, and the VB of the V2O5 thin film, compared to those of the freshly vacuum-evaporated V2O5. This result is beneficial for reducing the significantly large energy offset between V2O5 and BiI3. In addition, the V4+ states are expected to exhibit states close to the Fermi level and contribute to the formation of additional gap states.
It should be mentioned that the top ZnO thin film was deposited by the magnetron sputtering method rather than a solution approach since the bottom BiI3 thin film is sensitive to the majority of organic solvents. Different from general perovskite materials, the BiI3 thin film made by our method can tolerate magnetron sputtering and cannot be damaged. More importantly, the sputtered ZnO thin film is more compact and dense, and can serve as a barrier film to isolate water vapor and air, thus effectively improving the stability of the BiI3 solar cell device. In addition, the compact ZnO layer can efficiently prevent the diffusion of BiI3 into the metal electrode. Consequently, the Ag electrode is successfully used in our devices instead of expensive Au. The illuminated (under the standard AM 1.5G illumination) and dark current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the best-performing cell were measured and are presented in Fig. 8a. A power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 1.33% was achieved based on the device area of 0.09 cm2 with a short circuit current (Jsc) of 5.57 mA cm−2, an open circuit voltage (Voc) of 601 mV, and a fill factor (FF) of 39.87%, respectively. The PCE and FF values are comparable with the highest values in the literature. The Jsc value is not high, which is probably due to the relatively high resistance of our BiI3 film, while the Voc value is higher than those of most devices reported before, attributed to the deposition method and the high-quality of the BiI3 thin film. We measured the illuminated J–V curves for the BiI3 device with forward and reverse scans, which are shown in Fig. S7 (ESI). However, a small hysteresis exists in our work. The PCE measured in the reverse direction is lower than that measured in the forward direction, which is different from those of most lead-based perovskite solar cells. This phenomenon might be due to the inefficient separation of the electron and hole carriers in the BiI3 thin film. Moreover, the rather deep CB value of V2O5 cannot prohibit electron transport to the ITO anode.
Furthermore, the effects of the iodation temperature and the time on the PCEs of the BiI3 thin film solar cells were investigated, and the results are shown in Fig. S8 and S9 (ESI). Besides, the device performances with different BiI3 thicknesses are presented in Fig. S10 (ESI). The BiI3 thickness can be easily controlled by repeating the spin-coating and annealing procedures, and the best performance is achieved with 4 layers of BiI3. Too thick or too thin BiI3 layers are not beneficial to the solar cell efficiency. In our case, the optimal BiI3 thickness was found to be 1300 nm. If the thickness of the BiI3 thin film is less than 1000 nm, our BiI3 thin film is not continuous, and some penetrated pinholes are formed as shunt paths in the solar cell device. As a result, the power conversion efficiency of the BiI3 thin film solar cell with a thickness less than 1000 nm decreases. In addition, as the hole-extraction-layer, V2O5 has a vital influence on our devices. To further understand the role of the V2O5 thin film in the BiI3 solar cells, the photovoltaic performance of the BiI3 solar cells with different annealing temperatures and different thicknesses for the V2O5 thin films is studied (Fig. S11 and S12, ESI). The optimal conditions are found to be 300 °C and 10 nm. We believe that V2O5 also contributes to the high Voc and the FF of the devices.

Fig. 8b shows the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectrum of the best device. The band gap value of the BiI3 thin film was obtained by plotting [E × ln(1 − EQE)]2vs. E. From the intersection of the tangent and horizontal axes, the band gap of the BiI3 film is estimated to be 1.92 eV, higher than the value reported before. This might be due to the existence of BiOI on the BiI3 surface. An integrated short-circuit current was obtained by the function of  where P is AM 1.5G solar spectrum (unit: W m−2). The short-circuit current is calculated to be 5.48 mA cm−2, which is consistent with the experimental value. We note that the maximum EQE for the champion cell is only 45%, which leads to a large short-circuit current loss. The band gap of BiI3 is not the optimal band gap for the thin film solar cells, and the long-wavelength light (>750 nm) cannot be converted into electricity. This will result in a small Jsc. In addition, the carrier lifetime and the carrier diffusion length of the BiI3 thin film should be further improved for achieving high Jsc.

Fig. 9 presents the statistical efficiency distribution of 30 devices. It can be seen that the PCE is concentrated between 1.1 and 1.3%, indicating remarkable reproducibility. The stability of the un-encapsulated device was further investigated. From Fig. 10, the PCE of the BiI3 thin film solar cell exhibits 3.6% degradation after 30 days of air-storage in a desiccator (relative humidity ∼ 6%). Furthermore, we found that the PCE decreases by 8.1% after 100 days. If the BiI3 solar cell is directly exposed to air with a relative humidity of ∼40–60%, the PCE will show a slight improvement in five days, followed by a rapid decrease after 12 days. Therefore, water vapor is the crucial factor in the PCE degradation of the BiI3 thin film solar cells. When the BiI3 thin film was stored in humid air for 10 days, BiOI impurity was clearly observed from its XRD pattern (see Fig. S13 in the ESI). Therefore, further improvement in the device stability could be realized by encapsulation to prevent water vapor permeation.

In summary, we demonstrated that high-quality BiI3 thin films can be produced by iodization of BiSI thin films. During the iodination process, large-grain BiI3 thin films were obtained. Additionally, a smooth and continuous BiSI thin film can be prepared by repeatedly spin-coating the Bi(OH)3/iodine/butylamine/CS2 precursor solution, so the thickness of the BiI3 absorbing layer is highly controllable. In addition, the low density of defects and the long carrier lifetime of the BiI3 thin film are beneficial to the cell performance. An all-inorganic BiI3 thin film solar cell with a PCE of 1.33% was obtained. The solution-processed V2O5 hole-extraction layer and the compact ZnO electron-transport layer deposited by the magnetron sputtering method are also attributed to the good performance and stability of the devices. The all-inorganic devices showed good stability under dry air conditions for more than 100 days. We believe that the performance of the all-inorganic BiI3 solar cells can be further improved by optimizing the inorganic hole-transport layer and the electron-transport layer or by changing the device structure. Our work provides a new method for preparing large-grain and all-inorganic BiI3 solar cells, and it also offers a new choice for fabricating other lead-free perovskite solar cells.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 61974145 and 51672267) and the Jilin Provincial Science and Technology Development Program (20180101186JC).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: XRD patterns of the BiSI thin film and BiI3 thin films iodized at different temperatures. SEM images of the BiI3 thin films with different iodination times. XPS spectrum of O 1s of the BiI3 thin film. Transmission spectrum and Tauc plot of the 10 nm thick V2O5 thin film. J–V curves of the BiI3 solar cell measured in the forward direction and the reverse direction. J–V curves of the BiI3 thin film solar cells iodized at different temperatures and different times. J–V curves of the BiI3 thin film solar cells with different thicknesses of the BiI3 thin films. J–V curves of the BiI3 thin film solar cells with different sintering temperatures and different thicknesses of the V2O5 thin films. XRD patterns of the BiI3 thin films stored in humid air and in dry air for 10 days. See DOI: 10.1039/d0tc03753b
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020