 DOI: 10.1039/C2TA00410K
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 2089-2093

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Liang
Li
*,

Hao
Lu
 and 

Kaimo
Deng


Department of Physics, Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Thin Films, Soochow University, Suzhou 215006, People's Republic of China. E-mail: lli@suda.edu.cn; liang.li0216@gmail.com

Received
24th September 2012
, Accepted 3rd December 2012
First published on 3rd December 2012
To elucidate the intrinsic characteristics and limits of nanostructured solar cells, it is necessary to initiate studies of exploiting single nanostructures as photovoltaic elements. It is interesting to develop simple and effective methods to construct single nanostructured solar cells. In this paper, we synthesized single-crystalline CdSe nanobelts and reported their Schottky junction solar cells by a standard electron-beam lithography process. A single CdSe nanobelt was directly put on the top of an Au electrode to form a Schottky junction and the other end of the nanobelt was covered with Al/Au film to form an Ohmic contact electrode. The optimized solar cell devices showed a short-circuit current of 0.29 nA, an open-circuit voltage of 0.11 V and a cell efficiency of 1.22%. Our method presents a promising route to construct single-nanostructure junction solar cells that are applicable for emerging nanoelectronic devices.

Low-dimensional semiconductor nanostructures such as nanowires, nanorods, nanobelts and nanosheets have attracted considerable interest deriving from lateral confinement of charge carriers and phonons, resulting in novel physical phenomena and improved device performance. As a direct bandgap (Eg) semiconductor with excellent optoelectronic characteristic, one-dimensional (1D) CdSe nanostructure materials have found many potential applications in light-emitting devices (LED), biosensors, solar cells, photodetectors and lasers. Traditionally, CdSe nanostructures have been prepared using hydrothermal/solvothermal techniques, electrochemical deposition processes, chemical vapor deposition (CVD) and physical vapor deposition (PVD) processes, and colloidal methods.

Among a series of promising applications, solar cell devices based on CdSe nanostructures have been studied intensively owing to their merits of suitable bandgap (1.74 eV) for visible light absorption, tailored structure and morphology. For example, CdSe nanorods were assembled into bilayer nanocrystal solar cells with power conversion efficiencies of 3.0%. To widen the absorption wavelength of light, CdSe quantum dot-sensitized solar cells have also been developed. Recently, much attention has been paid to integrate CdSe semiconductor nanostructures into organic conjugated polymers to form organic/inorganic hybrid solar cells. Given the need to elucidate the intrinsic characteristics and limits of nanostructured solar cells in order to evaluate their potential for next generation, high-efficiency and low-cost solar cells, as well as integrated power solutions for emerging nanoelectronic devices, it is required to initiate studies of exploiting single nanostructures as active photovoltaic elements. Cao et al. fabricated solar cells by coating carbon nanotube films on single CdSe nanobelts, in which the network of nanotubes forms a Schottky junction with the underlying nanobelt and also works as a transparent electrode for the device. This device showed power-conversion efficiency of 0.72%. The obvious obstacle is that the optical transmittance of carbon nanotube films is 70–90% in the visible region and thus the incident light cannot be utilized fully. To attack this problem, their group and Dai et al. replaced carbon nanotube films with graphene films to form Schottky junctions with higher transmittance and conductivity. The power-conversion efficiency was increased to 1.25%. Although these efforts were made, it is still challenging to design other types of Schottky junctions to obtain high power-conversion efficiencies.
Here, we report a simple method to fabricate single CdSe nanobelts-on-electrodes Schottky junction solar cells using electron-beam lithography (EBL) followed by a lift-off process. The optimized device has a high conversion efficiency of up to 1.22%, which is mainly attributed to improved light absorption compared with the previously reported electrode configuration. Our results demonstrate a facile route to develop single-nanostructure Schottky junction solar cells.

The CdSe nanobelts were synthesized using a thermal evaporation process in a horizontal tube furnace. One gram of CdSe (purity >99.99%) powder in a ceramic boat was loaded into the central area of the furnace, and Si wafers covered with 10 nm Au films were used as the substrates. Before Au film deposition, the Si substrates were ultrasonically cleaned for 30 min each in acetone, ethanol and purified water. The distances between the CdSe powder and the Si substrates were 15–20 cm. The tube was pumped to a base pressure of 8 × 10−2 Torr to remove the O2, and then high-purity Ar was fed at a flow rate of 50 sccm. The pressure was maintained at about 100 Torr during the whole growth period. The temperature in the central area of the furnace was ramped to 870 °C at a rate of 40 °C min−1. The Au-coated Si wafers were positioned down-stream of the carrier flow with a temperature zone ranging from 600–700 °C. The synthesis duration was 0.5 h. After the synthesis, the as-prepared samples were collected for characterization.


The as-prepared CdSe nanobelts were characterized by field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM, Hitachi S-4800), high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM, JEOL 2010) equipped with an energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectroscope, and X-ray diffraction (XRD, Rigaku with Cu Kα radiation λ = 0.154056 nm). Photoluminescence (PL) measurements were taken at room temperature using the He–Cd laser line of 325 nm as the excitation source.


The single CdSe nanobelt Schottky solar cells were fabricated using the standard electron-beam lithography technique followed by metal film deposition (ULVAC Corp, evaporation rate of 2 Å s−1) and a lift-off procedure. The detailed experimental scheme is shown in Fig. 3.


Solar cells were characterized using a semiconductor characterization system (Keithley 2400) and a solar simulator (Peccell Technologies, Inc., PEC-L11) under air-mass (AM) 1.5G light illumination condition with a calibrated power density of 100 mW cm−2.



Fig. 1a–c show typical field-emission scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the as-prepared samples. Low-magnification SEM images (Fig. 1a and b) reveal that the nanobelts have lengths of several tens of micrometers. It can be clearly seen that the nanobelts grow out from the Au film that has been converted into nanoparticles under high temperatures. A high-magnification SEM image in Fig. 1c confirms the belt-like structure of the products, and the nanobelts have a smooth surface with uniform thickness of about 50 nm. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern (Fig. 1d) matches well the data of the standard PDF card (no. 77-0046), clearly indicating a hexagonal wurtzite structure. The higher intensity of the (100) diffraction peak compared with that of other peaks suggests that [100] is the preferred growth direction, which is consistent with the result of the selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern (Fig. 2a).

A high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) image (Fig. 2a) shows the clear lattice fringes of single crystals. The interplanar d-spacing of 0.37 nm corresponds to the (100) lattice plane of CdSe. The inset at the upper-right corner of Fig. 2a is the corresponding selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern. The HRTEM image together with the SAED pattern reveals that the CdSe nanobelt is a single crystal with the [100] growth direction. The elemental maps displayed in Fig. 2b–d demonstrate uniform distribution of the compositional elements Se and Cd. All these morphology, phase, microstructure and mapping results indicate that the as-prepared samples are pure-phase and single-crystalline CdSe nanobelts. The room temperature photoluminescence (PL) spectrum of CdSe nanobelts is shown in the ESI. The 705 nm peak comes from the band-edge emission.

Fig. 3 shows a schematic illustration of the detailed fabrication steps for the single CdSe nanobelt Schottky solar cell: (I) using a standard electron-beam lithography technique followed by 100 nm Au film deposition and lift-off procedure, T-shaped Au electrodes were formed on a Si substrate with a 200 nm thick thermal oxide layer; (II) CdSe nanobelts were suspended in ethanol and then deposited on the Si substrate, and single CdSe nanobelts were put on the top of Au electrodes; (III) the other end of the CdSe nanobelt was covered by a 10 nm/100 nm Al/Au film via the same procedure employed in step I, leaving a 1.5 μm length nanobelt as a conductive channel between the two electrodes.
The solar cells were tested under AM 1.5G light illumination at a calibrated intensity of 100 mW cm−2. The cells were illuminated from the top side and thus the incident light directly reached the CdSe nanobelt in which electron–hole pairs were produced. The fill factor and power conversion efficiency of the solar cells can be calculated using the following equations:
FF = ImVm/IscVoc = JmVm/JscVoc
(1)
η = ImVm/SPsun
(2)
where FF is the fill factor,
η is the conversion efficiency, Im (Jm) and Vm are the current (current density) and voltage at the maximum power point of the I–V curve for the illuminated device, Isc (Jsc) and Voc are the short-circuit current (current density) and the open-circuit voltage under illumination, and Psun is the incident power (100 mW cm−2) from the solar simulator. The solar cell shows an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.11 V, a short-circuit current of 0.29 nA (Jsc = 33.6 mA cm−2), and a power conversion efficiency (η) of 1.22% (Fig. 4a). The current density is calculated based on the effective junction area (the overlapping area of CdSe nanobelt and Au film: 0.862 μm2), where the charge separation takes place. In conventional structures, metal electrodes are deposited on top of active elements and it is difficult for incident light to completely pass through the metal films to reach the junction area. For example, Cao et al. reported Schottky junction solar cells by coating carbon nanotube films on individual CdSe nanobelts. The carbon nanotube film had a porous structure with an optical transmittance of 80% (at 550 nm wavelength), and had a sheet resistance of about 100 Ω square−1. This configuration ensured a conducting network as well as high-degree exposure of the underneath CdSe nanobelt to incident light. Dai et al. reported CdS nanobelt Schottky junction solar cells in which the Schottky contact Au film (100 nm) absorbed most of the simulated solar energy. Reducing the Au film thickness to 50 nm resulted in a marked degradation of the performance. Furthermore, they used Au/graphene Schottky contact combined electrodes to obtain higher performance, resulting from the merits of low series resistance, high transparency (>74%) and good Schottky contact. Compared with reported results, herein the nanobelt was directly deposited onto the Au electrode to form the Schottky contact, and thus the incident light was absorbed effectively and photoelectrons transferred quickly into the contact electrode for higher energy conversion efficiency.

Currently, the efficiencies of our single CdSe nanobelt-on-electrode Schottky junction solar cells are still lower in comparison with previously reported bulk-type structures such as CdTe–CdSe p–n heterojunctions, CdSe quantum dots-sensitized cells and CdSe–polymer hybrids. In future work, we plan to further improve the performance of our solar cells by the following methods: (i) replacing the Au electrode with higher conductivity materials such as graphene, which not only decreases the chance of Schottky interfacial carrier recombination but also improves the quality of contacts between CdSe nanobelts and electrodes due to the very thin thickness of graphene; (ii) shortening the distance between the Schottky junction and the Ohmic electrodes. This can significantly decrease the recombination chance of carriers during the transportation.
The photovoltaic mechanism of single CdSe nanobelt-on-electrode Schottky junction solar cells is explained qualitatively based on an energy band diagram (Fig. 5). As we know that there exist many uncontrollable factors including the size, surface states and doping level of as-prepared nanobelts, therefore some physical parameters such as the work function (φCdSe), the conduction band edge (EC) and the valence band edge (VC) have a variable range. Here we adopt a φCdSe of 4.2 eV, EC of 3.8 eV and EV of 5.6 eV according to recent literature. Metal Au has a work function φAu of ∼5.35 eV, and thus a Schottky junction will form when CdSe nanobelts are contacted with it and electron transfer occurs from CdSe to Au, resulting in a built-in potential Vi and the energy band bending at the interface. When the junction is illuminated by light, the built-in potential will drive photogenerated electrons to flow towards the nanobelt and be collected by the Al/Au Ohmic electrode, while holes flow toward to the Au electrode. Therefore, the Vi in the Schottky junction separates the photogenerated electrons and holes. When the solar cell is open-circuited, the separated electrons and holes will produce an open-circuit voltage Voc. When the solar cell is short-circuited, the carriers will form a current through the external circuit, generating a short-circuit current Isc.

In summary, we have developed a simple route to fabricate a single CdSe nanobelt Schottky junction solar cell by directly putting nanobelts on the top of electrodes using a typical electron-beam lithography process. This method will significantly enhance the absorption of light illumination compared with conventional structures. The optimized solar cells showed a short-circuit current of 0.29 nA, an open-circuit voltage of 0.11 V and a conversion efficiency of 1.22%. This high-performance solar cell has promising applications in nano-electronic and optoelectronic devices.


We are grateful for a Project Funded by the Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions (PAPD).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2ta00410k
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013