 DOI: 10.1039/C8EE02553C
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 756-766


P.
Dutta
*,

M.
Rathi
,

D.
Khatiwada
,

S.
Sun
,

Y.
Yao
,

B.
Yu
,

S.
Reed
,

M.
Kacharia
,

J.
Martinez
,

A. P.
Litvinchuk
,

Z.
Pasala
,

S.
Pouladi
,

B.
Eslami
,

J.-H.
Ryou
,

H.
Ghasemi
,

P.
Ahrenkiel
,

S.
Hubbard
 and 

V.
Selvamanickam


Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Houston, Houston, TX 77204, USA. E-mail: pdutta2@uh.edu

Advanced Manufacturing Institute, University of Houston, Houston, TX 77204, USA

Texas Center for Superconductivity, University of Houston, Houston, TX 77204, USA

Department of Physics & Microsystems Engineering, Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, NY 14623, USA

Materials Evaluation Laboratory, NASA Johnson Space Center, Houston, TX 77085, USA

Nanoscience and Nanoengineering, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology, Rapid City, SD 57701, USA

Received
3rd September 2018
, Accepted 18th January 2019
First published on 18th January 2019
In this report, we describe a unique roll-to-roll plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (R2R-PECVD) technique to grow high-quality single-crystalline-like Ge films on flexible metal foils, an important advancement towards scalable processing of epitaxial Ge films at low-cost. Ion-beam assisted deposition was used to create single-crystalline-like substrate templates to enable epitaxial growth of Ge films. The Ge films were highly (004) oriented, biaxially-textured and showed remarkable crystalline quality, equivalent to single-crystal Ge wafers. Subsequently, the Ge films on metal foils were used as substrates to fabricate flexible GaAs single-junction solar cell by metal-oxide chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD). The champion device showed efficiency of 11.5%, and the average efficiency of four devices was 8% at 1 sun, the highest reported on GaAs PV directly deposited on alternative flexible substrates. Devices made on CVD-Ge film exhibited significantly improved performance compared to the ones grown on sputtered Ge films. Scalable production of inexpensive and flexible epi-Ge films will not only be useful for developing low-cost and high-performance III–V solar cells, but also for emerging flexible electronic devices applications.

While contribution of solar energy to the overall energy mix is increasing at a rapid pace, drastically-new technologies are needed for it to be competitive with fossil fuels on a global scale. Gallium arsenide-based photovoltaics with its demonstrated efficiency values nearly twice as high as that of widely-used polycrystalline silicon solar cells are an obvious choice. But, their high cost, primarily due to high cost of wafers, has been an impediment. If GaAs-based photovoltaics can be fabricated on inexpensive metal substrates by continuous roll-to-roll manufacturing, there is an opportunity to combine high efficiencies with low cost. In this publication, we demonstrate a unique roll-to-roll plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (R2R-PECVD) technique to grow high-quality single-crystalline-like Ge films even on flexible metal substrates. These substrates have been used to fabricate flexible GaAs single-junction solar cells by metal-oxide chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) with conversion efficiency as high as 11.5%. GaAs-based solar cells fabricated by direct deposition on metal foils by roll-to-roll processing could be a breakthrough needed for solar energy to be competitive with fossil fuels. Additionally, the flexible, epitaxial Ge and GaAs films demonstrated in this work can be impactful for flexible electronics too.


III–V compound semiconductor solar cells have achieved the highest photo-conversion efficiency so far with single-junction GaAs and multijunction III–V solar cells demonstrating efficiencies of over 28 and 35% respectively at 1 sun. Ideal direct band-gap, long-term stability, radiation hardness and excellent opto-electronic properties of GaAs and related III–V compounds are highly suitable for high-efficiency photovoltaics (PV). However, the high-cost of III–V PV has prevented the large-scale adoption in mainstream terrestrial market and limited their use to only niche applications, primarily in space PV. It is widely accepted that the material and manufacturing costs need to be substantially reduced in order to make III–V PV viable for commercial market.

Efforts have been made over several decades to find alternative cost-effective techniques to manufacture III–V PV. Table 1 provides the efficiencies of single-junction GaAs solar cell (measured at AM 1.5) fabricated on reusable GaAs and alternative substrates. One of the major costs originates from the expensive Ge and GaAs single-crystal wafers, which are used as substrates to epitaxially grow the III–V PV devices. To address this, epitaxial lift-off (ELO) and transfer techniques were developed, and III–V solar cells were fabricated. Record efficiency of above 28% was achieved in SJ GaAs solar cells using this method. In these processes, III–V devices were lifted-off from the parent wafer and transferred to low-cost substrates, allowing multiple reuse of the parent wafer. Another III–V and low-cost substrate integration approach use mechanical bonding. However, the process scalability and cost benefits of reusing the wafers using the lift-off and bonding techniques are still unclear. It is evident from the present low-market share of III–V PV that these wafer reuse and transfer printing techniques have not been effective enough to render the III–V PV cost-competitive with Si, CdTe, CIGS and other existing PV technologies. It is imperative that a true scalable process of producing the III–V solar cells needs to be developed to further lower down the costs.
Type
Technique
Substrate
Efficiency (%)
Ref.
SJ GaAs (f)
Epitaxial lift off (ELO)
Reusable GaAs wafer
28.8
Kayes et al.
SJ GaAs (r)
SiGe grading
Silicon wafer
18.1
Andre et al.
SJ GaAs (r)
Selective area growth
Patterned Si wafer
10.4
Vaisman et al.
SJ GaAs (r)
Mechanical Bonding
Silicon wafer
13.25
Kim et al.
SJ poly-GaAs (r)
Direct growth
Poly-Ge wafers
18.2

22 and 23

SJ poly-GaAs (f)
Direct growth
Poly-Ge on Mo foil
9.2

24 and 25

SJ SCL-GaAs (f)
Direct growth/seed-and-epitaxy (IBAD)
SCL-Ge template on Hastelloy metal foil
11.5
This work
f – flexible
r – rigid
SCL = single-crystalline-like
Another alternative approach is to directly grow III–V PV and compound semiconductors on non-epitaxial low-cost substrates. Replacement of the epi-Ge and GaAs wafers with inexpensive substrates was expected to substantially reduce the cost of the devices. However, the challenge was to identify a low-cost substrate which has lattice/thermal match with GaAs and that can sustain the high growth temperatures. Heteroepitaxial GaAs growth was demonstrated on bulk single-crystal Si wafers (4% lattice mismatch, low-cost) using SiGe composition grading, thermal cycling and thick buffer layers (>3 μm) to account for the lattice mis-match of GaAs and Si and suppress misfit defects. Highest efficiency of 18.1% was achieved in single-junction GaAs solar cells on Si substrate with TDD of 1.8 ± 0.2 × 106 cm−2. However, the efficiency of the GaAs/Si devices was limited due to the challenges in achieving low threading dislocation density (<106 cm−2). Moreover, use of thick buffer layers added to the cost of the device, rendering them cost prohibitive for commercial applications. Selective-area growth (SAG) is another alternative technique to achieve high-quality GaAs on low-cost nano-patterned substrates without the use of thick buffer layers. Single-junction GaAs solar cells of 10.4% efficiency were fabricated on inactive V-grooved Si substrates using the SAG method. In another approach, GaAs films were deposited on poly-Ge wafers (with sub mm grains) and the devices demonstrated moderate efficiencies, but the cost-benefit was minimal. Furthermore, GaAs solar cell on large-grained re-crystallized Ge films on Mo and W/graphite substrates yielded poly-crystalline GaAs devices with efficiency of ∼10%. In general, direct growth of GaAs on poly-crystalline substrates resulted in polycrystalline GaAs films with μm mm sized grains with large-angle grain boundaries, intragrain and grain boundary defects, which acted as carrier recombination centers and deleteriously affected the device performance. Challenges in achieving PV quality poly-GaAs on alternative substrates stunted the progress of the poly-GaAs technology over the last decade.
To achieve higher-quality ordered (single-crystal-like) films on non-epitaxial alternative substrates, “seed-and-epitaxy” approaches have been developed where thin seed layers with good crystalline order were used as a template for subsequent epitaxial growth of the PV absorber. Single-crystal-like biaxially-textured Ge films were obtained on polycrystalline metal and amorphous glass substrates using ion-beam assisted deposition (IBAD) or oblique-angle deposition technique. IBAD is a process by which a biaxially-textured film (a film aligned both in-plane and out-of-plane directions) can be achieved on essentially any substrate at room temperature, using simultaneous deposition (sputter, e-beam evaporation, etc.) and low-energy ion-assist (typically argon) at a certain incident angle. As opposed to a polycrystalline film where grains are highly misoriented (>10 degrees misorientation angle) and disordered, a biaxially-textured film consists of crystalline grains which are aligned to each other both in the in-plane and out-of-plane directions, assuming a single-crystalline-like structure with grain misorientation angle less than 5 degrees. Similar IBAD technique was employed to grow epi-Si films, Si solar cells and GaN LEDs on flexible metal substrates and is also routinely used in the high-temperature superconductor (HTS) wire industry. The biaxially-textured films were highly aligned both in the in-plane and out of-plane directions and the grain-boundary angles were significantly lower compared to polycrystalline films. In another method, biaxially-textured Ge (111) and Ge (00l) were obtained on rolled cube-textured NiW (200) substrates using CaF2 (111) and CeO2 (00l) as intermediate layers respectively employing rolling-assisted biaxially-textured substrates (RABiTS) technique. a well-established commercial method to develop biaxially-textured metal substrates for epitaxial growth of high temperature superconductor films. It was noted that substantially better crystallographic alignment was achieved in (002) Ge templates compared to the (111) Ge templates. The high-alignment of the grains and low-angle-grain boundaries of biaxially-textured films were expected to be less detrimental to the device properties, leading to higher efficiencies. We have previously demonstrated epitaxial growth of single-crystalline-like GaAs films on low-cost, light-weight flexible metal foils using Ge films based on IBAD templates. Single-crystal-like Ge film templates, grown by roll-to-roll sputter deposition on IBAD textured buffers on metal foils, were used as substrates for epi-GaAs growth. The GaAs films consisted of 2–4 μm grains with (00l) orientation, strong biaxial texture and ultra-low-angle grain boundaries (<1 degree) and exhibited strong photoluminescence, carrier lifetime of ∼2 ns and high carrier mobilities, all indicating promise for high-performance PV application. However, to further improve the quality of the sputtered Ge template and to enable higher quality GaAs films, it was essential to develop a roll-to-roll process for Ge deposition using chemical vapor deposition method, a process which is known to yield device-quality semiconductor films and popularly used in the industry.
In this paper, we demonstrate for the first time, a method to directly grow epi-Ge films on flexible and inexpensive metal substrates using roll-to-roll (R2R) plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD). The ability to continuously deposit epi-Ge films by R2R CVD process was expected to improve both the Ge film quality (as opposed to sputtered Ge films) and process scalability. IBAD based “seed-and-epitaxy” method was used to obtain the epitaxy-enabling buffer template needed for epi-Ge growth. In addition, we also demonstrate epitaxial GaAs growth by metal–organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) and a proof-of-concept single-junction GaAs solar cell on the epi-Ge templates. The properties of R2R processed epi-Ge films and relative improvement with respect to the underlying sputtered Ge template have been described in detail. Furthermore, we have provided an in-depth insight on the properties of the epi-GaAs films and the design and fabrication of the flexible GaAs solar cell on metal substrates. The device current–voltage properties and quantum efficiency were also investigated.

To achieve GaAs epitaxy on non-epitaxial metal substrates, we adopted the seed-and-epitaxy approach using the IBAD technique to develop an appropriate lattice, thermal and structurally-matched buffer template which enables GaAs epitaxy. The IBAD technique can be used to produce a highly-aligned single-crystal-like film on an amorphous or polycrystalline substrate at room temperature. The fabrication of the multilayered buffer stack is by R2R thin film deposition processes whose details are described elsewhere. Briefly, the process began with 50 μm thick, 1.2 cm wide electropolished C-276 Hastelloy metal foils (Fig. 1 (a)), which are high-temperature tolerant and mechanically robust, amenable to growths at elevated temperatures. All the subsequent oxide buffer layers were deposited by continuous R2R PVD processes and meter lengths of the films were obtained at each layer. The multi-layered oxide buffer is shown in Fig. 1(b). First, an 80 nm Al2O3 layer was deposited by reactive RF sputtering which served as the diffusion barrier preventing metallic element diffusion from the substrate to the upper layers. Next, a thin 5 nm Y2O3 layer was deposited by ion beam sputtering which served as a nucleation layer for the IBAD MgO layer. Subsequently, a MgO layer (10 nm thick) was deposited using IBAD process at room temperature which resulted in single-crystal-like highly (002) oriented MgO films, providing the platform for heteroepitaxy of the subsequent layers. The alignment occurs within 10 nm of MgO thickness during the rapid roll-to-roll process. Next, a 60 nm thick epi-MgO layer was grown by reactive sputtering at higher temperature (∼500 °C) on the IBAD MgO layer to improve the crystalline quality. To enable Ge epitaxy, intermediate LaMnO3 (50 nm) and CeO2 (200 nm) layers were deposited by magnetron sputtering to match the lattice and structure of Ge. The CeO2 layer (cubic-fluorite), with a good structural match with Ge (cubic-diamond, ∼4% mismatch) enabled epitaxial growth of Ge. A photograph of a CeO2 buffer segment is shown in Fig. 1(b). Next, Ge layer was deposited by R2R radio-frequency (RF) sputtering on the CeO2 buffer layer resulting in single-crystal-like epi-Ge films with (004) orientation and strong biaxial texture, as shown in Fig. 1(c). The sputtered epi-Ge films on metal foils have been previously used as substrates for GaAs growth. However, high density of defects in the sputtered epi-Ge layer led to equivalent high-level of defect density in the GaAs films, deleteriously affecting the quality and performance of the devices. Therefore, improvement of the Ge layer was necessary to achieve device-quality epi-GaAs films.


To further improve the quality of the sputtered Ge layer, a PECVD Ge layer was coated over the sputtered Ge layer. A photograph of a segment of epi-Ge CVD film on sputtered Ge template on metal foil is shown in Fig. 1(c). CVD thin films, deposited in equilibrium with high purity precursors, are known to yield substantially high-quality (device-quality) material compared to sputtered films. A custom-designed R2R CVD chamber was developed to enable continuous growth of semiconductor films on flexible substrates. A schematic of the R2R chamber is shown in Fig. 2(a). The chamber was fitted with IR lamps which can heat up-to 1300 °C. Germane (GeH4) with 99.999 purity and hydrogen, purified by a palladium cell to ppb level, were used as process gases at a pressure of 2 Torr and temperature of 650 °C. A radio-frequency inductively-coupled (ICP) H2 plasma of 250 W was used during the CVD Ge growth which substantially improved the growth rate and precursor utilization. A tape moving speed of 6 cm min−1 was used to achieve a thickness of ∼ 1 μm in the Ge films. Long lengths of CVD epi-Ge films on metal foils were obtained which were subsequently used for GaAs growth. This is one of the very first reports of PECVD growth of epitaxial Ge films on flexible substrates by continuous R2R process, which is highly promising for high-volume scalable manufacturing of epi-Ge films at low-cost on alternative substrates.


III–V thin films were grown on CVD Ge template using a custom-built MOCVD tool with dual chambers. Segments of CVD Ge films were used as substrates for GaAs growth. Photograph of a GaAs film on CVD Ge template on metal foil is shown in Fig. 1(d), along with the schematic of the layer architecture. A custom-designed graphite susceptor was employed to hold the flexible substrates to ensure uniform heating of the samples in the MOCVD reactor. Trimethyl gallium (TMGa), trimethyl aluminum (TMAl) and arsine (AsH3) were used as Ga, Al and As sources, respectively. Silane (SiH4) and diethyl zinc (DEZn) were used as an n-type and p-type dopant respectively due to their low memory effect. H2, highly purified by a palladium cell to ppb levels, was used as the carrier gas. The chamber pressure was fixed at 20 Torr. While the GaAs films were grown at an optimized temperature of 650 °C, AlGaAs films were deposited at an elevated temperature of 750 °C. The device fabrication started with the deposition of undoped intrinsic GaAs layer of ∼2 μm thick on CVD Ge template on metal foil. Previously, it was observed that Ge diffuses about 500 nm in the GaAs layer and defect density decreases significantly with thickening of the GaAs layer. Thus, the role of this undoped GaAs layer was to act as a Ge diffusion barrier and to reduce defect density of the GaAs layer prior to deposition of the p–n junction. Next, a highly doped p++ GaAs layer of bulk carrier concentration (B.C.) 1 × 1019 cm−3 and 1.5 μm thickness was deposited to create a lateral current conduction layer for side contacts. Due to the intermediate oxide buffer, back contacts were not possible in the devices. Subsequently, 30 nm p++ AlGaAs layer back-surface field (B.C. = 1 × 1019 cm−3), 1.2 μm p-GaAs base (B.C. = 1 × 1017 cm−3), 50 nm n+ GaAs emitter (B.C. = 5 × 1018 cm−3), 20 nm n++ AlGaAs window layer (B.C. = 1 × 1019 cm−3) and 30 nm n++ GaAs cap layer (B.C. = 1 × 1019 cm−3) were deposited. A schematic and photograph of a fabricated GaAs solar cell on metal substrate are shown in Fig. 1(e).

Devices were fabricated using the photolithography technique, which included mesa formation to isolate the cells, deposition of top contact of Au/Ge/Ni (200/10/5 nm) and bottom contacts of Au/Zn (200/15 nm) by e-beam evaporation for n-GaAs and p-GaAs respectively and pattern formation using metal lift-off process. Transfer length measurement (TLM) was performed by deposition of metal pads with different separations to determine the sheet and contact resistance of the top and bottom contacts. The contact resistances were 5.5 and 3 Ohms for the top and bottom contact respectively. Achieving appropriate flatness of the sample surface during the photolithography steps was essential to obtain the desired pattern resolution and device yield. Etching of the flexible GaAs was performed using sulphuric acid (H2SO4):hydrogen peroxide (H2O2):distilled water (H2O) solution in 1:8:280 ratio which resulted in etch rate of ∼120 nm min−1. Removal of the parasitic absorption layer (cap layer) was performed using the same etch solution leading to an increase in the photocurrent. Finally, a double layer anti-reflection coating (ARC) of zinc sulfide (48 nm) and magnesium fluoride (102 nm) was deposited using e-beam evaporation which further enhanced the photon absorption and current density of the solar cells.
High resolution transmission electron microscopy (TEM) plan-view imaging was carried out using a JEM-2100 LaB6 microscope at 200 keV. Several locations (at least 5 spots) of representative samples (>4) were imaged to obtain a reliable defect density count. In order to study the crystallographic orientation and microstructural quality of the epilayers, high resolution X-ray diffraction (HRXRD) theta–2theta and rocking curve scans were conducted using a triple-axis Bruker D8 diffractometer. X-ray pole figure measurements were conducted using a Bruker 2D General Area Detector Diffraction System. Phi scans extracted from the pole figures were used to determine in-plane texture of the films. Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) imaging was carried out in a 55VP Zeiss SEM at 20 kV in variable pressure (VP) mode using a current of 10 × 1015 nA. Raman spectra were acquired with a triple T64000 spectrometer (Horiba) employing a blue 488 nm excitation laser wavelength in the backscattering geometry, using 50× objective to focus the incident laser beam and to collect scattered radiation. The laser intensity was kept low (<3 mW) to prevent laser-induced modification of the Si surface. Hall measurements were conducted in Van der pauw geometry using a HMS-5000 Ecopia system at room temperature. The carrier mobility was measured on several segments of the flexible Ge samples across a 50 cm length and an average value and standard deviation were reported.


Fig. 2(b) and (c) show the AFM surface morphology (and the inset shows the SEM morphology) of the CVD Ge and sputter Ge thin film templates on metal substrates respectively. The surface of the CVD Ge film consisted of inter-connected grains with pit-like regions in between, different from the underlying sputtered Ge film which did not exhibit such structures. In addition, the CVD Ge film grains appeared to be more elongated compared to the underlying sputter Ge film. The CVD Ge films were marginally smoother (r.m.s. roughness ∼ 9 ± 0.5 nm) compared to the underlying sputtered Ge layer (r.m.s. roughness ∼ 10 ± 0.5 nm). It is to note here that without the hydrogen plasma assist, a much rougher and non-uniform film was obtained. A nominal thickness of ∼1.1 ± 0.1 μm was achieved in the CVD Ge template at the tape moving speed of 6 cm min−1, as determined by focused ion beam cross-sections of multiple locations along the length of the films. The thickness of the sputtered Ge template was ∼800 nm, typically grown by the R2R sputter process.Fig. 2(d) shows the theta–2theta scan of the R2R Ge film and the underlying sputtered Ge substrate. Strong (004) peaks of Ge and absence of other orientations indicate a high degree of alignment towards the (00l) direction. The inset shows rocking curves, comparing the CVD Ge and sputtered Ge films, with peak-widths of 1.49 and 1.70 degrees respectively. The decrease in peak-width in CVD Ge indicate improvement in crystalline quality compared to the underlying sputtered Ge. Fig. 2(e) and (f) show the XRD (220) pole figure of the sputtered and CVD Ge films respectively which reveal a strong four-fold symmetry, confirming strong biaxial texture in the film. Fig. 2(g) shows the phi scans of the sputtered and CVD Ge films, extracted from the pole figure maps. Average in-plane texture spreads, estimated by fitting the peaks using Gaussian function, are 2.41 and 3.04 degrees for CVD Ge and sputtered Ge respectively. Again, the narrower peak width of CVD Ge suggested higher in-plane alignment of grains. Next, the crystalline quality of the films was examined optically using Raman spectroscopy. Fig. 2(h) shows the Raman spectra of sputtered Ge and CVD Ge films. Both films exhibited an intense and narrow Raman peaks (transverse optical mode) at 302 cm−1 corresponding to crystalline Ge. No amorphous phase was observed. The Raman peak widths, determined using a Lorentzian fit of the peaks, were 5.8 and 5.5 cm−1 for sputtered and CVD Ge respectively. The narrower Raman peak-width of the CVD Ge film indicated improved crystallinity compared to the underlying sputtered Ge. Moreover, the peak-widths were significantly narrower (indicating better crystalline quality) compared to previously reported values of Ge films grown on c-Si and other alternative substrates. Finally, Hall mobility measurements were done at room temperature to determine the carrier mobility. The unintentionally-doped CVD Ge films were n-type in character, with average carrier concentration of ∼(2 ± 0.5) × 1018 cm−3 and mobility of 230 ± 20 cm2 V−1 s−1. In comparison, the sputtered Ge film exhibited a mobility of 80 ± 20 cm2 V−1 s−1, substantially lower than that of the CVD-Ge film. It is evident from the results that coating the sputtered Ge layer with CVD Ge is important to improve the quality of the substrate and made it more conducive for high-quality GaAs growth. Furthermore, R2R continuous processing of CVD Ge helped in providing sufficient inventory of long lengths of Ge templates on metal foils for subsequent use as substrate for epi-GaAs deposition.



Fig. 3(a) and (b) shows the plan-view STEM image of undoped GaAs film deposited on CVD and sputtered Ge template respectively. Grain sizes of GaAs on sputtered and CVD Ge varied between 2–4 μm. It was clearly observed that the GaAs film on CVD Ge (Fig. 3a) exhibits far less defects (threading dislocations) compared to that on the sputtered Ge. Particularly, the inter-granular defects were substantially lower in the GaAs film on CVD Ge. Furthermore, while the defects spread across the GaAs film on the sputtered Ge template, majority of the defects in the GaAs film on CVD Ge were confined at the GB regions. The average threading dislocation density (TDD), counted manually employing several (>5) plan view images, was 4 × 108 cm−2 and 8 × 108 cm−2 for the GaAs films (2 μm thick) on CVD Ge and sputtered Ge film respectively. The defect densities were significantly higher compared to those obtained in GaAs films on high-quality and low-defect density single-crystal Ge wafer substrates where TDDs were often not generated in high numbers due to the good lattice-match of GaAs and Ge. In our case, the defects were originated from the already highly-defective Ge template where TDDs were abundant due to the >4% lattice mismatch of Ge and CeO2 buffer. Anti-phase defects (APDs) were also observed in the GaAs films due to growth on non-polar Ge templates. APDs are more common defects than TDDs during GaAs heteroepitaxy on Ge and are important to eliminate in order to achieve higher quality. However, the primary focus of this work was to control the TDDs and lower it using the CVD Ge films. At this point, no noticeable difference in APD density was observed in the GaAs films on sputtered and CVD Ge templates. A detailed analysis of the APDs in biaxially-textured GaAs films and their effect on film and device properties will be reported elsewhere. The selected-area electron diffraction pattern in the inset of Fig. 3(a) shows diffraction pattern corresponding to zinc blende structure, confirming single-crystalline nature of the film. Fig. 3(c) compares the XRD theta–2theta plot of GaAs grown on sputtered and CVD Ge templates. (004) and (002) peaks of zinc-blende GaAs verify the epitaxial growth with strong (00l) orientation. “Out-of-plane peak widths (Δω), determined from the rocking curves, shown in the Fig. 3(d), are 1.10 and 1.20 degrees for GaAs on CVD Ge and sputtered Ge template respectively. The narrowing of Δω from 1.49 degrees (CVD Ge template) to 1.10 degrees of GaAs on CVD Ge template, resulted in an improvement of texture and crystalline quality with GaAs deposition. Further, (220) pole figure of GaAs film on CVD Ge template, shown in Fig. 3(e), reveals a four-fold symmetry confirming strong biaxial texture. The in-plane texture (Δϕ) of GaAs film on CVD Ge template is 1.78 degrees as opposed to 2.2 degrees of GaAs on sputtered Ge template. Narrower Δω and Δϕ of GaAs film on CVD Ge template indicate a better crystalline quality compared to the GaAs film deposited on sputtered Ge template. Results also indicated that improved grain alignment in CVD Ge films, as shown in the previous section, resulted in better alignment in the GaAs film on CVD Ge compared to that on the sputtered Ge counterpart.

Next, room temperature steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra were acquired to investigate the optical properties of the GaAs film. Fig. 3(f) shows the normalized PL spectra of p-doped GaAs films (carrier concentration of 1 × 1018 cm−3), deposited simultaneously on CVD and sputtered Ge templates. All the samples were measured under the same conditions using a fixed excitation wavelength (690 nm) and incident power (10 mW). Strong PL intensity corresponding to GaAs band-to-band transition was obtained, attesting to the high optical quality of the films. The peak locations were 1.42 and 1.415 eV, and the peak widths (full-width at half maxima obtained by fitting using Lorentz function) were 49 and 55 meV for GaAs film on CVD and sputtered Ge template respectively. In PL analysis, broadening of peak width and shifting of peak position from ideal band-gap transition energy (1.42 eV for GaAs) indicate lowering of film quality. Therefore, narrow peak-width and peak location coinciding with band-gap transition energy point to improved GaAs optical quality on CVD-Ge template compared to its sputtered-Ge counterpart, which can be attributed to the low-level of impurities and defects in the GaAs films on CVD-Ge template. Overall, the results clearly indicated the beneficial role of the CVD Ge layer in improving the optical and structural properties of the GaAs films.

Next, flexible single-junction (SJ) GaAs solar cells were fabricated on sputter and CVD Ge templates and their photovoltaic performance was investigated. Fig. 4(a) shows the detailed schematic of the architecture of the SJ GaAs solar cell on the CVD-Ge template. Solar cell with the same structure was deposited on sputter-Ge template (sans the CVD-Ge layer). Epi-AlGaAs window and BSF layers were developed and optimized separately on Ge-templates on metal substrate and incorporated here in the device structure. Device sizes of 500–1250 μm were fabricated, and the device properties were observed to be a function of the size. Devices of 500 μm diameter showed the best performance while the larger devices (750, 1000 and 1250 μm dia) showed a 10–15% drop in performance, which can be due to the increased number of grains and GBs in the device active area (see ESI Table T3) Fig. 4(b) shows the dark-current versus voltage (I–V) plot for the flexible SJ GaAs solar cell (500 μm in diameter) on CVD-Ge template. Diode behavior with high rectification and distinct kick-in voltage was observed. The diode ideality factor (n) and reverse saturation current (Io), determined by fitting the dark I–V curve using standard diode equation, were 2.6 (for voltages between 0.5 to 0.6 V) and 2.2 × 10−8 A respectively, which are higher than the previously reported n of ∼2 and Io of ∼10−9 A for champion GaAs devices on wafer substrates. The high value of n and Io of the flexible GaAs cell reported here suggest an increased non-radiative recombination which may be attributed to the high-density of grain boundaries, intra-grain defects and un-passivated sidewalls and perimeters of the flex-GaAs cells. Currents flowing locally in the edge region, crystal defects and grain boundaries can also be a major contributing factor of non-ideal behavior and have been previously reported for Si and GaAs junctions with n > 2. Efforts to improve the material quality (reduction of TDDs) as well as implementation of passivation techniques are currently underway to mitigate this recombination loss. InGaAs/GaAs strained SLs with two-step GaAs growth and combined thermal annealing steps led to a significant reduction in defect density by an order of magnitude. Further defect density reduction can be achieved by employing selected area epitaxy (SAE) which is currently in progress. In addition, hydrogen and phosphine plasma treatment as well as citric acid wet treatment are being carried out to passivate the GB and side-walls. The impact of the GBs on film and device properties are currently under investigation and initial results suggest that the GBs at the p–n junction interface play an important role in the recombination characteristics of the devices.


Fig. 4(c) shows the illuminated current density versus voltage (J–V) plot of a SJ GaAs solar cell on CVD (black curve) and sputtered Ge (red curve) templates on metal substrates. An Oriel-200 solar simulator (calibrated by NREL) was used as the light source at 1 sun intensity (100 mW cm−2, AM 1.5G) at 25 °C. The devices had the parasitic cap layer (30 nm highly doped GaAs layer) removed and an anti-reflection coating deposited to enhance light absorption. The top contacts created a 5% shadowing and the probe tips, which were placed directly on the top contacts during measurement, caused an additional shadowing of 3% of the active area. The champion device showed efficiency of 11.5% at 1 sun. This is in good agreement with the modelling result reported by Jain et al. for GaAs with TDD of ∼108 cm−2. Short circuit current density (Jsc) of 25 ± 0.4 mA cm−2, open circuit voltage of 642 ± 10 mV, and fill factor (FF) of 72 ± 2% were achieved in the champion cell after cap layer removal and with ARC coating. The initial as-fabricated, cap-layer removed, and ARC coated device parameters are shown in the ESI. The average efficiency of multiple devices (>4) of same size fabricated in a batch was 8%. This is by far the highest efficiency achieved in GaAs SJ cells directly deposited on alternative flexible substrates. It is a substantial improvement from the 3.6% efficiency reported previously of GaAs SJ solar cell on poly-Ge on Mo substrate, and 1–2% efficiencies of Si solar cells on similar textured metal substrates. Comparatively, the SJ GaAs solar cell fabricated on the sputtered Ge template showed a significantly reduced efficiency of 6.7% in the champion device, with Jsc of 18.6 ± 0.4 mA cm−2, Voc of 570 ± 10 mV and FF of 63 ± 3%. The average efficiency of 4 devices was 5%. The improved performance of the solar cells on CVD Ge templates may be attributed to higher quality of GaAs films on CVD Ge (lower defect density, higher crystalline quality and better alignment of the GaAs grains), as observed in the materials property investigation. Average series (Rs) and shunt resistances (Rsh) of both the devices, extracted from the slopes of the J–V curve near the short circuit current and open circuit voltage, were of 260 ± 50 and 1150 ± 50 Ohms, respectively. In general, the devices were limited by low shunt resistance which may be due to the grain boundaries along the thickness of the cell causing shunt paths and also due to possible sidewall leakage. However, the series resistances were reasonably small which may be due to the low contact resistance of the top and bottom contacts. Also, there were no statistically significant differences in the devices made on CVD and sputtered Ge in terms of Rs and Rsh. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) of the SJ GaAs cell on metal substrate is shown in Fig. 4(d) was extracted from spectral response measured using an Oriel IQE-200 setup with a tungsten filament light source and Newport monochromator calibrated using Silicon and Germanium reference detectors. The quantum efficiency yield was moderate with a peak of ∼58% at the lower wavelength region. The downward slope of QE from 500–800 nm suggest insufficient absorption in the base and/or short diffusion length of minority carriers. The EQE results were fitted to using the minority carrier drift-diffusion model, or Hovel model to extract diffusion lengths of ∼1.1 μm in the emitter and ∼0.2 μm in the base. We previously measured the carrier lifetime (∼2 ns) and estimated diffusion length of ∼1.2 μm for carriers in the GaAs films on metal foils. Accordingly, we designed the base thickness (∼0.8–1.2 μm) to enable effective carrier collection. However, the recombination at the grain boundaries, sidewalls and interfaces which are not completely understood may have contributed to the overall low EQE. The low EQE may also be due to inherent low-absorption coefficient of the GaAs films on metal substrates, indicated by separate optical studies not shown here. Further investigations are underway to implement light management techniques (surface texture, back reflector) to enhance the optical absorption in the films. In overall, there remains a significant room for improvement to harness the full potential of the optoelectronic efficiency of these flexible GaAs solar cells. Improvement in defect density, introduction of passivation methods, incorporation of light-management techniques and development of multi-junction device design are essential and currently underway to further enhance the photo-conversion efficiency of these flexible GaAs devices on metal substrates.

We have demonstrated a method to produce epitaxial single-crystalline-like Ge films on metal foils using continuous roll-to-roll PECVD process. This marks a significant advancement towards scalable production of high-quality epi-Ge films on flexible, light-weight and inexpensive substrates for large-scale manufacturing of optoelectronic devices. The flexible CVD Ge films exhibited remarkable crystalline quality with strong biaxial texture and (00l) orientation. The Ge templates were subsequently used for a proof-of-concept single-junction flexible GaAs device development. An 11.5% power conversion efficiency was achieved at 1 sun in the champion device, with VOC of 642 ± 10 mV, JSC of 25 ± 0.4 mA cm−2, and FF of 72 ± 2%, which is a record for GaAs solar cells directly deposited on alternative substrates. Improved quality GaAs films on CVD Ge templates resulted in increased efficiency. This work lays a pathway towards developing high-efficiency and low-cost GaAs solar cells on inexpensive flexible metal substrates. However, further improvement in defect density, grain-boundary passivation and device efficiency is required to propel this technology towards commercial success.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work is supported by funding from the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) SunShot Initiative program (Award #: DE-EE-0006711), Advanced Manufacturing Institute, and Texas Center for Superconductivity at the University of Houston.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ee02553c
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019