 DOI: 10.1039/D2EE04045J
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2023, 16, 2226-2238


Youngwoong
Kim
,

Geunjin
Kim
,

Eun Young
Park
,

Chan Su
Moon
,

Seung Joo
Lee
,

Jason J.
Yoo
,

Seongsik
Nam
,

Jino
Im
,

Seong Sik
Shin
,

Nam Joong
Jeon
* and 

Jangwon
Seo
*

Division of Advanced Materials, Korea Research Institute of Chemical Technology (KRICT), Daejeon 34114, Republic of Korea. E-mail: njjeon@krict.re.kr

SKKU Advanced Institute of Nanotechnology (SAINT) and Department of Nanoengineering, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 16419, Republic of Korea

Chemical Data-Driven Research Center, Korea Research Institute of Chemical Technology (KRICT), Daejeon 34114, Republic of Korea

Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon 34141, Republic of Korea. E-mail: jwseo@kaist.ac.kr

Received
15th December 2022
, Accepted 28th March 2023
First published on 29th March 2023
In state-of-the-art n–i–p structured perovskite solar cells (PSCs), a dopant for doping hole transporting materials (HTMs) is a crucial component, which affects not only the electrical properties of HTMs, but also the performances and stabilities of PSCs. In this paper, we report new dual functional ionic liquids (ILs) consisting of various alkylammoniums (from butyl to decyl) and bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide (denoted as BATFSI, HATFSI, OATFSI, and DATFSI) as a dopant and surface passivator for highly efficient and stable PSCs and modules. Among these ILs, OATFSI provides enough miscibility with a poly(triarylamine) solution, which results in a smoother morphology of the hole transporting layer (HTL) with an enhanced electrical property via efficient doping. Simultaneously, OATFSI passivates the perovskite surface in situ, during spin-coating deposition of the HTL. Highly efficient and stable OATFSI-based PSCs are fabricated with a mesoporous n–i–p structure and a maximum power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 23.34%, due to reduced non-radiative recombination and better charge extraction. To verify the scalability of our new IL dopants, perovskite modules with a high PCE of 18.54% (on the aperture area of 224.89 cm2) and 19.91% (on the active area of 209.39 cm2) are demonstrated. We believe our work provides useful guidelines to achieve efficient and stable PSCs and modules for commercialization.

Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have received great attention as renewable energy devices due to their high efficiencies. Despite the remarkable efficiencies of PSCs, their long-term stabilities are still far from the level required for commercialization of PSCs. To date, efficient PSCs include doped hole transporting materials (HTMs) in a Li-based dopant system (e.g. LiTFSI + tBP), but the LiTFSI-doped HTMs suffer from hygroscopic, perovskite-corrodible characteristics and a Li ion migration problem, affecting both device stability and efficiency. Therefore, to ensure both high efficiency and stability, LiTFSI in HTMs should be replaced with a new dopant. Here we develop new dual functional ionic liquid (IL) dopants, alkylammoniun TFSIs (named BATFSI, HATFSI, OATFSI, and DATFSI). These IL dopants not only effectively enhance the electrical properties of HTMs, but also in situ passivate defects on the perovskite surface during the HTM deposition, resulting in outstanding efficiency and long-term stability of PSCs. Furthermore, we verify the scalability of our IL dopants by demonstrating high performance perovskite modules with PCE approaching 20% (19.91% on the active area of over 200 cm2). This demonstration suggests the remarkable potential of our IL dopants as promising dopants for efficient and stable PSCs and modules towards the commercialization of PSCs.


Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have attracted enormous attention as renewable energy devices based on their high efficiencies. Since the Miyasaka group reported the first perovskite-based solar cell with a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 3.8% in 2009, PSCs have been rapidly developed and recently a high certified PCE of 25.7% was reported. Among the state-of-the-art n–i–p PSCs, most efficient PSCs with PCE greater than 20% employ 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis[N,N-di(4-methoxyphenyl)amino]-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD) and poly[bis(4-phenyl)(2,4,6-trimethylphenyl)amine] (PTAA) as hole transporting materials (HTMs) in their device structures. However, these HTMs have intrinsically low hole mobility and conductivity in thick films, due to their amorphous nature originating from the twisted structure of triarylamine, leading to high series resistance and serious charge recombination in PSC devices. To address this issue, doping dopants into HTMs has been suggested as an effective approach to enhance the electrical properties.

Among various dopants for doping HTMs, lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (LiTFSI) is the most commonly used to improve the electrical properties of HTMs, leading to high performance n–i–p PSCs. However, LiTFSI negatively affects the operation and stability of PSC devices: first, LiTFSI is highly hygroscopic and can attract water molecules when dispersed inside a HTM, providing a pathway for the ingress of water into the perovskite layer through the HTM, and finally causing degradation of the perovskites. In addition, LiTFSI is not soluble in organic solvents for dissolving HTMs, such as toluene and chlorobenzene. Accordingly, an additional solvent (i.e. acetonitrile) is usually employed to deliver LiTFSI into the HTM solution. Although acetonitrile is used, the separation and aggregation of LiTFSI can occur in the HTM solution, which might interrupt the formation of homogeneous hole transporting layers (HTLs). To prevent this aggregation of LiTFSI, another additive, 4-tert-butylpyridine (tBP), should be incorporated into the HTM solution. However, acetonitrile and tBP are also known as perovskite-corrodible polar solvents. Even small amounts of acetonitrile and tBP in an HTM solution could cause pin holes and voids in both the perovskite layer and the HTL. Finally, as Li ions are so small, they can be easily diffused into the bulk perovskite layer and can also accumulate at the surface of the electron transporting layers (ETLs), which affects the performance and long-term stability of PSCs. Therefore, to ensure both high efficiency and stability, LiTFSI in HTMs should be replaced with a new dopant.
First, to exclude Li-ions from LiTFSI, other metal-based TFSIs (i.e. NaTFSI, AgTFSI, and ZnTFSI2) were introduced into the HTMs, leading to a performance comparable to that obtained using LiTFSI. However, these dopants are still moisture sensitive and require co-dopants (i.e. a cobalt-based dopant known as FK209) to achieve high performance as well as perovskite-corrodible acetonitrile and tBP to prepare HTM solutions. For the same purpose, ionic liquid (IL) dopants with an organic cation containing a hydrophobic chain were introduced as another candidate for Li-free, TFSI-based dopants. For example, the functional IL dopant anchoring a pyridyl group, BuPyIm-TFSI, was successfully utilized in the absence of harmful tBP. Recently, Ahmad et al. reported a hydrophobic IL dopant named BMPyTFSI to provide PSCs with improved long-term shelf stability under humid conditions. Nevertheless, these IL dopants required relatively complicated synthetic routes and are also processed with corrosive acetonitrile. Considering the beneficial features (low volatility, high viscosity, functionality, hydrophobicity, and thermal stability) of ILs, developing new IL dopants to achieve both efficiency and stability of PSCs is still of great interest. However, using the reported IL dopants in PSCs still led to moderate efficiencies lower than 16%. To date, no further studies have explored device stability using IL dopants under thermal stress and light soaking. In this regard, it is crucial to design and develop desirable IL dopants that are easy to synthesize, sufficiently soluble in common processing solvents without additive solvents, and do not corrode the perovskite layer.
Herein, we synthesized new dual functional ionic liquid dopants via a simple acid–base reaction between alkylamines (butylamine, hexylamine, octylamine, and decylamine) and bis(trifluoromethane)sulfonimide (HTFSI) to give alkylammonium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imides (alkylammonium TFSIs) (named BATFSI, HATFSI, OATFSI, and DATFSI) for highly efficient and stable perovskite solar cells. Among the dopant series, the longer aliphatic chains (more than eight carbons) in the ammonium cation parts allow better miscibility of the dopants with the PTAA solution, leading to a smoother morphology of the PTAA HTL. TFSI as the anion part provides an enhanced electrical property to the HTL through an efficient doping process as a dopant. Simultaneously, OATFSI can in situ passivate defect sites on the surface of the perovskite layer, which is evidenced by time-correlated single-photon counting (TCSPC) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements. As a result, in a typical mesoporous n–i–p structure, OATFSI-based PSCs exhibited a maximum PCE of 23.34% with higher open-circuit voltage (VOC) and fill factor (FF) values than those of conventional dopant-based PSCs. This is likely due to the reduction of non-radiative recombination and better charge extraction by passivation using OATFSI. To extend this approach into a large-scale deposition for the commercialization of PSCs, we demonstrated a large-area perovskite module of 225 cm2 and achieved PCEs of 18.54% and 19.91% on the aperture area and active area, respectively. We believe that our work can provide guidance to develop efficient and stable PSCs and to realize the commercialization of perovskite modules.

A new series of IL alkylammonium TFSI-based dopants was synthesized by a neutralization reaction between basic alkylamine with four different alkyl chain lengths (from butylamine to decylamine) and acidic HTFSI and confirmed by 1H NMR spectroscopy (Fig. 1a and Fig. S1, ESI). Synthetic details are described in the Experimental section. The alkylammoniums were selected as the cation. The alkylammonium has an aliphatic alkyl chain, and thus is able to impart miscibility (or solubility) in organic solvents such as toluene and chlorobenzene, in which HTMs are dissolved well. Moreover, the alkylammonium moiety plays a key role in passivating defect sites on top of perovskite layers by reacting with the perovskite and generating a 2D-perovskite structure, like other alkylammonium-based materials (i.e. butylammonium bromide (BABr), octylammonium bromide (OABr), and octylammonium iodide (OAI)), leading to highly efficient PSCs. For the counter part of alkylammoniums, a TFSI anion was chosen. It is known that the TFSI anion is widely used due to its lower toxicity and higher stability than other counter anions, such as BF4− and PF6−. Due to the strong electron withdrawing property of CF3SO2 groups in a TFSI molecule, the negative charge on the nitrogen atom is well delocalized, thus leading to a weak tendency to associate with organic cations.

First, we checked the miscibility of alkylammonium TFSIs with a PTAA solution. The conventional LiTFSI dopant system essentially contains harmful acetonitrile and tBP, which can corrode the perovskite layer. Furthermore, during the deposition of HTM, they rapidly evaporate due to their low boiling point and/or volatile nature, thereby causing a different solubility of HTL components and a change in the compositional ratio. Thus, this could lead to a batch variation in the HTL formation, which can be more critical for the fabrication of large-area modules. Thus, it is ideal to exclude these solvents from HTM coating solution for a higher reproducibility of the HTL deposition. We designed the alkylammonium TFSI with various alkyl chain lengths to ensure their miscibility in the PTAA solution without the assistance of harmful solvents. To explore the effects of the alkyl chain lengths of alkylammonium TFSIs on their miscibility, IL dopants were added into each PTAA solution (10 mg mL−1 in toluene) without any delivery solvent or additive. The miscibility was compared among them as well as with commercial IL dopants (BMIMTFSI and BMPyTFSI) at various dopant concentrations (from 9.75 mM to 304.59 mM in PTAA solution). As shown in Fig. 1b and Fig. S2 (ESI), at a low dopant concentration of 9.75 mM, all the alkylammonium TFSI dopants were miscible in the solutions. In contrast, the other two commercial IL dopants showed immiscible characteristics at this concentration. When the dopant concentration was increased, relatively short alkylammonium TFSIs, BATFSI and HATFSI, became immiscible in the PTAA solution at 24.37 and 80.41 mM, respectively (Table S1, ESI). Unlike BATFSI and HATFSI, the dopants with long octyl and decyl chains have high miscibility limits up to 243.67 mM. Next, the film morphology of PTAA with four different alkylammonium TFSIs was compared using optical microscopy (OM) and an atomic force microscope (AFM). The dopant concentration was 9.75 mM, at which all dopants have enough miscibility in the PTAA solution. The OM images are shown in Fig. 1c. Even though all the dopants have sufficient miscibility, the morphology of the PTAA films was distinctly different. Some aggregates were found in the films using BATFSI and HATFSI, which possibly originate from their relatively low miscibility. By contrast, a smooth morphology was observed in the films using highly miscible OATFSI and DATFSI. In the AFM images, the PTAA films with BATFSI or HATFSI have a high roughness due to aggregation and/or pinholes. By contrast, the PTAA film with OATFSI has the lowest roughness with almost no aggregates and no pinholes. Interestingly, the PTAA with DATFSI has no aggregation, but many pin holes, which might not be observed due to the size of the pinholes (200–300 nm) in the OM image (Fig. S3, ESI). Based on the miscibility and microscopy images, we decided to use OATFSI, which provides notable differences such as distinguishable miscibility and film morphology. Our suggested dopant system employs only one solvent of toluene, which is more cost-effective as compared with the conventional dopant system using an additional solvent (acetonitrile) and additive (tBP).
In addition to the miscibility and film morphology, we tested the compatibility of OATFSI with a perovskite film and also compared this with those of commercial IL dopants (named BMIMTFSI and BMPyTFSI). One drop of each IL dopant (without dilution) was dropped on perovskite layers. After 10 min, the drops of IL dopants were washed off with chloroform. As shown in Fig. S4 (ESI), for the perovskite layers treated with BMPyTFSI and BMIMTFSI, the surface damage by the IL dopants was visible to the naked eye, whereas for the perovskite layer with OATFSI, only a faint trace was observed on the contact area of the perovskite surface. This observation indicates that OATFSI is a more suitable dopant for PSCs due to its high miscibility and compatibility with the PTAA solution and perovskite. Moreover, the use of OATFSI with a diluted condition is expected to produce more stable and reproducible PSCs.
Next, to confirm the doping ability of OATFSI as a dopant, electron spin resonance (ESR), ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS), and UV-Vis absorption measurements were conducted. For ESR measurements, pristine PTAA film and PTAA film with 9.75 mM of OATFSI were prepared on a glass substrate. The doping process of PTAA using TFSI-based dopants is reported to be accelerated by light irradiation in ambient air. Therefore, before the ESR measurement, both PTAA films were exposed to light in air for 1 h under the same condition. For PTAA with OATFSI, a distinct signal corresponding to radical formation appeared, while the signal of pristine PTAA was negligible (Fig. 1d). In the UPS spectra, the work function of PTAA with OATFSI was found to be 4.49 eV whereas the PTAA without a dopant has a work function of 3.98 eV, as shown in Fig. S5a and b (ESI). Also, the Fermi level of PTAA with OATFSI (0.80 eV) was closer to the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) level than that (1.08 eV) of PTAA without a dopant. These results indicate that the OATFSI additive can work well as a dopant by generating radical species, similar to other reported dopants.
To obtain more information on the doping property for OATFSI, UV-Vis absorption spectra were measured. We prepared PTAA films using various concentrations of OATFSI comparable to the conventional LiTFSI + tBP system and irradiated light onto the PTAA films for up to 1 h. In Fig. S6 (ESI), new absorption features in the range of 400–600 nm appeared for all PTAA films after irradiation, and they are associated to the formation of doped PTAA. Nevertheless, all samples show a clear distinction in the intensity of the absorption in this range. It is found that the PTAA film with 4.87 mM of OATFSI has a peak corresponding to the doped PTAA with a similar intensity to that of the LiTFSI-based PTAA film (4.74 mM of LiTFSI under optimization conditions). In addition, peaks of the doped PTAA were enhanced with greater amounts of OATFSI. This means that OATFSI has a comparable doping ability with the conventional LiTFSI + tBP system and as the OATFSI concentration is increased, more doped species of PTAAs are generated in the film.
To evaluate the electrical properties of PTAA films with OATFSI, conductivity was measured using the 4-point probe method. As shown in Fig. 1e, PTAA without a dopant has an extremely poor electrical property. On the other hand, high conductivity of PTAA films was achieved with the addition of dopants into the PTAA films (Table S2, ESI). The PTAA film with 4.87 mM of OATFSI possesses a comparable conductivity of 3.28 × 10−5 S cm−1 to that of the conventional Li dopant-based PTAA (2.99 × 10−5 S cm−1). As the OATFSI concentration was increased to 9.75 mM and 14.62 mM, the conductivity of the PTAA films was gradually increased to 1.06 × 10−4 S cm−1 and to 1.22 × 10−4 S cm−1; a four-fold increase in the conductivity. This result correlated well with the results of the UV-Vis absorption measurements in Fig. S6 (ESI).

To examine the effects of OATFSI as the dopant on device performance, we fabricated PSCs with a mesoporous n–i–p structure of fluorine-doped SnO2 (FTO)/blocking TiO2 (bl-TiO2)/mesoporous TiO2 (mp-TiO2)/perovskite/PTAA with OATFSI/Au. Various concentrations of OATFSI (0–14.62 mM) were incorporated into PTAA solutions to optimize the performance of PSCs. Fig. 2a shows the current–density–voltage (J–V) curves for PSCs using different concentrations of OATFSI. The device performance and statistics of the PSCs are summarized in Fig. 2b, Fig. S7 and Table S3 (ESI). The PCEs of the PSCs gradually increased when the concentrations of OATFSI were increased. The maximum efficiency of PSCs was achieved when 9.75 mM of OATFSI was applied. At 12.18 mM of OATFSI, although the maximum PCE of PSCs was comparable to that of PSCs with 9.75 mM of OATFSI, the average PCE of the devices began to decline slightly. Finally, the PCEs of PSCs at 14.62 mM of OATFSI significantly decreased. The PCE trend of PSCs in terms of the OATFSI concentration closely matched their FF trend (Fig. S7b and c, ESI). Quite interestingly, the VOC trend was very different from the PCE trend. As shown in Fig. 2b, in the low concentration region (2.44–7.31 mM of OATFSI), relatively lower VOC values (below 1 V) were found whereas in the high OATFSI concentration region (9.75–14.62 mM), higher VOC values (over 1 V) were found. This behavior is not as common as the conventional case using LiTFSI + tBP. Therefore, this unusual result motivated us to investigate the surface property of the perovskite film after the deposition of the HTM with OATFSI.

To this end, we first prepared a pristine perovskite film and a bilayer film of perovskite/PTAA (with 9.75 mM of OATFSI). For the bilayer film, we removed the PTAA layer from the top of the perovskite layer using Scotch tape. We then performed XPS measurements to compare the chemical surface property of the two perovskite films (Fig. 2c and Fig. S8, ESI). For the pristine perovskite film, Pb 4f7/2 and 4f5/2 peaks were assigned at ∼143.4 eV and ∼138.5 eV with small shoulder peaks corresponding to metallic Pb at ∼141.6 eV and ∼136.9 eV, respectively. As seen in Fig. 2c, for the perovskite film after peeling off the PTAA layer, peaks of Pb 4f were significantly shifted to lower binding energies with reduced metallic Pb peaks. This result clearly indicates that under coordinated Pb2+ ions on the top surface of the perovskite film can be passivated after the deposition of the PTAA layer (Fig. 2d). From these results, we speculate that OATFSI is a dopant and is also responsible for the surface passivation in the high dopant concentration region. This is supported by the structural similarity of OATFSI to OAI and OABr, which are widely used to effectively reduce the surface defects and form a 2D perovskite on top of a 3D perovskite, thereby enhancing the VOC and FF values of the PSC devices. Also, it is proved that OATFSI interacts well with the perovskite layer by density functional theory (DFT) calculation (Fig. S9, ESI). DFT calculation shows that the binding energy of OA and TFSI molecules is about −5.62 eV, which indicates strong bonding between molecules and formamidinium lead iodide (FAPbI3). The charge density difference plot presents the charge transfer among molecules and FAPbI3, which supports the large binding energy of OATFSI.

To obtain a better understanding of the dual-function of OATFSI (dopant and surface passivator), the OATFSI-surface treated PSCs were compared with non-treated PSCs. To this end, 4.87 mM and 9.75 mM of OATFSI-containing PTAAs were selected as representatives in the low and high VOC region, respectively. Surface treatment was carried out by using a 5 mM OATFSI solution in toluene without additional thermal annealing. J–V curves are shown in Fig. 3a and the photovoltaic properties are listed in Table S4 (ESI). At 4.87 mM of OATFSI, the PSCs without surface treatment displayed relatively poor efficiencies. After surface treatment, the average PCEs of the PSCs were dramatically increased by 4.65% and 4.01% in reverse and forward scans, respectively, which is attributed to the remarkable enhancements of the VOC value. By contrast, in the case of 9.75 mM of OATFSI, increments of the average PCEs after surface treatment were only 1.46% and 0.40% in reverse and forward scans due to a relatively marginal increase in the VOC value. It is noted that the deposition process of the PTAA solution (containing a large amount of OATFSI) could unintentionally induce an in situ surface passivation effect.

To gain deeper insight into the surface passivation during the PTAA coating process, TCSPC measurements were carried out. It is known that the carrier lifetime of a perovskite can be increased by surface treatments, which passivate defect sites on the perovskite surface and grain boundaries, reducing non-radiative recombination paths. To confirm defect passivation by OATFSI, we compared the carrier lifetime of OATFSI-treated perovskite layers with that of pristine perovskite layers on quartz substrates (the scheme on the left in Fig. 3b). The perovskites with the surface treatments have a longer carrier lifetime of ∼10 μs, which is 1.6 times higher than that (∼6.1 μs) of the non-treated perovskite layers (Fig. 3c). This is evidence that the OATFSI dopant has a strong interaction with the perovskite layer and reduces the surface defects. However, this surface treatment of OATFSI did not accompany the formation of a 2D-perovskite layer, which is revealed from the grazing-incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) measurements. This behavior is quite different from OAI and OABr treatment in previous studies (Fig. S10, ESI). The recent report on octylammonium with various counter anions (such as BF4−, TFA−, and TsO−) also explained that steric hindrance and the nature of the counter-anions could be one of the reasons for not forming a 2D-perovskite layer. In our case, the large TFSI− ions do not penetrate into the perovskite layer and do not form a 2D-perovskite structure due to the anionic size difference, and thus the ionic liquid reacts only with the defects on the surface and does not reconstruct into a 2D-perovskite layer on the surface. In addition, the carrier lifetimes of non-treated perovskite layers covered by PTAAs using 4.87 mM or 9.75 mM of OATFSI were measured (the scheme on the right in Fig. 3b). Fig. 3d displays the carrier lifetime of the perovskite with the PTAAs and a summary of long components of lifetimes is listed in Table S5 (ESI). It is found that both samples showed fast decay and slow decay. The fast decay is likely related to carrier transfer from the perovskite to the HTM. After the charge transfer, the lifetime of the carriers remaining in the perovskite was recorded as the long component of the slow decay. Therefore, we fitted the slow decay after 2 μs as the long component to compare the carrier lifetimes of perovskites covered by the PTAA with 4.87 mM and 9.75 mM of OATFSI. It is noteworthy that the perovskite film covered with PTAA using 9.75 mM of OATFSI showed about 2.2 times longer lifetime (30 μs) than that of the perovskite covered with PTAA using 4.87 mM of OATFSI (13 μs). This tendency of lifetime change is quite similar to the change in lifetime for perovskite layers before and after OATFSI surface treatment. We thus concluded that during the deposition of the PTAA solution with a large amount of OATFSI on top of the perovskite surface, OATFSI as a dual function dopant not only doped the PTAA polymer, but also passivated defects of the perovskite surface.

To investigate the performance of PSCs with OATFSI dopant as compared with PSCs with conventional dopants, mesoporous n–i–p structure PSCs consisting of FTO/bl-TiO2/mp-TiO2/Perovskite/PTAA with dopants/Au were fabricated. First, we compared OATFSI-based PSCs with conventional LiTFSI + tBP-based PSCs. J–V curves and statistics of the PCEs are presented in Fig. 4a and b. Compared with the LiTFSI-based PSCs with a PCE of 21.23% (VOC = 1.033 V, short-circuit current density (JSC) = 25.60 mA cm−2, FF = 0.803) in a reverse scan, the OATFSI-based PSCs exhibited a higher PCE of 22.63% (VOC = 1.065 V, JSC = 25.55 mA cm−2, and FF = 0.832) with relatively less hysteresis. The higher PCE of the OATFSI-based PSCs originated from their higher VOC and FF values relative to those of LiTFSI-based PSCs. It was also revealed by transient photocurrent (TPC) measurements (Fig. 4c) that the carrier extraction from the perovskite to the HTL in the OATFSI-based PSCs (decay time, τ ∼ 0.89 μs) is faster than that in the LiTFSI-based PSCs (τ ∼ 1.28 μs). The results were likely associated with better photo-carrier extraction and passivation effects of the OATFSI-based PSCs compared with the LiTFSI-based PSCs. In addition, the carrier lifetime of the long component of the OATFSI-based PSCs (∼30 μs) was much longer than that of the LiTFSI-based PSCs (∼11 μs). This means many defects might still exist on the surface of the perovskite in the LiTFSI-based PSCs, leading to non-radiative recombination and finally to VOC loss and a lower FF in the PSCs (Fig. S11 and Table S5, ESI). As explained above, these defects could be effectively passivated by OATFSI for OATFSI-based PSCs. In addition, the energy level alignment between the perovskite and PTAA with OATFSI is more appropriate than that between the perovskite and PTAA with LiTFSI + tBP, which is confirmed by UPS measurements (Fig. S5c, ESI). The HOMO level of PTAA with OATFSI is closer to the valence band of the perovskite than that of PTAA with the LiTFSI + tBP system. The closer offset could lead to a high VOC of the PSCs. This appropriate energy level alignment is also one of the reasons that the PSC using OATFSI has a higher VOC than the PSC with conventional LiTFSI + tBP. Fig. 4d presents a PCE of 23.34% (VOC = 1.084 V, JSC = 25.45 mA cm−2, and FF = 0.846) for the best-performing OATFSI-based PSCs. The OATFSI-based PSCs achieved a certified quasi-steady-state (QSS) performance of 22.23% (Fig. S12, ESI). To the best of our knowledge, this result is the highest efficiency reported to date with certification of the QSS PCE among reported PTAA-based PSCs in a n–i–p structure (Table S6, ESI). Also, we fabricated OATFSI-based PSCs using SnO2 as the ETL via chemical bath deposition (CBD). The CBD SnO2-based PSC using OATFSI achieved a PCE of 24.10% in forward scan, which is attributed to the enhanced VOC as compared with the TiO2-based PSCs (Fig. S13, ESI).

We compared the performance of PSCs using alkylammonium TFSI in terms of alkyl chain lengths (at the same dopant concentration of 9.75 mM). In Fig. S14 (ESI), as the alkyl chain length of IL dopants became longer from butyl to octyl, the efficiencies of the PSCs gradually increased (Table S7, ESI). By contrast, the PSCs using DATFSI exhibited a poor efficiency with large hysteresis. These results could be attributed to the different film morphologies of the HTL films (Fig. 1c, Fig. S3, and S15a, ESI). We also fabricated conventional IL-based PSCs. Commercial BMPyTFSI and BMIMTFSI dopants were used to compare their performance. At the same concentration of 9.75 mM, the BMPyTFSI- and BMIMTFSI-based PSCs showed poorer efficiencies than those of OATFSI-based PSCs (Fig. S14, ESI). This likely results from the miscibility problem of BMPyTFSI and BMIMTFSI dopants in a PTAA solution. The immiscible nature of the IL dopants resulted in aggregated droplets (Fig. S2, ESI) and therefore the PTAA polymers in toluene rarely react with the IL dopant in the droplets, likely resulting in the poor doping states of the PTAA layer. In addition, the perovskite layers were damaged by the IL dopant droplets when the HTM solution was dropped onto the perovskite layers (Fig. S15b and c, ESI).
It is crucial to ensure the long-term stabilities of PSCs toward their commercialization. To explore the effects of OATFSI dopants on the stability of PSCs, we performed a damp heat test in conditions of 85 °C with 85% relative humidity (RH) of OATFSI-based PSCs compared with LiTFSI-based PSCs with encapsulation. As shown in Fig. 4e, during the testing time for over 800 h, both PSCs showed the same trend. The PCEs were slightly increased at the early stage. The increased PCEs appear to be affected by the improved interfacial contact between the perovskite and HTL by the stress. After that time, the PCEs started to decrease. Nevertheless, the OATFSI-based device maintained nearly 90% of its initial performance, while the LiTFSI-based device retained about 80% of its initial performance. In addition to the damp heat test, the operational stability of the encapsulated OATFSI-based PSC was tested under continuous 1-sun illumination at room temperature using a maximum power point tracking (MPPT) system. The OATFSI-based PSCs also exhibited outstanding operational stability and maintained a high efficiency for 1080 h, corresponding to ∼89% of its initial efficiency (Fig. 4f). This superior long-term stability can be attributed to several benefits of our suggested dopant, OATFSI; it is effective in doping HTMs and passivating the surface defects of the perovskite layer. As shown in Fig. S16 (ESI), the perovskite film covered by PTAA with LiTFSI + tBP was transformed into the yellow phase faster than the pristine perovskite films (untreated) under the condition of 40–55% RH. This is attributed to the hygroscopic nature of LiTFSI and tBP existing in the PTAA layer. Interestingly, the perovskite film covered by PTAA with OATFSI 9.75 mM showed no change under the same conditions. It appears that the perovskite film covered by PTAA with OATFSI 9.75 mM likely has a passivated perovskite surface by OATFSIs in the PTAA solution, thus exhibiting similar results to those of the perovskite film with pre-surface treatment by OATFSI. This result was consistent with the TCSPC measurements. The less corrodible characteristic and in situ passivation for the PSCs with OATFSI thus contributed to better long-term stability compared to the PSCs with LiTFSI and tBP. Also, the doped HTMs and the passivated surface may be robust against thermal stress. OATFSI also can exclude the diffusion of the cation part into the bulk perovskite layer because of its large size. This is different from the Li ions of LiTFSI, which could easily migrate into the perovskite and also accumulate at the surface of the ETL, causing photo-degradation of the device.

We also extended our suggested dopant system to large-area perovskite sub-module fabrication. We fabricated OATFSI-based modules at a size of ca. 225 cm2 with 30 series-connected cells (geometrical fill factor (GFF) = 0.931), as shown in Fig. 5a, b and Fig. S17 (ESI). The performance of the modules on the aperture area (224.89 cm2) and the active area (209.39 cm2) was determined to be 18.54% and 19.91% in the reverse scan, respectively. The efficiency of the OATFSI-based module was certified to be 18.24% (average in reverse scan and forward scan) on the aperture area in Newport PV laboratory (Fig. S18, ESI). The statistics of the performance measured in-house for the perovskite solar modules are summarized in Table S8 (ESI). The stabilized efficiency on the aperture area of the module was measured to be 17.7% by a MPPT system (Fig. 5c). In Fig. 5d, we summarize the module efficiencies reported in the past three years (larger than 50 cm2 in active or aperture areas on glass substrates). In the n–i–p structure, most perovskite modules used spiro-OMeTAD to achieve high efficiencies, which could suffer from instability under thermal stresses. Also, a few spiro-OMeTAD-based modules have been certified by non-accredited calibration laboratories. To the best of our knowledge, this work is the first study reporting a large sized perovskite module of over 200 cm2 on a glass substrate with certification by an accredited calibration laboratory. As shown in Fig. S19 (ESI), the module maintained nearly ∼90% of its initial efficiency after a damp heat test for 1000 h. We achieved an efficient and stable perovskite module in such a large area using PTAA with our OATFSI dopant system instead of using unstable spiro-OMeTAD as the HTL. Our results demonstrate the potential of OATFSI as a dual-functional dopant for efficient and stable PSCs and modules. We thus believe that this work could contribute towards commercialization of PSCs.


In conclusion, we have synthesized a new series of dual functional IL dopants with butyl, hexyl, octyl, and decyl chains (named BATFSI, HATFSI, OATFSI, and DATFSI, respectively) for highly efficient and stable perovskite solar cells and modules. The alkylammonium TFSI can provide higher miscibility with a longer alkyl (more than eight carbons) chain by the ammonium part as well as ideal electrical properties by the TFSI part in a smoother HTL. During spin-coating of a HTM, OATFSI could act as a dopant in the HTL to improve the electrical properties of the HTL. Concurrently, OATFSI provided in situ defect passivation of the perovskite surface by reducing non-radiative recombination and improving charge extraction. Consequently, the OATFSI-based PSCs exhibited a maximum efficiency of 23.34% with superior long-term stability when compared with a conventional LiTFSI-based PSC. To demonstrate the expandability of deposition using OATFSI in a large area, OATFSI-based perovskite modules were fabricated with an aperture area efficiency of 18.54% and an active area efficiency of 19.91%. This demonstration suggests the remarkable potential of OATFSI as a promising IL dopant for the fabrication of highly efficient and stable PSCs and modules towards the realization of their commercialization.


Titanium diisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate) (75 wt% in isopropanol), lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (99.95% trace metals basis), methyl ammonium chloride (≥98%), butylamine (99.5%), hexylamine (99%), octylamine (99%), decylamine (≥99.0% (GC)), bis(trifluoromethane)sulfonimide (purum, ≥95.0% (19F-NMR)), and 1-butyl-3-methylpyridinium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide (≥97.0% (H-NMR)) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Formamidinium iodide (>99.99%) and methylammonium bromide (>99.99%) were purchased from Greatcell Solar Materials. Lead iodide ((99.99%, trace metals basis) [for perovskite precursor]) and lead bromide (Lead(II) Bromide [for perovskite precursor]) were purchased from TCI. Strontium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide (Cat. no. 047099) was purchased from Alfa Aesar. Mesoporous titanium dioxide paste (Cat. no. SC-HT040) was purchased from ShareChem. Poly(triarylamine) (weight average molecular weight (MW): 115 kDa, Dispersity (Đ): 3.8) was purchased from MS solution. 1-Butyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide (TONIC-TECH™, Cat. no. ILI04E) was purchased from EURAMA INC. All of the chemicals were used as received without further purification.


Butylamine (0.268 g, 3.67 mmol) and HTFSI (1.03 g, 3.49 mmol) were mixed and stirred for 12 h to obtain the resulting ionic liquid (1.30 g). The ionic liquid was used after evaporation under reduced pressure using a rotary evaporator. 1H NMR (500 MHz, DMSO-d6) δ (ppm): 7.55 (s, 3H), 2.77 (t, 2H), 1.50 (p, 2H), 1.32 (h, 2H), 0.89 (t, 3H); 13C NMR (125 MHz, DMSO-d6) δ (ppm): 123.37, 120.81, 118.25, 115.69, 38.65, 29.13, 19.07, 13.42.


HATFSI was synthesized using the same procedure as BATFSI. Hexylamine (0.364 g, 3.59 mmol) and HTFSI (1.01 g, 3.42 mmol) were used to obtain the resulting ionic liquid (1.38 g). 1H NMR (500 MHz, DMSO-d6) δ (ppm): 7.55 (s, 3H), 2.77 (t, 2H), 1.51 (p, 2H), 1.34–1.21 (m, 6H), 0.87 (t, 3H); 13C NMR (125 MHz, DMSO-d6) δ (ppm): 123.36, 120.80, 118.24, 115.68, 38.93, 30.72, 27.02, 25.46, 21.91, 13.79.


OATFSI was synthesized by the same procedure as BATFSI. Octylamine (0.468 g, 3.62 mmol) and HTFSI (1.02 g, 3.45 mmol) were used to obtain the resulting ionic liquid (1.49 g). 1H NMR (500 MHz, DMSO-d6) δ (ppm): 7.53 (s, 3H), 2.76 (t, 2H), 1.50 (p, 2H), 1.32–1.21 (m, 10H), 0.86 (t, 3H); 13C NMR (125 MHz, DMSO-d6) δ (ppm): 123.36, 120.80, 118.24, 115.68, 38.92, 31.16, 28.49, 28.48, 27.05, 25.77, 22.08, 13.91.


DATFSI was synthesized by the same procedure as BATFSI. Decylamine (0.558 g, 3.55 mmol) and HTFSI (1.00 g, 3.38 mmol) were used to obtain the resulting ionic liquid (1.56 g). 1H NMR (500 MHz, DMSO-d6) δ (ppm): 7.54 (s, 3H), 2.76 (t, 2H), 1.51 (p, 2H), 1.32–1.20 (m, 14H), 0.85 (t, 3H); 13C NMR (125 MHz, DMSO-d6) δ (ppm): 123.36, 120.80, 118.24, 115.68, 38.91, 31.31, 28.89, 28.84, 28.70, 28.52, 27.03, 25.77, 22.10, 13.92.


A bl-TiO2 layer was deposited on a FTO (Pilkington, TEC8) substrate by spray pyrolysis deposition using a 20 mM titanium diisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate) solution at 450 °C in air. Subsequently, mp-TiO2 was spin-coated on the bl-TiO2/FTO substrate using commercial mesoporous TiO2 paste diluted in mixed solvent (2-methoxylethanol:terpineol = 3.5:1 w/w) and calcined at 500 °C for 1 h in air. (After the calcination of mp-TiO2, the film was treated with strontium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide solution (10 mg mL−1) in acetonitrile and annealed at 500 °C for 30 min in air.) For a perovskite layer, a perovskite solution was prepared by dissolving 889 mg mL−1 of FAPbI3 and 44 mg mL−1 of methylammonium chloride (MACl) in N,N-dimethyl formamide (DMF)/dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) (8:1 v/v) mixed solvent. The solution was deposited by two spin-coating steps of 1000 rpm and 5000 rpm for 8 s and 15 s, respectively. During the second spin-coating step, 0.65 mL of ethyl acetate was quickly poured onto the substrate after 12 s. The intermediate phase film was put on a hotplate at 150 °C for 10 min. Then, PTAA solutions (10 mg mL−1 in toluene) with 0–14.62 mM of alkylammonium TFSI or with 4 μL of LiTFSI solution (stock solution at 340 mg mL−1 in acetonitrile) and 4 μL of tBP were spin-coated on the perovskite film at 3000 rpm for 30 s. Finally, an Au electrode was deposited by thermal evaporation.

A CBD SnO2 layer was deposited on a FTO substrate by following the procedure in previous literature. For a perovskite layer, a perovskite solution was prepared by dissolving 889 mg mL−1 of FAPbI3, 11 mg mL−1 of methylammonium lead bromide (MAPbBr3), and 44 mg mL−1 of MACl in DMF/DMSO (8:1 v/v) mixed solvent. The deposition of perovskite was the same as aforementioned, except for the use of diethyl ether (1 mL). The intermediate phase film was put on a hotplate at 100 °C for 60 min. The PTAA and Au electrode were deposited by the same procedure as aforementioned.

For fabrication of solar modules (30-stripe cells connected in series), 17 cm × 17 cm FTO (Pilkington, TEC8) substrates were scribed by a pulsed-type UV laser scriber (Nd:YVO4 355 nm, Solardin Inc., South Korea) with a power of 2.52 W, frequency of 55 kHz and, scribing width of 49.59 μm (P1). A bl-TiO2 and mp-TiO2 layer was deposited on the pattered FTO substrate using the same method for fabrication of unit cells. After the calcination of mp-TiO2, the film was treated by strontium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide solution (10 mg mL−1) in acetonitrile and annealed at 500 °C for 30 min in air. Then, for a perovskite layer, a perovskite solution was prepared by dissolving 761 mg mL−1 of FAPbI3 and 29 mg mL−1 of MAPbBr3, and 29 mg mL−1 of MACl in DMF/DMSO (8:1 v/v) mixed solvent. The perovskite solution was loaded on the mp-TiO2/bl-TiO2/FTO substrate and deposited by two spin-coating steps of 1000 rpm and 3000 rpm for 8 s and 15 s, respectively. During the second spin-coating step, 25 mL of diethyl ether was poured onto the substrate after 13 s. The intermediate phase film was put on a hotplate at 150 °C for 10 min. Then, PTAA solution with OATFSI was spin-coated on the perovskite film at 3000 rpm for 30 s. Next, the PTAA/Perovskite/mp-TiO2/bl-TiO2/FTO substrate was scribed by a laser with a power of 1.14 W, frequency of 140 kHz and scribing width of 86.14 μm (P2). Finally, an Au electrode was deposited by thermal evaporation and scribed by a laser with a power of 0.98 W, frequency of 160 kHz and scribing width of 78.31 μm (P3). We designed the modules to have a geometric fill factor of 93.1%.



1H and 13C NMR measurements were conducted using a Bruker AVANCE II+ 500 MHz NMR using DMSO-d6 (2.50 and 39.52 ppm) as a solvent. Images of optical microscopy were obtained with an MX63, Olympus. ESR measurements were performed with JES-FA100 (JEOL) using HTM films on glass substrates. The conductivity of HTM films on glass substrates was measured using a 4-point probe method in a voltage range of −3 V to 3 V using a probe station (MSTECH 8000 equipped with a Keithley 236 source meter). The thickness of HTMs for measuring the conductivity and the morphology images of the HTLs with alkylammonium TFSIs on glass substrates were obtained using an AFM (NX10, Parksystems). UV-Vis absorption spectra were recorded using a Shimadzu UV 2550 spectrophotometer. XPS measurements were carried out using K-alpha form Thermo VG Scientific. UPS measurements were carried out using Axis-Supra, Kratos. The XPS and UPS samples were prepared with the same manner for device fabrication excluding deposition of HTM and/or Au electrode. For the computation part, we performed first-principles calculations within the density functional theory formalism to understand interaction between OATFSI and FAPbI3. We utilized the projector augmented wave method with the plane-wave basis set (cutoff energy = 550 eV), which is implemented in the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP). For exchange–correlation functional, we employed the generalized gradient approximation within the PBE formalism. van der Waals interaction between organic molecules and the inorganic backbone was considered within the Tkatchenko–Scheffler method. We built a slab model of FAPbI3 consisting of a 3 × 3 × 4 supercell with PbI2 termination to explain the interaction between molecules and the surface. For the momentum space sampling, a 2 × 2 × 1 regular grid was used. For simplicity, the spin-orbit interaction was not considered in this study. Internal coordinates were fully optimized. GIWAXS measurements were carried out at the PLS-II 6D UNISTPAL beamline, Pohang Accelerator Laboratory, South Korea. The wavelength of X-rays was 0.65303 Å. Diffraction angles were calibrated using a sucrose sample and the sample-to-detector distance was 239.87 mm. The incidence angle of the X-ray beam was set to 0.10° to compare the profile of the perovskite surface. Two-dimensional GIWAXS patterns were recorded with a 2D charge-coupled device (CCD) detector (Rayonix MX 225-HS). The surface morphologies of the films were observed using a field-emission scanning electron microscope (MIRA3 LMU, Tescan). Carrier lifetime was measured via a time-correlated single-photon counting method using commercial equipment (FluoTime 250, PicoQuant) equipped with a 470 nm excitation source and a 500 nm long pass filter. The repetition rate was set to 10 kHz and the sample was excited through the perovskite. Transient photocurrent decay profiles were obtained under illumination (1.0 sun) by an oscilloscope (DSO-X 3054A, Agilent) with 50 Ω input termination and 532 nm excitation (pulse energy attenuated to ∼1 μJ) of an OPO laser system (NT 342A-10-AW, EKSPLA). To estimate the photovoltaic performance, perovskite solar cells and modules were measured using solar simulators (91195A for unit cells and 94123A for modules, Newport) with a source meter (Keithley 2420) of 100 mA cm−2 under illumination at an air mass of 1.5 global (AM 1.5G) and a calibrated Si-reference cell certificated by NREL. The J–V curves were obtained by scanning along the reverse scan direction and the forward scan direction in the range of −0.2 V to 1.5 V in the case of unit cells and −2.0 V to 34.0 V in the case of modules at room temperature in ambient air. The step voltage was set at 10 mV and 213 mV for unit cells modules, respectively. The delay time was fixed at 10 ms.


Operational stability measurement of the encapsulated PSCs was recorded under illumination at AM 1.5G (white LED light (LSH-7320, Newport)) using a maximum power point tracking (MPPT) method with a Keithley 2420 source meter operated by homemade software with a perturb & observe algorithm. For damp-heat tests, PSCs were encapsulated by laminating face-sealing adhesive sheets for organic electronic devices at 60 °C of roll temperature under ambient conditions. The encapsulated PSCs for damp-heat tests were stored in a constant temperature and humidity chamber (85 °C/85% relative humidity) (WVC Climatic Chamber C4-340 E Series, vötschtechnik). Performances of the PSCs were measured under illumination at AM 1.5G after cooling down the devices to room temperature.


N. J. J. and J. S. conceived and supervised the project. Y. K., G. K., N. J. J., and J. S. wrote the paper. Y. K. and G. K. synthesized the relevant materials and performed analysis of the intrinsic properties of the materials via NMR, UV-Vis absorption, ESR, XPS, GIWAXS, and conductivity measurements. J. I. performed the computational part. S. N. and S. S. S. prepared CBD substrates. Y. K. and G. K. fabricated and characterized the perovskite solar cells. Y. K. and E. Y. P. fabricated and characterized perovskite solar modules. Y. K., G. K., E. Y. P., S. J. L., N. J. J., and J. S. achieved the certified performance of devices at Newport Corporation. C. S. M. carried out TPC measurements. J. J. Y. performed TCSPC measurements. All authors discussed the results.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by a grant from the Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning (KETEP) from the Ministry of Trade, Industry & Energy (20183010014470), the National Research Foundation under the Ministry of Science, ICT & Future, Korea (NRF-2022R1A2C3005928) and the Korea Research Institute of Chemical Technology (KRICT). N. J. J. acknowledges financial support from the National Research Council of Science & Technology (NST) grant by the Korea government (MSIT) (No. CAP18054-200).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ee04045j
‡ Y. Kim and G. Kim contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023