 DOI: 10.1039/D0PY00416B
(Paper)
Polym. Chem., 2020, 11, 3605-3614


Guiting
Chen
*,

Dan
Cheng
,

Wenyan
Zou
,

Ziyan
Cai
,

Yufeng
Xie
,

Yaqi
Chen
,

Baitian
He
*,

Hongqing
Hao
,

Wei
Yang
 and 

Yong
Cao


School of Chemistry and Environment, Jiaying University, Meizhou 514015, China. E-mail: cgt_jy@126.com; 469459719@qq.com

Institute of Polymer Optoelectronic Materials and Devices, State Key Laboratory of Luminescent Materials and Devices, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510640, China

Received
22nd March 2020
, Accepted 4th May 2020
First published on 4th May 2020
Herein, a novel electron-deficient conjugated water/alcohol-soluble polyelectrolyte (WSPE) named PFSOPyCl-E, consisting of dibenzothiophene-S,S-dioxide, bispyridinium salts and fluorene with ethylene oxide side chains, was presented. Previously we have synthesized another WSPE (PFSOPyCl) composed of the same backbone as that of PFSOPyCl-E but with octyl side chains. PFSOPyCl and PFSOPyCl-E were applied as cathode buffer materials (CBMs) to inverted polymer solar cells (PSCs) of poly[4,8-bis(2-ethylhexyloxyl)benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl-alt-ethylhexyl-3-fluorothithieno[3,4-b]thiophene-2-carboxylate-4,6-diyl] (PTB7):[6,6]-phenyl-C71 butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM) systems, and simultaneous enhancements in open-circuit voltage (Voc), short-circuit current density (Jsc) and fill factor (FF) could be achieved when inserting these cathode buffer layers (CBLs). It was found that these CBLs could build directed dipoles at the indium tin oxide (ITO)/active layer interfaces, leading to the reductions in the ITO work function (WF) and improvements in Voc for the modified devices. The Jsc and FFs of PSCs were increased by several mechanisms. Firstly, the energy level alignments between the reduced ITO WFs (4.30–4.32 eV), deep LUMO energy levels (ELUMO) of these CBLs (4.04–4.10 eV) and ELUMO of PC71BM (∼3.90 eV) could generate good ohmic contacts, facilitating electron extractions and transportations. Secondly, these CBLs were able to n-dope PC71BM at the interfaces, inducing efficient electron-transporting pathways in the devices. Moreover, these polar polymeric CBLs could improve the compatibilities between ITO and the active layers, thus decreasing the interfacial resistances. It is worth noting that PFSOPyCl-E showed better cathode-modifying performance than PFSOPyCl, probably since PFSOPyCl-E with ethylene oxide side chains of high polarity and flexibility possessed better wettability with ITO and smoother films than PFSOPyCl. Hence, the devices modified by PFSOPyCl-E displayed lower contact resistances and higher FFs and Jsc than the PFSOPyCl-modified ones. Therefore, this class of electron-deficient conjugated WSPEs are promising CBMs for high-performance PSCs.

Bulk-heterojunction polymer solar cells (PSCs) are one of the most crucial technologies for obtaining renewable energy sources. Their main advantages are low cost, light weight, high mechanical flexibility, and simple solution processing for large-area devices. To date, the highest power conversion efficiency (PCE) values of PSCs have exceeded 17%, which are attributed to fabricating strategies including active layer engineering (materials and morphologies), interface engineering and device engineering.

Typically, a PSC is composed of a blended light-harvesting active layer sandwiched between a hole-collecting anode and an electron-collecting cathode. In order to realize the optimal performance, it is extremely essential to build ohmic contacts between the active layer and the two electrodes. However, the electronic energy levels of the donor and anode as well as the acceptor and cathode do not usually match well with each other. To address this problem, electrode buffer layers are introduced into the interfaces between the photosensitive layer and the two electrodes. Some of these electrode buffer materials have favourable energy levels that align well with those of active materials, such as highly conductive ZnO and TiO2 for electron transportations, and highly conductive PEDOT:PSS, MoO3 and graphene oxide derivatives for hole transportations. However, the others can adjust the work functions (WFs) of electrodes by directed interfacial dipoles to make them match well with the energy levels of active materials, for example, LiF, NaOH, nonconjugated organic molecules (PEIE, PVPy, PAMAM,etc.), and conjugated organic molecules (PFN, FPyBr, PFPy-A, PNDIT-F3N,etc.). In particular, some of the latter materials with dipole effects, such as FPyBr and PNDIT-F3N, also have intrinsic energy levels that match those of active materials, which are more beneficial for charge extractions and transportations from the active layers to electrodes.
Recently, the so-called inverted PSCs, which usually employ high-WF indium tin oxide (ITO) as bottom cathodes and high-WF metals (Al, Ag, Au, etc.) as top anodes, have drawn great attention due to their superior efficiencies, ambient stabilities, and compatibilities with R2R processing using air-stable and printable anodes (Ag and Au) compared to the conventional devices. During the inverted PSC fabrications, inorganic cathode buffer layers (CBLs) such as ZnO and TiO2 are often inserted into the ITO/active layer interfaces because of their good electron-extracting and electron-transporting properties. However, these inorganic fragile materials are not well compatible with the organic active materials and flexible devices, which may limit their future applications. In consideration of the weaknesses of these inorganic species, various organic cathode buffer materials (CBMs) including small molecules and polymers have been exploited in recent years. The polymeric CBMs are mainly focused on water/alcohol-soluble polyelectrolytes (WSPEs) such as PBSON-A, PFPy-A, PFN-Br, PVPy, PFN, PDPPNBr, PFEN-Hg and so on. The main working mechanism for WSPE-based CBMs is that the polar groups within these polyelectrolytes can generate interfacial dipoles at the cathode/active layer interfaces, resulting in shifts of the vacuum level and decreases in the cathode WF. Therefore, the built-in potentials (Vbi) can be increased and ohmic contacts can be formed at the cathode/active layer interfaces, leading to open-circuit voltage (Voc) improvements and more effective electron injections and transportations from the active layers to cathodes. The other dominating function for the polar groups lies in the fact that some kinds of polar groups are able to n-dope acceptors by electron transfer effects at the CBL/active layer interfaces, subsequently enhancing the electron mobilities of active layers and reducing the electron transportation loss.
To date, although numerous WSPE-based CBMs have been developed, most of them are made up of electron-rich conjugated backbones. Electron-rich polymers usually show relatively low electron mobilities and unfavourable energy level alignments with acceptors due to their high-lying LUMO energy levels (ELUMO), which ultimately degrade electron extractions and transportations. Theoretically, electron-deficient conjugated WSPEs are more ideal CBMs in view of their matched energy levels with acceptors and good electron-transporting abilities. Therefore, in order to further improve the performance of inverted PSCs, it is urgent to develop novel and effective electron-deficient conjugated WSPEs for CBMs. Previously, we have designed and synthesized a promising electron-deficient conjugated WSPE CBM named PFSOPyCl, with dibenzothiophene-S,S-dioxide (FSO), bispyridinium salts and fluorene in the conjugated backbone (Chart 1). The conjugated planar structures and high electron affinities of FSO and bispyridinium salts offered PFSOPyCl good electron-transporting properties and energy level alignment with [6,6]-phenyl-C71 butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM) in the conventional PSCs of both PCDTBT:PC71BM and poly[4,8-bis(2-ethylhexyloxyl)benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl-alt-ethylhexyl-3-fluorothithieno[3,4-b]thiophene-2-carboxylate-4,6-diyl] (PTB7):PC71BM systems. The ionic bispyridinium salts endowed PFSOPyCl with not only alcohol processabilities but also good tuning abilities for cathode WFs through interfacial dipole effects. Hence, the performance of PSCs could be boosted significantly when inserting PFSOPyCl layers.
Herein, a new electron-deficient conjugated WSPE, PFSOPyCl-E (Chart 1), composed of FSO, bispyridinium salts and fluorene modified by ethylene oxide side chains, was designed and synthesized. In comparison with the previously prepared PFSOPyCl with octyl side chains, ethylene oxide chains of higher polarity and flexibility were introduced into this new WSPE. Benefiting from these structural moieties, PFSOPyCl-E possesses the combined properties including good energy level alignments and ohmic contacts with acceptors, tuning abilities for cathode WFs, n-doping abilities for acceptors, electron-transporting abilities, alcohol solubilities and film-forming abilities. As a result, when these two electron-deficient conjugated WSPEs were applied as CBMs to inverted PSCs with the structure of ITO/CBL/PTB7:PC71BM/MoO3/Al, significant performance improvements could be achieved. In detail, the pristine devices showed a maximal PCE of 4.65%, and the modified devices with PFSOPyCl and PFSOPyCl-E CBLs exhibited the optimal PCEs of 8.43% and 8.70%, respectively. It is worth noting that PFSOPyCl-E with ethylene oxide chains displayed better cathode-modifying properties than PFSOPyCl, which might be attributed to the better interfacial wettability with ITO and smoother films for PFSOPyCl-E. These results suggest that this class of electron-deficient conjugated WSPEs are promising candidates as CBMs for high-performance inverted PSCs.

The synthetic routes for PFSOPyCl-E and its polymeric precursor PFSOPy-E are shown in Scheme 1. Monomers 1 and 2 were synthesized according to the literature. Monomers 1 and 2 were copolymerized under the conditions of the Pd-catalyzed Suzuki cross-coupling reaction, leading to the generation of the precursor polymer PFSOPy-E. The number-average molecular weight (Mn) of PFSOPy-E measured by gel permeation chromatography (GPC) was 16850 with a polydispersity index (PDI) of 1.6. PFSOPy-E can be readily dissolved in common organic solvents such as CHCl3, chlorobenzene and tetrahydrofuran (THF), but is insoluble in highly polar solvents such as methanol, DMSO and water. Treating PFSOPy-E with SOCl2 in CHCl3 solvent afforded the WSPE PFSOPyCl-E, during which an intramolecular nucleophilic substitution reaction took place and the bispyridinium salts were formed. Due to the mild quaternization conditions and thus nonexistent decompositions for these polymers during the preparation of PFSOPyCl-E, the Mn and PDI of PFSOPy-E could be used to estimate the molecular weight of PFSOPyCl-E. The molecular structures of PFSOPy-E and PFSOPyCl-E were confirmed by 1H NMR spectroscopy (Fig. S1 and S2 in the ESI). The WSPE PFSOPyCl-E is readily soluble in DMSO, and can be partly dissolved in methanol, yet it is insoluble in water or low-polarity organic solvents including CHCl3, THF, chlorobenzene and so on, similar to PFSOPyCl. The unique solubilities of PFSOPyCl-E as well as PFSOPyCl CBMs offer opportunities to fabricate multilayer inverted PSCs by orthometric solution processing techniques, since the upper active layers are spin-coated almost using low polar organic solvents (such as chlorobenzene) that can't corrode these CBLs.


The ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) absorption and photoluminescence (PL) spectra of PFSOPy-E and PFSOPyCl-E in solution and film are shown in Fig. 1, and the detailed data of the optical properties are presented in Table 1. In Fig. 1(a), PFSOPy-E showed an absorption peak at about 363 nm in THF, which was due to the π–π* transitions of conjugated backbones. Because of the intermolecular π–π stacking aggregations in film, the corresponding absorption band of PFSOPy-E in film exhibited an obvious bathochromic shift to 382 nm. The optical band gap (Eoptg) derived from the absorption onset in film was ∼2.74 eV for PFSOPy-E. In Fig. 1(b), the PL spectrum for PFSOPy-E showed a single peak at 436 nm in THF, and the signal displayed a red shift to 445 nm in film, which was also caused by intermolecular backbone aggregations.

Polymer
Solution
Film

E
optg (eV)

E
red (V)

E
ox (V)

E
LUMO (eV)

E
HOMO (eV)

E
eg (eV)

λ
abs (nm)

λ
PL (nm)

λ
abs (nm)

λ
PL (nm)

a 
E
eg = ELUMO − EHOMO.


PFSOPy-E

363
436
382
445
2.74
−1.45
1.31
−2.95
−5.71
2.76

PFSOPyCl-E

321444
560
353449
589
2.43
−0.30
1.73
−4.10
−6.13
2.03
In Fig. 1(a), the absorption spectrum for PFSOPyCl-E in DMSO exhibited two bands located at 321 and 444 nm. The short-wavelength peak was attributed to the π–π* transitions of conjugated backbones, and the long-wavelength peak was ascribed to the intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) effects. Compared with the absorption in a solution, the corresponding absorption peaks in film shifted to longer wavelengths of 353 and 449 nm for PFSOPyCl-E. The Eoptg derived from the absorption onset in film was ∼2.43 eV for PFSOPyCl-E. On the other hand, the PL bands for PFSOPyCl-E in DMSO and film shifted to 560 and 589 nm, respectively. For PFSOPyCl-E, the red-shifted absorption and emission in film compared to a solution also resulted from intermolecular aggregations in the film state.
Interestingly, in contrast to PFSOPy-E, PFSOPyCl-E showed significant bathochromic shifts in terms of the absorption and PL spectra. The reasons might be as follows. Firstly, the pyridinium salts in PFSOPyCl-E possessed stronger electron-withdrawing abilities than the pyridine units in PFSOPy-E, leading to stronger ICT effects and thus smaller Eg for PFSOPyCl-E than for PFSOPy-E. Secondly, the steric hindrance effects of bulky OTBDMS side chains might degrade the planar conformation for PFSOPy-E, yet the two ethylene bridges improved the planar conformation for PFSOPyCl-E, resulting in better overlaps of molecular orbitals and electron delocalization for PFSOPyCl-E.

To study the electrochemical properties of PFSOPy-E and PFSOPyCl-E, their cyclic voltammetry (CV) curves were recorded (Fig. 2). The redox potential of ferrocene/ferrocenium (Fc/Fc+) relative to the reference electrode (saturated calomel electrode, SCE) was first found to be 0.40 V. Therefore, the HOMO energy levels (EHOMO) and ELUMO of these polymers could be calculated with the following equations: EHOMO = −e(Eox + 4.80 − 0.40) (eV), ELUMO = −e(Ered + 4.80 − 0.40) (eV), where Eox and Ered are the oxidation potential and reduction potential vs. SCE, respectively. It was found that PFSOPy-E showed an Eox of 1.31 V and a calculated EHOMO of −5.71 eV, and an Ered of −1.45 V and a calculated ELUMO of −2.95 eV. For PFSOPyCl-E, the Eox and Ered values were 1.73 and −0.30 V, respectively. And the calculated EHOMO and ELUMO were −6.13 and −4.10 eV, respectively, for PFSOPyCl-E. Interestingly, PFSOPyCl-E exhibited deeper EHOMO and ELUMO levels compared with PFSOPy-E, due to the formation of electron-withdrawing bispyridinium salts in PFSOPyCl-E. Moreover, the ELUMO of PFSOPyCl-E is very close to those of fullerene derivative acceptors (ELUMO = −3.8 to −4.3 eV), meaning that PFSOPyCl-E and fullerene acceptors can build good energy level alignments and ohmic contacts, leading to effective electron extractions and transportations in various PSCs. The low-lying EHOMO for PFSOPyCl-E can block hole carriers from donors, reducing electron–hole recombination at cathodes.


In order to investigate the cathode-modifying properties of PFSOPyCl and PFSOPyCl-E for inverted PSCs, inverted devices based on the ITO/CBL/PTB7:PC71BM/MoO3/Al architecture were fabricated and studied. For comparison, the control devices without any CBL were also fabricated and tested under the same conditions. Fig. 3(a) and (b) show the device configuration and energy level diagram of PSCs, respectively. It can be seen that PFSOPyCl-E possesses a deep ELUMO that can form ohmic contacts with PC71BM acceptors in PSCs, just as PFSOPyCl (ELUMO = −4.04 eV). The current density–voltage (J–V) curves of PSCs under AM 1.5G irradiation (100 mW cm−2) are shown in Fig. 3(c), and the detailed photovoltaic parameters are presented in Table 2. The optimal pristine device without any CBL displayed a Voc of 0.57 V, a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 15.70 mA cm−2, a fill factor (FF) of 51.98%, and a PCE of 4.65%, which were higher than those photovoltaic parameters realized in the previous report. The best PSC with a PFSOPyCl CBL showed a significantly enhanced PCE of 8.43%, with the corresponding Voc at 0.73 V, Jsc at 16.73 mA cm−2 and FF at 69.02%. Compared with PFSOPyCl, PFSOPyCl-E could improve the device performance slightly better, which increased the Voc to 0.73 V, Jsc to 16.89 mA cm−2, FF to 70.55% and PCE to 8.70%. It can be seen that after inserting PFSOPyCl or PFSOPyCl-E into ITO, the photovoltaic parameters including Voc, Jsc and FF were simultaneously increased. The PSC modified by a well-known PFN CBL was also tested (Fig. S3), which showed a Voc of 0.74 V, a Jsc of 16.69 mA cm−2, a FF of 69.00% and a PCE of 8.52%, suggesting the comparable modifying performance for PFSOPyCl, PFSOPyCl-E and PFN. Besides, the series resistances (Rs) of pristine, PFSOPyCl-modified and PFSOPyCl-E-modified optimal devices were 7.87, 3.98 and 3.63 Ω cm2, respectively. And the shunt resistances (Rsh) of the above ordinal devices were 614, 2355 and 2416 Ω cm2, respectively. The reduced Rs and enhanced Rsh confirmed that the charge-transporting and charge-collecting properties within the devices were indeed improved by PFSOPyCl and PFSOPyCl-E CBLs. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra of PSCs are shown in Fig. 3(d). The integral Jsc values from EQE curves were 14.32, 15.40 and 15.56 mA cm−2 for the above ordinal devices, respectively, which were close to the measured Jsc from J–V characteristics.

CBL

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)

R
s (Ω cm2)

R
sh (Ω cm2)

a Average value calculated from six devices.

None
0.57 (0.57)
15.70 (15.59)
51.98 (51.27)
4.65 (4.56)
7.87
614

PFSOPyCl

0.73 (0.73)
16.73 (16.60)
69.02 (68.45)
8.43 (8.29)
3.98
2355

PFSOPyCl-E

0.73 (0.73)
16.89 (16.73)
70.55 (69.81)
8.70 (8.53)
3.63
2416

The J–V curves of inverted PTB7:PC71BM PSCs with different CBLs were recorded in the dark (Fig. 4), which could offer some information about the working mechanisms of these CBLs. Under a reverse bias, the devices containing PFSOPyCl and PFSOPyCl-E displayed smaller reverse leakage currents than the pristine one. The reduced reverse dark currents by these CBLs were beneficial for Voc improvements for the modified devices. Therefore, the enhancements in Voc when inserting these CBLs were partly caused by the decreases in reverse dark currents. Under a low forward bias, weaker leakage currents were also achieved after introducing PFSOPyCl and PFSOPyCl-E CBLs. In comparison with PFSOPyCl, PFSOPyCl-E could reduce the reverse and forward dark currents more effectively, leading to higher Rsh and FFs for the PFSOPyCl-E-incorporated devices.


In order to obtain an insightful understanding about the improvements in PSC performance when introducing these CBLs, scanning Kelvin probe microscopy (SKPM) was used to estimate the WFs of different ITO/CBL electrodes, as shown in Fig. 5. It was observed that the bare ITO electrode showed a WF of 4.88 eV. With respect to the CBL-modified electrodes, ITO/PFSOPyCl and ITO/PFSOPyCl-E displayed significantly shrunken WFs of 4.32 and 4.30 eV, respectively. These diminutions in WF suggested that directed dipoles could be built at the ITO/active layer interfaces by the bispyridinium salts. The close WFs for ITO/PFSOPyCl and ITO/PFSOPyCl-E meant that the dipole interactions might be governed by the bispyridinium salts, and the ethylene oxide chains contributed rarely to the interfacial dipoles. The Vbi of PSCs could be increased as the WFs of ITO were decreased, leading to Voc improvements for the modified devices. These reduced WFs of ITO and the deep ELUMO of these CBLs could establish good energy level alignments with the ELUMO of acceptors, which promoted electron extractions and transportations and decreased hole–electron recombination in the active layers, leading to Jsc and FF improvements. The hole–electron recombination could also be decreased by the low-lying EHOMO of these CBLs, as these EHOMO could obstruct hole carriers from the donors.


To confirm the electron transfer effects from Cl− anions within these CBLs to PC71BM at the CBL/active layer interfaces, an electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectroscopy study was performed, as shown in Fig. 6. All the samples were tested in the solid state and in the dark. Herein, no diagnostic absorption signal of anionic PC71BM could be observed for the sample of the pure PC71BM acceptor. However, obvious anionic PC71BM absorption peaks were found for the PC71BM/PFSOPyCl and PC71BM/PFSOPyCl-E mixtures. These phenomena implied that efficient n-doping interactions from Cl− anions in PFSOPyCl and PFSOPyCl-E to PC71BM were subsistent, which generated more effective conductive pathways that could reduce the charge transportation loss, leading to lower Rs and higher Jsc and FFs for the modified devices compared to the pristine ones.


The J–V curves of electron-only devices were studied to evaluate the influences of these CBLs on the electron-transporting properties of inverted PTB7:PC71BM PSCs, during which the curves were fitted with the space-charge-limited current (SCLC) model to calculate the electron mobilities, as shown in Fig. 7. The configuration of electron-only devices was ITO/Al/CBL/PTB7:PC71BM/Ba/Al. The depositing conditions for the active layers and CBLs were the same as those adopted for fabricating the PSCs. It was found that the pristine, PFSOPyCl-incorporated and PFSOPyCl-E-incorporated devices showed apparent electron mobilities of 7.15 × 10−4, 9.89 × 10−4 and 1.00 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively. Therefore, the electron-transporting properties of PSCs could be improved by PFSOPyCl and PFSOPyCl-E CBLs, probably ascribing to their electron-deficient conjugated structures and n-doping effects to PC71BM, leading to reduced Rs and elevated FFs and Jsc for the modified PSCs.


In order to study the influences of these CBLs on the wetting properties and compatibilities between ITO and the active layers, static water contact angles (θ) of different films were tested, and the images were obtained with a digital camera, as shown in Fig. 8. The ITO substrate was a very hydrophilic film, which showed a low θ of 35.2°. For the PTB7:PC71BM blended film, a θ as high as 98.2° was achieved, confirming its hydrophobic character. It is conceivable that the wetting properties at the ITO/active layer interfaces were not ideal for the pristine devices. The CBLs exhibited θ values of 92.8° and 87.4° for PFSOPyCl and PFSOPyCl-E, respectively. These CBLs with suitable θ and hydrophilic abilities could form “bridges” between ITO and the active layers, leading to better compatibilities and contact properties at the interfaces. Hence, lower Rs and higher FFs and Jsc could be realized for the modified devices compared to the pristine ones. As compared to PFSOPyCl, PFSOPyCl-E showed improved hydrophilic properties due to the introduction of ethylene oxide side chains, resulting in better wettability at the ITO/CBL interfaces and thus smaller Rs for the PFSOPyCl-E-incorporated devices.

For investigating the morphologies of these CBLs, atomic force microscopy (AFM) was used to record the surface topographic images of different films, as shown in Fig. 9. These polymeric CBMs could form homogeneous and smooth films on ITO, with root-mean-square roughness values at 7.41 and 5.92 nm for PFSOPyCl and PFSOPyCl-E, respectively. The smoother film for PFSOPyCl-E than for PFSOPyCl might be attributed to the higher flexibilities and thus film-forming abilities for ethylene oxide chains than alkyl chains. The more homogeneous CBLs for PFSOPyCl-E could generate better contacts with the active layers, resulting in smaller Rs and higher FFs and Jsc for the PFSOPyCl-E-modified devices.

In summary, a new kind of electron-deficient conjugated WSPE (PFSOPyCl-E), consisting of FSO, bispyridinium salts and fluorene modified with ethylene oxide side chains, was designed and synthesized. PFSOPyCl-E and PFSOPyCl were used as CBMs for high-performance inverted PSCs based on PTB7:PC71BM active layers. As a result, when introducing PFSOPyCl and PFSOPyCl-E CBLs, simultaneous improvements in Voc, Jsc and FF could be realized, leading to PCE increments from 4.65% to 8.43% and 8.70%, respectively. The increases in Voc were mainly attributed to the interfacial dipoles built between ITO and the active layers by these CBLs, which reduced the WFs of ITO cathodes. There were several reasons for the enhancements in Jsc and FF. Firstly, the energy level alignments between the reduced ITO WFs, deep ELUMO of these CBLs and ELUMO of PC71BM promoted electron extractions, transportations and decreased hole–electron recombination in the active layers. Secondly, these CBLs could n-dope the acceptors via electron transfer effects from Cl− anions to PC71BM at the interfaces, which facilitated electron transportations in the devices. Thirdly, these high-polarity polymeric CBLs could improve the compatibilities and contacts between ITO and the active layers, consequently diminishing the interfacial resistances. It is noted that PFSOPyCl-E showed better cathode-modifying performance than PFSOPyCl, which might be ascribed to the fact that PFSOPyCl-E with ethylene oxide chains of high polarity and flexibility possessed better wettability with ITO and smoother films than PFSOPyCl. Hence, the PFSOPyCl-E-modified devices could display lower Rs and higher FFs and Jsc compared with the PFSOPyCl-modified ones. Therefore, this class of electron-deficient conjugated WSPEs are promising candidates as CBMs for high-performance PSCs.


All reagents, unless otherwise specified, were purchased from J&K Chemical Co., Sigma Aldrich Chemical Co., Aladdin Chemical Co. and Alfa Aesar Chemical Co. and used directly without further purification. Some of the solvents were distilled before used.


Monomer 1 (253.5 mg, 0.3000 mmol) and 2 (186.7 mg, 0.3000 mmol) were dissolved in toluene (5 mL) and THF (2 mL). Then Pd(PPh3)4 (8.0 mg, 0.0069 mmol) was added under nitrogen protection. After an aqueous solution of K2CO3 (2 M, 700 μL) was added, the reaction mixture was stirred at 80 °C for 24 h under a nitrogen atmosphere. After cooling to room temperature, the reaction mixture was poured into methanol (150 mL). The mixture was filtered, and the precipitate was washed with methanol and acetone successively in a Soxhlet apparatus. Then the remaining solid was dissolved in THF (10 mL) and filtered through a 0.45 μm polytetrafluoroethylene filter. Finally, methanol (120 mL) was used to precipitate the target polymer (234.4 mg, 74%) from its THF solution after concentration. 1H NMR (500 MHz, CDCl3) δ (ppm): 9.05 (s, 2H), 8.14–8.12 (m, 2H), 7.93–7.82 (m, 6H), 7.76–7.65 (m, 6H), 3.92–3.90 (m, 4H), 3.31–2.92 (m, 18H), 2.59 (br, 4H), 2.03–1.99 (m, 4H), 0.89–0.86 (m, 18H), 0.00 (s, 12H).


Firstly, PFSOPy-E (100.0 mg, 0.0950 mmol) was dissolved in CHCl3 (10 mL). After SOCl2 (4.0 mL) was added under nitrogen, the mixture was stirred vigorously for 5 days at room temperature. The solution was evaporated, and the remaining solid was dissolved in DMSO (3 mL). The solution was poured into ethyl acetate (100 mL). The resulting precipitate collected by filtration was washed with THF and acetone successively in a Soxhlet apparatus, and the target polymer was obtained as an orange solid (67.3 mg, 82%). 1H NMR (500 MHz, DMSO-d6) δ (ppm): 9.86 (br, 2H), 9.25–8.97 (m, 6H), 8.73–8.40 (m, 4H), 8.26–7.94 (m, 4H), 5.08 (br, 4H), 3.60 (br, 4H), 3.43–2.77 (m, 18H), 2.02–1.96 (m, 4H).



1H NMR and 13C NMR spectra were recorded on a Bruker AV-500 spectrometer operating at 500 MHz (for 1H) and 75 MHz (for 13C) with tetramethylsilane as the internal reference. APCI-MS analyses were carried out with an Acquity Waters UPLC equipped with a Waters Acquity TQ detector (Thermo Finnigan LCQ Fleet system). The molecular weight of the precursor polymer was measured using a Waters GPC 2410 in THF using a calibration curve with polystyrene standards. UV-vis absorption spectra were recorded on a HP 8453 spectrophotometer. PL spectra were recorded on an Instaspec IV CCD spectrophotometer (Oriel Co.). CV curves were obtained on a CHI600D electrochemical workstation with a standard three electrode cell based on a Pt wire counter electrode and a Pt working electrode, against SCE as a reference electrode at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1 within a nitrogen-saturated anhydrous solution of 0.1 mol L−1 tetrabutylammonium hexafluorophosphate in acetonitrile, versus Fc/Fc+ as the internal reference.


The patterned ITO-coated glass substrate was used as the cathode. After being cleaned carefully, dried and plasma treated with oxygen, the substrate was taken in a nitrogen-filled glove box. A 10–15 nm CBL was spin-coated from methanol/DMSO (9:1, v/v) solution with a concentration of ∼2 mg mL−1 on the surface of the ITO substrate at 2000 rpm for 40 s. Then an 80–100 nm blended active layer of PTB7:PC71BM (1:1.5, w/w) was spin-coated from chlorobenzene/1,8-diiodooctane (97:3, v/v) solution. A 10 nm MoO3 layer and a 100 nm Al layer were subsequently evaporated through a shadow mask that defined the active area of the device (∼0.16 cm2) to form the anode.


The thicknesses of organic films were measured with Profilometry (Veeco Dektak150). Device fabrications were performed in a nitrogen-filled glove box (Vacuum Atmosphere Co.). The J–V characteristics were recorded with a Keithley 236 source meter. The spectral responses were recorded with a commercial photo modulation spectroscopic setup (Oriel). A calibrated Si photodiode was used to determine the photosensitivity. PCEs were determined under an AM 1.5G solar simulator (Oriel model 91192). The power of the sun simulation was calibrated before the testing using a standard silicon solar cell.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was financially supported by the Young Innovative Talent Project for Higher Education Institution of Guangdong Province (no. 2018KQNCX239), the Special Fund for Fostering Scientific and Technological Innovations of Undergraduates of Jiaying University (Jiaying University “Climbing” Project) (no. pdjh2019a0451), the “Yumiao” Project of Jiaying University (no. 318E0205), the Special Fund for Scientific and Technological Developments of Guangdong Province (no. 2016A030307012), the Natural Science Foundation of Guangdong Province (no. 2015A030313640), and the Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation (no. 2019A1515011141).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0py00416b
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020