 DOI: 10.1039/C1CC12419F
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 8247-8249

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Liang
Li
*,

Gang
Meng
*,

Hongqiang
Wang
,

Tianyou
Zhai
,

Xiaosheng
Fang
,

Ujjal K.
Gautam
,

Xiaodong
Fang
,

Yoshio
Bando
 and 

Dmitri
Golberg


International Center for Materials Nanoarchitectonics (MANA), National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS), Namiki 1-1, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0044, Japan. E-mail: LI.Liang@nims.go.jp

Anhui Institute of Optics and Fine Mechanics (AIOFM), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Hefei 230031, P. R. China. E-mail: menggang@mail.ustc.edu.cn

Key Laboratory of Material Physics, Anhui Key Laboratory of Nanomaterials and Nanotechnology, Institute for Solid State Physics (ISSP), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Hefei, 230031, P. R. China

Received
26th April 2011
, Accepted 6th June 2011
First published on 21st June 2011
High-quality ZnO nanobelts were synthesized through introducing an unsteady state in the vapour transport process and their applications in novel Schottky solar cells were demonstrated by contact-printing the ZnO nanobelt network onto a pre-patterned Pt electrode followed by the deposition of a Ti/Au electrode.


Zinc oxide (ZnO) is a wide band gap (3.37 eV) semiconductor with a high exciton binding energy (60 meV). In the past decades, ZnO one-dimensional (1D) nanomaterials have become the most interesting research target due to their unique optical, electronic, biological, and piezoelectric properties. Among these studies, the investigations of ZnO nanobelts have been performed in regard to promising applications, such as field-effect transistors (FETs), optical and gas sensors, lasers, nanocantilevers, and spintronic devices. Although ZnO nanobelts are among the most studied 1D nanomaterials, in comparison with ZnO nanowires/nanorods, there have been fewer reports on ZnO nanobelts because their reliable synthesis is comparatively more difficult. It usually needs a higher reaction temperature (1400–1500 °C) and a longer growth time (2–3 h). To reduce the energy consumption during the growth at lower temperatures and shorter times, some scientists used tin, indium or silver as catalysts (or dopants) during the vapor transport process. Some reports used zinc compounds or alloys as source materials, but the nanobelt yield was still low. Solution routes including hydrothermal and electrochemical growths were also used at a very low growth temperature of ∼150 °C, but the products usually contained mixtures of nanowires and nanobelts. Therefore, it is still interesting but challenging to develop facile methods to synthesize large-scale high-quality ZnO nanobelts under lower temperatures.


ZnO is a nontoxic and environmental-friendly “green” material with a high electron mobility, low combination rate, and ease of crystallization. Many studies have been devoted to using ZnO nanomaterials for photovoltaic devices, but most of which are dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) employing electrochemical systems. So far, the results obtained for ZnO DSCs have shown relatively low conversion efficiencies compared with commonly used TiO2 due to the slow electron-injection kinetics from a dye to ZnO, and the instability of ZnO in an acidic dye. In addition, although a variety of nanoscale ZnO DSCs have been reported, to the best of our knowledge, there are only a few studies on ZnO nanobelt solar cells. Compared with DSCs, Schottky solar cells are based on a “high-work-function metal/semiconductor/low-work-function metal” configuration and thus have the merit of simplicity and low cost. Various 1D semiconductors, for example, Si, CdS, CdSe, etc., have been assembled into Schottky solar cells. However, they require either the complex fabrication processes or the expensive lithography techniques, and the solar energy uptake is severely blocked by metal electrodes.
In this communication, we report on the large-scale synthesis of long and single-crystalline ZnO nanobelts at a relatively low growth temperature (900 °C) and their use in Schottky solar cells.

Fig. 1 shows field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM, Hitachi S-4800) images of as-prepared samples. Fig. 1a reveals abundant belt-like nanostructures. A thick layer of products completely covers the whole Si substrate. They are several tens of micrometres long and several hundred nanometres wide. Most of the nanobelts have a flat surface along its length direction (Fig. S1a, ESI). Some nanobelts are bent, from which we can estimate them to be 50 to 100 nm thick (Fig. S1b, ESI). The X-ray diffraction (XRD, RINT 2200) pattern (Fig. 1b) indicates a hexagonal wurtzite phase (JCPDS card No: 89-0511).

Fig. 2a is a typical transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image of a single nanobelt supported by a copper grid. This further confirms the nanobelt morphology. The corresponding high-resolution TEM (HRTEM, JEM-3000F) image and a selected-area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern (Fig. 2b and the inset) indicate that the nanobelt is a wurtzite single crystal, which is consistent with the XRD result. Its growth direction is determined to be [101]. Fig. S2 shows the uniform distribution of Zn and O elements.
In our experiment, two parameters including the Au catalyst and the introduction of an unsteady state are critical to the high-yield synthesis of ZnO nanobelts at a relatively low reaction temperature of 900 °C. (1) Au catalyst: although Au was used as the catalyst, no Au nanoparticles are shown at the top and bottom of nanobelts, as indicated in SEM images (Fig. S1, ESI). As the Au film was replaced with the ZnO seed layer, only ZnO nanowire arrays were obtained, as shown in Fig. S3a (ESI). These phenomena make us believe that the growth of ZnO nanobelts is mainly controlled by a vapour–solid (VS) mechanism. (2) Introduction of an unsteady state: to synthesize nanobelts, the rotary pump was turned off once the heating stage was finished and air was allowed to leak into the reaction zone. If we did not interrupt this stable vacuum state, Au and ZnO seed layers would catalyze the growth of ZnO nanowires (Fig. S3b, ESI) and nanowire arrays (Fig. S3c, ESI), respectively. Therefore, the combined contribution of the Au catalyst and introduction of an unsteady state leads to the growth of ZnO nanobelts. During the heating stage, the vapour pressure of Zn was very high due to the carbon thermal reduction reaction between ZnO and carbon. As the rotary pump was turned off, large quantities of air got into the reaction chamber and thus the concentration of oxygen increased quickly. At the initial growth process, the saturation vapour pressure of reaction species was very high and resulted in the formation of dense films (Fig. S3d, ESI). With the saturation vapor pressure decreasing to a proper value, single-crystalline ZnO nanobelts were rapidly synthesized with a high yield.

Fig. 3 shows the schematic diagram of the fabrication procedure of the ZnO nanobelt Schottky solar cells. The fabrication process of solar cells was divided into four steps. (I) A 100 nm thick Pt electrode was deposited on the Si substrate with a 200 nm thick SiO2 top layer using an electron beam evaporation system at an evaporation rate of ∼1 Å s−1 (ULVAC Corp). (II) ZnO nanobelts were transferred to the Si substrate coated with the Pt electrode by a contact printing technique. Specifically, the receiver substrate was first firmly attached to a bench, and the ZnO nanobelt growth substrate was placed upside down on top of the receiver substrate such that they were in contact. A gentle manual pressure was then applied from the top followed by sliding the growth substrate. During this process, nanobelts were detached from the growth substrate as they were anchored by the Van der Waals forces to the surface of the substrate, resulting in the direct transfer of nanobelts to the receiver substrate. Finally, the growth substrate was removed. (III) A 20 nm/200 nm Ti/Au electrode was deposited on the other end of the transferred nanobelt network with a mask protecting another part over the Pt electrode, leaving the bare middle part as a conductive channel. (IV) The mask was removed to obtain the final ZnO nanobelt Schottky solar cell. Solar cells were characterized using a semiconductor characterization system (Keithley 2400) and a solar simulator (Peccell Technologies, Inc., PEC-L11), using the light under air mass (AM) 1.5 global (1.5G) condition with a calibrated illumination power density of 100 mW cm−2.

Fig. 4a illustrates a typical SEM image of a ZnO nanobelt Schottky solar cell. The bottom-left inset indicates the interconnection of nanobelts. It is composed of a ZnO nanobelt network connected by asymmetrical electrodes in which the Pt electrode is underneath the nanobelts while the Ti/Au electrode is on top of the other part. Compared with other Schottky solar cells, an advantage of the present device is that the illuminated light energy can be effectively absorbed by ZnO nanobelts, because they are directly contacted to the top electrode surface. Fig. 4b shows the I–V behavior of the ZnO nanobelt-network Schottky solar cell measured under dark and air mass (AM) 1.5 global (1.5G) illumination conditions. In the dark the I–V curve demonstrates a typical rectification behavior of the Schottky junction. Under AM 1.5G illumination the device exhibits a photovoltaic characteristic. The short-circuit current density Jsc and the open-circuit voltage Voc are 3.0 mA cm−2 and 0.2 V, respectively. The fill factor FF and power conversion efficiency η are calculated from the following equations:
FF = ImVm/IscVoc = JmVm/JscVoc
(1)
η = ImVm/SPsun
(2)
where
Im (Jm) and Vm are the current (current density) and voltage at the maximum power output, respectively, Isc is the short-circuit current, S is the effective Schottky junction area (0.04 cm2), and Psun is the incident power density (100 mW cm−2) from the solar simulator. The ZnO nanobelt Schottky solar cells exhibit a FF of 28%, and a η of 0.042%.

The photovoltaic mechanism of ZnO nanobelt Schottky solar cells can be explained qualitatively based on an energy band diagram. Fig. 4c shows the energy band diagram of a ZnO nanobelt Schottky solar cell under AM 1.5G illumination. Metal Pt has a larger work function φPt (∼6.1 eV) than φZnO (∼5.3 eV) of ZnO nanobelts and thus the electron transfer occurs from ZnO to Pt upon contacting each other, which results in the band bending at the interface and the formation of a built-in potential Vi. When the interface is illuminated by the light with photon energies higher than the bandgap energy of ZnO, photogenerated electrons jump to the conduction band leaving holes in the valence band. At the same time, the Vi drives photogenerated electrons and holes toward the ZnO and Pt, respectively. In addition, metal Ti has a lower work function φTi (∼4.3 eV) and forms the Ohmic contact with ZnO without an energy barrier of electrons. Therefore, the Vi in the Schottky junction effectively separates the photogenerated electrons and holes, producing the photovoltaic effect. Photogenerated carriers will form current upon connecting the external circuit.
Present conversion efficiency is not high, but it is due solely to the network-Schottky structure without any additional device optimization. Two critical challenges must be solved in the real applications including the efficient utilization of solar energy and the decrease of recombination chance of photogenerated carriers in interfaces and bulk. Generally, the literature reports mainly three routes to improve efficiency of ZnO nanostructured solar cells, as shown in Table S1 (ESI). (1) The sensitization of narrow band gap quantum dots (QDs), which effectively enhances the absorption in the longer wavelength of the solar spectrum and uniquely generates multiple electron–hole pairs per photon. (2) Dye-sensitized solar cells: by selecting proper dye molecules, the absorption of incident light can be extended into the near-infrared region, and the semiconductor–sensitizer interface allows for the effective injection of electrons from the dye molecules to the semiconductor. (3) The surface passivation (Schottky and p–n junctions) with other narrow band gap organic/inorganic semiconductors, which largely decreases the interfacial recombination and increases the efficiency of charge separation.
In the future work, we will further improve the conversion efficiency by the following two routes: (1) sensitizing surfaces of ZnO nanobelts with narrow band gap QDs and coating layers; (2) shortening the electrode distance to below 500 μm. This will decrease the recombination chance of photogenerated electron–hole pairs.
We thank Dr Baowen Li for drawing the Figure 3.
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c1cc12419f
‡ Present address: New Chemistry Unit, Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research, Jakkur P. O., Bangalore-560064, India.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011