 DOI: 10.1039/C6RA18121J
(Communication)
RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 96109-96120

Mridula Baro,
Jaidev and 
Sundara Ramaprabhu*

Alternative Energy and Nanotechnology Laboratory (AENL), Nano Functional Materials Technology Centre (NFMTC), Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 600036, India. E-mail: ramp@iitm.ac.in; Fax: +91-44-22570509; Tel: +91-44-22574862

Received
16th July 2016
, Accepted 16th September 2016
First published on 21st September 2016
Nitrogen-containing hierarchically porous carbon is derived by carbonizing and activating polypyrrole nanostructure (APNP) using a template-free synthesis method and is demonstrated to be an efficient counter electrode (CE) in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). APNP exhibits an interconnected hierarchical pore structure with a pore volume of 0.52 cm3 g−1 and a large specific surface area of 707.98 m2 g−1. The material also displays a low degree of graphitization phase as well as numerous defects. The sheet resistance and conductivity of the APNP CE film are 2.05 × 103 Ω sq−1 and 35.86 S m−1, respectively. Electrochemical catalytic activity and photovoltaic performance studies demonstrate that APNP exhibits significant catalytic activity towards triiodide (I3−) reduction and shows power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 6.58%, which is comparable to Pt-based DSSCs (6.93%). We observed that, apart from improving the surface area and pore structure, the chemical activation process increases defect sites, conductivity and the graphitic N state, hence reduces the charge transfer resistance in the CE, and finally enhances the PCE of the DSSC.

Hierarchically porous carbons, consisting of interconnected 1D-to-3D pore networks in micro-, meso- and macropores, are presently potential candidates for emerging technological applications, such as lithium-ion batteries, electrochemical capacitors, solar cells, fuel cells and hydrogen storage systems. These porous carbons demonstrate the synergistic effect of high specific surface areas with hierarchically organized porosity in energy-based applications by playing major roles in ion transport, ion diffusion, electrical double layer enhancement and buffering. Well-defined porous carbons are generally synthesized using hard or soft templates and post-activation processes. The non-template method is advantageous since most of the templates are expensive and an additional disadvantage of the hard templating process is template removal.

Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) have attracted immense interest since their introduction by O'Regan and Grätzel because of simple fabrication procedures, low cost, transparency, environmental benignity and high power conversion efficiency (PCE). A DSSC consists of a dye-sensitized mesoporous nanocrystalline TiO2 photoanode, triiodide/iodide (I3−/I−) redox couple containing electrolyte, and a platinum (Pt) counter electrode (CE) to complete the redox reaction. The CE has two important roles: (1) it acts as a catalyst to reduce I3− to I−, hence regenerating the sensitizer and (2) collects the photogenerated electrons from the external circuit. Pt is commonly employed as the standard CE for DSSC due to its good catalytic activity towards I3− reduction and good conductivity and high stability in the electrolyte. However, Pt is an expensive noble element of limited availability which limits its practical applications.
High specific surface area, good conductivity, chemical stability in the electrolyte and low cost are some of the basic requirements for efficient practical CEs in DSSCs. In recent years, several functional materials, such as carbonaceous materials, conducting polymers, inorganic sulphides, nitrides and oxides, have been studied as efficient Pt-free CEs for DSSCs. Various carbon-based materials, such as carbon nanoparticles, carbon black, graphene and carbon nanotubes, were explored as efficient CE materials owing to their high surface area, high electrical conductivity, decent catalytic activity, and chemical inertness towards electrolyte. For carbon materials, it is reported that surface defects (e.g. dangling bonds) and oxygen-containing functional groups at the sharp atomic edges can act as active sites during the electrochemical catalytic reactions, but the introduction of more defect sites can decrease the conductivity and hence reduce the overall cell performance. Therefore, for carbon-based CEs, it is essential to balance the catalytic activity and the electrical conductivity, which is a challenge. A better solution is to dope the carbon matrix with heteroatoms such as B, N, P and S that can enhance the electrical conductivity as well as introduce electrocatalytic active sites into the material. In addition, doping can facilitate charge-transfer during electrolyte–electrode interaction processes by improving the surface hydrophilicity. Following this idea, nitrogen-doped graphene nanoplatelets and nitrogen-doped graphene foams have recently been demonstrated as efficient CEs for DSSCs by achieving comparable or superior efficiency to Pt. N-doped carbons are mainly prepared by annealing the carbon materials in the presence of reactive nitride gases, or carrying out pyrolysis of N-containing organics, however the second method is preferred due to its scalable procedure. Although nitrogen-doped graphene was produced via pyrolysis of polypyrrole/graphene composites very recently, and demonstrated as a comparable CE to the Pt, the pure polypyrrole nanostructure-derived N-containing hierarchically porous carbons have not been explored for CE applications. The method of carbonizing N-containing aromatic polymers such as polyaniline (PANI) and polypyrrole (PPy) has emerged as an efficient way to prepare N-containing carbon materials. Although, the derived carbons have limited conductivity compared to carbon nanotubes and graphene, they offer various advantages such as versatility in the fabrication method, the possibility of tailoring the derived carbon structures for required applications with high surface area, an internal porous structure developed during carbonization, chemical stability, rich surface chemistry, and are cost-effective. In addition, well-defined and interconnected pore networks can be created in these carbon structures using a non-template-based technique, such as the KOH or NaOH activation method.
In this present study, nitrogen-containing hierarchically porous carbon was synthesized by carbonizing polypyrrole (PPy) nanostructure followed by KOH activation. This activated PPy nanoparticles-derived hierarchically porous carbon (APNP) displayed high surface area and pore volume with interconnected pore networks, numerous defect sites, good conductivity with a low degree of graphitization phase and an increased graphitic N state. As a result, APNP achieved improved catalytic activity towards I3− reduction. The power conversion efficiency of an APNP CE-based DSSC is comparable to that of a Pt CE, demonstrating APNP as a potential CE for DSSC.

The schematic of the synthesis method is shown in Fig. 1. Interconnected polypyrrole nanoparticles (PNP) were prepared by a chemical polymerization method in the presence of cetyltrimethylammonium bromide [CTAB, (C16H33)N(CH3)3Br]. In the typical synthesis procedure of PNP, 1.4 g CTAB was dissolved in 200 mL deionized water with stirring for 1 h. Pyrrole monomer (800 mL) was then added to the solution and stirring continued for 1 h. Ferric chloride (FeCl3) solution (4 g dissolved in 10 mL water) was then added to the above monomer solution for polymerization. After 12 h, the resulting black product was washed using sufficient distilled water and dried at 60 °C in vacuum for 24 h. The as-prepared PNP sample was carbonized at different temperatures (300 °C, 600 °C, 800 °C and 1000 °C) in an Ar atmosphere for 2 h to get carbonized samples designated as CPNP 300, CPNP 600, CPNP 800 and CPNP 1000, respectively. For KOH activation, the CPNP 800 was mixed with KOH at 1:4 mass ratio, then heated to 800 °C (using 5 °C min−1 heating rate) in an Ar atmosphere for 2 h. The resulting activated sample (APNP) was then washed with dilute HCl and sufficient water for removal of metal species and finally dried at 60 °C overnight.


Counter electrode materials (4.5 wt%) were dispersed in N-methylpyrrolidone (NMP) with 0.5 wt% polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) to make slurries. The required amount of as-prepared slurries were drop-cast on the pre-cleaned FTO glass plates and vacuum dried at 120 °C for 24 h to get a CE film of area around 0.5 cm2. Pt CE was prepared by depositing Pt catalyst on the FTO substrate by dropping H2PtCl6 solution and heating at 400 °C for 15 min.

To prepare the TiO2 photoanode of the DSSCs, pre-cleaned FTO substrates were dipped in an aqueous TiCl4 solution (40 mM) at 70 °C for 30 min and then washed with ethanol and water. The TiCl4 treated substrates were heated at 500 °C for 30 min. Then, using the doctor blade technique, a layer of TiO2 mesoporous beads (15–16 μm thickness, 0.25 cm2) was coated on the FTO substrates using the already prepared TiO2 paste and dried at 120 °C. The TiO2 mesoporous beads were synthesized as reported earlier. The TiO2 electrodes were heated gradually at 325 °C (5 min), 375 °C (5 min), 450 °C (15 min) and finally at 500 °C (15 min). The prepared TiO2 electrodes were once again treated with TiCl4 solution and heated as mentioned earlier. The annealed TiO2 electrodes were then dipped in 0.3 mM N719 dye solution (in acetonitrile and tert-butyl alcohol) and kept for 24 h for dye adsorption at room temperature. The dye-adsorbed TiO2 photoanodes and various CEs were assembled in a sandwich-type cell using an ionomer film as a spacer (Surlyn, DuPont). Finally, electrolyte containing 0.06 M LiI, 0.03 M I2, 0.60 M BMII, 0.50 M 4-tert-butylpyridine and 0.10 M guanidinium thiocyanate in a mixture of acetonitrile and valeronitrile (85:15 volume ratio) was introduced into the cell.

The structural and crystallinity analyses of various CE materials were carried out using an X'Pert Pro powder X-ray diffractometer (PANalytical) and the morphology was explored by field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM, FEI Quanta) and high resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM, Tecnai G-20). Elemental composition analysis of various CE materials was done by recording energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectra with an Li-doped silicon X-ray detector attached to the FESEM. The molecular vibrational characteristics were investigated by Raman spectroscopy (WITec alpha 300 Confocal Raman systems equipped with a Nd:YAG laser as the excitation source). The surface area and pore size distribution were obtained using the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) and density functional theory (DFT) methods, respectively (Micromeritics, ASAP 2020, Surface Area and Porosity Analyzer). Sheet resistance and conductivity of the CE films were calculated from four-point probe measurements. X-ray photoelectron spectra (XPS) were obtained using a SPECS X-ray photoelectron spectrometer (Mg-Kα X-ray radiation source and PHOIBOS 100MCD energy analyzer) at a ultrahigh vacuum of 10−10 mbar. The CASA XPS software was used to analyze the XPS data. Cyclic voltammetry were carried out in an electrochemical workstation (CHI 608C) at room temperature using different CE materials as the working electrode in a three electrode configuration. The electrolyte used was 5 mM LiI, 0.5 mM I2 and 0.1 M LiClO4 in acetonitrile. The Ag/AgCl electrode was used as reference electrode and a Pt wire was used as the auxiliary electrode. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were performed in Solartron 1400 and 1470E Cell Test Systems in the frequency range from 0.1 Hz to 1 MHz at 0–0.8 V bias voltage and 10 mV amplitude. The current–voltage (J–V) measurements of the assembled DSSCs were obtained under AM 1.5G solar radiation in a Newport 150 W Solar Simulator (Class A) attached to a Keithley 2420 source meter.


The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns (Fig. 2(a)) of PNP, CPNP 300 and CPNP 600 showed a broad and low intensity diffraction peak around 2θ of 26°. The broad nature of peaks implies amorphous structure in these samples, as is expected for polymer and amorphous carbons. However, XRD patterns of CPNP 800, CPNP 1000 and APNP comprised two diffraction peaks at around 26° and 43°, which can be assigned to hexagonal graphitic carbon planes (002) and (101) (JCPDS, card no. 75 1621), respectively. This result suggests the graphitic nature of these samples. Particularly, for CPNP 800 and CPNP 1000, as carbonization temperature increases, the diffraction peak at around 26° shifts towards higher angle, the peak intensity increases and it becomes less broadened. These observations indicate that, at a higher temperature, the degree of graphitic property (increased graphitic crystallite size with reduced interlayer graphene spacing) for CPNPs is improved. Compared with CPNP 1000, the XRD pattern of APNP shows wider peaks with lower intensity, which suggests lower graphitic crystallinity of APNP. This implies that chemical activation could produce more disordered carbon fragments and more defects.

Raman spectra of CPNP 800, CPNP 1000 and APNP samples showed similar types of patterns with two distinct peaks around 1350 and 1580 cm−1, called D- and G-band, respectively (Fig. 2(b)). The D-band is associated with the defects and disorders of carbon materials and mainly corresponds to the breathing of C hexagons at the edges or borders of the crystalline structure due to the loss of translational symmetry. The G-band arises due to first order Raman scattering of the E2g phonon at the Brillouin zone center of sp2 carbon atoms. In contrast, PNP, CPNP 300 and CPNP 600 did not display any clear features of the G- and D-bands and only reflected features corresponding to the molecular structure of polypyrrole. Therefore the presence of G- and D-bands in carbonized and activated PPy nanostructure confirmed the successful conversion of polymer into carbons. The relative intensity of G- and D-bands (IG/ID) gives information about the nature of graphitic materials as well as replicating the degree of graphitization. In other words, defects present in the sample can be predicted using this relative intensity ratio (ID/IG). The broad peaks with low intensity of the D-band and G-band for APNP indicated that it has a low degree of graphitization with more defects as compared to CPNP 800 and CPNP 1000. These findings agree well with the XRD results.
Surface morphology of the PNP, CPNP 800 and APNP was investigated using field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) (Fig. 3). PNP was uniform with average particle size around 90 nm which showed a tendency to interact with each other to form aggregates. CPNP 800 and APNP showed little shrinkage from their pristine PNP form. The improved image resolution of APNP > CPNP 800 > PNP is due to an increase in conductivity. Development of surface roughness is also observed in CPNP 800 and APNP due to carbonization and activation. The energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectra of the samples were recorded to estimate the elemental composition of the materials and all showed the presence of C, N and O. Traces of Cl were found in PNP and CPNP 800 samples, which might be because of the ferric chloride used during synthesis. It is seen that in the CPNP 800 sample, the C content increases and, in contrast, the N and O contents decrease, as already observed in the EDX analysis. These observations suggest that the carbonization process would cause emission of elements like N and O (non-C elements) and hence reduce the N- and O-containing species due to the aromatization, denitrogenation, and dehydrogenation. In contrast, it is observed that the N content in the APNP sample is lower than that of CPNP 800 and moreover the O content of the APNP sample is higher than that of CPNP 800. This suggests that during the chemical activation process the loss of N-containing species as well as introduction of O-containing species can occur. To know more details about the structure of PNP, CPNP 800 and APNP, transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and high resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) images were recorded (Fig. 4). PNP showed aerogel-like agglomeration with interconnected particles. The HRTEM image of CPNP 800 revealed the presence of numerous pores, mostly micropores, in the network of the material due to carbonization along with external surface roughness. In the case of APNP, the surface morphology is remarkably rougher than that of CPNP 800 due to KOH chemical activation. Significant increase in pores with wide pore size distribution in the micro- and meso-regimes is observed in TEM and HRTEM images of APNP. In addition, APNP shows much less dense internal structure with random connections and indistinctly/disordered stacked carbon layers suggesting the presence of more exposed graphitic edges and defects which may enable more active sites contributing to the improved catalytic activity of the counter electrode.
To evaluate the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface area and pore volume of the materials, nitrogen adsorption–desorption analysis measurements were performed at 77 K (Fig. 5(a)). Both CPNP 800 and APNP exhibit combined type I/IV adsorption isotherms. At low relative pressure (P/P0 < 0.1), the observed high adsorption capacity reveals the significant presence of micropores in the samples. According to the IUPAC guidelines, type I isotherms indicate the characteristics of microporous structures, such as activated carbons, molecular sieve zeolites and certain porous oxides materials. A steep uptake in the isotherm of CPNP 800 at a very low relative pressure (P/P0) is due to enhanced adsorbent–adsorptive interactions in narrow micropores, which results in micropore filling at a very low relative pressure. However, in the case of APNP, the isotherm was observed with less steep or inclined uptake in low P/P0 while comparing with the isotherm of CPNP 800. The result indicates that APNP has a broader range of pore size distribution including wider micropores and narrow mesopores. Type IV adsorption isotherms are observed in mesoporous adsorbents. The noticeable type-H4 hysteresis loop in the isotherm is due to the filling and emptying of a small fraction of mesopores by capillary condensation. This type of hysteresis loop generally occurs in complex materials having both micropores and mesopores. The more the pores connect, the smaller the hysteresis loop, and vice versa. The smaller hysteresis of APNP compared to CPNP 800 clearly shows that APNP has more pore connections.
The pore size distributions of APNP and CPNP 800 were analysed using the density functional theory (DFT) method (Fig. 5(b)). The figure reveals the presence of micro-, meso- and macropores in both materials. CPNP 800 showed mainly micropores with some mesopores and macropores. In the case of APNP, a significant increase in pore volume was observed with shifted predominant pore widths. It implies that, due to the activation process, the creation of a microporous structure as well as widening of the micropores to mesopores also occurred. Macropores can occur due to random stacking of disordered carbon structures and pore widening due to a large amount of pore formation, which is more significant in APNP due to its highly defective, disordered and porous structure. BET surface areas of CPNP 800 and APNP were 250.02 and 707.98 m2 g−1, and total pore volumes were obtained as 0.25 and 0.52 cm3 g−1, respectively.
X-ray photoelectron spectra (XPS) of the PNP, CPNP 800 and APNP samples were recorded to evaluate the elemental composition and to know the chemical state of N in the samples. As shown in Table 1, comparison of PNP and the CPNP 800 sample shows increased C content but decreased N and O contents. Further increase in C content is observed in APNP along with decrease in N content. However, O content of the APNP sample is slightly higher than that of CPNP 800 due to KOH activation. The same trends have been observed using EDX analysis, as discussed earlier. However, the amounts of C, N and O contents were different in both studies, which may be due to different sample preparation methods for EDX and XPS study. The elemental analysis using XPS is more convincing when compared with earlier studies. XPS and N 1s spectra of PNP, CPNP 800 and APNP are displayed in Fig. 6. The peaks of the N 1s spectra are fitted by three components that are assigned as N-5, N-6, and N-Q corresponding to pyrrolic N, pyridinic N and quaternary (graphitic) N, respectively. Pyrrolic N refers to the N atom bonded to a carbon atom in a pentagonal ring as in pyrrole. Pyridinic N refers to the N atom bonded to two C atoms in hexagonal rings. Quaternary N denotes the N atom bonded as a substitute for the C atom in the hexagonal rings. As shown in Fig. 6, only the N-5 peak is observed at around 399.6 eV for PNP, corresponding to pyrrolic N in PPy. In the case of CPNP 800 and APNP, peaks appeared around 398.5 and 400.9 eV, corresponding to N-6 and N-Q, while the peak of N-5 has disappeared. These observations suggest that pyrrolic N of PNP is thermally unstable and can convert to N-Q and N-6 in CPNP 800 due to carbonization. Furthermore, as shown in Table 1, the N-Q/N-6 ratio in APNP (2.75) is more than that in CPNP 800 (1.92), signifying possible removal of N-6 during KOH activation and hence indicating the higher stability of N-Q compared to N-6.
Materials
C (%)
O (%)
N (%)
N-Q (%)
N-6 (%)
PNP
74
16.12
9.37
—
—
CPNP 800
81.92
13.40
4.42
65.87
34.13
APNP
83.18
13.91
2.90
73.35
26.65
The sheet resistance and conductivity of the prepared CPNP 800 and APNP CEs were obtained by the four-probe method. APNP CE film achieved low sheet resistance (2.05 × 103 Ω sq−1) and better conductivity (35.86 S m−1) compared to that of CPNP 800 CE film (sheet resistance of 11.06 × 103 Ω sq−1 and conductivity of 6.49 S m−1).

Fig. 7(a) and (b) display the current density–voltage (J–V) curves for DSSCs using PNP, CPNP 300, CPNP 600, CPNP 800 CPNP 1000, APNP and Pt CEs, and measured under simulated AM 1.5G solar irradiance (100 mW cm−2). The important cell parameters, such as short circuit current (Jsc), open circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (FF) and power conversion efficiency (PCE) are listed in Table 1. PNP showed very low power conversion efficiency (0.39%) due to poor conductivity. CPNP 300 and CPNP 600 showed 0.72% and 2.55% efficiency, respectively. CPNP 800 and CPNP 1000 showed only decent PCE of 4.76% and 4.62%, respectively. A remarkably improvement in Jsc and FF was observed for APNP-based DSSCs demonstrating an impressive PCE of 6.54%. The reference DSSC based on a Pt CE showed Jsc of 13.51 mA cm−2, Voc of 737 mV, and FF of 0.69, displaying a PCE of 6.87%. In view of these results with CPNP and APNP CEs, electrochemical analysis was conducted to enumerate their catalytic activity.


The catalytic activity of carbon-based CEs is believed to be due to the exposed graphitic edges and defects. The other parameter is conductivity of the counter electrode material. Therefore, we studied the catalytic activity of PNP at different carbonization temperatures, since conductivity increases with carbonization. Fig. 8(a) shows the cyclic voltammetry (CV) curves of PNP, CPNP 300, CPNP 600, CPNP 800 and CPNP 1000 along with the Pt CE at a scan rate 50 mV s−1. Two pairs of redox peaks were observed for the Pt CE as expected according to the literature. The pair of anodic and cathodic current (Aox, Ared) in the higher potential range corresponds to the redox reaction (oxidation and reduction) of I2 and I3− (eqn (1)), gives as follows:


3I2 + 2e− → 2I3−

(1)
The other pair, Box and Bred, observed in the lower potential range, corresponds to the redox reaction of I− and I3− (eqn (2)), given as follows:

I3− + 2e− → 3I−

(2)
since the role of CE in the DSSC is to reduce I
3− to I−, the focus of our analysis is mainly the redox peaks Box and Bred corresponding to eqn (2). Generally, the intensity of peak current (Jox and Jred) and the peak-to-peak separation (Epp) are two key parameters to be considered in the evaluation of the catalytic activity of a CE. High Jred with small Epp value signifies high electrocatalytic activity of the CE.

For all other CEs other than Pt, only one pair of redox peak was observed which corresponds to the redox of I3−/I−. From the CV curves, it is observed that PNP and CPNP 300 samples do not have noticeable catalytic activity towards I3− reduction. CPNP 600 has shown improved catalytic activity. Since, for a redox reaction, the standard electrochemical rate constant and Epp are negatively correlated to each other, the value of Epp between the redox peaks measures the catalytic activity of the CE. The Epp values for Pt, CPNP 800 and CPNP 1000 are around 0.35, 0.60 and 0.57 V, respectively. CPNP 800 and CPNP 1000 exhibit similar catalytic activities for the reduction of I3−, because CPNP 1000 shows less peak current than CPNP 800 and shows slightly less Epp value. The current density of CPNP 1000 may be due to a decrease in catalytic sites because of the graphitization at high carbonization temperature. This may be the reason that less current density and less efficiency is obtained in the case of the CPNP 1000 CE during the photovoltaic performance study (Table 2). This result suggests that the conductivity of CPNPs, which increases with increasing carbonization temperature, competes with their catalytic activity.
CEs
Jsc (mA cm−2)
Voc (mV)
FF
PCE (%)
PNP
3.79
730
0.14
0.39
CPNP 300
6.20
729
0.16
0.72
CPNP 600
6.74
729
0.52
2.55
CPNP 800
12.36
727
0.53
4.76
CPNP 1000
11.78
728
0.54
4.62
APNP
14.37
735
0.62
6.54
Pt
13.51
737
0.69
6.87
An electrode with carbonization temperature less than 600 °C may not be conductive enough to be utilized as a CE. As an example, PNP and CPNP 300 CEs have clearly shown poor catalytic activity. To distinguish between the catalytic activity and surface area effects, we have compared CV curves of CPNP 800 and APNP CEs (Fig. 8(b)). From the CV curves, it can be observed that a CE prepared from APNP exhibits more current density with a much larger enclosed redox reaction area under the CV curve than one prepared from CPNP 800. This reveals that APNP has a comparatively higher electrochemically active surface area than CPNP 800. In addition, the APNP CE has less Epp value (0.5 V) than the CPNP 800 CE. The APNP CE is therefore more catalytic toward the reaction than CPNP 800 CE.
Considering the morphologies of the APNP and CPNP, it is reasonable to expect that the electrode made from APNP exhibits more porosity. Therefore, to study the morphology effect of the CE on the observed catalytic activity of the APNP, we studied the variation of the I3− oxidation and reduction peak current (Ip) with scan rate (ν) (Fig. 8(c)) and obtained CV by varying the CE thickness (Fig. 8(e)). Ip vs. ν somewhat deviates from the ideal characteristics, which was supposed to be Ip ∝ ν1/2 for the participating redox species in the case of semi-infinite diffusion (Fig. 8(d)). At low scan rates, the deviation is remarkable where a reduction is observed in the peak magnitudes of both the oxidation and the reduction. This behaviour might be due to the porosity of the CE, since the redox species of the electrolyte can get depleted at low scan rates. In addition, the dependence of Epp and Ip on the CE thickness is one more factor that supports the effect of electrode morphology (Fig. 8(e)). Since the geometric areas of all the CEs are the same, thicker films are produced for higher material loadings. From Fig. 8(e) and Table 2, it is found that Epp of the I3−/I− redox reaction is much larger for the electrode with 0.5 mg cm−2 than for those with higher loadings. No significant oxidation or reduction peak was observed for a CE of 0.3 mg cm−2, may be because of its reduced surface area. As the loading increases, the reduction potential is shifted towards the positive (reduction in Epp). Simultaneously, the peak current as well as the capacitive background current increase, which indicate higher accessible surface area and catalytic active sites. Beyond 1 mg cm−2 loading, for example 1.3 mg cm−2, the Epp value was observed to increase again, maybe due to it being too thick for efficient electron transfer to the FTO glass substrate from the CE.
EIS was also used to study the catalytic activity for the reduction of I3− on the CEs. Fig. 9 shows the Nyquist plots for APNP CE for a symmetric sandwich cell configuration. The series resistance Rs is ascribed by the intercept on the real axis in the high frequency region. The charge transfer resistance Rct and the subsequent constant phase angle element (CPE) of the CE/electrolyte interface are referred to by the left arc in the first high frequency region. The right arc in the low frequency region is due to the redox couple (I3−/I−) transport in the electrolyte, and is assigned as the Nernst diffusion impedance, ZN. These EIS parameters were evaluated by fitting the Nyquist plots with the equivalent circuit diagram, as shown in Fig. 10(a) and are presented in Table 3.
CE loading (mg cm−2)
Epp value (V)
0.5
0.75
0.7
0.53
1
0.5
1.3
0.6
The Rct value of a CE is a key parameter for its catalytic activity towards the redox reaction (I3−/I−). For a high performing DSSC, Rct needs to be low. From Table 3 (the data are listed as obtained from Fig. 9(a)), it is observed that the Rct of APNP CE decreases as the thickness of the CE layer increases. When the thickness of the APNP layer increases from 0.3 mg cm−2 to 1 mg cm−2 loading, Rct of the CE decreases from 7.75 Ω cm2 to 4.08 Ω cm2. This is due to the fact that with the thicker APNP layer the active surface area of film increases. However, with further increase in the thickness (1.3 mg cm−2) of APNP layer, Rct barely changes. Therefore, for the APNP CE layer, 1 mg cm−2 loading results in optimal thickness. The thickness of the CE with 1 mg cm−2 loading was around 13.6 μm as shown in Fig. 10(b). Rs does not depend significantly on the thickness of the APNP layer, but sometimes with increasing thickness, it appears to increase due to poor binding with the FTO glass. When compared with CPNP and Pt CEs (Fig. 9(b)), APNP electrodes showed higher Rct values than Pt (1.66 Ω cm2), but lower than CPNP 800 CE (46.97 Ω cm2). In addition, APNP electrodes displayed a higher ZN (2.16 Ω cm2) value than Pt (0.93 Ω cm2), but lower than CPNP 800 CE (39.16 Ω cm2) (Table 4).
CE loading (mg cm−2)
Rct value (Ω cm2)
0.5
7.75
0.7
5.67
1
4.08
1.3
4.10
To study the effect of bias voltage on the charge transfer property of APNP, we studied impedance spectra recorded at various applied biases (Fig. 9(c)). Applied bias increases the Nernst diffusion impedance, which corresponds to I3− depletion at the CE. Furthermore, according to simple Butler–Volmer kinetics, Rct decreases exponentially until a limited diffusion region is reached. Such behaviours have been observed in case of Pt CEs. To further study the diffusion nature in the CE, we considered two parameters, as displayed in Fig. 9(d): (1) the viscosity, by adding poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG, 10 mM) as a gallant and (2) the electrolyte concentration, by diluting the parent electrolyte 10 times. Both increasing viscosity and decreasing electrolyte concentration increases diffusion resistance since the increased electrolyte viscosity lowers the diffusion coefficient and less electrolyte species in the diluted electrolyte decrease the conductivity of the electrolyte. As is evident, increase in impedance is observed in the low-frequency semicircle for the PEG-added electrolyte. A similar effect is observed in the high-frequency semicircles also.
For carbon-containing materials, surface defects (e.g. dangling bonds) and optimal measures of O-containing functional groups may act as catalytic active sites for the reduction of I3−. Electrocatalytic activity of carbon materials often improves with increasing number of graphitic multi-edges where dangling bonds are present. The other important parameter is conductivity of the counter electrode material for efficient collection and transport of photogenerated electrons. Large catalytic active sites and good conductivity of the material enhances the charge transfer property of the counter electrode. Since a large number of structural defects can affect the material conductivity, an optimized balance between these two parameters is required to improve the charge transfer property of the counter electrode and to enhance the overall device performance. Comparing APNP with CPNP 800 CEs, APNP possesses a greater number of structural defects and higher conductivity compared to CPNP 800. Hence, the APNP CE showed an enhanced charge transfer property by displaying higher redox current density and lower Epp value in the CV curve as well as less Rct value in the EIS analysis than CPNP 800. The increased specific surface area and pore volume with interconnected hierarchical pore structure enhances the diffusion property of APNP by displaying a lower ZN value than CPNP 800. It also enhances the charge transfer property of APNP by improving the contacts between electrolyte species and catalytic active sites. High specific surface area and pore volume with hierarchical pore structure guarantee fast mass transport in macropores and hence enhances the catalytic activity of the CE material.
Considering the effect of elemental composition in catalytic activity, it is observed in both EDX and XPS analysis data that the KOH activation process reduces N as well as increases C and O content in APNP. Increase in C content mainly increases the conductivity of APNP; while higher surface area of APNP may expose more N as well as O functional species accessible to interact with electrolyte species, enhancing catalytic activity of APNP. In addition, it was suggested that the nitrogen states are more important than the total N content to have a significant effect on the catalytic activity. It was revealed that pyridinic N and graphitic N could contribute significantly to the catalytic activity. However, decrease in charge transfer resistance was observed with an increase in content of graphitic N. From the XPS analysis we observed that, with activation, the ratio of graphitic N/pyridinic N was increased significantly in APNP. Hence, decrease in charge transfer resistance and enhanced catalytic activity of APNP was observed in comparison with CPNP 800.

We synthesized nitrogen-containing hierarchically porous carbon by carbonizing and activating a polypyrrole nanostructure (APNP) using a template-free synthesis method and demonstrated it as an efficient counter electrode (CE) in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). APNP possessed high surface area and pore volume with interconnected pore networks, numerous defect sites, as well as good conductivity with a low degree of graphitization phase and an increased graphitic N state. These material properties aided APNP CEs to achieve improved catalytic activity towards I3− reduction. APNP-based DSSCs displayed power conversion efficiency of 6.58%, which is higher than the carbonized sample (CPNP, 4.76%) and comparable to Pt-based DSSCs (6.93%). This work explores an efficient alternative counter electrode material to Pt in DSSCs and also affords an opportunity for various polymer-derived nitrogen-containing carbons to be used for solar cell applications, with the particular interest being their lower cost, ease of fabrication and environmental benignity nature.


The authors acknowledge Indian Institute of Technology Madras (IITM), Chennai for the financial supports.


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016