 DOI: 10.1039/D2SE01686A
(Paper)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2023, 7, 2495-2503


Leying
Zha
,

Lei
Ning
,

Pengyun
Zhang
,

Pingfan
Du
,

Jie
Xiong
* and 

Lixin
Song
*

College of Materials and Textiles, Zhejiang Sci-Tech University, Hangzhou 310018, Zhejiang, China

School of Fashion Design & Engineering, Zhejiang Sci-Tech University, Hangzhou, 311199, China. E-mail: jxiong@zstu.edu.cn; lxsong12@zstu.edu.cn

Key Laboratory of Intelligent Textile and Flexible Interconnection of Zhejiang Province, Hangzhou 310018, Zhejiang, China

Received
5th December 2022
, Accepted 14th April 2023
First published on 14th April 2023
Organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have received extensive attention due to their high efficiency, low cost and simple solution processability. In regular PSCs, tin oxide (SnO2), as the commonly used electron transport layer (ETL) material, suffers from undesirable aggregation and inferior charge transport during the low-temperature fabrication process, jeopardizing and dampening the photovoltaic performance and shelf stability of the devices. Herein, an alkali metal salt, 2,2′-biquinoline-4,4′-dicarboxylate disodium salt trihydrate (BCA), was introduced into a SnO2 colloidal solution to overcome these obstacles. The BCA modifiers can optimize the agglomeration phenomenon of SnO2 colloids, thereby forming a SnO2 electron transport layer with favorable film coverage and outstanding electrical properties. The oxygen vacancy (–OH) defects at the SnO2 upper surface could be efficiently passivated through coordination bond interaction between the CO groups of BCA molecules and –OH sites. Moreover, the CN and sodium ions from BCA combined with the undercoordinated Pb2+ and halide vacancies distributed at the perovskite bottom side to modulate crystal growth and the resultant film morphology. Accordingly, the BCA molecules effectively passivated the buried layer defects and realized the benign energy level alignment of the perovskite heterojunction, which was conducive to the extraction of charge and the reduction of interfacial carrier recombination. As a result, the PSCs fabricated employing the SnO2–BCA layer under open-air conditions achieved a champion efficiency of 20.24% along with negligible hysteresis. The unencapsulated modified device retained 80.1% of its initial PCE after aging for over 1000 h at 55 ± 5% relative humidity under ambient conditions. This work provides a simple and feasible pathway to synchronously minimize SnO2 colloid coagulation and enhance interfacial electron transport, hence contributing to further enhancement in the efficiency and stability of PSCs.

Organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have gained tremendous research interest mainly considering their fascinating optoelectronic properties and simple fabrication process. During the last decade, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of PSCs has increased dramatically from 3.8% to 25.7%, which is comparable to that of commercial silicon-based solar cells. In the regular PSC configuration, the underlying electron transport layer (ETL) materials, tin oxide (SnO2) and titanium dioxide (TiO2), play a significant role in interfacial charge transport and extraction, as well as the film properties of perovskites. In contrast to TiO2, SnO2 ETL is a natural ideal partner in n-i-p type PSCs on account of its lower conduction band minimum with perovskite heterojunctions, stronger ultraviolet stability, as well as lower hysteresis effect. Moreover, the low temperature preparation process of the SnO2 layer has enormous potential for the purpose of the large-scale commercial application of PSCs. Nevertheless, the SnO2 films with inferior coverage and undesirable interconnection caused by aggregation during the solution procedure can promote current leakage, hence jeopardizing the photovoltaic performance of PSCs. Meanwhile, the defects distributed along the bottom side of the perovskite and the upper surface of the SnO2 layer serve as the non-radiative recombination center to trigger the irreversible chemical decomposition of perovskite materials. Therefore, modifying the interface precisely to achieve uniform film coverage and inhibit non-radiative recombination is an effective strategy to assemble efficient and stable PSCs.

The surface chemical properties and morphology of the underlying interface heterojunction can affect the formation of the perovskite atop of it, which in turn influences the photovoltaic performance and shelf stability of the devices. Unfavorable coagulation and interfacial contact lead to interfacial charge accumulation, which weakens electron transport and accelerates the hysteresis behavior of PSCs. In order to improve the crystal quality and film properties of the SnO2 ETL, various strategies have been attempted, such as elemental doping, surface modification, and chemical bath deposition. Through incorporating external ions (such as metal cations, halide ions, and organic/inorganic salts) into a SnO2 colloidal solution, favorable film coverage and electronic properties of the resultant film can be obtained. For example, Sun et al. introduced the organic compound phenylethyl ammonium chloride into a SnO2 hydrocolloid dispersion, in which –NH2 groups could undergo a complexation reaction with Sn4+, efficiently improving SnO2 aggregation and enhancing the performance of the resultant films. Besides, the introduction of Cl− ions filled the oxygen vacancy defects of SnO2 thin films, and ultimately improved the photoelectric performance and shelf stability of the devices. On the other hand, the plentiful defects distributed at the perovskite bottom side and upper surface of SnO2 ETLs can arouse grievous non-radiative recombination, resulting in the degradation of the photovoltaic performance of PSCs. Aiming to achieve high-performance PSCs, the premise is to reduce the detrimental defects, which substantially hinges on the underlying interfacial contact on which the perovskites are crystallized. Alkali metal ions, such as K+, Na+, and Li+, are preferentially employed to ameliorate the SnO2 ETL. It is found that the alkali ions can not only tune the crystallization kinetics of perovskite films, but also optimize the heterojunction contact at the perovskite/SnO2 ETL interface with decreased defect densities and minimized non-radiative recombination. Wang et al. introduced an alkali metal fluoride as an additive into the SnO2 ETL. The alkali metal ions (K+, Rb+, and Cs+) effectively filled the organic cation vacancies and improved the film quality; consequently, the SnO2-based PSCs exhibited better power conversion efficiency (PCE). Based on the aforesaid studies, it is a facile and feasible approach for synchronously modulating the electrical properties of SnO2 films and suppressing interfacial non-radiative recombination at the perovskite/ETL interface to further enhance the photovoltaic performance of PSCs.
In this work, 2,2′-bisquinoline-4,4′-dicarboxylate disodium salt (BCA) with CO and pyridine functional groups was incorporated into the commercial SnO2 dispersion. We found that sufficient electrostatic repulsion with the inclusion of the BCA modifier reduced the agglomeration of SnO2 colloidal dispersion and ameliorated the electrical properties of the resultant ETLs. Furthermore, the oxygen vacancy (–OH) defects in SnO2 could be efficiently passivated through coordination bond interaction between the CO groups of BCA molecules and –OH sites. Meanwhile, the BCA additives could modulate the perovskite crystallinity, and the pyridine rings and alkali metal ions combined with undercoordinated Pb2+ and halide vacancies in the perovskite bottom side, respectively. In addition to the interfacial defect optimization, the SnO2–BCA ETL displayed more suitable energetic alignment with respect to the perovskite heterojunction compared with the bare SnO2 based layer, beneficial in interfacial charge transport and extraction. As a consequence, the PSCs assembled under open-air conditions based on BCA modification achieved a decent efficiency of 20.24% accompanied by smaller hysteresis. Moreover, the optimized device without encapsulation retained 80.1% of its initial PCE after aging for over 1000 h at 55 ± 5% relative humidity under ambient conditions.

Deionized water was used to dilute the SnO2 colloidal solution with their volume ratio of 1:6, and then BCA molecules were incorporated into the SnO2 dispersion (denoted as SnO2–BCA). SnO2 and SnO2–BCA thin films were obtained by spin-coating the corresponding precursor solutions on fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) substrates followed by annealing at 150 °C for 30 min, as illustrated in Fig. 1a. The weight loss of BCA molecules before 127.7 °C indicated by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) could be attributed to the loss of bonded water, and the SnO2–BCA thin films had good thermal stability at 150 °C (Fig. S1b). The surface of the commercial nanosized SnO2 nanoparticles was usually negatively charged, and for the sake of fabricating the ultra-small grains, alkaline materials were introduced into the colloidal solution and acted as the stabilizer. To investigate the effect of BCA molecules on the SnO2 colloidal dispersion, zeta potential was firstly measured. The zeta potential of the fresh SnO2 solution was measured to be −29.47 mV; after storage for 72 h in an ambient environment, the value increased to −20.05 mV, indicating unfavorable colloidal stability (Table S1), whereas the zeta potential value of the SnO2 dispersion with BCA modification did not show any visible difference before (−39.99 mV) and on ageing (−38.13 mV), which suggested favorable colloidal stability. The enhanced interparticle chemical interactions of the colloidal dispersions were sufficient to repel the nanoparticles from each other, resulting in benign dispersibility, mirrored in dynamic light scattering results in Fig. 1b. The particle size increased from 15.37 nm of the fresh SnO2 colloidal solution to 21.94 nm of the SnO2–BCA dispersion, originating from the absorption of BCA molecules on the surface of SnO2 nanoparticles.

Atomic force microscopy (AFM) measurements were used to characterize the surface morphology and topography of SnO2 ETLs without and with BCA additives. Compact SnO2 films were deposited onto FTO substrates by spin-coating a dilute solution of SnO2/SnO2–BCA. As illustrated in Fig. 1c, both films exhibited a smooth surface with a root mean-square (RMS) roughness of 1.59 and 1.72 nm for the SnO2 and SnO2–BCA films, respectively, well in line with DLS results. After 72 h storage, the grain size (Fig. S2) of the SnO2 solution remarkably increased to 27.66 nm, and that of the SnO2–BCA slightly changed to 22.80 nm. Furthermore, the AFM images of the SnO2 films based on the aging SnO2 colloidal solutions without and with BCA modifiers were recorded, as provided in Fig. S3. To sum up, the incorporation of BCA molecules enhanced interparticle van der Waals interactions, leading to a well-dispersed colloidal solution, that was expected to enhance the film formation and electronic properties of the resultant SnO2 ETLs. The optical transmission spectra of the SnO2 films on the FTO substrate without and with BCA modification are presented in Fig. S4. Both the samples exhibited a similar optical transmittance trend, but the optical transparency of the SnO2–BCA interface layer was marginally higher than that of the pristine film at short wavelengths, which was instrumental in enhancing the photophysical properties of PSCs. Furthermore, the water contact angle (Fig. 1d) was investigated to characterize the surface chemical properties of the SnO2 films without and with BCA molecules. A smaller contact angle reduced the Gibbs free energy of heterojunction nucleation, which was beneficial for perovskite crystallization, contributing to high-performance perovskite films with large grain sizes and fewer grain boundaries.
Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) was used to explore the impact of BCA on the surface energy level alignment of the SnO2 films. The secondary electron valence band edge (Eonset) and cutoff region (Ecutoff) of the pristine SnO2 and the BCA-modified one are exhibited in Fig. S5, and the detailed parameters are summarized in Table S2. The work functions (WF) of SnO2 and SnO2–BCA were calculated to be 4.63 and 4.37 eV, respectively. The decline in WF value after BCA modification originated from surface dipole moments relevant to electron donation from CO groups in the modifiers to the SnO2 substrate. Combined with the band gap values (Eg) of the samples measured by UV-vis absorption (Fig. S6), the conduction band minimum and valence band maximum values of the pristine SnO2 and BCA-modified SnO2 samples can be calculated as −4.46 and −8.42 eV, and −4.04 and −8.13 eV, respectively. Accordingly, the corresponding surface energy level alignments of the SnO2 ETLs without and with BCA treatment are presented in Fig. 2a. It is striking that the conduction band minimum values of the modified SnO2 films were substantially closer to the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital of the CsFAMA-based perovskite as compared to the pristine one. The reduction of the energy barriers was conducive to extracting electrons from the perovskite layer to ETLs and minimizes recombination losses. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern was recorded to investigate the crystallinity of the SnO2 films without and with BCA modification, as shown in Fig. S7. The characteristic diffraction peak positions of both samples were basically the same, implying that the incorporation of BCA additives improved the crystallization and they did not embed into the crystal structure of the SnO2 nanocrystals. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements were employed to elucidate the chemical interactions and the mechanism of defect passivation between the BCA molecules and SnO2 film. As presented in Fig. 2b, it was clear that the binding energies for the Sn 3d5/2 and Sn 3d3/2 peaks of the bare SnO2 film corresponded to 486.25 and 494.66 eV, whereas the binding energies for the BCA treated SnO2 film shifted to 486.15 and 494.55 eV, respectively, demonstrating strong chemical interaction between the BCA modifiers and SnO2 films. From Fig. 2c and d, the O 1s peaks of the pristine SnO2 film were deconvoluted into peaks at 530.0 eV and 531.4 eV, which were assigned to lattice oxygen and vacancy oxygen in SnO2, respectively. The peak located at 532.40 eV was assigned to the CO groups of the BCA dopants, which corroborated that the BCA molecules were successfully doped into the SnO2 ETLs. In addition, the peak area ratio of vacancy oxygen to the total of lattice oxygen and vacancy oxygen in the bare SnO2 film was estimated to be 0.081, which was astonishingly higher than that of the SnO2–BCA ETL (0.059). This result suggested an effective suppression in oxygen defects through coordination bond interaction between the CO groups of the BCA molecules and –OH defects of the SnO2 layers. Chemical chelation was also observed in the Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectra in Fig. 2e. The characteristic peak of the CO functional group at 1694 cm−1 of BCA shifted to a higher wavenumber (1721 cm−1), which proved the chemical chelation between BCA and SnO2.
Dark current–voltage (I–V) characteristics were measured to evaluate the electrical conductivity of the pure and modified SnO2 films (Fig. 2f), and the illustrations revealed the device architecture. The slope of the I–V curve was directly related to the conductivity of the film, the larger the curve slope of the SnO2–BCA sample, the higher the electrical conductivity. The improvement of electrical properties of the SnO2–BCA film is related to the crystallization, and the film-forming properties of SnO2 are enhanced by BCA doping, which further promotes the carrier extraction and transfer.
The surface chemical properties of the underlying interface heterojunction not only affected the electron transmission of the SnO2 ETLs, but also optimized the perovskite film quality. The perovskite layers were deposited on the SnO2 ETL by the antisolvent process, and the morphology and properties of perovskite thin films were investigated. Fig. 3a reveals scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of perovskite films based on different SnO2 ETLs. Both the perovskite films on SnO2 and SnO2–BCA ETLs showed compact surface morphology. Compared with the bare SnO2 substrate, the addition of BCA molecules enlarged the grain size of the perovskite, which suggested that the modifier could ameliorate interfacial contact and facilitated perovskite crystallization. Simultaneously, due to the higher wettability of the SnO2–BCA surface, the perovskite film had better properties. To further elucidate the influence of BCA on the crystallinity of perovskite films, XRD patterns were studied, as shown in Fig. S8. The enhanced peak intensity of the perovskite film on SnO2–BCA ETLs can be attributed to the BCA molecules enhancing perovskite crystallization, caused by the favorable defect passivation effect.
Moreover, XPS experiments were employed to explore the chemical interaction of BCA modifiers with the perovskite. As shown in Fig. 3b, the peaks of Pb 4f7/2 and Pb 4f5/2 shifted to the direction of higher binding energy, which proved the electron donation from pyridine to undercoordinated Pb2+. FTIR spectra (Fig. 3c) were used to buttress the abovementioned results. The stretching vibration peaks of CN and CO moved from 1390 and 1694 cm−1 to 1409 and 1715 cm−1 after addition of BCA, respectively. The obvious movement of these peaks indicated that the BCA molecules could chemically interact with uncoordinated Pb2+ to passivate the buried defects distributed at the perovskite layer. As everyone knows, alkali metals minimize the halogen defects located at perovskite grain boundaries and surface and suppress the ion migration inside the devices through ionic bond interactions to facilitate the performance improvement of PSCs. From the spectra of Fig. 3b, the obviously shifted binding energy provided evidence that chemical chelation between BCA molecules and perovskite materials occurred. BCA modifiers had been successfully corroborated to optimize the electronic properties of SnO2 ETLs and modulate perovskite crystallization through coordination and ionic bond interactions, in order to enhance the photovoltaic performance of PSCs.
To investigate the charge carrier dynamics in the perovskite films based on the two types of ETLs, steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) decay spectra were obtained. The PL (TRPL) measurements were based on the device construction of FTO/SnO2/perovskite. Fig. 3d displays the steady-state PL spectra. Compared with the pristine SnO2, the perovskite film deposited on the SnO2–BCA ETL expressed lower PL peak intensity, revealing higher carrier extraction efficiency. Blue-shifted PL peaks were observed in the decorated samples, as a result of the effective defect passivation as a consequence of the formation of coordination bonds between CN groups and undercoordinated Pb2+ ions and ionic bond interactions of alkali metal and halogen defects. The TRPL spectra in Fig. 3e exhibit the perovskite film fabricated on SnO2 and SnO2–BCA fitted by a double exponential model:
where
A1 and A2 are relative amplitudes, and τ1 and τ2 are the carrier lifetimes of fast decay and slow decay, respectively. The final fitting parameters are listed in Table S3. The fast decay lifetime τ1 decreased from 10.89 to 5.58 ns, indicating that the interfacial non-radiative recombination was inhibited. The decrease of the slow decay lifetime τ2 caused by slow recombination indicated the improvement of charge transport efficiency. The τavg of the BCA treatment was reduced from the original 182.91 to 60.13 ns compared with the original average carrier lifetime, verifying the enhanced interfacial contact between the perovskite film and SnO2 ETL, which was more conducive to the transport and extraction of carriers.

To obtain a deeper insight into the effect of BCA on the carrier transfer and charge recombination processes in PSCs, the light intensity-dependent Voc values for two different electron-only devices were determined (Fig. 4a). The slope of SnO2–BCA was 1.66 kT/q, lower than that of pristine SnO2 (1.86 kT/q). The slope represents the linear relationship of the fitted voltage to light intensity, which indicated that the interfacial non-radiative recombination was largely suppressed. To test the defect densities of the perovskite films, the space charge confinement current (SCLC) tests were applied to the devices with the configuration of FTO/SnO2 (SnO2–BCA)/perovskite/phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM)/Ag (Fig. 4b). The trap density was calculated using the following formula:
where
ε0 denotes the vacuum permittivity, ε is the relative permittivity of the perovskite, VTFL is the trap field limiting voltage, e is the unit electron charge, and L is the thickness of the perovskite layer. The VTFL of the SnO2–BCA film was 0.166 V, obviously smaller than that of the SnO2 film (VTFL = 0.304 V). The trap densities of the perovskite thin films grown on SnO2 and SnO2–BCA were calculated to be 3.88 × 1015 and 2.12 × 1015 cm−3, respectively. The perovskite film based on SnO2–BCA had much lower defect density, suggestive of a benign defect passivation effect. Fig. 4c presents electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) tests under dark conditions, and the inset illustrates the equivalent circuit model. The model includes series resistance (Rs) in the high-frequency region and the charge transfer resistance (Rct) in the low-frequency region. The Rs values of PSCs decreased from 30.07 to 20.20 Ω after adding BCA, while Rct increased from 12050 to 13452 Ω. This result demonstrates the suppressed interfacial non-radiative recombination and the enhanced charge transport with the assistance of BCA molecules. Meanwhile, the measurement of the lower dark-current densities of the SnO2–BCA based devices (Fig. 4d) substantiated effective inhibition of charge-carrier recombination. Transient photovoltage (TPV) and transient photocurrent (TPC) decay curves were recorded to elucidate the role of BCA passivation in interfacial charge transfer and recombination process. As shown in Fig. 4e, the decay lifetime increased to 80.07 ns after BCA decoration from 37.03 ns for the pristine one. This suggested that interfacial non-radiative recombination was suppressed markedly, in good accordance with PL (TRPL) results. In addition, the photocurrent decay lifetime (Fig. S9) was reduced from 153.59 ns in the case of the pristine sample to 42.64 ns in the case of the decorated one, facilitating interfacial charge transport and extraction on account of the favorable defect passivation effect. We further performed Mott–Schottky analysis to obtain more insight into the effects of the BCA additive on carrier diffusion and extraction within perovskite films. As indicated in Fig. 4f, the built-in potential (Vbi) values were 0.886 and 0.792 V for the solar cells based on SnO2 without and with the BCA additive, respectively. A higher Vbi indicated a stronger electric field between the SnO2 ETL and perovskite layer, which was beneficial for carrier transfer, thereby suppressing charge carrier recombination. Based on the above-mentioned results, the PSCs based on BCA modification demonstrated more efficient charge transport as a consequence of favorable defect passivation and ameliorated interfacial contact.

Furthermore, the effects of the concentrations of BCA on the performance of PSCs were investigated. The current density voltage (J–V) characteristic curves and photovoltaic parameters corresponding to the original and modified PSCs are shown in Fig. 5a and Table S4. The average PCE increased with the addition of the BCA modifier; the champion efficiency of the devices with the optimal concentration of 1.2 mg ml−1 was obtained. As manifested in Fig. 5b and Table 1, the pristine device delivered an efficiency of 18.01% (a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 22.62 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.079 V, and a fill factor (FF) of 0.738) in the reverse direction and 17.62% (Jsc of 22.60 mA cm−2, Voc of 1.075 V, FF of 0.726) on forward scanning. After BCA modification, the best device had a champion efficiency of 20.24% with a Jsc of 23.53 mA cm−2, a Voc of 1.120 V, and an FF of 0.768 under reverse scan, and an efficiency of 20.01% with a Jsc of 23.52 mA cm−2, a Voc of 1.119 V, and an FF of 0.761 under forward scan. The hysteresis index (calculated by PCEreverse − PCEforward/PCEreverse) was 0.22 for the pristine PSCs, larger than that of the BCA-modified device, which was put down to efficient charge transport and extraction on account of the benign defect passivation effect with the assistance of BCA modifiers. The enhancement of the photovoltaic performance of PSCs was mainly mirrored in the improvement in Jsc, Voc, and FF values, attributed to the benign interfacial contact amelioration with the incorporation of BCA molecules. As shown in the SEM images and XRD pattern, better crystallinity with larger grain size and fewer grain boundaries of perovskite films as well as favorable interfacial charge transport were responsible for the increment in the Jsc values of PSCs. The suppressed non-radiative recombination and reduced defect densities at the perovskite/SnO2 ETL interface enhanced the Voc and FF values of the devices. Additionally, the suitable energy level alignment and interface modification could also be instrumental in the increase of FF values.
Device
Scan direction

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF
PCE (%)
SnO2
Reverse
22.62
1.079
0.738
18.01
Forward
22.60
1.075
0.726
17.62
SnO2–BCA
Reverse
23.53
1.120
0.768
20.24
Forward
23.52
1.119
0.761
20.01
The steady-state power output and Jsc (Fig. 5c) of PSCs without and with BCA integration at the maximum power point were investigated. The pristine device produced a steady-state Jsc and efficiency of 20.82 mA cm−2 and 17.49%, while the SnO2–BCA-based PSC delivered the corresponding values of 22.01 mA cm−2 and 20.03%, respectively. Fig. 5d and S10 display 30 different SnO2 ETL-based devices to explore the reliability and repeatability of device performance. Unlike the photovoltaic value distribution of the pristine devices, the samples based on BCA decoration displayed a narrower range and almost all the targeted devices exhibited astonishingly higher photovoltaic parameters than the maximum values of the pristine PSCs. The incident-photon-to-charge conversion efficiency (IPCE) and the integrated current of the PSCs based on different ETLs were measured. The BCA-containing PSCs exhibited significantly higher external quantum efficiency (EQE) values than the pristine one in the broad wavelength range of 350–750 nm, which was derived from better light absorption (Fig. S11) and carrier transport efficiency. The integrated current density value of the original PSCs was about 22.06 mA cm−2 and that of the PSCs containing BCA was 23.01 mA cm−2, which was consistent with the experimental results of the J–V curves (Fig. 5b).
In addition to the enhanced photovoltaic performance, the stability of devices under harsh operating conditions remained another utmost bottleneck for large-scale commercial applications of PSCs. In this research, we systemically investigated the effect of BCA treatment on the device stability of the unsealed devices under humidity, light illumination, and heat conditions. Moisture and oxygen from the ambient environment could easily penetrate perovskite films and induce an irreversible chemical reaction along with morphological transformation and composition degradation due to the hydrophilic nature of perovskite materials. As provided in Fig. 5f, the pristine devices retained 34.3% of their initial efficiency under 55 ± 5% relative humidity on aging for 1000 h, while the sample based on the SnO2–BCA ETL retained 80.1% for the same period. The larger grain size and fewer grain boundaries of perovskite films with the introduction of BCA modifiers could obstruct the penetration of moisture and water, which effectively alleviated the degradation of perovskite materials. Furthermore, devices without encapsulation aged for 500 h under 85 °C heating environment and light illumination, respectively, were investigated (Fig. S12). The pristine devices retained 48.9 and 36.6% of their initial PCE under heat aging and consecutive light illumination, respectively, whereas the SnO2-based PSCs displayed 87.7 and 84.3% of their original PCE after 500 h. The strong chemical chelation through coordination and ionic bond interactions between BCA modifiers and perovskite materials alleviated and restrained an irreversible decomposition under thermal stress. Meanwhile, the favorable interfacial contacts with reduced defect densities at the interface and charge extraction resulted in the enhancement in photostability.

In summary, we demonstrated a facile and feasible strategy by incorporating sodium salt into SnO2 hydrocolloids to modify the electrical properties of SnO2 ETLs and improve the photoelectric properties of the resultant PSCs. The BCA modifiers well-dispersed and stabilized SnO2 colloidal solution through enhanced electrostatic repulsion, reducing colloid coagulation and forming uniform film coverage. In addition, favorable interface energetic alignment with the assistance of BCA modifiers was achieved, facilitating interfacial charge transport and extraction. More importantly, the CO functional groups of the BCA additives combined with the –OH defects of SnO2 films through coordination bond interaction to neutralize the defects and improve the electrical properties of the SnO2 ETL. Meanwhile, pyridine rings and sodium ions from BCA modifiers reacted with the undercoordinated Pb2+ and halide vacancies at the perovskite bottom side via coordination bond and ionic bond coupling to modulate the perovskite films' performance. This passivation effect restrained the interfacial non-radiative recombination, which could enhance the efficiency and device stability of PSCs. As a result, a champion PCE of 20.24% was achieved for the device based on the SnO2–BCA ETL fabricated under open-air conditions. The unsealed PSCs based on the SnO2–BCA ETL showcased satisfactory device stability and retained 80.1% of their initial PCE after aging for 1000 h at 55 ± 5% relative humidity under ambient conditions. This work provided a simple and effective modification method to enhance the optoelectronic properties of SnO2 ETLs and the photovoltaic performance of PSCs.


The authors declare no conflict of interest.


The financial support of this work was provided by Zhejiang Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China (No. LY21F040008); Fundamental Research Funds of Zhejiang Sci-Tech University (No. 2021Q001), and the Applied Basic Research Project of China National Textile and Apparel Council (No. J201801); the opening Fund of China National Textile and Apparel Council Key Laboratory of Flexible Devices for Intelligent Textile and Apparel, Soochow University (No. SDHY2107).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2se01686a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023