 DOI: 10.1039/C4TA06425A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9011-9019


Ming-Hsien
Li
,

Po-Shen
Shen
,

Kuo-Chin
Wang
,

Tzung-Fang
Guo
 and 

Peter
Chen
*

Department of Photonics, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan 701. E-mail: petercyc@mail.ncku.edu.tw

Research Center for Energy Technology and Strategy (RCETS), National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan 701

Advanced Optoelectronic Technology Center (AOTC), National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan 701

Received
25th November 2014
, Accepted 13th January 2015
First published on 20th January 2015
Organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells are promising low-cost emerging photovoltaic devices due to their rapid progresses in conversion efficiencies. In this perspective, we review recent published works of perovskite-based solar cells incorporated with an inorganic p-type hole transport layer. The current state-of-the-art devices of nickel oxide-based perovskite solar cells display a remarkable power of efficiency over 15%. In addition, solar cells using perovskite as light absorber and hole transporter without p-type contact material are also reviewed.

With rapid progress being made in solid-state organometal lead halide perovskite such as CH3NH3PbX3 (X = I, Br, Cl) this material has attracted considerable attention because of its direct optical band gap of around 1.5 eV, low exciton binding energy, long diffusion length, long carrier lifetimes, and broad absorption range from visible to near-infrared spectrum (800 nm) with high extinction coefficient (∼10−4 cm−1 at 550 nm). Hence, perovskite is extensively utilized as a promising light absorber in low-cost photovoltaics. CH3NH3PbI3 and CH3NH3PbI3−xBrx were first employed to fabricate sensitized-type solar cells with iodide liquid electrolyte by Miyasaka's group, and a power conversion efficiency (PCE) beyond 6% was further demonstrated by Park's group. However, the perovskite materials are not stable in highly polar liquid electrolyte. A remarkable success for the perovskite-based solar cell (PSC) was obtained by replacing the liquid hole-transporting medium with solid-state organic molecules or polymers as hole transport materials (HTM). The first realized solid-state perovskite-based solar cells using HTM of Spiro-OMeTAD (2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis-(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′-bifluorene) were fabricated with mesoscopic TiO2 having a PCE exceeding 9% and with the super-mesostructure Al2O3 scaffold over 10%. Perovskite solar cells using Spiro-OMeTAD were continuously improved with optimization on the deposition methods of perovskite absorbers and interface control, which delivered an efficiency of over 19%.

The configurations of perovskite solar cells evolved from mesoscopic sensitized junction, non-injecting super-mesostructure Al2O3 scaffold to thin film planar photovoltaic devices. Basically, the structure of organolead halides based hybrid solar cells can be categorized into mesoscopic junction (Fig. 1(a) and (c)) or planar (Fig. 1(b) and (d)) junction devices. For either mesoscopic or planar configuration, the devices can be constructed with n–i–p (Fig. 1(a) and (b)) or p–i–n heterojunctions (Fig. 1(c) and (d)), depending on which polarity of contact is applied as substrate layer. These four structures of PSC are illustrated in Fig. 1. Perovskite solar cells based on mesoscopic layer, which start with n-type contact substrate materials as n–i–p heterojunction photovoltaic, were firstly investigated. Perovskite was employed as an intrinsic material (i) and light absorber. This structure mimics the conventional solid-state dye-sensitized solar cells just by replacing the dye with perovskite. Wide band gap n-type oxides such as TiO2 or ZnO remained as the electron selective contact materials. The p-type materials frequently used in this case are organic HTMs. Recently some inorganic materials, such as CuSCN, CuI and NiO, have been demonstrated with success to work as p-type materials.
Briefly, a compact hole-blocking layer is first formed on top of the transparent conductive oxide (TCO) substrate, on which a pinhole-free and uniform layer is thus formed to suppress the recombination between carriers from the perovskite layers and TCO efficiently. On top of the compact layer, inorganic electron transport materials (ETM) accept the photo-excited electrons from the light absorber and transport them to the TCO anode. A mesoporous layer of n-type metal oxide semiconductor (such as TiO2, ZnO) or scaffold (such as Al2O3, ZrO2) is formed by spin-coating a nanoparticle paste, providing a highly porous matrix to adsorb the perovskite. The perovskite films are subsequently deposited on top of the n-type mesoporous layer by spin-coating, two-step sequential deposition or solvent engineering technique. The deposition of a HTM, such as organic hole conducting polymer of spiro-OMeTAD, with appropriate dopants to improve conductivity is utilized to extract and transfer holes from the valance band (VB) of the light absorber. Finally, a metal electrode is deposited on top of the HTM to complete the solar cell. Recently, the PCE was improved to achieve ∼17% using a two-step spin-coating procedure, involving spin-coating of PbI2 film followed by spin-coating a solution of CH3NH3I to form cuboids CH3NH3PbI3.
With a feature of long diffusion length for perovskite, charge carrier diffusion lengths were observed to be more than 100 nm (ref. 3 and 4) for CH3NH3PbI3 and more than 1000 nm for CH3NH3PbI3−xClx (ref. 4) based on a femtosecond transient optical spectroscopy study, including transient absorption and photoluminescence quenching measurements. As a result, planar heterojunction (PHJ) device configurations are further proposed and attracting attention due to the removal of the mesoscopic layer, which simplifies the device fabrication process with reduced material cost and sintering temperature. For planar structure, a uniform perovskite film is deposited by a variety of methods such as spin-coating, dual-source vapor deposition and vapor-assisted solution processing. By controlling the formation of the perovskite layer and carefully choosing the other materials, this planar structure has remarkably advanced the PCE close to 19% with n–i–p heterojunction.
Although devices based on n–i–p heterojunction exhibit good performance, the diffusion length of the hole is slightly shorter than that of the electron due to a larger effective mass of the hole. Therefore, mesoscopic (or planar) perovskite solar cells based on p–i–n heterojunction, in which the substrate started with the p-type selective contact, are recently studied. The perovskite films are deposited on the mesoscopic (or compact) HTM layer. With the illumination from the p-side, the perovskite solar cell based on the p–i–n heterojunction, could feasibly have a charge generation profile with more effective hole extraction, as schematic presented in Fig. 2. Furthermore, with holes flowing to the TCO substrate, more choices are provided on the designs for the integration of perovskite solar cells with silicon or copper indium gallium selenide (CIGS) solar cells to build tandem devices.
Highly efficient perovskite solar cells have exclusively employed organic hole conducting polymers, which are often expensive and have relatively low hole mobility. The stability is another concern for its long-term use. For example, PEDOT:PSS, the common organic hole extraction layer used in organic photovoltaic (OPV) is acidic, which has a tendency to absorb water. Its stability remained an issue for long-term use. Hence, the use of organic hole conductors may cause a potential hurdle to the future commercialization of PSC from the consideration of cost and stability. Thus, providing more stable constituents of HTM for perovskite-based photovoltaics is required. In order to explore new inorganic hole conducting materials for these perovskite-based photovoltaics, inorganic p-type semiconductors are alternative hole transport materials due to their higher mobility, high transparency in the visible region, good chemical stability and various selections in terms of the VB energy level.
For organic bulk heterojunction (BHJ) solar cells, p-type metal oxide semiconductors, including NiO, V2O5, MoO3, have been utilized as the hole extraction layer. In DSCs, many metal oxides such as NiO and Cu-based delafossite (CuMO2, M = Al, Ga or Cr) have been applied as the electrode for p-type sensitization. Recently, p-type sensitized NiO/perovskite heterojunction solar cells have been successfully demonstrated with decent efficiencies. The elimination of the organic hole transporter (or hole collecting layer) shall improve the device stability and provide versatile choices for the selection of materials and device design. Other inorganic materials such as CuI and CuSCN have been demonstrated to be potential candidates for this purpose. Copper iodide (CuI) was just reported as a hole conductor in perovskite-based mesoscopic n–i–p devices, showing a PCE of 6%. Another interesting inorganic p-type semiconductor is copper thiocyanate (CuSCN), which shows good transparency throughout the visible and near infrared spectrum, high hole mobility of 0.01–0.1 cm2 V−1 s−1 and good chemical stability.
In this review article, we focus on the recent developments in perovskite solar cells based on inorganic p-type semiconductor, including CuSCN, CuI and NiO. We first review the n–i–p heterojunction with planar or mesoscopic structure, followed by the review of the p–i–n heterojunction. We examined the recent studies on the carrier relaxation dynamics of the perovskite/NiO heterojunction. In addition, perovskite solar cells without HTMs are further discussed where the perovskite functioned as the light absorber and hole transporter. Lastly, we conclude the review with further possible improvements.

In the n–i–p structure, we can simply replace organic HTM with inorganic p-type semiconductors. Copper-based inorganic semiconducting hole materials, such as CuSCN and CuI, have shown potential for their use in dye-sensitized and quantum dot-sensitized solar cells. These materials can be deposited using a solution process with good pore-filling. Moreover, these wide-band-gap semiconductors have high conductivity, suitable energy level and good transparency. It is intuitive to apply these materials with perovskite for photovoltaic application.


An inorganic p-type semiconductor of copper thiocyanate (CuSCN), which shows good transparency throughout the visible and near infrared spectrum, high hole mobility and good chemical stability, is first discussed. It can be deposited through a doctor-blade process at low temperature, making it compatible with flexible substrates. Ito et al. first introduced CuSCN into mesoporous perovskite solar cells comprised of FTO/compact TiO2/mesoporous TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/CuSCN/Au. In the fabrication process, the CH3NH3PbI3 structure and thickness can be controlled by hot-air drying during the spin coating, whereas the CuSCN layer is deposited using the doctor-blade process. By decreasing the CH3NH3PbI3 thickness by hot-air drying and the addition of the CuSCN layer, an improvement of the PCE was achieved from 1.35% to 4.85%. With the CuSCN hole conductor on the CH3NH3PbI3 film, the photocurrent considerably increased from 0.83 mA cm−2 to 14.5 mA cm−2. As a Sb2S3 layer is introduced at the interface between the mesoporous TiO2 and CH3NH3PbI3, it enhanced the crystalline of the perovskite structure and eliminated the PbI2 formation. Therefore, PCE was improved to 5.12%, and the device presented stability against light exposure without encapsulation. By further controlling the thickness of the perovskite film (less than 1 μm), the CH3NH3PbI3 capping layer, and the optimized HTM layer of 600–700 nm, a promising PCE of 12.4% was achieved. They demonstrated the same perovskite solar cell architecture consisting of TiO2 as a scaffold as well as electron collector, perovskite as the light harvester and CuSCN as the HTM. With a compatible energy level as shown in Fig. 3(a), the device displayed a promising performance with a short circuit current density of 19.7 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage of 1016 mV and a fill factor of 0.62, resulting in a PCE of 12.4%. As observed in Fig. 3(b), with an effective charge extraction layer of CuSCN, the photovoltaic parameters have significant increased.


Copper iodide (CuI) was selected on the basis of its suitable VB position, high p-type conductivity, and the compatibility of the solution deposition method with the perovskite absorber. Kamat et al. employed CuI as hole conducting materials, and a PCE of 6.0% with excellent photocurrent stability was achieved. The solar cell device was constructed as FTO/compact TiO2/mesoscopic TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/CuI/Au. In the fabrication process, the perovskite film was deposited by a one-step spin-coating of CH3NH3I and PbI2 in γ-butyrolactone and then annealed to complete the crystallization. The solution deposition of CuI was performed by an automated drop-casting technique. The open-circuit voltage, compared to the best spiro-OMeTAD devices, remains low and is attributed to the higher recombination in CuI devices as determined by impedance spectroscopy. However, impedance spectroscopy revealed that CuI exhibits 2 orders of magnitude higher electrical conductivity than spiro-OMeTAD, which allows for the significantly high fill factors of ∼0.6. Reducing the recombination in these devices could render CuI as a cost-effective hole conductor in perovskite solar cells.


For mesoscopic PSC based on NiO, Liu et al. employed mesoporous NiO as a spacer layer between the mesoporous TiO2 and the carbon electrode. The perovskite solar cell is based on the structure composed of FTO/compact TiO2/mesoporous TiO2/sequential deposited CH3NH3PbI3/mesoporous NiO/carbon. The energy landscape at the NiO/TiO2 junction is a hetero p–n junction that separates electron and hole flow in different directions. Low recombination could occur at this interface. The mesoporous NiO layer effectively adsorbed perovskite and facilitated the hole extraction, resulting in an impressive PCE of 11.4%. This device can be fabricated under atmospheric condition due to the use of completely inorganic materials as the solar cell constituent.


Subbiah et al. reported a p–i–n type device architecture consisting of FTO/electrodeposited CuSCN/vapour-deposited CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/PCBM/Ag, which was fabricated under ambient condition, with a maximum PCE of 3.8%. Photoluminescence (PL) quenching of the perovskite emission on CuSCN was performed, as shown in Fig. 4. A considerable decrease in PL intensity was observed as the perovskite film deposited on CuSCN with an excitation wavelength of 530 nm. Despite CuSCN showing effective quenching ability, higher series resistance (RS) and shunt resistance (RSH) may cause poor photovoltaic parameters of PSC with CuSCN.


Nickel oxide is a cubic p-type metal oxide material with a large band gap. It has been widely used as interfacial layer in OPV or photocathode in conventional liquid junction p-type dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs). Some p-type materials have been investigated in conjunction with perovskite film for a PL response. It was the first evidence that NiO was able to effectively quench the PL spectrum of perovskite, although a complete device combining NiO and perovskite was not fabricated due to poor perovskite film formation and poor surface coverage. For the fabrication of the first planar NiO/CH3NH3PbI3 heterojunction solar cells, we applied a solution processed NiOx thin film electrode interlayer on the glass/ITO electrode to realize the efficient CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM PHJ hybrid solar cells. As reported above, NiOx as expected is a potential electrode interlayer for the charge transfer of hole from the PL spectrum. To resolve the coverage issue, a UV-ozone treatment of the glass/ITO/NiOx substrate was performed to modify the work function to improve the photovoltaic parameters and surface wetting properties and as a result improve surface coverage, as observed in the ultraviolet photoelectron spectrum (UPS) shown in Fig. 5. The work function of NiOx electrode interlayer is estimated to be 5.4 eV with a reduced water contact angle that significantly improves the surface coverage of the perovskite film.

The hybrid cell of glass/ITO/spin-coated NiOx/one-step deposited CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/BCP/Al was produced with a PCE of 7.8%. Subbiah et al. also reported a similar architecture of FTO/electrodeposited NiO/vapour-deposited CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/PCBM/Ag with the replacement of CuSCN by NiO. Because RS and RSH for PSC with a NiO film are about an order of magnitude lower, a higher PCE of 7.3% was obtained. Hu et al. presented the same device architecture of ITO/spin-coated NiO/sequential deposited CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/Al with a UV-ozone treatment to achieve a device PCE of 7.6%. However, in lack of a hole blocking layer of BCP, the obtained PCE was slightly lower than that reported by Chen and Guo groups. With further improvement in the quality of the NiO film, Cui et al. exploited the reactive magnetron sputtering method to prepare a compact NiO film. A planar PSC was constructed as FTO/sputtered NiO/solvent-engineering CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/BCP/Au. The solvent-engineering method had the benefit to form a homogeneous surface coverage and uniform interlayer morphology and hence PCE increased to 9.84%. Furthermore, significant improvements were made by doping the NiO thin film. Cu was employed as a dopant in a NiOx film to modulate conductivity. The device configuration proposed by Kim et al. is ITO/Cu-doped NiOx/solvent engineering CH3NH3PbI3/PC61BM/C60/Ag. PCE of planar PSC based on Cu-doped NiOx film could be significantly improved to 15.4%, which was attributed to the improved electrical conductivity and favourable perovskite crystallization. The highly doped NiO has a higher work function that matches well with wider band gap perovskite materials using other halide such as Br. The favourable energy level matching between the work function of Cu-doped NiO and the VB of Br-containing (MAPb(I0.6Br0.4)3) perovskite allowed high voltage output of 1.16 V.

For the fabrication of mesoscopic CH3NH3PbI3 heterojunction solar cells, two results were reported nearly at the same time. Tian et al. reported PSC based on a mesoporous NiO film. A architecture of FTO/compact NiO/mesoporous NiO/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/Al was fabricated. By controlling the thickness of the compact NiO layer of 80 nm with mesoporous NiO film of 120 nm, the best PCE of 1.5% was obtained. However, the IPCE spectra of the CH3NH3PbI3 deposited on mesoporous NiO film was extremely low, the response of CH3NH3PbI3 was far from optimal with low PCE of 0.31% and JSC of 1.45 mA cm−2 was obtained.

Another similar device reported by our group incorporated a mesoporous NiO layer into the planar device to adsorb more amount of perovskite, resulting in a significant improvement of the photovoltaic performance. The full device structure of ITO/compact-NiO/spin-coated mesoporous NiO/sequential deposited CH3NH3PbI3/PC61BM/BCP/Al is shown in Fig. 6(a) with the energy level of each material illustrated in Fig. 6(b). This arrangement is appropriate for receiving high voltage with minimum loss providing the charge separation process between the absorber and selective contacts. The best-performing cell using PC61BM delivered high VOC of 1040 mV with JSC of 13.24 mA cm−2 and 69% fill factor, leading to an overall PCE of 9.51%. The high VOC received from the junction demonstrated the advantage of energy level alignment between the light absorber and the contact materials. The energy loss in charge extraction is minimized using PC61BM whose LUMO is nearly identical with the conduction band (CB) edge of perovskite while the mesoporous NiO's VB edge is close to the VB of perovskite. The implementation of the mesoscopic NiO layer evidently improved photovoltaic performances for increased current response at the long wavelength part and voltage with respect to the PHJ cell.
From the IPCE and calculated light harvesting efficiency (LHE) in Fig. 7, the mesoscopic NiO film seemed to be thick enough to absorb 90% of the incident light. However, the IPCE of the device seem to be lower than the state-of-the-art devices. There still exists some charge collection losses in the NiO/perovskite mesoscopic junction. Further improvements on the material quality of compact NiO film with better crystallinity will be beneficial. Smaller particle size and well-dispersed mesoporous nanostructure are expected to promote the overall photovoltaic performance of this p-type oxide/perovskite heterojunction.
Zhu et al. also reported similar work employing a mesoporous NiO film as hole extraction and transport layer for a perovskite solar cell without the compact NiO layer. Appropriate controlled aggregation of the faceted NiO nanocrystals resulted in a corrugated surface that could support perovskite crystals with good coverage and interconnectivity. By increasing the thickness of the mesoporous NiO film from 20 to 40 nm, the electron blocking ability was improved; the charge recombination and leakage current were reduced. However, as for the film-thickness increase from 40 to 70 nm, the decrease in photocurrent and voltage was most likely due to the increased series resistance and absorption of the mesoporous NiO film. With an optimized thickness for the mesoporous NiO layer of 40 nm, the best performance of the perovskite solar cell exhibited PCE of 9.11%, JSC of 16.27 mA cm−2 and VOC of 882 mV.
In the following progress, we introduced a low-temperature sputtered NiOx film to form a pinhole less compact layer to prevent the charge collection losses caused by the solution-processed compact NiO layer. The efficiencies are greatly enhanced and the device reproducibility is significantly improved compared with the devices fabricated by solution-processed NiOx thin film. Similar device architecture of ITO/sputtered NiOx/mesoporous NiO/sequential-deposited CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/BCP/Al was demonstrated by the deposition of compact NiOx film with an RF magnetron sputtering system in pure Ar or reactive sputter method under a mixture of Ar and O2 gas. With the optimized doping oxygen flow ratio of 10% and thickness of mesoporous NiO layer, a PCE of 11.6% was obtained. Compared with the p–i–n heterojunctions PSC based on PEDOT:PSS, a considerably higher PCE of 14.1% was achieved with the configuration of ITO/PEDOT/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/LiF/Al. This indicates that PSCs based on NiO could still considerably improve their performance. In order to minimize the light harvesting and interfacial recombination loss, Chen et al. utilized the super-mesostructure Al2O3 scaffold to replace the mesoporous NiO layer to fabricate the device architecture of the ITO/spray NiOx/mesoporous Al2O3/solvent engineering CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/BCP/Ag. Synchronized improvements in VOC, JSC, FF lead to a remarkable PCE of 13.5%.

Although several reports have demonstrated a PL quenching effect of the perovskite/NiO junction, the direct evidence of charge separation needs to be examined. The PL spectra of perovskite coated on Al2O3 or NiO with similar intensity of UV/Vis absorption are shown in Fig. 8. It is noted that a large band gap material of Al2O3 does not quench the PL and could be considered as a scaffold layer. To quantitatively analyze the PL quenching of both films, as observed in the UV/Vis absorption, the steady-state PL spectra with excitation at 450 nm were recorded (dashed curves in Fig. 8) due to their similar absorption. The PL intensity of the perovskite coated on the NiO film was quenched more significantly than that of perovskite deposited on the Al2O3 film. The PL quenching of perovskite excitons might be caused by the extraction of the charge carriers across the interface through a p-type hole-extraction layer or charge recombination in the defects of perovskite layer. To explore the charge separation, we performed a photoinduced absorption (PIA) experiment to show that effective charge separation occurred at the NiO/perovskite interface. As shown in Fig. 9, it is evident that free carrier absorption is presented at the junction between NiO/perovskite. On the other hand, when perovskite is in contact with non-injecting wide band gap materials (Al2O3 and glass), no such IR transient absorption feature is present.

For the carrier relaxation, Diau group demonstrated the dynamics of carrier relaxation in two device configurations of mesoporous NiO/perovskite and mesoporous Al2O3/perovskite employing femtosecond photoluminescence up-conversion spectroscopy.
The relaxation mechanism is presented in Fig. 10. The excitation at 450 nm invokes a transition from the VB2 state to the hot CB state; the probe at 670 and 770 nm correspond to the transitions of hot CB → VB1 and cold CB → VB1, respectively. The transient followed the kinetic model containing two sequential relaxations in parallel: (R1) A → B → C and (R2) A → B′ → C′. Component A represents the hot electrons relaxation of CH3NH3PbI3 in the CB state. The carriers thermalized to CB edge subsequently produce components B and B′. Components B and B′ represent the relaxation to the surface state (SS; C) and the internal recombination relaxation to the VB1 state (C′), respectively. In experimental measurement, the temporal emission of PL transients were probed in the spectral region of 670–810 nm, in which individual PL transient was deconvoluted into one rapid-decay (0.2–0.5 ps) of component A (contribution from hot carrier relaxation) and two slow-decays of components B (20–50 ps for surface state relaxation) and B′ (0.5–1.2 ns for recombination). The rate of the decay of component B are similar for both films, whereas the values of the decay coefficient of component B′ (τ3−1) of the Al2O3 film are significantly greater than those of the NiO film. The similar relaxation times of τ2 observed for both Al2O3 and NiO films indicated that it is the intrinsic relaxation process that occurred on the surface of the perovskite. For the amplitude of component B, the intensity in the NiO/perovskite film is greater than that of Al2O3/perovskite, which indicated that quenching by the non-emissive surface state is more prevailing. The observed quenching of the steady-state PL intensity of perovskite, shown in Fig. 9, might be attributed to the surface-state relaxation of perovskite, which is more significant for the NiO film than for the Al2O3 film. The hole extraction time from perovskite by the NiO is estimated to be around 5 ns at the PL maximum of 770 nm.

Except for the standard perovskite/TiO2 heterojunction solar cells employing organic–inorganic HTMs, the concept of hole–conductor-free perovskite heterojunction solar cells also attracts attentions as alternatives to the low-cost photovoltaic devices. The first mesoscopic PSC without HTM is successfully demonstrated by Etgar et al. with a PCE of 5.5%, and the perovskite simultaneously served as light harvester and hole conductor. With advanced deposition technology for perovskite formation, such as the two-step sequential deposition method, the device efficiency was further enhanced beyond 10%. Soon, the planar PSC without the presence of HTM delivered a PCE over 5% with the inverted p–i–n heterojunction structure using the configuration of ITO/perovskite/C60/Ag. In general, thermal evaporation of a noble metal (Au or Ag) is still the major option for the deposition of back electrodes. Nevertheless, this process is energy-consuming and of high-cost. In order to further reduce the fabrication cost, the evaporation process is considered to be replaced or even eliminated. Utilizing the successful concept of porous carbon material as cathode in DSCs, carbon has demonstrated to be promising counter electrode candidate due to its similar work function compared with Au (−5.1 eV). Therefore, the carbon-based mesoporous electrode is adapted to fully printable laminated carbon/ZrO2/TiO2 PSCs without HTM and metal electrode, reaching an initial PCE of 6.64%. After further effort on the deposition methods or film thickness control, the best device efficiency of HTM-free carbon-based mesoporous PSCs has boosted up to 12.8%, to date. This configuration eliminated most of the organic components in the perovskite solar cells and showed a good performance in stability.


In conclusion, we summarized the recently reported perovskite solar cells based on inorganic p-type materials with their champion photovoltaic parameters summarized in Table 1 and Fig. 11. The replacement of the organic hole transport materials by inorganic p-type HTM has the advantages of providing robust device architectures for the further development of all-inorganic perovskite-based solar cells and tandem photovoltaics. With further improvement on the perovskite deposition methods such as solvent engineering technique achieving high efficiency on mesoscopic structure and planar structure, higher efficiency are expected for inorganic p-type perovskite solar cells.

Number
Types
HTM
Device structure
Photovoltaic parameters
Ref.

V
OC (mV)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
PCE (%)

n–i–p junction

#1
Mesoscopic
CuSCN
FTO/cp-TiO2/mp-TiO2/PsK/CuSCN/Au
630
14.5
4.9

10

#2
Mesoscopic
CuSCN
FTO/cp-TiO2/mp-TiO2/Sb2S3/PsK/CuSCN/Au
570
17.2
5.12

12

#3
Mesoscopic
CuSCN
FTO/cp-TiO2/mp-TiO2/PsK/CuSCN/Au
1016
19.7
12.4

9

#4
Mesoscopic
CuI
FTO/cp-TiO2/mp-TiO2/PsK/CuI/Au
550
17.8
6

13

#5
Mesoscopic
NiO
FTO/cp-TiO2/mp-TiO2PsK/mp-NiO/carbon
890
18.2
11.4

38


p–i–n junction

#6
Planar
CuSCN
FTO/CuSCN/PsK/PCBM/Ag
677
8.8
3.8

11

#7
Planar
NiO
FTO/NiO/PsK/PCBM/Ag
786
14.2
7.3

11

#8
Planar
NiO
ITO/NiOx (solution)/PsK/PCBM/BCP/Al
920
12.4
7.8

15

#9
Planar
NiO
ITO/NiO/PsK/PCBM/Al
1050
15.4
7.6

14

#10
Planar
NiO
FTO/NiO (sputter)/PsK/PCBM/BCP/Au
1100
15.2
9.8

19

#11
Planar
NiO
ITO/Cu:NiOx/PsK/PC61BM/C60/Ag
1110
19.0
15.4

20

#12
Mesoscopic
NiO
FTO/cp-NiO/mp-NiO/PsK/PCBM/Al
830
4.9
1.5

18

#13
Mesoscopic
NiO
FTO/NiO (sol–gel)/PsK/PCBM/Au
882
16.3
9.1

21

#14
Mesoscopic
NiO
ITO/NiOx (solution)/mp-NiO/PsK/PCBM/BCP/Al
1040
13.2
9.5

17

#15
Mesoscopic
NiO
ITO/NiOx (sputter)/mp-NiO/PsK/PCBM/BCP/Al
960
19.8
11.6

16

#16
Super-mesoscopic
NiO
ITO/NiOx (spray)/mp-Al2O3/PsK/PCBM/BCP/Ag
1040
18.0
13.5

22


P. C. appreciates the research funding from the Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST) of Taiwan (NSC102-2113-M-006-010) and the financial support from the Top-Notch Project under the Headquarter of University Advancement at National Cheng Kung University, which is sponsored by the Ministry of Education, Taiwan, ROC. T. F. G. would like to thank the MOST of Taiwan (NSC102-2682-M-006-001-MY3) for financially supporting this research.


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015