 DOI: 10.1039/C4NR03366C
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 11403-11410


Yang-Yen
Yu
*,

Rih-Sheng
Chiang
,

Hsiang-Lin
Hsu
,

Chun-Chen
Yang
 and 

Chih-Ping
Chen
*

Department of Materials Engineering, Ming Chi University of Technology, 84 Gunjuan Road, Taishan, New Taipei City, 243, Taiwan. E-mail: yyyu@mail.mcut.edu.tw; cpchen@mail.mcut.edu.tw

Battery Research Center of Green Energy, Ming Chi University of Technology, 84 Gunjuan Road, Taishan, New Taipei City, 243, Taiwan

Center for Thin Film Technologies and Applications, Ming Chi University of Technology, 84 Gunjuan Rd., Taishan, New Taipei City, 243, Taiwan

Department of Chemical Engineering, Ming Chi University of Technology, 84 Gunjuan Rd., Taishan, New Taipei City, 243, Taiwan

Received
17th June 2014
, Accepted 30th July 2014
First published on 5th August 2014
In this study we used solution-processable crystalline TiO2 nanoparticles as an interfacial modified layer between the active layer and aluminum cathode to fabricate CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM-based planar heterojunction perovskite photovoltaic (PPV) devices. We optimized the performance of the PPV device prepared without TiO2 by varying the preheating temperature of the indium tin oxide (ITO)/poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) substrate, obtaining a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 6.3% under simulated AM 1.5 G irradiation (100 mW cm−2). After incorporating the TiO2 layer, we obtained a much higher PCE of 7.0%. The TiO2-containing PPV device exhibited extremely high stability (retaining ∼96% of its PCE after 1000 h) under long-term storage in a dark N2-filled glove box; the unencapsulated device retained approximately 80% of its original efficiency (T80) after 1 week under ambient conditions (ISOS-D-1; defined as 23 °C/50% RH). In contrast, the normal device was sensitive to ambient conditions with a value of T80 at only 3 h. We attributed the improved device performance (PCE, stability) to the enhanced electron transporting, hole blocking, and barrier properties arising from the presence of the TiO2 layer.

The study of organometal halide perovskite photovoltaics (PPV) is flourishing because of their promising applications arising from their light weight, flexibility, high efficiency, and inexpensive wetting process. In particular, methylammonium lead halide perovskite (CH3NH3PbX3; X = I, Cl, or Br) functions well in thin-film architectures, with a layer of bulk crystalline perovskite formed over the meso-superstructure (TiO2 or Al2O3) or sandwiched between the hole-transporting layer (HTL) and electron-transporting layer (ETL) in the form of planar p–i–n heterojunctions. Unique among perovskites, CH3NH3PbX3-based perovskite is capable of transporting electrons and holes. With innovations in device engineering, the power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of these PPV cells have improved within the last 2 years to greater than 15% for both mesoscopic and planar heterojunction structures. Moreover, Snaith et al. reported prospective device structures that might push the PCEs up to 20% in the near future. These encouraging advances suggest that such technologies might have great potential in commercial applications.

In the near future, it is likely that solar research will advance PPV technology to reach very high efficiencies, with enhanced device stability in a wide range of environments, facilitating commercial applications. To further increase performance (PCE, stability), research is being directed toward functional interfacial materials that simplify fabrication processes while enhancing device properties. Optimal materials require excellent ohmic contact with the perovskite layer, good stability, and electron- or hole-transporting capability. For cost-effective roll-to-roll production and the application of plastic substrates, a low processing temperature (<150 °C) would be necessary; several interfacial layers [e.g., poly (3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):polystyrenesulfonate (PEDOT:PSS) or 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-MeOTAD), with [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) or ZnO] have exhibited flexibility and high performance. Such planar PPV configurations, prepared without a meso-superstructured layer, are appearing with increasing frequency.
Motivated by the low-temperature solution processability of the devices, we adopted a planar heterojunction architecture—indium tin oxide (ITO)/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3/PC61BM/with or without TiO2/Al—to study the influence of the interfacial layer on device performance (Fig. 1a). We employed solution-processed TiO2 nanoparticles as an ETL and hole-blocking layer (HBL), which we inserted between the PC61BM and Al. Because of its scavenging effects originating through photocatalysis and from oxygen deficiencies, TiO2 can form a robust diffusion barrier against O2 and water. Relatively air-stable organic photovoltaics (OPVs) and LEDs have been demonstrated that incorporate TiO2 layers. Recently, a solution-processed sol–gel titanium suboxide (TiOx) has been applied as an ETL/HBL in a CH3NH3PbI3−xClx-based perovskite device. In that study, the TiOx layer was prepared through sol–gel processing, accomplished through spin coating, exposure of the TiOx precursor layer to the ambient atmosphere, and annealing at 130 °C for 10 min to functionalize the TiOx layer. Such sol–gel processing of TiOx complicates the device fabrication procedure and risks degradation of the perovskite active materials during the additional thermal annealing step prior to cathode deposition. Furthermore, the requirement for light soaking of TiOx-derived PPV is needed to present the best performance. Therefore, coating with crystalline TiO2 at room temperature, without the need for additional hydrolysis or thermal treatment of precursors, is deemed necessary. Generally, crystalline TiO2, in either the anatase or rutile phase, requires heat treatment at temperatures above 450 °C—conditions that are not suitable for low-temperature solution processing. Accordingly, we adopted a mechanical grinding (ball mill) method—compatible with solution processes—to prepare our functional oxide layers.
In this paper, we describe the outstanding efficiencies and stabilities of these solution-processable planar PPV devices and discuss our investigation into the origins of their high performance. One of the main challenges encountered when developing planar PPVs is control over the crystallization process during solid film formation, and, hence, its impact on film quality. We found that this problem could be solved using a simple and very effective method: varying the preheating temperature of the ITO/PEDOT substrate. After optimizing these processing conditions, we obtained remarkable PPV performance: a PCE of 6.3% with a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 13.1 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.78 V, and a fill factor (FF) of 61.4% under simulated AM 1.5 G irradiation (100 mW cm−2). After inserting a thin layer of TiO2 between the PCBM and Al layers, the PCE improved dramatically to 7.0%, with values of Jsc, Voc, and FF of 12.7 mA cm−2, 0.87 V, and 62.9%, respectively. A key feature toward achieving this higher PCE was matching the electronic energy levels in the perovskite layer/PCBM with the adjacent TiO2 layer with minimal energy loss (Fig. 1b). Furthermore, the TiO2 film served as a protective layer that retarded device decay from the effects of O2 and water over various periods of time. Hence, such devices exhibited enhanced performance and stability. For example, our devices displayed extremely high stability after long-term storage in a dark N2-filled glove box for over 1000 h with constantly high PCE of 6.7%. Furthermore, the unencapsulated PPV retained approximately 80% of its original efficiency (T80) over a period of 100 h under ambient conditions, outperforming the device prepared without the TiO2 layer.

We prepared the perovskite precursor solution by dissolving methylammonium iodide (MAI) and lead(II) iodide (1:1) in dimethylformamide (DMF) at a solid content of 10 wt%. We fabricated PPV devices having the layered configuration glass/ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3/PC61BM/with or without TiO2/Al, similar to the OPV structures reported previously and using similar methods. The main challenge encountered during the fabrication of planar CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite films is control over the crystallization process. During film formation, CH3NH3PbI3 tends to crystallize rapidly, resulting in a film morphology with large crystallites and poor coverage. The fabrication process is dependent on precursor concentrations, annealing temperature and time, and rate of spin coating, all of which can have significant effects on the quality and morphology of the derived films. In this study, we adopted a simple, effective method to optimize the morphology of the derived film. Prior to deposition of the perovskite layer, we preheated the ITO/PEDOT substrate at various temperatures (60, 100, 140, or 160 °C) for 5 min. We used UV-vis spectroscopy, X-ray diffraction (XRD), and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) to characterize the resulting PPV devices and to address the relationship between the film quality and device performance. After deposition, we heated the CH3NH3PbI3 film at 100 °C for 30 s to convert the precursor to the perovskite structure. Heat treatment was essential to ensure complete formation of perovskite; this transition, which occurred with a color change, could be observed clearly with the naked eye. Typically, a change in color from yellow to dark brown confirmed that the conversion was complete. Annealing at 100 °C for 30 s was sufficient to achieve this purpose. We employed SEM to investigate how the morphology of the perovskite layer evolved under these conditions. For direct comparison, we prepared the films for SEM analysis under the same conditions that we used for device fabrication. Fig. 2 presents SEM images of perovskite films prepared under different preheating conditions. We observed dramatic changes in the morphologies of these films upon changing conditions. Increasing the preheating temperature of the substrate changed the microstructure of the perovskite film significantly, with sponge-like, hyperbranched, fiber, and bead-like microstructures being obtained for the films prepared at 60, 100, 140, and 160 °C, respectively.

We used UV-vis absorption and XRD to investigate the effect of the preheating temperature on the light absorption and crystal structure of the CH3NH3PbI3 films. As displayed in Fig. 3a, the spectra of all films featured absorption onsets at 800 nm, with broad absorptions ranging from the visible to the near-IR region. Relative to the spectra of the films preheated at 60, 100, and 140 °C, the spectrum of the perovskite processed with a preheating temperature of 160 °C exhibited significantly greater light absorption across the visible range and into the near-IR, suggesting its improved crystallinity. Fig. 3b displays glancing-angle X-ray diffraction (GAXRD) profiles of ITO/PEDOT/CH3NH3PbI3 structures prepared under different preheating conditions. The integrated scattering intensities in these GAXRD patterns are plotted against 2θ, where θ is half the total scattering angle. Because the incident beam angle was approximately 5°, we observed the XRD signal of the ITO and PEDOT substrate. Fig. S1 presents the XRD signals of ITO and ITO/PEDOT for comparison. We attribute the diffraction peaks at 21.4° (211) and 30.4° (222) to the crystallinity of ITO and the scattering peak at 14.1 and 28.5° to the (110) and (220) crystal planes of the orthorhombic lattice of CH3NH3PbI3 perovskites. The profiles of all our perovskite films were consistent with the CH3NH3PbI3 pattern. A close look at Fig. 3b revealed an overall increase in intensity for the film prepared with preheating at 160 °C. We detected a notable increase in the ratio of the intensities of both the (110) and (220) peaks, as well as the intensities of the (310), (224), and (314) peaks located at 31.9, 40.6, and 43.2°, respectively. It has been demonstrated that the morphology and absorption of perovskite are both sensitive to fabrication conditions. Grätzel et al. reported that increasing the annealing temperature of the perovskite layer from 60 to 100 °C led to an increase in absorbance across the entire spectral range. Nevertheless, further increases in the annealing temperature led to decreased absorbance, due to degradation of perovskite to give the PbI2 precursor. In order to get more information regarding the dramatic change of perovskite absorption with different preheating temperature, we performed a more comprehensive study relating to the preheating temperature. Fig. 2 and S2 present SEM images of perovskite films prepared with preheating at 60, 100, 140, 145, 150, 155, 160, or 165 °C. A dramatic change in the morphology of the film occurred when the preheating temperature was greater than 150 °C, with the morphology changing from hyperbranched or fiber-like to a microbead (pebble)-like topography. Further increasing the preheating temperature was associated with an increase in the average size of the microbeads. Fig. S3 displays UV-vis spectra and GAXRD profiles of perovskite films prepared with preheating at 140, 145, 150, 155, 160, or 165 °C. We observed improved crystallization upon increasing the preheating temperature (Fig. S3b). A dramatic change in the absorption curve occurred when the preheating temperature was greater than 150 °C, close to the temperature of the morphological change. We observed changes in the intensity and shape of the signals in the absorption spectra upon increasing the preheating temperature from 150 to 165 °C. We attribute the increase in absorbance at higher wavelengths to the relatively higher degree of crystallinity of the perovskite film at higher preheating temperatures. Notably, the film treated at 165 °C exhibited a high surface coverage and a broad absorption spectrum. Nevertheless, we observed a change in color and the generation of an opaque phase, due to excessive crystallization, for the film preheated at 165 °C; this phenomenon would not be favorable for photovoltaics applications.

Table 1 and Fig. 4 summarize the values of Voc and Jsc, the FFs, and the PCEs of our devices. In Table 1, the numbers in parentheses are the average device performances determined from four fabricated devices. The highest PCEs for the devices prepared with preheating at 60, 100, 140, and 160 °C were 1.2, 2.9, 3.6, and 6.2%, respectively (Fig. 4). The values of Jsc and Voc and the FFs all increased significantly when the devices had been prepared at higher preheating temperatures. The effect of the preheating temperature on the PCEs can be explained by considering the morphological and absorption properties of the films (Fig. 2 and 3a). Devices associated with the morphology of connected microbeads exhibited the best performance because of enhanced crystallization, as revealed through XRD and UV-vis spectroscopy. Relative to the devices prepared using lower preheating temperatures, a significant increase in PCE occurred for the one prepared with preheating at 160 °C—it exhibited a PCE of 6.2%, a value of Jsc of 13.2 mA cm−2, a value of Voc of 0.78 V, and a FF of 60.6% (Fig. 4). This PCE is comparable with the highest ever reported in the literature when using CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM as the active layer in a similar device architecture. The surface coverage, the degree of crystallization, and the absorption of the perovskite layer all governed the performance of derived devices. The high preheating temperature (160 °C) decreased surface coverage of the perovskite film relative to those of substrates subjected to lower-temperature preheating (at 60, 100, or 100 °C). Our results suggest that the optimized preheating temperature accelerated the solvent evaporation rate, allowing the formation of intact CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite with a desirable morphology, but did not lead to excessive crystallization of CH3NH3PbI3 or the generation of too many grain boundaries. The improvement in crystallinity and light absorption at the higher preheating temperature was associated with some scarification of the surface coverage. It is very challenging to form well-defined perovskite films through spin coating of the directly mixed PbI2 and MAI blend precursor solution when using a planar PPV architecture, with the performance of such systems being far below that of devices having a mesoporous superstructure. Very recently, the performances of CH3NH3PbI3-based planar PPV devices have been improved to greater than 10% after interdiffusion of a precursor stacking layer, alternating the precursor's composition variation and employing a non-stoichiometric precursor ratio, or using an additive. We anticipate further increases in our device performance after improving the surface coverage, while maintaining the crystallinity and light-harvesting ability of the perovskite film, through device engineering using these newly development methods for CH3NH3PbI3-based planar PPVs.
Devices

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)

a With preheating temperatures of 60 °C (without TiO2).
b With preheating temperatures of 100 °C (without TiO2).
c With preheating temperatures of 140 °C (without TiO2).
d With preheating temperatures of 160 °C (without TiO2).
e Preheated at 160 °C with TiO2.

A
6.6
0.47
39.4
1.2 (1.1)
B
11.4
0.56
45.4
2.9 (2.6)
C
10.7
0.69
49.1
3.6 (3.6)
D
13.2
0.78
60.6
6.2 (5.4)
E
12.7
0.87
62.9
7.0 (6.5)
In an attempt to further increase performance, we incorporated a layer of TiO2 nanocrystals between the PCBM and Al layers. TiO2 films have been investigated widely, and can have several effects (e.g., as an interface modification or optical spacer layer) within OPVs, including transporting electrons with excellent mobility, blocking holes (as a result of increasing the energy barrier and poor hole mobility), minimizing damage to the active layer during subsequent metal deposition, serving as an optical spacer to enhance light harvesting, and blocking O2 through a scavenging effect. Taking advantage of all of these features, we incorporated films of TiO2 into our PPV devices. First, we used a ball mill grinding method to prepare a stable, well-suspended nano-TiO2 solution. The anatase TiO2 powder (Degussa) was dispersed, using the dispersant Disper BYK190, in EtOH after performing the grinding process, providing a stable, well-suspended TiO2 solution having a solid content of approximately 2 wt%. Fig. S4 displays a TEM image of the nano-TiO2 particles; the diameter of each particle was approximately 7–10 nm. Fig. S4 reveals a GAXRD pattern of the TiO2 film that is consistent with that of anatase TiO2. All the peaks can be ascribed to the anatase crystal structure without any secondary reaction impurities, with the intense, sharp reflection peaks indicating high crystallinity. Typically, the electronic properties of crystalline semiconductors are generally better than those of their amorphous counterparts. The mechanical grinding process decreased the particle size of the commercially available TiO2 powder down to the nanoscale, while maintaining its crystallinity, suggesting excellent carrier mobility and diffusion length for our solution-processable TiO2, thereby relaxing the operating window for depositing this interfacial layer. Fig. 1b presents the energy diagram of this planar heterojunction; in terms of energy levels, the TiO2 layer fulfilled the requirements of an ETL and HBL. The energy level of the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of TiO2 (−4.4 eV) matches well with the work function of Al (−4.2 eV) and may facilitate electron transfer from PCBM (LUMO energy level: −4.2 eV) to Al. Furthermore, the energy level of the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of TiO2 (−8.1 eV) is deeper than that of CH3NH3PbI3 (−5.43 eV), thereby decreasing the likelihood of interfacial charge recombination. As a result, we expected our TiO2-embedded devices to exhibit higher values of Voc and higher FFs.

Fig. 2d–f presents the top-view morphologies of the CH3NH3PbI3 and CH3NH3PbI3/PC61BM active layers prepared with and without a TiO2 coating. The surface was smoother after PCBM had been deposited on top of the CH3NH3PbI3 layer. An even smoother and pinhole-free morphology resulted from the TiO2 coating. Fig. S1 displays the GAXRD profiles of ITO, ITO/PEDOT, ITO/PEDOT/CH3NH3PbI3, ITO/PEDOT/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM, and ITO/PEDOT/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/TiO2. We plotted the azimuthally integrated scattering intensities of the various GAXRD patterns against 2θ. After depositing PCBM and then spin-casting the TiO2 layer, we did not observe any changes in the scattering peaks for the (110) and (220) peaks or for the (310), (224), and (314) peaks located at 31.9, 40.7, and 43.3°, respectively. Fig. S5 presents the UV-vis spectra of CH3NH3PbI3, CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM, and CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/TiO2. The spectra of all films featured absorption onsets at 800 nm with broad absorptions ranging from the visible to the near-IR region. We attribute the absorptions at low wavelengths after the deposition of PCBM and TiO2 to the absorptions of these materials. Fig. S6 displays the energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) image taken from the surface of the TiO2-coated sample; it presents a magnified section where the titanium peaks are located. EDS examination of the sample confirmed the presence of TiO2. Importantly, the SEM images, UV-vis spectra, and XRD patterns confirmed that incorporation of the TiO2 layer did not modify the properties of the CH3NH3PbI3/PC61BM film to any significant degree.

Table 1 and Fig. 4 summarize the performance of our TiO2-containing devices. The resulting optimal device exhibited a PCE of 7.0%, with values for Jsc, Voc, and FF of 12.7 mA cm−2, 0.87 V, and 62.9, respectively (Fig. 3a). Relative to the device prepared without a TiO2 layer, the PCE for this optimized device increased by 13%, due primarily to the increases in the values of both Voc and the FF. This trend in performance can be explained by considering the morphological properties of the thin films and the energy level diagrams of each layer (Fig. 1b, 2e and f). It has been demonstrated that the poor performance of a planar PPV arises from pinhole formation and incomplete coverage of the perovskite layer, resulting in low-resistance shunting paths. We attributed the increase in FF for our TiO2-coated device to its pinhole-free nature. Furthermore, the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite layer exhibited good alignment with the LUMO energy levels of PCBM (−4.2 eV) and TiO2 (−4.4 eV). As a result, the minimal energy losses for the transfer of free carriers (electrons and holes) at the CH3NH3PbI3–PCBM, CH3NH3PbI3–TiO2, and PCBM–TiO2 interfaces enhanced the values of Voc of the devices. Moreover, TiO2 has a wide band gap and a HOMO energy level (∼–8.1 eV) that is much deeper than that of perovskite (∼–5.4 eV); thus, injection of holes into TiO2 is not energetically favorable (i.e., it acts as an HBL). The external quantum efficiency (EQE) response of our TiO2-containing device reveals (Fig. 3b) a significant contribution at wavelengths between 350 and 800 nm, consistent with the absorption spectrum of a perovskite film, with the maximum EQE appearing near 550 nm. Convolution of the spectral response with the photon flux AM 1.5 G spectrum provided an estimate for the value of Jsc of 12.3 mA cm−2 for the device under irradiation.
Stability in a wide range of environments is the biggest challenge facing the commercialization of PPV devices. Few reports have described the stability of such cells. Grätzel et al. studied the long-term stability of encapsulated mesoscopic TiO2-derived perovskite cells (FTO/TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-MeOTAD/Au) toward light exposure (light intensity, 100 mW cm−2; temperature, 45 °C). They observed promising long-term stability: the PPV device maintained greater than 80% of its initial PCE after a period of 500 h. Seok et al. studied the long-term stability of unencapsulated FTO/TiO2/CH3NH3Pb(I1−xBrx)3/polytriarylamine (PTAA)/Au devices under low-humidity (35%) air in the dark. The International Summit on OPV Stability standard suggests recording the degradation of organic devices under an ambient environment. As suggested by Krebs et al., shelf-life stability [ISOS-D-1 (shelf)] of novel devices can be determined by leaving samples in the dark with no load under ambient conditions, defined generally as 23 °C/50% RH. Perovskite structures readily decompose in the presence of moisture; this phenomenon is especially significant for the MAPbI3 structure. To demonstrate that our TiO2-containing device outperformed the normal device, we recorded the stability of our unencapsulated devices using the accepted consensus protocol (ISOS-D-1). We found that the normal device (prepared without TiO2) was sensitive to the ambient conditions, degrading rapidly under the ISOS-D-1 condition; its value of T80 (the period of time required for the PCE of the device to decay by 20% from its initial value) was typically 3 h (Fig. S7a). We observed a rapid change in color from dark brown to yellow, accompanied by a bubble, for our normal devices. Our TiO2-containing devices were much more stable, with values of T80 of approximately 100 h. Known mechanisms for the degradation of organic devices include O2- and H2O-mediated degradation of the active and interfacial layers, electrode diffusion, and morphological changes. To evaluate the stability of our devices over various periods of time, we stored them inside a glove box so that we could ignore the effects of O2 and H2O. We examined the stability of our best-performing cell—the TiO2-containing device prepared with preheating at 160 °C—in the dark under N2. Fig. S7b summarizes the PCEs of the device with respect to time. The PCE of the best device remained stable: after storage for 1000 h, we observed only a slightly change in device performance (from 7.0 to 6.7%). Thus, our ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3/PC61BM/TiO2/Al device structures were stable at room temperature under N2. The relative low sensitivity of our TiO2-containing cells to humidity presumably resulted from the barrier characteristics of TiO2. Considerable room for improvement remains in performance (stability, PCE) of such devices through optimization of their morphologies and architectures. We anticipate that more-stable PV parameters could be obtained after replacement of the PEDOT:PSS layer with a solution-processed p-type metal oxide material, such as NiOx, VOx, or MoOx. A robust form of perovskite, after solution processing at low temperature, may be obtained using metal oxide/perovskite/metal oxide architecture; it might meet the requirements for commercial application. Our results demonstrate that judicious selection of contact materials for a PPV device can have a critical influence on its resulting PCE and stability. Further development of these devices—through morphological control, increasing the PCE, replacing the PEDOT:PSS layer, and enhancing device stability—is currently under investigation in our group.

We have developed a simple, yet potentially all-solution-processable approach toward enhancing the PCEs and stabilities of PPV cells. To the best of our knowledge, this paper describes the first successful example of a PPV incorporating a TiO2 film, solution processed at low temperatures, that functions as an ETL, an HBL, and a barrier layer for PPV applications. We achieved a PCE of 7.0% for a device having the following architecture: ITO/PEDOT/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/TiO2/Al. Relative to the normal device (prepared without TiO2), the PCE for this optimized device increased by 13% as a result of improved alignment of energy levels. In addition, the TiO2-containing device was very stable in the dark under N2; its value of T80 (100 h) outperformed that of the corresponding normal device, which was very sensitive to the ambient environment and degraded rapidly.


All chemicals were purchased from Aldrich and used as received, unless otherwise specified. UV-vis absorption spectra were recorded using a Hitachi U-3300 spectrophotometer. The MAI was synthesized according to a procedure described previously.


Commercial titania powder P-25 (Degussa) and Disper BYK190 were used as raw titania material and dispersant, respectively. A ball mill (JBM-BO35, JUST NANOTECH, Taiwan) was used for grinding the samples. Titania P25 (6 g), BYK190 (0.5 g), and EtOH (300 mL) were mixed in a beaker under ultrasonication for 1 h. The resulting mixture and zirconia balls (50 μm diameter, 600 g) were introduced to a SiC pot (inner volume: 600 mL). The grinding process was performed at a rotation speed of 2000–3000 rpm for 8–10 h. The grinding chamber was cooled with water (18 °C) circulating in the water jacket.


PPV cells were prepared using the following device fabrication procedure. ITO coated glass substrates (Sanyo, Japan [8 Ω □−1]) were sequentially patterned lithographically, cleaned with detergent, ultrasonicated in acetone and isopropyl alcohol, dried on a hot plate at 140 °C for 10 min, and treated with oxygen plasma for 5 min. PEDOT:PSS (Baytron P-VP AI4083) was passed through a 0.45 μm filter and deposited on ITO (thickness ∼40 nm) through spin coating (3000 rpm) in air; the sample was then dried at 140 °C for 20 min inside a glove box. The perovskite precursor solution was prepared by dissolving MAI and lead(II) iodide (1:1) at a concentration of 10 wt% in DMF and continuously stirring the mixture overnight at 60 °C in the dark. PPV devices were fabricated in the layered configuration, glass/ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3/PC61BM/with or without TiO2/Al. Prior to deposition of the perovskite layer, the PEDOT:PSS film was preheated at 140 °C for 2 min. The precursor solution was preheated at 60 °C for 5 min. Prior to depositing the perovskite layer, the ITO/PEDOT substrate was preheated (at 60, 100, 140, or 160 °C) for 5 min. PCBM was deposited from a chlorobenzene solution (10 mg mL−1) at a spin-coating rate of 2000 rpm. The layer of Al (100 nm) was deposited thermally under vacuum. The active area of each device was 10 mm2. The cell performance was measured inside a glove box. The current–voltage (I–V) properties of the devices were measured using a computer-controlled Keithley 2400 source measurement unit (SMU) and a Newport solar simulator (Oriel Sol2A Class ABA Solar Simulators) under AM 1.5 illumination (100 mW cm−2). The illumination intensity was calibrated using a standard Si reference cell and a KG-5 filter. EQEs were measured using an Enlitech QE-R spectral response measurement system to calibrate the current densities of the devices. The morphologies of the polymer films were analyzed through atomic force microscopy (AFM) using a VEECO DICP-II instrument operated in the dynamic force mode at ambient temperature; the etched Si probe exhibited a resonant frequency of 131 kHz and a spring constant of 11 N m−1. GIWAXS patterns were collected on a Philips PANalytical X'Pert PRO MRD apparatus; the incident beam angle was above the critical angle (∼5°).


We thank the Ministry of Science and Technology (101-2113-M-131-001-MY2, 101-2221-E-131-006-MY3) of Taiwan for financial support and the Research Center for New Generation Photovoltaics (RCNPV) for providing the facilities.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: WAXS profile, TEM image of TiO2, WAXS of the thin films and stability of devices. See DOI: 10.1039/c4nr03366c
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014