 DOI: 10.1039/C5EE00599J
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1816-1823


Samrana
Kazim
,

F. Javier
Ramos
,

Peng
Gao
,

Mohammad Khaja
Nazeeruddin
,

Michael
Grätzel
 and 

Shahzada
Ahmad
*

Abengoa Research, Abengoa, C/Energía Solar no. 1, Campus Palmas Altas-41014, Sevilla, Spain. E-mail: shahzada.ahmad@abengoa.com

Group for Molecular Engineering of Functional Materials, Institute of Chemical Sciences and Engineering, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, CH-1015-Lausanne, Switzerland

Laboratory of Photonics and Interfaces, Department of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne Station 6, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland

Received
22nd February 2015
, Accepted 13th May 2015
First published on 13th May 2015
A solution processable, molecular organic semiconductor, 6,13-bis(triisopropylsilylethynyl) pentacene (TIPS-pentacene), was employed as hole transport material (HTM) in mesoscopic methylammonium lead iodide perovskite solar cells. TIPS-pentacene is potentially cost effective, exhibits a relatively high hole mobility and has a favourable HOMO level with respect to the valence band of perovskite. The photovoltaic performance of perovskite solar cells with TIPS-pentacene as HTM in its pristine form and with a dopant/additive was investigated and compared with classical spiro-OMeTAD based devices. Through solvoneering (solvent engineering) and concentration optimization TIPS-pentacene in its pristine form gave a very competitive power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 11.8% under 1 sun conditions. The open circuit voltage of 0.92 V and a short circuit current density of 20.86 mA cm−2 for the devices with pristine TIPS-pentacene were higher compared to doped spiro-OMeTAD based devices under similar conditions, thus paving the use of TIPS-pentacene as an alternative to an expensive spiro-OMeTAD for large area integration in perovskite based solar cells.

Solar energy is an ideal source of energy to make our environment clean and green. It's conversion to electricity by the means of photovoltaic technology at a cost competitive price is a societal concern. Perovskite pigmented solar cells have made a stunning entry into the photovoltaic domain and now emerging as a viable technology in thin film category for the fabrication of highly efficient and low-cost photovoltaics. Regardless of the high efficiencies reported (20%), spiro-OMeTAD remains a material of choice for transporting of holes inside the perovskite solar cells. Spiro-OMeTAD was developed almost two decades ago and after ages of improvement it still suffers from desirable electrical properties and requires doping. With the renaissance of perovskite solar cells, recently some new hole transport materials (HTM) have been reported but they too need doping. Here we report our findings on the use of linear acene derivatives as efficient HTMs in their pristine form. TIPS-pentacene was introduced as a HTM into perovskite solar cell fabrication and competitive power conversion efficiencies were measured, without the use of any dopant or additives. Dopant free perovskite based solar cells yielded close to 12% efficiency. At the time of submission of this article, to the best of our knowledge, this is the highest number reported for a dopant free HTM for perovskite solar cells, moreover with the use of a very common p-type semiconductor. These findings will be of interest for further advancement of perovskite solar cell technology.


The recent progress in the application of methyl ammonium lead halide perovskites as light-absorbers for thin film solid state solar cells has led to a remarkable power conversion efficiency of ∼20%, placing them ideally in emerging thin film PV technology. Solvent-controlled crystal-growth engineering for perovskite infiltration into the TiO2 scaffold and the use of an additional capping layer of perovskite led to attaining high power conversion efficiency (PCE) values and consequently the certified PCE value for perovskite solar cells increased. The potential of perovskites as light absorbers was first revealed in 2009 for liquid electrolyte based dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) with merely 3.8% of PCE and currently, over six times higher PCE is being measured in solid state configuration. This fast unprecedented increase in PCE of perovskite based solar cells motivated many groups to focus on the direction of the choice of scaffolds, device architecture and optimized crystal formation. Among all these architectures, spiro-OMeTAD remains an obvious choice as hole transport material (HTM). Recently, some reports appeared on novel molecular organic semiconductors to be used as HTMs, but they suffer from a cumbersome synthetic approach and thus limited to a group of researchers. The classical spiro-OMeTAD shows the best performance in both perovskites as well as DSSCs in its doped state. The first report in solid state dye solar cells was 0.74% using doped spiro-OMeTAD, which after decades of optimization reached 7.2% using the cobalt complex as a p-type dopant developed by the Grätzel group.

However, the spiro-OMeTAD suffers from the multiplex synthetic approach and purification, which plagued its commercial viability. Moreover, it performs efficiently when it is doped with a metal complex and/or additives. The use of dopants/additives in spiro-OMeTAD induces device instability and also the oxidized form of the spiro-OMeTAD acts as a filter in the visible region at 520 nm due to absorption. In this direction, different inorganic, small organic molecules and conjugated polymers were tested as HTMs in the fabrication of perovskite solar cells. The best efficiency was reported for inorganic CuSCN (12.4%), carbazole derivative based small molecules (14.6%) and polytriarylamine [PTAA] (16.2%). However, CuSCN requires a micron thick layer as HTM, which was deposited by the screen printing method. Low-band gap colored polymers have been used as HTMs similar to their large-band gap counterparts using perovskite as a light harvester, and the highest achieved PCE was 9.2%. Among the polymer family, only PTAA gave the best performance due to its higher hole mobility than others. However, its polymeric nature will allow defects, low device reproducibility, less affinity towards perovskite as well as instability arising from its exposure to high vacuum conditions during metal cathode evaporation, limiting its use in commercial endeavours.
The main limitation in perovskite solar cell performance might be the discrepancy between the series and shunt resistance. Usually, a thick layer of HTM is required to avoid a short circuit, which also leads to high series resistance. Therefore, it is paramount to find a cost effective HTM having desirable conductivity and charge mobility to reduce series resistance and simultaneously create a pinhole free thin layer. In our quest for HTMs with thermal stability, high hole mobility, high conductivity and a suitable highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) level with respect to the perovskite valence band, the functionalized soluble derivative of pentacene i.e. TIPS-pentacene was exploited. It has a matching energetic level to the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite valence band, and can be a material of choice as a HTM. Pentacene has been studied extensively over the decades as a p-type semiconductor layer in organic thin film transistors (OTFTs) and organic solar cells. However pentacene cannot be solution processed, thus has a limited deposition scope, while its analogous 6,13-bis(triisopropylsilylethynyl) pentacene (TIPS-pentacene) can be deposited by numerous processes.
Here we report on the use of solution processable, p-type organic molecule TIPS-pentacene as a HTM for perovskite solar cells. In the past, TIPS-pentacene was investigated extensively as OTFTs and also exploited as a active layer in organic solar cells. The two TIPS side groups at the C-6/C-13 position of pentacene stabilize the HOMO level facilitating stability and solubility in various organic solvents and a 2-dimensional lamellar structure with a brick wall style in the solid state. The cofacial π–π stacking of TIPS-pentacene allows improved charge transport properties over unsubstituted pentacene. TIPS-pentacene is potentially cost effective, easy to synthesize and exhibits a relatively high hole mobility (>1 cm2 V−1 s−1), and complimentary glass transition temperature. Its HOMO level is energetically favourable with regards to the valence band (VB) of CH3NH3PbI3. The PV performance of TIPS-pentacene as a HTM in its pristine form as well as with dopants and additives in perovskite solar cells was probed. For comparison purposes, devices were also made with state of the art spiro-OMeTAD. With solvent and concentration engineering, it was found that TIPS-pentacene in pristine form yielded a very competitive PCE of 11.82% at 100 mW cm−2 under AM 1.5G simulated irradiation.

TIPS-pentacene (Fig. 1a) has minimum synthetic steps compared to spiro-OMeTAD. The substitution of the solubilising (triisopropylsilylethynyl) (TIPS) group at carbon-6 and 13 positions of pentacene facilitates fine-tuning of electronic properties, and an adjustable HOMO–LUMO level making it suitable to use as a HTM with perovskite. Furthermore these TIPS group provide photo-oxidative stability due to stabilized HOMO levels compared to the unsubstituted pentacene.


Contrary to spiro-OMeTAD, TIPS-pentacene shows broad absorption in the visible region. Fig. 2 shows the UV-Vis absorption spectra of TIPS-pentacene in solution, while the film configuration deposited by spin-coating in the pristine form as well as in the doped state is shown in the ESI (Fig. S1). The UV-Vis absorption spectrum in solution is characterized by three long-wavelength bands at 549, 592, and 643 nm, which corresponds to the first singlet exciton excitation and mainly involves one-electron transition from the HOMO to the LUMO and its accompanied vibrational structure. The onset of absorption starts at 663 nm corresponding to an optical band gap of 1.87 eV and reaches λmax at 643 nm. In the film, large red-shift of all the three peaks occurs due to the π–π* intermolecular interaction. The presence of LiTFSI and t-BP as a ionic dopant and additive does not alter the peak position or show the arrival of an additional peak at the longer wavelength region. It was also observed that pristine TIPS-pentacene shows lower absorption than its doped state.

To identify the thermal properties of TIPS-pentacene we conducted differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) studies (Fig. S2, ESI). The glass transition temperature for pristine TIPS-pentacene was found to be at 122 °C, which is very close to Tg of spiro-OMeTAD (124 °C). Further to determine the thermal stability range, thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) was employed (Fig. S3, ESI). Pristine TIPS-pentacene was found to be stable up to 380 °C. It is noted that the addition of LiTFSI and t-BP as additives decreases the thermal stability (to 350 °C) and significant weight loss was observed between 75–175 °C. The addition of additives also changes the surface morphology significantly (Fig. S5, ESI). The change in the microstructure from small granular to large crystalline spherulites in all likely points to its hydrophilic nature after the addition of additives. Thermal studies reveal that TIPS-pentacene in its pristine form is more suitable for practical applications.

Cyclic voltammograms (CV) of pristine TIPS-pentacene and with LiTFSI and t-BP as additives in dichloromethane are shown in Fig. 3. Similar to the doped spiro-OMeTAD, pristine TIPS-pentacene shows a reversible redox couple. In pristine TIPS-pentacene the cathodic and anodic peak ratio is close to unity pointing towards the electrochemical reversibility in the system. Doping of TIPS-pentacene with LiTFSI and t-BP as additives displays significant cathodic shift and more importantly, it loses its reversibility. The shift in the onset of oxidation potential was found in between the pristine TIPS-pentacene and doped spiro-OMeTAD. Further, the HOMO energy level is calculated from the oxidation onset potential with Fc/Fc+ as an internal standard (Table 1). The HOMO and LUMO levels of TIPS-pentacene calculated from CV measurements were found to be −5.4 eV and −3.53 eV, respectively, and the reported values for valence and conduction bands of CH3NH3PbI3 are −5.44 eV and −3.93 eV, a well positioned energy level with perovskite for hole transport (Fig. 1b). It is well known that in DSSC, the difference between the quasi Fermi level of TiO2 and the HOMO of the HTM determines the open circuit voltage (Voc). It is worth noting here that the HOMO of TIPS-pentacene is 300 mV lower than that of spiro-OMeTAD, which will assist in gaining higher open circuit potential of the devices. Chemical doping is a strategy usually employed to increase the conductivity, and subsequently the device performance. It is well reported that the Li salt works as an ionic dopant for organic semiconductors and increased conductivity is due to increased mobile charge carriers filling deep trap sites and improving the mobility. However, the dopant can also act as a trapping center for holes generated by the HTM and the hole transfer might take place from the HOMO of TIPS-pentacene to the immobile dopant counter anion acceptor acting as a trapping site, thus reducing its hole mobility. We have measured the in-plane conductivity of pristine TIPS-pentacene after the addition of LiTFSI and t-BP additives. As expected, we found an increase of two orders of magnitude for TIPS-pentacene, with the addition of LiTFSI and t-BP. The conductivity of pristine TIPS-pentacene was 3.5 × 10−7 S cm−1 and after the addition of the additives it was 1.0 × 10−5 S cm−1. However, in spite of showing high conductivity and high absorbance (in film formation) with dopants/additives, no significant changes were observed in Voc, moreover Jsc and the fill factor decreased. We speculate that the presence of additives in TIPS-pentacene induces some trap sites or disorder in chain packing, which was also supported by irreversible CV peaks.

HTM

E
1/2ox (V)

E
HOMO (eV)

E
LUMO (eV)

E
gopt (eV)

a 
E
LUMO = EHOMO + Eg(opt).
b Optical band gap was calculated by onset of absorption.

Pristine TIPS-P
0.488
−5.4
−3.53
1.87
Spiro-OMeTAD
0.156
−5.07
−2.09
2.98

Fig. 1b shows the corresponding energy level diagram of CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite based solar cells employing TIPS-pentacene as the HTM. Under illumination, perovskite as well as TIPS-pentacene captures the incident visible light and photo-generation of charge carriers occurring in both, where electrons are transferred through the mp-TiO2 layer to the TiO2 conduction band of the compact layer, and collected through a FTO anode, while the corresponding holes are transported from perovskite to Au (cathode) through the TIPS-pentacene hole-transporting layer. However, the contribution to generate photocurrent from TIPS-pentacene towards an electron is insignificant in comparison to perovskite. In order to confirm the contribution of TIPS-pentacene for light harvesting in the visible region, devices were also prepared without gold (cathode). Absorption spectra of CH3NH3PbI3 were measured in the presence of TIPS-pentacene in its pristine form and with LiTFSI and t-BP additive. Fig. 4 illustrates that TIPS-pentacene adds value to the absorption of perovskite film with respect to spiro-OMeTAD in a higher wavelength region (500–750 nm). This additional light absorption from TIPS-pentacene might be a result of filtering of unabsorbed photons from the perovskite layer to TIPS-pentacene, which finally contributes to the overall photocurrent generated by the cell.
A cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the solar cell fabricated using pristine TIPS-pentacene as the HTM shows the typical anatomy of the mesoscopic perovskite solar cells (Fig. 5). The complete infiltration of CH3NH3PbI3 into the ∼250 nm thick mesoporous TiO2 layer, placed over a ∼80 nm thick TiO2 compact layer, can be clearly observed and a ∼150 nm TIPS-pentacene HTM layer is formed over the perovskite capping layer. Fig. 5b shows the magnified version of the image and a very intimate and defined contact between the perovskite and TIPS-pentacene can be witnessed. A cross-sectional SEM image of the solar cell fabricated using doped TIPS-pentacene with an additive is shown in the ESI (Fig. S4).
Several processing parameters such as TIPS-pentacene concentration, solvents, spinning speeds and additive concentration were optimized for maximum light harvesting abilities. Devices were fabricated with and without LiTFSI and 4-tert-butylpyridine (t-BP), which were used as a dopant/additive. Through solvoneering (solvent-engineering), toluene was found to be an ideal solvent for TIPS-pentacene, and quality films were made using toluene with and without a dopant/additive. We have observed that the devices showed the best performance after few days of storage. It is known that TIPS-pentacene shows slow crystallization behaviour in high boiling point solvent (such as toluene) in its fully soluble form and normally produces larger grains. These grain sizes have profound effects on charge transport in TIPS-pentacene.
The current–voltage (J–V) characteristics of CH3NH3PbI3 solar cells with TIPS-pentacene as the HTM measured in the dark and under illumination are shown in Fig. 6a, and the corresponding photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table 2. For comparison, a reference cell with spiro-OMeTAD with a LiTFSI dopant and a t-BP additive as the HTM was also fabricated under similar conditions. Pristine TIPS-pentacene based devices gave enhanced PV performance after aging (under dark conditions) resulting in predominantly increased Jsc and Voc, while the fill factor remains unaltered.
Device

R
s (ohm cm−2)

R
sh (ohm cm−2)

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (mV)
FF
PCE (%)

a Average data with standard deviation were based in a single batch; FF = fill factor, PCE = power conversion efficiency, Rs = series resistance, Rsh = shunt resistance of the cell. The devices were masked with a black aperture to define the active area of 0.283 cm2.

Pristine TIPS-pentacene
23.65
10197.28
20.84 ± 0.01
913 ± 5.2
0.60 ± 0.01
11.51 ± 0.31
TIPS-pentacene + LiTFSI + tBP
43.80
1549.54
16.51 ± 0.49
920 ± 3.7
0.54 ± 0.01
8.20 ± 0.23
Spiro-OMeTAD
23.68
2793.19
18.61 ± 0.78
843 ± 4.9
0.62 ± 0.01
9.77 ± 0.35
The devices fabricated with TIPS-pentacene in pristine form gave a competitive PCE (11.5%) while the one doped with LiTFSI and t-BP as additives attained an average PCE of 8.20%. In the same batch, the fully optimized reference device with spiro-OMeTAD with a LiTFSI dopant and a t-BP additive achieved 9.77% efficiency (Table 2). It is clear from the table that the device with pristine TIPS-pentacene had higher current density (Jsc) than doped TIPS-pentacene as well as spiro-OMeTAD. The open circuit voltage (Voc) of the device with TIPS-pentacene as the HTM was higher than that of classical spiro-OMeTAD confirming the lower Fermi level of TIPS-pentacene than spiro-OMeTAD. Possibly, high Jsc obtained from the device with pristine TIPS-pentacene might be due to the improved light harvesting and effective charge separation and collection.
The fill factor (FF) of pristine TIPS-pentacene based devices was similar to that of doped spiro-OMeTAD confirming low series resistance, possibly due to a similar hole mobility of TIPS-pentacene. Table 2 shows that pristine TIPS-pentacene has almost equal series resistance as the doped spiro-OMeTAD based devices. Due to low conductivity in pristine form, spiro-OMeTAD requires LiTFSI dopant and 4-tert-butyl pyridine (t-BP). In order to further push the PCE, we designed the experiment with lower loading of dopants i.e. 0.011 M LiTFSI and 0.06 M t-BP for TIPS-pentacene. Contrary to this, we found the PCE of such devices was even lower than that of pristine TIPS-pentacene based devices, which can be attributed to unfavorable packing of the structure hindering the mobility of TIPS-pentacene.
Differences in behaviour of the devices can be analysed by current–voltage characteristics in the dark (Fig. 6a) and the extracted values of the series resistance (Rs) and the shunt resistance (Rsh) of each device is presented in Table 2. TIPS-pentacene based devices show comparatively lower dark current and delayed turn-on of the device in the forward direction than that of doped spiro-OMeTAD and doped TIPS-pentacene. We also found that Voc is intensely interrelated to the turn-on point of the dark current under a forward bias and delayed turn-on of the device will result in high Voc. The turn-on of the devices will take place when the injected electrons and holes are recombined under a forward bias. The finite value of Rsh indicates the leakage current pathways and/or bimolecular recombination of the charge carriers. However, a larger value of Rsh in the case of pristine TIPS-pentacene reflects lower leakage current than the doped TIPS-pentacene and spiro-OMeTAD.
In contrast, a small variation was found in the case of Rs; Rs is increased by a factor of two in the case of doped TIPS-pentacene, while spiro-OMeTAD based devices have similar Rs. The lower leakage current and delayed turn on of the forward current in the dark suggests that pristine TIPS-pentacene has good electron blocking ability, resulting in a reduced rate of charge recombination than spiro-OMeTAD. Therefore the delayed turn-on point of the dark current in the case of pristine TIPS-pentacene and doped TIPS-pentacene signifies reduced rate of charge recombination and attains high Voc. The best champion device with pristine TIPS-pentacene shows a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 20.86 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 918 mV and a fill factor (FF) of 0.62, leading to an overall PCE of 11.82% (Fig. 6b). Device statistical data in individual piece of cells are shown in Fig. S10–S13, ESI. Pristine TIPS-pentacene based devices showed almost negligible degree of hysteresis. The hysteresis index was calculated according to ref. 42 and it was minimum in the case of pristine TIPS-pentacene (0.041) and highest for doped TIPS-pentacene (0.154). The obtained hysteresis index of spiro-OMeTAD based devices (0.072) was in close vicinity of 0.080 recently reported. The hysteresis index value for TIPS-pentacene was found to be lower than spiro-OMeTAD based devices. The first attempt to deposit TIPS-pentacene by vacuum evaporation yielded a promising PCE of ca. 6%, which we believe can be further optimized.
The incident photon-to electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra were recorded (Fig. 7) for the devices measured in Fig. 6a. Diverse spectral response was observed in the case of TIPS-pentacene based devices compared with respect to the spiro-OMeTAD one. Pristine TIPS-pentacene and spiro-OMeTAD based devices showed higher IPCE than that of doped TIPS-pentacene. In the visible part of spectra higher conversion efficiencies close to 75% were recorded in the case of pristine TIPS-pentacene, while its counterpart exhibits lower IPCE indicating that it plays a synergistic role of the hole transporter contributing to photocurrent generation. In order to elucidate it further, whether TIPS-pentacene contributes to photocurrent generation, the spectral difference in the IPCE of a spiro-OMeTAD and pristine TIPS-pentacene based device is shown in the ESI (Fig. S7). The difference in IPCE lies exactly in the wavelength region <500 nm region where TIPS-pentacene absorbs. As a result of the IPCE data, a difference in Jsc for these two cells of about 0.634 mA cm−2 is derived.

All chemicals were obtained from Sigma Aldrich, Acros or Merck KGaA and were used without any further treatment. CH3NH3I was synthesized following the previous literature. CH3NH3PbI3 layers were prepared by the sequential deposition method following the recipe using CH3NH3I and PbI2.


4.02 g (30.0 mmol) of ortho-phthalic dialdehyde and 1.68 g (15.0 mmol) of cyclohexanedione were dissolved in 450 mL of ethanol. 15 mL of a 15% aqueous KOH solution was added, upon which the solution turned brownish and a yellow/orange precipitate was formed. For completion of the reaction the mixture was stirred for an additional 4 h at 60 °C. After cooling, the solid was filtered and thoroughly washed with acetone, giving the product as a yellow solid (3.95 g, 12.8 mmol; 85%). H-NMR: (400.1 MHz, CDCl3): δ = 7.71 (dd, 4H), 8.12 (dd, 4H), 8.94 (s, 4H).


Under an atmosphere of argon, 16.2 mL of n-butyllithium (40.5 mmol, 2.5 M solution in hexane) was added dropwise to 9.1 mL (40.5 mmol) of triisopropylsilyl acetylene in 50 mL of dry tetrahydrofuran at 0 °C. The mixture was kept at 0 °C for another 40 min before it was transferred to a solution of 6,13-pentacenequinone (5 g, 16.2 mmol) in 50 mL of dry tetrahydrofuran at 0 °C. The mixture was warmed to room temperature and stirred overnight. The reaction was quenched with 15 mL of 10% HCl and then subjected to a CHCl3/H2O workup. The solvent was removed, and the resulting solid was collected by filtration. The crude solid was dissolved in 50 mL of acetone, and then a solution of tin(II) chloride dihydrate (9.2 g, 40.5 mmol) in 50% acetic acid (50 mL) was added dropwise. This mixture was stirred at room temperature for 24 h. The resulting blue solid product was filtered. The solid was then dissolved in hexane, washed with water and saturated sodium bicarbonate solution, and then dried over magnesium sulfate. The hexane solution is then poured onto a silica plug, which is flushed with hexane (200 mL), followed by a 9:1 hexane/methylene chloride mixture to elute a deep blue solid (9.5 g, 92%): mp 220–221 °C; 1H NMR (300 MHz, CDCl3) δ 9.31 (s, 4H), 7.98 (dd, 4H), 7.42 (dd, 4H), 1.39 (s, 42H).


Optical measurements were carried out in a 1 cm quartz cuvette and films were cast on the quartz substrate. UV-Vis spectra were recorded using a Cary 60 UV-Vis spectrometer. Cyclic voltammetry was measured using an Autolab Eco Chemie cyclic voltammeter in dichloromethane solvent. The experimental setup consisted of a glassy carbon working electrode, platinum wire counter electrode and platinum reference electrode. All samples were deaerated by bubbling with pure nitrogen gas for ca. 5 min at room temperature. The system was initially calibrated with a ferrocene/ferrocenium (Fc/Fc+) redox couple.

Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and thermo gravimetric analysis (TGA) measurements were carried out in a nitrogen atmosphere using a Mettler Toledo equipment (Star System). In-plane conductivity of TIPS-pentacene with and without additives was measured on OFET substrates purchased from Fraunhofer Institute for Photonic Microsystems (IPMS).

An FTO-coated glass, TEC15 from Pilkington, was patterned by laser etching. Then, the substrates were cleaned using Hellmanex solution and rinsed with deionized water and ethanol; subsequently they were ultrasonicated in 2-propanol and then rinsed using ethanol and acetone and finally dried with compressed air. Prior to the compact layer deposition, the samples were cleaned with an ultraviolet/O3 treatment for 30 minutes.

A TiO2 compact layer was deposited by spin coating 2 M solution of TiCl4 on the etched FTO glass at 5000 rpm and heated at 70 °C for 30 minutes. Following this, the samples were washed again with deionized water, annealed at 500 °C for 15 minutes and were left to cool down slowly. After that, on top of it, the mesoporous TiO2 was spin-coated at 5000 rpm using 18NR-T followed by gradual sintering at 500 °C for 1 h in air.
Followed this, perovskite was prepared using the sequential deposition method. More precisely, lead iodide (PbI2) film was deposited by spin coating using a solution of N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF). After spin coating, the cells were placed onto a hot plate at 100 °C for 30 minutes for annealing, and after cooling down the samples, the photoanode was dipped in methyl ammonium iodide (MAI) solution in 2-propanol and rinsed in pure 2-propanol. Subsequently, the samples were annealed again at 100 °C for 20–30 minutes.
For the hole transporting layer 6,13-bis(triisopropylsilylethynyl)pentacene (TIPS-pentacene) was used and spun coated on top of the perovskite layer at 2000 rpm for 30 s using toluene solvent. Several parameters such as TIPS-pentacene concentrations, solvents (chlorobenzene and toluene), spinning speeds and additive concentration were tested and optimized to achieve the best PV properties. TIPS-pentacene concentration was varying from 10–70 mg mL−1 and in our case, we found 30 mg mL−1 gave better PV properties. In the case of a dopant, lithium bis(trifluoromethylsulphonyl)imide (LiTFSI) and 4-tert-butylpyridine (t-BP) were used as dopants/additives. It was found that toluene is an ideal solvent and gave better PV results. Devices were prepared without and with 18.8 μL of LiTFSI dopants and 9.4 μL of t-BP additives. For the reference cell, spiro-OMeTAD in chlorobenzene was used as the hole transport material; 17.5 μL of lithium bis(trifluoromethylsulphonyl)imide (LiTFSI) and 28.8 μL of 4-tert-butylpyridine (tBP) were added to the spiro-OMeTAD solution as additives and finally the devices were prepared under the same fabrication conditions.
Finally, 70 nm of gold were thermally evaporated on the top of the cell as a cathode under a vacuum level between 1 × 10−6 and 1 × 10−5 torr.

Current–voltage (I–V) curves were obtained using a Keithley 2400 source-measurement-unit under AM 1.5G 100 mW cm2 illumination from a certified CLASS AAA ORIEL® Sol3A™ 2 × 2, 450 W solar simulator (model 94023A). Light output power was calibrated using a NREL certified calibrated mono-crystalline silicon solar cell (model 91150V).

The incident photon conversion efficiency (IPCE) was measured using a 300 W xenon lamp (Oriel) fitted with a motorized monochromator with 2 gratings to cover from 200 nm up to 1400 nm (Cornerstone 260, Model 74125) as a monochromatic light source.
For both J–V and IPCE measurements, a black mask with a circular aperture (0.283 cm2) was used though the active area was 0.5 cm2. For IPCE measurements, a constant white light bias (5% of the received light) was recommendable to measure perovskite cells, this was achieved by an array of white LEDs. In our observation we have found that the device PV properties improved with time, and the best results were always obtained in aged devices after 6–7 days. This was possibly due to fine crystal structure formation in TIPS-pentacene, which is well known.
The cross section of the devices were imaged using a field-emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM) using a Hitachi S5200 field emission microscope operated at 5.0 keV.

We have developed solution processable, cost effective and easily synthesized TIPS-pentacene as a hole transport material for perovskite solar cells. The devices gave a very competitive performance of 11.8% without the need of additional dopants or additives. Remarkably, TIPS-pentacene as such gave enhanced performance, compared to the classical spiro-OMeTAD in the doped state to enhance its usage. These results show the potentiality of TIPS-pentacene as the HTM in perovskite solar cells and represent a promising candidate to achieve efficient and cost effective thin film photovoltaic devices. This points towards further exploitation of other family members of pentacene derivatives as an HTM.


Authors from Abengoa Research may have competing interests as Abengoa is an international company and has significant interest in the renewable energy sector. The patent disclosing the work is pending.


The authors thank Paul Gratia for help with conductivity measurements. One of us (SA) acknowledges the grant from Torres Quevedo, Ministry of Competitive and Economics, Spain.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: TIPS-pentacene absorption in films, thermal properties, surface SEM images, device characterization and optimization. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ee00599j
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015