 DOI: 10.1039/C4TC01857E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 473-478


Luting
Ling
,

Lin
Zhu
,

Qiang
Zhang
,

Cai-Feng
Wang
 and 

Su
Chen
*

State Key Laboratory of Materials-Oriented Chemical Engineering, College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Nanjing University of Technology, 5 Xin Mofan Road, Nanjing 210009, China. E-mail: chensu@njut.edu.cn

Received
20th August 2014
, Accepted 17th October 2014
First published on 21st October 2014
We report herein the first interfacial synthesis of photoluminescent NiSe QDs and their evolution towards excitation-dependent multicolour hybrid QDs after solvothermal treatment. We demonstrate that tri-n-octylphosphine (TOP), a very commonly used ligand for the synthesis of QDs, would pyrolyze and generate fluorescent carbon dots (CDs), which is responsible for the asymmetrical and bimodal emission of QDs but has been neglected before. Also described is the application of these QDs for multicolour fluorescent patterns with high uniformity.

Colloidal semiconductor quantum dots (QDs) have been continually attracting research interest in fields like biological labels, light-emitting diodes (LEDs) and photovoltaic devices, owing to their unique optical and electrical properties derived from the quantum confinement effect. So far, photoluminescent (PL) colloidal QDs with high performance in most cases have focused on heavy metal compounds such as cadmium or lead chalcogenides, which causes much concern for the environment and public health. However, the development towards more environmentally friendly PL QDs composed of light metal components has been delayed and is still a major challenge, mainly due to the high activity of these elements in traditional synthetic methods resulting in particles larger than their exciton Bohr radii. In this respect, advances in the synthetic methods for heteronanostructures and zinc-based PL nanocrystals have been realized, while the development of other light-metal-based QDs has lagged behind. Meanwhile, though great success has been achieved in the emission mechanism studies of QDs, some unclear aspects remain, such as bimodal and asymmetric emission spectra.

Herein, we report for the first time the interfacial synthesis of PL NiSe QDs towards various applications and present new fundamental explanation for specific emission behaviour. A liquid–liquid interface is a powerful platform to grow fine nanocrystals, since it offers a limited reaction area retarding the nucleation and growth rate. Here we extended the interfacial strategy to synthesize light-metal-based QDs, NiSe QDs, which were formed at a toluene/water interface at a moderate temperature (95 °C) through the reaction of NiCl2 with NaHSe in the presence of tri-n-octylphosphine (TOP), as shown in Fig. 1. The resulting QDs exhibit brightly blue fluorescence with the quantum yield (QY) of 14%. As we know, NiSe QDs bearing a considerable quantum confinement effect are still scarcely reported. Perhaps more interestingly, after the solvothermal treatment of the blue-emitting QDs, excitation-dependent multicolour photoluminescence was observed. Further investigation indicated that the photoluminescence of the solvothermal-treated product arose from two different sources, namely NiSe QDs and carbon dots (CDs); the latter was generated from the carbonization of TOP, the most commonly used ligand for the synthesis of QDs, which further rendered the emission spectra asymmetrical and bimodal.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report on this unexpected phenomenon in the synthetic process of QDs and is of great significance and needs specific attention. Also demonstrated are the applications of QDs for multicolour fluorescent patterns and sensitized solar cells. This work expands the interface strategy to fabricate the rare example of highly fluorescent NiSe QDs, which will greatly facilitate the preparation of other PL QDs with various applications, as well as offers fundamental insight into the formation of asymmetrical emission.

The interfacial synthetic method allows the preparation of high-quality NiSe QDs at a moderate temperature. NiCl2 (1 mmol) dissolved in purified water (30 mL) and the capping ligand (2.5 mmol of TOP, oleic acid (OA) and undecylenic acid (UA), respectively) in toluene (30 mL) were mixed in a N2 atmosphere under stirring for 1 h to form the nickel precursor which was transferred into the toluene phase. Subsequently, a solution of NaHSe (0.5 mmol) was added into the aqueous phase, and then the biphase system was heated at 95 °C for several hours to afford the formation of NiSe QDs (see details in the Experimental section). Fig. 2a and b present the typical transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of the TOP-NiSe QDs. The as-prepared QDs are spherical, and the corresponding histogram given in the inset of Fig. 2a indicates that NiSe QDs have a relatively narrow size distribution with an average size of 3.4 nm. The high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) image of an individual QD reveals a high crystalline structure with continuous lattice fringes throughout the whole particle (Fig. 2c and S2). The fringe spacing is 0.18 nm, corresponding to the (110) plane of hexagonal NiSe. The crystalline structure of the as-prepared QDs was further characterized by powder X-ray diffraction (XRD). As shown in Fig. 2d, the diffraction peaks of NiSe QDs at 2θ values of 33.5°, 45.4° and 51.0° match with the hexagonal NiSe (JCPDS no. 02-0892) with a small shift towards the large diffraction angle and can be indexed to the (101), (102) and (110) planes. The wide and weak peaks also imply the small particle size of the QDs. The results demonstrate the successful synthesis of well-defined NiSe QDs.

Significantly, the as-prepared NiSe QDs exhibit superior blue fluorescence (Fig. 3), which has rarely been reported before. To obtain NiSe QDs with good optical properties, the optimal preparative parameters were explored. We initially investigated the effect of different types of ligands on the photoluminescence of NiSe QDs. The results are shown in Fig. 3a. All these ligands showed success in preparing PL NiSe QDs, and the emission peak remains almost unchanged while the intensity varies greatly. In the case of OA and UA, a great amount of precipitate formed upon the injection of the Se precursor, which reveals the poor stabilization of these ligands, resulting in an increase in defect-related surface states, poor PL and precipitation. And TOP serves as the best ligand in this case. We further studied the temporal revolution of TOP-NiSe QDs. As shown in Fig. 3b, during the reaction, the emission peak of the QDs shifted to longer wavelength indistinctly after 5 h while the strongest intensity was obtained at 7 h. Excessive reaction time might cause detachment of the excessive ligands from the QD surface, resulting in a large amount of surface defects and an obvious decrease in PL intensity, which is a common phenomenon in the preparation of QDs. The ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) spectrum of TOP-NiSe QDs reacting for 7 h shows a sharp excitonic absorption peak at about 400 nm (Fig. 3c), which confirms the narrow size distribution and high quality of the PL QDs. The corresponding PL spectrum shows a strong emission peak at about 415 nm (Fig. 3c), which is consistent with the bright blue colour as displayed in the inset of Fig. 3c. The effect of molar ratio between Ni and TOP has also been investigated (Fig. S3). The QY of NiSe QDs was determined to be 14%, using quinine sulphate in 0.1 M H2SO4 as the standard reference, which is comparable with other QDs containing light metal components or even doped QDs, and is the highest among those reported for rare examples of NiSe QDs. The good fluorescence should be ascribed to high-quality nanocrystals derived from slow nucleation and growth rate. The growth of QDs in this case (ca. 7 h) is much tardier than those (several minutes) in a hot injection method. In the hot injection method, fast nucleation and growth occur in a homogeneous system and reactions usually complete in several minutes. Therefore, owing to the high reactivity of nickel ions, NiSe particles with sizes much larger than the exciton Bohr radius or with great impurity were often obtained, exhibiting very poor fluorescence. However, the nucleation and growth of QDs herein can only occur at the liquid–liquid biphase interface. Such a limited area makes possible a remarkably prolonged assembly time and better passivation on QDs to heal surface defects, thus resulting in improved photoluminescence.
To investigate the dynamical features of NiSe QDs, we studied the temporal decay of the photoexcited state based on the time-correlated single-photon counting (TCSPC). As shown in Fig. 3d, the decay trace of NiSe QDs is biexponential in nature and can be well fitted with the exponential function Y(t) based on nonlinear least-square, using the following equation:
Y(t) = α1exp(−t/τ1) + α2exp(−t/τ2)
where
α1 and α2 are fractional contributions of time-resolved decay lifetimes τ1 and τ2. The fitting parameters are shown in Fig. 3d. The amplitude α2 with a lifetime of 1.82 ns accounts for a large amount of the total spectrum, while the amplitude α1 with longer lifetime only possesses a small portion, which is similar to the lifetime of InP nanocrystals. And the average lifetime was calculated to be 4.27 ns (χ2 < 1.1). The biexponential time distribution is very common for PL QDs, such as CdSe QDs. Usually, the shorter lifetime is caused by the intrinsic recombination of excitons while the longer lifetime is attributed to the surface trap states located in the forbidden band, which is caused by dangling bonds or poorly passivated surfaces, usually resulting in the tails of the PL spectra. The time-resolved measurements indicate that though there exist two types of radiative mechanisms for NiSe QDs, the PL emission mainly originates from the intrinsic recombination of excitons, which further confirms the good passivation on NiSe QDs prepared from the interfacial assembly.

We further investigated the interfacial solvothermal treatment of NiSe QDs and the biphase solution of NiSe QDs prepared at 95 °C was directly transferred to an autoclave and then heated at 200 °C for another 7 h (Fig. S1). After the intensive solvothermal process, the PL spectrum of the product became broader and asymmetric, and the absorption peak was also weaker (Fig. 4a). Besides, the crystallinity of the nanoparticles decreased and the lattice fringes could hardly be seen, indicating the amorphous structure (Fig. 4a (inset) and S4). And the average particle size increases to about 4.3 nm. More surprisingly, we observed that the photoluminescence was excitation dependent. The PL peak shifts to longer wavelength as the excitation wavelength gradually increases (Fig. 4b). We noted that after the solvothermal treatment, the photoluminescence is excitation-dependent and much decreased, and the best excitation wavelength is not as the same as that of pure NiSe QDs, which is 360 nm. For the sake of comparison, we still used 360 nm as the excitation wavelength for the measurement of QY of the hybrid QDs. The corresponding QY was determined to be about 9% at 360 nm.
As we know, the excitation-dependent photoluminescence phenomenon has never been reported for metal-based semiconductor QDs, but it is the unique characteristic for carbogenic nanoparticles, so-called carbon dots (CDs, also known as carbogenic dots or C-dots). As reported in the literature, fluorescent CDs could be prepared from carbonization of some specific chemicals or even natural sources like eggs and leaves. Besides, amorphous structures are also observed for CDs. To clarify the formation of excitation-dependent photoluminescence for the solvothermal-treated sample of NiSe QDs, a control experiment without the addition of Ni or Se precursors was carried out, with other conditions kept the same. The resulting control sample also exhibits excitation-dependent multicolour photoluminescence but with more symmetrical features (Fig. 4c) and its Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectrum shown in Fig. S5 reveals the existence of carboxyl and hydroxyl groups. Given that only C, H, O, and P exist in the control sample (Fig. S6) as well as in the reactants and solvents, we speculate that fluorescent CDs formed during the solvothermal process, which was caused by the carbonization of TOP. To further elucidate the difference in PL profiles between the solvothermal-treated sample of NiSe QDs and control sample, we fitted a typical spectrum in Fig. 4b (λex = 400 nm) with the Gaussian model. As shown in Fig. 4d, the spectrum of NiSe QDs prepared at 200 °C (cyan solid line) was fitted with two peaks (R2 = 0.999), fit peak 1 (red dotted line) centred at 441 nm and fit peak 2 (green dotted line) centred at 472 nm. Fit peak 2 is similar to that of the control sample, while fit peak 1 possesses a similar shape with that of NiSe QDs prepared at 95 °C but red shifts. Such a result suggests that the spectra of the solvothermal-treated sample consist of two segments: emission from the QDs and that from the CDs. Therefore, solvothermal treatment of NiSe QDs at 200 °C caused the carbonization of surface ligand TOP to yield hybrid QDs composed of NiSe QDs and CDs, as schematically demonstrated in Fig. 4e. The change in morphology from crystalline to amorphous structure further confirms our proposal. It has to be mentioned that the excitation-dependence phenomenon was only observed in the TOP sample. As for UA and OA, no obvious excitation-dependent fluorescence was observed besides weak emission in the ultraviolet region (Fig. S7). Moreover, as shown in Fig. 4e, the formation of hybrid QDs well rationalizes the asymmetrical and bimodal spectra. Asymmetrical or bimodal spectra are common for PL QDs and such phenomena are usually caused by: uneven particle size and size distribution; individual nucleation of the shell materials during the synthesis of core/shell structures; structures with random spatial composition fluctuations. In this case, no shell metallic materials are involved and the particle size is relatively uniform with regular shape as indicated by the UV-vis absorption spectrum and the TEM images (Fig. 4a (inset) and S4), which rule out the above reasons. The PL spectra of NiSe QDs and CDs partially overlap, as demonstrated in Fig. 4d, resulting in asymmetrical and bimodal emission profiles. Therefore, it can be concluded that TOP, a very commonly used ligand in the synthesis of QDs and other nanocrystals, would be in situ carbonized into CDs, which may have unexpected influence on the optical properties but is neglected before. Besides, high temperatures are usually involved in traditional hot injection methods for preparation of QDs, as well as materials containing carbon element. As demonstrated here, these conditions may lead to the formation of fluorescent CDs. Therefore, great attention should be paid to avoid unreasonable explanation.
The desirable photoluminescence of NiSe QDs and hybrid QDs renders these nanomaterials promising for various applications (Fig. 5). For instance, with the use of QDs as inks, multicolour PL patterns were realized through an inkjet printing platform. The principle of inkjet printing is shown in Fig. 5i. The piezoelectric material changes its shape in an electric field resulting in a pressure pulse, and therefore causes a liquid drop of the ink to be ejected from the nozzle (Fig. S8). And finally a predefined pattern forms on the substrate. The pattern was printed on a filter paper in less than 2 minutes (see details in the ESI). Fig. 5a shows the fluorescent pattern of NiSe QDs prepared at 95 °C under 405 nm excitation (additional patterns are shown in Fig. S9), while Fig. 5b–d are the Tai Chi patterns of the hybrid QDs exhibiting blue, green and yellow emission colours at excitation wavelengths of 405, 488 and 514 nm, respectively. The patterns are intact and preserve the PL properties of the QDs. And the corresponding uniformity of the photoluminescence is demonstrated in Fig. 5e–h. The PL intensity throughout the area is almost the same, indicating a highly homogeneous photoluminescence and the stability of the QDs. The PL intensity with different scaling factors is displayed in Fig. S10 to explicitly reveal the PL distribution consistence. The inkjet printing technique, a non-contact and maskless approach, provides an ideal capability for creating highly defined patterns with reduced material wastage and cost. And various “inks” of nanoparticles have been adopted for electronic devices, sensors and detectors, while inkjet printing of pure QDs has been less reported. The successful patterning of the PL QDs here indicates the easy manipulation of these QDs and their potential application in the anti-counterfeit field and optoelectronic devices as well.
Finally, we demonstrated the first example of NiSe QD-sensitized TiO2 solar cells, and their potential photovoltaic properties (Fig. 5j and k). As an alternative to traditional dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), QD-based solar cells offer advantages such as the size-tunable quantum confinement effect (tuning capability of the absorption onset) and multiple exciton generation (MEG), which make QDs highly pursued light harvesting materials. Upon excitation, QDs can transfer excited electrons to large bandgap semiconductors such as TiO2, leading to the separation of electron–hole pairs and the generation of photocurrent in the circuit. The schematic illustration of NiSe QD-sensitized solar cells is shown in Fig. 5j, and the detailed fabrication procedure is presented in the ESI. The photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the cell were measured under standard simulated AM 1.5 irradiation.
The J–V curve of the solar cell sensitized by TOP-NiSe QDs is shown in Fig. 5k, which shows a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 0.547 mA cm−2 and an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.565 V with a fill factor (FF) of 0.68 and a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 0.21%. The high fill factor may benefit from good alignment between QDs and TiO2. Though the PCE is relatively low compared with other QD-sensitized solar cells such as PbS and PbSe QDs, the high FF (usually less than 0.75) offers promising opportunities for further development of NiSe QDs. The low PCE may be induced by poor matching of the bandgap of QDs with the solar spectrum and deficient electron transition from QDs to the TiO2 film, inhibited by the ligand with long carbon chains. Considering these factors, further attempts to improve the PCE of QD sensitized solar cells can focus on the bandgap engineering of the QDs, and preparation of QDs with short chains or inorganic ligands, as demonstrated by the work of Talapin et al. and Sargent et al. to enhance the electron transportation and photocurrent, thus the final PCE. This work suggests the potential of NiSe QDs in photovoltaic devices.

Typically, a mixture of TOP (2.5 mmol, 1.030 g, Aladdin-reagent, 90%) and toluene (30 mL) was first loaded into a 100 mL three-neck flask, and then a solution of NiCl2·6H2O (0.238 g, 1 mmol, Aldrich, 98%) in deionized water (30 mL) was added under magnetic stirring, and the mixed solution was degassed with N2 and stirred for 1 h. Afterwards, the fresh NaHSe solution, prepared by the reaction of selenium powder (0.0395 g, 0.5 mmol) and NaHB4 (0.0454 g, 1.2 mmol) with 1.5 mL deionized water, was added into the above solution under stirring. Finally, the reaction temperature was increased to 95 °C from room temperature. The mixture was refluxed to obtain NiSe QDs. It was cooled to the ambient temperature by air and then centrifuged to remove any large aggregates. And the QDs were precipitated from toluene with acetone, washed twice, and redispersed in toluene. The synthetic procedure of OA-capped and UA-capped NiSe was similar to that of TOP-capped NiSe, except that TOP was replaced by the same mole of OA (Aladdin-reagent, 90%) and UA (Aladdin-reagent, 90%) respectively. The interfacial solvothermal treatment was carried out by transferring the as-prepared TOP-NiSe QDs to an autoclave and reacted at 200 °C for 7 h.


For inkjet printing, 10 g toluene solution of QDs of about 1 mg mL−1 was transferred to the chamber of the Jetlab®II Precision Printing Platform at room temperature. And a predefined picture was used in the printing program. The nozzle has a diameter of 70 μm. The formation and dropping process of the droplets were observed with a stroboscopic camera. And the pressure in the nozzle, the liquid flow, the wetting of the pinhead and the dwell voltage were optimized to control the formation of droplets and the ejection properties. The inkjet was set on the drop-on-demand (DOD) mode to print the pattern. And the droplet distance was set to be 100 μm, though the actual distance was decreased due to the liquid diffusion. The printing process completed in about 90 s and was repeated for 6 times to allow full printing of the QDs on the substrate.


The TiO2-FTO electrodes (Rainbow Solar Technology) were immersed in NiSe colloidal solutions for 48 h in the dark and then dried under vacuum. A platinum-coated FTO substrate (Rainbow Solar Technology) was used as the counter electrode. The electrodes were sealed with a polymer gasket (Surlyn) and several drops of electrolyte (acetonitrile solution containing an I−/I3− redox couple, Rainbow Solar Technology) were infiltrated to the sealed electrodes through the hole on the work electrode.


In summary, we reported here the interfacial synthesis of blue-emitting NiSe QDs for the first time. After the solvothermal treatment of NiSe QDs, multicolour excitation-dependent photoluminescence was observed unexpectedly. Thorough analysis reveals that the capping ligand on the surface of NiSe QDs, TOP, a very commonly used ligand, could be carbonized into fluorescent CDs, which has been neglected before and well rationalizes unexpected asymmetrical or bimodal spectra. This work represents an important step towards preparing QDs with light metal elements and understanding their optical properties. We further fabricated fluorescent patterns of QDs with different emission colours at different excitation wavelengths, as well as the first example of NiSe QD-sensitized solar cells showing a high fill factor, which show their potential in anti-counterfeit and photovoltaic fields. This work will promote both the development of PL QD preparation and understanding of their optical properties.


This work was supported by the National High Technology Research and Development Program of China (863 Program) (2012AA030313), National Natural Science Foundation of China (21474052), Industrial Project in the Science and Technology Pillar Program of Jiangsu Province (BE2012181), and Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions (PAPD).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Additional TEM images, XRD pattern, and PL spectra. See DOI: 10.1039/c4tc01857e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015