 DOI: 10.1039/C3TA13647G
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 292-298


Jun-Seok
Yeo
,

Jin-Mun
Yun
,

Yen-Sook
Jung
,

Dong-Yu
Kim
*,

Yong-Jin
Noh
,

Seok-Soon
Kim
 and 

Seok-In
Na
*

Heeger Center for Advanced Materials (HCAM), School of Material Science and Engineering, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, Gwangju 500-712, Republic of Korea. E-mail: kimdy@gist.ac.kr

Professional Graduate School of Flexible and Printable Electronics and Polymer Materials Fusion Research Center, Chonbuk National University, Jeonju-si, Jeollabuk-do 561-756, Republic of Korea. E-mail: nsi12@jbnu.ac.kr

School of Materials Science and Chemical Engineering, Kunsan National University, Kunsan, Chonbuk 753-701, Republic of Korea

Received
11th September 2013
, Accepted 24th October 2013
First published on 25th October 2013
A r-GO with sulfonic acid groups (sr-GO) was newly developed and it showed dramatically concentrated aqueous dispersions with high film conductivity. With the aid of sulfonic acid groups, good compatibility with various HOMO materials was achieved, resulting in PCEs over 7% for sr-GO-based cells with superior device stability to PEDOT:PSS-based devices.

The research community is motivated to develop renewable green energy sources, so polymer solar cells (PSCs) with qualities such as flexibility, low-cost and low-temperature roll-to-roll solution-processed applications have emerged as an attractive technology. With the rapid improvement of power conversion efficiency (PCE) in the past few years, PSCs have gained prominence as a viable technology in commercial photovoltaic technologies. The enhancement of PCE in the last decade can be attributed primarily to the use of newly developed donor materials with a lower optical band-gap and a deeper highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) level compared to conventional poly(thiophene) donors, which can extend short-circuit current density (JSC) and open-circuit voltage (VOC). However, to better use these newly synthesized photoactive donor materials, the interfacial properties between electrodes and the active layers, in particular anode modification to have to be paid careful attention due to the emergence of new donor materials with various HOMO levels, should be also equally considered for desirable photovoltaic characteristics such as fill factor (FF), JSC, and VOC as well as the device life-time of PSCs.

To date, water-dispersible poly(ethylenedioxythiophene):polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS) is the most successful anode interfacial material because it fulfills almost all of the requirements of an anode interfacial layer (AIL): high transparency, good passivation properties, high conductivity, adequate work-function (WF) for an Ohmic contact to enhance the built-in potential for higher VOC, and simple solution-processability to be scalable PSCs regardless of device architectures. Consequently, most of the published data for newly synthesized donors with a wide range of HOMO levels and verified PCE records have employed PEDOT:PSS as an AIL. However, the long-term operation of PSCs with the currently available device architecture containing PEDOT:PSS does not look promising, because the high acidity and hydroscopic properties of PEDOT:PSS have a negative influence on device stability. To overcome these problems, some inorganic materials including MoO3, V2O5, and NiO have been studied in order to substitute PEDOT:PSS as the AILs in PSCs. Despite the encouraging properties of inorganic materials to offer a high WF and high durability for long-term device operation, their cost-intensive vacuum process or heat treatments typically needed for hydrolysis processes have limited their broad applications due to incompatibility with low-cost solution-processable and roll-to-roll processed PSCs. Therefore, developing a low-cost and simply processed interfacial material with a strategy that will retain the desirable properties of PEDOT:PSS as an AIL, but overcome its stability issue for device durability, has been an urgent need.
As a new class of a promising alternative to PEDOT:PSS, solution-processable chemically converted graphenes (CCGs), such as graphene oxide (GO) and reduced graphene oxide (r-GO), have been recently introduced and have demonstrated the potential to achieve low-cost and high-performance PSCs. Furthermore, the versatile functionalization of graphene nanosheets have allowed the controllability of electronic properties, and thus have led to their widespread use as electron/hole-transport layers in PSCs. In a recent paper, we investigated GO, a conventional r-GO, and a graphene oxide reduced by p-toluenesulfonyl hydrazide (pr-GO) for use as AILs. The device with pr-GO showed better cell-performance than either GO or r-GO, which originated mainly from better film morphology than r-GO and better conductivity than GO. However, although a reduced form of GO can better function as an AIL due to its enhanced conductivity and improved carrier transport ability, studies on r-GO materials for interfacial layers of PSCs have rarely appeared in the literature, which is probably due to the difficulties in obtaining high dispersibility and a good film morphology with the r-GO forms. More importantly, although most of the above-mentioned studies mentioned the possibility of utility as AILs with comparable performance to PEDOT:PSS, the applications of CCGs have been significantly restricted to poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) donor-based systems, primarily due to the relatively low work-functions of CCGs including our pr-GO only to be matched with the HOMO of certain donors such as P3HT; to date, there has been no approach for utilizing CCGs as interfacial materials in state-of-the-art PSCs based on various donor materials with HOMOs more diverse and deeper than P3HT. Therefore, significant effort should be dedicated to the development of chemically converted graphene to ensure donor polymer-independent, highly-efficient, and highly-stable PSCs that can completely replace conventional PEDOT:PSS.
In this work, we introduce a novel r-GO functionalized with a sulfonic acid group on the edge and basal plane of CCGs (sr-GO), and we also provide the first evidence that the newly developed sr-GO can efficiently serve as an interfacial layer leading to donor polymer-independent high-performance PSCs. A simple one-step reduction and functionalization of GO using p-hydrazinobenzene sulfonic acid hemihydrate (HBS) as a reducing agent was achieved, and a resultant sr-GO functionalized with a sulfonic acid group showed a very high dispersion concentration (∼20 mg ml−1) in pure water with no insulating surfactants such as poly(styrenesulfonic acid), which has been the best reported in currently published data for isolated r-GO aqueous dispersion. More importantly, with a high conductivity of 3.18 S cm−1, the WF of sr-GO exhibited a higher value of 5.04 eV compared to other reported CCGs including our pr-GO (WF = 4.66 eV), which seems to be more compatible with a deep HOMO donor to facilitate the extraction of holes and a large built-in potential via an Ohmic contact. To provide proof of the universal feasibility of sr-GO as an AIL, we applied the sr-GO as an AIL in a large set of PSCs employing donor polymers with diverse HOMOs such as P3HT, poly[2,3-bis-(3-octyloxyphenyl)quinoxaline-5,8-diyl-alt-thiophene-2,5-diyl] (TQ1), poly[[4,8-bis[(2-ethylhexyl)oxy]benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl][3-fluoro-2-[(2-thylhexyl)carbonyl]thieno[3,4-b]thiophenediyl]] (PTB7), and poly[4,8-bis(2-ethylhexyloxy)benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl-alt-(4-octanoyl-5-fluoro-thieno[3,4-b]thiophene-2-carboxylate)-2,6-diyl] (PBDTTT-CF). These were all systematically compared with conventional PSCs incorporating PEDOT:PSS and pr-GO as reference AILs. The pr-GO functioned well as an AIL only in P3HT-based PSCs, but when sr-GO was simply inserted between the active layer and the anode as an interfacial layer, it dramatically enhanced the performances of PSCs regardless of the HOMO levels of the donor polymers. This resulted in PCEs of as high as 4.80% for TQ1, 7.18% for PTB7, and 7.18% for PBDTTT-CF, which are the highest values reported in the literature for PSCs based on r-GO derivatives. Furthermore, the devices with sr-GO exhibited superior device operation-time compared with those of the devices with PEDOT:PSS. This approach and demonstration of donor polymer-independent high-performance of PSCs with sr-GO could be an important step toward the complete replacement of conventional PEDOT:PSS for the realization of low-cost, high-efficiency, and high-stability PSCs.
The structural and electronic characteristics of graphene oxides reduced by HBS (sr-GO) illustrated in Fig. 1a were evaluated by several analyses such as atomic force microscopy (AFM), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), Raman spectroscopy, thermogravimetric analysis (TGA), and electrical conductivity, which were all systematically compared with reduced graphene oxides (pr-GO) prepared as our preliminary report via p-toluenesulfonyl hydrazide (p-TosNHNH2). Fig. 1b and c show the topographic AFM images for CCG films spin-cast from 0.5 mg ml−1 aqueous solutions on glass substrates. Both kinds of r-GOs were comprised of isolated graphene single sheets and formed nearly full-covered films. Single sheets of pr-GO and sr-GO showed similar thicknesses of ∼1.3 nm and were slightly thicker than those of generally reported r-GOs, indicating that during the reduction process through the formation of hydrazone bonds, the p-toluenesulfonyl group and the phenyl sulfonic acid group were effectively grafted onto the graphene sheets of pr-GO and sr-GO, respectively. To gain further insights into the surface chemical composition of pr-GO and sr-GO sheets, we conducted XPS analysis. Fig. 1d shows the C 1s spectrum for pr-GO and sr-GO, which includes the peaks deconvoluted into several components: C–C (284.5 eV), C–S (285.15 eV), C–N (285.54 eV), C–O (286.58 eV), CO (287.89 eV), and C–(O)–O (289.11 eV). Here, the peak of C–N bonds of hydrazones (285.54 eV) also well supports that the p-toluenesulfonyl group and phenyl sulfonic acid groups from p-TosNHNH2 and HBS reductants are attached to the pr-GO and sr-GO graphene sheets, respectively. More importantly, as shown in the inset of Fig. 1d, the peaks at ∼168 eV corresponding to sulfonic acid groups were clearly shown in the S 2p spectrum of the sr-GO sample, revealing that the sr-GO is successfully functionalized with sulfonic acid groups. The resultant sr-GO with sulfonic acid groups showed a very high dispersibility of ∼20 mg ml−1 in pure water without surfactants. At least two factors suggest that the charged sulfonic acid units are mainly responsible for the dramatically increased dispersion concentration. First, with the exception of the sulfonic acid group, there were no significant differences in the chemical composition of XPS data, but the pr-GO showed a dispersion concentration of ∼0.6 mg ml−1. Second, the sulfonic acid units can reduce the van der Waals interaction due to their bulky groups and increase colloidal repulsion between r-GO sheets due to the negatively charged sulfonic acid units, when dispersed in water, attached to the basal plane and to the edge of the sr-GO. In addition, after reduction with HBS, the peak intensities assigned to C–O (hydroxyl and epoxy), CO (carbonyl), and C–(O)–O (carboxylate carbon) were further weakened compared with pr-GO, indicating that the oxygen functional groups were eliminated more efficiently, and that the HBS is a better reducing agent than p-TosNHNH2 for the reduction of GO. These results are consistent with the Raman spectra and TGA data, showing that sr-GO has a more decreased D-band to the G-band intensity ratio for sr-GO (ID/IG = 0.98) compared to that of pr-GO (ID/IG = 1.06) and more improved thermal stability than that of pr-GO (see Fig. S1). Furthermore, the better reduction ability of HBS made the sr-GO have an excellent electrical conductivity of 3.18 S cm−1, which exceeds the pr-GO conductivity of 1.13 S cm−1 and is highly similar to conventional r-GO by using hydrazine well known to produce high-conductivity, but to adversely induce a poor dispersibility (0.3 mg ml−1) and a significant precaution due to its toxic and explosive properties. These results confirm that r-GO with the novel HBS reducing agent has better conductivity and a much higher dispersibility than conventional r-GO, and it can be successfully obtained via a one-step reduction process without the use of any surfactants.
To evaluate the potential of sr-GO as an AIL in PSCs, various analyses such as surface morphology (AFM), optical transmittance, and work-function were conducted as depicted in Fig. 2 and S2.Fig. 2a shows AFM topographic images of pristine indium tin oxide (ITO), conventional PEDOT:PSS, pr-GO, and sr-GO AILs on ITO/glass substrates. The surface root-mean-square (rms) roughnesses of pristine ITO, PEDOT:PSS, pr-GO, and sr-GO in the 5 × 5 μm2 scan window were 2.26, 1.21, 2.52, and 2.50 nm, respectively. The pr-GO and sr-GO all showed uniform film morphologies that could basically be used as AILs for achieving uniform-contacts between anode and active layer in contrast to conventional r-GO generally having non-homogeneous film morphologies and a larger peak-to-valley to induce poor cell-performance. In addition to the surface morphology, the WF of an interfacial material plays an important role in determining the PSC-performance. In this respect, ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) analyses were performed to examine the WFs, as shown in Fig. 2b. The WF of pristine ITO deduced from the onset of UPS spectra in the secondary electron cutoff region was 4.31 eV, while the deposition of PEDOT:PSS and pr-GO on ITO anodes increased the WFs to 4.70 and 4.66 eV, respectively. More importantly, as shown in Fig. 2b, sr-GO exhibited a noticeably larger WF of 5.04 eV, which can further facilitate an Ohmic contact even with deep HOMO donor materials, compared with those of pr-GO and generally reported CCG films with WFs typically ranging from 4.6 to 4.8 eV. The larger WF of sr-GO might be attributed to the existence of sulfonic acid groups on the graphene nanosheets that would induce a negative dipole moment with an orientation away from the graphene surface. Eventually, it was confirmed that the incorporation of sulfonic acid onto r-GO, in addition to achieving a highly concentrated aqueous suspension and uniform film with higher conductivity, produced a higher WF of CCG films with no complicated and additional processes, which made the sr-GO highly desirable as an AIL for high-performance and low-cost PSCs.
To assess the viability of sr-GO as AILs in PSCs, we employed two different device architectures based on P3HT:PC61BM ([6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester) and TQ1:PC71BM ([6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester), and we also prepared several identical PSCs that varied only in their respective AILs as follows: PEDOT:PSS, pr-GO, and sr-GO. Fig. 3a shows the representative current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of PSCs with P3HT, which has been widely studied as a donor material that has a moderate HOMO value of 4.9 eV. The control P3HT-based device with a PEDOT:PSS AIL exhibited an average PCE of 3.56%, an average VOC of 0.60 V, an average JSC of 9.11 mA cm−2, and an average FF of 0.65, as summarized in Table 1. In particular, when pr-GO and sr-GO films were applied as AILs, all resultant solar cells showed excellent cell-performances without noticeable differences: PCE = 3.61% and 3.64%, VOC = 0.60 and 0.61 V, JSC = 8.78 and 8.66 mA cm−2, and FF = 0.69 and 0.69 from pr-GO and sr-GO, respectively. Considering that despite the smaller WF of pr-GO than that of sr-GO, highly comparable and excellent photovoltaic parameters were obtained in the P3HT:PCBM system even with the use of pr-GO, it is believed that the WF of pr-GO (4.66 eV) is already well matched to the HOMO level of P3HT, leading to an Ohmic contact for efficient hole extraction with sufficient built-in potential. To further expand and generalize such WF effects of AILs on PSC-performances, we investigated TQ1-based PSCs, which are thought to be highly sensitive to the interface WF due to its deep HOMO level of 5.7 eV.Fig. 3b designates the J–V curves for TQ1-based PSCs incorporating sr-GO in comparison with cells employing PEDOT:PSS and pr-GO, and the average values of PSC-performances are shown in Table 1. The TQ1-based cells with sr-GO AILs showed high performance characteristics: an average PCE of 4.80%, an average VOC of 0.84 V, an average JSC of 9.24 mA cm−2, and an average FF of 0.62, which are closely comparable values to reference PSCs with PEDOT:PSS AILs having a PCE of 5.06%, a VOC of 0.88 V, a JSC of 9.57 mA cm−2, and a FF of 0.60. However, TQ1-based cells fabricated with pr-GO showed poor photovoltaic parameters as follows: an average PCE of 0.75%, an average VOC of 0.32 V, an average JSC of 8.25 mA cm−2, and an average FF of 0.28, which was quite different from the results with P3HT-based PSCs that demonstrated comparable photovoltaic performances regardless of the AIL type or the AIL WF. The results observed from J–V curves were also consistent with external quantum efficiency (EQE) and internal quantum efficiency (IQE) spectra depicted in Fig. 3c. Also, the JSC values obtained from EQE data were within 6% error compared to the corresponding JSC observed from J–V curves. The EQE spectrum of sr-GO-based PSCs nearly tracked that of the cell with reference PEDOT:PSS, whereas the pr-GO-based cell showed relatively poor quantum efficiency. In particular, as shown in the inset of Fig. 3c, the IQE spectra of sr-GO and PEDOT:PSS-based PSCs seemed identical, which thus indicated that sr-GO based AILs can also offer excellent and comparable charge extraction performance as PEDOT:PSS. Thus, it is obvious that pr-GO failed to approach the original photovoltaic performances of TQ1-based PSCs due to a nonohmic anode-side contact to be caused by the relatively low WF of pr-GO, while even in deep HOMO material-based systems, sr-GO can also perform efficiently as an interfacial layer due to a better Ohmic contact formation by the higher WF of sr-GO to facilitate hole extraction and sufficient built-in electric field. To expand the potential of sr-GO as an outstanding AIL, we also investigated the influence of sr-GO films on device stability. The cell performances of the TQ1-based PSC with sr-GO were evaluated as a function of time of exposure in an ambient environment without encapsulation according to the ISOS-D-1 protocol, and these were compared with those of PEDOT:PSS systems. As shown in Fig. 3d, a rapid degradation rate was observed for PCEs in PEDOT:PSS-based cells. The degradation showed complete failure in photovoltaic performance after 180 hours, which could have originated from the hydroscopic PEDOT:PSS films, resulting in acidic PEDOT:PSS layers by taking up water from the atmosphere and the degradation of hole extraction through the ITO/PEDOT:PSS interface. By contrast, the cell fabricated with sr-GO AILs showed a greatly enhanced device stability with the PCE retaining 69% of its initial value after 180 hours, and furthermore, a high PCE of ∼2.5% (52% of the original value) was still obtained after 480 hours, which could be due to the higher passivation property of r-GO against oxygen and moisture even with sulfonic acid groups compared to PEDOT:PSS. A similar trend was also observed for P3HT-based PSCs as shown in Fig. S3. These results apparently indicated that the use of sr-GO as an AIL is much more suitable for the fabrication of PSCs than conventional PEDOT:PSS for maximizing photovoltaic performance coupled to excellent device stability under an ambient environment.
Donor
HOMO [eV]
AIL

V
OC [V]

J
SC [mA cm−2]
FF
PCE [%]

a From ref. 39.
b From ref. 29.
c From ref. 7.
d From ref. 8.

P3HT
4.9
PEDOT:PSS
0.60
9.11
0.65
3.56
pr-GO
0.60
8.78
0.69
3.61
sr-GO
0.61
8.66
0.69
3.64
TQ1
5.7
PEDOT:PSS
0.88
9.57
0.60
5.06
pr-GO
0.32
8.25
0.28
0.75
sr-GO
0.84
9.24
0.62
4.80
PTB7
5.15
PEDOT:PSS
0.69
14.9
0.69
7.07
pr-GO
0.66
14.5
0.69
6.52
sr-GO
0.68
14.7
0.71
7.18
PBDTTT-CF
5.22
PEDOT:PSS
0.76
15.0
0.63
7.16
pr-GO
0.73
14.7
0.60
6.46
sr-GO
0.75
15.3
0.63
7.18
Interestingly, the high WF of sr-GO, however, does not fully elucidate the compatibility of a deep TQ1 HOMO of 5.7 eV, because an energetic mismatch still exists between the sr-GO WF and the HOMO of TQ1, which is also arisen in the case of a PEDOT:PSS AIL. To further understand the reason why sr-GO or PEDOT:PSS can show dramatically improved cell-performances, unlike pr-GO, although they still have a lower WF that does not match the HOMO level of TQ1, we carried out UPS studies to investigate the interaction and interface energetics between TQ1 film and three types of AILs. Fig. 4 illustrates the UPS spectra in the secondary electron cut-off region of a TQ1 layer (∼2 nm) on PEDOT:PSS, pr-GO, and sr-GO films. The onset of the UPS spectra in a PEDOT:PSS/TQ1 contact implies that there was a shift of the vacuum level (Evac) in the PEDOT:PSS/TQ1 interface, which yielded an interfacial dipole (ID) of 0.38 V. In the case of sr-GO/TQ1, the Evac shift that indicated an ID existence was in the same direction and highly comparable ID magnitude (0.32 V) with PEDOT:PSS/TQ1, which can induce a favorable hole collection from the active layer to the AIL. In contrast, there was a negligible energy offset in the pr-GO/TQ1 interface, indicating the absence of ID between the pr-GO and TQ1 films. This ID formation observed in sr-GO/TQ1 and PEDOT:PSS/TQ1 contacts, but not in the pr-GO/TQ1 interface, could stem from the sulfonic acid groups on the surface of PEDOT:PSS and sr-GO that lead to a better interfacial charge transfer, in contrast to the pr-GO that had no sulfonic acid group. It is well known that the presence of sulfonic acid groups in AILs can perform as proton sources for doping of adjacent conjugated polymers via a charge transfer process, and that the protonated donor polymers near sulfonic acid can increase the electrode selectivity for hole transport. In addition, considering that in fact, as shown in Fig. S4, the surface protonation of donor polymers can be confirmed by bleaching in the main absorption peak of a polymer and the new charge transfer peak in the near infrared region, we can conclude that the improved ohmicity of the sr-GO/TQ1 interface is attributed to the presence of ID at its interface via the surface protonation by sulfonic acid groups. More importantly, this finding has implications that as much as the AIL WF or the WF modulation of electrodes, the interface properties between AILs and donor materials should be carefully considered in AIL design and when choosing the AIL materials, as this can have a greater effect on PSC-performance.
Finally, to clearly demonstrate that this sr-GO AIL can be applied to various donor-based systems regardless of HOMO values, the PSCs incorporating other promising donor polymers such as PTB7, PBDTTT-CF, P3HT, and TQ1 were also fabricated. As illustrated in Fig. 5 and Table 1, the corresponding J–V characteristics present successful demonstrations of various PSCs employing sr-GO AILs. In particular, with the sr-GO AIL, PTB7 and PBDTTT-CF based PSCs exhibited excellent average PCEs of 7.18% in both cases, which were highly comparable values to those of PEDOT:PSS-based PSCs yielding average PCEs of 7.07% (PTB7) and 7.16% (PBDTTT-CF). To the best of our knowledge, this is the first successful demonstration of the universal feasibility of CCGs as AILs in a large variety of donor systems, and the highest PCEs for r-GO based PSCs to date.

In conclusion, we developed a novel r-GO functionalized with a sulfonic acid group (sr-GO), and we also demonstrated for the first time that the newly developed sr-GO can efficiently serve as an interfacial layer leading to donor polymer-independent high-performance PSCs. The resultant sr-GO prepared through a novel reductant of HBS showed dramatically concentrated aqueous dispersions with high film conductivity. With the aid of sulfonic acid units of the sr-GO, good compatibility even with deep HOMO materials was achieved via the improved WF and the presence of an interfacial dipole, resulting in PCEs of up to 4.80%, 7.18%, and 7.18% for TQ1, PTB7, and PBDTTT-CF cells, respectively. Furthermore, under ambient environments, sr-GO based cells presented superior device stability to PEDOT:PSS-based cells. This successful development and demonstration of sr-GO to guarantee donor polymer-independent high-performance PSCs clearly verified that reduced graphene oxide functionalized with sulfonic acid units is a highly advanced interfacial material to surpass the utility of a general PEDOT:PSS AIL even in a large variety of donor systems, thereby advancing the realization of low-cost, solution-processed high-performance, and high-stability PSCs.


This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIP) (No. 2013-059210), the Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT and Future Planning (NRF-2013R1A1A1011880), by the "Basic Research Projects in High-tech Industrial Technology" Project through a grant provided by GIST in 2013, and by the Heeger Center for Advanced Materials (HCAM). We thank the Korea Basic Science Institute (KBSI) for AFM and XPS measurements.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ta13647g
‡ J.-S. Yeo and J.-M Yun contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014