 DOI: 10.1039/C5RA06220A
(Paper)
RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 44398-44407

Su Pei Lim,
Alagarsamy Pandikumar*,
Nay Ming Huang* and 
Hong Ngee Lim

Low Dimensional Materials Research Centre, Department of Physics, Faculty of Science, University of Malaya, 50603 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. E-mail: huangnayming@um.edu.my; pandukumarinbox@gmail.com

Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Universiti Putra Malaysia, 43400 UPM Serdang, Selangor, Malaysia

Functional Device Laboratory, Institute of Advanced Technology, Universiti Putra Malaysia, 43400 UPM Serdang, Selangor, Malaysia

Received
8th April 2015
, Accepted 12th May 2015
First published on 18th May 2015
In the present investigation, gold-decorated TiO2 (Au@TiO2) plasmonic nanocomposite materials were successfully prepared through a simple one-step chemical reduction method without using any stabilizer or surfactant. These materials were then used as efficient photoanodes in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSC). The prepared nanocomposite materials were characterized by transmission electron microscopy (TEM), field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM), energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) mapping, X-ray diffraction (XRD), photoluminescence (PL) and Raman analyses. The DSSC assembled with the Au@TiO2-modified photoanode demonstrated an enhanced solar-to-electrical energy conversion efficiency of 5.61%, which was higher than the unmodified TiO2 photoanode (2.55%) under full sunlight illumination (100 mW cm−2, AM 1.5 G). This enhanced efficiency is mainly attributed to the plasmonic effect, reduction in the band gap energy, improved interfacial charge transfer, and retarded charge recombination process. The influence of the Au content on the overall efficiency was also investigated, and the optimum Au content with TiO2 was found to be 2.5 wt%. The significant improvement in the solar energy conversion efficiency with the Au@TiO2-plasmonic nanocomposite showed its potential as a photoanode for high-efficiency DSSC.

Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSC) have emerged as promising candidates for substitution of silicon-based solar cells owing to their low cost, flexibility, ease of production, relatively high energy conversion efficiency, and low toxicity to the environment. In order to realize commercialization, designing a DSSC with good performance is essential. Fabrication of a photoanode with an efficient transport pathway for the photo-injected charge carriers to the current collector seems to be a possible alternative to enhance the performance of DSSC. So far, titanium dioxide (TiO2) is one of the most promising materials for a DSSC because of its high specific surface, which is essential for the uptake of a large quantity of dye molecules. However, the major limitations associated with the use of bare TiO2 are its random electron transport, which will cause the charge recombination process and hence affect the overall device performance. The efficient operation of a DSSC greatly depends on the minimization of the charge recombination at the TiO2–dye–electrolyte interface.

There are active studies being conducted to overcome the deficiency of TiO2-based DSSC, which can be divided into a few approaches such as efforts to increase the dye sensitization area by controlling the structure and morphology of the TiO2 to improve the monolayer dye absorption. Research has also been done on ways to improve the light absorption in the visible region. There are two solutions to this problem: (i) designing and synthesizing a higher efficiency dye and (ii) improving the light absorption in the visible region by incorporating a noble metal into the TiO2. Besides, it is also essential to prevent the charge recombination process at the TiO2–dye–electrolyte interfaces in order to enhance the efficiency of DSSC. The most common approach for the charge recombination minimization is through the surface modification with metal nanoparticles, non-metals, semiconductor coupling, and hybridizing with carbon materials.
In the present decade, the surface modification of TiO2 with noble metal nanoparticles such as silver (Ag) and gold (Au) have been regarded as an attractive approach to boost the efficiency of a DSSC. These noble metal nanoparticles play dual roles in the DSSC performance, including the enhancement of the absorption coefficient of the dye and the optical absorption due to surface plasmon resonance. Moreover, they also play role in improving the interfacial charge transfer process, and minimize the charge recombination, thereby in a DSSC. Hence, noble metal nanoparticles have been targeted for use in DSSC with the goal of improving the interfacial charge transfer process and photon-to-electron conversion in the visible region.
Till date, several synthetic methods were used for the synthesis of Au@TiO2 nanocomposite including electrodeposition, hydrothermal, chemical reduction, microwave assisted hydrothermal, UV reduction, hydrothermal and sputtering for DSSC application. These methods are time consuming, required expensive instruments and lengthy synthetic protocols. Hence it is essential to develop a rapid and facile synthetic route for the preparation of Au@TiO2 nanocomposite. In this respect, we have successfully developed a facile synthetic method in this study to prepare the Au@TiO2 nanocomposite using a simple one-step chemical reduction method without adding any stabilizer or surfactant for DSSC application. The as-prepared Au@TiO2 plasmonic nanocomposites were characterized using various suitable analytical techniques and used as photoanodes in the DSSC. The Au@TiO2 plasmonic nanocomposite-modified photoanode showed an enhanced solar energy conversion efficiency compared to that of a bare TiO2-based DSSC. The effect of the Au content on the DSSC performance was also investigated. There are many positive aspects of the Au-modified TiO2, including the synergetic interaction of the Au nanoparticles on the TiO2 surface, the surface plasmon resonance effect, reduction of the band gap, and enhancement of the charge transfer process. These multi-functional properties of the prepared Au@TiO2 plasmonic nanocomposite will lead to superior performance in a DSSC.

Titanium dioxide (P25) was purchased from Acros Organics. Sodium borohydride (NaBH4) was purchased from R&M chemical. Hydrogen tetrachloroaurate(III) trihydrate (HAuCl·H2O) was purchased from abcr.Gmbh & Co. KG. Indium tin oxide (ITO) conducting glass slides (7 Ω sq−1) were purchased from Xin Yan Technology Limited, China. The N719 (Ruthenizer 535-bisTBA) dye and Iodolyte Z-100 were received from Solaronix. The crystalline phase of the samples was studied via X-ray diffraction (XRD; D5000, Siemens), using copper Kα radiation (λ = 1.5418 Å) at a scan rate of 0.02° s−1. The morphologies of the prepared samples were examined using a Hitachi-SU 8000 field emission scanning electron microscope and JEOL JEM-2100 F high-resolution transmission electron microscope. The optical absorption properties in the spectral region of 190–900 nm were assessed using a Thermo Scientific Evolution 300 UV-vis absorption spectrophotometer. Photoluminescence and Raman spectra were collected using a Renishaw inVia 2000 system with an argon ion laser emitting at 325 and 532 nm, respectively. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements were performed using synchrotron radiation from beamline no. 3.2 at the Synchrotron Light Research Institute, Thailand.


The Au@TiO2 nanocomposite materials were prepared using a simple one-step chemical reduction method. Briefly, 500 mg of TiO2 were added to aqueous solutions that contained different concentrations of HAuCl (0.5, 1, 2.5, 5, and 7.5 wt%). Each mixture was vigorously stirred for 30 min at room temperature. The reduction of Au(III) was carried out by the drop-wise addition of NaBH4 until the color changed to purple. The appearance of this purple color indicated the formation of the Au@TiO2 nanocomposite, and the solution was continuously stirred for another 30 min. The Au@TiO2 nanocomposite was collected and washed with distilled water and ethanol several times by centrifugation. Finally, the product was dried in an oven at 60 °C and stored in dark conditions.


Au@TiO2-modified photoanodes were fabricated using the following procedure. Initially, 300 mg of the Au@TiO2 nanocomposite was mixed in an ethanolic solution and stirred for 30 min. A 0.1 M quantity of TTIP was slowly introduced into the above reaction mixture and stirred until a homogenous solution was obtained. Finally, the Au@TiO2 nanocomposites were coated on a conducting side of the ITO using the doctor-blade technique with the aid of 3M-scotch tape and the thickness of film was ∼12 μm. In order to obtain a stable photoanode, the film was dried at room temperature, sintered at 150 °C for 30 min in a muffle furnace, and then allowed to cool naturally to room temperature.


The prepared Au@TiO2 plasmonic nanocomposite photoanodes were immersed into an ethanolic solution of 0.3 mM N719 (Ruthenizer 535-bisTBA) dye for 24 h at room temperature in a dark condition. The dye-adsorbed plasmonic photoanode was withdrawn from the solution and immediately but gently cleaned with ethanol. A platinum-sputtered ITO was placed on a dye-absorbed photoanode, and they were clamped firmly together. A redox electrolyte (Iodolyte Z-100, Solaronix) solution was introduced into the cell assembly through by capillary action. An active area of 0.5 cm2 was used to measure the cell performance. A 150 W xenon arc lamp (Newport, Model 69907) containing a simulated AM 1.5G filter with a manual shutter was used as a light source throughout the experiments. Prior to testing the photovoltaic parameter, an Avaspec-2048 fiber optic spectrophotometer was used to measure the light illumination intensity. The photocurrent signal measurements and electrochemical properties of the fabricated DSSC were studied by using a computer-controlled VersaSTAT 3 Electrochemical Workstation (Princeton Applied Research, USA). The electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) were performed in the dark condition and recorded in the frequency range between 0.01 Hz and 100 kHz, with 10 mV amplitude and 0.7 V applied potential. The 0.7 V is used in this studied because all the Au@TiO2 based DSSC have the Voc value around 0.7 V.


The physical appearances of Au@TiO2 with different concentrations of Au are shown in Fig. 1a, where the nanocomposites become darker in purple colour with increasing Au content. During the formation of the Au@TiO2 nanocomposite, the adsorption of Au(III) has taken place on the surface of TiO2, which is then followed by the chemical reduction of Au(III) by NaBH4 at room temperature in the absence of any stabilizer or surfactant. The FESEM and back-scattered electrons (BSE) images show the general structure and distribution of the Au within the synthesized Au@TiO2 nanoparticles, as illustrated in Fig. 1b and c. Fig. 1b shows the FESEM image of the TiO2 nanoparticles, which appeared to be spherical and uniform in size. Since the distribution of Au cannot be clearly shown by the FESEM image, a BSE image was taken for the Au@TiO2 nanocomposite. The quantity of back-scattered electrons is highly dependent on the atomic number of a sample. A material with a higher atomic number will have more back-scattered electrons. Since Au has a greater atomic numbers than titanium and oxygen, Au nanoparticles will be brighter than titanium dioxide in the image. From the BSE image, it can be observed that the Au nanoparticles were homogenously distributed on the TiO2 nanoparticles. Upon the addition of Au, no significant change in morphology was observed for the Au@TiO2 nanocomposite (Fig. 1c). Furthermore, TEM images for Au@TiO2 were also recorded, and are shown in Fig. 1d and e. Fig. 1d shows TiO2 nanoparticles, and it can be observed that the TiO2 nanoparticles are spherical in shape, with a particle size range of 20–25 nm. The TEM image of the Au@TiO2 nanoparticles is presented in Fig. 1e, and the Au particle size range is 8–20 nm. The energy dispersive X-ray spectrometry (EDS) mapping analysis of the Au@TiO2 thin film also confirmed that the Au@TiO2 nanocomposite is composed of Au elements dispersed on the surface of the TiO2 nanoparticles (Fig. 1f).


The optical absorption properties of the TiO2 and Au@TiO2 were studied by recording the UV-visible absorption spectra, which are shown in Fig. S1. The bare TiO2 nanoparticles did not show any absorption in the visible light region (Fig. S1(a)). It can be seen that the deposition of Au nanoparticles on the surface of the TiO2 significantly influenced the visible light absorption, and an additional peak was also observed at 556 nm. The enhanced absorption in the visible region was due to the surface plasmon resonance (SPR). It was reported that the interfacial chemical interaction and charge transfer between the noble metal particles and the matrix will influence the free electron density and consequently affect the SPR frequency. The surface plasmonic resonance created by Au nanoparticles can cause strong local field enhancements around the Au nanoparticles, which can increase the light absorption and harvesting efficiency of the surrounding dye molecules and eventually improve the performance of DSSC. One of the main objectives of incorporating Au nanoparticles into the TiO2 was to reduce the band gap energy (Ebg) of the TiO2, with the aim of increasing the absorption in the visible region. Hence, the determination of the Ebg values of the Au@TiO2 nanocomposite was very important. The Ebg values were calculated using the well-known Tauc's plot method. The calculated Ebg values of TiO2 and Au@TiO2 were 3.28 and 3.16 eV, respectively (inset Fig. S1). When Au nanoparticles were added to the TiO2, the Ebg value was decreased. This was due to the free electron properties being exhibited with a downward shift in the conduction band and upward shift in the valence band, which then led to a decrease in the Ebg value.

Understanding the charge recombination process for a semiconductor is crucial because it would significantly influence the photoelectrochemical properties and DSSC performance. The TiO2 absorbs incident photons with energy equal to or higher than the band-gap energy, and it produces photoinduced charge carriers (h+…e−). The recombination of photoinduced electrons and holes will release energy in the form of photoluminescence. Hence, a lower PL intensity indicates less charge recombination. The observed PL spectra for the TiO2 and Au@TiO2 are shown in Fig. 2. A broad peak with a maximum emission at around 580 nm can be observed for the TiO2 and Au@TiO2. The TiO2 showed higher PL intensities due to the rapid recombination of photoinduced charge carriers, whereas the PL intensity was minimized upon the addition of Au onto the TiO2 surface. This is mainly attributed to the formation of a Schottky barrier at the Au–TiO2 interface, which could act as an electron sink to efficiently prevent the electron–hole recombination process. Au@TiO2 with 2.5% Au showed the lowest PL emission intensity, which indicated the least electron–hole recombination compared to 0.5, 1, 5 and 7.5 mM of Au content on the TiO2 surface, as seen in Fig. 2.

The X-ray diffraction patterns indicated that the TiO2 and Au@TiO2 were composed of mixed anatase and rutile phases (Fig. 3), which was in good agreement with the reference patterns of JCPDS card no. 83-2243 and 21-1276, respectively. The diffraction peaks observed at the 2θ values of 25.55°, 38.0°, 48.0°, and 75.0° corresponded to the anatase phase of TiO2 and were assigned to the (101), (004), (200), and (215) crystallographic planes, respectively. In contrast, the peaks at the 2θ values of 27.6°, 54.5°,62.9° and 68.81° agreed well with the rutile phase of TiO2 and were are assigned to the (110), (220), (002) and (301) crystallographic planes, respectively. The crystallographic peaks of Au (JCPDS 04-0784) cannot be detected due to the low concentration of Au as well as the overlap with those for the anatase phase of the TiO2. Hence, the Au peaks were indistinguishable in Au@TiO2. The crystallite size of TiO2 and Au@TiO2 calculated from the full width at half-maximum (fwhm) of (1 0 1) diffraction peak due to anatase at the value of 25.55° (2θ) by using the Scherrer equation and the calculated crystallite size for TiO2 and Au@TiO2 were ∼16.57 and 16.65 nm, respectively.

To further evaluate the phases in the prepared films, Raman studies were performed in the range of 100–1000 cm−1, and the results are shown in Fig. 4. The observed Raman peaks at 145.6, 201, 395, 513, and 635 cm−1 are due to the anatase phase TiO2. However, no signals related to Au particles were identified for the samples because of the relatively low concentration of Au loaded onto the TiO2 and its weak Raman scattering power. Interesting observations are that the peak intensities decreased and were shifted to a higher wavenumber with the deposition of Au. This indicates that there was an interaction between the Au and TiO2 and increased crystalline defects within the TiO2 that affected the Raman resonance of TiO2. Furthermore, this observation also shows that the deposition of Au on TiO2 does not cause any phase transition, but may bring about an electronic environment change in the surroundings.

The XPS spectra of the TiO2 and Au@TiO2 were recorded to understand their chemical nature and are shown in Fig. 5. Fig. 5a shows the Ti 2p spectra for both samples, in which two peaks are observed at 458 and 463.9 eV, corresponding to the binding energies of the Ti 2p3/2 and Ti 2p1/2 core levels due to the presence of the Ti(IV) state. Fig. 5b shows the O 1s spectra of the TiO2 and Au@TiO2, and the binding energy of the O 1s state of the samples is located at 531.1 eV, which is assigned to the bulk oxides (O2−) in the P25 lattice. The Au 4f spectra of Au@TiO2 are shown in Fig. 5c. The binding energies found for the Au 4f5/2 and Au 4f5/2 levels are 83.2 and 87.4 eV, respectively, which suggest that the Au nanoparticles are in metallic state. The XPS analysis provided support for the existence of elements such as Ti, O, and Au in the nanocomposite materials.


The photovoltaic performances of the Au@TiO2 plasmonic nanocomposite-modified photoanode-based DSSC with different Au contents were evaluated under simulated solar AM 1.5G irradiation. The obtained photocurrent density and photovoltage (J–V) curves are shown in Fig. 6a, and their evaluated photovoltaic parameters are listed in Table 1. The Au@TiO2 plasmonic photoanode (2.5 wt% of Au) showed a higher efficiency (5.61%) than the unmodified TiO2 (2.55%). The enhanced photovoltaic performance is attributed to the formation of a Schottky barrier at the Au and TiO2 interface and rapid interfacial charge transfer that arose from the presence of Au nanoparticles on the TiO2. The electrons in the conduction band of the TiO2 could be effectively captured by the Au until the Fermi level equilibrium was obtained, which minimized the charge recombination process and greatly contribute to the improvement in the short-circuit current density (Jsc) thus enhancing the DSSC performance. In addition to the Schottky barrier, the plasmonic feature of Au nanoparticles also played an important role for the enhancement of Jsc. The Au@TiO2 nanoparticles could offer an additional optical absorption at the 556 nm region. Hence, the photovoltaic performance was significantly improved with the enhancement of absorption in the visible region due to the surface plasmon resonance of the Au nanoparticles. Nevertheless, the addition of Au nanoparticles will lead to the slight decrease of the open circuit voltage (Voc). This is because the incorporation of Au resulting in a change in the Fermi energy level. Therefore, the gap between the Fermi level of Au@TiO2 and the Nernst potential of the I−/I3− redox is smaller compared to pure TiO2. Since the Voc is proportional to the difference between the Fermi level and the I−/I3− redox Nernst potential, Au@TiO2 will have a smaller Voc value compared to pure TiO2.

Au (wt%)
Jsc (mA cm−2)
Voc (V)
Jmax (mA cm−2)
Vmax (V)
FF
η (%)
a The DSSC performance was evaluated under 100 mW cm−2 simulated AM 1.5G solar light irradiation. Jsc: short-circuit current density; Voc: open-circuit voltage; Jmax: maximum photocurrent density; Vmax: maximum photovoltage; FF: fill factor; η: power conversion efficiency. Area of the cell electrode was 0.5 cm2.
0
6.43
0.74
5.11
0.50
0.54
2.55
0.5
11.01
0.57
7.39
0.37
0.44
2.73
1
11.78
0.62
8.93
0.43
0.53
3.84
2.5
18.81
0.72
13.20
0.43
0.41
5.61
5
11.41
0.69
7.89
0.46
0.46
3.63
7.5
6.82
0.62
4.50
0.43
0.46
1.94
The optimization of Au on TiO2 is essential from the economic and high-performance perspectives for a DSSC. In this regard, the loading of the Au content in the photoanode was varied to enhance the DSSC performance. The observed results clearly revealed that the conversion efficiency of a DSSC was increased with an increase in the Au content of the photoanode until it reached a maximum of 2.5%. However, a further increase in the Au content eventually led to a decrease in conversion efficiency (Fig. 6c and Table 1). The decrease in efficiency at a high Au loading occurred for the following reasons: (i) the absorption and scattering of incident photons, (ii) the shielding of the TiO2–dye interface from irradiation, and (iii) the excess Au may have undergone photooxidation by the photo-generated holes and/or surface hydroxyl radicals present in the TiO2 particles. Consequently, the overall conversion efficiency of the DSSC deteriorated. The relationships between the photovoltaic parameters and Au content on the TiO2 surface are represented in Fig. S2(a–c) for better understanding. The Jsc was increased with the increasing Au content and attained a maximum of 18.81 mA cm−2 at a loading of 2.5% Au (Fig. S2a). On the other hand, Jsc decreased to 11.41 mA cm−2 with 5% Au loading. It can also be seen that the Voc trends were almost the same, within the range of ∼0.55 to 0.75 V. The Jmax and Vmax values of the device also followed trends similar to Jsc and Voc (Fig. S2b). The fill factor (FF) changes slightly within the tested range. As a result, the η% increases with increasing Au content and then falls after reaching the maximum (Fig. S2c). The Jsc and Voc values for Au@TiO2 nanocomposite are higher than the bare TiO2 based DSSC. Since, the Jsc value is determined by the initial number of photogenerated charge carriers and the effectiveness in the injection of electrons from N719 dye to conduction band of metal oxide. When the Au nanoparticles deposited on TiO2, this interfacial charge transfer process is significantly improved as results increase in the Jsc value. The photocharging effect caused by the electron storage in Au nanoparticles present in the Au@TiO2 nanocomposite, which brings the Fermi level to more negative potentials as a results the Voc value increases. The photovoltaic performance of this present Au@TiO2 nanocomposite-modified photoanode was compared with those of the few previously reported Au deposited TiO2 plasmonic photoanode-based DSSCs, and their photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table 2. Various methods were reported for the fabrication of Au–TiO2 nanocomposite photoanode for the DSSC application. The conversion efficiency achieved by Au@TiO2 nanocomposite photoanode is greatly depend on the synthesis and fabrication technique used. The conversion efficiency of 9.31% have been achieved by using TiO2 nanowire – Au nanoparticles as DSSC photoanode. The fabrication of TiO2 nanowire – Au nanoparticles is through two-step synthesis method. The TiO2 nanowire was first prepared by deposited the titanium film on the FTO glass and treated under hydrothermal condition. Next, the Au layer was deposited onto the TiO2 nanowire using sputtering method before immersing in the TiCl4 solution. Lastly, TiO2 paste was spread onto the TiO2 nanowire – Au nanoparticles using screen-printing method. It showed that by introducing the Au nanoparticles onto TiO2 nanowire, the conversion efficiency improved from 6.62% to 8.39% and further improved to 9.73% after the TiCl4 treatment. In another report, an Au–TiO2 core–shell nanowire array was prepared by Sahu et al. using electrodeposition and pulsed laser deposition technique. The efficiency achieved was 6.7% after introduction of Au and TiCl4 treatment compared with 0.69% for pure TiO2 electrode. Nahm et al. reported on Au–TiO2 as photoanode and achieved conversion efficiency of 3.3%. The gold nanoparticles were first prepared and reduced using ascorbic acid before added in the acid treated P25 powder. Next, the Au–TiO2 photoanode was fabricated using doctor-blade method. Au–TiO2 nanorod was also prepared and used as photoanode by Ghaffari et al. The photoanode was prepared by immersing the electrospinning prepared TiO2 film into the Ag and Au precursor and followed by the reduction of the metal through the UV photoreduction. The TiO2 nanorod was first prepared using hydrothermal method before deposited the Au nanoparticle through photoreduction technique. It showed the conversion efficiency increased from 0.31% to 0.94% after addition of Au nanoparticle. To the best of our knowledge, no study has yet explored the co-deposition of Au and Ag nanoparticles on TiO2 as a photoanode for a DSSC by a single step method. Our study based on Au@TiO2 photoanode is totally different from the previous report. Since, we have employed a simple one-step chemical reduction approach for deposition of Au on the TiO2 surface and the nanocomposite showed tunable SPR property.
Photoanode
Fabrication method
Jsc (mA cm−2)
Voc (V)
η (%)
[Ref.]
Au–TiO2 core–shell nanowires
Electrodeposition
14.2
0.69
6.7
18
Au@TiO2 core–shell hollow spheres
Hydrothermal
22.1
0.63
8.13
14
Au–TiO2
Ascorbic acid reduction
6
0.76
3.3
19
Au@TiO2 core–shell nanoparticles
Microwave assisted hydrothermal
17.80
0.70
7.63
20
Au–TiO2 nanorod
UV reduction method
2.75
0.63
0.94
21
3D TiO2 nanowire-AuNP layer
Hydrothermal and sputtering method
17.38
0.79
9.31
22
Au@TiO2 nanocomposite
Sodium borohydride reduction method
18.81
0.72
5.61
Present study

In order to obtain deeper insights into the interfacial charge transfer process within the fabricated DSSC with the Au@TiO2 photoanode, the electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) were recorded in the frequency range between 0.01 Hz and 100 kHz, and are shown in Fig. 7. Well-defined semicircles in the middle frequency region for the DSSC with the Au@TiO2 nanocomposite-modified photoanodes for different Au contents were observed in the Nyquist plots (Fig. 7a). The intersection of the high-frequency semicircles at the real axis represents the equivalent series resistance of the device (Rs), while the arc in the middle frequency range between 1 and 1000 Hz represents the charge transfer resistance (Rct) between the dye-adsorbed photoanode and electrolyte interface. From the Nyquist plot (Fig. 7a), Since the Rs value remains fairly constant and the DSSC components are the same except for the different concentrations of Au in the photoanode, the Rs value can be ignored. Meanwhile, The changes in Rct can mainly be attributed to the changes in the Au content in the photoanode, which contributed the most to the internal impedance. An increase in the Rct value of the Au@TiO2-based photoanode was observed with increasing Au content and reached the maximum value when the Au content is 2.5%. The Nyquist plot of the different photoanodes is shown in Fig. 7b. As demonstrated by this Nyquist plot, both the real (Z′) and imaginary (Z′′) parts of the total impedance, as well as Rct, increased in the order TiO2 < Au@TiO2, which showed the crucial dependence of Au incorporation on the charge transport. The increase in the Rct value is beneficial to for the suppression of charge recombination and could influence the short circuit current (Jsc) of the DSSC. Therefore, the origin of the higher Jsc in Au@TiO2 is attributed to the device resistance Rct, and the charge transport dynamics determined by the electron lifetime (τn).

Based on the Bode phase plots (Fig. 7c and d), the frequency was shifted to the lower frequency region with the addition of Au. The maximum frequencies (ωmax) in the middle frequency region of the Bode plots for TiO2 and Au@TiO2 were 3981.07 Hz and 1258.93 Hz, respectively. Since ωmax is inversely associated with the electron lifetime τn = 1/(2πf), the decrease in ωmax indicated a reduced rate of the charge-recombination process in the DSSC. Hence, electrons with longer τn values were prevented from recombining, characterized by a larger Rct.
Furthermore, Table 3 summarizes the results obtained from the Nyquist plots. The Au@TiO2 photoanode exhibited a faster electron transport time (τs = RsCμ) than TiO2. Hence, its electron lifetime (τn = RctCμ) was significantly increased, and recombination was prevented. The photovoltaic performance of the DSSC was clearly reflected by the charge collection efficiency (ηc) derived from ηc = (1 + Rs/Rct)−1. Eventually, the charge collection efficiency was significantly increased upon the addition of Au. Therefore, we can conclude that as a result of the longer τn and larger Rct, the devices fabricated using the Au@TiO2 photoanode showed improved Jsc values compared to the TiO2 photoanode-based DSSC.
Photoanode
Rs (Ω)
Rct (Ω)
Cμ (μF)
τs (ms)
τn (ms)
ηc (%)
a The electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) were recorded at an applied bias of −0.7 V in the frequency range of 0.01 Hz to 100 kHz. Rs: device resistance; Rct: charge transfer resistance; Cμ: chemical capacitance; τs: electron transport time; τn: electron lifetime; ηc: charge collection efficiency.
TiO2
17.21
10.67
4.71
0.08
0.05
38
Au@TiO2
17.07
20.81
9.63
0.16
0.20
55

The operation principle of the DSSC based on the Au@TiO2-modified photoelectrode under illumination is shown in Fig. 8. The DSSC is based on the photo-excitation of the dye, followed by electron injection into the conduction band of the TiO2 nanoparticles. During light irradiation, the dye absorbs incident light and promotes electrons to the excited state. The excited electrons are injected into the Au nanoparticles and are then transferred to the conduction bands of the TiO2 nanoparticles. The dye is then oxidized by receiving electrons from the electrolyte through the redox system, and it is ready to be used again. The electrolyte itself will be regenerated by the electrons from platinum counter electrode through the external circuit. In our study, the Au deposited onto the TiO2 not only acted as an electron sink for an efficient charge transfer but could also be used as a scattering element for plasmonic scattering to trap the light and near-field coupled with the dye molecules. This will eventually improve the optical absorption of dye, resulting in a significant photocurrent enhancement (Fig. 8). Additionally, the incorporation of Au also resulted in a change in the Fermi energy level. A large number of electrons accumulated on the surfaces of Au nanoparticles due to the surface plasmon resonance effect will shift the position of the Fermi level closer to the conduction band of TiO2. Subsequently, the excited electrons in the Au nanoparticles were transferred to the conduction band of TiO2 and to be collected by collected by the current collector (ITO). Thus, the photocurrent was boosted under irradiation in the visible region. This way, the enhancement of absorption in the visible light region due to the surface plasmon resonance of the Au nanoparticles led to noteworthy improvement in the photovoltaic with the enhancement of absorption in the visible region due to the surface plasmon resonance of the Au nanoparticles.


In summary, a facile route to prepare Au nanoparticles deposited on TiO2 via a simple chemical reduction method was demonstrated in this report. The DSSC fabricated with Au@TiO2 showed an enhanced solar-to-electrical energy conversion efficiency of 5.61% compared to the photoanode composed of unmodified TiO2 (2.55%) under simulated solar irradiation of 100 mW cm−2 with AM 1.5 G. The improvement was mainly attributed to the Au nanoparticles, which enhanced the visible light adsorption due to its light harvesting property in the visible range as a result of the surface plasmon resonance effect. In addition, the promotion of the interfacial charge transfer effectively minimized the charge recombination process. The optimum Au content in the Au@TiO2 for an efficient photoanode was found to be 2.5 wt%. The conversion efficiency was found to be around 120% improvement compared to that of unmodified TiO2. The synergetic effects of the Au nanoparticles, surface plasmon resonance effect, reduction in the band gap, and effective charge transfer ameliorated the photocurrent generation and conversion efficiency of DSSC.


The author(s) declare(s) that there is no conflict of interest regarding the publication of this article.


This work was financially supported by a University of Malaya Research Grant Program (RP007C/13AFR), a High Impact Research Grant from the Ministry of Higher Education of Malaysia (UM.C/625/1/HIR/MOHE/05 and a University Malaya Flagship project (FL017-2011)). The authors are grateful to the Synchrotron Light Research Institute, Nakhon Ratchasima, Thailand, for the XPS measurements.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ra06220a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015