 DOI: 10.1039/D1EE01800K
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 5406-5415


Qi
Cao
,

Jiabao
Yang
,

Tong
Wang
,

Yuke
Li
,

Xingyu
Pu
,

Junsong
Zhao
,

Yixin
Zhang
,

Hui
Zhou
,

Xiaoqiang
Li
 and 

Xuanhua
Li
*

State Key Laboratory of Solidification Processing, Center for Nano Energy Materials, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, 710072, China. E-mail: lixh32@nwpu.edu.cn

Department of Chemistry and Centre for Scientific Modeling and Computation, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong, China

Received
12th June 2021
, Accepted 13th August 2021
First published on 13th August 2021
Metal halide perovskites have attracted great attention and are rapidly developing mainly due to their excellent optoelectronic properties. Currently, the efficiency of inverted (p–i–n) PSCs is around 23%, which is catching up with that of the regular structured devices. Short-term and low-efficiency operational stability are the main obstacles to the commercialization of PSCs. Although many modified materials have been proven to effectively enhance device performance, they do not satisfy operational stability at high efficiency. Here, we propose a multidentate-cross-linking strategy, which uses multi-branched and adequate chemical anchor sites in three-dimensional star-polymer to directly chelate perovskite materials in multiple directions, thereby regulating the morphology of perovskite, passivating defects at surface/GBs, inhibiting the non-radiative recombination, and improving the stability of the device. As a result, the modified PSC achieves a 22.74% efficiency, which is one of the highest values reported for the inverted PSCs. Meanwhile, the encapsulated modified device exhibits significant advancement of operational stability with 93% of the initial efficiency (∼22.00%) under maximum power point tracking at 45 °C for 1000 h, and an estimated T80 (time to retain 80% of the initial efficiency) lasted nearly 4000 h. The three-dimensional star-polymer multidentate-cross-linking strategy has proved to be a new direction for realizing commercial applications of PSCs with excellent operational stability for high-efficiency devices.

Metal halide perovskites have have attracted widespread attention and are rapidly developing mainly due to their excellent optoelectronic properties. Currently, the efficiency of inverted (p–i–n) PSCs is around 23%, which is catching up with that of the regular structured devices. Short-term and low-efficiency operational stability are the main obstacles to the commercialization of PSCs. Although many modified materials have been proven to effectively enhance device performance, they do not satisfy operational stability at high efficiency. In this context, a multidentate-cross-linking strategy using adequate functional groups in star-polymer to directly chelate perovskite materials in multiple directions achieves superior device stability at high efficiency. This star-polymer multidentate-cross-linking strategy has proved to be a new direction for realizing commercial applications of PSCs with excellent operational stability for high-efficiency devices.


Metal halide perovskites have attracted rapid development and a great attention mainly due to their excellent optoelectronic properties. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of solution-processed single-junction regular (n–i–p) perovskite solar cell (PSCs) has increased to a certified 25.5%, which is comparable to that of single-crystal silicon solar cells, making it a promising candidate for the next-generation photovoltaic device. The certified PCEs of inverted (p–i–n) PSCs are nearly 23%, which catch up with that of the regular structured devices. However, many crystal defects (including anion vacancies and insufficiently coordinated lead cations) will be generated during the solution process, such defects are mainly formed on the surface/grain boundaries (GBs) of the perovskite layer, and damages the photoelectric performance and operational stability of PSCs.

To date, an anti-solvent methodology has proved to be a practical and simple approach to prepare high-quality perovskite films and mitigate the surface/GBs problems. In order to expand the scope of anti-solvent treatment, various additives on account of the Lewis acid–base reaction, include fullerenes, nanocrystals, conjugated molecules, and organic polymers with specific functions are added to the anti-solvent to modify perovskite films. Among them, linear polymers, including poly(bithiophene imide) (PBTI), poly(ethylene-co-vinyl acetate) (EVA) with lone pair of electrons on sulfur, or oxygen have been used to enhance the photoelectric properties of perovskites by passivating defect sites. Nevertheless, the normalized operational stability shows that these polymers cannot achieve efficient operational stability at high efficiency. Short-term and low-efficiency operational stability are the main obstacles in the commercialization of PSCs. In view of the widely reported issues of the linear polymer having a small functional range and poor device stability, we propose a direct multidentate-cross-linking perovskite structure strategy using three-dimensional (3D) star-shaped polymers to passivate perovskite defect sites in multiple dimensions and achieve superior operational stability at high efficiency.
Here, we design a 3D star-shaped polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxane-poly(methyl methacrylate) polymer as a characteristic antisolvent additive to modify the perovskite film. The POSP material includes a symmetrical siloxane cubic-octameric cage framework as the core and is surrounded by eight branches that are long chains composed of methyl methacrylate monomer molecules (Fig. 1a). The core plays a role in strengthening the entire network and can give the POSP material excellent temperature resistance (T95 up to 327 °C) and 3D structure stability (Fig. S1, ESI). The 3D star-shaped polymer provides abundant carbonyl (CO) passivation sites. In addition, the 3D star-shaped network structure can form a larger range and a more directional perovskite grain boundary cross-linking, which significantly improves the operational stability of the high-efficiency PSCs (Fig. 1b). As a result, the POSP-modified inverted device obtains high 22.74% efficiency. Moreover, the encapsulated modified device exhibits significant advancement of operational stability with 93% of the initial efficiency (∼22.00%) under the maximum power point tracking at 45 °C for 1000 h.

The synthetic route of POSP polymer is shown in Fig. S2, as described in the Experimental section of the ESI.29Si nuclear magnetic resonance spectrum (29Si NMR, Fig. S3, ESI), 1H-NMR (Fig. S4, ESI), Fourier transform infrared (FTIR, Fig. S5, ESI) and high-resolution X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, Fig. S6, ESI) were used to confirm the designed POSP polymer molecular structure. The molecular weights and molecular distribution of the POSP polymer were ascertained by gel permeation chromatography (GPC, Fig. S7, ESI). We further calculated the electrostatic potential of the smallest unit of the POSP polymer by density functional theory, and we can clearly observe the local negative charge (red) around the oxygen atom in the POSP polymer (Fig. 1c). The carbonyl group (CO) of POSP polymer acts as the electron donor and possesses the conditions for coordinating with unsaturated Pb2+. Through molecular structure analysis and calculation, we speculate that the POSP polymer has flexible multi-directional branches and multiple repetitive ester functional groups (–COO–) that can provide chemical chelation positions for passivation of noncoordinating Pb2+ in the perovskite film.

We first performed FTIR to investigate the interaction between the POSP polymer and CsFAMA (FA: CH(NH2)2+; MA = CH3NH3+) based perovskite (Fig. 1d). The peak at 1721.98 cm−1 is the stretching vibration of the CO bond in the POSP polymer, and it moves to 1712.44 cm−1 when the POSP polymer is incorporated into CsFAMA. The red-shift of the CO vibration in the POSP polymer is caused by the formation of an intermediate POSP-CsFAMA adduct, which indicates the chelating force between CO in the POSP polymer and unsaturated Pb2+ in the CsFAMA based perovskite.
To determine the chemical compositional changes on the surface of the perovskite film and the potential chemical interaction between POSP and perovskite, we performed XPS analyses of the pristine (control) and POSP-modified perovskite films (Fig. S8a, ESI). The XPS spectra of Pb 4f (Fig. 1e), I 3d (Fig. S8b, ESI), O 1s (Fig. S8c, ESI), and C 1s (Fig. S8d, ESI) shift after the addition of the POSP polymer. This result predicates the interaction between the POSP polymer and perovskite. In the POSP polymer, the C 1s peak of C–CO is observed at 285.3 eV (Fig. S6b, ESI). However, the POSP-modified perovskite film has a C–CO near 286.0 eV (Fig. S8d, ESI), which indicates that CO in the POSP-modified perovskite film shifts to high energy. From Pb 4f XPS spectra, two main peaks of Pb 4f 7/2 and Pb 4f 5/2 were identified, corresponding to energies of 138.3 eV and 143.2 eV, respectively. Besides, the two small peaks at 136.5 and 141.4 eV are attributed to the presence of metallic Pb in the control film and are identified as recombination centers that can deteriorate the photovoltaic performance of PSCs. Interestingly, the metallic Pb peak disappears when the perovskite film is incorporated into POSP polymer, indicating that the POSP polymer can obviate the appearance of metallic Pb. The peaks from Pb 4f shift to lower binding energies in the POSP-modified film, manifesting the interaction between the POSP polymer and the Pb on the surface of perovskite film. Moreover, we observed an increase in the contents of C and O and the appearance of Si on the POSP-modified perovskite film surface from the XPS spectra (Fig. S8e, ESI), which indicates that the POSP molecules are partially stacked on the buried interface. We further used the time of flight secondary-ion mass spectroscopy (ToF-SIMS) to anatomize the detailed distribution of the POSP polymer (Fig. 1f). From the distribution of O and Si, it can be proved that the POSP polymer in the perovskite film shows a gradually less trend from the outside to the inside.
We further studied the effect of the POSP polymer on the morphology of the perovskite film. The top-view scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the control and POSP-modified perovskite films are shown in Fig. 2a and b. It can be found that the control sample shows an obvious white phase. The previous results have confirmed that the white phase is PbI2 and the black phase is perovskite material. However, after the POSP polymer modification, the white phase disappears, forming a dense and larger grained film. The corresponding statistical distribution of grain size shows that the average grain size of the control is around 165 nm, whereas that of the POSP-modified is around 392 nm (Fig. 2c and d). Furthermore, compared with the disorder of grains in the control film, the cross-sectional SEM of the POSP-modified perovskite film shows larger dense grains and fewer GBs (Fig. 2e and f). The grains in the POSP-modified perovskite film vertically penetrate the entire perovskite film, which facilitates carrier transport. The crystal structure of annealed perovskites with the control and POSP-modified is also analyzed as shown in Fig. 2g. They all show similar diffraction patterns, with a set of typical black α-FAPbI3. A small diffraction peak at 2θ = 14.32° is also found as PbI2 in the pristine sample, which is due to 4 mol% excess PbI2 in the perovskite precursor formulation. When the POSP polymer modifies the perovskite film, the diffraction peaks do not shift, indicating that the POSP polymer does not penetrate into the CsFAMA lattice. Compared with the control, the POSP-modified perovskite presents a stronger and sharper X-ray diffraction (XRD) peak, and the full-width at half maximum of the (100) peak is narrowed down (Fig. S9, ESI). XRD patterns also display an increase in the ratio of intensity between (100) and (110) peaks when modified with POSP (2.67 for the control and 9.65 for the POSP-modified), which manifests a preferential (100) orientation (Fig. 2g). Absorption enhancement in the POSP-modified perovskite film was also noticed, which was ascribed to higher crystallinity (Fig. 2h). We further measure the XRD patterns of the quenching solvent cast perovskite films before thermal annealing to isolate the intermediate phase (Fig. 2i). The POSP-modified film displays numerous unknown diffraction peaks compared with the control film. We speculate that POSP can successfully induce a POSP-CsFAMA intermediate without annealing. Due to the strong coordination of the CO bond in the POSP polymer and Pb2+ to form POSP-CsFAMA intermediates, this can further delay the crystallization of the perovskite, suppress the content of unreacted PbI2, and promote the increase in the crystallinity of the perovskite and preferential (100) orientation, thereby facilitating high-quality perovskite.
In order to understand the influence of intermediates on crystallization, we performed an in situ analysis of the film formation during the spin-coating process using ultraviolet-visible spectrophotometry (UV-vis) absorption spectroscopy (Fig. S10, ESI). The spectra in Fig. 2j and k exhibit the change in absorption intensity from a solution state (<24 s) to an intermediate state (>24 s) throughout the spin-coating process. In the solution state, there is negligible nucleation. After the antisolvent is dripped into the perovskite solution (∼24 s), the absorption intensity begins to increase at ∼24 s. This indicates the formation of perovskite crystallites. We extracted the absorption intensity at a wavelength of 600 nm and the plot it as a function of spinning time (Fig. 2l). The slope of the standard part is 0.0118, while that of the POSP-modified film is 0.0094. This shows that the absorption enhancement of the POSP-modified film slows down. Afterward, we heated the spinning film, and the blackening of the POSP-modified film was significantly slower than that in the control (Fig. S11, ESI). In the pristine perovskite, the formation of relatively unstable intermediate adducts with anhydrous dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) leads to unfavorable quick growth of perovskite crystals, resulting in inhomogeneous and discontinuous film morphology (Fig. S12, ESI). In contrast, because POSP-modified perovskite can form intermediate adducts with Pb, the thermal annealing process requires additional energy to decompose the intermediate adducts with relatively stable POSP-Pb2+ coordination bonds, which obviously retards the growth of crystals. Slowing crystal growth in the POSP-modified perovskite allowing the randomly formed nuclei to regulate their orientation and grow in the preferred direction along the direction of minimizing the total Gibbs free energy and the most preferred thermodynamics.
We confirmed the cross-linking between the perovskite grains by transmission electron microscopy (TEM). The TEM image in Fig. 2m shows the cross-linking of two perovskite particles that have been scraped from the perovskite film and dispersed in a chlorobenzene antisolvent. We analyzed the two prominent areas shown in Fig. 2m, the inside of the crosslinker is the crystalline phase and the edge of the crosslinker is the amorphous phase, which plays a role in bridging the two adjacent perovskite grains. The interplanar spacing of the perovskite crystal was determined to be 0.63 nm, which corresponded to the (100) plane of the CsFAMA crystal tetragonal phase, and the amorphous region, which can be ascribed to the POSP polymer, mainly exists among crystalline perovskite grains. For the control perovskite film, it is completely crystalline, and there is no obvious amorphous region at the grain boundaries (Fig. S13, ESI). The polymer-perovskite composite interconnection formed at the interaction between the long chains of the 3D POSP and perovskite. This unique composite helps to reduce the electrolytic decoupling or insulation between the perovskite grains.
We used photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy to roughly evaluate the quality and charge carrier behavior of the perovskite film after introducing the polymer (Fig. 2n and o). The steady-state PL peak position displays a blueshift from 780 to 775, which may be due to the POSP Lewis base reducing the GBs/surface defects of the perovskite. The peak PL intensity was increased three times from 3.9 × 105 (control) to 12.8 × 105 with the use of POSP (Fig. 2n), implying that the non-radiative recombination within the CsFAMA film was significantly suppressed. Next, we measured the time-resolved PL attenuation curve. The curve was fitted with a biexponential decay model:, and the fitting parameters are shown in Table S1 (ESI). The faster decay component (τ1) and slower decay component (τ2) are ascribed to the defect-assisted (monomolecular) nonradiative recombination and radiative (bimolecular) recombination in the bulk perovskite crystals, respectively. The proportion of τ1 for the POSP-modified was greatly reduced from 53.33% to 27.59% and a time constant (300 ns) slower than the control perovskite film (130 ns). This indicates a decrease in the defect density in the POSP-modified perovskite film. Moreover, τ2 increases from 590 ns (control) to 1270 ns, which suggests that the Lewis base also extends charge carrier lifetimes in perovskite crystals. Consequently, the average PL lifetime was significantly increased from 498 ns to 1190 ns. The POSP polymer passivation of the perovskite GBs/surface reduces the defect density, thereby reducing charge carrier trapping, while the extended τ2 can be attributed to larger crystal grains and the grain cross-linking caused by the intermediate phase as observed through the SEM, TEM, and XRD analysis.
We use an inverted planar heterojunction structure with an architecture of ITO/NiOx/perovskite/PCBM + C60/BCP/Cr/Au (Fig. 3a) to study the effect of POSP modification on the photovoltaic performance of PSCs. The highest PCE of the control device reaches 19.23% in the reverse scan (open-circuit voltage (Voc) = 1.088 V, short-circuit current (Jsc) = 22.48 mA cm−2, fill factor (FF) = 0.786), while the PCE of the forward scan is 18.35% (Voc = 1.088 V, Jsc = 22.81 mA cm−2, FF = 0.740) (Fig. 3b). After the POSP polymer is incorporated into the devices, PCE increases significantly. Fig. S14 and Table S2 (ESI) show the optimal current density–voltage (J–V) curve and photovoltaic parameters of PSCs with various POSP polymer concentrations. The optimal concentration of POSP polymer is determined to be 0.08 mg mL−1. The champion PCE of the POSP-modified device in the reverse scan has increased to 22.74% (Voc = 1.139 V, Jsc = 23.56 mA cm−2, FF = 0.848), and the PCE of the forward scan reaches 22.19% (Voc = 1.139 V, Jsc = 23.48 mA cm−2, FF = 0.830) (Fig. 3c). The hysteresis factor (HF) of the control and POSP-modified devices was calculated based on the equation are 4.58% and 2.42%, respectively, which shows that the HF of the POSP-modified device is reduced. Reduced carrier recombination (Fig. 2o) and efficient carrier transport (Fig. S15, ESI) in the POSP-modified device are potentially conducive to reducing HF compared with the control device. The integrated Jsc of the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra is 21.74 and 23.02 mA cm−2 for the control and POSP-modified devices, respectively, which is in basic accordance with the measured Jsc values in the J–V curve (Fig. 3d). Fig. 3e shows the corresponding curves at steady-state power output (SPO) in the J–V plots. When the devices using the control and POSP-modified are biased at 0.90 and 0.97 V, respectively, the PCEs stabilize at 18.50% and 22.32% with photocurrent densities of 20.55 and 23.01 mA cm−2, respectively, awfully close to the values measured from the J–V curves. It implies that POSP-modified PSCs can improve efficiency and luminescence stability. The PCE average is improved from 18.27 ± 0.64% for the control devices at 21.55 ± 0.44% for POSP-modified devices (Fig. S16, ESI). Converting 20 statistical PCEs into a histogram, the POSP-modified PSCs show excellent reproducibility more intuitively (Fig. 3f). In addition, we investigated the effect of POSP additive on the device performance under different thicknesses. All the devices show improved PCE after POSP modification (Fig. S17, ESI). When the POSP polymer was directly added to the perovskite precursor solution, the device also realizes an obviously increased PCE (Fig. S18 a, b and Table S2, ESI). When we suspended the POSP polymer on the surface of the perovskite via the post-treatment, the device performance was also improved (Fig. S18c, d and Table S2, ESI). We tried to use the blade coating and anti-immersion method to prepare a large area (1 cm2) and obtain a PCE of 21.03%, demonstrating that the POSP multidentate-cross-linking strategy is feasibile for larger area devices (Fig. S19, ESI). The improvement of PCE with the POSP-modified devices is mainly attributed to the synergistic increase of three photovoltaic parameters (Voc, Jsc, and FF).
To compare the differences in photovoltaic performance of PSC and influence on crystallization between the star-polymer and linear polymer as a mediator, we chose the common linear polymer material poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) (Fig. S20a, ESI). We used dynamic light scattering (DLS) to study polymer aggregation behavior. Chlorobenzene (CB) is a good solvent for the two polymers. The small Z-averaged diameters of the two polymers in CB indicated that the two polymers did not aggregate in CB (Fig. S20b, ESI). We performed FTIR to investigate the interaction between the two types of polymers and the perovskite film. The interaction between CO in PMMA polymer and unsaturated Pb2+ in perovskite moves 5.15 cm−1 (Fig. S20b, ESI), while the interaction between POSP and perovskite moves the peak by 9.54 cm−1. It shows that star-polymer and perovskite have a stronger interaction. The optimal concentration of PMMA polymer is determined to be 0.08 mg mL−1 (Fig. S21a and Table S3, ESI). The optimal concentrations of PMMA and POSP modification is the same, which means that the functional groups of the two polymers are almost the same. The highest PCE of the PMMA-modified device gained in the reverse (forward) scan was 21.55% (20.90%), with a Voc of 1.120 (1.119) V, a Jsc of 23.23 (23.10) mA cm−2, and a FF of 0.828 (0.809) (Fig. S21b, ESI). The interaction between a linear polymer and perovskite inhibits non-radiative recombination, thereby improving photovoltaic performance, but PCE of the linear polymer-modified device is lower than that of the star-polymer-modified devices. Although a linear polymer also delays the crystallization of perovskites, the star polymer delays more (Fig. 2l), which has been confirmed by the slope of the absorption intensity at a wavelength of 600 nm as a function of spinning time (the value is 0.0106) (Fig. S22a–c, ESI). The delay of crystallization of perovskites leads bigger grain size. As shown in Fig. S22d and e (ESI), the average grain size after PMMA-modification was around 252 nm, while that after POSP-modification was around 392 nm. The crystal grain size obtained by the linear polymer was smaller than the crystal size obtained by star polymer. In addition, compared with the PMMA-modified film, the cross-sectional SEM of POSP-modified perovskite film shows more uniform and regular grains (Fig. S22f, ESI). In brief, the star-shaped polymer adjusts the orientation of the branch chains and enhances the interaction with the perovskite film. Moreover, it has more advantages in affecting the perovskite crystallization and photovoltaic performance of PSCs.
In order to broaden the universality of the multidentate-cross-linking strategy, we also investigated more molecules additives with different numbers of arms, such as octa (γ-chloropropyl)-polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxane (POSS-(Cl)8), trimethylolpropane trimethacrylate (TMPTMA), pentaerythritol tetraacrylate (PT), triacetyl-β-cyclodextrin (TC), and polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxane-poly(methyl methacrylate)-b-poly(acrylonitrile) (POSPP), as shown in Fig. S23 (ESI). The PCEs of the devices modified by POSS-(Cl)8, TMPTMA, PT, TC, and POSPP are 19.61%, 20.61%, 21.16%, 21.34%, and 21.94%, respectively. Compared with the control device, the PCEs of the modified devices have been correspondingly improved, which proves that the multidentate-cross-linking strategy has universal applicability.
To explain the improvement in Voc, we calculate the Fermi energy (EF), valence band (VB), and conduction band (CB) levels of the control and POSP-modified perovskite films from ultraviolet photoelectron spectra (UPS, Fig. 4a) and Tauc plot (Fig. S24, ESI). Fig. 4b presents a schematic in the energy level scheme for the perovskite film with the control and after POSP-modification. Compared to the control perovskite, EF, VB, and CB energy levels of the POSP-modified perovskite are shifted up to 0.41, 0.34, and 0.34 eV, respectively, which may be ascribed to the formation of the interfacial dipole on the upper surface of perovskite caused by POSP. The EF level of the POSP-modified perovskite film is significantly improved, indicating that the POSP-modified film is more of an n-type film and has a better band alignment with the PCBM + C60 electron transport layer and NiOx hole transport layer, which helps to improve Voc and facilitate charge transfer. The more n-type perovskite film is because the POSP polymer fills in some electronic defects, further reducing the recombination events caused by the defects.
In order to explain the charge transfer loss caused by the non-radiative recombination loss, we used VOC, Jsc and suns technology (Fig. S25, ESI). We then drew the relationship curve between VOC and JSC in Fig. 4c. The slope of the graph is related to the ideality factor (n), which is a reflection of trap-assisted recombination behavior in PSCs. The POSP-modified PSC shows a smaller n of 1.04 than the control device (n = 1.34), indicating that the trap-assisted recombination in the device is inhibited. Moreover, the FF loss between the measured FF and Shockley–Queisser (S–Q) limited FF consists of the charge transport loss and non-radiative loss. S–Q limited FF of PSC with a 1.59 eV bandgap is 0.904. When there is no charge transport loss, The maximum FF (FFmax) can be empirically calculated by the equation  where  (kB is the Boltzmann constant and q is the electron charge). The calculated FFmax are 0.862 and 0.890 for the control and POSP-modified devices, severally. The difference between the FFmax and the measured FF are 0.076 and 0.043 and the difference between the FFmax and the S–Q limited FF are 0.042 and 0.014 for the control and POSP-modified devices, respectively. In Fig. 4d, the smaller difference in the POSP-modified device means that the non-radiative loss is significantly suppressed, whereas the charge transport loss is also somewhat reduced. The –CO functional groups on the POSP polymer can passivate the perovskite film GBs/surface traps and decrease the non-radiative loss. Meanwhile, the POSP modification improves charge carrier transport in the CsFAMA film (Fig. S15, ESI), which is conducive to charge collection, thereby reducing charge transport loss. These results prove that the excellent passivation effect of POSP inhibits the non-radiative recombination in the device, and at the same time enhances charge transport in the device.
To evaluate the carrier transportation and the passivation effect of the POSP polymer more directly and clearly, we combine Mott–Schottky analysis and admittance spectroscopy (AS). For a detailed description and calculation, please refer to the ESI. The Mott–Schottky analysis can directly estimate the built-in potential (Vbi) and depletion width (W) values of the devices. The results shown in Fig. 4e suggest that the Vbi of the control and POSP-modified PSC devices are 0.87 and 1.07 V, and the corresponding W values are 172 and 234 nm, respectively. The relatively high Vbi and expansion of the depletion region mean that the driving force for the charge separation is enhanced and carrier recombination is inhibited, which is identified with the characteristics of the more n-type film. Then, the distributions of trap density of states (tDOS) in control and POSP-modified devices can be calculated from AS, and the result is presented in Fig. 4f. The 0.35–0.40 eV energetic defect level is related to shallow traps while the 0.40–0.60 eV energetic defect level is for deep traps. According to reports, shallow traps correspond to traps in GBs, while deeper traps are related to defects on the perovskite film surface. In both shallow and deep trap regions, the trap density of the POSP-modified device is much lower than that of the control device. The POSP-modified PSC exhibits the lowest trap density at the shallow and deep regions, which proves that the POSP polymer can beneficially passivate perovskite surface/GBs defects, and indicates that the POSP polymer has a relatively larger trap state passivation ability.
The environmental and thermal stability of the device are issues of concern to researchers. We studied the contact angle of the perovskite film with or without POSP modification. The contact angle of the control perovskite film is 47.59°, whereas the contact angle of the POSP-modified perovskite film is 75.30°, indicating that the hydrophobicity of the surface of the perovskite film increased after POSP polymer is introduced (Fig. S26a and b, ESI). We store the unencapsulated devices in an 85% relative humidity (RH) environment and study the long-term environmental stability of the PSCs. The modified device stabilizes at about 94% of its normalized PCE after 3000 h, while the control device drops to 61% of its original value (Fig. S26c, ESI). The POSP-modified perovskite film exhibits a relatively stable PCE compared with the control film, which is mainly because the POSP polymer reduces the grain boundary defects and the hydrophobic POSP polymer protect the perovskite crystals. Moreover, Fig. S26d (ESI) shows the PCE evolution of the unencapsulated devices aged at 85 °C and in N2 environment. The POSP-modified devices impressively retain 85% of their normalized PCE after 1000 h, while the control devices maintain merely 40%. The results show that the heat resistance of the POSP polymer itself (T95) is up to 327 °C and the multidentate-cross-linking of the POSP polymer and perovskite strengthens the perovskite film, thus significantly improving the thermal stability of the PSCs.
Operational stability is an urgent problem requiring a solution for the commercialization of PSCs. We investigated the long-term operational stability of encapsulated perovskite solar cells with the control, PMMA-modified, and POSP-modified aged at maximum power point (MPP) tracking and one-sun sunlight (in ambient air, 45 °C, 100 mW cm−2, Fig. 5a). The SPO of the control device (initial efficiency of ∼18.29%) only retains ∼47% after 600 h operational. The SPO of the PMMA-modified device (initial efficiency of ∼20.83%) retains ∼77% after 1000 h of operation. In contrast, the SPO of the POSP-modified device retains 93% of the initial efficiency (∼22.00%) and the PCE remains ∼20.56% after a continuous operation of 1000 h. According to the method proposed by Khenkin et al., we estimate that the T80 (time to retain 80% of the initial efficiency) of the control and PMMA-modified devices are ∼151 h and ∼816 h, respectively. Assuming that the steady-state degradation of PSC conforms to the linear degradation law, the extrapolated T80 duration of the POSP-modified PSC is estimated at ∼3982 h. To further verify the stability of the unencapsulated device, we carry out more stringent operational stability (double 85 aging conditions). The PCE of the control device decays to 0 in only ∼24 h, but the PCE of the device POSP-modified remains above T80 for ∼170 h (Fig. S27, ESI). We further investigate the underlying reasons for the superior operational stability. After light irradiation and bias, the tDOS of the POSP-modified device does not significantly change compared with that before the light irradiation and bias, but the control device changes obviously, which prove that the POSP polymer suppresses the appearance of GBs/surface defects in the perovskite film (Fig. 4f). Besides, ToF-SIMS shows that the ion mobility of Pb clusters (PbI2−, PbI−) in the POSP-modified perovskite film is weaker than that of the control after light irradiation (Fig. 5b and c). ToF-SIMS proves that the POSP polymer can immobile Pb clusters and inhibit the ion migration of Pb clusters, thereby inhibiting the decomposition of the perovskite material. Absolutely, the multi-branched and multiple chemical anchor sites (CO) in the 3D POSP polymer form a strong multidentate-cross-linking interaction with perovskite. This structure can form a wide range of multi-directional perovskite grain boundary cross-linking, and the polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxane structure at the center of the network plays a role in strengthening the entire network, so this structure can significantly improve the stability of the device. At the same time, the presence of the polymer in the grain boundary can block the migration channel of ions and effectively inhibit ion migration, which helps suppress the decomposition of perovskite under illumination conditions and enhance the operational stability of PSCs at high efficiency.

In summary, we design a 3D star-shaped POSP polymer as a novel antisolvent additive to modify the perovskite film. The POSP material includes a symmetrical siloxane cubic-octameric cage framework as the core that can give the POSP material excellent temperature resistance and 3D structure stability and is surrounded by the eight branches that provide abundant passivation sites CO. In addition, the 3D star-shaped network structure can form a larger range and more directional perovskite grain boundary cross-linking, which significantly improves the operational stability of the high-efficiency PSCs. Therefore, the POSP-modified inverted PSC achieves optimal efficiency of 22.74%. Meanwhile, the encapsulated modified device also shows remarkable advancement of operational stability and maintains 93% of initial efficiency (∼22.00%) under MPP tracking at 45 °C for 1000 h. This star-polymer multidentate-cross-linking strategy has proved to be a new direction for realizing commercial applications of PSC with excellent operational stability for high-efficiency devices. The successful demonstration of this new molecular design and its mechanistic elucidation thereby presents a major conceptual breakthrough in the material design with broad application to hybrid perovskite optoelectronics.


X. H. L. and Q. C. proposed the experimental ideas, designed the experiments, and wrote the manuscript. J. B. Y., T. W., X. Y. P., J. S. Z., Y. X. Z., and H. Z. conducted the devices/samples fabrication, optimization, and characterizations. Y. K. L. completed the calculation of molecular electrostatic potential. Q. C., X. Q. L., and X. H. L. analysed the data and revised the manuscript.


The authors declare no conflict of interest.


This research is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (52172237, 52072228), the Shaanxi International Cooperational Project (2020KWZ-018), and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (3102019JC005). We thank the members from the Analytical & Testing Center of Northwestern Polytechnical University for the help of SEM, XRD, and XPS characterizations. We thank Dr. Yongjiang Li and Prof. Xiaoyan Ma for providing POSP polymer.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ee01800k
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021