 DOI: 10.1039/C9TA00385A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 9948-9957


Xinchen
Li
,

Daming
Zhuang
*,

Ning
Zhang
,

Ming
Zhao
,

Xinping
Yu
,

Peng
Liu
,

Yaowei
Wei
 and 

Guoan
Ren


School of Materials Science and Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, P. R. China. E-mail: dmzhuang@tsinghua.edu.cn

Key Laboratory for Advanced Materials Processing Technology, Ministry of Education, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, P. R. China

Beijing Sifang Crenergy Optoelectronics Technology Co., Ltd., No. 9, Shangdi 4th Street, Haidian District, Beijing, 100085, P. R. China

Received
11th January 2019
, Accepted 16th March 2019
First published on 21st March 2019
In this study, earth-abundant thin film Cu2ZnSnSe4 (CZTSe) solar cells were fabricated by the magnetron sputtering of a quaternary compound target. Precursor films were deposited in a designed chemical composition followed by a selenization process under the mixed atmosphere of an active gas, H2Se, and a carrier gas, Ar. Due to the existence of the Se element within the film, a relatively low concentration of H2Se was utilized to mainly crystallize the precursors and also supplement Se. To explore the selenization process, the as-deposited CZTSe absorbers were annealed at different temperatures. The results of X-ray diffraction (XRD) and Raman scattering spectroscopy measurements showed that the CZTSe grains continuously grew after selenization. In this study, when the absorbers were annealed at 575 °C, the CZTSe solar cells were obtained with the highest efficiency of 11.95%, with the open circuit voltage (VOC) of 432.22 mV, short circuit current density (JSC) of 36.28 mA cm−2 and fill factor (FF) of 76.21%. The photoluminescence (PL) spectrum indicates that the peak center underwent a red-shift from the band gap (Eg) of 90 meV. The analyses of fluctuation modules indicate that the electrostatic potential fluctuation is dominant for the band tail. The investigations demonstrate that sputtering of the Cu–Zn–Sn–Se quaternary compound target via the selenization process can be an effective and simple method for the fabrication of high-performance CZTSe solar cells.

Kesterite materials have been the potential candidates to replace Cu(InGa)Se2 (CIGS) and CdTe absorbers for thin film photovoltaic devices due to their promising theoretical efficiencies and earth-abundant elements. Efforts have been made in the last two decades to promote the efficiencies from 0.66% for the first Cu2ZnSnS4 (CZTS) solar cell to a record 12.6% for the pentenary Cu2ZnSn(SSe)4 (CZTSSe) solar cell. The band gap (Eg) range of the kesterite materials can be almost linearly varied from 1.5 eV to 1.0 eV with an increase in the Se/(Se + S) ratio; this has been proved by theoretical and experimental results. Moreover, one of the attractive kesterite absorbers for solar cells is the pure selenized Cu2ZnSnSe4 (CZTSe) material with the lowest Eg of about 1.0 eV.

Kesterite thin film solar cells with high efficiencies were mostly achieved with high Se/(Se + S) ratios. The evidence has shown that pure sulfurized kesterite solar cells exhibit larger open circuit voltage (VOC)-deficits (Eg/q − VOC, where q is the elementary charge) as compared to those with higher Se ratios. In the pure selenized CZTSe material, the defect-induced electron trapping effect is weaker as compared to that in CZTS. Moreover, the less isolated deep donor defects reduce the concentration of the recombination centers in CZTSe. These advantages lead to the lower VOC-deficit of the CZTSe solar cells. However, a VOC-deficit of about 0.6 eV in the CZTSe solar cell is still much larger than that of the CIGS solar cell (about 0.4 eV). Consequently, systematic studies should be conducted on pure selenized CZTSe solar cells due to limitations of the theoretical efficiency and the current performance.
High performance pure selenized CZTSe solar cells have been realized and demonstrated by different fabrication methods. Based on the hydrazine solution process, highly selenium-enriched CZTSe solar cells have been demonstrated with an efficiency of 10.1%. CZTSe solar cells with 11.6% efficiency were achieved by the thermal co-evaporation method with high-quality, large grain size and improved minority carrier diffusion length. The metallic stack deposition method has been applied with the selenization process and demonstrated CZTSe solar cells with an efficiency of 9.7%. By the electrochemical deposition method, the CZTSe solar cells can reach up to the efficiency of 8%. Furthermore, the doping strategy of Mn and Ge can achieve high-performance kesterite solar cells with optimized doping amounts. Moreover, 10.4% efficiency CZTSe solar cells with low Cu content can be achieved by sputtering from metallic targets under controllable Se vapour composition. The stacking strategy involving the sputtering of precursors can significantly enhance the performance of kesterite solar cells with high charge separation efficiency and low radiative recombination. Recently, the method of sputtering from a quaternary target, followed by a selenization or sulfurization annealing process, has become a simple and attractive approach to obtaining high-efficiency kesterite solar cells. By using this method, elemental uniformity and surface compactness can be enhanced, which have significant potential advantages for large area solar cell fabrication processes for future commercial mass production. The stoichiometry of the absorbers can be easily and finely controlled by the elemental ratio of the quaternary target. Besides, with the existence of Se or S within the precursors in amounts close to the ones needed, the requirement for the Se- or S-containing partial pressure during the annealing process can be greatly reduced.
In this work, CZTSe solar cells with the peak performance of 11.95% have been achieved. High-quality CZTSe absorbers can be obtained by sputtering the Cu–Zn–Sn–Se quaternary compound target, followed by the selenization process. Different annealing temperatures have been applied from 300 °C to 590 °C under the H2Se/Ar atmosphere. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images show that uniform and smooth CZTSe absorbers can be obtained after the selenization process. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) and Raman scattering spectroscopy results indicate that pure phase absorbers can be formed with the kesterite structure at specific annealing temperatures. Compared with impure phase absorbers, pure kesterite CZTSe absorbers can lead to significant enhancement and relatively stable device characteristics of the fabricated solar cells. By using the high-quality absorbers at the annealing temperature of 575 °C, CZTSe solar cells have been demonstrated with a peak performance of 11.95%. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) of the solar cell reveals the good photon conversion ability. From the analyses and results of fluctuation modules, electrostatic potential fluctuation by charged defects is the dominant loss-mechanism for the performance limitation of the solar cells. Besides, the inhomogeneity-induced band gap fluctuation provides a minor contribution to the band tail of the absorption in the low energy region.

The CZTSe precursors were prepared by sputtering a quaternary Cu–Zn–Sn–Se target, with the target film composed of the Cu-poor and Zn-rich stoichiometry of Cu/(Zn + Sn) = 0.85 and Zn/Sn = 1.02. The precursors with film thickness of 1500 nm were deposited onto Mo-coated soda lime glass (SLG/Mo) by the DC-sputtering method at room temperature.


The as-deposited CZTSe precursors were selenized in a graphite box fixed inside a vacuum chamber with a water-cooling wall. The selenization was carried out at the temperatures of 300 °C, 350 °C, 400 °C, 450 °C, 500 °C, 550 °C, 575 °C and 590 °C in a H2Se mixed Ar atmosphere. During the annealing process, pure Ar gas was introduced into the chamber first, up to a pressure of 50000 Pa. When the sample temperature reached 300 °C, H2Se (2 vol.%) containing Ar mixed gas was introduced at an appropriate rate of flow, and the flow was maintained till the end of the annealing process at the given temperatures. The heating and cooling temperature rates were 2 °C min−1, and the duration of the target annealing was 5 min, by the optimization results shown in Fig. S1 and Table S1 of the ESI. After the annealing process, the chamber was cooled down by furnace cooling to room temperature.


The solar cells were fabricated by our previously reported routine process. A CdS buffer layer of 50 nm was deposited by chemical bath deposition (CBD) on the selenized CZTSe absorber, and then a ZnO film of 50 nm and an AZO layer of 400 nm were deposited by magnetron sputtering in sequence. A number of solar cells were formed by isolation with mechanical scribing. The total area of each solar cell was 0.52 cm2. The performance data for one sample condition is the average based on the measurements of more than 10 devices.


The film thickness was measured by a KLA-Tencor Alpha-Step D-500 stylus profiler. The surface and cross-sectional images of different films were taken by Scanning Electron Microscopy, SIGMA HV & PV Series, Carl Zeiss. The XRD (DMAX 2500 V, Rigaku) results were obtained under Cu Kα (λ = 0.15418 nm) irradiation, with a 2-theta scan step of 0.02° and resolution of 0.0002°. Raman scattering spectroscopy (Raman, LabRAM HR Evolution, Horiba) results were obtained with laser excitation at 532 nm, 473 nm and 633 nm. The compositions of the films were measured by X-ray fluorescence (XRF, SPECTRO XEPOS), which was calibrated by inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES, SPECTRO ARCOS EOP). The Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) and Kelvin Probe Force Microscopy (KPFM) for surface height and potential roughness of CZTSe absorbers were taken by using a Dimension Icon with PeakForce Tapping mode, Bruker. The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics were measured by using a Photon Emission Tech AM 1.5G AAA solar simulator with a light intensity of 1000 W m−2 and Keithley 2420 source meter. The EQE measurement of solar cells was performed by using a SCS-100 EQE, Zolix testing system with a white light bias of 0.1 sun intensity. The absorption was measured by using a Lambda 750 UV/Vis/NIR Spectrophotometer, PerkinElmer. The photoluminescence (PL) spectrum was obtained with 532 nm laser excitation using FLS980, Edinburgh Instruments.


CZTSe precursors were deposited on Mo-coated glass by the magnetron sputtering method. The uniform and smooth precursors were obtained with thickness of 1500 nm. In Fig. 1(a) and (b), the SEM surface and cross-sectional images show that there are no voids on the boundary with the substrate. The atomic ratios of the metallic elements in the precursor were measured by XRF. The stoichiometry of the precursors was controlled at Cu/(Zn + Sn) = 0.85 and Zn/Sn = 1.02, which agree well with previous experimental and theoretical reports of high efficiency kesterite solar cells with Cu-poor and Zn-rich conditions.

The XRD and Raman results of the CZTSe precursors are plotted in Fig. 2(a) and (b). The XRD pattern indicates a weak peak at 27.09°, corresponding to the (112) plane. As shown in Fig. S2 of the ESI, the deconvolution of the Raman peaks from the spectrum of the precursor indicates one major peak at 195 cm−1 and three minor peaks at 175 cm−1, 226 cm−1 and 247 cm−1, which are in accord with the dominant Raman peaks of the CZTSe compound. In XRD and Raman measurements, no obvious secondary phases were observed. These results imply that the precursors are composed of the pure CZTSe compound. However, the weak and broadening peaks of the precursors indicate the poor crystallization of this film, which was also confirmed in SEM surface and cross-sectional images.

To investigate the effects of the selenization process on the crystallization of CZTSe absorbers, the precursors were selenized at the chosen annealing temperatures of 300 °C, 350 °C, 400 °C, 450 °C, 500 °C, 550 °C, 575 °C and 590 °C. The details of the selenization process are as described in the experimental section. The morphologies of CZTSe absorbers after the selenization have been investigated by SEM. Fig. 3(a–h) illustrate the surface morphologies of absorbers annealed at different temperatures and Fig. 3(i–p) show the cross-sectional images. The precursors started to crystallize after annealing at 300 °C in the H2Se containing atmosphere. The absorbers annealed at the temperatures from 300 °C to 450 °C contained small grains. The grains became more uniform at 450 °C. When the annealing temperature reached above 500 °C, the grain sizes of the absorbers increased continuously. As shown in the SEM images, a uniform and compact absorber was formed when the annealing temperature reached 575 °C. However, when the annealing temperature reached 590 °C, lots of pin-holes appeared on the surface of the absorber and there were vertical voids across the film. Previous reports imply that the CZTSe starts to decompose at a high annealing temperature due to the volatile nature of SnSe. As a consequence, the annealing temperature should be appropriate to maintain the morphology and composition, as well as high crystallization of the absorbers. The voids may lead to leakage current across the CZTSe absorbers and performance degradation of the solar cells.

The XRD patterns of selenized CZTSe absorbers at different annealing temperatures are shown in Fig. 4(a). As a comparison, the as-deposited CZTSe precursor is also shown in the same plot. The results illustrate that four major CZTSe peaks of (112), (220), (312) and (008) can be observed in the XRD patterns. The full widths at half maximum (FWHM) for (112) peaks are shown in Fig. 4(b). With the increase in annealing temperatures, FWHM of CZTSe absorbers decrease. Based on the Scherrer equation, the average crystal size is inversely proportional to the FWHM value; therefore, the CZTSe crystals grow with the increase in annealing temperatures. Nevertheless, there are two clear inflection points in this curve, i.e. 350 °C and 500 °C. The precursors began crystallization after applying the selenization process. When the annealing temperature reached 350 °C, the crystal sizes kept increasing slightly up to 450 °C. The grain size slightly increased with the increase in temperature in the range from 350 °C to 450 °C. After reaching 500 °C, the crystal size increased abruptly, which was also verified in the surface and cross-sectional images in Fig. 3(e) and (m). From 500 °C to 590 °C, the FWHM results indicate the continuous increase in the average crystal size of the absorbers.
To investigate the phenomena of FWHM inflection points during the selenization process, the CZTSe (112) diffraction peaks at different annealing temperature were magnified to have a clear view of the peak centers. From Fig. 4(c), the (112) peak centers of the absorbers shift to higher degrees during annealing at low temperatures, but return to lower degrees after the annealing temperature goes above 500 °C. Fig. 4(d) shows the centers of the (112) peak in the 2-theta coordinate axis; there are clearly three sections in this curve. After applying the annealing process, the peak center of the precursor slightly shifted from 27.08° to 27.14° for the absorber annealed at 350 °C. With the increase in the annealing temperature, the peak center dramatically increased to 27.29° at 500 °C. Interestingly, after this point, the peak centers shifted to lower degrees with increasing annealing temperatures.
By using Bragg's law, the (112) interplanar spacing d of CZTSe absorbers can be obtained from the peak centers. As plotted in Fig. 4(d), the interplanar spacing d at different annealing temperatures follows the opposite tendency of the peak centers. The lattice dynamics of CZTSe with kesterite and stannite structures have been calculated in previous studies. The spacing of the kesterite structure is slightly larger than the stannite structure of the CZTSe material. Besides, due to the tiny energy difference between the kesterite and stannite structures, the CZTSe absorbers co-exist with the two structures when the material is annealed at low temperatures in the polycrystalline films. The interplanar spacing changes in accord with the structure and phase transformation within the CZTSe absorbers during the selenization process. Firstly, the spacing decreases slightly with the temperature increase at low annealing temperatures below 350 °C. After 350 °C, the lattice spacing rapidly decreases. However, the CZTSe absorbers are hardly crystallized at annealing temperatures lower than 500 °C. As shown in previous reports, CZTSe absorbers can be formed with the stoichiometry of the Cu-poor and Zn-rich conditions due to the high population of defect clusters. The formation of the ZnSe secondary phase should be expected in Zn-rich conditions within the absorbers. ZnSe gives diffraction (111) peak overlapping with the CZTSe (112) peak, but it has a smaller lattice spacing according to previous research reports. As a consequence, the peak centers increase with the increase in annealing temperatures up to 500 °C, which illustrates the formation of CZTSe absorbers with the intermediate phase such as ZnSe. After this temperature, the lattice spacing becomes larger, so that the peak centers shift to lower degrees. The evidence of crystallization indicates that the absorbers become CZTSe with a much purer kesterite structure.
The Raman spectra of CZTSe absorbers and the precursor are plotted in Fig. 5(a). From the figure, the CZTSe absorbers exhibit almost the same Raman spectra at different annealing temperatures. As plotted in Fig. 5(b), the Raman peak intensity of the absorber at 575 °C increases by about 10 times as compared to the precursor. This represents the formation and crystallization of CZTSe after applying the selenization process. In Fig. S3 of ESI, three major peaks were deconvoluted, using the Gaussian line shape from the spectrum of the selenized absorber, which are located at 175 cm−1, 195 cm−1 and 232 cm−1. The major peaks at 175 cm−1 and 195 cm−1 can be attributed to the A mode of the CZTSe material with kesterite structure. Compared to the precursor, the selenized CZTSe absorber gives a third major Raman peak at 232 cm−1. It represents the B mode of CZTSe with kesterite structure, which correlates well with the previous theoretical and experimental results. Moreover, the Raman spectra of the CZTSe absorbers with 473 nm and 633 nm lasers excitation are given in Fig. S4 of ESI, which are coincident with the Raman result with 532 nm laser excitation. As an effective method for determining the compound purity of the CZTSe material, no obvious Raman peaks of binary or ternary compounds such as Cu2Se (263 cm−1), ZnSe (205 cm−1 and 251 cm−1), SnSe (130 cm−1 and 150 cm−1), SnSe2 (185 cm−1) and Cu2SnSe3 (180 cm−1) were identified. These results indicate that the kesterite structure CZTSe absorbers can form and crystallize during the selenization process at the annealing temperature of 575 °C.

The analyses of the as-deposited CZTSe precursor indicate that it contains CZTSe material within the film. However, no photovoltaic effect could be characterized for the solar cells based on the CZTSe precursors. As discussed above, the weak and broadening peaks of XRD and Raman results imply the poor crystallization of this film. The precursors can only form the layers with the CZTSe crystal nucleus, which was also proved by SEM images. The existence of too many crystal boundaries can strongly recombine the generated carriers. Consequently, the selenization process should be applied to the precursors to obtain high-quality absorbers with better crystallization and proper grain sizes. The CZTSe absorbers at the annealing temperature of 575 °C gave the root mean square (RMS) surface height roughness of 55.40 nm and surface potential roughness of 16.70 mV, which are shown in AFM and KPFM images in Fig. S5 of the ESI. Based on the absorbers with the selenization process at different annealing temperatures, CZTSe solar cells have been fabricated with the device structure of SLG/Mo/CZTSe/CdS/ZnO/AZO. As summarized in Table 1, the averaged device characteristics of CZTSe solar cells are listed with the different annealing temperatures. The CZTSe solar cells perform a peak efficiency of 11.95%, and an average efficiency of 11.43% by using the absorbers with the selenization process at the annealing temperature of 575 °C.

Devices

V
OC [mV]

J
SC [mA cm−2]
FF [%]
PCE [%]

R
S [Ω cm2]

R
SH [Ω cm2]
300 °C
1.98
0.85
—
—
—
—
350 °C
47.76
2.59
23.71
0.03
32.80
32.51
400 °C
306.52
24.54
28.74
2.16
12.87
56.86
450 °C
356.03
29.52
37.65
3.58
7.42
170.76
500 °C
424.56
31.99
53.26
7.23
1.95
991.92
550 °C
429.38
35.75
60.64
9.31
1.36
1.33k
575 °C
415.75
37.27
73.79
11.43
0.97
1.43k
590 °C
415.62
36.21
63.99
9.63
1.44
910.09
From Table 1, it clearly illustrates that performance increases with the increase in the annealing temperatures of the CZTSe absorbers from 300 °C to 575 °C. At 300 °C, the solar cells show almost no photovoltaic effect. With the annealing temperature rising to 500 °C, the VOC continuously increases to over 400 mV. As indicated by the XRD results, the CZTSe absorber with the kesterite structure crystallized after annealing at the temperature of 500 °C. For the temperatures over 500 °C, CZTSe solar cells maintained almost the same VOC. With the increase of annealing temperatures, the short circuit current density (JSC) and fill factor (FF) increased dramatically, which are also illustrated in Fig. 6(a) for the current density–voltage (J–V) curves of different solar cells. With the SEM and XRD results, the crystallization of absorber dominates the efficiency improvement of the solar cells with annealing temperatures from 500 °C to 575 °C. The series resistance (RS) and shunt resistance (RSH) of different solar cells can be extracted by using Sites' method. The results show that the RS decreased and the RSH increased following the increase in the device performance. As shown in Fig. 6(b), the peak performance of the CZTSe solar cell exhibits the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 11.95%, with VOC of 432.22 mV, JSC of 36.28 mA cm−2 and FF of 76.21%. As plotted in Fig. S6 of ESI, the dark current density–voltage (Jdark–V) curve illustrates the remarkable diode quality of the solar cell. Besides relatively low RS and high RSH under light, the solar cell exhibits negligible leakage current, which leads to the high FF in the device characteristics.

In order to investigate the photon absorption and charge carrier collection abilities, the EQE measurement of the peak performance solar cell was measured, which is plotted in Fig. 7(a). The CZTSe solar cell exhibited a relatively high and flat EQE of about 90% in the main absorption region from 500 nm to 1000 nm. As plotted in the same figure, the EQE integrated JSC of 36.17 mA cm−2 agrees well with the measured device characteristics. It reveals the small mismatch of the spectrum during the J–V measurement. The internal quantum efficiency (IQE) of the CZTSe solar cell is given by the ratio of EQE and absorption spectra, which is plotted in Fig. S7 of ESI. Assuming the collection of carriers generated within the space-charge region, the IQE of the solar cell can be expressed as

IQE ≅ 1 − exp(−αW)
(1)
where
α is the absorption coefficient and W is the space-charge region width. As a direct bandgap material of CZTSe, the absorption coefficient can be given by the following relationship:

(2)
The bandgap can be determined by the intercept of (
hνln(1 − IQE))2vs. hν curve in the low energy region by Tauc plot method. The Eg of 1.07 eV can be extracted in this plot, which is given in Fig. S8 of ESI. From the result, a VOC-deficit of 637 meV can be calculated for the CZTSe solar cell, which is the main reason for efficiency limitation in comparison with the counterpart chalcopyrite solar cells.

As shown in Fig. 7(b), the room temperature PL spectrum of the absorber is plotted and marked with the peak center of 0.98 eV and Eg of 1.07 eV. The PL peak center is red-shifted from the Eg of 90 meV. The red-shifted and broadened PL spectrum indicates that band tail states act as the recombination centers in CZTSe absorbers. The Urbach tail energy (Eu) can estimate the sub-bandgap absorption induced by band tail states lower than the band gap energy from the absorption coefficient. The Eu can be expressed by the relationship of
(3)
From the fitting plot in Fig. S9 of ESI,
 the Eu of 30.3 meV can be obtained. However, the PL peak center gives a larger red-shift in the comparison of Eu to the band gap.

According to previous reports, the tailing of the absorption and the red-shift of PL spectrum can be influenced by the band tail states involving the spatial variation of energy bands induced by bandgap fluctuation or electrostatic potential fluctuation. Based on the facts of inhomogeneous CZTSe composition and crystallization, the tailing of the absorption coefficient can be ascribed to band gap fluctuation, which is described by Gaussian distribution with a standard deviation σg. The band gap Eg around the mean band gap Eg,mean can be described by the relationship.
(4)
Besides, by using the model of Shklovskii and Efros, the absorption coefficient below
Eg can give an average depth γopt of electrostatic potential fluctuation induced by charged defects. The relationship of the absorption coefficient and band gap can be given by

(5)
As shown in
Fig. 8(a) and (b), fitting results of σg = 35.2 meV and γopt = 81.6 meV can be deduced from the plots of absorption coefficient with the energy lower than the Eg. The fitting procedures for the band gap and electrostatic potential fluctuations are described in the ESI.

Yielding high-efficiency solar cells, CZTSe absorbers are constrained to a non-stoichiometric composition with Cu-poor and Zn-rich conditions up to the present. Thus, material disorder is critical for inhomogeneity and defects within the absorber. From the results above, the Eu = 30.3 meV of the absorption coefficient is close to the σg = 35.2 meV. This reveals the average tailing energy states by bandgap fluctuation, which results in the tail of the absorption. Meanwhile, electrostatic potential fluctuation with the average depth γopt = 81.6 meV provides the radiative recombination paths by charged defects within the absorber, which mainly contribute to the PL emission with red-shifted peaks centered at 90 meV. As previously mentioned, the selenization process can promote the crystallization of precursors to CZTSe absorbers with kesterite structure. The XRD and Raman measurements revealed the compositional homogeneity and phase purity of the absorbers, although the existence of minor band gap fluctuations may result in the band tailing of CZTSe. However, results and analyses clearly indicate that defect-induced electrostatic potential fluctuation is the main reason for the performance limitations of solar cells.

High-efficiency CZTSe solar cells have been obtained by magnetron sputtering from a quaternary compound target via the selenization process. The as-deposited CZTSe precursors can be transformed and crystallized into high-quality CZTSe absorbers with kesterite structure with no obvious secondary or ternary phases. The inflection points of annealing temperatures at 350 °C and 500 °C of the CZTSe absorbers were identified during the selenization process. The CZTSe crystals continuously grew with the increase in annealing temperatures. The temperature dependent variation in interplanar spacing indicates the formation of the kesterite structure CZTSe absorbers with the selenization process. Over the transition annealing temperature of 500 °C, kesterite CZTSe solar cells can exhibit enhanced and more stable performance as compared to the ones based on impure phase absorbers. By using the high-quality absorbers at the annealing temperature of 575 °C, CZTSe solar cells with the standard fabrication process can achieve peak efficiency of 11.95%, with VOC of 432.22 mV, JSC of 36.28 mA cm−2 and FF of 76.21%, also with relatively low RS of 0.76 Ω cm2 and high RSH of 1.31 kΩ cm2. The solar cells exhibit good photon conversion and charge carrier collection abilities. The electrostatic potential fluctuation by charge defects is the dominant reason for the sub-bandgap emission, which limits the efficiency of the solar cells. Bandgap fluctuation by the inhomogeneity of the composition and phase gives a minor contribution for the band tail states of the absorbers. In conclusion, our demonstration illustrates that sputtering from a Cu–Zn–Sn–Se quaternary compound target with the selenization process is an effective and simple approach to achieve high-performance CZTSe solar cells.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the Project of Beijing Municipal Science and Technology Commission (Z171100000317002). The authors are also grateful for the analysis support of State Key Laboratory of New Ceramics and Fine Processing.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta00385a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019