 DOI: 10.1039/D1CP05119A
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2022, 24, 4871-4880


Fei
Zhao
,

Jiangchuan
Lin
,

Zhenhua
Lei
,

Zao
Yi
*,

Feng
Qin
*,

Jianguo
Zhang
*,

Li
Liu
,

Xianwen
Wu
,

Wenxing
Yang
 and 

Pinghui
Wu


Joint Laboratory for Extreme Conditions Matter Properties, Southwest University of Science and Technology, Mianyang 621010, China. E-mail: yizaomy@swust.edu.cn

Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Complex Electromagnetic Environment, China Academy of Engineering Physics, Mianyang 621900, China. E-mail: fq_soul2000@163.com

Department of Physics, Jinzhong University, Jinzhong 030619, China. E-mail: phys.zhangjg@gmail.com

School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Jishou University, Jishou 416000, China

School of Physics and Optoelectronic Engineering, Yangtze University, Jingzhou, Hubei 434023, China

Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory for Advanced Micro-nano Photonics Technology and Devices, Quanzhou Normal University, Quanzhou 362000, China

Received
9th November 2021
, Accepted 7th December 2021
First published on 27th January 2022
In this work, we demonstrate that the performance of c-Si/ZnO heterojunction ultrathin-film solar cells (SCs) is enhanced by an integrated structure of c-Si trapezoidal pyramids on the top of a c-Si active layer and Al pyramids in the active layer on the Al back electrode. The top c-Si trapezoidal pyramid (TTP) increases the absorption of short wavelengths by lengthening the propagation distance of incident light and coupling the incident light into photonic modes in the active layer. The bottom Al pyramid (BP) improves the overall optical absorption performance especially for the long wavelength band by forming the surface plasmon resonance (SPR) mode in the active layer. As a result, the average absorption in the entire wavelength range (300–1400 nm) reaches 93.16%. The optimized short-circuit current density (Jsc) and photoelectric conversion efficiency (PCE) of ultra-thin film c-Si/ZnO SCs are 41.94 mA cm−2 and 18.97%, respectively. Moreover, the effect of different illumination angles on the optical absorption of the SCs was explored. The SCs have good absorption when the incident angles are in the range from 0 degrees to 60 degrees. Furthermore, the underlying mechanism for the enhancement of photon absorption in the SCs was discussed through careful analysis of the electric field intensity profile at different wavelengths. It was found that the electric field tends to concentrate around the bottom pyramids and top trapezoidal pyramids even for the long-wave band, which results in an excellent light-trapping performance.

The rapid development of human society is increasingly becoming inseparable from the continuous requirement of electricity. Compared with traditional fossil energy, photovoltaic energy has attracted widespread attention due to its wide distribution, easy access and environmental sustainability. Due to extensive research, the efficiency of SCs is constantly being improved. At present, crystalline silicon (c-Si) solar cells account for a large proportion of the photovoltaic market. Although their cost has significantly reduced, the fabricating cost of c-Si is still high compared with fossil fuels. Besides, with the increasing consumption of silicon materials, silicon resources are quickly reducing. Researchers are thus increasingly committed to developing ultra-thin film SCs for the purpose of reducing the material cost. Ultra-thin film silicon SCs can greatly reduce the consumption of c-Si materials, thus significantly reducing the cost of SCs.

In recent years, the preparation of ultra-thin SCs has attracted widespread attention, and some progress has been made. Besides, there are more and more research studies on the performance enhancement of ultra-thin silicon SCs. Yan et al. found that when the recombination rate of silicon SCs is low, the thinner the silicon wafer is, and the greater the open circuit voltage is. Simultaneously, a shorter diffusion length is needed. The carriers can thus be easily collected using an electrode, which in turn can lower the requirement of excellent crystallinity for photovoltaic materials and make it easy to fabricate flexible batteries. But, the electrical property of ultra-thin c-Si SCs is poor compared with the traditional thick c-Si SCs. The main reason for the poor electrical performance of ultra-thin c-Si solar cells is its poor solar energy absorption in the near-infrared region. There are some challenges that need to be overcome, such as the limitation of light absorption, the high sensitivity of surface recombination as well as the complicated manufacturing processes brought about by reduced thickness, in order to use the ultra-thin SCs in practical applications. In order to increase the light capture ability of SCs, a variety of nanostructures applied to SCs have been reported in recent years, such as trapezoid-pyramidal, nanowires, nanocones, elliptical arrays, nanorings, and nanoholes. These nanostructures have excellent light-trapping and anti-reflection properties, which is a fantastic strategy to enhance the solar energy absorption for ultra-thin film SCs. However, because of the differences in materials and sizes, light-trapping of the nanostructures and the performance of anti-reflection are unstable. Besides, it is known that the SPR is an effective approach to enhance the optical absorption. The plasmonic structures can scatter and couple the incident light into SPR mode or active layer waveguide mode which is conducive to confining the light within the active layer, thereby improving the optical absorption. There have been many reports on ultra-thin c-Si SCs that utilize plasmons or nanostructures.
Herein, we present c-Si/ZnO heterojunction ultrathin-film SCs based on the bottom pyramids and top trapezoidal pyramid double-layer nanostructures. The optical absorption of SCs with different structures beneath the illumination of incident light has been investigated, which shows that the SCs proposed by us can greatly improve the light capture ability. Moreover, in order to reveal the stability of optical absorption under different incident angles, the influence of different illumination angles of the SCs was explored. The short-circuit current density and photoelectric conversion efficiency of the optimized structure reach 41.94 mA cm−2 and 18.97%, respectively. Furthermore, we attempt to reveal the possible mechanism for the strengthening of photon absorption in the SCs through careful analysis of the electric field intensity distribution. The results show that the electric field is prone to concentrate around the bottom pyramids and top trapezoidal pyramids even for the long-wave band. In addition, the absorption and electric characteristics for different c-Si active layer thicknesses and c-Si TTP top surface side length were compared and analyzed. Through the TTP structure, the propagation distance of incident light is lengthened and the incident light can be coupled into the photon mode in the active layer, which enhances the solar energy absorption of the short-wave band. The SPR is formed on the Al pyramids which can significantly enhance the optical absorption even for the long wavelength band. Overall, the structure greatly increases the solar energy absorption for the solar cells we presented, thereby reinforcing the electrical property of the solar cells. We demonstrate the potential of ultra-thin film c-Si/ZnO SCs combined with plasmon in one nanostructure, which provides a novel approach for improving the properties of ultra-thin film SCs. Compared with previous work, the conversion efficiency of the solar cells in this work is better compared to other solar cells of the same thickness.

The c-Si/ZnO ultrathin-film solar cell based on the bottom pyramid and top trapezoidal pyramid double-layer nanostructure is shown in Fig. 1. The bottom layer is an Al electrode. Periodic and neatly arranged Al pyramids are present at the interface in between the Al electrode and the crystalline silicon. The top surface of c-Si active layer is a c-Si trapezoidal pyramid which is arranged identically to the bottom Al pyramid. On top of the c-Si active layer is a zinc oxide (ZnO) electron transport layer, which is employed to reduce the surface carrier recombination rate brought by the reduction of the thickness of c-Si solar cells. The ZnO electron transport layer is coated on the c-Si silicon. The c-Si trapezoidal pyramid forms a conformal structure on it, and the upper glass has a light-gathering and antireflection effect.Fig. 1(b) is a cross-sectional view in the x–z axis direction. As shown in the figure, a, b, c and d represent the thickness of the glass, ZnO, c-Si and Al electrode, respectively. The optimized parameters are a = 100 nm, b = 200 nm, c = 900 nm and d = 200 nm, respectively. The heights of the TTP and BP are both set as h = 200 nm, and w = 40 nm is the width of the top surface of the trapezoidal pyramid. P = 100 nm represents the period of the solar cell.

The transport of the carrier in the band is shown in Fig. 2. The feature of band alignment is determined by the Anderson energy-band rule. According to Anderson's rule, the conduction band offset (ΔEC) and valence band offset (ΔEV) can be written as follows
ΔEC = χZnO − χSi
(1)
ΔEV = (χZnO + EgZnO) − (χSi + EgSi)
(2)
where
χ and Eg are the electron affinity and bandgap, respectively. As shown in the figure, the energy band and electron affinity of Si are 1.12 eV and 4.17 eV, respectively. The energy band and electron affinity of ZnO are 3.4 eV and 4.35 eV, respectively. Because of the high doping of the ZnO film, and that the work function of ZnO has the same affinity for selective conductivity, its Fermi level is thus very close to the conduction band. Then ΔEC and ΔEV are approximately 0.18 eV and 2.38 eV, respectively. Therefore, when the sunlight is irradiated onto the solar cell, photo-generated carriers will be produced in the photoactive layer. The photo-generated electrons will pass through the ZnO layer because of the presence of a built-in electric field, and then are collected by the electrode. Moreover, since a large band offset (hole-blocking contact) existing in the valence band at the interface between the n-type ZnO layer and p-type c-Si layer, the photo-generated holes will be collected by the electrode but cannot pass through the ZnO layer to recombine with the photo-generated electrons.

For the optical property, finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) simulation software is used to simulate the proposed solar cell. Light with a wavelength in the range of 300–1400 nm is incident directly above the Z axis. Periodic boundary conditions are used in both the X and Y axis directions, and perfectly matched layer (PML) boundary conditions are employed in the Z axis direction. PML absorption boundary conditions are designed to absorb incident light with minimal reflection. The PML boundary is basically implemented as an absorbing material, which also matches the impedance of the surrounding material to minimize reflection. In the meantime, the optimized geometric parameters of the solar cells are used. In addition, electric field diagrams at different wavelengths as well as the solar energy absorption under different incident angles are calculated. The optical generation rate calculated by FDTD will be used as the input of the Lumerical Charge Solver module. As a result, the short-circuit current density (Jsc), open circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (FF) and power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the solar cell can be obtained.
In the optical and electrical simulations, some important parameters were obtained by using mathematical formulas. In the FDTD optical simulation software, the divergence of the Poynting vector can be used to calculate the absorption per unit area:
Pabs = −0.5ω|E|2Im{ε}
(3)
where
ω is the angular frequency, E is the electric field density, ε is the permittivity, and Im{ε} is the imaginary part of the permittivity. This calculation of solar absorption is from the electric field density and the permittivity of the magnetic field in the material database of FDTD software. The distribution of electron–hole pairs in the solar cell at any wavelength is determined. The intensity of the electric field and the permittivity of the imaginary part measured in the FDTD simulation can be used to calculate the absorption per unit area.

A larger generation rate is produced when a large amount of light is absorbed. In solar cells, the design of solar cells should take into account the different generating rates due to the efficient use of light from the entire wavelength range of the standard solar spectrum. A photon generates an electron–hole pair in the FDTD simulation calculation process. The number of photons absorbed per unit volume divided by the energy per photon is equal to the generation rate as follows:
(4)
where
G is the number of absorbed photons per unit volume and ℏ is the reduced Planck constant. Under ideal conditions, all absorbed photons can produce electron–hole pairs. The current is then calculated by the equation as follows:

I = eG
(5)
where
e is the charge of the electron. In the charge solver, we will get a more accurate current. After calculating the total current, electrical properties such as short-circuit current density (Jsc) can be calculated through the DEVICE. When the AM1.5G spectrum is used as a source (with a total power density specified as 100 mW cm−2), the total number of photons absorbed at all wavelengths will be able to generate a current of:

(6)
where
c and λ correspond to the speed of light in a vacuum and wavelength, respectively. QE(λ) and IAM1.5(λ) are the quantum efficiency of SCs and the solar irradiance of AM1.5, respectively. The open circuit voltage is derived from the following formula:

Voc = nKT/qln(IL/I0 + 1)
(7)
where,
k, T and q are the Boltzmann constant, absolute temperature and absolute value of electronic charge, respectively. IL and I0 correspond to the dark current and bright current. The filling factor is calculated using the following formula:

FF = Pmax/VocJsc
(8)
where
Pmax is the maximum power of the solar cell. The energy conversion efficiency of solar cells is calculated using the equation as follows

η = (FF × Voc × Jsc)/SAM1.5G
(9)
where SAM1.5G is the incident light energy under AM1.5 solar spectral radiation.

Because of the combination of the Al BP and the c-Si TTP, the optical and electrical performances of the ultra-thin c-Si/ZnO solar cell are improved. In the wavelength range from 300 nm to 1400 nm, the light absorption of these solar cells with comparative structures under the excitation of a plane wave (to simulate the sunlight) is shown in Fig. 3(a). In the full spectrum band (300 nm to 1400 nm), the average absorption of the “Planar”, “Only c-Si TTP” and “Only Al BP” structures are 65.31%, 74.51% and 79.05%, respectively. In contrast, the average absorption of the “c-Si TTP + Al BP” structure is 93.16%. It is clearly seen that the absorption spectra can be divided into two absorption regions. In the short-wave band (300–500 nm), the “Only c-Si TTP” structure and “c-Si TTP + Al BP” structure show almost identical absorption characteristics, and their average absorptions are 91.91% and 91.98%, respectively. For the “Planar” structure and “Only Al BP” structure, they also show a nearly identical absorption property in this region, and the average absorption is 80.92% and 81%, respectively. The short-wave band absorption is improved, which is probably ascribed to the extended propagation distance of incident light in silicon with a c-Si trapezoidal pyramid structure. For the long-wave band (500–1200 nm), the average absorption of the “Only c-Si TTP” structure and “Planar” structure are only 52.93% and 60.86%, respectively. However, with the embedding of the Al BP structure, the absorption of the “Only Al BP” structure and “c-Si TTP + Al BP” structure is significantly improved. On the sub-wavelength regime, the incident light is localized around the surface of Al pyramids via electromagnetically coupled oscillation (the so-called Surface Plasmon Resonance, SPR), and thereby the long-wave band (>500 nm) absorption is enhanced by Al pyramids. The transmission is almost zero due to the existence of the Al layer. Therefore, we primarily discuss the reflection characteristics of solar cells with different structures. From Fig. 3(b), it can be seen that the reflection of incident light is greatly suppressed by the c-Si/ZnO heterojunction solar cell combined with microstructures of c-Si TTP and Al BP. Moreover, it can be seen that the solar absorption spectra of the “only Al BP” structure and “c-Si TTP + Al BP” structure are more stable than other structures that have no Al pyramids, especially in the wavelength range of 300–1000 nm.

In order to study the influence of parasitic absorption on the performance of the SCs when the bottom Al BP is in contact with c-Si, we calculated the light absorption and the internal electric field distribution of the SCs with or without the bottom Al BP. As show in Fig. 4(a), The SCs without and with the Al BP structure are shown in (A) and (B). From the two curves A and B in Fig. 4(a), it can be seen that the absorption of the SCs with the Al BP structure has been significantly improved in the visible light band. In order to understand the internal absorption of the SCs with or without the Al BP structure, the corresponding internal electric field distribution diagram is shown in Fig. 4(b). This shows that the main electric field of the SCs with the Al BP structure is distributed in the c-Si layer, and the corresponding main absorption is distributed in the c-Si layer. The electric field distribution inside the Al BP structure is the smallest, and the corresponding absorption is the smallest. In order to further analyze the electric field distribution of the SCs with the Al BP structure, electric field monitors were set up at the bottom, middle, and top of the Al BP structure to explore the electric field distribution inside. As shown in Fig. 4(c), it can be seen that the electric field distribution from the bottom to the top increases in turn, indicating that the electric field is mainly distributed in the c-Si layer. The corresponding main absorption is also distributed in the Si layer of the SCs.
The absorption spectra of the solar cells with four different structures in the wavelength range from 300 nm to 1400 nm under the solar spectrum of AM 1.5 are shown in Fig. 5. For the standard AM 1.5 solar spectrum, the energy of sunlight is mainly distributed within 300–1200 nm, so the waveband we discuss in the following is mainly within 300–1200 nm. The light absorption spectra of the “Planar”, “only c-Si TTP”, “only Al BP” and “c-Si TTP + Al BP” structures versus the standard AM 1.5 solar spectrum are shown in (a), (b), (c) and (d), respectively. Among these curves, the black curve denotes the standard AM 1.5 solar spectrum, and the red curve denotes the solar energy absorption of c-Si/ZnO heterojunction solar cells with four different structures under simulative AM 1.5 sunlight. The average absorption efficiency of solar cell with the “planar” structure is 67.85% in the spectrum range from 300 nm to 1200 nm, which is shown in Fig. 5(a). Compared with the “planar” structure, the average absorption efficiency of the solar cell with the “only c-Si TTP” structure reaches 77.40% under the simulative AM 1.5 solar spectrum (Fig. 5(b)), which is attributed to the light absorption improvement in the short-wave band (300–600 nm). The extended propagation distance of incident light increases the coupling of light into the active layer. However, solar energy in the spectrum range from 600 nm to 1200 nm is not well absorbed (Fig. 3(b)). The solar cell with the “only Al BP” structure under simulative AM 1.5 sunlight is shown in Fig. 3(c). Due to the existence of SPR produced by the interaction between the Al BP and incident light, a near-field enhancement effect is generated and much of the electromagnetic energy is confined around the surface of Al BP, thereby enhancing the interaction between the incident light and photoactive layer. The average solar energy absorption of the c-Si/ZnO heterojunction solar cell with the “Only Al BP” structure reaches 80.25%. Compared with the “Planar” structure and “only c-Si TTP” structure, the solar energy absorption in the long wavelength band (600–1200 nm) is obviously improved. As shown in Fig. 5(d), for the structure of “c-Si TTP + Al BP”, the average solar energy absorption efficiency is increased to 93.76% in the spectrum range from 300 nm to 1200 nm. This structure combines the advantages of both the “only c-Si TTP” structure and “only Al BP” structure, not only broadening the absorption range in the solar spectrum, but also improving the solar energy absorption efficiency. Particularly, the solar spectrum energy not absorbed in the entire spectral range is further reduced compared with the other three structures, indicating that the combination of “c-Si TTP” and “Al BP” can comprehensively promote the solar energy absorption of the c-Si/ZnO heterojunction solar cell, which is attributed to the light-trapping improvement brought about by c-Si trapezoidal pyramids, near-field enhancement induced by Al pyramids as well as the optical coupling in between these two structures.
In order to simulate the influence of different incident angles of sunlight on the solar energy absorption at different times of the day, we set the incident angle through angle parameter sweeping in FDTD. We set the deflection angle of the incident light source through X on the sweeping, so as to analyze the absorption and electric field diagrams of different incident angles. The absorption is calculated from the normal incidence to the oblique incident angle of 60°. The absorption spectra for different angles are shown in Fig. 6(a). The difference in the solar energy absorptions for different incident angles is very slight. Whereas, it can be seen from Fig. 6(a) that the absorption is the largest with a 0° to 20° of incident angles, and the absorption is the smallest with an oblique incident angle of 60°. The average absorption of the solar cell under a normal incident angle of zero degrees is 94.82% when the wavelength range is 300 nm to 1200 nm, and the average absorption at an incident angle of 20 degrees is 94.88%. The average absorptions for incident angles of 40 degrees and 60 degrees are 94.65% and 92.51%, respectively. The average absorption efficiency of sunlight in the spectrum (300–1200 nm) from 0° to 60° is greater than 90%. Fig. 6(b) is the electric field scanning diagram under different incident light angles. The electric field density distributions have a very minor difference under different incident light angles. In all, it is demonstrated that the c-Si/ZnO heterojunction solar cell we designed has outstanding angle tolerance, so that the cells can better adapt to changes in the external environment.
Moreover, we studied the electrical properties of the c-Si/ZnO heterojunction solar cells of these four structures. The J–V characteristics of the solar cells with different structures are shown in Fig. 7(a). For the “Planar” structure, the Jsc and Voc are 11.50 mA cm−2 and 0.62 V, respectively. The Jsc and Voc were improved when the “c-Si TTP” structure was embedded on the top of the active layer surface, which enhances the absorption of the short-wave band by extending the propagation distance of light in silicon and increases the possibility of photons being absorbed by silicon. For solar cells with only an Al BP structure, the incident light is coupled to the Al BP surface due to the surface plasmon effect, which increases the near field effect, and its Jsc increases to 30.00 mA cm−2. When the “c-Si TTP + Al BP” structure was employed, the Jsc reached 41.94 mA cm−2 and Voc is 0.58 V, which is the best electrical performance among the four structures. The high absorption of solar energy is related to the high quantum efficiency which corresponds to the high Jsc according to eqn (4). Fig. 7(b) shows the dependence of power versus voltage (P–V curve) for these four solar cells with different structures. The Pm of the “c-Si TTP + Al BP” structure reaches 18.97 mW cm−2, while the “Planar” structure is only 5.81 mW cm−2, further indicating that the combination of “c-Si TTP” and “Al BP” can effectively improve the electrical performance of the solar cell.
For the purpose of demonstrating well the electrical performances of these four different solar cells, we compared the energy conversion efficiency and fill factor of solar cells with these four different structures. As shown in Fig. 8(a), it is clear to see that the energy conversion efficiency of solar cells with the “c-Si TTP+ Al BP” structure can reach 18.97%. Whereas, the energy conversion efficiency of solar cells with the “Planar”, “only the c-Si TTP” and “only Al BP” structures is only 5.81%, 6.03% and 13.41%, respectively. Surface plasmon resonance plays a very critical role in the enhancement of solar energy absorption. The fill factor of solar cells with different structures is shown in Fig. 8(b). Among them, the fill factor of the “Planar” solar cell without “c-Si TTP” and “Al BP” structures has the highest fill factor of 0.80. It is deduced that the existence of microstructure will degrade the fill factor of solar cells.
From the above discussion, it is shown that the solar cells exhibit different optical and electrical characteristics with different structures. To further reveal the underlying physical mechanism, comparative analysis of the electric field (E-field) intensity profiles for the “Planar”, “Only c-Si TTP”, “Only Al BP” and “c-Si TTP + Al BP” structure based c-Si/ZnO heterojunction solar cells were performed. The E-field intensity profiles at three representative wavelengths of 300 nm, 700 nm and 1100 nm of these four structures with optimized geometric parameters are shown in Fig. 9(a–l). As we can see from all figures in Fig. 9, the biggest region of the bottom Al layer has the lowest E-field distribution owing to the excellent reflection effect of the Al layer. According to Fig. 9(a)–(d), for wavelength λ = 300 nm, the “Planar” and “Only Al BP” structures have a weak E-field intensity at the top of the solar cell. Most of the incident light is reflected, and thereby a very weak E-field distribution is present in the silicon layer (not absorbed by the silicon layer). In contrast, the “Only c-Si TTP” and “c-Si TTP + Al BP” structures have a relatively stronger E-field located around the c-Si TTP structure and a little light can couple into silicon. The results indicate that the reflection at the short-wavelength band is slightly suppressed owing to the excellent light-trapping performance brought by the c-Si TTP structure. For a wavelength λ = 700 nm, as shown in Fig. 9(e)–(h), the incident light reaches the Al layer and the interference fringes are formed because of the interaction between incident light and reflected light for all four structures. The width of the interference fringes is related to the wavelength, and the intensity difference between the interference fringes is related to the stability of light absorption. In the “Only Al BP” structure and the “c-Si TTP +Al BP” structure, the bottom Al pyramids primarily enhance the solar energy absorption by coupling incident light to the Al pyramids surface, there is a near-field enhancement around the Al pyramids caused by SPR. For the “only c-Si TTP” structure and the “c-Si + TTP” structure, a strong E-field is distributed around the c-Si TTP, and with the increase in wavelength, the E-field is stronger than the wavelength of 300 nm, indicating that the intensity of optical coupling is increased and the optical absorption is improved. Besides, we can see that the intensity distribution of the interference fringes is kind of different, the intensity difference between the interference fringes in the “only Al BP” structure and “c-Si + Al BP” structure are smaller than the structure without the Al BP structure. This is attributed to the light scattering and coupling on the Al pyramids, which plays a critical role on tuning the incident light. That is, the smaller intensity difference between the interference fringes is, the more stable of optical absorption is, which corresponds to the results as shown in Fig. 8(a). For the longer wavelength λ = 1100 nm, as shown in Fig. 9(i)–(l), the interference fringes of E-field are evenly distributed in the “Planar” structure (Fig. 9(i)). In addition, for the “Only c-Si TTP” structure and the “Only Al BP” and “c-Si TTP + Al BP” structures, an extremely strong E-field is localized around the Al pyramids, which is the reason why the light absorption is higher than other structures in the longer waveband. Especially, in the “c-Si TTP + Al BP” structure, a relatively strong E-field is produced at the bottom of the c-Si TTP structure, which doesn’t exist in the case of the “Only c-Si TTP” structure. This indicates that the existence of Al pyramids is beneficial for enhancing the light-capturing property of the c-Si TTP structure. Therefore, it is deduced that the combination of the “c-Si TTP” structure and “Al BP” structure can further suppress the reflected light owing to the light-trapping effect of c-Si TTP, the SPR of the Al pyramids and the interaction between them. In this case, the “c-Si TTP + Al BP” structure for c-Si/ZnO heterojunction solar cells shows the highest optical absorption compared to the other three structures.
The thickness of the active layer is an important factor in the design of ultra-thin solar cells. The thickness of the active layer can directly affect the optical absorption and carrier transport characteristics, so it is very critical to optimize the thickness of the c-Si active layer. To optimize the thickness of the silicon layer, we will explore in detail the optical absorption performance of solar cells with different silicon layer thicknesses. The absorption of the solar cells is not significantly different as shown in Fig. 10(a). The absorption of solar cells with different c-Si thicknesses in the wavelength range from 300 nm to 800 nm basically overlaps. The solar cell with a thickness of 600 nm has an average absorption of 93.82% in the wavelength range from 300 nm to 1200 nm, an average absorption of 93.76% at a thickness of 750 nm and 900 nm, an average absorption of 93.79% at a thickness of 1050 nm, and an average absorption of 93.87% at a thickness of 1200 nm. The absorption of solar cells with a c-Si thickness of 1200 nm is better than other thicknesses in the long wavelength ranging from 800 nm to 1400 nm. In order to more intuitively reveal the influence of the active layer thickness on the optoelectronic properties of solar cells, we thus compared and analyzed the average absorption in the whole wavelength range and the ideal short-circuit current density of different c-Si active layer thicknesses. As shown in Fig. 10(b), the black curve is the average absorption of solar cells with different active layer thicknesses. The average absorption of solar cells with c-Si active layer thicknesses of 600 nm to 1200 nm is 0.921523, 0.921355, 0.921531, 0.922107 and 0.9224, respectively. We can see that with the increase of thickness in the c-Si active layer, the average light absorption tends to increase. When the thickness of the c-Si active layer is between 750 nm and 900 nm, with the increment of the absorption of solar cells, the ideal Jsc is accordingly increased. When the thickness of the c-Si active layer reaches 900 nm, the ideal short-circuit current attains a peak value, and then as the thickness of the c-Si active layer is further increased, the ideal short-circuit current density gradually decreases. It is possible that the recombination of charge carriers increases with thickness, thus resulting in a slight decrease in the ideal short-circuit current density.
The short-circuit current density of these c-Si/ZnO silicon solar cells with different active layer thicknesses is shown in Fig. 11(a). The Voc remains almost unchanged, whereas the Jsc first increases, and then decreases, as the thickness of the c-Si active layer is varied from 600 nm to 1200 nm. When the height is 900 nm, the Jsc reaches the maximum (41.94 mA cm−2). Fig. 11(b) shows the dependence of power on voltage (P–V curve) for these solar cells with different thicknesses of c-Si active layer. When the thickness c of the active layer is 900 nm, the maximum power is 18.97 mW cm−2, and when the thickness c of the active layer is 600 nm, the minimum power is 16.31 mW cm−2. When the thickness C of the active layer is different, the power is slightly different. When the thickness of the active layer is 750 nm, 1050 nm and 1200 nm, the corresponding power is 17.87 mW cm−2, 18.22 mW cm−2 and 17.81 mW cm−2 respectively.
It can be seen from Fig. 3 that the introduction of “c-Si TTP” can significantly improve the absorption of the short-wave band. In order to better explore its physical mechanism, we have investigated the effects of different widths (w) of the upper surface of c-Si TTP on the optoelectronic properties of the device. Fig. 12(a) is the optical absorption of c-Si TTP with different w. Because of the pyramid's tip effect when is in the short-wavelength region (300–500 nm), with the increase in w from 0 nm to 80 nm, the absorption efficiency is decreased from 95.83% to 75.79%. For the long-wave band (500–1200 nm), when w is 40 nm, its absorption efficiency reaches the peak of 95.80%. When w is 0 nm, the absorption efficiency is 93.66%, and when w is 80 nm, the absorption efficiency is 93.16%. For the optimized the solar cells with the “c-Si TTP + Al BP” structure, the w of the c-Si trapezoidal pyramids was further varied to investigate its effect on the optoelectronic properties of the solar cells. Fig. 12(b) shows the I–V characteristic curves of c-Si/ZnO solar cells with different c-Si TTP widths. When w is 0 nm, Jsc is 39.67 mA cm−2 and Voc is 0.58 V. When w is 40 nm, Jsc is 41.94 mA cm−2 and Voc is 0.58 V. When w is 80 nm, Jsc is 37.13 mA cm−2 and Voc is 0.57 V. Obviously, when w is 40 nm, the largest Jsc is obtained, which is consistent with the results of the optical properties discussed above. The maximum Jsc and Voc were obtained by using a c-Si of 40 nm (41.94 mA cm−2 and 0.58 V). The dependence of power on voltage for these c-Si/ZnO solar cells are shown in Fig. 12(c). When w is 0 nm, the maximum power density of the solar cell is 18.07 mW cm−2. When w is 40 nm, the maximum power density of the solar cell is 18.94 mW cm−2. When w is increased to 80 nm, the maximum power density of the solar cell is dropped to 16.74 mW cm−2. The thickness, short-circuit current density and open circuit voltage for different c-Si/ZnO thin-film solar cells were compared and listed in Table 1. It can be seen from the Table that the solar cells we proposed have the best performances.
Materials
Si thickness (μm)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
Efficiency (%)
Ref.
c-Si
0.31
32.79
9.07

58

c-Si
1
32.8
15.9

59

c-Si
25
31.9
15.1

60

a-Si
1
17.08
8.94

61

c-Si
10
33.9
15.7

62

c-Si (this work)
0.9
42.94
18.97
Proposed
In addition, the influence of period on the absorption performance of the solar cell is shown in Fig. 13(a). As shown in Fig. 13(a), in the short wavelength range of 300 nm to 500 nm, the average absorption of 100 nm and 150 nm periods of the solar cell are 92.00% and 93.94%, respectively. In the visible light range where the solar spectrum is mainly concentrated, it can be seen that the absorption at the period of 100 nm is more stable and better than that at the periods of 50 nm and 150 nm. The average absorption of the solar cell with different periods of 50 nm, 100 nm and 150 nm are 95.49% 98.80% and 97.73% at wavelengths of 500 nm to 900 nm, respectively. Therefore, we know that the period of the solar cell with the optimal solar spectral response is 100 nm. We have also investigated the effects of different heights (h) of c-Si TTP and Al TP on the optical properties of the solar cell. Fig. 13(b) shows the absorption of c-Si TTP and Al TP with different h. It can be seen that the absorption of the solar cells at 200 nm and 300 nm overlaps. In the wavelength range of 300 nm to 800 nm, the average absorptions are 94.54% and 94.62%, respectively. When the height of the TTP and BP is 100 nm, the absorption is the worst, and the average absorption is 89.92%. The absorption of the solar cell increases with increasing height. However, as the height of the c-Si TTP and Al BP increases, the enhanced absorption of the plasmon results in a partial parasitic absorption increase, so the ideal Jsc decreases when the height of the c-Si TTP and Al BP is 300 nm.
The short-circuit current density of these c-Si/ZnO silicon solar cells with a different period is shown in Fig. 14(a). The Voc remains almost unchanged when periods of the solar cell are 50 nm and 100 nm. The voltage reaches 0.64 when the period is 150 nm, whereas the Jsc first increases, and then decreases, as the periods of the solar cell are varied from 50 nm to 150 nm. When the period is 100 nm, the Jsc reaches the maximum (41.94 mA cm−2). Fig. 14(b) shows the dependence of power on voltage (P–V curve) for these solar cells with different periods. When the period of the solar cell is 100 nm, the maximum power is 18.97 mW cm−2 and when the period of the solar cell is 50 nm, the minimum power is 15.27 mW cm−2. When the power of the solar cell period is 150 nm, the power is 18.36 mW cm−2.
The short-circuit current density of these solar cells with different heights are shown in Fig. 15(a). The Voc remains almost unchanged when the heights of the solar cells are 100 nm and 300 nm. The Voc are 0.64 and 0.65 respectively, whereas the Jsc first increases, and then decreases, as the heights of the c-Si TTP and Al BP are varied from 100 nm to 300 nm. When the height is 200 nm, the Jsc reaches the maximum (41.94 mA cm−2). Fig. 15(b) shows the dependence of power on voltage (P–V curve) for these solar cells with different heights of the c-Si TTP and Al BP. When the height of the c-Si TTP and Al BP is 200 nm, the maximum power is 18.97 mW cm−2. When the height (h) of the c-Si TTP and Al BP is 100 nm, the minimum power is 14.95 mW cm−2. The power when the height of the c-Si TTP and Al BP is 300 nm, is 17.87 mW cm−1.

In conclusion, the solar energy absorption and electrical characteristics were improved by the structure of a solar cell with c-Si TTP and Al BP. The top c-Si trapezoidal pyramids enhance the absorption of the short-wave band (300 nm to 600 nm) by extending the propagation distance of incident light and coupling the reflected light into the active layer. The bottom Al pyramids primarily improve the absorption of a longer wavelength band by confining the electromagnetic energy around the Al pyramids by SPR. The average solar energy absorption of our proposed structure is above 92% under wavelengths ranging from 300 nm to 1400 nm. We have also explored the solar energy absorption characteristics under the AM 1.5 spectrum. The influence of different incident light angles on solar energy absorption was calculated, and the electric field intensity scanning diagram under different incident light angles was compared and analyzed. To further understand its electrical properties, we have calculated the electrical characteristics of different structures of the solar cells. The current density of the solar cell with c-Si TTP and Al BP structures was 41.94 mA cm−2, which is consistent with the highest absorption under the AM 1.5 spectrum. Its energy conversion efficiency is as high as 18.97%. The underlying physical mechanism was also analyzed. Moreover, in order to explore the influence of different geometrical parameters on the electrical and optical properties of solar cells, the effects of different c-Si active layer thickness and c-Si TTP top side length on the light absorption and electrical properties of solar cells were compared and analyzed. Our work has made some progress in the development of ultra-thin crystalline silicon solar cells.


There are no conflicts to declare.


The authors are grateful to the support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51606158, 11604311, 61705204, 21506257); the funding from the Scientific Research Fund of Si Chuan Provincial Science and Technology Department (2020YJ0137; 2020YFG0467); the funding from the Scientific and Technological Innovation Programs of Higher Education Institutions in Shanxi (STIP) (Grant No. 2021L485); the funding from the Undergraduate Innovation Fund Project Precision Funding by Southwest University of Science and Technology (JZ21-052; JZ21-057); the College Students’ innovation and entrepreneurship training program (S202110619073; S202110619069; S202110619065); and the undergraduate Innovation Fund Project of SWUST (CX 21-099; LX20210067; LX2020010; LX20210001 and CX21-008).


This journal is © the Owner Societies 2022