 DOI: 10.1039/C9TC05301H
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 14962-14969


Yalun
Wang
,

Mengxue
Chen
,

Donghui
Li
,

Zhiwei
Huang
,

Yuchao
Mao
,

Wenjiao
Han
,

Tao
Wang
 and 

Dan
Liu
*

School of Materials Science and Engineering, Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan 430070, China. E-mail: dliu@whut.edu.cn

Received
27th September 2019
, Accepted 6th November 2019
First published on 7th November 2019
Grafted with hexamethyldisiloxane (HMDS), mesoporous silica nanoparticle (MSN) hybrids have been synthesized and explored as an antireflective coating (ARC) to enhance the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of non-fullerene organic solar cells (OSCs). The ARC consisting of HMDS–MSN hybrids and silica oligomer binders can increase the transmittance of the OSC glass substrate from a maximum value of around 90% to 95%, allowing more visible light to be absorbed by the photoactive layer of OSCs and be converted to free charges. After coating of an ARC, the short-circuit current density and PCE of PBDB-T:ITIC OSCs increased from 15.5 mA cm−2 and 9.7% to 16.1 mA cm−2 and 10.1%, with those of PBDB-T-2F:BTP-4F OSCs increasing from 25.2 mA cm−2 and 15.4% to 26.7 mA cm−2 and 16.2%, which is among the highest reported efficiency of single-junction OSCs in the literature. Meanwhile, the fill factor and open-circuit voltage of those OSCs remain unaffected. Our results suggest that an ARC is a superior approach to enhance the efficiency of organic solar cells.

With promising advantages such as low cost, light weight, and excellent mechanical flexibility, organic solar cells (OSCs) are one of the key devices to generate renewable energy from sunlight. The state-of-the-art power conversion efficiency (PCE) of single-junction OSCs is over 16% now, benefiting from the emergence of new semi-conductors, and the optimization of the components and morphology of the photoactive layer. For instance, in 2015, a non-fullerene electron acceptor (NFA) ITIC was synthesized by Lin et al., which shows broad light adsorption, good electron transport ability, and good miscibility with polymer donors. A PCE over 11% has been achieved when employing PBDB-T as the electron donor. Recently, another NFA BTP-4F was synthesized and delivered a maximum PCE of 15.7% with PBDB-T-2F as the donor. By sticking to the BTP-4F electron acceptor, Huang et al. reported a PCE over 16% by employing P2F-EHp as the electron donor, and Peng et al. demonstrated that the platinum(II) complexation between Pt(Ph)2(DMSO)2 and the polymer PSFTZ can effectively regulate the crystallinity and molecular packing of the PSFTZ donor to obtain a PCE of 16.35%. Hou et al. reported a chlorinated derivative of BTP-4F, i.e. BTP-4Cl, to extend the optical absorption and to achieve a higher voltage, and demonstrated a high PCE of 16.5% in single-junction PBDB-TF:BTP-4Cl solar cells.

Whilst novel electron-donating and electron-accepting materials steer the steady progress of OSCs, light management has also been demonstrated to be a promising strategy to effectively increase the light-harvesting and efficiency of OSCs. For example, Chen et al. doped Au nanoparticles into the hole transport layer to extend the path of photons in the active layer of P3HT:PC60BM solar cells, and increased the PCE from 3.46% to 4.28%. Yang et al. incorporated Au nanoparticles into the PEDOT:PSS interconnecting layer between PSBTBT:PC60BM and P3HT:ICBA layers, and enhanced the PCE of tandem solar cell from 5.22% to 6.24%. However, this costly method needs strict control over the size and shape of the metal particles, as well as the content and location of these nanoparticles within the OSCs.
Casting an antireflective coating (ARC) onto the transparent substrate side of solar cell devices is another effective approach to increase the device performance. For example, the PCE of a P3HT:PCBM device could be increased by 10% after casting an acrylate functionalized perfluoropolyether ARC using the template-mediated UV replica molding method. The methods of fabricating ARCs are versatile. For instance, Striemer et al. used the electrochemical etching method to achieve zero reflection at 550 nm on a silicon substrate. Raut et al. used the nanoimprint lithography method and demonstrated the fabrication of a highly durable and mechanically superior ARC by imprinting a polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxane-based material on double-sides of a glass substrate. However, those technologies need extremely precise regulation of patterns, accompanied by specialized and expensive instruments as well as complex processing procedures. Nanoscale phase separation of block copolymers has also been applied to prepare ARCs, e.g. Li et al. cast a PS-b-PMMA/PMMA blend solution onto a modified glass substrate, and an ARC could be obtained after the removal of the PMMA component. Again, it's difficult to precisely control the mesoporous structure via this method. Hence, a simple method to cast ARCs is important to extend their applications. Mesoporous silica nanoparticles (MSNs) have been used to prepare uniform ARCs with suitable refractive indices in many studies. In these studies, dip-coating is a common strategy to get ARCs, and circular dip-coating into a SiO2 sol followed by high temperature calcination to remove the template was used to get ARCs on the substrate. The type of substrates is therefore restricted in order to avoid damage in the precursor solution and under high temperature. Fortunately, ARCs can also be prepared by bar-coating 27 and spin-coating of MSNs without the presence of templating materials, and high temperature sintering can therefore be avoided.
In this work, we used triethanolamine (TEA) instead of ammonia as the catalyst to synthesize a monodisperse colloidal suspension of MSNs with diameters of 20–30 nm, which allows us to discard the long aging process reported in the literature. The large pore volume within these mesoporous nanoparticles can substantially reduce their refractive indices. Then the surface of the MSNs was grafted with hydrophobic hexamethyldisiloxane (HMDS) to give HMDS–MSN hybrids, and the surfactants were removed using the procedure described by Okubo et al. A silica oligomer was employed as a binder to tune the refractive indices of the spin-cast HMDS–MSN hybrid films to match the refractive index of the glass substrate. The ARCs consisting of HMDS–MSN and binders can increase the transmittance of the glass from a maximum value of around 90 to 95%, allowing more visible light to reach the photoactive layer of OSCs and be converted to free charges. With the presence of an ARC coated on the outside of the glass substrate of OSCs facing the sun-light, the short-circuit current density (JSC) and PCE of PBDB-T:ITIC OSCs increased from 15.5 mA cm−2 and 9.7% to 16.1 mA cm−2 and 10.1%, with those of PBDB-T-2F:BTP-4F OSCs increased from 25.2 mA cm−2 and 15.4% to 26.7 mA cm−2 and 16.2%. Meanwhile, the fill factor (FF) and open-circuit voltage (VOC) of those OSCs remain unchanged. Our ARC therefore pushes forward the PCE of OSCs to among the highest efficiency reported in the literature.

The mesoporous silica nanoparticles were synthesized according to literature reports from Bein and Okubo, and this synthesis is detailed in the Experimental section. During the preparation of HMDS–MSN hybrids, the silylation and surfactant removal processes were achieved in one step with the presence of HMDS and HCl. As shown in the FT-IR spectra of the MSNs and HMDS–MSN in Fig. 1a, the symmetric and anti-symmetric Si–O–Si stretching vibrations are observed at 782 cm−1 and 1082 cm−1. The peaks at 454 cm−1 and 941 cm−1 derive from Si–O–Si and Si–OH bending vibrations. The bending and stretching vibrations of the methyl group from the surfactant hexadecyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) are observed at 2966 and 2928 cm−1 respectively but with very low intensities, suggesting the existence of a small amount of CTAB in the MSNs and HMDS–MSN hybrids. Our following results suggest that these remaining surfactants do not have a substantial influence towards achieving a low refractive index of the ARC. To confirm that the –Si(CH3)3 group of HMDS has been successfully grafted onto the MSNs, a solid-state 29Si MAS NMR test was performed and the results are illustrated in Fig. 1b. Both NMR spectra in Fig. 1b show three obvious signals: Q2, Q3 and Q4 (Qn: Si(OSi)n(OH or O−)4−n, where n = 2, 3 or 4). After grafting HMDS onto the MSNs, a new M1 signal (originating from SiOSi(CH3)3) appears in the NMR spectrum of HMDS–MSN, confirming that HMDS has been successfully grafted onto the MSNs.

Dynamic light scattering (DLS) spectra of the MSNs and HMDS–MSN dispersed in 2-propanol are presented in Fig. 1c. The DLS data show that the hydrodynamic diameters are distributed narrowly and are centered at about 30 and 37 nm respectively, suggesting fairly good monodispersity of both suspensions. The TEA used in the synthesis of the MSNs accounts for the monodispersity here, which has been reported in the literature to give stable and monodisperse MSNs. The reduced hydrodynamic diameter of HMDS–MSN compared with the MSNs is mainly caused by the grafting of HMDS onto the MSNs, where the alkyl chains of HMDS around the MSNs will provide a steric effect to inhibit the aggregation of the MSNs.
In order to investigate the mesoporous structures of the MSNs and HMDS–MSN, nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherms were measured and are plotted in Fig. 1d. Hysteresis can be observed in the isotherms of both the MSNs and HMDS–MSN, which are typical type IV isotherms showing a mesoporous structure. The pore diameter distribution curves are shown in Fig. 1e, where two peaks located at ca. 2.7 and 26 nm can be observed. The first peak at 2.7 nm represents the pore diameter, which shows that the pore sizes of the MSNs and HMDS–MSN hybrids are almost the same. The second peak reflects the average pore space resulting from the random packing of silica nanoparticles.Table 1 summarizes the Barrett–Joyner–Halenda (BJH) surface area (A), pore volume (V) and average pore width (4V/A) extracted from the nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherms, all of which are reduced after grafting HMDS onto the MSNs, indicating that the grafting of HMDS also happens in the pore sites of the MSNs. The TEM image (Fig. 1f and Fig. S1, ESI) clearly shows the porous structure of HMDS–MSN, from which a particle diameter of around 25 nm can be determined, which is smaller than the hydrodynamic diameter from DLS data where the particles are dispersed in 2-propanol.
BET surface area (m2 g−1)
Pore volume (cm3 g−1)
Average pore width (nm)
MSNs
832
1.48
7.1
HMDS–MSN
626
0.97
6.2
The above monodisperse and stable suspension of HMDS–MSN in 2-propanol is then blended with a silica oligamor binder at various volume ratios to cast the ARC films. Fig. 2a shows surface scanning electron microscopy (SEM) of an HMDS–MSN ARC film (VolumeHMDS–MSN:Volumebinder = 5:1), in which the nanoparticles randomly packed closely to form a uniform and fairly continuous coating. A cross-sectional SEM image of an HMDS–MSN hybrid ARC film around 115 nm thick is shown in Fig. 2b, from which a uniform and continuous cross-section is observed. The ARC made of MSNs is hydrophilic, with a water contact angle of ca. 16° (see Fig. 2c), and turns hydrophobic after grafting with HMDS with the water contact angle increased to ca. 127° (see Fig. 2d). This significantly increased hydrophobicity is due to the presence of the HMDS component in the hybrid. The environmental durability of these ARCs is evaluated through water impalement testing (see Fig. 2e), during which water droplets land on the ARC surface from a height of 50 cm (giving a 1 MPa impact force on the surface) at a rate of ca. one drop per second, and the transmittance of the ARC coatings was re-measured every three hours. The results suggest that ARCs made of MSNs, HMDS–MSN and HMDS–MSN/binder (a volume ratio of 5:1) can all retain their original transmittance after 24 hour water droplet impalement measurements, demonstrating good environmental durability. Fig. 2f shows that the ARC can significantly increase the transmittance of the glass substrate from a maximum value of around 90% to 95% at a wavelength near 515 nm, with the transmittance reduced at both shorter and longer wavelengths. The reflectance of the glass also reduces substantially after coating with the ARC (see Fig. S1d, ESI). Optical modeling of the transmittance and reflectance of the bare glass and that coated with an ARC was performed to compare with experimental results (see the ESI for details). Our model fitting suggests negligible difference in either the transmittance or reflectance of the glass coated with ARCs having different thicknesses, a result that is consistent with our experimental observation presented in Fig. S1c and d (ESI). A comparison of the transmittance and reflectance of bare glass and glass coated with a 115 nm thick ARC shows that the reflectance of the experimental and modeled data match each other (Fig. S1d, ESI), and the maximum value of the transmittance also matches although deviations can be observed at short and long wavelengths (Fig. S1c, ESI). This is largely due to the fact that the optical modeling failed to take into account the absorption of both the glass substrate and the ARC. It is also observed that the transmittance remains largely unchanged when the volume ratio of HMDS–MSN:binder varies (Fig. 2g).
To deliver the antireflective effect, the reflective index and thickness of the ARC should follow the relationship:
(1)
(2)
Here
nair (= 1), narc and nglass (= 1.5) represent the refractive indices of air, the ARC and the glass substrate respectively, which implies an ideal narc of ca. 1.22. darc is the thickness of the ARC, and λ is the wavelength of the light. The binder here was used to adjust the refractive index and improve the mechanical properties of the ARC. With the volume ratio of HMDS–MSN:binder changed from 5:1, 4:1, and 3:1 to 7:3, the refractive index of the ARC (115 nm thick) can be finely tuned to 1.20, 1.20, 1.23 and 1.24 at 550 nm. These low refractive indices, which are all close to the ideal value of 1.22, ensure a good antireflective effect of these ARCs at various blending ratios and this is consistent with our experimental results presented in Fig. 2g. Then a HMDS–MSN:binder ratio of 5:1 was chosen to cast the ARC, due to its best film uniformity and mechanical strength, onto the glass substrate of OSC devices (see Fig. 3) to increase the transmittance of the glass substrate and therefore allow more light to reach the photoactive layer of the OSCs to enhance the device performance. Our OSC devices are pixelated to have 8 individual sub-devices, with can each operate separately and therefore can be employed to evaluate the uniformity of the ARC at different locations of a single glass substrate.

We have coated our ARCs on the outside of glass substrates of both PBDB-T:ITIC and PBDB-T-2F:BTP-4F non-fullerene OSCs. The effects of the ARC on the performance of the OSCs could be obtained by comparing the device photovoltaic parameters before and after the coating of the ARC. Representative current density–voltage (J–V) curves of PBDB-T:ITIC and PBDB-T-2F:BTP-4F OSCs are plotted in Fig. 4a and c, and average device metrics are summarized in Table 2. The original PBDB-T:ITIC OSC exhibits a maximum PCE (PCEmax) of 9.7%, with a JSC of 15.5 mA cm−2, a VOC of 0.88 V and a FF of 71.3%, a performance that is close to literature reports. With the presence of a 115 nm ARC, the FF and VOC are largely unchanged, however, the JSC increases to 16.1 mA cm−2, leading to an increased PCE of 10.1%. The PCE of our reference PBDB-T-2F:BTP-4F OSC is 15.4%, an efficiency that is again close to the literature report, and validates our device fabrication process. The changes in the device metrics of the PBDB-T-2F:BTP-4F OSC follow the above trends. Whilst the FF and VOC values are constant regardless of the presence of the ARC, the JSC of the OSC increases from 25.2 to 26.7 mA cm−2, leading to an increased PCE from 15.4% to 16.2%, which is among the highest reported PCEs of non-fullerene OSCs in the literature. The corresponding external quantum efficiency (EQE) of Fig. 4a and c is presented in Fig. 4b and d, from which JSC can be calculated, and it is found to be about 4–8% less than the JSC obtained from the J–V curves and therefore validates our J–V measurements. The EQE spectrum illustrates that the PBDB-T:ITIC OSC responds in the wavelength range from 300 to 800 nm, and the EQE spectrum is extended to 950 nm when using PBDB-T-2F:BTP-4F as the photoactive layer. With the presence of the ARC, the PBDB-T:ITIC OSC exhibits an enhanced photon response through the wavelength range from 415 to 725 nm, and the PBDB-T-2F:BTP-4F OSC exhibits an enhanced photon response from 470 to 835 nm, both due to the enhanced light absorption. We also found that the variation of the ARC thickness from 105 to 120 nm provides the same effect to enhance the light absorption and efficiency of both PBDB-T:ITIC and PBDB-T-2F:BTP-4F OSCs (see Fig. S2 and Table S2, ESI for more details).

J
SC (mA cm−2)
Calculated JSC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)

V
OC (V)
PCE (%)
PBDB-T:ITIC (W/O ARC)
15.5 (15.5 ± 0.1)
14.2
71.3 (71.4 ± 0.5)
0.88 (0.88 ± 0.01)
9.7 (9.7 ± 0.1)
PBDB-T:ITIC (with 115 nm ARC)
16.1 (16.2 ± 0.1)
15.0
71.7 (71.5 ± 0.5)
0.88 (0.88 ± 0.01)
10.1 (10.1 ± 0.1)
PBDB-T-2F:BTP-4F (W/O ARC)
25.2 (25.2 ± 0.3)
24.3
76.0 (77.0 ± 0.1)
0.80 (0.80 ± 0.01)
15.4 (15.3 ± 0.4)
PBDB-T-2F:BTP-4F (with 115 nm ARC)
26.7 (26.6 ± 0.1)
25.7
76.0 (75.9 ± 0.2)
0.80 (0.80 ± 0.01)
16.2 (16.2 ± 0.1)
To evaluate the uniformity of these ARCs to improve the absorption and enhance the device performance of OSCs, we look at the device photovoltaic parameters of all eight pixels sharing the same glass substrate. Fig. 5a–d plot the PCE, JSC, FF and VOC of PBDB-T:ITIC OSCs with and without the ARC, and Fig. 5e–h plot the PCE, JSC, FF and VOC of PBDB-T-2F:BTP-4F OSCs with and without the ARC. It is clear that the FF and VOC of all pixels of both OSCs are largely unchanged, whilst the PCEs of all pixels can be enhanced as a result of the increased JSC by around 5%. Varying the thickness of the ARC from 105 to 120 nm has the same impact on all pixels of the OSCs (Fig. S3, ESI).
Finally, the storage stability of PBDB-T:ITIC devices with ARCs having different thicknesses (105 nm, 115 nm and 120 nm) and without an ARC was also measured. Fig. S4a (ESI) shows that the PCE degradation of all OSCs follows the same trend, suggesting that the presence of the ARC has no influence on the shelf lifetime of the OSCs, and the degradation of the OSCs is due to intrinsic damage within the OSCs. Indeed, we found that the transmittance of our ARC coating remained constant for a duration of 30 days upon storing in air (Fig. S4b, ESI).

Mesoporous structured silica nanoparticles have been synthesized and further grafted with HMDS to produce HMDS–MSN hybrids, which are employed to fabricate an antireflective coating on a glass substrate after blending with silica oligomer binders. The transmittance increment of the glass substrate (from ca. 90% to 95%) and the decrease in reflectance (from ca. 8% to 4%) have been verified by both experiments and optical modeling. These antireflective coatings are cast on the outside of the glass substrate of organic solar cells to increase the light-absorption of the photoactive layer and to enhance the device performance. With the presence of a 115 nm antireflective coating, the short-circuit current density and PCE of PBDB-T:ITIC OSCs increased from 15.5 mA cm−2 and 9.7% to 16.1 mA cm−2 and 10.1%, with those of PBDB-T-2F:BTP-4F OSCs increased from 25.2 mA cm−2 and 15.4% to 26.7 mA cm−2 and 16.2%, a PCE that is among the highest reported efficiency of single-junction OSCs in the literature. Our results suggest that an antireflective coating is a superior approach to enhance the device performance of organic solar cells.


Tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS, >99%) was purchased from Macklin. Triethanolamine (TEA, AR), hydrochloric acid (HCl, 36–38%), ethanol, iso-propanol, chlorobenzene and chloroform were purchased from Shenshi Chemical. Hexamethyldisiloxane (HMDS, 99%) and hexadecyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB, 99%) were purchased from Aladdin. PBDB-T, PBDB-T-2F and ITIC were purchased from Solarmer Materials (Beijing) Inc. BTP-4F was purchased from eFlex. PV Technology (Shenzhen) Co. Ltd. The ZnO precursor was synthesized as reported before.


Firstly, 15.0 g aqueous solution of CTAB (2.5 wt%) and 0.6 g aqueous solution of TEA (10 wt%) were heated under stirring to 70 °C in an oil bath. Foam was avoided after adequate stirring. Then 1.2 mL TEOS was added into the solution and a nattier blue solution can be observed after a few minutes. The mixture was stirred at 70 °C for another 2 hours. Finally, 14.0 mL flocculant (a mixture of 8.9 mL concentrated HCl (37%) and 100 mL ethanol) was added slowly into the resulting solution, to allow silica nanoparticles to flocculate and then be collected by centrifugation. The surfactants within these silica nanoparticles were removed by 10 min ultrasonication in 20 mL flocculant. The resulting MSNs were collected by centrifugation, cleaned twice with ethanol, and then dried in an oven under 60 °C. To prepare the HMDS–MSN hybrids, the as-synthesized silica nanoparticles were redispersed in 80 mL deionized water, and the suspension was slowly added to a mixture of HMDS (23.76 mL), 2-propanol (26.75 mL), and 5 N HCl (40.1 mL) that had been stirred at 70 °C for 0.5 h. During this procedure, HMDS was grafted onto the silica nanoparticles to give HMDS–MSN hybrids and the surfactants were also removed with HCl. The resulting HMDS–MSN was collected by centrifugation, cleaned twice with ethanol, and then redispersed into 2-propanol for further use.


The ARC film was fabricated by spin-coating a mixture of the HMDS–MSN suspension (2 wt% in 2-propanol) and silica oligomer binder (2.3 wt% in 2-propanol) at various volume ratios. The silica oligomer binder was synthesized by reaction of 2 mL 2-propanol, 100 μL TEOS and 50 μL HCl (0.1 mol L−1) at room temperature for 2 h.


Inverted non-fullerene organic solar cell devices were fabricated as described herein. The pre-patterned ITO glass substrates (resistance 15 Ω per square) were cleaned by three times sonication in deionized water, ethanol and isopropyl alcohol, respectively for 10 minutes each. Then the substrates were dried at 100 °C on a hotplate and subsequently treated with UV/ozone for 15 min. Then the ZnO precursor solution was spin-coated onto the ITO glass at a speed of 4000 rpm and annealed at 200 °C for 30 min (final thickness ca. 30 nm). The PBDB-T:ITIC layer was spin cast from a 14 mg mL−1 CB solution at a spin speed of 1000 rpm to give a final thickness of 100 nm. For the PBDB-T-2F:BTP-4F devices, the active layer was deposited by spin-coating from a 16 mg mL−1 chloroform solution (with 0.5 vol% CN) of PBDB-T-2F:BTP-4F to obtain films 130 nm thick, in a nitrogen-filled glovebox. Next, 10 nm MoO3 and 100 nm Ag were thermally evaporated onto the photoactive layer under a high vacuum through a shadow mask as the hole transport layer and anode, respectively. Each device consists of 8 pixels, and the size, determined by the anode and cathode, is 4 mm2. Finally, all devices were encapsulated with glass slides using UV-curable epoxy before being moved out of the glove box for J–V and stability measurements. The ARC layer was coated on the outside of the glass substrate after the fabrication of the OSCs.


The morphology of the MSNs and HMDS–MSN was determined using a transmission electron microscope (TEM) (JEM-1400Plus, Japan) at an accelerating voltage of 120 kV. The mesoporous structure of the silica nanoparticles was analyzed by a fully-automatic specific surface area and porosity analyzer (ASAP 2020M, Micromeritrics). Surface area calculations were performed using the BET method. The distribution of the pore size was calculated using the BJH mode. The Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) absorption spectra of the silica particles were measured with an FT-IR spectrometer (Spectrum Two, PerkinElmer, America). The solid-state 29Si MAS NMR spectra of the MSNs and HMDS–MSN were collected using a solid state nuclear magnetic resonance spectrometer (AVANCE III). The silica particle films’ transmittance was measured using a UV-vis spectrophotometer (Hitachi, Japan) from 300 to 900 nm. The reflectance was measured using a UV-vis spectrophotometer (Lambda750 S, PerkinElmer, America) with an integrating sphere accessory. The optical modeling of the transmittance and reflectance was performed using the software TFCalc, and is described in the ESI. The morphology of the ARCs was measured by SEM (S4800, Hitachi). The thickness and refractive indices of the films were calculated using a spectroscopy ellipsometer (SE) (M2000D, J. A. Woollam Co.) and analyzed in Cauchy mode. The hydrophobicity of the films was analyzed using a water contact angle instrument (Theta Attension, Biolin Scientific, Finland) at room temperature, and recorded using OneAttension software.

Device J–V measurements were performed under AM 1.5G (100 mW cm−2) with a Newport 3A solar simulator (Newport, USA) after the light intensity was calibrated using an NREL-certified silicon reference cell. The J–V characteristics were measured with software developed by Ossila Ltd (UK) and a source meter unit (2612B, Keithley, USA). An aperture mask was placed over the device to define an accurate measurement area of 2.2 mm2 for each pixel. EQE measurements were conducted using an EQE system (Zolix, China) equipped with a standard silicon diode.

The authors declare no conflict of interest.


This work was supported by the Natural Science Foundation of Hubei Province (Grant No. 2019CFB575), and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grants No. 21774097).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9tc05301h
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019