 DOI: 10.1039/D0EE02043E
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 5068-5079


Shuangjie
Wang
,

Bowen
Yang
,

Jian
Han
,

Ziwei
He
,

Tongtong
Li
,

Qi
Cao
,

Jiabao
Yang
,

Jiajia
Suo
,

Xuanhua
Li
*,

Zhike
Liu
,

Shengzhong (Frank)
Liu
,

Chao
Tang
 and 

Anders
Hagfeldt
*

State key Laboratory of Solidification Processing, Center for Nano Energy Materials, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an 710072, China. E-mail: lixh32@nwpu.edu.cn

Laboratory of Photomolecular Science, Institute of Chemical Sciences and Engineering, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne 1015, Switzerland. E-mail: anders.hagfeldt@epfl.ch

School of Materials Science and Engineering, Shaanxi Normal University, Xi’an, 710119, China

Key Laboratory for Organic Electronics & Information Displays (KLOEID), Institute of Advanced Materials, Nanjing University of Posts & Telecommunications, 9 Wenyuan Road, Nanjing 210023, China

Received
28th June 2020
, Accepted 8th October 2020
First published on 13th October 2020
The inferior power conversion efficiency (PCE) compared to their regular counterparts (n–i–p) and undesirable stability issues of inverted (p–i–n) perovskite solar cells (PSCs) are the foremost issues hindering their commercialization. Here, for the first time, we demonstrate a polymeric room-temperature molten salt (poly-RTMS), namely poly(1-vinyl-3-ethyl-acetate) imidazole tetrafluoroborate (PEa), as a novel type of additive to modulate the perovskite crystallization and its electronic properties. The PEa poly-RTMS containing multiple chemical anchoring sites along with strong bonding stability can firmly bond to Pb ion defects at grain boundaries and the interface of the perovskite film via coordination bond, which effectively passivates the electronic defects and enhances the photo-, thermal-, and moisture-stability of perovskite films. As a result, the PEa-modified inverted PSCs show striking performance improvements over the control with the PCE exceeding 21.4% and excellent long-term operational stability, maintaining over 92% of the initial efficiency for 1200 hours under continuous full sun illumination at 70–75 °C. This strategy opens a new avenue to modulate the properties of perovskites for optoelectronic applications.

Metal halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have made tremendous advancements over the past several years. The inferior power conversion efficiency (PCE) compared to their regular counterparts and undesirable stability issues of inverted PSCs are the foremost issues hindering their commercialization. Recently, room-temperature molten salt (RTMS, also known as ionic liquid) has become a strong candidate to compete against the traditional materials for the modification of PSCs due to its unique physicochemical properties. However, the stability of such small molecule RTMS is insufficient under harsh conditions, and it causes substantial diffusion and easy migration in the perovskite film during operation, which does not meet the requirement of future commercialization of PSCs. In this context, we have proposed a new concept of a polymeric room-temperature molten salt (poly-RTMS) in the field of PSCs, which is a novel additive to modulate the perovskite crystallization and enhance the photo-, thermal-, and moisture-stability of perovskite films. The advantage of the poly-RTMS over RTMS monomers has been systematically studied by rationally designing and comparing three types of RTMS molecules, opening a new window for the design of additives to improve the performance and stability of PSCs.


Metal halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have made tremendous advancements over the past several years. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of PSCs has enhanced from 3.8% to 25.2% within a very short period. Compared with regular (n–i–p) architecture devices, inverted (p–i–n) planar PSCs offer simple processes, low-temperature preparation, alleviated hysteresis, and good compatibility with flexible or tandem architectures. However, the main challenge of inverted PSCs is a comparably low PCE. The traps existing at both the grain boundaries (GBs) and surface of the photo-active layer would induce trap-assisted nonradiative recombination and serve as vulnerable initiation sites for the external environmental degradation of inverted PSCs. Therefore, an efficient and simple passivation method is highly required to simultaneously improve the PCE and prolong the durability of inverted PSCs.

To date, additive-assisted techniques and crystal engineering have been put forward to improve the performance and stability of inverted PSCs. Additive-assisted techniques incorporate nanoparticles, metal halide salts, acids, fullerene derivatives, and polymers to passivate defects and improve the PV performance of inverted PSCs. On the other hand, crystal engineering provides large-sized crystal growth and high crystallinity to minimize GBs and defects at both the grain interior and boundaries via solvent treatment, gas vapor treatment, and organic additives. In both cases, room-temperature molten salt (RTMS, also known as ionic liquid) is a strong candidate to compete against the traditional materials due to its unique physicochemical properties with negligible vapor pressure, remarkable electrochemical properties, various functional ligands, and nonhazardous nature. Bai et al. used RTMS as an additive in the precursor solution to obtain PSCs with a PCE of 20.8% and excellent stability. Recently, our group developed a self-assembled monolayer of water-soluble triazolium RTMS to enhance the moisture resistance of perovskite films. However, the stability of such small molecule RTMS is insufficient, especially under harsh conditions, such as strong light and high temperature and humidity, because it can be deteriorated by chemical reactions with air, water, and solvent. Concomitantly, this causes substantial diffusion and easy migration in the perovskite film during operation, which does not meet the requirement of future commercialization of PSCs. Moreover, RTMS are prone to agglomerate due to its small molecular size and strong electrostatic interaction during spin coating, resulting in inferior coverage on top of the perovskite layer and poor repeatability of PSCs.
To overcome these issues, herein, we demonstrate a polymeric room-temperature molten salt (poly-RTMS) as a novel additive to modulate the perovskite crystallization and enhance the photo-, thermal-, and moisture-stability of perovskite films. As a proof-of-concept, poly(1-vinyl-3-ethyl-acetate) imidazole tetrafluoroborate (PEa) was employed to achieve a high-quality and stable perovskite layer via the additive-assisted technique (Fig. 1a). To systematically investigate the advantages of the poly-RTMS over RTMS, two kinds of RTMS monomers, 1-vinyl-3-butyl imidazole tetrafluoroborate (Bu) and 1-vinyl-3-ethyl-acetate imidazole tetrafluoroborate (Ea), were chosen for comparison (Fig. 1a). There are three unique advantages of the as-designed PEa poly-RTMS: (i) the repeating units of the poly-RTMS contain multi-site anchored carbonyl groups (CO) with strong bonding stability (Fig. 1a), which could passivate Pb ion defects on the perovskite surface or GBs and form a highly coordinated and long-range perovskite–poly-RTMS composite ordering along the polymer chain; (ii) the presence of the highly coordinated perovskite–poly-RTMS composite obstructs the poly-RTMS from leaving GBs under high temperature and continuous light illumination, which shows superiority in practical PSCs operated under harsh environmental stresses; and (iii) compared to RTMS, the high decomposition temperature (347 °C) and hydrophobicity of the poly-RTMS are critical to enhance the device stability. As a result, the judiciously tailored PEa poly-RTMS improves the PCE of inverted PSCs from 18.16% (champion) to 21.47% (champion) via modulating perovskite crystallization and suppressing defect formation. Notably, the unencapsulated PEa-modified device displays pronounced moisture stability over 5000 h in a relative humidity (RH) of 35 ± 5%, and the encapsulated device exhibits superior long-term operational stability by retaining over 92% of the initial performance for 1200 h under continuous light illumination at 70–75 °C.

The molecular structures and synthetic routes of the Bu RTMS, Ea RTMS, and PEa poly-RTMS are presented in Fig. 1a and Fig. S1–S4 (ESI), respectively. 1H nuclear magnetic resonance (1H NMR) was carried out on the designed RTMS and poly-RTMS to confirm their molecular structure, as described in the experimental section. The molecular weights and the molecular distribution of the PEa poly-RTMS are shown in Fig. S2 (ESI). Through molecular structure analysis, we speculated that the PEa poly-RTMS with flexible long chains as well as multiple functional repeat units (CO groups) could provide chemical anchoring sites for the passivation of under-coordinated Pb ions in the perovskite film. As proof, we calculated the electrostatic potential (ESP) by density functional theory to specify the electron density distribution in the corresponding RTMS monomers (Fig. 1b). The electron-donating groups (positive region) mainly distribute on the alkyl chain linked by the imidazole ring, and the high electron density (negative region) is mainly concentrated on the electron-withdrawing CO group, possessing favorable conditions for coordination with the unsaturated Pb ions (Fig. 1c).

The molecular interactions between the RTMS, poly-RTMS, and triple-cation FAMACs (FA: formamidinium; MA: methylammonium) perovskite film were investigated using 1H NMR, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). For the Bu RTMS, a series of 1H NMR measurements were conducted in solution (Fig. 1d and Fig. S5 and S6, ESI). As shown in Fig. 1d, the broad peak around 9 ppm in the mixed solution of FAI and MABr splits into two new peaks after the introduction of the Bu RTMS, suggesting that a hydrogen bond is formed between the H atom in the amidinium moiety of FA and the N3 atom of the imidazole ring in the Bu RTMS (inset in Fig. 1d). We have also conducted a 1H NMR test of the mixed solution of the Ea RTMS and PEa poly-RTMS with FAI, respectively (Fig. S7, ESI), and observed the same results as for the Bu RTMS, which indicates that hydrogen bonds are also formed in Ea- and PEa-modified films. FTIR spectroscopy characterization was also performed to study the existing form of the Ea RTMS and PEa poly-RTMS in the perovskite film. The FTIR result after the addition of the Ea RTMS monomer is illustrated in Fig. 1e. The peak at 1750 cm−1 in the spectrum of the pure Ea RTMS is assigned to the stretching vibration peak of CO and is red-shifted to a lower wave number of 1746 cm−1 in the corresponding Ea-modified perovskite films, while a large red shift to a wave number of 1743 cm−1 from 1750 cm−1 is observed for CO in the PEa-modified perovskite films (Fig. 1f). These results indicate that the unsaturated Pb2+ in the perovskite forms bonds with CO groups in the RTMS or poly-RTMS.
We obtained further evidence for the molecular interactions between the perovskite and RTMS or poly-RTMS additives by XPS analysis. The main peaks of Pb 4f7/2 and 4f5/2 with saturated coordination are shown in Fig. 1g. The two small peaks next to the main peaks are assigned to metallic Pb due to the highly under-coordinated Pb ions in the perovskite (see the marked dots in Fig. 1g). The Pb 4f peaks in XPS of the Bu-modified film shift slightly to lower binding energy although the Bu RTMS has no CO group. As shown in the ESP calculation result (Fig. 1b), the high electron density (negative region) is mainly concentrated on the junction of the vinyl group and imidazole ring. The main reason can be attributed to the shared electrons between the vinyl and imidazole ring, leading to an electron-rich conjugated π-electron system. Therefore, we speculate that the binding energy shift is caused by the formation of weak coordination bonds between this negative region and under-coordinated Pb ion defects. Meanwhile, we observed that the Pb 4f peaks in the PEa-modified film show a strong shift of 0.6 eV toward lower binding energy but a relatively small change for the Ea-modified film (0.3 eV). Moreover, the small peaks of metallic Pb in the Ea- and PEa-modified perovskite films almost disappeared compared to the control film. The increased intensity of Pb–O at 529.4 eV and the decreased peak intensity of CO at 531.5 eV of the PEa-modified film compared with the Ea-modified film comfirm the intensive coordination effect (the reason is discussed later), as exhibited in the XPS O 1s spectra in Fig. S8 (ESI). According to the results of 1H NMR, FTIR, and XPS examined, we conclude that the larger decrease in the CO stretch vibration and binding shift of the Pb 4f peaks in the PEa-modified perovskite film compared to the Ea- and Bu-modified perovskite films could be correlated with the strong chemical reaction of Pb–O in the presence of electron-rich CO groups in the long-chain PEa poly-RTMS. Although the hydrogen bonding effect was also produced in the Bu-, Ea- and PEa-modified perovskite films, which could reduce the number of hanging bonds and thus the number of electronic defects, its positive effect on improving the stability is much weaker than that of the ability of Pb–O coordination bonds. Furthermore, we have adopted the NMR titration method to calculate the coordination ratio and binding constant of the PEa poly-RTMS and the corresponding monomeric Ea RTMS with Pb2+ (the details are described in Fig. S9 and S10, ESI). The coordination ratio of the PEa poly-RTMS (Ea RTMS) to Pb2+ is 1:2. The binding constant of Pb2+ and the CO group in the PEa poly-RTMS (Ea RTMS) is 899.93 (685.13) M−1, which indicates a stronger Pb–O bond in the PEa poly-RTMS compared to that of the Ea RTMS. During the thermal annealing of the perovskite film, the stronger bonding stability is conducive to improving the bonding probability of CO with unsaturated lead ions, resulting in the ability of the PEa poly-RTMS to passivate defects being better than that of the Ea RTMS.
The morphology of the perovskite films and grains was studied by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Top-view and cross-sectional SEM images, and crystal size distributions of the perovskite films are displayed in Fig. 2a–d, respectively. The control film shows small grains (concentrated at 200–300 nm) and nonuniform morphology (Fig. 2a), which could be improved by tailoring the molecular structure of the RTMS. In comparison with the control film, the incorporation of the Bu RTMS contributes to a uniform morphology with a larger grain size of ∼300 nm (Fig. 2b). The grain size of the perovskite is further increased to ∼400 and ∼600 nm upon the incorporation of the Ea RTMS (Fig. 2c) and PEa poly-RTMS (Fig. 2d). The large grain size of the PEa-modified film is also confirmed by electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD) measurements (Fig. S11, ESI). Moreover, the RTMS- and poly-RTMS-modified perovskite have particular monolithic, large grains throughout the films, which benefits the longitudinal electron transport. These results demonstrate that the quality of the perovskite film could be better controlled by adding the PEa poly-RTMS due to its low volatility, which could slow down the crystallization rate and lead to large perovskite grains. More importantly, the long chain structure of the PEa poly-RTMS prevents its agglomeration during perovskite crystallization (the good film-forming property of the PEa poly-RTMS compared to the Ea RTMS has been confirmed in Fig. S12, ESI), resulting in a homogenous perovskite film and more delicate GBs than the control film. We have performed energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy of the cross-sectional SEM (SEM-EDX) to clarify the element distribution. As illustrated in Fig. 2e, the distribution of B and F elements (characteristic elements in the PEa poly-RTMS) is the same as that of Pb and I elements, which indicates that the PEa poly-RTMS exists in the entire perovskite layer. X-ray diffraction (XRD) spectra confirm the enlarged grain size observed by SEM measurements (Fig. S13, ESI). No obvious peak shift and new peaks are observed in the RTMS- and poly-RTMS-modified perovskite films in XRD, indicating that the additives do not insert into the perovskite lattice.
The distinct change of the PEa-modified perovskite film motivated us to deeply study the unique role of the PEa poly-RTMS in the crystallization of the perovskite film by transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Fig. 2f exhibits the low magnification TEM image of the PEa-modified film with polycrystalline grains and GBs. A few hundred nanometer grains and their GBs can be seen from the image. In high-resolution TEM (Fig. 2g-i), the perovskite grains show noticeable lattice fringes because of their crystallinity, while the PEa poly-RTMS shows an amorphous morphology. Fig. 2g shows the high-resolution TEM of a “bridge” between two adjacent perovskite grains in the dotted circle of Fig. 2f. We thus focused the study of the interior connection (Fig. 2h) and the edge (Fig. 2i) of this bridge. In Fig. 2h, the adjacent regions of the amorphous and crystalline phases clearly appeared, and the amorphous region, which can be attributed to the PEa poly-RTMS, mainly exists among crystalline perovskite grains. Meanwhile, the magnified image in Fig. 2i exhibits the bonding of the crystalline and amorphous phases, forming a perovskite–poly-RTMS connecting bridge between two grains. We summarize the likely role of the PEa poly-RTMS in perovskite crystallization in Fig. 2j. The strong interaction between the PEa poly-RTMS and perovskite film as deduced from FTIR and better film-forming properties inferred from SEM ensure that the PEa poly-RTMS could uniformly functionalize most perovskite crystals and be immobilized rather than getting agglomerated. As the perovskite grains grow, partial PEa poly-RTMS continues to be distributed in the narrowing intergranular regions among grains or grain clusters, resulting from the large ionic radius of the PEa poly-RTMS. Eventually, the continuous long-chain structure of the PEa poly-RTMS can fill in the GBs and form three-dimensional skeleton templates to support perovskite grains, as previously reported for PMMA-templated nucleation, like “a thread with a needle” connecting adjacent perovskite crystals with more poly-RTMS. The unique composition of perovskite–poly-RTMS acting as a connecting bridge described here could minimize electrical decoupling or insulation between the perovskite crystals, which could inhibit non-radiative recombination in the perovskite film.
We carried out conducting atomic force microscopy (cAFM) studies to provide spatially resolved electronic properties of the studied films. The cAFM measurements have been performed under room light conditions and the local current mapping of these perovskite films is illustrated in Fig. 3a–d. For the PEa-modified film in Fig. 3d, a large current is presented, compared with the control and other RTMS monomer-modified films in Fig. 3a–c. The obvious change in current for the PEa-modified film indicates that the poly-RTMS incorporation could lead to an effective increment in the conductivity of the perovskite film. We conjecture that the large local current of the PEa-modified film is due to the large grain size and fewer horizontal GBs; on the other hand, the long-chain poly-RTMS can bridge the adjacent perovskite grains effectively, providing a smooth path for charge transfer through GBs.
The light absorption of the perovskite film was increased by the introduction of the poly-RTMS (Fig. S14, ESI). The improvement in absorption might result from the better crystallinity and the larger crystal size, which is beneficial to enhance the light-harvesting efficiency, as previously reported. The charge carrier behavior in these perovskite films was investigated by steady-state photoluminescence (PL). In Fig. 3e, the PL intensities of the poly-RTMS- and RTMS-modified perovskite films exhibit obvious enhancement compared to the control. Particularly, the PEa-modified film exhibits twofold enhancement as compared to the control film. Meanwhile, a blue shift of the PL peak from 775 to 767 nm for the PEa-modified film is observed (inset in Fig. 3e), indicating that the PEa poly-RTMS has a strong ability to passivate the defects through coordination with the perovskite film, as confirmed by XPS and FTIR. Thus, the PL results provide compelling evidence that the PEa poly-RTMS acts as a much more effective passivator compared to the traditional RTMS to inhibit nonradiative recombination in the perovskite film. In addition, the lowered trap density can extend the carrier lifetime (τ), which can be estimated by time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL). As presented in Fig. 3f, the photoluminescence decay of the PEa poly-RTMS-modified perovskite film with bi-exponential fitting exhibits a much longer carrier lifetime (τ = 2484 ns) than those of the control (τ = 1524 ns), and Bu- (τ = 1863 ns) and Ea-modified (τ = 2295 ns) films, indicating a lower trap density. It is worth mentioning that the slower PL component τ2 with the PEa poly-RTMS (1114.9 ns) is considerably higher than those of the films with the Bu RTMS (644.4 ns) and Ea RTMS (827.3 ns), which indicates a longer bulk carrier lifetime. We attributed such improvements to the much larger crystallite sizes and the inter-grain connection induced by the long-chain structure of the PEa poly-RTMS as observed in the SEM and TEM analysis.
We further estimated the trap density of different films by space-charge limited current (SCLC) measurements with a structure of ITO/TiO2/perovskite/PCBM/Ag electrode. As evidenced in Fig. 3g, the dark current–voltage response includes an ohmic-response at low bias, a trap-filled limited region at intermediate bias, and a trap-free SCLC region at high bias. All the trap states are completely filled in the trap-filled limited region (TFL). Thus, the trap density can be calculated from the onset voltage VTFL corresponding to VTFL = entL2/2εε0, where e is the elementary charge, nt is the trap density, L is the thickness of the perovskite layer, ε is the relative dielectric constant of the perovskite, and ε0 is the vacuum permittivity. It can be observed that the trap density is decreased from 1.40 × 1016 for the control film to 0.89 × 1016, 6.44 × 1015, and 5.32 × 1015 cm−3 for the Bu-, Ea-, and PEa-modified films, respectively, illustrating that the PEa poly-RTMS is more effective in suppressing the appearance of trap states in perovskite films. The carrier mobility can be determined by the Mott–Gurney law corresponding to J = 9εε0μV2/8L3. The calculated electron mobilities of the control, and Bu-, Ea- and PEa-modified perovskite films are 0.014, 0.058, 0.148, and 0.290 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively. We also calculated hole mobilities of 0.096, 0.126, 0.287, and 0.430 cm2 V−1 s−1 for the control, and Bu-, Ea- and PEa-modified perovskite films (Fig. S15, ESI), respectively. Compared to the hole mobilities, the electron mobilities of these modified films show more obvious improvement. We have also conducted thermal admittance spectroscopy (TAS) to further evaluate the distribution in the trap density of states (t-DOS). As shown in Fig. S16 (ESI), the PEa-modified device exhibits the lowest t-DOS, especially in the shallow trap region compared to the control film. Because the shallow traps are mainly concentrated on the GBs, it can be concluded that the PEa poly-RTMS effectively passivates the trap states of GBs.
To comprehensively evaluate the characteristic of the poly-RTMS passivation effect, we fabricated inverted PSCs with a structure of ITO/NiOx/FAMACs (without or with the RTMS or poly-RTMS)/PCBM/BCP/Cr/Au (Fig. 1c, PCBM is [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester, and BCP is 2,9-dimethyl-4,7-diphenyl-1,10-phenanthroline). The corresponding schematic of the energy band alignment is illustrated in Fig. S17 (ESI), and the energy bands of these perovskite films were calculated from UV photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS). Fig. 4a and Table 1 present the corresponding photovoltaic parameters of optimized devices with the poly-RTMS and RTMS monomers. The dependence of the device performance on the concentration of the RTMS or poly-RTMS was investigated, as shown in Fig. S18–S20 and Tables S1–S3 (ESI). The statistical photovoltaic parameter distribution of all devices is shown in Fig. S21 (ESI). The control device exhibits an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.09 (1.08) V, a short-circuit current (Jsc) of 21.77 (21.50) mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 76.52% (70.08%) with a corresponding PCE of 18.16% (16.27%) measured in the reverse (forward) scan. The PCEs of the optimized Bu- and Ea-modified devices are 19.86% and 20.94%, respectively. The PEa-modified device yields a champion PCE of up to 21.47% (21.20%) measured in the reverse (forward) scan, showing a Voc of 1.10 (1.10) V, Jsc of 23.48 (23.44) mA cm−2, and FF of 83.12% (82.21%), indicating negligible hysteresis in Fig. 4b. The detailed parameters for these devices in both the forward and reverse scans can be found in Fig. S22 (ESI). We also investigated the effects of the PEa poly-RTMS with different relative molecular weights on the device performance (the details are illustrated in Fig. S23, ESI). To the best of our knowledge, this is one of the best inverted planar PSCs among RTMS modified PSCs with a PCE over 21%. In addition, compared to the other reported RTMS modified devices, our PEa poly-RTMS-modified device exhibits the highest PCE. Table S4 (ESI) further strengthens the advantage of the PEa poly-RTMS. The highly monolithic and larger size grains with a low trap density are an important factor to enhance the performance of Jsc in the PEa-modified device. The dependence of Vocversus light intensity curves indicate a reduction in trap-assisted recombination in the PEa-modified device (Fig. S24, ESI). Moreover, the decreased charge transport resistance (Rct) and the increased recombination resistance (Rrec) in electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements suggest more efficient charge transfer and decreased carrier recombination in the PEa-modified device, resulting in the increment of Jsc and the FF (Fig. S25, ESI). In Fig. 4c, the integrated Jsc values from the internal photon-to-current efficiency spectrum (IPCE) were 21.20, 22.06, 22.92 and 23.05 mA cm−2 for the control, and Bu-, Ea- and PEa-modified devices, respectively, which are consistent with the Jsc derived from the J–V curves. In addition, we observed a higher and much swifter photocurrent by measuring the steady-state photocurrent and stabilized PCE under a bias voltage at the maximum power point (MPP) (Fig. S24, ESI).

V
oc [V]

J
sc [mA cm−2]
FF [%]
PCE [%]

a The values corresponding to the best devices.
b The averaged values of devices from different batches.

Bu
1.10 (1.09 ± 0.013)
22.63 (22.64 ± 0.43)
79.77 (78.07 ± 0.75)
19.86 (19.21 ± 0.44)
Ea
1.11 (1.10 ± 0.011)
23.37 (23.02 ± 0.41)
80.73 (80.27 ± 0.67)
20.94 (20.29 ± 0.38)
Pea
1.10 (1.09 ± 0.011)
23.48 (23.43 ± 0.29)
83.12 (82.34 ± 0.51)
21.47 (21.15 ± 0.16)
Control
1.09 (1.08 ± 0.013)
21.77 (21.50 ± 0.68)
76.52 (75.90 ± 0.83)
18.16 (17.68 ± 0.50)
Apart from the efficiency, the device stability was examined upon exposure to air, heat, and light conditions. The stability of different devices in the dark at room temperature with 35 ± 5% relative humidity (RH) in air storage was recorded, as shown in Fig. 4d. For the Bu-, Ea- and PEa-modified devices, the PCEs experienced a reduction of about 36%, 23%, and 6% after 5000 h, respectively. The stability is much inferior in the control device and merely about 43% of the initial efficiency can be maintained after 3600 h. In Fig. S27 (ESI), the contact angle of water was dramatically increased from 58.33° (control film) to 81.54° (PEa-modified film) due to the excellent hydrophobic nature of the PEa poly-RTMS (Fig. S28, ESI), from which we can foresee improved moisture stability of the PEa-modified device. We tested the thermal stability of the different perovskite films by ageing the samples at 85 °C for 300 h in ambient air (RH = 40 ± 5%). The photographs and corresponding UV-vis absorption spectra of the different degraded perovskite films were tracked (Fig. S29, ESI). The PEa-modified film retained its original color even after 300 h thermal ageing, as confirmed by the nearly unchanged absorption intensity. Meanwhile, as illustrated in Fig. 4e, the encapsulated PEa-modified device exhibited impressively enhanced stability compared with the control device and retained over 92% of its initial PCE for 1200 h under continuous light soaking at 70–75 °C. The control, and Bu- and Ea-modified devices experienced reductions to about 57%, 80%, and 83%, respectively. This PEa-modified device is one of the most stable devices reported when ageing under continuous light, and thermal conditions, as illustrated in Table S4 (ESI). Although the perovskite GBs are susceptible to moisture and thermal stress, which in turn triggers the rapid diffusion of various ions and other species, the additives with the poly-RTMS and RTMSs can effectively passivate defects in the perovskite to varying degrees. In particular, the modification with the poly-RTMS is beneficial to the stability of PSCs in three aspects. First, the long-chain structure of the poly-RTMS could continuously be distributed along the GBs and form three-skeleton templates to support perovskite grains, increase the grain size of the perovskite, and decrease the number of GBs (see Fig. 2d). Secondly, the highly coordinated perovskite–poly-RTMS composite was formed at adjacent perovskite crystals, and its bonding strength is stronger than the hydrogen bond between FAI and the Bu RTMS as well as the coordination bond formed by unsaturated Pb ions and the small molecule Ea RTMS (see Fig. 1d–f), which could avoid PEa poly-RTMS shedding from GBs under light or high temperature. Finally, the PEa poly-RTMS with the strongest hydrophobicity behavior (Fig. S28, ESI) and the highest decomposition temperature (Td ≈ 347 °C, Fig. S30, ESI) in the three RTMS is conducive to enhancing the thermal, light, and water resistance of the corresponding perovskite film.

In conclusion, the PEa poly-RTMS containing multiple chemical anchoring sites along with strong bonding stability has been designed, synthesized, and employed to improve the performance and stability of inverted PSCs for the first time. Compared to RTMS, the PEa poly-RTMS can act as three-dimensional skeleton templates to form high-quality (uniform and large grain size) perovskite films. Furthermore, the long-chain PEa poly-RTMS with chemical anchoring sites can fill GBs to passivate the under-coordinated Pb ion defects in the perovskite, and the PEa poly-RTMS with strong bonding stability improves the bonding probability of CO with unsaturated lead ions during thermal annealing of the perovskite film, which makes more poly-RTMS connect adjacent perovskite crystals; the PEa poly-RTMS, firmly immobilized at the GBs, greatly promotes device stability even under harsh environmental conditions. As a result, we achieved a PCE as high as 21.47% for the inverted PEa-modified PSCs accompanied by significantly improved storage, light, and thermal stability. Our strategy opens a new avenue to design effective passivator molecules and broadens the applications of poly-RTMS due to their versatility.


The solvents and chemicals were purchased commercially and used without further purification (except where noted). FAI, CsI, MABr, PbBr2, PbI2, PCBM and BCP were obtained from Xi’an Polymer Light Technology Corp. C4H9Br, C4H7BrO2, 2,2′-azobis(2-methylpropionitrile), NaBF4, and 1-vinylimidazole were obtained from Alfa Aesar.


1 mol of 1-vinylimidazole and 1.5 mol of C4H9Br were dissolved in ethyl acetate in a round-bottomed flask, and stirred at 323 K for 24 hours. Letting the reaction solution stand for several minutes, it can be seen that the solution in the flask was stratified and the lower layer was the crude product of the [BuVIm]Br RTMS. The crude product of the [BuVIm]Br RTMS was cleaned several times with solvent and the resultant solvent was evaporated under a vacuum. Then, the light yellow viscous liquid was dried for 24 hours at 323 K under vacuum conditions.

Next, the [BuVIm]Br RTMS was reacted with NaBF4 at a molar ratio 1:1 and stirred at room temperature for 32 hours in acetonitrile solution, obtaining a mixture of precipitated white solid and solution. The reaction product was filtered to remove white solids. The remaining solution was washed several times with solvent, and then evaporated under a vacuum, and a light yellow solution was obtained. Finally, the target product Bu RTMS was achieved by drying the light yellow solution for 24 hours at 323 K under vacuum conditions. The Ea RTMS was synthesized according to Fig. S1 in the ESI, by adopting the synthetic method of the Bu RTMS.

1H NMR spectra of the Bu and Ea RTMSs were measured on a Bruker AVANCE 400 MHz (Germany), using DMSO-d6 as a locking solvent. 1H NMR (Bu RTMS): 0.884–0.921 (t, 3H), 1.236–1.330 (m, 2H), 1.778–1.852 (m, 2H), 4.422–4.257 (t, 2H), 5.397–5.424 (d, 1H), 5.995–6.044 (d, 1H), 7.321–7.382 (m, 1H), 8.017 (s, 1H), 8.296 (s, 1H), 9.757 (s, 1H). 1H NMR (Ea RTMS): 1.240–1.276 (t, 3H), 4.205–4.258 (m, 2H), 5.306 (s, 2H), 5.466–5.494 (d, 1H), 5.995–6.041 (d, 1H), 7.400–7.460 (m, 1H), 7.910 (s, 1H), 8.281 (s, H), 9.492 (s, 1H). 1H NMR (PEa poly-RTMS): 1.240–1.276 (t, 3nH), 4.213–4.242 (m, 2nH), 5.307 (s, 2nH), 7.874 (s, nH), 8.242 (s, nH), 9.423 (s, nH).

Using 2,2′-azobis (2-methylpropionitrile) (abbreviated AIBN) as an initiator, the Ea RTMS and AIBN (the mass ratio of the initiator to the Ea RTMS is 1%) were dissolved in ethanol in a flask with three necks, stirred and kept at 338 K for 12 hours in a nitrogen atmosphere. The reaction solution was washed several times with ethyl acetate until the washing solution was not turbid and then rotary evaporated. Next, we dissolved the PEa poly-RTMS in a small amount of DMSO solvent, and then added the obtained DMSO solution into a large amount of ethanol solvent to precipitate the PEa poly-RTMS (the unreacted reactants remained in the ethanol solution). This dissolution–precipitation was repeated three times, and finally we dried the precipitated PEa poly-RTMS at 323 K under vacuum conditions for 24 hours. In addition, we have synthesized PEa poly-RTMS with different relative molecular weights by adjusting the reaction time between the Ea monomer and AIBN initiator (i.e., 8 hours; 12 hours; and 30 hours).

The molecular weights and the molecular distribution of the PEa poly-RTMS were measured at 35 °C by gel permeation chromatography (GPC) on an HPLC-1525 (Waters), and polystyrene was used as a standard sample for GPC calibration. DMF was adopted as an eluent. The weight-average relative molecular weight (Mw) and number-average relative molecular weight (Mn) are 24510 Da and 11418 Da, respectively. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) of the Bu and Ea RTMSs and PEa poly-RTMS was carried out using an SDTA851 (METTLER TOLEDO).

The ITO substrates were cleaned in an ultrasonic bath in acetone and ethanol. The NiOx precursor solution was prepared according to a literature procedure. Thereafter, the NiOx solution was dropped on the cleaned ITO glass by spin coating at 4000 r.p.m. for 30 s and annealed at 100 °C for 10 min. The perovskite precursor solution consisted of mixed cations (FA, MA, Cs and Pb) and halides (Br and I), which were dissolved in a mixed solution (DMF:DMSO = 4:1, volume ratio) according to the formula of Cs0.05(MA0.15FA0.85)0.95Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3. Subsequently, the perovskite precursor solution with or without the RTMS or poly-RTMS was spin coated on the top of the NiOx film at 1000 r.p.m. for 10 s and 4000 r.p.m. for 40 s, and chlorobenzene solvent was dropped onto the substrate 20 s after the spin-coating step. Then, the substrate was annealed at 100 °C for 20 min. After cooling down to room temperature, PCBM solution (10 mg mL−1 in chlorobenzene) was drop cast at a speed of 5000 r.p.m. for 50 s. Then, BCP solution (0.3 mg ml−1) was coated at a speed of 5000 r.p.m. for 40 s and annealed at 60 °C for 20 min. Finally, the Cr (4 nm) layer and Au (100 nm) electrodes were evaporated by thermal evaporation. The photoactive region of the device was 0.1 cm2.


The ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) absorption spectra of the samples were measured using a spectrophotometer (Lambda 35, PerkinElmer). Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectra were recorded in ATR mode (Thermo, Nicolet 6700). The photoluminescence (PL) and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) were studied using an Edinburgh Instruments FLS920, similar to a previous report. The X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements were made using a Kratos instrument (AXIS Supra) with a monochromatic Al Kα source under a base pressure of 1 × 10−9 Torr. The UPS measurements were also carried out on a Kratos instrument (AXIS Supra), with the HeI (21.22 eV) emission line employed for excitation. Top-view and cross-section morphologies were studied by field emission scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (FEI Helios G4 CX). An electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD) measurement was also performed, and the sample surface was treated by ion beam polishing technology (Leica, RES102) before the EBSD measurement. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) analysis was performed using a Talos F200X (FEI). The perovskite film was scratched out from the substrate and dispersed in chloroform to sonicate until the perovskite powder was well dispersed, and dropped on an aluminium grid. The conducting atomic force microscopy (cAFM) measurements were made on an Asylum Research MFP-3D-Origin AFM using Au-coated conductive probes. We chose a bias voltage of 0.8 V to test and compare the conductivity of the control, and Bu-, Ea-, and PEa-modified perovskite films. The contact angles were measured using a DSA100 (KRUSS, Germany).


A xenon-lamp-based solar simulator (Newport 94023A Oriel Sol3A, Class AAA) was used for simulated AM1.5G irradiation (100 mW cm−2) and the scan rate was 0.1 V s−1 (−0.1 V to 1.2 V) to record the J–V characteristics. The simulated light intensity was calibrated with a standard silicon solar cell and a Keithley 2420 source meter was used to drive the J–V measurements. The photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) spectra were measured on an IPCE system under DC mode (1600 W, Newport). Impedance spectroscopy was performed through an electrochemical work station (ZAHNER, Zennium-E). The frequency range was changed from 1 MHz to 0.1 Hz, with a voltage of 0.8 V. Thermal admittance spectroscopy (TAS) was conducted using an impedance analyzer (ZAHNER Stat.). In a nitrogen filled glove box, we used ultraviolet glue to stick the glass on the devices to complete the encapsulation. The environmental stability was recorded by storing the unencapsulated devices with 35 ± 5% relative humidity (RH) in the dark at room temperature. For the thermal stability measurements, the different perovskite films were placed on a hot plate at 85 °C in ambient air (RH = 40 ± 5%). The degraded perovskite films were cooled to room temperature to measure their UV-vis spectra. For the operational stability test, J–V measurements were conducted. The encapsulated devices were aged in xenon lamp light-soaking without an additional ultraviolet filter and the intensity of the light source was calibrated as one sun AM 1.5 intensity (100 mW cm−2) using a silicon solar cell. Meanwhile, the temperature of light ageing was set at 70–75 °C during the measurement.


The geometry optimization was conducted using density functional theory calculations under the Guassian 09 program package (B3LYP/6-31G*). By analyzing the frequency of all stationary points, we find the stable geometry of the configurations.


Taking the example of the PEa poly-RTMS, we first fixed the total concentration of the host (PEa poly-RTMS) and the guest (Pb2+), and by adjusting the ratio of the host and guest we have obtained a graph of the change in chemical shift with the proportion of the host. The abscissa value corresponding to the highest point is the coordination ratio, that is, the coordination ratio of CO (host) to Pb2+ (guest). Secondly, NMR titrations were conducted with solutions of a constant concentration of the host and varying concentrations of the guest to calculate the binding constant. We have drawn the Benesi–Hildebrand plot by the change value (Δ) of the chemical shift of a-H in the poly-RTMS versus the reciprocal of the Pb2+ concentration, and obtained the maximum value (Δmax) of the chemical shift change of a-H after all CO groups in the PEa poly-RTMS were bonded by Pb2+ from the intercept of the Benesi–Hildebrand plot. Finally, a Scatchard plot of p/[Pb2+] vs. p (where p is Δ/Δmax) shows the binding constant of the host and guest, which is the average of the slope and intercept in the Scatchard plot. DMSO-d6 is used as as locking solvent for NMR characterization.


S. J. Wang performed the overall experiments. X. H. Li supervised the work. J. Han performed the TEM data analysis. Z. W. He and T. T. Li contributed to the highly-efficient perovskite solar cell fabrication. Q. Cao and J. B. Yang helped to prepare materials. The manuscript was mainly written by S. J. Wang and X. H. Li and revised by B. W. Yang, J. J. Suo, and A. Hagfeldt. All authors contributed to the discussion of the results and commented on the manuscript.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This research is supported by the Basic Research Fund for Free Exploration in Shenzhen (Grant No. JCYJ20180306171402878), the project of Shaanxi Young Stars in Science and Technology (2017KJXX-18), the Shaanxi Provincial Key R&D Program (2020GXLH-Z-025 and 2020KWZ-018), and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (3102019ghxm003, 3102019JC005, 3102019ghjd001). B. Y., J. S., and A. H. acknowledge the funding from the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation program ESPRESSO under the agreement No.: 764047. We thank Dr Hong Zhang for valuable discussion. We also thank the members from the Analytical & Testing Center of North Western Polytechnical University for the help with SEM and TEM characterization.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ee02043e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020