 DOI: 10.1039/D0NJ01559H
(Paper)
New J. Chem., 2020, 44, 8422-8433


Selvakumar
Pitchaiya
*,

Nandhakumar
Eswaramoorthy
,

Muthukumarasamy
Natarajan
*,

Agilan
Santhanam
,

Venkatraman Madurai
Ramakrishnan
,

Vijayshankar
Asokan
,

Pavithrakumar
Palanichamy
,

Balraju
Palanisamy
,

Ananthi
Kalimuthu
 and 

Dhayalan
Velauthapillai


Department of Physics, Coimbatore Institute of Technology, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu, India. E-mail: sharewithselva@gmail.com; vishnukutty2002@yahoo.co.in; Tel: +91 9791963457

Faculty of Engineering and Science, Western Norway University of Applied Sciences, 5063 Bergen, Norway

School of Mechanical Engineering, Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, Tamil Nadu, India

Environmental Inorganic Chemistry, Department of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering Chalmers University of Technology, 412 96 Göteborg, Sweden

Received
30th March 2020
, Accepted 17th April 2020
First published on 17th April 2020
To improve the performance of PSCs, it is essential to prevent the carrier recombination losses at the interfaces of the transparent metal oxide electrode/electron transport layer (ETL)/active absorber perovskite layer. This present work reports on the green synthesis approach used for the preparation of flake like-ZnO nanostructure (GF-ZnO NS), naturally extracted from the leaf of Albizia Amara, used as a reducing cum capping agent. Herein, we have introduced an n-type GF-ZnO NS material as an efficient electron transport interfacial layer (bi-ETL) at the ETL/perovskite junction in the fabricated perovskite solar cells (PSCs). The structure of the fabricated PSC device is as follows: glass/ITO/bi-ETL (c-TiO2/GF-ZnO NSs)/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/spiro-MeOTAD/Au. A comparative study has also been carried out by deploying electron transport materials such as c-TiO2 and GF-ZnO NSs separately. From this, it has been found that the bi-ETL perovskite solar cell devices achieved a maximum power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 7.83% with an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 0.728 V, a short circuit current density (JSC) of 20.46 mA cm−2 and a fill factor (FF) of 52.61% whereas, the c-TiO2, GF-ZnO NSs and the chemically reduced CR-ZnO ETL based devices achieved a PCE of 4.84%, 5.82% and 6.81%, respectively. The better performance obtained for the bi-ETL based devices is ascribed to the enhanced carrier extraction and the reduced recombination losses at the interface between the ETL and the active perovskite layer.

In the past two decades, perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have become the rising star in third-generation thin-film photovoltaic (PV) technology, attracting broad attention from both the academic and industrial communities. Perovskite materials used as an absorber layer in solar cells are well-known for their low-cost, solution based synthesis, optimal energy bandgap value (∼1.1–1.55 eV), powerful absorption coefficient (104 cm−1), long charge diffusion length (∼1 microns), and outstanding charge-carrier mobility (∼5–10 cm2 V−1 s−1). The best performing perovskite solar cells discovered to date has a notable power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 25.2%. However, the major drawback of PSCs is the problem with its long-term stability which has to be overcome if they are to gain commercial viability. In PSCs, the inorganic electron transporting layer plays a pivotal role in transporting electrons and blocking holes, to enhance the charge separation. Among the various electron transporting layers, TiO2 has been considered to be one of the most widely used electron extraction material in planar PSCs owing to its optimal energy bandgap, suitable optical absorption and chemical stability. However, its low electron mobility and low charge extraction ability may result in low charge separation and high charge accumulation at the ETL/perovskite interface which will reduce the device performance. Therefore, many researchers are working to develop and use various alternative inorganic ETL materials such as transition metal oxides (SnO2, ZnO, WO3, etc.), Nb2O5-lanthanum oxide and metal sulphides (MoS2, SnS2, In2S3, etc.) because of their good ohmic contact which is required for efficient electron extraction and transport, optimal optical behaviour, high charge carrier mobility and efficient air stability. Moreover, they are of low-cost and have tunable optoelectronic properties and their energy levels match with perovskite materials which make them a suitable electron extraction material.

ZnO with its superior merits such as remarkable optical transmittance in the visible region, optimal bandgap value (∼3.3 eV), excellent electrical properties and higher charge carrier mobility compared to TiO2 is an ideal choice as an alternative ETL in PSCs. TiO2 and ZnO nanostructure based bilayer ETMs can be used in PSCs which can provide an enhanced device performance by solving the TCO/ETL/perovskite interfacial issues.
The use of a single TiO2 electron transporting material for the fabrication of PSCs without pin-holes is still a challenging task. Pin-holes present in the single ETL will provide direct contact between the absorber and the transparent conductive oxide layer (TCO) and this may lead to high leakage current and serious charge recombination at the ETL/TCO interface. When single TiO2 material is used as ETL, the oxygen related defects at the c-TiO2 surface may react with the perovskite layer which may induce the decomposition of the perovskite material at the ETL/perovskite interface which will degrade the photovoltaic performance. From the above-mentioned limitations, it is understood that a single ETL may not act as an effective hole blocking material in PSCs and it is not possible to reduce the charge recombination efficiently. To solve this perovskite degradation issue and achieve long-term stability, it is essential to modify the surface of a single TiO2 ETL by using some other n-type materials. In order to overcome these issues, a dense, pin-hole free and electrically conductive TiO2/ZnO electron transport bilayer can be used at the c-TiO2/perovskite interface which has the advantages of improved electron extraction and low interfacial recombination.
In 2019, Xie et al. have reported about using TiO2/SnO2 bilayer as an efficient electron extraction layer in PSC device and have achieved a PCE of 18.85% compared to that of individual TiO2 or SnO2 ETL based devices. Khalid et al. have used polyethyleneimine polymer coating on the surface of a ZnO based bilayer ETL film consisting of ZnO nanosheets/ZnO nanoparticles in PSCs and have obtained a PCE of 16.39%. From this, they have concluded that the devices based on such ZnO bilayer films are always superior compared to single-layer ZnO because of the improved morphology and better crystalline quality. You et al. have found that a bilayer TiO2/WO3 film is beneficial for extracting electrons from perovskite and the fabricated cell exhibited a PCE of 20.14%, which is better than those of the single WO3 or TiO2 ETL based devices. Kumari et al. have fabricated devices with TiO2/ZnO as bilayer ETL, and the bilayer was found to be helpful in achieving high electron extraction and low interfacial recombination which resulted in achieving a PCE of 7.39%. Faisal et al. have recently reported about the hysteresis-less mesostructured PSCs consisting of a novel barium hydroxide hybridized boron-doped ZnO (B:ZnO) bilayer thin film as the ETM and the fabricated device with this ETM exhibited a PCE of 20.62%. Deng et al. have described the fabrication of PSCs using a hydroiodic acid (HI) modified TiO2/SnO2 bilayer and they reported that the devices exhibit good stability maintaining their initial PCE (η = 16.74%) up to 85% and 83% after 100 ± 5 °C heating for 22 h and under 1 sun illumination for 6 h, respectively. Denegri et al. have used a bilayer SnO2/TiO2 ETL in PSCs and have found that the introduced bilayer can reduce the leakage current and improve the charge transfer at the ETL/perovskite interface. Hsuan et al. have designed a ZnO/Al-doped ZnO (AZO) bilayer thin film based device and have reported that there is an increase in the PCE value from 12.3% to 16.1% when AZO is used as a buffer layer. Yi et al. have used SnO2 bilayer as the ETL and the device showed a maximum PCE of 16.84%. Escobar et al. have found that the introduction of insulating ZrO2 nanocrystals onto c-TiO2 for preparing a bilayer ETL may inhibit the direct contact between the c-TiO2 and perovskite layer. This will reduce the recombination losses at the interface and the device fabricated using this bilayer exhibited a maximum PCE of 17.9%. Kogo et al. fabricated a bilayer PSC comprised of amorphous SnOx and mesoporous brookite TiO2 as the ETL and it exhibited good mechanical stability against cyclic bending in which the fabricated cells yielded a PCE of 13.4%. By optimizing the process time, Chen et al. have obtained an impressive PCE of 16.38% using a TiOx/In2O3 bilayer ETL and the fabricated cell had a good fill factor because of the introduced bilayer. Shahiduzzaman et al. have made an important advancement in the design of photovoltaic devices with respect to charge transport and electron–hole recombination by using a c-TiO2 on the anatase phase TiO2 ETL and the device exhibited a maximum PCE of 17.05%.
There are many previous reports available about the preparation of metal oxide nanostructure based electron transporting materials using expensive physical processing techniques and by using simple chemical methods but hazardous capping and reducing agents (HMT, CTAB, KOH, and NaOH) are used in the chemical methods which can create health risks and threat to the environment. So as to overcome all these issues, in recent years, researchers have started moving towards the low-cost green approach method because of its eco-friendliness. In this green approach technique, the raw materials obtained from the biological system such as plant parts and microorganisms are used to prepare various metal oxide (ZnO, TiO2, etc.) nanoparticles and nanostructures.
In this present study, a flake like-ZnO nanostructure has been synthesized by using a novel green approach in which the leaf extract of Albizia Amara has been used to synthesize the ZnO nanostructure which is used as an electron transport material in bilayer ETL based PSCs. A comparative study has also been made using a single layer (c-TiO2 and GF-ZnO NSs) ETL along with the bilayer (c-TiO2/GF-ZnO NSs) ETLs. Further, the devices fabricated using the green synthesized ZnO have been compared with the devices fabricated using chemically reduced ZnO based ETLs. Among them, the best performing bi-layer green synthesized ETL based perovskite device yielded a maximum PCE of 7.83%.

The scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the as-prepared GF-ZnO NSs is shown in Fig. 1(a) and it indicates the effectiveness of the phytochemicals present in the Albizia Amara leaf extract which have helped in the formation of a morphology with flake-like structure.

The phytochemicals in the leaf extract can act as both reducing and capping agents which can reduce zinc nitrate hexahydrate (Zn(NO3)2·6H2O) precursor into Zn2+ ions and also help in transforming them into irregularly scattered flake-like structures with rough edges. The size of the observed flake-like structure ZnO NSs is found to be around ∼50–60 nm and the morphology looks similar to that of the reports of Li and Liu et al.Fig. 1(b and c) shows the energy dispersive X-ray spectrum (EDS) and elemental mapping of the as-prepared GF-ZnO NSs and it also shows the presence of only oxygen and zinc elements having atomic percentage of 55.17 and 44.83%, respectively.

Fig. 2(a) shows the optical absorbance spectra of the as-prepared GF-ZnO NSs and Albizia Amara leaf extract. The leaf extract of Albizia Amara leaves has a fundamental strong absorption peak at 268 nm and this corresponds to the absorption behaviour of the natural leaf extract. The absorption spectra of the prepared GF-ZnO NSs shows a peak at 363 nm which corresponds to the intrinsic bandgap absorption and the electron transitions of O2p–Zn3d from the valence band to the conduction band of the prepared ZnO. The energy bandgap of the as-prepared GF-ZnO NSs was determined by using the Tauc's plot given in Fig. 2(b) and was found to be around 3.42 eV which is also the same as the bandgap value calculated from eqn (2) given below,
(αhν)2 = A(hν − Eg)
(1)
(2)
The photoluminescence (PL) study has been carried out to study the luminescence properties of the as-prepared GF-ZnO NSs which orginates either from the photo-induced electron and hole recombination or the intrinsic defects.Fig. 3 shows the room temperature PL spectra of the as-synthesized GF-ZnO NSs recorded using an excitation wavelength of 350 nm and their deconvoluted subpeak positions by Gaussian distribution. Significant defect-related emission peaks are observed and are in good agreement with the previous reports.
The intrinsic defects of ZnO have been categorized in the previous reports as zinc interstitial (Zni), zinc vacancy (VZn), zinc anti-site (ZnO), oxygen interstitial (Oi), oxygen vacancy (VO), and oxygen anti-site (OZn), respectively. The emission peak observed at 393.05 nm (3.15 eV) in the near UV region could have originated from the photo-induced electron–hole recombination of the free exciton and the near band edge emission of ZnO. Furthermore, the peaks at 418.43 nm (2.96 eV) and 453.65 nm (2.73 eV) can be assigned to the Zni defect. The peak at 490.63 nm (2.53 eV) is ascribed to VO and the blue–green emission peak at 539.12 nm (2.29 eV) is usually attributed to the oxygen interstitials (Oi). The observed high intensity emission peaks can be attributed to the ZnO flakes having a higher surface area to volume ratio. Also, from the previous reports it is understood that the electric and electronic properties of ZnO films mainly depend on the oxygen vacancies, since these vacancies can result in improved charge transfer and reduced recombination loss at the ETL/perovskite interface.
The crystal phase and the purity of the green synthesized ZnO nanostructure (GF-ZnO NSs) were analyzed using X-ray diffraction (XRD) using copper Kα radiation. The XRD pattern depicted in Fig. 4 exhibits strong diffraction peaks at 31.94°, 34.46°, 36.58°, 47.81°, 56.71°, 63.10°, 66.58°, 68.13° and 69.29° and they correspond to the respective crystal planes of (100), (002), (101), (102), (110), (103), (200), (112) and (201) belonging to the hexagonal wurtzite crystalline structure with lattice parameters of a = b = 3.179 Å and c = 5.314 Å. All the observed diffraction peaks are in good agreement with the standard JCPDS card (zincite, JCPDS 36-1451).
The average crystallite size (D) of the GF-ZnO NSs was found to be 38.97 nm which was calculated using the Debye Scherrer equation given below,
(3)
where,
k – constant of the shape factor (0.89), λ – 1.5418 Å for copper Kα radiation, θ – Bragg's diffraction angle, and β – full width at half maximum.


Fig. 5 displays the Raman spectra of the as-prepared GF-ZnO NS sample. The observed spectrum shows a strong peak at 460.01 cm−1 which corresponds to the (E2H) high mode of vibration of ZnO nanostructure. Whereas several weak peaks located at 419.64, 439.83, 476.16 and 510.75 cm−1 can be attributed to the first-order Raman peaks of the wurtzite structure ZnO NSs related to the E1T, E2L – low mode, E1L – low mode and the A1L – low mode, respectively. However, there are no tentative Raman assignments for the peaks of ZnO NSs at 406.38 and 492.87 cm−1 from the previous reports. All the marked peaks of the present Raman spectra correspond to the ZnO nanostructure.
Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy is an effective study which helps to identify the functional groups and possible phytochemical molecules involved in the reduction and stabilization during the formation of ZnO nanostructures using the green extract of Albizia Amara leaves. The typical IR spectra for the green synthesized ZnO NSs and for the Albizia Amara leaf extract are shown in Fig. 6.
The spectral bands of the leaf extract present at 3391 cm−1 and 2921 cm−1 exhibited the presence of O–H stretching mode which may be due to the presence of alcohol or phenol or water molecules. The peaks at 1069 cm−1 and 1647 cm−1 indicate the C–N and CO stretching modes present on the surface of the leaf extract, respectively. Hence the presence of the respective functional groups indicates that the Albizia Amara leaf extract has polyphenolic and flavonoid compounds, which are mainly responsible for the efficient reduction process. The FTIR spectrum of the green synthesized ZnO NSs shows prominent peaks at 438 cm−1 and 496 cm−1, which are attributed to the hexagonal Zn–O stretching vibrations. The observed vibration peaks in the region of 400–500 cm−1 denote the Zn–O metal oxide peaks.
The wide peak at 3427 cm−1 indicates the presence of O–H and N–H stretching vibrations. Other vibration peaks observed at 1564 cm−1, 1412 cm−1, 1022 cm−1 and 857 cm−1 are due to the presence of amine and phenolic groups that are characteristics of flavonoids and polyphenols. Despite several washes, the presence of these amines and phenols help in the reduction of zinc ions to form ZnO nanostructures. Also, the presence of such phytochemicals capping over the surfaces of zinc not only helps in preventing aggregation of particles but also helps in keeping them stable. The formation mechanism of the ZnO nanostructure is illustrated in Fig. 7 and in the equation given below,
The surface chemical composition of the prepared ZnO nanoparticles have been studied by using XPS analysis. Fig. 8(a) shows the wide scan XPS survey spectrum of the green synthesized flake like ZnO where all the observed XPS peaks are found to agree with the standard values of ZnO.Fig. 8(b) shows the Zn 2p core-level spectra of ZnO which has two strong peaks of Zn 2p3/2 and Zn 2p1/2 corresponding to the binding energy 1020.76 eV and 1043.83 eV, respectively. It is clearly seen from Fig. 8(c) that the O 1s core-level spectrum peak of the prepared ZnO is present at 529.43 eV. Fig. 8(d) displays the narrow scan of the C 1s peak which is located at about 284.73 eV and corresponds to the C–C bond of the saturated carbon chains.

In PSCs, the active perovskite layer and its properties play an important role in determining the device performance in terms of both efficiency and stability. The XRD pattern recorded for the deposited perovskite thin film is shown in Fig. 9 and the inset shows the deposited perovskite films. The observed three major diffraction peaks at 14.13°, 28.30° and 43.04° are ascribed to (110), (220) and (330) planes and they indicate that halide based perovskite is formed with a high level of phase purity and is having tetragonal structure (a = 8.635 Å and b = 12.617 Å) and the obtained results are in good agreement with the previous reports.

The manifested light-harvesting behaviour of the prepared perovskite film over the visible region is given in Fig. 10(a).
The absorption edge in the absorption spectra lies at 826 nm corresponding to optimal optical bandgap value of about ∼1.51 eV, which is consistent with our previous reports and also with the value obtained from the Tauc plot shown in Fig. 10(b).
The surface morphology of the as-prepared mixed halide perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3−xClx) thin film is shown in Fig. 11(a). It shows a uniform distribution of polygonal-like crystals having small pin-holes which are expected to provide better light absorption in photovoltaics. The HRTEM image shown in Fig. 11(b) clearly shows that the size of the particles is in the range of 100–150 nm. However, the voids between the crystals present in the surface may lead to direct contact with the c-TiO2/perovskite interface.
Hence the present work is mainly focused towards the bilayer ETL based PSCs which may have a smaller number of pinholes and grain boundaries and can be expected to enhance the photovoltaic performance of PSC devices.

The PL measurement is considered to be an effective tool to explore the recombination properties of photo-excited bound electron–hole in the prepared perovskite films.Fig. 12 shows the PL spectra of both individual (c-TiO2 or ZnO/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx) and bilayer ETL (c-TiO2/ZnO/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx) based PSC films. All the samples showed a consistent emission peak located at 769 nm when the films are excited at 448 nm and the observed results match well with the previous reports of emission for mixed halide perovskites (CH3NH3PbI3−xClx).

The observed emission peak matches well with the bandgap of the prepared perovskite and confirms that there is a negligible amount of non-radiative defects in the prepared perovskite material. Furthermore, the broadened PL peaks observed for all the samples from 700 nm to 850 nm might be due to the phonon coupling within the perovskite crystal structure material. PL quenching is found to be more in the bilayer electron extraction material based film (TiO2/GF-ZnO NSs/perovskite) when compared to the single layer electron extraction material based films (TiO2/perovskite and GF-ZnO NSs/perovskite). The lowest peak intensity of the bilayer film indicate that the recombination is less in bilayer film when compared to the films having single layer ETM and thus can result in better device performance. On the other hand, the films having a single layer ETM exhibited the highest PL intensity indicating highest recombination loss at the ETL/perovskite interface.

Fig. 13 shows the top view FESEM images of (a) glass/ITO/c-TiO2 (20 μm magnification), (b and c) glass/ITO/c-TiO2/perovskite film (1 μm and 100 nm magnification, respectively), (d) glass/ITO/GF-ZnO NSs (20 μm magnification), and (e and f) glass/ITO/c-TiO2/perovskite/GF-ZnO NSs film (1 μm and 100 nm magnification, respectively).
Herein, Fig. 13(c and f) depicts the surface morphology and also shows the changes observed in the formation of pin-holes which may be due to the deposition of the perovskite layer onto the top of both single and bilayer ETLs.
From this, it could be inferred that micro-sized pinholes present in the single layer ETL have been reduced into nano-sized pin-holes with a continuous perovskite film over the bilayer c-TiO2/GF-ZnO NSs ETLs. Since, the micro-sized pinholes present in the surface of the c-TiO2/perovskite film may have the primary negative influence on the photovoltaic performance of perovskite devices due to the serious carrier recombination at the interface caused by the direct contact between ITO and perovskite layers.
This phenomenon of charge extraction and carrier recombination at the interface due to the presence of pin-holes has been schematically illustrated in Fig. 14(a and b). As shown in Fig. 14(a), the larger pinholes present in the single layer electron extraction material based device can act as a recombination centre which induces more charge recombination at the interface of TiO2/perovskite. However, for the devices having a bilayer electron extraction material (given in Fig. 14(b)), the oxygen defects present in ZnO act as a recombination barrier at the interface of ETL/perovskite. Besides the oxygen vacancy defects (VO and Oi), the hydroxyl groups present in the surface of ZnO prepared using the green approach play a key role in controlling the decomposition of the perovskite layer and facilitate charge extraction and thus enhancing the photovoltaic behaviour in ZnO based PSCs.
For the devices having a single ETL, the pinholes present in the ETL may lead to providing a direct pathway between perovskite and FTO layer, which can obviously increase the risk of recombination between the photogenerated charge carriers, while for the devices having bilayer ETL (TiO2/ZnO), the better hydrophilic nature of the TiO2 layer helps in providing a pinhole-free ZnO layer which may cover the FTO layer uniformly. As a result, there is less recombination loss in the bilayer ETL device, leading to increased VOC, JSC, and FF.
Herein, the present work is mainly focused on reducing or if possible eliminating the recombination and backflow of electrons at the ETL/perovskite interface using the bilayer ETL (c-TiO2/GF-ZnO NSs) in the PSC devices, which can reduce pinholes and thereby result in an enhanced photovoltaic performance.


Fig. 14(c) displays the cross-sectional FESEM image of the constructed PSC device having the structure of – glass/ITO/c-TiO2/GF-ZnO NS/spiro-OMeTAD/Au. The thickness of the respective layers is found to be optimal for achieving enhanced photovoltaic performance. The schematic representation of the energy level and the work function of the corresponding materials used to fabricate the complete bilayer ETL based perovskite device is shown in Fig. 14(d). Energy is expressed in terms of electron volts (eV), using the electron energy in a vacuum as a reference. The energy level of the conduction band (CB) edge of the corresponding materials – ITO, TiO2, ZnO and perovskite – are −4.7 eV, −4.1 eV, −4.0 eV and −3.9 eV, respectively, whereas the valence band (VB) edge of TiO2, ZnO, perovskite, spiro-OMeTAD and gold (Au) are found to be −7.1, eV, −7.2 eV, −5.40 eV, −5.20 eV and the Fermi level of Au counter electrode is −5.1 eV, respectively.

When sunlight falls on the working cell, the free electrons in the perovskite layer jump to the CB edge of the electron transport TiO2/ZnO layer and are finally collected at the ITO anode. Meanwhile, the holes formed at the VB of the perovskite are extracted by the spiro-OMeTAD and then move into the Au electrode.


Fig. 15 represents the typical current density–voltage (J–V) curves obtained for PSC devices having different electron extraction material combinations such as single layered ETMs (glass/ITO/c-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/spiro-MeOTAD/Au and glass/ITO/GF-ZnO NSs/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/spiro-MeOTAD/Au) and bilayer ETM ((glass/ITO/bi-ETL (c-TiO2/GF-ZnO NSs)/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/spiro-MeOTAD/Au)).

The photovoltaic parameters of all the fabricated perovskite solar cells obtained from the J–V curves are given in Table 1. From the obtained results, the single layered c-TiO2 as an electron extraction material based device achieved a PCE of 5.82% (with JSC of 18.37 mA cm−2, VOC of 0.673 V and FF of 47.10%). Whereas, the device having only ZnO as an electron extraction layer yielded an efficiency of 4.84% (with JSC of 14.51 mA cm−2, VOC of 0.635 V and FF of 52.52%).
Device structure

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Glass/ITO/c-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/spiro-D/Au
18.37
0.673
47.10
5.82
Glass/ITO/GF-ZnO NSs/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/spiro-D/Au
14.51
0.635
52.52
4.84
Glass/ITO/c-TiO2/GF-ZnO NSs/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/spiro-D/Au
20.46
0.728
52.61
7.83
Glass/ITO/c-TiO2/CR-ZnO NSs/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/spiro-D/Au
18.71
0.716
50.81
6.81
The perovskite device having both c-TiO2 and ZnO as a bilayer electron extraction material  exhibited a PCE of 7.83% (with JSC of 20.46 mA cm−2, VOC of 0.728 V and FF of 52.61%). Besides this, the performance of the perovskite solar cells fabricated using the chemically reduced ZnO electron transporting material has been compared with the performance of the cells fabricated using green synthesized ZnO based electron extraction material of the present work and the chemically reduced ZnO based perovskite device exhibited a PCE of 6.81% with JSC of 18.71 mA cm−2, VOC of 0.716 V and FF of 50.81%.
The better JSC, VOC and FF values obtained for the bilayer ETL devices indicates that the double electron transport layer plays a pivotal role in the better blocking effect with improved interface contact which results in reduced recombination losses, thereby resulting in achieving better device performance than the single ETL devices.
From this, it could be inferred that the bilayer ETL device exhibited slightly higher short-circuit current density (JSC), open-circuit voltage (VOC) and fill factor (FF) compared to those of the single layered ETL devices, thus giving rise to a better device performance. In contrast, the single layer c-TiO2 and GF-ZnO NS based device showed the lowest performance due to the obtained poor JSC and FF values which may be attributed to the large size pin-holes present in the absorbing material or the charge recombination taking place at the ETL/perovskite interface which may be responsible for its lower performance.

The pre-patterned indium tin oxide (ITO) glass substrates of about 12 × 12 × 11 mm dimensions having a sheet resistance of ∼16 Ω sq−1 were purchased. Methylammonium iodide (MAI, 98%), lead(II) chloride (98%), anhydrous ethanol (ACS reagent, 99.9%), diethyl ether, N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF), titanium diisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate) (75 wt% in isopropanol), 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenyl-amine)9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD), 4-tert-butyl pyridine (tBP), lithium bis(trifluoromethane sulfonyl)imide (Li-TFSI), chlorobenzene (99.8%) and zinc nitrate hexahydrate Zn(NO3)2·6H2O purchased from Sigma-Aldrich have been used. In addition, Dyesol 18 NR Titania paste purchased from Greatcell Solar was used as received.


The fresh Albizia Amara leaves were collected from a village in the Coimbatore region in Tamil Nadu, India. From this, 10 grams of the Albizia Amara leaves were taken and cleaned with tap water and then with double distilled (DD) water. The leaves were then chopped into pieces and were put into a 100 ml beaker. 75 ml of DD water was poured into the beaker containing leaves and was heated at 60 °C ± 5 °C for 3–4 hours. The heated leaf extract solution was filtered using Whatman filter paper and the filtered solution is to be used as a reducing and capping agent for the preparation of a flake-like ZnO nanostructure.


The preparation of green synthesized ZnO NSs was carried out as per the previous report of Senthil et al. To prepare the GF-ZnO NS precursor solution, 0.1 M (196 mg) of zinc nitrate hexahydrate (Zn(NO3)2·6H2O) was dissolved in 40 ml of double-distilled (DD) water and was stirred (at 300 rpm) overnight at room temperature. Then 25 ml of the leaf extract was added dropwise as a reducing and capping agent into the above prepared colourless solution and then was heated at 90 ± 5 °C for 60 min. The colour change of the solution from clear white to yellow confirms the formation of ZnO nanostructure. Further, the samples were annealed at 400 ± 5 °C for 180 minutes. The finally obtained sample was used as an electron extraction material in the fabrication of bilayer PSCs.


The purchased ITO substrates were cleaned by using acetone, methanol and finally with isopropanol for 10 minutes each. To deposit compact-TiO2 (c-TiO2), precursor solution was prepared by mixing (1:10 v/v) titanium diiosopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate) in absolute ethanol and stirred for 30 minutes. To form compact TiO2, 3.3 ml of the above solution was sprayed onto the 400 °C preheated ITO substrate and the coated films were then annealed at 450 °C for 10 minutes. The above prepared colloidal green synthesized suspension of the GF-ZnO NSs ETL was deposited onto the c-TiO2 by mixing GF-ZnO NSs with ethanol at 2:7 weight ratio along with a drop of Triton X-100 and stirred vigorously for the formation of colloidal GF-ZnO NSs solution. From this, 50 μl was taken and spin-coated onto the c-TiO2 layer at a spin rate of 4500 rpm for 30 s followed by an annealing process at 400 °C for 60 minutes.

The active perovskite layer solution was prepared by dissolving 294.9 mg of methylammonium iodide (MAI) prepared as per our previous report in 700 μl of DMF and was stirred. Then 171.1 mg of lead (II) chloride was added to the stirred solution containing MAI and the stirred solution was heated at 90 ± 5 °C for 2 hours. Then the prepared perovskite precursor solution (50 μl) was taken and spin-coated onto the bilayer ETL at 2000 rpm for 30 s and was annealed at 120 ± 5 °C for 45 minutes. To deposit hole transporting layer (HTL), 1000 μl of spiro solution (97 mg ml−1 of spiro-OMeTAD in chlorobenzene) was added to 9.7 μl of 4-tert-butyl pyridine and 30.2 μl of a lithium salt (175 mg ml−1 of Li-TFSI solution in acetonitrile) and then mixed and stirred for 30 minutes. The prepared HTL precursor solution (30 μl) was spin-coated at a spin rate of 2000 rpm for 30 s onto the deposited perovskite layer and was kept in the dark overnight. To complete the device, a ∼80 to ∼100 nm layer of gold was deposited at ∼10−6 bar vacuum condition via thermal evaporation onto the spiro-OMeTAD layer coated film to ensure electrical contact. Hence, the overall fabricated device structure is glass/ITO/c-TiO2/GF-ZnO NSs/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/spiro-OMeTAD/Au and the active device area is about 0.042 sq cm as shown in the inset of Fig. 15.

The crystalline structure was analyzed using an X-ray diffractometer (Bruker D8 ADVANCE ECO). The presence of functional groups was identified by recording the Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectrum in the range of 4000–500 cm−1 using a Bruker FTIR spectrometer. The optical absorption spectra were recorded using a UV-Visible spectrophotometer (Jasco V-670). The photoluminescence (PL) studies were carried out using a PerkinElmer (LS 45) system. The morphology of the samples was studied using a field-emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM, Zeiss, Sigma, UK). The high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) images of the prepared samples have been recorded using an electron microscope (JEOL JEM 2100). Raman spectroscopy studies were carried out using a laser confocal Raman microscope (Renishaw, UK, Model: Invia). The current density–voltage (J–V) curves for the fabricated perovskite solar cells were obtained using a (Keithley 2420) source meter under illumination with an ORIEL Solar Simulator having a 1000 W xenon arc lamp with AM 1.5 G filters. The J–V scan was performed from VOC −2 to +2 V with a time delay of 30 ms with a step size of 10 mV and a scan rate of 50 mV s−1. At least three sets were taken for observing the current density–voltage (J–V) at 25 ± 5 °C at 70 ± 5 °C % humidity.


In summary, we have interfaced a green approach synthesized flake-like ZnO nanostructure (GF-ZnO NSs) between compact TiO2 and perovskite layer to form bilayer (c-TiO2/GF-ZnO NSs) ETL perovskite solar cells. Compared to the single c-TiO2 and GF-ZnO NSs ETLs, the introduced bilayer ETL film efficiently covered the ITO substrate, avoiding the direct contact at the interface of ITO/perovskite layers. The bi-ETL PSC device achieved a maximum PCE of 7.83% with a VOC of 0.728 V, a JSC of 20.46 mA cm−2 and an FF of 52.61%. Whereas, the c-TiO2, GF-ZnO NSs and the chemically synthesized ZnO based ETL devices achieved a PCE of 4.84, 5.82 and 6.81%, respectively. The better performance of the bi-ETL based devices is ascribed to the enhanced carrier extraction and the reduced recombination losses at the interface between the ETL and the active perovskite layer due to the obtained flake like structured ZnO nanomaterial.


The authors declare no competing financial interest.


Authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support provided by the Indo-Norwegian Collaborative Project (INCP 2015-2020) and mobility research funding from the UTFORSK program, Western Norway University of Applied Sciences, Bergen, Norway.


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2020