 DOI: 10.1039/C9PY00461K
(Communication)
Polym. Chem., 2019, 10, 4407-4412


Um Kanta
Aryal
,

Junwoo
Lee
,

Kakaraparthi
Kranthiraja
,

Saripally Sudhaker
Reddy
,

Vijaya Gopalan
Sree
,

Taiho
Park
*,

Myungkwan
Song
* and 

Sung-Ho
Jin
*

Department of Chemistry Education, Graduate Department of Chemical Materials, Institute for Plastic Information and Energy Materials, Pusan National University, Busan, 46241, Republic of Korea. E-mail: shjin@pusan.ac.kr

Department of Chemical Engineering, Pohang University of Science and Technology, Gyeongbuk 37673, Republic of Korea. E-mail: taihopark@postech.ac.kr

Surface Technology Division, Korea Institute of Materials Science, Gyeongnam 51508, Republic of Korea. E-mail: smk1017@kims.re.kr

Received
27th March 2019
, Accepted 16th July 2019
First published on 16th July 2019
To improve the photovoltaic performance of fullerene-free organic solar cells (OSCs), the domain size of the polymer blend film is often reduced using low-volatility solvents and additives. However, since the resulting film is thermodynamically unstable, chemical modification of the polymer is necessary to obtain small domain size from low crystallinity. In this study, we synthesized a new random π-conjugated polymer (asy-PBDTPBT) and investigated the effect of its structural irregularity arising from random copolymerization and from introducing an asymmetric third component. The crystallinity of asy-PBDTPBT was remarkably lower than that of the control polymer (PBDTP) owing to its higher degree of irregularity. According to the tendency of this irregularity, non-fullerene OSCs using asy-PBDTPBT (power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 8.22%) outperformed those using PBDTP (7.37%).

Organic solar cells (OSCs) have become an efficient alternative device for renewably generating electricity. Continuous efforts by various researchers around the world have opened new opportunities for OSCs, including in large, cost-effective, and flexible solar farms, and provided diverse routes for OSC integration; however, such efforts have also unearthed new challenges. In general, high-performance OSCs often consist of an interpenetrating polymer blend of electron donors and acceptors. In these polymer blends, the domain size is critical to achieving high photovoltaic performance. Large domains will reduce the practical interfacial area and increase charge recombination, thus decreasing photovoltaic performance metrics, including the short-circuit current (JSC), the fill factor (FF), and the corresponding open-circuit voltage (VOC). Accordingly, the domain size must be reduced to improve photovoltaic performance.

Many research groups have reported ways to decrease the domain size of blend films by using low-volatility solvents and additives, which prevent liquid–liquid phase separation. However, when a blend film is deposited via spin-coating, it forms quickly; thus, the resulting film can be thermodynamically unstable. Morphological deformation, such as phase separation, could occur during aging or at high temperature. Accordingly, to stabilize the morphology while reducing the domain size, the semiconducting polymer should be chemically modified to decrease the crystallinity. Since low crystallinity leads to a high free volume in the polymer matrix, small-molecule acceptors can be mixed into the polymer blend, which further inducing reduces the domain size.
You et al. reported that steric distortion of polymer backbone leads to low crystallinity, thus increasing OSC performance. Recently, our group demonstrated that random copolymerization and asymmetric alkyl substituents both decrease polymer crystallinity. The random copolymer (P2FBT-T4) led to irregularity owing to the sequence of monomeric units in the conjugated backbone. The polymer with the asymmetric alkyl substitution also induced a similar phenomenon caused by irregularity in the acceptor moiety. Although these approaches reduced the inter-chain interactions between conjugated backbones, low crystallinity owing to irregularity improved the charge transport by decreasing the number of grain boundaries, where trap-assisted charge recombination was prominent.
Here, we synthesized a new random π-conjugated polymer (asy-PBDTPBT (25% asymmetric benzothiadiazole (BT)) by incorporating a third component into the control polymer (PBDTP) backbone to study how the photovoltaic performance is related to the domain size of a polymer blend system (Fig. 1). Irregularity owing to the asymmetric third component and its random copolymerization can remarkably decrease the polymer's crystallinity, which corresponds to a smaller domain size, thus suppressing charge recombination in OSC applications. Accordingly, asy-PBDTPBT exhibits lower crystallinity and a smaller domain size than the control polymer (PBDTP). Furthermore, the resulting blend morphology is thermodynamically stabilized by modifying the polymer structure, which cannot be achieved by incorporating additives.
The OSCs with asy-PBDTPBT demonstrated a higher power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 8.22% and higher JSC and FF than the OSCs with PBDTP. According to a morphological analysis, the blend film using asy-PBDTPBT showed lower surface roughness owing to its lower crystallinity, which also prevents charge recombination in OCS applications.

Fig. 1 shows the structure of the π-conjugated polymer. The key monomers (4,8-bis(5-(4-((2-ethylhexyl)oxy)-3-fluorophenyl)thiophen-2-yl)benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl)bis(trimethylstannane) (DBT), 1,3-bis(5-bromo-4-octylthiophen-2-yl)-5-(2-ethylhexyl)-4H-thieno[3,4-c]pyrrole-4,6(5H)-dione (P), and 4,7-bis(5-bromothiophen-2-yl)-5-ethoxy-6-(octyloxy)benzo[c][1,2,5]thiadiazole (BT) were synthesized according to methods in previous reports. The new π-conjugated polymers were synthesized via microwave-assisted Stille polymerization reactions, and the polymers were analyzed via1H NMR (Fig. S1 and S2), GPC, and elemental analysis. Furthermore, the thermal properties of the new π-conjugated polymers were investigated via thermogravimetric analysis (TGA), and the results are shown in Fig. S3 and Table 1. The TGA results (high Td values) indicate that the new polymers are well suited to optoelectronic applications, which could be attributed their rigid conjugated backbones. Furthermore, the DSC curves (Fig. S4) of the random π-conjugated polymer (asy-PBDTPBT) show no peaks indicating crystallization or melting, which indirectly reflects that the irregularity from random copolymerization decreases crystallinity.
Polymers

M
n (kDa)
PDI

T
d (%)

λ
max,film (nm)

λ
onset,film (nm)

E
optg (eV)
HOMO (eV)
LUMO (eV)

a Determined by GPC using THF as the eluent at 25 °C.
b Measured by TGA.
c UV-vis absorption onsets in the polymer film.
d Measured by cyclic voltammetry.
e HOMO = LUMO − Eoptg, LUMO = HOMO + Eoptg.

PBDTP
55
2.3
406
571
667
1.86
−5.40
−3.54
asy-PBDTBT
60
2.3
380
581
695
1.78
−5.38
−3.60
The UV-visible (UV-vis) absorption spectra of the new π-conjugated polymers were analyzed both in solution and as films (Fig. 2a and b). All the π-conjugated polymers showed absorption from 300 to 700 nm, with two distinct absorption peaks originating from the π–π* transition of the monomeric unit and donor–acceptor intra-charge transport. The asy-PBDTPBT showed slightly red shifted absorption spectra compared to the control polymer (PBDTP) in both solution and film states. This red shift may be attributed to the stronger electron-withdrawing effect of the third component (BT). Accordingly, random copolymerization with the third component further red-shifted the UV-vis absorption spectra owing to this stronger electron-withdrawing effect.
The energy levels of the π-conjugated polymers were estimated via cyclic voltammetry (Fig. 2c and Table 1). The estimated HOMO energy levels of PBDTP and asy-PBDTPBT were found to be −5.40 and −5.38 eV, respectively.
Furthermore, the lowest occupied molecular orbital energy levels (LUMOs) were calculated from the HOMO and optical band gap (Eoptg) values (Table 1). The LUMO energy levels of the π-conjugated polymers (PBDTP and asy-PBDTPBT) were estimated to be −3.54 and −3.60 eV, respectively. These results show that the energy levels of the new π-conjugated polymer are highly aligned with 3,9-bis(2-methylene-(3-(1,1-dicyanomethylene)-indanone))-5,5,11,11-tetrakis(5-hexylthienyl)-dithieno[2,3-d:2′,3′-d′]-s-indaceno[1,2-b:5,6-b′]dithiophene (ITIC-Th) for OSC application. In addition, DFT simulations were performed for the new random π-conjugated polymers (Fig. S5). The dihedral angle study (Fig. S6 and Table S1) clearly shows that the new random π-conjugated polymer (asy-PBDTPBT) might attain better planar structures than the control π-conjugated polymer (PBDTP). This enhanced planarity could be attributed to the improved intramolecular non-covalent interactions induced by the third component in the polymer backbone. In addition, asy-PBDTPBT exhibits a higher dipole moment (5.90 D) than the control π-conjugated polymer PBDTP (4.51 D), which confirms that the former exhibits a potential regarding a better-packed structure than the latter.
To investigate the crystal orientation and crystallinity, two-dimensional grazing-incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (2D-GIWAXS) was performed (Fig. 3). All the polymers show the face-on orientation, which exhibits a (010) π–π scattering peak in the out-of-plane direction. This result is compatible with OSC applications for vertical charge transport. Furthermore, both polymers show similar lamellae spacing and π–π stacking distance of 25.7 Å and 3.6 Å, respectively. Thus, the random copolymerization does not affect packing distance. In terms of crystallinity, which is determined from the intensity of the (100) lamellae scattering peak, PBDTP was more crystalline than asy-PBDTPBT. The asy-PBDTPBT showed a remarkably less intense lamellae scattering peak than PBDTP (Fig. 3c). Thus, the irregularity from the asymmetric third component and the random copolymerization notably decreased the crystallinity of asy-PBDTPBT although the polymer backbone in dihedral angle study was calculated to a more planar structure and a higher dipole moment. This finding indicates that the structural irregularity can lead to a smooth surface and a small domain size in OSC blend systems owing to low crystallinity.
The impact of the third component in the random π-conjugated polymer on the photovoltaic properties was investigated using fabricating fullerene-free OSCs (Fig. 4 and Table 2). The active layers with various donor/acceptor (D/A) compositions were prepared by mixing the new polymers and ITIC-Th. Among the various D:A compositions, 1:1 showed a higher-quality nanoscale active layer morphology than the other compositions. The current density–voltage (J–V) curves and external quantum efficiency (EQE) curves of the optimized non-fullerene OSC devices are shown in Fig. 4a and b, and the resulting photovoltaic properties are listed in Table 2. The optimized PCEs of the PBDTP- and asy-PBDTPBT-based OSCs are 7.37 and 8.22%, respectively. Among the OSCs using π-conjugated polymers, although the absorption spectra of asy-PBDTPBDT is incompatible with that of ITIC-Th, asy-PBDTPBT-based devices showed a higher PCE than those based on the control polymers. The high PCE of asy-PBDTPBT-based devices is very well aligned with the high FF and JSC values. The PCE's higher performance could be attributed to the improved charge transport and suppressed charge recombination along with the smooth morphological texture owing to the lower crystallinity than that of the other blend. Generally, geminate recombination is related to JSC and FF, and bimolecular recombination correspond to only FF. The small domain size can lead intrinsically to large surface area between donors and acceptors, which induces decreasing geminate recombination. Furthermore, well-mixed bulk-heterojunction films exhibited decreasing bimolecular recombination geometrically. In this study, the geminate recombination seems to be major factor because the JSC and FF is simultaneously enhanced, but it is hard to determine only germinate recombination. Consequently, geminate and bimolecular recombination should be considered simultaneously. In addition, although the HOMO level of asy-PBDTPBT is higher than that of PBDTP, the VOC also increased along with JSC and FF owing to suppressed charge recombination. In other words, the charge recombination decrease electric potential, reflecting decrease VOC in addition to JSC and FF. Therefore, the improved efficiency of the new random π-conjugated polymer over the control polymer is highly correlated with its improved EQE response, which was relatively higher than that of the PBDTP control polymer. The charge transport properties of the blends were analyzed using the space-charge-limited current density (SCLC) method (Fig. 4c). The hole mobility of PBDTP- and asy-PBDTPBT-based pristine blends is 2.46 × 10−5 and 3.31 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively. These drastically different charge transport properties clearly demonstrate the origin of the difference in the efficiency of the OSCs. Next, we performed electrical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) on fullerene-free OSCs fabricated from the optimized blends, and Fig. 4d shows the resulting Nyquist plots. The random π-conjugated-polymer-based OSCs showed lower bulk resistance (asy-PBDTPBT = 51.32 Ω) than those based on the control π-conjugated polymer (PBDTP = 154 Ω), which correlates very well with the difference in efficiency. The relatively high performance of the random π-conjugated-polymer-based OSCs with the higher JSC and FF corresponds well with the lower bulk resistance values obtained from the EIS results.
Donor

V
OC (VOC,avg) (V)

J
SC (JSC,avg) (mA cm−2)
FF (FFavg) (%)
PCE (PCEavg) (%)
Device configuration: ITO/ZnO/donor:ITIC-Th (1:1)/MoO3/Al.
PBDTP
0.80 (0.80)
15.35 (15.34)
60.00 (59.90)
7.37 (7.36)
asy-PBDTPBT
0.83 (0.83)
15.75 (15.70)
62.91 (62.70)
8.22 (8.15)
Finally, the bulk morphology of the optimized blend films was characterized using atomic force microscopy (AFM) to verify the degree of aggregation and phase separation (Fig. 5). The both root mean square (RMS) roughness values of PBDTP (1.25 and 1.45 nm) regarding top and cross sectional profiles was higher than that of asy-PBDTPBT (0.81 and 1.30 nm), which corresponds to the degree of crystallinity in GI-WAXS data. The lower RMS values indicate a smaller domain size, which suppresses severe charge recombination, thereby increasing the JSC and FF of the OSCs. The indicated domain sizes can be confirmed indirectly through calculation of crystallite coherence length from full width at half maximum (FWHM) of (100) diffraction peaks from 2D-GIWAXS on blended films (Fig. S7). The FWHM values of PBDTP and asy-PBDTPBT blended films were calculated to 0.657 nm−1 and 1.143 nm−1, and the resulting coherence lengths were 9.56 nm and 5.49 nm, respectively. The coherence length value of the asy-PBDTPBT blended film is lower than that of the PBDTP, indicating that asy-PBDTPBT can lead to small domain size in the blended film owing to lowering crystallinity from irregularity. Accordingly, the structural irregularity of the π-conjugated polymers arising from the asymmetric component and random copolymerization improves the photovoltaic performance owing to the small domain size by reducing the charge recombination.

In this study, we synthesized a new random π-conjugated polymer and investigated the effect of its structural irregularity arising from random copolymerization and an asymmetric third component. The crystallinity of the control PBDTP polymer was higher than that of asy-PBDTPBT, in accordance with its lower degree of irregularity. When applied in OSCs, although the optical absorption of asy-PBDTPBDT is unfavorable for use with ITIC-Th, the non-fullerene OSCs with the random π-conjugated polymer (i.e., asy-PBDTPBT) outperformed those with the control π-conjugated polymer (PBDTP), as demonstrated by PCEs of 8.22 and 7.37%, respectively. In addition, the former showed a higher JSC and FF. The high performance of the random π-conjugated polymers in non-fullerene-based OSCs could be attributed to their smaller domain size owing to their lower crystallinity, which suppresses charge recombination. Overall, the results clearly depict the importance of design strategies involving random π-conjugated polymer donors to introduce structural irregularity in realizing high-performance OSCs with improved photovoltaic properties.


There are no conflicts to declare.


2D-GIWAXS measurements were performed at a synchrotron radiation on the beam line 3C at the Pohang Accelerator Laboratory(PAL), Korea. This work was supported by the Technology Development Program to Solve Climate Changes of the National Research Foundation of Korea (2015M1A2A2056216) and the National Research Foundation (2016R1E1A1A01942593) by the Ministry of Science, ICT of Korea.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9py00461k
‡ These authors contributed equally.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019