 DOI: 10.1039/D1NR00312G
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 6798-6808


Wipakorn
Jevasuwan
* and 

Naoki
Fukata
*

International Center for Materials Nanoarchitectonics, National Institute for Materials Science, 1-1 Namiki, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0044, Japan. E-mail: JEVASUWAN.Wipakorn@nims.go.jp; FUKATA.Naoki@nims.go.jp

Received
17th January 2021
, Accepted 3rd March 2021
First published on 29th March 2021
Vertical-oriented silicon nanowire (SiNW) arrays with shaped smooth, nanodot-, or NW-structured surfaces offer many desirable advantages for advanced device applications. In this study, these functionalized SiNW formations were simplified by ex situ preparation of an aluminum (Al) catalyst along with optimization of the substrate temperature and time during vapor–liquid–solid chemical vapor deposition as a one-step process. SiNW-based photovoltaic cells were demonstrated with minimized NW surface defects through NW surface modification, opening a new path for the development of versatile Al-catalyzed SiNWs as a material of choice for on-chip integration in future nanotechnologies.

Due to their fascinating physical, optical, and electrical characteristics, silicon (Si) nanostructures such as nanowires (NWs) and nanodots (NDs) have attracted a great deal of attention in the last decade as building blocks for many advanced technological applications, including photovoltaics, field-effect transistors (FETs), lithium (Li)-ion batteries, and gas sensors. SiNW arrays are of great interest for increasing light trapping, in the form of a black Si substrate for radial p–n junctions, to enhance the solar cell performance. Si-Based core–shell NW structures have been a focus of research attention as FET channel materials for gate-all-around architectures to eliminate short channel effects via their three-dimensional (3D) carrier transportation and one-dimensional (1D) strong confinement. SiNW structures with NDs or NWs have been suggested as next-generation Li-ion anode materials to increase the energy density of Li-ion batteries up to the high theoretical charge storage capacity of Si (4200 mA h g−1), exploiting the high surface-area-to-volume ratio of these NW structures. Moreover, branched SiNW structures have been proposed for use as low bias voltage field-ionization tips for gas sensing. Various SiNW formation methods have been demonstrated, such as laser ablation, vapor–liquid–solid (VLS) growth, metal-catalyst electroless etching, and nanoimprinting or colloidal lithography followed by reactive ion etching. Of these methods, VLS growth using chemical vapor deposition (CVD) is of particular interest owing to its effectiveness in providing a high density of single-crystalline SiNWs, combined with expandability to large-scale manufacturing. The VLS mechanism can potentially form SiNW structures using metal catalysts with a simple eutectic phase diagram. The Si–metal alloy catalyst droplet formed via diffusion of Si in the vapor phase from a precursor gas into the liquid metal catalyst droplet can be crystallized to a solid wire of 1D growth when the Si concentration in the metal-Si droplet reaches a critical point. Gold (Au) is most commonly used as a metal catalyst due to its low eutectic temperature (Au–Si) of 363 °C with a Si composition of 18.6%, its availability as colloid nanoparticles and evaporation, non-oxidation in air, and the absence of a metal-silicide phase in the Au–Si phase diagram. In our previous research, Si and Ge NW formations and characterization using an Au catalyst have already been reported, including their radial shell layer formations, with highly controllable dimensions, morphologies, and doping levels. However, it is difficult to apply Au-catalyzed NWs to electronic applications owing to the drawback of Au contamination, which acts as a deep-level trap and degrades device performance.

Aluminum (Al) has been proposed as a new alternative catalyst to form SiNWs using the VLS process. A similar binary phase diagram of Al–Si and Au–Si systems suggests that SiNWs can be grown using the VLS method at a moderate eutectic temperature of 577 °C with a Si composition of 12.2%. The desirable features of earth-abundance (inexpensive material), availability of various depositions, lack of toxicity, absence of a metal-silicide phase, and absence of a mid-gap impurity state in Si make Al a prominent candidate for use as a catalyst for growing SiNWs. The ease of Al catalyst removal and the capabilities of Al existence as a p-type dopant in Si are also advantageous to overcome the problems of catalyst contamination. From previous reports, it can be found that the formation of Al-catalyzed SiNWs has been successfully achieved by two approaches under ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) and low-pressure (LP) CVDs. The combination of in situ processes under UHV namely thermal evaporation for Al catalyst deposition and CVD for SiNW growth is likely to provide an atomically smooth surface and a uniform SiNW structure without tapering.Ex situ Al catalyst evaporation with in situ pressure control of hydrogen (H2) carrier gas and the Si precursor gas of silane (SiH4) during the LP-CVD process has the potential to create various tapered SiNW structures such as hexagonal and nanopyramid SiNWs. A faster SiNW growth rate of LP-CVD of several orders of magnitude, reaching 10 μm min−1 was achieved, which is considerably faster than the UHV technique (∼20–100 nm min−1). The Al concentration in SiNWs was detected to be in the high-level range of 1018–1019 cm−3 in both CVD growth environments. Although various formations of Al-catalyzed SiNWs were explored, well-controlled SiNW formation with and without ND or NW structures on the surfaces has not yet been reported. Al-Catalyzed SiNW devices have not been much described and have also shown relatively low performance. Therefore, not only the investigation of Al-catalyzed SiNW formation for good property controls of morphology, Al concentration, and surface defects, but also the optimization of device fabrication processes needs to be performed to realize the use of Al-catalyzed SiNWs for useful multi-functional applications in future advanced technologies.
In this study, we investigated the Al-catalyzed SiNW formation using a thermal LP-CVD process. SiNW surface transformation from smooth to ND- and NW-structures on the SiNW surface by one-step growth was explored. The crystalline properties and elemental distribution of SiNWs were thoroughly examined from their tip to the base. The Al concentration in SiNWs, estimated by fitting to the Fano equation and Al catalyst removal prior to device demonstration, were studied. The structural and optical properties of Al-catalyzed SiNWs were investigated for potential photovoltaic applications. The SiNW-based solar cells with the p+–p–n–n+ structure were fabricated by optimizing the NW surface defects through NW surface modification and NW length reduction. An enhanced power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 9.6% was achieved. The differences between Al- and Au-catalyzed SiNW-based solar cells were also elucidated. The functionalized SiNW formation using the one-step CVD process together with SiNW-based solar cell demonstration in this study suggest increased potential for widespread application of Al-catalyzed SiNWs using low-cost materials and high throughput techniques as new alternative nanostructures for future technologies.

The growth of all Al-catalyzed SiNWs was carried out using 525 μm-thick n-type Si (111) substrates with a resistivity of 1–10 Ω cm. The substrates were cleaned successively with acetone, isopropanol, piranha solution (H2SO4: H2O2), and deionized (DI) water, and then immersed in diluted hydrofluoric acid (1% HF) for 2 min to remove SiO2 and form an H-terminated surface. The 50 nm-thick Al films were immediately deposited by sputtering. The Al-coated substrates were stored in a vacuum before pregrowth etching for Al2O3 removal and Al-catalyst nanohillock formation with a diameter of up to 47.69 nm and a height of 7.89 nm on the Si substrates, as shown in Fig. S1 and S2, by immersion in 1% HF for 10 s. The samples were then immediately loaded into a CVD chamber. SiNWs were grown at temperatures ranging from 600 to 750 °C. The VLS growth was controlled under a chamber pressure of 800 Pa for a growth time of 30 min, with SiH4 (100%) and nitrogen (N2) gas flow rates of 20 and 30 sccm, respectively. This was followed by post-annealing inside the CVD chamber at 850 °C for 20 min under a vacuum pressure of 10−6 Pa. The synthesized SiNWs were characterized using a Hitachi S-8000 scanning electron microscope (SEM), a JEOL JEM-2100F scanning transmission electron microscope (STEM), an energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) system, and a micro-Raman spectrometer with a 532 nm laser excitation beam of 1 μm penetration depth and 1 μm spot size focused using a confocal microscope with a 100× objective lens and excitation power setting of 30 μW. Prior to fabricating the solar cells, the SiNW surface and length were optimized by varying the growth time from 5 to 30 min. The NW surface morphology, optical properties, interfacial defects, and effective minority carrier lifetime were examined using a SEM, a Jasco V-670 ultraviolet-visible-near infrared (UV-Vis-NIR) spectrophotometer, a JEOL FA-200 X-band electron spin resonance (ESR) spectrometer at 4.2 K, with a magnetic field modulation of 100 kHz and a microwave power of 0.5 mW, and a Sinton WCT-120 quasi-steady-state photoconductance (QSSPC) lifetime tester, respectively. The SiNW surfaces were then immersed in 1% HF for 5 min to remove the Al catalyst and SiO2. The samples were then loaded into a CVD chamber for the formation of a 50 nm-thick p+-Si shell layer of ∼4 × 1019 atom per cm3 boron (B) concentration under a chamber pressure of 800 Pa at 750 °C for 3 min with SiH4, diborane (B2H6) (1% in H2), and N2 gas flow rates of 19, 0.5, and 30 sccm, respectively. The back surface field (BSF) or n+-Si layer was then applied to the substrate backside by spin-coating phosphorus-containing solution (OCD P-59210) and N2 annealing at 850 °C under a pressure of 100 Pa for 20 min. For solar cell front electrode preparations, a 120 nm-thick indium tin oxide (ITO) film was first sputtered, followed by a photolithographic process of 200 nm-thick Al layer with a micro-grid pattern. The 50 nm-thick Ti and 200 nm-thick Ag films were deposited for the back contact. Al-Catalyzed SiNW-based solar cells were examined with an active area of 1 cm2. The solar cell performances were characterized using a Keithley 2400 source meter under illumination of a 1-sun air mass (AM) 1.5G Xenon lamp solar simulator, calibrated using a single-crystalline BS-500 Si solar cell provided by Sharp. Au-catalyzed SiNW-based solar cells were also fabricated in the same manner as the Al-catalyzed samples to investigate the effect of catalyst contamination on the solar cell performance. Au nanocolloid was used as a catalyst for B-doped SiNW formation at 600 °C for 2 min by VLS growth in CVD using SiH4 and B2H6 (1% in H2) gas flow rates of 19 and 0.2 sccm, respectively, to obtain similar SiNW length and doping concentration level to those of Al-catalyzed SiNWs. The same post-annealing conditions at 850 °C for 20 min after Au-catalyzed SiNW formation under a vacuum pressure of 10−6 Pa in the CVD chamber were also applied. The Au catalyst was then etched with a KI + I2 solution (AURUM-302) for 1 min, followed by immersion in 1% HF for 5 min to remove SiO2 before p+-Si shell layer formation. The surface morphology and optical properties of Au-catalyzed SiNWs, and the performance of Au-catalyzed SiNW-based solar cells were compared to the Al-catalyzed SiNWs and solar cells.


The SEM images of Al-catalyzed SiNWs grown at various growth temperatures between 600 and 750 °C on n-Si(111) substrates are shown in Fig. 1(a–l). The NW morphology was significantly changed as the growth temperature was increased. Tiny non-directional NWs started forming at 600 °C, with a more vertical-oriented and tapered NW shape being created at 650 °C, as shown in Fig. 1(a, e, i) and (b, f, j), respectively. Good vertical tapering was noted at 700 °C and the addition of NW branches was more obvious at 750 °C, as shown in Fig. 1(c, g, k) and (d, h, l), respectively. The ND formation encompassed on the NW surfaces at 700 and 750 °C was clearly observed. The NW branches at 750 °C were inclined at angles of 70.5° and 109.5° with respect to the [111] direction as shown in Fig. 1(m). These SiNW formations at a growth temperature ranging above the eutectic temperature of the Al–Si binary phase diagram confirmed that SiNWs were formed in the VLS growth mode. The details of the NW length, tip and base diameters, and growth rate with various growth temperatures are shown in a histogram format and as a Gaussian fit of their statistical distributions in Fig. 2(a–c). The mean values and standard deviations of the NW length, tip and base diameters were evaluated as shown in Fig. 2(d–f) and are summarized in Table S1. The box ranges represent the percentiles from 25 to 75 and the inner square dots show the mean values. The NW length and base diameters are exposed to similar increased tendencies with increasing growth temperature. These NW growth configurations can be explained by the transition from an unstable to a stable catalyst droplet morphology. The change in the surface energy during NW growth at a certain vapor pressure or system temperature could initiate a transformation in this metastable droplet shape. The new angles at VLS contacts were introduced when energetically favorable and NWs tended to grow in the most energetically favorable direction. The larger NW diameters promoted by the higher growth temperature in this study are mainly attributed to the size enlargement by aggregation of Al catalysts with diameters of 47.7 nm–149.7 nm and heights of 7.9 nm–12.5 nm at a higher temperature raised prior to the VLS process (shown in Fig. S1 and S2). The longer NW lengths are caused by faster VLS growth due to more rapid decomposition of SiH4 precursor gas into Si and faster Si incorporation into the Si–Al alloy catalyst at the higher growth temperatures. The formation of kinked SiNWs and vertical SiNWs with NDs or NWs on the surface by increased growth temperature could also be explained by the instability and migration of liquid Al catalysts during the VLS growth. The kinked and crawled SiNWs formed at 600 °C and 650 °C originate from the slow VLS processes that contribute to low NW growth rates at equilibrium at which the VS surface energy can be perturbed at one side of the wire. The LS interface morphology at the sidewalls could therefore adopt a low-energy orientation and define the equilibrium Si crystal shape to grow NWs at other angles. At a higher growth temperature of 700 °C, a larger catalyst volume and a faster VLS mechanism were noted. Good balancing of the VS surface energy at this growth temperature favored a stable LS interface morphology, leading to formation of a steady-state NW with a good vertical shape. Raising the growth temperature to 750 °C caused a much greater increase in the volume of the Al catalyst aggregation and the VLS growth rate, resulting in more Al catalyst migration to the sidewalls of the NWs and the second VLS growth of subsequent branched NWs. The anisotropic surface energy of each LS interface of catalysts on the NW surface provided the different directions and lengths of NW branches with their minimum-energy orientations. Although vertical NWs could be formed at growth temperatures above 700 °C, the presence of more NW tapering and ND formation at higher growth temperatures appeared to cause increased VS growth. The calculated VS (or radial) and VLS (or axial) growth rates as a function of growth temperature are shown in Fig. 2(g).


Fig. 3(a–g) show STEM images with EDX analyses, high-resolution (HR) TEM images at the SiNW tip, and ND- and NW-structures on the SiNW surface formed at 700 °C. The results of the EDX scan and mapping for Si and Al along the length of a SiNW in Fig. 3(a) show increased Si intensity toward the NW base, corresponding to the tapered shape of the NW. A constant low Al content distribution along the SiNW growth direction and also near the catalyst of 0.5 at% was observed. The HRTEM images in Fig. 3(b–d) with higher magnification of the blue rectangular areas in Fig. 3(e–g) and fast Fourier transform (FFT) analyses of red rectangular regions show the crystalline properties of the SiNW tip, and ND- and NW-structures on the SiNW surface. The orderly atomic arrangement with an equal interplanar spacing of 0.32 nm at the NW tip in Fig. 3(e) was inspected together with the single-crystalline nature of SiNWs grown in the [111] direction. The creation of polycrystalline-Si NDs was proved by the FFT pattern shown in Fig. 3(f). The ND density and size distribution are related directly to Al catalyst migration and the non-uniformity of VS growth in each direction around the NW structure. The longer VS growth at the NW base in contrast to the NW tip induced not only NW tapering but also more Al catalyst migration, resulting in the ND diameter increase and multi-stack ND layer formation as revealed in the SEM images (Fig. 1(k and l)) that the size distribution and density of ND at the NW base were higher than those at the near NW tip position. A NW branch angle of 70.5° in Fig. 3(d) confirmed NW branch growth in the [111] direction, as previously shown in Fig. 1(m). The smooth surface of the tapered NW branches with a circular and spotty FFT pattern shown in Fig. 3(g) confirmed VS growth with amorphous- and polycrystalline-Si thin layer formation.

Fig. 4(a–d) show cross-sectional SEM images of SiNWs grown on n-Si(111) substrates at various growth times from 5–30 min. A 3D plot of the statistical distributions NW tip and base diameters of approximately 20 NWs with different growth times is shown in Fig. 4(e). A reduction of NW length from 6.1 μm to 1.3 μm with a smooth NW surface could be obtained by shortening the NW growth time to 5 min. A narrow tip diameter distribution of around 43.5 nm was exhibited, whereas the base diameter of NWs was around 104.3 nm. The longer growth time resulted in a wider variance of the NW length range. The tapered shape of the SiNWs has remained owing to the radial or VS growth. The mean values and standard deviations of the NW length, and NW tip and base diameters for different growth times are summarized in Table S2.
Raman measurements of the as-grown SiNWs at different growth temperatures were performed (Fig. 5(a and b)). Raman spectra with a shift of the Si optical phonon peak toward a lower wavenumber from the bulk-Si crystal at 520.1 cm−1 and asymmetrical broadening signify the presence of mixed polycrystalline and amorphous Si (a-Si) components at the SiNW surface, corresponding to the previously described SEM and TEM results. The Si optical phonon peak and full width at half maximum (FWHM) observed for SiNWs grown at 600 °C are close to those observed for the bulk-Si substrate, which is due to the low density of the SiNWs. The Si optical phonon peak observed for SiNWs grown at 650 °C showed a large downshift and broadening, which is due to the low crystallinity of SiNWs grown at this low temperature. The crystallinity of SiNWs is improved by growing at 700 °C and the Si optical phonon peak shifts to higher wavenumbers and narrows. However, the Si optical phonon peak showed a downshift and broadening again for SiNWs grown at 750 °C. These results agree with the increased mixed-crystalline Si ND, NW-branch, and thin-layer formations at the NW surface resulting from increased VS growth at higher temperatures, as investigated previously by SEM and TEM. Although the as-grown SiNW morphologies and crystalline properties at various growth temperatures were preliminarily elucidated, the crystallinity needs to be better controlled and a quantitative estimation of Al doping inside SiNWs must be performed for device applications. Post-annealing at 850 °C for 20 min after SiNW growth inside the CVD growth chamber under a vacuum pressure of 10−6 Pa was therefore carried out for improving the crystallinity of SiNWs and activating Al dopant atoms. Here the vacuum condition prevents oxidation at the NW surface.Fig. 5(c and d) show the Raman spectra of SiNWs grown at different temperatures followed by post-annealing. The Si optical phonon peaks were made sharper by post-annealing. With increasing growth temperature, the phonon peaks were upshifted and approached the value obtained for bulk Si. This is due to the improvement of the crystallinity of SiNWs by post-annealing. To gain more insights into the details of the SiNW properties throughout the SiNW structure, the post-annealed individual SiNWs grown at 700 °C were ultrasonicated in ethanol and the diluted solution was dispersed on a quartz substrate to make individual observations. Raman measurements of five single ∼7 μm-long SiNWs were performed. The Raman spectra measured at the NW base, center, and tip positions are shown in Fig. 5(e) with the Raman shift of the Si optical phonon peak and FWHM being shown in Fig. 5(f). Constant Si optical phonon peak and FWHM values from the tip to base NW positions were observed. The analyzed values for single NWs corresponding to the results from the Raman spectra of SiNWs in Fig. 5(d) indicate the improvement of Si crystallinity by post-annealing throughout the entire SiNW structure. Although the asymmetrical broadening of the Raman spectra of both assembled SiNWs and individual SiNWs in Fig. 5(c and e) became imperceptible after post-annealing, these asymmetric line-shapes could be estimated as a function of active Al doping concentration inside the SiNWs by fitting to the Fano equation as given by
(1)
where
I0 is the prefactor, q is the asymmetry parameter (1/q is sometimes referred to as the coupling strength), ω is the wavenumber, ωp is the phonon wavenumber, and Γ is the line width parameter. The asymmetric broadening originates from Fano interference due to the energy overlaps between the continuum of electronic excitation states caused by the transitions in inter-valence bands and the discrete states of the zone-center optical phonon. For different doping concentrations, the Raman spectra can exhibit different line-shapes that can be used to estimate the impurity density in NWs. When using B-doped SiNWs for p-type doping, the smaller |q| value implies stronger Fano interference and a higher active B atom concentration.Fig. 6(a and b) shows an example of fitting data using the Fano formula for the Raman spectrum of SiNWs grown at 700 °C and bulk-Si with B-doping at 1016 and 1018 atom per cm3. The Fano parameters q and Γ estimated from the Si optical phonon peaks of post-annealed SiNWs at different growth temperatures and post-annealed single NWs grown at 700 °C are plotted in Fig. 6(c and d), respectively. SiNWs grown by VLS growth of CVD using Au nanocolloid as a catalyst with an SiH4 gas flow rate of 19 sccm at 600 °C for 30 min, followed by the post-annealing process were used as the undoped SiNW sample. Fig. 6(c) shows the gradually decreased q values and increased Γ values with increasing growth temperature, revealing the higher Al concentration incorporated into the SiNWs. The decreased q value from the NW base to the NW tip, as shown in Fig. 6(d), represents the slightly higher Al substitution impurities at the NW tip corresponding to the Al composition analyzed by EDX, as shown in Fig. 3(a). The thicker VS growth at the NW base led to a lower concentration of Al impurities inside the SiNWs. The Al doping concentration was roughly estimated to be lower than 1016 atom per cm3 for SiNWs grown at 600 °C and 650 °C, and in the order of 1016–1018 atom per cm3 for SiNWs grown at 700 °C and 750 °C in comparison with B-doped Si wafers and undoped SiNWs. The smaller q value estimated for all Al-doped SiNWs compared to the q value of undoped SiNWs clarifies the electrical activity of Al as a p-type dopant in SiNWs. Their comparative Raman shift of the Si optical phonon peak and asymmetrical broadening, and the fitting data of the Si optical phonon peak of undoped SiNWs using the Fano equation are shown in Fig. S3.

Other than the aforementioned influences of growth temperature on Al-catalyzed SiNW formation and their structural properties, this study was also designed to demonstrate the SiNW-based device in actual use. The integration of SiNWs in solar cells is anticipated to improve device performances with respect to light trapping and to play a significant role in increasing the surface area to volume ratio. From the observation on the SiNW-based solar cells fabricated using Al-catalyzed SiNWs grown at different growth temperatures, the solar cells showed a relatively low performance as presented in Fig. S4 and Table S3. The light reflectance observed was lower than 30% but the highest PCE was only 3.4% after integrating the SiNW into solar cells. The EQE showed poor carrier extraction in short-wavelength range, indicating the increased surface defects of Si nanostructures formed at the higher temperatures. Therefore, more optimizations of the NW length and NW surface morphology while maintaining the light trapping level and vertical growth direction need to be performed to yield higher solar cell junction qualities and minimize lower NW surface defects. SiNWs grown at 700 °C, followed by post-annealing at 850 °C for 20 min, continued to show the simultaneous effects of the NW growth time on the NW length and ND structural formation. Fig. 7 shows their optical, electrical, and morphological properties related to photovoltaic applications. The light reflectance and absorbance spectra of SiNWs grown at 700 °C for various growth times of 5–30 min examined using an UV-Vis-NIR spectrophotometer in comparison with the n-Si (111) substrate are shown in Fig. 7(a and b). A light reflectance of over 38% and a light absorbance of lower than 62% for the whole spectral region were detected for the Si wafer. A light reflectance of below 20% and a light absorbance of higher than 80% corresponding to the NW length and structure were observed for the SiNW samples in the spectral window of 300–1000 nm. The shorter NW length slightly increased the light reflectance from 10% to 20% and decreased the light absorbance from 90% to 80%.
As a consequence, all SiNW samples appear black in color, suggesting their potential use as good antireflection and absorption resources for solar cells. The ESR measurements were performed at 4.2 K and 0.5 mW microwave power to observe the interfacial defects located at the Si and SiO2 interface, which affect the electrical properties, and the so-called dangling bond (DB)-type Pb-centers as shown in Fig. 7(c). The intensity of the ESR signal at a g-value of 2.005, which is attributed to the interfacial defects of SiNWs, increased with a longer growth time, which is likely attributed to the larger surface area, more defects, and ND formations that result from prolonging the growth period. The 5 min SiNWs showed minimal NW surface defects close to the n-Si (111) substrate, indicating good potential for providing solar cell junctions. The effective minority carrier lifetimes (τeff) of SiNWs grown using different growth times compared to the reference p-Si(111) wafer with a B-doping concentration of 1016 atom per cm3 were measured using the QSSPC lifetime method as shown in Fig. 6(d). Excess charge carriers were observed to be generated at the sample surfaces under short-wave illumination with a xenon flash lamp. The τeff of total recombination can be expressed as
(2)
where
τbulk is the bulk recombination lifetime, τsurf is the surface recombination lifetime, W is the wafer thickness and S is the surface recombination velocity. The τeff value of p-Si(111) reference wafer was detected for 26.6 μsec and the τeff values of SiNWs could be increased from 9.1 μsec to 18.7 μsec by decreasing the SiNW growth time from 30 min to 5 min. The reduction of the recombination rate by shortening the SiNW growth time reflected the lower surface defect density in the same manner as seen in the ESR results. The increased τeff value of 5 min SiNWs signified the potential for fabricating the solar cells with good characteristics. Fig. 7(e and f) show SEM images, STEM images, and EDX mapping of Si and Al near the NW tip and NW body of SiNWs grown at 700 °C for 30 min after 1% HF etching for 5 min to certify the presence of the SiNW morphology and Al catalyst prior to solar cell fabrication. The complete removal of the Al catalyst from the NW tip and the remaining ND structures on the NW body after HF etching were evidenced, indicating the effectiveness of HF etching to eliminate the Al catalyst while sustaining the NW surface for the device fabrication process.

A demonstration of SiNW-based solar cells with various SiNW growth times was then performed. Their structural properties and device characteristics were examined as shown in Fig. 8. Fig. 8(a) shows the photograph, schematic, and energy band diagram of the Al-catalyzed SiNW-based solar cell structure described in this study. B-doped p+-Si shell layer deposition by CVD was performed immediately after HF etching, followed by BSF layer diffusion, ITO and micro-grid Ag front contact formation, and Ti/Ag back electrode sputtering. The cross-sectional SEM image observed from the upper-half solar cell structure of an ITO layer on ∼50 nm p+-Si shell and 5 min p-SiNW core structures is displayed in Fig. 8(b). The NW feature was well distributed along the vertical direction over the top surface of the solar cell. The NW pitch was relatively closely packed near the NW base position, which is attributed to the full coverage of the shell layer and ITO film formation throughout the NW core structure. A core–shell NW diameter of around 195 nm and an ITO thickness of around 120 nm were clarified as shown in Fig. 8(c). Fig. 8(d) shows the core–shell interface of ∼10 nm p+-Si shell on 5 min p-SiNWs and their FFT patterns. The HRTEM image of the p+-Si shell layer showed a polycrystalline film formation at the NW surface, corresponding to the detection of the spotty FFT pattern. The p-SiNW core, when inspected, revealed an orderly atomic arrangement with an equal interplanar spacing of 0.32 nm that showed a pseudohexagonal symmetry and periodicity of {111}-plan FFT pattern, representing the single-crystalline property in the [111] direction. The current density versus voltage (J–V) characteristics measured under AM 1.5G illumination and the external quantum efficiency (EQE) in the spectral wavelength range of 300–1000 nm of SiNW-based solar cells with various SiNW growth times were compared to those of a planar cell and plotted as shown in Fig. 8(e and f) respectively. Data and statistics were collected from three cells under each condition and the numbers shown here are the maximum recorded values. The maximum power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the 5 min SiNW-based solar cell reached 9.6%, with a short circuit current (Jsc) of 26.79 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.53 V, and a fill factor (FF) of 57.00%. The better light absorption and larger junction area, together with the surface modification and length reduction of the optimized 5 min NW structure, resulted in enhanced collection efficiency and a shortened minority carrier diffusion path, leading to a PCE exceeding that of a planar cell by 2.0%. The improvement of EQE in the short-wavelength range due to the shortened NW growth time denoted better solar cell junction qualities, exhibiting higher PCE, Jsc, Voc, FF, and shunt resistance (Rsh) values, and lower series resistance (Rs), as summarized in Table 1. Defects such as recombination centers and the τeff degradation caused by the VS or radial growth processes could be reduced by NW surface transformation of the thick Si layer with an ND structure to thin Si film formation.
SiNW growth time
PCE (%)

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF (%)

R
s (Ω cm2) @ V = Voc

R
sh (Ω cm2) @ V = 0 V
0 min (planar)
7.6
25.90
0.54
54.01
1.17
111.30
5 min
9.6
26.79
0.53
57.00
1.42
274.96
10 min
5.7
22.73
0.52
48.45
2.27
178.63
20 min
3.0
14.52
0.49
41.32
5.18
170.00
30 min
1.7
9.49
0.47
38.13
8.71
162.58
For more clarification of the advantages of an Al catalyst from the viewpoint of a good candidate as a metal catalyst for SiNW formation and SiNW-based solar cell fabrication, Au-catalyzed p-SiNWs and their SiNW-based solar cells were compared. Au-Catalyzed p-SiNWs were formed by CVD using Au nanocolloid and B atoms as the catalyst and dopant, respectively. All parameters of the n-Si(111) substrate, SiNW length of 1.3 μm, doping concentration level in the order of 1018 atom per cm3 in SiNWs, post-annealing conditions, and device processes were equally controlled for optimized 5 min Al-catalyzed SiNW formation and its solar cell fabrication. The SEM image in Fig. 9(a) reveals that the as-grown Au-catalyzed p-SiNWs have a uniform NW diameter with an average value of around 35.8 nm and random NW growth direction. The average core–shell NW diameter after p+-shell layer formation was detected to be 138.2 nm, as shown in Fig. 9(b). The Au-Catalyzed p-SiNW morphology exhibited a better cylindrical structure, smaller diameter, lower density, and larger nondirectional NW formation, in comparison with the 5 min Al-catalyzed SiNWs shown in Fig. 4(a). These characteristics lead to relatively lower light reflectance and higher light absorbance than the Al-catalyzed SiNWs in the spectral range of 300–1100 nm as shown in Fig. 9(c and d). The J–V characteristics of an Au-catalyzed SiNW-based solar cell measured under AM1.5G and EQE compared to Al-catalyzed SiNW-based and planar solar cells are presented in Fig. 9(e and f), respectively. The PCE of the Au-catalyzed SiNW-based solar cell was conducted at 3.2% with Jsc of 18.01 mA cm−2, Voc of 0.52 V, FF of 33.67%, Rs of 10.19 Ω cm2, and Rsh of 58.21 Ω cm2. Although best antireflection was provided by the Au-catalyzed SiNWs, the Au-catalyzed SiNW-based solar cell showed lower performance and the lowest EQE over the entire spectral range. These results indicate poor carrier extraction, possibly caused by the NW surface defects, and deep-level-traps from Au contamination. The inferior EQE revealed the highest carrier recombination rate over the whole spectral range, corresponding to a low τeff of 10.4 μsec for Au-catalyzed p-SiNWs and the presence of deep-level traps inside the SiNWs. These results signify that Al is superior as a metal catalyst for SiNW formation and SiNW-based device utilization. Although more development, such as NW surface passivation, photonic design of NW diameter, and combinations with organic material or Si nanostructures, is evidently required to ameliorate the extra carrier extraction in the visible region of EQE for Al-catalyzed SiNW, the substantial improvement of PCE in this study successfully demonstrated Al-catalyzed SiNWs to be a Si-based material with excellent potential to be a leading light absorber and an excellent medium for photovoltaic applications.

Shape-controllable Al-catalyzed SiNW formation, including the enhancement of solar cell performances as new promising SiNW-based materials for future photovoltaic applications, was demonstrated in this study. SiNW structures with a transformation from a smooth surface to ND- and NW-structures were successfully synthesized using a bottom-up approach that employed the VLS mechanism based on the growth temperature and time controls of thermal LP-CVD and a simple ex situ Al catalyst sputtering technique followed by dilute HF etching. The Si crystalline properties, Si and Al elemental distribution, and Al-doped concentration range of 1016–1018 atom per cm3 estimated using the Fano equation in the SiNWs were thoroughly explored from the tip to the base of SiNWs. Al catalyst removal was successfully performed by diluted HF etching without damage to the SiNW surface prior to device fabrication. The smooth-surface SiNW formation was achieved by shortening the growth time to 5 min at a growth temperature of 700 °C to minimize the NW surface defects, contributing to enhanced PCE that reached 9.6% with the p+–p–n–n+ solar cell structure. The comparison between Al- and Au-catalyzed SiNWs and their device performances revealed Al to be a good metal catalyst. The controllable shaping of SiNW formation using a one-step CVD process and good integration of SiNWs into solar cells demonstrated efficient NW characteristics and opens a new path for the development of multi-functional Al-catalyzed SiNWs for next-generation advanced technological applications.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported in part by JSPS KAKENHI Grant No. K7E001 and the World Premier International Research Center Initiative (WPI Initiative), MEXT, Japan.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1nr00312g
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021