 DOI: 10.1039/C9CC00016J
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 4315-4318


Shengfan
Wu
,

Zhen
Li
,

Jie
Zhang
,

Tiantian
Liu
,

Zonglong
Zhu
* and 

Alex K.-Y.
Jen
*

Department of Chemistry, City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon, 999077, Hong Kong. E-mail: zonglzhu@cityu.edu.hk; alexjen@cityu.edu.hk

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon, 999077, Hong Kong

Received
2nd January 2019
, Accepted 18th March 2019
First published on 19th March 2019
We present a strategy for suppressing the open-circuit voltage (Voc) loss of perovskite solar cells by incorporating large guanidinium cations (Gua+) into a perovskite lattice, leading to a significantly improved Voc of 1.19 V and an impressive power conversion efficiency of >21%. Our results manifest the critical role of Gua in passivating defects and highlight the importance of compositional engineering in promoting the performance of perovskites.

Solution processable organic–inorganic lead halide perovskite solar cells (PVSCs) have attracted enormous attention from both industry and academia as a promising photovoltaic technology for renewable energy generation. Very recently, a PVSC with a certified power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 23.7% has been reported, which is on par with the performance of several existing inorganic photovoltaic technologies. Although PVSCs have developed so rapidly, it becomes more and more challenging to further improve the efficiency as it has already approached a theoretical limit. For state-of-the-art PVSCs, the reported short-circuit current densities (Jsc) have reached 92% of their theoretical maximum while the Voc and fill factors (FF) are still less than 90% of the Shockley–Queisser limit.

Given that any nonradiative losses can potentially narrow the quasi-Fermi level splitting (QFLS), large number of defects within perovskites or at its grain boundaries and interfaces act primarily as nonradiative centres contributing to the most significant voltage loss (Voc,loss = Eg/q − Voc). The Voc,loss plotted as a function of PCE from some recently reported single-junction PVSCs based on the n-i-p configuration is shown in Fig. S1 (ESI). To tackle voltage loss issues, composition engineering, surface treatments/passivation and interfacial modifications are the most commonly used methods to reduce the defect states of halide perovskites. Among them, composition engineering for halide perovskites has proved to be a highly effective strategy for achieving efficient PVSCs with low voltage loss since it can improve the quality of perovskite films and thus reduce the defects in grain boundaries and on surfaces.
Several research groups have recently reported that the defects in perovskite films can be effectively modulated by employing additives in precursor solutions. Saliba et al. demonstrated that the incorporation of rubidium iodide (RbI) can improve the photoluminescent quantum yield (PLQY) of Cs-FA-MA based perovskites from 2.4 to 3.6%, and correspondingly, a high Voc of 1.24 V could be obtained. More recently, Son et al. found that the addition of potassium iodide to perovskites can eliminate the hysteresis of PVSCs by preventing the formation of iodide Frenkel defects, compared to other alkali metal iodides.
Organic halide salts such as butyl ammonium iodide and phenylethyl ammonium iodide have also been used to reduce the defect density of perovskite films. However, most of the organic halide salts with large size would result in Ruddlesden–Popper layered perovskites, leading to a quantum confinement effect that reduces the Jsc of devices. In addition to alkali halides and 2D organic cations, highly symmetric guanidinium cations (Gua+) with ionic radii of 278 pm have also been reported to enhance the photovoltaic performance in MAPbI3 based PVSCs by forming a highly stable 3D crystalline structure. Moreover, we have recently found that Gua alloyed perovskites possess enhanced defect tolerance and phase stability for large bandgap perovskites.
In this work, a large Gua cation was incorporated into Cs0.1(FA0.83MA0.17)0.9Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3 perovskites to form CsGuaFAMA mixed cation perovskites. The remarkably prolonged carrier lifetime, sharper Urbach tail and lower trap density of states (tDOS) demonstrated the strong passivation effect of Gua on the defects in bulk perovskites. As a result, the 10% Gua (molar ratio) based PVSCs yield a champion PCE of 21.12%. More importantly, an impressive Voc of 1.19 V can be achieved with the Voc,loss of merely 420 mV. Our result suggests that Gua+ can function as a unique alternative cation to suppress the formation of lattice defects and be generally applicable for other perovskite-based optoelectronic devices.
Cs0.1(FA0.83MA0.17)0.9Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3 (denoted as CsFAMA) is used as the reference to investigate the structural, optical, and electrical properties of Gua based perovskites. Considering the complex nature of Gua-incorporated films, the molar ratio (x) of Gua to Cs0.1(FA0.83MA0.17)0.9Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3 is used to indicate the different perovskite films. Fig. 1a presents the proposed crystal structures of the mixed perovskite. To gain more insight into the arrangement of Gua in a perovskite crystal structure, we performed X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements to investigate the phase and crystal information. Fig. 1b shows the diffraction patterns of the samples containing different molar ratios of Gua and it is noted that a small peak at 12.7° is observed for the pristine film (0% Gua), which originates from PbI2 in perovskite. Interestingly, upon incorporation of Gua, the intensity of the diffraction peak gradually decreased while still remaining in the 3D perovskite phase. However, a new diffraction peak at a lower angle around 11.31° occurred for 20% and 40% Gua, indicating the formation of the 1D GuaPbI3 phase.Fig. 1c displays the zoomed-in region corresponding to the (011) and (012) lattice planes. An obvious left shift of the peaks was observed when the ratio of Gua was increased. Considering the ionic radius (r) of Gua is 278 pm, being larger than that of FA+ (253 pm), it is possible that partial substitution by Gua has generated lattice expansion. To verify this hypothesis, the lattice constant a was calculated. As plotted in Fig. 1d, a is gradually increased upon increasing the concentration of Gua, proving that Gua has been inserted into the perovskite lattice. The average crystallite size was also calculated from Debye–Scherrer equation and the results are summarized in Table S1 (ESI).
The surface electronic states of the perovskite films were investigated by X-ray photoemission spectroscopy (XPS). As shown in Fig. 1e, the high-resolution spectra of Pb 4f for a pristine film exhibit two characteristic peaks at 138.5 eV and 143.4 eV, which are shifted to 138.9 eV and 143.7 eV respectively for 10% Gua. Similarly, C 1s peaks also shifted right to higher binding energy (Fig. S2, ESI), which likely resulted from different atomic environments or coordination strengths between Gua and FA/MA/Cs. However, the shift of the N 1s peak might be due to the background noise when compared with the N 1s peak of 1D GuaPbI3. Additionally, the morphology of these perovskite films were studied by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and atomic force microscopy (AFM), as shown in Fig. S3 and S4 (ESI). We found that there are no clear differences between the perovskite films, indicating that the film morphology was not obviously affected by Gua.

Fig. 2a and b display the photograph and UV–vis absorption spectra of the perovskite films with different contents of Gua, respectively. A color change of the films from black (0% Gua) to brown (40% Gua) is observed, which can be attributed to the reduced absorption in the visible region. All of the samples demonstrated a similar band edge at around 770 nm. Specifically, the band gaps of 0% and 10% Gua (denoted as CsGuaFAMA hereafter) mixed perovskite films were calculated to be 1.62 eV and 1.61 eV, respectively (see Fig. S5, ESI), suggesting that Gua has negligible effect on bandgap. Steady state photoluminescence (PL) was also employed to study the charge dynamics of these perovskite films, as shown in Fig. 2c. It can be seen that 10% Gua achieved the highest PL intensity and then gradually decreased when the concentration of Gua was over 10%, which indicates that a small amount of Gua can passivate the defects in perovskite films. However, the PL intensity decreased when an overdose of Gua was introduced, which might be attributed to the formation of 1D GuaPbI3 that has lower PLQY. Upon comparing the PL spectra, it is noticed that there was a gradual red shift and broadening of FWHM for 20% and 40% Gua (Fig. S6, ESI). This redshift is probably related to a slight phase segregation change from homogeneously mixed halide anions to bromide- and iodide-rich perovskite phases at a high concentration of Gua.
The charge carrier kinetics of these perovskite films were characterized by time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) spectroscopy. As shown in Fig. 2d, all TRPL spectra exhibited a typical bi-exponential decay behaviour and the PL decay times were fitted by a bi-exponential function of time (t) (see ESI). The average carrier lifetime (τave) and the related fitting parameters are summarized in Table S2 (ESI). The sample without Gua showed an τave of 767.00 ns, and then increased to 1.22 μs, 2.66 μs, 1.84 μs and 1.30 μs, respectively, when the Gua concentration was increased to 5%, 10%, 20% and 40%. It is reported that the increase in charge carrier lifetimes is attributed to the rapid reorientation through electron–rotor interaction of Gua in the A-site. These remarkably improved PL intensity and lifetime indicated that the bi-molecular radiative recombination was gradually enhanced upon embedding a larger Gua cation into the perovskite lattice, which is consistent with the previous reports.
The photovoltaic performance of Gua incorporated PVSCs was examined by fabricating the regular n-i-p planar photovoltaic devices. Since it is important to select proper hole- and electron-transporting materials with compatible valence band maximum (VBM) and conduction band minimum (CBM) to perovskites, ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) was carried out to measure the VBM and CBM of perovskite films (Fig. S7, ESI). The calculated energy levels of perovskites were provided in Fig. 3a, where SnO2 and spiro-OMeTAD were accordingly chosen as the ETL and HTL to form favourable cascade charge transport. The energy level alignments of the materials are depicted in Fig. 3a and the best current density–voltage (J–V) curves (measured under AM 1.5 G irradiation at 100 mW cm−2) of the studied PVSCs are displayed in Fig. 3b. The Cs0.1(FA0.83MA0.17)0.9Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3 based PVSC showed a decent PCE of 18.56% with a short current density (Jsc) of 23.55 mA cm−2, a Voc of 1.11 V and a fill factor (FF) of 0.71. Whereas, 10% Gua based perovskite achieved a significantly enhanced Voc of 1.19 V with a Jsc of 23.66 mA cm−2 and FF of 0.75, leading to a champion PCE of 21.12%. It is noted that the Voc,loss of 10% Gua is only 420 mV, which is among the lowest voltage loss in the PVSCs with Eg around 1.60 eV. In contrast, the voltage loss of the reference device is as high as 500 mV. Since planar PVSCs usually suffer from hysteresis, the J–V curves with forward and reverse scans were compared in Fig. S8 (ESI) and it was found that there is no obvious difference in the hysteresis behavior for the 10% Gua based device. All the device performances are summarized in Table S3 (ESI) and the J–V curves for other ratios of Gua are also provided in Fig. S9 (ESI).
The PCE statistics of total 20 devices of each regular PVSC with 0% and 10% GUA were demonstrated in Fig. 3c. It is found that the average PCE of 10% Gua based PVSCs was remarkably enhanced from 17.48% to 19.92% with good reproducibility. The stabilized power output of the CsGuaFAMA cell was measured at the maximum power point (MPP) and stabilized with a PCE of 20.69% under 1 sun illumination (Fig. 3d). It was close to the PCE value obtained from the J–V curve and demonstrated high reliability. Moreover, the external quantum efficiency (EQE) of the reference and 10% Gua based PVSCs is measured (Fig. S10, ESI). A Jsc of 22.25 mA cm−2 and 22.60 mA cm−2 was integrated from the EQE spectrum of the reference and CsGuaFAMA, respectively, which matched well with the values extracted from J–V curves. The statistics of photovoltaic parameters obtained from the devices are shown in Fig. S11 (ESI) and it is clear that the most obvious impact of the Gua passivation is the enhancement of Voc.
To quantitatively analyse the Voc,loss from nonradiative recombination in PVSCs, we describe Voc by several terms related to losses from the ideal Voc, as shown in eqn (1):
Voc = VSQoc + ΔVSCoc + ΔVradoc + ΔVnonradoc
(1)
where Δ
VSCoc was the loss from less-than ideal above bandgap Jsc, ΔVradoc can be ascribed to nonideal radiative Voc loss and ΔVnonradoc resulted from nonradiative recombination, which are calculated according to the previous works (see ESI, for details) and summarized in Table S4 (ESI). The obtained ΔVradoc of 5.42 mV for CsGuaFAMA was evidently lower than that of the reference device (29.78 mV), suggesting the lower degree of energy disorder at the band edge. More importantly, we found that the ΔVnonradoc of CsGuaFAMA is merely 137.03 mV, whereas it is as high as 201.86 mV for the reference device. This difference in ΔVnonradoc is consistent with the increase of 0.08 V in Voc, and therefore, we can attribute the low voltage loss for CsGuaFAMA to the suppressed trap-mediated nonradiative recombination.

Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was also applied to characterize the charge transport dynamics in solar cells.
Fig. S12 (ESI) showed the Nyquist plots of the devices with 0% and 10% of Gua, which were measured under dark conditions with the frequency range from 500 mHz to 1 MHz and the equivalent circuit is shown in the inset of Fig. S12 (ESI). The series resistance (Rs) is calculated from the Nyquist spectra and it is 23.03 and 16.38 Ω for the reference and the 10% Gua based device, respectively. Clearly, the CsGuaFAMA device exhibited lower Rs and larger Rrec values compared to the reference device, indicating a better transporting and less charge recombination rate, which further explains the enhanced FF and Voc.
In order to examine the trap states and obtain more insight into the optoelectronic properties of our prepared perovskite films, we also investigated the Urbach energy (Eu). In the case of reference, the Eu was calculated to be 50 meV while it decreased to 46 meV with the addition of 10% Gua (Fig. 4a), which was likely due to the lower band edge disorder and defect density. To characterize both shallow and deep trap states (NT) and quantize the reduction of NT, it is calculated by admittance spectroscopy (calculation details are provided in the ESI) as shown in Fig. 4b and Fig. S13 (ESI). In the shallow band region (band I, 0.26–0.27 eV), the NT of the reference device was almost the same as that of CsGuaFAMA. Nevertheless, it was gradually decreased for the CsGuaFAMA sample in the deeper region (band II, 0.27–0.38 eV) and maintained a stable gap in band III (0.38–0.45 eV), indicating the effective passivation of defects in the deep band region.
In summary, we have comprehensively studied the structural, photophysical, and photovoltaic properties of new perovskite compositions based on CsGuaFAMA mixed cations. It is found that the defects are effectively passivated after incorporating Gua, which is verified from the much longer PL lifetime, lower energy disorder in the band edge (Urbach tail), larger charge recombination resistance, and an order of magnitude lower trap state density. These beneficial effects result in a remarkably enhanced Voc from 1.11 V to 1.19 V and an impressive PCE > 21%. Our work highlights the great potential of A-site composition engineering using Gua to reduce the nonradiative recombination centres, which should be highly applicable to other perovskite-based optoelectronic devices.
The work was supported by the New Faculty Start-up Grant of the City University of Hong Kong (9610421, 7200587), Department of Energy SunShot (DE-EE 0006710) and the Office of Naval Research (N00014-17-1-2201).

There are no conflicts to declare.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9cc00016j
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019