 DOI: 10.1039/C6CP05544C
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 27818-27828


Avishek
Banik
,

Mohammad Shaad
Ansari
,

Tushar Kanta
Sahu
 and 

Mohammad
Qureshi
*

Materials Science Laboratory, Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, Guwahati – 781039, Assam, India. E-mail: mq@iitg.ernet.in; Fax: +91-361-258-2349; Tel: + 91-361-258 2320

Received
10th August 2016
, Accepted 10th September 2016
First published on 14th September 2016
The present study discusses the design and development of a dye sensitized solar cell (DSSC) using a hybrid composite of ZnO nanoparticles (ZnO NP) and silica nanospheres (SiO2 NS). A ≈22% enhancement in the overall power conversion efficiency (PCE, η) was observed for the device fabricated with a binary hybrid composite of 1 wt% SiO2 NS and ZnO NP compared to the pristine ZnO NP device. A systematic investigation revealed the dual function of the silica nanospheres in enhancing the device efficacy compared to the bare ZnO NP based device. Sub-micron sized SiO2 NS can boost the light harvesting efficiency of the photoanode by optical confinement, resulting in increased propagation length of the incident light by multiple internal reflections, which was confirmed by UV-Vis diffused reflectance spectroscopy. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopic (EIS) analysis showed a reduced recombination of photo-generated electrons to the I−/I3− redox shuttle in the case of the composite photoanode. The higher recombination resistance (Rct) in the case of a 1 wt% composite indicates that the SiO2 NS serves as a partial energy barrier layer to retard the interfacial recombination (back transfer) of photo-generated electrons at the working electrode/electrolyte interface, increasing the device efficiency.

Clean energy resources are at top priority as global climate change becomes more and more manifest with each passing decade. Solar energy promises to be the most reliable clean energy resource because of its high abundance. Effective utilization of solar energy relies on the development of efficient photovoltaic devices, and dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) are thought to be able to generate robust and high efficiency photon-to-current conversion devices to overcome the ever-increasing global energy demand. Since the ground-breaking work by O’Regan and Grätzel in 1991 on DSSCs utilizing a ruthenium (Ru) based dye and TiO2 as a sensitizer scaffold, with a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of ∼7.1%, researchers have been focusing on improvement of the prime components of the devices and achieved up to ∼13% PCEs using a zinc-porphyrin dye and cobaltII/III redox mediator, paving a pathway for the practical progress of DSSCs. Recently, zinc oxide (ZnO), an important II–VI semiconductor with a wide bandgap of 3.37 eV and a large exciton binding energy of 60 meV, has emerged as a potential candidate for DSSCs. Zinc oxide has distinct advantages over the most commonly used material, TiO2, in terms of high electron mobility (200–1000 cm2 V−1 s−1), larger diffusion length (∼103 mm), and ease of achieving diverse morphologies with high crystallinity, which makes it superior to conventional TiO2. Tremendous efforts have been made towards increasing the efficiency of the solar cell by modifying the architecture of the photoanodic segment. For ZnO based DSSC, modifications have been done by (i) incorporating a variety of morphological structures with distinct advantages, (ii) using different sensitizer molecules, (iii) increasing the light harnessing capability of the device by plasmonic treatment, and (iv) incorporation of scattering scaffolds with enhanced light absorption through multiple reflections. Over the years, researchers have developed various photoanodic architecture for ZnO-based DSSCs, and a record overall PCE of 7.35% has been reported. Nevertheless, this power conversion efficiency (PCE) is still relatively lower than that of TiO2-based DSSCs. However, the main bottlenecks to further increase the power conversion efficiency are mainly (i) optical losses in the devices and (ii) severe charge recombination at the ZnO/dye/electrolyte interface.

Conventional photoanodic films are fabricated utilizing small sized (approximately 20 nm in diameter) metal oxide nanoparticles (NPs) to ensure a large interfacial surface area for maximum dye adsorption. However, the fabricated thin film suffers a significant optical loss owing to the high transparency, resulting in an inferior photon-to-electric conversion efficiency. Increasing the film thickness inhibits the penetration ability of incident light. It is also known that thicker films possess a large number of grain boundaries, resulting in a higher probability of recombination of photo-generated electrons. Thus, the thickness of the film should be optimized so as to get the maximum dye loading without compromising on absorption and related optical losses. An additional way to boost the power conversion efficiency in DSSCs is to increase the light harvesting ability of the photoanode films by incorporation of a light scattering material. The basic principle of the light scattering method is to confine the propagation of light and extend the traveling distance of light within the photoanode film. Optical confinement occurs when light suffers multiple reflections from a large sized particle and becomes trapped within the working electrode whereas the forward-scattered light increases the path length in the forward direction. For the optimal scattering effect, the diameter of the scattering centres should be comparable (around 200–500 nm) to the incident light wavelength according to Mie theory. These light scattering materials can be introduced into the photoanode in two ways. In one, a double-layer structure is created in which the large sized particles are placed on the top of the nanocrystalline film, so as to reflect the incident light back to the film, resulting in enhanced absorption. In the second, a mixture structure is created in which a blend of the scattering material and nanoparticles forms the basic absorbing layer of the DSSCs. Introducing a double layered structure increases the internal resistance of the solar cells and hinders charge transport within the solar cells, whereas in the mixture structure, the large sized particles embedded in the nanocrystalline film unavoidably cause a loss of internal surface area of the photoanodic film. Compared to the top scattering layer technique, embedded scatterers do not involve a further step in the cell fabrication process, which simplifies the fabrication technique as well as reduces the production cost. Scattering particles that are large in their size (usually in sub-microns or microns) have a narrow concentration window for optimal light harvesting. A higher concentration than the optimal value would lead to a decrease in the transparency of the film, thereby blocking light from entering the cell and causing a lower efficiency of the photoanode. On the basis of these optical properties, various structures of light scattering materials like hollow spherical microspheres, large particles, nanocrystalline spherical aggregates, tailored spherical aggregates, spherical voids, and materials with different refractive indices, e.g., SnO2, SiO2, CeO2etc., have been explored. On the other hand, it is believed that recombination between the photogenerated electrons and the redox couple is detrimental for achieving higher efficiencies. Different strategies have been employed to reduce the recombination by lowering the redox potential of the electrolyte, modifying the conduction band of the metal oxides, and involving core–shell structures with a thin layer of shell materials, which mainly results in the shift of the conduction band or the existence of an energy barrier, to enhance the DSSCs by retarding the recombination process or forming an energy barrier at the electrode surface. Various groups have utilized a thin layer of Nb2O5, Al2O3, ZnS, MgO, CaCO3, etc. as an energy barrier to suppress the back-transfer of electrons at the semiconductor/dye/electrolyte interface. However, this approach brings forth an electron injection problem, which leads to the accumulation of charges at the interface, resulting in reduced charge collection at the electrode.
In optimizing the conditions for harvesting light by scattering and inhibiting the back transfer of electrons for efficient charge collection, we propose the use of SiO2 nanospheres for the first time as a binary hybrid composite of ZnO nanoparticles and SiO2 nanospheres (ZSx) in the photoanodic segment. Large sized SiO2 NS simultaneously act as an efficient light scattering booster and a partial energy barrier in retarding the reverse tunnelling probability of photo-excited electrons in the ZnO/dye/electrolyte interface. We performed a systematic study on the effects of SiO2 nanospheres in enhancing the photovoltaic performance parameters and optimized the SiO2 NS loading in the photoanode by varying the SiO2 NS to ZnO NP weight ratio. Current density–voltage (J–V), incident photon to current conversion efficiency (IPCE), and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were carried out to explain the dual function of SiO2 as an efficient scatterer and partial energy barrier for improvement in the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the photovoltaic devices.

All the chemicals and reagent purchased for the experiments were analytically pure and used as received without further purification. Zinc acetate dihydrate (Merck), ethanolamine (Himedia), 2-methoxyethanol (Himedia), zinc chloride (Merck), sodium hydroxide (Merck), silver nitrate (Merck), terpineol (Himedia), poly(ethylene glycol)-block-poly(propylene glycol)-block-poly(ethylene glycol) or PEG–PPG–PEG triblock copolymer (Aldrich), hexachloroplatinic acid (H2PtCl6, Aldrich), 4-tert-butylpyridine (Himedia), di-tetrabutylammonium cis-bis(isothiocyanato)bis(2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylato)ruthenium(II) (Dyesol, Australia), acetonitrile (HPLC grade, Merck), valeronitrile (Aldrich), absolute ethanol (TMEDA), tert-butanol, tetraethyl ortho silicate (Merck), and ammonia (Merck) were used. FTO coated glass substrates with a surface resistivity of ∼13 Ω sq−1 cm−1 (Aldrich, USA), 0.2 μm PTFE filter paper (Axiva, India) and low-temperature thermoplastic sealant (Dyesol, Australia) were purchased. High grade Milli-Q water (18.2 MΩ cm) was used for all the experiments.


ZnO nanoparticles (ZnO NPs) were synthesized following a previously reported protocol. In the typical synthesis, ZnCl2 (1.10 g, 8 mmol) was dissolved in 40 mL of distilled water at 90 °C under vigorous stirring, followed by a slow addition of 3.2 mL of an aqueous NaOH (5.0 M) solution. The reaction mixture was allowed to stir further for 30 min at 90 °C, cool down to room temperature and stand for 30 min to allow the precipitate to separate. The supernatant liquid was decanted, and the solid product was washed with plenty of distilled water to remove the traces of NaCl (confirmed by AgNO3 test). To resist agglomeration, the particles were then dispersed in 10 mL iso-propanol under ultrasonic treatment for 10 min. The solid product was then isolated by centrifugation and calcined at 450 °C for 2 h in a muffle furnace to obtain the ZnO NPs.


The synthesis of the silica nanospheres was carried out following a reported protocol. Briefly, 6 mL of tetraethoxysilane (TEOS) was added dropwise into 10 mL of a 4.5 M ammonia solution in 100 mL ethanol and 5 mL of water under vigorous stirring for 8 h to hydrolyse TEOS. Then, the resultant product was obtained by centrifugation, and the precipitate was washed thrice with ethanol and dried at 70 °C in a hot air oven. Finally, the product was calcined at 550 °C for 4 h to obtain the SiO2 nanospheres.


The ZnO NP–SiO2 NS composites were prepared by ultrasonication treatment of the desired amount of SiO2 NS and ZnO NP. In detail, an appropriate amount (according to weight ratio) of the as synthesized SiO2 NS was dispersed in iso-propanol under ultrasonic treatment for 45 min. One gram of the as synthesized ZnO NPs was added into each dispersed solution, and the ultrasonic treatment was continued for another 45 min. Finally, the solution was placed inside a hot air oven to evaporate the solvent to obtain the composite products, named hereafter as ZS1 (ZnO NP–1 wt% SiO2 NS), ZS5 (ZnO NP–5 wt% SiO2 NS) or ZS10 (ZnO–10 wt% SiO2 NS).


All the photoanodes were fabricated by making a homogenous paste of ZnO NP and ZnO NP–SiO2 NS composite viz. ZS1, ZS5, ZS10 containing 1 wt%, 5 wt% and 10 wt% of SiO2 NS. First, a ZnO seed solution was prepared by dissolving 0.30 g of zinc acetate and 0.084 mL of ethanolamine in 4.50 mL of 2-methoxyethanol under vigorous stirring for 6 h. The as-prepared ZnO seed solution was filtered through a 0.2 μm membrane filter (Axiva Sichem, India). FTO coated glass substrates were cleaned with soap solution and washed with Milli-Q water. The washed FTO substrates were then subjected to ultrasonic treatment for 15 min each in acetone and 2-propanol and dried by blowing argon. The cleaned FTO substrates underwent an ozone treatment for 30 min using a Novascan UV-ozone chamber. The filtered ZnO seed solution was spin coated on the FTO substrates followed by heating at ∼175 °C for 10 min. The process was repeated once more to obtain a uniform ZnO layer film on the FTO substrates. For the preparation of homogeneous pastes, 0.1 g of ZnO nanoparticle powder or ZnO–SiO2 composite were ground with a mixture of terpineol and triblock copolymer (PEG–PPG–PEG) in an agate mortar. This homogenous paste was coated on the ZnO seed layered FTO using a doctor blade technique, and the films were dried in air, followed by calcination at 450 °C for 30 min to remove the polymer. Scheme 1 depicts a pictorial presentation of the step-by-step photoanode fabrication processes. The thickness of the photoanode layers was measured by surface profilometer and found to be in the range of 13–15 μm. These substrates were then immersed into an N719 dye solution in acetonitrile:tert-butanol (7:3) (3 × 10¬4 M) for 6 h. The sensitized photoanodes were then removed from the dye solution, washed with acetonitrile and dried under hot air blowing. The photovoltaic devices were fabricated by sandwiching the photoanodes and counter electrodes. The Pt counter electrode was fabricated by spin coating a solution of chloroplatinic acid (5 mM in isopropanol) on a pre-cleaned ozonized FTO substrate followed by calcination at 450 °C for (heating ramp of 5 °C min−1) 30 min in a muffle furnace and cooling to room temperature naturally. Then, the electrolyte solution was added after sealing (using low-temperature thermoplastic sealant, thickness ∼50 μm) to complete the device. The I−/I3− electrolyte solution was prepared by dissolving 0.5 M LiI, 0.05 M I2, 0.1 M guanidium thiocyanate, and 0.5 M 4-tert-butylpyridine in a solvent mixture of acetonitrile:valeronitrile (85:15, v/v). The active area for all the fabricated devices was fixed, and it was 0.16 cm2. All the devices were kept for 24 h in dark conditions prior to device measurements.


Powder XRD patterns were recorded using a Bruker D8 Advance X-ray diffractometer with Cu-Kα (α = 1.54 Å) X-ray source with an operating voltage and current of 30 kV and 30 mA. The scan rate was fixed at 0.1° s−1 to investigate the XRD patterns within a 2θ range of 10–80°. The UV-Vis diffused reflectance spectra (DRS) were recorded in a JASCO Model V-650 spectrophotometer using a 150 mm integrating sphere and BaSO4 as an internal reference. The morphology of the as-synthesized materials was investigated by FESEM using a Zeiss (Model: Sigma) instrument operating at a voltage of 2–5 kV. Laser micro Raman spectroscopic analysis was carried out in a Horiba LabRAM HR spectrometer equipped with a He–Ne laser with an excitation wavelength of 488 nm. Brunauer Emmett Teller (BET) surface area analysis was performed by nitrogen (N2) adsorption at a liquid N2 temperature with a Beckman-Coulter SA 3100 N2 adsorption apparatus. Prior to the surface area analysis, the samples were degassed at 150 °C for 6 h. The thickness of the deposited films on the FTO substrates was measured using a Veeco Dektak-150 surface profilometer. Current density–voltage (Jsc–V) measurements of the fabricated devices were carried out using a Keithley 2420 sourcemeter series at 100 mW cm−2 artificial solar illumination and under dark conditions. The calibration of the 450 W ozone-free xenon short arc lamp of a Newport ORIEL Sol3A solar simulator was done using a standard Si photovoltaic cell. The incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) measurements of the fabricated devices were performed in a Newport Oriel IQE-200 instrument with a 250 W quartz tungsten halogen (QTH) lamp as the light source. CHI600E, CH instruments, Inc., Austin, TX was used to perform EIS measurements.


Powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD) patterns were recorded to confirm the crystallinity and phase purity of bare ZnO NP and ZnO NP–SiO2 NS composites, as shown in Fig. 1. All of the diffraction peaks from the lattice planes (100), (002), (101), (102), (110), (103), (112) and (201) were indexed to the formation of the hexagonal wurtzite phase (JCPDS File Card No. 36-1451) of ZnO NP with a P63mc space group symmetry and calculated lattice constants of a = 0.3248 nm and c = 0.5205 nm with no traceable impurity peaks. The PXRD spectrum of SiO2 NS displays a broad band centered at 2θ = 22.0° from the lattice plane (100), which implies the amorphous nature of SiO2 (JCPDS No. 29-0085). Notably, the recorded PXRD patterns for composites ZS1, ZS5 and ZS10 show diffraction peaks assignable to ZnO, while the diffraction peaks for SiO2 NS were not seen in the composite. This may be due to the low crystallinity and low loading percentage of SiO2 NS. To examine any change in the average crystallite size of ZnO NP upon SiO2 NS loading, the average crystallite sizes of bare ZnO NP and composites ZS1, ZS5, ZS10 were calculated using the Debye–Scherrer relationship to monitor the (101) lattice plane of ZnO NP. However, it was observed that 1%, 5% and 10% loading of SiO2 NS did not alter the crystallite size of ZnO NP significantly (Z ∼ 20.77 nm, ZS1 ∼ 19.46 nm, ZS5 ∼ 19.12 nm, ZS10 ∼ 20.74 nm), which is indicative of the retention of the crystallinity of ZnO NP even after loading with SiO2 NS.


Raman spectroscopy is a key tool to elucidate the vibrational characteristics of materials and to identify their crystallization, structural disorder, material defects and optical properties. Fig. 2 shows the typical Raman spectra of photoanodes fabricated with ZnO NP and ZnO NP–SiO2 NS composites at room temperature. For all of the samples, a sharp and dominant peak observed at 439 cm−1 is assigned to the E2 (high) mode of wurtzite hexagonal ZnO lattice. This mode is a fingerprint of the degree of crystallinity of the wurtzite ZnO nanoparticles associated with oxygen displacement. The suppressed peak at 581 cm−1 is attributed to the A1 (LO) mode, which may have occurred because of an oxygen vacancy. The peak observed at 333 cm−1 is assigned to the multiphonon second order scattering process of (E2 (high) − E2 (low)), which occurred because of overtones of first order modes. It was observed that upon SiO2 NS loading there was no shift in the peak positions of the wurtzite hexagonal ZnO lattice, inferring the presence of amorphous SiO2, and the results are in good agreement with the XRD results.



Fig. 3 demonstrates the normalized UV-Vis absorption profiles of the N719 dye sensitized photoanodes fabricated with the ZnO nanoparticles (ZnO NP) and ZnO NP–SiO2 NS composites viz. ZS1, ZS5, ZS10. All of the spectra were recorded in the scan range of 360–800 nm against a blank FTO substrate as a reference. It is well established that N719 dye absorbs in the visible region (420–670 nm) starting with an absorption onset from 710 nm. It was observed that all the photoanodes showed absorption in the visible region (420–700 nm) corresponding to the N719 dye in the decreasing order of Z > ZS1 > ZS5 > ZS10. The decrease in absorption was because of less surface area imposed by the large sized SiO2 NS, as seen from the BET analysis.

The light scattering ability of submicron sized SiO2 NS was investigated by analysing the diffused reflectance spectra of photoanodic films of comparable thickness. Fig. 4 depicts the diffused reflectance measurements carried out for the photoanode films based on bare ZnO NP (purple line), ZnO NP–SiO2 NS composites viz. ZS1 (dark cyan line), ZS5 (blue line) and ZS10 (magenta line) deposited on glass substrates prior to dye sensitization. The composite photoanodic film containing 1 wt% SiO2 NS shows a higher diffused reflectance than the pristine ZnO NP film owing to the scattering by the individual submicron sized SiO2 NS as well as enhanced scattering from the ensemble. Further increasing the SiO2 content, the diffused reflectance increases, and the composite with 10 wt% SiO2 NS (ZS10) exhibited the highest reflectance among all the composites in the wavelength range 600–800 nm. It is seen from elemental mapping (EDX) that the distribution of SiO2 NS is homogeneous throughout the sample, contributing to the effective light trapping and scattering effects. Superior light harvesting through confinement of light propagation extends the optical path length of the incident light by multiple reflections within the photoanodic film entailing SiO2 NS, resulting in a reduced loss of the incident light. Scheme 2 depicts a pictorial presentation showing the light scattering pathways in the composite photoanodes fabricated with various amounts of SiO2 NS and ZnO NP, resulting in a better light harvesting capacity compared to a pristine ZnO NP photoanode. Though it is observed that the light scattering effect is highest in the case of 10 wt% SiO2 NS loading, the opaqueness of the films increases with an increase in SiO2 NS content, resulting in a decrease of the penetration ability of the incoming photon flux (inset to Fig. 4), i.e., reducing the light absorption and harvesting ability, causing adverse effects on the device performances.

The quantity of the dye chemisorbed onto the fabricated photoanodes was evaluated by employing a dye adsorption–desorption process using a 1 × 10−4 M NaOH solution in ethanol/water (1:1, v/v). Briefly, each of the dye sensitized photoanodes was immersed in a 1 × 10−4 M NaOH solution in a 1:1 ethanol:water mixture. Then, the photoanodes were removed from the solution after complete desorption of the dye, and the UV-Vis absorbance was recorded. The concentration of the desorbed dye per cm2 area was then calculated using Beer's law. It was observed that the photoanodes show an optimum quantity of dye loading with values for ZnO NP ≈ 9.49 × 10−7 mol cm−2, for ZS1 ≈ 9.05× 10−7 mol cm−2, for ZS5 ≈ 8.85× 10−7 mol cm−2 and for ZS10 ≈ 8.53× 10−7 mol cm−2. The decrease in the adsorption of the dye is ascribed to the lower BET surface area (13.5 m2 g−1) provided by SiO2 NS in the composite photoanodes compared to the pristine ZnO NP photoanode. Fig. 5 shows the N2 adsorption–desorption isotherm and Barrett–Joyner–Halenda (BJH) pore size distribution plots for SiO2 NS. According to the Brunauer–Deming–Deming–Teller (BDDT) classification, the physisorption isotherms can be grouped into six types. The BET plot exhibits a type IV isotherm and H3 hysteresis loops, indicating the mesoporous nature of SiO2 NS. The Barrett–Joyner–Halenda (BJH) pore size distribution curve (inset) indicates the high degree of uniformity of the pores in the range of 3–5 nm. The porous nature of SiO2 NS facilitates the trapping of light by individual molecules and increases the propagation of incident light within the photoanodes, thus increasing the absorption probability of the incident light within the photoanode.


The morphology of the synthesized materials was investigated by FESEM analysis. Fig. 6(a) shows the morphological features of the as-synthesized SiO2 nanospheres. The average size of the SiO2 nanospheres is in the range of ≈300 nm, which is in the range of the particle size suggested by Mie scattering theory.Fig. 6(b–d) show the fabricated photoanode composites with different dopings of SiO2 NS. It is clearly seen that the density distribution of SiO2 NS in the photoanodes increases with the increase in the doping percentage, and they are homogenously dispersed throughout the regions, resulting in uniform light scattering effects from the photoanodes.

To further elucidate the elemental composition of the photoanode material, energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) mapping of ZnO–1 wt% SiO2 (ZS1) was performed. As can be seen from Fig. 7, the EDS mapping of ZS1 indicates a homogeneous distribution of SiO2 throughout the specific area, leading to a better light harvesting ability by optical confinement of the incident radiation.

Photovoltaic performances of the fabricated DSSCs were evaluated against a Pt counter electrode employing I−/I3− redox shuttles under AM 1.5G with a standard sunlight illumination intensity of 100 mW cm−2. Fig. 8 shows the detailed comparison of the photocurrent–voltage (J–V) plot for ZnO NP and ZS1, ZS5 and ZS10 photoanode based DSSCs.

A short-circuit current density (Jsc) of ≈8.61 mA cm−2, an open circuit voltage (Voc) of ≈616 mV and a fill factor (FF) of ≈47.5% affording a PCE of ≈2.53% were exhibited by the cell with pristine ZnO NP. Interestingly, in the case of the 1 wt% SiO2 NS loaded ZnO NP device (ZS1), we observed an increment of ≈22% in the efficacy value compared to the pristine ZnO NP based device, affording a PCE of 3.08% with Jsc ≈ 9.31 mA cm−2, a Voc ≈ 625 mV, a FF ≈ 53.6%. Devices loaded with 5 wt% and 10 wt% SiO2 NS, i.e., ZS5 and ZS10, showed lower performances, yielding a Jsc ≈ 8.40 mA cm−2, a Voc ≈ 609 mV, a FF ≈ 42.1% and a PCE ≈ 2.15%, for ZS5 and a Jsc ≈ 6.87 mA cm−2, a Voc ≈ 596 mV, a FF ≈ 41.8%, and a PCE ≈ 1.71% for the ZS10 device. The increase in the short-circuit current density is credited to several factors viz., (i) utilization of photoanodes containing microstructures of SiO2 NS with a superior light scattering ability for enhanced light harvesting, (ii) reduced recombination of photo generated electrons, and (iii) exploitation of photosensitizers with a higher molar extinction coefficient. The increase in the overall efficacy of the ZS1 device compared to the pristine ZnO NP device can be attributed to the efficient light scattering ability and reduced recombination (back electron transfers) of photo generated electrons using SiO2 NS. Because of the enhanced light scattering ability of the composite photoanode entailing submicron sized SiO2 NS, the path length of the incident light increases because of multiple internal reflections, and light spends more time within the photoanode. This in turn generates a high number of photoexcited electrons in the CB level of the semiconductor, which can be extracted at the collecting electrode, i.e., the transparent conductive oxide glass substrate (TCO). An increase in the charge collection efficiency of the device results in an increase in the current density value and device performance. SiO2 NS, owing to its higher CB position (≈0.9 eV vs. Evacuum) and insulating nature, also functions as a partial energy barrier, reducing the back transfer of electrons from the conduction band of ZnO to the dye/electrolyte interface and enhancing the collection efficacy at the electrode. SiO2 NS containing devices (ZS1) also exhibited an improved fill factor of ≈54% compared to the pristine ZnO containing device, which shows a fill factor of ≈48%, and is indicative of better electron transport characteristics. Although the scattering ability of photoanodes ZS5 and ZS10 is more compared to ZS1, the submicron sized SiO2 NS provide less specific surface area in the photoanodic segment for dye adsorption, resulting in decreased dye loading. The reduced dye loading affects the absorption of incoming light, providing fewer photo-generated electrons in the CB of the semiconductor and resulting in poor charge collection. On the contrary, the increase in the SiO2 content from the optimal concentration causes the FF to decrease because of the insulating nature of the SiO2 NS. This phenomenon is further explained in the EIS analysis, where the recombination resistance plays a major role in determining the efficacy of the devices.
The photocurrent characteristics of the fabricated DSSCs were evaluated using IPCE measurements against a wavelength range of 400–800 nm. Fig. 9 depicts the prominent photosensitization throughout the visible region achieved by the dye with maximum IPCE values of ≈38%, ≈42%, ≈33% and ≈30% at 525 nm for the ZnO NP, ZS1, ZS5 and ZS10 based photovoltaic cells, respectively. The higher IPCE values observed at longer wavelengths in the IPCE spectra in the case of ZS1, ZS5 and ZS10 signify the enhanced light scattering ability of submicron sized SiO2 NS. The increase in the overall IPCE value in the ZS1 device compared to the pristine ZnO NP device is due to the higher flux of photo-generated electrons because of the optimal dye loading and light scattering effect with 1 wt% SiO2 NS. With a further increase in the SiO2 content, the charge collection efficiency at the TCO decreases because of the low dye loading capacity of the photoanode, resulting in a lower IPCE value.
The overall photovoltaic performances of all the DSSCs employing I−/I3− redox shuttles are summarized in Table 1.
DSSC photoanode

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (mV)
FF (%)
PCE (η, %)
IPCEmax (%)

τ
el (ms)

a Data reported are the results of the best performing devices out of a minimum of five devices for each configuration. The standard deviations evaluated for the five devices are included.
b Electron lifetime measurements were performed only for the best performing devices.

ZnO NP
8.61 (±0.6)
616 (±5)
47.5 (±2.1)
2.53
38
7.3
ZnO NP–1 wt% SiO2 NS
9.31 (±0.6)
625 (±6)
53.6 (±1.8)
3.08
43
9.3
ZnO NP–5 wt% SiO2 NS
8.40 (±0.7)
609 (±8)
42.1 (±3.1)
2.15
32
5.7
ZnO NP–10 wt% SiO2 NS
6.87 (±0.8)
596 (±7)
41.8 (±2.6)
1.71
30
4.4

To corroborate the effect of SiO2 NS loading on kinetics and interfacial energetics of electron transport and recombination properties in fabricated DSSCs, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were carried out for the best performing devices under dark conditions at an external bias equivalent to an open circuit voltage (Voc) in the frequency range of 0.1 Hz to 100 KHz, as shown in Fig. 10(A) and (B). EIS analysis for the DSSCs typically explicates the characteristics of interfacial charge transfer and recombination processes taking place in the device, viz. at the interface of the counter electrode and electrolyte (typically, 1–100 KHz, high-frequency region), the semiconductor/dye/electrolyte interface (0.1–1 KHz, mid-frequency region), and the diffusion of the electrolyte (0.1–0.01 KHz, low-frequency region). As seen from the corresponding Nyquist plot, i.e., Fig. 10(A), the diameter of the semicircle in the mid frequency region for the device with 1 wt% SiO2 NS loading is larger than the bare ZnO NP based device, which shows a greater charge recombination resistance (Rct) for the ZnO NP–1 wt% SiO2 NS device relative to the ZnO NP based device. A large value of Rct for the ZnO NP–1 wt% SiO2 NS based device implies a retarded backward reaction of the dye injected electron at the semiconductor/dye/electrolyte interface or lesser interfacial charge recombination with the holes of the electrolyte in the device. Incorporation of SiO2 NS serves as an energy barrier layer that hinders the back electron recombination, as shown in the inset in Fig. 10(B). It has been found that with a further increase in the SiO2 content, the Rct decreases, which is attributed to the greater resistance posed by the insulating SiO2, and a similar trend is noticed in the fill factors (FF) of the devices. FF can be related to Voc using the following equation:
where
Vr is the reduced voltage and given by Vr = βqVoc/kBT, and β is the recombination exponent.

Since, there is no significant change in Voc, FF can now be considered as a function of β only. An increase in the recombination resistance (Rct) will enhance the fill factor, which is seen in the device ZS1 (ZnO NP–1 wt% SiO2 NS) with the highest fill factor of ≈54%. Upon a further increase in the SiO2 NS content, as in ZS5, ZS10, there is a decrease in the recombination resistance owing to the insulating nature of SiO2, which results in a decreased fill factor in the corresponding devices.

Fig. 10(B) shows the corresponding Bode phase plots for the fabricated DSSCs. The two observed distinct peaks in the mid- and high-frequency regions confirm the two diode interfaces present in the devices. The phase angle peak at the mid-frequency region is located at ≈21.7 Hz, ≈16.4 Hz, ≈27.7, ≈35.4 Hz for the ZnO NPs, ZnO NP–1 wt% SiO2 NS, ZnO NP–5 wt% SiO2 NS and ZnO NP–10 wt% SiO2 NS devices, respectively. The values of the photo-induced electron life time, τe, in the conduction band of the photoanode based cells can be estimated from the Bode phase plot using the relation τe = (2πfp)−1, where fp is the observed maximum peak frequency in the mid-frequency region. The calculated τe for the different photoanodes were 7.3 ms, 9.7 ms, 5.7 ms, 4.4 ms for ZnO NPs, ZnO NP–1 wt% SiO2 NS, ZnO NP–5 wt% SiO2 NS and ZnO NP–10 wt% SiO2 NS devices. The increase in the photo-induced electron lifetime also validates the hindrance created by 1 wt% SiO2 NS incorporation in the photoanode, which acts as a partial barrier for electrons to undergo recombination with the oxidized electrolyte. A further increase in the SiO2 NS content decreases τe, which is indicative of impediment of photo-generated electron injection from the dye to the semiconductor. Upon an increase in the SiO2 NS, the tunneling possibility of far less photo-induced electrons from the dye to the ZnO across the SiO2 NS barrier is reduced when the optimal concentration is crossed, resulting in a poor charge collection efficiency. Based on the understanding of the photovoltaic and electrochemical impedance analysis, we propose a schematic of electron transfer occurring in DSSCs, as shown in Fig. 11. The photogenerated electron tunnels through the insulating SiO2 NS to the ZnO NP and is collected at the FTO. The photo-generated electron can also transfer from the sensitizer to the ZnO NP through a direct pathway and finally to the collector electrode, i.e., FTO. The electrons travel through the external circuit, reach the counter electrode, and oxidized sensitizer molecules are regenerated using the I−/I3− redox shuttle.
In order to check the stability of the devices, the dependence of the photovoltaic parameters, such as short circuit current density (Jsc), open circuit voltage (Voc), Fill factor (FF) and the power conversion efficiency (η), on the time durations (over 48 h) are shown in Fig. 11. The photovoltaic characteristics were collected at an interval of 2 h for 12 h and then up to 48 h in air, and the examinations show that a ∼30% reduction in efficacy was observed after a 48 h duration. Therefore, this indicates that the devices are quite stable initially but show a slow decrease in performance with increased time (Fig. 12).

In summary, a facile approach for enhanced light harvesting and reducing recombination of photo-generated electrons in ZnO based DSSCs was demonstrated by introducing a low cost, easily synthesizable SiO2 NS. SiO2 NS can effectively scatter incident light and can increase the light propagation path by multiple reflections within the photoanode owing to its optimal size. SiO2 NS can also function as a partial energy barrier for reverse tunnelling of photo-generated electrons at the working electrode/electrolyte interface and lifts the photovoltaic efficacy. We performed photovoltaic studies by varying the amount of SiO2 NS with reference to ZnO NP viz. 1 wt%, 5 wt% and 10 wt%, and the ZnO NP–1 wt% SiO2 photoanode showed an ≈22% increase in PCE compared to the bare ZnO NP based photoanode. In essence, SiO2 NS plays a vital role in increasing the light harnessing capability of the photoanode and acts as an energy barrier to prevent the back electron processes, leading to an enhanced efficacy in the solar cell.


We acknowledge the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, India and the Department of Science and Technology, India for financial support through project no. CSIR/01(2704)/12/EMR-II and DST/TSP/2009/23, respectively. The Infrastructure and instrumentation help from IIT Guwahati and CIF, IIT Guwahati are hereby acknowledged.


This journal is © the Owner Societies 2016