 DOI: 10.1039/C3TA13204H
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 14286-14293
Sung-Eun Park, Sehwan Kim, Dae-Young Lee, Eunkyoung Kim and Jungho Hwang*
School of Mechanical Engineering, Yonsei University, Seoul 120-749, Korea. E-mail: hwangjh@yonsei.ac.kr; Fax: +82-2-312-2821; Tel: +82-2-2123-2821
Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Yonsei University, Seoul 120-749, Korea
R&D Center, Samsung Display, Yongin 446-711, Korea
Received 14th August 2013, Accepted 25th September 2013
First published on 26th September 2013
Fabrication of a flexible organic solar cell is demonstrated with an anode that is free of tin-doped indium oxide (ITO) by electrohydrodynamic (EHD) spraying of silver nanowires (Ag NWs). This methodology is applicable to fabricate patterned Ag NW thin-film electrodes for organic solar cells (OSCs). By optimizing the spray parameters and post-processing conditions, transparent electrodes with sheet resistances of ∼11 Ω sq−1 (on glass) and ∼20 Ω sq−1 (on polyethylene terephthalate, PET) and DC to optical conductivities of ∼70 (on PET) can be obtained at an optical transmittance of ∼80%. Bulk heterojunction OSCs are demonstrated with patterned Ag NW films serving as bottom transparent anodes on both glass substrates and flexible PET substrates. The photoactive layers are based on low band-gap polymers, poly[(4,8-bis-(2-ethylhexyloxy)-benzo[1,2-b;4.5-b′]dithiophene)-2,6-diyl-alt-(4-(2-ehtylhexanoyl)-thieno[3,4-b]thiophene)]-2,6-diyl] and phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester. Under AM 1.5 illumination, fabricated cells have high power conversion efficiencies of 5.27% (on glass) and 3.76% (on PET). This study indicates that a Ag NW electrode prepared by EHD spraying can serve as an alternative to the ITO electrode, which also enables its potential application in practical and flexible OSCs.

In recent years, as demand for optoelectronic devices such as touch panels, liquid crystal displays, organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs), and organic solar cells (OSCs) has dramatically increased, the transparent electrode has become one of the most important components in optoelectronic devices. Tin-doped indium oxide (ITO) is the most commonly used material because of its excellent electrical conductivity and high transparency. When glass is used as the substrate material, the sputtering process is typically operated at a high temperature for the fabrication of ITO electrodes whose sheet resistance is below 20 Ω sq−1 at ∼90% transmittance. However, if a flexible plastic substrate is used instead of the glass substrate, ITO should be deposited at a lower temperature to prevent any damage to the substrate. The corresponding sheet resistance then increases to ∼200 Ω sq−1 at the same transmittance of ∼90%. Moreover, the ITO transparent electrode on a flexible substrate rapidly gives rise to bending fatigue owing to the brittle nature when bending is involved and is therefore of limited use in flexible electronics. A substitute for the ITO electrode with similar electrical performance is thus clearly needed.

In order to replace ITO, several alternative materials such as conductive polymer thin films, random networks of single-wall carbon nanotubes (SWNTs), graphene thin films, and patterned metal grids have been proposed. Recently, Lee et al. proposed that a random network of one-dimensional (1-D) metal nanowires has the potential to be applied to the transparent electrode. They fabricated silver nanowire (Ag NW) electrodes with a sheet resistance of 16 Ω sq−1 at an optical transmittance of 86% using drop casting. De et al. presented Ag NW electrodes, fabricated by vacuum filtration, with a sheet resistance of 13 Ω sq−1 at an optical transmittance of 85%. The performances of these two electrodes were nearly comparable to that of the ITO electrode, as mentioned above (20 Ω sq−1 with ∼90%). The previous studies also showed that Ag NW transparent electrodes were resistant to continuous bending without causing any significant increase in sheet resistance even after 1000 bending cycles at a curvature radius of 2.5 mm.
While several researchers have fabricated Ag NW transparent electrodes using drop casting, vacuum filtration, and spin coating successfully, there are two challenging issues. One issue is increasing the size of Ag NW electrodes for large-scale optoelectronic devices. The size obtained with vacuum filtration is restricted by the size of the filter and is, therefore, not applicable to large-scale industrial usage. Although spin coating produces high-quality and uniform thin films, it is a batch process and is not scalable to cover a large area. Alternatively, it has been demonstrated that fabrication methods such as rod coating, brush painting, dip coating, and spray coating are applicable to realize the mass production of large-scale devices based on Ag NWs.
The other issue is that transparent electrode layers usually need to be deposited in a two-dimensional pattern to fabricate optoelectronic devices such as OSCs and OLEDs. However, with deposition methods such as drop casting, vacuum filtration, spin coating, brush painting, dip coating, and rod coating, excessive NWs need to be wiped out manually to produce a patterned transparent electrode. On the other hand, spray coating can directly fabricate a transparent electrode in the desired pattern with the use of a pattern mask.
Electrohydrodynamic (EHD) spraying is a type of spray method and is one of the latest approaches to deposit thin films. EHD spraying is simple and easily scalable to a large area under ambient pressure at room temperature. Droplet size is one of the most important parameters in the deposition of non-agglomerated and uniformly coated thin films using spray methods. Compared to the conventional spray methods, EHD spraying is known to generate fine droplets without significant coagulation, owing to the repulsion between highly charged droplets. It has been widely reported that the droplet size produced by EHD spraying is finer than that obtained with airbrush spray. In addition, the deposition efficiency of the EHD spray on an object is more effective with smaller material loss than that of conventional sprays.
In this study, we fabricated patterned Ag NW transparent electrodes using EHD spray coating with a pattern mask. The electrical and optical performances of the Ag NW electrodes were measured for different conditions of deposition and post-deposition processes. We then demonstrated that efficient flexible bulk heterojunction (BHJ) OSCs were fabricated with the Ag NW electrodes.

An Ag NW colloidal solution (mean diameter: ∼40 nm; mean length: ∼20 μm; dispersed to 0.2 wt% in aqueous co-solvents) was used for the EHD spraying process. The Ag NW solution contained additives such as viscosity-adjusting agents and surfactants, which would not be suitable for EHD spray. The additives were removed by washing of the Ag NW solution with centrifugation at 3000–5000 rpm for 20 min in distilled water and isopropyl alcohol three times. After the final centrifugation, the precipitated Ag NWs were redispersed in 20 mL of isopropyl alcohol. The glass substrate (0.8 mm thickness) and PET film substrate were purchased from Free M Teck, Ltd. (Korea), and SKC Co., Ltd. (ART 1695, Korea), respectively. The glass substrate was successively rinsed via sonication in detergent, distilled water, acetone, and finally boiled in isopropyl alcohol. It was then coated by dipping into a poly-L-lysine solution (0.1 w/v%, Sigma Aldrich Corp., USA) for 10 min to improve the substrate's affinity with Ag NWs. The PET substrate was rinsed with distilled water. To prepare a typical OSC, a PEDOT:PSS aqueous solution for the buffer layer was purchased from H. C. Stark (Clevios AI 4083, USA). For the electron donor, poly-3-hexylthiophene (P3HT) and poly-[(4,8-bis-(2-ethylhexyloxy)-benzo[1,2-b;4.5-b′]dithiophene)-2,6-diyl-alt-(4-(2-ethylhexanoyl)-thieno[3,4-b]thiophene)]-2,6-diyl] (PBDTTT-C) were purchased from Rieke Metals (USA) and Solarmer Materials Inc. (China), respectively. For the electron acceptor, phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) was purchased from Nanocraft Inc. (USA).


The Ag NW film was prepared on a substrate using the EHD spray method, shown in Fig. 1, which was used in our previous studies. The experimental setup, shown in Fig. 1(a), consisted of a liquid supply system, an electrical system, and a visualization system. The liquid supply system included a syringe pump (KDS 200, KD Scientific Inc., USA), a feeding tube, and a stainless steel nozzle (inner diameter: 180 μm, outer diameter: 350 μm; Iretech Co. Ltd., Korea). The electrical system consisted of a high-voltage power supply (HV-RACK-4-250, Ultravolt Inc., USA, DC 0 ∼ +15 kV) and electrical connections. The nozzle used for the liquid supply system was also used as the anode. A copper plate (60 mm width × 80 mm length × 0.5 mm thickness) was placed below the nozzle, which was used as the ground electrode. In order to deposit Ag NWs over the substrate, the substrate was moved using an automatic x–y motion stage during the deposition process. The visualization system consisted of a high-speed camera (FASTCAM SA1.1 model 1000K-C2, Photron Ltd., Japan) and a 400 W peak-power, and a metal–halide light source (MHB-400/DOL, Inflidge Industrial, Ltd., Japan). The camera used was capable of capturing continuous images with a resolution of 512 pixels × 512 pixels at a recording rate of 60000 fps and with an exposure time of 400 ns. All experiments were conducted in a Class-100 (above 0.5 μm) clean room to minimize the penetration of ambient aerosol particles into the substrate.
The optimized experimental parameters for uniform coating of the Ag NW solution were a liquid-feeding flow rate of 25 μL min−1, a nozzle–substrate distance of 10 mm, an applied electric potential of ∼3.3 kV, and a stage speed of 10 mm s−1. To obtain a patterned Ag NW transparent electrode, a pattern mask made of PET films was utilized. After the pattern mask was removed, the Ag NW transparent electrodes in the patterned-shape (Fig. 1) were obtained. For comparison, commercially available patterned ITO electrodes (on glass and on PET) were purchased (Free M Teck Ltd., Korea).
Before the deposition process, the Ag NW solution was sonicated for ∼60 s to prevent aggregation of the NWs. After the deposition process, the Ag NW film was placed between two fluoridized silicon wafers that were sandwiched by two pristine glasses. The bottom glass was placed on a hotplate while the top glass was placed under a 2 kg weight, which resulted in the sintering of Ag NWs at 140 °C for 20 min. A mechanical pressing process was also performed at a pressure of 100 kgf cm−2 for 60 s using a commercial mechanical pressing machine (Model 4286, Carver Inc., US).
The morphology of the Ag NW film was characterized using a field-emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM, JSM-6701F, JEOL, Japan) and an atomic force microscope (AFM, XE-100, Park Systems Corp., Korea) in the tapping mode. The optical transmittance was calculated by applying the equation absorbance = −log(transmittance) to the absorbance measured with a UV-visible spectrophotometer (Libra S12, Biochrom, UK) within the range of 350–850 nm. The sheet resistance of the Ag NW film was measured using a four-point probe (FPP-400, DASOL ENG, Co., Ltd., Korea) at a minimum of five locations over the sample and the average values were presented. The sheet resistances before and after bending were also compared using a one-axis bending test machine (SUD series, SPG Co., Ltd., Korea).

BHJ OSCs were fabricated using the patterned Ag NW electrode and also the commercial ITO electrode. Prior to OSC fabrication, both electrodes were cleaned using the method described in the previous section. An as-received PEDOT:PSS solution was passed through a 0.45 μm PTFE filter and spin-coated onto the electrode at 4000 rpm for 20 s and dried at 120 °C for 15 min on a hot plate (∼30 nm film thickness). All spin-coating processes were conducted in a glove box under a nitrogen atmosphere. PBDTTT-C (10 mg mL−1) and PCBM (15 mg mL−1) were dissolved in a 1,2-dichlorobenzene:1,8-diiodooctane (97:3, v/v) solvent for the active layer as reported in previous studies. The solution was stirred for 1 day at 40 °C. All solutions were filtered to remove insoluble impurities using the 0.45 μm PTFE filter before spin coating. The active layer of PBDTTT-C:PCBM was deposited by spin coating at 1100 rpm for 60 s. The thickness of the PBDTTTC:PCBM layer was estimated to be around 80 nm. The active area of the OSC fabricated was ∼9 mm2. Thermal annealing was carried out for 1 h under a nitrogen atmosphere in the glove box. Samples were then loaded into a vacuum thermal evaporation system; a 0.7 nm layer of LiF and a 100 nm layer of Al were deposited through a shadow mask. For the reference cell, blends of P3HT and PCBM (in a weight ratio of 1:0.8) were dissolved in 1,2-dichlorobenzene and spin-coated at 800 rpm to produce a 200 nm thick photoactive layer. After the spin-coating process, the substrate was dried at a temperature of 140 °C for 20 min and cooled to room temperature. The performance of the fabricated devices was measured using an AM 1.5 Global (1.5G) solar simulator (XES-301S, SAN-EI Co., Japan) at a light intensity of 100 mW cm−2. In the case of flexible OSCs, a silver-paste (P-100, CANS, Korea) was manually coated on the Ag NW electrode for better electrical contact with the solar simulator. Current density–voltage (J–V) curves were recorded using a Keithley 2400 sourcemeter.


Fig. 1(a) shows a schematic of the EHD spray method. Fig. 1(b) and (c) show photographs captured using a high-speed camera under the same spraying conditions (Fig. 1(b): color image captured at a rate of 2000 frames per second (fps) and an exposure time of 500 μs; Fig. 1(c): 2-bit image captured at a rate of 10000 fps and an exposure time of 1 μs). As shown in the images, the solution liquid jet was emitted from the liquid meniscus, which was elongated from the capillary nozzle, and was then disintegrated into fine droplets (Fig. 1(d)) that were much smaller than the nozzle size (350 μm). The droplets passing through the pattern mask were finally deposited on the substrate. The effect of droplet size on the film quality is discussed below.

Fig. 2(a) shows a typical photograph of a Ag NW film on a PET substrate. The Ag NWs were uniformly coated over a large area (7 cm × 6 cm) of the PET substrate with an optical transmittance of 83%. Fig. 2(b) shows an FE-SEM image of the Ag NW film shown in Fig. 2(a). Compared to the Ag NW film coated by the airbrush spray method, our Ag NW film was relatively uniform without agglomeration of NWs, possibly because smaller droplets generated and deposited on a substrate require less time for complete evaporation and smaller droplets on the substrate have less chance to coalesce into larger droplets. A patterned Ag NW transparent electrode was also obtained using a pattern mask, as shown in Fig. 2(c). Fig. 2(d) shows the flexible nature of the patterned Ag NW transparent electrode.
Optical transmittance spectra in the visible region and sheet resistances were obtained for various areal mass densities of Ag NWs on the PET substrate. Fig. 3(a) and (b) show that as the areal mass density decreased, the optical transmittance increased and the sheet resistance also increased. For the Ag NW film with an areal mass density of 852 mg m−2, the optical transmittance at a wavelength of 550 nm was as low as 15.5%, while the sheet resistance measured was 9.15 Ω sq−1. At an areal mass density of 142 mg m−2, the optical transmittance was as high as ∼80% (at 550 nm), but the sheet resistance was also as high as 82.6 Ω sq−1.
In order to improve the electrical contact between the NWs (thereby reducing the sheet resistance), post-processes, such as mechanical pressing at high pressure (from ∼100 to ∼8.3 × 105 kgf cm−2) and sintering at high temperature (from 120 to 180 °C), are usually required.
We performed both sintering and mechanical pressing in order to minimize the sheet resistance of the Ag NW film. To minimize the deformation of the PET substrate, the sintering was carried out at a relatively low temperature of 140 °C under a 2 kg weight for 20 min. The effect of these post-processes on the sheet resistance of the Ag NW film was evaluated, as shown in Fig. 3(b). The sheet resistance of the Ag NW film deposited with a density of 142 mg m−2 (80% of optical transmittance) decreased to ∼30 Ω sq−1 and ∼20 Ω sq−1 after 10 min and 20 min of post-processes, respectively. An angled cross-sectional SEM image for the Ag NW film after post-processes (20 min), given in Fig. 3(c), shows that the NWs were in relatively good contact with each other. Fig. 3(d) shows tapping-mode AFM topographies for the Ag NW film before and after the post-processes (20 min). The relatively rough surface of the Ag NW film before mechanical pressing and sintering was smoothened after the two post-processes. An SEM image of the NWs after sintering at 140 °C for 20 min (Fig. 3(e)) shows that the overlapping NWs were fused together, which might result in good electrical connection. When sintered at a temperature above 200 °C, the interconnected NWs coalesced and grew into larger and pendant-like droplets owing to the excessive fusion (see the inset image), which might result in electrical disconnections, as reported by Lee et al.
Here we demonstrated a highly conductive (sheet resistance <∼20 Ω sq−1) and transparent (transmittance >∼80%) Ag NW film without employing a commercial mechanical pressing machine, which was necessary in previous reports. When we utilized a commercial pressing machine (see Experimental) to apply a high pressure of ∼100 kgf cm−2 onto the Ag NW film, its sheet resistance further decreased to 10.8 Ω sq−1 from ∼20 Ω sq−1 at the same transmittance of 80.2% (the annealing temperature was the same at 140 °C).
The optical transmittance of Ag NW films was plotted with the sheet resistance and was compared with the results reported in the literature, as shown in Fig. 4(a). It is generally accepted that the performances of a transparent, conductive thin film can be evaluated using the relationship suggested by Dressel and Gruner:
(1)
where
δop(λ) is the optical conductivity and δDC is the DC conductivity of the film. The ratio of the DC conductivity to the optical conductivity, δDC/δop, has been used to evaluate the performance of transparent conductive thin films. For Ag NW films obtained from previous studies (blank symbols in Fig. 4(a)), the values of δDC/δop in De et al. (2009) and Leem et al. (2011) almost reached ∼400 while Wang et al. (2011) exhibited values within ∼20–80. Most of the δDC/δop values ranged between two solid lines representing δDC/δop = 20 and 400, respectively. The ratios for Ag NW films fabricated in our study using EHD spraying after the post-processes under a 2 kg weight (solid rectangular symbols in Fig. 4(a)) matched the curve for δDC/δop = ∼70.
Further analysis of the performance of Ag NW films was carried out with the percolation theory, which has been widely utilized to evaluate the conductivity of a random network of one-dimensional material. According to the percolation theory, the density dependence of the sheet resistance is given by
(2)
where
N is the areal number density (μm−2), NC is the critical value of the areal number density required for the onset of electrical conduction in the random network (=percolation condition) (μm−2), α is the conductivity exponent that depends on the dimensionality of the space involved, and L is the mean length of an NW (m). Stauffer reported that the theoretical values of α are 1.33 and 1.94 for a 2-D percolation network and a 3-D percolation network, respectively. For a random Ag NW network, Madaria et al. proposed that the best fit of eqn (2) with their experimental result was obtained by applying α = 1.42, which was slightly higher than that of the 2-D percolation network. Additionally, the density dependence of the optical transmittance of an NW film can be given by

%T = 100 × (1 − Ac)
(3)
Ac = Ld × N
(4)
where
Ac is the total area covered with NWs and d is the diameter of an NW. The transmittance loss of visible light owing to NWs is approximately equal to the total area covered with the NWs.

The experimental results for the sheet resistance and the optical transmittance versus the areal number density were plotted and compared with the percolation theory. The areal number density (N) was calculated from the areal mass density and the given dimensions of a single NW (diameter: ∼40 nm; length: ∼20 μm). As shown in Fig. 4(b), the sheet resistance and the transmittance obtained from the experimental results were in reasonable agreement with those predicted using eqn (2) (solid line) and eqn (3) (dotted line), respectively. The transmittance of the Ag NW film at an areal density of 0.34 μm−2 was measured to be ∼80%, whereas that predicted by eqn (3) was 82.8%. However, in the range of areal densities above 2.25 μm−2, the transmittances obtained experimentally were slightly higher than those predicted theoretically. This might have been caused by the overlapping areas between Ag NWs, which were not considered in the calculations with eqn (3).
In order to evaluate the durability of a flexible Ag NW electrode under stress, the sheet resistances of both the ITO electrode (on PET) and the Ag NW electrode (on PET) were measured at a bending radius of 2 mm. The results are shown in Fig. 5. The initial sheet resistances (R0) of the ITO electrode and Ag NW electrode were 10.8 Ω sq−1 and 13.7 Ω sq−1, respectively. Within less than 20 bending cycles, the sheet resistance of the ITO electrode increased to 4 × 104 Ω sq−1. On the other hand, the sheet resistance of the Ag NW electrode increased very slightly, less than 15% from its original value, even after 500 cycles, indicating the high durability of the flexible Ag NW electrode.
A high-efficiency, flexible, ITO-free OSC was fabricated using the Ag NW transparent electrode with an optimized sheet resistance of ∼15 ohm sq−1 and a transmittance of ∼80%. Details for the optimization are described in the ESI (Fig. S1 and Table S1). A schematic representation of the OSC structure is illustrated in Fig. 6(a). The cell consisted of the substrate (glass or PET), a patterned transparent electrode (ITO or Ag NW), a buffer layer (poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate), PEDOT:PSS), an active layer (blend of electron donor and electron acceptor), and a metal (Al) cathode. In order to realize an efficient OSC, a novel low band-gap polymer, PBDTTT-C, was used as the electron donor. The electron acceptor was PCBM. Details on the OSC fabrication process are described in the Experimental section.
Fig. 6(b) shows the J–V characteristics of high-efficiency OSCs fabricated with the Ag NW transparent electrodes. As summarized in Table 1, the OSC fabricated on the Ag NW/glass electrode (A-1) exhibited an excellent power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 5.27% with an open circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.69 V, short-circuit current (Jsc) of 15.84 mA cm−2, and fill factor (FF) of 48.19% under air mass (AM) 1.5 illumination, which were comparable to the cell performances of the reference OSC (on the ITO/glass electrode, A-2): Voc = 0.66 V; Jsc = 15.37 mA cm−2; FF = 56.9%; and PCE = 5.78%. To the best of our knowledge, this paper is the first attempt to present the utilization of a Ag NW electrode in an ITO-free and flexible OSC with PCE over 5.2% without a tandem structure. As shown in the inset image of Fig. 6(b), a flexible OSC fabricated on a Ag NW/PET electrode (A-3) after 500 cycles showed a relatively high PCE of 3.76%, with a Voc of 0.72 V, Jsc of 13.04 mA cm−2, and FF of 40.1%. For comparison, an ITO/PET cell (A-4) was fabricated, although its cell performances were not measurable, possibly owing to the failure of the ITO anode caused by the severe bending. The PCE of 3.76% for our flexible Ag NW/PET cell was comparable to those from previous reports (0.38%, 2.5%, 3.8%, 2.4%, 3.45%, 0.25%, and 1.98%).
Cell no.
Cell condition
Voc (V)
Jsc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
A-1
Ag NW/glass
0.69
15.84
48.2
5.27
A-2
ITO/glass
0.66
15.37
56.9
5.78
A-3
Ag NW/PET after 500 cycles
0.72
13.04
40.1
3.76
A-4
ITO/PET after 15 cycles
Failure

In summary, we presented the fabrication of efficient OSCs based on Ag NW transparent electrodes on plastic substrates using the EHD spray deposition method, beginning with the performance evaluation of the electrode. This method has high potential to be scaled up to a large-area process and direct-patterning process of patterned electrodes. A sheet resistance of 20 Ω sq−1 at ∼80% optical transmittance was achieved without utilizing a commercial mechanical pressing machine. The ratio of DC conductivity to the optical conductivity for our Ag NW electrode was ∼70 and further increased to 150 with a mechanical pressing of 100 kgf cm−2, which was comparable to previously reported values. We also evaluated the performance of ITO-free BHJ OSCs with a transparent bottom anode made from Ag NWs and an active layer based on PBDTTT-C:PCBM. Under AM 1.5 illumination, the cells reached high power conversion efficiencies of 5.27% (on glass) and 3.76% (on PET), respectively. This study indicates that Ag–NW-based transparent electrodes prepared from EHD spraying can serve as an alternative to ITO for low-cost flexible OSC devices, which also offer cost advantages when combined with roll-to-roll, solution-processed OSC devices.


This work has been supported by the Converged Energy Materials Research Center program of Defense Acquisition Program Administration and Agency for Defense Development, the National Research Foundation (NRF) grant funded by the Korean government (MSIP) through the Active Polymer Center for Pattern Integration (APCPI) (2007-0056091), and the Pioneer Research Center Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT & Future Planning (2011-0001672).

† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Preparation of P3HT:PCBM organic solar cells for obtaining efficient, ITO-free, flexible organic solar cells. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ta13204h
‡ The first two authors contributed equally to this article.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013