 DOI: 10.1039/D1EE01446C
(Comment)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 6050-6052


Lea
Nienhaus
* and 

Timothy W.
Schmidt
*

Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL, USA. E-mail: lnienhaus@fsu.edu

ARC Centre of Excellence in Exciton Science, School of Chemistry, UNSW, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia. E-mail: timothy.schmidt@unsw.edu.au

Received
13th May 2021
, Accepted 16th September 2021
First published on 14th October 2021
Sheng et al. (2021) report an increase in the power conversion efficiency of a methylammonium lead iodide perovskite solar cell, which they have attributed to the benefits of in situ perovskite-sensitized upconversion by triplet–triplet annihilation in the organic semiconductor rubrene. In the following, we will discuss why in the device structure presented here upconversion inherently cannot be the underlying cause of the observed effects. Rather, the process of upconversion can fundamentally only lead to a reduction of the device efficiency if the same material is used as the active layer in the photovoltaic devices and as the triplet sensitizer. Therefore, the improved photovoltaic performance must have a different root cause. We follow up with an alternative interpretation for the performance increase observed by the authors.

Sheng et al. have included a perovskite-sensitized upconversion (UC) system based on the organic semiconductor rubrene directly into the perovskite solar cell (PSC) structure and observe an increase in the power conversion efficiency (PCE) from 17.33% to 20.18%. While we agree that this is a respectable increase in the PCE upon the addition of the upconverter rubrene doped with dibenzotetraphenylperiflanthene (DBP), this effect fundamentally cannot be the result of triplet–triplet annihilation UC (TTA-UC) in the device structure presented here. Rather, the increased device efficiency can be traced back to other factors which are also influenced by the addition of rubrene during device fabrication.


TTA-UC has long been proposed as a pathway to overcoming the Shockley–Queisser limit by increasing the efficiency of photovoltaics (PV) by sub-bandgap photon sensitization. Importantly, in this approach the UC device is placed beneath the PV to harvest the sub-bandgap photons which are transmitted through the absorber layer of the PV. Following TTA-UC, these additional generated higher energy photons can be absorbed by the solar cell and give a boost to the obtainable PCE.

We begin our introduction to TTA-UC by highlighting the general mechanism of perovskite-sensitized UC, which is expected to be the result of free charge carrier injection into the triplet state of rubrene. The favorable band alignment of the perovskite and rubrene allows for asynchronous hole and electron transfer from the valence band and conduction band, respectively, to populate the triplet state. Upon electronic interaction of two rubrene triplets, the excited singlet state can then be created in a spin-allowed annihilation process. Hence, TTA-UC is a ‘two photons in – one photon out’ mechanism. However, in the device structure presented here, we must keep in mind that both for the current generation in the PV, and for the triplet sensitization the incident NIR photons must be absorbed, and free charge carriers subsequently created.
In the PV device structure utilized here, the perovskite acts both as the active layer for the PV and as the sensitizer for the UC process. Two electron–hole pairs are required for the creation of two triplet states which can annihilate to form one higher energy singlet state in rubrene/DBP. This singlet state can subsequently be reabsorbed by the perovskite to generate a single electron and hole, leading to a ‘two steps back – one step forward’-type scenario. To highlight the limitations of TTA-UC under the presented conditions, we perform a series of thought experiments.
We will first assume 100% efficiency of the carrier generation in the perovskite, complete extraction of all generated carriers to the rubrene triplet state, no loss channels in the UC process itself and unity reabsorption of the upconverted emission. Here, the direct absorption of two photons by the perovskite would generate two electrons and two holes which can be extracted at the respective electrodes. However, TTA results in the creation of one higher-lying singlet state from two low energy triplets. Therefore, a Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) step can only generate one electron and one hole in the perovskite which can be extracted at the electrodes. This leads to a fundamental loss of 50% of the extractable charge carriers, leading to an uncircumventable loss in the PCE of the PV.
Moving to a more realistic scenario: only a small fraction of the generated charge carriers result in triplet states in rubrene. This is evidenced by the fact that the authors see strong residual perovskite photoluminescence (PL), a result of carriers radiatively recombining prior to being extracted at the perovskite/rubrene interface. Now, a maximum of half of the small fraction of extracted charge carriers can be regenerated upon reabsorption of the high energy photons by FRET.
However, the FRET step from DBP to the perovskite itself is also inherently lossy, as FRET is only efficient over fairly short distances on the order of several nm. Evidence that the FRET step does not have a unity efficiency is given by the fact that the upconverted PL is observed in the devices presented here and also in past studies by Nienhaus and co-workers. Therefore, only a fraction of charge carriers generates triplets capable of undergoing TTA-UC and only a subset of these upconverted photons can actually be recycled by FRET.
As shown in these past studies by the Nienhaus group, the overall TTA-UC process in these perovskite/rubrene devices is far from optimized. Recent reports indicate only a 3% internal UC efficiency, and the strong residual perovskite PL observed for thicker UC devices highlights that a large fraction of the generated charges are indeed not transferred to rubrene, and rather recombine in the perovskite itself prior to reaching the interface. In addition, the TTA-UC process itself is not 100% efficient and adds additional loss channels. Although rubrene is a worthy annihilator, careful analysis showed that it is only capable of converting a maximum of about 60% of triplet pairs into excited singlet states. A proportion of annihilation events are assumed to result in generation of T2 states which rapidly deactivate to T1, thus wasting excitons. The maximum quantum yield of rubrene is thus about 30%. However, we reiterate that this 30% is what can be salvaged from electron–hole pairs that would better have been extracted as charges. Indeed, if the augmentation of photocurrent from 17.33% to 20.18% were all due to excitons generated by a maximally efficient TTA process in rubrene (30%), then the device would be generating extractable charges with a potential 26.83% power conversion efficiency. The current single junction perovskite solar cell record is 25.6%.
Considering all loss pathways, even if we assume an extremely generous 1% external UC efficiency for the current state-of-the-art perovskite/rubrene UC devices, defined as the number of incident photons which are converted to higher lying singlet states, it is apparent that the UC process cannot be the cause of the performance enhancement observed here. Using the same absorber material as the active layer for the PV photocurrent generation and as the sensitizer for UC in situ simply cannot result in a performance enhancement, as this would violate the fundamental laws of thermodynamics.

We have repeatedly noted in the past that the addition of rubrene does not result in a noticeable quenching of the perovskite PL despite obvious UC PL occurring. Rather, often an increase the perovskite PL in the bilayer device has been observed due to surface passivation effects, resulting in fewer trap states which are detrimental to both the perovskite PL quantum yield and PCE.

The authors show an increased perovskite grain size upon addition of rubrene/DBP in the one-step fabrication method, and further demonstrate an increased preferred grain orientation. Previous reports by e.g., Correa-Baena et al. and Wieghold et al. clearly demonstrate that the film quality and crystallographic texture influences the charge carrier transport and extraction. Increased charge extraction and reduced carrier trapping has been shown to positively influence the short circuit current JSC, the open circuit voltage VOC, the fill factor FF and result in a boost in the external quantum efficiency EQE. Therefore, the increase in the PCE observed here could simply be attributed directly to the increase in the perovskite quality and trap state passivation.
The authors attribute the EQE enhancement and observed feature around 620 nm for their one-step device to DBP and mention: “As shown in Fig. 3e, a significant absorption enhancement of perovskite films with Rub:DBP are observed owing to the FRET.” However, their absorbance spectra do not show any additional spectral features caused by rubrene or DBP, likely due to a very small absorbance of the organic layer in contrast to the strongly absorbing thick perovskite layer. Rather, it appears the baseline is simply shifted, which can be attributed to increases in scattering. In addition, FRET does not influence the absorption per se, rather only changes the wavelengths at which emission is observed.
There is already a significant fine structure in the EQE in the reference device (Fig. 3d), which has been attributed to interference effects. It is not surprising that the addition of rubrene/DBP will vary the wavelengths which result in constructive and destructive interference and cause shifts in the interference patterns, which can account for the newly found feature at 620 nm in the EQE upon addition of rubrene/DBP.
Furthermore, as mentioned previously, the TTA-UC process in this system is far from optimized and additional carriers cannot be generated through this process, making it impossible to attribute the NIR enhancement of the EQE of nearly 20% to TTA-UC. If photoexcited charge carriers are generated upon photon absorption and can transfer to the triplet state of rubrene, instead, they could also be extracted at the electrodes and contribute to the PV performance. Therefore, any gains by TTA-UC would be offset by a two-fold loss in extractable carriers.
An additional fundamental flaw of the experimental design is that the device performance is investigated under AM1.5G conditions. Direct excitation of the rubrene layer using this broad spectrum will create excitons in the organic layer which can be split at the perovskite/rubrene interface and directly add to the photocurrent observed, or FRET stemming from direct excitation of rubrene/DBP can result in charge carriers in the perovskite. This direct excitation of the organic may also contribute to the increased VOC and JSC observed. However, the influence of the direct excitation of rubrene/DBP will vastly eclipse any effects caused by a possible TTA-UC mechanism.
In summary, while we support the observed PCE enhancement upon addition of rubrene/DBP, the attribution to the process of TTA-UC is fundamentally impossible. Rather the addition of rubrene appears to influence the underlying perovskite properties, passivate the perovskite surface, facilitate hole extraction as discussed by the authors and increase the level of crystallinity in the perovskite layer, which all positively influence the overall device performance.

There are no conflicts to declare.


L. N. acknowledges support by Florida State University. T. W. S. was supported by the Australian Research Council (Centre of Excellence in Exciton Science CE170100026).


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021