 DOI: 10.1039/C3EE24454G
(Communication)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1152-1157

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Jongjin
Lee
*,

Hyungcheol
Back
,

Jaemin
Kong
,

Hongkyu
Kang
,

Suhee
Song
,

Hongsuk
Suh
,

Sung-Oong
Kang
* and 

Kwanghee
Lee
*

Research Institute for Solar and Sustainable Energies (RISE), Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, Gwangju 500-712, South Korea. E-mail: (J. Lee) bandy1@naver.com; piercelife@gmail.com; (S. Kang) kso3710@gist.ac.kr; Fax: +82 (62) 715 3204; Tel: +82 (62) 715 3205

School of Materials Science & Engineering, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, Gwangju 500-712, South Korea. E-mail: (K. Lee) klee@gist.ac.kr; Fax: +82 (62) 715 3204; Tel: +82 (62) 715 2345

Department of Chemistry and Chemistry Institute for Functional Materials, Busan National University, Busan 609-735, South Korea

Received
21st December 2012
, Accepted 7th February 2013
First published on 11th February 2013
An efficient module cell architecture of a polymer solar cell built upon self-aligned alternating interfacial layers is presented. Alternating conventional and inverted subcells are serially connected on a single compound electrode with self-aligned interfacial layers. A high relative power conversion efficiency of 82% of the large-area module cell (4.24%) to the small-sized laboratory cells (5.19%) could be obtainable.

While polymer solar cells have been a topic of interest because of their attractive features of feasible processability and cost-effective printability on flexible substrates, a substantial power conversion efficiency (PCE) drop in large-area module cells compared with small-sized laboratory-cells has been a roadblock toward the commercial application. Indeed, the field of research on polymer solar cells demands innovative changes in the fundamental module architecture to bridge the laboratory-scale cells (lab-cells) to the large-area module cells. To this end, we report a simple and robust scalable module architecture of a polymer solar cell with a high module-cell PCE of 4.24% reaching 82% relative to the 5.19% PCE of small-sized reference lab-cells due to a dramatically high geometric fill factor of 96% and reliable series connections. The PCE can even reach 4.78% at 0.1 Sun, which corresponds to 92% of the lab-cells.


Bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) polymer solar cells (PSCs) based on solution-processed conjugated polymers and fullerene derivatives are considered one of the next generation photovoltaic technologies due to their attractive features of low-cost printability on large area flexible substrates. Research focus for high power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of PSCs has been on bandgap engineering of the photoactive polymers to cover broader absorption regions and high operation voltages. To further improve the device performance, additional processing methodologies, such as solvent drying, thermal annealing, the use of buffer layers and morphology-control using additives, have been employed. Parallel to the material-based approaches, a tandem solar cell architecture was assessed to be a possible solution for achieving high PCE by multiplying an open-circuit voltage and enhancing the absorption of incident photons. While the energy conversion efficiencies of small-sized lab-cells have been increased to a daily application value of 10%, the commercialization of PSCs has been impeded by a substantial efficiency drop in the large-area module cells. In thin-film inorganic photovoltaics, the efficiencies of module cells have been higher than 80% of the small-sized lab-cell efficiencies. However, the efficiency drop in the PSC module is still larger than 40%, which implies the present world-record efficiency of the lab-cells to be doubled for the commercial applications. Here, we report a highly efficient module cell architecture of PSCs specifically designed upon self-aligned alternating subcells. In this conceptual module cell architecture, we could achieve a high relative efficiency of 82% between the large-area module cells (4.24%) and the small-sized reference cells (5.19%), which provides an effective possible route to improve the PCEs of large area module cells by following the development of photoactive polymers.

Accompanied by the maximized operation parameters of lab-cells such as open-circuit voltage, short-circuit current and fill factor, the efficiency of PSC module cells also hinges on additional factors, including geometric fill factor, reproducibility of individual subcells and compatibility with current printing technologies. To date, the geometry of printed PSC module cells has anchored on a traditional one-dimensional (1-D) active structure composed of series-connected multi-striped subcells to alleviate a problematic ohmic loss during power delivery. This 1-D stripe-patterned layout of module cells has an inherent drawback of a large aperture loss, which is mainly responsible for the significant efficiency drop; the individual subcells including photoactive layers are patterned in the geometry of cascading stacks with blank offsets to avoid undesirable overlapping of the layers and to allow for the serial connection of the two different (bimetal) electrodes belonging to two adjacent subcells. Furthermore, the performance reliability of subcells influencing the overall efficiency of module cells is significantly hindered by the difficulties in obtaining defect-free and uniform multilayers during the 1-D patterning of each layer. Because the series-connected subcells require current-matching, a defective single cell strongly limits the resulting performance of module cells. To address these challenges in the present module cell structure, an idea for the effective series-connection of subcells was previously proposed, however, still demanding substantial and significant progress in the conception of the module cell structure: for instance, inevitable complicated patterning of charge-selecting interfacial layers for complete stacking of alternating subcells certainly accompanied by the cumulative pattern-aligning errors and the uncontrollable interconnecting areas.
In this work, we report a highly efficient module cell architecture of PSCs specifically designed upon self-aligned alternating interfacial layers with dual charge-selectivity. We could achieve a high relative efficiency of 82% between the large-area module cells and the small-sized reference cells, which provides an effective route to improve the PCEs of large-area module cells by following the development of photoactive polymers. The eminent efficiency ratio stems from the specific geometric fill factor reaching 96% in this module design realized by a self-aligned clear border between two interfacial layers on a single continual electrode without an area consuming bimetal contact.
Likewise, the highly steady fill factor across various cell areas, based on the effectual charge-collection throughout a homogeneous zero-dimensional photoactive layer, ensures the reproducibility of the module cell performance and also the scalability up to the large-area modules with a high efficiency.
The module architecture is schematically illustrated in Fig. 1. The individual subcells are serially connected in a sequence of alternating conventional and inverted configurations (marked with I and C, respectively). The dual subcells with opposite charge polarities can be fabricated by alternating interfacial layers of the hole transport layer (HTL) and self-aligned electron transport layer (ETL) in each cell stack, and are series-connected through seamless continual terminal (SELECT) electrodes and further linked to a large-area module cell structure. In the conventional module structures, a vertical interconnection between top and bottom electrodes is mainly responsible for not only a serious aperture loss but also a restricted net-current flow. At sufficiently high electron concentrations in both electrodes, a good tunnel contact, which moderates a work-function difference through an electron Friedel oscillation within a Debye screen length, is likely formed; thus, the net-current efficiently flows based on the effective charge recombination between the neighbouring subcells. In contrast, the unbalanced electron concentrations, such as those in contact with a thin native oxide layer between aluminum (Al) and indium tin oxide (ITO), lead to an increase of tunnel resistance requiring additional excitation energy to recover the charge recombination over the imperfect tunnel barrier. With the SELECT electrodes interconnecting the dual polarities of subcells in series, the geometric fill factor dramatically increases and the parasitic resistance vanishes without the vertical bimetal series-connection, whereas the required voltage doubling is still assisted in buried tunnel junctions between the as-staked interfacial layers. The pathway for the charge carriers (electrons and holes) to reach the final current collectors is schematically illustrated in Fig. 1. Cross-sectional transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images in Fig. 1 show the alternating subcells in the conventional and the inverted configurations with well-defined interfaces, in which the HTL is in contact with the ITO and Al electrode, respectively. Chemical compositions of the multilayers are confirmed by energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (Fig. S1 in the ESI).
On the pre-patterned ITO electrodes, a bi-functional polyethyleneimine (PEI) modulates a work-function of the ITO electrodes through the formation of ionic self-assembled dipole moments (Fig. 2a and b). The interfacial dipoles, which are aligned by the interaction of protonated amines with oxygen ions on the ITO surface, were found to reduce the work-function of the ITO down to 4.0 eV. For the subcell in the inverted stack, the reduced work-function of the surface-modified ITO lies below the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of fullerene, providing an ohmic contact for effective electron collection. The other subcell type in the conventional stack is constructed from the deposition of a hole-selective molybdenum sub-oxide (MoOx) layer on a half of the ITO/PEI electrode (Fig. 2c). By the patterning of the MoOx layer, the remaining PEI area is self-defined to be the neighbouring ETL. As a result, these post-patterned HTL and self-defined ETL can be a key substructure for the self-aligning of the alternating subcells with dual polarities. The MoOx was reported to have the good hole-selecting property with a work-function of 5.1 eV. In the ITO/PEI/MoOx stack, the ultra-thin PEI layer plays a role of buried charge tunnelling layer that enables the ITO/PEI/MoOx stack to work as the compound hole-collecting anode. The charge tunnelling through the PEI layer was validated by comparison of the usual performance in the PEI-based devices with the anomalous S-shape response in the device incorporated with a conventional electron-collecting titanium sub-oxide (TiOx) layer (ETL) (Fig. S2 in the ESI). The generality of such a tunnelling assisted compound anode with PEI for the self-aligned dual charge-selectivity could be confirmed by incorporating another HTL material of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) and polystyrene sulfonate acid (PEDOT:PSS) instead of MoOx, which presented the comparable device performance with the ITO/PEI/MoOx compound electrode (Fig. S2 in the ESI).
The self-aligned dual charge-selectivity on a single electrode is a key substructure in this module cell architecture, improving the overall photovoltaic response and simplifying the cell fabrication processes. The opposite charge-collecting polarities on the single electrode are profiled by surface potentials on the layers. A Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM) image presents the surface potentials of the ITO/PEI and ITO/PEI/MoOx layers with a contact potential difference (CPD) offset of 0.95 eV, which approximately accords with the work-function difference between the dual charge-collecting layers (Fig. 2c). A photoactive bulk-heterojunction layer of poly[N-9-hepta-decanyl-2,7-carbazole-alt-5,5-(4,7-di-2-thienyl-2,1,3-benzothiadiazole)] (PCDTBT) and the fullerene derivative [6,6]-phenyl C70-butyric acid methyl ester (PC70BM) was spin-cast onto the dual charge-collecting layers. The difference in the CPD values of 0.45 eV is measured on the surface of the active layer (Fig. 2d). The reduction in the surface potential of the active layer is attributed to a potential decrease between the active layer and the electrodes. Based on the measured CPD values, energy band diagrams for the dual charge-selecting bottom electrode and the surface of the active layer can be drawn as shown in Fig. 3.
To invert the subcell polarities, the areas of the underlying ITO/PEI regions are post-evaporated with the MoOx on the active layer (Fig. 2e). The fabrication of the device is completed by evaporating the top Al electrode, which enables the efficient net-current flow based on the effective charge recombination between the neighbouring subcells without the bimetal contact (Fig. 2f). After the sequential deposition of the top HTL and the Al electrode, the potential difference in any subcell is pinned back to 0.95 eV. Details on the device fabrication and the measurements are presented in the Experimental section in the ESI.
The fabricated module cells consist of four series-connected alternating subcells with various widths, defined as the overlapping width between the top and the bottom electrode; the blank offset between the subcells was fixed to be 0.4 mm, defined as a non-overlapping region between both electrodes (Fig. S3 in the ESI). Fig. 4a and b represent the photovoltaic characteristics of the module cell at a subcell width of 2.6 mm. Because the module cell architecture in this work is scalable and composed of four series-connected subcells with small areas, we follow the module efficiency definition of designated illumination area standard. The inverted subcells yield an average PCE of 4.91% with an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.86 V, a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 10.19 mA cm−2 and a fill factor (FF) of 56%; the conventional subcells show an average PCE of 4.45% with Voc = 0.87 V, Jsc = 8.95 mA cm−2, and FF = 58%. The operation parameters from the individual subcells to the module cell are summarized (Table S1 in the ESI).
As recognized in Fig. 4b, the output voltage of the module cell accurately equals to the Voc sum of the subcells, which proves the reliable subcell coupling. However, the output current of the module cell is limited by the lowest Jsc of the series-connected subcells. To identify the current difference between the dual subcells, we measured incident photon conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra.
The IPCE values of the inverted subcell higher than those of the conventional one are indicative of the higher Jsc in the inverted configuration (Fig. S4 in the ESI). The discrepancy in the Jsc of the dual subcells originates from the different device geometries. The MoOx layer stacked below the top Al electrode in the inverted structure serves as an optical spacer, spatially redistributing the light intensity inside the PSC device. In contrast, the MoOx layer stacked on the ITO/PEI anode in the conventional structure hampers the constructive light redistribution into the photoactive layer, leading to the lower Jsc. As a result, the optimized lab-cells, with a cell area of 4 mm2, exhibited the PCEs of 5.77 and 4.64% for the inverted and the conventional configuration, respectively (Fig. S5 in the ESI). The relative decrease of PCE in the conventional stack was identified to be from the lower Jsc due to the absence of the optical spacer.
To balance the currents of the subcells, we matched the short-circuit currents (Isc) by varying the width ratio between the dual subcells because the output current of the solar cell is proportional to the active area. The ratio can be readily adjusted by varying the top and the bottom HTL width at a specific subcell width because the remaining ETL is self-defined by the masking HTL. As plotted in Fig. 4c, extending the width of the conventional subcell continuously increases the Isc of the subcells; simultaneously, the Isc of the inverted subcells reduces along the narrower cell widths. At the cross-point of the Isc, the output currents are balanced at a width ratio of 5.25 for the conventional subcell, corresponding to that of 4.75 for the inverted one. Under the optimal current-matching conditions, the ideal PCE of the lab-cells with a cell area of 4 mm2 is averaged to be 5.19% and used as the reference to the module cell efficiency.
The dependence of efficiency on the subcell width also provides the most attainable efficiency of our module cells. As recognized in Fig. 4d, the active area efficiencies are undiminished at approximately 4.4% from 2.6 mm (60 mm2) up to the subcell width of 10 mm (416 mm2) and found to decrease by the width larger than 10 mm due to an increase in the ohmic loss across the ITO electrode: the subcell with 2.6 mm width has a cell length of 5 mm and the other wider cells have the cell length of 10 mm. When the width extends from 2.6 to 10 mm, the module cell efficiency continuously steps up from a substantial increase of the geometric fill factor. For instance, the module cell efficiency for a width of 10 mm reaches 4.18% with a high aperture ratio of 96% to the active area, which corresponds to the relative module cell efficiency of 80.5% with respect to the reference lab-cells. Additionally, the steady and high FF in the various subcell widths significantly contributes to such a high module cell efficiency ratio to the lab-cells. As aforementioned, the effectual net-current flow through the dual charge-collecting electrodes, without the electrical contact between the bimetal electrodes, leads to the undiminished FF even in the enlarged cell areas; thus, enables the reliable performance based on the homogeneous zero-dimensional photoactive layer instead of the 1-D patterning. The FF, the active area efficiency and the module cell efficiency with respect to the subcell width are summarized (Table S2 in the ESI).
As shown in Fig. 4d, the module cell efficiency is expected to be optimized at a subcell width of 8.5 mm. To demonstrate the most attainable efficiency and the large-area scalability, we fabricated a module cell of a width of 8.5 mm with a designated illumination area of 1068 mm2, exhibiting the average PCE of 4.24% obtained from 28 modules (Fig. S6 in the ESI). This average PCE corresponds to the relative module cell efficiency of 82%, as compared with the ideal lab-cell efficiency of 5.19% (Fig. 5a and b) (the back side of the device is shown in Fig. S6 in the ESI). We believe that a fabrication technique incorporating the ETL into the conventional subcell stack would raise the relative module cell efficiency to the lab-cell. The reference lab-cell in the conventional structure stacked with a ZnO ETL in the configuration of ITO/PEI/MoOx/PCDTBT:PC70BM/ZnO/Al yielded a PCE of 5.64% comparable to that of the inverted lab-cell (Fig. S7 in the ESI). In addition, the absolute PCE value of the module cell is likely to be further improved with the more effective photoactive polymers. It is also observed that the optimized module cell efficiency is still limited by the low conductivity of the ITO electrode, as verified with the enhancement in the efficiency at the lower light-intensity of 50 (4.64%) and 10 mW cm−2 (4.78%) with a reduced resistive loss (Table S3 in the ESI). The enhanced performance under the weak illuminations indicates that the final module efficiency can be further improved with the highly conductive transparent electrode.

In summary, the highly effective module cell architecture of polymer solar cells has been developed upon the almost loss-free series-connection of the alternating subcells, which are fabricated upon self-aligned dual charge-selecting interfacial layers. In this conceptual module cells, we demonstrated the high average PCE of the module cell (4.24%) reaching 82% relative to the small-sized lab-cell (5.19%) through high geometric fill factor, uniform photovoltaic response and effectual charge carrier transport, while the PCE of the module cell can be further improved by employing the efficient photoactive materials. We expect that the module cell design developed in this work bridges the laboratory-scaled PSCs with the industrial large-area module cells and thus opens up opportunities for the practical application of the PSC systems.


This research was supported by the Core Technology Development Program for Next-generation Solar Cells of Research Institute for Solar and Sustainable Energies (RISE), the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korean government (MEST) (no. 20090093869) and the Basic Science Research Program through the NRF funded by the MEST (2012R1A1A2006831 and 2012-0001369).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ee24454g
‡ First two authors equally contributed to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013