 DOI: 10.1039/C3TA10803A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 10693-10702

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Chung-Wei
Kung
,

Yu-Heng
Cheng
,

Hsin-Wei
Chen
,

R.
Vittal
 and 

Kuo-Chuan
Ho
*

Department of Chemical Engineering, National Taiwan University, No. 1, Sec. 4, Roosevelt Rd, Taipei 10617, Taiwan. E-mail: kcho@ntu.edu.tw; Fax: +886-2-2362-3040; Tel: +886-2-2366-0739

Institute of Polymer Science and Engineering, National Taiwan University, No. 1, Sec. 4, Roosevelt Rd, Taipei 10617, Taiwan. E-mail: kcho@ntu.edu.tw; Fax: +886-2-2362-3040; Tel: +886-2-2366-0739

Received
25th February 2013
, Accepted 14th May 2013
First published on 23rd July 2013
Hollow microflower arrays (HMFAs) of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) with several two dimensional hollow nanopetals on each microflower are fabricated on a conducting glass by using ZnO microflower arrays as the template. Various charges are applied for the electrodeposition of the film of PEDOT-HMFAs, intending to investigate their effect on the film's morphology. A morphological variation is observed due to the swelling of PEDOT during the removal of the ZnO template. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) is used to optimize the charges for the deposition of the films of both a flat PEDOT and the PEDOT-HMFAs. Long-term stability of the films in an I−/I3− electrolyte is studied by CV. The PEDOT-HMFA film shows a better stability than those of the films of flat PEDOT and sputtered Pt. The PEDOT-HMFA film is employed as the catalytic material on the counter electrode (CE) of a dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC). A power conversion efficiency of 7.20% is achieved, at 100 mW cm−2 for the DSSC with the film of PEDOT-HMFAs, which is much higher than that of the cell with the flat PEDOT (6.39%) and comparable to that of the cell with a sputtered Pt film on its CE (7.61%). Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy is used to substantiate the photovoltaic parameters. “Hemispherical diffusion of ions” occurs on each PEDOT hollow microflower of the CE with PEDOT-HMFAs in the DSSC, as against the linear diffusion occurring on the CE with flat PEDOT or sputtered Pt. This type of “hemispherical diffusion of ions” is explained to result in a smaller diffusion resistance of ions and thereby in a much higher fill factor for the DSSC using the CE with PEDOT-HMFAs.

Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) is one of the most successful conducting polymers in antistatic, electric, and electronic applications, because of its excellent optical and electronic properties. PEDOT has also been investigated in several areas of application, including electrochemical sensors, electrochromic devices, solar cells, and supercapacitors. Currently, some nanostructures of PEDOT, e.g., nanorods, nanospheres, and nanoflowers have been prepared, intending to further improve the performance of the related devices. These PEDOT nanostructures are found to exhibit better properties for their applications, compared to those of bulk PEDOT. However, these nanostructures are synthesized in a powder form and then coated on a substrate; that is to say that they cannot be aligned uniformly on a substrate in a regular fashion. In order to prepare a PEDOT thin film with well-aligned nanostructures and with a good adhesion to the substrate, often a template is used. Among various templates, anodic aluminum oxide (AAO) is the most commonly used one for the synthesis of inorganic or polymeric nanotube arrays. PEDOT nanotube arrays are commonly raised on a substrate with the help of the AAO. Although the AAO-assisted method is very common, it shows the disadvantage that it is very difficult to obtain robust nanotube arrays, i.e., without any structural deformation after the removal of the AAO template. To fabricate robust PEDOT nanotube arrays, ZnO nanorod arrays were used as the template. In this study, the ZnO template was removed, after the coating of the PEDOT, by soaking it in an acid solution; robust PEDOT nanotube arrays were then obtained. The thus obtained nanotube arrays showed several advantages, with reference to those in the case of PEDOT nanotube arrays fabricated by using the AAO template. Besides, the PEDOT nanotubes were also aligned on a substrate by vapor deposition polymerization, using electrospun polymer nanofibers as the template. However, only one dimensional (1D) PEDOT nanostructure arrays have been fabricated in previous literature. Although 1D nanostructure arrays show the advantage of a facile electronic conduction along the axial direction through the arrays to their substrate, their surface area is smaller than those of the arrays of most of the two dimensional (2D) and three dimensional (3D) nanostructures or those of the arrays of their combination. However, 2D or 3D nanostructure arrays of PEDOT, aligned uniformly on a substrate, have not been fabricated previously. Even the 2D nanostructures of PEDOT, such as nanosheets and nanoflakes, have not been reported in the literature.

Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) have attracted great attention recently due to their ease of fabrication, low cost, and relatively high efficiency for the conversion of solar energy into electricity. Typically, a DSSC is composed of a photoanode with a TiO2 porous thin film, adsorbed with a photosensitizing dye, an electrolyte of an I−/I3− redox couple, and a counter electrode (CE). Sputtered platinum (Pt) is commonly employed as the electrocatalytic material on the CE of a DSSC. However, Pt is very expensive and is rare on earth. In order to reduce the production cost of DSSCs, several materials have been introduced to replace Pt; these materials include carbon materials, metal sulfides, and conducting polymers. Conducting polymers are attractive for the use of CEs in DSSCs due to their low cost for large-scale production. Among them, PEDOT is the most commonly used conducting polymer; several studies have applied PEDOT thin films as the CE films in DSSCs. However, only one study has used a PEDOT thin film, with a specific and regular nanostructure as the CE film for a DSSC. In that work, 1D PEDOT nanotube arrays that were synthesized much earlier were used as the CE film for a DSSC; the pertinent DSSC showed a better cell efficiency than that of a DSSC with a flat PEDOT thin film.
In this study, PEDOT hollow microflower arrays (HMFAs) with several 2D hollow nanopetals on each of the microflowers were fabricated on a conducting glass, by using ZnO microflower arrays (MFAs) as the template. We have successfully synthesized a 2D nanostructure of pure PEDOT. In addition, the flower-like structures of PEDOT, aligned on a conducting substrate in an array form, have not been reported previously. This study provides a breakthrough in the synthesis of PEDOT nanostructures, and the approach used in this study can be extended to prepare 2D or 3D hollow micro/nanostructure arrays of other conducting polymers. The PEDOT-HMFAs were applied as a catalytic film on the CE of a DSSC; a high efficiency of 7.20% was achieved, at 100 mW cm−2, which is much higher than that of a DSSC with flat PEDOT as its CE film (6.39%) and is comparable to that of a DSSC with sputtered Pt as its CE film (7.61%). The flower-like PEDOT microstructure plays an important role to enable a hemispherical diffusion at its CE and thereby a much higher fill factor to its DSSC than those in the case of flat PEDOT and sputtered Pt films; this phenomenon was not discussed previously.

3,4-Ethylenedioxythiophene (EDOT) was purchased from Aldrich. Zinc nitrite 6-hydrate (99.5%) was obtained from J. T. Baker. Urea (99.0%), dichloromethane (99.9%), hydrochloric acid (HCl, 37%), LiClO4 (98%), and tetrabutylammonium hexafluorophosphate (TBAPF6, 98%) were bought from Sigma-Aldrich. Anhydrous LiI, I2, and acetonitrile (ACN) were received from Merck. 4-tert-Butylpyridine (TBP, 96%) and tert-butanol (TBA, 99.5%) were acquired from Acros. Cis-bis(isothiocyanato)bis(2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylato)ruthenium(II) bis-tetrabutylammonium (N719) and 1,2-dimethyl-3-propylimidazolium iodide (DMPII) were supplied by Solaronix S. A., Aubonne, Switzerland. Two kinds of commercial TiO2 pastes (Ti nanoxide T and Ti nanoxide R/SP) were procured from Solaronix. All chemicals were used as received. Deionized water (DIW) was used throughout the work.


A thin film of ZnO-MFAs was synthesized on a FTO glass substrate, first by using a chemical bath deposition (CBD) technique, and then by treating the thus obtained film by pyrolysis. In the CBD process, the FTO substrate (TEC-7, NSG America, Inc., New Jersey, USA, 7 Ω □−1), with an exposed geometric area of 1.5 cm2, was suspended upside-down in a closed bottle with an aqueous solution, containing 5 wt% of urea and 0.05 M of zinc nitrate, at 90 °C for 4 h. After the CBD process, the obtained film on the FTO was converted to the film of ZnO by pyrolysing it at 300 °C for 1 h in air. The electrode with the film of ZnO-MFAs was thus obtained. In the second step, PEDOT was electrodeposited on the ZnO-MFAs in a solution of dichloromethane, containing 0.01 M EDOT and 0.05 M TBAPF6. A conventional three-electrode system was used for the electrodeposition process, at room temperature, with an electrode of ZnO-MFAs as the working electrode, a Pt foil (4.0 cm2) as the counter electrode, and a homemade Ag/Ag+ electrode as the reference electrode. Step-wise chronopotentiometric electrodeposition was used for the purpose. The step-wise electrodeposition method was assumed to have avoided a strong diffusion limitation of the EDOT monomer and thus enabled the deposition of the PEDOT more uniformly on the surface of the ZnO nanostructure, with reference to a traditional electrodeposition method. In detail, an anodic current of 0.25 mA cm−2 was passed through the electrode of ZnO-MFAs for 20 s. The thus obtained electrode was then rested for 20 s. This process of passing current and resting for 20 s is considered here as one cycle. The electrode was subjected to 120 such cycles to electrodeposit the film of PEDOT; this process of 120 cycles was calculated to consume a charge of 600 mC cm−2. A film of PEDOT/ZnO-MFAs was thus obtained. Various charge densities were used for the electrodeposition. Finally, the PEDOT/ZnO-MFA film was soaked in an aqueous 0.05 M HCl solution for 24 h; this step had resulted in the removal of ZnO-MFAs and thereby the formation of the film of PEDOT-HMFAs on the electrode. For comparison, flat PEDOT thin films were also prepared. The same step-wise electrodeposition method mentioned above was used, with a bare FTO glass as the substrate. In the case of flat PEDOT films, the charges used for the electrodeposition were in the range of 10 to 60 mC cm−2.


The commercial TiO2 paste (Ti nanoxide T) was coated on a cleaned FTO substrate by a doctor-blade technique. The coated substrate was gradually heated to 450 °C (rate = 10 °C min−1) in an oxygen atmosphere, and subsequently sintered at that temperature for 30 min. After sintering the electrode at 450 °C and cooling it to room temperature, two layers of Ti nanoxide T and one layer of another TiO2 paste (Ti nanoxide R/SP) were coated on the electrode by the doctor-blade method; the thus coated electrode was then sintered as in the previous process. The total thickness of the TiO2 film was about 16 μm, which included 6 μm of the mentioned Ti nanoxide R/SP as the scattering layer on the top. A portion of 0.16 cm2 was selected from the composite film as the active area by removing the side portions by scrapping. Thereafter, the electrode was dipped in a solution, containing 0.3 mM N719 dye in ACN–TBP (v/v = 1:1) for 18 h. The TiO2 electrode was coupled to one of the various CEs (CEs with PEDOT-HMFAs, flat PEDOT, and sputtered Pt) to fabricate the DSSC; these two electrodes were separated by a 60 μm thick Surlyn® (Solaronix S.A., Aubonne, Switzerland) and sealed by heating. A mixture of 0.6 M DMPII, 0.125 M LiI, 0.045 M I2, and 0.5 M TBP in ACN was used as the electrolyte. The electrolyte was injected into the gap between the two electrodes by capillarity, and the hole was sealed with hot-melt glue after the electrolyte injection.


Cyclic voltammetric (CV) measurements were performed with a CHI 440 electrochemical workstation (CH Instruments, Inc., USA), using the conventional three-electrode system. One of the various CEs, a platinum sheet, and a Ag/Ag+ electrode were used as the working, counter, and reference electrodes, respectively. A solution of 10.0 mM LiI, 1.0 mM I2, and 0.1 M LiClO4 in ACN was used as the electrolyte for all the CV measurements. CV curves were recorded at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1. The value of peak current density, excluding the current density caused by the double-layer capacitance, was measured using the CHI 440 software. The assembled DSSCs were illuminated by a class A quality solar simulator (PEC-L11, AM1.5 G, Peccell Technologies, Inc.), and the incident light intensity (100 mW cm−2) was calibrated with a standard Si Cell (PECSI01, Peccell Technologies, Inc.). Electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) were obtained by using a PGSTAT 30 potentiostat/galvanostat (Autolab, Eco-Chemie, The Netherlands) equipped with a FRA2 module at a constant light illumination of 100 mW cm−2. The frequency range explored was 60 kHz to 1.0 Hz. The applied bias voltage was set at the open-circuit voltage (Voc) of the DSSC, between the CE and the photoanode, starting from the short-circuit conditions; the corresponding ac amplitude was 10 mV. The impedance spectra were analyzed by an equivalent circuit model. The morphologies of the films of ZnO-MFAs, PEDOT/ZnO-MFAs, PEDOT-HMFAs, and flat PEDOT were observed by using a scanning electron microscope (SEM, Nova NanoSEM 230). Elemental analysis was performed using the same SEM with an additional provision of an x-sight light element energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectrometer (Oxford Instruments 6560 INCA). The crystalline compositions of ZnO-MFAs, PEDOT/ZnO-MFAs, and PEDOT-HMFAs were verified by X-ray diffraction patterns (XRD, X-Pert, the Netherlands) with Cu Kα radiation. The infrared spectra of PEDOT/ZnO-MFAs and PEDOT-HMFAs were obtained by Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR, Perkin Elmer Spectrum 100). The doping information of the PEDOT films was investigated by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, PHI 5000 VersaProbe system, ULVAC-PHI, Chigasaki, Japan) using a microfocused (100 μm, 25 W) Al X-ray beam with a photoelectron take off angle of 45°. The binding energies obtained in the XPS analyses were corrected for specimen charging by referencing the C 1s peak to 285.0 eV.


X-Ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the films of ZnO-MFAs, PEDOT coated ZnO-MFAs (PEDOT/ZnO-MFAs), and PEDOT-HMFAs are shown in Fig. 1. All the diffraction peaks of the ZnO-MFAs can be indexed to those of the conducting fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) substrate and ZnO, according to the Joint Committee on Powder Diffraction Standards (JCPDS, file no. 89-1397). This observation indicates that the ZnO-MFA film contains only pure crystalline ZnO. The diffraction pattern of the PEDOT/ZnO-MFA film shows the same diffraction peaks as those of ZnO-MFAs, however with greatly decreased peak intensities of diffraction peaks of ZnO; this decrease in the intensities of diffraction peaks of ZnO is certainly due to the covering of the ZnO by the PEDOT. The film of PEDOT-HMFAs does not show any peak for ZnO, indicating that ZnO is removed completely after the treatment with HCl.


Fig. 2 shows Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) spectra of the films of PEDOT/ZnO-MFAs and PEDOT-HMFAs. Both the spectra agree with the typical FTIR spectrum of PEDOT. The peaks at about 1525 and 1480 cm−1 are associated with CC asymmetric stretching vibration. The peak at 1360 cm−1 corresponds to C–C and CC stretches of the thiophene ring. The peaks at about 1150 and 1105 cm−1 are associated with the C–O–C band stretching vibration. The peaks at about 980 and 840 cm−1 are associated with the C–S stretching vibration. All the peaks mentioned above correspond to the absorption peaks of PEDOT, indicating that PEDOT was successfully electrodeposited on the ZnO-MFAs and remained on the substrate even after the treatment with HCl.
EDX spectra of the films of PEDOT/ZnO-MFAs and PEDOT-HMFAs are shown in Fig. S1(a) and (b) in the ESI, respectively. The signals of P and F can be observed in both spectra, implying that PF6− anions were doped in both PEDOT films. No signal of Zn can be observed in the spectrum of PEDOT-HMFAs, indicating the complete removal of ZnO during the HCl treatment. A small signal of Cl can be seen in both EDX spectra; this signal may be attributed to the solvation of a small amount of dichloromethane during the electrodeposition of PEDOT. XPS analysis was applied to further investigate the doping information of both films before and after the HCl treatment, and the XPS spectra in the regions of S 2p, P 2p, F 1s, and Cl 2p are shown in Fig. 3(a)–(d). From Fig. 3(a), two XPS peaks at 163.3 and 164.2 eV can be found in the S 2p region for both films; these peaks agree well with the S 2p peaks of PEDOT reported in the literature.Fig. 3(b) and (c) show the XPS spectra of PEDOT/ZnO-MFAs and PEDOT-HMFAs in the regions of P 2p and F 1s, respectively. The P 2p peaks at 135.2 eV and 136.0 eV, and the F 1s peak at 685.5 eV, can be observed in the XPS spectra of both films. These peaks correspond to the XPS peaks of PF6−, which clearly indicates that the doping of PF6− existed in the PEDOT films before and after the HCl treatment. Moreover, a P 2p peak at about 140 eV can be found in Fig. 3(b) for the film of PEDOT/ZnO-MFAs, but this peak cannot be observed in the spectrum of PEDOT-HMFAs. This peak is directly attributed to the adsorption of phosphate on the ZnO surface, which has been reported previously. It is important to note that the signal of Cl cannot be observed in the XPS spectra (Fig. 3(d)) of both films. This observation indicates that the small amount of dichloromethane did not exist on the surface of both films because of the easy volatilization of dichloromethane.

Fig. 4(a) and (b) show scanning electron microscope (SEM) images of the films of ZnO-MFAs at low and high resolutions, respectively. Fig. 4(a) shows several ZnO microflowers on the substrate, with some regions of the exposed substrate among the flowers; from this figure the diameter of each microflower can be estimated to be about 10 μm. Each microflower shows several 2D nanopetals, with the petal thickness being about 50–80 nm (Fig. 4(b)). Fig. 4(b) also shows that the ZnO nanopetals are highly porous. Low and high magnification images of the film of PEDOT/ZnO-MFAs are shown in Fig. 4(c) and (d), respectively. The morphology of the microflowers and their 2D nanopetals still remain the same after the coating with PEDOT. The fiber-structure of PEDOT on the surface of each nanopetal, as shown in Fig. 4(d), indicates that the PEDOT has covered the entire surface of each 2D nanopetal of the ZnO microflowers. It is important here to note that the regions of the exposed substrate are also coated with a PEDOT layer, as shown in Fig. 4(c); these regions could provide a strong adhesion between the PEDOT hollow microflowers and the FTO substrate after the removal of the ZnO microflowers, and thereby could prevent the separation of the PEDOT-HMFAs from the substrate after the HCl treatment. Fig. 4(e)–(g) show SEM images of the PEDOT-HMFA film obtained after the HCl treatment, at various resolutions. It can be seen that the basic morphology of the microflowers still remains the same, but the surface morphology of the nanopetals becomes quite different, with reference to the morphologies of the microflowers and nanopetals before the acid treatment. After the acid treatment, the nanopetals are much thicker and show highly porous cluster-like structures of PEDOT on their surface. PEDOT layers are known to become much thicker and looser due to the swelling of PEDOT, if treated by water or acid. The morphology variation of the nanopetals of PEDOT-HMFAs, with reference to that of the nanopetals of PEDOT/ZnO-MFAs, may be attributed to the swelling of PEDOT in an aqueous solution during the HCl treatment. A uniform distribution of the PEDOT hollow microflowers in an array form on the FTO substrate can be seen in Fig. 4(g). Fig. 4(h) shows the SEM image of a flat PEDOT film obtained through electrodeposition by using a charge of 40 mC cm−2. A large-scale SEM image of the flat PEDOT film is shown in the inset of Fig. 4(h); the PEDOT film shows a typical fiber-like morphology. The EDX elemental mapping images of the films of PEDOT/ZnO-MFAs and PEDOT-HMFAs are shown in Fig. S2 and S3 in the ESI, respectively. It can be seen that both C and S distribute uniformly on the surface of the microflower and the surface of exposed FTO in both figures; this observation confirms that the homogeneous coating of a PEDOT layer was obtained during the electrodeposition process.

Fig. 5(a) and (b) show cross-sectional SEM images of the films of ZnO-MFAs and PEDOT/ZnO-MFAs, respectively. It can be seen that the adhesion of both the ZnO-MFAs and PEDOT/ZnO-MFAs to their substrates is strong. The cross-sectional SEM image of the PEDOT-HMFA film obtained after the HCl treatment is shown in Fig. 5(c); this figure shows that the ZnO microflowers were removed completely to form the hollow microflowers of PEDOT, and the strong adhesion between the PEDOT microflowers and the substrate still remains the same. It can be seen in Fig. 5(c) that the PEDOT hollow microflower is composed of several 2D hollow nanopetals, resulting from the removal of the ZnO nanopetal template. Cluster-like structures can also be observed on the top of the hollow microflowers in Fig. 5(c). Fig. 5(d) is obtained by enlarging the lower part of the PEDOT hollow microflower of Fig. 5(c). Fig. 5(d) shows a relatively smooth PEDOT layer on each nanopetal; a porous and cluster-like structure cannot be seen here. The different nanostructures at the top and bottom of a microflower may be explained as follows. During the electrodeposition, EDOT monomers are expected to show preferential polymerization on the top regions of a ZnO microflower due to the difficulty of their diffusion into the lower part of the ZnO microflower. Consequently, the PEDOT layer on the top region of each microflower will be much thicker than the PEDOT layer at the lower part of the microflower. The thicker top PEDOT layer can become swollen more seriously during the HCl treatment and can get a cluster-like structure after the treatment; this phenomenon cannot occur well in the case of the thinner lower PEDOT layer.

Various charge densities were used for the electrodeposition of PEDOT on ZnO-MFAs to obtain the film of PEDOT-HMFAs, intending to investigate the effect of the amount of PEDOT on the morphology of the film. SEM images of the films of PEDOT/ZnO-MFAs obtained by using the charge densities of 400, 800, and 1000 mC cm−2 are shown in Fig. S4(a), (c) and (e) in the ESI, respectively; Fig. S4(b), (d) and (f) show the magnified versions of Fig. S4(a), (c) and (e), respectively. For all the three conditions, the PEDOT has covered the full surface of each of the nanopetals of the ZnO-MFAs without apparent morphological variation; these morphologies are similar to that for the 600 mC cm−2 case shown in Fig. 4(c) and (d). The film obtained with 1000 mC cm−2, however, shows some aggregates on the top of each of the nanopetals (Fig. S4(f)). This observation indicates that a thicker layer of PEDOT is electropolymerized on the top of each of the nanopetals. SEM images of the PEDOT-HMFA films obtained by using the charge densities of 400, 800, and 1000 mC cm−2 are shown in Fig. 6. Morphological variations exist for all the three conditions. In the case of 400 mC cm−2, the microflowers are collapsed, but the PEDOT nanopetals still show a 2D structure (Fig. 6(a); Fig. 6(b) is the magnified version). For 800 mC cm−2, the morphology of PEDOT-HMFAs shown in Fig. 6(c) and (d) is similar to that of PEDOT-HMFAs shown in Fig. 4(e) and (f), in which 600 mC cm−2 was used for the electrodeposition; a porous and cluster-like PEDOT structure can be seen in Fig. 6(c) and (d) much clearly than in Fig. 4(e) and (f), implying that the swelling of PEDOT due to the HCl treatment is more serious in the case of 800 mC cm−2 than that in the case of 600 mC cm−2. In the case of 1000 mC cm−2, a cave-like structure can be observed on the top of each of the PEDOT hollow microflowers, as shown in Fig. 6(e) and (f).

The mechanism for the morphological variation of PEDOT-HMFAs is shown in Scheme 1. A small charge density of 400 mC cm−2 produces only a thin layer of PEDOT on the ZnO-MFAs. This PEDOT layer is too thin for the generation of a cluster-like structure after the HCl treatment. The mechanical strength of the thin PEDOT is expected to be very weak on the ZnO microflower, and this would result in the collapse of the microflower after the removal of the ZnO template. With a medium charge density (600 or 800 mC cm−2), the obtained PEDOT layer on the ZnO-MFAs would be thicker than that on the ZnO-MFAs in the case of the use of 400 mC cm−2 of charge density; this thicker layer provides a higher mechanical strength than that in the case of 400 mC cm−2 of charge density and thereby prevents the collapse of the PEDOT hollow microflowers after the removal of the ZnO core. However, in the case of medium charge density (600 or 800 mC cm−2), the relatively thick layer of PEDOT on the top region of each ZnO microflower facilitates its swelling during the HCl treatment, and thereby allows a cluster-like structure on the top of each of the obtained PEDOT hollow microflowers. If the charge density is too high (1000 mC cm−2), the thick layer of PEDOT on the top region of each ZnO microflower causes a more serious swelling of PEDOT during the HCl treatment. The serious swelling is assumed to occur inside the thick layer of PEDOT, resulting in the cave-like structure on the top of each of the obtained PEDOT hollow microflowers.

Cyclic voltammetry (CV) was performed in the I−/I3− electrolyte to study the electrocatalytic abilities of the counter electrodes (CEs) with flat PEDOT films and PEDOT-HMFA films, both types being obtained using various charge densities. The experimental procedure is described in the “Experimental section”. Fig. 7(a) shows the CV curves of sputtered Pt-CE and of the CEs with the flat PEDOT films obtained by using the charge densities of 10, 20, 40, and 60 mC cm−2. Two pairs of redox peaks can be observed for each CV curve. The redox peaks at more negative potentials, labeled by a1 and c1, are associated with the reaction of eqn (1), and the redox peaks at more positive potentials, labeled by a2 and c2, are associated with the reaction of eqn (2),

3I− ↔ I3− + 2e−
(1)
2I3− ↔ 3I2 + 2e−
(2)
The electrocatalytic ability of a CE in a DSSC is related to the redox reaction shown in eqn (1) and can be visualized by the cathodic peak current density (Jpc) at c1. Thus, the magnitude of the peak current density at c1 can be used as a measure for the electrocatalytic ability of a CE in its DSSC. The anodic peak current density (Jpa), the Jpc, and the peak separation (ΔEp) at a1 and c1 of each CV curve are listed in Table 1. It should be noted that the peak current density (Jpa or Jpc) is defined as the current density excluding the current density caused by the double-layer capacitance of the film. From Table 1, it can be seen that the CE with the flat PEDOT obtained with 40 mC cm−2 shows the highest Jpc among all the CEs with the flat PEDOT films and shows a comparable ΔEp with that of the CE with the sputtered Pt. As the charge increases to 60 mC cm−2, the Jpc decreases and the ΔEp increases; this can be attributed to an increased resistance of a thicker PEDOT film formed at higher charge density. Similar cyclic voltammograms were obtained for the CEs with the films of PEDOT-HMFAs obtained with the charge densities of 400, 600, 800, and 1000 mC cm−2; the pertinent curves are shown in Fig. 7(b) and the data are given in Table 2. From Table 2, it can be seen that the CE with the film of PEDOT-HMFAs obtained with 600 mC cm−2 shows the highest Jpc among all the CEs with the films of PEDOT-HMFAs and with the film of sputtered Pt. Although the Jpc and Jpa of all the CEs with the films of PEDOT-HMFAs are much higher than those of the CEs with the flat films of PEDOT and with the sputtered Pt film, their ΔEp values are much larger than those of the CEs with the flat films of PEDOT and the film of sputtered Pt. The ratios of Jpc to Jpa for all the CEs with the films of PEDOT-HMFAs are far from unity, implying that the redox reaction of I−/I3− is quasireversible. Thus, the larger ΔEp can be explained by using the equivalent parameter, ψ, which is commonly used for a quasireversible redox reaction and is defined as follows,
(3)
where
DO is the diffusion coefficient of I3−, DR is the diffusion coefficient of I−, k0 is the standard rate constant, α is the transfer coefficient, f is defined as F/RT, F is the Faraday constant, and ν is the scan rate. The value of ΔEp increases significantly with the decreasing ψ. Thus, the larger ΔEp of the CEs with the films of PEDOT-HMFAs in the cases of 400, 600, and 800 mC cm−2 (about 0.4 V) may be attributed to the different diffusion behavior of ions near the flower-like surface. This may lead to much higher DO and DR locally near the flower-like surface, resulting in a smaller ψ and a larger ΔEp. As for the 1000 mC cm−2 case, the ΔEp increases significantly to 0.51 V due to the increased resistance of the cave-like structure. From here, the charges for the electrodeposition of the flat film of PEDOT and the film of PEDOT-HMFAs are thus optimized to be 40 mC cm−2 and 600 mC cm−2, respectively.

Electrode

J
pc (mA cm−2)

J
pa (mA cm−2)
ΔEp (V)
PEDOT (10 mC cm−2)
1.47
1.24
0.28
PEDOT (20 mC cm−2)
1.53
1.24
0.28
PEDOT (40 mC cm−2)
1.57
1.22
0.28
PEDOT (60 mC cm−2)
1.46
1.13
0.34
Sputtered Pt
1.49
1.50
0.29
Electrode

J
pc (mA cm−2)

J
pa (mA cm−2)
ΔEp (V)
PEDOT-HMFAs (400 mC cm−2)
2.49
1.83
0.38
PEDOT-HMFAs (600 mC cm−2)
2.75
1.96
0.41
PEDOT-HMFAs (800 mC cm−2)
2.69
1.93
0.42
PEDOT-HMFAs (1000 mC cm−2)
2.27
1.81
0.51
Sputtered Pt
1.49
1.50
0.29

Long-term stability of the CEs with the sputtered Pt, flat PEDOT (40 mC cm−2), and PEDOT-HMFAs (600 mC cm−2) was studied in the I−/I3− electrolyte, by subjecting the electrodes to 200 potential cycles. Such a long-cycle CV measurement has been applied to study the long-term stability of the CEs with several kinds of materials in I−/I3− medium, including metal sulfides and conducting polymers. The electrolyte and the scan rate were the same as those used before, but the potential window was changed to −0.45 to 0.35 V that included only the redox peaks of eqn (1). The CV curves obtained for 200 cycles for these three CEs are shown in Fig. S5 in the ESI. In the case of the CE with sputtered Pt, the Jpa decreases by about 11%, while the Jpc decreases by about 23%, after 200 cycles of the potential scanning. With regard to the CE with flat PEDOT, there is an 8% decrease in the Jpa and a 16% decrease in the Jpc. The CE with PEDOT-HMFAs shows an increase of 7% in the Jpa and a decrease of 8% in the Jpc. A deactivation of Pt in I−/I3− solution was observed previously; the poor stability of the CE with sputtered Pt in I−/I3− medium is consistent with this report. Both the CEs with PEDOT show better stability in I−/I3− medium than the sputtered Pt-CE, and the one with PEDOT-HMFAs shows a far higher stability.


Photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) curves of the DSSCs using the CEs with sputtered Pt, flat PEDOT (40 mC cm−2), and PEDOT-HMFAs (600 mC cm−2) were obtained at a light illumination of 100 mW cm−2, which is defined as 1 sun. The J–V curves are shown in Fig. 8(a); the photovoltaic parameters of the cells are listed in Table 3. The error bars in Table 3 were calculated from the J–V curves of three DSSCs for each condition. The DSSC with PEDOT-HMFAs shows a smaller open-circuit voltage (Voc) value than those in the case of cells with sputtered Pt and flat PEDOT. A negative shift in the reduction potential of I3−, which can be observed in the CV curve of the PEDOT-HMFAs in Fig. 7(b), may be the reason for the smaller Voc value of the pertinent DSSC compared to those of the cells with the flat PEDOT and sputtered Pt. The DSSC with PEDOT-HMFAs shows higher short-circuit current density (Jsc) and fill factor (FF) than those of the cell with the flat PEDOT, consequently showing a much higher cell efficiency (η) of 7.20% than that of the cell with the flat PEDOT (6.39%); this efficiency is also comparable to that of the DSSC with sputtered Pt (7.61%). The DSSC with sputtered Pt still shows a higher Jsc than the cell with PEDOT-HMFAs, implying that the CE with sputtered Pt shows a higher catalytic ability in a DSSC; this observation does not agree well with the Jpc and Jpa obtained from CV (Table 2). The poor reversibility of the I−/I3− redox reaction on the CE with PEDOT-HMFAs, which can be judged by the ratio of Jpc to Jpa in Table 2, may be the possible reason for the lower catalytic ability of the PEDOT-HMFAs in a DSSC compared to that of the sputtered Pt. It is very important to note that a much higher FF value of 0.71 is achieved for the cell with PEDOT-HMFAs compared to that of the cell with sputtered Pt (0.67), which is a rare phenomenon and finds an explanation at the end of this section.

CE

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (—)

η (%)

R
s (Ω)

R
ct1 (Ω)

R
ct2 (Ω)

Z
w (Ω)
Sputtered Pt
0.71 ± 0.01
16.14 ± 0.11
0.67 ± 0.01
7.61 ± 0.12
16.5
2.6
17.8
6.5
Flat PEDOT
0.71 ± 0.02
13.64 ± 0.42
0.66 ± 0.02
6.39 ± 0.28
19.4
3.6
18.2
7.7
PEDOT-HMFAs
0.69 ± 0.02
14.60 ± 0.93
0.71 ± 0.01
7.20 ± 0.24
18.4
3.1
17.3
3.3
In order to explain the variation in the FF values, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was used. The EIS spectra of the DSSCs using sputtered Pt, flat PEDOT, and PEDOT-HMFAs obtained at 100 mW cm−2 are shown in Fig. 8(b); the inset shows the equivalent circuit model. Each Nyquist plot is composed of three semicircles, and they correspond to, from left to right, the charge-transfer resistance at the interface between the electrolyte and the CE (Rct1), the charge-transfer resistance at the interface of the TiO2/dye/electrolyte (Rct2), and to the Warburg diffusion resistance of I−/I3− in the electrolyte (Zw). In addition, the series resistance of a DSSC (Rs) can be estimated from the extrapolated intercept of the EIS spectrum. The EIS parameters mentioned above are listed in Table 3. The DSSC with sputtered Pt shows the smallest Rs, which may be attributed to the better conductivity of Pt than that of PEDOT. The tendency of Rct1 of the cells agrees with the tendency of Jsc of the cells; this clearly indicates that the CE with sputtered Pt shows the highest catalytic ability among the CEs, and the one with PEDOT-HMFAs shows a better catalytic ability than that with flat PEDOT. The values of Rct2 for all the three cells are nearly the same, because only CEs differ here. Interestingly, the DSSC with PEDOT-HMFAs shows the least value for Zw (3.3 Ω), with reference to those of the cells with sputtered Pt (6.5 Ω) and flat PEDOT (7.7 Ω). The possible reason for this unusual observation may be explained by a concept of “hemispherical diffusion of I− and I3− ions” at the microflower structure in the DSSC; this is shown in Scheme 2. With a diameter of about 10 μm, the PEDOT hollow microflower can act as a hemispherical surface for the electrocatalytic reaction in the electrolyte region with a thickness of the same scale (60 μm thick Surlyn®). A smaller value of Zw was reported in the case of a spherical electrode surface, with reference to a flat electrode surface. The smallest Zw of the DSSC with PEDOT-HMFAs is probably the reason for the highest FF of the cell.

PEDOT hollow microflower arrays (PEDOT-HMFAs) with several 2D hollow nanopetals on each microflower were successfully fabricated on a conducting glass by means of ZnO microflower arrays (MFAs) as the template. The XRD patterns show that the ZnO template was removed completely after the treatment with HCl. FTIR spectra show that PEDOT was electrodeposited on the ZnO-MFAs and it remained on the substrate after the treatment with HCl. Porous and cluster-like structures can be observed on the top region of each nanopetal of the PEDOT hollow microflowers; these cluster-like structures are attributed to a swelling of PEDOT during the HCl treatment. By using different charge densities for the electrodeposition of the film of PEDOT, various morphologies were obtained for the resultant film of PEDOT-HMFAs. The PEDOT-HMFA film shows a much better long-term stability in I−/I3− medium than those of the films of sputtered Pt and flat PEDOT. The films of flat PEDOT and PEDOT-HMFAs were used as the catalytic films for the CEs of DSSCs. The DSSC with PEDOT-HMFAs shows a power conversion efficiency of 7.20% at 100 mW cm−2, which is much higher than that of the cell with a flat PEDOT-CE (6.39%) and comparable to that of the cell with sputtered Pt (7.61%). Unusually, a much higher FF is observed in the case of the cell with PEDOT-HMFAs than those in the case of the cells with flat PEDOT and sputtered Pt; this observation is attributed to the hemispherical diffusion of ions at the surface of PEDOT-HMFAs in its DSSC. The flower-like PEDOT microstructure plays an important role to enable a hemispherical diffusion of ions in the DSSC, resulting in a much higher FF than that of the DSSC using sputtered Pt.


This work was sponsored by the National Science Council of Taiwan.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ta10803a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013