 DOI: 10.1039/D2TC01938H
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 9794-9801


Jiahao
Xi
,

Jifeng
Yuan
,

Jiuyao
Du
,

Xiaoqin
Yan
 and 

Jianjun
Tian
*

Institute for Advanced Materials and Technology, University of Science and Technology Beijing, 100083, China. E-mail: tianjianjun@mater.ustb.edu.cn

School of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing, 100083, P. R. China

Received
11th May 2022
, Accepted 10th June 2022
First published on 10th June 2022
Phenethylammonium iodide and its derivatives have been used to passivate the surface traps of metal halide perovskites films to increase the efficiency of solar cells, but their non-conductive nature harms the hole transfer from the perovskite to hole transport layer (HTL). Here, we prepared a novel solution containing 4-methoxyphenethylammonium iodide (CH3O-PEAI) and 2,3,5,6-tetrafluoro-7,7,8,8-tetracyanoquinodimethane (F4-TCNQ) to address effectively the above issue. CH3O-PEAI passivates the uncoordinated Pb2+ ions of the perovskite film surface. As an electron acceptor, F4-TCNQ can attract electrons from the valence band of the perovskite film. The energy difference between the valence band maximum and the Fermi level of the perovskite is decreased from 1.37 to 1.23 eV, and thus an upward band bending is formed at the perovskite film surface, which facilitates the hole transport from the perovskite to the HTL, and inhibits reverse electron transport. Consequently, the power conversion efficiency of the perovskite solar cells is increased to 21.57%.

The metal halide perovskites have attracted extensive interest as a potential photovoltaic material, which exhibits superior properties, such as tunable energy band structure, small exciton binding energy, long carrier diffusion lengths, and large absorption coefficients. In a dozen years, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the metal halide perovskite solar cells was increased from 3.8% to 25.8%. Among metal halide perovskites, the α-phase formamidinium lead iodide (FAPbI3) perovskite shows a superior optical bandgap. Nevertheless, the α-phase is prone to transforming into the δ-phase, the yellow phase, resulting in a loss of photovoltaic performance. Surface treatment of the perovskite is a feasible way to stabilize the phase structure of α-phase FAPbI3, which is widely applied in FAPbI3 solar cells. Passivation materials, such as phenethylammonium iodide and its derivatives, are usually spin-coated on the perovskite film, which reduces the traps and improves the stability of the perovskite film. Also, these materials could improve the hydrophobicity of the perovskite film, further extending the lifetime of the perovskite solar cells.

Although these materials can improve the quality of perovskite films, the hole transfer from the perovskite to the hole transport layer (HTL) is hardly improved and is even impaired by the above passivation materials at high concentrations. To solve this problem, researchers adopt some new materials or strategies. In 2019, Noel et al. covered the perovskite film surface by the molybdenum tris(dithiolene) complex, a strongly oxidizing material, which shifted up the work function of the perovskite film and increased the conductivity of the perovskite. The PCE of the perovskite solar cell was increased to 21.2%. In 2020, Jiang et al. prepared an antisolvent of chlorobenzene with the addition of poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) to prepare perovskite films, which boosted the hole transfer and transport between the perovskite and HTL. In 2022, Li et al. used tetraphenyldibenzoperiflanthene (DBP) as an interface layer between the perovskite and HTL. A gradient energy level structure was constructed at the interface, which improved the hole transfer and collection. A fill factor (FF) of 80% and a PCE of 20.44% of the solar cell were achieved. Therefore, the drawbacks in carrier transport can be solved by modifying the energy band structure between the perovskite and HTL.
In this work, we developed a feasible way to promote the hole transfer and collection from the perovskite to the HTL. 2,3,5,6-Tetrafluoro-7,7,8,8-tetracyanoquinodimethane (F4-TCNQ) was mixed in the 4-methoxyphenethylammonium iodide (CH3O-PEAI) solution, which was then spin-coated on the surface of the FAPbI3 perovskite film. The CH3O-PEAI passivated the charged traps through electrostatic interactions. As an electron acceptor, F4-TCNQ could attract the electrons of the conduction band maximum (CBM) of the perovskite film, which reduces the energy difference between the valence band maximum (VBM) and the Fermi level (EF) of the perovskite film from 1.37 to 1.23 eV. An upward band bending was formed to facilitate the hole transport. Consequently, the open-circuit voltage (VOC), FF and PCE of the perovskite solar cells were increased to 1.130 V, 77.44% and 21.57%, respectively. The solar cells maintained an initial efficiency of over 94% after 1000 hours of storage in the air.


Fig. 1a shows the chemical structures of CH3O-PEAI and F4-TCNQ. CH3O-PEAI (CP) and CH3O-PEAI + F4-TCNQ (CPF) were dissolved in IPA, respectively. These solutions were spin-coated on the perovskite film surface, then annealed at 100 °C for 5 min. The samples are named the control (without surface treatment), CP (with CP surface treatment), and CPF (with CPF surface treatment) films or devices in the following discussion. Fig. 1b shows a possible interaction between the additives and perovskite surface. CH3O-PEAI can passivate the uncoordinated Pb+ ions on the surface of the perovskite film. Compared with the conventional passivation additive of PEAI, the methoxy group can enhance the electron density on the benzene ring of CH3O-PEAI, which enhances the electrostatic interaction between CH3O-PEAI and the perovskite. At the same time, F4-TCNQ was proposed to attract electrons from the valence band (VB) of the perovskite film, thus causing hole enrichment on the perovskite film surface. This will lead to the occurrence of an upward band bending on the perovskite film surface, which provides a favorable channel for hole transfer and transport.

We investigated the effect of the surface treatment on the crystalline quality and surface morphology of the perovskite films. As shown in X-ray diffraction (XRD) results (Fig. 1c), the intensity of the diffraction peak corresponding to the (001) plane increases after surface treatment. The intensity of the (001) plane for the CPF film is higher than that of the CP film. In addition, the diffraction intensity of the (001) plane corresponding to PbI2 is reduced by the surface treatment. This result should be attributed to a secondary growth of the perovskite films, which is caused by the CP and CPF solutions. Also, there are no diffraction peaks at small angles, implying that no 2-dimensional reaction products are formed after the surface treatment. Furthermore, we explored the crystalline orientation of the perovskite crystals by calculating the intensity ratios of the different crystalline planes. Fig. S1a (ESI) shows the peak intensity ratios of the (001) and (111) planes. The value of I(001)/I(111) is 3.48 for the control film. A nearly twofold increase in I(001)/I(111) for the CP-film is achieved, which reaches 6.69. The I(001)/I(111) of the CPF film is 10.15, which is much higher than those of the other films. As shown in Fig. S1b (ESI), the values of I(002)/I(111) are 2.36, 4.60 and 6.56 for the control, CP- and CPF-films, respectively, showing the same trend as I(001)/I(111). The increase in intensity ratios illustrates that a preferred orientation along the (001) and (002) planes is realized for the perovskite films after surface treatment, which may have stemmed from the secondary growth of the perovskite films.
Subsequently, the surface morphology of the perovskite films was investigated using a scanning electron microscope (SEM). As shown in Fig. 1d–f, the average size of the crystal grains exceeds 1 μm for all films. However, the PbI2 (white particles) precipitates are only found on the control film, which is absent in the CP- and CPF-films. This result demonstrates that the surface treatment helps to decrease the PbI2 precipitates, resulting in high-quality perovskite films, which is consistent with the XRD results. The CP- and CPF-films show similar surface morphology. The surface roughness of the perovskite films was studied using an atomic force microscope (AFM). The AFM images are shown in Fig. S2 (ESI). The root mean square (RMS) of the surface roughness is 46.44, 36.80, and 30.69 nm, corresponding to the control, CP- and CPF-films, respectively. It can be seen that the surface treatment reduced the roughness of the perovskite film, facilitating the formation of a favorable interface between the perovskite and HTL.
The ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) spectra are shown in Fig. S3a (ESI), and there is no significant difference in the light absorption intensity for all films. Furthermore, the band gaps remain unchanged, 1.52 eV for all films, extracted from the Tauc plots in Fig. S3b (ESI). Subsequently, the steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra and the time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) spectra were used to evaluate the carrier recombination and transport.Fig. 2a shows the PL spectra of the perovskite films without the HTL. The PL intensity of the CP-film is higher than that of the control film. These results indicate that the traps in the perovskite film can be passivated by CP, which suppresses the non-radiative recombination. For the CPF-film, a lower PL intensity is observed than that of the CPF-film. Fig. 2b shows the TRPL spectra. Consistent with the PL spectra, the carrier lifetime of the CP-film is longer than that of the control film. But the CPF-film shows a shorter carrier lifetime compared to the CP-film. As an electron acceptor, F4-TCNQ can attract electrons, boosting the carrier transport between the perovskite and F4-TCNQ. Therefore, we deduced that the weak PL intensity and decreased carrier lifetime for the CPF-film should be attributed to the fast carrier transfer between the perovskite film and F4-TCNQ, rather than the increase of trap density. Then, the PL and TRPL spectra were measured again after spin-coating the HTL on the perovskite films. As shown in Fig. 2c and d, a lower PL intensity and shorter carrier lifetime are obtained for the CP- and CPF-films, which indicates that the surface treatment helps to boost the carrier transfer between the perovskite and HTL. In addition, the fastest carrier transport in the CPF-films demonstrates that F4-TCNQ plays an active role to assist hole transfer at the interface between the perovskite and HTL.
The trap density and hole mobility (μh) were verified by the space charge limited current (SCLC) theory. Hole-only devices with the structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/perovskite films/Spiro-OMeTAD/Ag were fabricated. As shown in Fig. 3a–c, the curves were divided into three regions based on J ∝ Vn: ohmic region (n = 1), trap-filled limit region (TFL, n ≥ 3), and child region (n = 2). The kink point between the ohmic and TFL regions is referred to as the trap-filled limit voltage (VTFL). The trap state density (Nt) can be calculated according to eqn (1):
(1)
where
ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, ε is the relative dielectric constant of the perovskite, e is the electron charge, and L is the thickness of the perovskite film. The VTFL is 0.35, 0.26 and 0.22 V for the devices based on the control, CP- and CPF-films, respectively. The corresponding values of Nt were calculated as 1.21 × 1016, 9.02 × 1015 and 7.63 × 1015 cm−3, respectively, indicating a gradual reduction in the trap density. This result proves that the trap density is greatly reduced by surface treatment. The passivation of the CPF is more effective than that of the CP. Therefore, we can confirm that the negative phenomena for the CPF-film in PL and TRPL spectra in Fig. 2a and b stem from the carrier transport caused by F4-TCNQ rather than the increased trap density. Then we calculated the μh of the perovskite films according to SCLC theory following eqn (2):

(2)
The values of μh were calculated as 3.12 × 10−4, 7.11 × 10−4 and 9.62 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 for the control, CP- and CPF-devices, respectively. The increased μh is consistent with the variation of the PL and TRPL spectra in Fig. 2c and d. The improved μh should be attributed to the reduced trap density and the role of F4-TCNQ to boost carrier transport, which would increase the performance of the perovskite solar cells.
The curve of VOC with light intensity has been widely used to investigate non-recombination in perovskite solar cells. The value of the slope reflects the non-recombination according to eqn (3):
(3)
where
kB is the Boltzmann constant, n is the ideality factor, and T is the thermodynamic temperature. As shown in Fig. 3d, the slope of fitting lines is 1.81 kBT/q, 1.48 kBT/q and 1.16 kBT/q for the control, CP- and CPF-devices, respectively. The closer the slope is to 1.0 kBT/q, the less the non-recombination occurs in the perovskite solar cell. The results reveal that the non-radiative recombination has been greatly suppressed by the surface treatment. Moreover, the CPF-devices exhibit the weakest non-radiative recombination among the three devices. This result is in agreement with the SCLC results.

We investigated the mechanism of the suppressed non-radiative recombination and improved hole transfer for the CPF surface treatment. As shown in the X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) spectra in Fig. S4 (ESI), the characteristic peaks of Pb 4f, N 1s and I 3d of the CPF films show only a slight shift compared to the CP film. This indicates a weak interaction between the perovskite film and F4-TCNQ, which is not the main reason for the improvement of the performance of solar cells. The presence of F4-TCNQ can be confirmed by the characteristic peak of F 1s in Fig. 4a. Then, ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) was performed to analyze the energy band structure of the perovskite films. According to Fig. 4b and c, the energy offset between the VBM and EF is 1.37 and 1.23 eV for the CP- and CPF-films, respectively. This indicates that the Fermi level of the CPF-film moves towards the VB, which would result in an upward band bending on the perovskite film surface. In addition, the VBM is −5.48 eV and EF is −4.11 eV for the CP-film, while the VBM is −5.43 eV and EF is −4.20 eV for the CPF-film. Fig. 4d illustrates the energy band structure diagrams. An upward band bending occurs on the surface of the CPF-film with a reduced energy offset of the VBM between the CPF-film and HTL, which facilitates hole transfer from the perovskite film to the HTL. Furthermore, this band structure inhibits the reverse transport of electrons, suppressing non-radiative recombination of electrons at the interface. Therefore, we can deduce that the modified energy band structure should be the main reason for further suppression of non-radiative recombination and promotion of hole transfer, thus enhancing the performance of the solar cells.
We prepared perovskite solar cells with a planar structure. The cross-sectional SEM image of the device is shown in Fig. S5 (ESI). We investigated the performance of the perovskite solar cells. The current density–voltage (J–V) curves are shown in Fig. 5a and Fig. S6 (ESI). The VOC is 1.059, 1.096 V and 1.130 V for the control, CP- and CPF-devices, respectively. Meanwhile, the FF of the CPF-device is increased to 77.44%, significantly higher than those of the control and CP-devices. The increased VOC and FF should be attributed to the modified energy band structure, which contributes to suppressing non-radiative recombination and promoting hole transfer. Consequently, the PCE of the CPF-device is up to 21.57%, which is much higher than those of the other devices. At the same time, the PCE of the forward scan of the CPF-device is 20.92%, indicating negligible hysteresis behavior. Details of the device parameters are shown in Table S1 (ESI). Then the reliability of the J–V curves was investigated by comparing the performance of multiple devices, as shown in Fig. S7 (ESI). In line with the previous discussion, the VOC and FF show an increase after the surface treatment, while the short-circuit current density (JSC) is maintained at around 24.50 mA cm−2. As shown in Fig. 5b, the steady-state PCEs are 18.91%, 20.28%, and 21.19% for the control, CP- and CPF-devices, respectively. These are close to the PCEs extracted from the J–V curves. Then, we investigated the monochromatic incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) of all devices and estimated the integrated JSC. As shown in Fig. 5c, the IPCE curves for the control, CP- and CPF-devices are almost identical and their calculated integrated JSC values are 24.32, 24.38 and 24.42 mA cm−2, respectively. This result matches well with the JSC in the J–V curve, confirming the reliability of the JSC.
Fig. S8 (ESI) shows the contact angles of the perovskite films. The contact angles are 68.53°, 71.16° and 74.13° for the control, CP- and CPF-films, respectively. This indicates the increased hydrophobicity of the perovskite films with surface treatment, ensuring that the modified perovskite film can maintain high photovoltaic properties in the environment, which improves the environmental and operational stability of the devices. Fig. 5d shows the efficiency variation of the devices without encapsulation stored in an atmospheric environment with a temperature of 20–30 °C and a humidity of 20–40% RH. The PCE of the CP- and CPF-devices remained 90% and 94% of the initial values after 1000 hours. In contrast, the PCE of the control device exhibited a notable decay, only 67% of the initial PCE. The significant improvement in device stability is due to the reduction of traps and the increased hydrophobicity of the perovskite films.

In summary, we proposed an available strategy to boost hole transfer and collection by passivating surface traps and modifying the energy band structure with a surface treatment of the perovskite films. CH3O-PEAI passivated traps through electrostatic interactions, suppressing non-radiative recombination on the perovskite film surface. At the same time, the introduction of F4-TCNQ resulted in a small energy difference between the VBM and EF of the perovskite film surface. A upward band bending was formed at the surface of the CPF-film, which facilitates hole transfer and collection. Consequently, both the VOC and FF of the perovskite solar cells were improved by this surface treatment. The champion device exhibited a PCE of 21.57%.


The authors declare no conflict of interest.


This work was financially supported by the Beijing Municipal Natural Science Foundation (2222061), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51961135107 and 51774034), and the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2017YFE0119700).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental methods. The peak intensity ratio of the perovskite films in Fig. S1. AFM images of the perovskite films in Fig. S2. UV-vis absorption spectra and Tauc plots in Fig. S3. XPS spectra in Fig. S4. Cross-sectional SEM image of the perovskite solar cell in Fig. S5. The J–V curves of control and CP-solar cells in Fig. S6. Statistic distribution of photovoltaic parameters for solar cells in Fig. S7. Contact angels of the perovskite films in Fig. S8. Device parameters of the J–V curves in Table S1. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2tc01938h
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022