 DOI: 10.1039/C4CP03621B
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 25280-25287


Narendra
Nath Ghosh
,

Arnab
Chakraborty
,

Sougata
Pal
*,

Anup
Pramanik
 and 

Pranab
Sarkar


Department of Chemistry, University of Gour Banga, Malda-73 2103, India. E-mail: sougatapal_1979@yahoo.co.in

Department of Chemistry, Visva-Bharati University, Santiniketan-731 235, India

Received
13th August 2014
, Accepted 24th September 2014
First published on 24th September 2014
By using computational methodologies based on time dependent density functional theory (TDDFT) we study the opto-electronic properties of three types of triphenylamine (TPA)-based dyes, namely TPA-TBT-1, TPA-DBT-1, and TPA-BT-1, and these are proposed as potential candidates for photovoltaic applications. Energy band modulation has been performed by functionalizing these dyes with different electron donating and electron withdrawing groups. Photoelectron spectra and photovoltaic properties of the dyes have been investigated by a combination of DFT and TDDFT approaches. Based on the optimized molecular geometry, relative position of the frontier energy levels, and the absorption maximum of the dyes we propose some dyes offering good photovoltaic performance. At the same time, these results provide a direction for optimizing the composition of dye–metal surface nanodevices for fabricating dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs).

Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) have attracted considerable attention in recent years as they offer the possibility of low-cost conversion from photon to electrical energy and thus they have been regarded as the next generation of photovoltaics. Although ruthenium-based sensitizers offer an overall light-to-electricity energy conversion efficiency of over 11%, the limited resources and the environmental issues relating to ruthenium use make it necessary to look for alternative dyes. In this regard organic dyes have received much attention due to their environmentally friendly nature, low cost for device fabrication and easy preparation process. Other major advantages of these metal-free dyes are their tunable absorption and electrochemical properties through suitable molecular design.

Among the different DSSCs, the bulk heterojunction model (BHJ) is the most successful. A DSSC is composed of four elements, namely, transparent conducting and counter conducting electrodes, a wide band-gap semiconductor surface (such as TiO2, ZnO etc.), a dye molecule (sensitizer), and an electrolyte [commonly a redox couple, I3−/I− (μ = 4.80 eV)]. The working principle of a DSSC involves the photoexcitation of a dye molecule and thereby generation of an electron–hole pair. In the subsequent step, the photoexcited electron is injected into the semiconductor surface followed by its diffusion to the transparent electrode. The cycle is completed via the regeneration of an electron in the dye through the counter electrode and electrolyte. In this regard TiO2 is the most used semiconducting surface, with a conductance band located at 4.0 eV. From a static energetic point of view, the most crucial steps of a photovoltaic cell are the injection and regeneration processes as stated above. To facilitate these two processes the following criteria should be met. (1) The lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energy level of the dye molecule must lie above the conduction band (CB) of the semiconductor (ECB) by at least 0.2–0.3 eV. (2) The highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of the dye must be at a lower energy than the chemical potential of the redox couple (μredox). During this whole electronic dynamic process, the electron injection efficiency to the CB of the semiconductor surface and the electron collection efficiency at the transparent conductive electrode directly determine the short circuit current density (JSC) of the DSSC. The potential difference between the Fermi level of electrons in the semiconductor substrate and the redox potential of the electrolyte gives the open circuit photovoltage (VOC). These two parameters are important factors for determining the energy conversion efficiency of a DSSC,
(1)
where, FF is the fill factor at which the DSSC operates with the maximum power, which is mainly related to the total series resistance of the DSSC.
Pinc is the input power of incident solar light. However, it should be pointed out that the overall efficiency of a DSSC also depends on some other parameters such as recombination series resistance, etc. Obviously, an embedded dye over a particular metal oxide plays a key role in the energy conversion efficiency of a DSSC. Generally, metal-free organic sensitizers consist of donor (D), π-bridge (π), and acceptor (A) moieties, so-called D–π–A character. This push–pull structure can induce the intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) from subunit A to D through the π-bridge when the dye is irradiated with sunlight. This is important for harvesting solar energy. In order to act as an efficient dye in the BHJ cell, it must have the following characteristics: (i) the dye must show broad absorption spectra covering the whole UV and visible region to absorb the maximum energy coming from light, (ii) it should have a low band gap, (iii) it should be able to prevent electron–hole recombination effectively, (iv) the dye should show high oscillator strength, (v) the open circuit voltage of the dye must be very high, (vi) the HOMO of the dye must lie below the HOMO of the redox couple and the LUMO of the dye must lie above the LUMO of the CB of the semiconductor for swift downhill movement of electrons and uphill movement of holes, and (vii) a good anchoring group must be added to the dye so that it anchors well on the semiconductor surface. As the electronic energy levels of organic dyes are tunable by varying the donor–acceptor moieties, it is possible to design a dye with desired energy levels. An enormous effort has been given to this purpose during the last couple of years. One of the most interesting topics in the field of organic photovoltaics in the past twenty years is the design and synthesis of low band-gap organic conducting materials for use in DSSCs.

Polyheterocyclic molecules have attracted much attention for application in DSSCs due to their electronic and photonic properties. Triphenylamine (TPA) is one such kind of molecule, the excellent electron donating power and its huge steric hindrance give it the ability to prevent undesired dye aggregation at the semiconductor surface. Dyes composed of TPA as the donor and cyanoacetic acid as the acceptor/linker have been of great interest in recent times. Yanagida and co-workers first used the TPA unit as an electron donor in organic dyes and obtained a high photocurrent efficiency (5.3%) for the dye (Ph)2N–Ph–CHCH–CHCH(CN)COOH. Compounds such as (2Z)-2-cyano-3-[4-(diphenylamino)phenyl] acrylic acid and (2Z)-2-cyano-3-4-[[4-(diphenylamino)-phenyl](phenyl) amino] phenylacrylic acid have been synthesized successfully and the overall conversion efficiency of the dyes are 2.51% and 4.12%, respectively. A highly advantageous property of TPA is that an enormous range of substitutions can be performed on it to meet the conditions for an efficient donor. Exploring this quality, a variety of p-substituted TPA derivatives have been created and they are found to perform as excellent donors. A compound with TPA as the donor and rhodanine-3-acetic acid linked by a –CC π-spacer shows a photocurrent efficiency (PCE) of 4.3%, but upon suitable substitution the PCE reaches up to 6.3%.
In general, electron deficient units are found to perform well as acceptors. For a fixed donor moiety, acceptors such as 1,2,3-benzothiadiazole (BT) and thiadiazolo[3,4-c]pyridine (PyT) are found to decrease the LUMO level of the composite system without altering the HOMO level and thus a low band gap material is obtained. Thus, these can be considered as good acceptors. In the development of TPA-based dyes, it has been found that the above combination gives the greater efficiency in every case compared to other accepting/anchoring groups.
The TPA unit is very well-known for its strong electron-donating ability and hole-transport properties. A large number of TPA-based dyes show good power conversion efficiency in DSSCs. Very recently, a series of triphenylamine-based dyes with multiple corhodanine derivatives as acceptors were synthesized and reported as sensitizers for dye-sensitized solar cells with a maximum PCE of 5.31%. Nevertheless, the scope is always open to further design and develop more efficient TPA dyes. In this paper we take an opportunity to perform computational studies on some newly designed TPA-based dyes with D–π–A architectures. Further modifications have been carried out by introducing three different electron donating groups viz. –OC2H5, –SCH3, –N(CH3)2 and two electron withdrawing groups viz. –CN, –NO2 on the phenylene moiety of the TPA unit of the dye systems. Hence, a family of 18 TPA dye systems has been analyzed. Here, vinyl pyrrole is chosen as the extension of the π-spacer. The advantage of using pyrrole moieties as the π-spacer is that they create a better charge separation in the excited states of the dye which arises from less interaction with their neighboring aromatic units. Furthermore, vinylene groups offer a more flexible polymer chain, which could improve the solubility compared to directly-coupled aryl–aryl conjugated polymers. By increasing the π-conjugation of the linker, the HOMO and LUMO energy levels can be tuned. Benzothiadiazole-based dyes show a wide coverage of the solar spectrum. Such a broad absorption is greatly beneficial to the improvement of the photocurrent density and power-conversion efficiency of the dyes. Here, we used three different benzothiadiazole derivatives as the π-spacer to construct all of the dye systems. So by incorporating both electron-rich and electron-deficient moieties into the TPA unit our aim is to understand how photovoltaic parameters are tuned by substitution, as well as to find out the optimum dye system within the selected dyes.

All of the calculations have been performed using the Gaussian 03W program suite. The geometries of the dyes in the gas phase were optimized using density functional theory (DFT) with the B3LYP hybrid functional and the 6-311G* basis set. The use of B3LYP/6-311G* or B3LYP/6-31G* level of theory for computing the geometry and electronic structure of TPA-based dyes are well tested and reported in the literature. Furthermore, to calibrate our level of theory, we performed some test calculations on some TPA-based dyes whose experimental orbital energies are already reported. We observed a reasonably good comparison between the calculated and experimentally observed results. For example, from differential pulse voltammetry measurements and absorption spectra, the HOMO and LUMO energies for the dye TA-DM-CA were estimated to be −5.51 and −3.02 eV, respectively, while our B3LYP/6-311G* calculation gives the same values at −5.23 and −2.73 eV, respectively. The higher deviation in estimating the LUMO energy is well known in DFT due to a weak correlation effect. All of the optimized geometries were subjected to vibrational analysis and characterized at the energy minimum (no imaginary frequency). The time-dependent DFT (TD-DFT) calculations were carried out to determine at least 30 vertical excitations to the excited state of the molecules. We would like to point out that TD-DFT at B3LYP has known problems of self-interaction errors, particularly for D–A systems as charge transfer interactions are poorly accounted for here. Although more time consuming, the use of range separated DFT functionals is a good way to treat this problem. Based on the optimized molecular structures of the dyes we simulated the UV-vis spectra of all of them in the gas phase as well as the solvent phase (methanol) with the PBE1PBE hybrid function using the same basis functions. The DFT functional PBE1PBE contains no empirical parameters and is reported to reproduce good electronic properties in the gas phase as well as the solvent phase within reasonable computational resources. In the solvent phase (methanol), the computations were performed by applying the polarisable continuum model (PCM) using the integral equation formalism variant (IEFPCM) to describe the electrostatic solute–solvent interactions by the creation of a solute cavity via a set of overlapping spheres. The absorption spectra were simulated using the 30 lowest spin-allowed singlet transitions, and finally the spectral data were plotted using mixed Lorentziane Gaussian lineshape (0.5) and an average full-width at the half maximum (3000 cm−1) for all peaks.


As we have already mentioned in the previous section, we mainly chose three types of dyes which originate from triphenylamine (TPA) as the donor portion. Subsequent addition of different acceptors, namely thiadiazolothienopyazine, benzobis(thiadiazole), and benzothiadiazole groups, results in different dyes which are named as TPA-TBT-1, TPA-DBT-1, TPA-BT-1, respectively. The optimized geometries of the dyes are shown in Fig. 1. To anchor the proposed dyes onto the semiconductor surface, however, an anchoring group, namely cyanoacrylic acid, has been attached to each of the dyes at the acceptor portion. Table 1 shows some of the geometric parameters, especially some selected dihedral angles. It is expected that an efficient dye should maintain the co-planarity between the anchoring group and the bridging unit so as to facilitate the electron transfer process from the donor moiety to the semiconductor surface. It is revealed from Table 1 that the dyes TPA-DBT-1 and TPA-BT-1 are more coplanar than TPA-TBT-1, indicating better electron delocalization and hence higher susceptibility to better intramolecular charge transfer. Coplanarity, on the other hand, also facilitates the recombination process, which in turn decreases the efficiency of the dye as a photovoltaic material. So, a balance between charge transfer and the electron recombination process is required.

Name of the dye
Dihedral angle (degree)
C1–C2–C3–C4
C5–C6–C7–C8
TPA-TBT-1
29.55
−28.36
TPA-DBT-1
1.17
−30.06
TPA-BT-1
0.19
−0.05
To gain further insight into the molecular structure and electronic distribution of these dyes, we have performed a molecular orbital analysis (MOA). In this regard, few occupied and unoccupied molecular orbitals are of particular interest, since they might be involved in the electron transfer process. However, upon photoexcitation, one electron of the HOMO of the dye is transferred to the LUMO which thereafter participates in the subsequent energy injection processes. Fig. 2 depicts the electron density distribution of some of the frontier molecular orbitals of the dyes. It is clear from Fig. 2 that the HOMOs of the dyes are more concentrated over the donor part (TPA moiety) and its adjacent π-spacer (vinyl pyrrole group) while the LUMOs are more concentrated over the acceptor and the adjacent cyanoacrylic acid (anchoring) group. The situation becomes more prominent when some electron withdrawing groups are attached to the donor moiety which will be discussed later. Thus, a spatial separation of the electron density within the dye molecule indicates facilitation of the electron transfer processes from the dye to the semiconductor surface through photoexcitation which is one of the crucial requirements for being an efficient dye useful for DSSCs. It is evident that for the dyes TPA-TBT-1 and TPA-BT-1 this spatial separation is more prominent and consequently these are expected to perform in a better way. The HOMO–LUMO gaps (Δ) of the dyes are depicted in Table 2 which shows that TPA-TBT-1 and TPA-DBT-1 dyes have Δ values in the order of 1.3 eV, whereas the same for the dye TPA-BT-1 is much higher and in the order of 1.60 eV. However, as also indicated from the energy positions of the HOMO and LUMO of the dyes, we expect to have type-II band alignment in most of the cases while attaching the dyes to a TiO2 semiconducting surface, keeping in the mind that, in the composite system, the quasiparticle energy levels are tunable depending upon the nature of the dye–adsorbent interaction. It is noteworthy to mention here that the use of a TiO2 semiconducting surface as a sink of photoelectrons in solar cells is well tested and is of crucial interest in recent times and we use a TiO2 surface referring the value of ECB = −4.0 eV as reported by Asbury et al. Note that the band bending, as is evident from recent studies, may alter the conduction band edge of the TiO2 surface which has a direct influence on the performance of a DSSC, although a very recent experiment demonstrates the higher photocatalytic activity of an anatase surface of TiO2 under flat-band conditions.
Dye

E
HOMO (eV)

E
LUMO (eV)

Δ (eV)
TPA-TBT-1
−5.02
−3.68
1.35
TPA-TBT-2
−4.84
−3.59
1.26
TPA-TBT-3
−5.05
−3.70
1.35
TPA-TBT-4
−4.61
−3.51
1.10
TPA-TBT-5
−5.46
−3.93
1.53
TPA-TBT-6
−5.41
−3.91
1.51
TPA-DBT-1
−5.23
−3.92
1.30
TPA-DBT-2
−5.05
−3.80
1.25
TPA-DBT-3
−5.34
−4.01
1.34
TPA-DBT-4
−4.83
−3.68
1.15
TPA-DBT-5
−5.71
−4.28
1.43
TPA-DBT-6
−5.65
−4.23
1.41
TPA-BT-1
−5.32
−3.72
1.60
TPA-BT-2
−5.13
−3.62
1.51
TPA-BT-3
−5.46
−3.80
1.66
TPA-BT-4
−4.74
−3.25
1.49
TPA-BT-5
−5.81
−3.79
2.02
TPA-BT-6
−5.74
−3.75
1.99

The electron injection process, and hence efficiency of a dye in a DSSC, is governed by the relative position of the energy levels of the dye with respect to the CBM of the semiconductor surface. Interestingly, the most prominent feature of the organic dye is the tunability of these energy levels by introducing various functional groups, especially to the donor moiety. For this purpose, we chose three electron donating groups namely, –OC2H5, –SCH3 and –N(CH3)2 and two electron withdrawing groups –NO2 and –CN. The unsubstituted and the substituted dyes are named with suffixes 1 and 2–6, respectively. It is worth mentioning here that all of the groups are introduced at the donor part, firstly because the introduction of electron donating groups at the π-spacer increases steric repulsion and secondly an electron withdrawing group at the π-spacer induces a negative effect on the DSSC efficiency as reported by Sun and co-workers. This is because the electron withdrawing units on the π-spacer suppress the electron injection from the LUMO level to the semiconductor conduction band. It should also be noted that functionalizing the acceptor part creates a severe steric hindrance that retards the charge transfer process. Table 2 depicts how the electronic energy levels of the dyes are changed upon substitution of different functional groups. The HOMO and LUMO energy levels of the dyes TPA-TBT-1, TPA-DBT-1, and TPA-BT-1 are −5.02, −5.23, −5.32 eV and −3.68, −3.92, −3.72 eV, respectively. These values indicate that the HOMO energy in the dye TPA-BT-1 is significantly lowered due to the presence of the benzothiadiazole group. In TPA-DBT-1 the LUMO level is greatly stabilized due to the highly electron withdrawing benzobis(thiadiazole) group which is reflected by the low band gap (1.30 eV) of TPA-DBT-1. Now, concerning the effect of substituents on the donor moiety of the dye, it is revealed that attaching –CN and –NO2 groups on the phenyl ring of triphenylamine stabilizes both the HOMOs and LUMOs of TPA-TBT-5, and TPA-TBT-6. The substituent –N(CH3)2 offers a very low band gap in TPA-TBT-4 (1.10 eV) but the HOMO energy level is situated slightly higher than the reduction potential energy of the I3−/I− electrolyte (−4.80 eV). The –OC2H5 group destabilises the HOMO energy and reduces the band gap to 1.26 eV in the dye TPA-TBT-2. Among the substituted structures of TPA-DBT-1, the dye TPA-DBT-4 is quite interesting for which the presence of the –N(CH3)2 group stabilizes both the HOMO and LUMO, and a very low band gap (1.145 eV) is achieved. The –OC2H5 group in TPA-DBT-2 offers a band gap of 1.25 eV. In the substituted forms of the TPA-BT-1 dyes the band gap of TPA-BT-4 is the lowest (1.49 eV) due to the strong electron donating effect of the –N(CH3)2 group. The HOMO and LUMO energy levels of all of the TPA-BT dyes (TPA-BT-1–6) fulfill the requirements of a good sensitizer.


As already mentioned, suitable energy band alignment is necessary to acquire a desired photovoltaic performance. Thermodynamically, the spontaneous charge transfer process from the excited state of the dye to the conduction band of TiO2 requires the LUMO energy of the dye to be at a more positive potential than the conduction band of TiO2 (−4.0 eV), while the HOMO energy of the dye should be more negative than the reduction potential energy of the I3−/I− electrolyte (−4.80 eV). As displayed in Table 2, chemical substitution of the dye molecule changes the relative position of the frontier energy levels by a substantial amount which affects the charge transfer process. For example, dimethylamine (–N(CH3)2) increases the LUMO level of the TPA-TBT-1 dye by 0.09 eV, thereby increasing the electron injection rate from the photo-excited dye to the TiO2 surface. According to the Marcus theory of electron injection, the larger the value of ΔGinject the faster the rate of electron injection. It is worthy to mention here that this assumption is valid as long as the injection is restricted to energy levels close to the conduction band edge and that the density of the acceptor states in this energy range remains constant. It is clear from Table 2 that the LUMOs of all dyes (except TPA-DBT-3, TPA-DBT-5, TPA-DBT-6) lie over the ECB of TiO2 and the HOMOs are situated below the redox potential of the I3−/I− electrolyte (−4.80 eV). Thus, it can be stated that all of them (except TPA-DBT-3,5,6) possess a positive response to charge transfer and regeneration related to the photooxidation process. Fig. 3 displays the relative energy levels of some selective dyes with reference to the conduction band of the TiO2 surface and triiodide/iodide as the redox couple. The figure depicts that TPA-BT-2 is expected to show the fastest electron transfer among the dyes studied here. Our prediction is also supported by the greater charge separation of the HOMO and LUMO of this specified dye as could be found in Fig. 4.


Based on the optimized molecular structures with the B3LYP/6-311G* method we calculated the UV-vis spectra of the dyes using TDDFT calculations in methanol with the PEB1PBE hybrid functional, taking the lowest 30 spin-allowed singlet–singlet transitions into account. Before computing the UV-vis spectra the dipole moment values of the individual dye systems have been analyzed and are tabulated in Table 3. The high dipole moment values indicate that all of the dyes are polar. Table 3 also provides the vertical excitation energy (E*), oscillator strength (f), and the light harvesting capacities (LHC) of the parent and the substituted dyes.

Dye

E* (eV)

λ
max (nm)

f

LHC
(eVOC)

μ

TPA-TBT-1
2.28
543
0.611
0.75
0.32
8.1
TPA-TBT-2
0.76
1640
0.643
0.77
0.41
12.3
TPA-TBT-3
2.25
551
0.615
0.76
0.30
9.8
TPA-TBT-4
0.67
1841
0.776
0.83
0.49
14.5
TPA-TBT-5
2.48
499
0.632
0.77
0.06
5.1
TPA-TBT-6
2.37
523
0.850
0.86
0.09
4.6
TPA-DBT-1
1.05
1185
0.956
0.89
0.08
17.7
TPA-DBT-2
0.99
1252
1.026
0.91
0.20
22.3
TPA-DBT-3
1.04
1193
0.898
0.87
−0.01
16.2
TPA-DBT-4
0.86
1445
1.066
0.91
0.32
25.4
TPA-DBT-5
1.14
1089
0.768
0.83
−0.28
7.7
TPA-DBT-6
1.08
1153
0.742
0.82
−0.23
8.5
TPA-BT-1
1.10
1126
0.826
0.85
0.28
12.9
TPA-BT-2
1.02
1215
0.859
0.86
0.38
17.1
TPA-BT-3
1.11
1112
0.782
0.83
0.20
11.7
TPA-BT-4
0.86
1442
0.807
0.84
0.75
18.1
TPA-BT-5
1.40
886
0.766
0.83
0.21
0.7
TPA-BT-6
1.29
962
0.649
0.78
0.25
1.6
All of the dyes show broad UV-vis spectra whose tails enter into the IR region rendering a broad light harvesting power. In Fig. 5 we have shown the computed UV-vis spectra of some representative dyes in methanol solvent. It is clear from Fig. 5 that all of the dyes show two absorption peaks, one in the visible region (around 500 nm) and the other in the far infrared region; the corresponding values of the maximum absorption wavelength (λmax) for all of the dyes are given in Table 3. For the dye TPA-TBT-1, λmax = 543 nm is assigned as being mainly due to a HOMO → LUMO + 2 transition, whereas the second broad absorption peak at 1566 nm corresponds to a HOMO–LUMO transition. On the other hand, for two other dyes the HOMO–LUMO transition becomes the highest intensity peak which can be interpreted by the more co-planer nature of TPA-DBT-1 and TPA-BT-1 compared to that of TPA-TBT-1. Table 3 also indicates that there is a pronounced effect on λmax and oscillator strength, and hence LHC, with substitution. For most of the substituted dye systems there is an increased oscillator strength compared to the corresponding main dye system which may be ascribed to the better π-conjugation. We have also calculated the LHC which is another factor which determines the efficiency of a DSSC. The highest oscillator strength and hence highest LHC is found for TPA-DBT-2. λmax is found to be the highest for the TPA-TBT-4 dye for which LHC is 0.8324. From the calculated data it can also be inferred that in the case of the electron donating –OC2H5 substituent there is always a higher value of λmax, oscillator strength and LHC as compared to the corresponding unsubstituted dye.
The overall efficiency (η) of the DSSC can be computed from the short-circuit photocurrent density (JSC), open circuit potential (VOC), the fill factor (FF) and the intensity of incident solar light (Pinc) as expressed in eqn (1). The values of JSC, VOC, and FF can be obtained from the current–voltage characteristics in the illuminated condition and are beyond our scope. Only the analytical relationship between VOC and ELUMO of the dye may be expressed as: eVOC = ELUMO − ECB, where (ECB) is the conduction band energy of the semiconductor surface. It implies that the higher the value of ELUMO, the larger the value of VOC. The computed values of eVOC for the dyes are given in Table 3 which depicts that the maximum VOC is for TPA-BT-4.

In the present work, we managed to bring out different structural modifications that will optimize the photovoltaic properties of the TPA-based DSSCs. We use this theoretical procedure to gain insights into the geometrical and electronic structures of the dyes. All of the dyes except TPA-DBT-3, TPA-DBT-5, and TPA-DBT-6 are found to fulfill the criteria for use in an efficient dye-sensitized solar cell. The substituents are found to have a huge effect on the optoelectronic properties of the dyes. Substitution by the –OC2H5 group emerged to be most successful. In all of the dyes –OC2H5 substitution resulted in an increase of the open circuit voltage, a significant decrease in the band gap and a remarkable increase in the oscillator strength. So, it can be concluded that substitution by the –OC2H5 group is suitable for meeting the needs of an efficient dye, while substitution by the –S(CH3)3 group hasn't been very successful. Only in the case of TPA-BT has it lowered the band gap, and in every case it has lowered the oscillator strength and open circuit voltage value. Substitution by –N(CH3)3 gave positive results in the case of the TPA-TBT dyes, leading to a decrease in band gap, increase in oscillator strength and consequently LHE, and a significant increase in open circuit voltage, while in the case of the other two dyes it gave mixed results. In both cases it lowers the band gap and increases the open circuit voltage but decreases the oscillator strength. –NO2 substitution is also not very successful. Other than for TPA-BT, –NO2 substitution increases the band gap and in all cases it has lowered the open circuit voltage. Oscillator strength has increased in TPA-TBT but not in the other two cases. –CN substitution shows almost similar results. We strongly believe that our theoretical study will be a stimulus for experimentalists and the guidelines provided by these studies will be very effective for experimental design and fabrication of TPA-based photovoltaic devices.


The authors sincerely acknowledge UGC, New Delhi, Govt. of India for partial financial support. The financial support from SERB-DST, New Delhi through the project Ref. No. CS-085/2014 is gratefully acknowledged. PS acknowledges the financial support from CSIR [01(2744)/13/EMR-II]. AP gratefully acknowledges Dr D. S. Kothari Postdoctoral Fellowship provided by UGC, New Delhi.


This journal is © the Owner Societies 2014