 DOI: 10.1039/C7NR06410A
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 17893-17901


Lu-Yao
Wang
,

Lin-Long
Deng
*,

Xin
Wang
,

Tan
Wang
,

Hao-Ran
Liu
,

Si-Min
Dai
,

Zhou
Xing
,

Su-Yuan
Xie
*,

Rong-Bin
Huang
 and 

Lan-Sun
Zheng


Pen-Tung Sah Institute of Micro-Nano Science and Technology, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005, China. E-mail: denglinlong@xmu.edu.cn

State Key Lab for Physical Chemistry of Solid Surfaces, iChEM (Collaborative Innovation Center of Chemistry for Energy Materials), Department of Chemistry, College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005, China. E-mail: syxie@xmu.edu.cn

Received
28th August 2017
, Accepted 24th October 2017
First published on 25th October 2017
Organic–inorganic perovskite solar cells have emerged as a promising photovoltaic technology because of their advantages such as low cost, high efficiency, and solution processability. The performance of perovskite solar cells is highly dependent on the crystallinity and morphology of the perovskite films. Herein, we report a simple, one-step anti-solvent deposition process using di-isopropyl ether as a dripping solvent to obtain extremely uniform and highly crystalline CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite films. Compared to toluene, chlorobenzene, chloroform, or diethyl ether, di-isopropyl ether has proven to be a more suitable solvent for an anti-solvent deposition process. The perovskite solar cells fabricated by the anti-solvent deposition process using di-isopropyl ether treatment exhibit an average power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 17.67 ± 0.54% and the highest PCE of 19.07%. Moreover, the higher boiling point of di-isopropyl ether makes the anti-solvent deposition process more tolerant to elevated ambient temperature, which can be carried out at ambient temperatures up to 40 °C. Our results demonstrate that di-isopropyl ether is an excellent dripping solvent in the anti-solvent deposition process for efficient and reproducible perovskite solar cells.

Organic–inorganic halide perovskite solar cells have attracted widespread attention owing to their advantages of high efficiency, easy fabrication, and compatibility with high-throughput and low-cost manufacturing on flexible substrates. Since the pioneering work of Miyasaka's group in 2009, perovskite solar cells with both mesoscopic and planar structures have demonstrated a rapid increase of power conversion efficiency (PCE) over 22% within a short period of time. Such an unprecedented progress in efficiency benefits from the development of various film deposition techniques to improve the quality of perovskite thin films. Since the device performance strongly depends on the crystallinity and morphology of the perovskite film, one of the crucial issues for perovskite solar cells is controlling the crystallinity and morphology of the perovskite films.

At present, perovskite materials such as CH3NH3PbI3 can be deposited on substrates by various deposition methods, mainly one-step or two-step deposition methods. The two-step deposition procedure is performed by depositing a PbI2 film on a substrate followed by converting PbI2 to perovskite in the presence of organic ammonium salt solution. However, there are two issues related to this method: one is the incomplete conversion from PbI2 to perovskite due to the presence of a thick PbI2 layer, and the other is the uncontrollable surface morphology. In contrast, the one-step deposition method is quite simple: a mixture of metal halide and organohalide of a certain ratio is dissolved in a common solvent and then spin-coated on a substrate. This method is very attractive because it is simple, cost-effective and time-saving. Nevertheless, perovskite films made by using the conventional spin-coating method exhibit poor film morphology with incomplete surface coverage and pinholes. The perovskite with poor morphology leads to poor device performance because it not only causes electrical shorting but also has detrimental effects on charge dissociation/transport/recombination. Therefore, several methods have been developed for controlling the perovskite morphology by the one-step deposition method for obtaining uniform, dense and pinhole-free perovskite films, with the optimization of processing solvents, annealing temperatures, additives, anti-solvent treatment or solvent engineering, gas-assisted crystallization,etc. Amongst the various methods which have been developed, an anti-solvent deposition approach, which involves dripping a non-coordinate solvent (e.g. toluene, chlorobenzene, o-dichlorobenzene, trifluorotoluene, diethyl ether etc.) upon the perovskite film while the film is spinning, has been shown to produce extremely smooth and homogeneous perovskite films. For instance, Seok et al. reported a method called solvent engineering to deposit uniform and dense perovskite films onto mesoporous TiO2 scaffolds. The perovskite film is deposited from a precursor solution dissolved in a mixture of dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) and γ-butyrolactone (GBL), followed by toluene dripping while the substrate is spinning. Cheng and co-workers independently developed a fast deposition–crystallization method involving spin-coating of a N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) solution of CH3NH3PbI3 followed by exposure to chlorobenzene to induce crystallization. Gao and co-workers systematically studied the role of anti-solvent treatment during perovskite film crystallization. They demonstrated a PCE of 20.3% by using trifluorotoluene as an anti-solvent with a composite perovskite as an active layer. These solution-processing techniques can manipulate perovskite crystallization to achieve high quality films. However, the high cost and toxicity of toluene or chlorobenzene or trifluorotoluene will hinder their application in mass production. Therefore, facile solution-processing techniques based on nontoxic solvents, which can regulate the perovskite crystallization process and produce high-quality films with a controllable morphology, are highly desirable.
Most recently, Song et al. reported a one-step, solvent-induced fast crystallization method based on sec-butyl alcohol to produce flat and uniform CH3NH3PbI3 films. Planar heterojunction solar cells were fabricated with an average PCE of 13.1% and a maximum PCE of 14.3%. Han and co-workers developed a new instant-crystallization technique using ethyl acetate as a dripping solvent for the deposition of perovskite films. Perovskite solar cells fabricated with annealing-free perovskite films showed a PCE of 15.58%. However, the PCEs of perovskite solar cells based on sec-butyl alcohol or ethyl acetate were lower than those of devices based on toluene or chlorobenzene. Park and co-workers reported highly reproducible perovskite solar cells with an average efficiency of 18.3% fabricated by spin-coating of the DMF solution containing equimolar CH3NH3I (MAI), PbI2, and DMSO and using diethyl ether to remove the solvent DMF only. Yet, the boiling point (34.6 °C) of diethyl ether is very low, which means that it will evaporate rapidly at temperatures higher than 30 °C. Thus, it is difficult to conduct the washing procedure using diethyl ether at temperatures higher than 30 °C, limiting its use in mass production of perovskite solar cells.
Herein, we report the solution-process fabrication of efficient perovskite solar cells comprising a bilayer architecture and CH3NH3PbI3 perovskites formed by the anti-solvent deposition method using di-isopropyl ether as a dripping solvent. This simple approach involves the spin coating of the DMF solution containing equimolar MAI, PbI2, and DMSO on a substrate, followed by a di-isopropyl ether drip while spinning, achieving an extremely uniform and highly crystalline CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite film. The best PCE of 19.07% under standard AM 1.5 conditions was obtained with the optimized cell. Besides, the process is highly reproducible with an average PCE of 17.67 ± 0.54% for 60 devices. Moreover, the higher boiling point of di-isopropyl ether (68.3 °C) makes it an excellent anti-solvent, which greatly enhances the tolerance to elevated ambient temperature. Perovskite solar cells based on CH3NH3PbI3 perovskites prepared by the anti-solvent deposition method using di-isopropyl ether as a dripping solvent demonstrated an average PCE as high as 16.75%, even though the process was conducted at temperatures up to 40 °C.

A schematic representation of the fabrication process using the anti-solvent deposition method is shown in Fig. 1. A DMF solution containing equimolar MAI, PbI2, and DMSO was spin-coated on the substrate at 4000 rpm. After several tens of seconds, a certain amount of organic solvents including toluene, chlorobenzene, chloroform, diethyl ether, or di-isopropyl ether was dripped onto the film while spinning. A transparent intermediate phase was formed after removing the residual solvent. Highly dense and homogeneous CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite films were eventually obtained by further thermal annealing at 100 °C for 10 min.

The choice of the anti-solvent is crucial in the anti-solvent deposition process. In this study, we tested several solvents including toluene, chlorobenzene, chloroform, diethyl ether, and di-isopropyl ether. Toluene, chlorobenzene, and chloroform are chosen as anti-solvents because they are miscible with DMF and DMSO but cannot dissolve PbI2 and MAI. The role of diethyl ether is to remove solvent DMF only because diethyl ether is miscible with DMF, but does not dissolve the MAI·PbI2·DMSO adduct that is an intermediate phase obtained after removing the residual DMF. Considering the similarities between diethyl ether and di-isopropyl ether, we speculated that di-isopropyl ether may play the same role as diethyl ether during the anti-solvent deposition process. To confirm this speculation, we isolated the intermediate phase by pouring di-isopropyl ether or diethyl ether to the precursor solution containing equimolar MAI, PbI2, and DMSO. The precipitate was filtered and dried in a vacuum oven for 1 h, which was used for X-ray diffraction (XRD) and infrared spectroscopy measurements. As shown in Fig. S1, the appearance of XRD peaks at low angles (6.55°, 7.17°, and 9.15°) indicates that the MAI·PbI2·DMSO immediate phase was formed. Regarding the washing solvent, the presence of a PbI2(DMSO)2 complex in the diethyl ether treated intermediate phase powder is confirmed by diffraction peaks at 10.13°, 12.63°, and 25.53°, which is not found in the di-isopropyl ether treated intermediate phase powder. Because only the MAI·PbI2·DMSO complex is present in the precursor solution, the presence of the PbI2(DMSO)2 complex in the diethyl ether treated intermediate phase powder indicates that a part of the MAI·PbI2·DMSO complex is decomposed into PbI2(DMSO)2 during diethyl ether treatment. This result reveals that di-isopropyl ether is a more appropriate solvent than diethyl ether to retain the nominal ratio of MAI/PbI2/DMSO = 1:1:1 because it does not cause the decomposition of the MAI·PbI2·DMSO adduct and thereby leads to a well-defined adduct. The presence of MAI·PbI2·DMSO is further confirmed by the Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) spectrum for the intermediate phase. The stretching vibration of SO (ν(SO)) appears at 1015 cm−1 (Fig. S2), which is consistent with the frequency of MAI·PbI2·DMSO. Therefore, the role of di-isopropyl ether is to remove the solvent DMF only, and not dissolve the MAI·PbI2·DMSO adduct.
The effects of different anti-solvent treatments were characterized by top view scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Fig. 2 shows the morphologies of the obtained CH3NH3PbI3 films. It is clearly observed that the surface morphology of the perovskite film is markedly changed by the anti-solvent treatment. Perovskite films prepared by the traditional one-step method without anti-solvent treatment contained many pin-holes and voids. In contrast, perovskite films fabricated by the anti-solvent deposition process exhibited a smooth and homogeneous morphology, with large perovskite crystals packed densely without pinholes. The grain size distributions of the perovskite films extracted from SEM images are shown in Fig. S3. The average particle size is 158 nm, 148 nm, 87 nm, 195 nm, and 288 nm for perovskite films treated with toluene, chlorobenzene, chloroform, diethyl ether, and di-isopropyl ether, respectively. Therefore, the analysis of the grain size reveals that the perovskite films prepared by di-isopropyl ether treatment had a larger crystallite size compared to films prepared by other solvents, such as toluene, chlorobenzene, chloroform, or diethyl ether. The high-quality and full coverage perovskite film is expected to greatly enhance the device performance and improve the reproducibility of perovskite solar cells. The influence of anti-solvent treatment during the film formation process on the structure of the CH3NH3PbI3 films was further characterized by XRD patterns as shown in Fig. S4. Intense diffraction peaks at 14.11°, 20.01°, 23.51°, 24.47°, 28.45°, 31.90°, 34.95°, 40.65°, 42.59°, 43.20° and 50.21° appeared, which can be respectively assigned to (110), (112), (211), (202), (220), (310), (312), (224), (411), (314) and (404) diffractions of the tetragonal CH3NH3PbI3 phase. No diffraction peaks of PbI2 or MAI were found, indicating complete conversion to the perovskite phase. Compared to the films obtained by the traditional spin-coating process, perovskite films obtained by the anti-solvent deposition process exhibited a stronger diffraction peak intensity, which indicates better crystallinity of the anti-solvent treated films. Furthermore, perovskite films treated with di-isopropyl ether showed a higher peak intensity than films treated with other solvents, which is consistent with the larger crystal sizes of di-isopropyl ether treated films as revealed by SEM.
Perovskite solar cells with a typical bilayer structure of FTO/bl-TiO2/mp-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-MeOTAD/Ag were fabricated with perovskite films produced by the anti-solvent deposition method using toluene, chlorobenzene, chloroform, diethyl ether, or di-isopropyl ether as the anti-solvent. The photovoltaic parameters of devices fabricated with different anti-solvents treatment are summarized in Table S1 and the typical current density–voltage (J–V) curves are shown in Fig. S5. It can be clearly seen that device parameters are greatly influenced by anti-solvent treatment. The average PCE of the device fabricated with anti-solvent treatment using toluene, chlorobenzene, chloroform, diethyl ether, and di-isopropyl ether is 15.25 ± 1.56%, 14.51 ± 0.65%, 11.11 ± 0.43%, 16.26 ± 0.88%, and 17.19 ± 0.52%, respectively. Interestingly, the device fabricated with di-isopropyl ether treatment performed the best in photovoltaic measurements, which can be ascribed to the larger crystal sizes and increased crystallinity of di-isopropyl ether treated films as revealed by SEM and XRD. To check if di-isopropyl ether is the optimal dripping solvent, three ethers with higher boiling points than diethyl ether, including di-n-propyl ether (90.5 °C), di-n-butyl ether (142.2 °C), and anisole (153.8 °C) were also tested. The photovoltaic parameters of devices fabricated with di-n-propyl ether, di-n-butyl ether, and anisole treatment are also summarized in Table S1 and the typical J–V curves are displayed in Fig. S5. The average PCE of device fabricated with di-n-propyl ether, di-n-butyl ether, and anisole treatment is 7.96 ± 1.61%, 15.99 ± 0.88%, and 14.26 ± 0.75%, respectively. These PCEs are much lower than that of di-isopropyl ether, which can be ascribed to the unfavorable morphologies of the obtained perovskite films as revealed by SEM (Fig. S6). Based on the preliminary results, di-isopropyl ether was chosen for further investigation.
As previously mentioned, it has been proved that a pre-annealing process at a relatively high temperature (around 100 °C) is usually required for the complete transformation and crystallization of the perovskite and the removal of the residual solvents. In order to investigate the effect of the pre-annealing treatment on the photophysical properties of the perovskite films that relate to the film quality and defects, the steady-state and transient photoluminescence (PL) spectra of CH3NH3PbI3 films prepared by di-isopropyl ether treatment were measured. As shown in Fig. 3a, the CH3NH3PbI3 film annealed at 100 °C exhibited the strongest PL intensity, which indicates better film quality and fewer defects in the film. However, the PL intensity of the CH3NH3PbI3 film decreased when the annealing temperature continued to increase above 100 °C. The time-resolved PL decay curves (Fig. 3b) were also measured and fitted with a double-exponential function of time, and their decay parameters are summarized in Table S2. The average recombination lifetime (τave) was estimated to be 35.8 ns for perovskite films annealed at 80 °C. As for the perovskite film annealed at 100 °C, the lifetime increased to 51.6 ns. It further dropped to 46.7 and 24.2 ns for the perovskite film annealed at 120 and 150 °C, respectively. Since long charge carrier lifetime means large charge carrier diffusion length and low density of defects in the perovskite film, this result further verifies the high quality and low defects in the perovskite film annealed at 100 °C. Indeed, the higher steady-state PL intensity and longer PL lifetime of the CH3NH3PbI3 film annealed at 100 °C confirm the high quality, with fewer traps and defects within the film. Therefore, the perovskite film annealed at 100 °C is anticipated to provide perovskite films with good photovoltaic performance.
To probe the effect of the pre-annealing treatment on device performance, perovskite solar cells were fabricated with the CH3NH3PbI3 film prepared by di-isopropyl ether treatment and annealing at different temperatures (80, 100, 120, and 150 °C). The annealing time for all the above temperatures was 10 min. Typical J–V curves of the perovskite solar cells using pre-annealing treatment at different temperatures are shown in Fig. S7. When the annealing temperature is low (80 °C), the device showed a relatively low PCE of 15.2%, which is probably due to the low crystallinity. When the annealing temperature is increased to 100 °C, the device exhibited the best performance with a PCE up to 17.7%. However, on further increasing the annealing temperature to 120 or 150 °C, the PCE decreased. Therefore, 100 °C for 10 min was employed as the annealing condition for the rest of the devices fabricated by the anti-solvent deposition process using di-isopropyl ether treatment.

Fig. 4a illustrates the cross-sectional SEM image of a complete device. As can be seen in Fig. 4a, the highly dense CH3NH3PbI3 film with a plateau surface was constructed via an adduct approach, where a ca. 400 nm-thick capping layer was formed on the ∼210 nm-thick mp-TiO2 film. The thicknesses of the bl-TiO2 layer and spiro-MeOTAD layer are about 50 and 200 nm, respectively. Fig. 4b shows the J–V curves of the best performing devices fabricated with the CH3NH3PbI3 films produced by the anti-solvent deposition process using di-isopropyl ether treatment. Perovskite solar cells based on di-isopropyl ether treatment exhibited a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 22.81 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.10 V, a fill factor (FF) of 0.76, and a PCE of 19.07%. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra of the best performing devices are shown in Fig. 4c. The calculated Jsc from the EQE spectra is consistent with the Jsc obtained from J–V curves. Recently, anomalous hysteresis has been observed in the J–V curves of perovskite solar cells, which greatly influences the accurate measurements of photovoltaic performance. To check the J–V hysteresis, our devices were measured from open-circuit to short-circuit conditions (reverse scan) and short-circuit to open-circuit conditions (forward scan) with different scan rates. As shown in Fig. S8, little hysteresis is found in devices based on di-isopropyl ether washing treatment. To confirm the reliability of the efficiency values obtained from J–V curves, the stabilized current density and power output from the device at the maximum power point (∼0.88 V) were recorded as a function of time (Fig. 4d). The stabilized PCE of devices based on di-isopropyl ether washing treatment is 17.81%, which gives a reasonably accurate estimate of the device performance.
To check the high reproducibility and slight efficiency deviation of perovskite solar cells fabricated by the anti-solvent deposition method using di-isopropyl ether treatment, the statistics of Voc, Jsc, FF, and PCE based on 60 devices are shown in Fig. 5. An average Voc of 1.08 ± 0.02 V, Jsc of 23.16 ± 0.7 mA cm−2, FF of 70.72 ± 2.92%, and PCE of 17.67 ± 0.54% were obtained for devices fabricated using di-isopropyl ether washing treatment. Such high reproducibility may be attributed to the reproducible and uniform growth of CH3NH3PbI3 obtained by the anti-solvent deposition process.
In the majority of cases, anti-solvent deposition processes have been carried out at room temperature (around 25 °C), but the effect of different ambient temperatures on the device performance is seldom discussed. However, the crystallization of CH3NH3PbI3 during the anti-solvent deposition process can be affected by ambient temperature, which in turn strongly influences the device performance. To investigate the effect of ambient temperature on the device performance, the perovskite solar cells were fabricated with the CH3NH3PbI3 film prepared by the anti-solvent deposition process using di-isopropyl ether at various temperatures in a temperature-controlled glove box. For comparison, devices based on diethyl ether treatment were also fabricated. The temperature dependences of device performance for 10 different cells are presented in Fig. 6. The results reveal that an increase in the temperature results in a smaller decrease in average PCE for both devices based on di-isopropyl ether and diethyl ether washing treatment. Besides, the average PCEs of devices based on di-isopropyl ether washing treatment were slightly higher than those of devices based on diethyl ether washing treatment at the same process temperature. It should be noted that the anti-solvent deposition process using diethyl ether cannot be conducted at a temperature higher than 30 °C due to its low boiling point (34.6 °C). In contrast, the anti-solvent deposition process using di-isopropyl ether can be carried out at much higher temperature. For instance, an average PCE of 16.75% was obtained for devices based on di-isopropyl ether at 40 °C, which is attributed to its high boiling point (68.3 °C). The relatively high process temperature of the anti-solvent deposition process using di-isopropyl ether makes this process advantageous for the mass production of perovskite solar cells, which does not require strict control of ambient temperature.
To elucidate the underlying cause for the temperature dependence of device performance, we further examined the XRD patterns, UV-Vis absorption spectra, and photoluminescence spectra of CH3NH3PbI3 films prepared by the anti-solvent deposition process using di-isopropyl ether or diethyl ether at different ambient temperatures. The influence of the ambient temperature on the crystallinity of the perovskite film prepared by di-isopropyl ether or diethyl ether treatment was investigated by XRD measurements. As shown in Fig. S9, the intensity of typical diffraction peaks of the CH3NH3PbI3 film was significantly enhanced with a decrease in the ambient temperature, indicating the improved crystallinity of the perovskite films. The UV-Vis absorption spectra of the perovskite film obtained by the anti-solvent deposition process using di-isopropyl ether or diethyl ether are presented in Fig. S10. The absorption of the perovskite film was increased gradually when the ambient temperature decreases, which can be attributed to the increased crystallinity of the perovskite film. The samples for PL measurements were deposited on the mesoporous TiO2-coated FTO substrates. A clear emission peak at ∼770 nm originated from the PL of CH3NH3PbI3. As shown in Fig. S11, the PL intensity of the CH3NH3PbI3 film prepared by the anti-solvent deposition process using di-isopropyl ether or diethyl ether increases gradually as the ambient temperature decreases, which indicates that there are fewer defects in the CH3NH3PbI3 films prepared at lower ambient temperature. All these characterization studies demonstrated that the perovskite films prepared at lower ambient temperature have better crystallinity and fewer defects, which is consistent with the literature. The improvement of PCEs at lower ambient temperature can be correlated with the improved crystallinity and reduced defects in the perovskite film because the energy loss in the perovskite solar cells mainly originates from recombination of carriers by defects in the perovskite film. These results suggest that special attention should be paid to control the ambient temperature during the anti-solvent deposition process to achieve optimum device performance.

In summary, di-isopropyl ether was proved to be the optimum anti-solvent for fabricating extremely uniform and highly crystalline CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite films by the anti-solvent deposition process. Compared to perovskite films obtained by toluene, chlorobenzene, chloroform, or diethyl ether treatment, perovskite films treated with di-isopropyl ether showed larger crystal size and better crystallinity, and devices fabricated from the latter films exhibited superior performance. The highly reproducible perovskite films prepared by the anti-solvent deposition process using di-isopropyl ether enabled reproducible perovskite solar cells with the best efficiency of 19.07%, and average efficiency of 17.67 ± 0.54% for 60 devices. Besides, the anti-solvent deposition process using di-isopropyl ether can be conducted at ambient temperatures up to 40 °C, which makes it more suitable for the mass production of perovskite solar cells. Based on our results, we believe that di-isopropyl ether is an excellent dripping solvent in the anti-solvent deposition process for the practical fabrication of high performance perovskite solar cells.


PbI2 (99.9985%) was purchased from Alfa Aesar. Titanium diisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate) (75 wt% in isopropanol), N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) (99.8%), N,N-dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) (99.8%), chlorobenzene (99.8%), toluene (99.8%), diethyl ether (99.5%), di-isopropyl ether (99.8%), di-n-propyl ether (99%), di-n-butyl ether (99.3%), and anisole (99.7%) were received from Sigma-Aldrich. Lithium bis(trifluoromethyl-sulphonyl)imide (Li-TFSI, 95%) and 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP, 96%) were received from J&K Chemical Ltd. 2,2′,7,7′-Tetrakis-(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD, 99%) and methylammonium iodide (CH3NH3I, 99.5%) were purchased from Lumtec.


A fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) coated glass substrate with a dimension of 2.0 × 2.0 cm was patterned by etching with zinc powder and 2 M hydrochloric acid. The etched FTO substrate was cleaned with detergent, deionized water, acetone and isopropanol, and subsequently dried by N2. The substrate was treated with UV-ozone for 15 min prior to use. A thin layer (∼60 nm) of the compact TiO2 blocking layer (bl-TiO2) was deposited onto the FTO substrate by spin-coating of 0.15 M titanium diisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate) in n-butyl alcohol at 4000 rpm for 30 s, which was followed by annealing at 125 °C for 5 min. This process was repeated three times. After cooling to room temperature, the film was immersed in a 50 mM TiCl4 (Sigma-Aldrich, >98%) solution at 70 °C for 30 min, and then washed with deionized water and ethanol. After drying in N2, a mesoporous TiO2 (mp-TiO2) layer was deposited on the bl-TiO2 by spin-coating the TiO2 colloid solution containing 1 g of TiO2 paste (Dyesol 18NR-T) dissolved in 5 mL of anhydrous ethanol solution at 5000 rpm for 30 s, which was subsequently annealed at 550 °C for 30 min and then treated with UV-ozone for 15 min. The substrate was further treated with 20 mM aqueous TiCl4 solution at 70 °C for 30 min, cleaned with deionized water and ethanol, and then sintered at 500 °C for 30 min. After that, a mixed precursor solution which was prepared with 461 mg of PbI2, 159 mg of MAI, and 78 mg of DMSO (molar ratio 1:1:1) was mixed in 600 mg of DMF solution at room temperature with ultrasonic treatment for 2 hours in order to prepare a MAI·PbI2·DMSO adduct solution. The dissolved hybrid solution was spin-coated on the mp-TiO2 layer at 4000 rpm for 25 s and 1 mL of di-isopropyl ether was quickly dropped on the substrate within less than 5 s before the surface changed to become opaque resulting from rapid vaporization of DMF. For reference devices, a certain amount of organic solvents (0.2 mL toluene, 0.25 mL chlorobenzene, 0.2 mL chloroform, 0.2 mL anisole, 1 mL di-n-propyl ether, 1 mL di-n-butyl ether or 1 mL diethyl ether) was slowly dripped on the rotating substrate in 10 s before the surface changed to become turbid caused by rapid vaporization of DMF. After being heated at 100 °C for 10 min, the film changed from a transparent MAI·PbI2·DMSO adduct to a dense CH3NH3PbI3 film. A solution of spiro-MeOTAD in chlorobenzene (1 mL) was mixed with 28.8 μL of 4-tert-butyl pyridine and 17.5 μL of Li-TFSI solution (520 mg Li-TSFI dissolved in 1 mL acetonitrile), and was spin-coated on FTO/bl-TiO2/mp-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3 at 3000 rpm for 30 s. Finally, a ∼100 nm silver layer was thermally evaporated on top of the device to form the back contact.


The photovoltaic performance was measured in air without any encapsulation under an AM 1.5G filter at 100 mW cm−2 using a Newport Oriel 92192 Solar Simulator, as calibrated by a standard Si solar cell. The current density–voltage (J–V) curves were measured by a reverse (forward bias (1.2 V) → short circuit (−0.3 V)) or forward scan, using a Keithley 2420 source meter. While measuring, the cell was covered with a mask having an aperture of 0.065 cm2. The solar cells were measured after aging for 16 h. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) was measured by using a Newport Oriel QE/IPCE measurement kit. The light intensity was calibrated using a single-crystal Si photovoltaic cell as a reference. The steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra were recorded by using an Edinburgh Instruments FLS980 fluorescence spectrometer. Time-resolved PL spectra were recorded using the time-correlated single photon counting method with an Edinburgh Instruments FLS980 fluorescence spectrometer. Excitation was provided by using an Edinburgh EPL-375 picosecond pulsed diode laser. The scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images were taken on a ZEISS Sigma FE-SEM. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the prepared films were recorded on a Rigaku Ultima IV diffractometer using Cu Kα radiation. UV-Vis absorption spectra were recorded on a Varian Cary 5000 UV-Vis-NIR spectrometer. Fourier transform IR (FTIR) measurements were recorded by using a Nicolet iN10 MX Fourier transform microscopic infrared spectrometer.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the National Basic Research 973 Program of China (2014CB845601), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21390390, 51502252, and 51572231), the Natural Science Foundation of Fujian Province of China (no. 2016J01264), and the Young and Middle-Aged Teachers Educational Scientific Research Project of Fujian Province of China (no. JA15006).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7nr06410a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017