 DOI: 10.1039/C8NR05862H
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 20963-20989


Ting
Qiu
,

Yanqiang
Hu
,

Feng
Xu
,

Zhong
Yan
*,

Fan
Bai
,

Guohua
Jia
 and 

Shufang
Zhang
*

College of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing 210094, China. E-mail: zhangshufang@njust.edu.cn; zhongyan@njust.edu.cn

Nanochemistry Research Institute, Department of Chemistry, Curtin University, Perth, Western Australia 6845, Australia

Received
20th July 2018
, Accepted 18th October 2018
First published on 19th October 2018
Metal–halide perovskites have emerged as efficient, low-cost energy materials owing to their remarkable optoelectronic properties. In particular, the dimensionality and morphology of crystallites may have a striking influence on their chemical and physical properties and therefore affect their optoelectronic applications. One-dimensional halide perovskites have superior carrier transportation in one dimension, high crystalline quality, and consequently, high quantum efficiencies and long carrier diffusion lengths, which are important for the performance of perovskite-based nanoscale optoelectronic and photonic devices. In this review, we highlight recent advances in the synthesis of one-dimensional halide perovskites and their unique properties as well as their novel optoelectronic applications. This review aims to provide an overview of the achievements in synthesis techniques and nanoscale optoelectronic applications based on one-dimensional perovskite nanocrystals.
Ting Qiu
Ting Qiu received her bachelor's degree from Nanjing University of Science and Technology in material forming and control engineering. She then continued her postgraduate study under the supervision of Prof. Shufang Zhang and in organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells. Her research interests include the synthesis of one-dimensional perovskite nanostructures, as well as their applications.
Yanqiang Hu
Yanqing Hu received his bachelor's degree from Nanjing University of Science and Technology in 2016. Now, he is a Ph.D. candidate in Prof. Zhang's group. His current research focuses on the design and synthesis of organic–inorganic hybrid halide perovskites, as well as their applications.
Zhong Yan
Dr Zhong Yan received his PhD degree from the University of California, Riverside in 2013. He is currently an associate professor at Nanjing University of Science and Technology. His research interests are mainly focused on exploring new two-dimensional crystals and developing new device applications based on 2D crystals.
Shufang Zhang
Dr Shufang Zhang received her PhD degree from the Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2008. Then she conducted postdoctoral research at Tokyo Institute of Technology and the National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS), Japan during 2008–2013. She is currently an associate professor at Nanjing University of Science and Technology. Her research is focused on the synthesis of photoelectric nanomaterials and their application in functional devices (memristors, photodetectors, solar cells, etc.)

Metal–halide perovskites are characterized by the general formula ABX3, A = organic or inorganic monovalent cation (e.g. CH3NH3+ or Cs+), B = bivalent cation (e.g. Pb2+ or Sn2+), and X = halogen (Cl−, Br− or I−), and have emerged as efficient and low-cost energy materials since Miyasaka reported the first perovskite solar cell. Benefiting from their strong optical absorptions, high photoluminescence quantum yields, low non-radiative recombination rates, tunable bandgaps, relatively high charge-carrier mobilities, long diffusion lengths and solution processabilities, they are uniquely suited for optoelectronic applications such as solar cells, light-emitting diodes (LEDs), photodetectors, waveguides, and lasers. In particular, organic–inorganic hybrid lead halide perovskites such as CH3NH3PbX3 (MAPbI3) have been prominently applied as light absorbers in solar cells. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) has quickly risen from 3.8% to more than 22% over the past six years. Compared with organic–inorganic hybrid halide perovskites, all-inorganic perovskites such as CsPbX3 exhibit higher stability and outstanding optical properties, especially tunable and high-quantum-yield photoluminescence (PL), and therefore, inorganic perovskites have become a new class of emitting materials in practical LEDs. In addition to the diversity of compositions, the morphologies and dimensions of perovskite materials are also multitudinous. Various chemical synthesis approaches have so far been reported to synthesize nanocrystals with sizes in the range of several nanometres to tens of nanometres and with variable morphologies, such as zero-dimensional (0D) spherical quantum dots, one-dimensional (1D) nanorods (NRs) and nanowires (NWs), two-dimensional (2D) nanoplates and three-dimensional (3D) nanocubes, as shown in Fig. 1. As is well known, the dimensionality and morphology of crystallites may significantly influence their chemical and physical properties, and further affect their optoelectronic applications. For instance, it was verified that semiconductor NWs could offer additional advantages compared with their thin film counterparts, such as superior antireflection, significant light trapping and enhanced mechanical properties, beneficial for applications in optoelectronics and flexible devices. Different performances owing to different morphologies have also been confirmed in perovskite materials. Recently, low-dimensional metal–halide perovskites with high quality began to receive increasing attention since the first report by Endre Horváth, primarily for their enhanced photoelectric performance compared with bulk materials. One-dimensional nanostructures, such as NWs and NRs, provide guiding channels for transportation and propagation of charge carriers and photons in one dimension while confining them to the other two dimensions. This unique feature endows NWs with intriguing electrical and optical properties, which are not only fundamentally interesting, but also technologically useful for a variety of device applications. Therefore, 1D perovskites are expected to be important as potential building blocks for future perovskite-based nanoscale optoelectronic and photonic devices such as miniaturized solar cells, photodetectors, and nanolasers.

Hence, this review highlights recent advances in the synthesis of one-dimensional metal–halide perovskites and their unique properties as well as their applications in optoelectronic and photonic devices. It is expected that this review can serve as an overview and evaluation of the state-of-the-art shape-controlled synthetic methods as well as the structure (morphology)–property–application relationship.

One-dimensional nanostructures, such as NWs and NRs, usually have a large aspect ratio, i.e. 1–100 nm in diameter, but much longer in length. Generally, 1D nanostructures with relatively small aspect ratio are called NRs and those with relatively large aspect ratio are called NWs. The special structural feature makes the physical and chemical properties of 1D nanomaterials greatly different from their corresponding bulk materials. This is because two dimensions of NWs and NRs are confined and only one unconstrained dimension can conduct quantum particles such as electrons, phonons, and photons. Furthermore, the nanoscale diameter confines the radial dimension of these structures below the characteristic length scale of various fundamental solid-state phenomena: the exciton Bohr radius, wavelength of light, phonon mean free path, critical size of magnetic domains, exciton diffusion length, etc. As a result, many NWs and NRs exhibit very extraordinary physical properties. Due to their unique properties compared with their bulk counterparts, NWs and NRs are attractive building blocks in a wide range of applications, including sensors, nanoelectronics, photonics, and renewable energy. When this special structure is applied in perovskite materials, extraordinary performance can be obtained by integrating the advantages of the structural features and material properties. The perovskite NWs have well-defined crystal structure and a novel one dimensional enclosing surface, which offers fewer grain boundaries, lower defect and trap density, smaller recombination rate, and longer lifetime of the photogenerated carriers. Jia Zhu and colleagues studied the absorption ability of 1D perovskites as shown in Fig. 2a. They found that NW samples have much better absorption than perovskite thin films with MAPbI3 particles, even though they started with the same thickness. This is mainly due to two reasons. Firstly, NWs can provide impedance match for coupling light with much reduced reflections. This was proved by the obviously different absorption behaviours of these two kinds of samples in the short wavelength region. Secondly, the nanowire arrays can significantly increase the optical path length and therefore increase the absorption of light, compared with thin films. It should be noted that as the wavelength moves toward 800 nm (corresponding to the bandgap of MAPbI3), the difference in absorption between these two kinds of samples increases because of the light trapping effect. Another excellent performance of 1D perovskites is their improved stability relative to particles. Jie's group examined the stability of 1D MAPbI3 array-based photodetectors under ambient conditions with a relative humidity of 45%–55%. They demonstrated that compared with MAPbI3 particles, the moisture stability of 1D MAPbI3 arrays was greatly superior. Even when blown moisture directly by a humidifier, 1D MAPbI3 perovskite samples remained stable and only a little colour change was observed after 30 min, while the colour of thin films composed of MAPbI3 particles turned yellow in 4 min after exposure to a water spray, manifesting the rapid degradation of thin films by moisture. Large unstable grain boundaries, which are highly susceptible to moisture attack, are responsible for the poor stability of polycrystalline perovskite films. The superior stability of 1D perovskite arrays is attributable to the highly crystalline structures, unique 1D enclosing surfaces, and fewer grain boundaries. The improved stability of 1D perovskites was also demonstrated in MASnI3 NWs. The stability of MASnI3 NWs and MASnI3 particles was monitored by measuring the PL peak intensity of the samples that were kept in air with 70% humidity (see Fig. 2b). It took 7 days or 10080 min for the PL peak height of the NW sample to decay down to 65% of its original intensity. However, the PL peak intensity of the particles decayed rapidly down to the same level only in 12 min. The perovskite decay process was dramatically slowed down by up to 840 times when MASnI3 was fabricated into NWs.

Thus, 1D perovskite materials are widely considered to be one of the most effective nanomaterials for photoelectric response devices because of their remarkable properties such as long photocarrier lifetime, fast charge transfer, simple processing technique and excellent stability.

Although the most commonly used solution methods such as the one-step self-assembly method and the two-step sequential deposition method are convenient for fabricating metal–halide perovskites, simple solution methods were reported to more likely produce polycrystalline perovskites, rather than one-dimensional perovskites. Moreover, the typical vapour–liquid–solid method is also not suitable for the synthesis of 1D metal halide perovskites, because it usually requires a metal droplet to initiate one-dimensional crystal growth, but it is unlikely that a metal catalyst can be found for the complex organic–inorganic metal halide perovskite. Even for an alternative catalyst-free approach, it needs screw dislocations (linear crystallographic defects) in seed particles to initiate 1D growth. Therefore, novel methods should be developed for the fabrication of 1D metal–halide perovskites. To date, a variety of techniques have been developed, such as the modified solution method, the vapor-phase epitaxial growth method, and the template method for the preparation of 1D metal–halide perovskites with special properties.


The one-step self-assembly method is a conventional method for the preparation of perovskite granule films. Typically, organic halides or inorganic halides AX (MAI or CsI) and bivalent metal halides BX2 (PbI2, PbBr2, or PbCl2) are dissolved in an organic solvent to prepare the precursor solution and are spin-coated on a substrate, and then the perovskite granule film was formed after annealing. It is critical to choose appropriate processing temperature and time based on different precursor compositions to achieve the desired crystallinity, phase, and morphology of the perovskite films. MAPbI3 prepared by this method tends to crystallize in a cubic structure, implying no crystallographic driving force for anisotropic growth. To achieve the anisotropic growth of 1D perovskites, some improvements were made based on the traditional method. Song's group firstly grew MAPbI3 NWs through modifying the one-step self-assembly method only by lowering the temperature of the substrates to room temperature, and then keeping the spinning-coated samples at room temperature for a few hours before annealing. The growth procedure could be described as the evaporation-induced self-assembly method. When the precursor solution was cast on the substrates at room temperature, the slow evaporation of the solvent resulted in crystal growth along the c-axis that is parallel to the surface. The low symmetry (tetragonal) and strong intermolecular interactions may allow for the preferred growth of NW morphology. If the substrate is at high temperature, the perovskite film tends to grow homogeneously into nanoparticles and suppress the preferential growth. Subsequently, the same group developed a “two-step” method for preparing Csx(MA)1−xPbI3 perovskite NWs in aqueous solution. This method mainly consisted of two steps, as shown in Fig. 3a. The first step was the preparation of PbI2 flakes in saturated aqueous solution. In this process, water was utilized as a “green” solvent to replace the usual organic solvent. The second step was the growth of perovskite NWs. After violently shaking and a short time of growth (within 1 minute), the corresponding perovskite NWs were obtained. The diameters of CsPbI3, MAPbI3 and hybrid Csx(MA)1−xPbI3 perovskite NWs were about 300 nm, 1200 nm, and 300 nm, respectively. In this method, the growth of perovskite NWs was highly dependent on the formation of PbI2 flakes. As shown in Fig. 3b, PbI2 nanoflakes were firstly formed (Part I), and then CsI and MAI molecules gradually approached and reacted with the PbI2 nanoflakes (Part II), and then the perovskite molecules would freely self-assemble along their preferential orientations to grow into NWs (Part III).

Recently, a simpler and scalable method for the synthesis of MAPbI3 NWs directly from perovskite films has been reported. In the initial stage, a layer of perovskite film was formed by the commonly used method (see Fig. 4). When a mixed solvent (DMF and IPA) was spin-coated onto the perovskite thin film, NWs could be formed upon the evaporation of the solvent. The mechanism of this method was concluded to be a dissolved and recrystallization process. From the kinetic control theory, the separation of the nucleation and growth stages is crucial to enable monodisperse crystal growth. In their experiment, perovskite thin films were rapidly dissolved by the mixed solvent (due to the great solubility of perovskites in DMF) at just the beginning. Along with the quick evaporation of the solvent during spinning, the solution quickly reached supersaturation and came to nucleation. With more nucleation centres, the concentration of monomers drops rapidly until it is below the critical threshold, and therefore ends the stage of nucleation. The following stage only involves the growth of the seeds. The tetragonal phase of perovskites has a preference to form NWs by self-assembly of particles along the same orientation, which causes the perovskite crystals to grow into NWs. The role of IPA in the mixed solvent was to serve as a poor solvent to adjust the solubility of perovskites and therefore could be replaced with other poor solvents. The concentration of DMF in a poor solvent was found to be the key factor in the kinetics of the reactions, no matter what the synthesis method and the components of the precursor film are.
A special catalyst-free strategy was reported by He et al. to synthesize inorganic CsPbBr3 perovskite NRs. As schematically shown in Fig. 5a, a CsPbBr3 perovskite precursor solution was introduced into a polymer matrix (e.g. polystyrene) through a solvent-induced swelling process and distributed in between the swollen polymer chains as stripe-shaped droplets. Subsequently, in an annealing process, the solvent was driven out of the polymer matrix and perovskite nanocrystal nucleation began soon after the solvent evaporated. This allowed the precursors in droplets to reach supersaturation, which was followed by perovskite NR growth within the confines of the surrounding polymer chain clusters. Meanwhile, the polymer matrix shrank, passivating and protecting the perovskite NRs. Inspection of NRs in a polystyrene matrix prepared with different precursor concentrations or spin-coating speeds by fluorescence microscopy (Fig. 5b) clearly showed that the NR size could be reduced either by lowering the precursor concentration or by increasing the spin speed. Considering the kinetics of precursor distribution in the polymer matrix, a lower precursor concentration led to a lower solution viscosity, which facilitated the formation of smaller droplets, thus generating smaller NRs. Increasing the rotational speed of the spin-coating process would lead to more vigorous distribution of precursor droplets, also resulting in a smaller droplet size and thus smaller NRs. This strategy was not limited to polystyrene substrates and appears to be a feasible synthesis strategy for most polymers that undergo a swelling–deswelling process when interacting with DMF as a solvent, but rod sizes were not identical for different polymers even when the same precursors and processing procedures were used, since the intrinsic polymer properties, such as the swelling ratio in DMF as a solvent, polymer chain length, and cluster morphology can vary for different polymers and may have a key impact on the dynamics of droplet distribution.
By carefully choosing the organic cation, Yuan et al. created single crystalline 1D C4N2H14PbBr4 perovskites. This unique one-dimensional structure was reported to exhibit high luminescence with an unusual broadband emission and these materials were promising light emitters for optoelectronic devices. Recently, sibling C4N2H14PbCl4 single crystals were also prepared by the same group through antisolvent vapor-assisted crystallization, which exhibited unusual inverse excitation-dependent broadband emission from bluish-green to yellow.

The two-step sequential deposition method is also a commonly used method for preparing organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite granule films. In this typical two-step sequential deposition method, a BX2 seed layer is spin-coated and then converted to ABX3 by dipping the substrate in an AX/IPA solution. This method was modified to synthesize perovskite NWs. Generally speaking, seed particles with many screw dislocations were obtained on dipping BX2 in an AX/IPA solution. The strain induced in the crystallographic structure by these defects promotes fast one-dimensional growth of the crystal in a helical trajectory, in a direction along the axis of the screw dislocation, which could initiate the NW growth. For example, Zhu and colleagues synthesized high-quality single-crystal perovskite NWs by depositing a polycrystalline film of lead acetate (PbAc2) onto a glass substrate and dipping it in a solution of IPA and MAX. As shown in Fig. 6, at the beginning only part of the PbAc2 layer reacted with the MAX solution and a thin layer of MAPbX3 with many dislocations was firstly formed. This polycrystalline MAPbI3 film could serve as seeds to initiate the crystal growth. However, in order to grow NWs well, the direct and full conversion of the PbAc2 film into MAPbI3 should be suppressed as much as possible. In their study, this initially formed perovskite film could just act as a diffusion barrier that prevents further rapid reaction between the solution and the PbAc2 remaining underneath the film. The slow dissolution of Pb from the unreacted PbAc2 produced an intermediate precursor, PbI42−, which promoted the growth of crystalline NWs driven by the dislocations in the perovskite seed layer as mentioned above. The key to successful NW growth was slow release of the low-concentration Pb precursor (PbI42−) from the solid Pb(Ac)2 film on the substrate and careful tuning of the MAX precursor concentration to maintain low supersaturation conditions for the crystal growth of perovskites. Recently, MAPbBr3 single crystalline perovskite nanowires were synthesized following this method.

A similar growth mechanism was also used for the preparation of single crystalline NWs of inorganic perovskites CsPbX3 (X = Br, Cl) NWs. It's worth mentioning that this is the first report of the synthesis and characterization of NWs of the entire CsPbX3 family as well as the CsPb(Br,Cl)3 and CsPb(Br,I)3 alloys. In order to promote NW growth, maintaining slow release of lead ions into solution by selecting proper lead precursors and controlling the formation of the seeding layer on the substrates should be ensured.
In addition, high-quality single-crystal hexagonal phase FAPbI3 NWs were successfully synthesized by reacting a PbAc2 thin film deposited on glass slides immersed with a FAI solution in isopropanol. Unlike MAPbI3, the larger radius of the FA cation favors the formation of a more stable hexagonal phase (δ-FAPbI3) instead of a perovskite (α-FAPbI3) structure at room temperature and shows no photovoltaic and luminescence performance. But then the authors stabilized FAPbI3 NWs in the cubic perovskite phase by incorporating a small amount of MABr into FAPbI3. It is worth mentioning that they confirmed that FA NWs show significantly improved lasing stability compared to MAPbI3 NWs due to the enhanced thermal stability, which remained in the corresponding granule film. In addition, the solution growth of NWs of FAPbBr3, mixed cation alloys (FA,MA)PbI3 and double alloys (FA,MA)Pb(Br,I)3 through both cation and halide substitutions were also reported for the first time. Owing to the better photostability and cation-induced bandgap tuning effect, another advantage of these NWs of FA-based perovskites over MA-based perovskites was that the lasing emissions are more widely tunable from visible to near-infrared wavelength. However, some of the black FAPbI3 (α-FAPbI3) gradually turned back to yellow FAPbI3 (δ-FAPbI3) over a few weeks at room temperature even in a desiccator, so the phase stability issue still needs to be addressed before it can be practically used in an optoelectronic device, which is also a direction of research for the future.
Zheng et al. also conducted a research study of the transition of the two phases of one-dimensional FAPbI3. They successfully synthesized hexagonal δ-FAPbI3 NRs through the two-step sequential deposition method as described earlier and then converted δ-FAPbI3 from hexagonal phase to α-FAPbI3 perovskites by the heating process. The phase transition of the FAPbI3 NR induced optical bandgap change was investigated by the temperature dependent photoluminescence technique, which reveals a sudden redshift near 150 K due to the phase transition from the tetragonal phase (δ-FAPbI3) to the cubic phase (α-FAPbI3). The optical constants determined by the temperature-dependent technique are helpful to understand this material and design effective perovskite devices in the future.
In addition to the single cation perovskite NWs, hybrid cation perovskite materials have shown the highest star-of-the-art conversion efficiency in solar cells and light emitting diodes, ascribed to their superior optoelectronic properties. After MAPbI3, FAPbI3 and CsPbBr3 NWs were reported, the synthesis of ion mixing perovskite NWs was also studied. It has been reported that perovskite solar cells based on FA1−xMAxPbI3 thin films often showed comparable or even better performance than those based on α-FAPbI3 and MAPbI3 devices. Song Jin and co-workers synthesized a complete series of mixed cation FA1−xMAxPbI3 nanostructures by placing a PbAc2-coated side facing upward in a vial and reacting with a mixed MAI/FAI solution with various FA/MA ratios as previously reported. NWs with different anionic compositions (MAPbBr3, MAPbCl3, FAPbBr3, MAPbIxBr3−x, and MAPbI3−xBrx) were obtained via an ion-exchange reaction in isopropanol solutions by Petrov et al. Their research study demonstrated that through the proper control of precursor varieties, concentration and reaction conditions, different perovskite NWs with a series ratio of cations can be synthesized.

Peidong Yang's group synthesized CsPbX3 NWs by reacting cesium oleate with lead halide in the presence of oleic acid (OA) and oleylamine (OAm) in octadecene (ODE) at 150–250 °C. The temperature was directly increased to 150 °C and stayed 1 h for complete dissolution of the PbX2 (X = Cl or Br) salt; then Cs-oleate solution was quickly injected. For CsPbI3 NWs, a higher temperature (>180 °C) was needed for relatively uniform NW growth. After a certain duration, the reaction mixture was cooled by using an ice-water bath. To analyze the NWs’ formation mechanism, the shape evolution of the as-prepared CsPbBr3 nanostructures synthesized with different reaction times is shown in Fig. 7. Usually, the formation of high aspect ratio NRs or NWs in solution synthesis methods is achieved by oriented attachment of nanocrystals or by anisotropic growth driven by high monomer concentrations with the assistance of surfactant capping, but they dismissed the former possible mechanism, since no dimers or “oligomers” of nanocubes were observed in the products. In order to obtain a better understanding of the NWs’ growth mechanism, more experiments have been conducted to investigate the influence of temperature, time, surfactants, and precursor concentration on the morphology of the synthesized NWs. They demonstrated that the NW formation most likely follows a surfactant-directed 1D growth mode through a control experiment. First, when using only OAm as surfactant (without OA), it turned out that PbBr2 does not fully dissolve. This demonstrated that OA was essential for coordinating with Pb2+ and decomposing the precursor to form monomers. Another control experiment was carried out changing the reaction solvent to OAm (without ODE) while maintaining all other conditions. The reaction showed much slower kinetics and the yield of the NWs was much higher. ODE was a non-coordinating solvent, while OAm could serve as a capping ligand for Pb2+. The slower kinetics of the control experiment implied that the binding of OAm to Pb2+ can reduce the reactivity of the Pb2+ precursor and maintain a higher monomer concentration after the nucleation stage, which was essential for anisotropic growth as demonstrated in the two-step sequential deposition method. Liu et al. further verified this theory by varying the ratios of OA to OAm, which allowed their growth with tunable dimensionalities and sizes, as shown in Fig. 8. The dimensionality of the as-synthesized products could be tailored by controlling the ratios of OA to OAm in the raw materials. With an increase in OAm, CsPbBr3 would be changed into 1D NRs and subsequently grown into 2D nanosheets which confirmed that OAm bonded to the surface of PbBr2 ruled the growth of perovskites.

Mixed-halide perovskite CsPb(Br/I)3 NRs were also synthesized conveniently by simultaneously adding precursor salts PbBr2 and PbI2. It was also found that the CsPb(Br/I)3 NRs could maintain a uniform rod shaped structure and the diameter and the length of CsPb(Br/I)3 NRs can be roughly controlled by adjusting the reaction time. Similarly, the mixed-cation perovskite FA0.33Cs0.67PbBr3−xIx was also reported by simultaneously injecting Cs-OA solution and FA-OA solution during the reaction.
Both the CsPbX3 NWs CsPb(Br/I)3 NRs and FA0.33Cs0.67PbBr3−xIx mentioned above contain the Pb element. There have been efforts to replace lead with nontoxic elements, such as Sn, Ge, Bi, and Sb, in perovskite nanocubes. Among them, an Sn-based inorganic perovskite (CsSnI3) thin film has been successfully synthesized and used as the hole-transporting material in solar cells. Later, Lee et al. produced a Sn-based perovskite Cs2SnI6 film with higher air stability and good solar cell efficiency owing to the better stability of Sn4+ than that of Sn2+. The same train of thought and experience can be used for one-dimensional perovskite areas. The first study of well-structured lead-free and stable Cs2SnI6 NWs and NRs was reported by Wang's group via a facile hot-injection approach. Typically, cesium oleate reacted with tetravalent tin(IV) iodide in the presence of OA and OAm in ODE at 220 °C to generate crystalline Cs2SnI6 NWs and NRs. More surprisingly, they achieved morphological control of Cs2SnI6 nanocrystals over time through this method. Samples at different time points were taken and imaged with TEM and HRTEM, as shown in Fig. 9. In this process, OAm acted as a complexing agent for Sn4+ ions, while ODE played a role in suppressing Cs2SnI6 nanocrystal growth.
The same mixed OA/OAm systems have been used for the preparation of zinc oxide NWs. The NW growth mechanism has been discussed a lot, which should be a dielectric-constant-mediated attachment induced by dipole–dipole attraction. These results implied that there was a cooperative effect between OA and OAm, both of which were required in the formation process of Cs2SnI6 nanobelts, suggesting an OA/OAm cooperatively controlled crystallization mechanism.
It is generally accepted that deprotonated OA (C17H33COO−) could interact selectively with specific crystal facets strongly and densely because of its high electron-donating ability. With the presence of OAm (or other amines), enhanced deprotonation of OA takes place as shown by the following equation. Limited ion exchange reactions take place after adding precursors sequentially. Deprotonated OA, which possesses a higher electron donating ability than other organic ligands in the system, could preferentially and selectively adsorb on one orientation, thus forming the NWs and NRs.

The liquid phase growth pattern is determined by the formation of nucleation centres randomly distributed over the substrate; therefore there is little control on the coverage area, pinholes, aspect ratio and orientation of the NWs. It is difficult to achieve a pure preparation of perovskite NWs by the solution method. Typically, mixtures of rods, wires, plates, and cubic structures are obtained on the bottom with large variations in size. Precise control of the NWs’ position and orientation depends on the substrate surface. As a result, templates are introduced as the frame to guide the growth direction of perovskites. The templates simply serve as a scaffold within which material is generated in situ and shaped into a nanostructure with its morphology complementary to that of the template. An ideal template generally has the following two characteristics: (1) it can directly come into contact with and closely integrate with transparent conductive glass for subsequent material preparation, (2) the pore diameter can be finely tuned to control the nanowire diameter (D). This technique does not require the use of unique ligands or chemistries for any perovskite compositions. The difficulties lie in selecting appropriate templates and preparing uniform template pores and then filling the pores with perovskites, which is the key technology to improve the quality of perovskite NWs and is definitely worth exploring.

Ashley et al. adopted an anodized aluminium oxide (AAO) template on a conductive substrate, and then dipped it in a perovskite precursor solution, followed by dissolution and recrystallization of the material (see Fig. 10a). Due to the existence of the template, NWs oriented perpendicular to a transparent conductive electrode were obtained. Furthermore, using this technique, they could control the diameter of perovskite NW arrays along with the changeable AAO pore diameter (from 50 to 200 nm, see Fig. 10c–g). As mentioned above, the size and uniformity of pores in templates were the key factors. They also proved that the diameter of NWs had an effect on crystallinity. Experimental results showed that D = 110 nm NWs reproducibly exhibited the smallest absolute lattice strain (εWH), with greater εWH at both larger and smaller D. So, it makes sense to control the diameter of the as-grown NWs by selecting the appropriate diameter of the template. Additionally, they demonstrated that this process could be analogously used to synthesize organometal halide perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3 and CH3NH3PbBr3) and all inorganic perovskite (Cs2SnI6) NWs, further revealing another advantage of the template method. This approach, however, results in an unavoidable drawback: only NWs embedded inside the AAO are obtainable, since the AAO cannot be etched selectively. A method of selective template dissolution is required for more advanced structural characterization, for instance, determining whether the NWs are single crystalline. For this purpose, Oener et al. introduced a method to fabricate free-standing solution-based vertical nanowires. In contrast to embedding the perovskites inside the AAO matrix, they applied a pressure gradient to extrude the solution from the free-standing templates. The as-grown NWs could be broken off and transferred to a different substrate (glass, silicon, and TEM grids) for subsequent characterization.
A 2 μm-thick porous alumina membrane (PAM) was used as a nanoengineering template and firstly combined with a new vapor–solid–solid reaction (VSSR) process. Vertical nanochannels at the bottom immensely helped achieve guided 3D MAPbI3 NW array growth. A PAM can be fabricated via low-cost electrochemical anodization of aluminium (Al) foil with well-engineered nanochannel periodicity, diameter, and depth. It is worth noting that in many previous reports on MAPbI3 thin-film growth, PbI2 films were deposited first and then reacted with MAI to achieve crystalline MAPbI3 films. In this work, for the first time, Pb nanoclusters were used to grow perovskite NWs, which led to a fundamentally different growth mechanism. In particular, NW arrays with all diameters demonstrated better absorption than the planar control sample. This was ascribed to the NW array antireflection and light-trapping effect, which has been reported previously. It is conceivable that it will be a great challenge for vertical device fabrication if NW arrays are grown with other methods without the template, for example, the widely used NW epitaxial growth or non-epitaxial growth on supporting substrates. More importantly, they found that without nanochannel-guided growth, free-standing NWs had large length and diameter variations, which were highly undesirable for any device applications.
Experiments have shown that a template is not particularly sensitive to the materials that are deposited. For instance, lead-free CH3NH3SnI3 (MASnI3) NWs were fabricated by introducing the porous alumina template (PAT) earlier adopted by preparing 3D MAPbI3 NW arrays, along with a subsequent perovskite deposition by the vapor phase chemical reaction method. Briefly, MAI vapor was transported to the PAT by the argon gas and then reacted with the Sn nanoclusters inside the nanopores of the PAT. The overall growth process for MASnI3 NWs in a PAT is schematically shown in Fig. 11a–d. In this work, Sn metal was used as the precursor while SnI2 is the intermediate product. This reaction process has been confirmed in the MAPbI3 NW growth process. They found that a three-dimensional array of perovskite NWs was grown and tightly embedded in PAT. A NW sample and a thin film after fabrication were kept in air with 70% humidity, and the decay of the materials was monitored by measuring the PL peak intensity from time to time. The primary advantage of the MASnI3 material compared with the widely researched MAPbI3 for high performance photovoltaics rested in its nontoxicity by replacing heavy metal Pb with the much more environmental friendly Sn. However, the chemical and physical stability of the MASnI3 material was even worse than that of MAPbI3, thus limiting its device performance and practical applications. Surprisingly, it was discovered that MASnI3 NWs have dramatically improved stability over planar MASnI3 thin films. The main reason was that the lateral diffusion path of oxygen and water molecules was effectively blocked by the alumina sidewalls. Thus, the utilization of nanoengineering templates for significant material stability improvement presented here demonstrates a new and viable strategy to address the stability issue of perovskite materials, which is a major roadblock for their practical application in high-performance devices.
The template method was used to prepare oriented-guidance, diameter-controlled, and shape-uniform NWs, mainly depending on the template. Obviously vertically oriented well-aligned NWs were easier to prepare. In addition to the expected photoelectric performance advantage of orderly NWs, stability improvement of vertically-oriented NWs cannot be ignored. The mechanism was discussed by Aashir Waleed and colleagues. In their study, MASnI3 NWs have a significantly improved stability compared with polycrystalline thin film. In the latter, there were pinholes and grain boundaries inevitably. Water molecules from the atmosphere can easily diffuse through the pinholes and along the grain boundaries to reach each crystalline grain to trigger the decomposition of the thin film at a fast rate, schematically demonstrated in Fig. 12a and b. So, increasing the grain size and reducing the grain boundary area can improve the stability. This is consistent with the observation that single crystalline perovskite materials have shown good stability. In addition to the effective protection provided by PATs, another important reason for the better stability of the NWs than polycrystalline thin films is the vertical orientation of the NWs, because of which water can only diffuse vertically from the top surface of NWs, resulting in a slower decomposition rate.

Another 1D perovskite preparation method related to the substrate surface is the vapor-phase epitaxial growth method. In this approach, the precursor powders evaporate when heated and then they are carried to an epitaxial substrate by flowing gas for vapor growth. Compared with solution methods, vapor-phase grown nanostructures have better crystalline quality and lower defect density. In particular, vapor-phase epitaxial growth has shown great success in creating high-quality nanostructures with controllable morphologies and orientations. The unique patterns of the substrate surface produce well defined patterns of nanoparticles on epitaxial substrates. Commonly used epitaxial substrates include crystalline substrates for vertical epitaxial growth and mica or Si substrates for guided growth of horizontal NWs. Layered structured mica is a robust, inexpensive, and universal substrate for vertical epitaxial growth of other 1D semiconductors. Organic perovskites, such as MAPbI3, are not very suitable for high-temperature vapor-phase growth due to their poor thermal stability. However, vapor-phase synthesis can be a good choice for growing epitaxial nanostructures of inorganic perovskites (such as CsPbX3) with improved crystal quality because they are thermally stable at moderately high temperatures.

Chen and colleagues have grown high-quality horizontally oriented NWs and microwires (MWs) of CsPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, or I) with high density on mica by vapor-phase epitaxy. Specifically, a mixture of CsX and PbX2 powders was used as the precursor and heated in the middle of the heating zone of the furnace at about 300 to 350 °C. The evaporated precursor was carried by flowing argon gas to the downstream region, where freshly cleaved phlogopite (p-mica) or muscovite mica (m-mica) was placed and used as an epitaxial substrate for vapor growth. As shown in Fig. 13, well-aligned surface bound wires were horizontally oriented on the mica surface, and a network structure was formed by the elongated wires connected with each other. A 6-fold symmetry of the growth directions could be clearly observed, as indicated by the 60° or 120° angle between almost every pair of interconnected wires. Moreover, simply by varying the growth time, a variety of CsPbBr3 structures including single wires, Y-shaped branches, networks, and nearly continuous epitaxial CsPbBr3 films could be controllably grown, which further demonstrated the flexibility of this epitaxial growth progress. From XRD patterns of the as-grown samples, the absence of other diffraction peaks from CsPbBr3 strongly implied that these wires were well oriented, which was a signature of epitaxial growth with the (110) lattice planes of CsPbBr3 parallel to the mica surface.
Wang et al. successfully achieved epitaxial growth of individual CsPbX3 wires from vapor phase deposition (with the X component continuously tuned from Br to I) and large-scale synthesis of horizontally aligned wire arrays on a muscovite mica substrate. Each wire had a triangular prismatic structure with a clearly defined edge on top. There were other regions where CsPbBr3 NWs form equilateral triangles. Two separate wires clearly intersect together where the 60°-angle junction is formed. All the lines of evidence suggested that the CsPbBr3 arrays grow with guidance from the symmetry of the mica lattice.
Epitaxy is likely achieved via orientational matching between the nanowire and the substrate. For example, mica structures are composed of alternating sheets of positively charged potassium ions (K+) and negatively charged aluminosilicates, which consist of one layer of face-sharing AlO6 octahedra sandwiched with two layers of SiO6 octahedra. The adjacent alumina silicate sheets in mica are bound by van der Waals attraction; thus, the freshly cleaved mica surface is expected to be atomically smooth and free of dangling bonds. Such chemically inert substrates can relax stringent lattice matching conditions, facilitating the epitaxial growth of large-scale, high-quality crystals. The growth of CsPbBr3 NWs is initiated by the electrostatic attraction between CsPbBr3 and the mica substrate and then guided by the asymmetric lattice mismatch with the substrate to enable the formation of long surface-bound NWs. This kind of epitaxial NW growth mechanism is unlike the well-known horizontally orientated ZnSe, GaN, and ZnO, NWs guided by the atomic steps or nano steps on miscut sapphire. Instead it is close to that observed for materials that have an appropriate but asymmetric lattice mismatch with the host substrate, such as metal silicide on the Si (001) surface. Due to the approximately hexagonal symmetry of the mica (001) plane, the CsPbBr3 NWs grow in six directions with a 60° or 120° angle to each other. The as-grown wires in a horizontal manner, with stringent alignment, are often required in circuit level application.
High-quality CsPbX3 micro/nanorods with tunable compositions were also grown via a vapor deposition method. Briefly, an alumina boat containing of a mixture of CsX and PbX2 powders was placed at the heating zone of a home-built vapor deposition system (Fig. 14a). SiO2/Si substrates were placed downstream of the quartz tube to grow the CsPbX3 samples by systematically varying the temperature of the precursors with fully tunable compositions. As shown in the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image (Fig. 14b), perovskite micro/nanorods with a length of about 2–20 μm were achieved. Fig. 14e clearly showed that the rod had triangle cross sections with well-defined and smooth surfaces. A TEM image of the cross section of the triangular rod is shown in Fig. 14g, suggesting that the triangular rod grew along the [100] direction because of lower surface free energy according to the density functional theory (DFT) calculations. Importantly, CsPbBr3 rods were formed at low growth temperatures, while at high growth temperature cubic phase nanoplates were formed. They speculated that because the (011) surface interface of SiO2 can minimize the surface energy, the triangular rod morphology was formed with the (011) plane in parallel with the substrate and the [100] direction as the growth direction.

The hybrid organic–inorganic lead halide perovskites have been recognized as the most promising materials in fabricating solar cells owing to their high absorption efficiency, long diffusion length, and ambipolar semi-conductor characteristics. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the device has been enhanced from 3.8% to more than 22% rapidly in the past 9 years. Light absorption, exciton dissociation, and carrier transport are three factors affecting the photovoltaic performance. Carrier transport in perovskite layers is followed by charge separation at n-type oxide/perovskite and perovskite/HTL interfaces. MAPbI3 embedded in a ZnO nanorod scaffold showed excellent external quantum efficiency over the entire wavelength, which suggests that the reduced dimensionality of MAPbI3via the oxide nanorod template is beneficial for electron transport. To improve hole migration from perovskite to HTL and separation at the HTL/perovskite interface, perovskite NWs are introduced for solar cells because of their anisotropic geometry, large surface-to-volume ratio, and carrier and photon confinement in the other two dimensions. Therefore, compared with MAPbI3 nanocubes, the NWs exhibit higher external quantum efficiency, longer carrier lifetime, and lower dark current. These unique properties make NWs promising light-absorbing materials in solar cells. The 1D perovskite based solar cell structure is shown in Fig. 15a. Grätzel's group firstly reported a nanowire perovskite solar cell. MAPbI3 NWs films were surprisingly formed by coating the PbI2 layer with an isopropanol solution of MAI in the presence of a small amount of a polar aprotic solvent. They confirmed that charge separation at HTL/perovskite was faster for 1D nanowires than for 3D nanocubes, leading to the best performing MAPbI3 nanowire perovskite solar cell device with an active area of 0.159 cm2, which showed a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 19.12 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.052 V, and a fill factor (FF) of 0.721, and a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 14.71% at AM 1.5G full solar illumination (Fig. 15b). This is the first attempt to use a polar aprotic solvent like DMF to dissolve a small number of pre-deposited PbI2 solid films during the second spinning step. The locally dissolved PbI2 may serve as a preferential site for reacting with MAI to grow a 1D structure, like a liquid catalyst cluster model. Hole extraction from perovskite nanowires was demonstrated to be more efficient than in the bulk case because of their increased surface area, which established better contact with HTM. The lateral conductivity of nanowire films was higher than that of bulk cuboid films. Because charge separation and conductivity are better in a nanowire structure, higher photovoltaic performance is expected when a flat web structured nanowire film is fabricated. Yuqiao Wang's group did a similar study and obtained similar results. They reported solar cells composed of nanowire/nanocube hybrid perovskites by controlling the ratio of DMF in the MAI/iso-propanol solution and proved that the addition of NWs into nanocubes could improve the injective balance of the electron/hole. The loose and porous nanowire film would decrease the contact interface between perovskite and ETL if it directly comes into contact with ELT, resulting in the reduction of the electron/hole separation place, which has been discussed in previous results. They gained the optimized Jsc of 16.39 mA cm−2, Voc of 0.829 V, FF of 0.747 and PCE of 10.14%. PCE based on the nanowire/nanocube hybrid device enhanced by 12.29%.

Even though theoretically perovskite NWs are promising materials for solar cells, in fact the PCEs of NW-based solar cells are lower than the highest efficiency of granular films. We speculate there are two main reasons. Firstly, it is difficult to grow vertically oriented NWs without a template. Although by relying on the template method we can achieve the synthesis of high-quality vertical perovskites, the absorbance performance and carrier transport properties of the perovskite layer will be affected inevitably by the presence of the template. The transport capability of carriers along the axis of NWs is very strong, which can only be helpful in improving the efficiency of the solar cells when NWs are perpendicular to the two electrodes. The other reason is the bad contact between the NWs and the electron transport layer as well as the hole transmission layer, which results that electrons and holes that are separated from the light-absorbing layer cannot be transmitted well to the two electrodes. The two directions for future research on NW based solar cells may lie in the synthesis of vertical NWs without a template and the improvement of contact between NWs and other transport layers.

A laser is a device that uses stimulated radiation principles to amplify or oscillate light in certain excited substances. There are three conditions that should be satisfied, namely the reversed upper state population, the resonant cavity structure that enables the optical feedback, and the threshold current density to guarantee that gain is greater than loss. Usually the quality factor (Q = λ/δλ, where λ is the peak center wavelength and δλ is the peak width) of the resonant cavity is used to measure the lifetime of the photon in a waveform. A larger quality factor means that the photon lifetime is longer, which is a good choice for more efficient amplification and thus higher emission intensity. Another important parameter of a laser is called lasing thresholds (PTh), which is used to describe the critical oscillation condition, i.e. the smaller the laser threshold, the easier to oscillate.

The one-dimensional geometry and large refractive index enable strong confinement of photonic modes guided along the axial direction, and the two smooth end facets serve as a Fabry–Perot cavity for optical amplification to trigger lasing action. So one-dimensional materials are good alternative laser materials. Over the past 15 years, optically pumped lasing has been prepared from a number of classic inorganic semiconductor NWs, such as ZnO, GaN, CdS, and GaAs, with emissions from the ultraviolet to the near-infrared region. One of the main obstacles limiting the potential applications of semiconductor NW based lasers is the high threshold carrier density required for lasing. The high lasing threshold not only makes key technical advancements such as electrically driven lasing and integration into optoelectronic devices difficult, but also imposes fundamental limits due to the onset of Auger recombination losses. In the search for an ideal material for NW lasing, perovskites materials have attracted attention because of their good performance in solar cells. Their remarkable photoelectric performance can be attributed to their long carrier lifetimes and diffusion lengths, along with being easily excited from a reversed upper state population reversal, which are the same physical properties ideal for lasers. Indeed, perovskite films and nanoplates have been shown to be efficient optical gain media, but lasing thresholds were high in these reports, similar to other semiconductor materials, due to the polycrystalline nature of the samples used. Lately, lasers based on perovskite NWs were reported by many research scholars.
For example, Song Jin's group have grown high-quality single-crystal CH3NH3PbI3 NWs and then carried out lasing experiments. They demonstrated room-temperature lasing in these NWs with low lasing thresholds, high quality factors, near-unity quantum yield, and broad tunability covering the near-infrared to visible wavelength region. In their research, a small number of well-dispersed perovskite NWs were transferred from the growth surface to a Si/SiO2 substrate by a simple dry contact process, and then a 402 nm pulsed laser beam, with the beam waist adjusted to be larger than the length of each NW, was used as a nearly uniform pump source (see Fig. 16a). Representative emission spectra near the lasing threshold are shown in Fig. 16c. The inset shows the integrated PL intensity and the full-width at half-maximum (FWHM) of the PL peak (δλ) as a function of pump fluence and the integrated PL intensity grows linearly with pump fluence. Above PTh, a sharp lasing peak at ∼787 nm emerged and the slope of the emission intensity versus pump fluence plot increased, while the intensity of the spontaneous emission region approached saturation, indicating the occurrence of lasing. The FWHM at P = 630 nJ cm−2, at which power the lasing peak dominated, was 0.22 nm. This gave a quality factor Q of ∼3600, which was more than an order of magnitude higher than that from the state-of-the-art GaAs–AlGaAs core–shell NW laser operating at a temperature of 4 K. In addition, they proved that more than 85% of the as-grown NWs showed lasing, of which the minimum lasing threshold was 220 nJ cm−2. It's worth noting that the threshold values of as-grown single-crystal CH3NH3PbI3 NWs were nearly two orders of magnitude lower than those reported recently for near-infrared lasing from lead halide perovskites in polycrystalline thin films or nanoplates. By simply mixing different amounts of methylammonium iodide and bromide or bromide and chloride in the precursor solution, they successfully synthesized single-crystal NWs of MAPbBryI3−y and MAPbClxBr3−x alloys with various stoichiometries. As shown in Fig. 17a, the emission colour of mixed stoichiometry NWs could be tuned over the near-infrared to the visible range. Such an excellent lasing performance, combined with the facile solution growth of single-crystal NWs and the broad stoichiometry-dependent tunability of emission colour, makes MAPbX3 NW an outstanding new member of semiconductor NW laser materials.
Despite such an excellent performance achieved in MAPbX3 for optically pumped lasers, one major obstacle for its practical applications was its instability in that MAPbX3 could degrade when it is exposed to prolonged heat or injected with high current. Compared with MAPbX3, FAPbI3 exhibits a slightly lower bandgap as well as better temperature and moisture stability. Hexagonal phase FAPbI3 NWs were synthesized in the first step and then converted to stabilized perovskite phase NWs by incorporating a small amount of MABr into FAPbI3 and optically pumped lasing was demonstrated by Zhu's group. The MABr-stabilized FAPbI3 perovskite NWs showed low lasing thresholds of a few microjoules per square centimeter and high quality factors of ∼1500. In particular, the lasing stabilities of FAPbI3, MABr stabilized FAPbI3, and MAPbI3 NW lasers were tested. The pure lasing emission intensities from these NWs as a function of pumping time (or the number of excitation laser shots) were compared. Significantly, both types of FAPbI3 NWs show significantly improved lasing stability compared to MAPbI3 NWs. There could be two factors for the improved photostability of these FA-based double alloys over MA-based alloys. Firstly, the FA-based perovskites have better thermal stability, which could further contribute to improved photostability under sustained laser illumination. Secondly, recent first-principles calculations showed that the activation energies of the ion migration in FAPbI3 are slightly higher than those in MAPbI3. It's possible that the light-induced ion migration effect might be mitigated in FA-based perovskites owing to the larger cation size and the enhanced interaction between FA cations and halide ions. Compared with the converted FAPbI3 NWs, the MABr-stabilized FAPbI3 NWs generally showed longer PL lifetime, better crystallinity, smoother surface morphology, and flat end-facets, which likely contributed to their lower lasing thresholds (∼2.6 μJ cm−2). In addition, by cation and halide doping and substitution, FAPbBr3, (FA,MA)PbI3, and double alloy (FA,MA)Pb(Br,I)3 NWs were grown for the first time. Owing to the better photostability and the cation-induced bandgap tuning effect, another advantage of these NWs of FA-based perovskites over MA-based perovskites was that the lasing emissions are more widely tunable from 490 to 824 nm, covering the visible to near-infrared wavelength. In comparison, the lasing thresholds and quality factors of these FA-based NW lasers were not as good as MA equivalents, so improving the laser performance is the direction for future efforts.
Another robust alternative method to improve the stability was the use of inorganic CsPbBr3 perovskites in lasers without sacrificing emission tunability or ease of synthesis. With strikingly similar optical and electronic properties to MAPbI3, CsPbBr3 perovskites are favorable materials for laser gain media. Peidong Yang's group successfully applied CsPbBr3 NWs to laser for the first time. In their research, lasing was achieved via optical excitation from a femtosecond pulsed laser. Upon focused excitation, lasing occurred at 532 nm with the emergence of narrow peaks. The lasing threshold was found at 5 μJ cm−2 (Pth), and the Q factor was 1009. As expected, CsPbBr3 NWs were stable not only for days under an ambient atmosphere and illumination, but also under constant, pulsed excitation above the lasing threshold. NWs were excited to 1.2Pth under either a closed nitrogen atmosphere or an ambient atmosphere (26 °C ± 0.5 °C and 50% ± 1% relative humidity) and the integrated emission intensity was monitored. Under nitrogen, nanowire lasing continues uninterrupted for longer than 1 h or over 109 excitation cycles almost without a decrease in intensity. While under atmospheric conditions, lasing output was observed to decrease over the course of the experiment, but it did not fall below the original output until over 4.4 × 108 excitation cycles. In contrast, amplified spontaneous emission from thin films of CsPbBr3 falls to 90% after only 1.6 × 107 excitation cycles. Whispering gallery mode lasing in MAPbI3 persists for 8 × 106 excitation cycles, whereas the long-term lasing stability of MAPbX3 NWs lasers has not been reported. In addition, they proved the possibility of wavelength tunability by replacing bromine with chlorine, which indicated that through halide substitution, it is possible to tune the wavelength across the entire visible spectral range. Song Jin's group did a further research study. By controlling the anionic stoichiometry, the entire CsPbX3 family as well as the CsPb(Br,Cl)3 and CsPb(Br,I)3 alloys were synthesized. The lasing emission spectra of the entire CsPbX3 NWs ranged from 400 to 750 nm, showing their great ability to tune the lasing peak position across the whole visible range.
The research conducted later was selectively focused on three single halogen inorganic perovskites, CsPbBr3, CsPbI3 and CsPbCl3. With different compositions of halides, the bandgap was successfully tuned over a wide range. The lasing wavelengths of all three types of CsPbX3 NWs were measured. As shown in Fig. 17b, the wavelengths of the nanowire lasers could be tuned by halide substitution, which covered the lasing colour range of the inorganic perovskite materials from blue in the CsPbCl3 NWs to green in the CsPbBr3 NWs to red in the CsPbI3 NWs. The inset showed the coherent lasing emission from the two ends of NWs diffracted into nearly spherical distributions that form interference pattern on the fluorescence image. This phenomenon is common in other perovskite NWs lasers, because the cross-sectional dimensions of the NWs are smaller than the light wavelength. In their research, the Pth of the CsPbCl3 and CsPbI3 NWs was higher than that of the CsPbBr3 NWs, which might be related to the crystal qualities of the NWs. Indeed, the lifetimes of the CsPbCl3 (1.1 ns) and CsPbI3 (3.7 ns) NWs were shorter than that of the CsPbBr3 (7.2 ns) NWs at a settled excitation intensity. These results indicated that the long lifetimes of the NWs (CsPbBr3 > CsPbI3 > CsPbCl3) were responsible for the low Pth (CsPbBr3 < CsPbI3 < CsPbCl3). Lasing was observed at a slightly higher Pth after the NWs had been aged for several months at ambient temperature and humidity, illustrating that CsPbBr3 NWs were stable against hydrolysis under ambient conditions.
Recently, Huang et al. directly synthesized graded composition CsPbBrxI3−x NWs with an increased Br/I from the centre to the ends along a NW through vapor-phase epitaxial growth on mica. The graded composition resulted in varied bandgaps along the NW, which induces a blue-shifted emission from the centre to the ends. As an efficient gain medium, the NW exerted position-dependent lasing performance, with a different colour at the ends and centre, respectively, above the threshold. Meanwhile, dual-color lasing with a wavelength separation of 35 nm was activated simultaneously at a site with an intermediate composition.
It is certain that the quality of the laser emission which can be measured by Q, Pth, and stability depends on the type of material. But it may also be related to the length of the prepared NWs, which can be reasonably inferred according to the reported results in the CH3NH3PbI3 NW laser. The amplification efficiency in the nanowire resonators depends on several factors, such as the reflectivity of the end facets as well as the nanowire length, width, and crystal quality. The high crystal quality of the NWs, which means a low defect density, can reduce the lasing threshold. Thus, the excitation intensity needed to reach the minimum carrier density for lasing was lowered in NWs, because the loss of carriers by the nonradiative decay to the defect states was minimized. But the specific effect and mechanism of NW length is not clear. Certainly, the primary determining factors need to be investigated further.

Photodetectors are important functional components in many applications that can capture light signals and convert them into electric signals. The working mechanism for the photodetector could be described as follows. Firstly, the electron–hole pairs would be generated when the photon energy of the irradiated laser is higher than the bandgap of light-absorbing materials. Secondly, the electrons and holes are transferred under different bias voltages. Finally, the separate electrons are collected at the anode, which leads to an intensive increase in photocurrent. In recent years, studies of photoelectric response devices have focused mainly on the preparation of new materials such as InP NWs, GaN NWs, Si NWs, and so on. Nevertheless, the complicated device structure and the low photoelectric responsivity limited their further applications. Two key figure-of-merit parameters are responsivity (R) and detectivity (D*). Responsivity, the ratio of photocurrent to incident light intensity, indicates how efficiently the detector responds to an optical signal. It is defined by
where
Jph is the photocurrent and Llight is the incident light intensity. Detectivity is defined in terms of the responsivity, the effective area of the detector (A), the electrical bandwidth (f) and the noise current (in) by using the equation:
The most interesting features of perovskites are their high sensitivity to visible light and their high photovoltage, which are the basic parameters required for efficient solar-to-electric energy conversion. These excellent features of perovskites have been explored gradually in other photovoltaic devices, for example, photodetectors. Most materials that are suitable for solar cells are also suitable for photodetectors.
Moreover, long charge carrier lifetime and diffusion length have been observed for MAPbI3 perovskite films, indicating the low recombination rate of charge carriers in bulk films. In 2014, Yang Yang's group first reported perovskite photodetector based on the structure of PCBM/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/PEDOT:PSS. The device exhibited a photo response from 300 to 800 nm and a peak EQE of 80%. From 350 to 750 nm the detectivity approached 1014 Jones (at −100 mV), which was about one order of magnitude higher than the detectivity of a Si photodetector in the same spectral region. The performance parameters of these photodetectors, which were comparable to or even better than photodetectors fabricated from vacuum-processed inorganic materials, inspired new fundamental studies on the properties of such materials. However, continuous films consisting of tiny perovskite particles (at the sub-microscale or nanoscale) contained a large number of grain boundaries or defects, which acted as scattering centres for electrons and photons in photodetectors, thus causing problems such as low efficiency and responsivity. One possible approach to address this issue is to use low-dimensional and even single-crystal perovskites if possible as light absorbers in photodetection devices. In particular, the one-dimensional nanostructure has long photocarrier lifetime, fast charge transfer and simple processing technique, so the morphology-dependent photoconductive performance of perovskite materials deserves a further study. Besides, perovskite NW based photodetectors are extremely interesting because of the following reasons: (i) the one-dimensional structure introduces morphological anisotropy, which could be utilized to detect polarized light despite the highly isotropic crystal structure of perovskites; (ii) the excellent mechanical properties of perovskite NWs bring opportunities for the construction of highly flexible photodetectors on polymer substrates.
The first research study on the photo response of one-dimensional perovskites was conducted by Endre Horváth and colleagues. Devices were fabricated by placing MAPbI3 NWs of different sizes onto a highly p-doped silicon substrate with 300 nm SiO2 on top, and 100 nm-thick Pt contacts were deposited by e-beam evaporation through a microfabricated hard mask. A schematic illustration of a device is shown in Fig. 18a. They measured the current density in the device in the dark and under illumination (red laser, λ = 633 nm) by different incident laser powers in the 70 nW to 7 μW range. The output characteristics followed a linear behaviour, indicating that the contacts were ohmic (Fig. 18b). In the dark state, the device behaved like a good insulator with currents of the order of tens of pA and resistances in the GΩ range; while under the illumination of the laser, the absorption of the light generated electron–hole pairs that were extracted by the source-to-drain electric field and caused an increase in the conductance. From the photocurrent, one can estimate the responsivity. In their study, R was calculated to be 5 mA W−1. Although this value was about 4 orders of magnitude smaller than that of the best-in-class photoelectric devices made of graphene and monolayer MoS2, it was still comparable (10 times higher) to the value that has been achieved with the first prototypes of those 2D materials. The response time (Fig. 18c) showed that the rise and decay times for the on–off current under illumination were less than 500 μs, ∼104 faster than the state-of-the-art photodetectors made of monolayer MoS2 and graphene. It is worth mentioning that a comparative device with a film of MAPbI3 nanoparticles was produced. The results showed limited performance of the nanoparticle-based film, for the EQE of the device made of one-dimensional perovskites was twice as high as that of the photodetector prepared from MAPbI3 nanoparticles, most probably resulting from less grain boundaries in NWs. These results demonstrated that the morphological properties, such as the crystallite size, form, and its orientation, could play an essential role in the photodetection and photoconductive response of the trihalide perovskite thin films. Even though the performance of the first one-dimensional perovskite-based photodetector needed to be improved, it confirmed the possibility of optimizing the photodetector performance by reducing the dimensions.
Better performance was achieved in photodetectors based on MAPbI3 NWs through patterning and alignment. The photodetector performances had reached 1.32 A W−1 for responsivity, 2.5 × 1012 Jones for detectivity and 0.3 ms for response speed, superior to the performances of MAPbI3 thin films and other typical inorganic NW based photodetectors. The absorption of NW films as shown in Fig. 19a suggested that such NW films (∼300 nm thickness) could absorb more than 90% of the light from the UV to the whole visible light range, consistent with their bandgap and high molar extinction coefficient. The broadband absorption and high absorption coefficient suggested that the present NWs were promising materials for high performance photodetectors. The lighted current (Ilight) versus applied bias curves shown in Fig. 19b showed that photodetectors excited by 650 nm light obtained larger Ilight. Fig. 19c shows the I–t curve under the repetitive switching of 650 nm light at a bias of 2 V. The Ilight and Id (dark current) were stable as reversible and rapid switches between the illuminated state and the dark state. The obtained Ilight and Id were 115 nA and 5 nA, respectively, and the Ilight/Id ratio could reach 23. From a high-resolution scan of one cycle of I–t curves shown in Fig. 19d, the extracted rise and decay times were 0.2 ms and 0.3 ms, respectively, which were superior to a reported thin-film-based photodetector's speed (∼100 ms).
A previous study utilized groups of NWs to detect light sources, which might suffer from NW quality and the high resistance led to thermal degradation. It is necessary to systematically investigate single NW-based photodetectors in order to understand their intrinsic physical properties, especially their photo-carrier behaviour, which is the basis of perovskite-based optoelectronic devices. Moreover, the number of grain boundaries decreased in these single-crystalline perovskite NWs, thus resulting in a much smoother charge flow within the single-crystalline channel and enabling better device performance. Single-crystalline MAPbI3 NWs were firstly researched by Jiang Tang, particularly promising for photodetection because of their reduced grain boundary, morphological anisotropy, and excellent mechanical flexibility. They passivated surface defects of MAPbI3 NWs by introducing oleic acid (OA) soaking, thus extended the carrier lifetime, and increased the carrier mobility. OA can passivate exposed Pb ions on the surface of MAPbI3 NW through a deprotonation process, which formed lead-oleate bonds (Pb-OOC-R) in analogy to their passivation of PbS quantum dots and perovskite quantum dots. Such a hydrophobic oleate sheath (∼2 nm thick) also encapsulated the MAPbI3 NWs, which prevented moisture erosion and decomposition of MAPbI3 crystals. As a result, a device was generated with much improved stability, unprecedented sensitivity, and measured detectivity of 2 × 1013 Jones, which was the highest reported for any photodetectors based on MAPbI3. This value was better than those of commercial Si-based photodetectors (4 × 1012 Jones) and groups of MAPbI3 NW photodetectors (2.5 × 1012 Jones).
Studies of photodetectors based on all-inorganic perovskites were also carried out. For example, Lee et al. have reported the all-inorganic CsPbX3 (X = I, Br, Cl) perovskite quantum-dots as efficient optoelectronic detectors. Song Jin et al. synthesized CsPbBr3 NW networks with excellent connectivity, and then further fabricated photodetector devices using the as-grown NW networks on insulating and transparent p-mica substrate to study their optoelectronic properties. The response time of the photodetector device based on a NW network could be smaller than 0.1 s, which was faster than many previously reported perovskite-film based photodetectors, but inferior to MA-based NW photodetectors. But this attempt demonstrated the great potential of these materials and structure for direct integration into photodetectors.
Subsequently, mixed-halide CsPb(Br/I)3 NRs were synthesized and a photodetector device was formed based on the prepared NRs. The photoconductive properties of CsPb(Br/I)3 NRs for visible light photodetectors and fast optoelectronic applications were investigated. The absorption spectrum exhibited intense bandgap absorption around 625 nm, smaller than organic perovskites as reported earlier. A single photocurrent response with (without) irradiation was obtained, and a strong photo response was measured under the laser on–off status. On close observation, the CsPb(Br/I)3 nanorod based photodetector demonstrated comparable rise-time (0.68 s) and decay-time (0.66 s), which further indicated that the performance of inorganic perovskite NWs photodetectors should be enhanced further in order to compare with organic perovskite NW photodetectors.
Csx(CH3NH3)1−xPbI3 perovskite NWs were successfully synthesized and demonstrated single crystal characteristics with a uniform stoichiometric element distribution. Based on the abovementioned high quality single Cs0.5(MA)0.5PbI3 perovskite NWs, a reliable single-NW photodetector was fabricated to investigate their optoelectronic applications. It demonstrated a responsivity of 23 A W−1, exceeding most of the reported values in the perovskite NW photoconductive detectors, and the shot-noise normalized detectivity was 2.5 × 1011 Jones, comparable to the parameters of the commercial silicon-based NWs. After the organic component was introduced, the photoelectric detection ability improved a lot because the bandgap was finely tuned.
Also, popular non-toxic perovskite NW photodetectors have been fabricated and characterized based on three-dimensional MASnI3 perovskite NW arrays. Meanwhile, a planar MASnI3 film has been fabricated into photodetectors for comparison. The results showed that the photocurrent has a reasonable rise time of 1500 ms and decay time of 400 ms, which means a quick response speed of light. This device could reach a detectivity value of 8.80 × 1010 Jones. In particular, it was found that the decay of the light current is ∼500 times slower for the NW device as compared with the planar control device. The drastic improvement of stability originated from the structure characteristics of the NWs, which was excellently protected by the template, blocking the lateral diffusion of detrimental water and oxygen molecules.
In general, 1D perovskite photodetectors based on organic materials showed better photodetection performance than inorganic materials. This is ascribed to their broader absorption capacity leading to a higher light current. But because of the instability of organic perovskites, their application is limited. In comparison, the use of inorganic perovskites will be more practical, owing to their stability and absorption of fixed wavelengths. Follow-up work could focus on improving the NW preparation technique to obtain an improved detection performance.

NW-based photovoltaic devices have demonstrated high gain and high energy-conversion efficiency, either owing to the prolonged carrier lifetime or efficient light harvesting and carrier extraction. A variety of other device applications including transistors, diodes, memory, and sensors have been demonstrated based on such materials.

The well-structured lead-free and stable 1D Cs2SnI6 based solution-processed field effect transistors (FETs) were first successfully fabricated (see Fig. 20a) by drop-casting the concentrated Cs2SnI6 nanocrystal solution onto a clean silicon wafer with a 500 nm SiO2 layer and prepatterned gold as the electrode. The transconductance (gm = dIds/dVgs) was acquired by fitting the linear region of the Idsversus Vgs curve. As shown in Fig. 20b, a typical device showed an efficient modulation of current of more than 4 orders of magnitude (I-ON/I-OFF ratio >104). The field effect mobility of this device was estimated on the basis of equations in the literature. The calculated hole mobility was found to be 20.2 cm2 (V s), while the calculated hole concentration was 9.1 × 1018 cm−3. Moreover, the hole mobility of 1D-based FET devices was much higher than those of the recently reported PbSe, CdSe/ZnS, and ZnTe colloidal nanocrystal based devices and was comparable to the best hole mobility of organic FETs.
High-quality perovskite NWs prepared by template-directed methods are conspicuously promising for 3D integrated electronics and optoelectronics owing to both their good crystallinity and high charge-carrier mobility. To further demonstrate the technological potential of perovskite NW arrays, MAPbI3 NW arrays have been fabricated into image sensors for the first time. In their study, all NWs were well isolated by the PAM template; thus each individual NW could potentially serve as one pixel and each image sensor consisted of 1024 photodiode pixels. As the diameter of each NW could be as small as hundreds of nanometres and each NW could serve as one sensor pixel, this unique image sensor design can potentially lead to an extremely high resolution, approaching the optical diffraction limit. The imaging functionality has been verified by recognizing various optical patterns projected on the sensor. It was found that the NW sensors can respond to dynamic optical input with reasonable speed; thus, the video capture function of the NW image sensor was also successfully demonstrated. The overall device structure of a 3D-NW-array-based image sensor could be found in Fig. 20c. The magnified schematic of the 3D NW array showed high-density ordered vertical NWs integrated inside the channels of a nanoengineering template. As the results show, Fig. 20d demonstrates the imaged letter “H” and the symbol of a heart projected to the image sensor, respectively. It could be seen that these symbols were clearly resolved, indicating the reliable imaging function of the sensor device. The flexible optical sensor arrays could find broad applications in wearable electronics, electronic eyes, multifunctional robotics, artificial skins, etc.
Vertically oriented NR arrays have also been proposed as promising morphologies for LEDs because the vertically oriented geometry offers advantages in terms of an inherently large active surface area, a higher charge carrier injection efficiency, and improved strain relaxation from thermal expansion caused by heating. Peidong Yang's group fabricated the first hybrid perovskite NR array LEDs based on MAPbBr3 as shown in the illustration in Fig. 20e. For these devices, the turn-on voltage for room temperature electroluminescence was around 3.5 V of DC bias (Fig. 20f), which was 0.2 V higher than the thin film case. In addition, NR arrays offer a potential approach to realize higher external quantum efficiencies for LEDs.

Metal halide perovskites have been attracting tremendous attention from materials science researchers in recent years, mainly because of the excellent optoelectronic properties and high PCE of perovskite solar cells that have been achieved within a relatively short development time. They exhibit better absorption and greater stability in the form of one-dimensional materials such as NWs and NRs attributed to their geometrical characteristics. In this review, several methods of preparing one-dimensional perovskite are introduced, including solution-processed methods, template-directed methods, and vapor-phase epitaxial growth methods. We tried to summarize suitable preparation methods for different types of perovskite materials, referring to the organic or inorganic category, and analyzed the potential guiding mechanism of each method. In our discovery, the template-directed methods and the solution-process methods are not sensitive to the type of material. Therefore, in solution-process methods, we only need to focus on creating reaction conditions to achieve the crystallographic driving force of 1D perovskites; while in template-directed methods, the selection of an appropriate template is the most important. However, experiments which need high temperature conditions including the aforementioned high-temperature heat injection method and vapor-phase epitaxial method are not suitable for organic perovskites because of their poor thermal stability. In addition, morphology differences existed in 1D perovskites obtained by different preparation methods. It is difficult to prepare pure NWs or NRs by solution-processed methods, let alone well-aligned oriented-guidance NWs. Samples obtained are typically mixtures of rods, wires, and cubic structures on the substrate. In comparison, well-organized vertical and horizontal NWs can be produced by template-directed methods and vapor-phase epitaxial growth methods mainly because of a unique template and substrate, respectively.

Combining their material and geometric advantages, 1D halide perovskites exhibit excellent photoelectricity performance compared with granular films in various promising applications. We have critically reviewed recent advances in the optoelectronic applications of this type of material. The results indicated that they were well applied to three main devices, including solar cells, lasers, and photodetectors. NW samples with good absorption, low defect and trap density, small recombination rate, and long lifetime of the photogenerated carriers show great potential for solar cells. In lasers, their easily being excited (which means a low lasing threshold) along with high optical gain performance ensures a superior laser performance of 1D halide perovskites compared to granular films. Furthermore, their high sensitivity and low carrier recombination result in their better light detection performance compared to other semiconductor materials. It's worth noting that both in lasers and in photodetectors, organic perovskites showed more excellent performance than inorganic perovskites, but worse stability was a big issue that needed to be addressed.
In our opinion, research on preparation methods and the applications of 1D perovskites are never separable. The development of robust synthetic methods that offer good morphology control will certainly be required for the full utilization of these nanoscale perovskite materials in various device applications. For instance, if vertical growth on the substrate could be realized, without any template, the efficiency of solar cells would be able to improve a lot. Furthermore, orderly array NWs have better stability, so more effort should also be put into the control of morphology. All in all, we are convinced that 1D halide perovskites materials have a bright future for photovoltaics and other optoelectronics and could lead to exciting and useful discoveries by an in-depth understanding of the close relationship between the preparation method, structure (morphology) and transport properties.

There are no conflicts to declare.


We acknowledge the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21403112), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (No. 3091501333), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51502140), the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (BK20150761), a project funded by the Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions (PAPD), and Postgraduate Research & Practice Innovation Program of Jiangsu Province.


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018