 DOI: 10.1039/C3TC31933D
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 2622-2634


Hong Goo
Jeon
,

Yoon Ho
Huh
,

Soo Hong
Yun
,

Ki Woong
Kim
,

Sun Sook
Lee
,

Jongsun
Lim
,

Ki-Seok
An
* and 

Byoungchoo
Park
*

Department of Electrophysics, Kwangwoon University, Seoul 139-701, Korea. E-mail: bcpark@kw.ac.kr; Fax: +82 2943 3208; Tel: +82 2940 5237

Advanced Materials Division, Korea Research Institute of Chemical Technology, 141 Gajeong-Ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 305-600, Korea. E-mail: ksan@krict.re.kr

Received
2nd October 2013
, Accepted 26th January 2014
First published on 28th January 2014
We herein report an investigation of graphene oxide (GO) thin layers fabricated by simple horizontal-dip (H-dip) coating on an indium-tin-oxide (ITO) anode as used in solution-processable organic semiconducting devices. Homogeneous and smooth GO thin films were successfully deposited via an aqueous dispersion of GO on an ITO electrode, with a high surface coverage and low surface roughness, and a thickness controlled by H-dip coating. The use of an H-dip-coated GO film as a hole-injecting interfacial layer (IFL) in organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs) resulted in a remarkable improvement in device performance (17 cd A−1), better than that (12 cd A−1) of a reference OLED with a spin-coated GO IFL. Stacked bi-IFLs of GO/poly(ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulfonate) (GO/PEDOT:PSS) fabricated by H-dip coating were also investigated as hole-injecting IFLs in OLEDs, and these showed an even better device performance (23 cd A−1). Furthermore, it was also shown that polymer solar cells with H-dip-coated GO/PEDOT:PSS hole-collecting bi-IFLs exhibited a remarkable improvement in power conversion efficiency (6.9%), which was also higher than that (4.8%) obtained with spin-coated bi-IFLs. These results clearly indicate that the H-dip-coating of GO(/PEDOT:PSS) can effectively modify the ITO interface to yield efficient hole-selective IFLs, representing considerable promise for use as an alternative to spin-coated IFLs in the mass production of solution-processable organic semiconducting devices.

Interest in solution-processable organic (or polymeric) semiconducting devices such as organic (or polymer) light-emitting devices (OLEDs or PLEDs) and photovoltaic devices (OPVs) continues to increase thanks to their low-temperature, fast and simple fabrication process. The formation of a flat, uniform layer over a large area is particularly important for achieving high efficiency and reliable performance in solution-processable organic semiconducting devices. Over the past decade, the performance of such solution-processable organic devices has been improved and these devices have become more efficient; solution-processable OLEDs can now have a luminosity of about 53 lm W−1, and polymer solar cells (PSCs) have been produced with a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of over 10.6%. Moreover, important research has been carried out on solution processes such as roll-to-roll coating using a variety of techniques, including the use of new device structures and the development of new organic compounds. To date, however, solution-processed organic devices have shown relatively low performance and stability, and there is therefore still some way to go before they can compete with inorganic or vacuum-deposited devices.

One way to improve efficiency and stability in solution-processable devices is via a reduction in the height of the barrier at the electrode contacts; for cathode contacts, optimization of the barrier height can be achieved by modifying the metal cathode interface to match the work function of cathode to the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of the active layer. For anode contacts, the barrier height can be optimized by the application of a hole-selective interfacial layer (IFL) on top of the anode. Because the work function (4.5–5.0 eV) of indium tin oxide (ITO), the material most commonly used as the transparent anode, is significantly lower than the typical highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of the active layer, hole-selective IFLs must have a HOMO level that is closely matched to the energy level between the HOMO of the active layer and the work function of ITO. Several attempts have been made to match the energy band using various material systems, as well as to reduce the roughness and to obtain a uniform surface. Among these, an aqueous dispersion of a p-type transparent conducting polymer of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) has been widely used as the hole-selective IFL in solution-processable devices. However, PEDOT:PSS is highly acidic because of its sulfate ions (pH ∼ 1.5). This acidity can damage the surface of the ITO and dissolve the ions that might migrate into the layer stack. This acidity could also gradually reduce the device performance over time. These problems make it necessary to consider other neutral materials for IFLs that are chemically stable, mechanically uniform, and solution-processable, in order to minimize such undesired effects in solution-processable devices.
Recently, some consideration has been given to the use of stable aqueous dispersions of neutral graphene oxide (GO) sheets as an IFL material for ITO anodes. Water-soluble GO, which consists of a two-dimensional sheet of graphene functionalized with an oxygen group in the form of epoxy and hydroxyl groups on a basal plane and of various other types at the edges, has a unique heterogeneous electronic structure due to the presence of mixed sp2 and sp3 hybridizations. GO is an insulator because of the disrupted sp2 conjugation of the graphene lattice, but the residual sp2 clusters in it can still allow hole transport to occur via hopping, and GO is thus an intriguing nanomaterial that shows promise as a water-processable, flexible, low-cost material, with tremendous potential for large-area electronics. These properties, combined with a work function of 4.9 eV (similar to ITO) and a fairly large band gap, make it a good candidate as a hole-selective IFL in organic devices, with none of the problems associated with ITO erosion. The effectiveness of GO films as IFLs has been demonstrated in spin-coated PSCs consisting of bulk heterojunction (BHJ) photovoltaic (PV) layers of poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and fullerene derivative phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) blends, providing a PCE of 3.25%. It has also been reported that the use of a layer of GO beneath PEDOT:PSS (GO/PEDOT:PSS) could protect ITO from ion diffusion and acid etching, and extract holes from the active PV layer. The use of these stacked bi-layer IFLs of GO/PEDOT:PSS showed improved PSC performances, with a PCE of 3.53%. However, the efficiency of the PSCs was somewhat lower than that (3.63%) of reference PSCs with a conventional spin-coated single PEDOT:PSS IFL, which may be a result of the poor quality of the spin-coated GO film.
The GO films studied to date have been made using a spin-coating method, in which GO sheets are distributed inhomogeneously and sparsely, which may hamper their ability as anodic IFLs, given that the presence of uncoated regions of ITO can reduce device performance. In addition, despite the popularity and convenience of spin-coating, it has several disadvantages, such as the stress caused by spinning motion, poor uniformity, and a large amount of wasted solution, making spin-coating unsuitable for covering large areas. There is thus a need to fabricate homogeneous thin layers of GO to improve its use for IFLs, making it superior or at least comparable to PEDOT:PSS but without its drawbacks, for use in OLEDs, PSCs, and other organic devices.
We herein describe our attempts to overcome the limitations of conventional spin-coated GO films using simple sequential solution-processing as an alternative method. We report on the use of thin and homogeneous GO films fabricated using a simple solution process of horizontal-dip (H-dip)-coating on ITO substrates in place of spin-coated GOs, and discuss the influence of the H-dip-coated GO films on the performance of solution-processable OLEDs and PSCs. The H-dip-coating used in this study is known to be an alternative method for depositing solution and coating layers in a controlled fashion even when very little material is available, and is easily transferable to a roll-to-roll-coating environment, compared with conventional spin-coating. The thin film properties of GOs fabricated by H-dip-coating were examined, and we found that H-dip-coated GO films are quite homogeneous and smooth, with a high packing density of GO sheets and a low surface roughness. The H-dip-coated GO film was assessed as a hole-selective IFL and compared with a spin-coated GO IFL in solution-processed OLEDs and PSCs. Furthermore, to improve hole selectivity, we also examined stacked bi-layers of H-dip-coated GO/PEDOT:PSS IFLs on the ITO layer and showed a significantly improved device performance in both OLEDs and PSCs compared to those with conventional spin-coated GO/PEDOT:PSS IFLs.

A patterned ITO layer (80 nm, 30 ohm square−1) on a glass substrate was used as a transparent anode. The ITO substrates were ultrasonically cleaned and then dried in sequence, followed by ultra-violet ozone cleaning for 15 min. An aqueous graphene oxide (GO) dispersion was synthesized from natural graphite according to a modified version of Hummer's method. Natural graphite flake (Sigma Aldrich) was oxidized to graphite oxide using NaNO3, H2SO4, KMnO4, and H2O2. The as-obtained graphite oxide was washed with distilled water several times by centrifugation. GO sheets were exfoliated from graphite oxide by ultra-sonication. The products were redispersed in distilled water. The reproducibility of the GO synthesis was monitored by detecting the X-ray diffraction pattern and by using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy to confirm the oxygen-containing functionalities present in the GO. By using H-dip-coating, three types of hole-selective IFLs were prepared on ITO anodes: single layers of GO and PEDOT:PSS (CLEVIOS PVP AI 4083, H. C. Starck), and bi-layers of an upper PEDOT:PSS layer on a lower GO layer (GO/PEDOT:PSS). In order to maintain the shape of the downstream meniscus during H-dip-coating, the IFL dispersion was supplied into the gap space by using a syringe pump at an appropriate injection rate (1.5 μl s−1). For comparison, three types of reference IFLs were also prepared by spin-coating using GO, PEDOT:PSS, and GO/PEDOT:PSS. The IFLs coated on the ITO substrates were then dried at 120 °C in a dry N2 environment for 20 min. The thicknesses of the GO and PEDOT:PSS layers were 4 and 40 nm, respectively.


Raman spectra of the GO films were measured using a confocal Raman microscope (WITec alpha300, He–Ne laser, λlaser = 632.8 nm, ∼600 nm spot size, ∼10 mW power, 50× objective). The mapping area was set to be 128 × 128 μm2 and the step size was 8 μm. The D and G bands of the GO films were recorded and the integration time was 2 s at each spot.


OLEDs were fabricated by coating a blended solution to form an electroluminescent (EL) layer on the ITO layer, which was pre-coated with a hole-selective IFL. For the blended EL solution, we used N,N′-diphenyl-N,N′-bis(3-methylphenyl)-1,1′-biphenyl-4,4′-diamine (TPD), 2-(4-biphenylyl)-5-(4-tert-butylphenyl)-1,3,4-oxadiazole (Bu-PBD), tris(2-phenylpyridinato) iridium (Ir(ppy)3), and poly(vinylcarbazole) (PVK) without further purification, in mixed solvents (2.5 wt%) of 1,2-dichloroethane and chloroform (3:1) (viscosity ∼1.0 cp). For comparison, two types of EL layer were prepared by H-dip- and spin-coating processes. The thickness of the coated EL layer was about 80 nm. 2 nm of Cs2CO3 electron-injecting buffer layer and a 50 nm of Al cathode were evaporated sequentially on the EL layer via thermal deposition (0.5 nm s−1) at a base pressure below 2.7 × 10−4 Pa. The effective size of the light-emitting area was 3 × 3 mm2.


PSCs were fabricated by spin-coating a blended solution of a PV layer on the ITO layer, which was precoated with hole-selective IFLs. For the blended PV solution, we added poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT, 1-material Chemscitech Inc.) and fullerene derivative phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM, Nanostructured Carbon Inc.) in a 1.20:0.88 weight ratio to a solvent of 1,2-dichlorobenzene. The thickness of the spin-coated PV was about 85 nm. The coated PV layer was then dried at 120 °C for 3 min, to remove the remaining solvents. 1 nm of Al:Li electron-injecting buffer layer and 50 nm of Al cathode were evaporated sequentially on the PV layer via thermal deposition (0.5 nm s−1) at a base pressure below 2.7 × 10−4 Pa. After fabrication, the PSCs were annealed at 150 °C for 10 min on a hot plate (post annealing). For comparison, other PSCs were also investigated using low band gap BHJ PV materials of poly[[4,8-bis[(2-ethylhexyl)oxy]benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl][3-fluoro-2-[(2-ethylhexyl)carbonyl]thieno[3,4-b]thiophenediyl]] (PTB7, 1-material Chemscitech Inc.) and fullerene derivative phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM71, Nanostructured Carbon Inc.) (1:1.5). The thickness of the spin-coated PV was about 85 nm. Except for the fabrication process of the PTB7:PCBM71 PV layer, all other fabrication processes were the same as for the P3HT:PCBM PSCs, as described above.


In order to investigate the surface morphology of the functional layer, the surface of the layer was monitored by atomic force microscopy (AFM, Nanosurf easyscan 2 AFM, Nanosurf AG Switzerland Inc.). The optical properties of the fabricated layer were investigated using a Cary1E (Varian) UV-vis spectrometer. A Chroma Meter CS-200 (Konica Minolta Sensing, INC.) and a source meter (Keithley 2400) were used to measure the EL characteristics of current–voltage–luminance (J–V–L) measurements. The performance of the PSCs was measured under an illumination intensity of 100 mW cm−2 generated by an AM1.5 light source (Newport, 96000 Solar Simulator). The photocurrent characteristics were measured using a source meter (Keithley 2400) and calibrated using a reference solar cell (Bunkoh-keiki, BS-520). The incident photon-to-current collection efficiency (IPCE) spectra were measured using an IPCE measurement system (Titan Electro-optics Co., QE-IPCE 3000). Impedance spectroscopy measurements for the fabricated devices were performed using an HP 4192A. The AC oscillating amplitude was set as low as 100 mV (rms) to maintain the linearity of the response. Measurements were performed in the dark for different bias voltages. The characterization of the device was carried out at room temperature under ambient conditions, without encapsulation.



Fig. 1(a) shows a schematic illustration of the H-dip-coating used in this study as a coating process for a GO dispersion. By using H-dip-coating, the thickness of the film can be precisely controlled because the thickness of the film increases with increasing capillary number (Ca = μU/σ) of the coating solution, where μ and σ respectively represent the viscosity and surface tension of the solution and U is the coating speed. The thickness (h) of the H-dip-coated film can be described by the associated drag-out problem proposed by Landau and Levich for Ca ≪ 1; h = A(μU/σ)2/3Rd, where Rd represents the radius of the associated downstream meniscus and A is a constant of proportionality. We first investigated the thickness of H-dip-coated GO films as a function of the coating speed U and the gap height h0 (Fig. 1(b)). For an h0 of 0.6 mm, the thickness of the H-dip-coated GO film showed a continuous increase from ca. 3 nm to ca. 18 nm when U was increased from 0.25 to 2.0 cm s−1. Furthermore, when h0 was increased to 0.7 mm, the thickness of the H-dip-coated GO film also showed a further increase with U. These results agreed well with the theoretical prediction (solid lines in Fig. 1(b)). It is thus clear that H-dip-coating allows the precise control of GO film thickness using U and h0 as controlling parameters.


Next, we observed the optical properties of 4 nm-thick-GO films coated on ITO glass substrates, as shown in Fig. 2(a). In the visible range (450–700 nm), both the H-dip- and spin-coated GO films on ITO substrates showed high transmittance minima of ca. 80% at about 500 nm, comparable to that of the ITO substrate. Note that the characteristic transmittance spectrum of the ITO substrate is mainly caused by the thin-film interference effect due to the difference in refractive index between the glass (ca. 1.50 at 550 nm) and the ITO (ca. 1.90 at 550 nm, thickness ∼87 nm). From the fundamental optical absorption edge of the H-dip-coated GO films, it is possible to estimate the value of the band gap of the H-dip-coated GO film to be 3.36 eV, which is identical to that (3.36 eV) of the spin-coated GO film. The optical properties of the H-dip-coated GO film were therefore almost the same as those of the conventional spin-coated GO film.

Next, in order to investigate the surface morphologies of the GO films, we obtained atomic force microscopy (AFM) topographic images of the GO films fabricated on flat ITO glass substrates (root mean square (rms) roughness ∼2.5 nm). Fig. 2(b) shows AFM images of 20 × 20 μm2 scanned areas of the H-dip- and spin-coated GO films. Because a single-layer GO sheet has a thickness of between 0.8 and 1.2 nm or an average of 1 nm, the 4 nm thick GO film corresponds to four layers of GO sheets. The lateral dimensions of the GO sheets used ranged from 2.0 to 8.8 μm. As shown in the figure, the surface of the H-dip-coated GO film is fairly smooth and homogeneous with an rms roughness of about 1.31 nm. Compared with the surface of the spin-coated GO film (rms roughness: 1.64 nm), it is clear that a smooth and homogeneous surface with a similar roughness was formed on the H-dip-coated GO film; these values are comparable to those of the H-dip-coated functional layers reported previously, indicating a good coverage of the coated GO films. However, there were slight but distinct differences between the two GO films in terms of their inter-sheet spacing and packing densities of GO sheets; in the H-dip-coated GO film the packing density clearly seems to be higher than in the spin-coated film. This result implies that there were some differences in the adsorption mechanisms depending on the coating process of the GO sheets on the ITO surface, which may affect the flow of charge carriers through the GO films. Note that the lower rms roughness of the H-dip-coated GO film than that of the bare ITO substrate indicates that the deposition of the H-dip-coated GO films also serves to planarize the surface of the ITO anode, resulting in a reduction in the series resistance and in turn improving device performance, as shown in the following results.

Next, in order to estimate the surface coverage of the GO sheets on the ITO surfaces, we obtained spatially resolved Raman spectra (Raman maps) by confocal Raman spectroscopy, which is a particularly effective means of identifying the structure and degree of disorder in carbon based materials. The ITO substrates used in the Raman experiments were partially patterned by etching off half the side of the ITO layer on the glass substrate in order to compare the adsorption capacity of the GO sheets on the ITO surface with that of the GO sheets on the glass surface. The observed Raman maps (128 × 128 μm2) of the D peak (∼1320 cm−1) for the H-dip- and spin-coated GO films are shown in Fig. 3, where the D peak originates from the breathing modes of the six-membered rings activated by sp3 defects via the double-resonance process (see the inset of the figure). Note that Raman maps of the G peak (∼1590 cm−1, not shown) corresponding to the sp2 hybridized carbon of the GO sheets are almost identical to those of the D peak. It can also be seen that the Raman intensity ratio (D/G = 2.0–2.2) of our GOs shows a higher value than that (∼1.6) of conventional GOs, indicating the presence of more localized sp3 defects within the sp2 carbon network in our GOs.

By analysing the distribution of the intensity of the Raman map, we estimated that more than 80% of the mapped area had a high Raman intensity (bright colour) for the H-dip-coated GO film, implying only a small uncoated region (dark regions, less than 20%) among the GO sheets, while the bright region for the spin-coated layer occupied only about 72% of the mapped area. This result clearly indicates that H-dip-coating produced a GO film consisting of highly packed GO sheets, while the spin-coated GO film did not fully cover the ITO surface; in the latter case, the GO was inhomogeneously and sparsely distributed throughout the layer. Moreover, it is also clear from the Raman maps that the distribution of GO sheets in the H-dip-coated film is homogeneous over the whole observed region for both the ITO and glass surfaces, compared to the spin-coated film in which GOs are coated on the glass surface in preference to the ITO surface. It is therefore clear that H-dip-coating yields homogeneous GO films that have a high-packing density on the ITO anode without affecting its optical properties, which can in turn provide effective modification of the electrical properties of an ITO anode.

Next, we investigated the characteristics of solution-processable green OLEDs fabricated using H-dip-coated GO films as a hole-injecting IFL, in order to study the effect of the GO sheets due to the high GO coverage on the device performance. Here, the device configuration was: ITO anode/solution-coated GO IFL/solution-coated electroluminescent (EL) layer (TPD:Bu-PBD:Ir(ppy)3:PVK)/electron-injecting Cs2CO3 buffer layer (2 nm)/Al cathode (50 nm) (the inset of Fig. 2(a), see Experimental). TPD is N,N′-diphenyl-N,N′-bis(3-methylphenyl)-1,1′-biphenyl-4,4′-diamine (HOMO: 5.4 eV, LUMO: 2.4 eV), Bu-PBD is 2-(4-biphenylyl)-5-(4-tert-butylphenyl)-1,3,4-oxadiazole (HOMO: 6.0 eV, LUMO: 2.3 eV), Ir(ppy)3 is tris(2-phenylpyridinato) iridium (HOMO: 5.6 eV, LUMO: 3.0 eV), and PVK is poly(vinylcarbazole) (HOMO: 5.6 eV, LUMO: 2.2 eV). This sample OLED was fabricated using the H-dip-coating process for both GO IFL and EL layers, i.e., H-dip-coated GO IFL/H-dip-coated EL layer (sample cell H/H). For comparative purposes, we also fabricated three reference OLEDs using the conventional spin-coating process for each of the GO IFL and EL layers, i.e., H-dip-coated GO/spin-coated EL (H/S), spin-coated GO/H-dip-coated EL (S/H), and spin-coated GO/spin-coated EL (S/S). The IFL and EL layers were deposited at fixed thicknesses of 4 and 80 nm, respectively, which represent optimized thicknesses as explained elsewhere. Because all the variables are fixed apart from in the fabrication of the IFL and EL layers, the device performance can be related to the coating process used for the layers.

The current density–voltage–luminance (J–V–L) characteristics of the fabricated OLEDs are shown in Fig. 4 and summarized in Table 1. It is clear from the figure that in the J–V curves (Fig. 4(a)), the sample devices fabricated by H-dip coating (H/H) showed nearly the same current flow characteristics as those of the comparative devices of H/S, S/H, and S/S, and all devices exhibited good diodic behaviour; good coverages of the GO IFL and EL layers were therefore apparent. On the other hand, in the L–V curves (Fig. 4(b)), the four OLEDs under test exhibited clearly different characteristics according to the fabrication method used; the sample device (H/H) with H-dip-coated GO IFL performed noticeably better than the others (S/H, H/S, and S/S); an operating voltage of about 4.5 V yielded a brightness of 100 cd m−2, 5.7 V yielded 1000 cd m−2, and 8.2 V yielded 10000 cd m−2. The luminescence reached ca. 34500 cd m−2 (at 13 V). Moreover, device H/H also exhibited far higher maximum current and luminosity efficiencies (17.1 cd A−1 and 7.4 lm W−1) than the other devices H/S (14.9 cd A−1 and 5.7 lm W−1), S/H (12.1 cd A−1 and 3.7 lm W−1), and S/S (12.6 cd A−1 and 5.0 lm W−1) (Fig. 4(c)). Based on these observations, it is possible to arrange the following OLEDs in order of decreasing device performance: H/H > H/S > S/H ∼ S/S, which clearly reflects the fact that the OLEDs with the H-dip-coated GO IFLs performed better than those with the spin-coated GO IFLs for both H-dip-coated (H/H > S/H) and spin-coated EL layers (H/S > S/S). These improvements in device performance of H/H and H/S can be attributed to reduced non-radiative recombination due to the unique hole-transport and electron-blocking properties of the homogeneous H-dip-coated GO IFLs with high packing density, i.e., the closely packed GO layer acts as a hole transporting and electron blocking IFL, in view of its work function (4.9 eV), which matches the work function (4.7–4.8 eV) of the ITO anode quite well, and wide band gap (3.36 eV), as shown in the energy diagram of the OLEDs studied in Fig. 4(c). By incorporating an H-dip-coated GO IFL into our OLEDs, we successfully increased the current efficiency from 13 cd A−1 to 15–17 cd A−1via an increase in radiative recombination. Moreover, the H-dip-coated EL layer showed a better device performance than the spin-coated EL layer for the OLEDs thanks to the good charge balance in the EL layer of the H-dip-coated IFLs (H/H > H/S). The use of H-dip-coated GO IFL and EL layers, which covered almost the whole of the surfaces of the layers beneath them, avoiding the effects of shorting caused by the sparse distribution of GO in the spin-coated layers, may thus result in a greater overall efficiency, although the precise details of the underlying mechanism of the transport and recombination of charge remain unclear.
GO/EL processes
Symbol
Max. luminance [cd m−2]
Max. current efficiency [cd A−1]
Max. power efficiency [lm W−1]

a Average values were obtained from five individual devices for each of the device configurations studied.

H-dip/H-dip
H/H
34450.2
17.1
7.4
H-dip/Spin
H/S
27977.3
14.9
5.7
Spin/H-dip
S/H
25292.8
12.1
3.7
Spin/Spin
S/S
20422.4
12.6
5.0

Next, in order to understand further the hole-injecting properties of the GO films, we investigated the characteristics of OLEDs fabricated by the H-dip-coating process with the stacked bi-IFLs of GO/PEDOT:PSS and EL layer (OLED A). For comparative purposes, we also studied three other OLEDs; an OLED with H-dip-coated PEDOT:PSS IFL and EL layer (OLED B), an OLED with spin-coated PEDOT:PSS IFL and EL layer (OLED C), and an OLED with spin-coated GO/PEDOT:PSS IFLs and EL layer (OLED D). The resulting J–V–L characteristics are shown in Fig. 5 and summarized in Table 2. In the J–V curves (Fig. 5(a)), OLED A (H-dip) showed almost the same characteristics as OLED B (H-dip), while OLED C (Spin) showed almost the same characteristics as OLED D (Spin). Moreover, the H-dip-coated OLEDs A and B exhibited a better diodic behaviour, with lower turn-on voltages and higher maximum current densities than the spin-coated OLEDs C and D, indicating good coverage of the IFLs (GO and/or PEDOT:PSS interlayers) for the H-dip-coated IFLs. The L–V characteristics (Fig. 5(b)) show that OLED A with H-dip-coated GO/PEDOT:PSS is comparable to OLED B, and both are noticeably better than OLEDs C and D, as for their J–V characteristics; an operating voltage of about 3.5 V yields a brightness of 100 cd m−2, 4.5 V yields 1000 cd m−2, and 7.5 V yields 10000 cd m−2. The luminescence reached ca. 38100 cd m−2 (at 16 V). Moreover, OLED A also exhibits higher maximum current efficiency (23.3 cd A−1) and luminosity (9.1 lm W−1) than OLED C (19.5 cd A−1, 7.3 lm W−1) and OLED D (15.7 cd A−1, 6.6 lm W−1) (Fig. 5(c)). It should, however, be noted that the H-dip-coated PEDOT:PSS layer in OLED B is nevertheless the best interlayer (26.9 cd A−1, 11.3 lm W−1). It is also noted that the OLED A is still better than the conventional device (OLED C) with spin-coated PEDOT:PSS interlayers. These results clearly reflect the fact that the H-dip-coated GO/PEDOT:PSS has a better hole-injecting IFL performance in OLEDs than conventional spin-coated GO/PEDOT:PSS IFLs, due to some unique hole-transport and electron-blocking properties, and because their energy level matches that of the ITO anodes.

Coating process
Device structure
Max. luminance [cd m−2]
Max. current efficiency [cd A−1]
Max. power efficiency [lm W−1]

a Average values were obtained from five individual devices for each of the device configurations studied.

H-dip
GO/PEDOT:PSS
38060.0
23.3
9.1
PEDOT:PSS
38416.4
26.9
11.3
Spin
PEDOT:PSS
33162.7
19.5
7.3
GO/PEDOT:PSS
29685.4
15.7
6.6

Next, in order to investigate the charge carrier injection properties of the IFLs studied in OLEDs, we observed the impedance characteristics of the devices by impedance spectroscopy (IS), which is a powerful method for characterizing the electrical properties of materials and their interfaces. In these observations, we used the OLED fabricated by the H-dip-coating process with the stacked bi-IFLs of GO/PEDOT:PSS (sample device). For comparative purposes, we also studied an OLED with spin-coated GO/PEDOT:PSS IFLs as a comparative device, and an OLED with a spin-coated PEDOT:PSS IFL as a reference device. We applied H-dip-coated EL layers to the OLEDs to assess the effects of the different IFLs on the IS spectra. Fig. 6(a) shows representative examples of the complex impedance (Z) for the sample OLED with the H-dip-coated GO/PEDOT:PSS IFLs as a function of frequency at different bias voltages, revealing the single charge relaxation process in the device studied. Note that the peak frequency shifts in Im(Z) towards higher frequencies with increasing bias, indicating the decrease in bulk resistance with increasing applied bias. Fig. 6(b) also shows the plots of Re(Z) and −Im(Z) of the impedance (Cole–Cole plots) at frequencies between 20 Hz and 13 MHz for the OLEDs with different hole-collecting IFLs at bias voltages of 2 V and 4 V. It is noteworthy that for the IFLs used in the OLED devices, the impedance spectra resemble that of a single layer device, giving a single semicircle in the Cole–Cole plots. The equivalent circuit for the OLED device can thus be considered as a single parallel resistor Rp and capacitor Cp network with a series resistance Rs, as shown in the inset of the figure.

The equivalent circuit analysis using the fitting parameters Rs, Rp, and Cp for the H-dip-coated GO/PEDOT:PSS IFL-based device at different bias voltages yields an estimated value for Rs of about 51.3 Ohm. This value varies slightly with bias voltage, and the bulk capacitance Cp of 2.92 nF is almost independent of the bias, while the bulk resistance Rp decreases rapidly with increasing bias voltage. This behaviour indicates that as the bias is increased, an ever greater number of charge carriers is injected into the device, resulting in a decrease in the dielectric relaxation time τ, decreasing the bulk resistance Rp. Here, the relaxation frequency fr satisfies the relationship 2πfr = τ−1. On the other hand, the comparative and reference devices show Rs values of 59.3 and 68.2 Ohm, respectively, each of which is higher than that of the sample device, and Cp for the devices is approximately 2.89 and 2.83 nF, respectively. Moreover, at a bias voltage of 4 V, the sample, comparative, and reference devices show fr values of approximately 9.5, 0.9, and 0.9 kHz, respectively, while fr for the devices is approximately 7.2, 0.2, and 0.3 kHz, respectively, at a bias voltage of 2 V, clearly indicating that fr for the sample device is relatively higher than those of the comparative and reference devices. From these IS results, we conclude that hole-injection in the sample device with the H-dip-coated GO/PEDOT:PSS IFLs is as efficient (high relaxation frequency) as it is in the reference devices, while hole-injection in the comparative device with the spin-coated GO/PEDOT:PSS IFLs is not as efficient as in the reference devices.

Next, we investigated the capacitance characteristics of the pristine and the degraded OLED devices with the stacked bi-IFLs by IS. Since normal OLEDs (or PSCs) have air-sensitive low work function metal cathodes such as Ca or Al, the degradation of the ITO anode in the device is not easy to investigate due to the fast and pronounced degradation of the cathode. In the present study we therefore studied OLEDs having high work function metal Au electrodes (5.2 eV) as the cathode in order to assess the durability of the device with the stacked bi-IFLs. The devices were prepared using the structure [ITO/IFL/EL active layer/Au], where ITO and Au electrodes were used to facilitate hole injection and collection, respectively, and to suppress electron injection from the electrodes, thus the holes were the dominant charge carriers. In this experiment, we fabricated the device by the H-dip-coating process with the stacked bi-IFLs of GO/PEDOT:PSS (sample device). For comparative purposes, we also fabricated a device using spin-coated GO/PEDOT:PSS IFLs as a comparative device, as well as with the spin-coated PEDOT:PSS IFL as a reference device. We applied H-dip-coated EL layers to all devices to investigate the effects of the different hole-injecting IFLs on the IS spectra. After fabrication, capacitance measurements were undertaken for the pristine devices. Following these measurements, in order to degrade the devices, a constant low current density of J = 20 mA cm−2 was applied to the devices in a nitrogen glovebox at room temperature in the dark, in order to induce electrical ageing. This ageing process was brought to an end after 1 hour, after which capacitance measurements were performed again. The cycle of ageing and measurement was then repeated at 1 h intervals; all devices were kept in the dark during the measurements made between the successive electrical ageings. The resulting IS observations for the electrically degrading devices may be explained in terms of the degradation mechanisms generally seen in OLEDs, because the real-time degradation of OLEDs under continuous operation and the variations in IS after electrical degradation follow a similar pattern.


Fig. 7(a) shows the capacitance–voltage (C–V) behaviours of the studied devices with different IFLs. As shown in the figure, the capacitance of all the devices increases at a forward bias voltage (V1) due to the injection of the majority charge (holes, in this case), and then begins to decrease at a bias voltage (V2) due to the injection of the minority charge (electrons). Moreover, the C–V plots clearly show that while the potential V2 does not change, the hole-injecting voltage V1 does show an increase with ageing time. At the same time, the comparative and reference devices exhibit relatively large shifts in voltage V1 and decreases in capacitance with increasing ageing time, both of which are more pronounced than those of the sample device. These increased V1 voltages and decreased capacitance for the degraded devices indicate a deterioration in hole-injecting performance of ITO and IFLs used, which could be due to the generation of trapped charge near the interface between the IFL and the EML. As the ageing time increases, more trapped charges are generated and there is a further increase in hole-injecting potentials, reducing the device performance significantly, which may also be related to the migration of indium ions from the ITO anode into the EML layer. In order to check for this migration, the degraded devices were also investigated using time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (ToF-SIMS). Fig. 7(b) clearly shows that indium migration into the EML layer in the sample device is the lowest among the devices tested. The above results for the degraded devices therefore suggest that the sample device with the H-dip-coated GO/PEDOT:PSS IFLs is more durable than the other devices, although further systematic studies on long-term stability are needed to understand the fundamental processes underlying the degradation phenomena. Taken together with the J–V–L data (Fig. 5), these IS and ToF-SIMS results show that an OLED device with H-dip-coated GO/PEDOT:PSS IFLs would be a sensible option due to its low series resistance Rs, high relaxation frequency (good hole injection), high durability, and high luminance efficiency.

Next, in order to investigate the hole-collecting and electron-blocking ability of the H-dip-coated IFLs of GO, we also fabricated PSCs with hole-selective GO, GO/PEDOT:PSS, and PEDOT:PSS IFLs, using the H-dip-coating process in a device configuration of ITO anode/solution-coated IFL(s)/spin-coated PV layer (P3HT:PCBM, 85 nm)/electron-injecting Al:Li buffer layer (1 nm)/Al cathode (50 nm). We used spin-coated PV layers of P3HT:PCBM in all PSCs to investigate the effects of different IFLs on the device performance by measuring the J–V characteristics of the PSCs, as shown in Fig. 8. Fig. 8 shows the J–V curves of the PSCs, in which the inset shows that all cells clearly behaved as diodes in the dark, with high rectification ratios of 104 to 105 at 1.5 V, which also indicates good coverage of the PV layers. However, there were small but significant differences among the current flows, which implied that there were some differences in the flow of charge carriers through the IFLs and PV layers. Under an illumination of AM1.5 G, 100 mW cm−2, the PV characteristics of all the devices are shown in the figure, and summarized in Table 3. For the H-dip-coated PEDOT:PSS IFL, a fairly good PV performance was observed under illumination, showing an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 0.64 V, a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 11.88 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 51.5, corresponding to a PCE of 3.94%, while for the H-dip-coated GO IFL, a relatively poor device performance was observed with JSC = 8.54 mA cm−2, VOC = 0.39 V, FF = 22.0, and PCE = 0.73%. The fairly good PV performance of the PSC with the H-dip-coated PEDOT:PSS IFL is mainly due to the well matched energy levels of PEDOT:PSS with P3HT. The figure also shows that the performance of the PSC with the H-dip-coated double GO/PEDOT:PSS IFLs is comparable with that of the PSC with the H-dip-coated PEDOT:PSS IFL, having a JSC of 11.58 mA cm−2, VOC of 0.64 V, FF of 51.1% and PCE of 3.81%. We attribute this good PV performance largely to the HOMO energy level of PEDOT:PSS (5.0–5.1 eV), which lies between those of GO (4.9 eV) and P3HT (5.0–5.2 eV), resulting in effective hole-collecting from the P3HT to the ITO anode (4.7–4.8 eV). It is also noted that the PCEs of the PSCs with the H-dip-coated IFLs of GO and GO/PEDOT:PSS were higher than those of the PSCs with the spin-coated IFLs, by 16% and 5%, respectively. We also evaluated the PV performance of the PSCs in terms of their IPCE spectra (Fig. 9). Each cell shows the well known IPCE spectral shape of its P3HT:PCBM PV layer, indicating that photocurrents are generated mainly by dissociated excitons produced by absorbed photons in P3HT. The peak IPCE values (at 500 nm) are consistent with the variations in JSC for the PSCs with the IFLs investigated, also confirming that the H-dip-coated GO(/PEDOT:PSS) IFLs result in effective hole carrier collection from P3HT to ITO. It is thus shown that the H-dip-coated GO(/PEDOT:PSS) had a better hole-collecting IFL performance than the spin-coated IFLs, due to the formation of a homogeneous GO film with a high packing density.

PV layer (Spin)
Coating process (IFLs)
Hole-selective IFL

V
OC [V]

J
SC [mA cm−2]
FF [%]
PCE [%]

R
s [Ω cm2]

R
Sh [Ω cm2]

a The values are averages, obtained from five individual PSCs for each of the device configurations studied.

P3HT:PCBM
Spin
GO
0.34 ± 0.01
6.88 ± 0.15
26.99 ± 0.43
0.63 ± 0.01
28.3 ± 4.0
126.2 ± 14.4
GO/PEDOT:PSS
0.66 ± 0.00
11.12 ± 0.10
49.48 ± 0.09
3.61 ± 0.03
12.7 ± 0.5
284.7 ± 26.5
PEDOT:PSS
0.64 ± 0.00
11.47 ± 0.23
50.99 ± 0.04
3.77 ± 0.07
17.2 ± 1.2
288.6 ± 51.2
H-dip
GO
0.39 ± 0.01
8.54 ± 0.21
21.97 ± 0.57
0.73 ± 0.07
19.7 ± 0.8
212.3 ± 6.0
GO/PEDOT:PSS
0.64 ± 0.00
11.58 ± 0.38
51.05 ± 0.23
3.81 ± 0.12
12.7 ± 0.5
277.2 ± 11.9
PEDOT:PSS
0.64 ± 0.00
11.88 ± 0.18
51.51 ± 0.20
3.94 ± 0.05
12.1 ± 0.3
289.4 ± 24.0
PTB7:PCBM71
Spin
GO
0.75 ± 0.00
12.09 ± 0.51
34.41 ± 2.00
3.13 ± 0.27
28.3 ± 4.0
126.2 ± 14.4
GO/PEDOT:PSS
0.73 ± 0.01
13.44 ± 0.19
48.78 ± 1.90
4.80 ± 0.21
12.8 ± 0.6
284.2 ± 26.4
PEDOT:PSS
0.74 ± 0.01
16.69 ± 0.77
52.08 ± 0.97
6.46 ± 0.21
17.0 ± 1.1
288.2 ± 51.2
H-dip
GO
0.75 ± 0.00
12.08 ± 0.10
42.91 ± 0.65
3.90 ± 0.03
19.4 ± 0.9
212.2 ± 6.0
GO/PEDOT:PSS
0.74 ± 0.01
17.64 ± 0.61
52.34 ± 0.64
6.87 ± 0.18
12.4 ± 0.5
288.5 ± 11.0
PEDOT:PSS
0.74 ± 0.01
16.29 ± 0.55
52.96 ± 0.67
6.42 ± 0.15
12.1 ± 0.4
279.1 ± 25.1
Next, in order to confirm the efficiency of the hole carrier flows through the H-dip-coated GO IFLs, we investigated the hole-current flows versus applied electric field (J–E) characteristics for hole-only devices using a [ITO/IFL/P3HT:PCBM/Au (60 nm)] structure (Fig. 10). As shown in the figure, hole-only devices with H-dip-coated GO IFLs show increased hole-current flows through the IFLs compared with those with spin-coated GO IFLs. Moreover, among the hole-only devices with the H-dip-coated IFLs, the hole-only device with the GO/PEDOT:PSS IFLs, showing comparable hole-current flows to those with the H-dip-coated PEDOT:PSS IFLs, exhibited much higher hole-current flows than the device with the single GO IFL. This hole-selecting ability of the bi-IFLs of GO/PEDOT:PSS was largely attributed to the high packing density of GO sheets and the well-matched HOMO energy level of PEDOT:PSS between GO and the active layers, clearly indicating that the H-dip-coated GO/PEDOT:PSS IFLs could be a potential alternative to the conventional spin-coated PEDOT:PSS IFL. It is noted that IS and capacitance results for degraded PSCs were also observed and the observed results were similar to those of the OLED, as shown in Fig. 7(a), suggesting the durability of the PSC with H-dip-coated GO/PEDOT:PSS IFLs, details of which will be reported in a separate paper.

Finally, in order to demonstrate the efficiency of the hole collecting GO/PEDOT:PSS IFLs fabricated by H-dip coating, we investigated the PSC performance with another PV layer of PTB7:PCBM71 (85 nm) Here, we used spin-coated PV layers of PTB7:PCBM71 in the PSCs to confirm the effects of the H-dip-coated IFLs on device performance. For the H-dip-coated GO/PEDOT:PSS IFLs, a fairly good PV performance was observed under illumination, showing a VOC of 0.74 V, JSC of 17.6 mA cm−2, and FF of 52.3, corresponding to a PCE of 6.9% (Fig. 11(a)). This is better than the PSC with the spin-coated PEDOT:PSS IFL, which exhibited a VOC of 0.74 V, JSC of 16.7 mA cm−2, and FF of 52.1, corresponding to a PCE of 6.5% (Fig. 11(b)). This improved PV performance of the PTB7:PCBM71 PSC with the H-dip-coated GO/PEDOT:PSS IFLs is mainly due to the matching of the energy levels of GO/PEDOT:PSS with PTB7 (HOMO: 5.15 eV, LUMO: 3.31 eV), clearly demonstrating the effectiveness of H-dip coated GO/PEDOT:PSS IFLs. The PV characteristics of the devices studied are summarized in Table 3.

The results described above clearly confirm that small amounts of GO dispersion can be used to form homogeneous and smooth GO films with a high packing density and a low surface roughness by means of H-dip-coating; the use of H-dip-coated GO/PEDOT:PSS IFLs therefore results in an improved performance of OLEDs and PSCs that are more durable thanks to a reduction in the uncovered, rough areas of the ITO. Further optimization of the surface coverage of H-dip-coated GO/PEDOT:PSS IFLs will therefore bring about improved hole-carrier transport and/or extraction at anode interfaces, which has the potential to make these interfacial layers the foundation for the mass production of efficient and stable solution-processable OLEDs and PSCs.

In conclusion, we have investigated the use of simple H-dip coated GO films as hole-selective IFLs to improve the performance of solution-processable OLEDs and PSCs. Homogeneous and smooth GO thin films can be successfully deposited from aqueous dispersion on top of an ITO electrode with a high surface coverage, low surface roughness, and controllable thickness by H-dip coating. We have shown that the device performance of OLEDs and PSCs with H-dip-coated hole-selective IFLs of GO was better than those with conventional spin-coated IFLs of GO, due to the high packing density of GO sheets in H-dip-coated films. We also showed that OLEDs and PSCs with H-dip-coated hole-selective IFLs of GO/PEDOT:PSS exhibited improved device performance compared with the use of conventional spin-coated PEDOT:PSS IFLs. These results clearly demonstrate that the use of homogeneous and smooth H-dip-coated GO films on ITO substrates provides a solid foundation for efficient, stable and large-area OLEDs and PSCs; furthermore, the use of these innovative GO films could in future be applied to the mass-production of highly efficient organic semiconducting devices.


This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (MEST) (2012R1A2A2A01015654), the Converging Research Center Program through the Ministry of Science, ICT and Future Planning, Korea (2013K000162), the Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) Grant funded by the Korea Government (MSIP) (NRF-2010-0027963), Chungcheong institute for regional program evaluation promotion project of the Korean Ministry of Knowledge Economy (R0001445), and by Kwangwoon University (2014).


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014