 DOI: 10.1039/D0NR05670G
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 23116-23124


Mashiyat Sumaiya
Shawkat
,

Tanvir Ahmed
Chowdhury
,

Hee-Suk
Chung
,

Shahid
Sattar
,

Tae-Jun
Ko
,

J. Andreas
Larsson
 and 

Yeonwoong
Jung
*

NanoScience Technology Center, University of Central Florida, Orlando, Florida 32826, USA. E-mail: yeonwoong.jung@ucf.edu

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Central Florida, Orlando, Florida 32816, USA

Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, University of Central Florida, Orlando, Florida 32816, USA

Analytical Research Division, Korea Basic Science Institute, Jeonju 54907, South Korea

Applied Physics, Division of Materials Science, Department of Engineering Sciences and Mathematics, Luleå University of Technology, Luleå SE 97187, Sweden

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Central Florida, Orlando, Florida 32816, USA

Received
31st July 2020
, Accepted 22nd October 2020
First published on 23rd October 2020
2D PtTe2 layers, a relatively new class of 2D crystals, have unique band structure and remarkably high electrical conductivity promising for emergent opto-electronics. This intrinsic superiority can be further leveraged toward practical device applications by merging them with mature 3D semiconductors, which has remained largely unexplored. Herein, we explored 2D/3D heterojunction devices by directly growing large-area (>cm2) 2D PtTe2 layers on Si wafers using a low-temperature CVD method and unveiled their superior opto-electrical characteristics. The devices exhibited excellent Schottky transport characteristics essential for high-performance photovoltaics and photodetection, i.e., well-balanced combination of high photodetectivity (>1013 Jones), small photo-responsiveness time (∼1 μs), high current rectification ratio (>105), and water super-hydrophobicity driven photovoltaic improvement (>300%). These performances were identified to be superior to those of previously explored 2D/3D or 2D layer-based devices with much smaller junction areas, and their underlying principles were confirmed by DFT calculations.

Recently, interest in the family of noble metal-based two-dimensional (2D) crystals is on the rise owing to their superior electrical properties compared to those of conventional 2D transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs). Although a large number of semiconducting 2D TMD layers have been explored for unconventional opto-electronics, their carrier mobility values still remain uncompetitive with those of traditional semiconductors. In this regard, noble metal (particularly, platinum (Pt))-based ones provide distinguishable advantages of high carrier mobility and air stability even better than black phosphorus (BP) as well as low-temperature synthesis. 2D platinum ditelluride (PtTe2) layers are a recent addition to them and exhibit a large set of unparalleled properties compared to other Pt-based 2D TMD layers. Most notably, they exhibit an extremely high electrical conductivity of >106 S m−1 – superior to most of the previously reported 2D TMD layers, which is well maintained even with scalable wafer-level growth. Such intrinsic superiority is projected to be further promoted when they are merged with conventional 3D semiconductors yielding well-controlled 2D/3D heterojunctions, particularly for opto-electronic applications. In general, such 2D/3D heterojunctions exist in two distinct configurations, i.e., lateral vs. vertical, determined by the ways that 2D layers are interfaced with the 3D materials. Although the lateral integration of small-sized 2D flakes onto 3D semiconductors has accomplished high photosensitivity, the resulting devices exhibited limited photo-response speeds in the range of a few-to milli-seconds. The vertical integration approach would provide advantages of small diffusion length and depletion dimensions for photo-generated carriers, thereby leading to faster photo-responsiveness. However, it remains difficult to achieve 2D/3D vertical junctions on a laterally large (∼cm2) dimension via a scalable process avoiding the unreliable manual transfer of 2D layers. Herein, we fabricated large-area (∼cm2) PtTe2/Si 2D/3D vertical heterojunction devices by directly growing metallic 2D PtTe2 layers on pre-patterned Si wafers using a scalable chemical vapor deposition (CVD) method. We unveiled their “intrinsically” superior photovoltaic and photodetection performances over previously explored devices as well as identifying methods to “externally” further promote such superiority.


300 nm SiO2 was deposited on a cleaned Si wafer through a shadow mask at a rate of 1 Å s−1 by electron-beam evaporation (Thermionics VE-100). A Pt film was deposited on the prepared SiO2/Si wafer through another shadow mask at a rate of 0.05 Å s−1, defining Pt/Si active and Pt/SiO2 electrode areas. The prepared sample was transferred to the middle of a quartz tube CVD furnace, and Te powders were placed in an alumina boat at the furnace upstream side. The tube was purged with argon (Ar) gas and pumped to a base pressure of ∼1 mTorr. The furnace temperature was ramped up to 400 °C in 50 min and then maintained at the temperature for another 50 min. Throughout the reaction, Ar gas was constantly flowed (100 SCCM) through the tube, maintaining its operating pressure at ∼80 mTorr. Once the PtSe2/SiO2/Si samples were prepared, Au electrodes (50 nm thickness) were deposited through another shadow mask using a Quorum Q150 T Plus sputtering system.


Microstructure analysis of 2D PtTe2 layers was performed with a JEOL ARM 200 F Cs-corrected TEM at an operating voltage of 200 kV. For the plane-view TEM characterization of 2D PtTe2 layers, we directly grew them on a SiO2/Si wafer and applied a buffered oxide etchant (BOE) to the as-grown 2D PtTe2 layer-SiO2/Si sample. The BOE gently etched away the underlying SiO2, lifting off the 2D PtTe2 layers only. The delaminated 2D PtTe2 layers were transferred onto copper TEM grids. For the cross-sectional TEM sample preparation, focused ion beam (FIB; Quanta 2D FEG, FEI)-based milling and lift-out techniques were employed. For Raman spectroscopy characterization, a Renishaw RM 1000B system with a laser source of 514 nm wavelength was used.


All electrical measurements were performed with a home-built probe station using a HP 4156 A semiconductor parameter analyzer. Photovoltaic measurements were carried out using an AM 1.5 solar simulator (G2V optics). Photo-response measurements were carried out using a M625L4-C2 (625 nm) Thorlabs LED. The response speed was characterized using a home-built measurement system using a Tektronix MDO4104C digital oscilloscope. The frequency modulation of the LED source was carried out using a Tektronix AFG 3022C function generator.


Water contact angles of 2D PtTe2 layers were measured with a goniometer (model 90, Ramé-Hart Instrument Co.). Water droplets (2 μL) were gently integrated on the surface of as-grown 2D PtTe2 layers using a micro-syringe, and the contact angle values were extracted using the DROPimage Pro software (Ramé-Hart Instrument Co.).



Fig. 1 shows the preparation of PtTe2/Si devices and the structural/chemical characterization of the adopted 2D PtTe2 layers. Fig. 1a illustrates the sequential procedures for the device fabrication, starting with the patterned deposition of silicon dioxide (SiO2) on p-doped Si wafers (resistivity ∼1–5 Ω cm). Pt thin films of controlled thickness are selectively deposited on the wafers via an electron beam evaporator using a shadow mask. Subsequently, 2D PtTe2 layers are grown at 400 °C through the CVD tellurization method developed in our previous studies, defining the lateral dimension of PtTe2/Si vertical heterojunctions. Lastly, gold (Au) electrodes are selectively deposited on the top PtTe2/SiO2 side as well as the wafer bottom side. Details of the sample preparation are presented in the Experimental section. Fig. 1b shows the representative image of a complete PtTe2/Si device with Au electrodes. Fig. 1c shows the Raman spectroscopy characterization of few-layered 2D PtTe2 obtained by the CVD tellurization of Pt ∼0.3 nm, comparing experimentally determined (blue dotted line) vs. theoretically calculated (black solid line) characteristics. Two characteristic peaks of Eg and A1g are noted, where Eg (A1g) peaks depict the in-plane (out-of-plane) vibrational modes of Te atoms within the 2D layers, respectively. Excellent agreement is observed between these two spectra of experimental vs. theoretical in terms of their peak positions. The atomic crystallinity of the CVD-grown 2D PtTe2 layers was studied using a scanning transmission electron microscope (STEM). Fig. 1d presents the dark-field STEM image of the as-grown 2D PtTe2 layers, unveiling a large number of polycrystalline grains. Each grain is individually “stitched” with respect to its neighbouring ones, achieving a high spatial homogeneity over the entire sample area. The inset in Fig. 1d is the corresponding selective area diffraction (SAED) pattern, showing the dominant appearance of the (110) PtTe2 plane.Fig. 1e shows the plane-view high-resolution (HR) STEM image of the polycrystalline 2D PtTe2 layers, revealing two adjacent stitching grains separated by the grain boundary (purple curve). Each grain exhibits distinguishable Moiré fringes, indicating vertical stacking of individual 2D layers with misaligned crystallographic orientation. Fig. 1f shows the cross-sectional HRSTEM image to reveal the well-defined van der Waals (vdW) gaps in vertically stacked 2D PtTe2 layers, indicating their layer-by-layer growth. Fig. 1g shows the corresponding energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) elemental mapping images, unveiling the spatial homogeneity of constituent elements.


Fig. 2 shows the electrical properties of the stand-alone 2D PtTe2 layers as well as the PtTe2/Si heterojunction devices. The CVD-2D PtTe2 layers exhibit an extremely high electrical conductivity of ∼105–106 S m−1 and intrinsically metallic transport characteristics irrespective of their layer numbers, as confirmed in our previous studies. For further clarification, we characterized their transport properties in field effect transistor (FET) configurations, and confirmed no noticeable gate responses (Fig. S1, ESI). Additionally, we identified their electronic band structure by density functional theory (DFT) calculations and confirmed strong metallic dispersion characteristics (Fig. S2, ESI). Having confirmed the highly metallic nature of 2D PtTe2 layers, we developed the heterojunction devices by optimizing their layer thickness. Fig. 2a shows the photovoltaic characterization of the device incorporating 2D PtTe2 layers prepared with Pt of an ∼4.5 nm thickness, revealing the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics without (red) and with (blue) a solar illumination (intensity: 400 W m−2). The device shows pronounced photovoltaic effects corroborated by a large amount of photo-induced current density in the reverse bias regime. Fig. 2b presents the corresponding J–V plot in a semi-log scale, yielding the following parameters; open circuit voltage (Voc) ∼0.41 V, short circuit current density (Jsc) ∼5.9 mA cm−2, fill factor (FF) ∼44%, and rectification ratio ∼105 at ±1.5 V. The device ideality factor, n, extracted from the linearity (black line) in the forward bias regime is ∼1.9 and the power conversion efficiency (PCE) is ∼2.5%. This observation of strong current rectification and photovoltaic characteristics confirms the presence of metal (PtTe2)–semiconductor (Si) Schottky junctions whose mechanism will be discussed in the next section. Additionally, we confirmed the Ohmic transport characteristics from 2D PtTe2 layers and p-Si wafers interfaced with Au electrodes (Fig. S3, ESI), which further confirms that the rectification originates from the junctions. Representative data obtained from the devices prepared with smaller (∼0.3 nm) and larger (∼13.5 nm) Pt thickness are presented in Fig. S4, ESI, confirming inferior performances compared to the optimized one. This thickness-sensitive photovoltaic performance is attributed to the competing effect of thickness-dependent optical transmittance vs. electrical conductivity as confirmed in our previous studies. The optical transmittance steeply decreases with increasing thickness, while the electrical properties are less thickness-sensitive exhibiting maximum conductivity at a certain thickness due to the anisotropic crystallinity of 2D PtTe2 layers. We note that these PtTe2/Si heterojunction devices perform much better than the previously explored Pt TMD-based ones including platinum diselenide (PtSe2)/Si of comparable thickness,i.e., an increase of ∼15% and ∼47% for Voc and Jsc, respectively. In addition to photovoltaics, we also investigated their photo-responsiveness using an illumination source of a fixed wavelength. Fig. 2c shows the semi log-scaled I–V characteristics of another device different from the one in Fig. 2a and b under intensity-varying illumination at 625 nm wavelength. The photocurrent at the reverse bias regime steadily increases with increasing intensity, reflecting the increasing concentration of photo-generated charge carriers.Fig. 2d shows the time-dependent train of photocurrent generation at a zero external bias under periodic illumination of varying intensities revealing highly reliable photo-responsiveness. We also confirmed that the device was still very sensitive even at a much lower intensity of 0.1 mW cm−2 (Fig. S5, ESI). Photo-responsivity and specific detectivity are two key parameters used to evaluate the photo-responsiveness performance of the device; photo-responsivity, R, indicates its efficiency in responding to changes in optical signals, whereas specific detectivity, D*, delineates its ability to detect small signals. They are obtained from the following equations.
(1)
(2)
where
Iph, Id, Pin, A and e are the photocurrent, dark current, incident light power, active device area, and elementary charge, respectively. Fig. 2e presents the plots of R (blue) and D* (red) vs. light intensity extracted from the above equations for the PtTe2/Si device at a zero external bias. Both R and D* show the inverse relationship with intensity, consistent with the observations with other 2D/3D photodetectors. The R value reaches up to 0.213 A W−1 at an intensity of 1.1 mW cm−2, comparable to those of other 2D/3D photodetectors at a zero external bias. Furthermore, the D* value is as high as 2.66 × 1013 Jones, which is much higher than those of previously developed 2D/3D and stand-alone 2D devices – to be confirmed in the next section. This finding is particularly encouraging given that the lateral dimension of the active junction area in our device is quite large (1 cm × 0.5 cm), while previous developments mostly employed small-sized (typically, ∼μm2) exfoliated 2D flakes. Additionally, the external quantum efficiency (EQE) of the device was extracted using the following equation:

(3)
which yields a moderately high ECE of 42.2%. In the above equation,
h is Planck's constant, c is the velocity of light, R is the responsivity, and λ is the wavelength of the illumination source. Key parameters of various 2D/3D photodetectors operated at a zero bias are compared and presented in Table 1, ESI. It is noted that the perfomance of our PtTe2/Si device is comparable to those of the previously explored ones despite its much larger junction area.

Furthermore, we studied the practical suitability of the PtTe2/Si device for high-performance photodetection applications. Particularly, photo-response speed is of paramount importance in optical communication and imaging applications as it dictates their efficiency for optical-to-electrical signal conversion. For the precise quantification of response speed, a 625 nm wavelength light was pulsed and introduced to the device using a signal generator as demonstrated in Fig. 3a. The temporal photo-response of the device at a zero external bias was recorded using a digital oscilloscope at several frequencies. Fig. 3b–d present the normalised transient photocurrents generated by the pulsed illumination with frequencies of 10 Hz, 30 kHz and 300 kHz, respectively. The results show well-resolved and retained photo-responsiveness even up to a very high frequency of 300 kHz for multiple cycles, confirming fast and reliable photo-switching. Fig. 3e presents the relative current balance of the device, i.e., (Imax − Imin)/Imax, as a function of modulation frequency, where Imax (Imin) is the maximum (minimum) current obtained at each frequency with (without) illumination over multiple cycles, respectively. A high balance of >95% is well preserved up to a frequency of 100 kHz, after which it steadily attenuates with increasing frequencies. This current attenuation still maintains ∼80.6% of its maximum value even at a very high frequency of 300 kHz, significantly surpassing the 3-db cut-off frequency standard in commercial applications as well as the values observed with previously developed 2D/3D devices.Fig. 3f shows the representative plot of the photocurrent generation/decay transient characteristics obtained at 150 kHz, quantifying photoresponse intervals. The rise (τr) and fall (τf) times are determined from the 90% and 10% of the maximum current value, respectively, yielding τr ∼ 1.68 μs and τf ∼ 1.58 μs, respectively. Comparison is made between the PtTe2/Si device vs. previously developed 2D layer-based devices in terms of photo-detectivity and response time, as shown Fig. 3g. What is noteworthy is that this PtTe2/Si device exhibits well-balanced characteristics of high photo-detectivity and fast photo-responsiveness, while responsitivity, R, is observed to be similar in the measured wavelength range (∼600–850 nm), both the response time and photo-detectivity are much better than those observed with most of the 2D/3D, 2D/2D, and stand-alone 2D layer-based devices. This is particularly encouraging given the large (∼0.5 cm2) lateral dimension of the PtTe2/Si junction enabled by the scalable CVD growth, while a large number of the previously developed ones are based on the manual integration of small-sized 2D flakes. For instance, although the graphene/Si device shown in Fig. 3g exhibits slightly faster photo-response, its active junction area is only ∼0.25 mm2 which is 200 times smaller than that of ours. Furthermore, the MoTe2/Si device shown in Fig. 3g slightly outperforming our device demanded a manual integration of additional graphene top layers, thus limiting its process scalability. Meanwhile, our PtTe2/Si devices exhibit “intrinsic” 2D/3D Schottky junction characteristics un-aided by any additional materials and processes preserving a low-temperature growth scalability.
To confirm the charge transport mechanism of the device, we study the PtTe2/Si heterojunction contact characteristics by theoretically determining its Schottky barrier height using first principles calculations. The planar average electrostatic potential (PAEP) of the PtTe2/Si interface is computed in the out-of-plane direction along the Si (100) orientation, as presented in Fig. 4a. The work function of few-layered 2D PtTe2, ΦM, is defined as ΦM = Evac − EFermi, where Evac is the vacuum level set to 0 eV to calibrate the energy scale, and EFermi is the highest occupied electron energy state at 0 K. The work function value is determined to be ∼4.56–4.57 eV with the layer number ranging from three to six. We also computed the band offset and the work function of p-Si by superimposing the PAEP of bulk Si on that of the slab (Fig. S6, ESI). The PAEP diagram in Fig. 4b shows the work function of p-Si, ΦSi, is ∼4.95 eV, determined from the experimental bandgap (∼1.1 eV) of Si. Since the work function of the metallic 2D PtTe2 layers is smaller than that of p-Si, a p-type Schottky junction is anticipated to form when these two materials are interfaced, as depicted in Fig. 4c. To determine the Schottky barrier height, Φb, for this junction, we refer to the known equation, Φb = Eg + χ − ΦM, where Eg (∼1.1 eV) is the bandgap and χ (∼4.13 eV) is the electron affinity of Si, and ΦM is the work function of 2D PtTe2 layers. We identify that 2D PtTe2 layers form an obvious Schottky junction, yielding Φb = 0.67 eV. Fig. 4d shows the diagram of the energy band bending at the PtTe2/p-Si interface, which strongly justifies that the experimentally observed characteristics are a result of 2D/3D Schottky junctions. In the diagram, Ec, and EV represent the conduction and valence band edge of Si, respectively. The details of the computational method are presented in the Computational section (ESI). We also determined the Φb value by analysing experimentally obtained I–V characteristics and observed good agreement with the theoretically calculated one (Fig. S7, ESI).
Lastly, we demonstrated externally tunable opto-electrical properties in the PtTe2/Si devices by taking advantage of the intrinsic structural uniqueness of 2D PtTe2 layers. We identified that the large-area 2D PtTe2 layers intrinsically exhibit “super-hydrophobic” surfaces as manifested by the very large (>110°) water contact angle as shown in Fig. 5a. Indeed, this hydrophobicity is the highest among all previously explored 2D TMD layers, which can be exploited to further improve device performances as presented in Fig. 5b–g. Fig. 5b shows the representative I–V characteristics of an identical PtTe2/Si device under three different conditions; i.e., in the dark (blue), under illumination (red), and under the same illumination with water droplet integration (black) which drastically improved the photovoltaic effect as manifested by a significant increase in reverse current. Fig. 5c shows the corresponding semi-log scaled I–V characteristics, better visualizing the photovoltaic enhancement. Fig. 5d shows the summary of the water droplet-driven change in photovoltaic parameters, revealing enhancements in Jsc by ∼309%, Voc by ∼9%, PCE by ∼192%, and a reduction of FF by ∼35%. The much larger enhancement in Jsc over the other parameters indicates the significantly increased concentration of photo-generated charge carriers. Photo-responsiveness of another device slanted at ∼45° was also evaluated under a continuous illumination (29.8 mW cm−2 intensity and 625 nm wavelength) by periodically integrating water droplets on it, as shown in Fig. 5e. Fig. 5f presents the corresponding temporal photo-responsiveness, revealing that a train of current spikes periodically appears following the periodic water droplet application. Fig. 5g corresponds to the blue box in Fig. 5f, highlighting the periodic and instant increase in reverse current upon integrating water droplets, measured at a voltage of −2 V. The current reversibly returns to the original value once the droplets subsequently roll down from the sample surface and disappear. We believe that this significant increase in reverse current is the result of the light concentration effect introduced by the integrated water droplets; i.e. the hemispherical water droplet caused by the super-hydrophobic surface enables the in-ward refraction of incident light rays increasing the concentration of photo-generated charge carriers, as schematically illustrated in Fig. 5h. The phenomenon is qualitatively consistent with the effects resulting from integrating light concentrating optical lenses on top of photovoltaic cells. Indeed, Li et al. demonstrated significantly enhanced photovoltaic effects by directly integrating water droplets onto the surface of hydrophobic carbon-nanotube photovoltaic cells, which well agrees with the observation in this study. As a control experiment to verify this hypothesis, we prepared a glass slide with hydrophobic coating and integrated it on top of the PtTe2/Si device. We then integrated water droplets on top of the glass slide/device and performed photovoltaic measurements, mimicking the experiments in Fig. 5f and g. As predicted, a significant increase in photocurrent is observed by integrating water droplets (Fig. S8, ESI), which decisively confirms the super-hydrophobicity enabled light concentration effect.

In summary, we have developed the large-area PtTe2/Si heterojunction devices by directly growing metallic 2D PtTe2 multilayers on p-Si wafers and explored their photovoltaic and photodetection properties. The devices exhibit a comprehensive set of promising Schottky junction characteristics, i.e., large rectification ratio, small ideality factor, high photosensitivity and small photoresponse time. Extensive comparisons with previously explored 2D layer-based similar devices confirm their excellence in high-efficiency opto-electrical applications. Furthermore, the devices present improved performances upon integrating water droplets on their surfaces owing to the unusually high hydrophobic nature of 2D PtTe2 layers. This study is believed to greatly broaden the versatility of 2D PtTe2 layers – a relatively unexplored 2D crystal with high electrical conductivity – towards scalable 2D/3D hybrid device applications in a wide range of emerging opto-electronics.


There are no conflicts to declare.


Y. J. acknowledges financal supports from the National Science Foundation (CMMI-1728390) (M. S. S., and Y. J.), the Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning (KETEP) and the Ministry of Trade, Industry & Energy (MOTIE) of the Republic of Korea (no. 20173010013340), and the VPR Advancement of Early Career Researchers award from the University of Central Florida. S. S. and J. A. L. thank the Knut och Alice Wallenberg Foundation, Kempestiftelserna and Interreg Nord for financial support. S. S. and J. A. L. also thank the High Performance Computing Center North (HPC2N), the National Supercomputer Center in Linköping (NSC), and the PDC Center for High Performance Computing for allocation of time and resources, through the Swedish National Infrastructure for Computing (SNIC). The authors thank Drs. Putnam and Roy for experimental support in his interfacial transport laboratory and in her next-generation electronics laboratory, respectively.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0nr05670g
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020