 DOI: 10.1039/D3DT00864A
(Paper)
Dalton Trans., 2023, 52, 5976-5982


Silvia
Cucatti
*,

Luciano Timm
Gularte
,

Cristian Dias
Fernandes
,

Ramon
Dadalto Carvalho
,

Mateus Meneghetti
Ferrer
,

Pedro Lovato
Gomes Jardim
,

Cristiane Wienke
Raubach
,

Sérgio
da Silva Cava
 and 

Mario Lucio
Moreira
*

CCAF, IFM/CDTec-PPGCEM, Federal University of Pelotas, CEP: 96010-610, Pelotas, RS, Brazil. E-mail: cristiandf2003@gmail.com

Federal Institute of Sul-rio-grandense, CEP: 96015-360, Pelotas, RS, Brazil

IFM/PPGFis, Federal University of Pelotas, CEP: 96160-000, Capão do Leão, RS, Brazil

Received
21st March 2023
, Accepted 5th April 2023
First published on 6th April 2023
In this work, we present the potassium niobate (KNbO3) nanoparticles as a suitable mesoporous photoelectrode for dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). The KNbO3 particles were synthesized by the microwave-assisted hydrothermal method using mild conditions and characterized by SEM, XRD, Raman, and UV-Vis diffuse reflectance. The particles presented a pyramidal tower-like shape with an orthorhombic structure and an indirect bandgap of (3.0 ± 0.1) eV. Dye-sensitized solar cells were assembled using the synthesized KNbO3 nanoparticles, which were deposited as a photoelectrode on a TiO2 recombination charge blocking layer. It is noticeable that the synergistic operation of the TiO2 blocking layer and KNbO3 photoelectrode is essential to achieve photovoltaic behaviour in our solar cells. The short-circuit current density of Jsc = 2.82 mA, open-circuit voltage Voc = 669 mV, fill factor FF = 0.62, and a power conversion efficiency PCE = 1.17%, reports elevated parameters if compared to other DSSCs alternative materials, becoming potassium niobate suitable as photoelectrode.

The increasing demand for energy worldwide has stimulated the development of technologies for sustainable energy sources. Among the alternatives available for this purpose, solar energy is particularly attractive to be explored since the sun provides a vast and sufficient amount of clean and renewable energy. In this context, Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells (DSSCs) are electrochemical solar-to-electrical conversion devices with attractive properties, such as low cost incomparison to the conventional silicon-based photovoltaic devices, presenting simple manufacturing processes and advantages attributes as lightweight, low toxic and good performance in diverse lights conditions. These cells were first proposed by Grätzel and O'Regan, which are composed of a semiconductor oxide with a wide bandgap and large surface area acting as a photoelectrode associated with a dye, an electrolyte, and a counter electrode. In this type of device, the electric current is generated from the photo-excitation of the dye molecules absorbed in the photoelectrode under visible light irradiation. The excitation generates electrons that are injected into the conduction band of the semiconductor and then shuttled to the external circuit through the conductive substrate. The original state of the dye is subsequently restored by electron donation from the redox electrolyte, and the counter electrode returns charge from the external circuit back to the cycling circuit in the cell.

The fabrication of photoelectrodes with good light-harvesting ability, charge transport, and low recombination is a key challenge in the search of an efficient device. The photoelectrode in a conventional DSSC is typically made of mesoporous TiO2. However other materials have been explored in the literature, such as ZnO, Nb2O5, and semiconductor perovskites, in order to obtain a higher open-circuit voltage Voc.
Among the perovskite oxide alternatives, potassium niobate (KNbO3) stands out for this purpose since it presents high stability under irradiation, can be fabricated using low-cost methods, and is non-toxicity. Another important feature of this material is ferroelectricity, which have attracted attention for photovoltaic devices voltages higher than the bandgap and may enable efficiencies beyond the maximum possible in a conventional p–n junction solar cell. In this way, KNbO3 has been subjected to bandgap engineering in order to achieve a maximum absorption around the visible range and KNbO3 based composites were recently used in lead-free ferroelectric perovskite solar cells. Due to other properties as high refractive indices, larger nonlinear optical and electro-optical coefficients, the material is also used in optical waveguides and holographic memory storage applications, and is quoted to be potentially used in lead-free piezoelectric devices.

KNbO3 was synthesized using the microwave-assisted hydrothermal method based on previous similar procedure reported. Nonetheless, some parameters were adjusted and/or changed, such as precursor and microwave operating conditions. A KOH solution 7.5 M was prepared in 50 mL of distilled water using magnetic stirring at room temperature. In sequence, 0.696 g of NO5 (Brazilian Company of Mining and Metallurgy, CBMM, Brazil) was added, and the resultant suspension was kept under stirring for 10 min, then poured into a polytetrafluoroethylene vessel and placed into a reaction cell. The system was subjected to microwave radiation (800 W, working frequency 2.45 GHz) at 200 °C for 1 h, using a warm-up ramp of 3.5 min−1. After natural cooling, the white precipitate was collected, washed using distilled water and then centrifuged at 1600 rpm for 5 min The washing procedure was repeated successively until a neutral pH 7.0 was reached. The final material was then dried at 80 °C for 24 h.

The structural phase and the crystallinity of the synthesized KNbO3 was measured by X-ray diffraction (XRD) with Cu Kα using a diffractometer Bruker D8 Advance and by Raman spectroscopy using a Confocal Raman spectrometer Voyage, BWTEK, with an excitation wavelength of 785 nm and spectral resolution of 3 cm−1, both characterizations were conducted at room temperature. The shape and sizes were investigated by field-emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM) using FEI INSPECT F50 equipment. In order to calculate the optical gap, were performed UV-Vis light absorption spectroscopy by diffuse reflectance, measured with a spectrophotometer Ocean Optics HR2000+ using an ultraviolet-infrared light source model Ocean Optics DH-2000 and an integrating sphere model Thorlabs IS200-4. The gap was estimated by the Tauc model for a semiconductor with indirect bandgap through a graph of (αhν)0.5vs. hν, where hν is the photon energy and α is the absorption coefficient.

The preparation of the cells involves two steps, which are the preparation of the photoelectrode and counter electrode. In each step, the conductive glass FTO (fluorine doped tin oxide, 7 Ω sq−1 Sigma-Aldrich) was used as substrate. They went first through a sequential cleaning routine consisting of 10 min ultrasonic washes in 1% v/v neutral detergent, distilled water, and isopropyl alcohol, respectively.

Firstly, were prepared the blocking layer composed by one deposition of TiO2 this film obtained using a 0.3 M solution of titanium isopropoxide in isopropyl alcohol dropped on the FTO substrate and submitted to spin coating technique with progressive rotation speed increase: (i) rotation speed at 500 rpm for 5 s; (ii) rotation speed at 1500 rpm for 15 s and (iii) rotation speed at 3000 rpm for 30 s. In sequence, the substrates were dried at 125 for 5 min and sintered at 500 for 30 min in a muffle oven. This process generates a transparent TiO2 film with <50 nm thickness (estimated by transmittance) that avoids charge recombination between the electrolyte and conductive transparent oxide by preventing the direct contact between them and causing weak light absorbance.
To deposit a KNbO3 film on the TiO2 blocking layer, the KNbO3 paste was prepared with 50 mg of the synthesized KNbO3, 50 μL of ethylene glycol and 20 μL of Triton X-100. The dispersion was kept under ultrasonic agitation for 2 h and then mixed using a Vortex mixer until the required viscosity was achieved. This paste was deposited by the doctor blade technique, which consists in adding a small amount of paste on a 1 cm2 delimited area and spreading the material using a glass rod by moving it linearly over the substrate at a constant speed. The use of a tape to delimiter the 1 cm2 active area avoids the movement of the glass substrate during the process and also allows obtaining a uniform surface thickness. After the deposition, the substrate was dried at 125 for 5 min and sintered at 450 for 30 min in a muffle oven. Finally, we performed the dye-sensitization using a 0.3 M solution of cis-(SCN)2bis (2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylate) ruthenium(II) denoted as N-3, dissolved in ethanol. The substrates were immersed in the dye for 24 h at room temperature and in the absence of light.
The Pt counter-electrodes were prepared from the methodology used by Dias Fernandes et al. Once the photoelectrode and counter-electrode were ready, they were sandwiched together with a spacer (approx. 50 μm thick) between them in order to enable a room for the electrolyte, and then sealed. After, the electrolyte was inserted through a hole in the counter-electrode (initially done before cleaning). A scheme of the cell assembly is showed in Fig. 1. The electrolyte used in the cells was Z-150 (Solaronix).
The characteristic J–V curve of the solar cells was measured using potentiostat AMETEK VersaSTAT 3 in a solar simulator SLB-300A ScienceTech under an AM1.5G illumination and 1000 W m−2 of irradiance at 25 °C. We also performed Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) to characterize the kinetics of charge transfer in the DSSC. EIS was performed under illumination with signal amplitude 10 mVrms in a frequency range from 105 Hz to 0.1 Hz and zero potential bias. EIS measurements were also performed in the dark for bias potentials of 220 mV, 440 mV and 660 mV.

The size and shape of the synthesized KNbO3, evaluated with FE-SEM images, are shown in Fig. 2.

The synthesis generated cubic-shaped particles that are stacked together, forming a pyramidal tower-like structure according to Fig. 2 and 3 previously mentioned. Other authors using with both microwave-assisted and conventional hydrothermal synthesis of KNbO3 have reported a similar shapes in experiments with a non-stoichiometric molar ratio with higher proportion of KOH ions. This shape is associated to the increase of the reaction rate for nucleation and growth processes of KNbO3 particles in a specific direction under this non-stoichiometric condition. In our studies were observed a strict dependence of warm-up ramp, with size and shape of the crystals. Being high heathing hate increase the size of particles, due to high nucleation and subsequently growth.
This shape of KNbO3 even under nanometric scale avoid the formation of dense layers due to the non harmonic accommodations of particles, resulting in a porous layer. It is important to note that low size of the KNbO3 can increase the number of barriers along the deposited layer, increasing the resistance and resulting in a reduction of charge transference. Moreover, this can be handle by deposition process.

Fig. 4(a) shows the diffractogram analysis of the synthesized material in the range of 20 until 80 degrees. The X-ray diffractogram indicates that the synthesized KNbO3 is pure orthorhombic phase according to the JCPDS file 32-0822. The enlargement of diffraction peaks are correlated to de small size of particles as observed in SEM images, with can be even closer to the size of crystallographic coherence domain. Additionally, the absence of diffraction background reinforce that the synthesis method was successfull to obtain KNbO3 without even amorphous phase.
The Raman spectrum present in Fig. 4(b) corroborates to the XRD, reporting vibrational modes of the orthorhombic structure. According to the literature, the mode at 277 cm−1 (ν5) corresponds to the O–Nb–O symmetric bending vibration of the NbO6 octahedron, and the bands at 536 and 592 cm−1 (ν2 and ν1, respectively) represents the NbO symmetrical stretching modes of the NbO6 octahedron. The band at 830 cm−1 is assigned to the combinational phonon mode of ν1 and ν5. Based on this structural characterization the orthorhombic structure was obtained at long and short range order. Furthermore, the overwiden of modes indicate the local estructural defects, which imposes sublet variations on vibration modes.

Fig. 4(c) presents the Tauc plot obtained from the diffuse reflectance measurements, result that the orthorhombic KNbO3 presents an indirect bandgap. Thus, using the adequate plot, the calculated bandgap for the synthesized KNbO3 is (3.0 ± 0.1) eV. The value is competible to others reported in the literature and is adequate for use a semiconductor in DSSC photoelectrode because it is comparable to the TiO2 bandgap (3.2 eV for anatase phase and 3.0 eV for rutile phase). The indirect bandgap of the synthesized material is advantageous for its application in a DSSC photo-electrode since it has a longer life span of photo-generated carriers in comparison to a direct bandgap material due to change in spin multiplicity to decay and greater diffusion depth.


Table 1 compares the results obtained in this work with some other cells. Our parameters have been improved when compared to other DSSCs made of alternative materials photoelectrode. The J–V curve for the DSSC based on KNbO3 as a photoelectrode utilizing the TiO2 blocking layer is present in Fig. 5(a). The DSSC presented short-circuit current density Jsc = 2.82 mA, open-circuit voltage Voc = 669 mV and a fill factor of FF = 0.62, and a power conversion efficiency PCE = 1.17%.

Photoelectrode
Synthesis method
BL

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (mV)
FF
Ref.

a Microwave-assisted hydrothermal (MAH); solid-state reaction (SSR).
b TiO2 blocking layer (BL).

KNbO3
MAH
Yes
2.82
669
0.62
This work
KNBY
SSR
Yes
0.63
1560
0.85

20

KNBF
SSR
No
0.000115
75
—

42

KNLF
SSR
No
0.00019
35
—

42

Nb2O5
MAH
Yes
0.26
458
0.31

12

SrTiO3
SSR
Yes
0.128
636
0.464

13

CaTiO3
SSR
Yes
0.017
488
0.312

13

BaTiO3
SSR
Yes
0.127
650
0.433

13

BaTiO3
MAH
Yes
0.002
31.7
0.24

14


Fig. 5((b) and (c)) show the Nyquist plot for the same DSSC, along with the equivalent circuit used (Fig. 5(b)) to fit the EIS results. These figures demonstrate the electrochemical capacity and stability of the proposed system. In this diagram (Fig. 5(b)), two typical semicircles for solar cells were found: a small one at high frequencies that corresponds to the charge transfer resistance at the counter-electrode/electrolyte interface and a larger at middle and low frequencies range that is defined as recombination at the photoelectrode/electrolyte interface. Additionally, for large semicircle, the photoelectrode has effective contributions of internal resistance of KNbO3 as n-type semiconductor. This resistance comes from the potential barrier formed at grains h. This behavior also includes the capacitance effects if the grain boundary charge is different, between grain with distinct superficial structural termination. Noticable, these synergistic contributions make be increase the signal at this range of frequencies. The image inset of an equivalent circuit with charge transfer resistance (Rce) of the counter electrode, charge recombination resistance (Rrec), and its corresponding chemical capacitance (Cμ) of the photoelectrode shown in (Fig. 5(b)).
The fabricated DSSC was tested in the dark at three different bias potentials of 220 mV, 440 mV, and 660 mV, as shown in Fig. 5(c). In the high-frequency region, the curves demonstrated lower recombination of the injected electrons from the KNbO3 photoelectrode and TiO2 blocking layer to the redox electrolyte at reduced polarization potentials.
The value obtained (in Table 2) for these resistances from the adjustment of the Nyquist semicircles data was Rce = 1.92 W cm2 and Rrec = 20.46 W cm2. These values achieved are compatible with those presented in the previous publication. However, the low chemical capacitance (double layer) of Cμ = 66.21 μF, taking to reduced charge accumulation, probably due to the low density of surface area presented by the KNbO3 morphology, which is insufficient to raise the Jsc. Also, the agglomerate of rectangular-shaped particles (Fig. 2) offers adequate porosity to dye absorption but insufficient interfacial contact area with the TiO2 layer for the charge transference.
Cell

R
s (Ω cm2)

R
ce (Ω cm2)

C
ce (μF cm−2)

R
rec (Ω cm2)

C
μ (μF cm−2)
KNbO3
22.82
1.92
6.81
20.46
66.21
It is important to remark that the TiO2 present in the blocking layer does not add significant effects on the DSSC photocurrent since the layer is very thin and compact, then absorbing much less dye than the KNbO3 layer. In Fig. 5(a), is noticeable that the photocurrent of BL + KNbO3 (2.82 mA cm−2) is significantly larger (approximately thirteen times) than that of a single BL layer (0.21 mA cm−2). In our cells where used a kind of electrolyte composition that normally do not get high Voc and FF parameters, not with standing our results achieve great photocurrent if BL + KNbO3 are associated. An analysis of this possible additional influence was conducted using the transmittance measurements of the film, with respect to the FTO is shown in Fig. 6.
This results prove the absence of significative influence of BL on the photon absorption over KNbO3 photoelectrode. Additionally, the KNbO3 nanoparticles bandgap (3.0 eV) is over of ultraviolet range reaching a region with greater solar emissivity than that reached by TiO2. Then, even that the blocking layer has any absorption, this will be a cooperative effect. It is also important to note that DSSCs assembled with a KNbO3 photoelectrode without the blocking layer does not exhibit photovoltaic behavior, emphasizing that the nanoporous nature of the KNbO3 film allows direct contact between electrolyte and the FTO.

The overview on results obtained to KNbO3 compound, regarding structural, optical and electrical characterizations, allow us conclude that it has ability in anchoring the ruthenium dye N-3, providing a increase in energy absorption and, hence, also in the generated photocurrent. These aspects were corroborated by the EIS analysis, which correlate the lower recombination rate for the BL + KNbO3 system with an increase in the charge transfer between electrolyte/photoelectrode promoting the higher density current. Likewise, KNbO3 is a more promising material than some perovskites as photoelectrodes in solar cells.


There are no conflicts to declare.


SC is a fellow of the Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico (CNPq process 157881/2018-0). The authors also acknowledge the support of FAPERGS, CEME-Sul, CDMF and Companhia Brasileira de Metalurgia e Mineração (CBMM). This study was financed in part by the Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nıvel Superior Brasil (CAPES) Finance Code 001. The authors also thanks the Rio Grande do Sul Research Foundation FAPERGS (Grant Number 16/2551-0000525-7).


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023