 DOI: 10.1039/C4EE02441A
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 916-921


Byeong Jo
Kim
,

Dong Hoe
Kim
,

Yoo-Yong
Lee
,

Hee-Won
Shin
,

Gill Sang
Han
,

Jung Sug
Hong
,

Khalid
Mahmood
,

Tae Kyu
Ahn
,

Young-Chang
Joo
,

Kug Sun
Hong
,

Nam-Gyu
Park
,

Sangwook
Lee
* and 

Hyun Suk
Jung
*

School of Advanced Materials Science & Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 440-746, Korea. E-mail: hsjung1@skku.edu

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-744, Korea

Department of Energy Science, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 440-746, Korea

School of Chemical Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 440-746, Korea

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of California at Berkeley, CA 94720, USA. E-mail: wook2@berkeley.edu

Received
1st August 2014
, Accepted 3rd October 2014
First published on 3rd October 2014
Perovskite solar cells are promising candidates for realizing an efficient, flexible, and lightweight energy supply system for wearable electronic devices. For flexible perovskite solar cells, achieving high power conversion efficiency (PCE) while using a low-temperature technology for the fabrication of a compact charge collection layer is a critical issue. Herein, we report on a flexible perovskite solar cell exhibiting 12.2% PCE as a result of the employment of an annealing-free, 20 nm thick, amorphous, compact TiOx layer deposited by atomic layer deposition. The excellent performance of the cell was attributed to fast electron transport, verified by time-resolved photoluminescence and impedance studies. The PCE remained the same down to 0.4 sun illumination, as well as to a 45° tilt to incident light. Mechanical bending of the devices worsened device performance by only 7% when a bending radius of 1 mm was used. The devices maintained 95% of the initial PCE after 1000 bending cycles for a bending radius of 10 mm. Degradation of the device performance by the bending was the result of crack formation from the transparent conducting oxide layer, demonstrating the potential of the low-temperature-processed TiOx layer to achieve more efficient and bendable perovskite solar cells, which becomes closer to a practical wearable power source.

Perovskite solar cells, based on state-of-the-art inorganic–organic halide perovskite materials, are one of the most promising devices for realizing a wearable power source, on account of their high energy conversion efficiency, and economic fabrication processes such as roll-to-roll printing. Therefore, recently, the main concern of research in this field has moved to fabricating a highly flexible device, while preserving the high efficiency. The key process to achieve such a kind of highly efficient and flexible perovskite solar cells is the oxide film deposition process to make compact-electron-collection layers at a low temperature. In this regard, we report on highly efficient (12.2%) and bending durable perovskite solar cells on a cheap polyethylene naphthalate (PEN) substrate, with a TiOx compact-electron-collection layer that is fabricated at below 80 °C using the plasma enhanced atomic layer deposition method. We observed constant device performance up to 1000 bending cycles with 10 mm of bending radius. This study demonstrates that the flexible perovskite solar cell is potentially used for a power solution of future wearable devices.


Flexible and lightweight thin film solar cells have attracted considerable attention for their potential applications, such as portable electronic chargers, bendable display devices, and finally wearable electronic textiles, on account of their convenience of integration and versatile functionality. The most recently developed state-of-the-art solid-state solar cells based on inorganic–organic light-absorbing halide perovskites are highly promising candidates in this area due to their economically and practically viable fabrication processes which include the use of low temperature and the roll-to-roll process for the wearable/portable devices, as well as a high PCE of above 16%, which was achieved within only a few years from the first report in 2009 of this type of system on a rigid substrate. Recently, many groups have attempted to fabricate flexible perovskite solar cells with an all low-temperature (<130 °C) process and have shown the possibility of higher efficiency than that displayed by organic flexible solar cells. The reported flexible perovskite solar cells have employed two types of light absorbers, i.e. CH3NH3PbI3 and CH3NH3PbI3−xClx. So far, the best PCE of the flexible perovskite solar cells has been 10.2%, obtained by using a 300 nm-thick CH3NH3PbI3 layer, however, this is still inferior to the rigid-type perovskite solar cells. The main reasons for the relatively low performance are the large series resistance and fast charge recombination, which are expected to be improved by optimizing the TiO2 or ZnO compact charge collection layer in the flexible substrate. Usually, a few tens of nanometer-thick, solution-processed, TiO2 thin film as the compact layer can produce excellent performance when it is baked at over ∼500 °C. However, for flexible devices, the high temperature processes need to be avoided. Therefore, it is extremely important to study the origin of the inadequate properties of the low-temperature-processed compact nanolayers, and to establish the optimal technology for their development. Moreover, observation of the bending fatigue of the flexible perovskite solar cells, which has not been reported to date, is also crucial for real-world application and commercialization of the flexible solar cells.

Here, we present highly bendable (up to 1 mm of bending radius) and extremely efficient (PCE = 12.2%) perovskite solar cells based on tin-doped indium oxide (ITO) on PEN flexible substrates by forming an approximately 20 nm-thick TiOx compact layer on the substrate at 80 °C via plasma enhanced atomic layer deposition (PEALD). Moreover, we investigate the bending stability of the devices, with three effective bending radii for the wearable devices: 400 mm (R400), 10 mm (R10), and 4 mm (R4) for human neck, wrist, and finger, respectively. The device performance can withstand up to 1000 cycles of the bending test for R400 and R10. However, in the case of R4, the PCE significantly deteriorates to 50% of the initial efficiency after 1000 cycles. We demonstrate that the origin of degradation is not the fracture in the perovskite layer but is rather due to the fracture in the transparent conducting oxide layer (ITO in this study) on the PEN substrate, by analysing the microstructure of the damaged PEN/ITO/TiOx/perovskite multilayer after the bending test.


Fig. 1a and b present respectively a cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image and schematic diagram of an optimized flexible device employing the planar heterojunction structure. The TiOx layer, as the electron collection layer of perovskite solar cells, was prepared by PEALD at 80 °C (denoted as Lt-ALD-TiOx) on the ITO/PEN electrode. After that, a layer of light absorbing material, CH3NH3PbI(3−x)Clx, was deposited on the TiOx layer from a precursor solution containing CH3NH3I and PbCl2 at a molar ratio of 3:1, as reported by Snaith et al. Details of the experimental are well given in the methods section. Fig. 1c shows an image of an actual bent flexible perovskite solar cell, which is possible to patch onto sleeves, thus providing a good energy source for future wearable devices. The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the optimized flexible device are plotted in Fig. 1d. The optimized flexible device achieved 12.2% power conversion efficiency (PCE) at 21.4 mA cm−2 short-circuit current density (Jsc), 0.95 V open-circuit voltage (Voc), and 0.60 fill factor (FF). It is noteworthy that this flexible perovskite solar cell exhibits similar photovoltaic performance to typical glass substrate-based perovskite solar cells. This flexible device demonstrates a high photocurrent density of more than 20 mA cm−2Jsc, consequently yielding a high PCE of 12.2%, which is attributed to superior recombination-blocking and electron-transport properties of the Lt-ALD-TiOx layer (see below). The cross-sectional transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images for the Lt-ALD-TiOx layer in Fig. 2a clearly display conformal coating on the surface of the ITO layer. The high-resolution TEM image shows that the thickness of the TiOx compact layer is approximately 20 nm. Given that the lattice image is not observed, the TiOx compact layer is considered to be amorphous by reason of the low temperature process (80 °C).

A thick (100 nm) TiOx layer deposited via the same process shows no indexable X-ray diffraction (grazing incidence) peak (see Fig. S1(a), ESI), supporting the formation of the amorphous-like TiOx layer. Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopic (EDS) mapping of each element demonstrates that the amorphous layer is composed of Ti, distinguishable from the In detected ITO layer. To characterize the photovoltaic performance of the Lt-ALD-TiOx layer, two other TiOx compact electron collection layers, commonly used in dye-sensitized solar cells and perovskite solar cells, were prepared by a conventional solution process, at the same process temperature of 80 °C. The first layer, denoted as Et-TiOx, was prepared using an ethanol-based solution containing titanium isopropoxide (TTIP), distilled water, and diluted nitric acid. The other sample (Bt-TiOx) was fabricated from a butanol-based TTIP solution. The mixed halide perovskite layer on each TiOx layer has the same crystal structure (Fig. S1(b), ESI). The photovoltaic performance of the flexible perovskite solar cells employing the Lt-ALD-, Et-, and Bt-TiOx layers respectively on the PEN/ITO substrates is presented in Fig. 2b. All device performances are summarized in Table S1, ESI. It is notable that flexible devices with the Lt-ALD-TiOx layer achieve average characteristic values of 18.4 mA cm−2Jsc, open circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.89 V, fill factor (FF) of 0.58 and 9.42% PCE, thus exhibiting superior performance compared to devices employing Et- and Bt-TiOx (4.24% and 1.22% PCE, respectively). To confirm the reproducibility of the photovoltaic properties, we fabricated and characterized 100 devices. Histograms for the cell performance parameters of all devices are presented in Fig. S2, ESI. Half of the solar cells employing Lt-ALD-TiOx layers showed over 9% PCE at 1 sun illumination, further, ∼35% of the cells had a PCE above 10%. Moreover, the average Jsc was nearly 19 mA cm−2, which is much greater than in other compact electron collection layer based solar cells. The device shows some hysteresis in the J–V curves during back and forward scans, but the average efficiency of those scans is similar to the saturated static PCE which is obtained by applying the maximum power output potential (see Fig. S3, ESI). The electron injection from CH3NH3PbI(3−x)Clx into the TiOx layer and the transport properties in the TiOx layer had a great influence on the higher photocurrent density of the Lt-ALD-TiOx layer based solar cells.
Time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) characteristics of the flexible perovskite solar cells were measured to confirm the relaxation dynamics at the interfaces between each TiOx and CH3NH3PbI(3−x)Clx layers. The TRPL decays for each solar cell were convoluted using three exponential functions and are plotted in Fig. 2c. The convoluted parameters are listed in Table S2, ESI. In the case of Lt-ALD-TiOx, the intensity weighed average PL lifetime (383 ns) is faster than those of Et- and Bt-TiOx (435 and 537 ns, respectively). Since the faster electron injection process from CH3NH3PbI(3−x)Clx into TiOx is indispensable for PL quenching and shortening of the PL lifetime of perovskite, it could be concluded that the Lt-ALD-TiOx sample showed better solar cell performance due to the faster electron injection process even though organic defects in Et- and Bt-TiOx were not considered (see Fig. S4 and S5, ESI). Fig. 2d presents the impedance spectra for each flexible device, measured in the frequency range of 10−2 Hz to 2 MHz at an open circuit potential under 1 sun illumination. The Lt-ALD-TiOx layer based solar cell exhibits the lowest ending resistance of the semicircles, indicating the smallest internal resistance among all of the different solar cells. Although the exact impedance components have not been interpreted so far, the radius of the impedance semi-circles corresponds to the internal resistances of the TiOx/CH3NH3PbI(3−x)Clx interface, the TiOx layer itself and the ITO/TiOx interface. Therefore, the flexible perovskite solar cell containing a Lt-ALD-TiOx layer possesses superior charge injection characteristics and low internal resistance. The origin of the different charge collection properties is considered to be due to imperfections such as residual chemicals, hydroxyl groups, and Ti3+ ions, in comparison with other solar cells based on Et- and Bt-TiOx layers. To investigate chemical conditions, such as surface defects and residual organic compounds in each TiOx layer, Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) and X-ray photoelectron (XPS) spectra were considered (Fig. S4 and S5, ESI). The FT-IR spectra for each TiOx layer clearly demonstrate that both the solution based TiOx layers (Et- and Bt-TiOx) possess many residual organics and hydroxyl groups, as evidenced by the appearance of O–H (3200–3400 cm−1) and C–H stretching absorbance peaks (2850–2970 cm−1). On the other hand, any absorbance peaks corresponding to residual species are not observed in the Lt-ALD-TiOx layer. The residual species in the solution-based TiOx layers were due to the insufficient baking temperature. The XPS of Ti 2p3/2 and O 1s spectra, shown in Fig. S5, ESI clearly exhibits the negligible presence of nonstoichiometric point defects such as Ti3+ ions and oxygen vacancies in the Lt-ALD-TiOx layer. Both the solution based Et- and Bt-TiOx layers contain relatively high amounts of Ti3+ ions (∼457 eV) and hydroxyl groups (∼531 eV). Therefore, a large amount of residual organics, hydroxyl groups, and point defects in solution based TiOx layers may impede electron injection and transport, thereby contributing to the deterioration of the photovoltaic properties.
From the viewpoint of utilization of the flexible perovskite solar cells, operation under various light illumination conditions and the mechanical bending stability are of great importance. Systematic studies for light illumination and mechanical bending stability have not been reported to date for the flexible perovskite solar cell. Fig. 3a shows the J–V characteristics under various light intensities ranging from 0.4 to 1 sun. Jsc decreases from 19.05 to 8.77 mA cm−2 with decreasing light intensity. However, even at 0.4 sun light illumination, Voc remains between 0.9 and 0.82 V, thereby the PCE under 0.4 sun illumination is similar to that for 1 sun illumination. Relatively constant Voc values under inadequate illumination conditions are ascribed to the reduced charge recombination due to the negligible surface and sub-bandgap states in the perovskite layer. The J–V curves at different light incidence angles (θ), from 0° to 45° are also shown in Fig. 3b. The dependence of the photovoltaic property on the incidence light angle displays a similar trend to that for light intensity. Voc also is almost unchanged (from 0.9 to 0.88 V), although the normalized Jsc decreases by 30%. But, the efficiencies on the basis of the effective active area, calculated by the multiplied active area and cos(θ), remain nearly constant in the tested angle range. Over 1 micrometer diffusion length of the CH3NH3PbI(3−x)Clx perovskite absorber and its 330 nm thick multilayered device structure led to excellent PCE consistency under substandard effective light intensities.
In order to verify the device stability against mechanical bending of the flexible device, a bending test was performed taking into account the bending radii and cycles. The PCE of the flexible perovskite solar cells was measured after they were bent repeatedly with different radii of curvature. The PCE exhibited no significant decrease in efficiency even with 1 mm of bending radii, retaining 93% of the original PCE value (Fig. 3c). As the next step, we evaluated the effects of mechanical bending on device performance during 1000 consecutive bending cycles at three different values of radii of curvature, i.e., at 400 mm, 10 mm, and 4 mm, respectively (R400, R10, and R4). The flexible perovskite solar cells revealed fairly promising mechanical bending stability. Their performance was maintained without any reduction in PCE during the 1000 bending cycles when the device was bent with R400. The device with R10 also exhibited no significant decrease in PCE, retaining over 95% of its initial PCE (Fig. 3d) without deterioration of the key photovoltaic properties such as Jsc, Voc, and fill factor (Fig. S6, ESI). For R4, 90% of the initial PCE remained after 25 cycles. However, after 1000 cycles with R4, the PCE decreased by approximately 50% compared with the initial efficiency. These results demonstrated that the designed flexible devices possess good bending durability. However, under an acute bending radius such as R4, cell performance is degraded due to the limitation of flexibility in the PEN/ITO substrate, corresponding well with the expectations reported by Kelly et al.
To find out the origin of fatigue, we prepared three kinds of multilayer structures, i.e. PEN/ITO, PEN/ITO/TiOx/perovskite/spiro-MeOTAD (full device only without Ag electrode), and PEN/TiOx/perovskite/spiro-MeOTAD (full device without the ITO layer and Ag electrode), respectively, and measured the change in the electrical resistance of each structure with compressive strain using the in situ resistance-measurement compressive test system reported in a previous work (schematically shown in Fig. S7a, ESI).Fig. 4a shows the relative resistance changes (ΔR/R0 (%)) as a function of the bending cycles at the radius of curvature R4. In the case of the PEN/ITO substrate, a drastic increase in resistance is observed at the outset. When the TiOx/perovskite/spiro-MeOTAD layers are deposited on just the PEN/ITO substrate, the resistance is not changed until 250 cycles have passed. After 260 bending cycles, the resistance is abruptly increased, indicating that a fracture occurs inside the flexible device. In contrast, no abrupt resistance change of the flexible device without the ITO layer (PEN/TiOx/perovskite/spiro-MeOTAD) is observed for 300 cycles, only a gradual increase of 15%. Therefore, we suggest that the performance degradation of flexible devices as a result of repeated mechanical bending can be attributed to the fractures in the ITO layer, which induce an abrupt increase in series resistance. The SEM images of the ruptured PEN/ITO/TiOx/perovskite and PEN/TiOx/perovskite samples after 300 bending cycles at R4 clearly exhibit the origin of the abrupt fracture in the flexible solar cell. For more obvious observations, the spiro-MeOTAD layer was omitted. Fig. 4b shows that the large crack lines are formed perpendicular to the bending direction, which is typical of the rupture behavior displayed by an ITO layer coated onto a flexible substrate because of the difference in Young's modulus between the ITO and the flexible substrate. The magnified image (Fig. 4b-1) shows that the perovskite layer near the cracked ITO peels off. Fig. 4b-2 demonstrates that the crack propagates in the region of ITO and PEN/ITO/TiOx/perovskite, implying that the origin of the crack is the ITO fracture. However, in the case of TiOx/perovskite layers prepared on only PEN flexible substrates without ITO, the fracture and delamination are not observed after the bending test, indicating that the fatigue phenomenon of the flexible perovskite solar cells with a large bending radius of R4 originates from the fracture in the brittle ITO layer. This attests that the inorganic–organic halide perovskite materials themselves possess excellent mechanical properties, which can contribute to the realization of wearable solar cells, well beyond the capabilities of current flexible thin film solar cells, once the brittle ITO transparent conducting films are substituted with highly bendable conducting layers such as metal-transparent conducting film composite layers, poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly (styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS), or nanostructured metal web layers.

Highly efficient and decidedly bending durable perovskite solar cells were fabricated in a low temperature process employing a 20 nm-thick, low-impurity, amorphous TiOx layer, thus providing a promising approach to the development of practical wearable perovskite solar cells. By studying the TiOx nanolayer deposition technology, the layer qualities such as charge transport property and mechanical durability can be enhanced against bending or folding of the device. The observation of the unaltered PEN/TiOx nanolayer/perovskite/spiro-MeOTAD multilayer after several bending tests signifies that the bending durability of the TiOx nanolayer-employed perovskite solar cells can be improved if that of the transparent conducting substrate is achieved.


Ethanol and 1-butanol were purchased from Dychemi and Tokyo Chemical Industry, respectively. Nitric acid (HNO3) was purchased from Junsei Chemical. Spiro-MeOTAD was purchased from the Luminescence Technology Corp. The other materials were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. All materials were used as received. CH3NH3I was prepared by synthesizing according to a previously reported method.


Lt-ALD-TiOx was deposited in a lab-scale plasma enhanced atomic layer deposition (PEALD) system. The Lt-ALD-TiOx layer was systematically investigated using titanium(IV) isopropoxide (TTIP, UPChem) as the Ti precursor. For PEALD, high-purity O2 was employed as the oxygen source and high-purity Ar was used as the TTIP carrier and purging gas; these gas flows were controlled by a mass flow controller. Each deposition cycle comprised 10 s of pre-purging, 3 s of TTIP source injection, and finally 1 s of O2 flow. After O2 exposure plasma was enhanced at 300 W power, 10 s of Ar flow was followed by the post-purging step. The growth rate of the Lt-ALD-TiOx film was 0.5 Å per cycle. Et- and Bt-TiOx layers were prepared via the solution process as reported elsewhere. Each TiOx layer underwent spin coating at 2000 rpm and 3000 rpm for 30 s, respectively, then was baked at 80 °C for 15 min and cooled down to room temperature.


The solar cells were fabricated on PEN/ITO substrates (Peccell, PECP-IP, 13 Ω sq−1), which were washed for 15 min each with acetone, deionized water, and ethyl alcohol in an ultrasonic bath. First, each TiOx compact electron collection layer (Et-, Bt- and Lt-ALD-TiOx) was coated onto PEN/ITO as mentioned above. After deposition, the CH3NH3PbI(3−x)Clx solution (CH3NH3I–PbCl2 = 3:1 molar ratio, 42 wt% in N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF)) was spin-coated at 2000 rpm for 45 s, and then dried on a 95 °C hot plate for 2 h. Subsequently, 25 μl of a hole transport layer (80 mg of 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenyl-amine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-MeOTAD), 8.4 μl of 4-tert-butylpyridine, and 51.6 μl of bis (trifluoromethane) sulfonamide lithium salt (Li-TFSI) solution (154 mg ml−1 in acetonitrile), the whole mixture was dissolved in 1 ml chlorobenzene) was formed after spin coating at 2500 rpm for 45 s. All processes were carried out under controlled atmospheric conditions and a humidity of <0.5 ppm. Finally, a 100 nm thick Ag electrode was deposited by thermal evaporation at ∼10−6 bar with a shadow mask.


The cross-sectional structure and thickness of the flexible perovskite solar cells were characterized using field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM, JSM-7600F, Jeol). Cross-sectional TEM, STEM and EDS images (HRTEM, JEM-2100F, JEOL) of the Lt-ALD-TiOx were obtained with the aid of a focused ion beam system (FIB system, Helios 650, FEI). Crystallinity of the 100 nm thick Lt-ALD-TiOx layers deposited on a glass substrate was analyzed by using a Grazing incidence X-ray diffractometer (New D8 advance, Bruker) with 1° incidence angle. The infrared spectra (IR) of the TiOx layers were recorded on an FT-IR spectrometer (Nicolet 6700, Thermo Scientific) in the range of 600–4000 cm−1 with a Ge window. The chemical states of Ti and O in TiOx were analyzed using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, Sigma Probe, ThermoVG, UK). The current–voltage characteristics of the solar cells were measured under solar-simulated light (Newport Oriel Solar 3A Class AAA, 64023A) with the aid of a potentiostat (CHI 600D, CH Instruments). The AM 1.5G sun light (100 mA cm−2) was calibrated using a standard Si-solar cell (Oriel, VLSI standards). Solar light intensity from 0.4 to 1 sun was adjusted using a standard Si-solar cell by tuning the light sensor current (Newport Oriel digital exposure controller, Model 68945). Impedance spectroscopy was carried out at an open-circuit state by applying an AC amplitude signal of 5 mV and frequency from 10−2 Hz to 2 MHz, using the same potentiostat under 1 sun light illumination. Time-resolved photoluminescence was measured at 770 nm using a time-correlated single photon counting method (FluoTime 200, PicoQuant BmbH) employing a 670 nm diode laser (LDH-P-C-670, PicoQuant BmbH) with a 715 nm long-pass filter to block any scattered light. Excitation intensity was controlled using a series of neutral density filters in order to avoid nonlinear effects such as exciton-charge annihilation. In situ resistance measurements of the designed multilayered films (Fig. S7, ESI) with R10 compressive bending were conducted using a micro-compressive machine (MMT-500N, Shimadzu) equipped with an electrically contactable jig. All tests were conducted at 0.2 Hz bending frequency at room temperature. As the films were bent by compressive stress, the electrical resistance was measured with an Agilent 34410A multimeter.


This work was supported by the Global Frontier R&D Program at the Center for Multiscale Energy System (2012M3A6A7054861). Also this work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology (2012M3A7B4049967 and NRF-2014R1A4A1008474). Characterization of the crystal structure and TEM analysis were supported by the Research Institute of Advanced Materials (RIAM) and XPS analysis was supported by the National Center for Inter-University Research Facilities (NCIRF). Especially, this paper is dedicated to our late mentor, Prof. Kug Sun Hong.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Grazing incidence XRD of the Lt-ALD-TiOx compact electron-collection layer, XRD of the perovskite films on the each compact TiOx layer, histograms of the photovoltaic parameters of Lt-ALD-TiOx based perovskite solar cells, I–V hysteresis and static PCE of representative device, FT-IR and XPS of various TiOx electron collection layers, normalized device parameters of flexible perovskite solar cells as a function of bending cycles with diverse radii 400, 10, and 4 mm, schematic images for in situ measurements of resistance and designed multilayered structures, photovoltaic performance parameters and PL lifetime parameter of various TiOx charge collection layers based flexible perovskite solar cells. See DOI: 10.1039/c4ee02441a
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015