 DOI: 10.1039/C3NR00611E
(Communication)
Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 8934-8939

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms

Hyesung Park,
Yumeng Shi and 
Jing Kong*

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA. E-mail: jingkong@mit.edu

SUTD-MIT International Design Centre, Singapore University of Technology and Design, 20 Dover Drive, Singapore 138682, Singapore

Received
2nd February 2013
, Accepted 21st July 2013
First published on 31st July 2013
Graphene has been proposed as a promising transparent conducting electrode material in organic photovoltaic (OPV) solar cells to substitute the widely used indium tin oxide (ITO). Various studies have reported OPV devices with graphene electrodes showing comparable performances to ITO-based OPV cells. However, the fabrication reliability or device yield has not been widely discussed. In our investigation it was found that graphene-based OPVs tend to have much lower device yield than the ITO-based ones if similar fabrication processes are used. One possible reason could be due to the challenge faced in obtaining a uniform coating of PEDOT:PSS hole injection layer (HIL) on graphene. In fact, several attempts have been made to overcome this challenge. In this work, we report a facile method of solvent modification of PEDOT:PSS to achieve a homogeneous coating on graphene. A significant enhancement in the device yield was observed as compared to devices using normal aqueous solution based PEDOT:PSS; nevertheless, it was still only ∼50%. Further improvement was made by adding an additional electron blocking layer (EBL), molybdenum trioxide, after the coating of PEDOT:PSS. The observation in this work calls for further investigation to understand the role played by the HIL or EBL in graphene-based OPV devices.

Recent discoveries and advances in graphene research have provided many opportunities for opto-electronics applications due to the unique physical properties of graphene such as high electron and hole mobility and current capacity, quantum hall effect, bipolar super current, strong suppression of weak localization, etc. In particular, owing to the desired electrical, optical, and mechanical properties, graphene emerged as a viable transparent conducting electrode in organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs) and organic solar cells (OSCs). In the OSC application, indium tin oxide (ITO) has been widely used as a transparent window electrode. However, there are growing demands for alternative transparent conducting materials due to several issues reported: ITO is known to inject oxygen or indium ions into the active media of a device causing performance degradation; the non-uniform light absorption could limit harvesting of efficient solar radiation; the mechanical brittleness of ITO is not suitable for flexible device applications; and the limited availability of indium has also raised the manufacturing cost issue.

In this regard, several investigations have been made to use graphene electrodes in organic photovoltaics (OPV) and encouraging results have been obtained which showed comparable device performances to ITO-based devices. However, the research in this area is still in its infancy and to date the yield of the fabricated devices has not been discussed much. From our previous studies it has been found that if the OPV devices are made by simply replacing the ITO electrode with the graphene electrode, the device yield was very poor (<5%). It was hypothesized that this could be due to the challenge to obtain a uniform coating of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) hole injection layer (HIL) on the pristine graphene surface. Thus several attempts have been made to address this challenge. Park et al. used AuCl3 doping on graphene electrodes to improve the wettability of PEDOT:PSS aqueous solution to achieve a better coverage. Wang et al. tried to insert a thin buffer layer of molybdenum trioxide (MoO3) to improve the PEDOT:PSS wettability. Oxidative chemical vapor deposition has also been used to vapor print PEDOT onto the graphene to obtain a uniform coating. The device performance and the yield increased with this progress; nevertheless, the highest device yield was still ∼30%, much lower than those of devices fabricated with ITO electrodes.
In OPV devices, efficient charge transport at the material junction/interface (metal–organic or organic–organic) has been found to be critical to the success of device operation. For instance, it is desirable to minimize energy barriers between the electrodes and adjacent organic materials for the efficient extraction/injection of photo-generated free charge carriers. In this regard, the standard ITO anode with its high work function (∼5.0 eV after O2 plasma treatment) matches relatively well with typical p-type donor organic semiconductors such as copper phthalocyanine (CuPc) (HOMO (highest occupied molecular orbital) = 5.2 eV), tetraphenyldibenzoperiflanthene (DBP, HOMO = 5.5 eV), or poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) (HOMO = 5.2 eV). In contrast, chemical vapor deposition (CVD) grown graphene films typically have lower work function (4.2–4.5 eV depending on the processing conditions and number of layers) than ITO which leads to a large interfacial energy barrier at the graphene–organic junction. Fig. 1 schematically describes one type of commonly investigated device structure (small molecule-based OPV) and the flat band energy diagram illustrating the larger barrier at the graphene–organic interface.
In conventional ITO-based OPV or OLED devices, a HIL such as PEDOT:PSS is commonly inserted at the ITO–organic interface to minimize the hole-injection energy barrier. PEDOT:PSS with its high work function of 5.2 eV is well-suited to most p-type organic semiconductors and is typically spin-coated from an aqueous solution. The presence of the PEDOT:PSS buffer layer should be even more critical for graphene electrodes due to the generally large interfacial energy barrier at the graphene–organic junction. However, the hydrophobic nature of the graphene surface and its low surface free energy prevent complete and uniform coverage/wetting of the PEDOT:PSS layer onto graphene. In the case of ITO, the surface can be modified to be more hydrophilic via UV-ozone or O2 treatments, whereas for graphene, these treatments cause severe damage to the monolayer sheet and degrade the conductance significantly.
In this work, we developed another method to achieve a homogeneous coating of PEDOT:PSS on graphene through solvent modification. Compared to the previous ones, this method is simpler and more effective, and a uniform coating of PEDOT:PSS can be achieved every time. A significant improvement in the device yield was obtained; nevertheless, it was found that having a uniform PEDOT:PSS layer on graphene is not sufficient for good performance and high device yield (this solvent modification method gives rise to ∼50% device yield, not 100%). It was found that by adding an additional electron blocking layer (EBL) of molybdenum trioxide (MoO3) on top of the solvent modified PEDOT:PSS layer, further improvement can be made and the device yield was improved up to ∼80%. These observations point to the need to further understand the role of the HIL or EBL in the graphene electrode system in OPV.
The graphene electrodes studied in this work were prepared via a low-pressure CVD method by stacking three mono-layers of graphene films as reported in our earlier work (see the ESI). In order to obtain the required wetting of the buffer layer on the graphene electrode, the PEDOT:PSS (Clevios™ P VP AI 4083, aqueous-based) solution was modified by a polar solvent, isopropyl alcohol (IPA), via thorough mixing: after filtering the PEDOT:PSS (0.45 μm), it was mixed with IPA (3:1, v/v ratio) followed by 24 hours of rigorous stirring at room temperature. Similar efforts were made previously where the focus was to improve the electrical conductivity of PEDOT:PSS via solvent modification: a screening effect, due to the high dielectric constant of polar solvents, is induced between the PEDOT polymer chain and the surrounding insulating PSS dopant shell. This reduces the Columbic interaction between the polymer backbone and the dopant, which leads to enhanced hopping rate and DC conductivity (σDC) in the PEDOT:PSS composite. Kim et al. demonstrated that σDC of PEDOT:PSS can be generally controlled through the solvents, and by the variable range hopping model, higher conductivity was observed for the solvent modified PEDOT:PSS than that dissolved in water.
The wetting of PEDOT:PSS after solvent treatment was first analyzed from the contact angle measurement. Microscale droplets of both solutions, PEDOT:PSS and PEDOT:PSS–IPA, were placed on graphene sheets transferred on quartz substrates to investigate the wettability and the static contact angle. The relatively simple solvent manipulation greatly enhanced the wetting efficacy as shown in Fig. 2a and b. The contact angles measured for the PEDOT:PSS and solvent modified PEDOT:PSS mixture on graphene/quartz were 79.6 ± 0.1° and 19.6 ± 1.7°, respectively. As a comparison, Fig. 2c and d also show droplets of PEDOT:PSS on the sputter deposited ITO surface before and after O2 plasma treatment (30 s). Similar to graphene, it is also difficult to wet the pristine sputtered ITO thin film with hydrophilic PEDOT:PSS. However, O2 plasma treatment converts the surface from hydrophobic into hydrophilic by introducing hydroxyl and carbonyl groups. The contact angle was thus reduced from 71.8 ± 2.5° to 9.92 ± 0.2°. To further investigate the wetting of solvent modified PEDOT:PSS, scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was performed after spin coating each solution on the graphene/quartz surface. As shown in Fig. 2e and f, PEDOT:PSS–IPA formed uniform and complete coverage on the graphene surface (Fig. 2f), whereas PEDOT:PSS dewetted on the surface of graphene (Fig. 2e).
The physical properties of the solvent modified PEDOT:PSS were further characterized to investigate whether there is any change in the physical role of PEDOT:PSS in OPV application after such solvent treatment. The electrical properties, such as conductivity and work function, were first considered since these are important features of PEDOT:PSS as a HIL. Sheet resistance (Rsh) was measured on PEDOT:PSS and PEDOT:PSS–IPA mixture films spin-coated on quartz substrates, and improved conductivity was observed for the solvent modified PEDOT:PSS, which could promote more efficient charge transport by reducing the interfacial bulk series resistance in the complete solar cell: Rsh values of the two films were 17.1 ± 2.1 and 3.5 ± 0.6 MΩ □−1, respectively (Fig. 3a). Similar enhancement in the electrical conductivity of solvent modified PEDOT:PSS was also observed elsewhere where the conductivity of the PEDOT:PSS improved from ∼0.7 S cm−1 to ∼15–83 S cm−1, although the value was still quite lower than that of ITO (1–5 × 103 S cm−1). A previous report also showed that the polymer chain conformation was not significantly affected by the additional solvent in the PEDOT:PSS system, thus avoiding any substantial changes to the original chemical structure. We also observed almost negligible differences in the optical transmission spectra obtained from both PEDOT:PSS systems as shown in Fig. 3b. The transmittance at λ = 550 nm was 97.9% and 98.1% for PEDOT:PSS and PEDOT:PSS–IPA, respectively.
The effect of solvent on the work function of PEDOT:PSS was also investigated through the shift of surface potential measured by the contact potential difference from scanning Kelvin probe microscopy (SKPM). SKPM has been often used in the characterization of the surface potential distributions in various materials, especially for the surface charge distribution study of photosensitive materials. We note that the SKPM results can be affected by environmental changes such as moisture and tip conditions. Thus, to achieve repeatable results and make fair comparisons, various samples were tested in sequence without changing the tip. The SKPM study was performed by a dual-pass technique in a tapping mode. The topography information was acquired in the first scan as shown in Fig. 3c (PEDOT:PSS–IPA) and 3e (PEDOT:PSS). For the second scan, the surface potential variations were mapped out while the tip was maintained at a constant distance of ∼10 nm above the surface based on the recorded surface profile as shown in Fig. 3d (PEDOT:PSS–IPA) and 3f (PEDOT:PSS). In a conducting polymer, application of a secondary dopant (in this case, solvent IPA) to the primary (PSS) doped polymer can induce further changes in addition to the changes in the electronic, optical, and/or structural properties resulting from the primary dopant. Therefore, the observed morphological changes in the PEDOT:PSS films in Fig. 3c–e can be expected through the addition of the solvent. In OPV, achieving smooth coverage of the PEDOT:PSS film is important since this layer is also known to assist planarization of the rough surface of the underlying electrodes, which prevents local shunting pathways through the ultra-thin photoactive layers. Here, although the topography shows some difference across the investigated area, the effect was not significant: root-mean-square roughness only increased from 0.73 nm to 1.06 nm after the solvent modification. More importantly, despite the slight change in the surface morphology, the surface potentials do not show noticeable difference, which suggests that the surface roughness change does not significantly affect the electrical properties of these films in terms of charge distributions and local conductivities.
After achieving uniform and complete coverage of PEDOT HIL on the graphene electrodes, standard bi-layer heterojunction OPV devices were fabricated using small molecules as photoactive materials with the following structure: graphene/PEDOT:PSS–IPA/DBP, 25 nm/C60 (fullerene), 40 nm/BCP (bathocuproine), 8.5 nm/Al, 100 nm. Three layered graphene stacked films were used as an anode through the layer-by-layer transfer. The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of graphene-based OPV devices with both aqueous and solvent modified PEDOT:PSS HILs are shown in Fig. 4 with ITO reference cells for comparison. As shown in Fig. 4a, with aqueous-based PEDOT:PSS HIL, the photo-response of the OPV device was almost negligible, which is close to the behavior of the devices using the graphene electrode without any PEDOT:PSS layer. Considering the fact that PEDOT:PSS does not wet on graphene and does not form a continuous coating on graphene, this result is expected and it is also consistent with what was observed previously. This result indicates that without the PEDOT:PSS layer between graphene and DBP, the charge transport of photo-generated carriers is mostly prohibited possibly due to the presence of a large interfacial energy barrier at the graphene and the HOMO of the DBP junction. On the other hand, using a solvent modified PEDOT:PSS (PEDOT:PSS–IPA, 3:1 v/v) HIL, significant enhancement of the device performance was observed with the desired rectifying diode characteristics. Here two representative device characteristics are observed with the use of PEDOT:PSS–IPA (3:1) HIL (out of 125 devices), where one type displays the anticipated diode behavior (type 1) while the other (type 2) shows the reduced device performances such as lower short-circuit current density (JSC) or open-circuit voltage (VOC): for type 1 (red), the performance is comparable to the ITO devices (Fig. 4b) and 50% of the devices made with the solvent modified PEDOT:PSS displayed this type of behavior. On the other hand, another 50% of the devices showed behavior similar to type 2 (blue), in which the performance is noticeably lower than those of the ITO devices. In our study, PEDOT:PSS–IPA mixtures with different concentrations (v/v) of 2:1 and 1:1 were also investigated. It was observed that the results did not show noticeable dependence on PEDOT:PSS–IPA concentrations, rather, similar enhancements in the photo-response and device yield were observed with all three concentrations studied here. These results are shown in ESI Fig. S1 and Table S1. In addition, the performance of ITO reference cells with the PEDOT:PSS–IPA mixtures was also slightly improved possibly due to the enhanced conductivity of the PEDOT:PSS HIL, resulting in improved charge transport at the interface (Fig. 4b). The representative photovoltaic parameters, JSC, VOC, fill factor (FF), and power conversion efficiency (PCE), of each device presented in Fig. 4 are summarized in Table 1.
Anode
HTL
JSC (mA cm−2)
VOC (V)
FF
PCE (%)
ITO
PEDOT:PSS
5.34 (5.16 ± 0.11)
0.90 (0.88 ± 0.01)
0.62 (0.61 ± 0.00)
2.96 (2.80 ± 0.11)
ITO
PEDOT:PSS–IPA (3:1)
5.70 (5.62 ± 0.09)
0.89 (0.88 ± 0.01)
0.61 (0.60 ± 0.01)
3.08 (2.96 ± 0.10)
Graphene
PEDOT:PSS–IPA (3:1), type 1
5.49 (5.36 ± 0.13)
0.87 (0.87 ± 0.01)
0.56 (0.53 ± 0.02)
2.65 (2.47 ± 0.13)
Graphene
PEDOT:PSS–IPA (3:1), type 2
3.35 (3.17 ± 0.18)
0.80 (0.72 ± 0.06)
0.31 (0.30 ± 0.01)
0.83 (0.69 ± 0.11)
The observation that a uniform PEDOT:PSS coating on graphene does not give 100% comparable performance to the ITO devices was surprising. This suggests that PEDOT:PSS itself may not be an ideal EBL for the graphene electrode which has generally a lower work function than ITO. We thus fabricated devices with a bulk heterojunction poly(3-hexylthiophene):[6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (P3HT:PCBM) polymer active layer rather than bi-layer heterojunction small molecules to investigate the efficacy of electron blocking at the PEDOT:PSS and organic layer interface: since mixed phases of donor (P3HT) and acceptor (PCBM) materials appear simultaneously at the PEDOT:PSS interface, the role of the electron blocking property will be more significant in the polymer solar cells than in the small molecule bi-layer devices. Fig. 5 shows the J–V response of polymer solar cells with the graphene electrodes compared with ITO electrodes using the PEDOT:PSS–IPA (3:1) HIL, with or without an additional EBL of MoO3:graphene (or ITO)/PEDOT:PSS–IPA(3:1)/(MoO3, 20 nm)/P3HT:PCBM, 100 nm/Ca, 25 nm/Al, 80 nm. Although good coverage of the PEDOT:PSS layer was achieved on the graphene electrode after solvent modification, the device showed negligible photo-response with simple resistor-like behavior, presumably owing to the poor electron blocking property of PEDOT:PSS and the resulting charge recombination. However, with the addition of a thin layer of MoO3, the resultant solar cells showed the desired rectifying diode characters due to the good electron blocking property of the MoO3 layer. On the other hand, ITO-based devices did not need this additional EBL due to the relatively higher work function of ITO than graphene. With the additional MoO3 layer, the PCE of the ITO-based devices slightly decreased due to the insulating nature of MoO3. The related device performance is summarized in Table 2. This result indicates that uniform coverage of PEDOT:PSS on the graphene electrode is not sufficient for the successful graphene-based OPV application but suggests that an additional EBL is desirable for the improved device functionality in general.
Anode
HTL
JSC (mA cm−2)
VOC (V)
FF
PCE (%)
ITO
PEDOT:PSS–IPA (3:1)
5.99 (5.83 ± 0.12)
0.59 (0.58 ± 0.01)
0.68 (0.67 ± 0.00)
2.38 (2.27 ± 0.08)
ITO
PEDOT:PSS–IPA (3:1) + MoO3
5.68 (5.43 ± 0.17)
0.57 (0.56 ± 0.00)
0.64 (0.63 ± 0.01)
2.07 (1.94 ± 0.10)
Graphene
PEDOT:PSS–IPA (3:1)
5.79 (5.67 ± 0.10)
0.03 (0.03 ± 0.00)
0.23 (0.23 ± 0.00)
0.04 (0.04 ± 0.00)
Graphene
PEDOT:PSS–IPA (3:1) + MoO3
5.44 (5.37 ± 0.19)
0.63 (0.61 ± 0.02)
0.55 (0.55 ± 0.00)
1.90 (1.80 ± 0.10)
In conclusion, we demonstrated that a conventional hole transporting buffer layer, PEDOT:PSS, with its hydrophilic nature can be tailored through a relatively simple solvent modification, so that it can be conformally wetted on the hydrophobic graphene surface. Several physical properties such as morphological, electrical, or chemical aspects were investigated to verify that the role of PEDOT:PSS as a HIL remains unchanged after such solvent treatment. With the improved wetting of HIL and the MoO3 EBL on the graphene electrode, we observed significantly enhanced photovoltaic behavior on our graphene anode-based organic solar cells. Our strategy can be potentially applied to other types of optoelectronic devices based on graphene transparent conductors.

The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support for this work from Eni S.p.A. under the Eni-MIT Alliance Solar Frontiers Center. The authors also gratefully acknowledge Professor Vladimir Bulović for the use of experimental equipment for device fabrication and testing.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c3nr00611e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013