 DOI: 10.1039/C2JM16474D
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 5700-5705

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Ye
Huang
,

Mingqian
Zhang
,

Long
Ye
,

Xia
Guo
,

Charles C.
Han
*,

Yongfang
Li
* and 

Jianhui
Hou
*

State Key Laboratory of Polymer Physics and Chemistry, Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, Institute of Chemistry, CAS, Beijing, 100190, P. R. China. E-mail: hjhzlz@iccas.ac.cn

Graduate University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, P. R. China

CAS Key Laboratory of Organic Solids, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100190, China. E-mail: liyf@iccas.ac.cn

Received
9th December 2011
, Accepted 6th January 2012
First published on 13th February 2012
An investigation on the opto-electronic and photovoltaic properties of a pair of alkoxy substituted quinoxaline-based copolymers PTTQx is performed in order to describe the effect of changing the position of alkoxy substituents on the peripheral phenyl rings. The copolymer with meta-positioned alkoxy showed lower HOMO and LUMO levels and a higher Voc of 0.73 V, while the copolymer with para-positioned alkoxy displayed higher HOMO and LUMO levels and lower Voc of 0.60 V when a polymer/PC71BM blend film was used as the active layer in polymer solar cells (PSCs) under AM 1.5 G irradiation (100 mW cm−2). With the good agreement between theoretical calculation and experimental observation, it has been observed that the effect of the substituents depends on the position of the alkoxy group which exhibits a stronger electron donating effect in the para-position than in the meta-position. The resonance electron donating effect of the alkoxy group on the para-position can elevate the HOMO and LUMO levels simultaneously, while this effect is not obviously reflected on the meta-position. Therefore, PTTQx-m exhibits lower HOMO level, higher Voc correspondingly and thereby higher PCE of the PSCs based on it.


Polymer solar cells (PSCs) based on blends of conjugated polymers and fullerene derivatives have been the focus of intense research activities over the past decade. Conjugated donor–acceptor (D–A) copolymers have drawn considerable attention for use as active materials in PSCs and polymer field-effect transistors (FETs). In the development of new materials, it is central to understand the relationship between molecular structure and device performance. Three properties, that is, open-circuit voltage (Voc), short-circuit current (Jsc), and fill factor (FF), are of great importance in achieving high power conversion efficiency (PCE) of PSCs and evaluating the device performance. The Voc is limited by the difference between the electron affinity, i.e., the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of the electron acceptor, and the ionization potential, i.e., the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of the polymer donor. Therefore, the HOMO level is a very important factor to be considered when designing new conjugated polymers. More often than not, the electroaffinity of the side groups affects the HOMO and LUMO levels of the conjugated polymers. Therefore, side groups of conjugated polymers play an important role not only in the aspect of solubility but also in their optical and electrical properties.

In most cases, alkyl or alkoxy groups are introduced to the conjugated main chain to increase the solubility of conjugated polymers. In D–A structured polymers, the introduction of side groups should be cautious as the electroaffinity of the side groups affects the HOMO and LUMO levels. Referring to polymers with thiophene units, the alkoxy group is rarely used as a side chain of acceptor units to increase the solubility as the alkoxy group elevates the HOMO level and therefore decreases the Voc. For example, two PBDTDTBT-based polymers with different side groups on the DTBT unit show huge differences in their Voc values. The alkyl-substituted PBDTDTBT exhibits much higher Voc (0.84 eV) than the alkoxy-substituted PBDTDTBT (0.40 eV). Therefore, attaching an electron-donating or an electron-withdrawing group to the main chain has been largely considered in order to optimize the HOMO/LUMO levels of the conjugated polymers and the Voc of the corresponding PSCs.

Quinoxaline has been widely implemented as an electron-deficient unit of low band gap polymers as it shows great potential in achieving high performance in PSCs.2,3-Diphenylquinoxaline, which possesses two separated phenyl rings, is one of the widely investigated units because of its facile synthesis and versatility. In order to ensure the solubility and processability of the corresponding polymers, an alkoxy side group is usually introduced on the peripheral phenyl rings. Looking back at the relevant literature, some systems have the alkoxy group in the meta-position of the phenyl rings, while others prefer to put the alkoxy group in the para-position. After detailed comparison on the HOMO level and Voc of the 2,7-carbazole and quinoxaline-based polymers with different alkoxy positions, it is noticed that the alkoxy position has a great influence on the optical properties of the corresponding polymers. However, few investigations have been reported on the effect of the alkoxy group on the phenyl rings. Here, we report a pair of D–A type low bandgap polymers based on thieno[3,2-b]thiophene and quinoxaline, named poly[2,3-bis(3-((2-ethylhexyl)oxy)phenyl)-5-methyl-8-(5-methylthieno[3,2-b]thiophen-2-yl)quinoxaline] (PTTQx-m) and poly[2,3-bis(4-((2-ethylhexyl)oxy)phenyl)-5-methyl-8-(5-methylthieno[3,2-b]thiophen-2-yl)quinoxaline] (PTTQx-p)) (Scheme 1). The acronym extension (m or p) highlights the side-chain position: either in the para-position (p) or the meta-position (m). The only difference between these two polymers is the position of the alkoxy substituents on the phenyl groups. It is interesting that only a slight difference in the chemical structure, i.e., whether the alkoxy group is attached to the para- or meta- position on the peripheral phenyl rings, results in a significant difference in their Voc. In this paper, we studied the effect of the position of the alkoxy groups on the optical, electrochemical and photovoltaic properties of the resulting polymers. The inductive electron-withdrawing effect and resonance electron-donating effect of the alkoxy side chain on the phenyl group has been systematically discussed. Our results provide valuable information on the relationship between polymer design at the molecular level and its photovoltaic performance in polymer solar cells (PSCs).

The monomers 5,8-dibromo-2,3-bis(4-((2-ethylhexyl)oxy)phenyl)quinoxaline,5,8-dibromo-2,3-bis(3-((2-ethylhexyl)oxy)phenyl)quinoxaline, and 2,5-bis(trimethylstannyl)thieno[3,2-b]thiophene were purchased from Solarmer Materials Inc. Toluene was HPLC grade. All the other chemicals were purchased from Aldrich and used without further purification.


In a 25 mL flask, the two monomers (0.5 mmol of each) were dissolved in HPLC toluene (10 mL) and flashed by argon for 10 min. Tris(dibenzylideneacetone)dipalladium(0) (Pd2(dba)3) (0.02 equiv) and tris(p-methylphenyl)phosphine (P(o-tol)3) (0.08 equiv) were added, then the reaction mixture was stirred at 110 °C under argon atmosphere for 20 h. The polymer was then precipitated in a solution of methanol, filtered, and washed on a Soxhlet apparatus with methanol, hexane, and chloroform. The chloroform fraction was evaporated under reduced pressure, and the polymer was precipitated in methanol, filtered, and finally dried under high vacuum. These two polymers can be easily dissolved in commonly used solvents, like toluene, chloroform, chlorobenzene, etc.

For PTTQx-m (188 mg, yield 60%, Mn = 5.7 K, PDI = 2.8). 1H NMR (CDCl3, 400 MHz): δ (ppm) 8.7–6.2 (br, 12H), 4.2–3.4 (br, 4H), 2.2–0.6 (br, 30H). Elemental analysis: calculated as C44H52N2O2S2, C, 74.52; H, 7.15; N, 4.14. Found: C, 73.59; H, 6.62; N, 3.95.
For PTTQx-p (212 mg, yield 65%, Mn = 7.0 K, PDI = 2.3). 1H NMR (CDCl3, 400 MHz): δ (ppm) 8.7–6.2 (br, 12H), 4.2–3.4 (br, 4H), 2.2–0.6 (br, 30H). Elemental analysis: calculated as C44H52N2O2S2, C, 74.52; H, 7.15; N, 4.14. Found: C, 73.79; H, 6.78; N, 3.88.

In order to gain additional insight into the influence of the position of the alkoxy side chain on the optoelectronic properties of the copolymers, density functional theory (DFT) (using the Gaussian 03 package at the B3LYP/6-31G level of theory in vacuum) was utilized to model the structural and electronic properties of relevant molecular structures. In particular, the HOMO and LUMO level positions and related electron distributions were calculated using three repeating units. The alkoxy chains were replaced by methoxyl groups to keep the computational time within a reasonable range.



UV-visible absorption spectroscopy measurements were done using a Hitachi U-3100 UV-vis spectrophotometer. The molecular weight of polymers was measured by the GPC method, and polystyrene was used as a standard by using THF as eluent. TGA measurement was performed on a TA Instruments, Inc., TGA-2050. The electrochemical cyclic voltammetry was conducted on a CHI650D Electrochemical Workstation with a Pt disk, a Pt plate, and an Ag/Ag+ electrode as working electrode, counter electrode and reference electrode respective, in a 0.1 M tetrabutylammonium hexafluorophosphate (Bu4NPF6) acetonitrile solution.



PSC devices with the typical structure of ITO/PEDOT-PSS/polymer:PC71BM(1:3, w/w)/Ca/Al were fabricated under similar conditions as follows: after spin-coating a 30 nm layer of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT-PSS) onto a precleaned indium-tin oxide (ITO)-coated glass substrate, the polymer/PC71BM blend solution was spin-coated. The typical concentration of the polymer/PC71BM (1:3, w/w) blend solution was 10 mg mL−1, and o-dichlorobenzene (ODCB) was used as the solvent with 3% 1,8-diiodooctane (DIO) additive. The thickness of the active layer was ∼80 nm. The devices were completed by evaporating Ca/Al as the metal electrodes with an area of 4 mm2 which was defined by the masks used. Testing of the devices was done in a N2-filled glovebox under AM 1.5 G irradiation (100 mW cm−2).



Optical absorption spectra of the polymers are shown in Fig. 1. For PTTQx-m, two absorption maxima were detected at 378 nm and 644 nm in solution and at 378 nm and 666 nm in its film. In contrast, there is little difference between PTTQx-m and PTTQx-p in terms of absorption range and onset, which means the optical band gaps of these polymers are almost the same (Table 1). The λmax of the solid film of PTTQx exhibits a red-shift of ∼20 nm compared with that of its solution, which is attributed to the extended conjugation length and enhanced planarity of polymer chains due to the interchain π–π stacking effect in the solid state. It is known that the absorption spectra of conjugated polymers are closely related to their effective conjugated length, which is susceptible to the steric hindrance caused by side chains. As both of the polymers red-shifted to almost the same extent, the alkoxy in meta- or para-position did not exhibit much difference in steric hindrance on the adjacent units packing.


Polymer


λ
max
abs,sol
(nm)

λ
max
abs,film (nm)
HOMO (eV)
LUMO (eV)

E
g
ele (eV)

E
g
opt (eV)

PTTQx-m
378, 644
380, 666
−5.15
−3.68
1.47
1.54

PTTQx-p
380, 638
382, 661
−5.01
−3.54
1.47
1.56

The thermal properties of the polymers were evaluated in a nitrogen atmosphere by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA). Fig. 2 clearly shows that both of them exhibited good thermal stability, showing temperatures with 5% weight loss up to 420 °C (PTTQx-p) and 440 °C (PTTQx-m). The thermal stability of both polymers is adequate for the fabrication processes of PSCs and other applications in optoelectronic devices.


The HOMO and LUMO energy levels of the polymers are of great importance when using the materials in PSCs. Their positions are correlated to the onset oxidation and reduction potentials obtained in electrochemical measurements. The onset oxidation potential corresponds to the HOMO level, and the onset reduction potential corresponds to the LUMO level. Fig. 3 shows the cyclic voltammograms of the polymer thin films coated on a Pt electrode in a 0.1 M Bu4NPF6 solution in acetonitrile with a scan rate of 20 mV s−1. The results are summarized in Table 1. The oxidation potentials (Eoxvs. Ag/Ag+) were derived from the onset in the cyclic voltammograms. The HOMO and LUMO levels (in eV) are calculated according to the equations: HOMO = −e(Eox + 4.71) and LUMO = −e(Ered + 4.71) (Table 1). Compared with PTTQx-m, the electron-donating alkoxy groups in PTTQx-p raise the HOMO and LUMO levels simultaneously (Table 1) to an extent of ∼0.14 eV.

The calculated HOMO and LUMO levels of PTTQx-m are −4.75 eV and −2.49 eV, while those of PTTQx-p are −4.59 eV and −2.32 eV. The HOMO levels agree well with the calculations using the Density Functional Theory (DFT) at the B3LYP/6-31G(d,p) level, in which it is found that the HOMO wave function is delocalized along the polymer backbone while the LUMOs of both polymers are somewhat more localized on the acceptor unit (Fig. 4). The difference between their HOMO levels is ∼ 0.15 eV, which is consistent with the measured HOMO levels difference in Table 1.


Fig. 5 illustrates the I–V properties of fabricated PSC devices. PTTQx-m and PTTQx-p exhibit Voc of 0.73 V and 0.60 V, and Jsc values of 9.87 and 8.22 mA cm−2, respectively, when PC71BM is used as an acceptor. The resulted PCE of the devices (Table 2) exhibited values of 3.97% and 2.93%, respectively. There was a substantial difference in Voc of the PSCs based on PTTQx-m and PTTQx-p, while there is some difference in Jsc which can be illustrated in terms of the results of external quantum efficiency (EQE) as shown in Fig. 6. The substantial difference in Voc can be explained by the electron-donating effect of the alkoxy group on the para-position which will be discussed in detail in Scheme 2.

It should be noted that the difference of the PCEs between these polymers mainly originates from the Voc. They also show some difference in the Jsc. We speculate that it is probably due to their poor compatibility with PCBM which will affect the morphology of polymer/PCBM blend films and further influence the charge separation efficiency and transportation inside the devices. AFM was used to characterize the film morphology of polymer:PC71BM blends. The resulting height and phase images are shown in Fig. 7. As shown in Fig. 7a and b, the surface of the PTTQx-p blend film is quite rough, with a root-mean-square roughness (rms) of 5.43 nm, compared with the PTTQx-m blend film with a rms of 3.06 nm. This indicates that a smooth surface without large-sized phase separation between PCBM and polymer results in better charge separation and transportation and therefore higher Jsc for PTTQx-m.

Polymer

D/A wt

Solvent


V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)
Thickness (nm)

PTTQx-m
1:3

ODCB

0.73
9.87
55.1
3.97
85

PTTQx-p
1:3

ODCB

0.60
8.22
59.4
2.93
75
Introducing an alkoxy side chain to the phenyl group of the Qx unit affects the electronic structure in two ways, i.e. by withdrawing or donating charge carriers thereby lowering or raising the HOMO level. As the substituent on a conjugated system, the alkoxy group exerts both an inductive electron-withdrawing effect, due to the stronger electronegativity of oxygen than carbon, and a resonance electron-donating effect, due to the lone pair electrons of oxygen. Since the resonance electron-donating effect is dominant over the inductive electron-withdrawing effect, the alkoxy group can be seen as a typical electron-donating group. However, the alkoxy group’s contribution to the ortho- and para-positions of the phenyl group by the resonance electron-donating effect is stronger than that to the meta-position. As illustrated in Scheme 2, the alkoxy group exerts an electron-donating effect on the para-position because of the resonance effect. It is known that electron donor groups elevate both the HOMO and LUMO levels. From the calculation result, the para-position possesses higher electron density probability than the meta-position. Therefore, PTTQx-p exhibits higher HOMO and LUMO levels compared with PTTQx-m, thereby lower Voc.

From theoretical calculation and experimental observation, we have compared the effect of changing alkoxy substituent positions on the phenyl group of the Qx unit. The photovoltaic properties of PSCs based on the two PTTQx polymers were evaluated and PTTQx-m exhibits higher Voc than PTTQx-p, which is attributed to the resonance electron donating effect of the alkoxy group on the para-position. This effect can elevate their corresponding HOMO and LUMO levels and therefore decrease the Voc. As a result, PTTQx-p shows lower photovoltaic performance in the application of PSCs. These results provide valuable information for the conjugated molecular design and where to attach the alkoxy group to achieve better optoelectronic properties.


The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support from National High Technology Research and Development Program 863, Chinese Academy of Sciences and NSFC (Nos. 2011AA050523, 20874106, 20821120293)


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012