 DOI: 10.1039/C3IC90026F
(Review Article)
Annu. Rep. Prog. Chem., Sect. A: Inorg. Chem.
, 2013, 109, 277-298

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Fumitoshi
Kato
 and 

David A.
Rider
*

Department of Chemistry, Western Washington University, 516 High St., Bellingham, WA 98225, USA

Department of Engineering Technology, Western Washington University, 516 High St., Bellingham, WA 98225, USA

First published on 14th May 2013
This article provides an inexhaustive overview of research selected from the 2012 scientific literature involving polymers with inorganic elements as a key part of their structure.

The strategy for incorporating inorganic elements into polymers and macromolecular systems has often led to new properties and capabilities that would otherwise be challenging for purely-organic analogues to achieve. The increasing research activity in inorganic and organometallic polymers is a testament to the opportunity for advancing our fundamental understanding of polymer science and for triggering innovation in various technologies. In 2012 highlights in the topic of inorganic and organometallic polymers include: the fabrication of bulk heterojunction (BHJ) solar cell featuring a benzodiselenophene copolymer which operated with a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 6.87%, the synthesis of low band-gap poly(naphthalene-diimide-alt-biselenophene), the electropolymerisation of poly(3-alkyltellurophene)s, the preparation of silole-containing poly(silylenevinylene)s, quaternised poly(aryloxy- and alkoxyphosphazenes) and fluorinated poly(arylene ether phosphine oxide) with pendant iridium complexes, the preparation and self-assembly of peptidic-polyferrocenylsilanes, and the step-growth polymerisation porphyrin dialynes and diiodoaryl monomers to afford doubly-strapped porphyrin linked groups in the main polymer chain.

This review article adopts a similar organisational format to the previous 2011 Annual Report in this series. An overview of the recent books and review articles in the domain of inorganic and organometallic polymers will be given followed by sections discussing boron-containing polymers. Sections highlighting polyphosphazenes and other phosphorus-based polymers will then be covered followed by sections outlining new findings in other polymers containing main-group elements (sulfur-containing, silicon-containing etc.). Thereafter, Se- and Te-containing polymers will be reviewed followed by sections covering developments in metallocene polymers. Lastly, sections on rare earth-containing and metal-porphyrin-based polymers are included.
Throughout this article, primary attention will be given to discussing the synthesis (with a briefing on the characterisation used by the authors) and novel properties of new, covalently linked, macromolecules wherein inorganic elements represent an integral component of their core structure.

In 2012, several publications have summarised various aspects of inorganic and organometallic polymer science. A brief summary of these publications is listed in this section.

Recent progress in the synthesis of polysilanes and an overview about certain applications was presented in the book “Silicon Polymers – Advances in Polymer Science.” The journal Macromolecular Chemical and Physics presented a special series issue devoted to “New Frontiers in Functional Polymers” which included a review article on “Metal-Free and Metallated Polymers: Properties and Photovoltaic Performance.”
Similarly, as the field of polymer solar cells (PSCs) continued to grow, contributions from organic–inorganic conjugated polymers have been especially welcomed. Progress in the design of PSCs with high power conversion efficiency (PCE) have been reviewed by You and also proposed theoretical rules to rationally design and predict the performance of PSCs. Review articles discussing current advancements in solar cells composed of organic–inorganic polymers and metal-oxide nanocrystals have also been published. Katz et al. recently highlighted thiophene, selenophene, benzobisthiadiazole, and benzobisthienosilole type semiconducting polymers for n- and p-type field effect transistors.
Applications of polymers containing transition-metal complexes (PTMCs) for optoelectronic devices have also been demonstrated in an increasing amount. A review by Huang and co-workers summarised the current trends, advantages and disadvantages of PTMCs for optoelectronic devices. Strohm and Abd-El-Aziz reviewed the field of transition metal-containing macromolecules – particularly in their synthetic methodologies, structural properties and applications. Recent developments in the synthesis and application of metal-functionalised polymers via electropolymerisation were reviewed by Schubert et al.
Nishihara published a book dedicated to the current advancement in inorganic polymer synthesis via metal-catalysed cross-coupling reactions. A review on the progress towards the synthesis and photostability of polystannanes was reported. Highlights of the recent progress in morphologies, structures, compositions, and applications of transition metal modified polymer derived ceramics (PDCs) were reported.

RAFT polymerisation was used by the group of Sumerlin to prepare the boronic acid functionalised block copolymer: poly(N,N-dimethylacrylamide)-block-poly[N-(2-acryloylamino-ethyl)-4-boronobenzamide]. The sensitivity of the pendant phenylboronic acid moieties to pH and to glucose concentration was used as a trigger for solution assembly–disassembly. Chiral polymers consisting of styryl boron dipyrromethenes and 1,1′-binaphthyl units were synthesised via Sonogashira polymerisation. The organoboron polymers (Mn = 7780–10890; PDI = 1.8–2.0) exhibited excellent anisotropic NIR fluorescence with a maximum in the fluorescence spectra at 658–714 nm.

Nitroxide-mediated copolymerization of 4-methylstyrene and 4-acetoxystyrene (in a 2:1 and 4:1 ratio) afforded a copolymer capable of functionalisation with a boron subphthalocyanine. Deacetylation of the acetoxy groups on the copolymer and subsequent reaction with bromo boron subphthalocyanine yielded the poly(4-methylstyrene)-co-poly(phenoxy boron subphthalocyanine) (1) in ∼60% (PDI = 5.65–8.34; Mw = 8.7 × 103 to 1.76 × 104 g mol−1). The boron subphthalocyaninyl polymers exhibited strong absorption at 564 nm and relatively low quantum yields. The Jäkle group synthesised novel benzodiazaborolyl-functionalised polystyrenes (2) that exhibited high quantum yield of 77% and therefore offer potential efficient host materials for transition metal-based triplet emitters for polymer light-emitting diodes (PLEDs). Jäkle's group has also prepared a series of luminescent organoborane quinolato block copolymers. Block copolymers with polystyrene (PS), PS-co-polymaleic anhydride P(St-alt-MAh), and poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAM) segments linked to organoborane quinolato blocks were created from a reversible addition-fragmentation termination (RAFT) polymerisation strategy.
Wang and co-workers used Grignard metathesis route for the preparation of a novel heat resistant boron-containing poly(silyleneethynylene) termed a hybrid polymer of boron–silicon and acetylene (PBSA) (3). Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) and differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) analysis of the polymer confirmed its ability to act as an effective matrix material for high-temperature composites. The reaction between tris(dichloromethylsilylethyl)borane and methylamine yielded oligomeric boron-modified polysilazanes ([B(C2H4SiCH3NCH3)3]n, n = ∼2.5) (4). The materials were found to exhibit a ceramic yield of 44% after thermal decomposition at 1000 °C. Novel metal- and boron-containing conducting polymers (5) have been synthesised from electropolymerisation of tris(diphenylglyoximato)-bis(bithienylboron)cobalt(II)/iron(II) monomers. The monomers were prepared by a metal-templated condensation reactions between diphenylglyoxime and bithiopheneboronic acid. The presence of metal in polymer was confirmed by energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) analysis and cyclic voltammetry (CV) was used to verify the retention of metal during polymerisation. Currently, the iron- and cobalt-containing organoboron polymers are being explored for electrocatalytic applications. The borane termini of α,ω-(dibromoboryl)-functionalised telechelic polystyrene were converted to tris(1-pyrazolyl)borate (Tp) moieties and subsequently used for complexation with FeCl2 to afford iron-containing organoboron polymers (6). The UV-Vis spectrum confirmed the presence of the bridging Tp2Fe(II) units by way of metal-to-ligand charge transfer bands and 1A1g to 1T1g charge transfer at 343 and 530 nm, respectively.

The photo- and magnetochemical properties of two new PPNs based on iron bis(2,2′:6′2′′-terpyridine)-loaded terpyridinyl-PPNs have recently been studied. Electronic absorbance, proton nuclear magnetic resonance (1H-NMR), 31P-NMR, solid-state resonance Raman, magnetic susceptibility and Mossbauer spectroscopy were used to characterise the Fe(II)-loaded PPNs. DFT results were used to explain the possible suppression of interaction between Fe(II) centres with the PPN backbone in the phenyl-extended analogue.

Allcock and Mallouk et al. recently reported the synthesis of backbone quaternised poly(aryloxy- and alkoxyphosphazenes) (7). The degree of methylation of the backbone nitrogen by methyltriflate was determined by NMR and found to depend on the nature of the shielding effect of substituents at the phosphorus centre. Accordingly, the poly(phenyloxyphosphazene) could be quaternised up to 50 mol% whereas PPNs substituted with n-butoxy and 2-(2-methoxyethoxy)ethoxy sidechains were only quaternised to 21 and 19 mol%, respectively. The quaternised poly(aryloxy- and alkoxyphosphazenes) exhibited ionic conductivities of 2.58 × 10−4 S cm−1 and 2.09 × 10−3 S cm−1 at 25 °C and 80 °C respectively. TGA analysis showed that quaternised PPNs were less thermally stable than unquaternised counterparts. A series of bioerodible PPNs (8) that contain phosphoester and phosphonic acid substituents were synthesised via prior or post-side-group attachment. Currently their bioactivity during exposure to simulated body fluid is being investigated. A series of new ferrocene containing PN terpolymers (9) were prepared from the PPN copolymer poly(methylphenylphosphazene)-co-poly(dimethylphosphazene) [(Ph)(Me)PN]x[Me2PN]y. The synthetic methodology involved BuLi deprotonation of methyl sidechains followed by a substitution reaction at ferrocene carboxaldehyde. The redox properties of these polymers were studied by CV and revealed that the redox couple of the pendant ferrocenyl groups were shifted towards more positive potential relative to free ferrocene as a result of the electron-withdrawing nature of the PPN backbone. Moreover the diffusion coefficient of the terpolymers was determined to be mainly independent of the degree of substitution with ferrocene groups.
Other recent developments in PPNs include the understanding of an interesting reversible substituent exchange reaction for poly(alkyloxyphosphazenes). The study shows that the order of addition of different nucleophiles is crucial for determining the composition of co-substituted polyphosphazenes. Trichloroethoxy sidechain groups for example were shown to be labile to trifluoroethoxy nucleophiles. Accordingly, novel organophosphazenes with trichloroethoxy as the substituent or as cosubstituent of trifluoroethoxy, phenoxy, or methoxyethoxyethoxy groups were also studied. A similar study was conducted with short-chain linear oligomeric PPNs. Amphiphilic PPNs with diisopropylamino (DPA) substituents were synthesised and its cell membrane permeability in a certain pH range was recently evaluated. PPNs with a high DPA content inhibited P-glycoprotein activity in cells and are currently being investigated for applications for the treatment of drug-resistant tumors. Similarly, novel amphiphilic poly[bis(trifluoroethoxy)phosphazene]-block-poly[(dimethylamino)ethyl methacrylate] diblock copolymers were synthesised by click functionalising the terminus of the a PPN homopolymer with a 2-bromo-2-methylpropanoate group. Subsequently, atom transfer radical polymerisation (ATRP) of 2-(dimethylamino)ethyl methacrylate using this terminus was completed and, after a dialysis isolation step, afforded the block copolymers in sufficient yield for structural studies. The block copolymers undergo self-assembly in water and with a critical micelle concentration in the range of 3.47–9.55 mg L−1 and an average micelle diameter of 100–142 nm. Analogously, ATRP was used to graft styrene, tert-butylacrylate or N-isopropylacrylamide on sidechain functionalised PPNs.
A new method for the oxidation of poly(alkylene H-phosphate) by trichloroisocyanuric acid is reported and subsequently used to synthesise poly(methyloxyethylene phosphate) and poly(hydroxyoxyethylene phosphate) (10). The solubility and hydrolytic stability of these polymers are dependent on the controllable ratio between H-phosphonate and phosphate units and therefore carry the potential of becoming efficient drug carriers. Novel fluorinated poly(arylene ether phosphine oxide) backbone with iridium dyes (11) incorporated is reported with demonstrated maximum luminous efficiency of 19.4 cd A−1.
Novel polymer–protein conjugates of pentafluorophenyl (PFP) – ester functionalised phosphorylcholine (PC) conjugated to lysozyme were synthesised. The size of the conjugates in solution varied depending on their molecular weights and shape. The activity of the conjugates decreased as the polymer molecular weight increased possibly due to the steric interference, but in return the pharmokinetics analysis demonstrated the polymer–protein conjugate to have an extended elimination half-life of 30 times that of the lysozyme.

Sulfur-containing polymers such as carbazole and diazabenzothiophene have continued to advanced many optoelectronic research areas. Novel spirobifluorene-based polymers containing thiophene and benzothiadiazole units were synthesised by Suzuki–Miyaura polycondensation and found to exhibit an optical band gap of 1.97 eV. When blended with PC71BM, the BHJ solar cell showed a PCE of 4.6%. Similarly, a novel donor–acceptor (D–A) copolymer composed of benzothiophene derivative and fluorinated quinoxaline (12) was obtained by Stille cross-coupling polymerisation. The blend of fluorinated quinoxaline-based polymer and PC71BM was used to fabricate a BHJ solar cell and recorded a PCE of up to 8.0%.

Novel copolymers synthesised from fluorine substituted benzodithiophene-dithienobenzothiadiazole (BnDT-DTBT) (13) monomers were found to have enhanced open-circuit voltage (Voc), short-circuit current density (Jsc), and fill factor (FF) due to reduced charge recombination and improved π–π stacking. The BHJ solar cell made from the copolymer and PC61BM blend exhibited PCE of up to 7%.
Block copolymers composed of P3HT and poly(naphthalene bisimide) (PNBI) segments were synthesised by quasi-living Grignard metathesis polymerisation and Yamamoto coupling reactions. The 1.38 eV band gap material allowed for the fabrication of a BHJ photovoltaic device with Voc, Jsc, and PCE as high as of, 0.56 V, 4.57 mA cm−1, and 1.28%, respectively. Likewise, thienopyrroledione (TPD) containing P3HT-based D–A semi-random copolymers were synthesised via the Stille copolymerisation reaction. The maximum external quantum efficiencies (EQE) obtained were 68 and 40% at 680 and 800 nm, respectively. 3,4-Ethylenedioxythiophene (EDOT) was functionalised with acrylate via free radical polymerization and underwent a secondary electropolymerisation reaction to synthesise PEDOT-PAA. PEDOT-PAA showed excellent electrochemical and thermal stability as well as high optical contrast ratio and electroluminescent device coloration efficiency of 50.9% at 620 nm and 211 cm2 C−1, respectively. In another study by Ferraris et al. dialkoxy and dithioalkoxy side chains were attached to benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene (BDT) units and polymerised via Still cross-coupling reaction. Blends of the polymer with PC61BM gave BHJ photovoltaics with a Voc and a PCE of 0.99 V and 4.0%, respectively. Pyrene-containing poly[N-9′-heptadecanyl-2,7-carbazole-alt-5,5′-(4′,7′-di-2-thienyl-2′,1′,3′-benzothiadiazole)] (PCDTBT) and poly[4,8-bis(2-ethylhexyl-2-thenyl)-benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene-alt-5,5′-(4′,7′-di-2-thienyl-2′,1′,3′-benzothiadiazole)] (PBDTDTBT) were synthesised via Suzuki or Stille cross-coupling reaction and the copolymer: PC71BM-based devices recorded PCE as high as 3.22 and 5.04%, respectively. Novel copolymers based on thienoisoindoledione (TID) and BDT derivatives were reported. The highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) level of the BDT was tuned by chemical modifications to the monomers and achieved PCE as high as 4.8%. X-ray diffraction (XRD) showed lack of order domain in the polymer blend that contained TID and the computational modelling suggested the cause to be from the twisted backbone of TID. Related, a series of novel PNDT derivatives were synthesised via Stille, Suzuki cross-coupling, and oxidative cyclisation reaction between NDT and thiophene. The elongation of π-conjugation length by the installed thiophene units was verified with UV-Vis spectra and XRD and atomic force microscopy (AFM) and ultimately demonstrated increased polymer crystallinity. Novel copolymers were synthesised via the Stille cross-coupling reaction between NDT and thieno[3,4-c]pyrrole-4,6-dione (TPD). The BHJ solar cell fabricated from the polymer blend composed of the NDT-based copolymers and PC71BM and operated with a Jsc, Voc, and PCE of 11.54 mA cm−2, 0.69 V, and 4.0%. Novel copolymers based on thienoisoindoledione (TID) and BDT derivatives were reported. 3,6-Carbazole unit was incorporated into BT derivative monomer to synthesise novel D–A copolymers. The PSC device exhibited PCE as high as 5.1% due to the hole mobility enhanced by 2,6-carbazole. Suzuki coupling reaction was used to synthesize a series of [1,2,5]thiadiazolo[3,4-g]-quinoxaline (TQ). In this synthesis, Jo et al. has incorporated butoxy in the polymer and discovered to lower the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) level as low as −3.6 eV.
A novel p-type donor–acceptor type π-conjugated copolymer with pendant phenylazomethine (PImCDTBT) was synthesised via Suzuki cross-coupling reaction (14). Phenylazomethine serves as a metal ligation site and its complexation with SnCl2 was reported to enhance Voc values. Similarly, a novel DTP-based copolymer (15) was produced from dithienopyrroloquinoxaline (DTPQX) via Suzuki or Stille cross-coupling reaction.
Double intramolecular Friedel–Crafts acrylation was used to synthesise dithieno[2,3-b:7,6-b]carbazole-based D–A copolymers. Partial fluorination of poly[2,6-(4,4-bis(2-ethylhexyl)-4H-cyclopenta[2,1-b:3,4-b′]dithiophene)-2,6-diyl] (PCPDTBT) was performed via microwave-assisted Stille polymerisation and exhibited improvements in π–π stacking and hole mobility. The BHJ solar cell fabricated from PCPDTBT and [2,6-(4,4-bis(2-ethylhexyl)-4H-cyclopenta[2,1-b:3,4-b′]dithiophene)-alt-4,7-(5-fluoro-[2,1,3]-benzothiadiazole)] (PCPDTFBT) exhibited PCE of 2.73 and 6.16% respectively. A film of novel naphthobisthiadiazole (NTz)-based D–A polymer was analysed by 2D grazing incidence XRD and found to possess strong π–π stacking structure with a distance of 3.5 Å. The centrosymmetry of NTz-based polymer is assumed to allow favourable orientation of the polymer. The synthesis of a series of novel ter-polymers, poly-[2,7-(9,9′-dioctylfluorene)-alt-5,5′-(4′,7′-di-2-thienyl-2′,1′,3′-benzothiadiazole)] (PFTBT)-based copolymers containing perylene units via the Suzuki coupling polymerisation were reported by Hwang et al. The perylene units gave the polymers enhanced π–π interaction between the polymer chains and the BHJ device fabricated from the polymer blend demonstrated PCE, Jsc, Voc, and FF as high as 3.16%, 9.61 mA cm−2, 0.81 V, and 41%, respectively. Novel copolymers composed of 2,8-bis(alkoxy)dibenzothiophene as the acceptor and 3,4-bis(octyloxy)benzothiadiazole or benzothiadiazole as the donor unit were reported by Bo et al. Poly((9,9-dioctylfluorene)2,7-diyl-alt-[4,7-bis(3-hexylthien-5-yl)-2,1,3-benzothiadiazole]-2′,2′′-diyl) (PF8TBT) was synthesised via the Suzuki step-growth polycondensation and subsequently terminated by monobrominated P3HT to give a novel diblock copolymer PF8TBT-b-P3HT. The excess P3HT was removed via purification by preparative gel permeation chromatography (GPC) and obtained polydispersity index (PDI) as low as 1.12.
Suzuki polycondensation between benzothiadiazole (BT) and phenothiazine (PT) or phenothiazine-S,S-dioxide (PT-SS) were performed to synthesise novel D–A copolymers of PPTDTBT and PPTDTBT-SS (16), respectively. The CV characterisation revealed the HOMO and LUMO energy levels to be −5.41 and −3.63 eV for PPTDTBT and −5.60 and −3.60 eV for PPTDTBT-SS, respectively. A novel poly(phenylenevinylene) (PPV) derivative, poly[2,5-bis-(2′-ethylhexylsulfonyl)-1,4-phenylenevinylene] (SO2EH-PPV, 17) was synthesised via Stille coupling reaction. From the CV and optical studies on the polymer, HOMO and LUMO levels were calculated to be −6.0 and −3.61 eV, respectively.
Copolymerisation between poly(benzimidazolone sulfone)s and 4,4′-biphenol via N–C coupling polycondensation reaction was reported by Hay et al. (18). Disulfanyltricycle[5.2.1.02,6]decane (TCDSH) and bis(vinylsulfone)tricycle[5.2.1.02,6]decane were polymerised with divinyl sulfone (DVS) or 2,5-bis(sulfanyl-methyl)-1,4-dithiane (BSMD) to synthesise poly(TCDSH/DVS) (19a) and poly(BSMD/VSTCD) (19b). Poly(TCDSH/DVS) and poly(BSMD/VSTCD) had glass transition temperatures of 74 and 113 °C, high refractive indices of 1.6052 and 1.6228, and Abbe numbers of 48.0 and 45.8, respectively.
Photocrosslinked poly(arylene ether sulfone) (SPAEF) (20) containing chalcone units in the polymer backbone was synthesised via an aromatic nucleophilic substitution reaction with 4,4′-dihydroxychalcone (4DHC), 4,4′-difluoro-diphenylsulfone-3,3′-disulfonate (SDFDPS), and decafluorobiphenyl (DFBP) and subsequently irradiated by UV light to initiate photocrosslinking. Methanol diffusion coefficient of photocrosslinked SPAEF was found to be hindered due to its dense network but the proton conductivity, oxidative, and hydrolytic stabilities were significantly enhanced and surpassed those of Nafion® 117.

The induction of chirality in poly (m- and p-phenylenedisilanylene)s has been demonstrated. σ–π-conjugated polysilanylenes with oligo(ethylene glycol) side chains (21a; Mn = 8300–8500; PDI = 1.3–1.5: 21b; Mn = 10300; PDI = 1.15) were synthesised by reductive coupling of chlorosilane precursors and characterised by GPC, NMR and circular dichroism. As the positioning of the chiral centre in the side chain was extended away from the main chain, the induced Cotton effect on the polysilane was observed to decrease.

Silicon-containing aliphatic poly(ester)s have recently been synthesised from bis(4-hydroxymethyl)phenyl-methyl-alkylsilane (alkyl = methyl, ethyl) and were found to be soluble in polar aprotic solvents (22). Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopy and multi-nuclear NMR confirmed the structure while TGA showed high thermal stability (up to 337 °C for 10% weight loss; and 34% residue at 900 °C).
The curing of a polycarbosilane that is based on bridging hexylene–disilacyclobutane main chain units was investigated (23). Curing thin films at 300 °C was found to afford a hydrophobic cross-linked polycarbosilane layer with a dielectric constant of 2.5 and a resilency to moisture-assisted cracking.
A series of silicon-containing bithiopheneimide-based (BTI) polymers was recently prepared (24). The electron-deficient characteristics of the BTI lowered the HOMO level of the copolymer and the N-alkyl side chain tuned the solubility of the polymer which then allowed for higher degree of lamellar order and π–π stacking. Consequently, the copolymer: PC71BM blend-based BHJ solar cells exhibited a PCE of 6.41%. Stille polymerization was used to create a series of donor–acceptor copolymers (25) containing a novel silafluorene unit coupled with thieno[3,4-c]pyrrole-4,6-dione (PD), benzothiadiazole (BT), or diketopyrrolopyrrole (DPP) groups. BHJ solar cells were fabricated from PC61BM blends and ultimately performed with a PCE of 4.2% (Voc = 0.86 V, Jsc = 8.8 mA cm−2, FF = 56%). The absorption spectrum confirmed a significant red-shift in silafluorene-containing polymer: PC61BM blend which indicates a high degree of planarisation for the copolymer. The side chains on Si centre improved the intercalation of PC61BM to favour high hole mobility.
Kumada polymerisation was used for the synthesis of a novel bithiophenylsilane-based dendritic polymer (26) with σ–π-conjugation between bithiophene to terthiophene fragments. Spectral-luminescent characterisations indicate that there is a non-radiative transfer of the electronic excitation energy from bithiophene to terthiophene fragments by an inductive resonance mechanism. The intramolecular energy transfer efficiency for the polymer was measured to be 50%.
A series of silole-containing poly(silylenevinylene)s (27; typical Mw = 95300; PDI = 2.8) were synthesised by hydrosilylation using a Rh(PPh3)3Cl catalyst. FT-IR, multi-nuclear NMR and GPC were used to characterise the materials. In the thin film solid state, the polymers became significantly emissive implying that they have aggregation-enhanced emission characteristics. A superamplification effect useful for explosive detection was observed when the emission of the silole-polymers was quenched by picric acid. This trait therefore suggests that the silole polymer may be useful for the detection of trace compounds found in explosives.
Oligomeric poly(imide-amide)s (28) have been synthesised from bis(4-aminophenyl)diphenylsilane various diacids derived from α-amino acids. UV-Vis spectra showed that the addition of chiral, amide and imide groups increases polymer backbone flexibility, which results in disruption of the extended π-conjugation. The four phenyl groups attached to Si also hinder planar configuration of the system and decreases the polymer conductivity.

Recently, a series of macrocyclic and linear co-oligocarbosiloxanes containing pendant ferrocenyl moieties were reported. Hydrosilylation of 1,3-dimethyl-1,3-diferrocenyl-1,3-divinyldisiloxane [(CH2CH)(Fc)MeSi]2O with 1,1,3,3-tetramethyldisiloxane formed the oligocarbosiloxane products (19) that were isolated by chromatography and characterised by multinuclear (1H, 13C, 29Si) NMR spectroscopy, FT-IR, and matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization (MALDI) – time-of-flight (TOF) mass spectrometry. The electrochemical properties studied by cyclic and square wave (SQW) voltammetry demonstrated reversible two oxidation-steps which were indicative of strong electronic and electrostatic interactions among the ferrocenyl groups.
Novel polysiloxane and polycarbosilane aerogels (20a, b) were recently synthesised via hydrosilylation of poly(hydromethylsiloxane) (PHMS) with 2,4,6,8-tetramethyl-2,4,6,8-tetravinylcyclotetrasiloxane (TMTV) in acetone and polycarbosilane (PCS) with 1,4-divinylbenzene (DVB) in cyclohexane (both were isolated by supercritical drying with CO2). A density as low as 0.17 g cm−3 and porosity of ca. 84 vol% was reported for the polysiloxane aerogel. This is the first report of hydrosilylation used for crosslinking method in the synthesis of aerogels.
Polysiloxane polymers containing novel borate anion and cyclic carbonate side chains were prepared by hydrosilylation of poly(hydromethylsiloxane) with vinyl-functionalized borates. The structure of the polymers was confirmed by multi-nuclear NMR and DSC. Introduction of a perfluorinated borate ionomer onto the polysiloxane was shown to raise the ionic conductivity in spite of a relatively high Tg (−16 °C). The challenge of lowering the Tg of borate containing polysiloxane to maximise its conductivity still remains. A novel polysiloxane with CO2 – philic side chains has been produced by a three-step functionalisation of the hydrosilylation product of poly-(hydromethylsiloxane) and tert-butylacrylate. Hydrolysis of ester side-chains and conjugation with tert-butylamine afforded the corresponding amido polysiloxane which was readily chlorinated with tert-butylhypochlorite to produce the final N-halamine polysiloxane (21). FT-IR and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) iodometric titration was used to characterise the cotton bearing the material whereas biocidal capability was evaluated against Staphylococcus aureus and Escherichia coli.
A series of hybridized poly(urethane-siloxane)s have been produced from hydroxyl-functional aliphatic Boltorn hyperbranched polyesters. FT-IR, DSC and dynamic mechanic analysis (DMA) confirmed α,ω-functionalisation of polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) with the hyperbranched polyesters. TGA and hardness tests indicated a lower thermal stability and higher hardness value for hybrid materials created from an increasing pseudogeneration number for the hyperbranched polymer (HBP) starting material. A novel flame retardant was synthesised from coupling bisphenol A to hydro-functionalised polysiloxane using stannous octate as a catalyst. The polymer, when mixed with polycarbonate to form composites, proved to be effective as a flame retardant as well as smoke suppressant. Other developments in this topic include the following. The demonstration of photoacid catalysed copolymerisation of 2,2,8,8-tetramethyl-1,7-dioxa-6-silaspiro[5.5]undecane and α,ω-dihydroxy-terminated PDMS was reported. Synthetic pathways of photo-induced cross-linking of poly(4-hydroxystyrene-block-styrene) and poly(4-tert-butoxystyrene-block-styrene) with the presence of siloxane cross-linker were also reported. The use of cyclic siloxane cross-linker can form structures with a nanoparticle with surface olefins groups that allow for post-synthetic modification.

The synthesis of poly(germyl-s-indacene) and (germyl-s-indacene carbodiimides) (22) from organogermanium dichloride monomers was reported. The polycondensation of the bis-chlorogermylindacenes with dilithiated s-indacene afforded the organogermane polymer in sufficient yield for full characterisation by NMR, TGA, FT-IR and GPC (Mn = 2500–8000 and PDI = 2.08–2.16). Alternatively, dilithiated carbodiimide could be used to afford the poly(germyl-s-indacene carbodiimide) (Mn = 2100–7000 and PDI = 1.17–1.31). A high thermal stability was confirmed for these polymers with a main thermal degradation event in the range of 250–350 °C.

Unique Si or Ge-containing poly(amide)s (23) were developed from the polymerisation of bis(4-aminophenyl)diphenylsilane or bis(4-amino)diphenylgermane respectively, via Yamazaki reaction. Multinuclear NMR, UV-Vis, Raman, TGA, and DSC (Tg = −64 and −60 °C, respectively) were used to characterise the polymers. Notably, the steric hindrance and lack of symmetry at the main chain with Si or Ge centres led to a decrease of the Tg value and a large optical band gap.

Developments in selenium- and tellurium-containing polymers have occurred in 2012. Excitingly, many of these polymers have shown promise in advanced applications such as photovoltaics, memory devices, self-assembly and bio-conjugation. A titanacyclopentadiene-based organometallic polymer (24) was synthesised from polycondensation of titanium(IV) isopropoxide and ethynylbenzene. This polymer was also found to be a useful precursor for synthesising thiophene or selenophene-containing π-conjugated polymers via polycondensation reactions. The Stille-coupling polymerisation process was used to synthesise a dithienyl-diketopyrrolopyrrole polymer bearing siloxane pendants and selenophene monomer. The Si- and Se-containing polymers (25) demonstrated high electron and hole mobility values of 2.20 and 3.97 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively. The inorganic polymer's siloxane-side chains were proposed to enhance coplanarity and intermolecular interactions in the solid state and consequently improve charge mobility in thin films.
The Stille cross-coupling reaction was also used in another study to create a series of novel thiophene- and selenophene-based polymers containing quinoxaline and diketopyrrolopyrrole as acceptors. The highest Jsc in the author's series was 12.33 mA cm−2 and their highest PCE from BHJ solar cells was reported as 3.18%. Another study also used Stille cross-coupling reaction to synthesise novel seleno[3,4-c]pyrrole-4,6-dione-based polymers with an optical bandgap of 1.84 eV and low PCE of 0.28%. Copolymers with narrow band gaps as low as 1.41 eV have been synthesised by Suzuki coupling reaction between 9,9-dioctylfluorene and 6,7-dimethyl-4,9-di(selenophene-2-yl)-[1,2,5]thiadiazolo[3,4-g]quinoxaline. The LED devices fabricated from the polymers exhibited near-IR emission between 0.8 and 0.9 μm.
The nickel-catalysed chain-growth copolymerization of thiophene and selenophene derivatives was shown to produce π-conjugated copolymers (26) with a tunable linear gradient sequence of incorporated monomers. Accordingly, it was shown that adjusting the copolymer sequence permitted the tuning of the thin-film morphology, thermal and optical properties of the inorganic polymers.
The group of Seferos has recently synthesised a series of D–A copolymers with cyclopentadithiophene as the donor monomer and benzochalcogenodiazole with either S, Se, or Te as the acceptor monomer. The S-, Se-, and Te-containing polymers (27a–c, respectively) were determined to have band gap values of 1.59, 1.46, and 1.06 eV, respectively. Optical absorption spectroscopy revealed that the entire dual-band spectrum undergoes a bathochromic shift as the substituted inorganic element becomes heavier. This implies that substituting heavy inorganic atoms into the acceptor monomer in such materials is a strategy for reducing the band gap in the inorganic polymers.
A similar structure–property relationship study for a series of novel selenophene-based polymers containing bridging O or S substituents was conducted. The polyselenophenes (28a–e) were synthesised via electropolymerisation. The S atom bridge in the side chain was found to decrease the band gap and lower the HOMO level of the polymers while the O bridge gave greater backbone rigidity.
Seferos et al. used Grignard metathesis polymerisation to synthesise a series of P3HSe-co-P3HT copolymers with controlled Se content as well as molecular weights. Adjustment of the optical absorption was demonstrated by controlling the selenophene to thiophene ratio. The extent of order in self-assembled materials was observed to decrease as the P3HSe block became significantly longer than that of P3HT.
Stille coupling polymerisation was used to perform biaxial extensions of quarterthiophene–thiophene and –selenophene polymers (29). The resulting polymers had reduced conformational distortion in the main chain and therefore exhibited a reduced band gap. The polymer containing two selenophenes was found to have a high hole mobility (4.28 cm2 V−1 s−1) and consequently a promising power conversion efficiency (PCE) from its PC71BM blend-based BHJ solar cell (PCE = 2.60%). In similar work, selenopheno[3,4-b]selenophene and benzodiselenophene were copolymerised and applied to fabricate a BHJ solar cell which gave PCE of 6.87% (30). Novel N,N′-bis(2-phenylethyl)erylene-3,4:9,10-tetracarboxylic diimide based poly[2,5-bis(4-aminophenylenesulfanyl)selenophene/thiopene-hexafluoroisopropylidenediphthalimide] polymers were recently synthesised for their application in organic field-effect transistor (OFET) devices.
Atomic force microscopy (AFM)-based single-molecule force spectroscopy (SMFS) was used to investigate the effect of selenide oxidation to selenone on the amphiphilicity of the novel selenium-containing amphilic block copolymer (PEG-PUSe-PEG). A series of poly(3-alkyltellurophene)s (31) have been synthesised by electrochemical oxidation and Kumada catalyst transfer polymerisation. The absorption spectra showed the polymers to be 93% regioregular with a narrow optical band gap of 1.57 eV. The synthesis of novel solution processed n-type polymer, poly(naphthalene-diimide-alt-biselenophene) (PNDIBS, 32) was reported by the group of Jenekhe. The materials were found to have a very narrow optical band gap of 1.4 eV making them excellent candidates for photovoltaics. A series of hyperbranched Se- or Te-containing polymers was synthesised and exhibited activity that mimics glutathione peroxidase (GPx) (33). The increase in the polymer molecular weight and the degree of branching were found to enhance the GPx-like activity.
A coordination responsive Se-containing block copolymer designed for the controlled release of doxorubicin was synthesised. The block copolymer forms micelles in water when coordinated to Pt2+ but the competitive coordination with glutathione was found to uncoordinate Pt2+ therefore releasing doxorubicin.

The synthesis of amphiphilic A–B block and AB2 miktoarm star (34) copolymers of poly(vinylferrocene) (PVFc) was reported in 2012. The synthesis made use of benzyl glycidyl ether to afford hydroxyl-terminated PVFc that could be used to initiate the ring-opening polymerisation of ethyleneoxide. The copolymers (AB copolymer: Mn = 10000–48000 and PDI = 1.06–1.12; AB2 copolymer; Mn = 8000–40000 and PDI = 1.10–1.25) were characterised by GPC, NMR, MALDI mass spectroscopy and DSC. The iron-content proved sufficient for structural investigations of solution self-assembly by transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Similarly, the anionic copolymerisation between ferrocenyl glycidyl ether (FcGE) and ethyleneoxide (EO) was established such that water-soluble thermoresponsive ferrocenyl polymers could be isolated (Mn = 2100–8100, PDI = 1.07–1.20) (35). The materials were characterized by NMR, GPC, CV and UV-Vis spectroscopy. The cytotoxicity of P(EO-co-FcGE) via cell viability test confirmed that copolymers with a high Fc concentration have a strongly cytotoxic behaviour.
Surface-initiated atom transfer radical polymerisation (SI-ATRP) was used to synthesise poly[2-(methacryloyloxy)ethylferrocenecarboxylate] (PFcMA) (36) brushes on cross-linked polystyrene particles. Quantification of the brush-content was accomplished by TGA and UV-Vis spectroscopy while dynamic light-scattering measurements confirmed a linear relationship for the brush thickness with the hydrodynamic radius of the polymer. The brushed-particles were shown to be redox-responsive by CV and DLS. Thermal conversion of the brush to superparamagnetic iron was confirmed by SQUID magnetisation experiments. The group of Manners has succeeded in metallating the cyclopentadienyl (Cp) rings of PFDMS (37) by employing Schlosser's base pair in a lithiation reaction. The NMR studies indicated regioselectivity of the reaction occurring on the β-carbon of the Cp ring. The Manners group has recently investigated the redox activity of surface-relief gratings of polyferrocenylsilane block copolymers (38) bearing segment with complexed with ethyl orange ions. Photo-induced surface-relief gratings were found to be redox-active and permitted modulation of the grating depth from 50–85 nm.
In other related work, the Manners group has demonstrated a hierarchical assembly of self-assembled poly(ferrocenyldimethylsilane) (PFS)-based amphiphilic triblock co-micelles formed from PFS-block-poly(2-vinylpyridine) and PFS-block-PDMS (PFS-b-PDMS 39, PFS-b-P2VP 40). The triblock co-micelles can be tuned to form cylindrical [(I) in figure] or star-like [(II) in figure] micelles by controlling the degree of polymerisation of nonpolar and polar micellar blocks.
Another study by group of Manners reported the synthesis of an amino-terminated PFS series that were useful for functionalisation with tetrapeptide groups. Various tetrameric combinations of alanine, glycine and valine were installed at the amino-terminus of the PFS and characterized by MALDI mass spectroscopy, FT-IR and GPC (Mn = 3520–12150, PDI = 1.21–1.35). The polymers self-assembled into anti-parallel β-sheet structures in the solid state and formed peptidic-PFS core–coronae structures in solution.
A novel donor–acceptor polymer (41) was synthesised from the unique Staudinger reaction between ferrocene derivative and 11,11,12,12-tetracyanoanthraquinomethane (TCNAQ). The polymer was characterised by multinuclear NMR, TGA, UV-Vis, CV, DSC (Tg = 227 °C) and GPC (Mn = 38720; PDI = 53670). The strong broad absorption peak at 450–700 nm region of UV-Vis spectrum indicated the facilitation of intramolecular donor–acceptor charge transfer (ICT) by the phosphoranimine linkage in the polymer. The band gap was estimated by both CV and UV-Vis and was found to be 1.59 and 1.77 eV, respectively. A novel carbosilane metallodendrimers (42) with titanocene dichloride was synthesised via hydrosilylation reaction. Mass spectroscopy and multinuclear NMR confirmed the extent of attachment of titanocene groups at all peripheral vinylsilane groups in the hydrosilylation step.
A ring-opening polymerization (ROP) strategy has been used to prepare poly(ferrocenylalumane), poly(ruthenocenylalumane) and poly(ruthenocenylgallane) (Mw = 36000–106000, 8070 and 10100–28600, respectively). Multinuclear NMR, and DLS were used to confirm the polymerisation.

Recently, ring-opening metathesis polymerization (ROMP) was used to synthesise Ir(ppy)2(bpy) PF6 and PEG containing luminescent polymers which were found to have enhanced quantum yield upon micellisation. The group also incorporated biotin in the monomer to ensure strong binding between the micelles and streptavidin-coated magnetic beads.

Pd-catalyzed Stille-coupling method was used to synthesise a series of donor–acceptor copolymers (43) based on carbazole and quinoxalinoporphyrin with varying thiophene π-bridges in between. NMR, UV-Vis, photoluminescence spectroscopy, CV, TGA, DSC and GPC (Mn = 3400–66400; PDI = 1.42–2.13) were used to characterise the polymers. The bulk heterojunction photovoltaic devices fabricated from these polymers highlighted the significance of the π-bridge on the PCE of the device. The presence of Zn ion in porphyrin (POR) ring enhanced the hole mobility but compromised the PCE due to disadvantageous morphology for exciton dissociation.
Sonogashira coupling been employed in the synthesis of n-type conjugated polymers (44) with main chain azadipyromethene (aza-DIPY) dyes capable of borane, Cu(I) and Ag(I) loading. The boron-, copper- and silver-containing polymers were characterised by NMR, TGA, UV-Vis, CV, X-ray diffraction and GPC (Mn = 5000–15300 and PDI = 1.8–2.3; Mn = 6900 and PDI = 3.5; Mn = 6900 and PDI = 3.6, respectively). The electron deficient –BF2 functionalised polymer exhibited lowered HOMO and LUMO levels while the Cu(I) and Ag(I) derivatives showed marginally raised HOMO–LUMO levels.
A series of Pt-containing organometallic polyaniline with benzoquinone and 1,4-diaminobenzene spacers was reported. Another novel polymetallayne was irradiated by increasing doses of gamma rays and detected chlorine and hydrogen radicals generations due to the radiolysis. Novel Cu(I) coordinated polymer was synthesised through the aqueous subcomponent self-assembly reaction between 2,9-diformyl-1,10-phenan-throline and diamine C with Cu(I). This is the first white light emitting electrochemical cells composed of ionic transition-metal complexes.
Novel donor–acceptor copolymers (45) made from dithienocoronene (DTCDI) and Zn porphyrin accepting and donating planar units was reported. The Zn-containing copolymer displayed good solubility in common organic solvents to lend itself to several characterisation methods including NMR, UV-Vis, TGA, CV, GPC (Mn = 21400 and PDI = 3.69). Excellent thermal stability was reported with an onset for thermal decomposition at a temperature of 323 °C. UV-Vis spectra showed higher degree of electron delocalization due to the presence of large and planar DTCDI and also the donor-to-acceptor charge-transfer at 722 nm. The conjugation, planarity, and rigidity enhanced by DTCDI unit was also demonstrated with a two-photon absorption experiment. Recently, a novel fluorine-bridged benzimidazolium salt (BNM) was prepared and its direct complexation reaction with PdCl2 or PtCl2 was performed to synthesise new organometallic polymers (Mn = 7600 and PDI = 1.35; Mn = 8100 and PDI = 1.30, respectively) (46). CV revealed that although the LUMO levels of PMPd and PMPt increased upon metallation, the HOMO level of the polymers were nearly identical to that of unmetallated BNM. The absorption and photoluminescence (PL) spectra showed that the metal–benzylbenzimidazoyl coordination did not extend the conjugation.
Interesting Re- and Pt-containing polymers (47) have been synthesised by the functionalisation of bithiazole-containing polyplatinynes with ReCl(CO)5 (Mn = 9220–19810 and PDI = 1.84–2.92). GPC, multinuclear NMR, FT-IR, UV-Vis, CV and photoluminescence emission spectroscopy were used for characterisation where the latter showed that the bandgaps of the Pt(II) complex polymers can be controlled between the range of 2.18 to 1.85 eV by modifying the length of oligothiophene chain length (m) as well as by complexation with Re(CO)5.
A novel Ru-containing polymer (48) based on bidentate N∧N ligands were synthesized via still cross-coupling reaction. Multinuclear NMR, UV-Vis, FT-IR, CV and TGA were used to confirm the structure. The modification of substituent groups of the ancillary ligands (R) altered the absorption properties of the polymers and therefore represents an attractive method for tuning the bandgap of the organometallic polymers. Novel zinc-containing D–A polymers (49) were synthesised via a Stille coupling of benzodithiophenes and a dimethyl triphenylamine-functionalized Zn-POR monomers and subsequently characterized by MALDI, UV-Vis, PL spectroscopy, TGA, CV and GPC (Mn = 4100 and PDI = 1.38). The PL spectra exhibited broad absorption in the 300–650 nm regions while CV showed a reduction in the LUMO energy level occurs upon introduction of an electron-deficient dithiophenylbenzothiadiazole thiophene adjacent to the benzodithiophene units in the main chain. Similarly, novel alternating D–A copolymers (50) were synthesised by step-growth polymerisation using the Sonogashira cross-coupling reaction between POR dialynes and diiodoaryl monomers (Mn = 25800–61700; PDI = 1.18–1.31). Owing to the doubly-strapped porphyrin linkages in the polymer backbone, these copolymers exhibit orthogonally and alternately arrayed transition dipoles. Full characterisation by NMR, UV-Vis, and fluorescence spectroscopy confirmed the structure. The fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) study on these copolymers demonstrated a new FRET system based on the arrangement of dipoles in this polymer.
Novel conjugated Pt- and Ir-containing polymers (51) have been synthesised by Hagihara coupling. NMR, and GPC confirmed the oligomeric structure of the materials. Optical absorption and emission spectroscopy corroborated with density functional theory calculations that confirmed that the presence of luminescent cationic Ir acceptor moiety allows for charge transfer transitions between the Pt and Ir units.
The group of Lin has utilised a Pd/CuI-catalyzed Sonogashira cross-coupling reaction between the tetrahedral tetra(p-ethynylphenyl)-methane and dibrominated [Ru(bpy)2-(dbbpy)]2+ or Ir[(bpy)2(dbbpy)]+ to synthesise novel Ru- or Ir-containing polymers (52). The polymers were found to be thermally stable up to 300 °C and have particle-like structure with a diameter of 100–200 nm. An efficient core-to-surface transport of the excited-state was verified through quenching experiments. Accordingly, the materials were effective photocatalysts for aza-Henry reactions. The Suzuki polycondensation was used to synthesise a series of hyperbranched copolymers with carbazole-3,6-diyl-co-2,8-dioctyldibenzothiophene-S,S-dioxide-3,7-diyl as the branch and Ir(ppy)3 as the core (53).
Another study by the group of Harvey reported the synthesis of diethynyl-[2.2]paracyclophane (PCP)-containing organometallic polymers (54). The absorption values for polymers 54a–c were 315, 360, and 420 nm; phosphorescence emission spectra were 530, 505, and 645 nm, respectively. The rates of triplet energy transfers found in these polymers led to the conclusion that PCP does not affect the electronic communication in conjugated chains.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013