 DOI: 10.1039/D2TC04723C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2023, 11, 2273-2281


Yu-Chieh
Chao
,

Hung-I
Lin
,

Jia-Yu
Lin
,

Yu-Chuan
Tsao
,

Yu-Ming
Liao
,

Fang-Chi
Hsu
* and 

Yang-Fang
Chen
*

Department of Physics, National Taiwan University, Taipei, 106, Taiwan. E-mail: yfchen@phys.ntu.edu.tw

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA

Nano-Science and Technology Program, Taiwan International Graduate Program, Academia Sinica, Taipei, 115, Taiwan

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, National United University, Miaoli, 360, Taiwan. E-mail: fangchi@nuu.edu.tw

Advanced Research Centre for Green Materials Science and Technology, National Taiwan University, Taipei, 106, Taiwan

Received
7th November 2022
, Accepted 5th January 2023
First published on 7th January 2023
Hyperbolic metamaterial (HMM) has attracted considerable attention due to its enhanced light-matter interaction for tuning the photonic density of states and producing bulk plasmon polariton (BPP). In this study, we demonstrate the application of HMM in organic solar cells (OSCs) with superior performance for the first time. The designed HMM structure composed of multiple pairs of MoO3/Au stacks possesses a hyperbolic dispersion behavior in the primary light absorption regime of the photoactive material. To effectively couple BPP into the photoactive layer, the first pair of the HMM structure is designed to be a portion of the OSC structure, serving as the hole transport layer and anode. The unconventional HMM incorporated OSCs (HMM-OSCs) exhibit ∼29.4% enhancement in the power conversion efficiency (PCE) relative to similar OSCs using one pair of MoO3/Au and ∼11% improvement in PCE as compared to conventional OSCs with the fully reflective electrode. Compared to conventional OSCs, the performance improvement is primarily from the improved short circuit current density from a broad wavelength range of the enhanced photon-to-charge conversion efficiency due to the higher exciton generation and dissociation probability, as suggested by the photocurrent analysis and steady-state photoluminescence measurements. The experimental observation agrees well with that inferred from theoretical simulation for the enhancement in the local electric field and exciton generation rate for the designed HMM structure. Therefore, the designed HMM-OSCs can successfully couple BPP into operation with a large impact on light absorption efficiency enhancement. Our design principle can serve as a useful guideline for the application of HMM in other optoelectronic devices.

Solar cells with the ability to convert sunlight into electricity are one of the promising energy technologies for next-generation power sources. Among them, organic solar cells (OSCs) possess unique features such as mechanical flexibility, light-weight, and room-temperature manufacturing, and have been considered promising for smart technology applications. As high as ∼18.5% power conversion efficiency (PCE) has been achieved for OSCs, which is an encouraging result that moves one more step closer to their inorganic counterpart. There are numerous approaches proposed for improving the PCE of OSCs, including new photoactive materials design and device engineering. In the device engineering aspect, the adoption of the plasmonic resonance concept in designing OSCs has been shown to enhance the device performance. The localized surface plasmons (LSPs) produced by noble metallic nanoparticles can drastically amplify the light intensity around a specific wavelength and hence the PCEs by ∼10% increment for OSCs because of its narrow band resonance characteristics. To further enhance the PCEs, it would be desirable to achieve a broadband enhancement of light-matter interaction through a more rational design beyond the conventional structures.

Hyperbolic metamaterials (HMMs) are artificially engineered structures with subwavelength layers that are tailored to enhance their interaction with light. Recently, HMMs have become a novel platform for optoelectronic device applications due to their ability to manipulate the photonic density of states for high efficiency optoelectronic devices. Generally, HMMs are composed of layered alternating metal-dielectric stacks and can induce the collective oscillation of electrons called surface plasmon polaritons at interfaces upon light irradiation, allowing the radiation with wavevectors (k) to far exceed the free space wavevector, known as high-k modes, to propagate in the structure. The high-k modes are realized as bulk plasmon polaritons (BPPs) and have shown improvements in charge-transfer dynamics in organic dyad supramolecular self-assemblies, angular sensitivity of biosensors, achieving laser action,etc. Though excited BPPs have shown practical applications in some optoelectronic devices, the application of HMM in energy harvesting technology has not been seen in the literature yet.
Herein, we demonstrate the incorporation of HMM in designing OSCs with improved performance for the first time. The typical inverted OSCs configuration with prominent photoactive material, poly(3-hexythiophene):(6,6)-phenyl C61 butyric acid methyl ester (P3HT:PCBM), is used for demonstration. The studied HMM-inspired OSC (HMM-OSC) is of the layered structure of ITO/ZnO/P3HT:PCBM/(MoO3/Au)4, resulting in an unconventional solar cell structure. The HMM structure composed of multiple-pair MoO3/Au stacks ((MoO3/Au)4) partly serves as a portion of OSCs and also couples with incident light to generate BPP. It is found that there is a large improvement in the short circuit current density (JSC) and fill factor (FF) of HMM-OSCs, resulting in ∼29.4% increment in the PCE as compared with similar OSCs using one pair of MoO3/Au and ∼11% enhancement in comparison with conventional cells using a fully reflective Ag electrode. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) results reveal that the JSC improvement is a broadband effect from 450 nm to 650 nm. The enhancement of steady-state photoluminescence (PL) intensity also indicates an increase in light absorption efficiency. By analyzing the photocurrent behavior, a moderate enhancement in exciton generation rate and a noticeable improvement in dissociation rate are obtained. We also performed numerical simulations based on the finite-difference time-domain method (FDTD) to obtain the optical properties and the electrical properties in the vicinity of the HMM structure to support the experimental results. We conclude that the effect of HMM on OSCs is primarily to improve the light absorption efficiency. Our study shown here should be very useful for the future development of HMM toward practical applications in a wide range of optoelectronic technologies.

The ZnO sol–gel solution was prepared by dissolving zinc acetate dihydrate (Zn(CH3COO)2·2H2O, Aldrich, 99.9%, 1 g) and ethanolamine (NH2CH2CH2OH, Aldrich, 99%, 0.28 g) in 2-methoxyethanol (CH3OCH2CH2OH, Aldrich, 99.8%, 10 mL) under stirring for 24 h for the hydrolysis reaction in air. The photoactive layer was prepared by dissolving poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl) (P3HT, 1 g) and [6,6]-phenyl C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM, 1 g) in 1,2-dichlorobenzene (ODCB, 50 mL) under stirring at 50 °C for 24 h on a hot plate.


Pre-patterned indium-doped tin oxide (ITO)-coated glass substrates with sheet resistance of 15 Ω sq−1 served as the electrode. A 30 nm-thick ZnO layer was deposited by spin-coating the prepared ZnO solution on the cleaned ITO substrate, followed by thermal annealing at 200 °C for 60 min. The photoactive layer was prepared on top of the ZnO film by spin-coating from a P3HT:PCBM solution in ODCB (D/A ratio 1:1, 40 mg mL−1) at 800 rpm for 40 s in air. For the reference device, 7 nm of MoO3 and 100 nm of silver (Ag) layers were thermally deposited in sequence on the photoactive layer to complete the device fabrication. For the HMM-device, four pairs of MoO3 (7 nm)/Au (25 nm) stack were thermally deposited on the photoactive layer under a pressure <5 × 10−7 torr at a deposition rate of 0.3 Å s−1 to ensure the film uniformity of each layer to complete the fabrication. The active device area, defined by the mask in front of devices when exposed to light irradiation, was 0.040 cm2 based on the dimensions determined by the caliper. Thus, the error of device area was calculated to be 0.0014 cm2, which corresponds to 3.5% of the area.


The J–V characteristics of the devices were measured using a computer-controlled Keithley model 2400 meter and a Xenon-lamp-based solar simulator (QE-R, Enli Tech, AM 1.5 G, 100 mW cm−2). A mask with square opening was set in front of the devices upon light irradiation. The EQE measurement system (Enli Technology) was composed of a quartz-tungsten-halogen (QTH) lamp as the light source, a monochromator, an optical chopper, a lock-in amplifier, and a calibrated silicon photodetector. The steady-state PL spectra were recorded in the transmission mode under air ambient conditions, and a continuous-wave (CW) laser (532 nm) was used as the excitation light source. The fluorescence emission signal was measured using a high-resolution spectrometer (iHR550, HORIBA). For field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) (ZEISS Ultra Plus) images, we used the ion polishing mill (Gatan Ilion II 697) to prepare the cross-section of the device structure. The device was cut using an ion source under the operating voltage of 3 keV and the current of 50 μA to avoid the intermixing of the layers. All measurements were done under ambient conditions without device encapsulation.


The simulation results shown in this work were obtained from the commercial electromagnetic software (Lumerical) of finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) solutions. The refractive indices of Au and Ag were taken from the database of Johnson and Christy, MoO3 from Lajaunie et al., and ZnO as well as P3HT:PCBM from C. Stelling et al. A perfectly matched layer boundary condition was used to cover the boundaries of the computational domain to prevent reflection from the domain boundaries. The mesh resolution was set to 1 nm to obtain high-accuracy results.



Fig. 1a displays the schematic device architecture of the proposed unconventional HMM-OSCs using four pairs of MoO3/Au stacks as HMM, and the first pair is designed to be part of the solar cell structure, serving as the hole transporting layer/electrode. More precisely, the effective solar cell portion is of the layered structure of ITO/ZnO/P3HT:PCBM/MoO3/Au. The cross-sectional field emission microscopy (FE-SEM) image of HMM on the photoactive layer is shown in Fig. 1b, revealing a distinct interface between MoO3 and Au as well as a corresponding thickness of 7 and 25 nm, respectively. Fig. 1c presents the absorption, reflection, and transmission spectra of HMM on a piece of glass substrate, showing that the structure absorbs the visible light photons with noticeable reflection. The photoactive material P3HT:PCBM also absorbs most of the visible light as the absorption spectrum shown in Fig. 1d.

We then evaluated the performance of HMM-OSCs under 100 mW cm−2 illumination with an AM 1.5G filter. For comparison, conventional OSCs of the layered structure of ITO/ZnO/P3HT:PCBM/MoO3/Ag were also fabricated and served as the reference cells. The conventional OSCs have an Ag electrode of ∼100 nm, which can fully reflect incident light to be resorbed by the photoactive layer. Fig. 2a depicts the typical current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the best devices. The reference cells exhibited an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 0.53 V, a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 9.88 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 58.57%, resulting in a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 3.06%. For HMM-OSCs, the values for VOC, JSC, and FF were 0.53 V, 10.53 mA cm−2, and 62.16%, respectively, for a PCE of 3.39%. Apparently, there is a moderate improvement in JSC and FF for HMM-OSCs by ∼6.6% and 6.1%, respectively, leading to an overall ∼11% increment in PCE. The 11% increase in PCE for HMM-OSCs relative to the reference cells is above the experimental error margin of about 3.5%. We mention here that we have made more than 20 devices for both kinds of OSCs, and the statistical VOC, JSC, FF, and PCE values are 0.53 ± 0.00 V, 9.78 ± 0.09 mA cm−2, 57.76 ± 0.71%, and 3.02 ± 0.04% for the reference cells, respectively, while they are 0.53 ± 0.00 V, 10.38 ± 0.12 mA cm−2, 61.00 ± 0.59%, and 3.37 ± 0.03% for HMM-OSCs, respectively. The statistical results were calculated based on the same batch of samples on different pieces of glass substrates. There were 4 devices on a single glass substrate. The performance of the devices was similar from batch to batch.
To understand the device improvement, Fig. 2b depicts the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra of both types of devices and the value difference of EQE (ΔEQE) is presented in Fig. 2c. It can be seen that the EQE values of HMM-OSCs were enhanced in the wavelength (λ) from 450 to 650 nm with the maximum enhancement at λ = 600 nm for ∼7%. The result suggests that the photocurrent enhancement originates from a broadband improvement in photon-to-charge conversion efficiency and also reveals the importance of HMM on device performance.
To further understand the role of HMM on photocurrent enhancement, we analyzed the photocurrent density–effective voltage (Jph–Veff) curves of the devices. Here, Jph is defined as JL–JD, where JL and JD are the current densities under illumination at 100 mW cm−2 and in the dark, respectively; Veff can be obtained from V0 − Vapp, where V0 is the voltage when Jph = 0 and Vapp is the applied voltage. The devices were biased and swept from −1.5 V to +1 V. Fig. 3a illustrates the Jph–Veff curves for both devices, showing that Jph increases linearly with increasing Veff in the low effective voltage region and then reaches saturation at Veff ≥ 2 V. It is generally assumed that most of the photogenerated excitons are dissociated into free carriers and effectively collected by the electrodes at Veff. At a sufficiently high electric field, the photocurrent density starts to saturate and the saturation photocurrent density (Jsat) is dominated by the maximum exciton generation rate (Gmax) through the relation Jsat = qGmaxL, where q is the electronic charge and L is the thickness of the active layer. Using the thickness of the photoactive layer of 120 nm from the FE-SEM image, the values for Gmax were calculated to be 5.51 × 1027 and 5.77 × 1027 m−3 s−1 for the reference and HMM-OSCs, respectively. The results also corresponded to Jsat = 10.6 and 11.1 mA cm−2, respectively. The HMM-OSCs exhibit a noticeable improvement in Gmax and Jsat. For the same input photon flux, HMM-OSCs generate more excitons, which is an indication of the enhanced light absorption of the photoactive layer. In fact, only a fraction of photogenerated excitons are dissociated into free carriers. The exciton dissociation probability P(E, T), depending on electric field (E) and temperature (T), should be considered and can be determined from the equation Jph = qGmaxP(E, T)L. The value of P(E, T) at any bias can be obtained from the plot of normalized photocurrent density (Jph/Jsat) to Veff, as shown in Fig. 3b. As obtained, at short-circuit condition, HMM-OSCs possess a P(E, T) value of 94.9% in comparison with that of 92.2% for the reference cells. The slightly higher P(E, T) suggests a more efficient exciton dissociation condition. Accordingly, the enhanced light absorption intensity and exciton separation efficiency can contribute to the improved JSC and FF of HMM-OSCs.
To confirm the role of HMM on photogenerated excitons, we carried out steady-state photoluminescence (PL) measurements. The samples were prepared by spin-coating P3HT:PCBM film onto MoO3/Ag (reference) and HMM structures on Si wafers, respectively, and the light was incident on the P3HT:PCBM side (see Fig. S1, ESI). Fig. 4 shows the room temperature PL spectra for both the samples using a 532 nm excitation light source. The integrated PL intensity of the HMM sample was enhanced by 25% compared to the reference one, revealing that the photoactive layer absorbs more photons and generates more excitons under the influence of the HMM structure. The result is consistent with that obtained for increased Gmax from analyzing the photocurrent.
It is known that the layer thickness of HMM determined the wavelength regime possessing hyperbolic behavior. A numerical simulation based on finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) was performed to find out the optimal thicknesses of MoO3 and Au layers to be 7 and 25 nm, respectively, in consideration of the trade-off between maximum charge generation rate and the series resistance of the first MoO3/Au pair to OSC performance. To confirm the hyperbolic dispersion of the designed HMM structure overlapping with the light absorption spectrum of the photoactive layer, the effective dielectric tensor was calculated; the result revealed that the product of permittivity parallel (ε‖) and perpendicular (ε⊥) to the HMM surface was negative at the wavelength (λ) ≥420 nm (see Fig. S2 and S3, ESI). The iso-frequency relation for an extraordinary wave in a uniaxial medium is given by . Here, the wavevector of a propagating wave is given by  = [kx, ky, kz], ω is the frequency of the radiation, and c is the speed of light in vacuum. We then plotted the iso-frequency surface of the designed HMM structure at selected wavelengths of 300, 500, and 600 nm, revealing a simple ellipsoid at 300 nm, but opening to hyperboloids at 500 and 600 nm (see Fig. 5a–c). We also calculated the cut-off wavelengths of the designed HMM structure and it showed that incident light with λ ≥ 450 nm could propagate in the designed HMM (see Fig. S4, ESI). Compared with the absorption spectrum of the P3HT:PCBM photoactive layer (see Fig. 1d), the hyperbolic dispersion regime of the designed HMM overlaps mostly with the absorption spectrum of P3HT:PCBM, and the light is partially reflected by the HMM structure to be reabsorbed by the organic layer (see Fig. 1c). The low reflection region (400–500 nm) can be improved by increasing the thickness of the respective layer of HMM. By doing so, it can result in an even poor performance of the OSCs because of the large series resistance of MoO3/Au in the first pair. After judging the influence of several possible factors on device performance, the design parameters of HMM shown here have been optimized.

Fig. 5d and e show the simulation results for the wavelength-dependent electric-field distribution as a function of distance away from the surfaces of MoO3/Ag and HMM structures in P3HT:PCBM for λ = 300–800 nm, respectively, using the FDTD method. The sample structures used for simulation can be referred to in Fig. S1 (ESI) for clarity. A plane wave source was injected from the top of both structures. Apparently, a stronger electric field strength was present around the surface of the HMM than the reference sample. The result suggests that the excitation of BPP in the multilayered HMM structure can result in the local enhancement of the electromagnetic field in the vicinity of the HMM. This local field enhancement effect can raise the light absorption efficiency and hence the total number of excitons generated in the photoactive layer.
To support our argument, we also calculated the exciton generation rate in the organic layer based on the samples illustrated in Fig. S1 (ESI). We first calculated the absorption intensity per unit volume (Pabs) using Pabs = −0.5ω|E|2imag(ε), where E is the electric field and imag(ε) is the imaginary part of the permittivity. Based on the absorption intensity, one can derive the exciton generation rate per wavelength (g) as . The generation rate can be obtained from the integration of g over the simulation spectrum. As shown in Fig. 5f and g, it revealed that the generation rate of electron–hole pairs was relatively higher near the surface of HMM structure, which can be due to its higher electric field distribution, as resolved in Fig. 5e. The calculated average generation rate for the reference sample was 1.24 × 1028 m−3 s−1 for JSC = 118.93 mA cm−2 while for the HMM sample was 1.57 × 1028 m−3 s−1 for JSC = 150.59 mA cm−2. On an average, there was about a 27% increment in the generation rate of the HMM sample. The trend is consistent with the experimental result from analyzing the photocurrent. We mention here that the simulated generation rate did not take into account the recombination process, thus yielding a higher value than the experimental results obtained from photocurrent analysis.
We have also tried to fabricate OSCs using only one pair of MoO3/Au; these devices show average JSC, VOC, and FF of 9.45 mA cm−2, 0.55 V, and 51.11%, respectively, for a much lower average PCE of 2.54% than that of reference cells (3.02%) and HMM-OSCs (3.37%). The poor performance of OSCs with one pair of MoO3/Au can be understood as the large resistance of the thin Au electrode (25 nm), which can lead to lower JSC and FF. We then compare the series resistance of those devices. The series resistance values for the reference, one-pair, and four-pair HMM cells were 9.32, 16.6, and 8.21 Ω cm2, respectively. Apparently, one pair of MoO3/Au device has larger series resistance due to the thin Au electrode in comparison with the reference cell of the thick anode (100 nm). With four pairs of MoO3/Au, the series resistance is reduced more than the reference devices. The result can be understood as the stronger local electric field induced by the excited BPP facilitates charge transport, resulting in reduced charge recombination at the donor/acceptor interface and, hence, the improvement in FF. Consequently, there is a drastic enhancement in the PCE of ∼29.4% for OSCs with four pairs of MoO3/Au.
The effects of the excited BPP associated with HMM on the performance of the designed OSCs are summarized as follows. We designed four pairs of MoO3/Au stacks as HMM that can be excited by visible light to generate BPP. According to a numerical simulation based on the FDTD method, the BPP can enhance the electric field strength in the vicinity of the HMM. To couple this near-field effect into the photoactive layer of an OSC, the first pair of HMM is ideally to be involved in completing a solar cell structure, i.e., HMM is directly in contact with the photoactive material. With this designed guideline of devices, unconventional HMM-inspired OSCs were fabricated and tested. It was found that a PCE of HMM-OSCs is higher than that of conventional OSCs with a thick Ag anode due to improved JSC and FF. The performance enhancement results from a broadband improvement in photon-to-charge conversion from λ = 450 to 650 nm, a range correlated with the hyperbolic dispersion regime of the designed HMM and a fingerprint involving the BPP effect. The enhanced JSC originates from the increase in the photogenerated exciton concentration and exciton separation efficiency as obtained from analyzingthe photocurrent and steady-state PL measurements. The experimental observation is also supported by the theoretical prediction of enhanced exciton generation rate nearby the designed HMM structure. Therefore, we attribute the improved exciton generation rate to the coupling of BPP into the P3HT:PCBM layer to enhance its absorption cross-section, and the enlarged local field strength may be beneficial for exciton dissociation. In addition, the reduced series resistance of HMM-OSCs can lead to FF improvement.
In this study, we compare HMM-OSCs with conventional OSCs using a thick Ag electrode of 100 nm. Since the thickness of the P3HT:PCBM layer (∼120 nm) still allows light to pass through, the conventional OSCs of the 100 nm thick Ag electrode can reflect incident light to be reabsorbed by the photoactive layer. It has been reported that an HMM structure can act as a good quality mirror. We have also compared the reflection spectrum of the HMM structure with the thick Ag film and it has been found that the thick silver can reflect >96% of the incident light at λ ≥ 400 nm, whereas only 20–90% of visible light is reflected by the HMM structure (see Fig. S5, ESI). The result suggests that the designed HMM structure is not simply acting as a mirror. According to Fig. 5d and e, it clear shows that the electric field near the HMM surface is indeed much stronger than near the thick silver film. The result indicates that BPPs can be excited in the designed HMM structure and produce stronger electric field nearby than the fully reflected light does. Therefore, BPPs do play a dominant role in the improvement of device performance though partially reflected light from HMM may be involved in improving the PCE as well. The impact of HMM effect is significantly larger than light reflection-induced photon re-absorption in HMM-OSCs and conventional OSCs.
Since the BPP effect is a short-range effect, it is expected that the effect will be stronger for cells with a thinner photoactive layer. The photoactive layer thickness of the HMM-OSCs presented in this study is not optimized. Our study shown here is a proof-of-concept demonstration. It is possible to use more than four pairs of MoO3/Au stacks as HMM structure to design HMM-OSCs for a stronger coupling effect for higher PCEs. Further, it is also possible to design HMM structures possessing hyperbolic dispersion wavelength regimes overlapping with the photon absorption spectra of other high-performing OSCs by tuning the respective layer thicknesses composed of HMM. Thus, the proposed approach of incorporating HMM to enhance the performance of OSCs is general. Compared with OSCs adopting localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) concept, the proposed HMM-OSC is a relatively robust system to understand the impact of HMM on device performance in contrast to the additional scattering effect involved when using nanoparticles. In addition, generally, there is about 10% improvement in the PCE for LSPR-inspired OSCs, which is considered lower than that of ∼29.4% for HMM-inspired OSCs shown in this study. From the cost-effective perspective, we believe that there should be other facile processing approaches such as spin-coating to reduce the extra cost for the fabrication of the HMM structure instead of the costly sputtering method used in this study.

In summary, we have made the first attempt to successfully demonstrate the integration of multilayered HMM structure into OSCs with improved performance. The first pair of the HMM structure is designed to be a portion of an OSC for the best result. The designed HMM structure possesses hyperbolic optical dispersion behavior in the visible light regime, which overlaps with the light absorption spectrum of the photoactive layer. Under illumination, the light-triggered BPP associated with the HMM can significantly enhance the electromagnetic field strength nearby such that the light absorption efficiency of the photoactive material can be improved, as revealed in the photocurrent analysis, EQE, and steady-state PL enhancement. In addition, the BPP may also promote exciton separation and charge transport, as indicated by the slightly improved exciton separation probability from analyzing the photocurrent and reduced series resistance, respectively. As a result, unconventional HMM-OSCs exhibit superior PCEs even over conventional OSCs for ∼11% due to enhanced JSC and FF. Our study shown here can be generalized to other photoactive materials for advancing the development of high efficiency solar cells and can also serve as a useful guideline for the application of HMM in developing other optoelectronic devices.


Y. C. C. prepared the samples and characterized the samples together with assistance from H. I. L., J. Y. L., Y. M. L. Y. C. C., J. Y. L., F. C. H., and Y. F. C. discussed the mechanism of the solar cell. Y. C. C. wrote the manuscript and performed simulation. F. C. H. and Y. F. C. conceived the idea of HMM and supervised the project. All the authors were involved in analyzing the data.


The authors declare no competing financial interest.


This work is financially supported by the Advanced Research Centre for Green Materials Science and Technology from The Featured Area Research Centre Program within the framework of the Higher Education Sprout Project by the Ministry of Education (110L9006) and the Ministry of Science and Technology, Taiwan (MOST 110-2112-M-002-044, MOST 110-2112-M-239-001 and MOST 111-2112-M-239-001). The authors would like to thank Mr Wei-Kuo Li from the Department of Physics and Center for Theoretical Physics, NTU for the theory discussion, and Mr Jiann-Yen Chen and Mr Hung-Yan Lin from the i-Center for Advanced Science and Technology, NCHU for the assistance in ion polishing and SEM operation.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2tc04723c
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023