 DOI: 10.1039/D0TA10702F
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 997-1005


Yu
Lin
,

Han
Song
,

Jianxin
Zhang
,

Huashang
Rao
,

Zhenxiao
Pan
* and 

Xinhua
Zhong
*

Key Laboratory for Biobased Materials and Energy of Ministry of Education, College of Materials and Energy, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou 510642, China. E-mail: zxpan@scau.edu.cn; zhongxh@scau.edu.cn

Guangdong Laboratory for Lingnan Modern Agriculture, Guangzhou 510642, China

Received
3rd November 2020
, Accepted 2nd December 2020
First published on 8th December 2020
The slow hole transfer from quantum dots (QDs) to the polysulfide redox couple electrolyte deteriorates the photovoltaic performance of QD-sensitized solar cells (QDSCs). To accelerate hole transfer and improve the performance of QDSCs, a series of hole transport materials (HTMs, including graphene oxide (GO), diphenyl sulfide (DPS), and 2,2′,7,7-tetrakis[N,N-di(4-methoxyphenyl)-amino]-9,9′-spiro-bifluorene (Spiro)) are deposited on the QD-sensitized photoanode and serve as hole transfer interplay media. The experimental results indicate that except for Spiro, the other two HTMs have a positive effect on improving the photovoltaic performance of the resulting cell device. The intrinsic mechanism of the effect of GO on the performance of the corresponding cell device is studied systematically. Photoluminescence decay measurements indicate clearly that the introduction of GO on the interface between QDs and the electrolyte can accelerate the hole transfer dynamics by about 4.7-fold. GO modification on the QD-sensitized photoanode can improve the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of ZCISe QDSCs from the original 12.50% to 13.84%, which is among the best performances for QDSCs.

Due to the extraordinary optoelectronic properties of quantum dot (QD) light harvesting materials as well as the simple configuration of cell devices, quantum dot-sensitized solar cells (QDSCs) have attracted increasing attention and their photovoltaic performance has experienced a rapid improvement with the highest power conversion efficiency (PCE) over 13%. However, further enhancement of the PCE of QDSCs is still the current top priority to render them more competitive in commercial applications compared with other types of emerging photovoltaic cells. The basic structure of a QDSC device consists of three components: a QD sensitized mesoporous TiO2 photoanode, sulfide/polysulfide redox couple electrolyte, and electrocatalytic material loaded counter electrode (CE). Under solar light illumination, QDs absorb solar photons with energy over their band gap to excite elections and generate electron–hole pairs. The photogenerated electrons are then injected into the electron acceptor TiO2 matrix, transported through the interconnected TiO2 mesoporous film, and reach the counter electrode through the external circuit. Simultaneously, the photogenerated holes are scavenged by polysulfide redox couples in the electrolyte as illustrated by the blue arrows in Scheme 1. The oxidized species of the redox couple in the electrolyte and photogenerated electrons combine on the counter electrode to complete the electric circuit. The overall photovoltaic performance of QDSCs is determined by the interplay of a variety of interfacial charge transfer and recombination processes as illustrated by yellow arrows in Scheme 1. The undesired charge recombination paths include (1) intrinsic charge recombination inside QDs, (2) electron recombination with the oxidized species in the electrolyte at the QD/electrolyte interface, (3) electron recombination at the TiO2/electrolyte interface, and (4) electron back transfer from TiO2 to QDs. Photogenerated electron transfer to the TiO2 electron acceptor can occur on the picosecond time scale, while photogenerated hole transfer to the redox couple occurs typically on the time scale of nanoseconds, i.e., nearly 2–3 orders of magnitude slower than that for electron transfer processes. Because hole transfer out of the QD sensitizer is much slower in comparison with electron transfer, a considerable number of holes would accumulate inside the QD under the light irradiation process. This accumulation of holes in the QD sensitizer can negatively influence the device performance in two main ways: anodic corrosion of the QD and/or an increased possibility of charge recombination within the cell device. Accordingly, this bottleneck in hole transfer deteriorates the photovoltaic performance and cell stability.

To address this issue, some electron donating p-type organic and inorganic hole transport materials (HTMs) were deposited on the surface of the QD-sensitized photoanode and served as hole transfer mediators to accelerate hole transfer and remove holes from the QD sensitizer instantaneously in previous literature. The inorganic p-type semiconductor CuxS was deposited on the surface of CdSe QD sensitizers by controlled exposure of the QD sensitized photoanode surface to copper and sulfide ion solutions alternately. Besides accelerating hole transfer from the QD sensitizer to the polysulfide electrolyte, the CuxS HTM was also found to be able to passivate defect states on the CdSe surface. Combined with these effects, a PCE of 6.6% was obtained for Mn-doped CdS and CdSe cosensitized QDSCs. The CdS/CuxS composite core/shell structured QDs with p-type CuxS on the surface of the CdS core QD served as light harvesting materials in the construction of QDSCs to improve the light harvesting capacity as well as to accelerate the charge separation. Accordingly, both the charge collection efficiency and photovoltaic performance of the resultant solar cells were improved. Kamat et al. used electron donating carbazole to modify the surface of CdSe nanowires, with the effect of hole transfer from CdSe to carbazole, and an improved electron–hole separation via was observed in this system. Upon grafting 4′-(bis(4-(hexyloxy)phenyl) amino)-biphenyl-4-carboxylic acid (PAPC) molecules, a molecular relay with strong electron-donating properties, onto the surface of the CdS sensitized photoanode, the photogenerated hole transfer rate from QDs to PAPC was observed at the picosecond timescale, which sped up charge separation and alleviated QD photo-corrosion. It is noted that HTMs are extensively used to transfer photogenerated holes from light harvesting materials in the research fields of organic solar cells (OSCs) and perovskite solar cells (PSCs). Usually, good hydrophobicity is generally required for these HTMs in order to match the light harvesting materials in these solar cells. However, in QDSCs, good hydrophilicity is generally required for all the modification materials due to the adoption of a polysulfide aqueous solution electrolyte. Therefore most hydrophobic HTMs in both OSCs and PSCs should be inappropriate for QDSCs with the use of an aqueous electrolyte.
This report focuses on the acceleration of hole transfer from QDs to the electrolyte to improve the photovoltaic performance of the resulting QDSCs. A variety of HTMs were studied and deposited on QD-sensitized photoanodes. The tested materials include graphene oxide (GO), diphenyl sulfide (DPS), and 2,2′,7,7-tetrakis[N,N-di(4-methoxyphenyl)-amino]-9,9′-spiro-bifluorene (Spiro). The effect of different HTMs on the hydrophilicity of the photoanode was explored through the contact angle test. The photovoltaic performance of the resulting cell devices shows that the deposition of a suitable HTM on the surface of the QD sensitized photoanode can effectively improve the PCE of final cells. Among them, GO exhibited the best results. Compared with the reference samples without HTM modification on the photoanode, the photovoltaic parameters (Voc, Jsc and FF) of the ZCISe QDSCs with the GO modified photoanode were improved obviously. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and open-circuit voltage-decay (OCVD) measurements further confirmed that GO modification of the photoanode could improve the hole transport rate and reduce the charge recombination. Combined with the adoption of a nitrogen-doped mesoporous carbon loaded Ti mesh counter electrode (N-MC/Ti CE), the average PCE of ZCISe QDSCs approaches 13.84% (Voc = 0.772 V, Jsc = 26.98 mA cm−2, FF = 66.41%).

Indium acetate (In(OAc)3, 99.99%, Aldrich), copper iodide (CuI, 99.998%, Alfa Aesar), zinc acetate dihydrate (Zn(OAc)2·2H2O, 99%, Aladdin), sodium sulfide nonahydrate (Na2S·9H2O, 98%, Aladdin), diphenylphosphine (DPP, 98%, Aicon), 3-mercaptopropionic acid (MPA, 97%, Alfa Aesar), selenium powder (100 mesh, 99.99%, Aldrich), sulfur (S, 99.99%, Aladdin), 1-octadecene (ODE, 90%, J&K), oleylamine (OAm, 80–90%, Acros Organics), diphenyl sulfide (DPS, 98%, Energy Chemical), single layer graphene oxide (GO, Tanfeng Technology), and Spiro-OMeTAD (99.5%, Xi'an Polymer Light Technology Corp.) were all used as received without further treatment.


A mesoporous TiO2 layer with a thickness of about 25 μm (consisting of 6 transparent layers and 2 light scattering layers) was prepared on FTO glass by screen printing technology. Oil-soluble OAm-capped Zn–Cu–In–Se (ZCISe) QDs were first prepared according to a standard literature method. Typically, In(OAc)3 (0.2 mmol), CuI (0.14 mmol), and Zn(OAc)2 (0.08 mmol) were added to a flask containing OAm and ODE and heated to 180 °C under an inert atmosphere. 1 mL of pre-prepared Se precursor DPP and OAm solution (1.0 M) with a volume ratio of 1:1 was rapidly injected into the flask. After a 3 min reaction at 180 °C, oil soluble OAm-capped ZCISe QDs were obtained. Water-dispersible MPA-capped ZCISe QDs were obtained via a ligand exchange route from the as-prepared OAm-capped ZCISe QDs. The QD sensitized photoanode (TiO2/QD) was obtained by pipetting the MPA-capped ZCISe QD aqueous solution on the TiO2 film and leaving it undisturbed for 2 h. A ZnS energy barrier layer was deposited on the QD sensitized photoanode via immersing the photoanode film alternately into a 0.1 M Zn(CH3COO)2 methanol solution and 0.1 M Na2S aqueous solution for 1 min per dip and for five cycles. The HTM modified photoanodes were obtained by immersing the ZnS coated TiO2/QD photoanode in a 0.1 M Zn(CH3COO)2 methanol solution for 2 min, rinsing with water and ethanol, and then dipping it into the corresponding HTM solution (i.e., 0.1 M DPS methanol solution, 1.0 mg mL−1 GO water solution or 1.0 mg mL−1 Spiro toluene solution) for 4 min.


Sandwich-type solar cells were constructed by assembling the above obtained QD sensitized photoanode and a counter electrode, and then filling them with 30 μL of the polysulfide electrolyte solution. Briefly, the QD-sensitized photoanode with or without HTM modification and the Cu2S/brass or N-MC/Ti CE were assembled together using a binder clip, and then the polysulfide electrolyte (consisting of 2.0 M Na2S, 2.0 M S, and 0.2 M KCl) was injected. The Cu2S/brass CE was prepared by immersing polished brass in 10% HCl aqueous solution at 90 °C for 30 min, and then rinsing with deionized water and ethanol. The N-MC/Ti CE was prepared via screen printing the corresponding N-doped mesoporous carbon paste on the Ti mesh substrate according to the literature procedure. In order to ensure the reliability of the experimental data, five cells were prepared in parallel and tested under the same conditions.


The J–V curves were measured using a Keithley 2400 source meter under AM 1.5 G solar simulator with an intensity of 100 mW cm−2. Before each test, an NREL standard Si solar cell was used to calibrate the power of the simulated solar light to 100 mW cm−2. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were carried out on an impedance analyzer (Zahner, Zennium) under dark conditions at forward bias ranging from 0 V to higher than Voc, applying a 20 mV AC sinusoidal signal over the constant applied bias with a frequency range of 1 MHz to 0.1 Hz. The samples for open circuit voltage decay (OCVD) measurements were illuminated by a white light-emitting diode (LED) with an intensity of 100 mW cm−2, and the decay of photovoltage with time was recorded after switching off the light source. Zeta potential measurements were performed on a Nano ZSE (Malvern Panalytical). Time-resolved photoluminescence decay spectra were obtained on a PL Spectrometer (Edinburgh Instruments, FLS 900) with an excitation wavelength of 405 nm and the emission light was monitored at 825 nm.


ZCISe QDSCs were selected as the model device to investigate the effect of a series of HTMs (including DPS, GO and Spiro) on improving the hole transfer rate and enhancing the photovoltaic performance of the resulting cell devices. The ZCISe QDs with absorption onset at a wavelength of ∼980 nm were synthesized through a hot injection route and subsequently immobilized on TiO2 film electrodes via the well-developed capping ligand induced self-assembly approach. After coating a ZnS energetic barrier layer, the QD sensitized photoanode (denoted as TiO2/QD/ZnS) was modified with different HTMs by immersing it into the selected HTM solution at room temperature for 4 min followed by rinsing with ethanol. The detailed procedure is available in the Experimental section. A typical sandwich-type cell device was constructed by assembling the obtained photoanode and a Cu2S/brass CE or N-MC/Ti CE and filling it with a polysulfide electrolyte solution. For each condition, five cells were prepared and tested in parallel and the average performance was used to evaluate the cell performance.


The QD sensitized photoanodes modified with different HTMs together with the pristine photoanode without HTM modification as the reference sample were assembled into a standard sandwich structured QDSC device, and the photovoltaic performance of the corresponding cell device was measured to evaluate the effects of HTMs on the photovoltaic performance of the corresponding QDSCs. The current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the champion ZCISe QDSCs corresponding to different HTM modified photoanodes are shown in Fig. 1a. The obtained average value of photovoltaic performance parameters, including open-circuit voltage (Voc), short-circuit current density (Jsc), fill factor (FF) and PCE, are summarized in Fig. 2. The photovoltaic parameters and J–V curves of individual solar cells in each group are shown in Table S1 and Fig. S1 of the ESI. From the photovoltaic performance data, we can find that with the exception of Spiro, which is a star HTM in PSCs, all the other investigated HTMs have positive effects on the photovoltaic performance of the corresponding cell devices in comparison with the reference sample without HTM modification. The PCE values based on the Cu2S/brass CE of the corresponding QDSCs follow the order of GO > DPS > Ref > Spiro. The GO cells improved the PCE from 9.7% to 10.8%, while the Spiro reduced the PCE to 9.4%. The enhanced PCE was mainly derived from the enhancement of Voc (from 0.605 to 0.627 V) and FF (from 60.24% to 63.47%), while the corresponding short-circuit density (Jsc) showed different trends: all the tested HTMs had a positive effect on Jsc, and the Spiro exhibited the highest Jsc value (Fig. 2c). It is noted that the obtained Jsc values for all cells through J–V measurements were in accordance with the results from external quantum yield (EQE) measurements (Fig. 1b). It is clear that different HTM modification treatments resulted in distinct effects on the photovoltaic performance of the resultant devices.

An ideal HTM serving as a relay in transferring holes from the QD to the polysulfide aqueous electrolyte should have strong electron-donating capacity as well as good hydrophilicity to strengthen the penetration of the aqueous electrolyte into the TiO2 mesoporous film. All of the investigated HTMs possess strong electron-donating capacity as verified in previous reports, but exhibit distinct differences in the hydrophilicity. The hydrophilicity of the photoanode determines the interaction between the photoanode and aqueous electrolyte, and thus affects charge carrier transfer at the photoanode/electrolyte interface. To examine the wettability of the QD-sensitized photoanode with or without HTM modification with water, we performed contact angle tests with the corresponding photographs shown in Fig. 3. It can be found that the contact angles of photoanodes underwent different HTM modifications following the order: GO < Ref < DPS < Spiro. The contact angle of the reference sample without HTM modification was about 23.0°, showing good hydrophilicity. With modification by GO, the hydrophilicity of the corresponding sample was enhanced furthermore with the contact angle reduced to ∼21.0°. The enhanced hydrophilicity of the GO modified photoanode may be due to the presence of a large number of hydrophilic groups such as carboxyl groups, hydroxyl groups, etc. in the GO molecules. DPS has a structure with two hydrophobic benzene rings, and thus the contact angle of the DPS modified sample increased to ∼25.8°. With Spiro modification, the hydrophilicity of the photoanode decreased significantly while the corresponding contact angle increased to ∼65.5°. This is due to the hydrophobic property of Spiro molecules. Based on the contact angle data, we can primarily deduce that the deterioration of Spiro modified solar cells is partially derived from the reduction of hydrophilicity of the corresponding photoanode, which leads to the difficulty of aqueous electrolyte penetration into the mesoporous film and inhibits the efficient transfer of charge carriers.

OCVD measurements were performed in order to explore the effect of HTM modification on the surface of the QD sensitized photoanode on photogenerated electron dynamics. In the test, cell devices derived from different HTM modified photoanodes were irradiated using a white LED (100 mW cm−2). The LED light was turned off until a stable voltage was obtained, and the attenuation of the photovoltage with time was recorded. The voltage decay curves of various cell devices are shown in Fig. 4a. The corresponding electron lifetime (τn) can be obtained from the voltage decay curves via the following equation: , and the dependence of τn on potential is shown in Fig. 4b. It can be found that the GO and DPS cells have a higher steady-state open circuit voltage and a lower decay rate in comparison with the reference cells. The device treated with GO has the slowest decay rate. In addition, the electron life of the cell devices after the above treatments was also significantly higher than that of the reference solar cells, and the electron life of the solar cells treated with GO was the longest. This is also due to the good performance of GO, which can effectively reduce the electron recombination with holes and the electrolyte, thus significantly prolonging the life of electrons. The steady-state voltage of the devices treated with Spiro was lower than that of the reference solar cells and the voltage decay rate was higher than the reference solar cells. This demonstrates that the recombination of electrons increased, further confirming the reason for the decrease of PCE in previous articles. It is clear that different HTM modifications on the QD-sensitized photoanode resulted in distinct effects on the photovoltaic performance as well as electrochemical features of the resultant devices. Since GO modified cells exhibited the best photovoltaic performance, the GO modification strategy was selected as the representative model for in-depth study henceforth.


In order to maximize the potential of GO in accelerating the hole transfer from the QD light absorber, the deposition conditions of GO on the photoanode films were optimized. When the as-prepared QD sensitized photoanode film was directly immersed into a GO aqueous solution for a certain period, only a moderate improvement in the PCE of the resultant cells related to that of the reference sample was observed (Fig. 5a and b, from 9.7% to 10.3%), while the Zn2+/GO treated photoanode (the as-prepared QD sensitized photoanode film was immersed into a Zn2+ methanol solution followed by immersion into a GO aqueous solution) could push the PCE of the corresponding cells to 10.8%. The combination of Zn2+ and GO modification may cause the increase of the GO loading amount on the photoanode. In order to confirm this assumption, zeta potential measurements on the QD sensitized photoanode before and after Zn2+ treatment were conducted. The experimental results indicate that the Zn2+ treatment can alter the zeta potential value from the original −24.8 mV to −12.1 mV. The increase of electropositivity of the photoanode is beneficial for the deposition of negative charged GO sheet due to the extra Coulomb effect. Furthermore, the adsorption of Zn2+ on the photoanode provided anchoring sites for the oxygen atoms in GO. Therefore, the pretreatment with Zn2+ on the photoanode film can increase the loading amount of GO on the QD sensitized photoanode and leads to the improvement of photovoltaic performance of the resultant cell devices. Only Zn2+ treated cells showed an average PCE of 9.7%, close to that of the reference sample. This result indicates that adsorption of only Zn2+ on the photoanode has no obvious effect on ameliorating hole transfer from QD sensitizers and on improving the photovoltaic performance of the resulting cell devices. This highlights the effect of enhanced GO loading on accelerating hole transfer and enhancing the photovoltaic performance of the corresponding cell devices. It is noted that increasing the cycle number of the Zn2+/GO treatment cannot improve the PCE of the resultant solar cells further, but reduces the PCE systematically (Fig. S2, S3 and Table S2). Therefore, the optimal deposition conditions for GO are one cycle of treatment with Zn2+ and GO alternately.


The PL decay measurements were performed with the purpose of probing the effect of GO modification on the hole transfer rate and carrier dynamics and exploiting the mechanism of the enhanced photovoltaic performance of the corresponding solar cells. It has been well established that both photogenerated electron and hole transfer from the excited QD can accelerate the PL decay dynamics. To exclude the interference of the electron transfer process in PL decay, insulating SiO2 served as a substrate to hold QDs as it cannot accept photogenerated electrons from excited QDs due to the insulating characteristics. Therefore, SiO2/QD films in the polysulfide redox couple (S/S2−) electrolyte offer the possibility of monitoring the QD PL emission quenching arising from the hole transfer at the QD/electrolyte interface selectively.

In the experiment, a standard literature procedure was adopted for immobilizing ZCISe QDs on a SiO2 mesoporous film, and the PL decay curves for SiO2/QD and SiO2/QD/GO samples in a 0.2 M Na2S solution and in a 0.2 M NaOH solution were monitored. It is noted that for the SiO2/QD/GO sample, treatment with Zn2+ was conducted prior to the deposition of GO on SiO2/QD. Fig. 6 shows the PL decay of SiO2/QD and SiO2/QD/GO in Na2S and NaOH media, respectively. It was found that with the incorporation of GO into the QD system, the PL decay process becomes remarkably faster in both Na2S and NaOH media in comparison with those of pristine QD samples. Furthermore, the PL decay rate was profoundly sped up when the measurements were performed in Na2S solution for both the samples. This is because in the NaOH solution without the presence of a hole scavenging reagent, the ZCISe QDs exhibited natural decay as it underwent intrinsic charge recombination, while in the polysulfide electrolyte solution with the presence of Na2S serving as an effective hole scavenging reagent, besides the intrinsic charge recombination processes, an extra decay route existed, i.e., the holes were transferred from QDs to S2−. Accordingly, the PL decay rate was increased in Na2S solution.
All the measured lifetime traces could be successfully fitted by bi-exponential decay kinetics, and the fitting parameters are listed in Table 1. Average lifetimes of QD PL decay were calculated based on these extracted values. The average lifetime (τ0) of SiO2/QD in 0.2 M NaOH corresponding to the natural radiative decay of ZCISe QDs on the SiO2 surface was 125.7 ns, while this value was shortened to 109.6 ns in the case of SiO2/QD/GO in 0.2 M NaOH. On the other hand, the average lifetimes (τ′) for SiO2/QD and SiO2/QD/GO in 0.2 M Na2S were 95.7 and 47.9 ns, respectively. If the decreased lifetime in S2− solution is entirely due to the scavenging of holes, we can obtain the rate constant for hole transfer (ket) from the following expression:
ket = 1/τ′ − 1/τ0
where
τ′ is the exciton lifetime of QDs in Na2S solution and τ0 corresponds to the exciton lifetime of QDs in NaOH solution. On the basis of the lifetimes listed in Table 1, the calculated electron-injection constants (ket) are 1.17 × 107 s−1 and 0.25 × 107 s−1 for the hole transfer to S2− in the pristine QD and QD/GO system. It is noted that the observed ket value for ZCISe QDs in our case is in the same range as those observed previously.

Samples

A
1


τ
1 (ns)

A
2


τ
2 (ns)

τ (ns)

R
2


k
et (×107 s−1)
QD/GO in Na2S
0.47
4.76
0.32
53.52
47.89
0.986
1.17
QD/GO in NaOH
0.26
7.99
0.60
112.74
109.62
0.989
QD in Na2S
0.35
7.38
0.50
100.22
95.67
0.989
0.25
QD in NaOH
0.25
7.54
0.79
127.87
125.67
0.992

With the purpose of exploring the inherent mechanism of GO modification for improving the performance of QDSC devices, EIS characterization of QDSCs was carried out under dark conditions based on different forward biases to obtain relevant charge transfer and recombination information. The chemical capacitance Cμ represents the change of the density of electronic states with the Fermi level. As illustrated in Fig. 7a GO treatment did not significantly affect the conduction band edge of the TiO2 photoanode because no significant change was observed compared to the Cμ value of the reference device under different bias conditions. Fig. 7b describes the dark current test results. It can be seen that the dark current of the device after GO treatment was significantly lower than that of the reference solar cells under different bias, indicating that the recombination of the charge in the QDSCs was suppressed. It can be seen in Fig. 7c that the charge recombination resistance value Rrec of GO treated devices under different bias voltages was significantly higher than that of the reference devices. Nyquist plots at a forward bias of −0.65 V and the corresponding parameters are shown in Fig. 7d and Table 2. The Rrec of the GO treated QDSC is 94.02 Ω cm2, which is significantly higher than the Rrec value of the reference solar cells (57.03 Ω cm2), resulting in a longer electron lifetime (τn = Rrec × Cμ). The increase of the Rrec further confirms the weakening of the charge recombination in the QDSC device, which also explains the improvement of the device Voc and Jsc caused by the higher hole transport speed in the photoanode after GO treatment.

Solar cell

C
μ (mF cm−2)

R
rec (Ω cm2)

τ
n (ms)
Ref
10.43
57.03
594.82
GO
7.63
94.02
717.37

According to previous reports, N-MC/Ti CE exhibited better photovoltaic performance for QDSCs in comparison with the traditional Cu2S/brass CE. N-MC/Ti CE has excellent catalytic activity and electrical conductivity, which can reduce the reduction potential of the polysulfide electrolyte and improve the Voc and FF of the corresponding QDSC. Based on this consideration, we also fabricated the N-MC/Ti CE and GO modified photoanode to assemble QDSC devices. The detailed photovoltaic parameters as well as the J–V curves of the five individual cells are shown in Table S3 and Fig. S4 and the J–V curves of the champion QDSC are shown in Fig. 8. The average PCE was improved from 12.50% to 13.84% (Voc = 0.772 V, Jsc = 26.98 mA cm−2, FF = 66.41%) for cells with GO modification on the photoanode compared to the reference sample without GO modification. Consistent with the results reported in the previous literature, the N-MC/Ti CE effectively improved the Voc and FF of the device in comparison with the Cu2S/brass CE.


A series of HTMs (including GO, DPS, and Spiro) were used to modify the QD-sensitized photoanode to accelerate hole transfer from QDs to the redox couple in the electrolyte and improve the photovoltaic performance of the corresponding cell device. It was found that GO and DPS modifications had a positive effect on improving the photovoltaic performance, while the Spiro treatment had a negative effect on the performance. These different effects may be derived from the hydrophobicity of HTMs used, which influences the penetration of the aqueous electrolyte into the photoanode mesoporous film, and therefore the transfer of charge carriers out of QD sensitizers. The photoluminescence decay measurement results indicated clearly that the hole transfer dynamics in GO modified photoanodes were accelerated by about 4.7-fold in comparison with that in the control sample without HTM modification. Accordingly, GO modification on the QD-sensitized photoanode improved the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of ZCISe QDSCs from the original 12.50% to 13.84%, which is among the best performances for QDSCs.


There are no conflicts of interest to declare.


This research was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NFSC, No. 51732004, 21703071, 22075090, 21805093, and 21975083).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: J–V curves and photovoltaic performance parameters of ZCISe QDSCs based on different HTM modified photoanodes, different cycles of the GO modification strategy and GO modified QDSCs based on N-MC/Ti CE. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta10702f
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021