 DOI: 10.1039/C4CP03342F
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 23967-23974


Fanggong
Cai
,

Feng
Yang
*,

Yong
Zhang
,

Chuan
Ke
,

Cuihua
Cheng
,

Yong
Zhao
* and 

Guo
Yan


Superconductivity and New Energy R&D Center, Key Laboratory of Advanced Technology of Materials (Ministry of Education of China), Mail Stop 165#, Southwest Jiaotong University, Chengdu, 610031, People's Republic of China. E-mail: yf@home.swjtu.edu.cn; yzhao@home.swjtu.edu.cn

National Engineering Labortary for Superconducting Materials, Western Superconducting Technologies Co. Ltd, Xi'an, People's Republic of China

School of Materials Science and Engineering, University of New South Wales, Sydney, 2052 NSW, Australia

Received
28th July 2014
, Accepted 29th September 2014
First published on 30th September 2014
PbS nanoparticles (PbS NPs), an efficient sensitizer for TiO2 nanotube arrays (TiO2 NAs), were fabricated by the method of sonication-assisted successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR). The filling degree and size of PbS NPs can be tuned by changing the repeated cycles (N) of the SILAR process. TiO2 NAs can be fully covered with PbS NPs with a size ranging from less than 4 nm to 25 nm and large aggregates inside and outside the nanotubes when N reaches 15. The growth mechanism of PbS NPs in TiO2 NAs was expounded in great detail in this work. Ultraviolet-visible diffuse-reflectance spectra and surface photovoltage spectroscopy were used to investigate the light absorption properties and the transfer behavior of photogenerated charges in PbS-modified TiO2 NA heterostructures. Results show that the absorption range of TiO2 NAs is extended from the ultraviolet to the visible region by PbS NPs modification. A heterojunction is formed between PbS NPs and TiO2 NAs, facilitating the separation of photogenerated charge carriers. This PbS NPs fully-covered TiO2 NA electrode exhibits the best photoelectrochemical performance in all PbS-sensitized TiO2 NA electrodes, due to a larger number of small PbS NPs (<4 nm). With AM 1.5G illumination at 100 mW cm−2, its short-circuit current density, open-circuit voltage and photoelectric conversion efficiency are 9.55 mA cm−2, 0.95 V and 2.83%, respectively.

In recent years, the development of clean and renewable energy sources has become an important issue, due to global warming and shortage of traditional fossil fuels. Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), as the third-generation solar cells, have gained much attention over the past two decades. DSSCs that employ porphyrin dye sensitizers with the cobalt(II/III) redox shuttle obtain an excellent power conversion efficiency of 13% under full sunlight irradiation. Compared with the conventional organic dyes, nanoscale inorganic semiconductors are easier to prepare and have a lower cost. Inorganic semiconductors also present higher photostability and larger extinction coefficients than the conventional dyes. Their band gaps and, consequently, absorption spectra can be conveniently tailored by controlling the nanoparticle size, making them extraordinarily attractive for photovoltaic applications. These solar cells, as promising third-generation photovoltaic devices, can push the theoretical thermodynamic efficiency (44%) because of multiple exciton generation. Many nanoscale inorganic semiconductors such as CdS, CdSe, Bi2S3, and PbS have been used to harvest light on TiO2 nanostructures as sensitizers instead of dyes. Among them, PbS is a good candidate due to its narrow band gap (Eg = 0.41 eV for bulk), large exciton Bohr radius of 20 nm, and long excitonic lifetime (200–800 ns). Therefore, we tried using PbS nanoparticles (PbS NPs) as the sensitizer of TiO2 nanotube arrays (TiO2 NAs) to form a heterostructure photoelectrochemical (PEC) cell. Successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR) is an efficient method for assembling nanoparticles onto TiO2 NAs. However, the precipitation reaction in aqueous solution is so rapid that large agglomerates of PbS NPs easily block the tube mouths of TiO2 NAs and result in the inside of the tubes not being completely covered with PbS NPs. Cho et al. found that the sonication-assisted method could help to increase the coverage of nanoparticles. Our previous study also indicated that the TiO2 NAs could be modified with PbS NPs by the SILAR method under ultrasound irradiation.

To obtain better PEC properties, in this work, we fabricated TiO2 NAs sensitized with PbS NPs of various sizes and filling degrees by tuning SILAR cycles under ultrasound irradiation. The growth mechanism of PbS NPs in TiO2 NAs was expounded in detail. The PbS NPs sensitized TiO2 NAs were successfully applied as the photoanode material in PEC solar cells. The charge transfer process between PbS NPs of different sizes and TiO2 nanotubes is discussed in detail. Optical properties of PbS NPs/TiO2 NAs were characterized by Ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) diffuse-reflectance spectra (DRS). The separation and transport characteristics of the photogenerated electron–hole pairs of all samples were investigated by surface photovoltage (SPV) spectroscopy. PEC solar cells based on pure TiO2 NAs and PbS NPs/TiO2 NAs were constructed in a three-electrode system, and their PEC properties were examined. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was employed to study the electron transport and recombination kinetics of all electrodes.

TiO2 NAs were prepared by electrochemical anodic oxidation in a two-electrode system, using Ti foil (3 cm × 1 cm × 0.25 mm, 99.6% purity) as the working electrode and platinum foil (3 cm × 4 cm) as the counter electrode. Ethylene glycol was used as the electrolyte, while 0.25 wt% NH4F was added into the electrolyte. Electrochemical anodic oxidation was carried out at a constant potential of 60 V for 6 h at room temperature. After anodic oxidation, Ti foil with TiO2 NAs was thoroughly washed by sonication in D.I. water, and dried. To obtain anatase TiO2 NAs, the sample was annealed at 450 °C for 3.5 h with heating and cooling rates of 3 °C min−1 in an air atmosphere.


PbS NPs were attached to TiO2 NAs by a sonication-assisted SILAR approach. Briefly, the as-prepared TiO2 NA electrode was successively immersed into 0.005 M Pb(NO3)2 aqueous solution, pure D.I. water, 0.005 M Na2S aqueous solution, and pure D.I. water again (then dried in air) for 20 s each. This immersion procedure was repeated for 5 to 15 cycles. All experiments were carried out using ultrasonic waves (20 KHz, 100 W). The sample was designated PbS(N) NPs/TiO2 NAs. The N appearing after PbS means the repeated cycles (N) of the SILAR process, N = 5, 10 and 15, respectively.


The morphologies of PbS(N) NPs/TiO2 NA electrodes were investigated using a field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM, JSM 7001F, JEOL, Japan) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM, Tecnai G2 F30 S-Twin, Philips-FEI, Holland). Compositional analysis was performed by energy dispersive X-ray analysis (EDX) attached to a TEM. The powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of electrodes were obtained using a PNAlytical diffractometer using monochromatic Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.54 Å) in the scan range of 2θ (20° to 80°). UV-vis DRS were recorded using a UV-vis spectrophotometer (TU-1901, Beijing Purkinje General Instrument Co., Ltd, China) equipped with an integrating sphere of 150 nm radius. BaSO4 was used as a reflectance standard.

The separation characteristics of photogenerated charge carriers were tested by a lock-in-based surface photovoltage measurement system, which is made up of a lock-in amplifier (SR830-DSP) with an optical chopper (SR540) running at a frequency of 20 Hz, a source of monochromatic light provided by a 500 W Xenon lamp, a double-prism monochromator, a sample cell, and a computer. The construction of the photovoltaic cell is a sandwich-like structure of conductive glass (ITO)/sample/Ti foil. The incident light acts on the ITO side. The illuminated area is approximately 0.5 cm2. SPV spectroscopy was recorded in an air atmosphere and at room temperature.
EIS and PEC measurements were carried out in a conventional three-electrode system using a saturated calomel electrode (SCE) as the reference electrode and a platinum foil as the counter electrode. The indifferent electrolyte was always a 0.5 M Na2S aqueous solution. All potentials were measured with respect to SCE in the text. The photocurrent–voltage (J–V) characteristics and EIS were recorded using an electrochemical analyzer (Lanlike2006A, Tianjin Lanlike Chemical and Electron High Technology Co., Ltd, China). The electrode was illuminated with simulated sunlight (AM 1.5G), which was emitted from a 500 W xenon lamp. Light intensity was estimated using a radiometer (Photo-electronic Instrument Co., affiliated with Beijing Normal University, China). The effective area of the electrode for illumination was 1.5 cm2. For the impedance measurements were carried out at an open-circuit voltage (Voc), the amplitude of the ac signal used was 10 mV, and the frequency ranged between 100 kHz and 0.05 Hz. The EIS results were fitted and analyzed by the commercial software of ZSimpWin.

The SILAR process is considered an effective way to prepare NPs on mesoporous films. The sonication-assisted deposition approach is effective for the decoration of TiO2 NAs with QDs or NPs. In our study, the ultrasound was introduced into the SILAR process. Ultrasound offers a rapid reaction rate method for the preparation of uniform nanosized materials, because it can produce a local environment with extremely high temperature (>5000 K), high pressure (>20 MPa) and fast cooling rate in liquid medium. The SILAR cycle from the precursor solutions of Pb2+ and S2− was repeated 5, 10, and 15 times.

XRD experiments were carried out to determine the structure of the samples. Fig. 1A is an experimental XRD profile taken from a TiO2 NAs film before PbS deposition. All peaks result from the Ti substrate and anatase TiO2 NAs. Fig. 1B–D are another XRD patterns taken from PbS(N) NPs/TiO2 NAs. Unlike in Fig. 1A, additional peaks aside from Ti and TiO2 NAs can be attributed to the PbS cubic phase (JPCDS file: 05-0592). PbS is formed through the S2− reaction to Pb2+ during the SILAR process under ultrasound. The broad peaks associated with the PbS cubic phase suggest that the size of the PbS is very small. And the intensity of peaks is stronger as repeated cycles (N) of the SILAR process were increased, suggesting that the filling degree of PbS in TiO2 NAs gradually increases with the sonication-assisted SILAR process.

Fig. 2 shows typical top-view FESEM images of all samples. Fig. 2A illustrates that the pure TiO2 NAs have a mean inner diameter, outer diameter, and wall thickness of 146 nm, 186 nm, and 20 nm, respectively. Fig. 2B–D show the corresponding FESEM images of the TiO2 NA electrode processed with different SILAR cycles (N) (i.e., 5, 10, and 15). In figures, many NPs are introduced into the TiO2 NAs by the SILAR process under ultrasound. Our earlier XRD result had displayed that the NPs deposited onto TiO2 NAs are PbS NPs. The wall thickness of nanotubes gradually increases as the number of SILAR cycles increase. It is about 40 nm and 60 nm for N = 5 (Fig. 2B) and N = 10 (Fig. 2C), respectively. When the cycle number N reaches 15 (Fig. 2D), we can find that the TiO2 NAs is filled with the NPs. In other words, the filling degree of NPs in TiO2 NAs gradually increases with the SILAR process under ultrasound. From the top view, the maximum size of PbS NPs is about 4, 12 and 25 nm for SILAR cycles N = 5, 10 and 15, respectively. Furthermore, according to the high resolution FESEM images (Fig. S1, indicated by arrows, ESI), the PbS NP size below 4 nm can also be found when the SILAR cycle N = 10 or 15.
The PbS NPs may be distributed on three regions relative to TiO2 NAs, the top surface, gap and inside of TiO2 nanotubes. The cross-section FESEM images (Fig. S2, ESI) show that large PbS NPs (40–100 nm) are distributed throughout the gap of the TiO2 NAs, no matter how many repeated cycles (N) of the SILAR process were carried out. Pb2+ and S2− ions can flow freely and react completely through the gap of TiO2 NAs. Thus, the prepared PbS NPs are normal large. However, there are no large PbS NPs on the top surface of TiO2 NAs under supersonic vibration. At last, PbS NPs inside of TiO2 NAs were further observed using a TEM. Fig. 3 shows TEM images of PbS(15) NPs/TiO2 NAs. Fig. 3A and B clearly show that PbS NPs have been filled into the channels of the TiO2 nanotubes. Interestingly, the size of PbS NPs inside TiO2 nanotubes is inhomogeneous, which ranges from about 4 to 25 nm. PbS NPs are marked oval, of which size is below 4 nm in Fig. 3B. Further, we carried out energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) measurements of the marked region in Fig. 3A. As shown in Fig. S3 (ESI), the strong peaks for Pb and S in the spectrum confirmed the formation of the PbS NPs inside TiO2 nanotubes.
According to the SILAR principle, increasing SILAR cycles (N) can result in two different types of crystallite growth: formation of new crystallites and growth of crystallites. Simultaneously, the TiO2 nanotubes having an inner diameter of 146 nm limit the growth of PbS NPs inside them. As suggested above, the growth mechanism of PbS NPs in TiO2 NAs can be explained by the space location effect, as illustrated by Fig. 4, where the PbS NPs in size from small to large are represented in red, brown, green, and blue dots, respectively. Pb2+ and S2− ions flow into TiO2 NAs in succession during the SILAR process under ultrasound. And then PbS NPs are produced by the reaction of Pb2+ and S2− in TiO2 NAs. With the sonication-assisted SILAR process, existing PbS NPs gradually grow and new PbS NPs are produced at the same time. Morphology of PbS NPs is dependent on relative space location. The gap and top surface of TiO2 NAs is completely open space. PbS NPs grow to large particles without space restriction. Nevertheless, large PbS NPs cannot cover the top surface of TiO2 NAs because of supersonic vibration. On the other hand, the internal cavity of TiO2 NAs is a semi-closed space, and the TiO2 nanotubes having an inner diameter of 146 nm limit the growth of PbS NPs inside them. Pb2+ and S2− ions are difficult to flow inside of TiO2 nanotubes. Thus, the filling degree of PbS NPs in TiO2 NAs continuously increases during the period of the SILAR process.
The effective band gap of NPs increases with decreasing size. The band gap of PbS NPs can be estimated using eqn (1) with an effective mass approximation:
(1)
where
R is the NPs radius; me* and mh* are effective masses of electrons and holes, respectively; ε0 and ε∞ are the vacuum permittivity (ε0 = 8.854 × 10−12 F m−1) and the relative permittivity of NPs material, respectively; and h and e are Planck constant (h = 6.625 × 10−34 J s) and basic charge (e = 1.602 × 10−19 C), respectively. For PbS,me* = mh* = 0.085m0 (the electron rest mass, m0 = 9.108 × 10−31 kg), ε∞ = 17.2, and Eg = 0.41 eV. According to the calculation, the band gap of PbS NPs is 0.93 eV for R = 4 nm, 0.46 and 0.42 eV for R = 12 and 25 nm, respectively.

To examine the light absorption properties and to reflect the nature of samples' surface, the UV-vis DRS were obtained from pure TiO2 NAs and PbS(N) NPs/TiO2 NAs (N = 5, 10 and 15, respectively), as shown in Fig. 5A. The result demonstrates that the reflectance of PbS(N) NPs/TiO2 NAs in the visible region decreases with increasing SILAR cycles (N). The reflectance of materials indirectly reflects its absorption property. On one hand, the absorption of the PbS(N) NPs/TiO2 NA electrode enhances with increasing SILAR cycles (N), because the filling degree of PbS NPs in TiO2 NAs is enhanced. On the other hand, the optical performance may be affected by the size of PbS NPs on the top surface of TiO2 NAs. When N is 15, the large-sized PbS NPs (25 nm) are formed on the top surface of TiO2 nanotubes. PbS NPs have the narrowest band gap (Eg = 0.42 eV) and highest scattering ability caused by their largest size (25 nm) among all electrodes, resulting in the PbS(15) NPs/TiO2 NA electrode displaying the lowest light reflection and strongest light absorption. By the way, a rapid decrease in the region 300–380 nm in Fig. 5A is observed due to the obvious absorption in the UV region of TiO2.
SPV spectroscopy was implemented to investigate the behavior of photogenerated charges in PbS(N) NPs/TiO2 NA heterostructures. Fig. 5B presents the comparison of SPV of TiO2 NAs without and with PbS NPs combination. The signal of SPV is attributed to the change in surface potential barriers before and after light illumination. Distinct SPV response in the UV range is observed for pure TiO2 NAs due to its large energy gap. A broader and stronger SPV response (300–800 nm) is observed when PbS NPs were coupled with TiO2 NAs. These responses are consistent with the earlier DRS result, as SPV originates from light absorption. However, almost no SPV response was observed in pure PbS NPs (inset Fig. 5B). The PbS NPs were prepared by the SILAR approach in a fresh filter. Its morphology is shown in Fig. S4 (see ESI). Photogenerated electrons and holes are rapidly recombined in the narrow band gap semiconductor PbS. SPV experimental results indicate the existence of a heterojunction between PbS NPs and TiO2 NAs. This heterojunction aids the separation of photogenerated charge carriers.
According to ref. 11 and 30, the energy band structure of PbS NP and TiO2 NA is schematically illustrated in Fig. 5C. The band gap of PbS NPs with different sizes is estimated using eqn (1). As shown in Fig. 5C, the conduction band edge of PbS NPs (larger than 4 nm) is more negative than the corresponding band of TiO2. The process of photogenerated electron transfer to TiO2 from the PbS component is restricted. Comparatively, the conduction band edge of smaller PbS NPs (<4 nm) is more positive than the corresponding band of TiO2. As a consequence, smaller PbS NPs (<4 nm) will facilitate photogenerated electron transfer from PbS to TiO2 rather than restrict this procedure. However, the strongest SPV response intensity is obtained from PbS(15) NPs/TiO2 NAs in all PbS(N) NPs/TiO2 NA (N = 5, 10 and 15, respectively) electrodes (Fig. 5B). SPV response intensity is attributed to the charges of surface net carriers, resulting in the charges of surface potential barriers before and after illumination. Therefore, SPV response intensity is directly related to the number of surface net carriers. We can conclude that the PbS(15) NPs/TiO2 NA electrode collects more surface net carriers than other electrodes. However, a potential barrier exists between PbS NPs and TiO2 when the size of PbS NPs is larger than 4 nm, so that the separation and transmission effects of photogenerated carriers in PbS(N) NPs/TiO2 NAs become weaker as the SILAR cycles (N) increase. In other words, the intensity of SPV response becomes weaker with the increase in the size of PbS NPs. However, the experiment result is the complete opposite. The size of PbS NPs in PbS(15) NPs/TiO2 NAs ranges from below 4 nm to 25 nm, while that of PbS NPs is below 4 nm for N = 5. Thus, we can conclude that large PbS NPs (>4 nm) also contribute to SPV due to their light absorption. The charge transfer process between PbS NPs (>4 nm) and TiO2 nanotubes is illustrated as Fig. S5 (see ESI). Before contact, the conduction band edge of PbS NPs (>4 nm) is lower than that of TiO2, and the Fermi level of PbS NPs (>4 nm) is also lower than that of TiO2. After contact, the Fermi level of PbS NPs (>4 nm) is moved up, while the Fermi level of TiO2 is moved down until an equilibrium state is formed. At the equilibrium, an inner electric field is formed, thus the PbS NPs (>4 nm) and the TiO2 region have negative and positive charge, respectively. Under visible-light illumination, PbS NPs (>4 nm) could be excited and induced the generation of photoelectrons and holes. The migration of photogenerated carriers can be elevated by the internal field. Due to the difference of conduction band edges of PbS NPs (>4 nm) and TiO2, it is worth noting that there will be a band discontinuity ΔEC, introducing additional energy barrier. This energy barrier will limit the efficiency of photoelectron transfer from PbS NPs (>4 nm) to TiO2. Photoelectron transport across the barrier may be dominated by the tunneling effect.
The J–V characteristics for pure TiO2 NA and PbS(N) NPs/TiO2 NA electrodes are shown in Fig. 6, and the corresponding PEC performances and parameters are summarized in Table 1. The measurements were carried out in 0.5 M Na2S electrolyte under AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2). The pure TiO2 NA electrode exhibits a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 1.04 mA cm−2 and a negligible overall power conversion efficiency (η) of 0.26%. The Jsc of the PbS(N) NPs/TiO2 NA electrode certainly increases as the SILAR cycles (N), reaching 5.89, 7.12, and 9.55 mA cm−2 for N = 5, 10, and 15, respectively. Jsc is the parameter determined by the product of the charge carrier density under illumination, which shows the maximum number of the photogenerated carriers that can be extracted from a solar cell. The trends in Jsc of the PbS(N) NPs/TiO2 NA electrode are similar to those in their SPV response intensity. Compared with the pure TiO2 NA electrode, the PbS(N) NPs/TiO2 NA electrode prepared by the sonication-assisted SILAR process exhibits superior PEC performance, indicating that PbS NPs are a major contributor to the obtained photocurrent. The reported PbS-sensitized TiO2 film electrode reveals η of about 2%. Interestingly, for PbS(N) NPs/TiO2 NA electrodes in our work, the η is 2.16%, 2.46%, and 2.83% respectively for N = 5, 10, and 15, which is 8–11 times higher than that of the pure TiO2 NA electrode.
Photoelectrode

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF

η (%)

a 
J
sc, Voc, FF and η are the short-circuit current density, open-circuit voltage, fill factor, and overall power conversion efficiency, respectively.

Pure TiO2 NAs
1.04
−0.90
0.28
0.26
PbS(5) NPs/TiO2 NAs
5.89
−0.94
0.39
2.16
PbS(10) NPs/TiO2 NAs
7.12
−0.96
0.36
2.46
PbS(15) NPs/TiO2 NAs
9.55
−0.95
0.31
2.83
The band gap of larger sized PbS NPs (25 nm) is 0.42 eV, which is very close to 0.41 eV of the bulk value. As shown in the energy band structure diagram of Fig. 5C, a heterojunction structure is hard to built between TiO2 and larger PbS NPs (25 nm), so even the larger PbS NP has a higher light absorption ability, and it can't facilitate photoelectron generation. In Fig. 3A, it shows that larger PbS NPs as well as more small PbS NPs are formed after 15 cycles of reaction. Higher photocurrent density of PbS(15) NPs/TiO2 NAs is mainly attributed to a larger number of small PbS NPs (<4 nm). However, bigger PbS NPs play a negative role as the carrier recombination sites. This might be the reason why as the reaction cycle increases, the fill factor of the PEC cell decreases.
The best PEC performance in all analyzed cases was achieved for the PbS(15) NPs/TiO2 NA electrode. Based on the above analysis, PbS NPs below 4 nm promote the separation and transmission of photogenerated carriers, whereas large PbS NPs enhance the light absorption in PbS(N) NPs/TiO2 NAs. To determine what contributes more to the PEC performance of the PbS(N) NPs/TiO2 NA electrode, we conducted a comparative test using a large PbS NPs sensitized TiO2 NA electrode (designated as PbS/TiO2 NAs). The FESEM image and J–V curve of PbS/TiO2 NAs are shown in Fig. S5(A) and S5(B) (ESI), respectively. The PEC performance of the PbS/TiO2 NA electrode (Jsc = 4.94 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.64 V, FF = 0.40, and η = 1.28%) is inferior to that of PbS(15) NPs/TiO2 NA and PbS(5) NPs/TiO2 NA electrodes. These results display that the main contribution of the photocurrent is the PbS NPs of below 4 nm in PbS(N) NPs/TiO2 NA electrodes.
The enhanced PEC property of the PbS(N) NPs/TiO2 NA electrodes can be mainly attributed to three factors. First, PbS has a narrow band gap, and it efficiently absorbs a large part of visible light (Fig. 5A), enabling it to act as a sensitizer. Second, a heterojunction forms between PbS NPs and TiO2 NAs, and an interfacial electric field prevents the recombination of photogenerated electron–hole pairs. The filling degree of PbS NPs in PbS(N) NPs/TiO2 NAs gradually enhances with increasing SILAR cycles (N), leading to the reduction of the reflectance (Fig. 5A) and increase in the surface net carriers (Fig. 5B). Third, as shown by the energy band diagram in Fig. 5C, the photogenerated electrons in PbS NPs (smaller than 4 nm) can be effectively injected into the conduction band of TiO2. An efficient electron transfer process is energetically favored.
EIS under open-circuit conditions was applied to further study the electron transport and recombination kinetics of pure TiO2 NA and PbS(N) NPs/TiO2 heterostructure NA electrodes (N = 5, 10, and 15, respectively). Fig. 7 shows the Nyquist plots obtained for the four electrodes. The equivalent circuit (inset Fig. 7) and results of Nyquist plots was simulated and fitted using the ZSimpWin software. Rs, Cdl, Ret, CPE and R denote the ohmic serial resistance, double-layer capacitance, electric charge transfer resistance, constant phase elements of the inner layer of the composite, and corresponding to the depleting layer, respectively. The semicircle radius on the EIS Nyquist plot is the smallest in the case of PbS(15) NPs/TiO2 heterostructure NA electrode. The semicircle is attributed to the electron transfer process at the photoanode/electrolyte interface. The Ret is 5.411, 19.73 and 2.458 ohm cm2 respectively for N = 5, 10, and 15. Ret is the electric charge transfer resistance, which is inversely proportional to the resistance at the photoanode/electrolyte interface. The increase in the resistance at the photoanode/electrolyte interface is beneficial for suppressing the charge recombination at this interface. Thus, the weakest electric charge transfer resistance or strongest resistance of the photogenerated electron–hole pair recombination occurred in the case of the PbS(15) NPs/TiO2 heterostructure NA electrode. This is a key factor that results in the optimal PEC property achieved in the PbS(15) NPs/TiO2 heterostructure NA electrode.

In summary, we successfully fabricated PbS(N) NPs/TiO2 heterostructure NAs through the sonication-assisted SILAR process. The filling degree and size of PbS NPs in PbS(N) NPs/TiO2 NAs were controlled by adjusting the SILAR cycles (N, N = 5, 10, and 15, respectively). The TiO2 nanotubes were filled completely with inhomogeneous PbS NPs when the SILAR cycles N = 15. The size distribution of PbS NPs was from less than 4 nm to 25 nm. The growth mechanism of PbS NPs in TiO2 NAs was expounded. Compared with that of pure TiO2 NAs, the PEC property of PbS(N) NPs/TiO2 NA electrodes significantly improved. The PEC property enhances with the increasing filling degree of PbS NPs in PbS(N) NPs/TiO2 NA electrodes. An optimal PEC property with a Jsc of 9.55 mA cm−2 and an η of 2.83% was obtained from the PbS(15) NPs/TiO2 NA electrode under 100 mW cm−2 illumination. Our results show that PbS NPs can be used to sensitize TiO2 NAs, making them more responsive to the visible spectrum of sunlight. Moreover, a heterojunction between PbS NPs and TiO2 NAs can be formed to prevent the recombination of photogenerated electron–hole pairs. Higher photocurrent density of PbS(15) NPs/TiO2 NAs is mainly attributed to a larger number of small PbS NPs (<4 nm).


This work was supported financially by National Magnetic Confinement Fusion Science Program (2011GB112001, 2013GB110001); Program of International S&T Cooperation (2013DFA51050); National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51271155, 51377138); Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (2682013CX004, SWJTU11ZT31,and 2682013CX004); Science Foundation of Sichuan Province (2011JY0031, and 2011JY0130); New Teachers' Fund for Doctor Stations, Ministry of Education (20120184120024).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c4cp03342f
This journal is © the Owner Societies 2014