 DOI: 10.1039/D1TA09392D
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 640-650


Daehee
Han
,

Yunghee
Han
,

Youngkwon
Kim
,

Jin-Woo
Lee
,

Dahyun
Jeong
,

Hyeonjung
Park
,

Geon-U
Kim
,

Felix Sunjoo
Kim
 and 

Bumjoon J.
Kim
*

Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, KAIST Institute for the Nanocentury, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon 34141, Republic of Korea. E-mail: bumjoonkim@kaist.ac.kr

School of Chemical Engineering and Material Science, Chung-Ang University (CAU), Seoul 06974, Republic of Korea

Received
2nd November 2021
, Accepted 10th December 2021
First published on 13th December 2021
Organic solar cells (OSCs) based on poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) have achieved a significant enhancement of the power conversion efficiency (PCE), mainly driven by the development of non-fullerene small-molecule acceptors. However, their relatively poor thermal stability, in terms of blend morphology and concomitant performance, limits their application. Herein, we develop a non-covalently fused-ring acceptor (NFRA), denoted as CPDT–ICMe to achieve high-performance and thermally stable P3HT-based OSCs. Non-covalent interactions in CPDT–ICMe impart high planarity to its molecular backbone and facilitate strong intermolecular packing. A resulting P3HT:CPDT–ICMe OSC demonstrates superior electrical properties and a high PCE of 8.17%. Importantly, the P3HT:CPDT–ICMe OSC exhibits excellent thermal stability, maintaining 98.4% of initial PCE after 100 h of thermal annealing at 120 °C. This is attributed to the high glass transition temperature (Tg) of the amorphous fraction of CPDT–ICMe in the blend. Under thermal stress (at temperatures up to 120 °C), molecular motion and diffusion are limited, preventing severe molecular aggregations and macrophase separations. Thus, this work provides important guidelines for the design of NFRAs for highly efficient and thermally stable P3HT-based OSCs.

Organic solar cells (OSCs) have attracted great attention as reliable devices for energy conversion over the past decades due to their unique features such as solution processability, mechanical flexibility, and color tunability. The development of polymer donors (PDs) and non-fullerene small-molecule acceptors (NFSMAs) has greatly improved the performance of OSCs. However, efficient PDs typically feature complex-structured fused-rings and require multistep and high-cost procedures for synthesis, impeding the commercialization of OSCs. In this respect, poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) is still considered as one of the most commercially viable PDs, owing to its simple chemical structure, straightforward synthesis, small batch-to-batch variation, and thus economical and reliable production. Accordingly, significant effort has been devoted to development of NFSMAs with high absorption coefficients in the bands that complement that of P3HT. These efforts have led to the realization of P3HT-based OSCs with power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) exceeding 9%.

Despite these successful improvements in the PCEs of P3HT:NFSMA OSCs, there are limited examples of the P3HT:NFSMA OSCs to investigate their thermal and morphological stabilities. The morphology of a solution-processed bulk heterojunction (BHJ) of P3HT:NFSMA is kinetically trapped as the solvent evaporates. Under thermal stress, the high immiscibility of P3HT and NFSMAs drives their macroscale phase separation in the blend films. Since small-sized NFSMAs typically have much lower onset-temperature for thermal movement and higher diffusion coefficients than their polymer counterparts, NFSMA-based OSCs are significantly more thermally unstable. The onset-temperature has been described as glass-transition temperature (Tg) for polymeric materials, at which the amorphous parts of polymer chains become mobile. Recently, Qin et al. expanded the concept of Tg to NFSMAs for delineating their thermal motions, by associating a cold-crystallization temperature (Tcc) of NFSMAs with Tg of their amorphous parts. This is because a significant fraction of NFSMAs can be disordered in the solution-processed active layer of the OSCs. The concept of Tg for the NFSMA materials can represent an onset point of thermal motion of the molecules in an amorphous region. In addition to the kinetic factors, the formation of a BHJ morphology is determined by thermodynamic interactions (including enthalpic and entropic contributions) between P3HT and NFSMAs, indicating the importance of modulation of their miscibility. Therefore, the development of NFSMAs that have a high Tg and an appropriate miscibility with P3HT is imperative for realizing thermally stable and highly efficient P3HT:NFSMA OSCs.
An effective candidate for producing NFSMAs with superior optoelectronic properties and a high Tg is non-covalently fused-ring acceptors (NFRAs). The introduction of non-covalent interactions (i.e., S⋯O, O⋯H, and S⋯N) into the molecular backbones of NFRAs affords high crystallinity; the segmental mobility of the molecules in the crystalline domains is significantly suppressed, resulting in molecules with kinetically locked conformations. In addition, due to the non-covalently fused structure of NFRAs, their solubility and processability exceed those of fused-ring acceptors (FRAs) while exhibiting superior light-absorption and electron-transport properties. Accordingly, NFRAs have been employed to realize efficient OSCs when blended with PDs other than P3HT. However, there are limited examples of NFRAs for P3HT-based OSCs. In addition, the correlations between the molecular structures/properties of the NFRAs and the thermal stability of NFRA-based OSCs need to be investigated to guide the design of NFRAs for high-performance, thermally stable OSCs.
In this study, we develop a new NFRA, 2,2′-((2Z,2′Z)-(((2,5-bis((2-ethylhexyl)oxy)-1,4-phenylene)bis(4,4-bis(2-ethylhexyl)-4H-cyclopenta[2,1-b:3,4-b′]dithiophene–6,2-diyl))bis(methanylylidene))bis(5&6-methyl-3-oxo-2,3-dihydro-1H-inden-1-diylidene))dimalononitrile (CPDT–ICMe) with a high Tg, and demonstrate highly efficient and thermally stable P3HT-based OSCs. The CPDT–ICMe NFRAs having non-covalently fused structures exhibit highly planar structures with small dihedral angles between the building units. As a result, they show broad and intense absorption extended to near-infrared region (∼900 nm), which is beneficial for constructing complementary absorption with P3HT. Furthermore, CPDT–ICMe is highly crystalline and has a high electron mobility, enabling a PCE as high as 8.17% in P3HT:NFSMA OSCs. Importantly, the Tg of amorphous fraction of CPDT–ICMe in the film is high as 126.0 °C. As a result, P3HT:CPDT–ICMe OSCs show excellent thermal stability, retaining 98.4% of its initial average PCE after 100 h under thermal annealing at 120 °C. In contrast, the PCEs of P3HT-based OSCs featuring other efficient small-molecule acceptors (i.e., ZY-4Cl and PC61BM) seriously decreased under similar thermal stress. The superior thermal and morphological stabilities of P3HT:CPDT–ICMe OSCs are attributed to the high Tg of CPDT–ICMe which produces a blend film with a kinetically locked BHJ morphology as molecular motion and diffusion are limited.

To develop efficient NFRAs for P3HT-based OSCs, CPDT–ICMe is designed with the following requirements: (i) incorporation of non-covalently fused, ladder-like chemical structure to promote molecular planarity and crystallinity; and (ii) an up-shifted energy level that aligns appropriately with that of P3HT to achieve a high open-circuit voltage (VOC). With these design strategies, 4,4-bis(2-ethylhexyl)-4H-cyclopenta[1,2-b:5,4-b′]dithiophene (CPDT) and the 1,4-bis((2-ethylhexyl)oxy)benzene (alkoxy-Bz) were selected to build highly electron-donating and planar core-units. Particularly, oxygen atoms substituted into alkoxy-Bz interact strongly with the sulfur atoms in CPDT unit via S⋯O interactions, promoting the formation of a ladder-like structure (Fig. 1a). The 2-(5&6-methyl-3-oxo-2,3-dihydro-1H-inden-1-ylidene)malononitrile (ICMe) was used as the electron-withdrawing terminal group, forming the planar structure through another S⋯O interaction with the outer sulfur atom on CPDT unit. The incorporation of an electron-donating methyl group into ICMe affords the up-shifted lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) level. The CPDT–ICMe successfully synthesized as described in Fig. 1b; the synthetic procedures are detailed in the Experimental section. The chemical structure of CPDT–ICMe was confirmed by nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy and matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight (MALDI-ToF) mass spectrometry (Fig. S1).

The molecular conformations of CPDT–ICMe were optimized according to the density functional theory (DFT) using a modeling software (Spartan'14) with the B3LYP functions and the 6-31G* basis set (Fig. 2a). CPDT–ICMe has two low dihedral angles, 9.6° (θ1) and 0.2° (θ2), between alkoxy-Bz and CPDT, and between ICMe and CPDT, respectively. Interestingly, we can see that the central core-unit restricts conformational rotation and that the frontier molecular orbitals are distributed across the NFRA (Fig. S2). The highly planar structure of CPDT–ICMe, attributed to non-covalent S⋯O interactions within the molecular backbone, leads to highly ordered intermolecular assembly through the favorable π–π stacking. Next, the ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) absorption spectra of P3HT and CPDT–ICMe were measured in solution and film states (Fig. 2b). In solution, CPDT–ICMe absorbs light in the wavelength range of 600–800 nm; in film, this band extended significantly to 600–900 nm and an intense absorption peak associated with 0–0 vibrational transition was observed (Table 1). This result indicates that CPDT–ICMe in the film achieved strongly packed intermolecular structures. The absorption band of CPDT–ICMe (in film) of 600–900 nm complements that of P3HT (400–600 nm) for superior light harvesting.
Material

M
w
 (g mol−1)

Đ


HOMO (eV)
LUMO (eV)

λ
solutionmax (nm)

λ
filmmax(nm)

a Measured by gel permeation chromatography (GPC) with THF as the eluent.
b Determined from CV curves.
c Determined from CV curves.
d Calculated according to ELUMO = EHOMO + Eoptg.
e Thermally annealed at 130 °C for 5 min.


CPDT–ICMe

—
—
−5.30
−3.48
698
784

P3HT

18k
1.32
−5.10
−3.10
444
514
Next, we performed cyclic voltammetry (CV) to characterize the CPDT–ICMe and P3HT films using a ferrocene/ferrocenium redox couple as an external standard (Fig. 2c and S3). The highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and LUMO energy levels of CPDT–ICMe are described in Table 1. Interestingly, the HOMO and LUMO levels of CPDT–ICMe at −5.30 and −3.48 eV, respectively, are relatively higher-lying than those of many reported NFRAs. This result is mainly attributed to the electron-donating unit (alkoxy-Bz) and methyl-functional end-groups of ICMe in CPDT–ICMe. The up-shifted LUMO energy level of CPDT–ICMe leads to a P3HT-based OSC with a higher Voc. As shown in the energy diagram in Fig. 2c, P3HT and CPDT–ICMe exhibit cascade energy level alignment with appropriate offsets between their energy levels, promoting exciton dissociation and charge generation.
Next, we measured the grazing incidence X-ray scattering (GIXS) of CPDT–ICMe film to investigate its structural properties. The obtained 2D GIXS images and line-cut profiles of P3HT and CPDT–ICMe films are displayed in Fig. S4 and 2d. The 2D GIXS image in Fig. 2d shows that the CPDT–ICMe film has a well-developed crystalline structure with strong intermolecular packing, originated from the highly planar molecular conformation of CPDT–ICMe. The out-of-plane (OOP) GIXS line-cut profile of the CPDT–ICMe film exhibited a distinct (010) peak associated with π–π stacking. The corresponding d-spacing (d010) is 3.43 Å (Table S1), indicating the presence of crystallites that exhibited very tight π–π stacking. We compared the crystalline properties of the CPDT–ICMe film with those of 2,2′-((12,13-bis(2-butyldecyl)-3,9-diundecyl-12,13-dihydro-[1,2,5]-thiadiazolo[3,4-e]thieno[2′′,3′′:4′,5′]thieno[2′,3′:4,5]pyrrolo-[3,2-g]thieno[2′,3′:4,5]thieno[3,2-b]indole-2,10-diyl)bis(methane-lylidene))bis(5,6-dichloro-1H-indene-1,3(2H)-dione) (ZY-4Cl) film, as determined by GIXS (Fig. S4b). To date, ZY4-Cl realizes a P3HT-based OSC with the highest PCE (reported as 9.4%). Notably, the d010 of the CPDT–ICMe film is less than that of a ZY-4Cl film (3.54 Å). In addition, the peaks (i.e., the (100) peaks) in the GIXS line-cut profiles of the CDPT-ICMe film (Fig. S4c and d) are much sharper than the corresponding peaks in the GIXS line-cut profiles of the ZY-4Cl film. The formation of face-on oriented CPDT–ICMe crystallites with very tight π–π stacking facilitates charge transport in OSCs. On the other hand, P3HTPD showed the edge-on oriented structures with lamellar (100) d-spacing of 16.71 Å and (010) π–π stacking distance of 3.79 Å, which were consistent with the results from the previous literatures.
To evaluate photovoltaic properties of CPDT–ICMe as an electron acceptor in a P3HT-based OSC, we fabricated devices with an architecture of indium tin oxide (ITO)/poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):polystyrene sulfonic acid (PEDOT:PSS)/P3HT:CPDT–ICMe/PNDIT–F3N–Br/Ag. The detailed procedures of device fabrication are described in the ESI. The P3HT:CPDT–ICMe OSCs showed a maximum PCE of 8.17% with a Voc of 0.77 V, a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 16.52 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 65% (Fig. 3a). Notably, the P3HT:CPDT–ICMe OSC showed very high Jsc value of over 16 mA cm−2, which presents one of the highest values among the P3HT-based OSCs. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra of the P3HT:CPDT–ICMe OSCs in Fig. 3b support the efficient light-harvesting in the broad wavelength ranges of 400–900 nm, resulting from the complementary light absorption of P3HT and CPDT–ICMe. In addition, we examined the charge transport characteristics of the P3HT:CPDT–ICMe OSCs by measuring the space-charge-limited current (SCLC) electron and hole mobilities (μe and μh, respectively). The P3HT:CPDT–ICMe devices showed a μe of 1.85 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1 and a μh of 8.45 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1, producing a good balance between the μe and μh values (Table S2). Thus, good charge transport and Jsc value of the OSCs are benefitted from the strongly crystalline, face-on oriented CPDT–ICMe with tight π–π stacking.
Next, the thermal stability of the P3HT:CPDT–ICMe OSC was compared with those of P3HT-based OSCs featuring different small-molecule acceptors, i.e., ZY-4Cl and phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PC61BM). ZY-4Cl and PC61BM were selected as the reference acceptors as they are the representative fused-type NFSMA (i.e., FRA) and fullerene acceptor, respectively, which produce high PCEs in the P3HT-based OSCs (Fig. 4a). In this study, the optimized PCEs of P3HT:ZY-4Cl and P3HT:PC61BM OSCs were obtained as 8.77 and 3.48%, which are consistent with the PCEs reported in previous studies (Table S3).
The photovoltaic performances of the P3HT:CPDT–ICMe, P3HT:ZY-4Cl and P3HT:PC61BM OSCs were measured with the blend films annealed at 120 °C in an N2-filled glove box for various intervals. The J–V curves and normalized PCEs depending on the annealing time for the P3HT:CPDT–ICMe, P3HT:ZY-4Cl and P3HT:PC61BM OSCs are shown in Fig. 4b and c. The corresponding photovoltaic parameters are presented in Table S3. The PCE of a P3HT:PC61BM-based OSC for 48 h annealing was dropped to only 16.9% of the initial PCE of a P3HT:PC61BM-based OSC; a significant deterioration in its Voc, Jsc, and FF was observed. This result is coincident with the previous literatures that report a rapid decrease in the PCE of a P3HT:PC61BM OSC under thermal stress owing to severe macroscale phase separation between the P3HT and PC61BM domains. In comparison, the PCE of P3HT:ZY-4Cl-based OSCs after 100 h annealing at 120 °C was decreased to 40% of the initial PCE. In stark contrast, the P3HT:CPDT–ICMe OSCs exhibit excellent thermal stability. The PCEs of the P3HT:CPDT–ICMe-based OSCs (i.e., 7.42%) were well maintained with 98.4% of the initial PCE even after 100 h annealing at 120 °C (Fig. 4c and Table S3). Thus, the P3HT:CPDT–ICMe-based OSC achieved the highest PCE among any P3HT-based OSCs subjected to thermal stress, i.e., long-term exposure to a temperature exceeding 85 °C.
To better understand the decreases in PCE of the OSCs caused by thermal stress, their charge recombination properties were investigated by measuring the light intensity (P)-dependent Jsc and Voc. The Jsc–P plots of P3HT:CPDT–ICMe and P3HT:ZY-4Cl OSCs in Fig. S5a and c, respectively, show the exponential relationship of Jsc ∼ Pα. The α of both the pristine and annealed P3HT:CPDT–ICMe-based OSCs are almost the same (0.801 and 0.816, respectively). The P3HT:ZY-4Cl OSCs also showed almost identical values (0.857–0.864) before and after annealing. This observation indicates that the bimolecular recombination in both OSCs is relatively unaffected by thermal stress. In contrast, the Voc–P plots of corresponding OSCs before and after annealing differ significantly (Fig. S5b and d). In a plot of VOCvs. ln(P), the slope S, which has the unit of kBT q−1, approaches to unity when trap-assisted or monomolecular recombination is negligible (kB = Boltzmann's constant, T = absolute temperature, and q = charge). The S value of the P3HT:CPDT–ICMe OSCs is nearly unchanged by thermal stress; the S values associated with OSCs featuring pristine and annealed blend films are 1.10 and 1.15 kBT q−1, respectively. In contrast, the S values of the P3HT:ZY-4Cl OSCs were remarkably increased from 1.52 to 5.02 kBT q−1 after 100 h of thermal annealing, indicating that accelerated monomolecular or trap-assisted recombination is responsible for the decreases of Jsc and FF values of P3HT:ZY-4Cl OSCs after thermal annealing.
To further understand the difference in the thermal stabilities of different P3HT-based OSC systems, we investigated the blend morphologies by measuring transmission electron microscopy (TEM), GIXS, and resonant soft X-ray scattering (RSoXS). All of the samples were prepared under the same conditions as the films employed in the corresponding OSCs. Fig. 5a and b present the TEM images of the P3HT:CPDT–ICMe and P3HT:ZY-4Cl blends before and after 100 h of thermal annealing. The morphology of the P3HT:CPDT–ICMe blend films showed almost no change after the annealing (Fig. 5a). In contrast, the morphology of the P3HT:ZY-4Cl film is significantly altered by 100 h of annealing; unlike the pristine blend film, the annealed blend film contains large agglomerates and segregated domains. These different trends of the morphology changes depending on the blend systems were also observed in the optical microscopy (OM) images and atomic force microscopy (AFM) images (Fig. S6 and S7). The OM images also show that the morphologies of P3HT:CPDT–ICMe films were almost unaffected by thermal stress. However, macroscopic changes were clearly observed in both P3HT:ZY-4Cl and P3HT:PC61BM blends after the thermal annealing (Fig. S6). We determined the root-mean-square roughness (Rq) from AFM height images to quantify how large the aggregated domains have evolved on the film surface (Fig. S7). The P3HT:CPDT–ICMe film showed almost no change of Rq (1.2 nm) under thermal stress. However, the Rq values of P3HT:ZY-4Cl and P3HT:PC61BM were significantly increased from 1.2–1.3 nm in the pristine states to 5.9 and 13.2 nm, respectively, after annealing at 120 °C for 100 h. These microscopic results suggest that morphology of the P3HT:CPDT–ICMe film is thermally stable, unlike those of the P3HT:ZY-4Cl and P3HT:PC61BM films.
Next, GIXS measurements were performed to investigate the effect of thermal stress on the crystalline structures of the P3HT:NFSMA blend films (Fig. 5c, d, S8, and Table S4). Before thermal annealing, P3HT:CPDT–ICMe and P3HT:ZY-4Cl films contain crystalline structures that adopt a preferential face-on orientation, which facilitate vertical charge transport between the electrodes of OSCs. Both P3HT:CPDT–ICMe and P3HT:ZY-4Cl films exhibited distinct (010) peaks in the OOP direction, and (h00) peaks in both IP and OOP directions (Fig. 5c and d). The GIXS line-cut profiles of annealed P3HT:CPDT–ICMe film were not changed, indicating that the crystalline structures of the materials were not affected by thermal annealing. In contrast, the P3HT:ZY-4Cl film experienced significant changes of the packing structures after 100 h annealing. For example, the (010) peak in the OOP GIXS line-cut profile of the blend film was separated into two distinct peaks with d-spacings of 3.81 and 3.53 Å after annealing. These two peaks corresponded to P3HT and ZY-4Cl, respectively (Fig. 5d, S4 and Table S4), indicating the presence of the independent crystallite domains of P3HT and ZY-4Cl. In addition, several isotropic peaks (q range between 0.2–0.7 Å−1) were observed in the GIXS line-cut profiles of the annealed P3HT:ZY-4Cl film. These features suggest that the P3HT:ZY-4Cl blend became strongly phase-separated between the P3HT and ZY-4Cl domains with high domain purity driven by thermal annealing. In contrast, the crystal structures and blend morphology in the P3HT:CPDT–ICMe films were thermally stable.
The morphological changes in the blend films caused by thermal stress were further investigated by RSoXS. The beam energy of 284.2 eV was selected to maximize the material contrast between PD and NFSMA (Fig. 6). The domain spacing and relative domain purities (proportional to the square root of integrated scattering intensities) of each blend film were estimated (Table S5). Before thermal annealing, the P3HT:CPDT–ICMe blends showed a broad, weak peak with a domain spacing of 69.8 nm (q = 0.009 Å−1) and the P3HT:ZY-4Cl did not show any distinct scattering peaks. After annealing, the P3HT:CPDT–ICMe blend showed almost no changes in the scattering patterns. In contrast, the P3HT:ZY-4Cl blend after the annealing showed a significantly intensified scattering peak with a domain spacing of 209.4 nm (q = 0.003 Å−1). The large area of the peak indicates the presence of P3HT and ZY-4Cl domains with a high domain purity. This suggests that the phase-separated and pure domains evolved after the thermal annealing in the P3HT:ZY-4Cl blend, supporting the observations from the TEM and GIXS measurements. Since excessively phase-separated domains of P3HT and NFSMA in the blend deteriorate charge generation and recombination characteristics, the morphological analyses support the different thermal stabilities of the OSC performances depending on the acceptor materials.
To elucidate the origins of the different thermal stabilities of the P3HT:NFSMA, Tg values of the NFSMA materials were measured and analyzed. Recently, Qin et al. reported the assignment of Tg, which presents an important transition in the physical states of polymers, into disordered, amorphous domains of the SMAs in the solution-processed films. They associated the Tgs of NFSMAs with their Tccs, at which amorphous parts of NFSMAs start to be reorganized or crystallized. We also observed that CPDT–ICMe NFSMAs exhibited a clear Tcc peak in DSC thermograms (Fig. S9). To estimate the Tgs of CPDT–ICMe and ZY-4Cl in the thin-film states, we used the temperature-dependent UV-vis absorption spectroscopy by following the procedure reported by Lipomi et al. This technique is very useful for determining the Tgs of semi-crystalline materials in thin-film states that shows distinct light absorption behavior depending on temperatures. As shown in Fig. 7a and c, the UV-vis absorption spectra of NFSMA films change with increasing temperature, owing to the rearrangement of amorphous domains and the formation of aggregates in semi-crystalline domains near their Tg. For quantitative analysis, we used a deviation metric (DMT) calculated as the mean-squared deviation in the absorbance between annealed temperature and room temperature (R.T.). The Tg is estimated as the temperature at which the slope of the DMT–temperature curve rapidly increases producing a clear discontinuity. The detailed calculation procedures are described in the ESI, and the estimated Tg are shown in Fig. 7b and d. For example, the UV-vis spectra of the CPDT–ICMe thin film underwent red-shift and exhibit enhanced vibronic peaks at ∼800 nm when the temperature exceeds 130 °C; the slope of the DMT–temperature curve shows a corresponding change representing the Tg. As a result, the CPDT–ICMe showed a higher estimated Tg of 126.0 °C than that of ZY-4Cl (102.0 °C). Furthermore, the Tg of CPDT–ICMe is also higher than those of other representative NFSMAs in P3HT-based OSCs such as EH-IDTBR (112.9 °C) that was measured as shown in Fig. S10. Thus, relatively higher Tg of the CPDT–ICMe can afford kinetically locked P3HT:CPDT–ICMe blend morphology at 120 °C. Meanwhile, ZY-4Cl being mobile states at 120 °C induced aggregation and macro-phase separation, accounting for the deterioration of the photovoltaic performance of a corresponding OSC under thermal stress (120 °C). It is noted that while the Tg of P3HT:NFSMA film should be correlated with the measured Tg of pristine NFSMA film, the actual Tg of NFSMA in the blend film can be varied upon mixing with P3HT having a lower Tg (i.e. 20 °C). In conclusion, these results suggest that the kinetically locked morphologies of P3HT:CPDT–ICMe films are mainly attributed to the high Tg of CPDT–ICMe, leading to superior thermal stability (Fig. 7e).

In summary, we demonstrated efficient and thermally stable P3HT-OSCs by the design of new CPDT–ICMe with desirable light absorption and high crystalline properties as well as high Tg. CPDT–ICMe exhibited extended UV-vis absorption ranges until 900 nm due to strong non-covalent S⋯O interaction and the resulting planar structures, leading to strong, complementary absorption with P3HT. Furthermore, CPDT–ICMe films had well-ordered face-on oriented crystalline structures with tight π–π stacking, affording high SCLC electron mobility. These beneficial optical and structural properties of CPDT–ICMe enabled high-performance P3HT:CPDT–ICMe OSCs with a PCE of 8.17%. Importantly, P3HT:CPDT–ICMe device exhibits superior thermal stability retaining 98.4% of its initial average PCE even after 100 h at 120 °C. This is mainly attributed to the high Tg (126.0 °C) of CPDT–ICMe, which affords blend films with kinetically locked morphologies even at the elevated temperatures. Our work provides important design guidelines of NFSMAs for achieving efficient and thermally stable P3HT-based OSCs.


Details of experimental procedures including material synthesis, device fabrication/characterizations and additional characterization data can be found in the ESI.



P3HT (Mw = 18 kg mol−1; dispersity = 1.3; regioregularity = 88–89%) and CPDT unit were purchased from Rieke Metals and Solarmer, respectively. The intermediate chemicals and solvents were purchased from TCI and Sigma Aldrich. CPDT–CHO was prepared by following the method in the previous report.


Dry two-neck flask (100 mL) was charged with CPDT–CHO (2.00 g, 1.67 mmol) and ICMe (2.09 g, 10.03 mmol). Then, the flask was purged, followed by pouring chloroform (20 mL) into the mixture. Pyridine (0.5 mL) was injected slowly and the reaction mixture was stirred overnight at 45 °C. After cooling down to room temperature, residual solvents were evaporated. The crude materials were purified by column chromatography with hexane and dichloromethane (DCM) eluents. Finally, recrystallization of collected fraction with DCM and ethanol afforded a purple solid (2.42 g, yield = 92%).


1H NMR (CDCl3, 300 MHz): δH 8.88 (s, 2H), 8.54 (d, J = 8.2 Hz, 0.87H), 8.45 (s, 1.13H), 7.78 (d, J = 7.6 Hz, 1.13H), 7.66 (s, 0.87H), 7.61 (s, 1.30H), 7.52–7.45 (m, 4.70H), 7.27 (s, 2H), 4.07 (d, J = 5.2 Hz, 4H), 2.52 (s, 6H), 2.09–1.91 (m, 10H), 1.72–1.56 (m, 8H), 1.42 (s, 8H), 1.06–0.93 (m, 42H), 0.81–0.70 (m, 18H), 0.67–0.61 (m, 12H)

There are no conflicts of interest to declare.


This research was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF-2020M3D1A2102869 and 2020M3H4A1A02084906) and Grant (No. 1425144083) from the Ministry of SMEs and Startups of the Korean Government. This research is additionally performed as a cooperation project of “Basic project”, supported by the Korea Research Institute of Chemical Technology (KRICT). This study utilized resources of Advanced Light Source, which is a Department of Energy Office of Science User Facility under Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Material characterizations, detailed device fabrication conditions, measurement of glass transition temperatures, and morphological characterization data are contained in the ESI. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ta09392d
‡ D. H. and Y. H. contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022