 DOI: 10.1039/C6TA08175D
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1005-1013


Sadok
Ben Dkhil
,

Martin
Pfannmöller
,

Ibrahim
Ata
,

David
Duché
,

Meriem
Gaceur
,

Tomoyuki
Koganezawa
,

Noriyuki
Yoshimoto
,

Jean-Jacques
Simon
,

Ludovic
Escoubas
,

Christine
Videlot-Ackermann
,

Olivier
Margeat
,

Sara
Bals
*,

Peter
Bäuerle
* and 

Jörg
Ackermann
*

Aix Marseille Université, CNRS UMR 7325, CINaM, Marseille, France. E-mail: ackermann@cinam.univ-mrs.fr

Electron Microscopy for Materials Research (EMAT), University of Antwerp, Groenenborgerlaan 171, 2020 Antwerp, Belgium. E-mail: sara.bals@uantwerpen.be

University of Ulm, Institute of Organic Chemistry II and Advanced Materials, Albert-Einstein-Allee 11, 89081 Ulm, Germany. E-mail: peter.baeuerle@uni-ulm.de

Aix Marseille Univ, Univ Toulon, CNRS, IM2NP, Marseille, France

Industrial Application Division, Japan Synchrotron Radiation Research Institute (JASRI), Sayo, Hyogo 679-5198, Japan

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Iwate University, Ueda Morioka 020 8551, Japan

Received
20th September 2016
, Accepted 28th November 2016
First published on 30th November 2016
Solvent vapor annealing (SVA) is one of the main techniques to improve the morphology of bulk heterojunction solar cells using oligomeric donors. In this report, we study time evolution of nanoscale morphological changes in bulk heterojunctions based on a well-studied dithienopyrrole-based A–D–A oligothiophene (dithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]pyrrole named here 1) blended with [6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM) to increase photocurrent density by combining scanning transmission electron microscopy and low-energy-loss spectroscopy. Our results show that SVA transforms the morphology of 1:PC71BM blends by a three-stage mechanism: highly intermixed phases evolve into nanostructured bilayers that correspond to an optimal blend morphology. Additional SVA leads to completely phase-separated micrometer-sized domains. Optical spacers were used to increase light absorption inside optimized 1:PC71BM blends leading to solar cells of 7.74% efficiency but a moderate photocurrent density of 12.3 mA cm−2. Quantum efficiency analyses reveal that photocurrent density is mainly limited by losses inside the donor phase. Indeed, optimized 1:PC71BM blends consist of large donor-enriched domains not optimal for exciton to photocurrent conversion. Shorter SVA times lead to smaller domains; however they are embedded in large mixed phases suggesting that introduction of stronger molecular packing may help us to better balance phase separation and domain size enabling more efficient bulk heterojunction solar cells.

Solution-processed organic solar cells using conjugated oligomers, also referred to as “small molecules” (SMs), as donors have attracted high attention over the last few years due to a strong increase in power conversion efficiency to over 10% thanks to intense research in synthesis of new donors as well as in processing techniques. Several characteristics make SM donors outstanding compared to polymers. Generally, SMs can be produced with higher purity leading to less variation in quality between different batches. Due to their high monodispersity, energy distribution of defect states inside the band gap, so-called tail states, can be reduced compared to polymeric donors. Furthermore, SM-based organic solar cells (SMOSCs) generate usually higher open circuit voltages (Voc) and fill factors (FF) than devices using polymer–fullerene blends. Very recently, it was shown that such high-efficiency SMOSCs can be produced with active layer thicknesses of several hundreds of nanometer enabling SMs to be very promising candidates for large-scale and robust solar cell processing. This excellent evolution in efficiency and processing conditions of solution-processed SMOSCs was enabled by intense research in synthesis of novel SMs and enhanced morphological control of the photoactive layer. Indeed, the photoactive layer of high-efficiency SMOSCs uses a bulk heterojunction (BHJ) that generally consists of a bicontinuous interpenetrating network of nanosized donor- and acceptor-enriched domains as well as mixed disordered phases. The latter is addressed to a partial miscibility of both the donor and acceptor. Amongst techniques to improve the nanoscale morphology of BHJs, solvent vapor annealing (SVA) is nowadays one of the main techniques to enhance power conversion efficiencies of solar cells leading to efficiencies of more than 10%. During SVA, the FF and short-circuit current generally increase significantly, while the Voc is only slightly improved. Amongst SM donors, the acceptor–donor–acceptor (A–D–A) structured oligothiophene, referred here as 1 (see Fig. 1 for the molecular structure), showed strong performance improvement under SVA. Indeed, SVA leads to an increase in performance by a factor of five compared to untreated blend layers by inducing a higher degree of order and crystallinity inside the blend. Systematic investigations of the impact of SVA on blend morphology and device performance have been performed. It was found that SVA generally increases the crystallinity of the donor phase and improves the phase separation inside the blend. More recently, Brabec et al. investigated the time evolution of the nanoscale morphology under SVA using X-ray diffraction (XRD), Grazing-Incidence Wide-Angle X-ray Scattering (GIWAXS), and Resonant Soft X-ray Scattering (RSoXS) to clarify fundamental mechanisms behind SVA. A two-stage mechanism was identified in which donor crystallinity is initially improved with longer SVA time, along with enhanced domain purity, thus resulting in better charge transport properties and reduced recombination losses. Further extension of the SVA time was found to generate larger donor domains at a length scale of hundreds of nanometer depleting the donor component in the mixed domain phase. Additionally, Wessendorf et al. could show that a vertical phase separation occurs with diffusion of fullerenes to the top of the film. Thanks to these detailed studies, an improved picture of SVA-induced modification of the nanoscale morphology was obtained, but there are still important open questions. Indeed, the morphological understanding was obtained by indirect techniques such as XRD, GIWAXS, and RSoXS; however, a direct visualization of the nanoscale structure of the donor:acceptor blend in terms of domain size, shape, and purity as well as study of the mixed amorphous phases that are not detectable by diffraction techniques would allow us to complete the understanding of the SVA mechanism. This would help us to identify materials and processing parameters to further boost efficiency of SM devices. Furthermore, regarding the performance of the 1-based devices, main work including time evolution studies of the nanoscale morphology was performed on 1-blends using [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PC61BM) as the acceptor. The stronger absorption of the bigger fullerene derivative [6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM) in the visible enables PC71BM to be a promising acceptor to further increase photocurrent densities. The first results using 1:PC71BM as the active layer led to a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 7.1%, mainly due to the increase of photocurrent density (Jsc) to 12 mA cm−2 by using identical process parameters (such as the blend ratio and SVA time) to those for optimized 1:PC61BM-based solar cells. Further optimization with PC71BM is expected to enable further improvements.

In this report, we focus on a detailed study of time evolution of 1:PC71BM blends under SVA. Besides standard analysis techniques such as atomic force microscopy (AFM) and XRD, we apply for the first time spectroscopic imaging using a combination of scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM-SI) and low-energy-loss spectroscopy to visualize time evolution of nanoscale morphological changes of 1:PC71BM blends as a function of SVA time. Indeed, STEM-SI is a powerful technique that allows not only distinguishing between donor and acceptor-enriched domains, but can also analyse mixed amorphous phases. We first optimize the device structure and process parameters of the 1:PC71BM-based solar cells. While photovoltaic parameters of 1:PC71BM-based solar cells as a function of different donor:acceptor ratios, active layer thicknesses, and SVA times were studied in detail, we additionally applied normal device structures with optical spacers based on ZnO to optimize light absorption inside the photoactive layer. Indeed, in normal device structures as used in this report, optical spacers placed between the active layer and the cathode allow for improving spatial distribution of light inside the multilayer stack of the solar cell and thus optimizing the absorption in the photoactive layer. As shown recently, ZnO-based optical spacers can also lead to strong improvement in device performance when used as an electron extraction layer simultaneously. The use of optical spacers in combination with optical simulation of light distribution inside the solar cells allows us to optimize light absorption inside the 1:PC71BM blend by exclusion of optical losses. These studies led to solar cells with the highest conversion efficiency of 7.74% accompanied by high Voc and FF for an optimal SVA time of 30 s, while the as-casted blends led to solar cells with efficiencies of only 1.36%. Importantly, optimization of the blend morphology and light absorption via ZnO spacers generated a moderate Jsc of 12.74 mA cm−2 taking into account that absorption inside the active layers was optimized leading to 93% at the maximum of total absorption (see Fig. 2b). Analyses of internal quantum efficiency (IQE) of these devices revealed that photocurrent generation in donor domains with values below 65% is lower than that of the fullerene domains with values up to 73% indicating that photocurrent density is mainly limited by losses inside the donor phase. STEM-SI analyses combined with AFM and absorption spectroscopy revealed that 1-blends follow a three-stage mechanism in the morphological evolution during SVA processing: highly intermixed phases evolve into nanostructured bilayers followed by the formation of completely phase-separated micrometer-sized domains. Optimized 1-based solar cells using 30 s SVA treatment consist of nanostructured bilayers of donor and fullerene-enriched domains that are beneficial for charge extraction leading to high fill factors of 72%. However, the donor domains are much larger in size than the typical exciton diffusion lengths being at the origin of low IQE values. In contrast, very short SVA treatments of only 10 s led to blends with smaller and thus more suitable domain shapes and sizes for high photocurrent generation. However, those nanoscale morphologies generated devices with a low FF due to the lack of interconnections between donor domains as well as strong recombination due to a large amount of mixed phases.

The device architecture used to optimize the performance of 1:PC71BM blends is shown in Fig. 1b. Ligand-modified ZnO nanoparticles in isopropanol were spin-coated onto the photoactive layer to form highly uniform densely packed optical spacer layers.Fig. 1c depicts a schematic representation of the SVA process with a controlled duration (SVA time). Since the solar cell performance critically depends on the ratio between the donor and acceptor (D:A), we first focused on the impact of the ratio between 1 and PC71BM in blends. For each ratio, the SVA time was varied between 0 and 300 s to control and improve the nanoscale morphology of the blend with respect to device performance. The optimal D:A-ratio, by keeping both thicknesses of the active layer and of the ZnO layer constant, was in this way determined. The corresponding results are shown in Fig. S1 and S2 and summarized in Tables S1 and 1. As it can be seen, the 1:2-ratio provides the highest photocurrent density (12.74 mA cm−2), fill factor (72%), and open circuit voltage (858 mV). Interestingly, we found that for all blend ratios the highest power conversion efficiency was observed for a SVA time of 30 s indicating that the kinetics of SVA-induced changes in the blend morphology are independent of the D:A ratio. Importantly, this ratio 1:2 is identical to the optimal ratio determined for PC61BM used as the acceptor. In a second step and as other parameters also play a significant role, we optimized simultaneously the 1:PC71BM blend thickness and the thickness of the ZnO optical spacer to guarantee optimal light absorption inside the active layer based on the ratio 1:2 and exposed to a SVA time of 30 s. The corresponding results of the device optimization are shown in Fig. S3 and S4 and summarized in Tables S2 and S3. This optimization leads to device structures processed with 20 nm of ZnO optical spacer and 75 nm of 1:PC71BM active layer. Fig. 2 brings together all the performances (J–V curves, absorption, external quantum efficiency (EQE) and IQE) of optimized solar cells using a ratio of 1:2 for 1:PC71BM with an active layer of 75 nm and a ZnO layer of 20 nm. The direct impact of SVA is shown by measuring data before and after a 30 s SVA time.

Ratio 1:2
SVA duration
PCE (%)

V
oc (mV)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
Average PCE (±std dev.)
0 s
1.36
761
5.59
32
1.23 ± 0.10
10 s
5.03
835
11.1
54
4.76 ± 0.24
30 s
7.74
844
12.7
72
7.57 ± 0.13
60 s
3.42
858
6.61
60
3.21 ± 0.18
120 s
1.77
831
4.52
47
1.28 ± 0.45
This optimization leads to device structures enabling a power conversion efficiency of 7.74% (best cell) and an average efficiency of 7.57% as indicated in Table 1. Compared to the work of Wessendorf et al.Voc could be improved to 844 mV, while the FF in both device structures was as high as 71–72% indicating highly efficient charge extraction. Furthermore, photocurrent density under such optimized conditions could be increased, reaching the highest value of 12.74 mA cm−2. In order to verify that light absorption inside the photoactive layer was optimal for the experimentally determined parameters, we performed optical characterization via ellipsometry combined with optical simulation to calculate light absorption inside the active layer as a function of the blend layer thickness for different optical spacer thicknesses. The resulting measurements shown in Fig. S5 revealed that the optimal 1:PC71BM active layer thickness for our device configuration corresponds indeed to 75 nm active layer when using a 20 nm optical spacer. This result indeed fits to the experimentally obtained values for these layers confirming that light absorption inside the active layer was effectively optimized. Fig. 2b shows the light absorption inside the solar cells before and after SVA which was determined by measuring the reflection of the complete device. It can be seen that SVA strongly improves the light absorption inside the solar cells. At the absorption maximum of the 1:PC71BM blend, light absorption increases from 78 to 93% indicating that the increase in photocurrent density observed after SVA is related, at least partly, to the increase in light absorption inside the solar cell and not only to structural and morphological changes inside the blend. More importantly, light absorption inside the solar cell is close to optimum and thus much higher photocurrent densities are potentially accessible in these SM devices. In the following, we therefore focus on the understanding of limiting factors to reach higher photocurrent densities. EQE spectra of the optimized device before and after SVA are shown in Fig. 2c and the calculated IQE values are shown in Fig. 2d. The EQE values of SVA-treated devices were strongly improved reaching values of more than 60% at the two maxima corresponding to the absorptions of fullerenes and 1. The maximum of the IQE spectrum for the SVA-treated cell is 73% and the average IQE is 65%. Importantly, the maximum of the IQE spectrum is not in the wavelength region that corresponds to the absorption of 1, but rather corresponds to the absorption maximum of the fullerene acceptor. Taking into account that light absorption is higher in the 1 phase as shown in Fig. 2b, these results strongly suggest that the limitation of photocurrent generation originates from the 1 phase.
In order to obtain a deeper understanding of the correlation between photocurrent generation and morphological arrangement inside the 1:PC71BM blends, we carried out studies on optical properties and morphology of the photoactive layer as a function of SVA exposure time. Absorption spectra of layers were recorded as a function of SVA time up to 300 s with identical SVA time intervals to those used for solar cell optimization. Fig. 3 shows the time evolution of the absorption spectra of a pure 1 thin film and a 1:PC71BM (ratio 1:2) blend as a function of SVA time. A pure 1 layer was investigated as the reference to measure the impact of SVA on the molecular organization in the absence of fullerenes showing a mostly invariable absorption spectrum with a broad band from 500 to 800 nm including two maxima at 645 and 700 nm (Fig. 3a). As demonstrated recently, this band is strongly red-shifted compared to the absorption of 1 in solution and can be assigned to planarization, order or aggregation of the molecules in the bulk. With respect to the maxima observed in Fig. 3a, such features are indicative of a significant tendency of 1 molecules to strong intermolecular interactions in the solid state. Upon SVA, the absorption of 1 is enhanced in the visible range implying a continuous morphological rearrangement as a function of time. By mixing 1 molecules with fullerenes, the absorption spectra of 1:PC71BM blends highlight the strong changes in the absorption range of the donor molecules. Fig. 3b and S6 show the absorption spectral evolution of 1:PC71BM blends with different mass ratios of 1:1, 1:2, and 1:3. The incorporation of fullerenes into 1-layers produces additional light absorption in the range of 350 to 600 nm with two distinctive peaks at 350 and 450 nm, respectively. Depending on the ratio, the intensity of the two absorption ranges is associated either with the acceptor (350–600 nm) or with the donor (500–800 nm). The ratio of 1:3 showed a higher absorption due to fullerenes compared to 1 while the opposite tendency is observed for the ratio of 1:1. Upon SVA, the optimal ratio of 1:2 for solar conversion showed absorption across nearly the entire absorption range from 350 to 800 nm with an equivalent contribution of both fullerene and 1 donor molecules. This result provides a rectangular shape to the absorption spectra which is found in the corresponding IQE and EQE spectra in Fig. 2c and d, respectively. Regarding the time dependence of SVA on absorption spectra in Fig. 3b, this treatment leads to strong changes in the UV-visible absorption range of 1. Without SVA, the spectrum has only peaks in the region where the fullerene absorbs as previously observed. At higher wavelengths in the 1 absorption range, the spectrum is relatively featureless. Upon SVA, the absorption of 1 was strongly enhanced and exhibited more pronounced spectral features as a function of time. This effect is even more pronounced as the amount of fullerene increased. This implies that the fullerenes interact with 1 inside the blend in a way that spontaneously intermolecular interaction between the donor molecules is strongly disturbed.
Interestingly, the absorption changes in the blend induced by the addition of PC71BM were found to be more pronounced than those observed for 1-blends using PC61BM as the acceptor. In the case of the smaller fullerene derivative, only a small blue-shift was observed in the absorption spectra of blends compared to the pure 1-layers. Furthermore, oligomers of similar A–D–A structures to 1, but with different central building blocks blended with PC61BM, showed absorption changes identical to those observed here for 1:PC71BM blends. Thus, the strength of interaction between fullerenes and oligomeric donors depends on the molecular structure of both the donor and acceptor, and is not fullerene specific.
We can however conclude that in all cases a perturbation of intermolecular interaction in the oligomer phase is induced by the addition of fullerenes. This goes in line with our observations that an increase in fullerene concentration inside the blend leads to stronger perturbation of the donor absorption (Fig. S6). Applying SVA to 1:PC71BM blends of different mass ratios leads to a recovery of the broad absorption band of 1 together with the two features at 645 and 700 nm. Importantly, an appropriate SVA time of only 30 s is necessary to recover a degree of intermolecular interaction and thus molecular order in the blends.
Investigations of the surface topography of the active layer as a function of SVA time were performed by atomic force microscopy (AFM) operating in tapping mode. Fig. 4 depicts images before SVA treatment, in which a rather smooth blend surface with a root-mean-square roughness (Rrms) of only 0.39 nm is observed. After 10 s of SVA, the active layer exhibited a coarser surface and a slight increase in Rrms to 0.53 nm. In the case of 30 s SVA, which corresponds to the optimal SVA treatment time in solar cell devices, a well nanostructured surface showing mainly spherical phases was observed with a further increased Rrms of 0.96 nm. Longer SVA times further increased the size of the domains as well as surface roughness indicating a well-defined phase separation taking place under SVA conditions.
To develop a deeper understanding of the donor crystallinity in the presence of PC71BM, two-dimensional grazing incidence X-ray diffraction (2D-GIXD) measurements were performed on 1:PC71BM-blends with the optimal mass ratio of 1:2 before and after 30 s SVA and compared to pure 1 layers (Fig. S7). For these pure 1 layers, the patterns showed clear out-of-plane diffraction peaks (100), (200), and (300) corresponding to a lamellar stacking of donor molecules and an in-plane π–π stacking diffraction peak. This implies that 1 molecules preferentially adopt an edge-on orientation. Profiles along the (100) peak before and after the 30 s SVA treatment (Fig. S7b) showed the enhancement of the (100) peak intensity implying an increased crystallinity of 1 upon SVA. By adding PC71BM, a broad unoriented halo corresponding to the fullerene component appears in the patterns. Nevertheless, by the observation of the same characteristics assigned to 1, the blending with PC71BM does not dramatically change the orientation or spacing of the lamellae. Similarly and as observed previously, the crystallinity of donor molecules blended with fullerenes increased by applying a short SVA time. Such observations are consistent with the red-shift and more pronounced features observed in UV-visible absorption spectra in Fig. 3b.
While AFM images provide views of the surface topography of the active layer and XRD measurements give information about formation of pure crystalline phases, another technique that allows analysing donor and acceptor-enriched domain size and shape but also mixed amorphous phases is required. To get a deeper insight into the time evolution of the nanoscale morphology during SVA and to better understand SVA kinetics inside the blend layer, we applied state-of-the-art nanoscale imaging STEM-SI to 1:PC71BM blends with the optimal ratio of 1:2 exposed to different SVA times. STEM-SI combined with low-energy-loss spectroscopy has been proven to be a reliable technique in order to distinguish between donor and acceptor phases with the high spatial resolution of the electron microscope. Nanoscale visualization of material domains in organic blends has been made possible by such spatially resolved analyses. In the present energy range, optical excitations are found including plasmon excitations that are distinct between fullerenes and other conjugated molecules. A straightforward but effective way of visualizing spatial differences includes fitting of the peaks by Lorentzian functions yielding the so-called plasmon peak maps. Such a plasmon peak map of a pure 1 layer is shown in Fig. S8 indicating that pure 1 phases have plasmon energies that correspond to dark green in the color map. Furthermore it can be seen that there are no changes in the plasmon peak induced by SVA in 1-based thin films. The plasmon peak map of the as-casted blend (0 s SVA) is shown in Fig. 5a. The yellow phase corresponds to intimately mixed phases of 1 and PC71BM with a high concentration of both materials, while red and green are assigned to fullerene and 1-enriched phases, respectively. Thus, as-casted 1:PC71BM blends consist of a large amount of mixed phases of the donor and acceptor lacking any phase separation on the scale of several nanometers or higher. Only very small 1 and PC71BM aggregates are observed as green and red pixels. The morphology is in-line with the results of the optical analysis of the as-casted 1:PC71BM blends, for which long-range organisation and 1 intermolecular interactions were strongly disturbed by the addition of the fullerene. These results explain the very low FF and low Jsc observed for solar cells based on the as-casted blends since the device performance is controlled by strong geminate and non-geminate charge carrier recombination as already shown before for PC61BM. The plasmon peak map of blends after 10 s SVA revealed that the kinetics of SVA-induced changes of the blended nano- and microstructures are very fast (Fig. 5a). Only 10 s of SVA led to the formation of clearly distinctive 1-enriched domains of spherical but also elongated domains (diameter 10–40 nm) that are embedded in a homogeneously distributed fullerene-enriched phase. We further see that already after 10 s, there is a strong reduction in highly mixed phases indicating that fullerene and 1 reorganise very fast into a phase-separated nanostructure. However, the domain purity of both donor and acceptor phases is still low as it can be estimated from the color maps corresponding to plasmon peaks of each single material, i.e., dark red and dark green spots correspond to pure acceptor and donor phases, respectively. Along with the lack of connectivity between the donor phases, this induces pronounced geminate and non-geminate charge carrier recombination, which is in accordance with the low FF of 54% of the corresponding device. After an exposure time of 30 s, as shown in Fig. 5a, the SVA treatment transforms the blend into a nanostructured layer of well-defined, enlarged donor and acceptor phases, where fullerene-enriched domains surround the 1-enriched domains. Domain purity was strongly improved as indicated by the plasmon peak values close to those of the pure donor and acceptor, respectively. The generation of large 1-enriched domains corresponds to the increase of the broad absorption from 500 to 800 nm in the absorption spectra as well as to the appearance of the two maxima at 645 and 700 nm due to improved intermolecular interactions. Both effects directly impact the transport of excitons and holes inside the 1-enriched phase. The excellent FF of 72% obtained under these processing conditions indicates optimized blend morphology ensuring efficient charge carrier extraction thus minimizing bimolecular recombination losses.
Furthermore, we performed STEM-SI analyses on device cross-sections in order to visualize vertical phase separation inside the blend as a function of SVA time. In Fig. 5b (left), we present a conventional dark field image of a device cross-section, in which only the ZnO optical spacer layer is clearly distinguished, while the blend phase is uniform without contrast. The STEM-SI plasmon peak map of the same section provides a clear picture of the impact of SVA on the vertical phase separation inside the active layer. Indeed, after 30 s SVA, as evidenced by Fig. 5b (center), the 1:PC71BM blend is transformed into a nanostructured bilayer rather than into a bulk heterojunction. A fullerene layer accumulated at the top towards the ZnO interface as indicated by a dominant red color corresponding to the acceptor phase is visible, while 1-enriched regions are located near the bottom PEDOT:PSS layer. The diffusion of fullerene towards the surface is in contrast to the observation made for polymer blends, in which fullerene diffusion is typically found towards PEDOT:PSS at the bottom of the layers. Here, SVA leads to phase segregation into a nanostructured bilayer structure which is beneficial for very efficient charge carrier extraction towards the electrodes. Furthermore it contributes positively to the strong improvement of the fill factor towards 72% as both interfaces are constituted of pure material optimizing charge extraction and reduction of recombination simultaneously.
From Fig. 5a (30 s) and the corresponding cross-section 5b (centre), we can see that there is still a pronounced amount of mixed domains present after 30 s of SVA. Such mixed phases together with domain purity were found to have significant importance in photovoltaic performance of SM solar cells.
We further studied blend layers that were exposed to SVA extended times from 60 s to 300 s. As can be seen in Fig. 5a (60 s), SVA leads to the formation of a donor network, in which domain purity is increased as indicated by the dark green colour of the domains. Taking into account the plasmon peak value, which is very close to pure 1, it seems reasonable to conclude that single 1 domains span over the whole film thickness. Fig. 5a (300 s SVA) and 5b (right) show lateral and cross-sectional views of the blend after 300 s SVA, respectively, proving that longer SVA exposure times induce complete phase separation. Micrometer-sized domains of each material are formed that span the whole layer thickness. This is in accordance with a strong loss in the overall performance of the solar cells as the 1:fullerene interface is strongly reduced or even absent in some areas.
Based on this STEM-SI analysis, we propose a three-stage mechanism of time evolution of 1:PC71BM blends during SVA treatment. Before SVA treatment, 1:PC71BM blends consist to a large extent of mixed phases lacking any phase separation on the scale of several nanometers or higher leading to strong losses in Jsc and FF. Short SVA treatments from 10 to 30 s rapidly transform the blend into a nanostructured bi-layer of the donor and fullerene phases of high domain purity and improved crystallinity in the 1 domains. At this stage, there is still the presence of a large amount of mixed phases at their interface to observe. Further increase in the SVA time up to several minutes yields fully phase separated microstructured films, in which a single donor and fullerene crystals span over the whole layer thickness. Our model is consistent with recent analysis of 1:PC61BM blends.
After our detailed analysis, we discuss possible strategies to further improve the performance of oligomeric based solar cells. It has been demonstrated in the literature that SVA can affect oligomeric donor aggregation as well as the fullerene acceptor (PC61BM) aggregation and therefore influence the scale of phase separation between the donor and acceptor. Because casted 1:PC61BM blends are highly perturbed layers almost uniquely consisting of mixed phases, while SVA after only minutes generates fully phase separated layers, we therefore suppose that both 1 and PC71BM diffuse here during SVA in order to produce suitable phase separation. It also seems likely that strongly intermixed donor:fullerene layers are a good starting point to generate well-ordered highly efficient bulk heterojunctions during SVA. Indeed, a common feature of A–D–A-based molecules studied before in detail leading to high efficiency solar cells is that there is strong distortion of the oligomer packing when blended with fullerene. The intermixing of fullerene can be controlled by suitable distances between the alkyl chains as larger alkyl chain distances as in the case of 1 inhibit the intermixing of fullerenes. To reach smaller domains of high purity, one possibility may be to introduce additional molecular packing at the central molecule unit by keeping alkyl chain distances low to provide strong driving forces for phase separation. Another important parameter to gain precise control of the nanoscale morphology via SVA is the speed of molecules and fullerene diffusion inside the blend that needs to be slowed down in order to stop the re-organization of the as-casted layer at the right morphology. This may demand for larger donor molecules so that only fullerene diffusion is dominant.

To conclude, we have performed time-dependent evolution studies of the micro- and nanoscale morphology of 1:PC71BM blends during solvent vapor annealing. These analyses were completed by optimization of light absorption inside the bulk heterojunction using ZnO-based optical spacers and optical simulation of optimized blend nanoscale morphologies via SVA treatment. Our results demonstrated that 1:PC71BM blends follow a three-stage mechanism in the morphological evolution during SVA processing. The as-casted layers consist of highly intermixed phases that evolve very fast into nanostructured bilayers during SVA followed by the formation of completely phase separated micrometer sized domains. High efficiency solar cells of 7.74% efficiency are obtained with nanostructured bilayers constituted of donor-enriched domains as well as a pronounced amount of mixed phases. While the phase separation into a bilayer is beneficial to increase the fill factor to 72%, photocurrent density reaches only moderate values of 12.3 mA cm−2 despite light absorption of 93% inside the blend. This can be attributed to the presence of large donor domains in the optimized 1 blends that exceed typically the exciton diffusion length. For very short SVA treatment, phase-separated nanostructures with more suitable donor domain sizes are produced, but low domain purity of both donor and acceptor phases together with poor connectivity between the donor phases induces pronounced charge carrier recombination. To further improve power conversion efficiency of A–D–A oligothiophene solar cells, it is therefore essential to better balance domain size, purity, and phase separation by simultaneously slowing down donor and acceptor diffusion during SVA. This may be accessible by delicate chemical engineering of the donor structure through introduction of stronger molecular packing and thus stronger driving forces for phase separation.


We acknowledge financial support by the French Fond Unique Interministériel (FUI) under the project “SFUMATO” (Grant number: F1110019V/201308815) as well as by the European Commission under the Project “SUNFLOWER” (FP7-ICT-2011-7, Grant number: 287594). The synchrotron radiation experiments were performed at BL19B2 in SPring-8 with the approval of Japan Synchrotron Radiation Research Institute (JASRI) (Proposal No. 2016A1568). We further acknowledge financial support via ERC Starting Grant Colouratoms (335078).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta08175d
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017