 DOI: 10.1039/C9SE00963A
(Paper)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4, 878-883


Pengfei
Wu
,

Xiaotong
Ma
,

Baohua
Zhao
,

Chengben
Liu
,

Yanli
Chen
,

Guangwu
Yang
* and 

Xiyou
Li
*

School of Materials Science and Engineering, Institute of New Energy, College of Science, China University of Petroleum (East China), Qingdao, 266580, China. E-mail: yanggw@upc.edu.cn; xiyouli@upc.edu.cn

Received
17th October 2019
, Accepted 30th November 2019
First published on 2nd December 2019
Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have attracted extensive attention and their which power conversion efficiency (PCE) has rapidly increased from 3.8% to 25.2% in recent years. Interfacial modification is regarded as a highly effective strategy to address the humidity instability and improve the performance of PSCs. In this regard, L(+)-cysteine (L-cy), a typical trifunctional amino acid, is employed to modify the interface between mesoporous TiO2 (mp-TiO2) and perovskite. The incorporation of L-cy increases the PCE from 11.5% to 14.4%. Fluorescence measurements show that the electron injection from perovskite to mp-TiO2 is enhanced due to the interactions between the functional groups (–COOH, –NH2 and –SH) of L-cy and Ti4+ ions in mp-TiO2 and unsaturated Pb2+ and I− ions in the perovskite film. This work demonstrates a facile and effective method to achieve high-performance PSCs.

In the past few years, organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have drawn great attention and shown breathtaking development with an increase in the power conversion efficiency (PCE) from 3.8% to above 25%. Organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites exhibit a general formula of ABX3, where A represents CH3NH3+ (MA), HC(NH2)2+ (FA) or Cs+, B stands for Pb2+ or Sn2+, and X is a halide anion such as Cl−, Br− or I−. In addition to the remarkable advantages of perovskite materials, such as high optical absorption coefficients, tunable band gaps, outstanding charge carrier mobility and long charge diffusion length, high quality perovskite films can be fabricated through simple and low-cost techniques. It is believed that the quality of perovskite films is crucial for the performance of PSCs. Traps at the interface, where non-radiative recombination of electrons and holes occurs, can block the charge transfer. Therefore, many strategies to diminish traps/defects at the interface like adding additives in the solvent, optimizing the preparation conditions or post-treating the surface of perovskite films with functional molecules have been reported. These approaches are able to passivate traps via the adjustment of the crystallinity of the perovskite film and surface wettability.

TiO2 is one of the most widely used electron transport materials (ETM) in PSCs. In particular, mesoporous TiO2 (mp-TiO2) can be used as a scaffold to elongate the optical light path and mitigate the charge recombination losses. However, the incomplete pore-filling of mp-TiO2 with perovskite is a major concern and is harmful for electron extraction and transfer. Modification of the interface between mesoporous TiO2 and perovskite can effectively promote electron injection. Mahmud and co-workers introduced cesium acetate between the mesoporous TiO2 and perovskite layers, increasing the efficiency from 12.6% to 16.4%. Wang provided a new direction for the design of new fullerene derivatives as interlayer materials, leading to an enhanced PCE of 19.2%. Amino acids, a kind of bifunctional ligand containing both amino and carboxylic groups, have been employed to modify the interface between perovskite and mp-TiO2. Zhang and co-workers treated the TiO2 surface with L-leucine to improve the interfacial charge transfer, and the PCE was increased to 18%. Chaisan treated the TiO2 surface with 3-aminopropanoic acid and 4-aminobenzoic acid, and an increase of the PCE from 6.23% to 7.78% was achieved. Chen and co-workers introduced both aminocaproic and caproic acids to modify the surface of mp-TiO2 and obtained an average PCE of 17.5% with high reproducibility.
These studies demonstrate that amino acids are effective modifiers which diminish the traps at the interface and promote electron injection from perovskite to mp-TiO2. To further promote the effect of interfacial modification on the performance of PSCs, enhancing the interaction between amino acids and perovskite by introducing a third functional group might be useful. To our knowledge, this is the first report on the modification of mp-TiO2 with trifunctional ligands.
Herein, we developed a facile and effective approach to modify the interface between mp-TiO2 and perovskite with L(+)-cysteine (L-cy) (Fig. 1). L-cy is a typical amino acid with three functional groups, amino (–NH2), carboxylic (–COOH) and thiol (–SH) groups. The carboxylic group can anchor onto the surface of TiO2, while the amino group can coordinate with Pb2+ and form hydrogen bonds with I− on the edge of the MAPbI3 layer. Additionally, the thiol group can coordinate with Pb2+ by forming a Pb–S bond.L-cy has been employed to modify the surface of NiO to improve hole-extraction for p–i–n planar PSCs. It has also been used as a capping ligand during the synthesis of CH3NH3PbBr3 cubic crystals to increase the absolute photoluminescence (PL) quantum yield and PL lifetime. However, L-cy has never been used before to modify the interface between the mp-TiO2 and perovskite layer. Our results suggest that L-cy modification at the interface between the mp-TiO2 and perovskite layer can improve the interfacial electron transfer and tune the morphology of the perovskite film. Maximum photoelectric conversion efficiencies of 14.4% for small-area (0.06 cm2) and 12.1% for large-area (1.0 cm2) perovskite solar cell devices are obtained. In addition, the incorporated L-cy layer can retard the degradation of devices.

The modification of L-cy on the mp-TiO2 surface and the deposition procedure of the perovskite film are illustrated in Scheme 1.


To confirm the successful anchoring of L-cy to the mp-TiO2 surface, FTIR spectra were measured and are shown in Fig. 2. In the curve of the mp-TiO2/L-cy sample, the peaks below 1000 cm−1 are attributed to TiO2. Meanwhile, the peak at 2547 cm−1, which is also shown in the curve of L-cy powder shown in Fig. 2S, belongs to thiol groups. The peaks at 1624 cm−1 and 1400 cm−1 in the curves of the mp-TiO2/L-cy and mp-TiO2/L-cy/perovskite samples are assigned to the asymmetric and symmetric vibration of the CO of the carboxylate group bonded to mp-TiO2, respectively. The frequency difference between the asymmetric and symmetric stretching vibrations (Δ ≈ 220 cm−1) suggests that the binding of L-cy on the mp-TiO2 surface is through a monodentate linkage. In the curve of the mp-TiO2/L-cy/perovskite sample, the disappearance of the peak at 2547 cm−1 can be attributed to the formation of the Pb–S coordination bond. The broad peak at 3200–3600 cm−1 in the curve of all the samples can be attributed to the –OH of the unbonded carboxyl groups and the amino groups. From these results, one can deduce that the L-cy is successfully bonded to the mp-TiO2 surface.


The surface wettability of the mp-TiO2 layer is of great significance to perovskite film formation; therefore, it was measured according to Young's equation as shown in the ESI. The solvent employed in the fabrication of the perovskite film is N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF); therefore, the contact angles of DMF on the bare and modified mp-TiO2 surface are measured and shown in Fig. 3. The contact angle of DMF on the bare mp-TiO2 film is 17°, which decreases to 7.3° on the surface of the L-cy modified mp-TiO2 film. Evidently, the surface of mp-TiO2 is more compatible with DMF after L-cy modification. To further determine the surface wettability of the L-cy modified mp-TiO2 film to DMF, we calculated the solid–solid interface energy based on the bare and L-cy modified mp-TiO2 substrate and the results are shown in Table 1S. The surface energy of L-cy modified mp-TiO2 is higher than that of untreated mp-TiO2, indicating that L-cy modification can improve the lipophilicity of mp-TiO2 and wettability of precursor solutions, thus facilitating film formation.


X-ray diffraction (XRD) experiments were conducted to investigate the effects of L-cy molecules on the crystallinity of perovskite films (Fig. 4). It is seen that the crystal structure of MAPbI3Cl3−x prepared on L-cy/mp-TiO2 is similar to that on bare mp-TiO2, and the diffraction peaks at 14.2°, 28.5°, and 32° are assigned to the <110>, <220>, and <310> crystal planes, respectively, consistent with the major lattice structure of MAPbI3Cl3−x. Compared to those of the unmodified sample, all the peak intensities of the L-cy modified sample increase, and the half-peak widths become slightly smaller, indicating the improvement of crystallinity after L-cy modification. The morphology of the perovskite films was examined by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (Fig. 5). One can see that after L-cy modification, the number of pinholes in the perovskite film is notably reduced and the grain size is larger, both of which benefit from increased surface energy and wettability (Table 1S), indicating that L-cy modification improves the lipophilicity of mp-TiO2 and wettability of the precursor solutions, thus facilitating film formation. On the other hand, both the increased crystal size and decreased pinhole density can reduce the number of charge carrier traps and prolong the lifetime of charge carriers, which is desirable for improving the device performance.


To further confirm the improvement in the quality of the perovskite films, the UV-vis absorption spectra of the perovskite films were measured and are shown in Fig. 6a. The absorption of the perovskite film with L-cy modification is obviously increased in the range of 400–800 nm, which is attributed to the more complete conversion of PbI2 to MAPbI3.

To investigate the effects of L-cy modification on the electron transfer process at the interface between mp-TiO2 and perovskite, the steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra of perovskite films on modified and unmodified mp-TiO2 were measured, and the results are shown in Fig. 6b. It can be seen that both films display a PL emission band around 778 nm, which is consistent with the literature reported. However, the PL intensity of the perovskite film on the L-cy modified mp-TiO2 substrate is significantly smaller than that on the unmodified mp-TiO2 substrate, which is attributed to the more efficient electron injection from perovskite to mp-TiO2. To further confirm our speculation, time-resolved PL spectra (TRPL) were measured and the results are shown in Fig. 6c. The perovskite film on bare mp-TiO2 exhibits a lifetime of about 104.11 ns, while the perovskite film on L-cy modified mp-TiO2 shows a remarkably shorter PL lifetime (60.04 ns). The relatively short lifetime suggests that L-cy modification at the interface between the mp-TiO2 and perovskite layer facilitates electron transfer and retards charge recombination.

In order to further study the impact of L-cy modification on the photovoltaic behaviour of PSCs, we fabricated the L-cy modified mp-TiO2 layer in a meso-porous device architecture, FTO/bl-TiO2/mp-TiO2/L-cy/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Au, which is shown in the ESI. The structure is observed in the cross-sectional SEM image of the PSCs in Fig. 1S, where the interfaces are well resolved between individual layers.

The current density versus voltage (J–V) characteristics of the devices were measured and are shown in Fig. 7a with the corresponding photovoltaic parameters. The device without L-cy modification exhibits a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 20.10 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 0.87 V, and a fill factor (FF) of 0.65, yielding a PCE of 11.5%. In contrast, after L-cy modification, the best device exhibits a PCE of 14.4% with a JSC of 22.34 mA cm−2, a VOC of 0.90 V and a FF of 0.71. We also demonstrate that a large active area device (1.0 cm2) exhibits a PCE of 10.9% as shown in Fig. S3. All the photovoltaic parameters of these devices modified with L-cy increased remarkably in comparison with those of unmodified devices.
Moreover, we also optimized the dipping time and the solvent for L-cy modification. The results are shown in Fig. 4S. It is noted that an overlong dipping time of the TiO2 electrode in the solvent is harmful to the PCE of solar cells, which might be attributed to the hindered electron transfer across the interface by more physically adsorbed L-cy molecules on the surface of TiO2. The favourable solvent among the five solvents we tested for L-cy modification is methanol. The impact of L-cy concentration on perovskite film quality and device performance is also studied, and the results are shown in Fig. 6S and 7S. It can be seen that the efficiencies of the devices increase with the increase of L-cy concentration in the methanol solution, which further demonstrates the effect of L-cy. However, the perovskite films based on mp-TiO2 modified with L-cy solutions of different concentrations show no visible morphological or structural changes. These results indicate that the concentration of L-cy mainly affects the speed of reaching adsorption equilibrium for L-cy.
To confirm the reproducibility of L-cy modification, we fabricated nearly twenty devices in more than five batches to confirm the effects of L-cy modification on device performance. The statistical histogram of the device parameters indicates the excellent reproducibility of our devices, as shown in Fig. 5S. Fig. 8S shows the J–V characteristics for the champion devices based on bare mp-TiO2 and on L-cy modified mp-TiO2 in the forward and reverse scan directions. The reduced hysteresis for L-cy modified mp-TiO2 device can be attributed to the suppression on the ion motion and/or surface charge trapping caused by L-cy modification. The incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) was measured and is shown in Fig. 7b. After L-cy modification, the JSC value calculated by integrating the IPCE curve is 21.60 mA cm−2, corresponding to a device with an area of 1 cm2, very close to the results of J–V measurements. In contrast, the calculated JSC for the devices without L-cy modification is 18.40 mA cm−2, which is much lower than that of the L-cy modified devices. The integrated JSC values calculated from the external quantum efficiency spectra also agree well with those obtained from J–V curves.
To further understand the interfacial electron transfer and recombination processes in PSCs, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was performed under simulated AM 1.5 light illumination (Fig. 7c). A single R–C circuit is applied. Based on the equivalent circuit model, the recombination resistance (RCT) and series resistance (RS), corresponding to the electron extraction and recombination processes in the devices, can be obtained. The R–C circuit is putatively associated with the mp-TiO2/perovskite interface, because RCT is sensitive to interfacial modification. According to the fitted results in Table S2, the RCT obviously decreases from 129.8 Ω to 116.0 Ω after L-cy modification, indicating the improvement in electron transfer. Meanwhile, the series resistance RS slightly decreases compared to that of the unmodified device. Therefore, the EIS analysis provides convincing evidence that the L-cy modification facilitates electron injection from perovskite to mp-TiO2, resulting in an improvement in the device performance.
It is noteworthy that the stability of the devices was also enhanced after the L-cy modification as revealed in Fig. 7d. The device with L-cy modification retained 48% of its original PCE after 120 h of storage at room temperature and in air with a humidity of about 60%. In contrast, the devices without L-cy modification lost ∼70% of their original PCE under the same storage conditions, suggesting that the devices with L-cy modification are more stable. It should be noted that although L-cy modification shows no dramatic enhancement in the device stability owing to the fact that there are no phenyl rings and alkyl chains in the L-cy molecular structure, it can significantly improve the interfacial electron transfer and tune the morphology of perovskite films, which improves the device performance significantly.

In this work, we have successfully improved the performance of PSCs using L-cy to modify the interface between the mp-TiO2 and perovskite layer. L-cy modification improved the surface wettability of the mp-TiO2 layer to DMF, resulting in an improved perovskite film with an increased crystal size and decreased pinhole density. More importantly, L-cy modification facilitates electron injection from perovskite to mp-TiO2. Accordingly, the efficiency and the stability of L-cy modified devices are improved remarkably, which is due to the interactions of the functional groups including –COOH, –NH2, and –SH of L-cy with Ti4+ in mp-TiO2, as well as with unsaturated Pb2+ and I− in the perovskite film. This work demonstrates a facile and effective method for L-cy interfacial modification to achieve high-performance PSCs.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21703287), the Natural Science Foundation of Shandong Province (ZR2017MB006, ZR2017ZB0315, and ZR2017BB027), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (18CX02053A), and the Qingdao Applied Basic Research Project (19-6-2-20-cg). X. Li also acknowledges the Taishan Scholar Program of Shandong Province for financial support.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9se00963a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020