 DOI: 10.1039/C8TC02067A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 6823-6831


Bin Bin
Jin
*,

Guo Qing
Zhang
,

Shu Ying
Kong
,

Xin
Quan
,

Hui Sheng
Huang
,

Yan
Liu
,

Jing Hui
Zeng
* and 

Ye Feng
Wang


Chongqing Key Laboratory of Inorganic Special Functional Materials, College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Yangtze Normal University, Chongqing 408100, China. E-mail: bbjin001@126.com

Key Laboratory of Macromolecular Science of Shaanxi Province, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Shaanxi Normal University, Xi’an 710062, China. E-mail: nanosci@snnu.edu.cn

School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Shaanxi Normal University, Xi’an 710062, China

Received
29th April 2018
, Accepted 6th June 2018
First published on 8th June 2018
Hierarchical dendritic PbS films were deposited on fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) glass substrates as counter electrodes (CE) for quantum dot-sensitized solar cells (QDSSCs) by a facile one-step pulse voltage electrodeposition method. The electrodeposition time was the key factor to obtain the hierarchical dendritic PbS films. The morphology and the structure of the as-prepared films under different electrodeposition times were investigated by XRD, SEM, TEM and EDS. The results showed that perfect hierarchical dendritic PbS films could be obtained at an electrodeposition time of 20 s. The electrocatalytic and photovoltaic properties of these films as CEs for QDSSCs were evaluated by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), Tafel polarization measurements, CV cycling and J–V curves. The hierarchical dendritic PbS exhibits superior catalytic activity and stability in the polysulfide electrolyte, and significantly improved the performance of CdS/CdSe co-sensitized solar cells. An optimized power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 5.76% was achieved, and the QDSSCs were stable for over 24 h. The present study provides a simple pathway to obtain an efficient CE for the QDSSCs.

Quantum dot-sensitized solar cells (QDSSCs) have attracted extensive research attention due to high theoretical power conversion efficiency (PCE) and low production cost. Although the PCE has been over 11%, it still lags behind theoretical expectations (∼44%) due to multiple exciton generation. Inferior electron transfer at the photoanode/electrolyte interface and poor catalytic activity at the counter electrode (CE) are considered as the dominating barriers in attaining highly efficient QDSSCs. In the past decade, great efforts to improve the performance of QDSSCs were made, with primary focus on the charge injection and the charge recombination at the photoanode/electrolyte interfaces. The CE as an indispensable part of the QDSSCs is responsible for the catalysis and the reduction of the oxidized redox species, collects and transports electrons from the external circuit and keeps the cell working, and plays an equally important role as the photoanode to improve the performance of QDSSCs.

An ideal CE material is supposed to possess excellent catalytic activity, low charge transfer resistance (Rct) and good stability in the electrolyte. Platinum (Pt) is widely used as a standard CE in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) due to its stability and superior catalytic activity towards triiodide (I3−) reduction. However, in QDSSCs, the sulfide/polysulfide redox couple is used instead of the iodine/iodide electrolyte to stabilize the quantum dots and improve the cell performance. The traditional Pt CE is not compatible with polysulfide electrolytes due to the chemisorption of sulfur species on the Pt surface and the induction of the poisoning effect, which result in low photocurrent density and fill factor. Metal chalcogenides, such as iron sulfide (FeS), cobalt sulfide (CoS), nickel sulfide (NiS), copper sulfide (CuS), cuprous sulfide (Cu2S), lead sulfide (PbS), and lead selenide (PbSe), have been developed as highly effective CE materials due to their much higher electrocatalytic activity towards the reduction reaction of Sn2− to S2−. Among them, Cu2S is the most commonly used CE in high efficiency QDSSCs because of its relatively high activity towards the polysulfide electrolyte. However, Cu2S CEs are mechanically and chemically unstable, which result in the poisoning of the photoanode. PbS possesses similar catalytic activity to that of Cu2S, but with long-term stability, and is regarded as a prospective CE material for QDSSCs. The general preparation method of preparing PbS CE that is often used is the acid treatment of Pb foil in sulfide solution to obtain porous PbS films. The suitable porous structures increase the surface area and provide a large number of catalytic sites, which enhance the charge transfer kinetics at the polysulfide/PbS CE interface in QDSSCs. However, this method is not easy and cost-effective. More importantly, sealing the metal based CE with the active layer electrode that is made on the fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) glass substrate is a challenge, which is particularly a serious problem for large scale production. By hydrothermal method, chemical bath deposition (CBD) or successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR), compact PbS films can be deposited on FTO glass substrates for use as CEs. Compared to metal based CEs, excessively compact structures diminish the surface area and increase the charge transfer resistance at the CE/electrolyte interface, leading to low short circuit current density and poor fill factor in QDSSCs.
In addition to the intrinsic characteristics, the morphology and the microstructure of CE materials also significantly influence the electrocatalytic reduction of polysulfide because of the nature of the catalytic reactions. CE materials with different morphologies have been synthesized in order to attain high-performance QDSSCs. Prabakar et al. prepared nanorice-structured NiS and knit-coir-mat-like structured CuS as CEs, and PCEs of 2.97% and 4.53% for QDSSCs were obtained, respectively. Zai et al. developed Cu7S4 nanocages with symmetric opening windows as a CE, which exhibited a PEC of 4.43% for QDSSCs. Zhong et al. prepared a flake-like Cu2S CE, and a PCE of 5.41% for the corresponding QDSSCs was obtained. These CEs showed larger active surface areas and more catalytic sites, which enhanced the electrocatalytic activity towards polysulfide electrolyte reduction. Among various morphologies, one-dimensional structures, such as nanowires and nanotubes have been widely noted because they can provide a direct electron transport channel to accelerate the transportation of electrons and mass. However, the apparent low surface area of these 1D structures results in limited active sites to catalyze the reduction reaction of the oxidized redox species. Synergistically combining the characteristics of high surface area and rapid electron transport can be implemented by constructing 1D hierarchical architectures. Recently, Qian et al. synthesized hierarchical Cu2−xSe and Cu7S4 nanotubes via the assembly of nanosheets, which showed superior electrocatalytic activity towards the reduction of polysulfides. Using the two hierarchical nanotubes as CEs, enhanced PCE up to 4.53% and 5.14% for the corresponding QDSSCs were obtained. However, the hierarchical Cu7S4 and Cu2−xSe nanotubes were fabricated using Cu(OH)2 nanorod arrays as self-sacrificial templates, which were grown on copper foil. The obtained Cu7S4 and Cu2−xSe nanotubes were peeled off from the copper substrate and then doctor-bladed on the FTO substrate by mixing the as-prepared samples with acetylene black and poly(vinyldifluoride) in N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone as a paste. The synthesis process was complex and needed long synthesis time. Therefore, it remains a challenge to develop a stable and efficient CE with a facile preparation process.
In this study, hierarchical dendritic PbS films were directly deposited on fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) glass substrates by a facile one-step pulse voltage electrodeposition method. The hierarchical dendritic PbS films showed outstanding electrocatalytic activity and stability in polysulfide electrolytes. An improved power conversion efficiency of 5.76% was obtained for the CdS/CdSe QDSSCs using the hierarchical dendritic PbS film as the CE.

The morphology and the structure of the as-prepared CEs were closely related to the electrodeposition time. The CEs were electrodeposited at room temperature using a 20 V pulse voltage with a 0.2 s on-time and a 0.2 s off-time for 5 s, 10 s and 20 s; the corresponding CEs were labeled as CE5, CE10 and CE20, respectively. When the deposition time was over 20 s, the dendritic PbS grew rapidly and became larger, which made the PbS film fall from the FTO glass substrate during the deposition process (ESI, Fig. S1). Fig. 1 shows the SEM images of the CEs at 5 s, 10 s and 20 s deposition time. The CE film was mainly composed of particles with irregular shapes when the deposition time was set at 5 s (Fig. 1a). The thickness of the film was approximately 500 nm (Fig. 1b). When the deposition time was extended to 10 s, a few oriented hierarchical dendritic structures began to appear (Fig. 1c). The thickness of the film increased to ∼2 μm (Fig. 1d). On further increasing the deposition time to 20 s, more hierarchical dendritic structures were generated, with increase in size. Finally, hierarchical dendritic structures with a diameter of ∼500 nm and a length of several microns were obtained (Fig. 1e). Moreover, the thickness of the film increased to ∼4 μm and it became more porous (Fig. 1f).

XRD was used to study the crystal structures of the CEs obtained at different deposition times, and the results are shown in Fig. 2. It can be observed that all the reflections of the obtained CE5 film could be indexed to the cubic phase of Pb (JCPDS No. 65-2873), besides the peaks originating from the FTO glass substrate (Fig. 2a). With the increase in deposition time to 10 s and 20 s, two new weak peaks can be observed at 2θ = 25.96° and 30.07°. In order to more clearly identify the crystal structure of the CEs, the obtained CE20 film was detached from the FTO glass substrate and further characterized by XRD. The result is shown in Fig. 2b. From the diffraction profiles, five diffraction peaks are observed at 2θ of 25.96°, 30.07°, 43.05°, 50.97° and 53.41°, which correspond to the (111), (200), (220), (311) and (222) planes, respectively, of the PbS cubic structure (JCPDS No. 05-0592), and no other diffraction peaks besides those of Pb were detected.
XPS and TEM elemental mapping were employed to further determine the chemical composition and the element distribution of CE20, and the results are shown in Fig. 3. The binding energies of the Pb 4f5/2 and Pb 4f7/2 peaks are observed at 141.9 eV and 137.1 eV, respectively (Fig. 3a). The binding energies of the S 2p3/2 and S 2p1/2 peaks are 160.3 and 161.5 eV, respectively (Fig. 3b). This result is consistent with the previously reported values for PbS. TEM elemental mapping revealed that Pb and S are homogeneously distributed throughout the hierarchical dendritic structure (Fig. 3c–e). XRD, XPS and TEM elemental mapping results confirmed that the hierarchical dendritic PbS films were successfully deposited on the surface of FTO when the deposition time was extended to 20 s. The possible electrochemical reactions involved in the formation of CE20 are given in the following equations:
First, Pb2+ was electrochemically reduced to Pb, and a layer of Pb metal with 500 nm thickness (Fig. 2a and b) was formed on the FTO glass surface:
PbEDTA2− + 2e− → Pb + EDTA4−
(1)
Following this, thiourea was decomposed into S2− under electrochemical action:
NH2–CS–NH2 + OH− → HS− + CO(NH2)2
(2)
HS− → H+ + S2−
(3)
Subsequently, the newly generated Pb combined with S2− to produce the hierarchical dendritic PbS on the Pb metal layer surface. With the increase in the electrodeposition time, the hierarchical dendritic PbS constantly grew, and the film became thick:
Pb + S2− → PbS + 2e−
(4)
As a result, a Pb/hierarchical dendritic PbS composite electrode with ∼4 μm-thickness was obtained (Fig. 1e and f). Although the diffraction peak of PbS was weaker than that of Pb in CE20 (Fig. 2), the XPS, TEM and EDS data confirmed the hierarchical dendritic structure of PbS (Fig. 3). It is more important to note that metallic Pb has no catalytic activity toward the S2−/Sn2− redox couple. However, Pb can very slowly react with the polysulfide electrolyte to form PbS. The diffraction peaks of PbS at 25.96°, 30.07° and 43.05° were significantly enhanced when CE20 was immersed in the polysulfide electrolyte for one week (ESI, Fig. S2). This result confirmed that the Pb in CE20 could slowly react with the polysulfide electrolyte to generate more PbS. This is consistent with the acid treatment of Pb foil in sulfide solution to obtain porous PbS films as a highly catalytic CE for QDSSCs.
To investigate the electrocatalytic activity of the CEs, symmetric dummy cells with two identical CEs were assembled for electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and Tafel polarization measurements. The electrolyte was an aqueous solution consisting of 1 M S, 1 M Na2S and 0.1 M NaOH. The Nyquist plots of Pt, CE5, CE10 and CE20 are presented in Fig. 4a and b. According to the plots, the high frequency intercepts on the real axis correspond to the sheet resistance (Rs). The first semicircle in the high-frequency region is correlated to the solid–solid interface resistance (Rct1). The second arch is ascribed to the charge-transfer resistance (Rct2) at the CE/electrolyte interface. CPE1 and CPE2 are the constant phase elements for solid–solid and CE/electrolyte interfaces, respectively. The plots were fitted with the Z-view software in terms of an equivalent circuit (inset of Fig. 4a) and the parameters are summarized in Table 1. The Rct2 values of the Pt and CE5 were up to thousands of ohms (Ω), which indicated very slow electron transfer rates at the CE/electrolyte interface and their catalytic activity was very poor in the polysulfide electrolyte. The Rct2 value of CE10 is 1092 Ω, which is clearly lower than that of Pt and CE5. This result suggests that PbS has better catalytic effect on the reduction reaction of Sn2− than Pt and CE5. However, the resistance of the obtained CE10 was still large. This was due to the fact that the amount of hierarchical dendritic PbS in CE10 was insufficient and not fully grown, and not enough active sites were available to catalyze the reduction reaction of Sn2−. With the increase in the deposition time, the obtained CE20 exhibited the lowest Rct2 value of 6.161 Ω, suggesting that the hierarchical dendritic PbS provided more active sites and greatly enhanced the charge transfer at the CE/electrolyte interface. It is worth noting that the Rs values of CE5 and CE10 were higher than that of Pt. This is because the conductivity of Pb was lower than that of Pt. However, CE20 exhibits the lowest Rs value of 16.31 Ω, suggesting that the conductivity of the CE has been enhanced. This can be because the unique dendritic structures provide the electrons with a direct transport pathway by avoiding a series of particle-to-particle hopping transports in the CE film.
CE

R
s (Ω)

R
ct1 (Ω)

R
ct2 (Ω)

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF (%)

η (%)
Pt
17.90
1473
12387
9.36
0.53
36.28
1.80
CE5
19.06
91.05
5296
12.08
0.60
28.28
2.05
CE10
19.46
35.05
1092
14.66
0.65
44.08
4.20
CE20
16.31
0.3835
6.161
15.13
0.67
56.82
5.76
The Tafel polarization measurement is a powerful tool to assess the electrocatalytic activity of CE materials. The exchange current (J0) directly reflects the electrocatalytic activity of the CE, which can be obtained from the extrapolated intercepts of the anodic and cathodic branches of the polarization curves. The Tafel polarization curves of Pt, CE5, CE10 and CE20 are presented in Fig. 4c. These polarization curves clearly illustrate that the J0 for the four CEs increased in the order CE20 > CE10 > CE5 > Pt. The variation of J0 is in good agreement with the change tendency of Rct derived from EIS in terms of eqn (5),
J0 = RT/nFRct
(5)
where
R is the gas constant, T is the absolute temperature, n is the number of electrons involved in the polysulfide reduction, F is the Faraday constant, and Rct is the charge-transfer resistance. Furthermore, the limiting diffusion current density (Jlim) can also be used to assess the catalytic activities of CE materials. Jlim is related to the diffusion of the redox couple in the electrolyte, which can be derived at the diffusion zones from the Tafel polarization curves.

Higher Jlim indicates larger diffusion coefficient (D) and faster diffusion velocity of the redox couple in the electrolyte (eqn (6)).
D = lJlim/2nFC
(6)

D is the diffusion coefficient, l represents the spacer thickness, n is the number of electrons involved in the redox couple, F is the Faraday constant and C is the electrolyte concentration. According to eqn (6), CE20 showed the largest Jlim, implying that the hierarchical dendritic structure improved the diffusion of the S2−/Sn2− redox couple in the polysulfide electrolyte. EIS and Tafel test results show that CE20 has superior electrocatalytic activity for the reduction reaction of Sn2−.

The superior electrocatalytic activity of CE20 was further reflected in the performance enhancement of the CdS/CdSe sensitized TiO2 photoanode QDSSCs. The J–V curves for the cells with different CEs are shown in Fig. 4d. Detailed data including the short circuit current density (Jsc), open circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (FF), and the power conversion efficiency (η) are listed in Table 1. Consistent with the results of EIS and Tafel, cells with Pt and CE5 showed quite poor performances due to the low electrocatalytic activity of these CEs in the polysulfide electrolyte. With the appearance of the hierarchical dendritic PbS, the Jsc, Voc, FF and η drastically increased to 14.66 mA cm−2, 0.65 V, 44.08 and 4.20% for CE10, and 15.13 mA cm−2, 0.67 V, 56.82 and 5.76% for CE20, respectively. By comparing the SEM images, EIS and Tafel polarization measurements of the four CEs, it is clearly seen that the enhanced cell performance is mainly because the unique dendritic PbS greatly enhances the charge transfer at the CE/electrolyte interface and the conductivity of the CE.
Stability is another important indicator for evaluating CE materials. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurements from 200 cycles were used to investigate the stability of Pt, CE5, CE10 and CE20 in the polysulfide electrolyte, as shown in Fig. 5. The current density of Pt CE is the smallest and decays sharply with the increase in number of cycles. This is because Pt strongly chemisorbs the sulfur species in the polysulfide electrolyte, which would result in decrease in the surface activity and the stability of the Pt CE. For CE5, Pb can slowly react with sulfur species, resulting in slightly decayed current density of CE5 with the number of cycles. However, with the appearance of the hierarchical dendritic PbS, the current densities of CE10 and CE20 significantly increased and became increasingly stable. The current density of CE20 was the highest and it was perfectly linear, confirming that CE20 had the fastest diffusion velocity of S2−/Sn2− compared to that of the other three CEs. Furthermore, there has not been a noticeable decay in the current density of CE20 during CV cycling, which indicates that CE20 has excellent stability in the polysulfide electrolyte.
The long-term stability of QDSSCs with CE20 as the CE was also investigated in ambient environment for 24 h. Fig. 6 shows the temporal evolution of J–V curves and the extracted photovoltaic parameters of CE20 at two-hour intervals. After 24 h of aging, there was no significant decrease in Jsc and Voc, while FF decreased slightly. As a result, η showed a decline of only 2.6% within the given period.

Lead acetate (Pb(OAc)2), ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid disodium salt (Na2EDTA), thiourea (CH4N2S), selenium powder (Se), sodium sulfite (Na2SO3), sodium sulfide nonahydrate (Na2S·9H2O), cadmium nitrate tetrahydrate (Cd(NO3)2·4H2O), sulfur sublimed (S), zinc acetate dihydrate (Zn(OAc)2·2H2O), chloroplatinic acid (H2PtCl6), isopropanol ((CH3)2CHOH), sodium hydroxide (NaOH), methanol (CH3OH), and absolute ethanol (CH3CH2OH) were of analytical grade, purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd, and used without further purification. P25 was purchased from Germany Degussa Co. Fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) glass (7 Ω □−1) and hot-melt gaskets were purchased from WuHan GEAO company.


Pulse voltage electrodeposition in a two-electrode system was carried out to prepare the hierarchical dendritic PbS film on a Maynuo M8811 DC source meter. In this process, the FTO glass was used as the working electrode and a graphite rod was used as the counter electrode. The electrolyte for the electrodeposition of PbS was an aqueous solution composed of 0.02 M Pb(OAc)2, 0.04 M Na2EDTA, and 0.02 M CH4N2S. The pH was adjusted to 7.5–8.0 with NaOH solution before the addition of the CH4N2S solution. The electrodeposition time was the key factor to obtain the hierarchical dendritic PbS film. The CEs were electrodeposited at room temperature using a 20 V pulse voltage with 0.2 s on-time and 0.2 s off-time under different time conditions. The peak voltage was 20 V. The pulse width was 0.4 S. PPS (pulse per second) was 2.5 times per second. The pulse voltage electrodeposition process and the pulse waveform are shown in Fig. S3 (ESI). For comparison, Pt CE was prepared by spraying 5 mM H2PtCl6 isopropanol solution onto an FTO glass substrate, followed by sintering at 380 °C for 30 min. This process was repeated three times.


The assembly of QDSSCs was based on our previous study. Microporous TiO2 films were prepared by spin coating TiO2 paste (Degussa P25) on an FTO glass substrate, followed by sintering at 450 °C for 30 min. The as-prepared TiO2 films were sensitized with CdS/CdSe QDs by the successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR) method. First, the TiO2 films were immersed in a solution containing 0.1 M Cd(NO3)2·4H2O in methanol for 1 min. Then, the films were immersed in a methanol–water mixture (1:1 by volume), which contained 0.1 M Na2S·9H2O, for 1 min. The films were thoroughly rinsed with methanol to remove the excess precursors after each immersion. The same procedure was repeated 7 times to form CdS sensitized TiO2 electrodes. For the CdSe QDs deposition, TiO2/CdS electrodes were immersed in a solution containing 0.1 M Cd(NO3)2·4H2O in methanol for 10 min; this process was repeated 7 times. Subsequently, the electrodes were immersed in 0.02 M Na2SeSO3 aqueous solution at 50 °C for 20 min. Then, the electrodes were thoroughly rinsed with pure solvent to remove the excess precursors after each immersion. The same procedure was repeated 5 times to form CdSe sensitized electrodes. Finally, the CdS/CdSe cosensitized electrodes were coated with a ZnS passivation layer by alternately dipping twice into Zn(OAc)2·2H2O (0.1 M) and Na2S·9H2O (0.1 M) aqueous solutions for 1 min. The polysulfide electrolyte (1 M Na2S, 1 M S and 0.1 M NaOH aqueous solution) was sandwiched between the CdS/CdSe sensitized photoanode and the CE to obtain the cell, which was separated using a silicone spacer (thickness: 50 μm). The area of the cell was 0.28 cm2.


The crystal structures of the as-prepared CEs were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD) with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.5418 Å). The compositions and the chemical states of the CEs were examined by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, AXIS-Ultra, Kratos). Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images were obtained on a Philips-FEI Quanta 200 scanning electron microscope. The morphology and the composition of CEs were further examined by a JEOL JEM-2800 high resolution transmission electron microscope (TEM) combined with energy-dispersive spectroscopy (EDS). Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), Tafel polarization and cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurements were conducted in a symmetrical dummy cell fabricated with two identical CEs using a CHI 660D electrochemical workstation (Shanghai, China). The current–voltage characteristics were monitored and recorded by a source meter (Keithly 2400) under the irradiation of simulated solar light (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2).


In summary, a hierarchical dendritic PbS CE has been successfully prepared on an FTO substrate by a facile one-step pulse voltage electrodeposition method. The CE was comprehensively researched by EIS measurements, Tafel polarization, CV cycling and J–V curves. The CE exhibited excellent catalytic activity toward the S2−/Sn2− redox couple and achieved an optimized PCE up to 5.76%. The sealed QDSSCs with hierarchical dendritic PbS CE also exhibited excellent stability over 24 h. This study provides an effective strategy to attain low-cost high-performance CE materials.


There are no conflicts of interest to declare.


This study was supported by the Natural Science Foundation Project of Chongqing Science and Technology Commission (No. cstc2017jcyjAX0100), the Scientific Research Funding Project of Yangtze Normal University (No. 2017KYQD88) and the Growth Support Plan for Young Scientific Talents from Yangtze Normal University.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Pulse voltage specification, XRD patterns of the CE20 immersed in polysulfide electrolyte for one week and the digital photograph of the films prepared at different deposition time. See DOI: 10.1039/c8tc02067a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018