 DOI: 10.1039/C3TA12875J
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 12413-12416
Xiaodong Li, Wenjun Zhang, Yulei Wu, Chao Min and Junfeng Fang*
Ningbo Institute of Materials and Technology and Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Ningbo, 315201, China. E-mail: fangjf@nimte.ac.cn
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
Received 24th July 2013, Accepted 20th August 2013
First published on 20th August 2013
A highly efficient polymer solar cell was fabricated using a polar fullerene derivative C60 pyrrolidine tris-acid (CPTA) as the cathode buffer layer. By introducing CPTA, the Voc, Jsc and FF were all much enhanced simultaneously. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) was significantly improved to 7.92%, which outperformed the device using Ca/Al as the cathode in our experiment.

Polymer solar cells (PSCs) with a bulk-heterojunction structure have attracted much attention due to their advantages of low-cost, lightweight, flexibility, ease of large area fabrication through roll-to-roll printing, etc. Recently, the reported power conversion efficiency (PCE) has exceeded 9% for single solar cells and 10% for the tandem structure solar cells, making it very possible to realize commercial applications. Typical PSCs used a so-called sandwich structure, that is, the blended photoactive materials were sandwiched between a low work function cathode collecting electrons and an anode collecting holes (usually ITO). In this structure, Ca/Al was most widely used for the cathode due to its excellent electron collecting ability. However, due to the low work function and easy oxidation of Ca, the device performance was susceptible to degradation when exposed to air.

Recently, many efforts have been made to replace the use of Ca in PSCs, such as utilizing an inverted structure or inserting a buffer layer between photoactive materials and the cathode in the conventional structure. And these have been proven to be effective ways to enhance the device performance. For example, n-type metal oxides such as titanium oxide (TiOx) and zinc oxide (ZnO) have already been successfully applied to PSCs for their good electron mobility. But the metal oxides usually need high temperature to obtain a crystal structure or UV light to change the surface state, which limited their widespread application in PSCs, especially for conventional structured devices. Thus, organic cathode buffer layer materials started to attract much attention due to their advantages of solution-processing and rich available sources. Many studies have proved that device performance could be effectively enhanced by using alcohol or water soluble polyelectrolytes. However, these polyelectrolytes usually are based on polyfluorenes or thiophenes which are naturally p-type and may be unfavourable for electron collection as cathode buffer layers in PSCs. As a result, small molecules, especially naturally n-type fullerene derivatives, have attracted interest for their excellent ability to collect electrons. Usually, these derivatives were used as self-assembled monolayers on the surface of ZnO or TiO2. But the monolayer may be inefficient in surface coverage or easily eroded during the wet spin-coating of photoactive materials. To overcome these deficiencies, Li et al. reported a cross-linked fullerene derivative integrated on nano-particle ZnO or nano-rod ZnO used in PSCs with high performance. Despite the good performance obtained with these fullerene derivatives, they all should integrate with metal oxides such as ZnO and TiO2, maybe due to the energy level mismatch between ITO and these derivatives. And this made the fabrication of PSCs very complex and unfavourable to produce on a large scale. Recently, fullerene derivatives without additional metal oxides used as cathode buffer layers have also been reported and excellent performance could be obtained as well. But they could also be partially eroded by spin-coating the next layer, or they are difficult to synthesize due to the complex chemical structure. In addition, to the best of our knowledge, the fullerene derivatives were mainly used in PSCs based on relatively large bandgap materials, such as P3HT and PCDTBT, which may limit the acquisition of higher PCEs.
In this work, we report a polar fullerene derivative with carboxyl groups, C60 pyrrolidine tris-acid (CPTA) (Fig. 1a), used as the cathode buffer layer in PSCs. CPTA is soluble in methanol due to the polar property of carboxyl groups. Low bandgap polymer thieno[3,4-b]-thiophene/benzodithiophene and phenyl C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM) were used as the donor and the acceptor, respectively. A high performance device was fabricated with the structure ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PTB7:P71BM/CPTA/Al (Fig. 1a). For comparison, three reference devices were also made under the same conditions (without a buffer layer, with methanol only, and with the Ca/Al cathode). As a result, the open circuit voltage (Voc), short circuit current density (Jsc) and fill factor (FF) were all improved, leading to the increase of PCE from 4.83% to 7.92%, which even outperformed the device using Ca/Al as the cathode in our experiment.
The electrochemical properties of CPTA were studied by cyclic voltammetry (CV) (see the ESI for the details). The lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of PC71BM and CPTA was 3.69 eV and 3.94 eV, respectively (Fig. S1). Combining with the UV-Visible spectra (Fig. S2), we calculated that the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of PC71BM and CPTA was 5.80 eV and 6.01 eV, respectively. Through the energy level diagram (Fig. 2), it was clear that the LUMO of CPTA was just between that of PC71BM and Al, building a perfect energy level cascade, thus benefiting the electron transport from PC71BM to Al without much energy loss. In addition, the low-lying HOMO of CPTA compared with PC71BM could efficiently block the holes and reduce the recombination at the cathode interface.
The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics obtained under AM 1.5G irradiation (100 mW cm−2) are shown in Fig. 3a. The specific parameters of devices are summarized in Table 1. From the curves, the devices without a buffer layer showed a Voc of 0.64 V, a Jsc of 14.34 mA cm−2, a FF of 53% and a resulted PCE of only 4.83%. When Ca/Al was used as the cathode, the device performance was improved significantly and it showed a PCE of 7.21% which was comparable to the reported results by other research groups. After introducing CPTA to replace Ca as the buffer layer, the Voc, Jsc and FF were all enhanced further. The PSCs with CPTA as the buffer layer showed an impressive enhanced PCE of 7.92%, which was obviously better than that of the devices with Ca/Al as the cathode. The devices with CPTA showed an impressively enhanced Voc of 0.74 V, with moderate improvements in Jsc and FF. It is well known that pure methanol can also improve the device performance. To exclude the effect of solvent used here, we also fabricated a device with blank methanol spin-coated on the surface of the active layer. The device performance showed obvious but limited improvements, which was rather inferior to the device modified by CPTA. Thus, it can be concluded that the high device performance was mainly from CPTA. The devices with CPTA showed the highest Jsc and Voc, indicating that CPTA could effectively transport electrons and confine leakage current, which can be proved to some extent by the great reduction of series resistance from 15.0 Ω cm2 (device without a buffer layer) to 5.0 Ω cm2 (Table 1). The external quantum efficiencies (EQEs) of devices with CPTA and without a buffer layer are shown in Fig. 3b. The Jsc values calculated from the EQE spectrum are in agreement with the measured Jsc. From the EQE spectrum, we can see that by inserting CPTA, the EQE was obviously increased in almost the whole wavelength range from 400 nm to 800 nm, agreeing with the much higher Jsc.
Buffer layer
Voc, V
Jsc, mA cm−2
FF%
PCE%
Rs, Ω cm2
a Device structure: ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PTB7:PC71BM/buffer layer/Al.
No
0.64
14.34
53
4.83
15.0
Methanol
0.67
15.92
54
5.72
8.6
Ca
0.70
16.62
62
7.21
8.2
CPTA
0.74
16.95
63
7.92
5.0
J–V curves of devices with different buffer layers under dark conditions are shown in Fig. 4. It can be seen that the device with CPTA shows the lowest leakage current (when V < 0.8 V) and the largest injection current (when V > 0.8 V), implying that the CPTA could efficiently transport electrons and block the holes. This result was consistent with the lowest series resistance (5.0 Ω cm2) and energy level structure (Fig. 2). For the device with the Ca/Al cathode, almost the same large injection current could be obtained. But a rather large leakage current was also obtained at the same time. This could be due to the rather poor hole blocking ability of the Ca/Al cathode, which may also be the reason for the lower Voc compared with the CPTA based device. In addition, the devices with bare Al or modified with methanol showed the lowest injection current because of the mismatch of the electronic structure between PC71BM and Al (Fig. 2), hence, resulting in poor interfacial contact.

In conclusion, we fabricated high performance PSCs based on a polar fullerene derivative (CPTA) as a cathode buffer layer. By inserting CPTA, the PCE of a device can be much enhanced from 4.83% to 7.92%, benefiting from the simultaneous improvements in Voc, Jsc and FF. The significant enhancement of device performance could be ascribed to the excellent electron collecting and hole blocking ability of CPTA. In addition, the performance of the devices with CPTA obviously outperformed the conventional Ca/Al based devices. Our results indicated that a polar fullerene derivative with a simple chemical structure would also be a kind of promising cathode buffer material and could lead to high performance organic solar cells.

† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Cyclic voltammetry and UV-Visible absorbance measurement of CPTA and PC71BM, device fabrication and characterization. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ta12875j
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013