 DOI: 10.1039/C5TA07720F
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 458-465


Kyung Chul
Sun
,

Iftikhar Ali
Sahito
,

Jung Woo
Noh
,

Sang Young
Yeo
,

Jung Nam
Im
,

Sung Chul
Yi
,

Yeon Sang
Kim
* and 

Sung Hoon
Jeong
*

Research Institute of Industrial Technology Convergence Technical Textile and Materials R&D Group, Korea Institute of Industrial Technology, Korea. E-mail: yskim@kitech.re.kr; Tel: +82 2 2220 0498

Department of Fuel Cells and Hydrogen Technology, Hanyang University, Korea

Department of Organic and Nano Engineering, Hanyang University, Korea. E-mail: shjeong@hanyang.ac.kr

Department of Chemical Engineering, Hanyang University, Korea

Received
26th September 2015
, Accepted 13th November 2015
First published on 18th November 2015
Polyethylene terephthalate (PET), a commonly used textile fiber, was used in the form of a wet-laid non-woven fabric as a matrix for electrolytes in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). Also functioning as a separator between the photoanode and cathode of a DSSC, this non-woven membrane was prepared by a well-known wet-laid manufacturing process followed by calendaring to reduce the thickness and increase the uniformity of the structure. This membrane can better absorb the electrolyte turning into a quasi-solid, providing excellent interfacial contact between both electrodes of the DSSC and preventing a short circuit. An optimized membrane provides a better and more desirable structure for ionic conductivity, resulting in the improvement of the photovoltaic performance after calendaring. The quasi-solid-state DSSC assembled with an optimized membrane exhibited 10.248% power conversion efficiency (PCE) at 100 mW cm−2. With the aim of increasing the absorbance, the membrane was also plasma-treated with argon and oxygen separately, which resulted in retention of the electrolyte, avoiding its evaporation, and a 15% longer lifetime of the DSSC compared to liquid electrolytes. The morphology of the membrane was studied by field emission scanning electron microscopy, and the photovoltaic properties and impedance spectroscopy of the cells were studied using polarization curves and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy, respectively. The results suggest that this novel membrane can be used in high-efficiency solar cells, increasing their lifetime without compromising the photovoltaic properties.

Textiles being low-cost, lightweight, flexible, and easily fabricated with a number of varieties, have gained tremendous attention recently for their use in energy harvesting. Non-woven fabrics, in the form of thin membranes, provide high porosity, resulting in the absorption of more aqueous solution. On the other hand, the wet-laid process for producing non-woven fabrics has gained much interest because of its ease of processing and scalability of production. The non-woven fabric produced in this way can be used as a separator because it does not conduct electricity intrinsically; however, owing to its high absorbance, it can have high ionic conductivity, allowing the rapid transport of ions required for a high-efficiency electrolyte in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). Another advantage of using such materials is their flexibility, which makes them suitable for use in flexible solar cell applications. Commonly used polyethylene terephthalate (PET) is a cheap and strong synthetic fiber which is used for a variety of applications ranging from apparel to technical and is also used in medical applications. Owing to its low cost and availability in various forms, coupled with resistance to strong chemicals, the non-woven PET fabric can be manufactured in a variety of styles and shapes.

DSSCs have been focused on as a promising alternative to conventional solar cells due to their low cost, ease of fabrication, and suitability for a wide variety of applications. However, DSSCs prepared by sealing the liquid electrolyte between the photoanode and cathode suffer from the problem of electrolyte evaporation, which reduces the efficiency of the cell. Even highly efficient cells prepared with the liquid electrolyte sealed inside do not prove to be durable in the long term; therefore, researchers are trying to use other forms of electrolytes that could provide cells with higher resistance to weathering effects with less evaporation of the electrolyte, including non-volatile ionic liquids, polymer-based gel electrolytes and solid electrolytes. Ionic liquid electrolytes have a much lower efficiency, and the injection of a gel-based electrolyte is also a difficult step, due to its high viscosity; therefore, the efficiency of the DSSC falls far below that of those prepared with a liquid electrolyte. In such a case, the high ionic conductivity and high absorbance of the electrolyte together with resistance to the solvents used in the electrolyte are crucial properties for this type of separator. Recently, a very high conversion efficiency of 14.3% (ref. 27) has been achieved in a DSSC based on a liquid electrolyte; however, its lifetime is unknown. To address these issues, electrolytes based on membranes can be the best option for the fabrication of flexible, efficient and durable devices. Bella et al. prepared a crosslinked polymer electrolyte membrane and modified it with a titanium mesh (TiO2 nanotubes grown) to fabricate a flexible DSSC, however, the efficiency of the cells was only 3.4%. Gerbaldi et al. studied and compared the effect of carboxymethyl cellulose and micro-fibrillated cellulose as bio-sourced fillers in quasi-solid electrolytes for polymeric membrane based DSSCs. However, the preparation of the membrane was time consuming, due to the complex synthesis method and polymerization, and the fill factor of the cell was also very low.
Herein, we report a novel, thin, non-woven porous PET textile, which is capable of absorbing more electrolyte. It also shows improved durability due to its high ionic transport properties in conjunction with better solar cell durability with a high photovoltaic efficiency, which is as good as that of a liquid electrolyte. Other advantages include ease of processing, low cost, and flexibility as well as quicker and scalable fabrication. To improve the evenness of the produced non-woven fabric, it was calendared, and to improve the absorbance, the layer was plasma-treated with argon and oxygen separately. The results were compared with those obtained with a conventional liquid electrolyte in terms of photovoltaic and electrochemical properties, and the lifetime of the cells were also compared. The resulting DSSCs were optimized, and they exhibited a high photovoltaic conversion efficiency (PCE) of more than 10% at 1 sun illumination and a longer lifetime.

For the synthesis of titania nanotubes (TNTs), TiO2 (P25 by Degussa Co.), NaOH (98%, Samchun Co.), hydrochloric acid (37%, Samchun Chemicals Co.) and DI water were used. For the preparation of TiO2 pastes for photoelectrodes; P25 (Degussa Co.) and TNT, ethyl cellulous (Sigma-Aldrich Co.), terpineol (Aldrich Co.), and acetic acid (99.7%, Junsei Co.) were used as received. For fabrication of the wet-laid-based PET non-woven fabric, PET short-cut (0.06, 0.4, 1.1 De composite, 5 micrometers, Clean and Science Co.), a dispersing agent (Triton X-100), an antifoaming agent (polydimethylsiloxane), and adhesives (polyacrylamide and poly ethylene oxide composites, Clean and Science Co.) were used. For the photovoltaic cell assembly, FTO glass (TEC 7, Pilkington Co.), N719 (cis-diisothiocyanato-bis(2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylato)ruthenium(II)bis(tetrabutylammonium), Solaronix Co.), Surlyn for spacers (60 μm, Dupont Co.) and an anti-reflecting film (AR film, Toray chem. Co.) were used as received. Also, 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium iodide (BMII, Merck Co.), iodine (I2, Merck Co.), lithium iodide (LiI, Sigma-Aldrich Co.), 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP, Sigma-Aldrich Co.), and anhydrous acetonitrile were purchased for the preparation of electrolytes.


The PET-based membrane was prepared using the wet-laid method as mentioned in previous literature. PET staple fibers of 0.2 wt% (1.0 g) were placed in a PTFE-covered vessel containing 500 mL of H2O. A dispersing agent (1.0 mg) and an antifoaming agent (1.0 mg) were mixed with the PET staple fibers, which were dispersed in solution under stirring at 4400 rpm for 10 min. After stirring, 7500 mL of H2O and adhesives (0.3 mg) were added to the vessel under continuous stirring at 4400 rpm for 10 min. After that, the prepared slurry was removed from the vessel and then transferred to a lab-scale wet-laid system (Fig. 1). The PET particles were allowed to rest, and the supernatant was removed from the wet-laid system. Then, the mixed precursor was placed on a stainless steel (SUS) mesh indiscriminately. After drying below 70 °C for 4 h, a highly uniform PET-based non-woven membrane was produced. To reduce the thickness and improve the uniformity in terms of pore size and volume, the non-woven fabric was calendared (pressed between cylinders) three times under 60 kg cm−2 of pressure at 180 °C. Furthermore, to increase the absorbance of the liquid electrolyte, the prepared membrane was treated with oxygen and argon plasma separately for 2 min at 100 W using a plasma chamber (Europlasma Co., Italy).


To fabricate highly efficient photoanodes using TNT as an over layer, the recipe was used from our previous work. FTO glasses were cleaned with acetone, DI water, and ethanol by sonication and then dried. The cleaned FTO glasses (15 × 15 mm2) were immersed in TiCl4 solution (40 mM in water) for 30 min at 70 °C and successively washed with water and ethanol. After washing, the FTO substrates were annealed at 500 °C for 30 min. The pre-treated FTO glasses were coated with a DMT structure using a doctor blade. After printing, the TiO2 films were heated in six steps of 70 °C, 125 °C, 325 °C, 375 °C, 450 °C, and 500 °C for 30, 30, 5, 5, 15, and 15 min, respectively, using a high temperature furnace (Lab House Co.). The active area of the cells was about 4 × 5 mm2, which was measured by using a software equipped Camscope (ICS-305B, Sometech Co.). For post-treatment, the coated and sintered TiO2 films were immersed in TiCl4 solution (40 mM in water) for 30 min at 70 °C. After washing with water and ethanol, the films were again annealed at 500 °C for 30 min. After cooling down to less than 80 °C in a furnace, the annealed TiO2 films were rapidly immersed in N719 solution (0.5 mM in ethanol) and kept in an airtight glass-container at room temperature under dark and dry conditions for 24 hours.


The dye-covered photoanodes were washed to remove any unfixed dye using ethanol and then dried under nitrogen flow. The photoanodes and Pt-electrodes were sandwiched together using an ionomer spacer by hot-pressing at 80 °C for 20 s. After pressing, the electrolyte solution was injected into the cells through the one-holed FTO glass by a capillary effect under vacuum, and the holes were sealed with cover-glasses using the same spacer. The PET-membrane-based DSSCs were fabricated by sandwiching a slice of the separator membrane between the photoanode and the Pt-electrode. The schematic diagram in Fig. 2 shows the cells with different structures containing assemblies with different types of electrolyte. The membrane and inner-spacer size is 6 × 10 mm2. The resulting cells had an illuminated area of 0.2 cm2 with an AR film and black masking.


The morphology and structure of the materials were investigated by field emission-scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM, JEOL JSM-6700F). Load tests were carried out using a UTM with a 150 N loader. Pore size and porosity were measured using an AUTOPORE V through Mercury porosimetry (Micromeritics Co.) and a CFP-1200-AEL through capillary flow porometry (PMI Co.). Photocurrent–voltage measurements were performed using a K101-Lab20 (Mac Science Co.) source measuring unit. A solar simulator with a 160 W xenon arc lamp was used as a light source satisfying an AAA class (spectral match; 0.75–1.25, non-uniformity of irradiance; ≤±2%, temporal instability; ≤±2%). The light intensity was calibrated with a KIER-calibrated Si solar cell (Mc Science Co.). The electrochemical impedance spectra of the full cells were measured using an ultimate electrochemical workstation in the frequency range of 0.05 Hz to 500 kHz under 100 mW cm−2 (BioLogic Co.). The ionic conductivity of the membrane was measured by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) at room temperature using the symmetrical cell method. The electrolyte resistance, R, was measured using an ultimate electrochemical workstation in the frequency range of 0.1 Hz to 100 kHz, the AC oscillation was 10 mV. The diffusion constant of I3− was determined by using the same electrochemical workstation and the symmetric cells of a cyclic voltammogram using a slow scan rate (scan rate: 5 mV s−1, potential: −1 to 1 V). Their active area was 0.6 cm2.



Fig. 3 shows SEM images of the prepared PET membrane consisting of fibers as a web with an average diameter of about 2.5 μm. This membrane had high porosity and a completely interconnected-3D network structure. After calendaring, the pore size was decreased, resulting in better uptake of the electrolyte due to an even sheet thickness and improved distribution of the pores. The bare and calendared membranes show increased adequate strength to handle the membrane with ease. The bare membrane showed the maximum load of 271.1 and the calendared one showed 350.7 gf. The tensile stress at the maximum load was found to be 39.9 and 159.4 kgf cm−2 with elongation at the maximum load of 22.1 and 23.2%, respectively. The pore size and porosity percentage of the bare and calendared membranes were measured and are listed in Table 1. The bare membrane had a porosity of 82.57% which was slightly decreased to 80.33% after the calendaring, whereas the total pore area reduced from 13.49 m2 g−1 to 11.37 m2 g−1. However, after calendaring, the smallest pore size of 17.67 μm in the calendared sample was closer to the mean flow pore of 32.60, whereas in the bare sample, the difference between the smallest pore size and the mean flow pore was much higher, indicating that calendaring caused the samples to have a higher uniformity with respect to properties that can be attained, resulting in more regular transport of ions inside the membrane. The pore size distribution of the non-woven membranes before and after calendaring is plotted in Fig. 4. The bubble point pore in the bare membrane is 666.0178 μm, which is too wide to be called a pore, instead it can be considered as a hole. As seen in the distribution graph, around 60% of the pores fall in this category, and as listed in Table 1, the average pore size of the bare membrane is 483.3546 μm. Such a large pore may be regarded as a defect, and may not retain the electrolyte for long. However, as seen in Table 1, after calendaring, the average pore size dropped to only 32 μm. Also as seen in Fig. 3, only 25% of the pores fall near the bubble point pore, making the membrane more uniform with respect to pore size. With small and more uniformly distributed pores, the electrolyte can be easily held inside the membrane for a longer period of time and the membrane may be able to hold sufficient electrolyte for a longer period of time. It is also important to note that, after calendaring, the contact between the fibers constructing the membrane increases, thereby resulting in better transport of the electrolyte ions through newly formed channels.

Total intrusion volume (mL g−1)
Total pore area (m2 g−1)
Apparent density (g mL−1)
Porosity (%)
Smallest pore (μm)
Mean flow pore (μm)
Bubble point pore (μm)
Standard deviation
Bare
6.7925
13.490
0.6975
82.5706
34.3064
483.3546
666.0178
443.4995
Calendared
5.1979
11.373
0.7859
80.3344
17.6756
32.6043
663.9853
137.2946
Nine (09) membranes were randomly chosen and measured for thickness before and after calendaring. Their calculated weight and statistical analysis results are given in Table 2. The average thickness of the bare samples was measured to be 35.3 μm, which dropped to only 14.9 μm after calendaring. It was observed that calendared samples had less variation and showed smaller standard deviation (STD) and coefficient of variation (CV%) values compared to non-calendared samples, as shown in Table 2. This can be ascribed to the uniformity of the membrane which is required for high-efficiency cells because of better ionic transport due to a more compact structure.
Sample
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Range
AVG
STD
CV%
Bare
31
33
35
36
34
36
40
38
35
9
35.3
2.4
7.1
Calendared
14
15
14
15
16
16
16
14
14
2
14.9
0.9
5.9


Fig. 5 shows the overall photovoltaic performance, current–voltage (J–V curve), of the DSSCs prepared using bare and calendared non-woven membrane electrolytes and the liquid electrolyte, evaluated under AM 1.5 illumination (1 sun, 100 mW cm−2). The obtained cell parameters of DSSCs, the short-circuit current (JSC), open-circuit voltage (VOC), fill factor (FF), and overall conversion efficiency (PCE%), are summarized in Table 3. Fig. 5 and Table 3 show that the liquid-electrolyte-based cells achieved better photovoltaic performance than both types of non-woven samples. The overall conversion efficiency of the liquid-electrolyte-based cell was 11.18% compared to 9.93% and 10.24%, showed by the bare and calendared membrane-based cells, respectively. The JSC of the liquid-electrolyte-based cell was 18.95 mA cm−2 which was higher than those of 17.37 mA cm−2 and 17.95 mA cm−2 of the bare and calendared membrane-based cells, respectively. Additionally, there was not much difference between the VOC of the three cells, which can be attributed to the excellent interfacial contact between the two electrodes and high ionic transport, even when the proposed non-woven fabric was used. It was also revealed that the bare membrane reached 88.9% of the performance of the liquid electrolyte, and the calendared non-woven membrane reached 91.6%, suggesting that this novel thin, wet-laid, non-woven membrane can certainly be used as an electrolyte medium in high-performance DSSCs.

Electrolyte type

V
OC [V]

J
SC [mA]
FF [%]
PCE [%]
Liquid
0.686
18.958
85.937
11.176
Membrane
0.689
17.370
82.996
9.933
Membrane*
0.686
17.955
83.145
10.241

The internal kinetics of DSSCs, such as the essence of hole–electron transport processes and the behaviours of interfacial charge transport, can be understood by measuring the electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) of solar devices. All the EIS spectra were simulated using EC-Lab software according to the equivalent circuit shown in Fig. 6. The internal resistance and capacitance values of the cells are listed in Table 4, and the corresponding Nyquist plots are shown in Fig. 7. In a Nyquist plot, the complex impedance of a typical DSSC is the sum of all components, given as RS, Z1, Z2, and Z3. Here, RS denotes the contact impedance between the substrate (FTO) and metal ohmic contact (series resistance, RS), which is the only real part of impedance. The first semicircle corresponds to the charge transfer resistance at the counter electrode to electrolyte interface. The second semicircle shows a complex impedance of the interface among the photoanode, dye molecules, and the redox shuttle. The final semicircle represents the diffusion of tri-iodide ions related to the Warburg impedance; it can also be hidden in the second semi-circle.

Electrolyte type

R
S [Ohm cm2]

R
1 [Ohm cm2]

C
1 [F cm−2]

R
2 [Ohm cm2]

C
2 [F cm−2]

R
3 [Ohm cm2]

C
3 [F cm−2]

τ
e [ms]

δ [S cm−1]
 [cm
2 s−1]
Liquid
0.566
0.088
3.59 × 10−3
0.697
3.19 × 10−2
0.255
1.000
23.49
0.0209
3.64 × 10−6
Membrane
0.593
0.175
1.21 × 10−4
0.706
2.73 × 10−2
0.386
9.89 × 10−1
21.37
0.0036
1.43 × 10−6
Membrane*
0.570
0.155
1.08 × 10−4
0.617
2.77 × 10−2
0.450
1.291
17.76
0.0137
1.65 × 10−6
As shown in the Nyquist plots in Fig. 7, the starting point of the EIS, which is RS is the same as that of the electrode in all three cases and is the same for FTO glass. However, as the first semicircle is build up, the distinction starts to reveal, as the liquid-electrolyte-based cells provide less interfacial resistance and lower impedance than the other two cells. The membrane-based cells show a slightly higher impedance trend due to the contact between the membrane and the counter electrode. This contact can make a lower active area of the substrate, thereby decreasing the ionic transport and electron transfer in the cells. The structure having a membrane shows a larger second semi-circle due to the higher interfacial charge resistance between the semiconductor and redox shuttle. However, the calendared, thin membrane showed a relatively smaller semicircle than the thicker one, owing to its better evenness. Hence, it can be concluded that internal resistance depends upon the thickness, as we know that resistance = (thickness)/(area).
The charge transport and conductivity behaviour of the DSSCs can be explained by the Nyquist plots shown in Fig. 7 (top). It can be seen that the liquid-electrolyte-based cells show a higher total impedance shifted towards left, thereby indicating a lower recombination rate than that of the non-woven-membrane-based electrolyte. However, between the other two, the calendared, thin non-woven-membrane-based cells showed a higher peak due to the lower recombination rate compared to that of the bare membrane.
The electron life time (τe) is obtained from the Bode plot peaks in the middle-frequency range (0.1 to 100 Hz), by following the relationship in which ‘f’ is the frequency of the peak.
For all the cells having different electrolyte structures, the effective life time is almost identical with a frequency difference of only 1 or 2 steps. Therefore, we focused on different ionic conductivities and diffusion coefficients of the electrolyte.

Table 4 lists the ionic conductivities (δ) and diffusion coefficients of I3− of the three different types of electrolytes (the bulk resistance of symmetrical cells and cyclic voltammogram plots are shown in the ESI Fig. S2 and S3). The liquid electrolyte, as a reference, exhibits an ionic conductivity of 2.09 × 10−2 S cm−1 at room temperature; whereas the bare and calendared non-woven show ionic conductivities of 0.36 × 10−2 S cm−1 and 1.37 × 10−2 S cm−1, respectively. There was no boundary separation between the electrolyte and electrode. The decrease in the ionic conductivity and diffusion coefficient with the bare membrane is related to the generation of free volume at the membrane interface. The pressed membrane having decreased porosity and pore size with increased evenness showed a better ionic conductivity and diffusion coefficient. These results indicate that the pressed membrane provides the most desirable structure for ionic transport among the electrolytes under study. Comparing the results of the photocurrent and diffusion coefficient of I3−, an increase in JSC with different types of membrane is found to be related to the improved diffusion of I3−, as shown in Tables 3 and 4. On the other hand, the type of electrolyte has only a minor influence on the VOC, indicating that the non-woven membrane works as well as the liquid electrolyte.

In addition to the high photovoltaic properties, the long-term stability of cells is a very important parameter of DSSCs, and better absorption of the electrolyte in the separator can enhance the life of the cells. As mentioned earlier, the calendared PET membranes were plasma-treated with argon and oxygen separately for higher absorption of the electrolyte, aiming to retain most of the electrolyte and maintain a higher long-term stability, and were also compared with other types of electrolytes in terms of long-term durability of the DSSCs. The PCE values of the cells were recorded at regular intervals for four (04) weeks as a function of time, and the results are plotted in Fig. 8. In order to expedite the effect of atmospheric conditions, the cells were maintained at 60 °C.

Though the DSSC assembled with the liquid electrolyte showed a high efficiency after being assembled, its PCE decreased continuously during the testing period. The cell lost 45% of its initial conversion efficiency after 4 weeks. The normal decay of the PCE in the DSSC based on the liquid electrolyte is related to the evaporation of the electrolyte due to imperfect sealing of the DSSC having a thinner nanostructure. The bare PET-based DSSC lost the PCE rapidly within 2 weeks; however, it remained almost constant until 3 weeks. The overall drop in the PCE of the bare-PET-based DSSC was 30%, which was much lower than that of the liquid-electrolyte-based cells. On the other hand, the calendared-PET-based DSSC lost PCE slower than the bare-PET cell; however, after 24 days, it lost PCE rapidly and showed a similar PCE loss as that of bare-PET cells. Of the plasma-treated samples, the argon-treated sample showed a slightly higher efficiency compared to oxygen treated one. The oxygen plasma can be said to have a better effect on the uptake, yet it may also deteriorate the surface of the PET substrate, due to which, the cells may have shown a slightly lower efficiency in the first 15 days. The argon plasma, as is less effective on the organic impurities, which may have remained on the substrate and in contact with the electrolyte, may have started to react with argon to lessen its effect which might be the reason for the drop in the efficiency after 15 days. Though the exact reasons are not known, therefore, we propose this investigation as a future work. These results clearly indicate that plasma treatment increases the cell lifetime of membrane-based DSSCs. To support the discussion, we conducted the wicking test for the four types of the membranes used in the experiment. The membranes were dipped in the electrolyte solution and the results were recorded after 100 s in order to allow the membranes to complete the possible wicking inside their pores. As shown in Fig. S5, the plasma treated membranes resulted with higher uptake of the electrolyte compared to non-treated. However, there was no significant difference in the uptake of oxygen and argon plasma treated samples.

In conclusion, a thin, lightweight, low-cost and easily fabricated PET non-woven membrane was successfully synthesized through a scalable wet-laid process, commonly known in the non-woven textile industry. This novel membrane was used as a matrix for liquid electrolytes with high absorbance. The optimized DSSC assembled with the calendared membrane exhibiting a very high PCE of 10.24%, reaching 91.74% of the reference cell value, giving better long-term stability compared to the reference liquid-electrolyte-based DSSC under 1 sun illumination. In addition, the non-woven membrane was plasma-treated to enhance its uptake towards the electrolyte to increase the long-term stability of the DSSC, which resulted in a 15% longer lifetime compared to the liquid-electrolyte-based DSSC. The ionic transport and diffusion coefficients of the membrane-based cells were almost the same as those of liquid electrolytes, demonstrating their suitability for use in high efficiency DSSCs. If it is possible to prepare a thinner membrane without the calendaring process, it can provide more useful information for this study. The proposed novel membrane is a promising candidate to further improve the lifetime and efficiency of electronic devices, and it will provide a useful step towards the development of next-generation photovoltaic devices.


This work was supported by the ministry of trade, industry and energy, Republic of Korea (10049639) and Manpower Development Program for Energy, supported by the Ministry of Knowledge Economy (MKE), Republic of Korea.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta07720f
‡ These authors have equal contribution.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016