 DOI: 10.1039/C4TA03120B
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 15406-15413


Jie
Fan
,

Lei
Li
,

Hua-Shang
Rao
,

Qiu-Li
Yang
,

Jianyong
Zhang
,

Hong-Yan
Chen
*,

Liuping
Chen
,

Dai-Bin
Kuang
* and 

Cheng-Yong
Su


MOE Key Laboratory of Bioinorganic and Synthetic Chemistry, KLGHEI of Environment and Energy Chemistry, State Key Laboratory of Optoelectronic Materials and Technologies, School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Lehn Institute of Functional Materials, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510275, P. R. China. E-mail: chenhy33@mail.sysu.edu.cn; kuangdb@mail.sysu.edu.cn; Fax: +86-20-8411-3015; Tel: +86-20-8411-3015

Received
19th June 2014
, Accepted 18th July 2014
First published on 21st July 2014
Metal–organic skeleton based gel electrolytes are prepared for the first time for high efficiency quasi-solid-state DSSCs. The gel electrolytes feature in their sponge-like porous matrix of a metal–organic gel (MOG) assembled by coordination of Al3+ and 1,3,5-benzenetricarboxylate (H3BTC), which can provide an excellent ability to accommodate electrolyte ingredients, thus largely preserving the properties of the liquid electrolyte. Meanwhile, the MOG electrolyte can well penetrate into the photoanode film to ensure a good interfacial contact. The effects of the concentration of active species in the MOG electrolyte on the photoelectrical performances are investigated. On increasing the concentration, Jsc of gel-state cells improves gradually due to the enhanced I−/I3− redox couple content, while Voc undergoes an increase first but decreases subsequently. The synergistic function of cations (such as Al3+, Li+, etc.) and tert-butylpyridine (TBP), which can induce a conductive band (CB) shift of the TiO2 photoanode and affect the electron recombination, may contribute to the variation of Voc. By optimizing the composition of the gel electrolyte, a high conversion efficiency of over 8.60% can be obtained, which is a little lower than that of a liquid-state cell (9.13%). This research study will open up a new way to fabricate quasi-solid-state DSSCs with high efficiency.

As one class of the most attractive potential alternative photovoltaic devices to traditional fossil energy, dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) have attracted much attention in recent years. The energy conversion efficiency of this kind of cell has reached 13%, but the poor long-term performances of liquid electrolyte based cells related to leakage/evaporation of organic solvents, dissociation of dye molecules, corrosion of the counter electrode, and so on, have restricted their practical applications. Therefore, a solid-state/quasi-solid-state electrolyte was highly pursued recently, in an effort to enhance the stability of DSSCs. The substitutes include p-type inorganic semiconductors, organic hole transport materials (HTMs), ionic liquids, polymer and gel materials,etc. For example, small organic molecule 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-MeOTAD) is a kind of frequently used efficient HTM to construct solid-state DSSCs, and a high conversion efficiency of 7.2% has been reported. However, the photovoltaic performances of these solid alternative electrolytes were usually lower than those of liquid ones, because they always suffered from their relatively lower ion conductivity and high viscosity that would result in poor penetration into the pores of the photoanode. Compared to all solid-state electrolytes, the conductivity of quasi-solid-state electrolytes was usually much higher, which should be more beneficial to achieve better photovoltaic performances. Methods concerning the improvement of the conductivity and contact between viscous electrolyte and porous semiconductor films are under development.

Among the reported quasi-solid-state materials, the supramolecular gel electrolyte prepared by gelating a liquid electrolyte with low molecular weight organogelators (LMWGs) showed good advantages. On one hand, this kind of gel formed via weak non-covalent interactions, such as hydrogen bonding, π–π stacking, and hydrophobic interactions, was generally thermally reversible, and can permeate well into the pores of the photoanode at high temperature and form a solid 3D self-assembly network of LMWGs upon cooling. On the other hand, the liquid content in the supramolecular gel electrolyte can be as high as over 97%, which may preserve the properties of the liquid electrolyte largely. Although the conversion efficiency of supramolecular gel electrolytes was usually a little lower than that of liquid electrolytes, functionalization of the gel matrix, by modification with photoelectric functional groups, might be an effective way to enhance the electrochemical performances of the electrolyte. For instance, liquid crystal molecule based LMWGs were used to prepare gel electrolytes, and the strong light scattering effect of the liquid crystal network improved the efficiency to 8%.
As a special kind of supramolecular gel formed by introducing metal into organic gel systems, metal–organic gels (MOGs) are considered as a new multifunctional soft material. In contrast to common supramolecular gels, MOGs are mainly assembled from bridging organic ligands and metal ions, which is more similar to the formation of metal–organic frameworks (MOFs). Therefore, MOGs show many metal-specific features, and their functions can be well tailored by both ligand design and metal selection. For example, catalytic MOGs with Pd active centres, and smart sensitive MOGs responsive to multiple stimuli such as light, heat, and anions, have been reported. Moreover, it was found that MOGs can also be prepared by gelation of crystalline MOF nanoparticles through a self-assembly process, e.g. Al(III)-multicarboxylate system, indicating that the multifunctionality of MOFs, such as porosity and catalysis, can be introduced to enhance the function of MOGs. These features make MOGs attractive potential candidates for a wide range of applications including catalysis, sensors, adsorption, photoelectric materials, etc. If these multifunctional supramolecular gels were introduced to the quasi-solid-state electrolyte for solar cells, an elevated photovoltaic performance could be envisaged. However, no work concerning on this issue has been reported. Recently, Bella et al. tried to disperse Mg-based MOF particles on a polymer matrix to prepare composite polymer electrolytes for quasi-solid-state DSSCs, and an enhanced efficiency of 4.8% was obtained due to interactions between the terminal carboxyl groups of the Mg–MOF particles and the TiO2 photoanode. Here we report, for the first time, a metal–organic matrix based gel electrolyte for efficient quasi-solid-state DSSCs. MOGs assembled by Al3+ and 1,3,5-benzenetricarboxylate (H3BTC) are used to illustrate the effect of the metal–organic matrix. The sponge-like porous metal–organic skeleton shows great potential in holding a considerable amount of solvent and active species of the electrolyte, thus preserving the properties of the electrolyte, and a high conversion efficiency of over 8.60% is obtained. The effects of different ingredients in the metal–organic gel electrolyte (MOGE) on the performance of the electrolyte are investigated in detail.

In a sample vial, Al(NO3)3·9H2O (0.05 mmol, 18.8 mg) and benzenetricarboxylic acid (H3BTC, 0.02 mmol, 4.2 mg) were dissolved in a 1 mL mixture of acetonitrile and ethanol (v/v = 1/1). The transparent solution was kept at 80 °C for 30 min to obtain a semilucent gel. For the preparation of gel electrolyte, the gel was immersed into a 0.5 mL I−/I3− redox pair based liquid electrolyte with different concentrations (1C, 2C, 4C, 6C) for 24 h to allow sufficient absorption of active ingredients. Then the residual liquid was poured out. The liquid electrolyte of 1C concentration consisted of 0.03 M I2, 0.05 M LiI, 0.6 M 1-methyl-3-propylimidazolium iodide (PMII), 0.10 M guanidinium thiocyanate (GuSCN), and 0.5 M tert-butylpyridine (TBP) in a mixture of acetonitrile and valeronitrile (v/v = 85/15). For 2C, 4C and 6C precursors, 2-fold, 4-fold and 6-fold solutes were dissolved in 1 mL solvents, respectively. The actual concentrations of the resultant solution were smaller than 2, 4 and 6-fold of precursor 1C.

An AgI precipitation method was used to analyze the amount of iodine element in the gel electrolyte. Excessive AgNO3 solution was added into the residual liquid electrolyte after gel absorption to determine the concentration of iodine element left in the electrolyte solution (cI,left). The complete conversion of iodine can be monitored by the starch iodide test. The concentration of iodine in the gel electrolyte (cI) can be estimated by the expression cI = cI,total − cI,left. The concentration of TBP in the gel electrolyte was determined by UV-vis absorption spectroscopy and a standard curve method. Similarly, the concentration of TBP in the residual liquid electrolyte after gel absorption was tested using the absorption spectrum first (Fig. S2b). The residual liquids were diluted to a suitable concentration for accurate measurements. Then the concentration of TBP in the gel electrolyte can be estimated by the expression cTBP = cT,total − cT,left.

The home-made TiO2 nanoparticle films were used as the photoanodes. TiO2 nanoparticles with a diameter of ∼20 nm were synthesized through a hydrothermal method, and screen-printed onto FTO glass to prepare photoanode films with a thickness of ∼17 μm, using the procedure reported in our previous work. The film thickness was measured using a profilometer (Ambios, XP-1) and the active area of films was approximately 0.16 cm2. The nanoparticle photoanodes were sensitized by N719 dye molecules for 16 h, before which TiCl4 treatment was conducted to improve the connectivity between nanoparticles in films. The platinized FTO glass electrodes were used as the counter electrodes which were prepared by thermal deposition of chloroplatinic acid solution (5 mM in isopropanol) on the surface of the FTO glass substrate at 400 °C for 15 min. To assemble the devices, the liquid electrolyte or gel electrolytes were sandwiched between the dye-sensitized photoanode and the counter electrode to form simple cells.


The morphology and structure of the MOG matrix were examined by field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM, JSM-6330F) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM, JEM2010-HR). In order to preserve the matrix structure, the MOG was dried by the subcritical CO2 extraction method. The experiment was carried out in a high-pressure Soxhlet extractor, in which the solvent in the wet gel was exchanged with subcritical CO2(l) for 20 h. The crystalline structure of the MOG matrix was examined by powder X-ray diffractometry (XRD, Bruker D8). UV-vis absorption spectra were recorded on a UV/vis/NIR spectrophotometer (UV, Shimadzu UV-3150). The penetration of the gel electrolyte into the photoanode was also characterized by FE-SEM equipped with an energy dispersive X-ray spectrometry system (EDX, INCA, Oxford). An ac impedance technique performed on an electrochemical workstation (Zahner, Zennium) was used to determine the ionic conductivities of electrolytes. A symmetric cell with a Pt/electrolyte/Pt structure was used for characterization. The scanning frequency range was 1 MHz to 40 Hz with a voltage amplitude of 10 mV. The ion conductivity was calculated by the equation σ = L/(ARb), where L is the thickness of the electrolyte film, A is the area of the electrode, and Rb is the intercept of the Nyquist plot with the real axis at high frequency.

The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of DSSCs were recorded using a Keithley 2400 source meter. The solar light simulator (Oriel, Model: 91192) with a 1000 W xenon arc lamp (Oriel, Model: 6271) was used as the light source, and the incident light intensity was calibrated to one sun AM 1.5 G 100 mW cm−2 by a NREL-calibrated Si solar cell before each measurement. Intensity-modulated photovoltage spectroscopy (IMVS) was also performed on a Zennium electrochemical workstation equipped with a frequency response analyzer. A blue light emitting diode (457 nm) was used as the light source. It was driven by a Zahner PP211 source supply. The light intensity was modulated to 30, 60, 90, 120 and 150 W m−2, and the scanning frequency range was set from 1000 Hz to 10 mHz. The modulated light intensity was 10% or less than the base light intensity.

The Al(III)-multicarboxylate systems have been reported to be a simple and effective way to solidify polar solvents. Recently, this system was found to form MOF nanoparticle based MOGs via a stepwise assembly process. That is, crystalline particles with an ordered 3D framework were formed first, which subsequently bridged together to gelate the solvent. Fig. S1 shows the typical Al–BTC gel matrix prepared by using aluminum nitrate nonahydrate and H3BTC as gelators, with Al3+ of 0.2 M and Al3+:H3BTC = 1:1. The gel skeleton consisting of randomly stacked nanoparticles shows a special multi-scale pore structure that integrates well-ordered micropores of MOF nanoparticles and unordered meso/macropores between stacked nanoparticles, thus can provide a big specific surface area for solvent absorption and solidification. This strong gelation ability can be witnessed by further reducing the concentration of coordination ions. As shown in Fig. 1a the stable gel can still be obtained when the concentration of Al3+ was decreased to 0.05 M (Al3+:H3BTC = 5:2). Fig. 1b shows the SEM image of the as-prepared gel matrix after dried by subcritical CO2 extraction. Different from the gel formed at high gelator concentration, a sponge-like porous network assembled by nanosheets can be observed in this case with the large void spaces corresponding to the position of the solvent in the gel, which should be attributed mainly to the very low gelator concentration. What is more, the solid content of the skeleton matrix in this MOG is estimated to be only ∼1.1 wt% (∼9.3 mg mL−1). It indicates that this gel would greatly preserve the properties of the liquid phase, which should be very beneficial to the electrochemical applications.

For the preparation of the gel electrolyte, the Al–BTC (0.05 M) gels were swelled in the precursor liquid electrolyte with different concentrations to absorb the active ingredients, including I−, I3−, PMII, Li+, TBP, and GuSCN. Due to the special porous structure of the gel matrix, these active ingredients can be held effectively in the porous network. Fig. 1c inset shows the photograph of the pristine gel and gel electrolyte with different concentrations, respectively (the gel electrolyte prepared from the liquid electrolyte of 1C, 2C, 4C and 6C concentrations was denoted as MOGE1, MOGE2, MOGE4 and MOGE6, respectively). After being soaked in liquid electrolytes, the semitransparent white gel turns brown and the colour get darker on increasing the concentration of the precursor liquid electrolyte, implying that the gels have absorbed more and more active ingredients. Table 1 summarizes the concentration of iodine and TBP, two major active species in the electrolyte, in gel electrolytes. The former was determined by the AgI precipitation method and the latter was examined by UV-vis absorption spectroscopy and a standard curve method (Fig. S2). Both the content of iodine and TBP in gel electrolytes increase gradually with increasing concentration of precursor electrolytes. MOGE6 even has higher iodine content than the reference 1C liquid electrolyte, which has been proven to be the optimal concentration to get the best photovoltaic performances. Correspondingly, the ion conductivity of the gel electrolytes increases gradually with more active ingredients, approaching the value of the reference liquid electrolyte, as shown in Fig. 1c and Table 1.

J
sc [mA cm−2]

V
oc [mv]
FF

η [%]

η* [%]

I [mol L−1]
TBP [mol L−1]

σ [mS cm−1]

a 
η* is the efficiency with standard deviation calculated from three independent cells.

MOG
0.05
MOGE1
11.09
728
0.69
5.58
5.58 ± 0.15
0.211
0.139
3.38
MOGE2
15.28
749
0.69
7.85
7.85 ± 0.08
0.413
0.287
4.45
MOGE4
16.67
756
0.69
8.69
8.69 ± 0.11
0.591
0.338
5.82
MOGE6
17.10
734
0.68
8.49
8.49 ± 0.10
0.752
0.430
7.43
Liquid
16.75
789
0.69
9.13
9.13 ± 0.05
0.710
0.500
9.27
The photovoltaic performances of these novel gel electrolytes were evaluated using TiO2 nanoparticle photoanodes with a thickness of ∼17 μm. As is known, the interfacial contact between photoanode and gel electrolyte is one of the key factors affecting the photovoltaic performances of quasi-solid-state solar cells. Therefore, SEM images were taken first to evaluate the penetration of MOGE into nanoporous TiO2 photoanodes. As shown in Fig. 2a, individual TiO2 nanoparticle and interparticle pores can be clearly distinguished in the pristine photoanode film. After filling with the gel electrolyte, the cross-section of the film is covered thoroughly by a layer of the gel, even at the bottom of the film (Fig. 2b). Individual nanoparticles cannot be distinguished. This result is further confirmed by EDX elemental analysis. As shown in Fig. 2c, both I and Al elements distribute homogeneously across the whole film, indicating that the gel electrolyte has infiltrated thoroughly into the porous nanoparticle film to form a good contact between them. This result makes it possible to get an excellent photovoltaic performance.

Fig. 3a shows the typical J–V characteristics of DSSCs based on MOGE with various concentrations. The average photovoltaic parameters including short circuit current density (Jsc), open circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (FF), overall energy conversion efficiency (η) and statistical efficiency with standard deviation (η*) of these cells are listed in Table 1. For comparison, the performances of liquid-state cells based on reference 1C liquid electrolyte is also examined, which exhibits a efficiency of 9.13% with a Jsc of 16.75 mA cm−2, a Voc of 789 mV and a FF of 0.69. This value decreases dramatically to 5.58% when this liquid electrolyte is used to prepare a metal–organic matrix based gel electrolyte (MOGE1), with both Jsc and Voc decreasing dramatically, which should be preliminary attributed to the fewer active ingredient contents sucked up by the gel. With increasing the active ingredient concentration, the η of gel-state cells increases gradually, approaches a maximum value of 8.69% for MOGE4, and then decreases with further increasing the concentration.
Compared with liquid-state cells, all the FF of gel-state cells are almost the same as the former. Therefore, the change of conversion efficiency is caused mainly by the variation of Jsc and Voc. The Jsc of gel-state cells increases with increasing precursor concentration, e.g., from 11.09 mA cm−2 for MOGE1 to 17.10 mA cm−2 for MOGE6. The enhanced current density can be mainly attributed to the increased concentration of active species in the gel electrolyte, especially the concentration of the I−/I3− redox couple. It is known that reduction of dye cations will be fast if sufficient amounts of I−/I3− redox pairs exist in the electrolyte, which will lead to a higher photocurrent. Since the total iodine concentration in MOGE1 is estimated to be only 0.211 M, less than one third of that of the reference liquid electrolyte (0.710 M), a low Jsc of only 11.09 mA cm−2 is obtained. As the amount of I−/I3− redox pair increases gradually, the resulting Jsc in gel-state cells increases accordingly. As for MOGE6, the total iodine content (0.752 M) is even higher than the reference liquid electrolyte, thus a similar or a little higher Jsc is obtained. In addition, the enhanced electron injection efficiency caused by positive shift of the conduction band in MOGE based cells might be another reason for the similar or higher Jsc. This will be discussed below.
On the other hand, all the Voc of gel-state cells are lower than liquid one; moreover, this value increases first and then decreases with increasing precursor concentration, and a maximum value is achieved for MOGE4, thus results in a maximum efficiency for the MOGE4 based cell. The Voc of DSSCs refers to the difference between the Fermi level of the electron in the semiconductor photoanode and the redox potential of the electrolyte (as illustrated in Fig. 4c). It has been well investigated that the constituents in the electrolyte, e.g., cations with different concentrations such as Li+, additives such as TBP, showed great influence on shifting the conduction band (CB) edge of TiO2 photoanodes. To shed light on the effects of MOGE with different concentrations on the CB of TiO2, the Voc of cells as the function of charge density (Q) was examined by intensity-modulated photovoltage spectroscopy (IMVS) measurement. Q was obtained by charge extraction at open circuit under various light intensities. As shown in Fig. 4a, the liquid-state cell shows the highest Voc at the same charge density, implying that the CB level of the TiO2 photoanode shifts positively in all these gel-state cells. This positive shift can be attributed to the large amount of Al3+ in the current Al–BTC gel which can be adsorbed onto the TiO2 surface and shift the CB to the positive side, leading to a decreased Voc. In addition, for the gel-state cells, with increasing concentration of active ingredients in the gel electrolyte, the MOGE2 based cell shows a maximum Voc, indicating that the CB level of TiO2 shifts negatively first, reaching a maximum value for the MOGE2 based cell, and then goes downward subsequently. This phenomenon should be based on the following factors: (1) in addition to Al3+, a large amount of Li+ and imidazolium cation also exists in gel electrolytes, and their concentration increase in the order of MOGE1 < MOGE2 < MOGE4 < MOGE6, since the absorption method was used to prepare gel electrolytes, more and more electrolyte constituents should be sucked in the gel body with increasing concentration of the precursor. To a certain degree, more cations in gel electrolytes mean a bigger positive shift of the TiO2 CB. (2) The exception of MOGE2, the CB level of which shifts negatively compared with the MOGE1 might result from the increased concentration of TBP in the electrolyte. TBP has been illustrated as an important additive in the I−/I3− redox couple electrolyte and Li+ as their counter cation, because its adsorption onto the TiO2 surface can reduce the surface positive charge density, thus shifting the CB edge level of TiO2 negatively, which have been proved to be a main factor in achieving higher Voc (Fig. 4c). According to the UV-vis absorption spectrum, the TBP concentration in MOGE2 was estimated to be 0.287 M (Table 1), more than two times that of MOGE1 (0.139 M), so the CB could be pulled back to a more negative level. However, further increasing the TBP content does not have a strong effect as expected, a subsequent downward shift happens to MOGE4 and MOGE6 based cells. This result is obtained from the competition between cations and TBP, the amount of which increases simultaneously in gel electrolytes. The synergistic effect of TBP and cations in the gel electrolyte leads to the changes of CB edge level of the TiO2 photoanode, thus affecting the Voc of DSSCs. On the other hand, the positive shift of the CB in gel-state cells is also beneficial to enhance the electron injection efficiency by providing a large driving force; therefore, a much higher Jsc for the MOGE6 based cell is obtained.
According to CB shift analysis, the MOGE2 based cell should exhibit the highest Voc. In fact, the MOGE4 based cell shows a little higher value than the former. In general, the Voc value is quite sensitive to the electron recombination and electron lifetime in the conduction band of the photoanode. Therefore, the electron recombination in gel-based cells was also examined. Fig. 3b shows the J–V characteristics of cells tested in the dark. Obvious dark currents can be observed at high bias (>600 mV), and all the gel-state cells exhibit higher values than the liquid-state cell, indicating more serious electron combination happened in gel-state cells. Serious electron combination usually leads to lower Voc. It should be noted that the MOGE1 and MOGE6 based cells, containing the fewest and the most amount of active constituents, respectively, show smaller onset bias and higher dark current density than the other two cells, implying more severe recombination reaction happen in them. Consequently, they exhibit lower Voc. Compared with MOGE2, the MOGE4 based cell shows a little lower dark current density, which will lead to a higher Voc. In addition, the electron lifetime (τ) of the conduction band electrons was also investigated in an effort to further elucidate the influence of electron recombination on the variation of Voc. Fig. 4b shows the relationship between the electron lifetime and the applied voltage for the DSSCs. At the same applied potential, the liquid-state cell has the longest lifetime, while all the gel-state cells exhibit a much shorter lifetime, confirming that more serious electron recombination reaction happened in these cells. It is worth mentioning that the electron lifetime also increases first and then decreases with increasing concentration of gel electrolyte, but at this time, for MOGE4, the lifetime reaches the maximum value. This result can be attributed mainly to the effect of TBP in the electrolyte. As one of the most important additives in the electrolyte containing an I−/I3− redox couple, TBP is known to suppress the dark current and thus to improve the Voc of DSSCs. The adsorption of TBP onto the TiO2 surface can inhibit the recombination between the electrons in the conductive band and I3− ions in the electrolyte. As a result, higher TBP concentration would lead to an improved electron lifetime, thus a bigger τ value was obtained from MOGE1 to MOGE4 cell. But the positive role of TBP should be limited to a suitable concentration range. For MOGE6, although the concentration of TBP has reached 0.430 M, the electron lifetime decreased relatively. The possible reason is the large amount of I−/I3− redox couple (0.752 M of total iodine) existing in MOGE6 at the same time which is even higher than that of the reference liquid electrolyte. The excessive I3− in the electrolyte would greatly enhance the possibility of electron recombination. It is known that longer electron lifetime would lead to higher Voc; the variation of electron lifetime is in good agreement with the obtained J–V data.
According to the analysis above, one can conclude that the concentration of active species in MOG based electrolytes plays an important role in determining the photochemical performances. With increasing concentration, the Jsc of gel-state cells improved gradually due to the enhanced I−/I3− redox couple content, and may also be ascribed to the positive shift of the CB edge level of the TiO2 photoanode. As for the Voc, the CB shift and electron recombination induced by active species such as TBP and cations may synergistically contribute to the variation of Voc. Increasing the concentration of cations would pull down the CB edge of the TiO2 photoanode, but an increased amount of TBP would not only shift the CB negatively to a certain extent, but also inhibit the electron recombination effectively at the TiO2/electrolyte interfaces. The competition between the two functions led to a maximum Voc value for the MOGE4 based cell, thus an optimized η of 8.69% was obtained. This result can be further confirmed by another electrolyte controlling experiment. In this case, the precursor concentration for gel electrolyte preparation was kept at 4C, while the volume was varied from 0.2 to 0.8 mL, so as to control the concentration of as-prepared MOGEs. As shown in Fig. S3 and Table S1, with increasing the content of active ingredients, the η of cells increases first and then decreases, which is similar to the result mentioned above. The increased concentration of MOGE can lead to enhanced Jsc, but will impair the Voc when exceeding the certain concentration limit. Since the metal–organic network skeleton supplied a large ability to accommodate electrolyte ingredients, the composition of the electrolyte can be optimized to achieve high photovoltaic performances.

In summary, a series of novel metal–organic skeleton based gel electrolytes are prepared for high efficiency quasi-solid-state DSSCs. A simple absorption method is carried out to prepare gel electrolytes by swelling Al–BTC gels in a liquid precursor. The Al–BTC matrix exhibits a special multi-scale porous structure which can provide a good ability to accommodate electrolyte ingredients that largely preserves the properties of the liquid electrolyte. Meanwhile, the gel electrolytes can penetrate well into the photoanode film to ensure a good contact between them. As a result, a power conversion efficiency of as high as 8.69% can be obtained, which is only about 5% lower than that of the liquid-state cell. It is found that the concentration of active species in MOGE plays important roles in determining the photochemical performances of the electrolyte. With increasing concentration, the Jsc of gel-state cells improve gradually due to the enhanced I−/I3− redox couple content. On the other hand, the CB shift and reduced electron recombination induced by cations and TBP may synergistically contribute to the variation of Voc. This research study will open up a new way to fabricate quasi-solid-state DSSCs with high efficiency. Further work can focus on the optimization of the photoanode structure and the functionality of the MOG matrix, which may synergistically contribute to the photoelectrochemical performance of the gel electrolyte.


The authors acknowledge the financial support from the 973 Program (2012CB821701), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21103236), the Program for New Century Excellent Talents in University (NCET-11-0533), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities, the NSF of Guangdong province (S2011040001464), the Program of the Pearl River Yong Talents of Science and Technology in Guangzhou (2014J2200025), and the Research Fund for the Doctoral Program of Higher Education (20110171120026).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Additional gel characterization, UV-vis adsorption spectrum, and the J–V curve of cells. See DOI: 10.1039/c4ta03120b
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014