 DOI: 10.1039/C3TA11946G
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 9869-9874

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Guanglu
Shang
,

Jihuai
Wu
*,

Miaoliang
Huang
,

Zhang
Lan
,

Jianming
Lin
,

Qin
Liu
,

Min
Zheng
,

Jinghao
Huo
 and 

Lu
Liu


Institute of Materials Physical Chemistry, Huaqiao, University, Quanzhou 362021, Fujian, China. E-mail: jhwu@hqu.edu.cn; Fax: +86 595-22692229; Tel: +86 595-22693899

Received
17th May 2013
, Accepted 7th June 2013
First published on 7th June 2013
Three-dimensional hierarchical titania bur-like microspheres (TiO2 BMs) composed of nanowires were synthesized by a hydrothermal method, and possess a specific surface area of 114 m2 g−1 and a main pore size of 6 nm. The one-dimensional nanowire ensures faster electron transport and a longer electron recombination time than titania nanoparticles (TiO2 NPs). Therefore, a film based on the TiO2 BMs exhibits excellent light scattering properties and thus enhances light harvesting efficiency. Using a TiO2 BM film as a scattering layer on the top of a compact TiO2 NP film, the double layered dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC) shows a power conversion efficiency of 7.31%, indicating a 10.2% and 15.1% improvement compared to the DSSCs based on TiO2 NP and TiO2 BM single films, respectively.

Since the first report on a low-cost dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC) in 1991 by O'Regan and Gratzel, the DSSC has been studied extensively in pursuit of high efficiency. To date, the highest light-to-electric conversion efficiency of over 12% has been achieved by employing a cobalt(II/III) based redox electrolyte and zinc porphyrin sensitized dye. The heart of the DSSC system is a wide bandgap semiconductor nanoparticle film that provides a large specific surface area for the adsorption of light-harvesting molecules. Recently, a variety of titania nano/microstructures such as hollow spheres, nanorods, nanotubes, forest-like structures, core–shell, shell in shell, and hollow mesoporous fibers have been used to fabricate novel photoanodes. In addition, Wang et al. used multishelled ZnO hollow microspheres in DSSCs, which enable the film to load sufficient dye and multi-reflect the light for enhancing light harvesting, and a high conversion efficiency of up to 5.6% was obtained. Wu et al. doped rare-earth ions in the photoanode to improve the light harvesting via a conversion luminescence process, which provides a novel way to improve the performance of the DSSC.

Titania nanoparticles (TiO2 NPs) with sizes of ∼20 nm have been widely used due to their large specific surface area for dye loading. However, there are a lot of surface traps on the TiO2 NPs, which slow down the electron transport rate, resulting in a significant amount of charge recombination between the photoinjected electrons and the electron acceptors. Worse still, traditional TiO2 NPs in the working electrode are weak scatterers for visible light, resulting in a portion of the light transmitting through the TiO2 film without interacting with the sensitizer.
Recently, many efforts have been made to overcome the above drawbacks. In order to increase light scattering, some larger particles as light scatterers were mixed in the TiO2 NP electrode. However, large particles would reduce the dye-loading capacity of the working electrode due to the decrease of the internal surface area. One-dimensional (1D) nanostructures, such as nanotubes, nanowires and nanorods, have attracted great attention, because these 1D structures can provide a direct electron transport pathway and suppress the charge carrier recombination. However, the insufficient surface area of 1D nanostructures limits the performances of DSSCs to a relatively low level. Thus, it is still under discussion whether such 1D nanostructures can significantly improve the power conversion efficiency of the DSSCs. Hence, it is a challenge to design a material which simultaneously has a large specific surface area for high dye loading, efficient light scattering ability and fast electron transport.
To balance the light scattering and specific surface area effects, various hierarchical nanostructures consisting of nanosized crystallites have been synthesized and applied in DSSCs in recent years. Among these, nanocrystalline structures consisting of branched nanowires can offer a direct pathway for the rapid collection of photogenerated electrons and provide a large specific surface area, therefore promising attractive potential applications in DSSCs. Shi et al. prepared flower-like ZnO nanostructures consisting of interlaced nanosheets; a high conversion efficiency up to 6.19% was achieved, which was the highest recorded for quasi-solid ZnO-based DSCs up to now.
Based on the interesting performance of nanocrystalline aggregates, we report the application of hierarchical titania bur-like microspheres (TiO2 BMs) consisting of nanowires in DSSCs for the improvement of power conversion efficiency. The TiO2 BMs are ideal photoanode materials for the DSSC application due to their three functions: high dye loading, efficient light scattering and fast electron transport. Here, TiO2 BMs were used as a scattering layer on top of the TiO2 NP working electrode and the photovoltaic performances of the DSSCs are investigated.

Tetra-n-butyl titanate, nitric acid, glacial acetic acid, polyethylene glycol 20000 (PEG), absolute ethanol, hydrochloric acid, sodium iodide, tetrabutyl ammonium iodide, iodine, triton X-100, sodium hydroxide, ethyl cellulose, terpineol and acetonitrile were all of A.R grade and were all purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd, China. Sensitized dye N719 (RuL2(NCS)2, L = 4,4′-dicarboxylate-2,2′-bipyridine) was purchased from Solaronix SA (Switzerland). All reagents were used without further treatment. A fluorine-doped tin oxide conductive glass (FTO glass, with sheet resistance of 8 Ω cm−2, purchased from Hartford Glass Co., USA) was used as a substrate for precipitating TiO2 films. Titania nanopowder (P25) was purchased from Degussa, Germany.


TiO2 NP paste was prepared as per the following processes: 10 mL of tetra-n-butyl titanate was rapidly added into 100 mL of distilled water, and a white precipitate was formed immediately. The precipitate was filtered by using a glass frit and washed three times with 100 mL of deionized water. The filtered cake was added into 150 mL of nitric acid aqueous solution (0.1 M) with 10 mL of glacial acetic acid under vigorous stirring at 80 °C until the slurry became a translucent blue-white liquid, then 0.4 g of TiO2 (P-25) was dispersed in the above solution. The resultant colloidal suspension was autoclaved at 200 °C for 12 h to form a milky white slurry. Finally, 0.8 g of PEG and a little triton X-100 were dispersed in the above slurry with slow stirring.


Firstly, 5 mL of tetra-n-butyl titanate was mixed with 75 mL of absolute ethanol under vigorous stirring. After, 0.33 mL of concentrated sulfuric acid and 0.3 mL of deionized water were added. The resultant solution was transferred to a dried Teflon autoclave, and then kept at 180 °C for 4 h. After being cooled to room temperature, the white precipitate was collected and mixed with 50 mL of sodium hydroxide aqueous solution (10 M), followed by hydrothermal treatment at 150 °C in a Teflon autoclave for 24 h. Then, the filtered cake was dispersed into 600 mL of hydrochloric acid aqueous solution (0.1 M) for 12 h, and washed thoroughly with deionized water. The powder was collected and dried at 60 °C. Finally, the powder was calcined at 450 °C for 1 h in air, and the TiO2 BM powder was obtained. To prepare the TiO2 BM paste, 0.35 g of ethylene cellulose was added to 5 g of terpineol. Then, the obtained TiO2 BMs were added to 10 mL of absolute ethanol. Finally, the above two solutions were mixed by stirring for 2 days to yield the slurry.


The TiO2 NP paste was spread onto an FTO glass with adhesive tape to control the thickness of the TiO2 film and to provide a noncoated area for electric contact. After drying in air, the film was sintered at 450 °C for 30 min. For the double layered structure, the TiO2 BM paste was deposited on the annealed TiO2 NP film and heated over the same heating profile as previously. The resulting TiO2 film was immersed in a 0.05 M TiCl4 aqueous solution at 70 °C for 30 min to improve the photocurrent and photovoltaic performances. After sintering at 450 °C for 30 min, the film was sensitized by a 2.5 × 10−4 M N719 absolute ethanol solution for 24 h to adsorb the dye adequately; thus, a dye sensitized TiO2 film electrode was obtained. Then, the electrode was sandwiched together with a platinized FTO counter electrode. The redox electrolyte was injected into the aperture between the dye sensitized TiO2 film electrode and the counter electrode.


The phase structure of the samples was evaluated by X-ray diffraction (XRD, X'Pert Pro). The morphologies of the samples and the thicknesses of the films were characterized by field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM, Hitachi S-4800) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM, Hitachi H-7650), and the thicknesses of the films were all controlled to about 12 μm for all DSSCs. The specific surface area and the average pore size were calculated using a surface area analyzer (Hiden IGA100B). The diffuse reflectance spectra of the films were measured using a UV-vis spectrophotometer (Shimadzu, UV2550). In order to calculate the amount of dye in the TiO2 electrode, the absorbed dye was washed from the dye-adsorbed TiO2 film with a 0.05 M sodium hydroxide ethanol solution and the concentration of the desorbed dye was measured using a UV-visible spectrophotometer (Shimadzu, UV2450).

Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were conducted on an electrochemical workstation (Shanghai Chenhua Device Company, CHI660D), applying a DC bias at open circuit voltage and an AC voltage with an amplitude of 10 mV in dark conditions. An equivalent circuit model was used to fit the data with ZView software. The incident-photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra were measured using a specially designed IPCE system (Newport Co., USA). The photocurrent–voltage (J–V) measurements were performed on an electrochemical workstation (Shanghai Chenhua Device Company, CHI660D) under irradiation with a simulated solar light from a 100 W xenon arc lamp (Shanghai Photoelectricity Device Company, XQ-500W). The fill factor (FF) and light-to-electric energy conversion efficiency (η) of the DSSC were calculated according to the following equations:
(1)
(2)
where
JSC is the short-circuit current density (mA cm−2), VOC is the open-circuit voltage (V), Pin is the incident light power, Pmax is the maximum power output, Jmax (mA cm−2) and Vmax (V) are the current density and voltage at the point of maximum power output in the J–V curves, respectively.



Fig. 1a displays the FESEM image of the as-prepared TiO2 BM powder, in which numerous microspheres with main diameters of about 3 μm can be observed. The inset in Fig. 1a shows that the microsphere is a 3D hierarchical bur-like structure. The high magnification FESEM image in Fig. 1b reveals that the entire structure of the architecture is composed of several dozen nanowires with diameters of about 10 nm. Fig. 1c is the typical TEM image of TiO2 BMs. There are numerous small nanowires on the edge of microspheres. Fig. 1d and e are the FESEM image and TEM image of TiO2 NPs, respectively, and the particle size of TiO2 NPs is about 30 nm, which is much smaller than that of TiO2 BMs. Fig. 1f shows the cross-sectional view FESEM image of the TiO2 NPs and the TiO2 BM double layered film with a thickness of 7 + 5 μm.


Fig. 2 compares the XRD patterns for TiO2 BMs and TiO2 NPs annealed at 450 °C. All the diffraction peaks of TiO2 BMs are indexed to the anatase structure (JCPDS card no. 21-1272). The relatively high intensity of the diffraction peaks of TiO2 BMs demonstrates the high crystallinity. No impurity peak is observed, indicating the high purity of the anatase phase. Comparatively, the XRD pattern for TiO2 NPs indicates a mixture of the TiO2 anatase and rutile phases (JCPDS card no. 21-1276).
Furthermore, nitrogen sorptometer measurements were used to characterize the pore structures of the TiO2 BM and TiO2 NP powders. The N2 adsorption–desorption isotherm (Fig. 3a) of TiO2 BMs displays the typical type IV curve, which is usually ascribed to the predominance of mesopores. The Barrett–Joyner–Halenda (BJH) pore size distribution of TiO2 BM powder (Fig. 3b) indicates a narrow pore size distribution (1–10 nm), and a peak size of about 6 nm is observed in the pore-size distribution curve. Moreover, the BET (Brunauer–Emmett–Teller) surface area of TiO2 BMs is 112 m2 g−1, which is higher than TiO2 NPs (48 m2 g−1). As a result, the amount of the adsorbed dye on the TiO2 BM film is obviously higher than that on the TiO2 NP film (Table 2).


Fig. 4 shows the diffuse-reflectance spectra of the TiO2 BMs, TiO2 NPs and double layered films with similar thicknesses, revealing the differences in light-scattering capacity. Comparatively, the TiO2 NP film presents little diffuse reflectance and thus high transparency in the entire UV-vis range. This would cause the unabsorbed light to penetrate through the film without being backscattered to enhance light absorption. In contrast, the TiO2 BM film has the highest reflectance among the three films in the whole wavelength range (400–800 nm). After the introduction of TiO2 NPs into the TiO2 BM film, an obvious decrease in reflectance can be observed in the double layered film; however, it still shows a slightly higher reflectance than the TiO2 NP film in the 450–800 nm wavelength range. Hence, such a light scattering overlayer would maximize the use of light in the 450–800 nm range.


EIS analysis is used to investigate the electron-transport and recombination in DSSCs. Fig. 5 shows the EIS of the DSSCs based on the TiO2 BMs, TiO2 NPs and double layered films, respectively. Their Nyquist plots of EIS spectra are shown in Fig. 5a; there are two sets of semicircles; each set starts from total series resistance, followed by a small semicircle (the span, R1) at high frequency, and then a large semicircle (the span, R2) at low frequency. According to the EIS model reported in the literature,R1 is ascribed to the charge-transfer resistance at the Pt counter electrode–electrolyte interface and R2 is related to the electron transport resistance within the TiO2 layer and across the TiO2–electrolyte interface. The fitted parameters including R1 and R2 obtained by ZSimpWin software are listed in Table 1.

Photoanodes

R
1 (Ω)

R
2 (Ω)

f
max (Hz)

τ
e (s)
Double layer
1.15
5.11
5.62
0.0283
TiO2 NPs
1.11
6.41
8.25
0.0193
TiO2 BMs
0.889
7.67
10.0
0.0159
As shown in Table 1, the TiO2 BM DSSC shows a higher R2 value than the TiO2 NP DSSC, which can be ascribed to the poor attachment of the TiO2 BM film to the FTO glass (the film can be easily wiped off with a minor external force), leading to a higher interface resistance. It should be pointed out that the double layered DSSC shows the lowest R2 value among the three DSSCs. The reason is that the double layered photoanode overcomes some shortages of the single TiO2 BM and TiO2 NP electrodes. On the one hand, compared to the TiO2 NP electrode, the double layered photoanode has a larger specific surface area and exhibits faster electron transport along the nanowires due to TiO2 BMs in the top layer, and these factors contribute to a small resistance. On the other hand, in the double layered photoanode, the compact TiO2 NP layer improves adherence between the TiO2 BM layer and the FTO glass surface, which provides more electron pathways from the TiO2 BM layer to the FTO glass and subsequently enhances the electron transfer efficiency. Therefore, it is reasonable to infer that the double layered DSSC has the lowest R2 value among the three DSSCs.

Fig. 5b shows the Bode phase plots of EIS spectra for the three types of DSSCs. Based on the low frequency peak value (fmax), the electron lifetime for recombination (τe) for the three DSSCs are calculated according to the following equation.
τe = ωmin−1 = (2πfmax)−1
(3)
The fmax and τe values for the three DSSCs are summarized in Table 1. Compared to the DSSCs with the TiO2 BM film (10 Hz) and the TiO2 NP film (8.25 Hz), the DSSC with the double layered film shows the lowest value of fmax (5.62 Hz) and the longest electron lifetime (0.0283 s) for recombination. The lowest resistance for electron transport and the longest electron lifetime for recombination could favor the highest charge collection rate of photogenerated electrons, which enhances the efficiency of the DSSC based on the double layered film.

In order to study the photovoltaic performance of the DSSCs based on different films, the J–V behavior is shown in Fig. 6a and the corresponding photovoltaic characteristics are summarized in Table 2. From the table, the VOC and FF values for the three DSSCs are similar, while the η and the JSC for the three DSSCs are different. Clearly, the variation of η mainly comes from the change of JSC. The DSSC based on the double layer outperforms the DSSC based on TiO2 NPs, with a higher JSC (13.8 mA cm−2), and thus a higher η of 7.31%. This can be attributed to the following factors: Firstly, the specific surface area of TiO2 BMs is higher than that of TiO2 NPs, which enhances the adsorption of dye molecules and light harvesting. Secondly, compared to TiO2 NPs, TiO2 BMs with a high aspect ratio improves the transport of photoelectrons because of the diminished grain boundaries. Thirdly, TiO2 BMs are also expected to enhance the diffusibility of the electrolyte in the cell because of the mesoporous structure. It is well known that the efficient diffusion of I3−/I− to regenerate the dyes is important to the photovoltaic response of DSSCs. Finally, light scattering from TiO2 BMs, which extends the distance that light travels within the photoanode film and provides the photons with more opportunities to be absorbed by the dye molecules, results in a significant increase in the light-harvesting capability of the photoanode. All these factors contribute to the enhancement of the photovoltaic performance of the double layered DSSC. It is also observed that the TiO2 BM DSSC shows a little lower η than the TiO2 NP DSSC; the main reason can be attributed to the loose packing of the large particle TiO2 BMs. The poor connection between the TiO2 particles and the TiO2 film and the substrate will lead to an increased recombination rate and thus a lower JSC. Based on these results, we choose the double layered structure which will maximize the advantage of TiO2 BMs in DSSCs.

DSSC

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF

η (%)
Dye adsorption (10−7 mol cm−2)
Double layer
0.769
13.8
0.690
7.31
1. 27
TiO2 NPs
0.770
12.4
0.693
6.63
1.13
TiO2 BMs
0.763
12.1
0.686
6.35
1.48
The IPCE spectra in Fig. 6b offer detailed information on the light harvesting ability of the DSSCs. The IPCE value depends on the light absorption of the dye, the electron injection quantum yield, and the electron collection on the conducting glass substrate. It is observed that the maximum value of the IPCE spectra occurs at around 520 nm. Although TiO2 NPs and the double layered DSSCs have similar IPCE peak values, the IPCE of the double layered DSSC is much higher than that of the TiO2 NP DSSC in the long wavelength region (>550 nm), which can be ascribed to the enhanced light scattering effect, high dye loading and fast electron transport. Although TiO2 BMs have these advantages, the TiO2 BM DSSC has a lower IPCE peak value than the TiO2 NP DSSC, which can be ascribed to the inferior interface adhesion between the large microspheres and the FTO glass, leading to the lower charge collection efficiency of the TiO2 BM DSSC. However, the TiO2 BM DSSC shows a higher IPCE in the 600 nm to 750 nm wavelength range due to the enhanced light scattering. The TiO2 BM DSSC shows poor photovoltaic performances compared with the double layered DSSC although the former has a higher reflectance in the whole wavelength range (see Fig. 4). This is due to the fact that the double layered DSSC has better contact between the TiO2 nanoparticle film and the FTO glass substrate, which enhances the transfer of electrons from the nanoparticle film to the FTO glass substrate and increases the electron collection efficiency, thus leading to a higher IPCE value.

In conclusion, three-dimensional hierarchical TiO2 bur-like microspheres consisting of nanowires have been successfully synthesized. Due to the large particle size and high specific surface area, TiO2 BMs can enhance light harvesting in the photoanodes; in addition, their good crystallinity and direct conduction pathways along the nanowires result in the effective charge transport through the film. These advantages make TiO2 BMs an ideal candidate for the photoanode of DSSCs. The double layer structured DSSC employing TiO2 BMs as a scattering layer shows an improvement in energy conversion efficiency of 7.31%, which is increased by 10.2% compared with the DSSC based on the TiO2 NP film.


This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (no. 90922028, U1205112, 50842027) and the Specialized Research Fund for the Doctoral Program of Higher University, Ministry of Education, China (no. 20123501110001).


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013