 DOI: 10.1039/C9QM00191C
(Research Article)
Mater. Chem. Front., 2019, 3, 1632-1641


Anthony
Perthué
,

Thérèse
Gorisse
,

Hugo
Santos Silva
,

Didier
Bégué
,

Agnès
Rivaton
* and 

Guillaume
Wantz
*

Université Clermont Auvergne, CNRS, SIGMA Clermont, Institut de Chimie de Clermont-Ferrand, UMR 6296, F-63000 Clermont-Ferrand, France. E-mail: agnes.rivaton@uca.fr

Univ. Bordeaux, IMS, CNRS, UMR 5218, Bordeaux INP, ENSCBP, F-33405 Talence, France. E-mail: guillaume.wantz@enscpb.fr

CNRS/Univ Pau & Pays Adour/E2S UPPA, Institut des Sciences Analytiques et de Physico-Chimie pour l’Environnement et les Matériaux, UMR 5254, 64000, Pau, France

Received
28th March 2019
, Accepted 28th May 2019
First published on 3rd June 2019
A key challenge in the field of organic photovoltaics (OPVs) is making them efficient and stable devices despite their being composed of organic materials, which are susceptible to becoming photodegraded in the presence of atmospheric oxygen. It is therefore essential to determine to what extent the donor material used in the active layer can be oxidized before the oxidation results in a loss of solar cell performance. Here we mainly focused on thieno[3,4-b]thiophene-alt-benzodithiophene polymer (PTB7), and compared it to the well-known poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT). The complexity of the PTB7 chemical structure, based on an alternation of benzodithiophene (BDT) and thienothiophene (TT) and flanked with alkoxy and alkyl side chains, necessitated a re-investigation of the first step of the photooxidative process. Neither the intrinsic photochemical process nor the presence of an alkoxy side chain was found to be critical for the photostability. The high initial sensitivity of PTB7 in photooxidative conditions was instead related to attack of singlet oxygen on the conjugated backbone, with this attack shown to give rise to the formation of carbonylated species. In addition, traces of PTB7 oxidation, resulting from processing or very short durations of irradiation under ambient air, were found to result in a significant drop in solar cell performance. Also in this work, PTB7 was found to be more susceptible to photooxidation than was P3HT, in line with the higher instability of PTB7-based solar cells. The novel bottom-up approach implemented in this work revealed the importance of the formation of traces of polymer oxidation products in altering solar cell efficiency. The use of unstable materials is suspected to play a key role in the poor initial performances and/or reduced lifetimes of organic solar cells.

Organic solar cell (OSC) technology has enabled the development of flexible, lightweight and transparent modules. There have been intense research efforts devoted to increasing the ability of OSCs to convert sunlight with a high power conversion efficiency (PCE). In recent years, research work has mainly been focused on the improvement of the absorbing material used in the active layer, in particular with the development of the so-called low-bandgap copolymers based on the alternation of donor and acceptor moieties. The thieno[3,4-b]thiophene-alt-benzodithiophene polymer (PTB7) is one of the most popular low-bandgap copolymers, yielding efficiencies of up to 9%. The backbone structure of PTB7 is complex, based on the combination of two units: thienothiophene (TT) and benzodithiophene (BDT). The BDT unit is flanked by two alkoxy side chains whereas the side chain of the TT unit is linked to the backbone by an ester group (Fig. 1). Breakthroughs in OSC stability still need to be made before large-scale application of this promising cost-effective renewable electricity generation technology can be realized. Beyond the successful attempts to address the stability issues such as the use of inverted architectures, stable electrode materials, or ultrabarrier encapsulation, the ultimate OSC lifetime is limited by the stability of their organic active components. Some studies have revealed a relatively low stability of devices based on PTB7 and of PTB7 deposits under illumination. Recent results provided evidence for the role played by the polymer chemical structure in the resistance of bulk heterojunction solar cells to UV degradation under an inert atmosphere. Environmental stress such as air exposure combined with illumination drastically increases the instability of organic materials and related devices. It should be noted that a wide variety of parameters, including the molecular weight and the dispersity of the polymer, the nature of the solvent used for film deposition, and the use of high-boiling-point solvent additives, were shown to each dramatically impact the photochemical stability of the active layers. Therefore, with the aim of making efficient and stable devices with readily photooxidizable polymers, a key issue is the understanding of the effects of a small amount of oxidized polymer incorporated in the active layer of solar cells. Moreover, little is known about the photodegradation mechanisms responsible for the early steps of polymer degradation. In what operating conditions is the polymer unstable? What is the most vulnerable part of the chemical structure? Which transient species are involved in the photodegradation process? These are some of the questions that we tried to answer in this study.

Photodegradation is in essence the effect of light on the material (intrinsic photochemistry), with a combination of oxygen and/or water with light exposure (photooxidation) being able to drastically impact the intrinsic photochemical processes (also called photolytical processes). In recent years, several research groups have investigated the underlying mechanisms of PTB7 degradation by using experimental or modelling approaches, but without reaching a consensus. Indeed, due to the complexity of the chemical structure of PTB7 (and of most of the recently investigated push–pull low-bandgap copolymers), numerous and sometimes conflicting mechanisms have been suggested to account for the PTB7 photochemical reactivity. Darlatt et al. and Shah et al. have focused on the intrinsic light-induced degradation of PTB7 and suggested different processes based on an experimental study and density functional theory (DFT) modelling, respectively. In the same way, different mechanisms were proposed by Kettle et al. Son et al., Alem et al. and Razell-Hollis et al. to explain the photodegradation of PTB7 when it was exposed to light in the ambient air (photooxidation).
Answering the crucial issue, i.e., dealing with the effect of donor material degradation on OSC performance, is quite challenging: all of the components of the multilayer architecture of OSCs are prone to degrade. Studies focused on the stability of devices based on PCDTBT (poly[N-9′′-hepta-decanyl-2,7-carbazole-alt-5,5-(4′,7′-di-2-thienyl-2′,1′,3′-benzothiadiazole)]), another well-known conjugated polymer, suggested that degradation of PCDTBT within the active layers of devices occurs under operating conditions, and that increasing the molecular weight of the polymer and introducing inverted architectures yield devices displaying higher stability. But it is crucial to investigate this issue further, and in this work we set out to use PTB7 as a prototypical low-bandgap polymer.
In the first part of this paper, we describe a reconsideration of the mechanisms proposed for PTB7 degradation based on new experimental results obtained by combining IR analysis of thin films with DFT modelling and with the effect of chemically generated singlet oxygen. We also compared PTB7 to another polymer with a slightly different chemical structure, namely PTB7-Th (also known as PBDTTT-EFT or PTB7-Th in various reports, see Fig. S1, ESI). The BDT side chain of PTB7-Th is linked with a thiophene instead of an ether to the backbone. The effect of a phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) fullerene derivative on PTB7 photodegradation was also reconsidered. In the second part of the paper, we describe an implementation of a new bottom-up approach to directly evaluate the impact of PTB7 deposits and minute levels of photooxidation on the efficiency of devices. The same experiment was also performed with poly(3-hexylthiophene), i.e., P3HT, the workhorse of polymer photovoltaic research. Finally, we showed that the oxidation products, even in very low concentrations, significantly impacted the performances of the solar cells.

The irradiation of conjugated polymer thin films and tracking their photobleaching over time, i.e. the rate of absorption loss, allows for a quick screening of their photostability levels. The loss of absorption is related to a loss of conjugation resulting from photochemical reactions. Whether irradiation is performed in the absence of oxygen (hereafter called photolysis) or under ambient air (hereafter called photooxidation), determination of the photobleaching rate allows for a quick evaluation of the relative contributions of different degradation mechanisms: namely, intrinsic light degradation resulting from the light exposure alone or the so-called photooxidative degradation, i.e., in the presence of oxygen.

Absorption spectra of PTB7 deposits, irradiated either under ambient conditions in air or encapsulated in a glass tube sealed under secondary vacuum, were periodically acquired to track the decrease of the absorption of visible light with time (see ESI, Fig. S2). Irradiation in vacuum-sealed glass tubes was performed in order to simulate the conditions of ultrabarrier encapsulated solar cells and to address the issue of intrinsic photodegradation.
In order to compare the photobleaching rates of the two different environments, normalized absorbance versus time was plotted, as shown in Fig. 1. As observed for other conjugated polymers, PTB7 essentially showed a very slow decrease in the amount of visible light it absorbed in a deoxygenated environment while a rapid decrease in absorption, within hours, occurred in the presence of oxygen. The first crucial issue we tackled was to determine the underlying degradation mechanisms and the corresponding Achilles’ heel of the PTB7 chemical structure.
Darlatt et al. used ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) and S 2p X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (S 2p XPS) to study the effect of the irradiation wavelength on the stability of PTB7 in conditions where oxygen and moisture were absent. They concluded that photons of wavelengths >320 nm provoked no significant degradation. (At shorter irradiation wavelengths, PTB7 degradation would only concern the S atom of the structure). UPS and XPS are very sensitive methods but, as surface analysis techniques, they probe only the first few nanometres of exposed deposits. In our experiment, the encapsulating glass filtered the radiation with wavelengths below 320 nm. Nevertheless, as shown in Fig. 1, prolonged exposure in a deoxygenated atmosphere provoked a decrease of the UV-visible absorbance of the PTB7 deposits, revealing a reduction of the conjugation length. Inspection of infrared (IR) spectra that we acquired (Fig. 2) showed prolonged exposure in a deoxygenated atmosphere inducing a decrease of the band at 1568 cm−1 (CC stretching vibration of the polymer backbone), related to the conjugated skeleton. The UV-vis and IR spectroscopy investigations probed the entire thickness of each irradiated film (∼100 nm). The remaining question is which part of the polymer, if there is one, could be specifically responsible for this evolution?
Shah et al. used ab initio simulations to investigate the intrinsic light-induced degradation of PTB7 at the atomistic level. They modelled reversible and irreversible degradation pathways, all of them linked to the alkoxy side chain on the BDT unit. Irreversible processes in this modelling led to the formation of defects such as changes in the alkyl side-chain structure, and formation of –OH and CO groups. The involvement of the first two changes was not indicated from analysis of the IR spectra (Fig. 2). Neither any change in the band at 3000–2700 cm−1 corresponding to alkyl stretching vibration nor increase in absorbance at 3700–3200 cm−1 corresponding to the hydroxyl domain was observed, and hence these theoretical rearrangements did not occur or did so at low levels. Concerning the formation of new CO groups, the benzoquinone species suggested by Shah et al. is usually observed at ∼1660 cm−1. No clear evolution was observed in this part of the IR spectrum. Either the benzoquinone species did not form to any significant extent or its signal eventually overlapped with the pristine ester band.
The carbonyl region of the IR spectrum showed the ester vibration on the TT unit of the pristine structure (1680–1750 cm−1). To gain more insight into the changes in this domain that were provoked by the exposure, we subtracted the spectrum of the pristine sample from that of the irradiated one. The modifications observed were characteristic of a shift of the ester vibration bands to higher wavenumbers. It is worth noting that the same evolution was observed with PTB7-Th exposed to irradiation in a deoxygenated atmosphere and therefore could not have been related to a hypothetical modification of the alkoxy group, which was only present in the PTB7 structure. The shift of the ester band to higher wavenumbers was also observed under every stress condition tested (temperature and light w/or w/o oxygen) for both PTB7 and PTB7-Th (see Fig. S3 in ESI and Fig. 4a), and the spectroscopic modifications observed during photooxidation under 18O2 (Fig. 4b) allowed us to attribute the ester band modification to an intrinsic re-organization. The shift of the ester band to higher wavenumbers could suggest that its chemical environment was modified: a possible interaction with an F atom might have come into play.
Regarding again the alkoxy group (–OR) of PTB7, Kettle et al. suggested that exposure of this sample to light in their experiments provoked a homolytical scission of the BDT-OR bond, even in the absence of O2. We were able to calculate at the DFT level of theory the energy of the BDT-OR bond, and found it to be only of 55 kcal mol−1, suggesting that all the photons with λ < 520 nm were able to provoke the homolytic scission of the BDT-OR bond (see also Table S2 in ESI). Pendant groups cleaved from the main chain are usually observed to be susceptible to migrating out of the film in the gas phase. But this process was not indicated to have occurred to a significant extent as a result of our irradiation conditions, as no change in the alkyl side chain stretching vibration region (2950–2850 cm−1) was observed even after prolonged exposure (2000 h), as shown in Fig. 2. To explore this issue further, we subjected PTB7-Th films to irradiation in the same conditions. As summarized in Table S2 (ESI), the scission of the alkyl side chain required more energy in the case of PTB7-Th (109 kcal mol−1) than for PTB7, but the side chain may still have been cleaved by UV photons (<330 nm). As shown in Fig. 3, absorbance of visible light decreased in magnitude at the same rate in PTB7 and PTB7-Th deposits. Interestingly, the inclusion of PCBM slowed down the decrease of absorbance by PTB7 and PTB7-Th, and the same effect was previously observed when P3HT and P3HT:PCBM films were subjected to prolonged exposures in the absence of oxygen.
One could hypothesize that the same set of changes occurred for PTB7 and PTB7-Th as that postulated for P3HT irradiated in a deoxygenated atmosphere: the homolytical scission of the side chain followed by addition on the conjugated backbone. Such a saturation reaction, which would induce a reduction of the conjugation length of the pi-conjugated system, could have accounted for the decrease in the absorbance of visible light by PTB7 and PTB7-Th. The stabilising effect provided by the fullerene derivative in the polymer:blend active layer was ascribed to its ability to scavenge free radicals, thus hindering a radical-based degradation of the polymers.
Should we conclude that the degradation observed in deoxygenated conditions was only related to these supposed intrinsic photo-degradation processes? It cannot be ruled out that oxygen traces still remained in the polymer films, especially in our encapsulation and analysis conditions, which would have inevitably involved contact of the films with atmospheric oxygen. To test this hypothesis, the influence that the (re)encapsulation process may have had on the introduction of oxygen was assessed. To do this experiment, polymer films were encapsulated in a glass tube under a secondary vacuum and analyzed after 2000 h of exposure, with no intermediate steps. Interestingly, an absorbance loss of only 6.5% was observed after completion of 2000 h of photolysis, compared with the 12% value obtained for the same batch of samples sealed in the exact same conditions but opened and re-sealed multiple times during the 2000 h of irradiation (see Fig. 3 bottom). The different extents of degradation in the two cases indicated that each time the tube was opened to analyse the sample, a certain amount of oxygen was introduced and trapped in the polymer film. That is, samples analysed at several irradiation steps were in contact with higher amounts of oxygen, thus explaining the greater loss of absorption.
Therefore, in contrast to what was predicted on the basis of theoretical calculations, the experimental results suggested the presence of an O atom between the side chain and the BDT units to not be the crucial point rendering PTB7 vulnerable to light exposure in a deoxygenated atmosphere. We mainly concluded that the chemical structure of PTB7 would in general be intrinsically resistant to light exposure in optimal encapsulation conditions. However, in our experiments, oxygen traces in combination with light probably provoked the tiny changes in chemical structure observed in the photolysis experiments.
As a result of the above-described observations, we next set out to determine why atmospheric oxygen might have had such a large effect on PTB7. Previous studies devoted to the photooxidation of PTB7 suggested an attack by singlet oxygen, but the postulated oxidation site was inconsistent with the resulting products. Using sensitization techniques performed in solution combined with molecular orbital calculations, Son et al. suggested that singlet oxygen can attack the TT moieties of the polymer, and proposed the thienyl ring directly linked to the polymer main chain to most likely be the site of a [2+4] cycloaddition. Alem et al. proposed that singlet oxygen can react with the BDT unit of PTB7 in accordance with the well-known behaviour of anthracene with 1O2 Razzell-Hollis et al. studied the photooxidative degradation of PTB7 using Raman spectroscopy combined with DFT modelling. Short exposure of PTB7 to the laser beam of the Raman apparatus provoked a shift of a Raman band attributed to BDT unit without a decrease in the intensity of the band. This observation led the authors to suggest the initial oxidation of PTB7 to involve the hydroxylation of the BDT unit of PTB7 without an absorbance intensity decrease as a result of singlet oxygen attack. It is worth recalling that formation of hydroxyl groups was not directly observed and that the UV-vis spectra were not recorded in parallel to the Raman spectra. Additionally, no detailed mechanism was proposed to explain how a singlet oxygen attack would provoke PTB7 hydroxylation.
To gain more in-depth information about the photooxidative mechanism, we carried out a direct observation of the effect of short time exposures using both UV-vis monitoring and IR spectroscopy, which is a very efficient method to track the formation and identification of oxidation products of polymers. We also performed thermooxidation experiments as well as exposure in 18O2 atmosphere, and used a new method allowing us to assess the involvement of singlet oxygen in the photooxidation of conjugated materials.
Photooxidation (Suntest device, samples temperature ∼37 °C) and thermooxidation (ventilated oven at 100 °C) of PTB7 deposits induced a progressive loss of the UV-visible light absorbance, indicating that the pi-conjugated backbone degraded during ageing (see ESI, Fig. S2 and S4). Photooxidation and thermooxidation also resulted in rapid and noticeable modifications to the IR spectrum of PTB7. Upon ageing, a rapid disappearance of the various functional groups of PTB7 was observed. At the same time, new absorption bands in the carbonyl, hydroxyl and fingerprint regions developed. Fig. 4a (subtracted spectra, direct spectra are reported in ESI, Fig. S5) shows a comparison of the IR modifications for PTB7 samples thermooxidized in air at 100 °C or photooxidized in the Suntest device in air. As observed previously upon irradiation in a deoxygenated atmosphere, photooxidation and thermooxidation induced a rearrangement of the ester group. An increase of absorbance intensity was observed after a long-duration exposure (>3 h) in the hydroxyl region (3200 cm−1), and this increase could be attributed to the OH vibration of carboxylic acids. Their CO vibration band most likely overlapped the initial ester band of the TT moiety as confirmed below with 18O2 photooxidation experiments (Fig. 4b). Photooxidation and thermooxidation also led to the formation of numerous bands in the fingerprint region, as well as a decrease of the intensity of all of the PTB7 bands (conjugated skeleton and side chains). A photooxidation of very short duration (1–3 h) led, most notably, to the formation of two bands at 1630 and 1660 cm−1, whereas no increase in the intensity of the absorbance in the hydroxyl region of the spectrum was observed. The band at 1630 cm−1 was not observed after carrying out thermooxidative degradation. We also found that post-thermal treatment at 100 °C did not decrease the intensity of this band. It was then possible to conclude that its formation to involve pure photochemical processes or photochemically produced transient species. A band at 1630 cm−1 is generally found for carbonyl products and/or double bonds. To determine which explanation would be most likely, we performed the same photooxidation experiment but under an 18O2 atmosphere. As observed in Fig. 4b, the band shifted from 1630 cm−1 in atmospheric conditions (16O2) to 1604 cm−1 in the 18O2 atmosphere; based on this shift, this band was concluded to have resulted from a carbonyl species created after incorporation of atmospheric oxygen into the chemical structure of PTB7. Furthermore, under 18O2 irradiation we also observed the formation of a band centred at 1664 cm−1. Assuming that the fixation of 18O2 produced a 40 cm−1 shift, as theoretically estimated by the use of the classical equation relating frequency and reduced mass, the corresponding carbonyl vibration should be found at 1704 cm−1 under 16O2 irradiation (vibration range of the CO group of carboxylic acids). This band overlapped that of the ester vibration and thus was not observed in ambient air (16O2) irradiation conditions. These results confirmed our previous attribution of an OH vibration band (3200 cm−1) to carboxylic acids. The ester vibration band was clearly not modified by the irradiation under 18O2, thus confirming that the changes to the IR spectrum resulted from an intrinsic structural modification of the ester moieties. To complete the analysis of the changes to the IR spectrum, the decrease of the alkyl band intensity (2850–2950 cm−1) correlated with the detection of low-molecular-weight oxidation products in the gas phase (see ESI, Fig. S6 and Table S1, ESI). Moreover, the oxidation of the sulfur atom of the thiophene moieties led to the formation of sulfinic ester as shown by the formation of a band at 620 cm−1 after a long photooxidation duration (>30 h) (see Fig. S7 in ESI).
Finally, it was necessary to determine whether the carbonyl products creating the 1630 cm−1 band resulted from singlet oxygen attack on PTB7 structure. Fig. 4c shows the IR spectra of PTB7 chemically treated with singlet oxygen using a recently developed protocol. Clearly, singlet oxygen attack resulted in the development of the band at 1630 cm−1 thus allowing us to conclude that (i) singlet oxygen attack led to the formation of carbonyl products and not hydroxyl adducts, and (ii) the very first step of the PTB7 photooxidation involved singlet oxygen attack.
Singlet oxygen, being both a dienophile and electrophile, was expected to attack the electron-rich regions of PTB7. In order to probe the regions of the molecule most likely to be susceptible to an oxygen attack, we calculated and plotted the condensed Fukui functions (CFFs) for both the PTB7 and PTB7-Th structures. In the zeroth order, it would be sufficient to calculate the electron density of the HOMO orbital, but this approach does not take into account any orbital relaxation. CFFs can be used to describe, for a specified reaction, the distribution of attack probabilities on the molecular coordinates of the target. The three CFFs f+, f− and f0 describe the tendency of a molecule to be targets of, respectively, electrophilic, nucleophilic and radical attacks. Generally speaking, for a molecule having N electrons in its ground state, these functions are calculated using the equations
f+k = qk(N + 1) − qk
f−k = qk − qk(N − 1)
and

where
qk is the charge of the k-th atom of the molecule for a cationic (N − 1) or anionic (N + 1) electron state. Since oxygen is an electrophile, we needed to estimate the propensity of the molecule to be the target of such an electrophilic attack. In this way, we plotted f− to indicate the regions of the molecule most likely to be attacked in this way. As shown in Fig. 5, the BDT donor group was determined using this plot to be is the most probable location to be attacked by singlet oxygen in the PTB7 and in PTB7-Th structures. Our conclusion obtained from this modelling was in line with that by Razell-Hollis et al. We also calculated the electrophilicity levels of the PTB7 and PTB7-Th structures in an attempt to quantify their susceptibility to being photooxidized. The full details are provided in the ESI. But briefly, the electrophilicity can be understood as the ratio between the propensity of a molecule to capture an additional electron from its environment (chemical potential) and its resistance to transfer the molecule back. In this way, the higher the electrophilicity of a compound, the higher its resistance to an electrophilic attack. Our calculations showed very similar electrophilicities displayed by PTB7-Th and PTB7, and hence did not allow us to make a conclusion about which molecule would be less likely to be subjected to an electrophilic attack.

The identification of by-products is essential to validate a proposal for a reaction mechanism. Based on modelling of the Raman spectra of PTB7 deposits irradiated in pure oxygen or in situ in the Raman apparatus, Razell-Hollis et al. suggested that oxygen attacks the BDT unit of PTB7 to result in the mono-and di-hydroxylation of the thiophene rings of the BDT unit. In our conditions representative of outdoor exposure, we observed the formation of carbonyl products, not hydroxyl groups. Carbonylated species identified in the IR spectra at 1630 cm−1 (Fig. 4) probably resulted from the decomposition of highly unstable primary products of singlet oxygen attack (typically endoperoxide (R–O–O–R′), hydroperoxyde (R–O–O–H…)). Certainly carbonylated species identified in the IR spectra at 1630 cm−1 did not arise from mono- or dihydroxylated structures as modelled by Razell-Rollis et al., as these structures would likely have been rather stable in our mild irradiation conditions.
While the initiation of PTB7 degradation by singlet oxygen attack was now proven, we next set out to assess the role of the free-radical chain oxidation route, which is generally thought to lead to photooxidation of the polymer and start with a hydrogen abstraction. It appeared that the carbonyl products observed at 1630 cm−1 did not accumulate much in the film but other degradation products observed at 1660 and 1790 cm−1 continued to be formed. The formation of these products may have involved either a free-radical chain oxidation mechanism, which may have taken place parallel to the reaction of singlet oxygen with PTB7, or involved the steps occurring after this singlet oxygen reaction. Two modes of action have been described for singlet oxygen reactivity: the first one being the formation of an endoperoxide species and the second one being the formation of a hydroperoxide. Both mechanisms can lead to the formation of radicals which would in turn start a free-radical oxidation route involving abstraction of hydrogen from the side chain of the polymer and ending up with oxidation of the sulphur atoms of the thiophenic moieties (see Fig. S7, ESI) as reported for many conjugated polymers. Our results differed from those of the literature in one way: the PCBM effect. In our irradiation conditions, inclusion of PCBM appeared to have increased the PTB7 and PTB7-Th photostability, which could validate the involvement of a radical process inhibited by the radical scavenging properties of the fullerene cage (see Fig. 4d). Interestingly Razzell-Hollis et al. and Tremolet de Villers et al. observed no photostabilizing effect of PC71BM on PTB7 and PTB7-Th photooxidations. The degradation conditions were different in both cases: for the former, pure oxygen and the laser beam of the Raman apparatus were used and remaining di-iodooctane (DIO) as processing co-solvent might have drastically impacted PTB7 stability. For the latter, the thickness of the polymer deposits, being twice that of the blend, may have played a significant role in the photooxidation rate as previously reported. Another possibility was that PC61BM used in the present study had a much better stabilizing effect due to a higher electron affinity, as this feature goes hand-in-hand with a lower rate of blend photobleaching according to Hoke et al.
Importantly, the above-described similar photooxidation rates of PTB7 and PTB7-Th (Fig. 4d) indicated a lack of any crucial role played by the presence of a thiophenyl group or O atom linking the side chain to the BDT unit. However, DFT modelling described in ESI showed a key role played by the link between the BDT unit and the alkyl chain in the oxidizability of the side chain versus a chain radical oxidation. Clearly the presence of the thiophenyl group in PTB7-Th rendered the H atom on the alpha position of the CH2 quite labile. Therefore, all these results suggested the key point in low-bandgap polymers based on the BDT-TT alternation to be how easy it is for them to be attacked by singlet oxygen, and that the nature of the side chain plays a minor role.

Finally, it was important to determine whether small amounts of oxidation products, unavoidable because of the high propensity of PTB7 to be photooxidized, could alter the electronic properties of the devices. An additional issue here was to determine whether it is the amount of oxidation products or their chemical structures that play the most important role. We therefore decided to compare the effect of a very short photooxidation duration on PTB7 to that on P3HT, as the photooxidative degradation of the latter does not involve singlet oxygen. To determine the impact of PTB7 and P3HT oxidation traces on OSC performances, we implemented a bottom-up approach described in a previous paper. Thin films of PTB7 and P3HT were first exposed to different durations of photooxidation: from 0 to 20 min for PTB7, and from 0 to 60 min for P3HT. Longer durations could be tested for P3HT due to this polymer being more resistant to photooxidation compared to PTB7 in terms of photobleaching. This greater resistance of P3HT to becoming oxidized was clearly indicated, as shown in Fig. 6 (left), by experiments showing decreases of the UV-Vis absorbance intensity of P3HT and PTB7 deposits exposed to short durations of photooxidation. The irradiation duration was kept relatively short so that the absorbance decrease was minimal. It is noteworthy that after 3 min and 20 min exposures for PTB7 and P3HT, respectively, the absorbance of the deposit decreased in intensity by less than 2%. In addition, the corresponding level of oxidation was so low that oxidation products were barely observed using IR spectroscopy to be formed for PTB7 (see Fig. S8 in ESI).

After irradiation, polymer thin films were re-dissolved and then blended with PC61BM and used to produce inverted bulk heterojunction solar cells. The efficiencies (PCEs) of OSCs processed with partially photooxidized P3HT and partially photoxidized PTB7 deposits are shown in Fig. 6 (right). Devices with pristine P3HT and PTB7 showed PCEs of approximately 3.5% and 6%, respectively, values that are very common in the field. Photovoltaic performance measures included short-circuit current (Jsc) values of 11.8 mA cm−2 and 11.6 mA cm−2, open-circuit voltage (Voc) values of 0.52 V and 0.72 V, and fill factor (FF) values of 0.57 and 0.71 for, respectively, P3HT and PTB7. Quite different photovoltaic performances were obtained when the polymers were just photooxidized for a little bit. Indeed, the PCE underwent a rapid drop: a 20% decrease of the PCE was observed when the solar cells were made with PTB7 and P3HT photooxidized for 3 and 20 min, respectively; and the PCE was close to zero after 20 min of photooxidation in the case of PTB7, whereas 60 min of photooxidation in the case of P3HT resulted in only a less than 50% decrease. Importantly, the similarity of the kinetics found for polymer oxidation tracking (Fig. 6 (left)) and device performances (right) suggested that the efficiency of OSC performance was clearly related to the level of polymer oxidation.
Note that the scales in Fig. 6 (left and right) are very different: between 100% and 90% for absorbance (left) and between 100% and 0% for the PCE (right).
To determine whether the chemical structures of oxidation products might play a role in altering the PV properties of the devices, we determined the fill factor (FF), short-circuit current (Jsc) and open-circuit voltage (Voc) values of the solar cell based on PTB7 and that based on P3HT as a function of the amount of time that PTB7 and P3HT were each photooxidized (Fig. 7). The loss of short-circuit current was apparently the most detrimental origin of the loss of efficiency. As described above and shown in Fig. 6, the loss of absorbance was relatively minor (e.g., less than 2% after 3 min and 20 min of exposure for PTB7 and P3HT, respectively), and could thus not explain on its own the drop of Jsc. Hence, the traces of oxidized polymer (P3HT or PTB7) were concluded to have been acting as traps or recombination centers. In addition, photooxidation of PTB7 was shown to involve the formation of volatiles (Fig. S6 and Table S1 in ESI) and to involve scissions of the polymer backbone. Such a reduction in molecular weight may have also contributed to the decrease of photovoltaic performances, as has been shown previously in various studies. Note, importantly, that here only the polymer was partially oxidized on purpose prior to device fabrication, i.e., PC61BM was pristine. We also conducted experiments in which the whole BHJ blend, i.e., PTB7:PCBM (or P3HT:PCBM), was exposed to gradual photooxidation prior to device fabrication following the same experimental procedure. Photooxidation of the blend gave the same trend of results (Fig. S9, ESI) as found when only the polymer was oxidized. As noted previously, blends have also been found to be sensitive to oxidation, and the presence of fullerene has been shown to not completely inhibit the formation of photooxidized products. On top of that, in a previous study of ours using a similar protocol, photooxidation of PCBM was also found to seriously degrade solar cell performance. Here, we surmised that the blends contained both traces of photooxidized polymer and traces of photooxidized PCBM. However, the loss of performance was not stronger with the blend. The current work provided for the first time, to the best of our knowledge, evidence showing that degradation of performance of a polymer solar cell could be related to the polymer oxidation itself, and hence provided evidence for a new mechanism of degradation in a real operating device.

We have shown that PTB7 becomes steadily oxidized when exposed to a combination of light and oxygen. This vulnerability was shown to arise from the propensity of the BDT unit in BDT-TT alternating structures to be attacked by singlet oxygen, thus leading to the formation of carbonylated species. Due to the high “oxidizability” of PTB7, our results suggested that the involvement of intrinsic photochemical processes that can be theoretically modelled should be considered as an epiphenomenon versus the effect of oxidation traces during fabrication or upon operating conditions. A key feature of this study was the demonstration of polymer oxidation traces, resulting from indoor processing or minute levels of photooxidation, having a dramatic negative impact on the efficiency of PTB7-based solar cells. The bottom-up approach implemented in this work clearly emphasized the key role of traces of polymer oxidation products on the efficiency levels of the solar cells. Such a degradation mechanism has hardly ever been put forward due to a lack of sensitive methods. Further investigations may be needed to better identify the exact role of polymer oxidation defects in the photovoltaic mechanism. This study should nevertheless guide the synthesis of novel low-bandgap polymers that are more resistant to photooxidation, and particularly less susceptible to being attacked by singlet oxygen, and that hence can allow for a maintenance of OSC efficiency for a long period of time. Since we determined that traces of polymer oxidation products can play an important role in the loss mechanism, ultrabarrier encapsulation of the actual materials should be considered to be mandatory to maximize the durability levels of actual solar cells.


PTB7 and PTB7-Th were purchased from 1-Materials. PCBM was kindly provided by ARMOR collaborators. Chlorobenzene (CB), orthodichlorobenzene (ODCB), chloroform, absolute ethanol, diiodooctane and zinc dihydrate acetate were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich. MoO3 and Ag were purchased from Neyco and the ITO-coated glass from Visiontek. 18O2 with an isotopic purity of 97% was obtained from Sigma-Aldrich.


Deposits on KBr substrates and solar cells were prepared through spin coating. Large-surface-area glass plates coated with PTB7, PCBM or a PTB7-PCBM blend were prepared by bare-coating according to a method recently described.


ITO-coated glass was washed by carrying out an ultrasonic treatment in soap/de-ionized water solution, in pure de-ionized water, and in isopropanol (15 min each) and subjected to UV–ozone for 10 min to complete the cleaning procedure. The electron transfer layer consisted of a 40 nm-thick ZnO sol–gel layer: zinc acetate dihydrate dissolved with monoethanolamine (both at 0.15 mol l−1) in absolute ethanol was spin coated at 2000 rpm for 60 s on the ITO substrate and annealed at 180 °C for 1 h. The samples were then transferred into a water-free oxygen-free environment (glove-box). The blends were prepared following the same procedure as described above. After the blend deposition, the substrates were transferred to a thermal evaporator, where the top electrode, 7 nm of MoO3 and 70 nm of Ag, was deposited at 3 × 10−6 mbar. The final device area was 10 mm2, as defined by a shadow mask.


Photodegradation experiments were conducted using a Suntest CPS/XLS Atlas device, which was provided together with a ATLAS (NXE1700) xenon lamp configured at 750 W m−2 in the UV-visible domain (300–800 nm). IR irradiation and UV photons below 300 nm were cut off using an Atlas “daylight filter”. A cryostat was used to maintain the black standard temperature (BST) at 60 °C, corresponding to about 37 °C in the irradiation chamber. Irradiations in the absence of oxygen were conducted by encapsulating the samples in borosilicate tubes sealed under a secondary vacuum (10−6 Pa) before exposure in the Suntest. Short irradiations were also conducted by enclosing the samples in a borosilicate tube filled with a slight overpressure of synthetic air composed of 20% of either 18O2 or 16O2 and 80% of N2.


Thermooxidation was conducted in a ventilated oven at a temperature of 100 °C.


PTB7 and PTB7-Th were subjected to the presence of singlet oxygen in chloroform solutions, at ambient temperature and in the dark as already reported for other semi-conducting organic materials. Singlet oxygen was generated through the cycloreversion reaction occurring at ambient temperature of dimethylnaphthalene endoperoxide, which was synthesized according to Turro et al.


UV-visible spectra were obtained with a UV2600 spectrophotometer equipped with an integrating sphere from Shimadzu.

Infrared (IR) transmission spectra were obtained using a Thermo Scientific Nicolet 6700 spectrophotometer purged with dry air at a resolution of 4 cm−1 by summing 32 scans.

Headspace solid-phase microextraction (HS-SPME) coupled with gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC-MS), together abbreviated as HS-SPME-GC-MS, was employed to collect and analyze the volatile compounds created upon photooxidation of PTB7 films irradiated in sealed vials. The procedure has been described in detail for studies concerning other polymer matrices.


Current density vs. voltage curves were acquired for each device using a Keithley 2400 analyser under an AM1.5 solar simulator with a xenon lamp calibrated with a radiometer (IM1400) at 100 mW cm−2. The power conversion efficiency (PCE), fill-factor (FF), short-circuit density current (Jsc) and open-circuit voltage (Voc) were extracted from these curves. For each condition, two substrates, each with four cells with 10 mm2 of surface area, were fabricated. Because a few devices malfunctioned, the average and standard deviations were calculated with between 6 and 8 values.


Molecular geometries were optimised using density functional theory (DFT) at the B3LYP/def2-TZVP level of theory together with using the D3BJ dispersive correction to account for long-range corrections in the unrestricted wave-function formalism. The RIJCOSX approximation with the def2-TZVP/C auxiliary basis set was used throughout the calculations. Energy and gradients had their convergence criteria set to very tight. All of the calculations were performed using Orca 3.0.3 software. Whenever needed, molecular orbitals were plotted using a 0.02 isosurface value. The molecular electrostatic potential (MEP) was used to map the total electron density (TED) using a 0.001 isosurface value. Plotting was performed for differences in electrical charge from −2 × 10−2 to 2 × 10−2e. Time-dependent density functional theory (TDDFT) was used in the same level of theory to calculate the UV-vis electronic transitions as well as to probe the energies of the first excited states. Thirty roots were calculated and the analysis was performed by using both differences of transition densities (DTDs) and natural transition orbitals (NTOs). Finally, calculations of the ionic states were done by performing single point calculations on the ground-state geometry (i.e., in the vertical approximation). Whenever the bond dissociation energy (DBE) values were calculated, the same level of theory was used except for the choice of the basis set, for which 6-31G** was used for such calculations. These DBE calculations were performed in the adiabatic approximation (i.e., once broken apart, each fragment had its geometry optimized in the same level of theory).


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the Agence Nationale de la Recherche (ANR) through the PROGELEC 2013 program “HELIOS” (ANR-13-PRGE-0006).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: UV-vis spectra of PTB7 films; infrared spectra of PTB7; HS-SPME-GC-MS analysis; normalized photovoltaic characteristics of solar cells; bond dissociation energies; electrophilic character. See DOI: 10.1039/c9qm00191c
This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2019