 DOI: 10.1039/C8TC05741A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 2781-2808


Binbin
Luo
*,

Fei
Li
,

Ke
Xu
,

Yan
Guo
,

Ying
Liu
,

Zhiguo
Xia
 and 

Jin Z.
Zhang
*

Department of Chemistry, Shantou University, Shantou, Guangdong 515063, China. E-mail: bbluo@stu.edu.cn

The Beijing Municipal Key Laboratory of New Energy Materials and Technologies School of Materials Sciences and Engineering, University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing 100083, China

Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, Santa Cruz, California 95064, USA

Received
15th November 2018
, Accepted 24th January 2019
First published on 25th January 2019
Lead halide perovskite (LHP) semiconductors with the general chemical formula ABX3 are now being widely investigated for a variety of applications including but not limited to high-efficiency photovoltaics (PVs) and light-emitting diodes (LEDs). Introducing impurity atoms into the LHP host through doping imparts new and interesting magnetic, electronic, and optical properties. Recent studies of doped LHPs have demonstrated great potential for their optoelectronic applications. In this review, we focus on the recent progress in B-site doped LHPs including isovalent metal ions such as alkaline-earth metal ions (Ba2+, Sr2+), transition metal ions (Mn2+, Zn2+, Cd2+, Ni2+), and heterovalent metal ions exemplified by rare earth ions, Al3+, Fe3+ and Bi3+. In particular, electronic band engineering and electron/energy transfer processes in relation to doping are discussed in detail. We also highlight light emission applications of doped LHPs that take advantage of their strongly luminescent properties. Finally, we briefly discuss some remaining challenges and possible future directions for further research and development.

Binbin Luo

Binbin Luo received his BSc degree in applied chemistry from Chongqing University, Chongqing, China, in 2011 and his PhD in chemical engineering from Chongqing University in 2016. He joined the group of Prof. Jin Z. Zhang as a visiting student in 2014. He is currently an associate professor in chemistry of Shantou University. He mainly focuses on perovskite nanocrystals and semiconductor nanomaterials for water splitting application.

Ke Xu

Ke Xu received her BSc degree in chemistry from Yangtze Normal University, Chongqing, China, in 2015. She is currently a visiting student in Prof. Jin Zhang's group at the University of California Santa Cruz, USA, and at the same time, she is also a PhD student in Prof. Xueming Li's group at Chongqing University, Chongqing, China. Her current research interests include synthesis, characterization and properties of perovskite nanomaterials.

Zhiguo Xia

Professor Zhiguo Xia received his PhD degree (Inorganic Chemistry) from Tsinghua University (Beijing, China) in 2008. Since then he has been working as an assistant and associate Professor in China University of Geosciences, Beijing (CUGB), 2008–2014. After that, he has transferred and been promoted as a full professor in Beijing University of Science and Technology Beijing (USTB). His research interests cover the inorganic solid state chemistry and spectroscopic study of rare earth doped luminescence materials and luminescent perovskites (nanocrystals and single crystals) for emerging optical applications.

Jin Z. Zhang

Jin Z. Zhang received his BSc degree in Chemistry from Fudan University, Shanghai, China, in 1983 and his PhD in physical chemistry from the University of Washington, Seattle, in 1989. He was a postdoctoral research fellow at the University of California Berkeley from 1989 to 1992. In 1992, he joined the faculty at UC Santa Cruz, where he is currently a full professor of chemistry and biochemistry. Zhang's recent research interests focus on the design, synthesis, characterization, and applications of advanced materials including semiconductor, metal, and metal oxide nanomaterials, particularly in the areas of solar energy conversion, solid state lighting, sensing, and biomedical detection/therapy. He has authored over 320 publications and three books. Zhang has been serving as a senior editor for JPC(L) published by ACS since 2004. He is a Fellow of AAAS, APS, and ACS. He is the recipient of the 2014 Richard A. Glenn Award of the ACS Energy and Fuel Division.

The term “perovskite” was first used for CaTiO3, which was discovered by the German mineralogist Gustav Rose in 1839 and named after Russian mineralogist Lev Perovski. This nomenclature now denotes a variety of compounds with the same type of crystal structure as CaTiO3 and the general chemical formula ABX3, in which a B-site cation is coordinated by six X-site anions to form a [BX6]4− octahedron and an A-site cation is implanted in the void surrounded by eight corner-shared [BX6]4− octahedra. Due to the large tunability of their structure, a wide variety of transition metal ions, rare earth ions or alkaline earth metal ions have been incorporated into the lattice of ABO3 perovskite oxides to improve the oxygen ionic conductivity, electronic conductivity, and catalytic activity, aiming at applications such as oxygen separation, solid oxide fuel cells, and catalytic conversions.

Triggered by the fast development of CH3NH3PbI3 in photovoltaics (PV) beginning in 2009, lead halide perovskites (LHPs), including all inorganic elements exemplified by CsPbX3 (X stands for a halogen ion) and hybrid organic–inorganic compositions such as MAPbX3 (MA:CH3NH3+) and FAPbX3 (FA:HC(NH2)2+), have been applied for diverse optoelectronic applications due to their unique properties including high absorption coefficient, photoluminescence (PL) quantum yield (QY), and defect-tolerance, as well as broad structure and bandgap tunability. As a simple and powerful approach to manipulating the electronic, optical and magnetic properties, doping is widely used to introduce atoms/ions into host lattices to yield desirable properties and functionalities for the targeted materials. For semiconductor materials, doping usually creates dopant-related energy levels within the interband region of the host. The photo-induced excitons in the host can then transfer their energy to such bandgap states, often resulting in light emission characteristic of the dopant. For example, intense orange PL (∼600 nm) with a lifetime of up to 2 ms can be observed in Mn2+ doped II–VI nanocrystal (NC) systems due to the spin-forbidden nature of Mn2+. The electrical conductivity and type of dominant carriers can also be tailored by introducing heterovalent ions exemplified by B-doped Si (p-type) and N-doped Si (n-type).
LHPs, as a new class of semiconductor materials and with a wide range of possible structures and bandgap tunability, provide an excellent platform for fundamental research on doping. Given the ternary composition of LHPs, the doping and alloying of LHPs have been explored by the replacement of all three sites: A, B and X. Since the A-site cation occupies the cage surrounded by the [PbX6]4− octahedra, its size has a great impact on the structure distortion and stability according to Goldschmidt's tolerance factor , where RA, RB and RX are the ionic radii of the corresponding ions, respectively. For most known 3D perovskites, 0.8 ≤ τ ≤ 1.0 is known as the empirical stability range, indicating that the limit on RA in LHPs is around 2.6 Å if using τ = 1.0 and the largest values for RB (RPb = 1.19 Å) and RX (RI = 2.20 Å). To date, Cs+ (1.67 Å), Rb+ (1.52 Å), MA+ (2.17 Å) and FA+ (2.53 Å) cations have been utilized to construct 3D compounds. Due to the small radius of Cs+, cubic α-CsPbI3, which is suitable for diverse optoelectronic applications, shows poor stability at room temperature. Therefore, two or three cations are usually mixed to enhance the stability. The X-site is usually the halogen ion, including Cl−, Br− and I−. Due to the major contribution to the energy bands from the outmost p orbits of halogen ions, the bandgap of LHPs can be easily tuned across the entire visible range using mixed halides. Besides the halide ions, a pseudohalogen ion SCN− was used for partially substituted LHPs, aiming at enhancing the moisture stability, controlling the crystal grain size, and tuning the optical properties based on the strong interaction between Pb2+ and the pseudohalogen ion.
Doping of the B-site (i.e. Pb2+) is more difficult compared to that of the A and X-sites owing to its large formation energy. Also, complete substitution of Pb2+ often deteriorates the impressive optoelectronic properties of LHPs. Therefore, doping of the B-site is relatively less studied compared to that of the other two sites. As a member of the same group of Pb, Sn was first considered for replacing Pb in consideration of the high toxicity of Pb. However, the oxidation of Sn2+ to Sn4+ greatly hinders its development. Two detailed studies of Mn2+-doped LHPs reported in 2016 indicate that LHPs can function as II–VI semiconductors, where the Mn2+ is doped into the B-site. Likewise, other dopants including transition ions and rare earth ions have been successfully doped into the B-site to tailor the optoelectronic properties of LHPs.
During the preparation of this paper, a review on metal-doped LHPs was published with a focus on optical properties and optoelectronic applications. In this review, we will pay close attention to the photophysics and electronic band structure of B-site doped LHPs to understand the origin of charge and energy transfer between the host and dopants. In addition, the synthetic routes for doping with isovalent and heterovalent metal ions and the future applications in light emission are emphasized.

Doping metal ions into semiconductor NCs or quantum dots (QDs) has been extensively studied over the last two decades. Typically, dopants are implanted into the lattice during the crystal growth of the host or via ion exchange post host crystal growth. Owing to the difference in atomic radii and charge number, dopants always induce lattice strain and defects, which may lead to the expulsion to the surface. Therefore, doping in NCs is more difficult than in the bulk due to the stronger strain and more defects in NCs. This suggests the particular need to develop synthesis strategies to prompt doping of NCs.


The hot-injection method is widely adopted to obtain Cs-based LHP NCs with well-defined morphology and controlled length, which was first reported by Kovalenko et al. In terms of B-site doped LHP NCs, dopant precursors (usually metal halides) are first added to octadecene and dissolved with the help of carboxylic and amino ligands. However, the doping efficiency is much lower than anticipated in most situations due to the mismatch of size and/or charge. Increasing the dopant content and reaction temperature is effective in obtaining heavily doped LHPs. For instance, doped CsPbCl3 NCs with up to 46 at% Mn2+ were obtained by adopting a high Mn:Pb ratio (10:1) and temperature (210 °C). The crystallinity of the host becomes worse with more dopants introduced, which affects the process of energy transfer between the host lattice and dopants. Compared to bulk materials, the strong lattice strain of NCs makes doping harder, especially for heavy doping. However, the large surface-to-volume-ratio of NCs also provides more opportunities for dopants to be involved in replacing Pb sites of the lattice. Alkylamine hydrochloride has been demonstrated to control the size and increase the number of NCs, which promotes Mn2+ substitution for Pb sites. With respect to other synthesis methods, hot injection creates a local high-temperature and inert atmosphere, which is helpful for many difficult doping reactions. For LHPs, many isovalent and aliovalent metal ions including (Al3+, Bi3+, Sn4+, Ni2+ and some lanthanide ions) can be effectively single-doped or co-doped to tune their optical and magnetic properties using this method.


LARP was first proposed by Zhong and his colleagues in 2015 for synthesizing organic–inorganic LHPs. The basic procedures include two main steps. First, a precursor solution is prepared by dissolving MA+/Cs+/FA+, Pb2+ and halogen ion precursors and capping ligands (alkylamine and carboxylic acid) in polar solvents such as dimethylformamide (DMF) or dimethyl sulphoxide (DMSO). Second, the precursor solution is injected into antisolvents such as acetone/toluene/hexane under vigorous stirring. Compared to the hot-injection method, the reaction conditions of LARP are mild and easier to control. However, the obtained LHP NCs are usually damaged or dissolved to some degree during purification due to their high sensitivity to polar solvents. B-Site doped LHP NCs are most often obtained through injecting the dopant containing precursor solution into antisolvents or vice versa. By controlling the species of precursors and capping ligands, doped NCs with low dimensionalities can be synthesized.


As ionic semiconductors, ion migration in LHPs is expected to be an important factor for some unusual properties such as current–voltage hysteresis, photoinduced phase transition, and giant dielectric constant. Activation energy (Ea) can be used to evaluate the rate of ion migration that is determined by the crystal structure, ionic radius, ion-jumping distance, and charge of ions. As for MAPbI3, a theoretical study suggests that I− has a much lower Ea (0.58 eV) than MA+ (0.84 eV) and Pb2+ (2.31 eV), which is responsible for the fast halide ion exchange. Although the Ea of Pb2+ is much larger, the partial cation exchange of the B-site can still be achieved with longer time. Cation exchange usually does not reach completion even when large dopant/Pb ratios are adopted, possibly due to increased lattice strain. Different from the above two approaches, ion exchange always proceeds following the synthesis of LHP NCs or films. For example, colloidal LHP NC solutions are usually first synthesized and dispersed in toluene/hexane solvents. Then, solid dopants or dopant stock solutions with a specific ratio are added into the LHP NC solution with vigorous stirring. For doped LHP films, the general steps involve the fabrication of LHP films followed by immersion in solutions containing the dopant ions.

Aiming at fast cation-exchange of the B-site, a simple and effective method, called halide exchange-driven cation exchange (HEDCE), has been proposed and demonstrated recently (Fig. 1a). Partial substitution of Pb sites can be sped up when the rigid [PbX6]4− octahedra are opened up by halide exchange. This strategy works only if a different halide species is present in the dopant precursors. Intriguingly, Mn2+-doped CsPb(Cl/Br)3 NCs can be easily synthesized by adding MnCl2 into CsPbBr3 NC solution, while cannot be obtained by mixing MnBr2 with CsPbCl3 NC solution. This is attributed to the difference in ionic radii of halides and dissociation energy of manganese halides. This strategy is also versatile for Sn2+-doped CsPb(Br/I)3 NCs (Fig. 1b), in which the thermodynamic balance was broken by the anion exchange, and the cation exchange between Pb2+ and Sn2+ was therefore promoted. With this HEDCE method, it still takes a long time (∼2 days) for ion exchange to complete, since the dopant precursors have a lower solubility in nonpolar solvents at room temperature. Increasing the solubility of dopant precursors and chance of collision between dopants and host should improve the doping efficiency. This has been demonstrated by mixing colloidal solutions of Mn2+-doped CsPbCl3 NCs with CsPbBr3 NCs (Fig. 1c), which successfully shortens the reaction time to 1 h. In most situations, LHPs are regarded as hosts to carry out ion exchange. Gao and coworkers demonstrated a reversible cation exchange between PbCl2 and CsMnCl3 NCs at 150 °C (Fig. 1d), and attributed it to the break of equilibrium of the system once excess capping ligands were introduced. Although Ea of the Pb-site is larger than the other two sites, the highly dynamic nature of capping ligands of LHP NCs greatly promotes the ion exchange between bound and free ions.
In addition, other strategies such as ultrasonication, melt quenching, spin-coating, solvothermal method, antisolvent vapour-assisted crystallization, and inverse temperature crystallization have also been used to prepare NCs, films and single crystals.

As adjacent element in the same group as Pb, Sn2+ is regarded as the first choice to partially substitute a Pb2+ site because of the high toxicity of Pb. Since MAPbI3 and MASnI3 crystallize in the tetragonal I4cm and P4mm space groups, respectively, the resulting structure depends strongly on the doping level of Sn2+ (Fig. 2a). The evolution of two diffraction peaks within the range between 22°–25° confirms the formation of MASn1−xPbxI3 solid solutions. A small amount of Sn2+ can help reduce the bandgap and extend the charge carrier lifetime of MAPbI3 LHPs, which is desired for light absorption and solar energy conversion. Usually, the bandgap of doped semiconductors is approximately linear with the lattice parameter and compositions according to the empirical Vegard's law. Unexpectedly, the doping of Sn2+ has a very different impact on the band structure of LHPs. The trend of bandgap change was found to be in the opposite direction once the alloying content of Sn2+ was over 50 at% (Fig. 2b), which is in striking contrast with the results reported by others. This is attributed to the competition between spin–orbit coupling (SOC) and lattice distortion. When the concentration of Sn2+ ranges from 0 to 50 at%, the SOC effect dominates and causes bandgap reduction. Lattice distortion accompanied by a phase transition occurs when the molar ratio of Pb/Sn is around 1. This anomalous phenomenon is also observed in mixed MAPbxSn1−xBr3 single crystals, as shown in Fig. 2c. Similarly, lattice contraction can result in an increase of orbital overlap, thereby reducing the bandgap of LHPs.

In contrast, Sn2+-doped CsPbBr3 NCs exhibit a different behavior, with bandgap increasing with partial Sn2+-substitution. For example, the PL of CsPb1−xSnxBr3 NCs can be tuned towards shorter wavelength by increasing the Sn2+ content (Fig. 3a). Similarly, divalent ions, including Cd2+ and Zn2+, were successfully doped into CsPbBr3 NCs through cation exchange. With these smaller cations, the PL blue-shifts linearly with the lattice contraction (Fig. 3b), attributed to the valence band maximum (VBM) shifting less than the conduction band minimum (CBM) with lattice contraction. Based on first-principles calculations shown in Fig. 3c, the CB of LHPs is mainly derived from the s orbitals of the metal with less contribution from the p orbitals of the halogen, which indicates that the CBM would shift less with respect to the VBM upon lattice contraction and distortion. Given the great effect of the radii of A, B and X-sites on lattice distortion/contraction, different species of A and X-sites may lead to an anomalous phenomenon upon doping of the B-site. For instance, Sn2+-doped CsPbBr3 and MAPbBr3 show totally different trends in terms of the bandgap of the host. Detailed theoretical and experimental studies are necessary in the future to better understand the difference.

The easy oxidation of Sn2+ to Sn4+ upon exposure to atmosphere presents a major challenge for use as a dopant. To search for other more stable metal halide perovskites with a suitable bandgap, the substitution of Pb2+ with all isovalent metal ions has been explored through computational screening. For instance, partial substitution of Pb2+ by alkaline-earth cation Mg2+ was suggested as a possibility according to simulation results. Similar simulations were also conducted on other alkaline-earth cations including Ca2+, Sr2+ and Ba2+ based on Goldschmidt's rules. Although the complete replacement of Pb2+ by these alkaline-earth cations results in a wide bandgap (2.9–3.3 eV) and poor absorption, low level doping with alkaline-earth cations is an effective strategy to tailor the structural, morphological and optoelectronic properties of LHP films. For example, the doping of Ca2+ results in a slight decrease of the bandgap and the formation of cubic MAPbI3.

Similarly, doping with Sr2+ causes a reduction of the MAPbI3 bandgap. Compared to the small radius of Ca2+ (1.00 Å), the radius of Sr2+ (1.18 Å) is almost identical to that of Pb2+ (1.19 Å), which eliminates the impact on structural distortion and contraction. In addition, the lifetime of charge carriers in MAPbI3 is significantly improved after the introduction of Sr2+ (Fig. 4a and b) and the charge separation efficiency is subsequently enhanced. Likewise, the recombination lifetime is improved from 11.1 to 17.1 ns upon doping with 2% Sr2+, which may originate from effective passivation by the Sr-enriched surface. Doping often induces the formation of defects, which can trap photogenerated electrons and holes and reduce the lifetime of emission. For instance, the average PL lifetime dramatically decreases from 200 to 60 ns after the introduction of Sr2+ (Fig. 4c and d). Despite the small drop of solar power conversion efficiency, the incorporation of Sr2+ improves the thermal stability and output voltage, attributed to the suppression of Pb0 and up-shift of the CBM, respectively.
Ba2+, as another alkaline metal ion, has also been investigated to tune the optical and electronic properties of LHP films. The addition of a small amount of Ba2+ is beneficial to the growth of smooth films and larger crystallites, thereby enhancing the carrier transport. Compared to Pb2+, Ba2+ with smaller electronegativity binds I− more strongly, which may affect the band structure of the host. The incorporation of Ba2+ into the lattice lifts the CBM and enlarges the bandgap (Fig. 4e), as indicated by the absorption spectrum (Fig. 4f). This is attributed to the distortion and weak Pb–I bond because of the larger radius (1.35 Å) and smaller electronegativity of Ba2+.

Mn2+, as a transition metal cation, has been intensively studied in II–VI semiconductor NCs due to its capability to endow hosts with paramagnetism and a new emission band, as a result of strong exchange interactions between charge carriers of the host and d-electrons of the Mn2+ dopants. Because the activation of spin relaxation of Mn2+ is induced by the energy transfer from the host exciton to Mn2+, the emission of Mn2+ strongly depends on the band-edge position and bandgap of the host. LHPs with a tunable bandgap resulting from varying the species and ratios of halogen are ideal as hosts for Mn2+ doping.

Two studies of Mn2+-doped CsPbCl3 NCs were reported simultaneously in 2016, which triggered intensive investigations on Mn2+ doping. The successful incorporation of Mn2+ can be indicated by the shift of angle towards higher degree in XRD pattern owing to the smaller radius of Mn2+ (0.97 Å) compared to Pb2+ (1.19 Å), and the electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) signal because of the high spin state of Mn2+ in the octahedron. Strong dopant emission centered at ∼600 nm is observed after introducing Mn2+ into the lattice of CsPbCl3 NCs (Fig. 5a and b). Interestingly, Mn2+ cannot be directly incorporated into CsPbBr3 and CsPbI3via a hot-injection method, but its doping can be achieved through anion-exchange. This is possibly related to the disparity of dissociation energy between Pb–X and Mn–X. Replacement of Pb2+ by Mn2+ is more likely if the dissociation energy of the Mn–X bond is comparable to that of Pb–X. Besides Cl-based LHPs, Mn2+ emission (∼2.10 eV) is expected in the CsPbBr3 host with a bandgap of 2.50 eV (Fig. 5c). However, the PL of Mn2+ is rarely observed in the CsPbBr3 or CsPbI3 host because of their inappropriate band-edge positions and narrow bandgap. Mn2+-doped CsPbBr3 NCs can be obtained via the formation of an intermediate structure through the hot-injection method. The prepared Mn2+-doped CsPbBr3 NCs exhibit strong dopant emission when the host bandgap is enlarged, as shown in Fig. 5d.
Similar strategies were also used on low dimensional Br-based LHPs. Such strong quantum confinement in low dimensional systems can further enhance the dopant–host exchange interaction and boost energy transfer. Mn2+ doping in single-layered (C4H9NH3)2PbBr4 has been achieved via simple grounding and post-annealing (Fig. 5e and f); Mn2+ emission shows a high QY of 37% and lifetime of 0.74 ms in (C4H9NH3)2PbBr4. This method works very well for a variety of single-layered LHPs with different spacing ligands but does not work for 3D LHPs. Since single-layered LHPs have more exposed Pb-sites for anion exchange compared to 3D systems, more efficient or faster exchange in 2D hosts is anticipated. Similarly, 1D C4N2H14PbBr4 with a broad emission band was also utilized as the host for Mn2+ doping (Fig. 5g). C4N2H14PbBr4 presents a broadband emission at room temperature due to the self-trapped exciton, which is usually observed in low dimensional materials. Mn2+ emission exhibits an extremely long lifetime of 2 ms, further confirming successful doping (Fig. 5h). By combining the broad blue emission from self-trapped states and the strong orange yellow emission from Mn2+ d–d transitions, white light emission with a color rendering index (CRI) of 87 is successfully realized (Fig. 5i).
In general, introduction of dopants into host lattices tends to result in the formation of defects that decrease intrinsic host emission. Emission from dopants such as Mn2+ usually competes with band-edge emission, which is expected to decrease after Mn2+ doping. Intriguingly, low level doping of Mn2+ in CsPbCl3/MAPbCl3 NCs has been found to not only generate new dopant emission, but also boost excitonic emission (Fig. 6a and b), which contradicts the traditional exciton energy transfer notion. Parobel et al. proposed that doping of Mn2+ may remove some of the preexisting defects and alter the competing kinetics between radiative and nonradiative relaxation. In comparison with Br- and I-based LHP NCs, the excitonic emission of CsPbCl3 NCs is usually much lower (QY < 5%), indicating that Mn2+ emission in doped CsPbCl3 with an overall QY of ∼20–60% mainly competes with nonradiative recombination. Wei and coworkers found that the build-up time of Mn2+ emission was much longer (206 ± 16 ns) than that of the band-edge emission (<10 ns), and close to the typical trap-state decay time (Fig. 6c), suggesting that the energy transferred to Mn2+ is mainly from the nonradiative trap states rather than band-edge states (Fig. 6d), consistent with the observation of increased band-edge emission with low level Mn2+ doping.
To achieve high QY of Mn2+ emission optimization of its doping level is required. However, usually only a small fraction of Mn2+ can be introduced into LHP NCs. For instance, Mn2+:Pb2+ in a 1:1 nominal molar ratio only results in the replacement of 6.7% Pb2+ sites. By elevating the reaction temperature and molar feed ratio of Mn2+:Pb2+, the Mn substitution can be increased up to 46% with an optimal overall QY of 54% for CsPbCl3 NCs (Fig. 7a) via a hot injection approach. Similarly, Yuan and coworkers obtained Mn2+-doped CsPbCl3 with a maximum atomic ratio of 14.6% and QY of ∼60%. Interestingly, mixed CsPbX3 with Mn2+ doping ratio of 37.7% is easily achieved at room temperature via the LARP method (Fig. 7b). Similarly, Arunkumar and coworkers successfully elevated the Mn2+ doping level to 90% in mixed hybrid organic–inorganic LHP NCs (Fig. 7c). However, the content of Mn2+ may have contributions from ions adsorbed on the surface of NCs in this case since no purification was done for the prepared samples.
Due to competition between band-edge and dopant emission, temperature may show different impacts on them, which could help understand the energy transfer process. For example, a study shows that upon lowering the temperature, the band-edge emission at 390 nm blue shifts slightly with greatly enhanced intensity, while dopant emission shows a red shift with reduced intensity (Fig. 8a). Such an evolution is consistent with thermally active exciton-to-dopant energy transfer (Fig. 8b). Femtosecond transient absorption (TA) further confirms the competing relationship between carrier trapping and exciton-to-dopant energy transfer. With a low doping level (2%), both the lifetime and amplitude of the slow component (representing the lifetime of nonradiative recombination via band edge) increase (Fig. 8c), indicating partial removal of pre-existing structure defects, consistent with the increased intensity of band-edge emission. With respect to carrier trapping, the much longer lifetime of exciton-to-dopant energy transfer suggests that the introduction of Mn2+ has very limited impact on carrier trapping. By increasing the doping level (12%), the bleach recovery becomes faster, resulting from prominent energy transfer from LHP hosts to Mn2+ dopants. The time scale of this energy transfer is estimated to be ∼50–100 ps, which highly depends on the doping content. In addition, high dopant concentrations induce exchange interaction of Mn2+–Mn2+ pairs that results in fast decay dynamics as well as a red-shift of dopant emission (Fig. 8d). In this case, only the carrier trapping and nonradiative recombination processes on the ps time scale are observed due to the short time window. To more completely determine the exciton dynamics, a longer monitoring time window (ns) is necessary. Rossi and coworkers compared the exciton dynamics of Mn2+-doped CsPbCl3 and Mn2+-doped CdS/ZnS core/shell QDs on the ns time scale (Fig. 8e and f). In this case, the fastest component with a few ps lifetime is attributed to the carrier trapping by defects, while the ns recovery component is attributed to radiative and slower nonradiative recombination. Different from the pristine sample, an additional recovery component with 380 ps lifetime is observed in Mn2+-doped CsPbCl3, which is due to exciton-to-dopant energy transfer. Compared to Mn2+-doped CsPbCl3, the coupling interaction between the exciton and Mn2+ dopants in CdS/ZnS core/shell QDs is much stronger with a shorter energy transfer time of 70–190 ps, consistent with other studies.
Motivated by the higher formation energy of CsMnX3, a strategy for enhancing the air and thermal stability of LHPs through Mn2+-doping was proposed. First-principles calculations were conducted to determine the formation energy (ΔEform, defined as the change in energy when a NC is formed from its isolated atoms) and some bond lengths of CsMnBr3, CsPbBr3, and CsPbBr3:Mn NCs. The absolute value of ΔEform per Pb2+ (or Mn2+) ion was found to rise slightly with increased Mn2+ content, reaching a maximum at ∼2.08 mol%, and then to decrease rapidly upon further increasing the doping content of Mn2+ in CsPbBr3 NCs. The increase of ΔE for doped CsPbBr3 NCs enhances its thermal stability. To evaluate the thermal stability of CsPbX3:Mn NCs induced by Mn2+ doping, the temperature dependent PL emission spectra for pure CsPbX3 and CsPbX3:Mn NCs in the range from 77 K to 473 K were compared. As shown in Fig. 9a, enhanced excitonic luminescence was clearly observed in Mn2+-doped CsPbBr3 QDs after three heating/cooling cycles at 100, 150, and 200 °C, much better than that of pure CsPbBr3. This approach also works well for Cl- and I-based LHPs. The excitonic emission was substantially enhanced with high level of Mn2+ doping (Fig. 9b). Such an enhanced emission stems from excess Mn2+ dopants gradually excluded from the lattices of CsPbX3 NCs when heated at high temperature.

Besides Mn2+, other transition metal ions have also been used to dope LHPs. For example, Cd2+ and Zn2+ were doped into CsPbBr3 NCs to tune the PL emission in the range of 452–512 nm. Since the ionic radius of both Cd2+ (0.95 Å) and Zn2+ (0.74 Å) is smaller than that of Pb2+, doping with these two ions induces a contraction of the lattice, causing a blue-shift of the host PL. Dopant ions with the same coordination mode and number as the host ion are favored for doping efficiency and stability of the lattice structure. Divalent Ni2+ (radius ∼0.69 Å) prefers octahedral coordination with halide ions and is a potentially good dopant for LHPs. A general strategy for the synthesis of violet-emitting LHP NCs with near-unity PL QY through Ni2+ doping has been reported (Fig. 10a). Although no dopant emission was observed at room or cryogenic temperature, the PL QYs of band-edge emission was greatly improved from 2.4% for undoped CsPbCl3 NCs to 96.5% for 11.9% Ni2+-doped CsPbCl3. Extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) spectra further demonstrate that the order of the local coordination environment of Pb2+ is improved after introducing NiCl2 during the synthesis, suggesting the removal of structural defects and improved short-range order of the lattice. This is consistent with density functional theory (DFT) simulation results that the introduction of Ni2+ can notably increase the formation energy of Cl, Cs and Pb vacancies. Both the excitonic absorption and PL peak shift to blue slightly, caused by lattice contraction. As shown in Fig. 10b, the PL lifetime becomes longer with Ni2+ doping, indicating suppression of non-radiative recombination upon doping. Importantly, this concept is not only applicable to Cl-based LHPs, but also to mixed LHPs (Fig. 10c). Recently, the doping of Co2+ was found to induce a transition of MAPbI3 from the tetragonal phase to cubic phase due to the small radius of Co2+ (0.74 Å at high spin state). With the increase of Co2+ concentration, both the absorption and emission shift to red slightly, probably caused by the decreased d-spacing. In addition, the larger grain size, enhanced electrical conductivities and charge carrier mobility of Co-doped MAPbI3 improve PV performance.


Heterovalent doping can effectively switch the sign of majority charge carriers in semiconductor materials and enhance electrical conductivity and mobility. Bi3+ is isoelectronic with Pb2+ and its radius (1.03 Å) is also close to that of Pb2+, indicating a possible good fit of Bi3+ into the perovskite. Abdelhady and coworkers showed an in situ chemical route of achieving trivalent cation (Bi3+, Au3+ or In3+) doped MAPbBr3 single crystals. By increasing the Bi3+ concentration in feed solution, the color of MAPbBr3 single crystals turns black gradually (Fig. 11a). More interestingly, the absorption onset shifts from 570 nm for the undoped crystal to 680 nm for the 10% Bi3+-doped LHPs (Fig. 11b). It was suggested that the introduction of Bi3+ alters the density of states and the higher electronegativity of Bi3+ leads to more covalent bonding with bromide, thereby narrowing the bandgap. This behavior is also observed in other Bi3+-doped LHPs. As an intrinsic p-type semiconductor, the sign of the majority carrier of MAPbBr3 has been successfully converted to n-type upon Bi3+ doping. In addition, the conductivity is enhanced by as much as 4 orders of magnitude and free carrier concentration increases from ∼109 cm−3 (undoped crystals) to ∼1011–1012 cm−3 (Fig. 11c).

Note that the shape of the absorption curves is not as sharp as that of the undoped crystals (Fig. 11b), which is likely due to the contribution from the absorption of the bandgap states or the thick LHP samples used. To determine the real cause, a series of careful measurements including absorption spectrum (Fig. 11d), spectroscopic ellipsometry (Fig. 11e), microstrain test and solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) were conducted by Nayak and colleagues. The results indicate that the apparent color change of Bi3+-doped LHPs is due to the increased number of defect states within the bandgap, which also facilitate the nonradiative recombination of excitons and lower the PL intensity and lifetime.
However, a recent study found no evidence of bandgap narrowing for Bi3+-doped CsPbBr3 LHPs, in which the excitonic luminescence peak remains unaffected at a temperature of 3.6 K (Fig. 11f). No changes of the position and state distribution of the VB and Fermi level are observed after Bi3+ doping (Fig. 11g). This clearly contradicts other studies, and further study is necessary to clarify the different observations.
The substitution of Pb2+ by Bi3+ was considered to possibly result in the increase of defect density of LHPs and distortion of the crystal lattice, which may lead to ultrabroad emission once the distorted lattices couple with photogenerated excitons. As shown in Fig. 12a, the insertion of Bi3+ greatly quenches the band-edge emission, while yields a broad band in the near infrared (NIR) region (Fig. 12b). Lowering the temperature further favors the broad emission and red-shifts the emission peak (Fig. 12c), similar to distorted 2D LHPs in which the broadband emission arises from the self-trapped exciton (STE). The ultrabroad emission is attributed to the luminescent center induced by the interaction between distorted octahedra and spatially localized bipolarons (Fig. 12d and e). A similar broad emission is also observed in Bi3+-doped CsPbI3 NCs, suggesting the potential applications in the secondary biological window.
Compared to LHP single crystals, Bi3+ doping has different impacts on the band alignment of CsPbBr3 NCs. Although the PL intensity of Bi3+-doped CsPbBr3 NCs shows a similar tendency to that in I-based LHPs, the first excitonic absorption peak shifts to a lower energy at low doping level, while shifts to a higher energy at higher doping level (Fig. 13a and b). Moreover, no evident Urbach tailing absorption is present, unlike that of Bi3+-doped LHP single crystals. Since dopant-induced states form a band-like structure within the bandgap of the host with increasing dopant level, the abnormal spectral shift is attributed to the filling of the CB with extra electrons donated by dopants, known as the Burtein–Moss effect (Fig. 13c). By comparing the TA data (Fig. 13d and e), the recovery time of the ground-state bleaching increases from 7 ns for undoped CsPbBr3 NCs to 36 ns for 0.8% doped NCs, implying that the involvement of change in the electronic band structure delays carrier recombination in Bi3+-doped CsPbBr3 NCs. The reduced PL lifetime for Bi3+-doped NCs further substantiates the presence of a high density of trap states.
Bi3+-Doped LHPs may be used for white light applications if the broad band induced by Bi3+ is located in the visible region. To explore this idea, Bi3+ has been successfully doped into CsPbCl3 NCs to extend the emission into the visible (Fig. 13f). Along with the excitonic emission located at 410 nm, another broad band from 420 to 520 nm is observed for doped NCs, which is attributed to the intrinsic transitions (3P1–1S0) of Bi3+ ions. To achieve white light emission, a yellow component is obtained by co-doping Mn2+ in Bi3+-doped CsPbCl3 NCs (Fig. 13g). Additionally, both Bi3+ and Ag+ are successfully co-doped in the LHPs to tailor the optical properties and band structure. The doped products maintain a direct bandgap structure for the low alloying levels, with the reduced bandgap due to the combination of VBM increase induced by the Ag 4d orbital and CBM decrease induced by the Sb 5p or Bi 6p orbitals based on the DFT simulation results.

Rare earth elements, mainly lanthanides, are characterized by a partially filled 4f shell that is shielded from the external field by 5s2 and 6p6 electrons. As a result, their energy levels are not sensitive to the environment. Due to the parity forbiddance, the intra-4f transitions are partially allowed by crystal field interactions and opposite parity wavefunctions. Therefore, the luminescence lifetime of rare earth elements is extremely long (in the ms range) and linewidths are narrow. Given the large absorption cross section, weak electron–phonon coupling and very high internal PL QY, LHPs are suitable to be the host materials for the doping of rare earth elements to achieve the downconversion, upconversion or quantum cutting application. Yb3+/Ce3+ as well as Yb3+/Er3+ codoped CsPbCl1.5Br1.5 PNCs have been synthesized and investigated in detail. Besides the excitonic emission (450 nm) from the host, two other peaks at 488 and 988 nm are observed, attributed to the 4f–5d transition of Ce3+ and 2F5/2–2F7/2 transition of Yb3+ ions, respectively (Fig. 14a). By introducing Yb3+ and Ce3+ simultaneously, the overall PL QY is up to 146% resulting from the quantum cutting process, as verified by the almost doubled increase of Yb3+ emission intensity. The proposed mechanism of energy transfer is shown in Fig. 14b, in which some electrons of the host generated by the 365 nm light relax to the energy level that is twice the level of Yb3+ ions, triggering the excitation of two electrons from 2F7/2 to 2F5/2. Upon codoping Ce3+ and Yb3+ ions into CsPbCl1.5Br1.5 NCs, the overall PL QY increases from 115.5% to 146%, associated with efficient energy transfer via a Ce3+ intermediate level.

Another study systematically examined the doping of various lanthanide ions (Ce3+, Sm3+, Eu3+, Tb3+, Dy3+, Er3+, and Yb3+) into the lattice of CsPbCl3 perovskite NCs. The first excitonic absorption peak of the host gradually shifts to red with decreasing atomic number of rare earth doping ions (Fig. 14c), mainly attributed to the contraction of the lattice and a small contribution from size decrease. Under 365 nm light excitation, the PL spectra of the doped LHP NCs show not only band-edge emission, but also several intense peaks (Fig. 14d) associated with the electronic transitions of lanthanide ions: 4f–5d transition for Ce3+, 4H5/2–6HJ (J = 2/5, 2/7, 2/9, 2/11) for Sm3+, 5D0–7FJ for Eu3+, 5D4–7FJ (J = 3–6) for Tb3+, 4G5/2–6HJ (J = 15/2, 13/2, 11/2) for Dy3+, 2H11/2−4I15/2/4S3/2−4I15/2 for Er3+, and 2F5/2–2F7/2 for Yb3+ ions.
Yb3+ doped CsPbCl3 NCs exhibit a high PL QY of 143%, possibly resulting from the quantum cutting of excitonic transition. As shown in Fig. 14e, besides the excitonic recombination of the host, the electron in the CB can be transferred to a defect state accompanied by the excitation of one electron from 2F7/2 to 2F5/2. Subsequently, the electron in the intermediate defect state is further deactivated by recombining with a VB hole and transfers its energy to another Yb3+ ion. As for Eu3+ doped NCs (Fig. 14f), the excited electrons are transferred to the emitting level (5D0) nonradiatively, resulting in low PL QY. Another detailed study revealed that the depopulation of the excitons of the host in Yb3+ doped CsPbCl3 NCs is extremely fast (ps time scale) as determined by TRPL and TA measurements (Fig. 15a and b). The possible explanation is that dopant-induced charge compensating defects act as shallow traps, competing with native defects and localizing the excitons on the ps time scale. For La3+ doped CsPbCl3 NCs, the induced defects are slightly below the CB of the host (Fig. 15c), resulting in near-band-edge PL. In the case of CsPbCl3 NCs with Yb3+ dopants (Fig. 15d), the charge-neutral Yb3+–VPb–Yb3+ defect complex (VPb denotes Pb vacancy, Fig. 15e) traps the exciton followed by nearly resonant energy transfer to produce two excited Yb3+ ions in a single quantum-cutting step. With the aid of the VPb defect, the overall PL QY is up to 170%, which is the highest for any colloidal NCs and very close to the theoretical maximum 200%.
It is unavoidable that heterovalent doping induces defect states due to charge imbalance, which has a great impact on the exciton dynamics. Generally, defect states could trap photogenerated electrons/holes, leading to quenching of host PL. A contrary phenomenon was found in the case of Ce3+-doped CsPbBr3. With the increase of dopant concentration, the overall PL was greatly enhanced with PL QY increased from 41% to 89% (Fig. 16a and b). Through TRPL and TA studies and global fitting of the dynamic data (Fig. 16c and d for undoped sample, Fig. 16e and f for doped sample), processes including intraband hot-exciton relaxation, exciton trapping to the bandgap trap states, and exciton recombination are identified. The former two decay processes are accelerated upon introducing Ce3+. The induced near band-edge states result in the increased density of the lowest excitonic states and coupling between the higher excitonic energy levels and lowest excitonic states, as well as increased coupling between the lowest excitonic states and the near band-edge trap states (Fig. 16g). In addition, since the induced near band-edge states are primarily emissive, its average PL lifetimes decrease gradually with increasing dopant concentration (Fig. 16h). Besides the aforementioned rare earth elements, Eu3+ and Tb3+ were also codoped into CsPbBr3 NCs for white light application.
A recent study on the upconversion luminescence (UCL) originated from CsPbX3 NCs is an example of the modification of the electronic properties of doped perovskite NCs. Fine tuning of the UCL in CsPbX3 was achieved through sensitization by lanthanide-doped NCs, which is governed by a radiative energy transfer upconversion (RETU) process shown in Fig. 17. Specifically, to sensitize photon upconversion in CsPbX3 NCs, the NCs with different chemical compositions were dispersed with LiYbF4:0.5%Tm3+@LiYF4 core/shell nanoparticles (NPs) in a homogeneous colloidal cyclohexane solution, in which the NPs can function as an internal UV or blue light source to illuminate the CsPbX3 NCs by utilizing the intense UCL of Tm3+ under 980 nm CW diode laser excitation. The characteristic band-edge excitonic emission from the CsPbX3 NCs dominates in the UCL spectra, whereas the emissions of Tm3+ from the NPs were selectively quenched in accordance with the CsPbX3 NC absorption, indicating efficient energy transfer from the NPs to CsPbX3 NCs as the CW laser cannot trigger photon upconversion in pure CsPbX3 NCs (Fig. 17a). The generality of the proposed RETU for sensitizing photon upconversion in CsPbX3 NCs has also been demonstrated. The UCL spectra for LiYbF4:0.5%Tm3+@LiYF4 core/shell NPs, NaYF4:18%Yb3+,2%Er3+ NPs, and the two kinds of NP-sensitized CsPbX3 NCs are comparatively shown in Fig. 17b and c, respectively.

Besides isovalent transition metal ions, other heterovalent ions such as Fe3+, Al3+, In3+ and Sb3+ have also been studied as dopants for LHPs. Uniform doping of Fe3+ in 1D CsPb(Cl/Br)3 nanowires (NWs) has been reported, which is usually hard to achieve in both cross and longitudinal directions. Both the growth process and optical properties of CsPb(Cl/Br)3 NWs are strongly affected by FeCl3 dopants (Fig. 18a). The blue-shift of the emission peak is attributed to the magnetic polaron, rather than the introduction of Cl. The PL lifetime of Fe-doped CsPb(Cl/Br)3 NWs is much shorter than that of undoped CsPbBr3 (Fig. 18b), attributed to the multiparticle effect (such as Auger recombination) facilitated by the increase of charge carrier density upon Fe3+ doping. In addition, Fe3+-doped CsPb(Cl/Br)3 NWs show high nonlinear absorption coefficients and high-quality optical properties, promising for optical switching applications.

As one of the earth-abundant elements, Al3+ has been used to dope CsPbBr3 NCs, causing a major change in optical properties. Both the absorption peak and emission band blue shift over 75 nm (Fig. 18c and d), along with a decrease in PL QY upon Al3+ doping. The changes are attributed to the electronic doping by Al3+ ions and enhanced quantum confinement of NPs induced by the decrease of NP size. Compared to undoped samples, the shorter PL lifetime of Al3+-doped samples is ascribed to the transfer of energy from the host to Al3+ (Fig. 18e). The dimeric form of Al2Br6 consisting of two AlBr4 tetrahedra with shared edge is proposed to be dominant in the solid state (Fig. 18f). However, the blue shift of PL was not observed in MAPbI3 films (Fig. 18g). In contrast, the average PL lifetime and PL QY of the Al3+-doped sample have an almost two-fold increase due to the higher quality of the perovskite film and reduction of defect density (Fig. 18h and i). Similar results were also observed in In3+-doped CH3NH3PbIxCl3−x, in which the introduction of In and Cl affects the crystallization process and changes the crystallization orientation. As an effective way to altering the type of semiconductor, heterovalent doping is also versatile for LHPs.

For while light LED applications, it is desirable but difficult to obtain solid-state lighting materials with strong yellow or orange emission. CsPbX3 NCs with mixed halide contents (e.g., CsPbClxBr3−x and CsPbBr3−xIx) show low PLQY and stability due to phase separation. Doped LHPs, mostly the Mn2+-doped CsPbX3 NCs, can function well as efficient light emitters in perovskite light-emitting diodes (PLEDs) with higher maximum luminance, external quantum efficiency (EQE), and current efficiency (CE) when compared with the LEDs based on pure CsPbX3 NCs.

Pristine and doped CsPbX3 NCs can be used for both PL and electroluminescence (EL) devices. For example, a CsPbxMn1−xCl3 NC-based LED device (Fig. 19a and b) has been demonstrated with luminous efficiency of 2.2 lm W−1 and good stability under a constant voltage of 3.5 V for 200 h. Similarly, CsPbBr3:Mn NCs have been utilized in PLEDs, with a multilayer-structured architecture as illustrated in Fig. 19c. Based on high quality CsPbX3:Mn2+ NCs with good thermal and air stability, a series of PLEDs show higher maximum luminance (9971 cd m−2), enhanced EQE and CE than devices using pristine CsPbX3 NCs (Fig. 19d and e).
The thermostability of CsPbX3 NCs is critical for LED devices. For example, CsPbCl3:Mn2+ NCs have been encapsulated in different matrixes such as KCl and polystyrene (PS) to improve their photostability and thermostability, and the resulting samples, CsPbCl3:Mn2+@KCl, CsPbCl3:Mn2+@PS, and CsPbCl3:Mn2+ NCs, have been used in LEDs. CsPbCl3:Mn2+@KCl exhibited greater photostability as well as thermostability compared to CsPbCl3:Mn2+@PS and CsPbCl3:Mn2+ NCs. As a result, a CsPbCl3:Mn2+@KCl tablet was adopted as a color converter in the LED coupled with a 365 nm GaN LED chip (Fig. 19f). After continuously working at a voltage of 3 V for 100 h, the intensity of the LED remained at 83% of the initial value. Similarly, silica-coating is often applied to improve the air stability of NCs, which can suppress the loss of Mn2+ and avoid anion exchange. Based on the PL color of the pure and doped CsPbX3 NCs, light-emitting devices have been constructed by coupling green CsPbBr3@SiO2 and orange CsPb0.835Mn0.165(Cl0.5Br0.5)3@SiO2 phosphors with an InGaN chip. The ratios of CsPbBr3@SiO2 to CsPb0.835Mn0.165(Cl0.5Br0.5)3@SiO2 can be used to finely tune color coordinates (CCT 5942–6636 K) and CRI (82.7–84.6) for the designed NC-based white LEDs (Fig. 19g). Importantly, no significant degradation or change of PL spectra was found, and the CRI, CCT and color coordinates were also stable upon prolonging the working time to 24 h, verifying the superior color stability for the constructed LHP QDs@SiO2-based WLED.
However, despite these achievements, stability is still a challenging problem and future work is needed to improve the performance. For example, the Mn2+-doped NCs severely suffer from photooxidation. Simple approaches to produce doped NCs with enhanced stability are highly desired.

Doped LHPs are also promising for solar cell applications. For example, a Yb3+/Ce3+ codoped CsPbCl1.5Br1.5 perovskite NC film self-assembled in front of commercial silicon solar cells (SSCs) leads to enhanced photoelectric conversion efficiency (PCE) from 18.1% to 21.5% and excellent photostability (Fig. 20a and b). A similar work was also conducted on Mn2+ doped CsPbCl3 NCs, in which CsPbCl3:Mn2+-based QDs serve as the energy-down-shift layer to boost the stability and efficiency of perovskite SCs (Fig. 20c).

Because of their sensitive response to the external environment, doped LHPs have also been used to construct temperature sensors. For instance, dually emitting Mn2+-doped CsPb(Cl/Br)3 NCs were used as ratiometric temperature sensors due to the temperature-dependent exciton-to-Mn2+ energy transfer (Fig. 20d). The temperature-sensing is based on the determination of the red-shift and quenching of the intrinsic PL emission of perovskite NCs as well as blue-shift and PL enhancement of the Mn2+ emission with increasing temperature. Additionally, the optoelectronic applications of some representative doped LHPs are summarized in Table 1. These results suggest the great potential of doped LHPs not only in PVs and LEDs, but also in photodetectors, two-photon absorption and gas sensors.
Host
Dopant
Synthesis strategy
Application
Performance
Ref.
Note that Jsc, short-circuit current; Voc, open-circuit voltage; FF, fill factor.a Al3+-Doped LHPs are combined with green CsPbBr3 NCs and red-emitting CdSe@ZnS NCs for WLED performance test.
MAPbI3
Ba2+
Spin coating
Solar cell
PCE = 17.4%; FF = 0.74; Jsc = 23 mA cm−2; Voc = 1.02 V

86

MAPbI3
Sr2+
Spin coating
Solar cell
PCE = 15%; FF = 0.85; Jsc = 17.5 mA cm−2; Voc = 0.95 V

85

CsPbBr3
Sn2+
Hot-injection
LEDs
CE = 3.6 cd A−1; EQE = N/A; luminance = 5495 cd m−2

79

CsPbI3
Sn2+
Solvothermal method
Photodetectors
Responsivity = 1.18 A W−1; detectivity = 6.43 × 1013 Jones;

64

CsPbCl3
Ni2+
Hot-injection
Violet luminescence
PL QY = near unity

46

CsPbCl3
Mn2+
Hot-injection
O2 sensor
Response time ≈5 s; linear range (0–12%)

89

MAPbI3−xClx
In3+
Spin coating
Solar cell
PCE = 17.55%; FF = 0.78; Jsc = 21.90 mA cm−2; Voc = 1.03 V

120

CsPbBr3
Al3+
Hot-injection
WLED
116% NTSC; color coordinates (0.32, 0.34);

40

CsPbBr3
Bi3+
Antisolvent vapour-assisted crystallization
Photostriction
Photostriction = 8 × 10−4; photostriction coefficient = 8 × 10−7 m2 W−1

65

CsPb(Cl/Br)3
Fe3+
Anti-solvent vapour-assisted crystallization
Two-photo absorption
Nonlinear absorption coefficient: ∼210 cm GW−1

32

CsPbCl3
Yb3+
Hot-injection
Quantum cutting
PL QY = 170%

117

CsPbBr3
Ce3+
Hot-injection
LED
CE = 14.2 cd A−1; EQE = 4.4% (at 3.8 V)

44


In this article, we have reviewed recent developments in B-site doped LHPs, using isovalent ions such as alkaline-earth metals, transition metals and heterovalent ions including rare-earth metals, some main group metals, with an emphasis on understanding the effect of doping on the electronic band structure and energy or charge transfer processes. The synthetic routes for doped LHPs are also discussed to illustrate how to control the doping level and achieve co-doping. Through dopant engineering, the structural, morphological, optical and electronic properties of the LHP host are varied and tailored towards diverse optoelectronic applications.

Despite the encouraging progress, however, the understanding of the doping mechanism, local environment of dopant ions, and dopant–host interaction is still very limited for B-site doped LHPs. Also, the underlying mechanisms of different synthesis approaches and variation of bandgap structure with doping remain unclear in most cases. For instance, one of the puzzling questions concerns the enlargement of bandgap induced by lattice contraction upon doping with smaller metal ions such as Sn2+, Zn2+, and Cd2+, which is contradictory with the anti-bonding nature of the energy band of LHPs. Therefore, better characterization of the local environment of dopants is needed to understand the change of host lattice caused by dopants. In addition, the energy/electron transfer processes between the host and dopants remain elusive in many systems. To achieve the desired optical properties, the interactions between the host and dopants should be better understood, e.g. through time-resolved studies such as fs TA and TRPL, as well as computational works.
Finally, instability of the LHPs is another major challenge to overcome. Recently, doped lead-free double perovskites showed not only impressive optical properties, but also improved thermal and moisture stability. These studies suggest the potential of developing lead-free double perovskites with different B-site cations to improve the intrinsic stability of the host and optical properties of the doped LHPs. Appropriate surface passivation is another possible approach to enhance the stability of LHPs.

There are no conflicts to declare.


This project was supported by NASA through the MACES Center at UC Merced (NNX15AQ01A), the BES Division of the US DOE, and UCSC Senate Special Research Fund. Work at the Molecular Foundry was supported by the Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, the U.S. Department of Energy, under Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231. B. L. thanks the support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC: 51702205) and the STU Scientific Research Foundation for Talents (NTF17001).


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019