 DOI: 10.1039/C6CC07335B
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 537-540


Jicheng
Zhang
,

Sufei
Xie
,

Xuejuan
Zhang
,

Zhen
Lu
,

Hongmei
Xiao
,

Cuihong
Li
,

Guangwu
Li
,

Xinjun
Xu
*,

Xuebo
Chen
 and 

Zhishan
Bo
*

Beijing Key Laboratory of Energy Conversion and Storage Materials, College of Chemistry, Beijing Normal University, Beijing 100875, China. E-mail: xuxj@bnu.edu.cn; zsbo@bnu.edu.cn

College of Chemistry and Environmental Engineering, ShanXi DaTong University, Datong 037009, China

Received
8th September 2016
, Accepted 6th December 2016
First published on 6th December 2016
For the first time, a hyperbranched polymer acceptor, HP-PDI, was designed, synthesized and applied in polymer solar cells (PSCs). Devices based on HP-PDI showed a power conversion efficiency of 2.15%, which is 14 times higher than that of devices based on the small molecular acceptor SM-PDI. The hyperbranched structure can effectively suppress the aggregation of PDI molecules preventing them from forming large domains. Our preliminary results have demonstrated that high efficiency PSCs could be achieved by using a hyperbranched polymer acceptor.

Recently, non-fullerene acceptors have been widely employed in polymer solar cells (PSCs) to overcome the limitations of fullerene derivatives such as PC71BM, due to their merits of high molar absorption coefficients in the UV-vis region and flexible tuning of their energy levels via chemical modification. Among the extensively investigated non-fullerene acceptors, perylene diimide (PDI) based small molecules and polymers have the advantages of high electron mobility and affinity, making them appropriate candidates for polymer solar cells (PSCs). Until now, PDI based small molecules have been among the most investigated non-fullerene acceptors and PCEs over 9% have been achieved for PDI based PSCs. However, PDI based small molecules generally suffer from strong aggregation when blended with donor materials, which can be attributed to the big, rigid and planar chemical structure of PDI, and this will impede further improvement of the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of devices. Introducing a twisty bridge to create a big dihedral angle between two adjacent PDI units has been proven to be an effective strategy to reduce the aggregation of PDI based acceptors and to produce abundant donor/acceptor interfaces for exciton separation. However, this strategy influences the charge transport of charge carriers in the active layers and results in low PCEs in non-fullerene PSCs. Polymer based acceptors, mainly including PDI and naphthalene diimide (NDI) based linear polymers, have also been reported for PSCs. NDI based polymer acceptors such as N2200 (poly((N,N′-bis(2-octyldodecyl)-1,4,5,8-naphthalenedicarboxi-mide-2,6-diyl)-alt-5,5′-(2,2-bithiophene))) could give higher PCEs in PSCs. The PCE of PSCs using PDI type polymer acceptors was still lower than that of PSCs with NDI based polymer acceptors. The strong aggregation tendency of the PDI unit makes it hard to form an ideal film morphology in devices, impeding the improvement of the PCE for PSCs with PDI polymer based acceptors. Jenekhe et al. have reported a strategy of tuning the crystallinity of polymers by the copolymerization of PDI with NDI based monomers. PSCs with such a polymer acceptor gave an enhanced PCE of 6.3%, which still lagged behind that of PSCs with small molecular acceptors. To the best of our knowledge, all these reported polymer acceptors have linear structures, which cannot provide isotropic electron transport like the fullerene acceptor PCBM.

In this communication, to surmount the above problem, we designed a PDI based hyperbranched polymer (HP-PDI, see Fig. 1), which possesses a quasi-spherical configuration, good solubility, and abundant terminal functional groups. Usually, hyperbranched polymers are widely used in many fields like biology, chemistry, materials, nanotechnology and catalysis. For instance, monomers of carbazole and triphenylamine (TPA) can be utilized to synthesize hypercrosslinked supermicroporous polymers, which can serve as efficient solid acid catalysts. Here, TPA was used as the branching unit in the hyperbranched polymer HP-PDI. HP-PDI can be easily prepared by a one-pot polymerization, which is propitious for its future commercial application. This quasi-spherical and branched structure was advantageous not only to suppress the intermolecular aggregation of PDI units, but also to provide isotropic electron transport similar to fullerenes. Moreover, the abundant terminal PDI groups in such a hyperbranched polymer are also beneficial to electron transport, making it a potential acceptor in PSCs. Devices based on HP-PDI gave a PCE of 2.15% without any additives or post-treatment, which is 14 times higher than devices based on SM-PDI (Fig. 1), demonstrating that hyperbranched polymers could significantly increase the performance of PDI based acceptors. This is the first demonstration of hyperbranched polymers acting as non-fullerene acceptors in PSCs, providing a new strategy to balance the exciton separation and the charge transport of PDI based acceptors to achieve high-performance devices.
The synthesis of HP-PDI is shown in Scheme S1 (ESI). An A2 + B3 approach was adopted to synthesize the hyperbranched polymer acceptor. Starting from 5-bromo-2,9-bis(2-ethylhexyl)anthra[2,1,9-def:6,5,10-d′e′f′]diisoquinoline-1,3,8,10(2H,9H)-tetraone (Br-PDI), its Suzuki polycondensation with tris(4-(4,4,5,5-tetramethyl-1,3,2-dioxaborolan-2-yl)phenyl)amine using Pd(PPh3)3 as the catalyst precursor afforded HP-PDI in a yield of 20%. Br-PDI and phenylboronic acid were added to end-cap the bromo and boronic acid end groups, respectively. The corresponding small molecular acceptor (SM-PDI), with one TPA group as the core and three PDI groups as the terminal groups, was also synthesized for a comparison. SM-PDI possesses good solubility in common organic solvents such as dichloromethane (DCM), chloroform (CF), tetrahydrofuran (THF) and dichlorobenzene (DCB). Due to its branched chemical structure, HP-PDI also exhibits good solubility in these solvents at room temperature. The molecular weight (Mw) and polydispersity index (Mw/Mn) of HP-PDI were therefore measured by gel permeation chromatography (GPC) at room temperature using THF as an eluent, and found to be 13.0 kg mol−1 and 2.45, respectively. Wide angle XRD experiments on SM-PDI and HP-PDI films were also performed to investigate their crystallinity. As shown in Fig. S1 (ESI), the SM-PDI film exhibits several intense diffraction peaks at 2θ angles of 3.61°, 4.24°, and 9.82° together with some weak ones. This indicates that crystalline phases exist in the SM-PDI film. In contrast, no obvious diffraction peak could be observed for HP-PDI, demonstrating that the crystallinity of HP-PDI was significantly lower than that of SM-PDI.
The optical properties of SM-PDI and HP-PDI were investigated by measuring their spectra in DCB solutions and as films (Fig. 2a and b). In solution, SM-PDI and HP-PDI displayed similar peaks with two peaks at around 500 nm. As a film, SM-PDI exhibits a broader and red-shifted spectrum relative to its solution one; however, HP-PDI does not show any obvious red-shift upon going from solution to film, revealing that the aggregation of HP-PDI in the solid state might be suppressed by the hyperbranched structure. From the onset absorption wavelengths of their film spectra, the optical gaps of SM-PDI and HP-PDI were estimated to be 1.98 and 1.70 eV, respectively. Detailed parameters are also listed in Table 1. To further investigate the performance of the two acceptors in exciton separation and charge recombination in non-fullerene devices, fluorescence spectra of PTB7-Th:SM-PDI and PTB7-Th:HP-PDI were measured. As shown in Fig. 2c, the intensities of the two emission peaks at around 750 and 830 nm were obviously greater for the PTB7-Th:SM-PDI blend film than for the PTB7-Th:HP-PDI film, indicating that the excitons in the hyperbranched polymer HP-PDI based blend film could be more effectively separated.
Materials

λ
max (nm) solution

λ
max (nm) film

λ
onset (nm) film

E
g,opt
 (eV)
HOMO (eV)
LUMO (eV)

a Calculated by the equation: Eg,opt = 1240/λonset.


SM-PDI

455, 491, 528
458, 515, 551
627
1.98
−5.74
−3.85

HP-PDI

485, 518, 623
487, 519, 622
729
1.70
−5.72
−3.78
The electrochemical properties of SM-PDI and HP-PDI were determined by cyclic voltammetry experiments to get their energy level values (Fig. 2d and Fig. S3, ESI). From the onset oxidation potentials, the HOMO levels of SM-PDI and HP-PDI were measured to be −5.74 and −5.72 eV, respectively. Similarly, the LUMO levels of SM-PDI and HP-PDI were estimated to be −3.85 eV and −3.78 eV, respectively. It is worth noting that SM-PDI and HP-PDI have similar HOMO and LUMO levels, demonstrating that the hyperbranched structure doesn't significantly influence the electronic properties of PDI based acceptors.
The porosities and surface areas of SM-PDI and HP-PDI were investigated by N2 adsorption–desorption analysis at 77 K. As shown in Fig. S4 (ESI), the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface areas of SM-PDI and HP-PDI are 28.198 and 52.383 m2 g−1, respectively. The corresponding pore size distributions of the materials were also obtained and found to be 0.57 nm and 0.81 nm for SM-PDI and HP-PDI, respectively (Fig. S5, ESI). The strong aggregation of SM-PDI results in a smaller pore size and extensive phase separation when blended with PTB7-Th (vide infra). In comparison with SM-PDI, the interior branched structure of HP-PDI can significantly reduce the aggregation of PDI units, leading to a larger pore size and more uniform film morphology when blended with donor materials. As a result, high performance was achieved for HP-PDI based devices.
To shed light on the photovoltaic performance of HP-PDI and SM-PDI, devices with a configuration of ITO/ZnO/PFN-OX/PTB7-Th:acceptor/MoO3/Ag were fabricated (S1.2, ESI). The current density–voltage (J–V) curves of these two devices are shown in Fig. 3a and detailed parameters are summarized in Table 2. After optimization, both devices displayed the best performance with a donor/acceptor weight ratio of 1:1.5. For PTB7-Th:SM-PDI based devices, an inferior PCE of 0.15%, with an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.73 V, a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 0.70 mA cm−2 and a fill factor (FF) of 0.29, was achieved; whereas HP-PDI based devices displayed a PCE of 2.15%, with a Voc of 0.83 V, a Jsc of 8.70 mA cm−2 and an FF of 0.30, which is fourteen times higher than that of SM-PDI based devices. Notably, the Jsc and FF values of SM-PDI were very low, which might be attributed to the inferior film morphology caused by the aggregation of SM-PDI molecules (vide infra). By introducing a hyperbranched structure, the aggregation of PDI units could be significantly reduced, leading to appropriate phase separation, and a higher Jsc and FF were therefore acquired. In addition, devices based on HP-PDI do not need any post treatment or additives to further reduce the aggregation of the acceptor, revealing the potential of using a hyperbranched polymer as the acceptor in non-fullerene PSCs.
Acceptor

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)
Thickness (nm)
Best/Ave

SM-PDI

0.73
0.70
0.29
0.15/0.10
102

HP-PDI

0.83
8.70
0.30
2.15/2.05
110

SM-PDI and HP-PDI based devices were periodically tested for 6 days to investigate their stability. As shown in Fig. S6 (ESI), HP-PDI based devices retain 91% of their PCE values after 6 days; whereas SM-PDI based devices lost 57% of their PCE values after 1 day and retained only 41% of their PCE values after 6 days, demonstrating that the branched structure of HP-PDI is beneficial to the devices’ stability. External quantum efficiency (EQE) curves of the optimized devices were also investigated to demonstrate their spectral responses. As shown in Fig. 3b, HP-PDI based devices displayed a broad response in the range from 300 nm to 800 nm, whereas SM-PDI based devices showed a very weak response in the same spectrum range. The Jsc value integrated from the EQE curves agreed well with that obtained from the J–V curves, demonstrating that the photovoltaic experiments were reliable.
To investigate the influence of the hyperbranched structure on the charge transport properties of PDI based acceptors in devices, hole-only devices with a structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PTB7-Th:acceptor/Au and electron-only devices with a configuration of FTO/PTB7-Th:acceptor/Al were fabricated to measure the hole mobilities (μh) and electron mobilities (μe) of the devices, respectively, by the space charge limited current (SCLC) method (S1.3, ESI). As shown in Fig. S7 (ESI), the μh of SM-PDI and HP-PDI based devices showed similar values, which were calculated to be 5.11 × 10−5 and 5.54 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively. In contrast, the μe values of SM-PDI and HP-PDI devices were quite different, which were ascertained to be 3.92 × 10−6 and 1.52 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1 respectively. For SM-PDI based devices, the μe was one order of magnitude lower than the μh, leading to unbalanced charge transport, and low Jsc and FF values were therefore achieved. When using HP-PDI as the acceptor, the μe in devices was significantly enhanced, which could be attributed to the isotropic electron transport, abundant terminal PDI groups of the hyperbranched polymers and the optimized film morphology (vide infra). A higher μe could not only enhance the Jsc in the devices, but also lead to more balanced charge transport and thus result in a higher PCE.
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) experiments on SM-PDI and HP-PDI based active layers were also carried out to investigate the influence of the hyperbranched polymer structure on the film morphology. As shown in Fig. 4, big domains could be observed in PTB7-Th:SM-PDI based active layers. The black domains in the TEM images could be ascribed to the aggregates of SM-PDI, which would significantly affect the exciton separation and lead to low Jsc values in devices. For PTB7-Th:HP-PDI based active layers, no obvious aggregation of the acceptor materials could be observed, demonstrating that the aggregation of PDI units was significantly suppressed with the hyperbranched polymer HP-PDI, and a higher Jsc and PCE were therefore acquired.
In summary, a hyperbranched polymer acceptor HP-PDI with TPA as the branching unit and PDI as the linear and peripheral groups was designed and synthesized. In comparison to the small molecular acceptor SM-PDI, the quasi-spherical and hyperbranched structures of HP-PDI helped to suppress the aggregation of PDI units, promote exciton separation and reduce charge recombination. Moreover, the isotropic quasi-spherical structure and abundant terminal PDI groups of HP-PDI were also beneficial for accelerating the electron transport to achieve higher μe and Jsc values. As a result, a PCE of 2.15% was achieved for HP-PDI based devices fabricated without any additives or post-treatment, which is 14 times higher than that of SM-PDI based devices, demonstrating that hyperbranched polymers could be potential acceptors for PSCs.
Financial support from the NSF of China (91233205 and 21574013), Program for Changjiang Scholars and Innovative Research Team in University and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities are gratefully acknowledged.
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental section including 1H and 13C NMR spectra of SM-PDI and HP-PDI, DFT calculations, porosities, BET surface areas, device decay plots, and CV and SCLC curves. See DOI: 10.1039/c6cc07335b
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017