 DOI: 10.1039/C1JM12388B
(Feature Article)
J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 18934-18945

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Hae Jung
Son
,

Feng
He
,

Bridget
Carsten
 and 

Luping
Yu
*

Department of Chemistry and The James Frank Institute, The University of Chicago, 929 E 57th Street, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA. E-mail: lupingyu@uchicago.edu

Received
27th May 2011
, Accepted 5th August 2011
First published on 6th October 2011
Over the last ten years, polymer solar cells have been developed as an attractive alternative to the traditional silicon photovoltaic devices. Remarkable progress has been made in polymer-fullerene solar cells and several polymers have shown power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) greater than 7%. The most important recent development has been the synthesis of new low bandgap polymers with optimal properties for the solar cells. Herein we provide an overview of the key strategies of optimization of highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energy levels in the design of new low bandgap conjugated polymers. Detailed examples of representative donor polymers, the current state of the art in their solar cell performances and possible future directions for development of new polymers with improved efficiencies are discussed.
Hae Jung Son
Hae Jung Son received her B.S degree in chemistry in 2000 from Sungkyunkwan University, Republic of Korea and her M.S. degree in organometallic chemistry in 2002 under the supervision of Prof. YoungKyu Do from the Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST). After graduation, she worked for Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology as a research staff member from 2002 to 2004. Presently, she is a Ph.D. student under the direction of Prof. Luping Yu at the University of Chicago. Her current research focuses on the development of novel conjugated polymers for organic solar cells.
Feng He
Feng He received his B.E. degree in 2002 and Ph.D. degree in polymer chemistry in 2007 from Jilin University, People's Republic of China, under the supervision of Prof. Yuguang Ma. Then he moved to the University of Toronto, Canada, for his postdoctoral research with Prof. Mitchell A.Winnik on the design and synthesis of fluorescent block copolymers as well as their supramolecular self-assembly. In 2009, he joined Prof. Luping Yu's group as a postdoctoral scholar at the University of Chicago, where his research interests are the synthesis of low band gap copolymers for organic solar cell applications.
Bridget Carsten
Bridget Carsten was born in Phoenix, Arizona. She received her Bachelor of Science in Chemistry from Northern Arizona University in 2007, working under the direction of Professor Edgar Civitello. She received her Master of Science in Chemistry from the University of Chicago in 2008, and is currently completing her PhD in Organic/Polymer Chemistry at the University of Chicago under the supervision of Professor Luping Yu. Her research interests include developing new organic materials for solar cell applications, focusing particularly on the development of new electron-deficient small-molecule and polymer systems for use as electron acceptors in photovoltaic devices.
Luping Yu
Luping Yu was born in Zhejiang Province, People's Republic of China. He received his B.S. (1982) and M.S. (1984) degrees in polymer chemistry from Zhejiang University and his Ph.D. degree (1989) from The University of Southern California. He is currently a Professor of Chemistry at the University of Chicago. His current research focuses on polymer chemistry, surface chemistry and supramolecular chemistry. Typical examples of current projects include: (1) conjugated diblock copolymers for the formation of self-assembled, nano-sized electroactive materials; (2) molecular electronics; (3) photo-induced electron transfer and photovoltaic materials; (4) nanoporous hydrogen storage polymeric materials.

It is a fact that solar energy can potentially supply around 124PW of energy if it is properly harvested. This is more than 8000 times higher than the total annual energy consumption in the world. However, there are no cost-effective current technologies available to achieve that goal. Although various approaches have been explored, such as solar fuels and solar thermo-electricity, photovoltaic solar cells are the most mature technology. Inorganic solar cells exhibit superior power conversion efficiency, but their wide-spread applications are hampered by their high cost.

Extensive research and manufacturing efforts are aimed at reducing the cost. More recently, remarkable research effort has been focused on semiconducting polymer/organic solar cells.
These materials and devices can be fabricated by using solution processing on lightweight and flexible substrates at a low cost. Furthermore, conjugated polymers allow fine tuning of their absorption windows and exhibit high absorption extinction coefficients compared to inorganic materials, allowing more effective light harvesting.
The recent surge in organic/polymer solar cell research began with the pioneering work by Tang, who developed a heterojunction solar cell based on a donor (D)-acceptor (A) bilayer structure embedded between two electrodes. A power conversion efficiency of ∼1% was reported. The general working principle of D–A type polymer solar cells is shown in Fig. 1.
When the chromophores (donor or acceptor) absorb photons possessing higher energy than their energy bandgaps, excitons are generated and start diffusing randomly. In the surface of the D–A bilayer, the electron of the exciton in the donor material transfers to the LUMO of the acceptor and the hole of the exciton in the acceptor transfers to the HOMO of the donor. The fully dissociated charge carriers transport to the respective electrodes due to the driving force of the internal electric field. Consequently, photocurrent and photovoltage are generated. However, the lifetimes of excitons in organic materials are usually very short and only permit them to diffuse a limited distance of about 10 nm. Otherwise, the excitons formed far from the D–A interface relax to the ground state, resulting in photocurrent loss and in turn, diminished solar cell efficiency. This is the major reason that organic films must be thin enough to allow effective exciton diffusion and charge carrier transport to electrodes.
The bilayer approach exhibited a limitation in that it incorporated a small D–A interfacial area, which limited charge separation efficiency. One of the breakthroughs in organic solar cells came when the concept of the bulk heterojunction (BHJ) was introduced using organic semiconducting polymers as active materials. In a donor and acceptor BHJ blend, an interpenetrating network with nanoscale phase separation can be formed, enabling a greater degree of interfacial contact between the donor and the acceptor. Since then, the performance in polymer BHJ solar cells has been gradually improved. The most promising composite structure in polymer BHJ solar cells is a system based on the conjugated polymer/fullerene BHJ structure, where a p-type conjugated polymer plays the role of donor and a fullerene (typically C60 or C70) plays the role of acceptor. In Fig. 2, the architecture of the polymer/fullerene BHJ solar cell and working mechanism are illustrated. Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) is a buffer layer, which improve the contact between an active layer and an indium tin oxide (ITO) electrode and therefore makes hole extraction easier.Fullerene derivatives have been demonstrated as the most effective acceptor materials due to several advantages. First, fullerenes can stabilize negative charges very well because of their low-lying triply degenerate LUMO energy levels. Photoinduced electron transfer from a donor polymer to a fullerene in a BHJ blend film occurs on an the femtosecond time scale. It is much faster than the other competing relaxation processes such as photoluminescence, which occur on a time scale of about 1 nanosecond. In addition, fullerene derivatives usually exhibit high electron mobility. For example, C60 showed a mobility of about 1.0 cm2 V−1s-1 in an organic field effect transistor. After functionalization of C60 and C70 with solubilising groups, [6,6]-phenyl-C61 (or C71) -butyric acid methyl esters (PCBMs, Fig. 3) have been extensively used as acceptor materials for polymer BHJ solar cells.
With concomitant research efforts in material developments and device technologies, polymer/fullerene BHJ solar cells have demonstrated power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of over 7% in several polymer systems. The major contribution to this noticeable result has been the development of new conjugated polymers with optimal chemical and physical properties, which synergistically satisfy the required properties for polymer/fullerene BHJ solar cells. However, the general consensus is that there is still much room left to achieve a PCE over 10% through further optimizing the properties of p-type polymers such as energy levels or microstructure in the polymer/fullerene blend film. Thus, development of conjugated polymers will play a vital role in the polymer solar cell field. Accumulated knowledge on design and synthesis of conjugated polymers and deep understanding of the effect of the polymer's chemical structures on solar cell properties will be crucial to generate ideal polymers for high performance polymer solar cells.
Throughout this article, we will review development of numerous p-type conjugated polymers that exhibit significant power conversion efficiency and represent the current state of the art in polymer BHJ solar cells. Emphasis will be placed on discussing their structure–property relationships in order to facilitate the design of new low bandgap conjugated polymers through fine-tuning of polymer structures. This article is by no mean a comprehensive review. Numerous papers are not mentioned here. Readers are encouraged to read more extensive past reviews.

The solar photon flux distributes over a wavelength range from 280 nm to 4000 nm and its maximum density is located at about 700 nm. In order to effectively harvest the solar energy, optical absorption of the active layer in polymer BHJ solar cells must be optimally matched with the region of maximum photon flux. Since the donor polymer in polymer/fullerene BHJ solar cells absorbs the most solar energy, it is essential to develop low band-gap polymers with high absorption coefficients in the red to near-infrared regions.

However, for the application of low bandgap polymers to organic solar cells, several criteria should be considered when the energy levels are controlled.
The photogeneration mechanism of free charge carriers in polymer/fullerene BHJ solar cells includes a series of the steps similar to those in organic bilayer devices. However, the interfacial area in polymer BHJ solar cells is distributed throughout the entire film randomly to form free charge carriers. A proper driving force for electron transfer that is higher than the Coulombic binding energy of the exciton is required and can be compensated for by utilizing the energy offset between the donor and acceptor's LUMO levels. It is reported that the LUMO level of the donor should be at least 0.3 eV higher than that of the acceptor. One of the factors defining the solar cell efficiency is an open circuit voltage (Voc). It is well demonstrated that Voc is linearly correlated to the gradient in the chemical potentials of electrons and holes, correlated with the difference between the HOMO energy level of the donor and the LUMO energy level of the acceptor. Narrowing the bandgap of the donor polymer while trying to maintain the driving force for charge separation leads to reduction of the theoretically achievable maximum value of Voc. Therefore, it is crucial to engineer the energy levels of the donor conjugated polymers to achieve a balance between pursuing the narrow bandgap of the donor and matching HOMO/LUMO energy levels to the acceptor with minimizing a loss in Voc. To maximize the potential value of the efficiency in a polymer/fullerene BHJ solar cell, all of these processes and parameters must be synergistically optimized.

The energy bandgap (Eg) of aromatic conjugated polymers is determined by several factors in Fig. 4, including contributions of the resonance stabilization energy of aromatic rings (Ere), the bond-length alternation, Δr (EΔr), the torsional angle, Θ (EΘ), and inductive or mesomeric effects of substituents (Es):
Eg = Ere + EΔr + EΘ + Es
Extensive delocalization of π-electrons reduces the bandgap of conjugated polymers. In the hypothetical case that all of the C–C bonds in the polymer backbone have the same length, the π-electrons can be completely delocalized and the energy bandgap would be zero. However, it has been demonstrated that such a structure is not stable as a consequence of Peierls distortion, and the polymer is characterized by alternative single and double bonds. Although it is difficult to push Δr to zero, minimization of the Δr value is used to develop low bandgap polymers. It is known that polyaromatic conjugated polymers such as poly(p-phenylene) and polythiophene have two energetically nondegenerate mesomeric forms which consist of an aromatic form and a quinoid form. Because of its aromatic resonance stabilization energy, the aromatic form is energetically more favourable, leading to confinement of π-electrons within each aromatic unit and the increase of Δr. Coplanarity in the conjugated backbone is crucial for electron delocalization, which requires a minimal torsional bond angle Θ because π-orbital overlapping occurs effectively in the planar structure.
Incorporation of thiophene rings instead of phenylene rings into the polymer backbone is more favourable for reducing the bandgap. Since a thiophene ring is less aromatic than a phenyl ring, the quinoid character of polythiophene is relatively higher compared with that of poly(p-phenylene). Also, the 5-membered ring of thiophene has a smaller torsional angle than the 6-membered phenylene ring due to smaller steric hindrance coming from the ortho-hydrogens of thiophenes. The combination of these properties makes polythiophene such as poly(3-alkyl)thiophene structurally more planar with a low Δr value and therefore narrow bandgap. As a result, poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) has been extensively studied in polymer solar cells. The majority of research efforts by synthetic chemists were concentrated on engineering the backbone of polythiophene to optimize the energy bandgap as well as the HOMO and LUMO energy levels.
Several factors were demonstrated to influence the energy bandgap of P3HT. For example, the alkyl side chains incorporated into the polymer backbone for improving the polymer's solubility were shown to affect the π-electron distribution along the polymer chain. P3HT with low regioregularity contains a number of head-to-head linkages, which reduce conjugation among adjacent thiophene rings due to the steric hindrance between neighbouring alkyl chains increasing the torsional bond angle Θ and consequently reduce planarity of the polymer chain.
A synthetic strategy to increase planarity of the backbone is to connect two adjacent rings by using a bridging atom such as a carbon, a nitrogen or a silicon atom. The bridging eliminates the rotation of C–C single bonds caused by the steric hindrance. For instance, P1, where the bithiophene repeat unit is bound through spcarbon, showed a much lower energy bandgap (1.2 eV) than that of P3HT (1.9 eV).
Another effective way to narrow the energy bandgap is to increase the quinoidal character of the polymer chain. The quinoidal form has a higher ground state energy than the aromatic form and in turn, forms a smaller energy bandgap. Additionally, the quinoid form enables π-electrons to delocalize more effectively in aromatic rings and increases planarity in the polymer backbone. In polythiophene, making an aromatic ring fused to a thiophene repeat unit at the 3,4-positions is the most effective strategy to promote a quinoidal form. Polyisothionaphthene (PITN) in Fig. 5 has a high tendency to form the quinoidal structure. Because a benzene ring has higher aromatic resonance energy than a thiophene ring (1.56 eV vs. 1.26 eV, respectively), the main chain of the polymer tends to adopt the quinoid form in order to preserve the aromaticity of benzene. The energy bandgap of PITN is about 1.0 eV, approximately half that of P3HT (2.0 eV). Similar polymers were prepared by replacing benzene with thiophene or pyrazine, resulting in polythieno[3,4-b]thiophene and polythieno[3,4-b]pyrazine, respectively in Fig. 5.
Another strategy to enhance the quinoidal character of the polymer is to design alternating copolymers of electron-deficient monomers (MA) and electron-rich monomers (MD). The strong driving force of push and pull induces switch of the polymer's mesomeric structures from the aromatic form to the quinoidal form (-MD – MA- → -MD+ = MA−-), consequently decreasing the degree of bond length alternation, and making π-electron delocalization more favourable. Between adjacent donor and acceptor units in the MD-MApolymer, molecular orbital hybridization occurs through intramolecular charge transfer. Two new HOMO energy levels which are energetically nondegenerate are formed after interaction of the donor's HOMO with the acceptor's HOMO. The same explanation is applied to LUMOs in the polymer. 2,1,3-Benzothiadiazole, diketo-pyrrole-pyrrole and thieno[3,4-c]pyrrole-4,6-dione have been extensively used as acceptors, while benzodithiophene and 4-dialkyl-cyclopenta[2,1-b:3,4-b′]dithiophenes are representative donors.
Apart from the intrinsic properties of a single polymer chain, intermolecular interaction between polymer single chains such as π–π stacking in the solid state also contributes to reduce the bandgap of conjugated polymers. A closely packed and ordered structure of polymer chains promotes a planar structure in the polymer backbone and facilitates π-electrons delocalization.

The most straight forward approach to control the HOMO and LUMO energy levels of conjugated polymers involves incorporation of electron-donating or withdrawing groups into the polymer backbone, which can respectively decrease the oxidation potential and increase the reduction potential of the polymer. The substitution effects on the HOMO and LUMO energy levels have been studied systematically on the experimental and the theoretical levels. For instance, mono or di-substitution of electron-withdrawing groups such as nitro and cyano groups into the 3 or 4 positions of the thiophene unit lead to an increase in oxidation potential. On the contrary, electron-releasing groups such as long alkyl chains, alkoxy or alkylsulfonyl groups contribute to an increase in HOMO energy levels. Modification of oxidation and reduction potential via substitution with varying functional groups has been used extensively as a strategy to fine-tune the HOMO/LUMO energy levels of low bandgap polymers to match optimally with those of acceptors. For example, Reynolds et al. reported introduction of cyanovinylene linkage into dialkoxyp-polyphenylene vinylene (MEH-PPV) lowered both the LUMO and HOMO by 0.5 eV in comparison with those of vinylene-substituted PPV, and consequently the LUMO energy level of cyano-polyphenylene vinylene (CN-PPV) in Fig. 6 became similar to the optimized LUMO energy level (¬3.9 eV) which is 0.3 eV higher than that (¬4.2 eV) of PCBM. At the same time, replacing dialkoxy benzene with a more electron-rich moiety selectively raised the HOMO energy level with little influence on the LUMO energy level of CN-PPV. After a systematic synthetic approach, the resulting polymer (P2) showed the HOMO/LUMO energy levels to be almost perfectly overlapped to the defined energies for the ideal donor. Similarly fluorine substitution of copolymers (P3–P6) of thieno[3,4-b]thiophene and benzo[1,2-b;4,5-b′]dithiophene (Fig. 7) has shown to decrease both the LUMO and HOMO by similar degrees. Yu and co-workers showed that the fluorinated polymers exhibited lower HOMO energy levels but similar energy bandgaps compared with those of the unfluorinated polymer, resulting in enhanced Voc (from 0.56 eV to 0.74 eV).

In MD-MAcopolymers, molecular orbital hybridization through donor–acceptor intermolecular π-electron interaction brought the HOMO/LUMO energy levels of the polymer near those of the HOMO of the donor repeat unit and the LUMO of the acceptor unit, respectively. Tailor-made control of the HOMO/LUMO energy levels was enabled by exploiting this principle. For example, incorporation of a strong donor will produce a high HOMO energy level relatively compared to the case that a weak donor is introduced, and thus lead to a decrease in the overall energy bandgap. Conversely, You's and co-workers showed that using a strong acceptor such as 2,1,3-benzothiadiazole and a weak donor in MD-MA type alternating copolymers led to a donor polymer with a low HOMO energy level while maintaining a narrow bandgap. Thus, the proper combination of the donor and acceptor units can lead to simultaneous optimization of both bandgap and energy levels.

In addition to optimization of the energy levels of donor polymers, the miscibility of the donor polymer with the acceptor material is important for efficient charge generation and collection because it will affect the morphology of the materials and domain size of each component. The polymer rich domain in the polymer/fullerene blend film needs to form with a proper size (10∼20 nm) and crystalline structures should be formed within the domain. The nature of the fullerene also plays an important role in solar cell performances. For example, PC71BM exhibits high absorption in the visible range and thus is more effective in light harvesting. High charge carrier mobility of the polymer is always important because it will allow the use of a thicker film for stronger absorption. The polymers must possess good solubility and chemical stability for device processing and reliable solar cells with long lifetimes.


In the past years, extensive synthetic, physical and device studies have led to development of a series of new solar cell polymers. Among them, several polymer systems were shown to exhibit respectable solar power conversion efficiencies. We will review these low bandgap conjugated polymers used for polymer/fullerene BHJ solar cells.



Thiophene-based polymers are extensively used in BHJ organic photovoltaic solar cells. Particularly in the early stages when the regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene) (rP3HT:P7, Fig. 9) was developed, both the PCEs and stabilities of organic photovoltaic (OPV) cells were significantly improved. The rP3HT possesses HOMO and LUMO levels at -5.2 and -3.2 eV, respectively, with an optical bandgap of ∼ 2.0 eV, which covers the solar spectrum from 350 nm to about 650 nm in film. The rP3HTs have a good interchain packing ability, offering hole mobilities up to 0.1 cm2 V−1s−1, and good solubility in organic solvents. In the current state of the art, the PCE of rP3HT can reach 5% for single BHJ cells and 6.5% for tandem cells and the reported operational lifetimes are over 1000 h. Most recently, the single BHJ cells based on rP3HT showed a further enhancement in PCE to 6.5% when a different fullerene derivative (indene-C60 bisadduct, ICBA) was used (Fig. 8). The enhancement was achieved due to the optimization in energy level matching, leading to maximization of the Voc value.

Regioregularity (RR) and molecular weight (MW) of rP3HT are two structural parameters that will significantly affect the corresponding performances of solar cells. The regioregularity of rP3HT is defined as the percentage of the monomers that adopt the head-to-tail rather than the head-to-head configuration. Kim et al. showed that the performance of solar cells based on rP3HT/PC61BM with different RR values was enhanced as the RR of P3HT increases. The performance increase was attributed to the higher crystallinity in the polymer films with higher RR, which benefits charge transport. Moreover, Fréchet et al. reported that a slight decrease of the RR of rP3HT (from 96% to 91%) retains the device efficiency but also enhances the thermal stability of the solar cell morphology. Concerning the issue of molecular weight, the best solar cell performance is obtained by using rP3HT with an optimal ratio (1:4, high/low) between high MW (153800 g mol−1) and low MW (26200 g mol−1) portions, because an ideal morphology is constructed in which the highly crystalline region formed by low MW molecules can be interconnected by the high MWpolymer chains.
Besides the effect of regioregularity and molecular weight of rP3HT, careful control and optimization of the morphology of P3HT/PC61BM blend films are also essential for obtaining highly efficient devices. The two components in the blend film will undergo phase separation. The size, composition and crystallinity of the formed domains will affect the fate of the excitons, thus the final efficiency of solar cells. Several approaches were adapted to control the morphology of P3HT/PC61BM BHJ film, which include thermal annealing,solvent vapor treatment, using solvent additives or co-solvents and forming P3HT nanofibers before deposition. Thermal treatment above the glass-transition temperature of the blend films allows the reorganization of the components to a lower energy conformation. Solvent annealing under a controlled evaporation rate during film forming partially dissolves both the polymer and PCBM, allowing them to rearrange in an ordered manner. Both methods have been shown to improve the growth of crystalline P3HT, which led to the enhancement of long wavelength absorption and hole mobility.
The growth of crystalline P3HT is accompanied by the further aggregation of PC61BM, and a better bicontinuous interpenetrating network is formed for the charge transport. Such a morphology change enhances short circuit current (Jsc)and fill factor (FF), which accounts for the efficiency increase.
However, the P3HT exhibits a relatively wide band gap ∼ 2.0 eV, which limits the portion of the solar spectrum that can be absorbed. It is calculated that P3HT is only capable of absorbing about 46% of the available solar photons and only in the wavelength range between 350 nm and 650 nm. The short circuit current densities of P3HT/PCBM systems in the best cases are low (between 10–12 mA cm−2), which limited the PCE values in this type of solar cells.
Research efforts were directed to lower the bandgap of P3HT. One design strategy used is to introduce additional absorptive chromophores directly attached to the main chain in full conjugation. Li et al. synthesized a series of two-dimensional polythiophene derivatives P8 having conjugated bi(thienylenevinylene) side chains. The extension of a conjugated side chain to the polythiophene main chain leads to a broad absorption from 350 to 650 nm and much stronger absorbance from 350–480 nm than that of P3HT due to the additional chromophore from the conjugated side chains. In addition, the P8 HOMO level is lowered by 0.2 eV from that of P3HT, resulting in a higher Voc. However, the best performance of the solar cells based on the blend of P8 and PC61BM (1:1, w/w ratio) was 3.18%, which is slightly higher than that of the cells based on P3HT (2.41%) under the same experimental conditions. The major problem is that the introduction of a bulky side group may change the properties of the polymer, such as charge transfer rate, chain packing and morphology.
An alternative design strategy to lower the bandgap of P3HT was the synthesis of regioregular poly(3-hexylselenophene) P9, which is an analogue of P3HT with selenium replacing the sulfur atom. McCulloch et al. reported that regioregular P9 (rP3HS) exhibits an absorption maximum at 630 nm in the solid state compared to 550 nm for P3HT, a bathochromic shift over 80 nm. The rP3HS has a lowered LUMO level while the HOMO level was kept, leading to a smaller optical bandgap of 1.6 eV than the rP3HT. Marinating a comparable HOMO level to that found in rP3HT devices led to a similar Voc for the rP3HS device, and the smaller optical bandgap of P3HS results in a stronger absorption at lower energy (up to 760 nm), a promising feature for solar cell applications. Unfortunately, the solar cell device based on rP3HS/PC61BM (1:1, w/w) only exhibited a PCE of 2.7% after optimal thermal annealing, lower than that of the P3HT/PCBM sample (3%).
In addition to the bandgap issue, energy mismatch is another significant pitfall in P3HT systems. The highest Voc reported for P3HT/PCBM solar cells are around 0.66 V. It has been demonstrated that Voc in BHJ solar cells with ohmic contacts is linearly dependent on the magnitude of the built-in potential, defined as the difference between the HOMO level of the donor polymer and the LUMO level of PCBM. The lower the energy of the HOMO, the greater the maximum theoretically attainable Voc value, but the larger the bandgap, the poorer the spectral overlap with the photon flux from the sun. A compromise is found by considering that a bandgap of about 1.5 eV is an optimal value for a polymer absorber, which gives a HOMO energy of about 5.4 eV. It was predicted that ultimately, with energy levels, bandgaps and mobilities properly optimized, polymer/fullerene solar cells can reach 11–15% in power conversion efficiency. The development of low bandgap polymers with low lying HOMO energy levels other than P3HT is necessary to achieve higher efficiency in solar cells.

Several key monomer units have been used in synthesis of low bandgap polymers. Electron-deficient 2,1,3-benzothiodiazole (BT) has been often copolymerized with electron-rich thiophene-based monomers to tune absorption to the long wavelength region. BT-based low bandgap polymers for polymer/fullerene BHJ solar cells were reported by Janssen and co-workers for the first time. A copolymer (P10, Fig. 10) of electron-rich 2,5-bis(2-thienyl)-N-dodecyl pyrrole (PPT) and BT, was synthesized by a palladium catalyzed Stille coupling condensation. The polymer showed an optical bandgap around 1.4 eV to 1.6 eV, despite its rather limited degree of polymerization. The polymer solar cell with a device structure of polymer/PC61BM in a 1:3 weight ratio yielded a PCE of about 1% with a Voc of 0.72 V, Jsc of 3.10 mA cm−2 and a FF of 0.37. Various MD-MA type conjugated polymers incorporating BT as acceptor were later synthesized for polymer solar cells. Among them, the polymer containing 4H-cyclopenta[2,1-b:3,4-b′]dithiophenes (CPDTs) has been considered one of the most promising MD-MA type polymers. Its structural planarity allows the polymer to show a strong intermolecular interaction and extended conjugation, resulting in high hole mobility. Furthermore, the alkyl chains on the bridging carbons improve the solubility of the polymer without causing twisting between the donor and the acceptor unit. An alternating copolymer (P11) of BT and CPDT with two 2-ethylhexyl groups was synthesized viaStille coupling polymerization. The HOMO and LUMO energy levels of the polymer were deduced from cyclic voltammetry to be −5.3 eV and −3.5 eV, respectively, which is considered as ideal for polymer/fullerene BHJ solar cells. The absorption is extended to about 890 nm, corresponding to an optical bandgap of about 1.4 eV. The solar cells made of P11 and PC71BM yielded a PCE of 3.5% with a Voc of 0.65 V and a Jsc of 11.8 mA cm−2. The low PCE value is likely due to the low values of the max external quantum efficiency (EQE) (38%) and FF (0.47). Interestingly, by adding small amount of alkanedithiols or diiodoalkane to the processing solvent, the solar cell performance was further enhanced. The resulting films showed an optimized morphology of an interpenetrating network, which improved the carrier life time and hole transport pathway. The BHJ solar cells were prepared under the processing conditions of polymer/PC71BM ratio (1:2 w/w) and chlorobenzene solution with 24 mg mL−11,8-octanedithiol. The device showed a PCE of 5.5%, a Voc of 0.62 V, a Jsc of 16.2 mA cm−2 and a FF of 0.55.

After CPDT was identified as a good donor component, it was further fine-tuned by replacing the bridging carbon atom with silicon or nitrogen atoms. The polymer (P12) of BT and dithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]silole with 2-ethylhexyl side chains was synthesized by using Stille coupling polymerization. Employing the longer C–Si bond instead of the C–C bond changed the molecular conformation of the polymer, which induced stronger π–π interaction of the polymer chain. Therefore, under thermal treatment, the crystallinity of the P12 solid films was effectively improved, which resulted in a higher charge carrier mobility of the polymer. The best solar cell performance, a PCE of 5.1%, was observed from the polymer/PC71BM (1:1 w/w ratio) with Voc of 0.68 V, Jsc of 12.7 mA cm−2, and a FF of 0.55.
In 2009, a similar polymer (P13) with a different side chain of n-C12H25 was prepared by Bazan et al. After optimizing polymerization conditions through microwave irradiation in combination with the screening of comonomer reactant ratio, the polymer with higher molecular weight of 34 kg mol−1 was obtained, leading to a higher PCE of 5.9% with an enhanced Jsc (17 mA cm−2) and FF (0.61). Inspired by the advantages of dithienosilole based polymers, the structure of CPDT and BT copolymer was further modified to improve solar cell performance. The incorporation of Thieno[3,4-c]pyrrole-4,6-dione into the polymer backbone by substituting BT gave a low bandgap (1.73 eV) polymer (P14) with a deep HOMO energy level, while keeping enough driving force for photoinduced electron transfer to fulleride in BHJ solar cells. Owing to an enhanced Voc value of 0.88 V, the solar cell device prepared using P14/PC71BM (1:2 w/w ratio) solution and CB with 3% DIO achieved a further improved PCE of 7.3%, with a Jsc of 12.2 mA cm−2 and a FF of 0.68.

Diketo-pyrrolo-pyrrole (DPP)-based conjugated polymers have been exploited for p-type donor polymers in polymer solar cells. The synthesis of conjugated polymers including DPP moieties was reported by Yu and co-workers in 1993.DPP has a high potential as a building block used to make MD-MA type low bandgap polymers due to its planar conjugated bicyclic structure and strong electron-withdrawing ability due to the presence of the two amide groups. The copolymer (P15) of quarter thiophene and DPP reported by Janssen et al. showed a low bandgap of 1.4 eV.
The polymer exhibited a significant shift of the onset of absorption from 720 nm to 860 nm with a vibronic fine structure when it was dissolved in DCB, which indicated a strong semicrystalline aggregation tendency. The solar cell device prepared using the polymer P15/PC71BM (1:2 w/w ratio) and chloroform/DCB mixed solvent system achieved a PCE of 4% with a Voc of 0.61 V, a FF of 0.58 and a Jsc of 11.3 mA cm−2.
Recently a new conjugated polymer (P16) incorporating a phenyl ring between two thiophene rings adjacent to the DPP unit in the main chain was introduced. Due to the polymer's deeper HOMO energy level, the Voc was improved to 0.8 V, which led to a higher PCE of 5.5% with a Jsc of 10.8 mA cm-2 and a FF of 0.65 when PC71BM was used as an acceptor. Another polymer (P17) incorporating benzo[2,1-b:3,4-b′]dithiophene as an acceptor unit showed a similar bandgap (1.34 eV) to P15. The solar cell of P17/PC71BM yielded a PCE of 4.5%.

Recently polymers containing fluorene moieties and exhibiting a wide bandgap received attention for polymer BHJ solar cell applications. These polymers show a deep HOMO energy level and high hole mobilities, which are advantageous for achieving high Voc and Jsc, thus high PCE. Several polymers employing fluorene moieties as donor building blocks have been developed. Conjugated polymers (P18, Fig. 11) composed of fluorene and BT were first reported by Andersson et al. The polymers had a broad absorption and a bandgap of 1.9 eV, narrower than poly(9,9-dialkyl fluorene)(3.0 eV). Unfortunately, although the solar cell prepared from the polymer/PC61BM (1:4 w/w ratio) exhibited a high Voc value of about 1.0 V, its PCE value was low (2.2%) with a Jsc of 4.66 mA cm−2 and an FF of 0.46.

The polymer P19 containing a 9,9-didecyl substituted in fluorene unit showed a higher PCE value of 4.2% after optimization of the device fabrication conditions to improve Jsc to about 7.7 mA cm−2. By taking advantage of the intrinsic properties of a silole ring and a fluorene, the polymer (P20) was synthesized by Suzuki coupling. The polymer showed a significantly improved hole mobility of 1 × 10−3 cm2 V−1s-1, compared to 1 × 10−4 cm2 V−1s−1 of P18 and a low-lying HOMO energy level. The solar cells made from a P20/PC71BM (1:2 w/w ratio) blend achieved a further enhanced PCE as high as 5.4%.

Carbazole is structurally similar to fluorene and was frequently used as a building block for p-type conductive materials in polymer light-emitting devices. Leclerc et al. synthesized the conjugated polymer (P21) from carbazole and a dithienothiadiazole, which showed an optical bandgap of 1.88 eV with a similar HOMO energy level of -5.5 eV compared to those of P19. The photovoltaic devices prepared with P21/PC61BM (1:4, w/w ratio) showed a PCE value of 3.6% with a Jsc of 6.92 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.89 V and a FF of 0.63.
By inserting a TiO2 optical spacer between the BHJ layer and the metal electrode Heeger et al. improved the photovoltaic performance from P21/PC71BM (4:1 w/w ratio) and achieved an internal quantum efficiency (IQE) value close to 100%. The role of the optical spacer is to increase the amount of light absorbed by avoiding destructive interference between the incident light and the light reflected from the metal electrode and enable efficient electron collection due to the hole-blocking nature of TiOx. A high PCE value of 6.1% was achieved with a Voc of 0.88 V, a Jsc of 10.6 mA cm−2 and a FF of 0.66. A similar polymer (P22), with two octyloxy chains attached to the BT unit and a linear octyl chain introduced to the carbazole unit allowed formation of a planar polymer conformation while maintaining good solubility. The solar cell fabricated from a P22/PC71BM blend showed a PCE of 5.4% with a Jsc of 9.6 mA cm−2, a FF of 0.69, and a Voc of 0.81 V.

Polythieno[3,4-b]thiophene was shown to exhibit a low bandgap of 1.2 eV primary due to the quinoid structure of the polymer main chain. Yu's group synthesized a series of copolymers P23a–e (Fig. 12) composed of thieno[3,4-b]thiophene (TT) and thiophene by using the Stille coupling reaction. The ester electron-withdrawing group in TT plays a role in lowering the HOMO energy levels, stabilizing the monomer against oxidation and increasing solubility. The alternating copolymer P23-a of TT and thiophene showed comparable hole mobility to that of P3HT despite the presence of bulky alkyl side chains. In addition, P23-a shows broad absorption with a bandgap of 1.2 eV. However, the PCE of the P23-a/PC61BM BHJ solar cell is low (0.73%) due to its low LUMO energy level, which is very close to that of PCBM, and a high HOMO energy level of the polymer. By controlling the ratio of TT to thiophene in the copolymer composition, the degree of quinoid form can be tuned and the energy levels and energy gap as well as electro-optic properties of the copolymers could be fine-tuned. The optimized polymer P23-d with a composition (m:n = 1:3.7) showed a bandgap of 1.45 eV and achieved a PCE of 1.93% when the copolymer was blended with PC61BM in the solar cell device. Further improvement can be realized when a regioregular copolymer P24 incorporating an oligothiophene unit was synthesized. The solar cell efficiency of 2.4% has been achieved in P24/PC61BM solar cells. A remarkable breakthrough in PCE was made when benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene (BDT) was used as a building block. BDT makes a polymer backbone more rigid because of its planarity and extended π-system, resulting in an increase of the polymer's hole mobility. Copolymers (P25a–f) comprised of alternating BDT and TT units were synthesized using the Stille coupling condenstation.P25-a showed an absorption of 690 nm at the maximum photon flux area in the solar spectrum and has good miscibility with a fullerene, forming a nanoscale bicontinuous interpenetrating network. Importantly, P25-a exhibited a higher mobility (5.8 × 10−4 cm2 V−1s−1) than P3HT (2.7 × 10−4 cm2 V−1s−1) measured with the space charge limited current (SCLC) method and conditions. The BHJ solar cell fabricated using a P25-a/PC61BM blend exhibited a PCE of 4.76% with Voc = 0.58 V, Jsc = 12.5 mA cm−2 and FF = 0.65. The PCE was improved to 5.3% when the polymer was blended with PC71BM. Using the polymer backbone as a platform, further structural modification was carried out. An effective approach is to enhance the Voc by lowering the HOMO energy level. Introduction of an electron-withdrawing group or replacing the electron-rich group with an electron-deficient group can achieve that goal. When the electron-rich alkoxy side chains on BDT of P25-a were replaced by a less electron-rich alkyl chain, P25-b was synthesized. P25-c and P25-f were obtained after introducing electron-withdrawing fluorine to the TT unit of the polymer backbone. A series of copolymers with different lengths and patterns of the alkyl side chains on both the TT ester and BDT were also prepared. Although the electro-optical properties of these new polymers are very similar to P25-a, the polymers' solubilities and miscibilities with fullerenes were tuned. The polymer (P25-e) with a bulkier side chain of 2-butyloctyl group at the TT unit showed the lowest mobility of 2.6 × 10−4 cm2 V−1s−1 among all polymers (P25-a∼d and f: 4.0∼7.7 × 10−4 cm2 V−1s−1). Substitution with fluorine on the TT unit provides good polymer chain packing and leads to enhanced hole mobility. P25-b, P25-c and P25-f showed reduced HOMO energy levels compared to those of the polymers with similar structures. Among the polymer/PC61BM solar cells from these materials, P25-b and P25-c devices showed improved Voc (0.74 V for P25-b and 0.72 V for P25-c). After optimization of device fabrication conditions, the polymer/PC61BM solar cells of these polymers achieved higher PCEs of 5.85% (P25-b) and 6.1% (P25-c), respectively than that of the P25-a device (4.76%).

Additionally, the relationship between polymer structures and the morphologies of the polymer/fullerene blend films were studied. It was found that changing from a long dodecyl chain in P25-a to a shorter branched alkyl chain in P25-d enhanced the PCE of the solar cells, mostly because of improved morphology. However, excessively bulky side chains, such as those in P25-e, induced large scale phase separation of the polymer/fullerene blend film, resulting in a decrease in Jsc and FF.
Further studies also find that while fluorine substitution is effective for improving Voc without sacrificing Jsc and FF, perfluorination of the polymer backbone (P6) can be detrimental to the solar cell performance. Perfluorination induces the fluorophobic effect and enhances polymer crystallinity and therefore, gives a strong driving force for phase separation, leading to formation of domains on the 100 nm scale. The film morphology is affected by the preparation conditions of the active layer for some polymers. The mixed solvents of DCB (or CB)/DIO are necessary to optimize morphology. The photovoltaic performance of the BDT-TT copolymer further improved when PC71BM was used as an acceptor. The solar cell device of P25-f/PC71BM has shown a PCE of 7.4%. A similar polymer including a ketone instead of an ester in TT also achieved a similar PCE of 7.7%.
Motivated by the solar cell performance of the BDT-TT copolymer, BDT was employed in other similar polymers. Introduction of the thieno[3,4-c]pyrrole-4,6 dione unit instead of TT, as in P26, can lower the HOMO energy levels of the polymer. The solar cell devices prepared using P26/PCBM blends showed a high Voc value of over 0.85 V. The best solar cell performance was obtained in P26/PC71BM BHJ solar cells with a PCE of 6.8% (Jsc = 11.5 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.85 V, FF =0.70).
When thiadiazolo[3,4-c]pyridine (PyT) was used instead of BT in P27-a, the resulting polymer P27-b exhibited a smaller energy bandgap. An improved Jsc was obtained while maintaining a high Voc and BHJ solar cells processed with a P27-b/PC61BM (1:1, w/w ratio) blend achieved a PCE of 6.32%. Replacing two hydrogen atoms on the BT unit with two fluorine atoms in P27-a resulted in P28, which showed both decreased LUMO and HOMO energy levels from P27-a. As a result, the Voc (0.91 V) was noticeably enhanced and a BHJ solar cell prepared using a P28/PC61BM 1:1 (w/w) blend yielded a PCE of 7.2% with Jsc of 12.9 mA cm−2 and a FF of 0.61. Similarly, a new polymer (P29-a) was synthesized by changing a fluorinated BT in P28 to fluorinated 2-(2-butyloctyl) benzo[d][1,2,3]triazoles(FTAZ). When blended with PC61BM in a BHJ solar cell, P29-a exhibited a PCE above 7%, which is primarily due to a higher hole mobility in P29-a (6.76 × 10−5 cm2 V−1s-1) compared to that of the unfluorinated polymer P29-b (3.34 × 10−6 cm2 V−1s-1).
A copolymer (P30, Fig. 13) containing an extended π-conjugated system was reported, in which the BDT unit in P25 was substituted with tetrathienoanthracene. Due to the enhanced π- π staking in the polymer/PC61BM blend film which facilitated the charge carrier transport, the solar cell device exhibited a PCE of 5.6% with a Vocof 0.66 V, a Jsc of 15.0 mA cm−2, and a FF of 0.58.

Although polymer/fullerene BHJ solar cells are showing a promising performances with PCEs close to 8%, we are still not there yet for real, wide spread commercialization. The past advancement in this area is the result of systemic optimization, involving development of materials with improved properties, an optimized device structure and processing methods. In order to achieve more than 10% PCE from polymer solar cells and commercialize them, further development of new materials is essential. Future research to develop new p-type polymers should satisfy several property criteria. First, the polymer needs to show a broad absorption with a high extinction coefficient near the maximum solar spectrum and exhibit a low-lying HOMO energy level and a suitable LUMO energy level. Next, to achieve high photocurrent density, the hole mobility of the polymer should be balanced with the electron mobility of the acceptor material. Furthermore, it is essential that the polymer has appropriate miscibility with n-type acceptor materials to form nanoscale bicontinuous interpenetrating networks. Apart from the characteristic points of the polymer required for high solar cell efficiency, the polymer's photochemical stability and the stability of donor/acceptor nano-morphology are also important issues to achieve long device life times, which need to be addressed with novel evaluation approaches.


We would like to acknowledge the supports from NSF, AFOSR, DOE, NSF, MRSEC (the University of Chicago), Intel and Solarmer Energy Inc. for the preparation of this article.


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011