 DOI: 10.1039/C3TA10892A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 6622-6628
Hui Wang, Wei Wei and Yun Hang Hu*
Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Michigan Technological University, 1400 Townsend Drive, Houghton, MI 49931-1295, USA. E-mail: yunhangh@mtu.edu; Tel: +1 906-4872261
Received 2nd March 2013, Accepted 28th March 2013
First published on 2nd April 2013
ZnO is usually exploited as a photoelectrode for dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), but it has not been applied as a DSSC counter electrode. Herein, it is reported that ZnO with poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS) could be an efficient DSSC counter electrode with a maximum power conversion efficiency of 8.17%. Furthermore, it was found that the conversion efficiency of DSSCs with the ZnO/PEDOT:PSS counter electrode strongly depends on the ZnO content. Density functional theory (DFT) calculations, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), and cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurements revealed that the variation of the conversion efficiency with ZnO content is determined by the fill factor (FF), which is dependent on the combination of the catalytic activity of ZnO and the conductivity of PEDOT:PSS.

As a representative of the third generation solar cells, dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) have been attracting considerable attention due to their low cost, easy fabrication, and high power conversion efficiency. In a DSSC, the photoexcitation of a dye sensitizer (D) leads to a fast electron injection into the conduction band of a semiconductor film, and then the generated electrons pass through the transparent conductive electrode to the external circuit, and finally to the counter electrode. The oxidized dye (D*) could be regenerated by electron donation (such as I−) from the electrolyte solution. The oxidized ions of electrolyte diffuse to the counter electrode, where the ions can be reduced via capture of electrons from an external circuit. As an important component in a DSSC, an efficient counter electrode would possess both excellent catalytic activity for the reduction of oxidized electrolyte and high conductivity for electron transfer from the external circuit to the electrolyte. Platinum is usually exploited as a counter electrode in DSSCs due to its excellent activity and conductivity. However, its practical application will be limited by its high cost and rare source. Therefore, it is necessary to develop efficient Pt-free counter electrodes for DSSCs.

Carbon materials have been widely investigated as counter electrodes in DSSCs, including carbon black, carbon nanotubes, and graphene. Furthermore, since it was proved that I−/I3− redox reaction happened on the surface of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT), conductive polymers also attracted much attention as DSSC counter electrodes, such as PEDOT, polyaniline and polypyrrole. Recently, it was reported that sulfides, nitrides, and carbides used for DSSC counter electrodes exhibited decent catalytic activity for the reduction of I3− in iodine-based electrolytes. In contrast, little investigation has been conducted on metal oxides as counter electrode catalysts in DSSCs. Ma et al. explored tungsten dioxide (WO2) nanorods and niobium oxides (Nb2O5 and NbO2) as DSSC counter electrodes and obtained power conversion efficiencies of 7.25% and 7.88%, respectively. This indicates that metal oxides would be promising materials for DSSC counter electrodes and the exploration of metal oxide counter electrodes for DSSCs will constitute an important research topic.
Zinc oxide (ZnO) is an attractive semiconductor as a photoelectrode in DSSCs due to its wide band gap and good carrier mobility. Furthermore, as nano-structured ZnO is a promising candidate as an electron acceptor and a transport material for DSSCs, various types of ZnO nanomaterials have been investigated, such as spherical particles, nanorods, nanowires, and nanoflowers. However, to the best of our knowledge, so far, there is not any research attempt to investigate ZnO as a DSSC counter electrode. This promoted us to explore ZnO-based counter electrodes in this work. As an ionic compound, ZnO can be expected to have a strong interaction with the ions of iodine-based electrolytes, leading to excellent catalytic activity. However, because ZnO possesses poor electrical conductivity, it is necessary to combine ZnO with a conductive component (such as a conductive polymer). To test this hypothesis, we combined ZnO with a conductive polymer—poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS)—as a composite counter electrode and revealed its properties. Furthermore, the excellent performances of DSSCs with ZnO/PEDOT:PSS counter electrodes were demonstrated.

A fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) glass plate was ultrasonically washed and then treated with 0.4 mM TiCl4 aqueous solution (70 °C) for 30 min. TiO2 paste (ethanol as solvent) was deposited on the FTO plate by the doctor blading method to form a TiO2 nanocrystalline film. The obtained TiO2 photoelectrode was heated at 325, 375, 450, and 500 °C for 5, 5, 15, and 15 min, respectively, followed by 0.4 mM TiCl4 aqueous solution (70 °C) treatment again and then heat treatment at 500 °C for another 30 min. The treated TiO2 photoelectrode was immersed in cis-bis(isothiocyanato) bis(2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylato)-ruthenium(II)-bis-tetrabutylammonium (N719, 0.3 mM in ethanol) dye solution for 24 hours to achieve dye sensitization.


ZnO nanopowder (Sigma-Aldrich) was mixed with 2.5% PEDOT:PSS aqueous solution with stirring for 5 min to form a homogeneous paste with a 4:1 weight ratio of ZnO to PEDOT:PSS. The paste was deposited on the FTO glass plate to form a composite film by the doctor blading method. The average thickness of the coated films was 10 μm. The ZnO-based counter electrode was obtained by heating ZnO/polymer coated FTO glass at 80 °C for 4 hours.

This procedure was also repeated to prepare ZnO/polymer counter electrodes with weight ratios of ZnO to PEDOT:PSS of 8:1, 16:1, 32:1, 48:1, or 64:1. The X-ray diffraction spectrometer (Scintag XDS2000 Powder Diffractometer) was employed to characterize the crystalline structure of ZnO/PEDOT:PSS composite electrodes. The morphologies of the counter electrodes were evaluated by field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM, Heichi 4700).

The sandwich solar cells were assembled using the dye-sensitized TiO2 photoelectrode and ZnO/PEDOT:PSS composite counter electrode with liquid electrolyte (I−/I3− redox) between them. The electrolyte consists of 0.025 M LiI, 0.04 M I2, 0.28 M tert-butyl pyridine (TBP), 0.6 M 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium iodide (BMII), and 0.05 M guanidinium thiocyanate in acetonitrile–valeronitrile solvent with 85/15 volume ratio. The photovoltaic performance of the obtained ZnO-based cells was evaluated by a Keithley 2400 under illumination of AM 1.5 (1 sun, 100 mW cm−2) using a solar simulator (Newport). Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) data were obtained at −0.8 V potential and 10 mV amplitude over the frequency range of 0.1–100 kHz using a CHI 600D electrochemical workstation. Cyclic voltammetry measurements were carried out using an electrochemical workstation (EG&G Princeton Applied Research) with a three-electrode system (ZnO/PEDOT:PSS composite as a working electrode, Pt wire as a counter electrode, and Ag/AgCl as a reference electrode) containing acetonitrile solution of 10 mM LiI, 1 mM I2, and 0.1 M LiClO4.


Hartree–Fock (HF) and Density Functional Theory (DFT) methods are the least expensive ab initio approaches. Furthermore, it has been found that a major improvement over the standard DFT can be achieved by combining the HF and DFT methods, leading to the so-called self-consistent hybrid (SCH) approaches. The B3LYP, which is a combination of HF with a DFT based on the Becke three-parameter exchange coupled with the Lee–Yang–Parr (LYP) correlation potential, is one of the most popular hybrid density functional methods. Furthermore, B3LYP hybrid DFT has been widely used for the energy and structure calculations of various molecules and clusters. For this reason, in this work, geometry optimizations and energy calculations were performed by using the B3LYP method with 3-21g basis set for I3− adsorption on ZnO and PEDOT. The cluster models of ZnO and PEDOT, in which unsaturated atoms were saturated with hydrogen, are shown in Fig. 1. All calculations are carried out using the Gaussian 03 program.

Hybrid B3LYP DFT calculations were performed for I3− adsorption on ZnO and PEDOT, respectively. As shown in Fig. 2, one can see that I3− was adsorbed on the Zn site of ZnO via the formation of a Zn–I bond, while adsorption of I3− on PEDOT resulted in two I–H bonds. The interaction energy (Eint) between I3− and ZnO (or PEDOT) can be defined as follows:

Eint = (EA + EB) − EC
(1)
where
EA, EB, and EC are energies of I3−, ZnO (or PEDOT), and I3−/ZnO (or I3−/PEDOT), respectively. Those energies were obtained from B3LYP hybrid DFT calculations and exploited in eqn (1) to evaluate interaction energies. The results showed that the interaction energy of I3− and ZnO is 30 kcal mol−1, indicating that ZnO can strongly adsorb I3−. In contrast, I3− has a weak interaction with PEDOT (8.4 kcal mol−1). Therefore, ZnO would have higher catalytic activity than PEDOT for the reduction of I3−.

Crystal structures of ZnO, PEDOT:PSS, and their composites were evaluated by XRD. As shown in Fig. 3, one can see the hexagonal wurtzite structure of ZnO with characteristic diffraction peaks at 2θ = 31.93, 34.57, and 36.4°, corresponding to (100), (002), and (101) diffraction planes. Interestingly, ZnO/PEDOT:PSS composite exhibits the same diffraction patterns as ZnO. In contrast, no diffraction peak can be observed for the bare PEDOT:PSS film, indicating its poor crystalline structure. Furthermore, the crystal particle sizes of ZnO, which were calculated from the XRD peak width at half-height using the Debye–Scherrer equation, are about 45 nm for ZnO/PEDOT:PSS composite and 48 nm for pure ZnO. This indicates that the combination of ZnO and PEDOT:PSS has no effect on either the ZnO crystal structure or its particle size.
Fig. 4 shows the surface morphologies of PEDOT:PSS, ZnO, and their composite. As can be seen in Fig. 4a, a flat and smooth surface morphology was observed for PEDOT:PSS, whereas ZnO nanoparticles show both sphere-like and rod-like morphologies with diameters of 50 and 100–200 nm, respectively. As expected, for ZnO/PEDOT:PSS composite, ZnO nanoparticles were dispersed on the surface of PEDOT:PSS to form the contact between them, which is important for electron transfer between ZnO and conductive PEDOT:PSS in DSSCs. Furthermore, ZnO nanoparticles are expected to provide active sites for the catalytic reduction of I3− in the electrolyte (see the following discussion).

Photovoltaic performances of ZnO-based DSSCs with counter electrodes of ZnO, PEDOT:PSS, and ZnO/PEDOT:PSS composite were evaluated with photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) measurements. The obtained J–V curves are illustrated in Fig. 5 and photovoltaic parameters are listed in Table 1. For a DSSC with a PEDOT:PSS counter electrode, its short-circuit current density (JSC), open-circuit voltage (VOC), fill factor (FF), and power conversion efficiency (η) were 17.64 mA cm−2, 0.718 V, 0.363, and 4.6%, respectively. When PEDOT:PSS was replaced by ZnO for the counter electrode, the DSSC exhibited a poor photovoltaic performance with a low power conversion efficiency of 0.777%. However, a DSSC with a ZnO/PEDOT:PSS composite counter electrode showed a JSC of 19.7 mA cm−2, VOC of 0.862 V, FF of 0.48, and η of 8.17%. This indicates that the combination of ZnO and PEDOT:PSS constitutes an efficient counter electrode for DSSCs than their individual ones. Furthermore, the improved efficiency is associated with a dramatic increase of FF but little change of JSC and VOC.
Samples
Jsc (mA cm−2)
Voc (V)
FF
η
RS (Ω)
RCT (Ω)
ZN (Ω)
PEDOT:PSS
17.6
0.718
0.363
4.6%
17
15
17
ZnO/polymer (4:1)
15.7
0.845
0.445
5.7%
14
10
55
ZnO/polymer (8:1)
17
0.827
0.456
6.4%
17
12
95
ZnO/polymer (16:1)
18.4
0.856
0.479
7.4%
14
9
170
ZnO/polymer (32:1)
19.7
0.862
0.48
8.17%
17
17
265
ZnO/polymer (48:1)
15.3
0.875
0.374
5.01%
15
110
1550
ZnO/polymer (64:1)
16.3
0.843
0.263
3.62%
16
140
2350
ZnO
10.4
0.395
0.189
0.777%
14
160
42000
The effect of ZnO content on photovoltaic parameters of DSSCs was evaluated. As shown in Fig. 6a, JSC and VOC of DSSCs with the ZnO/PEDOT:PSS composite counter electrode exhibited a negligible fluctuation with ZnO content. This indicates that the variation of ZnO content in the composite CE has no influence on JSC and VOC. In contrast, the values of FF and η are strongly dependent on the ZnO content in the composite counter electrode (Fig. 6b). As the content of ZnO increased, FF increased up to the maximum value of 0.48 at a 32:1 weight ratio of ZnO/PEDOT:PSS and then decreased. The power conversion efficiency (η) exhibited the similar ZnO-dependence as FF, namely, the power conversion efficiency (η) increased up to the maximum value (8.17%) and then decreased with increasing ZnO content. This indicates that the enhancement of η for DSSCs with a ZnO/PEDOT:PSS counter electrode is mainly due to the increase of FF.

Cyclic voltammograms (CVs) were measured to characterize the catalytic activity of counter electrodes for the I−/I3− redox couple. It is well-known that, for a typical CV curve, two pairs of oxidation and reduction peaks can be observed, namely, one pair for triiodide/iodide redox reaction and the other pair for iodine/triiodide redox reaction. Furthermore, the peak current density (JPC) and peak-to-peak separation (EPP) are two important parameters to evaluate catalytic activities of different electrodes. The higher peak current density and lower EPP, the better catalytic activity that counter electrode has. As shown in Fig. 7, PEDOT:PSS CE exhibited typical oxidation and reduction characteristics for the I−/I3− redox couple, whereas no effective redox of I−/I3− was observed on a bare ZnO CE. However, ZnO/PEDOT:PSS composite electrodes exhibited a remarkable change in position and intensity of CV curves. With increasing the content of ZnO in the composite, EPP decreased, whereas JPC increased. Furthermore, the JPC values reached the maximum with the lowest EPP at a ZnO/PEDOT:PSS ratio of 32:1. Therefore, the ZnO/PEDOT:PSS ratio of 32:1 generated the best catalytic activity. However, when the ZnO content was beyond the optimized ratio, the catalytic activity of the ZnO counter electrode decreased with increasing ZnO content. Interestingly, one can see a third reduction peak (marked in circle) for ZnO/PEDOT:PSS composite electrodes near 0.7 V, which did not appear in the PEDOT:PSS electrode.
Electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) were also exploited to evaluate ZnO/PEDOT:PSS composite CEs. Fig. 8 shows the Nyquist plots of DSSCs with ZnO/PEDOT:PSS counter electrodes and the equivalent circuit model for simulation as an inset. One can see two semicircles in the frequency range of 0.1–100 kHz for all samples. The intercept of the first semicircle (left one) represents the ohmic serial resistance (RS) related to the intrinsic resistance of assembled cells. The semicircle in the high-frequency range (corresponding to low Z′) is associated with the charge transfer resistance (RCT) at the CE/electrolyte interface and the semicircle in the low-frequency range arises from the Nernst diffusion impedance (ZN) of the triiodide/iodide couple in the electrolyte. As shown in Table 1, one can see that the variation of RS was negligible (14–17 Ω) for all CEs, whereas ZN increases with increasing ZnO content in ZnO/PEDOT:PSS composite CEs. Interestingly, the RCT value remained unchanged with increasing ZnO/PEDOT:PSS ratio until 32:1, but increased dramatically beyond that ratio. Those indicate that RS is independent of the ZnO content, whereas ZN and RCT are strongly influenced by the ZnO content in composite CEs. Furthermore, the variation of ZN with ZnO content shows that the conductivity of composite CEs is comparable when the weight ratio of ZnO to polymer is not larger than 32:1, but a further increase of ZnO content reduces significantly the conductivity of composite CEs.

Fig. 6a shows that JSC and VOC of DSSCs with ZnO/PEDOT:PSS CE remained almost unchanged with increasing ZnO content. In contrast, the FF and η are strongly dependent on the ZnO content in the counter electrode (Fig. 6b). The changes of both FF and η with ZnO content showed a volcano shape, namely, they first reached the maximum values and then decreased with increasing ZnO content. This indicates that the variation of η is mainly determined by FF.

It is generally recognized that FF is sensitive to the internal resistance in a DSSC, including both the series resistance and the charge transfer resistance. The smaller the resistances, the larger the value of FF is. However, a strange phenomenon was observed in this work, namely, resistances (RCT and ZN) increased with increasing ZnO content in the composite CE, but the FF value increased instead of decreasing. This means that there must be another factor contributing to the enhanced FF. As predicted by DFT calculations (Fig. 2), ZnO can strongly interact with I3−, indicating its high catalytic activity. Furthermore, CV curves showed that the catalytic activity of the ZnO/PEDOT:PSS CE improved when the ZnO content increased. Therefore, FF of a DSSC would be dependent on two factors: (1) internal resistances of a DSSC and (2) catalytic activity of the DSSC counter electrode. In most reports, FF was only determined by resistances because photoelectrodes were evaluated with a fixed counter electrode. In contrast, if there is a change for CE materials, the influence of catalytic activity on FF should also be considered. An excellent counter electrode for a DSSC should have a high conductivity for transferring electrons and good catalytic activity for triiodide reduction. However, ZnO, a typical semiconductor, possesses a low conductivity. Therefore, the addition of ZnO to a composite CE would increase the catalytic activity for the reduction of I3− to I−, but decrease the CE conductivity. At the beginning, the increase of catalytic activity with increasing ZnO content constitutes a determining-factor, leading to the enhancement of FF. In contrast, after FF reaches the maximum value, the decrease of conductivity with increasing ZnO content becomes a main factor, resulting in the reduction of FF.
For an effective counter electrode of a DSSC with iodine-based electrolyte, two pairs of oxidation and reduction peaks can be observed in CVs. The left and right pairs can be presented by eqn (2) and (3), respectively:
I3− + 2e ↔ 3I−
(2)
3I2 + 2e ↔ 2I3−
(3)
Furthermore, the peak current density (JPC) and peak-to-peak separation (EPP) are usually exploited to determine the catalytic activity of DSSC counter electrodes. A counter electrode with better catalytic activity should have the higher peak current density and smaller EPP. Fig. 7 shows that the PEDOT:PSS counter electrode exhibited typical oxidation and reduction characteristics (two pairs of oxidation and reduction peaks) for the I−/I3− redox couple whereas the oxidation and reduction were not observed on a bare ZnO counter electrode. However, for ZnO/PEDOT:PSS composite electrodes, besides two pairs of oxidation and reduction peaks, a third reduction peak can be observed at potential near 0.7 V, but it did not appear for the PEDOT:PSS electrode in this work and in previous reports. Roy-Mayhew et al. and Fang et al. had mentioned this third peak when they examined nanostructured carbonaceous CEs. They proposed that the third reduction peak was caused by functional groups on carbon materials and its corresponding oxidation peak cannot be resolved due to the overlap of the oxidation peaks of the I2/I3− redox pair. However, so far, no reduction process was proposed for the third peak. In our work, the appearance of the third peak was due to the presence of ZnO in ZnO/PEDOT:PSS composite CEs. The potential of the third reduction peak (0.7 V) is between reductions of I3− to I− (0.235–0.389 V) and I2 to I3− (1.026–1.092 V). It has been predicted that the reaction between those two reductions is the reduction of I2 to I− as follows:
I2 + 2e ↔ 2I−
(4)
Therefore, the third peak would be due to the reduction of I2 to I−. The position and intensity of the third peak were influenced by the ZnO content in ZnO/PEDOT:PSS composite CEs (Fig. 7). They might also be affected by the interaction between ZnO and PEDOT:PSS.

Semiconductor ZnO with a conductive polymer (PEDOT:PSS) was explored as a counter electrode for DSSCs. It was shown that the DSSC with a ZnO/PEDOT:PSS composite counter electrode exhibited excellent photovoltaic performance with a maximum power conversion efficiency of 8.17%. Furthermore, it was found that the conversion efficiency first increased with increasing ZnO content and then decreased. Such variation of conversion efficiency with ZnO content is dependent on the fill factor (FF) that is determined by the combination of the catalytic activity of ZnO and the conductivity of PEDOT:PSS.


This work was supported by the U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF-CBET-0931587) and the ACS Petroleum Research Fund (PRF-51799-ND10).

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013