 DOI: 10.1039/D2TA00217E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 4644-4652


Xian-Gang
Hu
,

Qinwei
Wei
,

Yi-Ming
Zhao
,

Peng-Xiang
Hou
*,

Wencai
Ren
,

Chang
Liu
* and 

Hui-Ming
Cheng


Shenyang National Laboratory for Materials Science, Institute of Metal Research, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenyang 110016, PR China. E-mail: pxhou@imr.ac.cn; cliu@imr.ac.cn

School of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Science and Technology of China, Shenyang, 110016, PR China

Shenzhen Geim Graphene Center, Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen 518055, PR China

Received
10th January 2022
, Accepted 31st January 2022
First published on 3rd February 2022
Single-wall carbon nanotube/silicon (SWCNT/Si) heterojunction solar cells are no longer a laboratory curiosity, but the commercial manufacture of devices with a high and stable conversion efficiency remains a big challenge. Here we report the fabrication of a FeCl3-functionalized GO/SWCNT/Si heterojunction solar cell by using a simple drop-casting method. It was found that the GO layer not only serves as an antireflection layer, leading to reduced incident light loss and a ∼20% increase in photocurrent, but also acts as a carrier transport bridge and physical barrier that traps more metal chloride. The FeCl3 acts as a solid-state redox functional material doping both the GO and the SWCNT film, resulting in a higher-conductivity composite film, which increases the work function and the charge carrier transport, contributing to a significant increase of the photovoltage and fill factor. As a result, the FeCl3–GO/SWCNT/Si heterojunction solar cell achieved a high conversion efficiency of 17.5% and good stability, where more than 90% of original efficiency was retained after exposure to air for 15 days.

Single-wall carbon nanotube (SWCNT) films have been used as transparent electrodes and/or hole transport layers (HTLs) in solar cells, photodetectors, organic light-emitting diodes, and many other photovoltaic devices due to their good conductivity and high transparency. Among them, SWCNT film/monocrystalline silicon (SWCNT/Si) heterojunction solar cells have attracted increasing attention. In this type of solar cells, SWCNT films not only act as transparent layers to replace increasingly expensive indium tin oxide electrodes, but also work as a p-type layer to reduce the use of silicon. Furthermore, SWCNT/Si solar cells have a simple device structure and can be fabricated at room temperature, thus avoiding the high-temperature diffusion processes that are required for traditional Si solar cells. Significant advances have been made in SWCNT/Si solar cells during the last 15 years, in terms of both headline performance values and a fundamental understanding of the underlying operating principles. However, there are still aspects that need to be improved, one of which is the development of strategies that enable devices with not only a high efficiency but also long-term stability in a commercially attractive way. The performance of this kind of solar cell is limited by the high resistance and low work function of the SWCNT films, as well as insufficient light absorption by the silicon. As a result several methods, including SWCNT film doping, the introduction of antireflection layers, and device structure optimization have been developed to improve the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of these cells. For example, combining a SWCNT film with poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS), Nafion, or MoOx has proved effective in improving both the carrier transfer and light absorption.

Graphene oxide (GO) is a two-dimensional material composed of a graphene skeleton and oxygen-containing functional groups that has excellent chemical stability and optical transparency and has recently been considered a potential HTL material. However, its poor electrical conductivity limits its use in solar cells. Considerable effort has been devoted to improving the conductivity of GO, and the methods can basically be classified as reduction and functionalization routes. Although reduction decreases the electrical resistance, the accompanying low work function usually leads to a poor photovoltaic performance. Chemical functionalization is a simple way to simultaneously improve both the conductivity and work function of GO. Choi et al. have fabricated a high-performance polymer solar cell using GO treated with a metal chloride (OsCl3, PtCl4 and AuCl3). Bhosale et al. improved the work function of GO by Au and MoOx nanoparticles doping, and based on this a planar-heterojunction perovskite solar cell with a high photovoltage was fabricated. These results indicate that functionalized GO can efficiently improve the photovoltaic performance of solar cells. However, there have been few reports on using functionalized GO in SWCNT/Si heterojunction solar cells.
In this study, we report a simple method to improve the photovoltaic performance of SWCNT/Si heterojunction solar cells by drop-casting GO and then FeCl3 onto a SWCNT film. The GO film acts as an efficient antireflection layer to increase solar light absorption and produce more photo-generating carriers, leading to an increased short-circuit current density (JSC). It also acts as physical barrier that traps more metal chloride. The FeCl3 serves as a solid-state redox functional material and dopes both the GO and SWCNT films, so that an improved work function and better conductivity are obtained. Due to the simultaneously improved JSC, open circuit voltage (VOC) and fill factor (FF), our functionalized GO/SWCNT/Si solar cells have a high PCE value of 17.5%, and have a good stability with more than 90% of the original efficiency retained after exposure to air over a period of 15 days.

The GO used in this study was synthesized by a green method using the electrolytic oxidation of graphite. Typical scanning (SEM) and transmission electron microscope (TEM) images of the GO sheets are shown in Fig. 1a and b, respectively. It can be seen that the lateral size of the GO is mostly in the range of 1–10 μm. A stable GO dispersion (Fig. S1) was prepared by dispersing the GO sheets in a mixture of deionized water and ethanol. SWCNT films were prepared by floating catalyst chemical vapor deposition (FCCVD) and directly transferred onto a target substrate (For details see Experimental section). Fig. 1c shows a typical SEM image of the SWCNT film, which consists of a randomly entangled SWCNT network, supported on a SiOx/Si substrate. Small-bundles of straight, high-quality SWCNTs are observed in the typical TEM image shown in Fig. 1d, and these give the SWCNT film excellent optoelectrical properties. The stable GO dispersion was then drop-coated onto the SWCNT film and dried in air. Fig. 1e shows that the GO uniformly covers the entire surface of the SWCNT network. The thickness of the GO film was controlled by changing the drop-casting time. Fig. 1f shows that the GO sheets are tightly and uniformly attached to the SWCNTs, and cover the empty area of the network and connect the inter-tube/bundle junctions. Finally, the GO–SWCNT hybrid film was coated with FeCl3 by drop-coating to improve the charge transport. Fig. 1g shows a typical SEM image of FeCl3–GO–SWCNT film. The corresponding Fe and Cl elemental distributions are shown in Fig. S2a and b, from which we see a uniform distribution of iron and chlorine. Fig. 1h shows a TEM image of the FeCl3–GO–SWCNT film, showing randomly-distributed FeCl3 particles on the GO–SWCNT film. High resolution TEM (HRTEM) observation of the FeCl3 grains (Fig. 1i) shows an interplanar spacing of 0.59 nm, which is same as the (003) crystal plane of FeCl3 (Table S1). The Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) image inserted in Fig. 1i indicates the (003) and (006) crystal planes of FeCl3.

We also characterized the structure of the pristine SWCNT, GO–SWCNT, and FeCl3–GO–SWCNT films using laser Raman spectroscopy, and the IG/ID map images obtained from an area 30 × 30 μm2 are shown in Fig. 1j, k and l, respectively. The IG/ID ratios of the pristine SWCNT film are in the range of 70–200 with an average value of 112, indicating high crystallinity. After the GO coating, the mean IG/ID ratio decreased to 16.8, which is attributed to the strong D-band peak of the GO (Fig. S3). The introduction of FeCl3 reduced the IG/ID value to 5.4. At the same time, an obvious blue-shift of the G-band peak was observed after the addition of FeCl3 (Fig. S4), which indicates that it serves as a p-type dopant.
The optical transmittance, I–V curves, absorption and ultraviolet photoelectron spectra (UPS) spectra were measured to investigate the effects of the GO and FeCl3 additions on the photoelectric properties of the hybrid film. GO has very little impact on the transmittance of the SWCNT film because of its high transmittance and low light absorption (Fig. S5). As shown in Fig. 2a and b, the FeCl3 produces a slightly decreased transmittance of the GO–SWCNT film, while the optical transitions of the van Hove singularities (EM11, ES22, ES11) are quenched. This indicates that the interband optical absorptions are suppressed due to the shift of the Fermi level caused by the FeCl3 functionalization. To confirm the functionalization effect, the UPS spectra of the films are compared in Fig. 2c. The work function of the SWCNT film was calculated to be 4.73 eV, and after applying the GO coating it increased to 4.98 eV, which is a result of the higher work function of GO. The FeCl3–GO–SWCNT film showed the highest work function of 5.13 eV due to the p-type doping effect. Therefore, the results of UPS characterization are in accordance with the Raman and absorbance spectra. Fig. 2d shows the I–V curves of the samples from which it can be seen that the resistance of the SWCNT film increased after coating with GO due to the poor conductivity of the latter. However, the FeCl3 doping significantly improved the conductivity of the hybrid film. It is well known that metal chlorides can functionalize both SWCNTs and GO films. We also compared the I–V curves of FeCl3–SWCNT and FeCl3–GO–SWCNT films. As shown in Fig. S6, the FeCl3–GO–SWCNT film has lower resistance than the FeCl3–SWCNT film. The reason may be that the FeCl3-functionalized GO sheets provide a carrier transport bridge for nanotube junctions to reduce the contact resistance between tubes and tubes.
To investigate the function of FeCl3, the above samples were characterized using XPS and their C 1s spectra are shown in Fig. S7. It can be seen that the C 1s spectrum of the GO–SWCNT film (Fig. S7c) is similar to that of GO (Fig. S7b), possibly because the thickness of GO is larger than the photoelectron mean-free path (much less than 10 nm). The C 1s core-level spectrum can be deconvoluted into five components (Figures S7a–d), corresponding to the following five functional groups: CC, C–C, C–O, CO and O–CO. The fractions of these functional groups in the GO–SWCNT and FeCl3–GO–SWCNT films as determined from XPS analysis are listed in Table S2. We see that the introduction of FeCl3 significantly changes the relative CC bonding content. At the same time, the total number of oxygen-containing functional groups decreases, which is consistent with the improved conductivity and indicates that FeCl3 reduces the oxygen-containing functional groups for the GO film. However, the conductivity improvement mechanism induced by FeCl3 doping for SWCNT film is slightly different. The resistance of a SWCNT film mainly originates from inter-tube contacts especially those between metallic and semiconducting nanotubes due to the formation of the Schottky barriers. Metal chloride doping can efficiently decrease the Schottky barrier height by adjusting their Fermi levels to improve the conductivity of the SWCNT film. To investigate the working mechanism of FeCl3, the Fe 2p peaks of pristine FeCl3 powder and a FeCl3–GO–SWCNT film on a Si wafer were characterized and the resulting spectra are shown in Fig. 3a and b. Both Fe(III) and Fe(II) peaks are observed in these two fitted XPS spectra. However, the Fe(III)/Fe(II) ratio of the FeCl3–GO–SWCNT film (1.15 ± 0.28) is much lower than that of the pristine FeCl3 (2.73 ± 0.23) (Table S3), which indicates the occurrence of electron transfer from the GO–SWCNT layer to FeCl3. In other words, the Fe(III) was reduced to Fe(II) by receiving electrons from the GO–SWCNT film. This phenomenon is similar to that of CNTs doped by AuCl3, and graphene doped with metal chloride, in which the metal ions received an electron from the GO–SWCNT and were reduced to the metal or metal ions with a lower valence state. We believe that this charge-transfer produces a downward shift in the Fermi level of the GO–SWCNT film and increases its work function. To study the effect of the GO on FeCl3-doping, we compared the XPS spectra of a FeCl3-doped SWCNT film (Fig. S8) and a FeCl3-doped GO–SWCNT film (Fig. 3b), and the Fe(III)/Fe(II) ratios for these two samples are shown in Table S3. It can be seen that the Fe(III)/Fe(II) ratio decreased from 1.96 ± 0.09 to 1.15 ± 0.28 introducing GO, which suggests that the GO on the SWCNT film acts to increase the electron transfer from the film to Fe(III). Furthermore, the GO nanosheets may act as a physical barrier to trap more FeCl3 to increase its degree of doping, resulting in a higher conductivity of the FeCl3–GO–SWCNT film.
The Si substrate with a 3 × 3 mm2 active area was fabricated by using the mask technology (Fig. S9). Then, we fabricated SWCNT/Si heterojunction solar cells following the process shown in Fig. 4a. An as-prepared SWCNT film was placed on a Si substrate by simple transfer method and GO and FeCl3 solutions were successively dropped on its surface to form the FeCl3–GO–SWCNT/Si heterojunction solar cell. The current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the SWNCT/Si, GO–SWCNT/Si and FeCl3–GO–SWCNT/Si solar cells, together with their optimum performances, are compared in Fig. 4b. For the SWCNT/Si solar cells, the PCE reached 11.1%, similar to our previous work. After drop-coating the GO film, the PCE increased to 12.3% and the values of both the open-circuit voltage (VOC) and short-circuit current density (JSC) were improved. VOC increased from 0.581 V to 0.603 V, and JSC increased from 30.6 to 36.4 mA cm−2. When the FeCl3 solution was dropped on the GO–SWCNT/Si, a high PCE of 17.5%, with a JSC of 36.7 mA cm−2, VOC of 0.637 V, and FF of 74.6%, was obtained. These results indicate that the introduction of GO significantly increases JSC, while an additional FeCl3 coating notably improves the VOC and FF. As a result, an excellent photovoltaic performance was achieved for the FeCl3–GO–SWCNT/Si solar cell.
To ensure their reproducibility and consistency, 20 devices were fabricated for each type of cell. The distributions of the JSC, VOC, FF and PCE values for the three devices are compared in Fig. 4c and S10, and their measured photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table S4. The GO–SWCNT/Si devices have a high JSC (Fig. S10a) with an average value of 36.5 mA cm−2, which is ∼1.21 times that of SWCNT/Si devices. As shown in Fig. S10b, the average VOC values of both GO–SWCNT/Si and FeCl3–GO–SWCNT/Si devices are higher than those of the SWCNT/Si devices, and this is especially true for the FeCl3–GO–SWCNT/Si devices, whose average VOC reached 0.629 ± 0.005 V. Fig. S10c indicates that the GO film coating reduces the average FF, but the addition of FeCl3 significantly improves the FF to a high value of 73.9 ± 2.01%. As a result, average PCE values of 10.6 ± 0.45%, 11.7 ± 0.45% and 16.9 ± 0.46% (Fig. 4c) respectively were obtained for the SWCNT/Si, GO–SWCNT/Si and FeCl3–GO–SWCNT/Si heterojunction solar cells.
In order to elucidate the origin of the large value of JSC, UV-vis-NIR reflectance spectra were measured to evaluate the charge-collection efficiency of the three solar cells, using a bare Si substrate as a reference material. As shown in Fig. 5a, the bare Si substrate has >33% reflectance in the wavelength range 400 nm to 1100 nm due to its high refractive index. The reflectivity of the SWCNT/Si solar cell is slightly lower because of the optical absorbance of the SWCNTs. In contrast, the reflectivity of the GO–SWCNT/Si solar cell is substantially reduced in the same spectral region, especially at 600 nm, where it is as low as 7.8%. These results show that the GO layer effectively acts as an antireflection layer in the cell. Solar radiation energy is mainly distributed in the wavelength range 400 to 900 nm, which is a good match with the antireflection ability of the GO-coated device. The reflection spectra of GO–SWCNT/Si devices with different GO layer thicknesses were measured, and are shown in Fig. S11a. We can see that the GO–SWCNT/Si device with a ∼88 nm thick GO layer shows the minimum reflectance in the visible spectral range, and is preferable for solar power conversion. The thickness of a GO coating (dGO) to produce destructive interference can be expressed by dGO = λ/4nGO, where λ is incident light wavelength and nGO is the refractive index of the GO layer (∼1.71). As shown in Fig. 5a, the device has the lowest reflection at an incident wavelength of ∼600 nm. As a result the calculated optimum layer thickness is ∼87.7 nm, which is very close to the measured thickness of the GO layer (∼88 nm). A schematic showing the reflection reduction of a GO–SWCNT/Si solar cell is shown in Fig. S11b. The lower reflection is attributed to destructive interference originating from the different refractive indices of the GO layer and the Si substrate. Photographs of solar cells without and with a GO layer are shown in Fig. S12. We see an obvious active-window color change from silver gray to dark blue due to the antireflection effect of GO film. This reduced reflectivity contributes to the improved solar light absorption and the generation of photo-carriers. Furthermore, it is worth mentioning that the reflectivity of the FeCl3–GO–SWCNT/Si solar cells is similar to that of the GO–SWCNT/Si ones. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra of the three devices are shown in Fig. 5b. For the SWCNT/Si solar cell, the EQE in the range of 400–1000 nm is less than 70%, but it increased after coating with the GO layer, achieving a value of ∼89.4% at a wavelength of 600 nm, the wavelength for the lowest reflectivity. The integrated photocurrent densities of the SWNCT/Si, GO–SWCNT/Si and FeCl3–GO–SWCNT/Si solar cells are calculated as 29.2, 36.0 and 36.2 mA cm−2, respectively (Fig. S13), which are very close to the photocurrent densities obtained from the J–V curves (Fig. 4b). Therefore, the decreased reflectivity and increased EQE lead to an increase in JSC for the solar cells with the GO coating, although the film transparency was slightly reduced (Fig. 2a).

Fig. 5c and d shows the J–V characteristics of the three solar cells in the dark. All the devices exhibit excellent rectifying behavior (Fig. 5c), indicating that they are high quality heterojunctions. However, the saturation current densities (J0) of both the GO–SWCNT and FeCl3–GO–SWCNT/Si devices are lower than that of the SWCNT/Si device (Fig. 5d). A smaller J0 indicates a higher barrier at the heterojunction interface, which leads to a higher VOC. Therefore, the highest VOC value of the FeCl3–GO–SWCNT/Si device originates from it having the lowest saturation current density. In addition, the significantly improved VOC value is attributed to the larger built-in potential (eVbi). Fig. S14 shows the energy band diagrams of the three devices. The work function (WF) of the SWCNT, GO–SWCNT and FeCl3–GO–SWCNT films obtained from the UPS spectra (Fig. 2c) are 4.73 eV, 4.98 eV and 5.13 eV, respectively. The Fermi level of the Si is ∼4.31 eV. Therefore, the built-in potential (eVbi) for the SWCNT/Si, GO–SWCNT/Si and FeCl3–GO–SWCNT solar cells are 0.42 eV, 0.67 eV and 0.82 eV, respectively. Because the VOC of the device is positively correlated with the eVbi, an increase of eVbi leads to an increase of VOC.

Fig. 5e shows I(dV/dI) plots as a function of current (I) for the three devices. The series resistance (RS) of the solar cell can be evaluated from the slopes of these plots which give values for the SWCNT/Si, GO–SWCNT/Si and FeCl3–GO–SWCNT solar cells of 13 Ω, 22.4 Ω and 9.42 Ω, respectively. The increased Rs of the GO–SWCNT/Si device is attributed to the larger resistance of the GO–SWCNT film, as shown in Fig. 2d. After functionalizing with FeCl3, the lowest Rs was achieved, which efficiently improves charge transport and leads to a high FF. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were performed to evaluate carrier recombination at the SWCNT/Si interface. As shown in Fig. 5f, all the curves are near semicircles, which suggests that there is only a single junction at the interface. The minority carrier lifetimes (τ) calculated from Fig. 5f, based on the equivalent circuit of our solar cell (Fig. S15), are listed in Table S5. It can be seen that the τ value decreases after coating with the GO layer, which is in agreement with the change of the FF (Fig. S10c). However, the τ value of the FeCl3–GO–SWCNT/Si solar cell increases, apparently due to a surface charge transfer doping effect, which contributes to the improved FF of the FeCl3–GO–SWCNT/Si device.
To reveal the other roles of the GO sheets in the FeCl3–GO–SWCNT/Si solar cell, a FeCl3–SWCNT/Si solar cell was fabricated for comparison (Fig. S16a), and a PCE of 12.8% was obtained, much lower than that of the FeCl3–GO–SWCNT/Si cell (∼17%). Fig. S16b shows that the device containing a GO layer has a lower series resistance, which is consistent with the measured film resistance shown in Fig. S6. Furthermore, the presence of a GO layer efficiently reduces J0 and increases the barrier height (Φ), which leads to improved FF and VOC values (Table S6). Therefore, the GO sheets in the FeCl3–GO–SWCNT/Si device not only improve photocurrent by acting as an antireflection layer, but also increase FF and VOC by increasing the barrier height.
As described above, the significantly improved photovoltaic performance of the FeCl3–GO–SWCNT/Si solar cell can be attributed to the higher light absorbance and improved charge transfer. A schematic showing the working mechanism is given in Fig. 6a. The GO layer reduces light reflection due to the destructive interference caused by the different refractive indices of the GO layer and the Si, which leads to increased light harvesting and generates more electron–hole pairs. The introduction of FeCl3 decreases the resistance of the GO–SWCNT hybrid film due to the surface charge transfer doping. In other words, the ferric ions are reduced by receiving electrons from the GO–SWCNT film. This FeCl3 functionalization promotes the hole transport ability of the GO–SWCNT film and the FeCl3-functionalized GO layer serves as a carrier transport bridge for SWCNT–SWCNT junctions and reduces the blind area (porosity) in the SWCNT network. As a result the FeCl3–GO–SWCNT/Si solar cell has excellent photovoltaic performance. The photovoltaic performance of representative SWCNT/Si heterojunction solar cells with front junction (blue) and back junction (yellow) structures are shown in Fig. S17 and Table S7. It is seen that CNT/Si solar cells with front-junctions have lower PCE values than those with back-junctions. However, the latter are usually fabricated by a traditional Si photovoltaic technique, where high temperature doping and passivating layers are involved when constructing the front surface field, leading to a complex fabrication procedure and higher cost. The performance of our FeCl3–GO–SWCNT/Si devices in terms of PCE value and stability is among the best of all reported SWCNT/Si solar cells with a front junction structure. Furthermore, the photovoltaic characteristics of this solar cell were measured in ambient conditions without encapsulation and it was found that it retained more than 90% of its original efficiency after fifteen days of exposure to air (Fig. 6b). Compared with the most commonly reported HNO3-doped solar cells, the FeCl3-doped GO–SWCNT/Si solar cell demonstrated a higher stability.

In conclusion, we have fabricated a FeCl3–GO–SWCNT/Si solar cell with a high performance and good stability by using a simple method at room temperature. The GO layer serves as an antireflection layer to improve light absorbance, as well as acting as a physical barrier to trap more metal chloride. Due to the presence of the solid-state redox dopant FeCl3, the conductivity and work function of the GO–SWCNT hybrid film was significantly increased, leading to a much improved photovoltage and fill factor. These improvements gave the solar cell a high conversion efficiency of 17.5%. This simple drop-casting method of introducing the FeCl3 dopant and GO layer to enhance device performance is also suitable for 2D materials/Si devices, such as graphene/Si and MXene/Si heterojunctions.


The authors declare no conflict of interest.


This work was supported by the Ministry of Science and Technology of China (Grant 2016YFA0200102), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grants 51761135122, 51532008, 51625203, 51772303, 51872293), the CAS/SAFEA International Partnership Program for Creative Research Teams, and the Liaoning BaiQianWan Talents Program.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d2ta00217e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022