 DOI: 10.1039/C9TA09260A
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 24191-24198


Helin
Wang
,

Fu
Yang
,

Yuren
Xiang
,

Shuai
Ye
,

Xiao
Peng
,

Jun
Song
*,

Junle
Qu
 and 

Wai-Yeung
Wong
*

Department of Applied Biology and Chemical Technology, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong, P. R. China. E-mail: wai-yeung.wong@polyu.edu.hk

Key Laboratory of Optoelectronic Devices and Systems of Ministry of Education and Guangdong Province, College of Physics and Optoelectronic Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, Guangdong, P. R. China. E-mail: songjun@szu.edu.cn

Institute of Materials for Electronics and Energy Technology (i-MEET), Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Martensstrasse 7, 91058 Erlangen, Germany

Received
22nd August 2019
, Accepted 23rd September 2019
First published on 9th October 2019
The lack of organic electron transport materials (ETM) with excellent electron transport and device stability is an important problem for the development and commercialization of perovskite solar cells (PSCs). Herein, a ladder-conjugated perylene diimide dimer containing an indacenodithiophene unit, namely IDTT2FPDI, was synthesized in two steps with high yields. In addition, IDTT2FPDI exhibits suitable energy levels, high electron mobility, and an excellent hydrophobicity because of its multiple fused thiophene rings and large ladder-conjugated framework. Compared with inverted PSCs which typically use PCBM as a single electron transport layer (ETL), the device utilizing IDTT2FPDI/PCBM as a double ETL showed a better power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 19.4%. Moreover, the double ETL-based devices exhibited superior stability compared with the single ETL-based devices due to the hydrophobicity of the IDTT2FPDI layer. These results highlight the potential of employing ladder-conjugated PDI dimers as ETMs to obtain high-efficiency and stable PSCs, which shows promise for the development of PSCs.

Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have gained much attention in recent years due to their high power conversion efficiency (PCE). The carrier transport layers in perovskite solar cells are an important component of the device, which can enhance the carrier directional transport and prevent the decomposition of perovskite caused by the contact between perovskite and the two electrodes. Although metal oxides and PCBM are frequently used as an electron transport layer (ETL) in PSCs, they have some disadvantages such as the film defect of metal oxides which reduces the efficiency of the electron transport, and insufficient coverage on the PCBM-based perovskite films and its hydrophilic ester group which results in poor device stability. Therefore, the research focus has now been shifted towards the development of novel and efficient organic electron transport materials.

Perylene diimide (PDI) derivatives are classical organic semiconductor materials that have strong absorption in the visible region, excellent thermal stability, and high electron transport properties. However, PDI monomers exhibit strong π–π interactions, resulting in solid-state aggregation that produces larger grains which hinder the application of PDI monomers in the photovoltaic field. Thus, the design of PDI dimers with distorted molecular skeletons can effectively solve this problem. In addition, PDI dimers can be utilized as electron acceptors or electron transport materials (ETMs) in organic solar cells or perovskite solar cells (PSCs) which can effectively improve the electron transport properties and PCE. Currently, linear conjugated PDI dimers are being widely applied and studied, but research based on fused-ring PDI dimers has yet to be conducted. Fused-ring PDI dimers also exhibit molecular distortion which prevents their strong intramolecular aggregation. Furthermore, a larger ladder-conjugated framework promotes π-electron delocalization which facilitates directional charge transport. Hence, there is a strong desire to develop high-efficiency fused-ring PDI dimers for applications in the photovoltaic field.
As far as we know, the indacenodithiophene unit is an important component of the high-efficiency electron acceptor (2,2′-[[6,6,12,12-tetrakis(4-hexylphenyl)-s-indacenodithieno[3,2-b]thiophene]methylidyne(3-oxo-1H-indene-2,1(3H)diylidene)]bis(propanedinitrile)) (ITIC). Its conjugated framework contains four thiophene units whose S⋯S interaction can enhance the regular arrangement of the thin film and potentially improve electron transport. Therefore, the development of a fused-ring PDI dimer containing an indacenodithiophene unit has many advantages when it is used as an ETM for PSCs. Firstly, the target molecule was obtained by a two-step reaction with simple synthetic routes and high yields, which help reduce the cost and enable large-scale production. Secondly, the multiple fused thiophene rings and larger ladder-conjugated framework can improve the electron transport and exhibit excellent hydrophobicity which can enhance the device efficiency and stability. Thirdly, the design of the herringbone side chain can increase its solubility in organic solvents and allow it to display rapid charge separation on the film surface. Fourthly, the carbonyl group in PDI units can coordinate with the perovskite, which helps to passivate surface defects on the perovskite film and improve the device performance. Consequently, a fused-ring PDI dimer, namely IDTT2FPDI, was designed and synthesized to investigate its effect on the performance and stability of PSCs when it was used as an ETL.
Herein, IDTT2FPDI exhibits excellent electron transport properties and hydrophobicity because of its multiple fused thiophene rings and large ladder-conjugated framework. Moreover, its suitable energy levels matched the energy levels of perovskite, which could improve the electron transport, indicating that IDTT2FPDI is a suitable ETM for use in inverted PSCs. A single transport layer is usually applied to prepare PSCs, but a double transport layer is more advantageous than the single one. It has been clearly demonstrated that using a double transport layer as a method of interface engineering can reduce the interface recombination, and the double transport layer has better coverage of perovskite films for enhancing carrier injection and transport. Thus, IDTT2FPDI and PCBM were utilized as a double ETL for the first time to enhance the performance and stability of PSCs. As a result, the PCE of the double ETL-based device reached 19.4%, which is higher than that of the device using only PCBM as the single ETL (17.2%). In addition, the double ETL-based devices exhibited better stability than the single ETL-based devices owing to the excellent hydrophobicity of the IDTT2FPDI layer, which prevented the destruction of perovskite by water under ambient conditions. These results demonstrate that IDTT2FPDI is an efficient ETM and has great potential for applications in the photovoltaic field.

IDTT2FPDI was synthesized as shown in Scheme S1 in two steps by Stille coupling and intramolecular ring-fused reactions in high synthetic yields of 72% and 91%, respectively. Owing to employing the classical synthetic methods for the synthesis of IDTT2FPDI, the synthetic complexity is decreased which is beneficial for the potential commercialization of IDTT2FPDI. The product was fully characterized by NMR and HRMS as depicted in Fig. S1 and S2, and these data agree well with its molecular structure. IDTT2FPDI shows outstanding solubility in common organic solvents due to its herringbone side chain. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) was used to evaluate the thermal stability of IDTT2FPDI, and Fig. S3 shows a 5% weight-loss at 390 °C under a nitrogen atmosphere. This result indicates that IDTT2PDI has good thermal stability.



Fig. 1a shows that the maximum absorption peaks for IDTT2FPDI are located at 455 nm in dichloromethane solution with an ε value of 1.37 × 105 M−1 cm−1 and 462 nm in the thin film. Two maximum absorption peaks of IDTT2FPDI were red-shifted by 7 nm, indicating a weak intermolecular interaction in the solid state due to the planar distortion of the ladder-conjugated framework. From the absorption onset in solution, the optical gap (Eg) of IDTT2FPDI is estimated to be 1.71 eV. To estimate the electrochemical properties of IDTT2FPDI, cyclic voltammetry (CV) was performed in Fig. 1b. IDTT2FPDI exhibits two reversible reduction waves and no oxidation waves in the CV sweep, and the onset reduction potential is at −1.21 V for IDTT2FPDI. Therefore, the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) level of IDTT2FPDI is estimated to be −3.87 eV based on the onset reduction potential, which agrees well with the LUMO level of MAPbI3 which should enhance the electron injection and transport. In addition, the HOMO level of IDTT2FPDI is calculated to be −5.58 eV according to its Eg and LUMO level. To further investigate the electronic density and energy levels of IDTT2FPDI, the ground-state geometries were optimized by DFT calculations (Fig. 1g). It is found that the ground-state LUMO electronic density is located on the two PDI units, and the HOMO is located on the indacenodithiophene unit. The calculated LUMO and HOMO levels are −3.27 and −5.31 eV, respectively, which agree well with the CV data. These results indicate that IDTT2FPDI has suitable energy levels for use as an ETM in PSCs.

The electron-only devices using PCBM and IDTT2FPDI were investigated to estimate the electron transport properties using the space-charge limited current (SCLC) method with an ITO/ZnO/ETM/Ca/Al device.Fig. 1c shows high electron mobilities of 1.54 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 for IDTT2FPDI and 1.22 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 for PCBM, demonstrating that the electron mobility of IDTT2FPDI is slightly higher than that of PCBM. These results show that IDTT2FPDI can potentially be used as an efficient ETM.

To explore whether IDTT2FPDI could be used as an efficient ETM, inverted PSCs were fabricated with a device structure of ITO/PTAA:F4-TCNQ/PMMA/MAPbI3/IDTT2FPDI/PCBM/Bphen/Al, whose structure and energy level alignments are shown in Fig. 1d and f. It is noteworthy to mention here that three materials (MAPbI3, IDTT2FPDI, and PCBM) have the same LUMO levels, which is more conducive to electron transfer and injection to improve the device performance. The devices using only PCBM as a single ETL served as a control reference. In these devices, polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) and 4,7-diphenyl-1,10-phenanthroline (Bphen) served as a passivation layer and a thin buffer layer, respectively, and F4-TCNQ-doped PTAA and IDTT2FPDI/PCBM were, respectively, utilized as the hole transport layer and double ETL to enhance the charge injection and transport. Furthermore, MAPbI3 was deposited in a one-step process to form a perovskite layer using 2-butanol as an anti-solvent.

X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was carried out to explore the intermolecular interaction between MAPbI3 and IDTT2FPDI as shown in Fig. 2a and S4. Compared with the pure MAPbI3 film, both Pb (4f) and I (3d) peaks of IDTT2FPDI-coated films slightly moved to low binding energy, suggesting that intermolecular interaction between MAPbI3 and IDTT2FPDI exists. Moreover, Pb (4f) and I (3d) peak positions did not change after using chlorobenzene (CB) to wash the IDTT2FPDI-coated films, implying that the IDTT2FPDI layer could not be washed off by the CB solution of the second ETL. Meanwhile, in order to further illustrate the existence of this intermolecular interaction, photoluminescence (PL) spectra of pure perovskite and two IDTT2FPDI-coated films were recorded as shown in Fig. 2d. In comparison with the pure MAPbI3 film, distinct PL quenching events were present for the two IDTT2FPDI-coated films. Although the PL intensity increased slightly during the first wash, the PL intensity remained nearly constant after the second and third washes in Fig. S5, further indicating that the results can reveal the existence of this interaction and agree well with the XPS measurement. As far as we know, this interaction could be assigned partly to the carbonyl and sulfur atoms of IDTT2FPDI bonded to the Pb atom of the MAPbI3 film, which helps to passivate surface defects on the perovskite film and improve the device performance.
Since IDTT2FPDI/PCBM was used as the double ETL, the film thickness is a key parameter that affects the device performance. Accordingly, different thicknesses (from 0 nm to 32 nm) were used to explore the effect of the film thickness of the IDTT2FPDI layer on the device performance (see Fig. 2b), and the results are summarized in Table S1. Interestingly, the efficiency of PSCs based on the double ETL was insensitive to the thickness of the IDTT2FPDI layer. Despite achieving the best PCE at 15 nm, the PCE changes were relatively small, and the majority of PCE values reached over 18.8%. These results indicate a significant improvement compared with the commonly used ETMs, which will help to realize the large-scale fabrication of efficient PSCs by a solution processing method. As a result, a 15 nm IDTT2FPDI layer was used to fabricate inverted PSCs, and the same thickness of the PCBM layer was used to achieve a double ETL.
Furthermore, the IDTT2FPDI/PCBM-based and PCBM-based devices were used to investigate the effect of the IDTT2FPDI layer on the device performance hysteresis, and the related results are summarized in Table 1. Fig. 2c shows that single ETL-based devices display only a little hysteresis effect, but there is a reduced hysteresis for the double ETL-based devices, indicating that the addition of an IDTT2FPDI layer results in an efficient charge extraction. Consequently, the single ETL-based device exhibited the best PCE of 17.2%, and the double ETL-based device showed an improved PCE of 19.4% with a higher short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 23.9 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.10 V, and a fill factor (FF) of 73.8%. These results demonstrate that the best efficiency of the double ETL is 10% higher than that of the single ETL. Additionally, SnO2/IDTT2FPDI was used as the double ETL to lead to negligible hysteresis with the conventional structure of ITO/SnO2/IDTT2FPDI/MAPbI3/PTAA/Ag as shown in Fig. S6 and Table S2. Therefore, the use of the IDTT2FPDI layer can efficiently reduce the hysteresis effect, which can improve the device performance. Then, IDTT2FPDI was employed as the single ETL and these PSCs exhibit a champion PCE of 16.3% without the hysteresis effect as shown in Fig. S7 and Table S3, which confirms that IDTT2FPDI can be a promising alternative to PCBM.
ETL
Scan direction

J
sc [mA cm−2]

V
oc [V]
FF [%]
PCE [%]
IDTT2FPDI/PCBM
Forward scan
23.9
1.10
73.8
19.4
IDTT2FPDI/PCBM
Reverse scan
23.7
1.09
74.5
19.3
PCBM
Forward scan
22.1
1.10
70.6
17.2
PCBM
Reverse scan
21.6
1.09
72.4
17.1
To gain further insight into the improvement in photocurrent and PCE, the external quantum efficiency (EQE) curves of PSCs based on two different ETLs were obtained and are presented in Fig. 2e. Although the two devices showed similar spectral shapes of their EQE curves, the double ETL-based device has a stronger photoresponse between 300 and 800 nm than that of the single ETL-based device. This indicates that the double ETL-based device has excellent charge injection and collection. Moreover, due to the improved photoresponse in the double ETL-based device, an integrated Jsc of 22.5 mA cm−2 was obtained, which was higher than that of the single ETL-based device (20.9 mA cm−2). It has been shown that the EQE curves and integrated Jsc results are consistent with the J–V measurement results. Meanwhile, the steady photocurrent and efficiency of the two devices at different maximum power output points (0.86 V for the single ETL and 0.89 V for the double ETL) were measured as shown in Fig. 2f. Compared with the single ETL-based device, the double ETL-based device exhibited a higher steady photocurrent (23.3 mA cm−2) and a stabilized PCE (18.8%), whose values agree well with the J–V measurements. The above results confirm the accurate characterization of the device performance and show that IDTT2FPDI can act as an efficient ETM for inverted PSCs.
The PL spectra were obtained for bare perovskite and two ETL-covered perovskite films to explore the electron transfer efficiency at the perovskite/ETL interface. Obvious PL quenching was observed in the two ETL-covered perovskite films compared with the bare perovskite as shown in Fig. 3c. The PL quenching efficiency of the double ETL-covered film was 40%, which was twice as high as that of the single ETL (20%), suggesting that the addition of the IDTT2FPDI layer can improve the electron transfer efficiency.
Time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) spectra of the two perovskite films were recorded to observe the film morphologies and to measure the decay lifetimes of perovskite as shown in Fig. 3d. TRPL decays were fitted with a biexponential decay function. The double ETL-based film exhibited a notably decreased decay lifetime compared with the single ETL-based film, which could be attributed to the increased electron extraction and degressive radiative recombination. The fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy (FLIM) images of the two films are displayed in Fig. 3a and b and show similar dense grains and pinhole-free morphologies, which are consistent with their atomic force microscopy (AFM) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images. However, the two images exhibited different PL brightness because the charge transfer was accelerated after the introduction of the IDTT2FPDI layer, which was confirmed by steady-state PL and TRPL decay lifetimes.
To further investigate the influence of the IDTT2FPDI layer, the electron-only devices were investigated to evaluate the trap density (Ntrap) and electron mobility (μe) of the two perovskite films in the device architecture of ITO/SnO2/MAPbI3/IDTT2FPDI/PCBM/Al using the SCLC method and the related results are summarized in Table 2. Fig. 3e shows that both traces can be divided into three different dependence regions: an ohmic region at low bias, a trap filling region starting at VTFL (trap-filled limit voltage), and an SCLC region at high bias. The VTFL from the intersection of the extension lines in the ohmic region and the TFL region was obtained. In addition, the Ntrap can be calculated by using the following expression: VTFL = eNtrapL2/(2εε0). The perovskite film based on the double ETL exhibited a lower Ntrap of 1.65 × 1015 cm−3 compared with that of the single ETL (2.38 × 1015 cm−3), suggesting that the IDTT2FPDI layer plays a key role in suppressing charge-trapped recombination at the perovskite/ETL interface. In addition, the electron mobility of the two devices can be estimated from the third region using the Mott–Gurney law: μ = 8JDL3/(9εε0V2). Consequently, the two films showed high mobilities of 0.031 and 0.017 cm2 V−1 s−1 obtained for the films in the double ETL and single ETL, respectively, suggesting that the IDTT2FPDI layer could efficiently enhance the electron transport because of the large ladder-conjugated framework. Hence, it is shown that the device performance can be improved by using the double ETL. In comparison with the PCE records reported in the literature, a diagram of the PCE of PDI-based PSCs is shown in Fig. 3f and the results are summarized in Table S4. It is obvious that the PCE (19.4%) in this work is one of the highest values for PDI-based PSCs, and the use of double ETLs can improve the performance and stability of PSCs. Meanwhile, these results demonstrate that IDTT2FPDI is an efficient ETM for inverted PSCs.
ETL

V
TFL [V]

N
trap [cm−3]

μ
e [cm2 V−1 s−1]
IDTT2FPDI/PCBM
0.38
1.65 × 1015
0.031
PCBM
0.54
2.38 × 1015
0.017
To observe the surface morphologies of bare perovskite, and PCBM-covered and IDTT2FPDI-covered perovskites, AFM was used to compare the three films. As shown in Fig. 4a–c, the surfaces of the three films have different root mean square (RMS) roughness values of 18.5 nm, 13.8 nm, and 11.1 nm, respectively. This suggests that high coverage on the perovskite films can be achieved by employing the ETL-covered method. The IDTT2FPDI-covered perovskite film had a lower RMS than that of PCBM, suggesting that the smoother morphology obtained on the IDTT2FPDI-covered film can enhance electron injection and thus improve the efficiency of PSCs. Furthermore, as shown in Fig. 4d and e, the SEM images of the perovskite films covered by either IDTT2FPDI/PCBM or PCBM were obtained, respectively. Even though the PCBM-covered film exhibited large grains and a pinhole-free morphology, there are a number of bare PbI2 particles on the perovskite surface. As expected, it is observed that the PbI2 particles are obviously reduced or covered on the double ETL-based film surface, which would help to reduce the contact between the perovskite layer and metal electrode and enhance the stability of PSCs. These results reveal that IDTT2FPDI is an important ETL for improving the device performance and stability of PSCs.
The PCE statistical distribution histograms are presented to demonstrate the reliability of the two devices in Fig. 4f. The two devices exhibited quite reasonable standard deviation values, and the PCEs of single and double ETL-based devices are (17.0 ± 0.3)% and (19.0 ± 0.3)%, respectively, suggesting that there is an actual improvement in the device performance of the double ETL-based PSCs. The stability of PSCs was measured by storing the encapsulated devices under ambient conditions with 25% humidity to gain a detailed insight into the influence of the IDTT2FPDI layer on the device performance. The time evolution of the PCE values of the two devices is shown in Fig. 4i. The results show that the stability of the double ETL-based PSCs is better than that of the devices with a single ETL within 150 hours, which is attributed to the surface contact at the perovskite/ETL. Consequently, the water contact angles of the two ETL-covered perovskite films are presented in Fig. 4g and h. The water contact angles were 94.8° and 107.8° for the PCBM- and IDTT2FPDI-covered films, respectively, suggesting that IDTT2FPDI is more hydrophobic than PCBM. The better stability of the double ETL-based devices can be attributed to the outstanding hydrophobicity of the IDTT2FPDI layer which prevents the accelerated degradation of perovskite films by water under ambient conditions.

In summary, a ladder-conjugated PDI dimer with an indacenodithiophene unit (IDTT2FPDI) was synthesized in two steps with high synthetic yields. Due to its multiple fused thiophene rings and ladder-conjugated framework, IDTT2FPDI shows excellent hydrophobicity and high electron mobility. In addition, the LUMO level of IDTT2FPDI is close to the energy level of MAPbI3, demonstrating that it can be a suitable ETM for use in inverted PSCs. Compared with the single ETL-based device, the device using IDTT2FPDI and PCBM as a double ETL provided the best PCE of 19.4%, which is attributed to the efficient electron transport and reduced charge-trapped recombination. Furthermore, the double ETL-based devices exhibited better stability than the single ETL-based devices due to the outstanding hydrophobicity of the IDTT2FPDI layer. Hence, IDTT2FPDI is an excellent ETM for PSCs, and the double ETL configuration has obvious advantages over the single ETL. This offers the possibility of achieving efficient inverted PSCs by using double ETLs. The key strategy of constructing large ladder-conjugated PDI dimers provides an opportunity to develop efficient organic ETMs for use in the photovoltaic field.


The authors declare no conflict of interest.


This work was financially supported by the Hong Kong Research Grants Council (PolyU 153051/17P and C5037-18G), Hong Kong Polytechnic University (1-ZE1C) and Ms Clarea Au (847S). J. Song and J. Qu would like to thank the National Key R&D Program of China (2018YFC0910602), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (61775145, 61525503, 61620106016, 61835009, 81727804, and 61605124), the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation Funded Project (2018M643147 and 2018M633128), the (Key) Project of Department of Education of Guangdong Province (2015KGJHZ002, 2016KCXTD007), the Guangdong Natural Science Foundation Innovation Team (2014A030312008), and the Shenzhen Basic Research Project (JCYJ20170412110212234, JCYJ20170412105003520, and JCYJ20170818142926085).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Materials and characterization; device fabrication and measurement; synthesis; NMR, TGA and XPS. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta09260a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019