 DOI: 10.1039/D1CC00169H
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2021, 57, 4027-4030


Weihua
Zhang
,

Jiankang
Du
,

Cheng
Qiu
,

Kai
Yang
,

Qingyi
Huang
,

Qifei
Wang
,

Wenhao
Zhang
,

Hongwei
Han
,

Xingyu
Gao
* and 

Yue
Hu
*

Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China. E-mail: yuehu@hust.edu.cn

Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility (SSRF), Chinese Academy of Sciences, 239 Zhangheng Road, Shanghai 201204, P. R. China. E-mail: gaoxingyu@sinap.ac.cn

Received
11th January 2021
, Accepted 17th March 2021
First published on 23rd March 2021
The crystallization mechanism of the perovskite crystals inside the mesopores of printable mesoscopic perovskite solar cells is demonstrated by in situ grazing-incidence X-ray diffraction. Ionic liquids can universally tune the crystallization process of different perovksites in the mesopores regradless of the precursor solvents, resulting in enhanced efficiency.

Organic–inorganic lead halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have received great attention due to their dramatic increase in power conversion efficiency (PCE) over the past few years. At present, the mainstream device structures of high-efficiency PSCs are the n-i-p structure and p-i-n structure. They both include an electron transport layer, a perovskite layer and a hole transport layer. However, the hole transport layers usually use high cost materials and cause long-term stability problems of the device. For this, we have developed a printable mesoscopic perovskite solar cell (MPSC) without a hole transport layer, which can be fabricated by screen-printing an all-inorganic scaffold followed by infiltrating perovskites.

However, the PCE of devices using this structure needs to be further improved. In order to improve the PCE, additive engineering is the most facile method. For example, Hu et al. initially designed a bifunctional conjugated additive, which hugely increased the conductivity of perovskite and the fill factor of the device. Sheng et al. reported that LiCl can also improve the conductivity, resulting in an increased PCE. In addition, the regulation of the perovskite crystallization process and post-treatment can also improve the performance of MPSCs.
Ionic liquids are widely used in different fields of applications due to their high conductivity, low saturation vapor pressure, and high thermal stability. They have also been used as additives in the PSC field. Moore et al. reported that methylammonium formate could be used as an additive to obtain higher quality perovskite films. Zhang et al. confirmed that PSCs with an ionic liquid modified with –CH2–CHCH2 groups have higher PCE (19.21%) than those with –CH2CCH and –CH2CN groups, which can be attributed to the reaction between new salts formed by the ionic liquid dopant with the PbI2 and PbI3− anions. Wu et al. demonstrated that the pyridine group in an ionic liquid can form a chemical bond with under-coordinated lead ions. There are still many studies that use ionic liquids as the modified layer of the film. We summarize the mechanism of different ionic liquids in PSCs to comprehensively understand the effects of ionic liquids on devices, as shown in Table S1 (ESI).
Herein, we added 1-ethylpyridine chloride (1-EC) ionic liquid to the perovskite precursor solution of MAI and PbI2 and used a simple one-step drop casting method to prepare MPSCs. By using the in situ grazing-incidence X-ray diffraction (GIXRD) technique, we for the first time reveal the crystallization mechanism of perovskites in tens of micrometre thick mesopores. We find that 1-EC can boost rapid nucleation while retarding the crystal growth of perovskite in MPSCs, which promotes the fillings of perovskite in the mesopores of titania. In addition, 1-EC passivates the defects of perovskite through coordination with unsaturated lead ions, which leads to more efficient charge carrier extraction and charge transfer. As a result, the ionic liquid 1-EC can universally improve the efficiency of MPSCs.
The chemical structure of 1-ethylpyridinium chloride (1-EC) is illustrated in Fig. 1a and the structure of the printable MPSCs studied is shown in Fig. 1b, in which the compact TiO2 (abbreviated as c-TiO2), mesoporous TiO2 (abbreviated as meso-TiO2), mesoporous ZrO2 (abbreviated as meso-ZrO2) and porous carbon electrodes are sequentially screen-printed on the FTO glass substrate. Then the perovskite precursor is dropped directly on top of the carbon layer and infiltrates into the scaffold. The energy band diagram of the device is shown in Fig. 1c. With a suitable band alignment, the electrons and holes can be effectively separated and extracted into the external circuit. The loading amount of perovskites in the mesopores and the crystal quality determines the light collection and charge transport efficiency in MPSCs. We mixed the ionic liquid 1-EC with the MAPbI3 precursor solution to control the crystallization process in the mesopores. As shown by the cross-sectional SEM images in Fig. 1d and e, we observed large pores and voids in the MAPbI3 infiltrated scaffold. In contrast, MAPbI3 mixed with 1-EC forms interconnected crystals. The compact morphology and complete fillings will not only promote the transfer of charges in the micron-thick spacer layer, but also increase the charge extraction at the interfaces of TiO2/perovskite and perovskite/carbon.
Nucleation and crystal growth are the fundamental factors affecting the quality of perovskites. Both the two mainstream models, the LaMer diagram and Ostwald ripening, can describe the fundamental crystallization mechanism of a perovskite. Here, we used GIXRD to explore the crystallization process of the perovskite in MPSCs and understand the influence of 1-EC ionic liquid. The in situ GIXRD experiment procedure was carried out step by step as follows: the first stage is the penetration stage of the precursor solution, which starts from 0 s with dripping the perovskite precursor solution on the carbon surface to 120 s. The second stage is the heating stage, during which the temperature is increased from 25 °C to 100 °C and warmed 7.5 °C per minute. After reaching 100 °C, the samples are kept at this temperature for another 20 min, which is the third stage, called the annealing stage. Fig. 2a illustrates the representative evolution of the scattering features with respect to the scattering vector q and the time for the MAPbI3 perovskite. At the first stage, we observe the wet, gel-like precursor as indicated by the formation of a scattering halo at low q values (3–5 nm−1) assigned to the disordered precursor colloidal gel (Fig. S1, ESI). The features of the PbI2 crystals located at q = 9.0 nm−1 and those of the intermediate MA2Pb3I8·2DMSO solvate located at q = 4.6, 5.1, 6.5, and 8.3 nm−1 are observed after heating. These features appear later (at 385 s) in 1-EC mixed MAPbI3 (Fig. 2a) than those in the pristine MAPbI3 (at 300 s) as shown in Fig. S2 (ESI). This difference may be due to the lower saturated vapor pressure and higher boiling point of 1-EC, which makes the solvent less easy to volatilize. The full width half max (FWHM) of the diffraction peak associated with the intermediate formed in 1-EC mixed MAPbI3 is smaller than that in the pristine MAPbI3 (Table S2, ESI). In the meantime, the intermediate (002) diffraction peak intensity becomes stronger but the (021) and (022) peaks become weaker (Fig. S3, ESI), indicating that the addition of 1-EC can promote the crystallization of the intermediate with preferentially oriented growth along the (002) plane. As shown in Fig. 2b, the film with 1-EC shows much stronger out-plane orientation for the perovskite (110) planes leading to a higher and narrower peak at an azimuth angle of 90° in the radially integrated intensity plot, suggesting that the improved orientation order of the intermediate would enhance the oriented growth of the perovskite phase. From the azimuthally integrated intensity plots of the GIXRD data at different times for both films with and without 1-EC, we made a graph of FWHM of the (110) diffraction peaks of the two films as functions of time along with the evolution of the derived crystal grain size over time (Fig. S4, ESI). In Fig. S5 (ESI), the transformation of the intermediate into the perovskite phase in the perovskite with ionic liquid is slower than that in the reference sample. Thus, it can be deduced that the 1-EC additive leads to a rapid nucleation followed by a slow crystal growth, which is essential in the formation of high-quality perovskite films with better mesopore-filling capability and less defects in the triple layer structures. At the end of the annealing stage, the lead iodide diffraction peak appears in the reference sample as shown in Fig. S6 (ESI), which indicates the start of decomposition of perovskite under the continuous destruction of heat. In contrast, the perovskite added with ionic liquid is relatively stable under heat with no trace of lead iodide found in Fig. S6 (ESI). This implies that the thermal structural stability of perovskite has been improved by the 1-EC ionic liquid.
To investigate the possible bonding between 1-EC and perovskite in the device, we performed the FTIR measurement of pure 1-EC, MAPbI3 and MAPbI3 with 1-EC film, as shown in Fig. S7 (ESI). The samples were prepared by dropping the precursor on meso-TiO2/FTO substrates. The stretching vibration peak assigned to the C–N bond (1216 cm−1) and CN bond (683 cm−1) in a pure 1-EC film both shift to lower wavenumber in MAPbI3 with the 1-EC film, demonstrating weakened bonds caused by the bonding interaction between the pyridine ring of 1-EC and undercoordinated lead ions. Thus, 1-EC can passivate the defects of perovskite caused by the uncoordinated lead ions, which is beneficial for inhibiting the non-radiative recombination. Thus, we can propose the crystallization formation mechanism of the perovskite crystals inside the mesopores, as shown in Fig. 2c. In the DMF/DMSO solvent system, the perovskite precursor solution first forms an intermediate phase MA2Pb3I8·2DMSO and then converts to the final perovskite crystal. With the help of 1-EC, the nucleation process is faster while the crystal growth process becomes slower. It also generates a better orientated intermediate and finally forms perovskite crystals of good quality.
We performed X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis on the final devices containing different concentrations of 1-EC, as shown in Fig. 3a. The diffraction peaks of the pristine MAPbI3 perovskite film appear at 14.37°, 28.71° and 32.12°, corresponding to the crystal facets of (110), (220) and (310), respectively, which belongs to the tetragonal crystal structure of MAPbI3. No significant difference was observed in the crystal structure by adding 1-EC. We further analyse the crystallinity of the perovskite films with various 1-EC concentrations by comparing their perovskite (110) diffraction peak intensity and FWHM, as shown in Fig. S8 (ESI). The highest peak intensity with the smallest peak FWHM demonstrates that the best perovskite crystallinity in MPSCs is achieved at 10% concentration of 1-EC. The optical and electrical properties were investigated by UV–vis spectroscopy and photoluminescence. As shown in Fig. 3b and Fig. S9 (ESI), the band gap of perovskite remains almost the same (1.59 eV for 1-EC added MAPbI3vs. 1.58 eV for MAPbI3). However, the visible light absorption capability of the MAPbI3 perovskite film mixed with various 1-EC concentrations is significantly enhanced, which will promote the higher photocurrent accordingly.
Photoluminescence spectroscopy was utilized to evaluate the nonradioactive recombination loss in MAPbI3 (Fig. 3c, d and Fig. S10, ESI). The perovskite films were prepared on ZrO2/glass substrates. As summarized in Table S3 (ESI), the charge carrier lifetimes of the 10% 1-EC mixed MAPbI3 show a significantly enhanced τ1-EC = 29.33 ns compared with τMA = 5.89 ns of the pristine MAPbI3. The enhanced carrier lifetime can be attributed to the lower defect concentration and the increased crystallinity of perovskites. We also tested the transient photoluminescence spectra of different perovskites deposited on the TiO2/FTO substrates with the extracted parameters listed in Table S4 (ESI). MAPbI3 and MAPbI3 with 1-EC of 10% concentration give carrier lifetimes of 24 and 15.4 ns, respectively, indicating that the charge carrier extraction at the perovskite/TiO2 interface is more efficient with 1-EC ionic liquid. As shown in Fig. 3d and Fig. S8 (ESI), the enhanced PL intensity and the blue shifted peak position of MAPbI3 with 1-EC of different concentrations indicates that the nonradioactive recombination is significantly suppressed by the incorporation of 1-EC. The electrical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) result is shown in Fig. S10 (ESI). The value of the charge transfer resistance of MAPbI3 with 1-EC is smaller than the control sample while the recombination resistance is bigger, indicating a more efficient charge transfer process at the carbon/perovskite and TiO2/perovskite interface. The detailed parameters of the EIS results are shown in Table S5 (ESI).
Finally, we fabricate MPSCs using different perovskites by dripping the precursor solution directly on top of the porous scaffold. The detailed device parameters including short-circuit current (JSC), open-circuit voltage (VOC), fill factor (FF) and PCE are summarized in Table S6 (ESI). The J–V curves of the champion devices are displayed in Fig. 4a. With the mixing of 1-EC ionic liquid, both VOC and FF increase intensely, yielding a significantly enhanced PCE from 9.79% to 15.14%. The enhanced VOC and FF can be attributed to the significantly decreased defect concentration and improved charge transfer in the device. The enhanced JSC can be attributed to the compact morphology and complete filling with mixing 1-EC. As shown in Fig. 4b, the JSC integrated from the IPCE spectra for the control and 1-EC mixed devices is 18.69 and 20.6 mA cm−2 respectively, which is comparable to the ones measured from the J–V curves. Fig. 4c shows the steady-state efficiency measured at the maximum power point. The PCEs for MPSCs with and without 1-EC ionic liquid are 14.59% and 9.35%, respectively. To confirm the reproducibility for the MPSCs fabrication, the PCEs of 20 independently prepared PSCs were measured. The detailed results are shown in Table S7 (ESI). As shown in Fig. 4d, the PCEs of the 1-EC-free and 1-EC-containing PSCs are in the range of 7.23%–9.79% (average 8.6%) and 12.79%–15.14% (average 14.04%) respectively, and the PCE distribution is shown in Fig. S11 (ESI). The results indicate that the fabrication process of PSCs can be repeated facilely.
In addition, we have added 1-EC in another perovskite system using (5-AVA)XMA1−XPbI3 as perovskite and γ-butyrolactone as solvent, which is a classic component combination in MPSCs. The results presented in Fig. S12 and Table S8 (ESI) demonstrate a very similar behavior to those observed in MAPbI3 with DMF/DMSO, leading to improved PCE and enhanced charge transfer with 10% 1-EC addition (Table S9–S11, ESI). This opens up a new universal method of increasing the performance of MPSCs using different perovskite composites and solvent systems.
In summary, we investigated the effect of 1-EC on different perovskites and solvent systems in a printable MPSC. 1-EC effectively boosts fast nucleation and retards crystallization of perovskite. With the assistance of bonding interaction between the pyridine ring of 1-EC and lead ions, a reduced defect density for the perovskite film was obtained, accompanied by a longer carrier lifetime. Correspondingly, the overall PCE of the MPSCs prepared by mixing of 1-EC ionic liquid into the different precursor solutions is significantly enhanced. This study proposes a method to further improve the performance of perovskite-based photovoltaics.
The authors acknowledge financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 22075094, 12075303, 21702069 and 11675252) and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities. We thank the Analytical and Testing Center of Huazhong University of Science and Technology (HUST) and beamline BL14B1 at SSRF for providing the beam time.

There are no conflicts to declare.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental procedures, device fabrication details and characterization. See DOI: 10.1039/d1cc00169h
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021