 DOI: 10.1039/D0EE02164D
(Communication)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 4854-4861


Jaehoon
Chung
,

Seong Sik
Shin
,

Kyeongil
Hwang
,

Geunjin
Kim
,

Ki Woong
Kim
,

Da Seul
Lee
,

Wansun
Kim
,

Boo Soo
Ma
,

Young-Ki
Kim
,

Taek-Soo
Kim
 and 

Jangwon
Seo
*

Division of Advanced Materials, Korea Research Institute of Chemical Technology, 141 Gajeong-Ro, Yuseong-Gu, Daejeon 305-600, Korea. E-mail: jwseo@krict.re.kr

Department of Mechanical Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), 291, Daehak-ro, Yuseong-Gu, Daejeon 34141, Korea

Center Research Facilities, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), 50 UNIST-gil, Eonyang-eup, Ulju-gun, Ulsan 44919, Republic of Korea

Received
8th July 2020
, Accepted 22nd October 2020
First published on 22nd October 2020
A facile and low-temperature process to prepare planar perovskite solar cells (PSCs) has led to considerable progress in flexible solar cells toward high throughput production based on a roll-to-roll process. However, the performance of planar PSCs is still lower than that of mesoscopic PSCs using a high temperature process. Here, we report a new concept of a low temperature processed porous planar electron transport layer (ETL) inspired by a mesoporous structure for improving the performance of flexible devices. The structurally and energetically designed porous planar ETL induced the formation of a high quality perovskite and a preferred band alignment, resulting in improved charge collection efficiency in a fabricated device. Through the porous planar ETL, we achieved a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 20.7% with a certified efficiency of 19.9% on a flexible substrate, which is the highest PCE reported to date. In addition, for the first time, we succeed in fabricating a large area flexible module with the porous planar ETL, demonstrating a PCE of 15.5%, 12.9% and 11.8% on an aperture area of 100 cm2, 225 cm2 and 400 cm2, respectively. We believe that this strategy will pave a new way for realizing highly efficient flexible PSCs.

Unprecedented developments of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have been achieved in recent decades, both for their power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) exceeding ∼25% and their long-term stability. However, most of the record efficiencies of PSCs are acquired from the device architecture including a mesoscopic scaffold, which is fabricated at high temperature and is not suitable for large scale manufacturing. For these reasons, low temperature processed PSCs with a competitive performance to the traditional PCSs are essential for realizing commercial PCSs at industrial level. Thus, we suggest a facile design concept of a low temperature processed electron transport layer (ETL) inspired by mesoporous structure for developing flexible PSCs with improved efficiency. This porous planar structure of ETL serves multi-functions: improving the crystallinity of the perovskite layer, generating a proper band alignment and enhancing charge collection efficiency. Flexible PSCs with a porous planar ETL exhibit a PCE of 20.7%, which is the highest PCE of flexible PSCs reported so far. This approach is also successfully extended into a fabrication of flexible sub-modules with a large area up to 400 cm2. We believe that this design concept of ETL will open a new way for realizing highly efficient flexible perovskite solar cells and sub-modules.


Since perovskite solar cells (PSCs) were first reported in 2009, many researchers have made significant progress in the PSC field, achieving power conversion efficiency (PCE) of more than 25%. In particular, the evolution of the structure of PSCs has contributed to strong improvement in their performance, and further enabled extension into flexible devices. In the initial stage, the PSCs were based on the classic mesoporous structure of a dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC) with a compact hole blocking layer, where the perovskite absorber is self-assembled within the pores of a thick TiO2 layer formed by sintering nanoparticles (NPs) at a temperature above 500 °C. With technological progress, the device architecture has gradually moved from a sensitized mesoporous structure to a pillared structure, which currently has been developed into a bilayered structure consisting of a thin mesoporous layer (filled with perovskites) and a perovskite capping layer. This device structure is favorable in terms of facilitating electron extraction by improved surface contact originating from the mesoporous structure of TiO2, and harvesting more light from the capping dense layer of the perovskite. In this configuration, more carriers are generated on the perovskite near mesoporous TiO2 than on the perovskite near the hole transporting layer (HTL). Therefore, rather than the electrons, the holes generated on the perovskite near ETL have to travel a longer distance through the perovskite layer to reach the HTL. For this reason, this structure has more benefits for formamidinium (FA) lead iodide perovskite with a long hole diffusion length, and balanced charge extraction can thereby be expected. Owing to these advantages, many PSCs using a TiO2 mesoporous layer show the highest efficiency, exceeding 24%, among the reported PSCs.

Unlike mesoporous TiO2, colloidal NPs such as ZnO and SnO2 are prepared at low temperature and are employed as an electron transport layer (ETL) in a planar structure, demonstrating remarkable potential for flexible PSCs. In particular, the use of small SnO2 colloidal NPs (below 5 nm) has attracted huge attention as ETLs for flexible PSCs due to its excellent band alignment with a perovskite absorbing layer, and superior charge extraction capability. With the help of full optimization of each interface in the devices, the PCEs of the flexible PSCs based on SnO2 have significantly increased. However, despite many advances, their PCEs are still less than 20% because a few key issues related to the SnO2 ETL remain unresolved. For example, the inherent poor crystallinity and the surface defects of low temperature processed SnO2 induce short diffusion length in spite of superior electron mobility, thereby reducing the electron collection property in devices. In particular, the performance of PSCs is strongly affected by the thickness of the SnO2 layer owing to short diffusion length. When the thickness of this layer is greater than 30 nm, the performance of PSCs significantly decreases due to increased series resistance. Therefore, complete surface coverage of the thin SnO2 layer with a thickness less than 30 nm is necessary for preventing leakage current and for effective hole-blocking. However, uniform deposition of the SnO2 layer with well-controlled thickness becomes a major concern for the fabrication of large-area flexible modules and for their potential applications such as indoor light illumination harvesters (i.e. self-powered sensors and wireless electronic devices).
To enhance the blocking effect, a bi-layered structure of ETLs was recently proposed; the combination of crystalline SnO2 colloids with a thin and compact film of TiO2 or other sol–gel metal oxides has been widely employed to avoid unnecessary leakage of the current at the interfaces of ETL/perovskite. Such bi-layered ETL structures based on SnO2 investigated thus far have the form of thin films by successive layer-by-layer coating, which are vastly different from the conventional compact and mesoporous oxide ETL in typical mesoscopic n–i–p devices. Many studies have pointed to the critical role of the mesoporous layer as the bottom substrate in achieving a high quality perovskite layer during the film preparation using the anti-solvent dripping method. In general, a mesoporous layer with a rough surface and pores can induce more air pockets when the perovskite precursor solution is loaded onto the mesoporous layer, yielding a composite solid–liquid-interface (see Scheme S1, ESI). The resultant composite interface can induce a more hydrophobic surface, thereby yielding a higher contact angle, and thus lower surface energy, as compared to a flat layer. The lower surface energy can enlarge the grain size during heterogeneous nucleation and growth of the perovskite layer. Therefore, introducing a porous layer into the planar structure can be a good solution for improving the performance of flexible devices.
In this work, for the first time, we report an energy-level engineered porous planar oxide ETL for efficient flexible solar cells and modules. By deliberately choosing oxide ETLs with different energy levels through the proposed porous planar structure, we attempted to maximize the charge collection efficiency and minimize the carrier recombination loss at each interface (TCO/ETL and ETL/perovskite). Finally, we extended our proposed ETL structure into flexible photovoltaic devices and successfully achieved power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of 20.7% and 15.45% on a flexible solar cell (with aperture area of 0.1 cm2) and sub-module (with an aperture area of 100 cm2), respectively, marking the highest PCEs among flexible perovskite solar cells and modules to the best of our knowledge.

A one-step deposition method using the supersaturation principle (i.e., the anti-solvent dripping method) is commonly employed to obtain highly crystalline and uniform perovskite films. Interestingly, the morphological characteristics of these perovskite films are found to be significantly influenced by the surface property of the bottom substrate (Fig. S1 and Table S1, ESI). As shown in Fig. S1 (ESI), the use of a fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) substrate with a rougher surface enabled the formation of a higher crystalline perovskite film with larger grains, as compared to an indium-doped tin oxide (ITO) substrate with a compact and flat surface. Therefore, as a proof-of-concept, we first investigated the influence of metal oxide NPs with different sizes on the perovskite film quality. Interestingly, as shown in Fig. S2 (ESI), increasing the particle size (∼20 nm) led to a rough-textured NP film with increased porosity, which induced larger-grained perovskite films. This indicates that the surface property of the ETL substrate may lead to better crystallization of the perovskites. This strategy therefore should be extended to the fabrication of flexible solar cells for further improving the device performance. In most cases showing high efficiencies in PSCs, the conventional n–i–p devices have compact and mesoporous TiO2 structures used for rigid substrates (see Scheme S1, ESI). These observations motivated us to design a porous planar structure for the ETL of efficient flexible solar cells, which could be composed of two kinds of NPs with 2 nm-size and 20 nm-size, for a compact layer (of ∼15 nm) and a porous layer (of ∼150 nm), respectively (see Scheme S1, ESI, and Fig. 1). This combination of two oxides is expected to have optimized band alignment for inducing fast electron extraction through the ETL and a high built-in-potential at the junction of the ETL and the perovskites. As a model system for embodying this porous planar ETL, we employed SnO2 NPs with 2 nm-size and Zn2SnO4 (ZSO) NPs with 20 nm-size as a compact layer and porous layer, respectively. Fig. 1a schematically illustrates this band alignment for the designed ETLs where this band diagram is estimated from ultraviolet photoluminescence spectroscopy (UPS). The estimated conduction band edge and work function are 4.13 eV and 4.14 eV for the porous planar layer, and 4.24 eV and 4.31 eV for the planar layer, respectively (Fig. S3 and Table S2, ESI). The smaller work function of the porous planar layer can increase the built-in potential (Vbi) at the ETL/perovskite. Thus, we expect that this optimized band alignment may facilitate better charge extraction probability at each interface. Additionally, we performed high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HR-TEM) and scanning transmission electron microscopy bright field (STEM-BF, Fig. S4, ESI) for the planar and porous planar layers prepared by the focused ion beam (FIB) technique. As shown in Fig. 1b, the planar layer composed of particles smaller than 5 nm is dense with a thickness of 15 nm, while the porous planar layer composed of particles larger than 20 nm is considerably porous with a thickness of 150 nm. Additionally, the energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) results in Fig. 1b show that Sn (red) is densely distributed, but Zn (green) is sparsely distributed, which further supports that the SnO2 layer is compact and the ZSO layer is relatively porous. Based on the designed porous planar structure, we fabricated devices consisting of an ITO glass/planar layer or porous planar structure/FA-based mixed perovskite/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au (Fig. 1c). From a cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image, we can confirm that a dense and uniform perovskite layer is deposited on top of the porous planar ETL. Fig. 1d shows photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) curves for the planar and porous planar ETL based PSCs. The porous planar ETL based PSC shows an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 1.18 V, a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 24.45 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 80.2%, giving an overall PCE of 23.1% (Fig. S5 and Table S3, ESI), whereas the planar SnO2 based PSC shows an overall PCE of 21% with a VOC of 1.14 V, a JSC of 22.9 mA cm−2, and a FF of 80.5%. Additionally, the average PCE for 40 cells based on porous planar ETL is 22.41 ± 0.47%, which is higher than that of cells based on planar SnO2 (20.31 ± 0.43%) (Fig. S6 and Tables S4, S5, ESI). The superior performance of the porous planar ETL based PSCs is mainly attributed to the higher VOC and JSC than the planar SnO2 based PSCs. In particular, it is noted that a JSC of over 24 mA cm−2 is achieved in the porous planar ETL based devices under the same processing conditions, which is the main factor for achieving high efficiency of low temperature processed PSCs. Additionally, we further examined the photostability for planar and porous planar PSCs under 1 Sun condition (45 °C, 100 mW cm−2) without a cooling system and a UV cut filter. Generally, planar SnO2 based PSCs show a relatively good photostability under operating conditions, but they suffer from an abrupt drop of PCE within the initial 24 hours, often called initial burn-in degradation. Interestingly, this initial drop in our porous planar PSCs is relatively mitigated such that ∼80% of the original efficiency is maintained after 120 h-irradiation (Fig. S7, ESI).

To analyze the effect of the porous planar ETL layer on the formation of the perovskite film, we first carried out SEM and atomic force microscopy (AFM) for the planar layer and porous planar layer, together with perovskite layers deposited on each layer. As shown in Fig. 2a and e, the planar layer composed of particles below 5 nm is considerably compact and flat, while the porous planar layer shows a relatively rough morphology with some pores. From the corresponding 3D topographical images (Fig. 2e and f), a much rougher surface is clearly observed for the porous planar layer and the calculated root mean square (RMS. Rq) roughness is eight times higher than that of the planar layer (i.e., 13.4 and 1.66 nm of Rq for the porous planar and planar layer, respectively), indicating that the porous planar layer has higher surface area. We further compared the morphology of perovskite films deposited on the planar layer and porous planar layer, respectively. As shown in Fig. 2c and d, the perovskite deposited on the porous planar layer has larger grain size than the perovskite deposited on the planar layer. The average grain size of the perovskites is 570 nm and 260 nm on the porous planar and planar ETLs, respectively (Fig. S8 and Table S6, ESI). Additionally, the perovskite deposited on the porous planar layer has a higher RMS value than that on the planar layer, which supports that the former has larger grain size. As mentioned earlier in Scheme S1 (ESI), substrate wettability and perovskite grain size are closely related to nucleation and the growth mechanism (Fig. 2i). According to the heterogeneous nucleation theory, nuclei with low density are produced at the very beginning of the nucleation step on the hydrophobic substrate, and they are then expanded and coarsened to larger grains during the thermal annealing step. However, if the substrate becomes superhydrophobic, the perovskite films are not sufficiently packed to be interconnected through the thermal annealing and, as a result, deposit with numerous pinholes. In contrast, when the substrate becomes too hydrophilic, the film uniformity would increase, but it grows with small grain size due to the high density of nuclei. In brief, as the coating solution is loaded onto the substrate, the substrate should be designed to adequately compromise hydrophilicity and hydrophobicity to satisfy heterogeneous nucleation and uniformity at once. According to Fig. S9 (ESI), the planar layer showed a superhydrophilic property with a low contact angle (θ = 7°) induced by the surface hydroxyl group (Fig. S10 and Table S7, ESI). Meanwhile, the porous planar layer showed a large contact angle of θ = 26.5°. Typically, being different from the smooth surface of a planar layer, a rough surface that has micro- and nanoscopic architecture contains air pockets inside the porous structure. Even though the porous planar layer has as many surface hydroxyl groups as the planar layer, the air gap inside the pores repels the liquid and renders the surface less hydrophilic than the flat surface. Namely, we hypothesize that the porous planar ETL not only has sufficient wettability to deposit without pinholes but also accelerates heterogeneous nucleation encouraged by the porous structure.
To obtain better insight into the nucleation and crystallization process of the perovskite on each film, we compare SEM images of perovskite films annealed at 100 °C for 1 to 10 min in sequence. Even at the early stage of heat treatment, known as the nucleation process, the perovskite on the porous planar structure appears to have higher crystallinity and larger grain size than that on the planar structure (Fig. S11, ESI). Furthermore, faster grain expansion occurred on the porous planar sample. This reveals that the porous planar ETL is more beneficial than the planar ETL in terms of nucleation and crystal growth of the perovskite. We thus anticipate that the enlarged perovskite layer on the porous planar layer will have a positive effect on the quality of the perovskite film.
To analyze the quality of the perovskite films (i.e., the charge trap-state densities) deposited on the planar layer and porous planar layer, we conducted space-charge-limited current (SCLC) measurements of the corresponding perovskite films after fabricating electron-only devices of ITO/(porous planar vs. planar ETL)/FA based perovskite/PCBM (Fig. 3a)/Au. Typical three region I–V curves are observed in both devices in a log–log representation. In the low-bias region, the current density is proportional to the voltage, which reflects an ohmic contact with the electrode. With increasing bias, the current density increased abruptly, corresponding to a trap-filled limit (TFL) current. We calculated the trap filled limit voltage (VTFL) and trap density (Nt) using the following equation (eqn (1)).
(1)
where
ε0, ε, e, and L represent the vacuum permittivity, the relative dielectric constant of the perovskite, the electron charge, and the thickness of the perovskite film, respectively. The perovskite film on the porous planar layer has lower trap density (Ntrap (porous planar film) = 2.07 × 1016 cm−3) than that on the planar layer (Ntrap (planar SnO2 film) = 3.32 × 1016 cm−3). This indicates that its rough morphology with pores can suppress the formation of defects when the perovskite film is deposited using the anti-solvent dripping method. We speculate that heterogeneous nucleation dominantly occurred on the porous planar ETL and induced a high quality perovskite film with increased grain size and a reduced grain boundary, which is known to be a defect site. Additionally, we evaluated the junction property of the ETL/perovskite because it strongly affects the charge extraction and output voltage in devices. First, capacitance–voltage (C–V) measurement for each device was performed, and their Mott–Schottky (M–S) plots (C−2vs. V) are presented in Fig. 3b. According to a previous report,Vbi is determined by the x-intercept of the linear regime in the M–S plot. From the M–S plots, we confirm that the porous planar device has a larger Vbi, compared to the planar device. The porous planar layer has a more negative Fermi level than the planar layer, and thus the insertion of the porous ZSO layer can enlarge the Vbi at the ETL/perovskite interface. Generally, a large Vbi can effectively increase the separation of the photogenerated carriers and extend the depletion region, resulting in efficient suppression of back electron transfer from the ETL to the perovskite and therefore contributing to large output voltage of the solar cell. Moreover, the time-resolved photoluminescence (TR-PL) results (Fig. 3c) show that the porous planar layer/perovskite has faster lifetime decay compared to the planar SnO2 layer/perovskite, indicating much more facile electron transfer from the perovskite to the porous planar ETL. The rough morphology of the porous planar layer with many pores can provide a large specific surface area. Thus, the increased contact area with the perovskite and the enhanced driving force of photo-generated carriers induced by the large Vbi can lead to effective electron transfer from the perovskite to the porous planar layer.

We further confirmed the effect of the ETL morphology on the electron dynamics of the planar layer and the porous planar layer based PSCs by transient photovoltage/photocurrent (TPV/TPC). As shown in the TPC results (Fig. 3d), the porous planar PSC shows faster decay than the planar PSC, indicating more effective charge extraction in the porous planar based device. This result can be ascribed to more effective electron transfer from the perovskite to the porous planar layer as well as improved crystallinity and enlarged grain size of the perovskite layer on the porous planar ETL. In the TPV measurement (Fig. 3e), the porous planar PSC show slower decay than the planar PSC, indicating that the former has a longer carrier lifetime. Increased lifetime results from the reduced trap density in the perovskite layer and the enhanced Vbi between the porous planar ETL and the perovskite layer. Based on TPC and TPV, we can conclude that the charge collection efficiency in the device increases with the porous planar ETL. Moreover, we measured the internal quantum efficiency (IQE) to further support the charge collection ability of the devices (Fig. 3f). Since the IQE excludes the light harvesting term, it only indicates the charge collection of the device. As shown in the IQE results, the IQE of the porous planar device is greater than that of the device based on the planar devices. This further demonstrates the superior charge collecting properties of porous planar ETL, which can be ascribed to the enhancement of perovskite quality and efficient electron transfer at perovskite/ETL interface. The improved charge collection capability of the porous planar devices resulted in higher external quantum efficiency and thus improved JSC.
We attempted to apply our porous planar structure as an ETL to flexible solar cells using an ITO/PEN substrate. Fig. 4a shows the J–V curve of the flexible PSCs based on the porous planar and planar ETL, respectively. The champion flexible device based on the porous planar ETL exhibits a PCE of 20.75% (VOC = 1.19 V, JSC = 21.9 mA cm−2, and FF = 79.5%), while the planar ETL based flexible device shows the PCE of 17.5% (VOC = 1.09 V, JSC = 21.1 mA cm−2, and FF = 74%). Furthermore, we obtained a certified PCE of 19.9% for the porous planar ETL based PSC (VOC = 1.19 V, JSC = 21.9 cm2, and FF = 76.3%) (Fig. S12, ESI), which is the highest record PCE and the first certification for a flexible device to date (Table S8, ESI). As shown in the histogram of 22 flexible devices (Fig. S13 and Table S9, ESI), flexible devices with the porous planar ETL show superior reproducibility with an average PCE of 19.6 ± 0.69%. Additionally, we fabricated a large-area flexible sub-module over a 10 × 10 cm2 area via angle-blade coating (solution-shearing) and a laser scribing method. The flexible sub-module has 15 cells interconnected in series, where three typical patterning lines (P1, P2, and P3) are scribed with a nanosecond laser scribing machine and each line has 130.512, 130.512, and 164.445 μm spacing for P1, P2, and P3, respectively, delivering a high geometric fill factor (GFF) of 90% (Fig. 4c). As shown in Fig. 4b, the flexible sub-module with the porous planar structure shows an outstanding PCE of 13.8% with a 100 cm2 aperture area (VOC = 15.30 V, JSC = 1.33 mA cm−2, and FF = 68.2%); an area of 100 cm2 is the first demonstration in a flexible PSC. Notably, the flexible sub-module with the porous planar ETL exhibits higher FF and VOC values than the planar ETL sub-module (PCE = 11.8%, VOC = 14.3 V, JSC = 1.32 mA cm−2, and FF = 62.0%). Even though well-dispersed SnO2 colloidal NPs can be coated on a flat substrate without pinholes in a unit cell area (<1 in2), coverage of a large area (>100 cm2) of the jagged surface induced after the laser scribing process cannot be guaranteed. This incomplete coverage may allow for direct contact of the perovskite with the ITO electrode, giving rise to the lower FF and VOC. As shown in the P1 line of the SEM image (Fig. 4c (A1 and A2)), the non-etched area (i.e. active area, A1) is fully covered by SnO2 NPs, while the edge of the patterned ITO is intermittently not covered by SnO2 NPs with some cracks due to the difference in the height level between the non-etched area (A1) and the etched area (A2). When using the ITO/plastic substrate, the thickness of the ITO is much larger than that on the glass substrate, which can lead to a greater height difference, and thus incomplete coverage of the substrate. The incomplete coverage can cause direct contact with the perovskite, deteriorating the shunt resistance (Rsh) (i.e. 1.48 kΩ cm−2) in the planar ETL based flexible sub-module. In contrast, the porous layer with a thickness of 150 nm successfully supports coverage over the entire area, regardless of the roughness and thickness of the ITO (Fig. 4c (B1 and B2)), and improves the Rsh (5.04 kΩ cm−2) and FF in the porous planar based flexible sub-modules. This finding is supported by the dark J–V curves, which exhibit a significantly higher dark current in the flexible sub-module based on the planar layer (Fig. S14, ESI). On the consideration of the previous literatures reporting efficient flexible perovskite sub-modules with respect to the materials, the deposition method of the perovskite film, and laser patterning process, we believe that our approach using porous planar ETL plays a key role in achieving high efficiency of flexible sub-modules.
Through the optimization process, we improved the PCE of the flexible sub-module up to a PCE of 15.5% and 17.5% on an aperture area of 100 cm2 and an active area of 90 cm2, respectively, which is the highest PCE among all flexible modules reported to date regardless of module size (Fig. S15, S16 and Table S10, ESI). Furthermore, we tried to fabricate 225 cm2 and 400 cm2 flexible modules consisting of 22 cells and 42 cells interconnected in series (Fig. 4d and Fig. S15, S16, ESI). Surprisingly, we obtained an outstanding PCE of 12.9% and 14.3% on an aperture area of 225 cm2 and an active area of 202.5 cm2 and PCE of 11.8% and 13.1% on an aperture area of 400 cm2 and an active area of 360 cm2, respectively (Fig. 4d, Fig. S16 and Table S10, ESI).
In order to examine the mechanical stability of the flexible sub-module, we performed bending tests over 1000 cycles with a bending radius of 10 mm and inside and outside folding directions for the 100 cm2 flexible sub-module (Fig. 4f, Fig. S17 and Movies S1, S2, ESI). After bending test of 1000 cycles with inside folding direction, gold counter electrode is found to be exfoliated from the module due to poor adhesion between gold and HTM so that the module degraded less than 15% of the initial PCE. However, after bending test of 1000 cycles with outside folding, the module perfectly maintains its original PCE. It indicates a good bending durability of the porous planar ETL. These results demonstrate that the porous planar ETL based on SnO2 NPs and ZSO NPs is a good candidate ETL for developing efficient, durable, and flexible perovskite solar cells.

In conclusion, we developed a new type of porous planar ETL to improve the performance of flexible perovskite solar cells and modules. The porous planar ETL was inspired by the conventional mesoscopic n–i–p structures, and was designed structurally and energetically for facilitating electron extraction. With the state of the art flexible PSCs using the porous planar ETL, we achieved a champion PCE of 20.7% with a certified PCE of 19.9%, which is the highest efficiency reported to date and the first certification in flexible PSCs. In addition, for the first time, we extended the designed ETL to large area flexible perovskite solar modules (100 cm2, 225 cm2 and 400 cm2). The perovskite solar modules using the porous planar ETL showed a PCE of 15.5%, 12.9% and 11.8% on an aperture area of 100 cm2, 225 cm2 and 400 cm2, respectively. We believe that our porous planar ETL can provide a new pathway for the commercialization of high throughput and high performance flexible PSCs.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by a grant from the Korea Research Institute of Chemical Technology (KRICT), Republic of Korea (KS2022-10 and KS2041-00), the Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning (KETEP), and the Ministry of Trade Industry & Energy (MOTIE) of the Republic of Korea (No. 20183010014470), and by a grant from the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT & Future Planning (MSIP) of Korea (NRF-2016M3A6A7945503). For fabricating perovskite solar modules with an aperture area of 400 cm2, laser scribing process was supported by Unitest Inc.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ee02164d
‡ These authors contributed equally.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020