 DOI: 10.1039/C9TC03301G
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 11142-11151


Yongqiang
Shi
,

Yumin
Tang
,

Kun
Yang
,

Minchao
Qin
,

Yang
Wang
,

Huiliang
Sun
,

Mengyao
Su
,

Xinhui
Lu
,

Ming
Zhou
* and 

Xugang
Guo
*

School of Materials Science and Engineering, Southwest Petroleum University and State Key Laboratory of Oil and Gas Reservoir Geology and Exploitation Engineering, Chengdu, Sichuan 610500, China. E-mail: mr.zhouming@163.com

Department of Materials Science and Engineering and The Shenzhen Key Laboratory for Printed Organic Electronics, Southern University of Science and Technology (SUSTech), No. 1088, Xueyuan Road, Shenzhen, Guangdong 518055, China. E-mail: guoxg@sustech.edu.cn

Department of Physics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, New Territories 999077, Hong Kong

Received
19th June 2019
, Accepted 11th August 2019
First published on 13th August 2019
Two new wide bandgap copolymers PTzTIBDTT and PTzTIBDTT-S based on thiazolothienyl imide (TzTI) and benzodithiophene with a distinct side chain were synthesized and characterized for applications in polymer solar cells (PSCs). The single crystal of the TzTI model compound showed a highly planar backbone with a close π-stacking distance of 3.65 Å, a desired structural feature for efficient charge transport. Moreover, the TzTI incorporation can trigger intramolecular noncovalent N⋯S interactions to yield a self-planarized polymer backbone, which should be beneficial for achieving ordered molecular packing and efficient charge transport. Due to its strong electron-withdrawing effect, the incorporation of the TzTI unit largely lowers the polymer HOMO levels to −5.65 and −5.69 eV for PTzTIBDTT and PTzTIBDTT-S, respectively. The PSCs containing the PTzTIBDTT:PC71BM active layer exhibited a promising power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 8.00% with a large Voc of 0.90 V. To the best of our knowledge, the PCE is among the highest values for fullerene PSCs based on an imide-containing polymer donor. This work not only demonstrates that thiazolothienyl imide is a promising building block for constructing high-performance wide bandgap photovoltaic polymer semiconductors, but also reveals that a noncovalent N⋯S conformational lock is an effective molecular design approach for enabling polymer semiconductors with a planar backbone for efficient PSCs.

Organic semiconducting polymers have attracted significant attention in both academia and industry communities, recently, due to their advantages for the fabrication of light-weight and mechanically flexible optoelectronic devices based on cost-effective solution-processable techniques. Thanks to innovative polymer design strategies together with device engineering, great progress has been achieved in the last decade, leading to promising charge carrier mobilities in organic field-effect transistors (OFETs) and remarkable power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) in polymer solar cells (PSCs). A great amount of effort has been dedicated to the development of narrow bandgap (NBG) polymer semiconductors for enhancing the light harvesting ability and maximizing the short-circuit current density (Jsc) of their PSC devices in the community. However, it is very challenging to attain a large open-circuit voltage (Voc) for NBG polymers due to the trade-off between Jsc and Voc. Compared to NBG polymers, the exploration of high-performance wide bandgap (WBG) polymers has lagged behind, and they typically showed low device performance in fullerene-based PSCs. In fact, most of the WBG polymers are based on donor–acceptor (D–A) type structures, where benzodithiophene (BDT) is usually adopted as the donor unit with a suitable electron-deficient moiety as the acceptor co-unit. The optoelectronic properties of these D–A type WBG polymers can be effectively modulated, making them good candidates as the third components in ternary solar cells or for constructing tandem solar cells with NBG polymers to achieve complementary absorption. Moreover, WBG polymers have achieved a great success in nonfullerene type PSCs when blended with small molecular acceptors, particularly fused-ring electron acceptors (FREAs), which typically feature a narrow bandgap. Therefore, it is still highly desired to design and explore WBG donor polymers for various types of organic solar cells due to their complementary absorption to increase Jscs and the potential to attain higher Vocs.

Compared to limited efforts and success on the design and synthesis of donor units in D–A type WBG polymers, which are dominated by benzodithiophene and its derivatives, there seems to be great room for developing new acceptor co-units to construct WBG polymers with fine-tuned optoelectronic properties. With respect to this, imide-functionalized arenes or heteroarenes, such as phthalimide (PhI), thieno[3,4-c]pyrrole-4,6-dione (TPD, a.k.a. thiophene imide, Fig. 1a), and bithiophene imide (BTI, Fig. 1b), are widely used acceptor building blocks for constructing efficient electron-donating polymer semiconductors. Among them, BTI is regarded as an exceptional building block due to its highly planar framework, compact geometry with minimized steric hindrance, close π–π stacking, and good solubilizing capability. A BTI-based polymer as a donor material for PSCs was first reported by Zhou et al., showing an encouraging PCE of 5.50% in inverted cells. In order to further improve the photovoltaic performance, the BTI unit was then copolymerized with a terthiophene unit (3T), boosting the PCE of the resulting polymer (PBTI3T) based PSC devices to >8.00% with a remarkable FF (>76%) in PSCs. However, polymer PBTI3T shows a high degree of backbone torsion with large dihedral angles between the BTI moiety and the adjacent thiophene units, which may adversely affect the polymer chain packing in the solid state and result in deteriorated device performances. This issue can be tackled by introducing specific spacers or groups which can trigger intramolecular noncovalent interactions and yield a self-planarized polymeric backbone. Recently, Yang et al. reported a novel D–A copolymer PBTI3T-S by replacing the alkyl side chains on the two adjacent thiophene moieties in the 3T units with a decylthio chain, which could result in noncovalent S⋯S interactions between the BTI and thiophene moieties and thus yield a more planar backbone conformation. In our previous work we have developed a strategy of incorporating alkoxy-functionalized thiophenes into polymer semiconducting materials to introduce intramolecular noncovalent S⋯O interactions, leading to a self-planarized polymer backbone, and the polymers show promising device performances in both OFETs and PSCs. The results demonstrate the great success of intramolecular noncovalent interactions for developing high-performance polymer semiconductors. Despite the high backbone planarity induced by noncovalent interactions, the strong electron-donating alkoxy groups result in an elevated HOMO energy level of the resulting polymers, resulting in a decreased Voc value in PSCs. Therefore, to realize the deep-positioned HOMO level while maintaining a good backbone planarity remains a challenge in developing high-performance WBG polymer donors.
Taking advantage of imide-functionalized arenes due to their strong electron-withdrawing ability and high backbone planarity, we devised two imide-functionalized thiazole based BTI derivatives, DTzTI and BTzI, recently. It has been well known that the replacement of sp2 carbon (CH–) by a more electron negative imine nitrogen (N–) within an aromatic unit can increase the electron affinity of the resulting (hetero)arenes. The higher electronegativity of nitrogen (versus that of carbon) and its incorporation into the polymeric backbone resulted in deeper-positioned energy levels of both the HOMO and LUMO of thiazole-based polymer semiconductors than those of thiophene analogues. In addition, the N atom on thiazole can result in reduced steric hindrance due to the omission of the hydrogen atom and also promote intramolecular noncovalent N⋯S interactions (Fig. 1c), which are beneficial to the backbone planarity, molecular packing, and hence charge transport. Driven by the excellent device performance of thiazole imide polymers in OFETs, in this work, we synthesized and characterized two new WBG conjugated copolymers PTzTIBDTT and PTzTIBDTT-S, in which the thiophene-flanked thiazolothienyl imide (TzTI, Fig. 1c) was copolymerized with two BDT units having distinct alkylthio and alkylthiothionyl side chains. Attributed to the introduction of thiazole, the two polymers showed deep-positioned HOMO levels of −5.65 and −5.69 eV for PTzTIBDTT and PTzTIBDTT-S, respectively. As a result, a PCE up to 8.00% with a high Voc (0.90 eV) was realized in the PTzTIBDTT:PC71BM-based inverted bulk heterojunction (BHJ) PSCs. The results indicate that TzTI is a promising building block for constructing wide bandgap polymer semiconductors for efficient PSCs.

The synthetic route to the new polymers PTzTIBDTT and PTzTIBDTT-S is straightforward as depicted in Scheme 1. A dibrominated TzTI building block was prepared according to the reported procedure and distannylated BDT co-monomers with a distinct side chain were purchased from Suna Tech Inc. (Suzhou, China) and used directly. π-Spacers were widely used in donor–acceptor type co-polymers to promote the self-assembly of materials and increase the charge carrier mobility, and hence a suitable π-spacer was introduced into the polymer backbone by flanking a 3-dodecyl substituted thiophene unit at the two ends of the TzTI unit to afford building block TzTIT. It was found that the introduction of π-spacer could trigger dynamic noncovalent interaction between thiophene and thiazole units, increasing the solubility in solution and improving the planarity of the backbone.

Both TzTIT-based copolymers PTzTIBDTT and PTzTIBDTT-S were prepared via a Stille coupling based polycondensation using tris(dibenzylideneacetone)dipalladium(0) (Pd2(dba)3) as the catalyst and toluene as the solvent. After polymerization, the product polymers were end-capped with mono-functionalized thiophenes, followed by Soxhlet extraction with methanol, acetone, hexane, DCM, chloroform and chlorobenzene to remove low molecular weight fractions and impurities. The final 1,2-dichlorobenzene (DCB) fractions were collected and re-precipitated into methanol to afford the final polymers, which were used for material characterization and device fabrication. All the polymers exhibited good solubility in DCB, and the number average molecular weights (Mns) and polydispersity indices (PDIs) of both polymers were measured using high-temperature gel permeation chromatography (HT-GPC) at 150 °C with 1,2,4-trichlorobenzene as the eluent. As summarized in Table 1, PTzTIBDTT has an Mn of 84 kDa with a PDI of 2.2, and PTzTIBDTT-S shows an Mn of 67 kDa with a PDI of 2.0.
Polymer

M
n
 (kDa)
PDI

λ
max
 (nm) solution

λ
max
 (nm) film

λ
onset (nm) film

E
optg
HOMO
LUMO

a Measured from GPC versus polystyrene standard; trichlorobenzene as the eluent at 150 °C.
b Dilute polymer solution in o-dichlorobenzene.
c Absorption spectra of the pristine film cast from 5 mg mL−1 dichlorobenzene solution.
d Optical bandgap estimated from the absorption onset of the as-cast polymer film using the equation: Eoptg = 1240/λonset (eV).
e 
E
HOMO = −e(Eonsetox + 4.80) eV, and Eonsetox determined electrochemically using the Fc/Fc+ internal standard.
f 
E
LUMO = EHOMO + Eoptg.

PTzTIBDTT
84
2.2
597
601
647
1.91
−5.65
−3.74
PTzTIBDTT-S
67
2.0
591
601
646
1.91
−5.69
−3.78

The thermal stability of PTzTIBDTT and PTzTIBDTT-S polymers was probed by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA). As shown in Fig. S13 (ESI), both polymers exhibited a thermal decomposition temperature (Td, defined as the temperature with a 5% weight loss) over 300 °C, indicating good thermal stabilities of these two thiazolothienyl imide-based polymers, which should ensure device fabrication and optimization over a wide range. Based on the differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) thermograms, no obvious exotherm or endotherm peaks were observed for both polymers PTzTIBDTT and PTzTIBDTT-S in the temperature range from 50 to 300 °C, revealing the absence of thermal-induced phase transitions, which likely indicates a low degree of crystallinity of both polymers.


The optical properties of these thiazolothienyl imide-based copolymers PTzTIBDTT and PTzTIBDTT-S in o-dichlorobenzene solution and film states were investigated by UV-vis absorption spectroscopy. As shown in Fig. 2a and summarized in Table 1, both polymers exhibit structured absorption characteristics in the range of 500–630 nm with a pronounced absorption shoulder around 600 nm in solution, indicative of the strong aggregation of these TzTI-based polymers. In comparison to solutions, very similar absorption with a slightly red-shifted absorption peak was observed for polymer films, which should be ascribed to the closer packing of polymer chains in the solid state. The comparable absorption in solution and the film further corroborates the strong aggregation of these two polymers in solution, which might originate from the fused TzTI and BDT structure together with intramolecular non-covalent N⋯S interactions in these thiazole-containing copolymers, leading to a planar polymer backbone. Based on the absorption onsets of the as-cast polymer films, the optical bandgaps of both PTzTIBDTT and PTzTIBDTT-S were estimated to be ∼1.91 eV.


The electrochemical properties of the thiazole-based polymer films were probed by cyclic voltammetry (CV) with a three-electrode cell using 0.1 M tetra(n-butyl) ammonium hexafluorophosphate (n-Bu4NPF6) as the supporting electrolyte in anhydrous acetonitrile under a N2 atmosphere. A platinum plate coated with a thin polymer film, a platinum wire, and a Ag/AgCl were used as the work, counter, and reference electrodes, respectively. As shown in Fig. 2b, both polymers show pronounced oxidation peaks, indicative of their p-type character. The HOMO energy levels of PTzTIBDTT and PTzTIBDTT-S were calculated from the onset potential of the oxidation peak, which are −5.65 and −5.69 eV (Table 1), respectively. The LUMO energy levels were found to be −3.74 and −3.78 eV for PTzTIBDTT and PTzTIBDTT-S, respectively, derived from the HOMO values and optical bandgaps of the polymer films (Table 1). The HOMOs of both polymers were lower than those of the typically reported polymer donor materials used in PSCs, which should not only be beneficial for achieving high Vocs but also for attaining improved oxidative stability of the polymers. Please note that the introduction of electron-deficient thiazole into the polymer main chains lowers the HOMO level by ∼0.20 eV compared to the BTI based analogues. Hence the replacement of thiophene with thiazole can effectively downshift both the HOMO and LUMO levels of the polymers PTzTIBDTT and PTzTIBDTT-S. The HOMO/LUMO levels obtained from the CV measurements were also consistent with the results of DFT simulations (Fig. 3, vide infra). Thus, it can be confirmed that the incorporation of the thiazole unit into the backbone could effectively tune the FMO energy levels in these photovoltaic materials.


To further investigate the geometries and electronic properties of these thiazolothienyl imide-based polymers, density functional theory (DFT) calculations of three repeating units of polymers PTzTIBDTT and PTzTIBDTT-S were performed at the B3LYP/6-31G(d) level using the Gaussian 09 program. All the solubilizing alkyl or alkylthio side chains on the TzTI and BDT building blocks were truncated to a methyl or methylthio group for simplifying the computations, respectively. As shown in Fig. 3, the optimized conformations of the trimers of polymer repeating units and the dihedral angles between the thiazolothienyl imide acceptor units and flanked thiophene π-spacers are illustrated. Clearly, the backbones of both trimers display a highly planar structure with the largest dihedral angle between any two neighbouring arenes <13°, which should be favorable for attaining ordered packing of polymer chains and promote charge carrier transport. The dihedral angles between the thiophene-flanked TzTI acceptor moiety and BDT in the repeating units of PTzTIBDTT and PTzTIBDTT-S were ∼6° and 12°, respectively. It was also found that the dihedral angles between the thiazole moiety in TzTI and the alkylthiophene π-spacer in each repeating unit of the polymers were smaller than 1°; in contrast, the computed angles increased to ∼10° between the thiophene moiety in TzTI and the flanked thiophene π-spacer. The DFT results confirmed that the formation of S⋯N noncovalent interactions in these TzTI-based polymers results in improved polymer backbone planarity. Please note that the dihedral angles between the TzTI core and the flanked thiophene π-spacers on both sides are much smaller than those (∼15°) between the BTI segment and the flanked alkylthiophene in polymer PBTI3T. These planar structures of PTzTIBDTT and PTzTIBDTT-S are beneficial for improving the polymer chain stacking.

The LUMO/HOMO energy levels obtained from the DFT calculations are −2.76/−4.98 and −2.83/−5.10 eV for the PTzTIBDTT and PTzTIBDTT-S trimers (Fig. 3), respectively. Compared to the polymer analogue PBTIBDTT without thiazole, lower FMO energy levels were obtained for the TzTI-based polymers, which were in good accordance with the CV results. Therefore, the replacement of thiophene with thiazole not only tunes the HOMO and LUMO energy levels of the TzTI-based copolymers but also facilitates the formation of an intramolecular noncovalent S⋯N conformation lock with reduced steric hindrance, leading to higher polymer backbone planarities. The deeper-positioned HOMO level and more planar backbone of PTzTIBDTT and PTzTIBDTT-S is expected to achieve larger Voc and improved charge transport and collection in solar cells.

To gain more information on the polymer backbone planarity and intermolecular packing structures of the TzTI-based polymers, a single crystal of the model compound TzTI-C7, i.e. thiazolothienyl imide with a short n-heptane chain was grown by slow evaporation of the TzTI-C7 solution in dichloromethane. As illustrated in Fig. 4, a highly planar backbone structure with a close π–π stacking distance of 3.65 Å was obtained for the TzTI-C7 model compound, indicative of the strong π–π interaction between the asymmetric thiazolothienyl imide units. The crystal structure analysis reveals a small dihedral angle of 3.49° between the thiazole and thiophene planes in TzTI-C7, which is smaller than that (4.32°) in the BTI analogue, indicating that a more planar backbone structure could be achieved for the asymmetric thiazolothienyl imide based materials. Such a planar conjugated backbone with close π–π stacking of TzTI is expected to favor the stacking of TzTI-based polymer chains.


Bulk heterojunction PSCs with an inverted device structure of indium tin oxide (ITO)/zinc oxide (ZnO)/polymer:fullerene/molybdenum oxide (MoO3)/silver (Ag) were fabricated to evaluate the photovoltaic performances of the new TzTI-based polymers. The details of device fabrication and optimization for the PSCs could be found in the ESI, and the characteristic photovoltaic performance curves and parameters of the optimized devices are illustrated in Fig. 5(b) and summarized in Table 2. After a systematic optimization of D:A ratios, solution concentrations, and processing additives (see Tables S1–S10, ESI), a promising PCE of 8.00% was achieved for polymer PTzTIBDTT with an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.90 V, a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 13.48 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 65.90%, while, the PTzTIBDTT-S cell showed a reduced PCE of 3.69% with a Voc of 0.80 V, a Jsc of 9.98 mA cm−2 and a low FF of 45.87%. Hence, it was found that simultaneously improved Jsc, Voc, and FF values were achieved for the PTzTIBDTT polymer when compared to PTzTIBDTT-S solar cells. Both devices showed reasonably large Vocs due to the deep-positioned HOMO energy levels of polymers PTzTIBDTT and PTzTIBDTT-S. The EQE curves of the optimal cells are shown in Fig. 5(c) and Table 2. Apparently, the much larger Jsc of PTzTIBDTT:PC71BM devices is ascribed to the higher EQE response, which shows a value higher than 70% in the wavelength range from 420 to 620 nm, even approaching 80% around 600 nm. In contrast, the EQE value of PTzTIBDTT-S:PC71BM cells is lower than 60% in the range, resulting in a smaller Jsc in the corresponding devices.

Polymers

J
sc
 (mA cm−2)
Cal. Jsc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)

μ
h
 (cm2 V−1 s−1)

μ
e
 (cm2 V−1 s−1)

a The average PCEs were calculated from at least 20 devices.
b Hole only and electron only mobilities were characterized by using the space charge limited current (SCLC) method.

PTzTIBDTT
13.48 (13.10 ± 0.38)
13.45
0.90
65.90
8.00 (7.85 ± 0.15)
2.1 × 10−5
1.1 × 10−4
PTzTIBDTT-S
9.98 (9.66 ± 0.32)
9.92
0.81
45.87
3.69 (3.43 ± 0.26)
1.5 × 10−6
1.6 × 10−5
WBG polymers have distinctive merits when combined with low bandgap nonfullerene acceptors due to their complementary absorption properties, which have largely changed the field of organic solar cells and greatly improved the device performance of organic solar cells in the last couple of years. ITIC and IDIC were then selected here as the nonfullerene acceptor materials to further explore the potential of these WBG polymers (PTzTIBDTT and PTzTIBDTT-S) as the donor materials, and the detailed device performance parameters are shown in the ESI (Tables S11–S17, ESI). However, a low PCE of 5.71% is achieved after systematic optimization of device fabrication, which is likely attributed to the mismatched energy levels of the donor polymers and ITIC/IDIC acceptors (PTzTIBDTT and PTzTIBDTT-S have low-lying HOMOs of −5.65 and −5.69 eV, respectively, which could be even lower than those (−5.52 and −5.69 eV) of ITIC and IDIC) and the unbalanced hole/electron mobilities of the donor polymers and ITIC/IDIC acceptors.
The electron (μe,SCLC) and hole (μh,SCLC) mobilities of polymer:PC71BM blend films in the optimal PSCs were characterized using the space charge limited current (SCLC) method based on the electron-only and hole-only devices, respectively. As shown in Fig. 6 and Table 2, the PTzTIBDTT-based devices exhibited a μe,SCLC and μh,SCLC of 1.1 × 10−4 and 2.1 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively, which are one order of magnitude higher than those of the PTzTIBDTT-S devices (μe,SCLC: 1.6 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1 and μh,SCLC: 1.5 × 10−6 cm2 V−1 s−1). The hole mobility of pristine PTzTIBDTT and PTzTIBDTT-S was also characterized, which was found to be 5.6 × 10−5 and 3.4 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively. The hole mobility of the active layers of PTzTIBDTT:PC71BM (2.1 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1) and PTzTIBDTT-S:PC71BM (1.5 × 10−6 cm2 V−1 s−1) is lower than those of pristine PTzTIBDTT (μh,SCLC: 5.6 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1) and PTzTIBDTT-S (μh,SCLC: 3.4 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1) (Fig. S16, ESI), which is ascribed to the fact that the addition of n-type PC71BM into the blend film can hinder the hole transport. However, the pristine films show the same mobility trend as the blend films. The larger charge mobilities of the PTzTIBDTT based active layer should be responsible for the higher Jsc and FF values observed in the corresponding solar cell devices. Notably, the higher Jsc, FF, and PCE values of the PTzTIBDTT-based devices were achieved with a thicker active layer of nearly 200 nm while the PTzTIBDTT-S-based devices were only 110 nm thick, which further corroborated the superior charge transport properties of the PTzTIBDTT:PC71BM blend film in the PSC devices.

The film morphology of PTzTIBDTT:PC71BM and PTzTIBDTT-S:PC71BM blends was probed by tapping-mode atomic force microscopy (AFM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) measurements. As shown in Fig. 7, both blend films exhibited a relatively small surface roughness, i.e. 0.85 nm for the PTzTIBDTT:PC71BM blend and 1.00 nm for the PTzTIBDTT-S:PC71BM blend, with interpenetrating fibrillar networks. However, the TEM images revealed a more uniform and compact fibrillar network with smaller PC71BM domains for the PTzTIBDTT:PC71BM active layer, in comparison to the PTzTIBDTT-S:PC71BM blend film showing coarser phase separation with larger PC71BM aggregates. As a result, the smoother and more uniform fibrillar network of the PTzTIBDTT:PC71BM blend with a phase separation on a finer scale should facilitate exciton dissociation and charge transport and collection, resulting in improved photovoltaic performance of solar cells.

Two dimensional grazing incidence wide angle X-ray scattering (2D-GIWAXS) measurements were then carried out to probe the crystallinity, molecular orientation, and packing characteristics of both polymers in their optimized blend films. Fig. 8 depicts the 2D-GIWAXS images of blend films and the corresponding in-plane (IP) and out-of-plane (OOP) line-cut profiles of blend films are presented in Fig. 8c. As it can be seen, the PTzTIBDTT:PC71BM blend film displayed a pronounced (010) diffraction peak at 1.72 Å−1 in the OOP direction, corresponding to a d-spacing of 3.65 Å and indicating the strong π–π stacking feature of the polymer chains. In comparison, for the PTzTIBDTT-S:PC71BM film, only a very weak diffraction peak was observed for the PTzTIBDTT-S:PC71BM film at 1.70 Å−1 in the same direction, indicating the much weakened π-stacking strength of the alkylthio chain-substituted polymer in the blend film. The reinforced π–π stacking strength of the PTzTIBDTT:PC71BM blend film should be beneficial for efficient charge carrier transport and collection, in accordance with the SCLC mobility, which corroborates the observed larger Jsc and higher PCE in the corresponding PSC devices.

In summary, two new WBG copolymers PTzTIBDTT and PTzTIBDTT-S featuring a thiazolothienyl imide acceptor and a BDT donor with a thiophene π-bridge were designed and synthesized for photovoltaic applications. The incorporation of the thiazole unit into the polymer not only lowers the polymer HOMO level, but also results in an intramolecular noncovalent S⋯N conformation lock to improve the backbone planarity of the resulting polymers. As a result, the polymers exhibited a wide bandgap of ∼1.9 eV and a low-lying HOMO energy level of ∼−5.7 eV. The PSCs containing the PTzTIBDTT:PC71BM active layer showed a higher PCE of 8.00% with a Voc of 0.90 V, a Jsc of 13.48 mA cm−2, and an FF of 65.90% when compared to the PTzTIBDTT-S:PC71BM cells with a PCE of 3.69% due to their improved bulk heterojunction blend film morphology with a stronger π–π stacking of polymer PTzTIBDTT than the PTzTIBDTT-S:PC71BM blend film, and a much higher hole mobility of 1.1 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 compared to that (1.6 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1) of PTzTIBDTT-S:PC71BM. These results demonstrate that the thiazole imide capable of the formation of intramolecular noncovalent N⋯S interactions is a highly promising electron-withdrawing unit for constructing a wide bandgap polymer donor with a deep-lying FMO energy level for high-performance polymer solar cells.


The authors declare no competing financial interest.


M. Z. acknowledges the Project of State Key Laboratory of Oil and Gas Reservoir Geology and Exploitation (PLN201807) and Key Projects of Application Foundation in Sichuan Province (19YYJC1537). X. G. thanks the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51573076), the Shenzhen Basic Research Fund (JCYJ20170817105905899), and the Shenzhen Peacock Plan Project (KQTD20140630110339343). X. L. thanks the Research Grant Council of Hong Kong (Theme-based Research Scheme no. T23-407/13-N and 14314216). Y. W. acknowledges the financial support from the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (No. 2018M630267) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21805128).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details, synthesis and characterization of model compounds, monomers, and polymers, single crystal structure data of model compounds, TGA plots, DSC curves, details of PSCs fabrication and characterization, PSC performance data, and GIWAXS data. CCDC 1539292. For ESI and crystallographic data in CIF or other electronic format see DOI: 10.1039/c9tc03301g
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019