 DOI: 10.1039/D2NJ05350K
(Paper)
New J. Chem., 2023, 47, 10036-10045


Qinghua
Sun
,

Wanting
Hu
,

Miao
Yu
,

Fengyou
Wang
,

Xiaoyan
Liu
,

Lihua
Yang
,

Huilian
Liu
*,

Lin
Fan
* and 

Lili
Yang
*

Key Laboratory of Functional Materials Physics and Chemistry (Ministry of Education), College of Physics, Jilin Normal University, Changchun, 130103, China. E-mail: lhl541@126.com; fanlin@jlnu.edu.cn; llyang1980@126.com

National Demonstration Center for Experimental Physics Education, Jilin Normal University, Siping, 136000, China

Received
1st November 2022
, Accepted 17th December 2022
First published on 22nd December 2022
The development of functional absorbers with excellent film-forming quality and carrier extraction/transfer efficiency is of great significance to achieve high-efficiency and stable n–i–p planar perovskite solar cells (PSCs). Herein, we propose a simple in situ growth technique to construct high-quality absorbers by introducing a commercial two-dimensional (2D) tungsten sulfide nanosheet (WS2 NS) modifier during the growth of a perovskite. The synergistic effects of WS2 on perovskite crystallization kinetics, charge extraction/transfer/recombination behaviors, and device photovoltaic outputs were systematically studied. Owing to the strong coordination effect between WS2 NSs and organic cations in a perovskite, WS2 can be used as a growth template in the crystallization process of the perovskite, thus effectively passivating grain boundaries and surface/interface trap states, and synchronously improving the film-forming quality, surface/interface contact, and photogenerated charge extraction/transfer efficiency of the perovskite. Moreover, WS2 located at the grain boundaries and surface/interface provides the “fast paths” for photogenerated electron–hole pairs by virtue of its high charge mobility, which greatly inhibits the accumulation/recombination of charge carriers and effectively improves the photovoltaic performance and hysteresis behavior of planar PSCs. Additionally, WS2 NSs induce the substitutional doping of formamidinium cations, which has a positive contribution to broadening the spectral response range. The results show that the efficiency of the WS2-modified PSC is significantly better than that of the conventional planar device. The non-encapsulated functionalized devices also exhibit good stability due to the multifunctional effects of a WS2-modified perovskite, resulting in great advantages for the development of highly efficient flexible-, semitransparent-, and tandem-photovoltaic applications.

N–i–p planar heterojunction perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have gained enormous attention due to their simple architectures, low-temperature low-cost manufacturing technologies, superb photovoltaic properties, and diverse photovoltaic applications (such as flexible, ultra-thin, tandem devices, etc.). At present, single-junction n–i–p planar PSCs have achieved a certified efficiency of 25.4%, which is close to that of the most popular silicon-based solar cells, showing greater potential for low-cost commercialization. However, due to the soft ionic solid nature of hybrid perovskite materials, considerable defects are easily formed during perovskite growth. These native defects act as trap centers to annihilate photo-generated exciton carriers, resulting in energy disorder and severe charge accumulation and recombination, thus reducing the open-circuit voltage (VOC) and fill factor (FF), and ultimately impacting the photovoltaic performance and stability of PSCs.

In recent years, a variety of technologies such as engineering additives, composition, size, interface, etc. have been adopted to passivate the internal and/or surface/interface defects of perovskites, so that the perovskite quality, carrier transport dynamics, device power conversion efficiency (PCE) and stability have been significantly improved. Cost-effective two-dimensional (2D) semiconductors have developed into the most promising candidates for grain boundaries and surface/interface modification. Following Geim and Novosolov's pioneering work on graphene, transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs, including metal sulfides, selenides, tellurides, etc.), 2D perovskites, and other emerging 2D layered materials have become the focus of the advanced photovoltaic field with their flexible structures and outstanding chemical, physical, and optoelectronic properties.
A plethora of recent reports has unambiguously demonstrated that 2D tungsten disulfide (WS2) materials were used as charge transporting layers and/or interlayers in PSCs and organic solar cells (OSCs) due to their high transmittance, high mobilities, and tunable band gaps (band gaps in the range of 1.1–2.1 eV), which shows superior performance to other 2D semiconductors in improving the PCE, dark storage, illumination, and thermal stability. Song et al. utilized the high hole mobility of 2D WS2 (approximately 116 cm2 V−1 s−1 at room temperature) to replace the conventional organic PEDOT:PSS hole transporting layer (HTL), greatly improving the efficiency and stability of inverted planar PSCs. Furthermore, Gong et al. and Yan et al. introduced ultra-thin 2D WS2 interlayers to guide van der Waals type quasi-epitaxial perovskite growth, which effectively suppressed the formation of native defects within perovskites and accelerated detrapping charge extraction, thereby reducing carrier recombination and ultimately improving the photovoltaic performance and stability of the inverted planar PSCs. Recently, Lü et al. constructed an organic–inorganic hybrid HTL based on WS2 and used it to prepare bifacial n–i–p planar PSCs. The high transmittance and conductivity of the WS2-based HTL were utilized to realize the synchronous improvement of bidirectional photovoltaic performance, which opens a new idea for the wide application of 2D WS2 in more efficient and stable n–i–p planar PSCs. Therefore, it is urgent to explore a more comprehensive, simple, and multifunctional method to simultaneously boost the film-forming quality (including grain boundaries and surface/interface quality) and electronic properties of absorbers by using 2D WS2, and ultimately create more efficient and stable planar PSCs.
In this work, we used a simple in situ growth technique to construct a novel absorber with good film-forming quality and electrical properties by adding commercial 2D WS2 NSs during perovskite formation. It was found that WS2 had stronger coordination with perovskite organic cations, which can be used as a growth template to effectively passivate grain boundaries and surface/interface trap states, thus suppressing nonradiative recombination, and significantly improving perovskite film-forming quality, surface/interface contact, and photogenerated charge extraction/transfer efficiency. Meanwhile, WS2 located at the grain boundaries and surface/interface of the perovskite can also form the “fast paths” of photogenerated electron–hole pairs by virtue of its high charge mobility, further reducing carrier accumulation/recombination, thus enhancing the photovoltaic outputs of planar PSCs, particularly FF and VOC. Additionally, WS2 NSs induced the substitutional doping of formamidinium cations (FA+), which broadened the spectral absorption range and improved the short-circuit current density (JSC) of planar PSCs. As a result, owing to the multifunctional effects of the WS2-modified perovskite, the PCE of the modified planar PSC can be up to 21.12%, with negligible hysteresis, which is superior to that of the conventional planar device. The functionalized devices without encapsulation also exhibited good stability. All processes were conducted at a relatively low temperature (≤150 °C), which is desirable for a wide range of applications, such as flexible- and tandem-solar cells on thermally sensitive substrates. This work demonstrates an alternative route to fabricate more efficient and stable planar PSCs, and provides novel insights into the growth mechanisms of high-quality absorbers.

Etched indium-doped tin oxide (ITO) conducting glasses were purchased from Yingkou Optimum Trade Co., Ltd, whereas tin oxide colloidal dispersion (SnO2 15% in H2O dispersion), N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF, ≥99.8%), and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO, ≥99.8%) were purchased from Alfa Aesar. Lead(II) iodide (PbI2, ≥99.999%) and methylammonium iodide (CH3NH3I, MAI, ≥99.8%) were obtained from Yingkou Optimum Trade Co., Ltd. Formamidinium iodide (HC(NH2)2I, FAI, ≥99.5%) and chlorobenzene (CB, ≥99.5%) were purchased from Aladdin Reagents. Isopropanol (IPA, ≥99.7%) was purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd, while tungsten disulfide nanosheets (WS2 NSs, average lateral size: ∼150 nm) were obtained from Nanjing XFNANO Materials Co., Ltd. 2,2′,7,7′-Tetrakis[N,N-di(4-methoxyphenyl)amino]-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD, ≥99.0%), lithium bis(trifluoro-methanesulfonyl)imide (Li-TFSI, ≥99%), acetonitrile (≥99.9%), and 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP, ≥99%) were supplied by Yingkou Optimum Trade Co., Ltd. The purity of silver (Ag) used for a thermally evaporated electrode was 99.99%. All chemicals and reagents were directly used without further purification.


Perovskite absorbers were prepared by a solution spin coating method, and the detailed deposition process is as follows:

For conventional perovskite absorbers: a precursor solution containing 1.65 mol PbI2 and 1.5 mol MAI in a co-solvent of DMF/DMSO (volume ratio: 3:1) was spin-coated onto substrates at 5500 rpm for 40 s. CB anti-solvent was drop-cast quickly onto the spinning substrates 11 s before the end of the program. After the spin coating, the substrates were annealed on hotplates at 95 °C for 10 min to obtain perovskite precursor films. A FAI/IPA mixture solution (10 mg mL−1) was spin-coated onto the precursor substrates at 4000 rpm for 30 s. After drying at 145 °C for 20 min, the final perovskite absorbers were obtained for fabricating solar cells. The resulting absorbers were denoted as PVK-C.
For modified perovskite absorbers: based on the above process, ∼0.02 mg, ∼0.04 mg, ∼0.08 mg, and ∼0.10 mg of commercial WS2 powders were ultrasonically dispersed in 1 mL of the as-synthesized FAI/IPA blend solution to obtain different concentrations of FAI/IPA/WS2 dispersions. Subsequently, the dispersions were spin-coated onto the above-mentioned precursor substrates at 4000 rpm for 30 s. After annealing at 145 °C for 20 min, high-quality modified perovskite absorbers were obtained. These modified perovskite films were denoted as PVK-W.

Etched ITO-coated glasses were ultrasonically washed with acetone, deionized water, and ethanol sequentially for 20 min. The cleaned ITO-glass substrates were dried at 60 °C for 4 h followed by treatment with UV-ozone for 30 min. The electron transporting layers (ETLs) were made by spin-coating SnO2 aqueous dispersion at 5000 rpm for 30 s, and subsequently heating in air at 150 °C for 30 min. After UV-ozone treatment for 25 min, the ITO/SnO2 substrates were immediately transferred into a nitrogen-filled glove box for perovskite and HTL preparation.

According to the practical requirements of solar cells, absorbers prepared with different processes were covered onto the ITO/SnO2 substrates. The detailed deposition processes were described in the preparation of perovskite absorbers.
After the as-prepared samples cooled down to room temperature, spiro-OMeTAD (0.0723 g), Li-TFSI (17.5 μL) solution (0.52 g Li-TFSI in 1 mL acetonitrile), and TBP (28.5 μL) were dissolved in 1 mL of acetonitrile and CB (1:10, v/v), which was spin-coated onto the above absorber at 6000 rpm for 30 s to yield a dense HTL. Finally, Ag electrodes (∼100 nm) were deposited by thermal evaporation as the back contacts. The active area of the devices was defined using a shadow mask during the thermal evaporation. All devices were not sealed but rather stored under dry conditions and characterized in a normal ambient atmosphere.

Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images were taken using a JEOL-2010 TEM operating at a 200 kV accelerating voltage. The surface morphologies and roughness changes of samples were examined using scanning electron microscopy (SEM, JEOL, JSM-7800F) and atomic force microscopy (AFM, MFP-3D Infinity). The crystal structure of samples was examined by X-ray diffraction (XRD, Rigaku, D/max-2500PC) using Cu-Kα radiation as the radiation source (λ ≈ 0.15 nm) across the 2θ range of 10° to 60°. Ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) absorption spectra of samples were recorded on an UV-3600 plus spectrophotometer of SHIMADZU, Japan. The chemical composition and state analysis of samples were evaluated by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, Thermofisher, Escalab 250 xi). The material states of samples were characterized by Raman spectroscopy (Nanofinder 30, Tokyo Instruments Inc.). Steady-state photoluminescence (SSPL) and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) spectroscopy were carried out using a PL spectrometer (Edinburgh Instruments, FLS1000, UK). Photocurrent dependence on the voltage (J–V) was measured under the simulated AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2, Model 94043A, Oriel, Newport, USA). Light intensity was calibrated using a standard KG3-filtered silicon reference cell certified by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory. The active area of devices was determined to be 0.09 cm2 by using a metal mask. External quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra were collected using a Newport IQE 200TM system in the wavelength range from 350 to 850 nm. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) of devices was performed using an electrochemical workstation (CHI660C) at a voltage bias of 0.8 V in the absence of light.


To obtain high-quality perovskite absorbers, the photoelectric characteristics of the commercial WS2 NSs need to be determined. The commercial WS2 NS powder was ultrasonically dispersed into IPA solution to obtain a WS2/IPA dispersion, as illustrated in Fig. 1. Fig. 1a shows a transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image of the corresponding dispersion. WS2 NSs have good dispersibility, with an average diameter of approximately 150 nm. The corresponding high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) and electron diffraction ring (SAED) clearly demonstrate the lattice fringes and good crystallinity of WS2 NSs, as shown in Fig. 1b. Raman spectroscopy was used to further analyze the structure and composition of WS2 NSs. As shown in Fig. 1d, the Raman modes of the E12g and the A1g are two characteristic peaks observed at 348 cm−1 and 411 cm−1, corresponding to the in-plane vibration and out-of-plane vibration of the W–S phononic film, respectively. Moreover, the distance between the two characteristic peaks is approximately 63 cm−1, indicating that the WS2 NS maybe a low-layer structure.

Subsequently, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) of the commercial WS2 NS powder was employed to detect the chemical composition and electronic states of the sample, and the corresponding high-resolution XPS spectra of tungsten (W) and sulfur (S) are provided in Fig. 1e and f, respectively. From the high-resolution XPS spectrum of W 4f in Fig. 1e, the binding energies of the W 4f7/2 and W 4f5/2 peaks were ∼32 and ∼34.4 eV, respectively, representing the metallic 1T phase of WS2. The signals recorded at ∼36 and ∼38.4 eV suggested the existence of W6+ species, probably due to the formation of W oxides during the exfoliation process. From the high-resolution XPS spectrum of S 2P in Fig. 1f, the binding energies of the S 2p3/2 and S 2p1/2 peaks of ∼161.87 and ∼162.91 eV are attributed to S2− in WS2. These results accord well with that reported in previous literature.
The modified perovskite was prepared by introducing WS2 NSs into the absorber via a simple continuous spin coating method, denoted as PVK-W. The related preparation processes are schematically depicted in Fig. 2a, and the specific synthesis and deposition processes are described in the Experimental section. The conventional perovskite without WS2 NSs is denoted as PVK-C. From the surface scanning electron microscope (SEM) morphologies in Fig. 2b and c, both the perovskite films with and without WS2 NSs exhibit uniform and dense surface morphology, and the introduction of WS2 NSs slightly increases the grain size of the perovskite. The corresponding atomic force microscopy (AFM) images clearly indicate that WS2 NSs contribute to the improvement of the surface and interface characteristics of the absorber. As shown in the inset of Fig. 2b and c, the root mean square roughness (RMS ≈ 20 nm) of the modified PVK-W film is less than that of the unmodified PVK-C film (RMS ≈ 27 nm). This smoother surface/interface morphology has a positive contribution to accelerating the separation, extraction, and migration of hetero-interface carriers. Fig. S1 (ESI) shows the cross-sectional SEM images of the corresponding samples. The thickness of the two absorbers is very similar (approximately 550 nm), which is consistent with the observations in Fig. 2.
In addition, the X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the corresponding samples further illustrate the synergistic effect of WS2 NSs on perovskite morphology and crystallization kinetics, as shown in Fig. 2d. The diffraction peaks of the synthesized samples are consistent with those of tetragonal perovskites (110), (220), and (310), and no new peaks are observed, suggesting that the introduction of WS2 NSs does not lead to lattice reconstruction and/or the formation of new components. Compared with the PVK-C film, all peaks of the PVK-W film are significantly enhanced, indicating that WS2 NSs improved the crystallinity of perovskites. Furthermore, Fig. S2 (ESI) shows that the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the PVK-W (110) plane is narrower than that of the PVK-C sample, while its diffraction intensity is higher, further confirming the synergistic improvement of perovskite morphology and crystallinity induced by WS2 NSs.
The ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) absorption spectra and the corresponding Tauc plots of the PVK-C and PVK-W films are presented in Fig. S3a and b (ESI), respectively. The band-gap energy (Eg) of the samples with and without WS2 was calculated to be 1.578 and 1.583 eV, respectively. The narrowing of the PVK-W energy gap may be attributed to the fact that WS2 NSs induced the substitutional doping of FA+ cations during the growth of perovskites, thus improving the crystallinity of the perovskite and helping to broaden its spectral response range, which is consistent with the observations in Fig. 2.
The steady-state photoluminescence (SSPL) spectra of the glass/PVK-C and glass/PVK-W substrates illustrate the influence of WS2 modification on perovskite-related defect states, as shown in Fig. 3a. The SSPL peak of the modified sample is significantly higher than that of the glass/PVK-C sample, and shifts towards the short-wavelength direction, implying that WS2 NSs can reduce the content of parasitic defects in the absorber, thus promoting the effective improvement of film quality and electronic properties. Subsequently, a space-charge-limited current (SCLC) test was conducted on the hole-only devices to quantitatively evaluate the defect density and relative charge behavior of the WS2-modified absorber. The corresponding dark current–voltage (J–V) curves are shown in Fig. 3b and c, respectively. The trap filling voltage (VTFL) values of the devices with and without WS2 NSs are 0.52 and 0.70 V, respectively, which further demonstrate that the deep-level defects of perovskite and its surface/interface are largely reduced upon the WS2 modification. According to the equation Nt = (2εε0VTFL)/qL2, the trap state density (Nt) values of the two devices were calculated to be 1.053 × 1016 cm−3 (PVK-C) and 7.822 × 1015 cm−3 (PVK-W), where ε is the relative dielectric constant of the perovskite,ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, q is the elemental charge, and L is the thickness of the absorber. The significant reduction in Nt has a positive contribution to inhibiting non-radiative recombination, accelerating the efficient extraction/transfer of photogenerated charges, preventing the charge accumulation at the perovskite surface/interface, and even improving the photovoltaic performance of the devices.
The high-resolution XPS spectra of C 1s and N 1s of the PVK-C and PVK-W samples shown in Fig. 3d and e deeply analyzed the modification mechanism of WS2 NSs on absorbers. The C 1s spectra exhibit the common peaks corresponding to the C–C and C–N bonds emerging from organic cations, with binding energies of ∼284.8 and ∼286.3 eV, respectively, while the CO peaks observed at ≈288.1 eV are related to the oxygen and water exposure on the surface of perovskite films. For N 1s, the binding energies of C–NH2 and CNH2 bonds are calculated to be ∼400.58 and ∼402.27 eV, respectively, originating from the HC+(NH2)2 and NH3+ groups of organic cations. Compared with the unmodified PVK-C sample, the binding energies of the modified PVK-W sample shifted to the higher binding region, and the C–NH2 peak (∼400.58 eV, from the HC+(NH2)2 group) in PVK-W was significantly enhanced, which confirmed that WS2 NSs had a strong interaction with organic cation defects in perovskites and could greatly promote the substitutional doping of FA+. More importantly, this enhanced coordination effect can promote WS2 NSs to act as a growth template in the process of perovskite crystallization, and then stably exist and embed into the grain boundaries and surface/interface of the modified perovskite, thus playing a role in passivating the trap states in the absorber, controlling the carrier dynamics, and determining the photovoltaic performance of the solar cell. The schematic model of the formation mechanism of the WS2 NS modified perovskite is shown in Fig. 3f. Additionally, the corresponding Pb 4f and I 3d XPS spectra in Fig. S4 (ESI) also provide strong evidence for the WS2 passivation effect.
In order to further clarify the influence mechanism of WS2 passivation on carrier transport dynamics, the ITO/SnO2/PVK-C/spiro-OMeTAD and ITO ITO/SnO2/PVK-W/spiro-OMeTAD samples were characterized by time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) measurements. The biexponential fitting TRPL decay curves are presented in Fig. 4a, in which the faster decay (τ1) is associated with the carriers extracted through the charge transporting layer/perovskite interface, and the slower decay (τ2) is related to the recombination of trapped charges. Relevant TRPL dynamic parameters are shown in Table S1 (ESI). Obviously, the carrier lifetimes of the modified PVK-W sample are relatively short (both in the bulk and at the interface), indicating that the photo-exciton recombination in the device was effectively suppressed. This improved carrier dynamics can be attributed to (1) the significant passivation effect of WS2, and (2) WS2 located at the perovskite grain boundaries and heterogeneous interface provides the “fast paths” for photogenerated electron–hole pairs, which greatly inhibits carrier accumulation/recombination in the device and is conducive to the improvement of photovoltaic performance.
The electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurement was used to further explain the effects of WS2 modification on the contact resistance and carrier extraction/recombination in the devices. The Nyquist plots of two devices measured at a bias voltage of 0.8 V in the dark and an equivalent fitted circuit model are shown in Fig. 4b. The detailed parameters extracted from the fitting curves are summarized in Table S2 (ESI). As expected, the high-frequency transportation resistance (Rtr) and series resistance (Rs) values of the PVK-W device are much smaller than those of the PVK-C device, and its low-frequency recombination resistance (Rrec) value is also higher, again confirming the positive contribution of WS2 to enhancing perovskite-related charge dynamics. The possible carrier migration/extraction/recombination processes of the corresponding devices are depicted in Fig. 4c. By comparing the statistical distribution of efficiency based on 24 devices (as shown in Fig. 4d), PVK-W devices are found to have higher PCEs and narrower distribution than conventional PVK-C devices, indicating that WS2 NSs improve the reproducibility of devices. Detailed parameters are listed in Tables S3 and S4 (ESI), respectively.
To optimize the champion PVK-W PSC, the J–V characteristics of devices fabricated with different WS2 concentrations were tested under simulated AM 1.5G illumination (100 mA cm−2). The corresponding J–V curves and the detailed photovoltaic parameters are presented in Fig. S5a (ESI). The active area of the devices was determined to be 0.09 cm2 by using a shadow mask on top of the substrates during J–V testing. The JSC, VOC, FF, and PCE gradually increase with increasing concentration of WS2 from 0 to 0.08 mg mL−1, and the PVK-W PSC fabricated at a WS2 concentration of 0.08 mg mL−1 exhibits the highest photovoltaic performance. Since the WS2 solution with higher concentration (≥0.10 mg mL−1) has reached the supersaturated state, as shown in Fig. S5b (ESI), we do not consider further optimizing the device efficiency by continuously increasing the WS2 concentration.
The J–V curves of the champion PSCs with and without WS2 are presented in Fig. 4e, and the detailed J–V parameters are summarized in the inset of Fig. 4e. The active area of the devices was determined to be 0.09 cm2 by using a shadow mask during the test. The champion PVK-W PSC with a reverse-scan (R-S) PCE of 21.12% and a forward-scan (F-S) PCE of 20.67% was obtained. The excellent photovoltaic parameters and negligible hysteresis shown by the champion device can be ascribed to the synergistic effect of WS2 on the perovskite film-forming quality, defect passivation, and charge dynamics. Fig. S6 (ESI) displays the steady-state current density and efficiency of the devices by applying a constant bias voltage referred from the maximum output power density points (VMPP). The VMPP of the PVK-C and PVK-W devices is 0.86 and 0.92 V, respectively. Obviously, the steady-state curves of the two devices are similar, but the PVK-W device exhibits higher current density and PCE, showing better photovoltaic characteristics. In addition, as seen from the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra shown in Fig. S7 (ESI), the champion PVK-W device also exhibits a superior spectral response in the wavelength range of 350–850 nm, which further verifies the tendency of the J–V characteristics. The integrated JSCs from the EQE spectra are very close to the JSCs measured from the J–V curves.
Open-circuit photovoltage decay (OCVD) and dark-current measurements were employed to further elucidate the synergistic relationship between the charge behaviors and photovoltaic parameters in solar cells. The VOC decay curves in Fig. 4f indicate that the carrier recombination rate of the PVK-W device is slower than that of the PVK-C device under open-circuit conditions, demonstrating that the WS2 modification effectively improved the electronic properties and VOC of the device. Similarly, the dark-current curves in Fig. 4g also reveal that the WS2 modification prevented current leakage caused by charge recombination to a certain extent, thus effectively ensuring the efficient photovoltaic output of solar cells, with notable improvements in FF and PCE.
Ultimately, from the thermogravimetric (TG) curves of the PVK-C and PVK-W films (as shown in Fig. 5a), the WS2-modified absorber has a relatively high heat resistance. By comparing the photographs in Fig. 5b, the degradation rate of WS2-modified samples is lower than that of the unmodified samples under the operating conditions or a thermal environment, because WS2 passivation effectively suppressed the movement of some active ions in a hybrid perovskite, especially the migration/diffusion/precipitation of organic ions in the absorber. Notably, due to the excellent film quality and electronic properties of the PVK-W absorber, the corresponding unencapsulated device also exhibits relatively good stability after ∼1000 h, where the PCE maintained approximately 90% of its initial value. The efficiency changes of the devices with and without WS2 are presented in Fig. 5c. For the unmodified PVK-C device, the efficiency is only 76% of the original PCE, and this photovoltaic attenuation is due to the deliquescence and instability of the conventional absorber.

We have demonstrated a simple in situ growth method to fabricate WS2 NS-modified absorbers with excellent film-forming quality and electronic properties, and obtained a planar PSC with a PCE of up to 21.12%, with negligible hysteresis. Compared with the conventional perovskite, WS2 NSs in the modified perovskite had stronger coordination with organic cation defects, which promotes WS2 NSs as a growth template in the crystallization process of the perovskite to effectively passivate grain boundaries and surface/interface trap states, thereby improving the film-forming quality and surface/interface contact, and ultimately accelerating the efficient extraction/transfer of photo-generated charges. Meanwhile, the WS2 NSs located at the perovskite grain boundaries and heterogeneous interface provided the “fast paths” for photogenerated electron–hole pairs, which greatly reduces the charge accumulation/recombination and effectively improves the photovoltaic outputs of the modified devices. In addition, the WS2 NSs induced the substitutional doping of FA+ during perovskite growth, which positively contributed to broadening the spectral response range of planar PSCs. Benefiting from the synergistic improvement of perovskite crystallization, defect passivation, and carrier dynamics by WS2 NSs, the modified absorber had a relatively high heat resistance, and the corresponding unencapsulated device exhibited good stability. This work provides a new strategy for the design and construction of high-quality absorbers, and paves the way for achieving more efficient and stable planar PSCs.


Qinghua Sun: investigation, methodology, analysis, and writing – original draft. Lin Fan: investigation, analysis, funding acquisition, and writing – review & editing. Wanting Hu and Miao Yu: validation, visualization, and analysis. Fengyou Wang, Xiaoyan Liu, and Lihua Yang: data curation, conceptualization, and analysis. Huilian Liu and Lili Yang: supervision, funding acquisition, project administration, and writing – review & editing.


The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest.


This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 61904066, 22075101, 11904127, 11904129, and 11904128), the Program for the Development of Science and Technology of Jilin Province (Item No. 20210509050RQ, 20200801032GH, YDZJ202201ZYTS300, YDZJ202101ZYTS065, and 20210101410JC), and the Program for the Science and Technology of Education Department of Jilin Province (Item No. JJKH20210447KJ, JJKH20210440KJ, JJKH20220440KJ, and JJKH20220442KJ).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2nj05350k
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2023