 DOI: 10.1039/D3NR01390A
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2023, 15, 12048-12063


Ke-Li
Wang
,

Qun-Gui
Wang
,

Cui-E
Hu
*,

Yan
Cheng
*,

Guang-Fu
Ji
 and 

Xiang-Rong
Chen


College of Physics, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610064, China. E-mail: ycheng@scu.edu.cn

College of Physics and Electronic Engineering, Chongqing Normal University, Chongqing 400047, China. E-mail: cuiehu@cqnu.edu.cn

National Key Laboratory for Shock Wave and Detonation Physics Research, Institute of Fluid Physics, CAEP, Mianyang 621900, China

Received
25th March 2023
, Accepted 16th May 2023
First published on 16th May 2023
Tuning the electron-donating ability (EDA) of the donor units of hole transporting materials (HTMs) is an efficient strategy to modulate the optoelectronic properties of HTMs. Based on this strategy, we first theoretically investigated the effects of the EDA of donor units on D–A–π–A–D architectural HTMs. The results show that the enhanced EDA of the donor unit leads to larger hole reorganization energy and poorer molecular stability of HTMs. In contrast, meta-substitution of side groups is an effective strategy to reduce the EDA of the donor unit. We found that the application of the meta-substitution strategy in the D–A–π–A–D system not only successfully improves the molecular stability, but also achieves higher hole mobility by promoting the electronic coupling between the molecular dimers and decreasing the hole reorganization energies simultaneously. Studies on interfacial properties indicate that intermolecular coupling also synergistically enhances the interfacial charge extraction performance and reduces carrier recombination. In conclusion, by utilizing the meta-substitution strategy to reduce the EDA of donor units on D–A–π–A–D architectural HTMs, we successfully designed four superior performance HTMs mD1, mD2, mD3, and mD4.

Harnessing the most abundant renewable and clean energy source, solar energy, through photovoltaic (PV) technology is one of the most feasible solutions in the face of depleting traditional fossil energy sources and has also become the focus of scientific research worldwide. Crystalline silicon-based solar cells with a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of up to 26.7% are the most successful commercially available photovoltaic products. However, silicon-based PV technology has its inherent flaws. Owing to the serious problems of high cost, high energy expenditure, and environmental unfriendliness of silicon-based PV technology, various alternative low-cost PV technologies such as III–V solar cells, thin-film chalcogenide solar cells, dye-sensitized solar cells, bulk-heterojunction full-organic solar cells, and perovskite solar cells (PVSCs) have rapidly evolved and brought vigorous vitality to the PV industry. Organic–inorganic metal halide PVSCs are expected to overturn the mature silicon-based PV technology market in the near future due to their excellent performance, including low fabrication cost, large light absorption coefficient, a wide range of tunable bandgaps, high charge carrier mobility, and high PCE (over 25.5%). As an essential part of the PVSC's device structure, hole transport materials (HTMs) are involved in electron blocking, hole extraction and transport, as well as protecting the activity of the perovskite layer. Therefore, developing efficient and stable HTMs is a crucial strategy to improve the capability and long-term operational stability of PVSC devices. Spiro-OMeTAD is the most popular and state-of-the-art organic HTM available for PVSC devices, becoming the most frequently used benchmark for comparison with a PCE of up to 25.7%. However, the large-scale commercial application of Spiro-OMeTAD is severely limited due to its poor stability and intrinsic hole transport properties. Undoped, high-efficiency, and low-cost organic small molecule HTMs can overcome the above-mentioned downsides of Spiro-OMeTAD. Among the many excellent research works on undoped organic small molecule HTMs, a work by Niu et al. has attracted our attention. Researchers of this work proposed an efficient undoped HTM, DTB-FL, with a linear D–A–π–A–D molecular architecture, which combines the advantages of easy tunability of the energy levels of functionalized donor and acceptor units with the enhancement of charge transport properties by extending the π-conjugation length. Compared to the DT-BT molecule with the same donor and acceptor units in the D–A–D architecture, DTB-FL shows an approximately 182 times improvement in hole mobility (3.94 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1versus 1.92 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1) and an improvement in PCE from 7.3% to 21.5%. Additionally, the open-circuit voltage (Voc), the short circuit current (Jsc), and the fill factor (FF) for DTB-FL and DT-BT are 1.14 V versus 0.83 V, 23.8 mA cm−2versus 16.8 mA cm−2, and 79.1% versus 52.2%, respectively. In contrast, the hole mobility and device PCE of TBP and Li-TFSI-doped Spiro-OMeTAD (p-doped Spiro-OMeTAD) are 4.28 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 19.4%, respectively. Meanwhile, the Voc, Jsc, and FF of p-doped Spiro-OMeTAD are 1.09 V, 23.2 mA cm−2 and 76.5%, respectively. Furthermore, DTB-FL achieved the maximum PCE of 17.0% in the all-inorganic PVSC (CsPbI2.5Br0.5), which is one of the highest PCEs in the undoped HTM-based CsPbI3−xBrx PVSC, while the p-doped Spiro-OMeTAD-based all-inorganic PVSC yielded only a moderate PCE of 15.9%. The above results indicate that DTB-FL not only has excellent performance for organic–inorganic PVSCs, but also has good compatibility with all-inorganic PVSCs. Overall, the easily fabricated, cost-effective, and efficient dopant-free HTM, DTB-FL, demonstrates a promising route to replace the most advanced Spiro-OMeTAD.

As the donor unit of DTB-FL, triphenylamine (TPA) is one of the most common, efficient, and successful end-capping groups for organic small HTMs due to its robust electron-donating ability (EDA), excellent hole transport properties, and film-forming performance. Normally, the stronger EDA of the molecule promotes the light harvesting ability and enhances the intramolecular charge transfer, both of which have positive effects on PVSCs, whereas the stronger EDA of the donor unit is accompanied by a weakening of the π–π interactions and a decrease in Voc due to the increase of the HOMO energy level. For the D–A–π–A–D architectural HTM, which was originally designed to enhance the charge transport properties, the impact of the EDA of the donor unit is a very interesting question to be explored. In this work, we introduce the ionization potential (IP) quantifying the EDA of a group or molecule; in general, the smaller the IP, the stronger the EDA. Regulating the EDA of the donor unit by altering its side group is a simple but effective strategy. For this purpose, we partially or completely replaced the –OMe group on TPA with stronger electron-donating donor units –NMe2 and –NH2 groups, and donor units designed based on these groups are experimentally available.
Besides, donor units with weaker EDA than TPA are also required to investigate the effects of the EDA of the donor group on D–A–π–A–D architectural HTMs comprehensively. The effect of the substituent position in the aromatic ring on its EDA is frequently taken into account when materials are designed by molecular engineering. Compared to para-substitution, which exhibits strong EDA due to resonance stabilization, meta-substitution (Fig. 1) significantly weakens the EDA due to inductive effects, while ortho-substitution does not lead to an evident change in oxidation potential and maintains electron-donating properties consistent with the para-substitution. Therefore, meta-substitution was employed to obtain the weaker EDA of donor units. By employing para-substitution side groups, pD1–pD3 were designed, and by utilizing meta-substitution side groups, mD1–mD4 were designed. Schematic structures of the designed donors and molecules are shown in Fig. 1, and the core is defined as the combination of the benzothiadiazole acceptor unit and the 9,9-dialkylfluorene π-bridge unit. We proposed possible synthetic routes for all the studied molecules, showing the feasibility of their experimental synthesis rather than being confined to theoretical research (Fig. S17). The ionization potentials of the donor unit in dichloromethane (DCM) solvent under adiabatic conditions, IPdonor, are listed in Table S1. Besides modulating the EDA of the donor unit, meta-substitution of the side group also has a significant impact on the molecular properties due to the changes in the spatial structure of the molecule. Compared with para-substitution, side-group meta-substituted HTMs exhibit lower HOMO energy levels, higher thermal stability, improved hysteresis, and better carrier extraction and transport capabilities. Additionally, the asymmetry brought about by the meta-substitution of side groups may benefit the improvement of the film morphology. In other words, the meta-substitution of the side groups on HTMs is an extremely effective strategy to optimize the efficiency of PVSC performance. However, the validity of the meta-substitution strategy in D–A–π–A–D architectural HTMs has not been verified experimentally and theoretically so far. Thus, theoretically investigating the effectiveness of the side-group meta-substitution strategy for D–A–π–A–D architectural HTMs is another major part of this work. We expect that the results of the current research will provide adequate theoretical guidance for the systematic and logical design of novel HTMs with higher PCEs and superior charge carrier transport properties.

Simulations for the isolated molecular properties of all designed HTMs were performed by employing density functional theory (DFT) and time-dependent TD-DFT, based on Gaussian 09 and Multiwfn software. The DFT combined with the B3LYP functional was used to optimize the ground and ionic state geometries of all molecules, and subsequently the TD-DFT associated with the PBE38 functional was applied to investigate the optical properties of the HTMs. The simulations were completed in the 6-31G(d, p) basis set, and the solution environment was the dichloromethane (DCM) solution with the solvent effect of the PCM model. In addition, the crystallographic structure of the studied HTMs was predicted in all possible space groups based on the Materials Studio package, utilizing the Polymorph module combined with the COMPASS II force field. The force field type was set to calculate automatically, while the charge was forcefield assigned. In the summation step, both electrostatic and van der Waals interactions were calculated with the Ewald summation method. In order to predict the molecular crystals more accurately, we selected all 10 space groups. Due to the large number of molecules investigated and the guessed space groups, the accuracy of all the predicted processes is set to the ‘Fine’ level to balance the computational precision and cost.

In this study, the charge transport behavior was approximately evaluated by the semiempirical Marcus theory, and the charge hopping rate k can be formulated as follows:
(1)
where
Vec, h, and kB represent the electronic coupling, the Planck constant, and the Boltzmann constant, respectively. T denotes the room temperature (T = 300 K). In addition, the hole reorganization energy λh for the geometrical relaxation related to charge transfer is generally obtained by the adiabatic potential-energy surface method as follows:

λh = (Egs+ − Ecs+) + (Ecs0 − Egs0)
(2)
where the subscripts ‘
gs’ and ‘cs’ represent the ground state and cationic state geometries, respectively, while the superscripts indicate the charge of the molecules. For example, Egs+ and Ecs+ represent the total energies of molecules with ground and cationic geometries carrying a positive charge. Analogously, Egs0 and Ecs0 represent the energies of systems with ground and cationic geometries in the neutral state, respectively.

Apparently, the maximization of electronic coupling between adjacent dimer molecules is beneficial for achieving improved charge transport properties. Integrating the spatial overlap S and the charge transfer integral J with site energies H1 and H2, the electronic coupling Vec of the molecular dimer can be expressed as follows:
(3)
Due to the demonstrated reliability and excellence in processing non-covalent interactions, M06-2X/6-31G (d, p) was adopted to evaluate the transfer integral. The hole hopping events under the Brownian motion assumption are mutually independent, and thus the hole mobility can be analyzed by employing Einstein's relation in the absence of an applied electric field:
(4)
where
n = 3, due to the hole mobility, is calculated in the real three-dimensional molecular crystal; ri, ki and pi represent the distance between the centroid of the two isolated molecules, the charge hopping rate, and the relative probability of the hopping occurrence, respectively, for the dimer in the ith path, and pi is expressed as pi = ki/Σiki.

To comprehensively research the interfacial properties of HTMs/perovskites, 3 × 5 × 2 supercells of the FAPbI3 (110) surface were first constructed, and then optimized HTM monomer molecules were arbitrarily put on the interface of the FAPbI3 supercells to form planar heterojunctions. Based on the same method, we also constructed 4 × 6 × 2 FAPbI3 supercells for constructing heterojunctions with the dimer of HTMs. The HTM/FAPbI3 heterojunction structures were optimized using the Quickstep code encapsulated in the CP2K package. The optimization adopted the Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof (PBE) exchange correlation associated with the DZVP-MOLOPT-SR basis set and introduced dispersive interactions between HTMs and perovskites via DFT-D3 (BJ). The conjugate gradient (CG) optimizer and the orbital transformation (OT) method were applied for geometry optimization. The electron density difference (EDD) and charge transfer curves were analyzed based on Multiwfn and the EDD maps were visualized by VESTA.

The optimized ground-state geometries and frontier molecular orbitals (FMOs) for the studied eight HTMs are depicted in Fig. 2. The ground-state geometries indicate that all molecules exhibit good planarity, which could facilitate intermolecular stacking and charge transition properties. The electronic properties in Fig. 2 show that the HOMOs of all molecules are localized on the whole molecular skeleton, and extensive HOMO delocalization is beneficial for hole transport properties. Meanwhile, the LUMOs of molecules are mainly concentrated on the acceptor unit and partially distributed on the π-bridge unit. The results of FMOs demonstrate that all molecules exhibit favorable D–A–π–A–D features and the cores of molecules form extended π-conjugated bonds, which helps improve the charge transport properties.

The distinct difference in the HOMO in the core region of the studied HTMs drew our attention. The overlap between the HOMO and the LUMO can lead to strong Coulomb interaction, which is advantageous for the generation of excitons and hole transport. Since the LUMO are almost entirely concentrated in the core region, this overlap will be determined by the HOMO in the core region. To illuminate the variation of the HOMO electron cloud orbitals in the core region, we divided each HTM into three fragments: the core, donor1, and donor2, where donor1 and donor2 represent the donor units on either side of the HTM, respectively. Subsequently, the total density of states (TDOS) of the molecules and the partial density of states (PDOS) of each fragment were calculated, and the details are presented in Fig. 3. Apparently, the intensities of the TDOS of the HOMO and LUMO indicate that the volume of the FMO electron cloud is almost constant for all molecules. Besides, the TDOS of the HOMOs are jointly contributed by the core fragment and the donor unit, while those of the LUMOs are almost contributed by the core fragment, which is consistent with the analysis of FMOs. The statistical results of the contribution of fragments to the overall HOMOs show that both the increase of IPdonor and the meta-substitution of the side group help enhance the electronic coupling on the core fragment, suggesting that both strategies are conducive to neutral exciton generation and hole transport.
The energy level alignment of perovskites and HTMs is essential for promoting the PVSC performance. The alignment of the valence band maximum (VBM) of the perovskite with the HOMO level of the HTM facilitates Voc, and normally, the deeper the EHOMO, the larger the Voc. Besides, an excessive energy level difference leads to the energy level bending of the quasi-Fermi energy level of the perovskite at the interface, which will exponentially increase the interfacial recombination. Considering that the B3LYP functional is frequently overestimated in dealing with the HOMO energy level, the empirical fitting formula suggested by Chi et al. was adopted to obtain a more reliable calculated value in comparison with the experimental ones. The formula to modify the energy level of the HOMO, , is expressed as . Meanwhile, the value of the LUMO level should be corrected by , where  and EGap represent the amended values of the LUMO energy level and the HOMO–LUMO bandgap, respectively. The fitted values of FMO energy levels and bandgaps are shown in Table S3 and are visualized in Fig. 4a with the energy levels of the perovskite and Spiro-OMeTAD. As reported, the theoretical values of FMO levels and the bandgaps of DTB-FL and DT-BT are remarkably close to their experimental ones, indicating that the method we employed is reliable. Obviously, increasing IPdonor significantly deepens the , indicating that weakening the EDA of the donor unit helps improve the Voc. Compared with the para-substituted HTMs, all meta-substituted molecules exhibit HOMO energy levels that match more with the perovskite due to higher IPdonor, and both the energy level differences are smaller than 0.2 eV, which facilitates the formation of flat quasi-Fermi energy levels of the perovskite at the interface and significantly reduces interfacial hole–electron recombination. As the closest  to the Cs0.05FA0.95PbI3 perovskite, mD4 shows the best performance among all HTMs. Besides, the LUMO levels of all HTMs are much higher than the conduction band edge of the perovskite (−4.11 eV), suggesting that the investigated HTMs can efficiently block the unexpected backflow of electrons from the perovskite to the Au electrode and thus inhibit carrier recombination.
Furthermore, we performed a linear regression fitting of the , , and Egap as a function of IPdonor (Fig. 4b), and the results indicated that these energy values exhibit extremely strong linear relationships with the IPdonor. Previous studies have shown a linear dependence between the HOMO energy levels of molecules and their ionization potentials. We present for the first time that for linear organic small D–A–π–A–D system HTMs, the energy of FMOs and the bandgaps of molecules can be conveniently predicted based only on the ionization potential of the donor fragment and a simple linear regression equation. This is helpful for us to rapidly and rationally design HTMs with the desired charge transport properties.

In order to minimize the impact on the absorption efficiency of the device, an ideal HTM should have no or weak absorption in the optical absorption range of perovskites. The UV-Vis optical properties of the studied HTMs were theoretically investigated, and the corresponding results are shown in Fig. S1. Meanwhile, the corresponding optical properties of another experimental molecule, DT-BT, are represented in Fig. S2. It is clear that both experimental molecules show clear bimodal absorption peaks consistent with the experimental results, and the calculated values of their main and visible region absorption peaks are highly in agreement with the experimental ones (Table S5), indicating the reliability of the PBE38 functional in calculating the spectra. A Stokes shift reflects the structural variation between the ground state S0 and the excited state S1 of the molecule, and the S0 state corresponds to the absorption peak in the visible region λabs. Combined with the optical properties, the Stokes shift is expressed as the redshift of the fluorescence spectral peak over the corresponding absorption peak, i.e., Stokes shift = λem − λabs, where λem denotes the emission peak. A diagram of the positions and intensities of λabs and λem and the Stokes shifts of the investigated HTMs is shown in Fig. 5. As reported, both λabs and λem are blue-shifted with increasing IPdonor, but IPdonor has a more significant effect on meta-substituted HTMs and emission spectra compared with para-substituted molecules and absorption spectra, respectively. Consequently, the Stokes shifts of para-substituted HTMs evidently decrease with increasing IPdonor, while for meta-substituted HTMs, the Stokes shifts change slightly.

The maximum absorption wavelengths of the eight investigated HTMs are in the UV region, far away from the absorption region of perovskites (550–800 nm), indicating that all HTMs are beneficial for improving the light-harvesting ability of perovskites and the Jsc of PVSCs. Moreover, the absorption spectra of HTMs in the visible region gradually avoid the absorption range of perovskites as IPdonor increases, suggesting that weakening the EDA of the donor unit helps improve the transmission properties in the absorption range of perovskites, which is further beneficial for obtaining a higher Jsc of PVSCs.
The Stokes shifts of all molecules are greater than 110 nm, much larger than the Stokes shift of Spiro-OMeTAD (64 nm). A large Stokes shift implies that the HTM can undergo a huge geometrical structure change upon excitation, indicating that the molecule has good flexibility. Meanwhile, Mhaisalkar and Grimsdale et al. predicted that large Stokes shifts are beneficial for the pore filling of HTMs. The results of Stokes shifts suggest that all designed molecules are beneficial for improving the performance and conversion efficiency of PVSCs due to their good structural flexibility and pore-filling ability.

In addition to transporting hole carriers, HTMs also play a role in protecting perovskites from external environmental erosion, and thus, stability is one of the most basic parameters for HTMs. The absolute hardness η is generally adopted to evaluate the stability of molecules, which is measured as a function of the adiabatic ionization potential IPa and electron affinity EAa: η = (IPa − EAa)/2. As shown in Table 1, the increased IPdonor has positive effects on both IPa and EAa, but the impact on the former is greater than the latter. Therefore, the diminished EDA of the donor unit is beneficial for molecular stability. Simultaneously, the meta-substitution of the side group has the same effect by affecting the IPdonor.

Molecules
IPa
EAa

η

ΔGsolv
pD1
4.21
2.49
0.86
−58.41
pD2
4.36
2.50
0.93
−60.30
pD3
4.39
2.51
0.94
−54.96
DTB-FL
4.68
2.54
1.07
−51.49
mD1
4.72
2.54
1.09
−57.49
mD2
4.81
2.56
1.13
−59.38
mD3
4.83
2.55
1.14
−54.57
mD4
4.94
2.59
1.17
−50.65
Electrostatic surface potential (ESP) is another common approach for evaluating the stability of molecules. The results of the ESPs of all studied molecules are shown in Fig. 6a, where green represents the regions of positive charges, while middle blue denotes the regions of negative charges. Generally, more positive charges on the molecule are able to enhance oxidation resistance and thus improve the stability of the molecule. As shown in Fig. 6a, as the IPdonor increases and the position of the side group changes from para to meta, the area and intensity of the positive charge regions change positively, while the negative charge regions change oppositely. Meanwhile, the ESPs of HTMs have been analyzed quantitatively to further confirm these results, and the relevant data are represented in Table S7 and Fig. 6b. As reported, the enhanced electron-donating ability of the donor unit leads to an obvious decline in both the area and strength of the negative charge, thereby increasing the antioxidant capacity of the molecules. Therefore, the reduction of the EDA of the donor unit effectively improved the stabilities of HTMs, and this outcome is aligned with the absolute hardness analysis. From the aspect of stability, the meta-substitution of side groups showed no other particular effects except for affecting the hardness of the molecule by modulating IPdonor.
The solubility of HTMs is informative for their commercial application in PVSCs, and their high solubility not only helps to form a homogeneous film but also reduces the processing cost of PVSCs. As shown in Table 1, the solubilities of NMe2- and OMe-based HTMs slightly increase with the reduced IPdonor, while the solubilities of NH2-based HTMs are obviously better than those of NMe2- and OMe-based HTMs. Furthermore, all HTMs exhibit excellent spontaneous solubility due to their extremely negative ΔGsolv values, of which pD2 shows the best solubility.

The conductivity of HTMs is primarily determined by their hole mobility, and high hole mobility generally results in an improved FF and a larger Jsc of PVSCs. The reorganization energy λh, as one of the essential parameters affecting the hole mobility, is mainly contributed by the internal reorganization energy and the external one, but the external reorganization energy is neglected as it is considerably lower than the internal one for condensed-state systems. The Materials Studio was applied to predict the crystal structures of the studied HTMs, and the spatial data of the crystals are listed in Table S8. Evidently, the IPdonor or the substitution position of the side group has no effect on the crystal system or space group of the linear D–A–π–A–D molecule. In this work, a more complete approach for calculating the hole mobility is used to consider the contribution of all hopping paths. A giant ideal crystal is obtained by expanding the lowest total energy crystal structure. Subsequently, the center of the giant crystal is located and the most compact molecules are searched for to form the corresponding dimer. The compactness of the constituent dimers is then ranked and the top N paths are selected to calculate the electronic coupling; when Vec converges it is considered that all hopping paths are found (Fig. S4). Since this work studies linear molecules, we accelerate convergence by judging the tightness of the dimer via the average effective distances as shown in Fig. S3b. It is easy to find that for nonlinear systems, the average effective distance is close to ri. The main hopping paths obtained by program filtering based on the predicted crystal structures, along with the hopping rates on each hopping path, are shown in Fig. 7. The data in brackets denote the contribution of the ith path to the hole mobility and is defined as μi/μ, where . We ignored paths that contributed less than 0.5% to the hole mobility. The relevant key parameters of HTMs are listed in Table 2, and the data in brackets in Table 2 are the hole mobility of DTB-FL measured by the experiment. The theoretical/experimental values of the hole mobilities of DTB-FL and DT-BT are 4.942 × 10−2/3.94 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 8.348 × 10−3/1.92 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively. Since we consider the hole mobility for all possible hopping paths in an ideal molecular crystal, it is reasonable that the calculated values are larger than the actual ones within the appropriate range. In other words, the same tendency exhibited by the calculated and experimental values demonstrates that our work on the hole transport properties is credible based on existing theoretical levels.

HTMs
Paths

λ
h


V
ec


r

i



k
h


μ


a Experimentally measured hole mobility of DTB-FL, data obtained from ref. 53.
b Theoretically calculated hole mobility of Spiro-OMeTAD, data obtained from ref. 123.

pD1
1
0.365
−16.977
11.045
2.33 × 1011
1.750 × 10−2
2
5.750
11.567
2.68 × 1010
3
−8.27
29.164
5.54 × 1010
4
3.526
35.683
1.01 × 1010
5
−2.925
35.988
6.92 × 109
6
−2.942
35.988
7.01 × 109
pD2
1
0.456
−12.789
10.496
4.91 × 1010
6.006 × 10−2
2
−15.227
29.587
6.96 × 1010
3
−15.315
29.587
7.04 × 1010
4
22.694
33.556
1.55 × 1011
5
6.796
35.666
1.39 × 1010
pD3
1
0.356
−23.676
14.365
5.05 × 1011
5.944 × 10−2
2
−11.233
20.624
1.14 × 1011
DTB-FL
1
0.183
−12.077
9.928
9.70 × 1011
4.942 × 10−2 (3.94 × 10−3)
2
−3.586
19.420
8.55 × 1010
3
3.185
20.013
6.75 × 1010
4
3.213
20.013
6.87 × 1010
5
2.562
26.761
4.37 × 1010
6
2.26
31.686
3.40 × 1010
7
2.266
31.686
3.41 × 1010
8
3.85
36.032
9.86 × 1010
mD1
1
0.176
28.857
11.738
6.06 × 1012
5.278 × 10−1
2
10.019
18.054
7.30 × 1011
3
−12.678
34.174
1.17 × 1012
mD2
1
0.131
−9.021
6.629
1.06 × 1012
1.992 × 10−1
2
17.623
6.299
4.04 × 1012
3
−14.046
9.031
2.56 × 1012
4
9.527
33.103
1.18 × 1012
mD3
1
0.115
−17.807
9.335
5.18 × 1012
2.519 × 10−1
2
−4.689
13.004
3.59 × 1011
3
−3.888
21.907
2.47 × 1011
4
4.808
29.011
3.78 × 1011
5
−2.570
34.587
1.08 × 1011
6
−2.558
34.587
1.07 × 1011
mD4
1
0.094
19.335
7.065
8.22 × 1012
2.618 × 10−1
2
−6.207
7.171
8.47 × 1011
3
3.495
27.494
2.69 × 1011
4
5.39
34.763
6.39 × 1011
5
5.397
34.763
6.41 × 1011
Spiro-OMeTAD
—
—
—
—
—
5.65 × 10−3
As shown in Fig. 7, the predominant hopping orientations of HTMs containing NMe2 and OMe side groups are in the longitudinal direction, while for HTMs containing the NH2 side group (pD2, mD2), the predominant hopping directions turn into the parallel direction. The results suggest that for the linear D–A–π–A–D system, NMe2 and OMe side groups might be favorable for the formation of effective cofacial π–π packing. From Table 2 and Fig. S6, we can find that the increased IPdonor, i.e. the increased IPa of HTMs can significantly reduce λh, and the λh of the meta-substituted molecules are extremely low, indicating that weakening the EDA of the donor unit is an effective approach for boosting the hole transport properties.
In order to achieve excellent hole mobility, electronic coupling Vec needs to be maximized in addition to the minimization of λh. To analyze the electronic coupling, we represent the HOMO distribution of the dimer on the predominant hopping path for each molecule in Fig. 8. Apparently, the meta-substitution of the side group can significantly promote the electronic coupling on the π-conjugated bonds, suggesting that the strategy is effective for enhancing the overlap of π orbitals between dimers. However, the electronic coupling is not individually determined by the distribution mode of FMOs, it also relies on the relative positions of the separate HTMs in the dimer. Different viewpoints on the spatial positions of separate HTMs in the dimer of the predominant hopping path and the overlap between the orbitals are shown in Fig. S7–S14. In general, the electronic coupling is positively correlated with the orbital overlap of FMOs in the dimer. The results indicated that only the dimers of the predominant hopping paths of pD3 and mD1 form good face-to-face stacking, and thereby the overlapped regions between their π-conjugated bonds are quite large, allowing them to have the two largest electronic couplings of all HTMs. mD1 obtained the largest mobility of all HTMs owing to the maximum Vec and a quite small λh. In addition, even though the other meta-substituted molecules do not form good face-to-face stacking, the obtained hole mobilities are much higher than those of the corresponding para-substituted molecules due to the extremely low λh. It is expected that excellent mobility will be obtained if these HTMs also form good face-to-face stacking. Compared to the theoretical hole mobility of Spiro-OMeTAD (5.65 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1), the linear D–A–π–A–D molecules in this work, especially the molecules with meta-substituted side groups, have significantly better hole transport properties than Spiro-OMeTAD. Surprisingly, PVSCs based on all designed HTMs are expected to obtain high PCEs, and these HTMs can be potential application candidates for PVSCs. Overall, the weakening of the EDA of the donor unit can reduce the molecular reorganization energy, while the meta-substitution of the side group helps enhance intermolecular electronic coupling on the π-conjugated bonds of the dimer. These two approaches, especially the meta-substitution of side groups, are extremely effective strategies to improve hole mobility.

The interfacial properties of charge carriers between the perovskite absorbing layer and the hole transport layer will remarkably affect the efficiency of perovskite solar cell devices. Hence, we selected monomer molecules of pD1, DTB-FL, mD1 and mD4 as representatives to construct HTM/perovskite planar heterojunction structures for further interfacial studies, respectively. Besides, in order to examine the effect of intermolecular coupling on interfacial transport, we also constructed the heterojunction structures of the dominant transfer path dimer of the above four molecules with the perovskite interface. Simulations of the dimer/perovskite systems are closer to the real scenario, thus allowing a comprehensive study of the interfacial hole carrier behavior. For all heterojunction structures, perovskites are selected with FAPbI3, which is dominant in DTB-FL-related PVSC devices (Cs0.05FA0.95PbI3 for perovskites in the experimental devices). The (110) face of the perovskite was selected for HTM adsorption because this face can promote hole transport. Previous studies also revealed that the MAI of MAPbI3 has a synergistic effect of promoting hole extraction and preventing hole recombination, and the conclusion can be extended to other perovskites. Based on this, we exposed the FAI terminal of (110) to form planar heterojunctions with HTMs. The results of the interfacial interaction indicate that the H and S atoms of HTMs with I atoms at the perovskite interface and H atoms in FA+ are dominant in the HTM/PVK system (Fig. S15). The adsorption energy (Eads) of the system was obtained according to Eads = EHTM/perovskite − Eperovskite − EHTM, where EHTM/perovskite, Eperovskite and EHTM represent the energies of HTM adsorption on a perovskite, a pristine perovskite and HTMs, respectively. The results of Table S10 show that the ability of HTMs to adsorb onto the perovskite decreases as the EDA of the donor unit decreases, which is due to the reduced electronegativity that results in a lower Coulomb interaction between FA+ ions. Notably, the adsorption energies of all heterojunctions are below −2.5 eV, signifying the excellent interfacial adsorption ability of the D–A–π–A–D system HTMs.

The electron density difference (EDD) of the HTM/perovskite systems was further analyzed to characterize the flow direction of charge carriers. The EDD is defined as the charge density difference between the HTM/perovskite systems and the individual components. The EDD maps, along with the plane-averaged electron density difference (Δρ) of the HTM/perovskite systems integrated in the x–y plane, and the curve of the transferred electrons with respect to the z-coordinate are shown in Fig. 9 (dimer/perovskite) and Fig S16 (monomer/perovskite), where light blue and light yellow in the EDD maps and fillings of the Δρ diagram represent the accumulation and consumption of electrons, respectively, and the corresponding color curves in the Δρ diagram represent the distribution of positive and negative charge carriers. The transferred electrons Δρint are the integrals of Δρ with respect to the z-axis. All interfaces are defined as the position with the lowest negative charge at the HTM/perovskite partition. Obviously, for all molecules of the D–A–π–A–D systems, the accumulation of electrons occurs mainly in the perovskite, while the electron depletion region is mainly in HTMs, indicating a significant transfer of holes at the interface, with the transfer direction being from the perovskite to the HTM. Combined with the interfacial charge transfer, we find that there is a clear decrease in the hole injection capacity of the monomer/perovskite system as the EDA decreases. The reason for such a result is that as the EDA of the donor units decreases, the electrons available from the monomer decrease, thus diminishing the charge exchange with the perovskite. In addition, the presence of a negative charge at the interface between the mD4 monomer and the FAI terminal suggests that the weak EDA of the monomer increases the probability of charge carrier recombination at the interface.
When further observing the dimer/perovskite systems, which is closer to the real scenario, we find that the intermolecular coupling of the dimer has a twofold synergistic effect. On the one hand, it helps enhance interfacial hole injection by 0.48, 0.71, 0.56, and 0.70 holes for pD1, DTB-FL, mD1 and mD4, respectively, narrowing the charge exchange difference caused by the decrease of EDA. On the other hand, the intermolecular coupling at the interface of the dimer/perovskite system can also diminish the probability of interfacial carrier recombination and compensate for the effect arising from the weak EDA. More importantly, for pD1, DTB-FL, mD1 and mD4 in the dimer/perovskite systems, the interfacial charge transfer at the interface is 2.23, 2.06, 1.99 and 1.80 holes, respectively, and such abundant interfacial charge transfer indicates that the hole extraction ability of the D–A–π–A–D system HTMs is excellent.

Firstly, the effects of the electron-donating ability of donor units on the linear D–A–π–A–D architectural HTMs were theoretically studied. Through a comprehensive study of a series of molecular properties including photoelectric properties and hole transfer properties, we reveal that for D–A–π–A–D system HTMs, the small IPdonor is negative in terms of energy level matching, optical absorption properties, molecular stability, and reorganization energy, thus resulting in poor carrier transport properties and device performance. Subsequently, the meta-substitution of the side group strategy was introduced in the D–A–π–A–D system as an approach for reducing the electron-donating ability of the donor unit. In addition to the success in overcoming the problems associated with small IPdonor, the meta-substitution strategy also promotes the electronic coupling on π-conjugated bonds between the molecular dimers. Studies on the interfacial properties show that intermolecular coupling can synergistically enhance the interfacial charge extraction capability and reduce the interfacial carrier recombination, and the interfacial carrier transfer performance of the D–A–π–A–D system HTMs is excellent. Consequently, all side-group meta-substituted HTMs achieve extraordinary hole mobilities and interfacial performances due to their extremely low λh and large Vec, and would be promising for application in high-performance PVSCs. We expect that the outcomes of this research would guide researchers seeking HTMs with superior performance to replace the most advanced Spiro-OMeTAD.


Ke-Li Wang and Qun-Gui Wang contributed equally. Ke-Li Wang: investigation, methodology, writing–original draft, and writing–review & editing. Qun-Gui Wang: methodology, writing–original draft, and writing–review & editing. Cui-E. Hu: writing–review & editing and supervision. Yan Cheng: visualization, supervision, and project administration. Guang-Fu Ji: project administration and software. Xiang-Rong Chen: supervision and project administration.


There are no conflicts of interest to declare.


This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 12074274).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d3nr01390a
‡ These authors contributed equally.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023