 DOI: 10.1039/C2CE06523A
(Paper)
CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 3257-3263

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Chuanmiao
Yan
,

Zhengtao
Deng
,

Fangqiong
Tang
*,

Linlin
Li
,

Dong
Chen
 and 

Jun
Ren
*

Laboratory of Controllable Preparation and Application of Nanomaterials, Technical Institute of Physics and Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, P.R. China. E-mail: tangfq@mail.ipc.ac.cn; rj@mail.ipc.ac.cn; Fax: +8610-62554670; Tel: +8610-82543521

Graduate School of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, P.R. China

Received
14th November 2011
, Accepted 9th February 2012
First published on 8th March 2012
We report the growth of high quality thiol-capped CdSe nanocrystals with narrow size distribution using a continuous, fast, green, low-cost, non-trioctylphosphine (Non-TOP) based chemical aerosol flow synthesis (CAFS) technique. Various synthetic parameters, such as reaction temperature, growth time, precursor ratio, and the hydrocarbon chain length of thiols, have been tuned to study the nanocrystal growth mechanism. The characteristics of fluorescence emission with long lifetimes suggests the existence of surface trap states induced by surface thiol ligands. Our primary results showed that these thiol-capped CdSe nanocrystals have enhanced the photovoltaic performance, indicating their great potential for solar energy conversion applications. Because the current strategy is fast and highly reproducible, it would facilitate the commercial scale synthesis of high quality CdSe nanocrystals with narrow size distribution.

Semiconductor nanocrystals, also known as quantum dots (QDs), have attracted great scientific and technological interest due to their significant optical and electrical properties, and the promising applications in biological labelling, light-emitting diodes, solar cells and sensors. In particular, Quantum dot solar cells (QDSC) have attracted lots of attention because of their theoretical high energy conversion efficiencies in comparison to silicon based solar cells. Passivating the surface of the nanocrystals with thiol will further enhance the power conversion efficiency of QDSC. When thiol was adsorbed on the nanocrystal surface, the holes were trapped in the surface of the nanocrystals, making it easier for the charge separation. Thus, the charge-carrier mobility could be greatly enhanced. Previously, thiol-capped CdSe quantum dots could be obtained by a ligand exchange method, which requires tedious work to replace the original trioctylphosphine (TOP) with thiol ligands. Thus, the direct synthesis of thiol-capped CdSe nanocrystals in the organic solvent will represent a significant step forward in QDSC applications.

The classic synthetic route for growing CdSe nanocrystals is the hot-injection method, which involves the rapid injection of selenium (Se) precursors into cadmium (Cd) precursor solution at high temperatures. This method can generate nanocrystals with narrow size distribution and high quantum yield. But large scale production with this method is limited due to the difficulties in achieving homogeneous mixing and uniform temperature. The chemical aerosol flow synthesis (CAFS) method developed by Suslick et al. allows for continuous synthesis. It is possible to obtain as much as quantum dots just by prolonging the reaction time. The high productivity of this method (100∼120 mg h−1) makes it desirable for large scale synthesis. Many different kinds of nanocrystals including binary nanocrystals, alloyed nanocrystals, tetrapod-shaped nanocrystals and even complicated core/shell structures, as well as core/shell/shell nanocrystals have been synthesized with this method.
On the other hand, low-cost, green approaches to produce nanocrystals are in high demand for satisfying the ever-increasing technical needs and environmental concerns. Previously, trioctylphosphine (TOP) and trioctylphosphine oxide (TOPO) were generally used as capping ligands for synthesis of nanocrystals. As TOP is expensive, unstable and hazardous, alternative methods without use of TOP should be developed. In 2005, our group reported the first non-TOP method to synthesize CdSe nanocrystals in paraffin liquid, without using any phosphines. This method opens the door to synthesize a series of high quality semiconductor nanocrystals with different compositions in a relatively green and low cost way. As suggested by Ball, if the non-TOP synthesis could be used in the CAFS technique, nanocrystals would be produced on a large scale via cheaper and greener way to meet the technical demands. However, to the best of our knowledge, there is no report on the Non-TOP based CAFS synthesis of nanocrystals up to now.
Herein, we report, for the first time, the fast, continuous, and commercial scale synthesis of high quality thiol-capped CdSe nanocrystals using a chemical aerosol flow synthesis technique. Because it uses environmentally friendly solvents without any phosphine (such as TOP), our strategy appears to be green and low-cost. We have systematically studied the effects of the synthetic parameters, such as reaction temperature, growth time, precursor ratio, and the carbon chain length of thiols. These high quality thiol-capped CdSe nanocrystals have narrow size distribution and improved photovoltaic performance.

CdO (99.5%), Se powder (99.9%), ethanethiol (ET), hexanethiol (HT), octanethiol (OT), dodecanethiol (DDT), oleic acid (OA), n-hexane (analytical grade), and methanol (analytical grade) were obtained from Beijing Chemical Reagent Ltd. China. Octadecene (ODE) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Rhodamine 6G was obtained from Alfa Aesar. All chemicals were used as received without further purifications.


In a typical synthetic procedure, a mixture of cadmium oxide (4 mmol), oleic acid (6 mL), and octadecene (12 mL) was first heated to 120 °C under a N2 flow in a 50 mL three-necked flask for about 10 min and then reacted at 240 °C for 2 h. The solution was then cooled and stored at room temperature.


Se (2 mmol) powder and ODE (20 mL) were loaded in a three-necked flask, then heated to 200 °C with rapid stirring and kept for 2 h. The solution turned red first, and yellow in the end.


In a typical synthesis of thiol capped CdSe nanocrystals, cadmium precursor (4 mL), Se-ODE (4 mL) and 1-Dodecanethiol (96 μL) (ethanethiol for 30 μL, hexanethiol for 56 μL and octanethiol for 70 μL) were loaded in a 50 mL conical flask, then toluene (22 mL) was added to dilute the precursor to form a clear solution with low viscosity. The mixture was then transferred to the self-developed equipment (as shown in Fig. 1a), and was ultrasonically nebulized into microdroplets by a 1.7 MHz ultrasound generator. The mist was carried by a N2 flow though a quartz in a furnace. The flow of N2 was changed from 0.5 L min−1 to 3 L min−1, and the temperature was kept at 200 to 400 °C with a 25 or 50 °C as a step. The products were collected in a toluene-filled bubbler. Oleic acid capped CdSe nanocrystals were synthesized without the addition of thiols while other reaction parameters were kept the same.


The optical characteristics of CdSe nanocrystals were investigated by a JASCO V5700 and a F4600 FL spectrofluorometer. Powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements were performed on a D8 Focus XRD system (Bruker). Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) images were recorded with a JEM 2100 electron microscope. Fluorescence lifetimes were carried out with a time correlated single photon counting (TCSPC) spectrometer (Edinburgh Instruments FL 900) with a thyratron-gated lamp filled with H2. The quantum yield were measured by comparing the optical density and the fluorescence intensity of the CdSe QDs and Rhodamine 6G. The photovoltaic performance was carried out by packaging the nanocrystals in a solar cell. First, 1 g TiO2 was added into 20 mL 1% nitric acid solution and stirred in a boiling water bath to get modified TiO2 powder. Then the TiO2 powder was mixed with 15 mL of 2% HPMC water/ethanol (5:3) solution and after milling for 5 h, a viscous paste was obtained. After annealing at 450 °C for 30 min and cooling to room temperature, we obtained flexible TiO2 electrodes. Then it was dipped in MPA solution and quantum dots solution respectively for 24 h to get QD sensitized TiO2 electrodes. The solar cells were assembled by using quantum dot sensitized TiO2 electrodes as the working electrodes and platinized FTO glass as the counter electrodes, while using polysulfide (1 mol L−1) as the electrolyte. The photocurrent and photocurrent–voltage (I–V) measurements were measured on an electrochemistry station (Model 263 A, Princeton) using a 500 W xenon lamp (Trusttech, China) as a light source with a filter to cut off wavelengths shorter than 380 nm.


We built a homemade chemical aerosol flow synthesis apparatus to synthesize the nanocrystals, as shown in Fig. 1. In the synthesis, the mixed precursors dissolved in toluene were firstly added to the ultrasonic nebulization (left part in Fig. 1). Then, the mixture was nebulized into mists. With the flow of N2, the mists were carried through the furnace, where they were heated and reacted. Finally, the produced nanocrystals could be continuously collected by toluene which was filled in the three-necked bottle (right part in Fig. 1).


As shown in Fig. 2, the XRD pattern of octanethiol-capped CdSe nanocrystals synthesized at different temperatures with flow speeds of 1.5 L min−1 shows diffraction peaks corresponding to (111), (220), (311) of the cubic zinc blended phase of CdSe (Joint Committee on Powder Diffraction Standards file No. 19-0191). With increasing temperature, higher crystalline nanocrystals were got, and the peaks of all samples were corresponding to the CdSe structure without any shifts to the CdS peaks, indicating the thiol acts works as a ligand. The average diameter of the nanocrystals was calculated using Debye-Scherrer's equation, D = 0.89λ/(Bcosθ), where D is the average diameter of the nanoparticles, λ is the wavelength of the X-ray used, B is the full width in radians at the peak half-maximum, and θ is the Bragg angle of the X-ray diffraction peak. And the diameter of QDs were obtained got by TEM and calculated by absorption spectra, as listed in Table 1. The size obtained by XRD and TEM correspond well with that calculated from absorption spectra using the CdSe equation, indicating that the composition of the nanocrystals were consistent with the formula CdSe instead of alloyed CdSeS. The fine absorption peak indicates that the nanocrystals have a narrow size distribution, which was further confirmed by the TEM image (Fig. 3a, 3b and 3c) and histogram of size distribution (Fig. 3g, 3h and 3i). The well resolved lattice fringes shown in Fig. 3d, 3e and 3f confirm the good crystallinity of the CdSe QDs.

Temperature
Size by XRD (nm)
Size by TEM (nm)
Size calculated by Abs (nm)
250 °C
2.1
2.24
2.21
300 °C
2.80
2.75
2.87
350 °C
3.17
3.20
3.33

The reaction temperature plays an important role to determine the size of nanocrystals, which can be seen from the change of the absorption peaks. As shown in Fig. 4, we investigated the temperature effect at the constant flow rate of 1 L min−1. With the increased temperature, the absorption peaks of synthesized nanocrystals showed an obvious red shift. The absorption peaks of CdSe synthesized at 200, 225, 250, 275, 300, 325, and 350 °C were 428, 438, 456, 497, 513, 535, and 546 nm, respectively. The obvious absorption peaks shown in the spectra indicate that the nanocrystals were highly monodisperse. In addition, the growth rate of the nanocrystals was strongly related to the temperature. When the temperature was higher than 300 °C or lower than 200 °C, the nanocrystal growth rate became slow (size change in Table 2). When the temperature was around 275 °C, the growth rate was fastest as shown in Table 2. These results show that the growth rate of the nanocrystals versus the reaction temperature is nonlinear. When the temperature is as low as 200 °C, the reaction rate is relatively slow, and it is hard to grow to a large nanocrystal in a short amount of time. The growth rate is the main limitation to influence the nanocrystal growth. With an increased temperature, the reaction rate increases following an exponential curve, the nanocrystals grow fast and large nanocrystals can be obtained. But when the temperature is above 300 °C, the diffusion of the monomer becomes the main influencing factor on the crystal growth instead of the temperature. Although the reaction rate is fast, it is also very hard to grow to large nanocrystals.

Temperature °C
200
225
250
275
300
325
350
Peak (nm)
427
438
56
497
513
535
546
Size (nm)
1.78
1.86
1.99
2.32
2.48
2.77
2.96
Size change (nm)
0
0.08
0.13
0.32
0.16
0.29
0.19

The effect of growth time was investigated by changing the gas flow at a constant reaction temperature of 250 °C. When the reaction temperature is fixed, the growth time could be controlled by the gas flow, which determines the size of nanocrystals. As shown in Fig. 5a, the absorption peaks of the samples shifted from 458 nm to 435 nm if the gas flow increased from 0.5 L min−1 to 3 L min−1. Considering the heat part of the quartz tube is about 60 cm and the radius of the tube is about 10 mm, the calculated volume of the heat zone is 0.1884 L. The growth time is calculated to be from 22.61 s to 3.77 s for different gas flow from 0.5 L min−1 to 3 L min−1 (Table S1, ESI). The shortest growth time in our experiment is 3.77 s, demonstrating that our CAFS method provides a unique way to shorten the reaction time to several seconds. With this method, we could also study the growth kinetics shortly over a few second scale, which is difficult to be realized in other synthesis methods. The kinetics of growth was accessed by plotting the relationship between nanocrystal size and reaction time (the growth time of 22.61 s at the lowest gas flow of 0.5 L min−1 was not included, this is due to Ostwald ripening or the defocusing of the size distribution when the reaction time is long) (see Fig. 5b). The results could be fitted to a first ordered exponential function. This result shows that the nanocrystal size increases quickly at the early stage, which is the reaction-controlled stage. With the time prolonged, the growth rate of the nanocrystals slows down, which is the diffusion-controlled stage.

The absorption peak of the nanocrystal sample is very sharp with high-speed gas flow, and it will be less sharper when the gas flow turns slower. When the gas flow is fast, it is more likely to be seen as a turbulent flow, and the velocity profile is more flat than that caused by laminar flow, thus, nanocrystals with narrow size distribution can be observed. When the gas flow is slow, laminar flow may occur, which means that the flow gets faster at the centre while gradually diminishing towards the periphery, resulting in a broad size distribution of nanocrystals. This is due to the Ostwald ripening if the reaction time is prolonged.

Different to the hot-injection method, which could generate highly crystalline nanocrystals using ODE as an on-coordinate solvent and oleic acid as the surface ligand, the reaction using the CAFS method needs a stronger ligand to bind Cd atoms. In the previous work, TOPO was a necessary agent due to the strong coordinate bond to Cd atoms. In the present study, we found that the presence of a strong coordinate ligand such as thiol is necessary. Without thiol as the capping ligand, it is difficult to get high quality nanocrystals with Cd(OA)2 and Se-ODE, as indicated by the less defined absorption peaks shown in Fig. S1, ESI. However, with thiol, we synthesized high quality CdSe nanocrystals using the Non-TOP based CAFS method, as indicated by the sharp absorption peaks shown in Fig. 6. Meanwhile, as a ligand, thiol hardly reacts with the cadmium precursors, as shown in Fig. S2, ESI. Only when the temperature is about 385 °C, can CdS nanocrystals be formed (Fig. S2, ESI). This result is consistent with the XRD pattern (Fig. 1a), where no diffraction peaks corresponding to CdS show up.

As a coordinating ligand, thiol can greatly affect the reaction speed. With relatively high thiol/cadmium ratios of 1:1, the monomer reactivity is decreased. The thermodynamic barrier is hard to overcome, which reduces the number of nanocrystals formed in the initial nucleation stage. In the following growth stage, with more residual monomers, the nanocrystal can grow bigger. But from the chemical kinetic aspect, if the reactivity of the monomer is low, it is hard to grow into big nanocrystals. These two stages have a competing relationship. The reaction temperature decides which one would be the key factor. When the temperature is high enough, the reaction rate is fast so the chemical kinetics can be neglected, the main influence factor is the thermodynamic barrier. While at low temperatures, the reaction rate is slow and chemical kinetics become the key factor.
As shown in Fig. S3, ESI, at relatively low temperatures, as the nucleation is relatively fast, the speed-limiting step is the chemical kinetics process. With increased thiol:Cd ratios, the reactivity of the monomers decreases, leading to smaller nanocrystals. While at high temperatures, nucleation would be the main barrier. Because of the fast reaction rate, when the thiol:Cd ratios increase, the low reactive monomer leads to fewer nanocrystals being formed in the initial nucleation stage. In the following growth stage, the nanocrystals can grow bigger. These results show that with increased thiol:Cd ratios, the absorption peak position change between two temperatures will be more obvious. Different sized CdSe nanocrystals can be synthesized by tuning the thiol:Cd ratio.

Thiols with different lengths, such as ethanethiol (ET), hexanethiol (HT), octanethiol (OT), and dodecanethiol (DDT), were used to investigate the influence of hydrocarbon chain length on the nanocrystal growth. For HT, OT and DDT, with the increasing hydrocarbon chain length, the absorption peak showed a red shift at 250 and 300 °C (Fig. 7a, b). The results show that the QDs size is correlated with the chain length of the thiol ligands in the CdSe nanocrystal growth. With longer hydrocarbon chains, the coordination ability of thiol decreases, so binding effects between Cd and thiol will be weaker, thus the Cd precursors will be more active. In the synthesis, with more active Cd precursors, larger nanocrystals would be obtained. But the ethanethiol did not follow this rule. This could be attributed to the low boiling point of ethanethiol (35 °C), even lower than toluene. In the reaction, the ET is quickly evaporated, leading to the decrease of the thiol ligand concentration, this explanation was further confirmed by the much less defined absorbance peak shown in Fig. 7b (black line). As illustrated in Fig. 6, with lower thiol concentrations, the more active precursors tend to grow into bigger nanocrystals, as suggested by the red shifted absorption peaks. This result is consistent with the effect of the cadmium/thiol ratio.


The thiol, known as an electron donating or hole trapping agent, can greatly influence the fluorescence property of nanocrystals. Different to the quenching effect in previous work, our results showed that thiol capped on the surface of the CdSe nanocrystals could trap the hole, leading to it accepting the electron and then emitting light. As shown in Fig. 8a and 8b, there is no band edge emission in the spectra, but only a broad trap state emission. The peaks of the trap state fluorescence would red shift with the increase in the reaction temperature. The light emitting mechanism could be explained as Fig. 8c. Holes were trapped in the surface states generated by the interaction between CdSe nanocrystals and thiol. As the nanocrystal absorbs a photon, an electron is excited from the valance band to the conduction band. Then the electrons and holes were combined together, and the red shifted fluorescent light could be emitted. This process shows that there is a charge separation between the nanocrystals and the surface ligands, which is very useful in the solar cell devices. These results indicate that the thiol-capped nanocrystals have potential applications in the photovoltaic devices. The fluorescence lifetime measurement shows that the trap state emissions have a long lifetime average of 526 ns (Fig. 8d), which further confirms the trap state emission. The highest quantum yield was calculated to be about 10% compared with Rhodamine 6G. The long fluorescence lifetime and low QY indicates there is a hole trapping on thiol, the trapping process prolonged the lifetime and decreased the quantum yield.


The thiol capped CdSe nanocrystals could be incorporated into the solar cell device to measure their photovoltaic performance. To this end, two typical DDT-capped CdSe nanocrystal samples synthesized at 250 °C and 350 °C and one oleic acid capped CdSe nanocrystal control sample were used. The open circuit potential (Voc), short circuit current density (Jsc), fill factor (FF) and conversion efficiency (h) of different CdSe quantum-dot sensitized solar cells are listed in Table 3. The thiol capped nanocrystals show an enhancement in open circuit voltage and a short circuit current simultaneously. Although the fill factor of CdSe-ODE is 26%, the overall conversion efficiency is only 0.332%, while the conversion efficiency of CdSe-SH(250) CdSe-SH(350) is 0.927% and 0.461% separately, with the increases of 179% and 39%, respectively. This is because when the thiols were linked to the CdSe QDs, holes were trapped by thiol, as thiol's redox energy level is situated between the valence band and conduction band of CdSe QDs, when thiol was adsorbed on the QDs surface, holes were trapped from QDs on thiols and it was hard for the exciton to combine together, this result indicates that the existence of thiols helps the charge separation, which is further confirmed by the long fluorescence lifetime in Fig. 8d. As reported in previous studies, when using MPA as the molecular link to replace OA and TOPO capped CdSe QDs respectively, the performance of OA capped CdSe SSCs (0.97%) is much higher than that of the TOPO capped CdSe QDSSCs (0.35%). This is due to the fact that the thiols were more effectively to replace OA than TOPO, so more QDs with thiol can exist in this QDSSCs. The results indicate that the thiol-capped CdSe nanocrystals produced by our Non-TOP based CAFS technique have enhanced the photovoltaic conversion efficiency, indicating their great potential for solar energy conversion applications. As reported before, the CdSe QDSSCs with a TiO2 nanotube array photoelectrode can reach a photocurrent of 6.2 mA cm−2 and an efficiency of 1.80%, we expect that a higher FF and η can be obtained by optimizing other parameters such as electrolyte and electrode in the thiol capped CdSe QDSSCs.

Nanocrystals
Voc/V
Jsc/mA cm−2
FF (%)

η (%)
CdSe-ODE
0.3405
0.1705
26
0.332
CdSe-SH(250)
0.533
0.3325
18.3
0.927
CdSe-SH(350)
0.468
0.133
25.9
0.461

In this paper, we have demonstrated a non-trioctylphosphine (Non-TOP) based chemical aerosol flow synthesis (CAFS) technique for continuous, fast, green, and low-cost synthesis of high quality thiol capped CdSe nanocrystals. The synthetic parameters have been systematically studied. Photovoltaic performance studies show that the thiol-capped CdSe nanocrystals have better energy conversion efficiencies than the oleic acid capped CdSe nanocrystals. By choosing suitable source and synthetic parameters, it is reasonable to expect that the present study could be extended to the commercial scale growth of other thiol-capped semiconductor nanocrystals.


The work was financially supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 60736001, 20873171, 30900349), the National Hi-Tech. Research and Development Program (‘863’ Program) of China (No. 2009AA03z302).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Additional absorption spectra of the thiol-capped CdSe nanocrystal samples. See DOI: 10.1039/c2ce06523a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012