 DOI: 10.1039/C7CC05934E
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 11028-11031


Yihua
Chen
,

Jianjun
Gu
,

Rundong
Fan
,

Ziliang
Li
,

Liang
Li
,

Ligang
Wang
,

Guanhaojie
Zheng
,

Honggang
Nie
,

Qi
Chen
 and 

Huanping
Zhou
*

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Department of Energy and Resources Engineering, College of Engineering, Peking University, Beijing 100871, P. R. China. E-mail: happy_zhou@pku.edu.cn

Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, Key Laboratory of Bioorganic Chemistry and Molecular Engineering of Ministry of Education, College of Chemistry, Peking University, Beijing 100871, P. R. China

School of Materials Science and Engineering, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, P. R. China

Received
30th July 2017
, Accepted 14th September 2017
First published on 14th September 2017
The design of electron transport layers (ETLs) is crucial to the performance of optoelectronic devices. A composite ETL was constructed to overcome the poor carrier extraction issue in perovskite solar cells, resulting in a maximum PCE of 19.14% with reduced hysteresis. A similar enhancement phenomenon was observed in both devices based on TiO2 and SnO2 ETLs.

Since Miyasaka et al. introduced the organic–inorganic hybrid CH3NH3PbI3 into dye sensitized solar cells for the first time in 2009, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of perovskite-based solar cells (PSCs) has increased from the initial 3.8% to over 20%. Despite the rapid progress of the PSCs, the fundamental problem, namely the origin of the current–voltage hysteresis, is still an important challenge in this field. The current–voltage (J–V) hysteresis refers to the phenomenon that a significant discrepancy is exhibited in the J–V curves depending on the voltage sweeping rate, scan directions, light intensity, applied bias, and even the conditions before measurements. This hysteresis effect severely affects the J–V measurement for an accurate evaluation of device performance, which has also emerged as a critical challenge to improve the stabilized power output and stability of the PSCs. Thus, numerous efforts have been made to reveal the origin of the observed hysteresis effect in PSCs, such as the trapping/de-trapping of charge carriers, photo-induced giant dielectric constant, ferroelectricity, and ion migration. In particular, the unsatisfactory charge extraction or the movement of the mobile ions, e.g. I−, could lead to severe charge accumulation in the interface. Therefore, it is of particular importance to engineer the interface, which could allow an efficient carrier pathway in the corresponding device.

Although there are still no agreed theories which can fully interpret the mechanism in general, recent work suggests that reducing trap states existing in the perovskite/carrier selective layer interface or perovskite material itself is an effective strategy to alleviate the J–V hysteresis in PSCs. For example, by using fullerene passivation in the grain boundary or surface of perovskite films, Huang et al. reported an inverted PSC with negligible hysteresis. Similarly, Im et al. have demonstrated a Li-treated mesoscopic TiO2 ETL as well to reduce the trap states in the adjacent interface to enable nearly hysteresis free solar cells. Sargent et al. recently employed a contact passivation strategy for PSCs based on Cl passivated TiO2, in which a low temperature processed TiO2 ETL led to a certified ∼20% PCE in planar PSCs for the first time. Besides, reduced hysteresis had also been observed when the grain size of perovskite or TiO2 was substantially increased with expected lower level defects. This suggests that the traps on the metal oxide ETL are considered to be influencing the anomalous J–V hysteresis in PSCs. Thus, effective methods that can offer reduced traps in charge transport layers are urgently needed, and are particularly useful in the widely pursued PSCs based on low -temperature processed metal oxide ETLs.
In this work, we developed a facile strategy to reduce J–V hysteresis and improve the stabilized power output of planar PSCs based on a metal oxide composite ETL. We synthesized highly crystalline TiO2 nanocrystals using a hydrothermal method and substituted the surface with the BF4− ligand. The TiO2 nanocrystals were combined with the traditional sol–gel processed TiO2 to construct a composite ETL, yielding over 19% PCE and substantially reduced J–V hysteresis in the typical PSCs. This approach has been successfully applied in the SnO2 ETL based PSCs. Various characterization methods, including the voltage versus current (J–V) test, photoluminescence (PL) and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL), showed that the conductivity and carrier extraction of the ETL had significant enhancement after the incorporation of the hydrothermally synthesized TiO2 or SnO2 nanocrystals. This presents an effective strategy for low-temperature processed high performance PSCs.
We first synthesized well-dispersed highly crystalline TiO2 nanocrystals via a hydrothermal reaction with oleic acid and oleylamine as the surfactant. A schematic illustration is shown in Fig. S1 (ESI). And the TiO2 nanoparticles were observed by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements. As shown in Fig. 1a, the size of the spindle-shaped TiO2 nanocrystals was approximately 10 × 30–40 nm, which was considerably bigger than those traditional low temperature sol–gel processed ones (∼5 nm). XRD patterns showed that the TiO2 nanocrystals were of the anatase phase with high crystallinity (Fig. S2, ESI). This high crystallinity was in contrast to the sol–gel processed TiO2 nanoparticles, as shown in Fig. S3, ESI. Subsequently, the long-chain ligands on the TiO2 nanoparticle surface were substituted by the much smaller ligand BF4−, through a ligand exchange process assisted by (CH3)3O(BF4) (TEOTB), which is confirmed by the Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectra (Fig. S4, ESI). A detailed description of the synthetic approach and ligand exchange process is shown in the ESI, which is in agreement with recent reports. There was no obvious phase and morphological difference for the TiO2 nanoparticles before and after ligand exchange (Fig. S2 and S5, ESI). It was generally believed that the conductivity of the TiO2 nanocrystals, originally influenced by the long-chain surfactants, could be improved substantially after the ligand exchange.
The hydrothermal TiO2 nanocrystals after ligand exchange were further employed as the entire or part of ETL in the PSCs. In the initial attempt, we fabricated planar devices based on TiO2 nanoparticles obtained from the sol–gel and hydrothermal method, respectively. The device was composed of ITO, TiO2, perovskite, Spiro-OMeTAD, and Au, where the perovskite was obtained from a two-step process. The J–V curves of these two devices are shown in Fig. 1b and Table S1 (ESI). It was observed that the open circuit voltage (VOC) and fill factor of the hydrothermal TiO2 based device both decreased compared to those of the sol–gel TiO2 based devices. We consider that the film coverage of the hydrothermal TiO2 nanocrystal ETL was relatively poor due to the bigger particle size, resulting in the increased probability of film leakage and carrier recombination (Fig. S6, ESI). The poor surface coverage of TiO2 also led to a relatively lower device reproducibility with a considerable amount of short circuited devices.
To overcome the leakage issue, an alternative approach to enable an efficient ETL for perovskite solar cells was the construction of TiO2 composite layers by employing both hydrothermal and sol–gel TiO2 nanocrystals (Fig. S7, ESI). Specifically, we first deposited a compact layer of sol–gel TiO2 on the ITO substrate, with hydrothermal TiO2 nanoparticles subsequently deposited. As a consequence, this composite layer would combine the advantages of two types of TiO2 nanoparticles: a compact film composed of sol–gel TiO2 could avoid any current leakage in the film; the highly crystalline TiO2 potentially reduced the defects in the interface and hydrothermal TiO2 nanoparticles possibly formed a mesoscopic-like TiO2 film. An additional prospect of the composite ETL was the low temperature processability of both TiO2 nanoparticles. The top view SEM image of composite TiO2 is shown in Fig. 2a, whereas the spindle-shaped TiO2 nanocrystals were clearly observed on the top of the compact film. And Fig. 2b shows the cross-sectional SEM image of a typical perovskite solar cell based on the TiO2 composite as the ETL. As shown in Fig. 2c and Table S2 (ESI), the composite TiO2 based devices exhibited a PCE of 19.14% under a reverse scan, a 2% absolute PCE higher when compared to the standard devices. The PCE improvement was mainly manifested in the short circuit current (JSC) augment. Additionally, it was observed that the hysteresis was obviously reduced in the J–V curves of the devices based on the composite ETL. The hysteresis index was decreased from 0.316 to 0.278 for the standard ETL-based and composite ETL-based devices, respectively (Table S2, ESI). The reduced carrier accumulation of the composite ETL could be associated to the highly crystalline TiO2 with fewer defects, which is confirmed by a space charge limited current test (SCLC; Fig. S8, ESI). And considering the mesoscopic-like TiO2 film, the improved carrier extraction was probably partly attributed to the increased surface area. It is unclear whether the decorated BF4− groups on the TiO2 surface might also suppress ion immigration and charge accumulation in the perovskite/TiO2 interface, which is still under investigation.
We further conducted the stable PCE measurement, as shown in Fig. 2d. The photocurrent of the composite ETL based cells was rapidly stabilized to 19.51 mA cm−2 within 15 s and remained almost constant for another 145 s. In contrast, it took 85 s for the photocurrent to slowly saturate to 16.54 mA cm−2 in the standard cells, which even displayed a gradual decreasing trend upon continuous illumination.
In addition, we also observed a photocurrent bump at the moment we turned on the light in both curves, which was interpreted as the influence of the non-steady transient process due to the charge accumulation in trap states existing in the perovskite/TiO2 interfaces. The ranges of the photocurrent bump of standard and composite ETL based cells were 11 mA cm−2 and 1.5 mA cm−2 respectively, which likely suggested that the composite ETL based devices had fewer traps and smaller hysteresis as well. As a result, we obtained 17.17% of the stabilized power output efficiency in the composite ETL based cell, compared with 14.39% in the standard cell. This clearly confirmed that the composite ETL based cells exhibited smaller J–V hysteresis, higher stabilized power output, and better stability than the standard cells.
To investigate how such hydrothermal nanocrystals improved the cell performance, we investigated the conductivity and electron extraction capability of ETLs, as well as the interface behaviour of the devices. Through the conductivity tests, which had been reported elsewhere, we found that devices with a structure of ETL/Spiro-OMeTAD/ETL showed a change in the current density when different ETLs were applied. The composite ETL had an enhancement of conductivity compared with the standard ETL, as shown in Fig. 3a. PL tests indicated more obvious quenching effects of the hydrothermal TiO2 compared to standard TiO2 for the perovskite film, as shown in Fig. 3b. The TRPL characterization in Fig. 3c showed that the charge transfer lifetime τ had been reduced from 45.44 ns (standard) to 20.98 ns in the presence of hydrothermal TiO2, indicating that such a composite ETL had better carrier extraction capability. The EIS measurement (Fig. S9, ESI) exhibited two semicircles in the Nyquist plot. The semi-circle at the higher frequency corresponded to the transport resistance and the one at the lower frequency represented the synergistic effect of the carrier recombination resistance. Compared to the standard sample, the optimized devices showed a decrease in the transport resistance, which indicated that this kind of ETL could facilitate the carrier transport in solar cells. Therefore, compared with the traditional TiO2 ETL, the composite ETLs containing hydrothermally synthesized nanocrystals lead to enhancement both in conductivity and carrier extraction, thus improving the device performances with reduced hysteresis.
Besides, we investigated the light propagation behaviour when assembling the hydrothermal nanocrystals on top of the compact layer. According to Fig. 3d, the transmittance was reduced in the presence of hydrothermal TiO2. We attributed this phenomenon to the scattering effect of the TiO2 nanocrystals, which had been reported elsewhere. Furthermore, we simulated the near field profiles based on the finite-difference time-domain method (Fig. S10, ESI). When the hydrothermal TiO2 nanocrystals were incorporated on top of the compact layer, there was obviously visualized field enhancement between the hydrothermal crystals, which was related to the scattering effect and beneficial to the absorption enhancement of perovskite.
Apart from the construction of the TiO2 composite ETL, we further demonstrated its generality in SnO2 ETLs. Hydrothermal SnO2 nanocrystals were synthesized via a similar approach (Fig. S11, ESI). The obtained tetragonal SnO2 nanocrystals were nanorods with the size of approximately 6 × 30–40 nm as shown in Fig. 4a and Fig. S12 (ESI). Similar to TiO2, the SnO2 nanocrystals experienced surface modification followed by material characterization and device fabrication. A composite SnO2 ETL including a SnCl2·2H2O based compact film and hydrothermal SnO2 nanorods was developed (Fig. S14, ESI). The performances of devices based on the composite SnO2 ETL are also summarized in Fig. 4b and Table S4 (ESI). The composite SnO2 based device exhibited a PCE of 18.10%, compared to the standard sample with 17.01%. It was also observed that the hysteresis of the composite SnO2 based device was obviously reduced when compared with the standard devices. The hysteresis index was decreased from 0.407 to 0.055 for the standard SnO2 and composite SnO2 based devices, respectively. The slight drop of VOC was probably attributed to the relatively lower CBM of the composite SnO2 ETL, leading to a slightly decreased quasi-Fermi level splitting (Fig. S15, ESI). As shown in Fig. 4c, PL testing also confirmed the obvious quenching effect in the presence of hydrothermal SnO2. TRPL on the SnO2/perovskite indicated that the charge transfer lifetime τ had been reduced from 15.63 ns to 11.10 ns when the standard SnO2 ETL was substituted by the composite ETL as shown in Fig. 4d. This is similar to the composite TiO2 ETL, in which the composite SnO2 ETL could benefit the device performance compared to the standard sample by tuning the carrier dynamics.
In summary, we have demonstrated a general and facile approach to construct composite ETLs based on nanocrystals for efficient perovskite solar cells. Highly crystalline TiO2 nanoparticles as a part of the ETL were synthesized via a hydrothermal approach and modified with BF4− groups through ligand exchange. The TiO2 composite ETL devices exhibit obvious enhancement in JSC and the overall efficiency compared to the sol–gel TiO2 ETL. Further characterizations indicated that such ETLs had better carrier extraction capability and conductivity, resulting in over 19% PCE and substantially reduced hysteresis. The concept of constructing TiO2 composite ETLs has found its application in SnO2 based ETLs, which may be extended to the design of a myriad of other transport materials. It is of great potential by employing the current approach to fabricate low cost and high efficiency solar cells.
The authors acknowledge funding support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51672008 and 51673025), the Young Talent Thousand Program and the ENN Group. The authors sincerely appreciate Enli technology Co. Ltd, for their help regarding PV efficiency and EQE measurement.

There are no conflicts to declare.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7cc05934e
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017