 DOI: 10.1039/C3NR04462A
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 12574-12581


Yichuan
Rui
,

Yaogang
Li
,

Qinghong
Zhang
* and 

Hongzhi
Wang
*

State Key Laboratory for Modification of Chemical Fibers and Polymer Materials, Donghua University, Shanghai 201620, P. R. China. E-mail: zhangqh@dhu.edu.cn; Fax: +86-021-67792855; Tel: +86-021-67792943; wanghz@dhu.edu.cn; Fax: +86-021-67792855; Tel: +86-021-67792881

Engineering Research Center of Advanced Glasses Manufacturing Technology, MOE, Shanghai 201620, P. R. China

Received
22nd August 2013
, Accepted 26th September 2013
First published on 30th September 2013
TiO2 microspheres assembled by single crystalline rutile TiO2 nanorods were synthesized by one-pot solvothermal treatment at 180 °C based on an aqueous–organic mixture solution containing n-hexane, distilled water, titanium n-butoxide and hydrochloric acid. The spheres had a radiative structure from the center, and their diameters were controlled in the range from 1 to 5 μm by adjusting the volume of the reactant water. Nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherms showed that all the as-prepared microspheres had relatively high specific surface areas of about 50 m2 g−1. The 1 μm sized TiO2 nanorod microspheres were fabricated as a scattering overlayer in DSSCs, leading to a remarkable improvement in the power conversion efficiency: 8.22% of the bi-layer DSSCs versus 7.00% for the reference cell made of a single-layer film prepared from nanocrystalline TiO2. Such improvement was mainly attributed to the enhanced light harvesting and dye loading brought by the effective scattering centers.

Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), with their advantages of low cost, simple manufacturing procedure and high theoretical energy conversion efficiency, have been attracting global attention since the breakthrough work of O'Regan and Grätzel in 1991. The most common versions of DSSCs are comprised of a titanium dioxide network loaded with dye molecules to harvest sunlight, where the nanostructured TiO2 serves as the dye carrier and electron transporter is one of the key components in DSSCs. It is known that the conventional photoanode films made from tiny TiO2 nanocrystallites, usually with a size of about dozens of nanometers, exhibit high transparency and low utilization rate of incident light; therefore, a bi-layer photoanode film with a light-scattering film placed on top of the nanocrystalline film has been adopted widely in state-of-the-art DSSCs as it increases the optical path of light and thereby enhances the photocurrent density.

Currently, extensive research is being performed to develop highly efficient scattering materials. For example, mirror-like cubic CeO2 nanoparticles and TiO2 microspheres with exposed {001} facets were fabricated as scattering layers to reflect the incident light, leading to high light-harvesting efficiency. Upconverting phosphors were introduced which can transform near-infrared photons into visible photons that can be absorbed by dye molecules. Shell-controlled hollow microspheres were also developed which can confine the incident light within an electrode. However, except for their role in the actual light scattering or generation, these scattering particles with relatively low surface areas exhibit poor dye adsorption ability and thus show limited contribution on the photoelectron generation.
To address this problem, dual-functional scatterers combining light-scattering with high surface area have been proposed. The sizes of such scatterers are analogous to the wavelength of visible light which induce strong scattering, while the nanoparticle subunits provide a large inner surface area for dye loading. Unfortunately, for those scattering particles assembled by tiny nanocrystallites, a large amount of defects, grain boundaries and even insufficiently close contact among the subunits of nanoparticles may impede electron diffusion. Recently, Kuang et al. prepared hierarchical anatase TiO2 spheres consisting of nanorods and nanoparticles as photoanodes for DSSCs and yielded a high efficiency of 10.34%; Fan et al. fabricated a three-dimensional (3D) hierarchically ordered nanobush structure, where dense networks of ZnO nanowires were embedded within a TiO2 inverse opal (IO) nanostructure. Such structures owned several favorable intrinsic characteristics, including high surface area, direct electron transport pathways, and engineered light scattering centers. It is thus highly desirable to develop 3D scattering particles incorporating 1D nanostructured subunits for high efficiency DSSCs.
Rutile TiO2 nanorods with some striking advantages, such as superior chemical stability and high refractive index, are relatively easy to access. Moreover, recent research shows that the electron diffusion coefficient of single-crystalline rutile TiO2 nanorods is more than two orders of magnitude higher than that of rutile nanoparticle films. It is thus expected that performance of DSSCs can be effectively enhanced by employing the 3D TiO2 nanorod microspheres as scattering centers in photoanodes. Actually, some synthetic routes that can produce urchin-like TiO2 nanorod spheres were developed in the field of photocatalysis because micron-sized particles are more easy to separate from water than nanosized particles. However, few scattering layers based on such TiO2 nanorod microspheres are reported, mainly because their sizes are over several microns which is too large to fabricate the scattering layer.
Herein, size-tunable (ranging from 1 to 5 μm) TiO2 nanorod microspheres were successfully synthesized via a one-pot solvothermal method, and the 1 μm sized TiO2 nanorod microspheres were fabricated as a scattering overlayer in DSSCs, leading a remarkable improvement in the power conversion efficiency: 8.22% of the bi-layer DSSCs versus 7.00% for the reference cell made of a single-layer film prepared from nanocrystalline TiO2.

The idea of synthesizing the TiO2 nanorod microspheres was originated from a previous work, in which the influence of the solvent polarity on the microstructures of three-dimensional TiO2 nanostructures was systematically investigated. On the basis of the work, we chose n-hexane (CH3(CH2)4CH3) and distilled water (H2O) as the reactant solvents, titanium n-butoxide (Ti(OC4H9)4) as the titanium precursor, and hydrochloric acid (HCl) as acid medium. In a typical synthesis, 20 mL of n-hexane, a few milliliters of distilled water, and 2 mL of concentrated hydrochloric acid were mixed in a beaker, and then 4 mL of titanium n-butoxide was added dropwise to the mixture under magnetic stirring. After 15 minutes the mixed solution was transferred into a Teflon-lined autoclave of 70 mL capacity. Subsequently, the autoclave was sealed and treated at 180 °C for 4 h, followed by natural cooling to room temperature. Afterward, the products were collected by centrifugation, and washed with ethanol several times. The sizes of the nanorod microspheres were controlled by adjusting the amount of the distilled water. When the volume of H2O was 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 mL, the diameters of the prepared microspheres would decrease from 5 μm to 1 μm, respectively.


The synthesis of nanocrystalline TiO2 for the underlayer and the preparation of DSSC pastes were carried out mainly according to our previous paper. The crystallite size of the nanocrystalline TiO2 was about 25 nm as shown in the FESEM image (Fig. S1 in ESI). For the paste used in the light scattering layer over the main TiO2 film, nanorod microspheres and nanocrystalline TiO2 with a mass ratio of 7/3 were mixed to prepare the paste in a procedure analogous to that of pure nanocrystalline TiO2. The TiO2 paste was coated on the FTO glass by the doctor-blade method, and then dried for 6 min at 125 °C in an electronic oven. The photoelectrodes with an effective area of 0.25 cm2 were sintered at 500 °C for 30 min under air atmosphere. After cooling to 80 °C, the electrodes were immersed for 24 h in an ethanolic solution of ruthenium dye N719 at a concentration of 3.0 × 10−4 M. The electrodes were then rinsed with ethanol to remove excess amounts of dye and dried in a vacuum oven. The solar cells were assembled by placing a platinized counter electrode on the top of the sensitized photoanode. The two electrodes were clamped into a sandwich type cell with a Surlyn hot-melt foil as a spacer frame. The redox electrolyte was introduced into the space through the hole predrilled on the back of the counter electrode.(Scheme 1)


The powder phase composition was identified by X-ray diffraction (XRD) equipment (Model D/max 2550 V, Rigaku Co. Tokyo, Japan) by using Cu Kα (λ = 1.5406 Å) radiation. The morphology and the size of the resultant titanium dioxide were observed by using field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM, Model S-4800, Hitachi, Japan) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM, JEM-2100F, JEOL Co., Japan). The specific surface area and pore size distribution of the TiO2 powder were measured by a N2 adsorption–desorption isotherm by the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET, for specific surface area) and Barrett–Joyner–Halenda (BJH, for average pore diameter) methods using a Quantachrome Autosorb 1 MP analyzer. Diffuse reflectance spectra of the resulting TiO2 films were collected on a spectrophotometer (Lambda 950, Perkin-Elmer, USA). In order to determine the exact amount of anchored dye molecules, the sensitized photoelectrodes were separately immersed into a beaker containing 5 mL of 0.1 m NaOH water–ethanol (1:1, v/v) solution. We calculated the amount of dye loaded on the photoanodes from the UV-vis absorption spectrum of the resultant solution using ε = 1.41 × 104 m−1 cm−1 as the molar extinction coefficient for N719 at 515 nm. Current–voltage curves of the DSSCs were obtained using a Keithley 2400 Source Meter under illumination of simulated sunlight (100 mW cm−2) provided by a Newport solar simulator (Model 96160) with an AM 1.5 G filter. The incident-photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra were measured as a function of wavelength from 350 to 800 nm using a specially designed IPCE system (Newport Co., USA).



Fig. 1 and 2 show the FESEM images of the TiO2 nanorod microspheres prepared via the solvothermal method. Their diameters were controlled by varying the volume of distilled water. It can be observed that the average sphere diameters decreased as the water concentration increased. As shown in Fig. 1a, the 5 μm TiO2 spheres were formed with 1 mL distilled water, whereas the 2–4 μm spheres were formed with 2 mL distilled water (Fig. 1b). The TiO2 spheres are hierarchical structures composed of densely packed nanorods as shown in the high magnification FESEM images of Fig. 1c and d. Additionally, the 1 μm urchin-like spheres were formed with 3 and 4 mL distilled water. The spheres are well dispersed and almost no abnormal aggregations exist. When the volume of distilled water was increased to 5 mL, most of the spherical structures were destroyed and broken microspheres and disordered nanorods were formed. Scheme 2 shows a schematic illustration of the formation process of the nanorod microspheres. In such an aqueous–organic mixture solution, the titanium n-butoxide hydrolyzed between the interface of the two immiscible solvents, and then the [Ti(O–C4H9)4–n–m(OH)nClm] complex was formed, where n and m were associated with the acidity and [Cl−] in the solution, respectively. The complex formed the titania nuclei at the initial stage during the solvothermal treatment. The chloride ions preferentially adsorbed and retarded the growth rate of the (110) plane of rutile TiO2, favoring the anisotropic growth of nanorods. Large amount of nanorods self-assembled to radially spherical structures to minimize the surface area and reduce the system energy. In addition, several works show that the aqueous–organic interface between two immiscible solvents is considered to be a favorable environment for self-assembly. Herein, the different water volumes brought different diameters of the nanorod microspheres. The increased water content expedited the hydrolysis reaction of titanium n-butoxide, which increased the number of nuclei and thereby suppressed the growth of individual microspheres. Fortunately, nanorod microspheres with a suitable size of about 1 μm meeting DSSC demands were successfully synthesized by increasing the reactant water to 3 mL.

Microspheres obtained from 3 mL distilled water were composed of loosely packed nanorods, and the microstructure of the microspheres was further examined by TEM (Fig. 3). It is seen that nanorods with a length of several hundred nanometers radiated from the center and assembled the hierarchical spherical structure. From high-resolution TEM image, the single-crystalline nature of the nanorods is clearly observed. The nanorods grow along the [001] direction, and the lattice spacing of 0.32 nm can be ascribed to the (110) planes of rutile TiO2.
The XRD patterns of five dried TiO2 microspheres are shown in Fig. 4; all the diffraction peaks are assigned to the rutile phase of TiO2, indicating perfect crystallinity, in particular in the (110) plane. The crystallite sizes of the primary TiO2 are determined to fall in the 13–16 nm range, as estimated from the full width at half maximum of the (110) peak using the Scherer equation. It is found that all the primary crystallites have a similar size, implying that the primary nanorods are not appreciably affected by the volume of distilled water.

Fig. 5 shows the nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherms and the corresponding pore size distribution curves of the nanorod microspheres. The detailed parameters are summarized in Table 1. The sorption isotherms display typical type IV isotherms according to IUPAC classification, which is characteristic of mesoporous materials. The specific surface areas of the TiO2 nanorod microspheres are 46.7, 41.3, 46.9, 52.2 and 53.9 m2 g−1, respectively. All the products show relatively high specific surface areas, which would be beneficial for dye adsorption for DSSCs. On the other hand, the average pore diameters of the five TiO2 microspheres increase from 6.0 to 14.0 nm with the decrease of their sizes, agreeing with the observation from the SEM images, where the relatively wide pore size distributions are beneficial to electrolyte diffusion (Table 1).
Water volume
1 mL
2 mL
3 mL
4 mL
5 mL
Surface area (m2 g−1)
46.7
41.3
46.9
52.2
53.9
Pore diameter (nm)
6.0
7.3
12.1
12.1
14.0
Electrodes

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (mV)
FF (%)

η (%)
Adsorbed dye (10−7 mol cm−2)
NM
10.9
738
63.6
5.12
1.08
NC
15.3
732
62.5
7.00
1.67
NC-NM
17.4
736
64.2
8.22
2.12
The rutile TiO2 nanorod microspheres with relatively large specific surface areas are ideal scattering materials for DSSCs. As a conventional scattering overlayer is usually about several microns thick, it is difficult to fabricate the thin scattering overlayer with the TiO2 nanorod microspheres with diameters larger than 1 μm. In this study, we chose the 1 μm spherical TiO2 formed with 3 mL distilled water to prepare the scattering overlayer. Considering the large pores still exist among the close-packed spheres, TiO2 nanorod microspheres and nanocrystalline particles with a mass ratio of 7/3 were mixed together to form a well-interconnected network. Three different DSSC photoanodes were prepared to investigate the scattering effect, and their cross-sectional images are shown in Fig. 6: a single layer photoanode film prepared from nanocrystalline TiO2 (NC) with a thickness of about 13 μm, a single layer photoanode film prepared from nanorod microspheres (NM) with a thickness of about 13 μm, and a bi-layer film (NC-NM) constructed by a 6 μm thick NM layer on top of a 13 μm thick NC underlayer.
Photoanode films made from pure tiny nanoparticles usually exhibit high transparency and low utilization rate of the incident light, therefore, structuring the photoanode film so that light is trapped inside to increase the absorbance is very important.Fig. 7a shows the diffuse reflectance spectra of the three different electrode films in the visible-light range. The NC film fabricated from nanoparticles exhibits low reflectance in the visible-light region of 400–800 nm, which means that a large amount of visible-light transmits through the transparent photoanode film directly. The NC-NM film with a scattering layer shows much stronger reflectance. This is attributed to the intrinsic scattering ability of rutile TiO2, whose high refractive index impels its wide use in the fields of pigments and cosmetics, etc. A rutile scattering layer usually shows stronger reflectance than the anatase counterpart. On the other hand, as pointed out by Cheng et al., the scattering particles with sizes analogous to the wavelength of visible light will lead to a strong scattering effect according to Mie theory. Thus, the NM scattering layer reflects a large portion of visible light back to the film, and improves the light harvesting of the photoanode. UV-vis absorption spectra of the photoanode films after the dye uptaking process would provide further information about light harvesting. As shown in Fig. 7b, the NC-NM film exhibits the strongest absorption intensity on the entire spectrum, implying aneffective utilization rate of the incident light.

Fig. 8 compares the photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the three DSSCs, and the resultant photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table 2. The NM DSSC fabricated from nanorod microspheres shows a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 10.9 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 738 mV, and a fill factor (FF) of 63.6%, leading to an energy conversion efficiency (η) of 5.12%, whereas the NC DSSC fabricated from nanocrystalline particles shows a higher efficiency of 7.00%. This is mainly attributed to the higher specific surface area of the nanocrystalline particles than that of the nanorod microspheres, which subsequently leads to a higher amount of dye adsorption. For the case of the NC-NM DSSC deposited with the scattering overlayer, the efficiency is improved to 8.22% which is mainly caused by the increase in photocurrent density. In our work, further enhancing the thickness of the NC film instead of depositing the NM scattering particles could not bring any increment of Jsc, although it will increase the dye adsorption. Fig. S2 (see ESI) shows the J–V curve of the DSSC based on nanocrystalline TiO2 with a film thickness of about 19 μm for a fair comparison, however, both the Jsc and Voc show a slight decrease than those of NC DSSC. Prof. Grätzel's research shows a similar result, they demonstrated that the optimum thickness of the nanocrystalline TiO2 film to produce highly efficient DSSCs is 12–14 μm. That is because trap-sites including defects, surface states, and grain boundaries in the random nanocrystalline network act as electron loss centers, the increased recombination offsets the increased photoelectrons, thus we could not observe any improvement in photovoltaic performance. However, herein the one-dimensional nanorod subunits of the microspheres will provide fast electron percolation pathways while electrons in the TiO2 nanoparticle film diffuse to the surface of the FTO substrate through a zigzag pathway, thus the photoelectrons generated by the scattering layer could be collected effectively by the external circuit. On the other hand, the strong light scattering would confine the incident light within the mesoporous photoanodes and augment the optical pathway significantly, which subsequently increases the probability of photons being absorbed.
The incident-photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra would offer detailed information on the light-harvesting ability of the DSSCs in Fig. 9. The IPCE spectra of the NC and NC-NM DSSCs show a considerable increase over the entire range of light compared to the NM DSSC because of the high amount of dye-loading, and in the long wavelength region the quantum efficiency of the NC-NM DSSC is much more prominent than that of the NC one. The normalized IPCE spectra (inset of Fig. 9) could show more apparent evidence for the scattering effect, in which the NC-NM DSSC shows much higher values of normalized IPCE in the long wavelength region of 550–750 nm. The enhanced IPCE of NC-NM DSSC can be attributed to the following facts. For one reason, the NC underlayer made from nanoparticles exhibits high transparency which allows a large amount of the unabsorbed light transmit to the NM overlayer, leading to subsequent photoelectron generation. Another reason is that the strong light scattering ability of the NM overlayer can reflect the light back to the transparent NC underlayer, effectively prolonging the light pathways inside of the nanocrystalline film, and therefore giving rise to the light harvesting over the entire visible light region.
Because the NM scattering layers here have the unique bi-functional property of generating photoelectrons and the light-scattering effect, it is therefore necessary for us to separate the two functions for a reasonable comparison. Assuming the negligible electron generation of the scattering centers, the increased IPCE value [Δ(IPCE)] will be contributed solely by the enhanced light harvesting of the nanocrystalline under layer and whose value will be proportional to the transmitted light, reflected light and IPCE of the under layer. Accordingly, the Δ(IPCE) can be expressed simply by the following equation
Δ(IPCE) = (TUL)(RSL)(IPCEUL)
where
TUL is the transmittance of the under layer, RSL is the reflectance of the scattering layer, and IPCEUL is the IPCE of the nanocrystalline underlayer, respectively. Fig. 10 shows the calculated Δ(IPCE) as a function of wavelength for the NC-NM DSSC, where the maximum Δ(IPCE) value of 5.2% is obtained at the wavelength of 650 nm. In the research of Lee et al., they used commercial rutile particles as the scattering layer, and an increased efficiency of 12.4% was obtained with the aid of the scattering layer while the rutile particles contributed a maximum Δ(IPCE) value of about 7.5%. Although our nanorod microspheres show relatively inferior scattering capabilities than the commercialized rutile particles (5.2% vs. 7.5%), the increment of efficiency brought by the nanorod microspheres is more apparent (17.4% vs. 12.4%) which is believed to be caused by the additional function of generating photoelectrons.


In summary, size-tunable (ranging from 1 to 5 μm) rutile TiO2 nanorod microspheres were successfully synthesized by controlling the hydrolysis reaction in the process of solvothermal treatment. The urchin-liked nanorod microspheres were assembled by single crystalline rutile TiO2 nanorods radiating from the sphere centers, exhibiting relatively high specific surface areas. The TiO2 nanorod microspheres with a particle size of 1 μm were fabricated as a scattering overlayer in DSSCs, leading a remarkable improvement efficiency of 17.4% compared with the single-layer film prepared from nanocrystalline TiO2, which was much more efficient than the commercial rutile scattering centers mainly because of their several favorable intrinsic characteristics including high surface area, direct electron transport pathways, and engineered light scattering capability.


This work was supported by the Innovation Program of Shanghai Municipal Education Commission, Natural Science Foundation of China (no. 51072034), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities, the Cultivation Fund of the Key Scientific and Technical Innovation Project (no. 708039), the Program for Professor of Special Appointment (Eastern Scholar) at Shanghai Institutions of Higher Learning, and the Program of Introducing Talents of Discipline to Universities (no. 111-2-04).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c3nr04462a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013