 DOI: 10.1039/C5CP05742F
(Communication)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 30993-30998


Tiantian
Hong
,

Zhifeng
Liu
*,

Weiguo
Yan
,

Junqi
Liu
 and 

Xueqi
Zhang


School of Materials Science and Engineering, Tianjin Chengjian University, 300384, Tianjin, China. E-mail: tjulzf@163.com; Fax: +86 22 23085110; Tel: +86 22 23085236

Received
25th September 2015
, Accepted 28th October 2015
First published on 29th October 2015
We report a novel promising quaternary sulfide (CuAgInS) to serve as a semiconductor sensitizer material in the photoelectrochemical field. In this study, CuAgInS (CAIS) sulfide sensitized ZnO nanorods were fabricated on ITO substrates through a facile and low-cost hydrothermal chemical method and applied on photoanodes for solar cells for the first time. The component and stoichiometry were key factors in determining the photoelectric performance of CAIS sulfide, which were controlled by modulating their reaction time. ZnO/Cu0.7Ag0.3InS2 nanoarrays exhibit an enhanced optical and photoelectric performance and the power conversion efficiency of ITO/ZnO/Cu0.7Ag0.3InS2/P3HT/Pt solid-state solar cell was up to 1.80%. The remarkable performance stems from improved electron transfer, a higher efficiency of light-harvesting and appropriate band gap alignment at the interface of the ZnO/Cu0.7Ag0.3InS2 NTs. The research indicates that CAIS as an absorbing material has enormous potential in solar cell systems.

Semiconductor sensitized nanocrystalline solar cells are emerging as a promising candidate for the next generation of solar cells. The pivotal component is the photoelectrode with a narrow semiconductor light sensitizer modified on the surface of an oxide layer. Recently, among the various semiconductor nanocrystals, the main research was concentrated on photoanodes consisting of metal oxide (ZnO and TiO2) sensitized with the I–III–VI2 family of chalcogenide nanocrystals such as CuInS2, CuInSe2, and AgInS2. This is largely due to the high absorption coefficient and ideal band gap value of these materials. In addition, the I–III–VI2 system has received great concern in solar energy conversion because the energy band gap of these semiconductor compounds lies between 0.8 and 2 eV.

In recent years, environmentally friendly silver–indium–disulfide (AgInS2) has been used as a heavy metal-free sensitizer for green solar cells. As a promising material for its intense absorption in the visible region, the ternary semiconductor AgInS2 with a band gap of 1.8 eV played the role of outer shell sensitizer with a low toxicity and high extinction coefficient. However, AgInS2 has a relationship with some vacancies at different constituent atom sites and the existence of vacancies leads to the emergence of defect states, which results in a sharp decrease in crystallinity and carrier mobility. One of the methods to improve the crystallinity and reduce the vacancies is annealing the semiconductor materials under the vapor of constituting atoms, and the other one is making multicomponent metal sulfides. Multicomponent sulfides have attracted considerable attention due to their improved chemical stability, high-absorption coefficient and ideal band gaps. Thereby, developing a new type of quaternary sulfide based on AgInS2 is a potential approach to expand the optical absorption and improve the power conversion efficiency of solar cells.
In this article, attracted by abovementioned advantages, we first synthesized CuAgInS (CAIS) nanocrystal sensitized ZnO-based nanorod arrays on an ITO substrate by a facile hydrothermal chemical conversion method and then applied it in nanocrystalline solar cells. The hydrothermal chemical conversion based on an ion exchange mechanism is easy to be controlled and form a uniform structure without destroying the original structure, which is in favor of declining defects and improving the light-harvesting capacity of photoelectrodes. The all-solid-state semiconductor sensitized solar cells (ITO/ZnO/Cu0.7Ag0.3InS2/P3HT/Pt) based on ZnO exhibit an outstanding photovoltaic performance with a Jsc of 6.93 mA cm−2, Voc of 499 mV and a power conversion efficiency of 1.80%. The excellent photovoltaic performance was attributed to the high speed of photo-induced charges transfer, higher efficiency of light harvesting and appropriate energy band gap.
CAIS quaternary sulfide was deposited on ZnO nanorods (NRs) through the hydrothermal and heat treatment procedure. First, the ZnO NR arrays were grown on indium tin oxide (ITO) glass substrates by a hydrothermal method. Then, an AgInS2 layer was deposited on the ZnO core by a chemical etching process based on an ion-exchange mechanism and hydrothermal process. Third, the composite structure was placed in Cu solution then heated to obtain the CAIS quaternary sulfide. Briefly, ZnO nanorod arrays were grown directly on an ITO conductive glass and the details of the synthesis scheme were as reported in previous works. The ZnO/ZnS composite nanostructure was fabricated by a simple hydrothermal process in which the ZnO electrode was dipped into a thioacetamide (TAA) aqueous solution (90 °C, 0.1 M, 240 min). An Ag2S film was coated on ZnO by dipping the ZnO/ZnS product into the AgNO3 aqueous solution (28 °C, 0.001 M, 20 min). The driving force of chemical conversion originates from the large difference in solubility product constant (Ksp), which are 2.93 × 10−25 and 1.6 × 10−49 for ZnS and Ag2S, respectively. The obtained arrays of ZnO/Ag2S were further immersed in triethylene glycol (TEG) containing 0.006 g of indium chloride (InCl3) in a Teflon-lined stainless steel autoclave. The autoclave was then sealed and maintained at 200 °C for 3 h to obtain ZnO/AgInS2 arrays. Ultimately, the composite structure was then immersed in cupric nitrate triethylene glycol solution (28 °C, 0.05 M, 240 min, 360 min, 600 min) and transformed into the CAIS completely by heating it to 300 °C in a muffle furnace for 30 min to generate the ZnO/CAIS nanostructure product.
The fabrication process of CAIS modified ZnO NR arrays is shown schematically in Fig. 1. First, the ZnO seed layer was deposited onto ITO by sol–gel and dip-coating methods. Furthermore, the glass was annealed at 400 °C for 1 h. For the ZnO NR synthesis, the ITO substrate with the seed layer was immersed in the aqueous solution containing 0.05 M zinc nitrate and 0.05 M hexamethylenetetramine at 90 °C for 4 h. In order to achieve conversion of ZnO NR into ZnO/ZnS, the ITO substrate with ZnO NRs was immersed into 0.1 M TAA aqueous solution. In the reaction procedure, the effective chemical transformation is driven by the large difference in solubility (Ksp) between ZnO (6.8 × 10−17) and ZnS (2.93 × 10−25). In this step, a large amount of sulphur ions are generated from the TAA hydrolysis and combines with zinc ions (eqn (1)–(3)). As the reaction time was increased, the ZnO NRs were etched as well as more ZnS nanoparticles accumulated on the top and flank of the initial core. Moreover, TAA solution generates a large amount of H+ and ZnO can react with H+, which leads to the process of sluggish dissolution occurring spontaneously. The chemical etching process does not occur simultaneously at the same rate but it is selective. In general, the etching reaction mainly occurred in the center of ZnO NR directly and started at the top of ZnO NR. This is because the polar plane (002) of wurtzite ZnO NR is unstable with a high surface energy compared with the nonpolar planes that are parallel to the 001 crystal orientation (perpendicular to the substrate surface); hence, the top plane of ZnO in an acidic solution is etched at a high rate relative to the lateral plane of ZnO NR. Thus, the etching effect is mainly concentrated in the inner part of ZnO NR instead of the surroundings. With the extension of etching time, the chemical etching process can be observed clearly and ZnO NRs are transformed into ZnO NTs gradually and ZnO NTs are finally obtained. In the final step, the pipe orifices of ZnO NTs are sealed up by numerous ZnS nanoparticles, and the ZnO/ZnS closed nanotube arrays were successfully synthesized. The sample of ZnO/Ag2S can be obtained by immersing ZnO/ZnS NTs into 0.001 M AgNO3 aqueous solution due to the large difference of Ksp between ZnS (2.93 × 10−25) and Ag2S (1.6 × 10−49) (eqn (5)). The AgInS2 shell was obtained when Ag2S reacted with enough In3+ in the TEG solvent under high temperature. Finally, ZnO/AgInS2 was immersed in the solution containing Cu ion to obtain the product of ZnO/CAIS nanoarrays. After rinsing with absolute ethanol and drying in air, the samples were fabricated by heating to 300 °C in air ambient for 0.5 h.
CH3CSNH2 + H2O → CH3CONH2 + H2S
(1)
H2S → 2H+ + S2−
(2)
ZnO + S2− + H2O → ZnS + 2OH−
(3)
ZnO + H+ → Zn2+ + H2O
(4)
ZnS + 2Ag+ → Ag2S + Zn2+
(5)
The morphologies of the samples were observed using a PHILIPS XL-30 scanning electron microscope (SEM). Fig. 2(a) and (b) display the SEM images of ZnO/CAIS-6 NTs (sample that was immersed in cupric nitrate triethylene glycol solution for 240 min, 360 min, 600 min are referred to as CAIS-4, CAIS-6 and CAIS-10, respectively). The low magnification SEM image in Fig. 2(a) shows a top view of the target product ZnO/CAIS NTs. It can be seen that a large-scale of ZnO/CAIS NTs are uniformly and densely perpendicular to the ITO substrate. Fig. 2(b) shows the high magnification SEM image of the product with a top view, which indicates that the sample is coarse due to the aggregation of some nanoparticles. The average diameter of a single NT is approximately 120 nm. Detailed microstructure information of the ZnO/CAIS NTs was further investigated by a HITACHI H-7650 transmission electron microscope (TEM) operating at 100 kV accelerating voltage. The typical TEM images of the ZnO/CAIS NTs are shown in Fig. 2(c) and (d), which demonstrate that the product is a core/shell nanostructure, in which ZnO is the hollow core and CAIS is the shell with many particles distributed unanimously in the surface. The ZnO/CAIS NTs have a uniform diameter of about 120 nm, which is consistent with that in the SEM images. Furthermore, the intrinsic crystal structure and lattice fringes of the ZnO/CAIS-6 NTs are characterized by a high-resolution TEM image (HRTEM) in Fig. 2(d). The image reveals merely two distinct sets of crystal-line lattice fringes of the ZnO and CAIS-6 materials and it also can be observed that both lattice fringes of the sample can be evidently separated due to their straight and evenly aligned arrangement along certain directions, which further confirms that the CAIS-6 film can prepare ZnO arrays successfully. In order to determine the chemical composition and crystal structure, X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were characterized by a Rigaku D/max-2500 using Cu Kα radiation (λ = 0.154059 nm). The XRD result corresponding to ZnO is shown in curve (I) in Fig. 2(e), the diffraction pattern of ZnO matches that of the hexagonal wurtzite structure (JCPDS 36-1451), and the enhanced (002) peak indicates that the nanoarrays are crystallized well and preferentially grow along the direction parallel to the c-axis. The peaks for CAIS quaternary sulfide are shown in curve (II–IV). An intensive analysis of the diffraction peaks displays a small but systematic shift towards the higher angle, which matches the Vegard's law. The shift occurs when the content of copper becomes higher, since silver and vacancies are replaced by copper ions, among them, the difference in the radii between copper and silver play a key role. There will arise a small change in the peak intensity and peak clarity; moreover, an improvement in crystallinity for CAIS quaternary sulfide could be obtained due to the vacancies and defects being able to be removed by copper. The successive shift of the XRD pattern confirms that ZnO/CAIS was prepared successfully by a hydrothermal chemical conversion and heat treatment.
The chemical composition and stoichiometry of the ZnO/CAIS-6 NTs were examined by an energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS). As shown in Fig. 3(a), all peaks of Zn, O, Cu, Ag, In and S elements are obvious, whereas the C peak originates from the carbon film, and the EDS analysis indicates an average composition of Cu0.71Ag0.33In0.84S2.02. Furthermore, surface states on the ZnO/CAIS NTs were examined by the X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) technique. Fig. 3(b–d) corresponds to the XPS of Cu 2p, Ag 3d, In 3d and S 2p. In Fig. 3(b), the two peaks of copper are located at 952.2 eV and 932.6 eV, which are assigned to the binding energies of Cu 2p1/2 and Cu 2p3/2, respectively, corresponding to Cu+. Fig. 3(c) exhibits the XPS spectrum of Ag 3d. The strong peaks at 374.2 eV and 368.2 eV are assigned to the binding energy of Ag 3d3/2 and Ag 3d5/2, respectively, suggesting the existence of Ag+. Fig. 3(d) shows the high-resolution XPS spectrum of In 3d, the peaks at 452.7 eV and 445.1 eV can be assigned to the binding energies of In 3d3/2 and In 3d5/2, respectively, indicating the statue of In3+. S2− is confirmed by the S 2p1/2 and S 2p3/2 peaks, observed at 162.6 eV and 161.4 eV, respectively in Fig. 3(e). In addition, the XPS also exhibits that the atom ratio of Cu, Ag, In and S are in close proximity to 0.7:0.3:1:2, which is consistent with that of EDS. Eventually, all of these, including XRD and EDS measurements, confirm that the products are composed of ZnO/CAIS based on hydrothermal chemical method and heat treatment.
The optical absorbance of the photoanode films was examined by a DU-8B UV-Vis double-beam spectrophotometer. The data was obtained in the wavelength range of 300–900 nm using the ITO substrate as the reference at room temperature. As shown in Fig. 4(a), it can be seen that the products of ZnO/CAIS NTs with various components exhibit an outstanding red-shift compared to the visible light absorption of pure ZnO NRs, and ZnO/CAIS-6 NTs achieve the best efficiency of visible light absorption. Subsequently, the corresponding band gaps of the samples were estimated in Fig. 4(b). The approximate band gap value of pure ZnO NRs, ZnO/CAIS-4 NTs, ZnO/CAIS-6 NTs and ZnO/CAIS-10 NTs were measured to be ∼3.20, ∼2.10, ∼2.00 and ∼2.13 eV, respectively. The curves clearly demonstrate that the optical band gaps of ZnO/CAIS NTs are reduced compared with that of ZnO NRs, which implies that ZnO-based nanorod structures modified with CAIS quaternary sulfide is more suitable for visible light absorption than that of single ZnO NRs. The sample of ZnO/CAIS-6 NTs displayed the narrowest band gap corresponding to the widest visible light region among others. The change appears in absorption and energy band gap due to the interaction between the 3d-state of copper and valence band-edge of the host material. The photoelectric performance of ZnO/CAIS NTs was improved significantly and it can be concluded that the CAIS shell can enhance the photoabsorption due to the appropriate band gap and the high optical absorption coefficient. Therefore, a semiconductor material with the narrow energy band gap can trap more photons and be more favorable to utilize visible light.
In this article, ZnO and ZnO/CAIS-4 NTs, ZnO/CAIS-6 NTs, ZnO/CAIS-10 NTs were spin-coated at 2500 rpm for 60 s with a regioregular-P3HT chlorobenzene solution. Then, the state solar cells were assembled by covering with a platinum sheet as a counter electrode. The structure of the all-solid-state inorganic–organic hybrid solar cells is shown in Fig. 4(c). For ITO/ZnO/CAIS/P3HT/Pt nanocrystalline solar cells, ZnO/CAIS-6 NTs served as photoanodes, Pt as the counter electrode, and regioregular-P3HT as the solid electrolyte. The current density–voltage curves for the products were tested under the irradiation of simulated sunlight (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2). The parameters of the nanocrystalline solar cells based on ZnO NRs and ZnO/CAIS NTs are shown in Fig. 4(d) and Table 1. In the photocurrent measurement process, the power conversion efficiency of a solar cell is calculated using the following equations:
η = (VocJscFF)/Pin,
(6)
FF = VoptJopt/VocJsc,
(7)
where
Pin is the power of incident white light, FF is the fill factor, Vopt and Jopt are voltage and current for the maximum power output, and Voc and Jsc are open-circuit photovoltage and short-circuit photocurrent, respectively. The solar cell only with bare ZnO NRs gives an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 269 mV, a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 1.20 mA cm−2, a fill factor (FF) of 0.55, and a power conversion efficiency (η) of 0.18%, whereas the device with the ZnO/CAIS-6 NTs delivers a Voc of 499 mV, a Jsc of 6.93 mA cm−2, a FF of 0.53, and the η of 1.80%, which represent an enhancement of 85.50%, 477.50% and 900.00% in Voc, Jsc and η, respectively. While all the devices based on ZnO/CAIS NTs acted as solar cells, ZnO/CAIS-6 NTs exhibited the highest photovoltaic performance. A reasonable interpretation of the excellent performance compared with ZnO/CAIS-4 NTs and ZnO/CAIS-10 NTs are as follows: (1) the ideal energy band gap (the enhanced photo response spectrum), which is consistent with red-shifting of the optical absorption spectra. The light absorption efficiency of ZnO/CAIS-6 NTs was enhanced significantly and reached the maximum range; (2) appropriate Cu/Ag atomic ratio, the Jsc increased with the content of copper, the Jsc decreased afterward; in other words, when an optimum replacement timer for copper substituted the silver atoms and the copper exceeded an optimal value, the highest Jsc and η were obtained.

Photoanodes

V
oc (mV)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)

η (%)
ZnO
269
1.20
55
0.18
ZnO/CAIS-4
484
6.13
54
1.60
ZnO/CAIS-6
499
6.93
53
1.80
ZnO/CAIS-10
476
6.03
54
1.55
It is believed that the optimized photoelectric performance of the solid state solar cells using ZnO/CAIS-6 NTs as a photoanode is attributed to the following major factors: (i) improved electron transfer due to the ZnO one-dimensional nanostructure; (ii) a higher efficiency of light-harvesting and (iii) appropriate band gap alignment at the interface of ZnO/CAIS-6 NTs. The following detailed explanation is provided. It should be noted that 1D ZnO NTs modified by CAIS-6 sulfide can provide a direct electron transport pathway without crystal boundary resistance, and therefore the structure exhibits much higher electronic mobility with reduced recombination loss for photo-induced electron–hole pairs. For the ZnO/CAIS-6 NTs nanostructure, an enhanced efficiency of photon capturing capability can be obtained by preparing well-aligned nanotube arrays with increased surface roughness and surface area for solar cell photoelectrodes. The ordered nanostructures enhance the scattering in the visible region between nanostructure arrays. The core of ZnO NTs, acting as a charge transmission pathway, was uniformly enclosed by plenty of CAIS-6 nanoparticles, which increases the specific surface area of the composite structure. CAIS-6 shell worked as a common absorber on the ZnO NTs surface that can enhance incident light utilization by increasing the total reflectance by reflecting unabsorbed light back into ZnO NT arrays to be secondarily utilized, and the expanded light propagation path facilitates sun light utilization. Moreover, these accumulated CAIS-6 nanoparticles, serving as a high light absorption coefficient material, can trap more photons, and therefore, numerous photons will be utilized by the ZnO/CAIS-6 NTs for generating electron/hole pairs. An appropriate band gap structure of the composite structure can be obtained by modifying a layer of CAIS-6 shell with narrow band gap on ZnO NTs, as shown in the inset of Fig. 4(d), a stepwise band structure was designed for efficient separation and reducing the recombination of photo-induced electrons and holes, which can increase the photoelectric property by improving the efficiency of charge injection and collection significantly. Electron injection from the lowest unoccupied molecular edge (LUMO) level of P3HT into the conduction band of CAIS-6 and ZnO in turn is favorable. Moreover, the photo-induced holes transport from the valence band of ZnO to that of CAIS-6 shell and then to the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) level of P3HT. Hence, it can be clearly observed that the perfect matching of energy band structures of ZnO/CAIS-6/P3HT is favorable for efficient photogenerated electron and hole transportation and for the suppression of interface electron recombination. Eventually, a remarkable enhancement of the photoelectric performance was achieved using CAIS-6 quaternary sulfide modified ZnO nanoarrays.
In summary, a promising quaternary absorber CAIS was prepared and vertically aligned ZnO/CAIS NTs were fabricated on ITO substrates by a hydrothermal chemical and heat treatment method. The material of CAIS based on ZnO was first investigated and applied to solar cells. It was found that the power conversion efficiency of ITO/ZnO/Cu0.7Ag0.3InS2/P3HT/Pt solid-state solar cells is up to 1.80% due to improved electron transfer, a higher efficiency of light-harvesting and appropriate band gap alignment at the interface of ZnO/Cu0.7Ag0.3InS2 NTs. More importantly, the experiment confirms that the CAIS sulfide is a promising material for improving the efficiency of solar cells.

The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51102174) and the State Key Laboratory of Heavy Oil Processing (No. SKLHOP201505).


This journal is © the Owner Societies 2015