 DOI: 10.1039/C9TA10887D
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 25978-25984


Guoming
Qin
,

Lianjie
Zhang
*,

Dong
Yuan
,

Haiying
Jiang
,

Wei
Tang
,

Mingjun
Chen
,

Weijing
Wu
*,

Yong
Cao
 and 

Junwu
Chen
*

Institute of Polymer Optoelectronic Materials & Devices, State Key Laboratory of Luminescent Materials & Devices, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510640, P. R. China. E-mail: lianjiezhang@scut.edu.cn; wuwj@scut.edu.cn; psjwchen@scut.edu.cn

Received
2nd October 2019
, Accepted 23rd October 2019
First published on 23rd October 2019
As-cast polymer solar cells without any additive and pre- or post-treatments principally have high compatibility with mass production technologies, and efforts in achieving higher efficiencies are typically promoted by engineering new donor and acceptor materials. In this study, a binary solvent processing approach using chloroform (CF), as a good low boiling point solvent for both the donor polymer PTQ10 and the non-fullerene acceptor IT-4Cl, and mesitylene (MES), as a semi-orthogonal co-solvent with relatively high boiling point and weak solubility to the acceptor, is explored. Due to the selective orthogonality of MES to the IT-4Cl acceptor, an optimized morphology has been realized for the as-cast device based on the PTQ10:IT-4Cl blend, which leads to a simultaneous improvement in the open-circuit voltage, short-circuit current, and fill factor, finally achieving a high as-cast efficiency of over 13%. Furthermore, the as-cast devices fabricated with this binary solvent system exhibit good air stability and great accessibility in large area cells. Our findings provide an alternative guideline for the optimization of as-cast polymer solar cells.

Solution-processed bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) polymer solar cells (PSCs) have attracted extensive attention due to the excellent feasibility of their low-cost processing, potential flexibility, semi-transparency, and good compatibility with high throughput roll-to-roll printing, which make them a promising energy conversion technology. Many efforts in the research of photoactive materials, morphology optimization, and device configuration have been made to boost the photovoltaic performance, and to date, the record power conversion efficiency (PCE) has increased to 17% in single junction and tandem solar cells. It should be noted that newly-emerged non-fullerene acceptors with A–D–A′–D–A architecture have become the latest favorites. However, many high performance active layers are usually achieved through multiple treatments, including solvent additive, vacuum drying, solvent annealing, and thermal annealing. Relatively, an as-cast active layer without a solvent additive and any post-treatments can be simply fabricated, which is attractive for the future low-cost mass production.

As a prerequisite, the as-cast active layer should exhibit high performance. There are two possible ways to elevate the device performance of as-cast active layers: developing new materials for the active layers and exploring new processing solvents to modify the BHJ morphology for the as-cast fabrication. Currently, most as-cast active layers are fabricated employing a single solvent. Consequently, a solvent mixture based on two or more solvents could have a certain potential in optimizing the morphology of the as-cast active layer. Recently, very encouraging as-cast device performances have been achieved due to the great activities of newly designed materials, e.g., the powerful non-fullerene acceptor Y6. Nonetheless, endeavors towards finding new processing solvents to realize high performance as-cast PSCs are scarce.
In this study, we developed a binary solvent system approach, based on chloroform (CF) and mesitylene (MES), to manipulate the blend-film morphology in a non-fullerene based system for achieving a stable as-cast device with a PCE of over 13%. Particularly, benefiting from the semi-orthogonal nature of the MES co-solvent to the IT-4Cl acceptor, favorable vertical segregation and suitable donor/acceptor interfacial interactions, two key factors for good BHJ morphology, have been obtained, from which open-circuit voltage (Voc), short-circuit current density (Jsc), and fill factor (FF) were improved simultaneously. Our findings imply that solvent processing engineering is of exclusive importance in as-cast PSCs and needs to be further explored.

To exploit this binary solvent system approach with a semi-orthogonal co-solvent system, we chose a blend of a low-cost polymer, poly[(thiophene)-alt-(6,7-difluoro-2-(2-hexyldecyloxy)quinoxaline)] (PTQ10), due to its facile preparation, and a non-fullerene acceptor, IT-4Cl, as the active layer, with their chemical structures shown in Fig. 1a. The preparation of PTQ10 was conducted according to a report by Li et al.; its number molecular weight of 15.6 kg mol−1 and polydispersity of 2.26 were obtained by high temperature GPC measurements. It should be noted that PTQ10 polymers with an irregular chemical structure arising from the position of the alkoxy side chains on the difluroquinoxaline units are highly soluble in both CF and MES. However, the IT-4Cl acceptor showed quite different solubilities in the two solvents, with 45 and 14.4 mg mL−1 in CF and MES, respectively (Fig. S1, ESI). The determination of the solubility was performed similarly to a previous report by Nguyen et al., which had been demonstrated to be a reliable optical measurement. Relative to CF, the lower solubility of IT-4Cl in MES may be due to the non-polar nature of MES. In some sense, MES, the co-solvent in this study, may be regarded as the semi-orthogonal solvent. On the other hand, the boiling point (bp) ranges for CF and MES are 60–62 °C and 163–166 °C, respectively, showing a big bp difference. Hence, due to the co-solvent having higher bp than the host solvent and the selective solubility of the IT-4Cl component, control over the phase distribution could be anticipated.

The normalized UV-vis absorption spectra of PTQ10:IT-4Cl (1:1, w/w) blend films processed in either pure CF or the CF:MES binary solvent are shown in Fig. 1b. The binary solvent-casted blend film showed a similar line profile to that processed from CF, but exhibited a small blue-shift and stronger absorbance in the long-wavelength range, implying that the binary solvent may affect molecular packing and hence result in a different active layer morphology.
To examine the effect of different processing solvents on the photovoltaic performance, solar cells based on PTQ10 as the donor and IT-4Cl as the acceptor were fabricated with a typical inverted device configuration of ITO/ZnO/active layer/MoOx/Al, where the blend weight ratio was fixed to 1:1 and the preliminary active area of the devices was 5.8 mm2. The relevant energy diagram for the materials in the inverted device structure is shown in Chart S1 (ESI). In order to further explore the low cost potential, we selected convenient as-cast active layers for PSC fabrication, where no solvent additives and no pre- or post-treatments were utilized. In addition, these simple as-cast devices can also help for a direct comparison of the individual role of the two-type processing solvents in this study. The current density versus voltage (J–V) curves are shown in Fig. 1c, and the corresponding photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table 1.
Processing solvent
Device area (mm2)

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)

a Chloroform and mesitylene are abbreviated as CF and MES, respectively.
b Average values and the standard deviation are in the parentheses obtained from over ten devices.

CF
5.8
0.89
19.33
70.46
12.12 (11.82 ± 0.30)
37.0
0.89
19.51
63.51
11.04 (10.67 ± 0.37)
57.0
0.89
19.24
52.44
8.99 (8.54 ± 0.45)
CF:MES
5.8
0.91
19.61
73.01
13.04 (12.83 ± 0.21)
37.0
0.91
19.83
64.14
11.58 (11.27 ± 0.31)
57.0
0.92
18.92
64.43
11.22 (10.83 ± 0.39)
With pure CF as the solvent, the as-cast device shows a PCE of 12.12%, based on an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.89 V, a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 19.33 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 70.46%. When changing the processing solvent to the binary solvent CF:MES (1:1 by volume), simultaneous elevations of the three parameters can be observed and the device power conversion efficiency is promoted to 13.04%. It should be noted that pure MES is not a powerful processing solvent for the as-cast device (PCE = 9.18%) because of its limited solubility to the IT-4Cl (Table S1, ESI). In literature, some cathode interlayer modifications exhibited a certain effectiveness toward improving the three parameters simultaneously. It is interesting that the CF:MES binary solvent system can afford a similar effect. The eco-friendly solvent MES, as a semi-orthogonal component of the binary solvent system for the IT-4Cl non-fullerene acceptor, might supply some helpful driving force for the phase separation of the PTQ10:IT-4Cl blend, which will be discussed below. Furthermore, the binary solvent system can play a vital role in the device stability, according to a comparison of the shelf lives in air. As shown in Fig. S2 (ESI), relative to CF, CF:MES-processed devices exhibit a much longer shelf life. After 20 days of storage, the CF- and CF:MES-processed devices can maintain 73% and 86% of the initial PCE values, respectively. As revealed in Fig. S2 (ESI), the decreased device efficiencies are mainly due to the continuous decays of the FF and Jsc. The decline trends of the FF for both CF- and CF:MES-processed devices are almost the same, indicating that the inherent traps influencing the charge recombination probably result from the degradation of the photo-active materials. With the assistance of the binary solvent system processing, this morphology deterioration can be suppressed to some extent, as shown in Fig. S2d (ESI).
The external quantum efficiency (EQE) curves of PTQ10:IT-4Cl-based PSCs processed by different solvents are presented in Fig. 1d. The EQE profiles reflect the complementary absorption patterns of PTQ10 and IT-4Cl, in agreement with previous reports. Compared to the CF-processed device, the CF:MES-processed device exhibits a similar photo-response range from 500 to 800 nm but a slightly stronger responsivity, consistent with its relatively higher Jsc. The maximum EQE values are 80.5% and 83.0% for CF- and CF:MES-processed devices, respectively. The Jsc values calculated from the EQE curves are 18.4 and 18.7 mA cm−2 for the devices processed from CF and CF:MES, respectively, which are consistent with those from the J–V curves within 5% error. It should be noted that the absorption spectra of the blend film (Fig. 1b) and the EQE profiles of the devices (Fig. 1d) are quite different. This should be attributed to the optical interference effect between incident light and reflected light from the opaque Al electrode.
To further explore the effect of different processing solvents on the charge recombination kinetics, light intensity (Plight)-dependent Jsc and Voc were studied. The relationship between Jsc and Plight can be described as Jsc ∝ Plightα, where α represents a power-law exponent. The slope values of 0.951 and 0.966 were found for CF- and CF:MES-processed devices, respectively. Thus, the CF:MES-processed device displays slightly less bimolecular recombination. As shown in Fig. 2b, the slopes for the CF- and CF:MES-processed devices are 1.16 and 1.11kT/q, respectively, which indicates that bimolecular recombination is the dominant recombination mechanism. The characteristics of photocurrent density (Jph) vs. effective voltage (Veff) were analyzed to investigate exciton dissociation and extraction properties.Jph is defined as Jph = JL − JD, where JL and JD are the photocurrent densities under illumination and in the dark, respectively. Veff is defined as Veff = V0 − Vbias, where V0 is the compensating voltage when Jph is zero and Vbias is the applied voltage bias. When Veff is large (in this case, 2 V), almost all photocurrent density can be extracted from the device, which reaches its saturated current density (Jsat). As shown in Fig. 2c, the CF:MES-processed device exhibits higher Jsat and reaches a plateau faster than that processed with CF. The exciton dissociation probability P(E,T) can be obtained from the Jphvs. Veff curves using the equation P(E,T) = Jph/Jsat. Under short-circuit current conditions, the P(E,T) values are 91.4% and 93.1% for CF- and CF:MES-processed devices, respectively, implying that binary solvent processing can promote efficient exciton dissociation and charge collection. Moreover, at the maximum power point, the Jph/Jsat ratio for the CF:MES-processed device is higher than that for the CF-processed device.
Photoluminescence (PL) quenching is an excellent complementary tool to infer details about exciton dissociations. The PL emission spectra of pristine films and blend films are displayed in Fig. S3 (ESI). At an excitation wavelength of 552 nm, mainly exciting the PTQ10 donor, the blend films processed by CF and CF:MES showed similar quenching efficiencies of 98% and 98.1%, respectively (Fig. S3a, ESI). At an excitation wavelength of 672 nm, mainly exciting the IT-4Cl acceptor, the emission peak of the acceptor could be quenched by 85.4% and 89.2% for the CF- and CF:MES-processed blends, respectively (Fig. S3b, ESI). Clearly, binary solvent processing can promote the PL quenching ability of the acceptor in the blend film and enhance exciton dissociation, consistent with the higher Jsc values. This also implies that the CF:MES-processed blend may possess a larger donor/acceptor interface area.
The space charge limited current (SCLC) method was used to determine the charge carrier mobilities in the blend films (Fig. S4), and the calculated hole and electron mobilities (μh and μe) are shown in Fig. 2d. For the CF-processed device, μh and μe are 3.22 × 10−4 and 1.06 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively. For the CF:MES-processed device, μe is slightly increased to 1.08 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 while μh is decreased to 2.62 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1. Therefore, a more balanced carrier transport is obtained via binary solvent processing, associated with a higher FF of 73.01%. The binary solvent processing approach is beneficial for efficient charge separation and less charge recombination.
On changing the processing solvent from CF to CF:MES, the Voc for the PTQ10:IT-4Cl PSCs increased from 0.89 to 0.91 V, which indicates that the related energy loss has been suppressed to some extent. Since there is a mere difference in the processed active layers, the improved Voc might be attributed to the modified molecular interactions of donor and acceptor materials by the binary processing solvent. As shown in Fig. 3a, the dark current characteristics are analyzed by a classic equivalent circuit model (inset of Fig. 3a) and a simplified Shockley equation Voc = (nkT/q)[ln(Jph/Js) + 1], where Jph is the photocurrent, Js is the reverse dark saturation current density, n is the ideality factor, k is the Boltzmann constant and q is the elementary charge. In this regard, Voc is related to the dark saturation current density and the diode ideality factor assuming a large shunt resistance and infinitesimal series resistance. In addition, according to the relevant equivalent circuit equation Jd = Js[exp(qV/nkT) − 1], Js and n were evaluated in the exponential regime of the dark J–V curves (fitting curves shown in Fig. S5, ESI). The CF:MES-processed devices show a much lower Js of 1.26 × 10−9 mA cm−2 than that for the CF-processed devices (2.12 × 10−9 mA cm−2). Furthermore, the related value of n for CF:MES-processed devices is 1.52, slightly lower than that of 1.55 for CF-processed devices. A low dark saturation current density and a value of n closer to unity contributed to Voc enhancement, better charge transport and extraction abilities, and reduced hole and electron recombination. Consequently, the CF:MES-processed devices can achieve better Voc and FF.
Taking the semi-orthogonal character of the MES co-solvent into account, the simultaneous elevation of the three parameters may be contributed by the optimization of the vertical morphology. Both CF and MES are good solvents for the donor PTQ10, but MES shows much lower solubility than CF to the IT-4Cl acceptor. Also, considering the big bp difference between CF and MES, the dissipation of CF occurs prior to that of MES during the film drying process. Therefore, the formation of IT-4Cl-dominated domains could precede that of PTQ10-dominated domains, leading to a favorable vertical phase distribution in these inverted devices. Conventional devices were also tested, with their corresponding parameters shown in Table S2. The inferior photovoltaic performance achieved employing the binary solvent system practically proves that the modified vertical morphology is more suitable for an inverted structure. To assess the phase distribution preliminarily, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was utilized to analyze the elemental compositions of the top surfaces of the blend films. Coincidently, fluorine and chlorine are the characteristic elements for PTQ10 and IT-4Cl, respectively. The relative elemental content of the top surfaces of blend films is shown in Fig. 3b and relevant data are listed in Table S3 (ESI). The F/Cl ratio in the CF:MES-processed blend film is 6.38, which is higher than that in the CF-processed blend film (5.35). Therefore, the top surface of blend films processed using the binary solvent system is enriched in PTQ10 donor compared to that of a CF-processed blend film. The enhanced vertical phase separation in the CF:MES-processed blend could reduce the near-field interaction between donor and acceptor to some extent, as reflected by the slightly blue-shifted absorption peak and higher Voc. In addition, this change in the vertical morphology also affords a more balanced charge transport (Fig. 2d). Collectively, the binary solvent-induced vertical morphology delivers a simultaneous improvement in Voc, Jsc, and FF.
More morphology measurements for the active layers obtained with different processing solvents were performed by atomic force microscopy (AFM), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), and grazing-incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS). For the surface morphology (Fig. 4a and b), the obtained root-mean-square (RMS) surface roughness is 0.792 nm for the CF:MES-processed blend, which is lower than that of 1.20 nm for the CF-processed blend. The utilization of the binary solvent system can improve the film formation of the as-cast PTQ10:IT4Cl active layer. Accordingly, a relatively homogenous phase distribution can be found in the binary solvent processed blend film (Fig. 4d), which elucidates its suitable phase aggregation. GIWAXS was conducted to investigate molecular orientation and packing in the blend films (Fig. 5), with line-cut profiles shown in Fig. S6 (ESI). The pristine films of IT-4Cl and PTQ10 exhibit a predominantly face-on orientation, associated with the previous reports. Moreover, the blend films processed by different processing solvents possess (010) diffraction peaks in the out-of-plane (OOP) direction, which suggest that the face-on orientation of donor or acceptor molecules can be retained in the blend films. For the pristine films of IT-4Cl and PTQ10 and their blend films, all the π–π stacking peaks are almost the same and located at 1.79 Å−1 in the OOP direction (Fig. S6b, ESI). Similar line-cut profiles for the two blend films imply that their difference in molecular packing and crystallinity is marginal. The result also correlates with the limited alteration in carrier mobilities.
Apart from the photovoltaic performance in a small surface area device, larger area devices were also fabricated to compare the CF- and CF:MES-processed active layers (Fig. S7, ESI), with the obtained photovoltaic parameters listed in Table 1. When the active layer area increases from 5.8 to 37 mm2, the PCE for the CF-processed device decreases from 12.12% to 11.04%, while in the CF:MES-processed device, the PCE can maintain a high value of 11.58%. More importantly, as the active layer area is further enlarged to 57 mm2, the CF-processed device shows a quite lower PCE of 8.99%, whereas the CF:MES-processed device still exhibits a notable PCE of 11.22%. In literature, chloroform was selected to cast large-area blend films, but some extra treatments had to be applied to achieve high performances. As mentioned above, the binary solvent system approach plays an important role in the preparation of high-quality inks for as-cast large-area solar cells.

In summary, a binary solvent processing approach comprising a good solvent (CF) and a semi-orthogonal co-solvent (MES) has been developed for the fabrication of PTQ10:IT-4Cl based solar cells. CF shows good solubility to both the donor and acceptor, while MES dissolves the donor better than the acceptor, affording a semi-orthogonal solvent system for the acceptor. Without any additive or post treatment, the CF:MES-processed devices show a simultaneous improvement in Voc, Jsc and FF compared to the CF-processed devices. Therefore, a higher efficiency of over 13% can be obtained. Owing to the lower solubility of MES to IT-4Cl and the higher bp of this solvent compared with CF, an optimal vertical phase distribution is achieved with the CF:MES binary solvent system, leading to an improved photovoltaic performance. Furthermore, PSCs processed using this binary solvent system exhibit good air stability and great accessibility in large area devices. Our study infers that a simple binary solvent processing strategy is effective in developing high-performance as-cast OSCs towards mass production.


The authors declare no conflict of interest.


We gratefully acknowledge the financial support of National Natural Science Foundation of China (51673070, 91633301, 51521002, and U1401244) and Natural Science Foundation of Guangdong Province (2017A030313326). This study was also supported by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (2180040, 2019ZD05).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta10887d
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019