 DOI: 10.1039/C2NR31923C
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 7735-7742

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Joong Tark
Han
,

Jun Suk
Kim
,

Sae Byeok
Jo
,

Sung Hun
Kim
,

Jong Soo
Kim
,

Boseok
Kang
,

Hee Jin
Jeong
,

Seung Yol
Jeong
,

Geon-Woong
Lee
* and 

Kilwon
Cho
*

Nano Carbon Materials Research Group, Korea Electrotechnology Research Institute, 70 Boolmosangil, Changwon, Korea 642-120. E-mail: gwleephd@keri.re.kr; Fax: +82-55-280-1590; Tel: +82-22-280-1677

Department of Chemical Engineering, Pohang University of Science and Technology, San 31, Hyojadong, Pohang, Korea 790-784. E-mail: kwcho@postech.ac.kr; Fax: +82-54-279-8269; Tel: +82-54-2789-2270

Department of Physics & Center for Plastic Electronics, Imperial College, South Kensington, London, UK SW7 2AZ

Received
18th July 2012
, Accepted 12th October 2012
First published on 22nd October 2012
Modulation of electronic structures and surface properties of transparent carbon nanotube films is a challenging issue for their application in optoelectronic devices. Here, we report, for the first time, that graphene oxide (GO) nanosheets play the role of a p-doping agent and surface energy modifier of single-walled carbon nanotube (SWCNT)-based transparent conducting electrodes (TCEs). The deposition of highly oxidized, small-sized (i.e., diameter of less than 500 nm) GO nanosheets onto a SWCNT network film reduces the sheet resistance of the pristine film to 60% of its original value by p-doping. The modified TCEs exhibit an outstanding optoelectronic feature of high conductivity with high transparency. Moreover, the wettability of the electrode surface was also noticeably increased, which is advantageous for the solution-based processing of organic electronics. Furthermore, the organic photovoltaic (OPV) cells with the GO-doped SWCNT anodes on flexible substrates were successfully demonstrated. In stark contrast to a power conversion efficiency of 0.44% for pristine SWCNT anodes, GO-doped SWCNT anodes show a drastically enhanced power conversion efficiency of 2.7%.

Conductive network films including single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) and metal nanowires have been considered for use as alternative transparent conducting electrodes (TCEs), due to their excellent electrical properties, flexibility, and their solution-processability under ambient conditions. Such electrode properties would be useful, for example, in touch-panel, solar cell, and organic light emitting diode applications. Although the metal nanowire electrode has a low sheet resistance of less than 50 Ω sq−1 at high transmittance up to 85%, in terms of optical properties, nanocarbon-based TCEs having low haze values are more suitable than metal nanowire films having high haze for optical devices. Moreover, there are some challenges to overcome before they can be used commercially as an electrode material in optoelectronic devices; (i) low electrical conductivity, (ii) high porosity, and (iii) hydrophobic surface property. In the case of the SWCNTs, for highly conductive TCE applications, the development of an efficient and stable dopant is one of challenges. Several ionic dopants have been successfully employed to enhance the electrical conductivity by a strong charge transfer mechanism, however, properties other than electrical conductivity, such as the surface morphology and wettability of porous network SWCNT films, still remain an important issue.

In this context, we introduce the two-dimensional (2D) and easily deformable GO nanosheets containing electron withdrawing groups (such as hydroxyl, epoxy, carbonyl, or carboxylic acid groups) on the basal plane and edges as a multi-purpose p-type dopant of SWCNT films. The presence of electron-withdrawing groups that exhibit charge-transfer interactions with SWCNTs can be used to tailor the SWCNT electronic structures, which can decrease the Schottky barrier height between the semiconducting and metallic nanotubes. Moreover, the geometric configurations of the SWCNT bundles in a network substantially influence the network conductivity. Modulation of the interfacial tension between the SWCNTs and a top coating material can effectively reduce the sheet resistance in SWCNT films via network densification. In this sense, easily deformable and hydrophilic 2D-GO nanosheets can reduce the junction resistance in the SWCNT bundle networks.
Moreover, the deposition of highly oxidized 2-D GO sheets onto porous nanotube networks can be advantageous in reducing the surface roughness of SWCNT films, and enhancing their wettability toward hydrophilic organic materials. There are several reports on the combination of CNTs and reduced GO nanosheets, which aim at the enhancement of the conductivity of SWCNT films. However, these methods did not produce significant changes in the electrical conductivity and surface properties of the SWCNT films without sacrificing transparency, except when additional post-treatments such as chemical doping or acid treatment were applied. Hybridization approaches have been shown to be ineffective in modulating the surface properties of films, for example, the roughness or wettability.
In the present work, we introduce a novel strategy for the use of GO nanosheets as a multifunctional p-doping agent in the preparation of high-performance SWCNT films, which can be used as alternative flexible electrode materials in organic photovoltaic (OPV) cells. The effects of the size of the GO nanosheet on the electrical conductivity of the SWCNT films were investigated by size-sorting the GO nanosheets. We found that the small-sized (diameter of less than 500 nm) and highly oxidized GO nanosheets were effective in reducing the sheet resistance of the SWCNT network films, without any sacrifice in transmittance. The small-sized highly oxidized GO nanosheets also improved the wettability of the SWCNT film toward the hydrophilic buffer layer hole-transporting material in an OPV cell. The power conversion efficiencies of OPV cells containing the GO-modified SWCNT electrodes were measured, demonstrating the successful use of the electrodes as an alternative anode in flexible OPV cells.
This strategy has several advantages as shown in Fig. 1: (i) GO nanosheets deposited onto the SWCNT network film improve the wettability of the top-coating layer such as the hole transporting layer in optoelectronic devices (Fig. 1a); (ii) the functional groups of the highly oxidized GO account for the electron-withdrawing characteristics of GO from SWCNTs, resulting in enhancing electrical conductivity (Fig. 1b); (iii) the flexible GO nanosheets wrap the nanotube bundles and junctions, which reduces the junction resistance and the surface roughness (Fig. 1b).

We hypothesized that highly oxidized transparent 2D-GO nanosheets with highly oxidative groups could be used to enhance the electrical conductivity of SWCNT network films, via densification and p-type doping. In this regard, the size and functionality of GO nanosheets may be crucial factors in manipulating the electrical conductivity of SWCNT network films. To investigate the effects of the size of the GO sheets on the electrical conductivity of the SWCNT network film, GO nanosheets were sorted by size using a simple centrifugation method. GO nanosheets were prepared via the exfoliation of graphite oxide in water, using bath sonication. The oxidation of the graphite powder was conducted over 3 days to obtain a highly oxidized graphite oxide, using a modified Hummers method. Prior to the sorting process, the highly carboxylated graphite oxide (which was highly dispersible in water) was removed by decanting the supernatant during the washing process; the carboxylated large-sized GO nanosheets would not have been separated from the small-sized GO nanosheets during centrifugation (Fig. S1). Because of their 2D, open structure, GO nanosheets can be cut into small-sized nanosheets during exfoliation by sonication. The GO nanosheet size distribution can therefore be widened by increasing the sonication power and time during the exfoliation of graphite oxide. In this study, GO nanosheets were exfoliated into single-layered GO nanosheets using sonication at 120 W for 1 h, producing a size distribution that ranged from several tens of nanometers to several micrometers (Fig. S2a). The GO dispersion in water was centrifuged at 10000 rpm for 1 h. The first supernatant solution was decanted and is denoted here as S1. The sediment was redispersed in water by sonicating the suspension for 5 min (such a short time was used to minimize any damage), and the solution was then centrifuged at 10000 rpm for 1 h to obtain a second supernatant (S2). The third (S3) and fourth (S4) supernatant solutions were prepared using the same procedure. Fig. S2c shows that the obtained supernatant solutions were light brown in color. The centrifuged supernatant solutions had different GO concentrations. Before their further use, the S1, S2, and S3 solutions were therefore diluted to give a concentration close to that of the (most dilute) S4-GO solution. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the sorted GO nanosheets, as shown in Fig. 2a, revealed that S1 contained small-sized GO (below 1 μm), and the size increased to several micrometers upon further centrifugation. The GO nanosheet size distribution was measured from the SEM images, as shown in Fig. 2b. The sorted GO nanosheets showed sizes that ranged from less than 1 μm (S1) to greater than 21 μm (S4). The size distribution could be controlled by varying the centrifugal force and time, with a higher centrifugal force resulting in smaller GO nanosheets. The functionalities of the sorted GO sheets were characterized using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy. Fig. 2c shows XPS spectra for the size-sorted GO from the fractions S1–S4. The C1s spectra were compared by deconvoluting each spectrum into three peaks. The C1s spectra of the S1-GO nanosheets showed peaks at 284.6, 286.6, and 288.1 eV, which corresponded to CC/C–C (51.6%), C–O (39.5%), and CO (8.9%) chemical bonding states, respectively. The degree of oxidation of the centrifuged GO nanosheets was similar in samples S1 to S4. The FTIR spectra in Fig. 2d qualitatively showed the presence of oxidative groups in the GO nanosheets. Interestingly, fractions S1–S4 could not be distinguished based on differences in the functional groups as detected by FTIR, which indicated that the GO nanosheets were sorted by size. A similar conclusion was drawn from a solid-state NMR analysis of the similar functionalities of the sorted GO sheets. The solid-state 13C magic-angle-spinning (MAS) nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectra of S1-GO and S4-GO shown in Fig. 2e showed peaks at 134, 70, and 60 ppm, which corresponded to unoxidized sp2 carbons, hydroxylated carbons, and epoxidation, respectively. The Raman spectra for the size-sorted GO nanosheets also did not reveal distinctive differences among samples S1–S4, indicating that the degree of oxidation and the presence of defects in the GO nanosheets did not differ among the samples, despite the different sizes (data not shown). We therefore excluded the possibility that variations in the functionalities of the sorted GO nanosheets contributed to differences in the conductivity of the resulting SWCNT films. The cutting of the GO nanosheets under sonication was also confirmed after the sonication of the S4-GO solution, as shown in Fig. S2d.


SWCNT films were deposited on polyethylene terephthalate (PET) surfaces using an automatic spray coater, from an aqueous dispersion of arc-SWCNTs stabilized by sodium dodecylbenzenesulfonate. Fig. 3a shows a plot of the sheet resistance (Rs) against the transmittance (T) for the SWCNT films on bare PET. The Rs and T of the SWCNT films before GO coating were found to be 248 Ω sq−1 and 90.0%, respectively.

Sheet resistance and transmittance are related by:
(1)
where
σDC and σOp are the direct current (DC) and optical conductivities, respectively.


Eqn (1), combined with the values of Rs and T (inset of Fig. 3a), yielded a value of σDC/σOp ≈ 12.5 for the pristine SWCNT film.
The conductivity σDC of the disordered nanotube films depends on the number density of the network junctions Nj, which in turn scales with the network morphology through the film fill-factor Vf, the mean diameter 〈D〉 of the bundles, and the mean junction resistance 〈RJ〉:
(2)
Here, K is a proportionality factor that scales with the bundle length. Changes in 〈RJ〉 and Vf that occur upon the application of the GO nanosheets may therefore be sensitive to the size and wetting properties of the GO nanosheets.
A size-sorted GO solution was deposited on the SWCNT films using air-spraying, and the coverage with the GO sheets was controlled by varying the number of spray applications. Fig. 3b shows the relative change in Rs in the SWCNT films (95% transmittance), as a function of the number of top-coating spray applications. Interestingly, the degree of reduction in Rs depended on the size of the GO nanosheets. The smaller GO nanosheets were more effective in reducing Rs for the SWCNT films. The Rs value for the film coated with the S1-GO was less than 60% of the sheet resistance of the pristine SWCNT film, with no decrease in the transmittance (Fig. S3), despite the insulating characteristics of the GO sheets. These values corresponded to a σDC/σOp ≈ 20.5. The reduction in Rs was more pronounced for thinner SWCNT films (higher transmittance), as shown in Fig. 3a; this suggested that the GO nanosheets loaded on the SWCNT film surface may have influenced the network structure and electronic structure, and therefore the conductivity, of the SWCNT films. In addition, the uniformity in Rs for the SWCNT films improved from 5.9% to 5% after the application of a GO nanosheet top coating, as shown in Fig. S4. The effects of the GO nanosheets on the conductivity of the SWCNT films were confirmed via in situ I–V measurements on the SWCNT films before and after GO coating, as illustrated in Fig. S5a. A gold electrode with a 50 μm channel length was deposited on an SWCNT film prepared on PET, and a GO solution was then sprayed on the film using an air brush. Electrical measurements were then performed on this structure. Fig. S5b clearly shows that the current in the SWCNT films increased when greater quantities of the GO solution were deposited (arrow direction). Large S4-GO nanosheets did not produce a distinct increase in the current upon deposition (data not shown).
The conductivity of the SWCNT films coated with GO nanosheets was sensitive to the interactions between the highly oxidized GO nanosheets and the carbon nanotubes possibly by the doping effects. The effect of doping is clearly shown in Raman spectra (Fig. 3c and d). The Raman spectrum at an excitation energy of 1.96 eV comprised a convolution of several peaks, due to the presence of both semiconducting (s-SWCNTs) and metallic SWCNTs (m-SWCNTs). It has been shown that s-SWCNTs exhibit four peaks with Lorentzian shapes in this region; specifically, at 1607, 1592, 1569, and 1553 cm−1. In contrast, the spectra for m-SWCNTs can be fitted to a single Lorentzian curve for G+ at 1580 cm−1, and a broad Breit–Wigner–Fano (BWF) line shape for G−, in the region 1530–1560 cm−1. In this study, the G bands for the pristine SWCNT film shown in Fig. 3 were downshifted by 2 cm−1 relative to the SWCNT powder, due to tensile strain imposed during film formation (Fig. S6). Most importantly, the G band peak shifted to some extent after top-coating with the GO nanosheets. An upshift of 3.5 cm−1 in the G+ band for the s-SWCNTs in S1-GO (with respect to the reference, which was the as-prepared SWCNT film) provided evidence for the doping of holes in the SWCNTs from the GO nanosheets via a charge transfer mechanism. Considering the effect of the size of GO nanosheet, this charge transfer was less pronounced for larger GO nanosheets (Fig. 3c). Fig. 3d also shows a progressive upshift in the G+ band of the s-SWCNTs with the deposition of more S1-GO nanosheets. A prominent reduction in the metallic BWF component was observed in the SWCNT films coated with the smaller GO nanosheets, which was attributed to the withdrawal of electrons from the nanotubes to the GO nanosheets. Previously, Shin et al. reported that aromatic solvents with electron-withdrawing groups could effectively extract electrons from m-SWCNTs, and induce charge transfer from s-SWCNTs. Thus, oxidative moieties in the highly oxidized GO nanosheets interacting directly with the nanotubes may have acted as electron-withdrawing groups, thus tailoring the electronic structures of the SWCNTs. We tried to measure the G band spectrum at the film interface by shifting the laser focus from the film to the air interface, as shown in Fig. S7. Interestingly, nearer the film surface the G band peaks progressively upshifted, and the BWF component decreased. This trend was less prominent for the larger GO nanosheets. These results indicated that the small-sized GO nanosheets penetrated the network effectively and interacted with the nanotubes more closely, whereas the large-sized GO nanosheets were located mostly on the top surface of the SWCNT films. These interactions could tailor the electronic structures of the nanotubes. Fig. 4 shows the work function changes obtained from the UPS at various deposition of GO solution. We can clearly observe that the change of the work function depends on the sheet size and the amount of deposited GO solution. The work function increased by 0.31 eV to saturate to 5.3 eV for the S1-GO deposition from 4.71 of the pristine SWCNT film. This trend of an increasing work function with doping is consistent with the previous report for the p-type doping.
The sheet resistance of an SWCNT film is the sum of the resistance of the intrinsic SWCNTs and the junction resistances between the nanotubes. Under ambient conditions, nanotubes typically show p-type behavior due to the presence of oxidizing adsorbates, which can be influenced by the oxidative moieties present in the GO nanosheets. The enhanced conductivity can be explained in terms of the height of the Schottky barrier at the junction between the metal and the semiconducting SWCNTs, because the Schottky barrier height plays an important role in decreasing the sheet resistance. Interactions with GO nanosheets can generate more holes in the semiconducting SWCNTs, which can shift the Fermi level toward the valence band, and electrons can be extracted from the metallic SWCNTs, which can decrease the Schottky barrier height as schematically shown in Fig. 4c.
To our knowledge, the present work reports, for the first time, a reduction in the Rs in SWCNT films achieved via the use of highly oxidized small-sized GO nanosheets. Improved electrical and surface properties were observed, despite the insulating characteristics of GO. This is an important observation, as it provides a new route for enhancing the conductivity of SWCNT films, using an environmentally friendly aqueous GO solution. The small-sized GO nanosheets were effective in reducing Rs for the SWCNT network films, possibly because the small-sized GO nanosheets could penetrate easily into the porous SWCNT network structure. As shown in Fig. 5a, the diameter of the SWCNT bundles and pore sizes in the SWCNT films were 10–50 nm and less than 200 nm, respectively. The sizes of the size-sorted GO nanosheets were also confirmed in the SEM images of the GO-coated SWCNT films (Fig. S8). In the SEM images, the GO nanosheets loaded onto the SWCNT networks resembled wet tissue paper (Fig. 5a and b). This suggested that during the drying process following the deposition of the wet GO nanosheets on the nanotube network, the small-sized (diameter of less than 500 nm) GO nanosheets penetrated into the network pore structure and densified the SWCNT network, decreasing the junction resistance in the SWCNT network. A schematic illustration of this is given in Fig. 5a and b. As shown in Fig. 5b, the SWCNT surface coated with large-sized GO (S4) had free-standing GO nanosheets between the nanotube bundles, whereas the small-sized GO nanosheets were tightly wetted on the SWCNT networks, as shown in Fig. 5a. GO nanosheets that were smaller than the network pore size could penetrate easily into the pores, which increased the contact area between the nanotubes and the GO nanosheets for p-doping. This visual inspection also supported the notion that the small-sized GO nanosheets were effective in reducing Rs for the SWCNT films because they effected network densification, which reduced the junction resistance.
Based on the above discussion, we conclude that the small-sized GO nanosheets were effective in enhancing the conductivity of SWCNT films. The differences in the properties of the S1-GO to S4-GO films originated in the interaction area between the SWCNTs and the loaded GO nanosheets for p-doping, as indicated by the SEM images (Fig. 5a and b) of the GO-coated SWCNT films. Moreover, the small-sized GO (diameter of less than 500 nm), which penetrated the porous SWCNT networks and tightly wrapped the nanotube bundles (Fig. 5a), reduced the junction resistance more effectively than the free-standing large GO nanosheets (Fig. 5b).
We next investigated the wettability of the GO-modified SWCNT network films. Fig. 5c–f shows SEM and water droplet images for increasing GO nanosheet coverage of the SWCNT films, upon deposition of increasing amounts of GO solution. With increasing GO nanosheet coverage, the water contact angles (WCA) of the SWCNT films decreased from 113.6° to 27.9°. In addition, the small-sized GO nanosheets showed slightly smaller WCAs than the SWCNT films modified with the large-sized GO nanosheets, possibly due to the tight wrapping of the nanotubes and the easy penetration into the network pore structure of the films in the case of S1-GO. Fig. 6a clearly illustrates the enhanced wettability of the PEDOT:PSS solution in the GO-coated area (dotted area).
The hydrophobic porous characteristics of SWCNT network films can limit their application in multilayered optoelectronic devices, in which a hydrophilic buffer layer such as PEDOT:PSS (which is used as a hole transport layer) must be deposited on the electrode surface. Thus, the enhanced wettability and reduced porosity of the GO-modified SWCNT films have the potential to enable the application of such films in optoelectronic devices such as organic photovoltaic cells or organic light emitting diodes.

To evaluate the optoelectrical performance of a GO–SWCNT electrode on PET, OPV cells with a PET/GO–SWCNT/PEDOT-PSS/active layer/LiF/Al structure were fabricated (Fig. 6b and c). The sheet resistances and transmittances of the SWCNT films were changed by varying the sprayed amount of the SWCNT solution; the same amount of the S1-GO solution was deposited on the SWCNT films in each case. Devices containing a pristine SWCNT electrode on PET were also fabricated for comparison. As shown in Fig. 6c and Table 1, the device performance—in terms of the short circuit current (JSC), open circuit voltage (VOC), and fill factor (FF)—was enhanced after the SWCNT films were treated with the S1-GO nanosheets.

Anode properties
Photovoltaic characteristics

T (%)

R
S (Ω sq−1)

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (mV)
FF

R
SE (Ω cm2)

R
SH (Ω cm2)

η (%)
Pristine SWCNT film
87.29
160
3.66
0.43
0.28
76.6
146.4
0.44
SWCNT–GO film
92.75
215
6.35
0.53
0.48
8.6
313.5
1.60
91.14
170
7.66
0.54
0.49
5.1
383.1
2.03
88.03
125
9.99
0.55
0.49
5.1
505.1
2.67
82.54
83
5.21
0.53
0.49
4.1
598.8
1.35
In principle, the photocurrent depends directly on the product of the light absorption, the exciton diffusion, the charge separation, and the charge collection efficiency. Since exciton diffusion and charge separation depend in large part on the morphology of the active layers, the changes in the surface energy could affect the photocurrent generation by modulating the morphology of the photoactive layers. As shown in Fig. 6a, the GO-coated SWCNT electrodes showed higher surface wettability than the pristine SWCNT electrode. Since PCBM has been reported to have a lower surface energy than P3HT, vertical phase separation during the film formation and subsequent annealing processes results in P3HT enrichment at the hydrophilic bottom surface. This vertically phase-separated structure is favorable in conventional OPV devices, because unwanted charge recombination at the opposite electrodes can be suppressed. In addition to the surface energy, differences in charge injection and surface roughness could play an important role in device performance, especially for VOC and FF. Since the charge collection depends on the charge transport and injection, the change in the work function of the electrode might significantly alter the resultant photovoltaic properties. With S1-GO coated on top of CNT, the work function of the electrode changes from 4.7 eV to 5.05 eV, which can induce a facile hole injection from the HOMO of P3HT (5.0 eV) to electrode. The resultant device performance showed a significant enhancement in the overall photovoltaic performance, comparing devices fabricated on pristine SWCNT electrodes and GO-coated SWCNT electrodes with similar transmittances and resistances (Table 1).
The light absorption and charge collection efficiencies also affect photocurrent generation. Because light absorption is directly proportional to the intensity of the incident light, reductions in the transmittance directly lower the photocurrent. As shown in Fig. 6c and Table 1, the devices fabricated on GO-coated SWCNT electrodes showed increases in JSC as Rs decreased, until the transmittance dropped to 80%, which counteracted further increase in JSC. The measured JSC values agreed well with the values calculated from the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra (Fig. 6d). Since all of the GO-coated SWCNT electrodes shared similar surface energies, the morphologies of the active layers showed no major differences. The variation in the photocurrent could therefore be attributed solely to the effects on the transmittance and resistance of the electrodes. The transmittance effects were more apparent in measurements of the series and shunt resistance. A continuous decrease in the series resistance and an increase in the shunt resistance agreed well with the lower Rs values for the GO–SWCNT electrodes, but contradicted the trend in JSC. A balance between the opposing trends in the transmittance and Rs would present the optimum operational conditions. The monotonic increase in the FF also agreed well with the reduction in the total series resistance as Rs decreased for the GO–SWCNT electrode. The GO-coated SWCNT electrode with 88% transmittance and 125 Ω sq−1 sheet resistance showed the optimum device performance. The insensitivity of VOC to the surface GO film indicated that the Fermi level of the GO–SWCNT electrode was pinned to the HOMO level of the donor polymer.
The photovoltage and series and shunt resistances (Rse, Rsh) also showed a significant dependence on the presence of GO on the SWCNT surfaces; devices fabricated with pristine SWCNT electrodes showed a low FF and a high series resistance. Considering the fact that series resistance includes both the electrode and interface resistance, this high series resistance implies insufficient charge transfer at the electrode interface, in comparison with GO–SWCNT electrodes with a similar sheet resistance. The insulating nature of GO can facilitate charge transfer at the active/electrode interface by removing interface dipoles. The resulting enhanced internal electric field can restore VOC to approximately 100 mV. The lower shunt resistance in devices containing pristine CNT electrodes was attributed to the high surface roughness of the SWCNT electrodes, which leads to a high leakage current. A reduced VOC also confirmed the increased leakage current. Because the GO nanosheets had a work function of 4.9 eV that was appropriate for hole-transporting layers, and they effectively smoothed the SWCNT film surface, the enhanced photovoltaic performances were consistent with a general trend.
The dependence of the device stability on the service cycle was tested using 10 repeated measurements over time. Since the electrical reduction of GO occurs favorably under ionic conditions with high applied bias, the possible reduction of GO during the service cycle was not noticeable, which agrees well with no significant degradation of OPV performance after the repeated measurements. However, the device performance showed no significant degradation after the repeated measurements. The degradation in the device performance with time (∼72 hours) showed a trend similar to that shown by ITO based devices (i.e., a 10% decrease in photocurrent). Furthermore, since OPV device operating voltages (∼0.4 V) are lower than the onset voltage for GO reduction (when connected with an appropriate load resistor, near the maximum power generation point), stable device operation can be expected with GO–SWCNT electrodes.

In summary, we have demonstrated that a coated layer of highly oxidized small-sized GO nanosheets enhanced the electrical conductivity and wettability of hydrophobic SWCNT network films for use as transparent electrodes in optoelectronic devices. This approach constitutes a significant advance toward the production of transparent conductive hydrophilic electrodes for optoelectronic devices with multilayered structures, in which some layers are composed of hydrophilic organic materials. GO nanosheets were size-sorted using a centrifugation method, and the size fractions displayed comparable functionalities according to XPS, FTIR, and solid 13C NMR spectra. We demonstrated that, compared with the several micrometer-sized GO nanosheets, the small-sized GO nanosheets were more effective in reducing the Rs of the SWCNT films. The reduction in Rs resulted from a decrease in the Schottky barrier height, which was due to the presence of electron-withdrawing groups on the oxidized GO nanosheets, as well as the densification of the SWCNT networks. Both factors contributed to decreasing the network junction resistance. The WCA of the SWCNT films changed from 112° to 28° after the deposition of the GO nanosheets. The SWCNT films modified with small-sized GO nanosheets performed well as transparent SWCNT electrodes in OPV cells. These results give new insights into the mechanism underlying the use of highly oxidized small-sized GO nanosheets as a multifunctional p-dopant. GO-modified SWCNT films could potentially replace ITO in OPVs; this could have important implications for the development of flexible organic optoelectronic devices.


This work was supported by a grant from the Center for Advanced Soft Electronics under the Global Frontier Research Program of the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology, Korea, and from the Fundamental R&D Program for Core Technology of Materials funded by the Ministry of Knowledge Economy, Korea.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2nr31923c
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012