 DOI: 10.1039/C0JM02184A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 1966-1969

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Jun-peng
Liu
,

Kwang-Leong
Choy
* and 

Xiang-hui
Hou


Faculty of Engineering, Energy and Sustainability Research Division, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, NG7 2RD, United Kingdom. E-mail: kwang-leong.choy@nottingham.ac.uk; Fax: +44 11595 14031

Received
8th July 2010
, Accepted 12th October 2010
First published on 29th November 2010

ZnO nanoparticulate thin films were fabricated on flexible indium tin oxide (ITO) covered polyethylene terephthalate (PET) substrates by spin coating technology and were used in flexible solar cells with a hybrid polymer, due to the benefit of low temperature processes. The flexible solar cells with a structure of PET/ITO/ZnO/regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl) (P3HT):[6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM)/Ag have shown a photovoltaic performance with open circuit voltage of 0.56 V, short-circuit current density of 12.55 mA cm−2, fill factor of 0.36 and power conversion efficiency of 2.51%. The opposite J–V curves of the devices with ZnO and without ZnO were attributed to the opposite charge transport directions, which suggested the electron transport and hole blocking role of ZnO. The photoluminescence intensity of P3HT was totally quenched in the P3HT:PCBM thin film while there was no photoluminescence quench in the ZnO/P3HT double layer thin film, which clearly indicates that the exciton dissociation occurs at the interface between P3HT:PCBM instead of that between ZnO and P3HT. Therefore, it is reasonable to infer that the electrons transported to ZnO are from the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of PCBM instead of the LUMO of P3HT according to the quenching experiment results combined with the J–V curve and energy level diagram. The identification of the charge transport directions and the exciton–dissociation interface will benefit the further improvement of photovoltaic performance by optimization of material selection, device design and process technology.

Developing inexpensive renewable and environmentally friendly energy sources is a potential solution to solve the current problems such as the energy crisis and environmental pollution. The photovoltaic devices based on conjugated polymer materials have at least the advantages of low cost and easy processing technology to convert the solar light to electricity. Encouraging improvements in the performance of polymer solar cells with efficiency around 5–7% have been reported by several groups since the discovery of photoinduced electron transfer between conjugated polymers and fullerenes. The most recent generation of bulk heterojunction solar cells have an efficiency potential of 10% according to the theoretical study results. As the efficiency of polymer solar cells approaches commercial viability, developing innovative structures such as the inverted structure to get stable photovoltaic devices has attracted more and more attention. Inverted solar cells with indium tin oxide (ITO) as the electron collecting electrode and silver as the hole collecting electrode show better stability comparing with the normal devices using ITO as a hole collecting electrode and aluminium as an electron collecting electrode. However, there is still an ambiguous understanding of the charge transport and exciton–dissociation for the inverted solar cells. Fabricating solar cells on flexible substrates, which has potential for roll-to-roll processes, is also a research focus in recent years. For flexible solar cells, the important challenge is the fabrication process at low temperature because most of the flexible substrates cannot resist temperatures above 150 °C.

In this work, we fabricated inverted solar cells based on hybrid ZnO and regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl) (P3HT) mixed with [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester fullerene derivative (PCBM) on flexible polyethylene terephthalate (PET) substrates at low temperature. To clarify the role of ZnO, devices without ZnO interlayer were also fabricated. The opposite current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the devices with and without ZnO were attributed to the opposite charge transport directions. The photoluminescence quenching results provided better understanding of the exciton–dissociation interface positions. The flexible inverted solar cells show better stability.

We synthesized ZnO nanoparticlesviahydrolysis and condensation of zinc acetate dihydrate using potassium hydroxide in methanol. At first, zinc acetate dihydrate (>99%, 2.95 g) was dissolved in 125 mL methanol at 60 °C, a solution of potassium hydroxide (85%, 1.51 g) in 65 mL methanol was titrated over 10 min into the zinc acetate solution under vigorous stirring. After 2 h and 15 min, the nanoparticles precipitated and the solution became turbid. Then the precipitate and mother liquor were separated by centrifugation and the precipitate was washed twice using 50 mL methanol. At last the precipitate was dispersed in 75 mL 1-butanol containing 10% (vol) methanol. The transparent dispersion was kept at room temperature. The ZnO nanoparticulate thin films were fabricated by spinning the dispersion with a speed of 2000 rpm for 1 min on flexible ITO coated PET substrate. The spin coating was repeated twice.

For the photovoltaic devices, P3HT and PCBM were purchased from Aldrich and used without further purification. Composite layers of P3HT and PCBM (P3HT:PCBM mass ratio of 30:18) were spin-coated from chlorobenzene solutions with a speed of 1000 rpm for 1 min on the ITO coated PET substrates with or without the ZnO nanoparticulate covering layer in an Argon-filled glove box. The heat treatment was performed at 150 °C for 10 min by a hot plate in the glove box. Then, the silver electrode was deposited by thermal evaporation in a vacuum around 3 × 10−6 mbar.
The crystal structure of the ZnO nanoparticles dried in an oven was determined by a Simens D500 X-ray diffraction (XRD) spectrometer with a Cu-Kα radiation. The surface morphology was investigated by a Philips FEI XL30 scanning electron microscope (SEM). J–V characteristics were measured using a Keithley mode 2602 power source under AM 1.5 illuminations of 100 mW cm−2 with an AM1.5 solar simulator. The light intensity was calibrated by a Newport Oriel 91150V reference cell with KG-5 filter. The photoluminescence quenching experiments for the P3HT (200 nm), P3HT:PCBM (320 nm) and ZnO (50 nm)/P3HT (200 nm) thin films on ITO covered PET substrates excited at 520 nm visible light were performed by a Hitachi F-2500 fluorescence spectrometer.

For flexible devices, the critical problem is the fabrication process at low temperature because most flexible substrates are not stable at temperatures above 150 °C. In this experiment, the ZnO nanoparticles were synthesized at 60 °C. By precisely controlling the temperature, the composition of the reactant and the reaction time, the ZnO nanoparticles can be formed with high reproducibility. The XRD pattern of the nanoparticles (shown in Fig. 1) matched well with the standard diffraction of ZnO crystal with hexagonal wurtzite structure. The ZnO nanoparticulate thin films were fabricated on ITO covered PET substrates by spin coating technology at room temperature. The surface morphology of the ZnO nanoparticulate thin film was characterized using SEM. As shown in Fig. 2, a rough surface morphology was observed, which might benefit the formation of a three-dimensional heterojunction.

The solar cells with a structure of PET/ITO/ZnO/P3HT:PCBM/Ag, as shown in Fig. 3, were fabricated. The flexible PET films coated with ITO were used as the substrates. ZnO is selected because of its suitable optical and electrical performance. It is transparent in the visible-wavelength range due to the wide band gap of around 3.37 eV.P3HT blended with PCBM were used as the active layer because of the high efficiency in light absorption and photo-induced charge transfer. Silver with a work function of −4.3 eV was used as the top electrode to collect the holes because a layer of silver oxide can be formed and the effective work function can increase to a higher value, which is suitable for the hole collecting.
In recent years, solar cells based on hybrid ZnO/organic material bulk heterojunctions and multiple-layer heterojunctions were widely investigated. In the bulk heterojunction solar cells, ZnO was regarded as the electron acceptor and electron transport material. However, in the multiple-layer heterojunction solar cells, the role of the ZnO was not clear, as there was no direct evidence to show the cascading electron transfer from PCBM to the ZnO. To obtain a better understanding for the role of the ZnO, we compared the J–V curve of the device with and without ZnO. As shown in Fig. 4, the device with a ZnO interlayer shows photovoltaic performance with open circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.56 V, short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 12.55 mA cm−2, fill factor (FF) of 0.36 and power conversion efficiency (η) of 2.51%. While the device without ZnO shows a J–V curve in the second quadrant. The J–V curves of the device with ZnO and without ZnO show opposite shape, which indicates an opposite charge transport direction. The phenomenon can be explained by the schematic sketch of the energy band structure.

Fig. 5 shows schematic diagrams of the corresponding energy levels and the charge transport directions for the solar cells with and without the ZnO nanoparticulate layer. For the device with ZnO, ZnO acts as an electron conducting and hole blocking layer due to its energy band structure. Therefore, the electrons transport to the ZnO and ITO electrode while holes transport to the silver electrode, resulting in a remarkable photovoltaic performance. However, for the device without an electron selective ZnO nanoparticulate layer, the electron and hole transport directions are complicated. According to our experimental results, it is most likely that the electrons transport to the silver electrode and the holes transport to the ITO electrode, which can explain why the J–V curve of the device without ZnO is opposite to that of the device with ZnO.
There is still an unclear issue as to whether the electrons are from the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of P3HT or the LUMO of PCBM. To further understand this issue, we performed photoluminescence quenching experiment because it is an effective way to evaluate the exciton dissociation efficiency. Fig. 6 shows the photoluminescence spectra of P3HT, P3HT:PCBM and ZnO/P3HT thin films on ITO covered PET substrates. The PL intensity of P3HT was totally quenched in P3HT:PCBM thin films indicating a highly efficient charge transfer between P3HT and PCBM. Meanwhile, the PL intensity was not quenched in the ZnO/P3HT double layer thin films indicating negligible charge transfer occurs from P3HT to ZnO. The difference of the exciton dissociation efficiency in different interfaces can also be explained by the different exciton lifetime obtained by ultrafast spectroscopy. Most of the photo generated excitons will be separated at the interface between P3HT and PCBM and only negligible excitons will be separated at the interface between P3HT and ZnO. Therefore, it is reasonable to infer that the electrons transported to ZnO are from the LUMO of PCBM instead of the LUMO of P3HT according to the quenching experiment results combined with the previous described J–V curve and energy level diagram.
Better stability is always a desirable property for solar cells. In this work, we also investigated the stability of the inverted polymer solar cells. The solar cell with an efficiency of 2.51% without encapsulation was stored in the air for four months. Then the solar cell showed Voc of 0.52 V, Jsc of 12.07 mA cm−2, FF of 0.32 and power conversion efficiency of 2.01%. There are several explanations as to the improved stability for the inverted solar cells. However, more investigations are needed to clarify which mechanism plays the most important role for the improved stability by the inverted structure.

In summary, ZnO nanoparticles were synthesised viahydrolysis and condensation of zinc acetate dihydrate with potassium hydroxide in methanol at low temperature. ZnO nanoparticulate thin films on flexible PET substrates were fabricated. The flexible solar cells based on hybrid conjugated polymer and ZnO with a structure of PET/ITO/ZnO/P3HT:PCBM/Ag were fabricated. The solar cell showed a photovoltaic performance with Voc of 0.56 V, Jsc of 12.55 mA cm−2, FF of 0.36 and power conversion efficiency of 2.51%. The J–V curves of devices with ZnO and without ZnO and the photoluminescence quenching experiment provided better understanding of the charge transport directions and exciton dissociation interface positions. These kind of inverted flexible solar cells also show improved stability which gives a promising method for fabricating solar cells with high stability and high performance.


The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support of the European Commission under the EU-FP6 NOE515703.2 EXCELL program, East Midlands Development Agency project (EMX06158) and an industrially funded solar cell program.


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011