 DOI: 10.1039/D2TA02565E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 14884-14893


Bonghyun
Jo
,

Gill Sang
Han
,

Hyang Mi
Yu
,

Jinheok
Choi
,

Jun
Zhu
,

Tae Kyu
Ahn
,

Gon
Namkoong
* and 

Hyun Suk
Jung
*

School of Advanced Materials Science and Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 16419, Republic of Korea. E-mail: hsjung1@skku.edu

SKKU Institute of Energy Science and Technology (SIEST), Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 16419, Republic of Korea

Department of Energy Science, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 16419, Republic of Korea

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Old Dominion University, Norfolk, USA. E-mail: gnamkoon@odu.edu

Received
31st March 2022
, Accepted 12th June 2022
First published on 13th June 2022
Although perovskite solar cells have been widely investigated to improve the photovoltaic conversion efficiency so far, perovskite light absorbers have a severe disadvantage for commercialization due to their facile degradation when exposed to humidity and oxygen. Herein, we suggest a synergic anti-solvent dripping strategy to improve the performance and stability of a photovoltaic device using a mixture of PMMA/sodium borate salt (borax) and perovskite materials. We characterized its unique features, i.e., the enhanced hydrogen bond formation between the PMMA/sodium borate mixture and the perovskite light absorber, which induced the lateral grain growth of perovskite films and efficient passivation of the surface and grain boundaries. Consequently, the PMMA/borax-treated devices exhibited significantly improved efficiency from 20.93% to 22.05% and retained 80% of the initial device performance over 1084 h at 22 °C and 50% RH. We believe that this technology will be useful for commercializing various optoelectronic devices.

Hybrid organic–inorganic perovskite materials have been shown to boost the device power conversion efficiency through their outstanding optoelectronic and photophysical properties, revolutionizing the photovoltaic field owing to their simple fabrication via the solution-casting process. Since the state-of-the-art perovskite solar cell (PSC) demonstrated a decent power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 25.7%, various strategies have been proposed to provide a further chance to achieve an enhanced performance close to its Shockley–Queisser (SQ) limit of approximately 33%. Notably, it has been observed that defects located at grain boundaries (GBs) between neighboring grains or the interfaces between polycrystalline perovskite films in combination with charge-transporting layers act as trap centers and are the main sources of performance loss for PSCs. Furthermore, perovskite films are prepared by the solvent processing method, which is typically prone to form defects on the film surface and GBs. These defects accelerate the degradation of the perovskite and serve as nonradiative charge recombination centers that negatively impact the device performance. Therefore, obtaining excellent surface coverage for perovskite film formation and an enlarged crystal size for GB reduction has been considered as one of the best approaches for yielding high-performing PSCs with high efficiency and stability by reducing the trap density.

There are several approaches to improve the performance of PSCs, such as composition engineering of perovskite materials and additive engineering of the perovskite precursor. The compositional engineering approach, including the use of triple or quadruple cations, the chemical modification of the X site anions of Br or Cl ions, and the inclusion of various metal halide salts in the perovskite precursor for reducing defects and manipulating the film morphology, has been the method of choice to date. In addition, the inclusion of alkali salts like Li+, Na+, K+, and Rb+ has been adopted as an attractive strategy to achieve highly uniform grains for enhancing the stability by partially replacing formamidinium (FA+) or methylammonium (MA+) with these ions.
Various additive materials like Lewis acid or base groups, including small molecules, and long-chain polymers, have been investigated for incorporation into the perovskite absorber to boost its performance and humidity tolerance. In particular, long-chain polymers have been successfully introduced; these include polyvinyl alcohol (PVA), polyethylene glycol (PEG), polystyrene sulfonate (PSS), poly[(9,9-bis(3′-(N,N-dimethylamino)propyl)-2,7-fluorene)-alt-2,7-(9,9-dioctylfluorene)] (PFN), and polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA). These polymers retard crystal growth via hydrogen bonding interactions to fabricate pin-hole-free perovskite films, having large and uniform grain size as well as a barrier to protect them from hydrolytic degradation. In addition, polymers with hygroscopic properties, e.g., PMMA and PVA, exhibit self-healing functionality to achieve the long-term operational stability and humidity resistance required for a marketable product. The binding effect of enhanced hydrogen bonding significantly affects the perovskite stability by preventing decomposed ingredients from leaking. Thus, the ingredients recrystallize into perovskite crystals through self-healing.
Herein, we propose a synergetic strategy to improve the performance of PSCs using a PMMA/sodium borate salt (borax) mixture in an anti-solvent. Borax, also known as sodium tetraborate, is an inorganic salt composed of a boron compound (Na2B4O7), which is widely used as a household cleaner and laundry detergent. In particular, borate salts with diols provided a very useful means of enhancing the crosslinking functionality with other polymers. For instance, in the PVA/borax system, the borax behaved as a cross-linking agent and self-healing enhancer by cross-linking the functional groups of PVA chains via the di-diol bonds to form a viscoelastic network.
In this study, we investigated PMMA/sodium borate mixtures for enhanced hydrogen bonding and its impact on the structural, optical, and photovoltaic performance of perovskite solar cells. We further expect that incorporating an alkali salt into the polymer/perovskite blend could be a feasible passivating method to optimize the long-term stability of photovoltaic devices.


Fig. 1A schematically shows the preparation of the perovskite film using PMMA/borax. The PMMA polymer and borax salts were dissolved in an anti-solvent instead of a perovskite precursor (as explained in the device fabrication section in the ESI). This method overcomes several methodological limitations, such as the formation of heterophases, insoluble additives, and the inappropriate miscibility of the additives in the perovskite precursor. In addition, it has been reported that the organic MA+ and FA+ cations of a perovskite form a loosely bound hydrogen bond between the organic cations and the PbI2 ionic cages. This leads to the discharge of the MA and FA species from the crystal lattice at the perovskite GBs, causing abrupt degradation. We assume that PMMA with borax additives fills the GBs, forming complexes with dative bonds between the perovskite and PMMA/borax.

X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis was performed to investigate the structural orientation of the additive-embedded perovskite thin films. The diffraction peaks at 14.1°, 28.5°, and 49.9°, corresponding to the (110), (220), and (330) planes, respectively, originate from the vertical growth of the thin film. On the other hand, those at 24.4°, 31.66°, and 40.3°, attributed to the (211), (310), and (224) planes, respectively, are related to the lateral growth of the films containing the PMMA/borax additives in Fig. 1B. We evaluated the lateral growth of the perovskite film by using full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the perovskite (110) diffraction peak, as shown in Fig. S1. The FWHM value of PMMA/borax samples (0.092) is 1.63 times smaller than that of the reference sample (0.15), indicating the larger grain size of the PMMA/borax sample than the reference sample, which is consistent with the SEM images in Fig. 1C. This indicates that PMMA/borax can induce grain orientation among the cross-linked perovskite grains.
To confirm the lateral growth of the perovskite film, we observed the changes in perovskite film morphology as borax concentrations were increased, as shown in Fig. 1C. The reference film exhibited a grain size of 203 ± 96 nm. In contrast, the PMMA/borax-treated perovskite films have a larger grain size of 485 ± 184 nm, 542 ± 242 nm, and 675 ± 175 nm for borax concentrations of 0.5, 1.0, and 2.0 mg mL−1, respectively ([PMMA] = 0.3 mg mL−1, [borax] = 0.5–2.0 mg mL−1). Beyond these enlarged grain growths, the bonding between MA+(FA+), the PMMA polymer, and borax salts slow down the perovskite crystallization process. Furthermore, carbonyl groups in PMMA at the boundaries will target the under-coordinated Pb2+, contributing to the formation of larger grains that will merge via cross-linking. Interestingly, the GBs of the perovskite film are gradually blurred as the borax concentrations increase, implying the formation of perovskite–polymer hybrid films. In addition, Fig. S3 shows that the borax concentration does not affect the perovskite film thickness owing to the adoption of the same perovskite precursor concentration.
FTIR spectroscopic measurements were conducted to elucidate the effect of borax salt on the perovskite layer, as shown in Fig. 1D. We found that the peak at ∼1700 cm−1 originates from the CN stretching vibration of FA+. Interestingly, we observed that the CN stretching peak changed from 1711 cm−1 to 1715 cm−1 with an increase in the borax concentration, where the blue-shift was attributed to the interaction of PMMA/borax with the amino group of formamidinium (FA+). In addition, the B–O bonding peak at 1510 cm−1 became stronger and the C–H bending vibration peak was shifted from 1352 cm−1 to 1373 cm−1 with increasing borax concentrations, indicating that B–O–H or B–O–C bonding is promoted by the interaction between sodium borate and CH3. Our previous study using proton nuclear magnetic resonance indicated that the presence of PMMA in the perovskite leads to the formation of hydrogen bonds between PMMA and the perovskite. Specifically, the interaction between the dipole moment of MA+ (CH3NH3+) in the perovskite and the polar CO bond in PMMA promoted hydrogen bond formation. Additionally, sodium tetraborate is composed of oxygen atoms bonded to boron atoms, where each boron atom is surrounded by either a triangular or tetrahedral configuration of the neighboring oxygen atoms. In this case, additional hydrogen bonds with MA+ (CH3NH3+) in the perovskite are likely to be formed with oxygens bonded to the boron atoms. Moreover, distinct quadruple FTIR peaks appear at 3265, 3327, 3356, and 3406 cm−1 that correspond to the N–H stretching vibration peaks of the FA+ cations. Remarkably, the quadruple N–H stretching peak becomes prominent with increasing borax concentration, providing clear evidence that the addition of borax to the perovskite enhanced hydrogen bond generation.
To investigate the cross-linking behavior and crystal growth mechanism, TEM images of the prepared bare perovskite film and PMMA/borax-treated films are shown in Fig. 1E and S2.Fig. 1E shows the GBs of the bare and perovskite–polymer hybrid films with borax, revealing a polymer-dominant phase (light-colored area) between the perovskite grains (dark-colored area). The highlighted regions in Fig. 1E (inside the yellow dashed line) represent the polymer-dominant regions with the amorphous regions at the GBs, indicating that the PMMA polymer was predominantly located at the GBs rather than embedded into the perovskite lattice (Fig. S2). However, the boron ions were detected throughout the thin film area by energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy mapping (Fig. 1E and Table S1), indicating that the interaction between the PMMA/borax mixture and perovskite crystals existed at the GBs and whole surface of the thin films. The inter-planar spacing of 3.1 Å for the reference and PMMA/borax samples (Fig. S2) corresponded well to the (220) reflection of the cubic perovskite as determined via the fast Fourier transform analysis and Fourier mask filtering method. These results for the (220) plane are in good agreement with those obtained from the XRD analysis.
We fabricated PSCs, each with an n–i–p planar heterojunction architecture, with various borax concentrations to investigate the effect of borax salts on photovoltaic parameters. To elucidate the advantage of the anti-solvent treated device, we fabricated the post-treated perovskite film using the same PMMA/borax solution for comparison. Fig. S4 shows the J–V curves of reference and borax-embedded PSCs. JSC was increased with PMMA/borax post-treatment, while VOC and the fill factor were not much affected. Comparison of the performance data between the anti-solvent treated device and post-treated device showed that PMMA/borax additives with anti-solvent can significantly passivate not only near-surface defects but also the perovskite film inside. The anti-solvent dripping method can incorporate the additives into the perovskite film inside because the wet perovskite film is not completely crystallized. The gradient distribution of additives in the perovskite film was investigated by the TOF-SIMS (Time-of-Flight Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry) analysis. In addition, PMMA/borax can control the crystallization process of the perovskite film via the anti-solvent dripping method, exhibiting a fully covered morphology with a smooth surface. As a result, the anti-solvent treated device improved the photovoltaic performance with an enhanced JSC, VOC, and fill factor, respectively.
In Fig. 2A, the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the best performing devices with various concentrations of borax (reference, PMMA-only, PMMA/borax) are depicted; these devices were fabricated with the FTO/SnO2/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Au configuration, and photovoltaic parameters of each device are summarized in Fig. 2B. Furthermore, the average and best performing photovoltaic characteristics of the solar cells under various conditions are summarized in Table 1. Noticeable improvements are observed in all the parameters (open-circuit voltage (VOC), short-circuit current density (JSC), and fill factor (FF)) of the target device (PMMA (0.3 mg mL−1) + borax (2.0 mg mL−1)).
(mg mL−1)

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF
PCE (%)
PMMA-only
22.68 (23.85)
1.13 (1.17)
0.75 (0.75)
19.22 (20.93)
PMMA/borax 1.0
23.20 (23.49)
1.13 (1.17)
0.75 (0.74)
19.66 (20.34)
PMMA/borax 1.5
23.13 (23.05)
1.14 (1.18)
0.77 (0.78)
20.30 (21.21)
PMMA/borax 2.0
23.28 (23.76)
1.17 (1.19)
0.76 (0.78)
20.70 (22.05)
PMMA/borax 3.0
22.91 (23.43)
1.16 (1.17)
0.75 (0.76)
19.93 (20.83)
The best PCE of the borax passivated device is 22.05%, with a VOC of 1.19 V, JSC of 23.76 mA cm−2, and FF of 78%, exhibiting a significant increase of 50 mV in VOC and 6.0% in FF. A similar trend is observed in the average VOC, which increases from 1.13 to 1.17 V; the average JSC, which increases from 22.31 to 23.28 mA cm−2; and FF, which increases from 0.73 to 0.76, due to the retarded charge recombination induced by the passivation of the GBs and surface defects. Moreover, the standard deviation of JSC gradually decreased with an increase in the borax concentration, due to the uniform and large grain size of the perovskite film with a smooth surface, as shown in Fig. 1C. In addition, the PMMA/borax 2.0 devices exhibited very little deviations of VOC, indicating that PMMA/borax 2.0 concentration can enable uniform passivation by efficient interaction with the perovskite surface and grain boundary.
As the borax concentration exceeded 2.0 mg mL−1, the photovoltaic parameters showed a slightly downward tendency. A borax concentration above 2.0 mg mL−1 might result in an excess of Na+ ions at the interface, resulting in smaller grain sizes and disordered grain formation, as depicted in Fig. S5, significantly degrading the PSC performance. The integrated JSC values obtained from the external quantum efficiencies (EQEs) of the borax-embedded PSCs are in good agreement with those obtained from the J–V curve, as shown in Fig. S6. Furthermore, the maximum power point results also correspond to those obtained from the aforementioned J–V results, indicating the stable operation of the device, as shown in Fig. S7.
Absorption and steady-state photoluminescence (PL) measurements were performed to investigate the defect passivation behavior of the PMMA/borax-treated perovskite films. The PMMA/borax-treated perovskite films showed improved absorbance in the visible-light range, as shown by the increased surface coverage and enhanced crystal quality in Fig. 2C. In addition, the optical bandgap of the PMMA/borax-treated film (1.55 eV) was slightly changed compared to the reference (1.54 eV) due to the shifting of the Pb2+ 4f core-level peak.

Fig. 2D shows the steady-state PL of the PMMA/borax-treated film. The intensity of the PL peak significantly increased with increased borax concentrations compared to the reference film. Moreover, we confirmed the synergetic effects of the PMMA/borax-treated film for the defect passivation, compared to the PMMA- and borax-only samples (Fig. S8).

Fig. 2E shows the high-resolution PL spatial maps of the emission spectra of the reference perovskite and PMMA/borax-treated films. The PL maps and intensity distribution of the reference perovskite film show many dark regions, indicating that the reference films contained numerous strong PL-quenching areas, which could be in part attributed to nonradiative trap centers. Notably, as the borax concentration increases from 0 to 2.0 mg mL−1, the dark regions in the PL mapping gradually disappear, leading to a uniform PL distribution as shown in Fig. 2E. Furthermore, a drastic improvement in the PL intensity of the perovskite films is observed as the borax additive concentration increases from 0 to 2.0 mg mL−1. Clearly, these PL maps suggest that the addition of borax facilitates the fabrication of perovskite films with improved optical qualities. In Fig. 2F, we illustrated the schematic chemical bonding structure of the perovskite and PMMA/borax blends, showing the possible interactions between the branched PMMA/borax mixture and organic MA+(FA+) cations of (FAPbI3)0.95(MAPbBr3)0.05. The organic cations were bonded with PMMA and tetraborate ions by hydrogen bonding. The lone-electron pairs of the oxygen atoms in the carbonate group (CO) from PMMA coordinate with Pb2+, forming a dative bond. In addition, borax acts as a cross-linker with PMMA, reacting with diols on the polymer chains to form intermolecular cross-links. These links cover the perovskite surface and GBs. The cross-linked PMMA/borax mixtures play a role as an oxygen and moisture barrier. Hence, the PMMA/borax-treated films show great potential for stable PSCs against environmental stimuli.

Fig. 3A presents the Mott–Schottky plots (C−2–V) of the devices with and without PMMA/borax treatment. The built-in potential (Vbi) values were calculated using the following equation: C−2 = 2(Vbi − V)(A2eεεoNA)−1, where A is the active device area, and NA is the doping concentration. The Vbi of the device increases from 0.940 to 1.028 V for the reference and PMMA/borax 2.0 sample, respectively. To further understand the defect passivation effects of the PMMA/borax treatment, the space-charge-limited current (SCLC) was measured, as shown in Fig. 3B. The trap-filled limit voltage (VTFL) was calculated using the following equation: Strap = 2εεoVTFL/(eL2), where L is the thickness of the perovskite film (500 nm); e is the elementary charge of 1.6 × 10−19C; ε is the relative dielectric constant of the mixed perovskite (≈32); and ε0 is the vacuum permittivity (= 8.854 × 10−12 F m−1). The calculated trap density of the perovskite film decreased from 3.79 × 1014 cm−3 (reference sample) to 3.28 × 1014 (borax 1.0) and 2.58 × 1014 cm−3 (borax 2.0), successfully reducing the trap states in the perovskite films.
To understand the recombination behavior and charge carrier dynamics of the PMMA/borax-treated perovskite films, time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) measurements and fluorescence lifetime imaging (FLIM) were performed. Through FLIM, the charge carrier lifetimes of the samples with the device configuration of glass/ITO/perovskite were obtained. The lifetime of the PMMA/borax-treated film (borax 2.0) was calculated to be 122 ns, substantially longer than that of the reference film (31 ns), as shown in Fig. 3C and Table S2. These TRPL results reveal efficient defect healing at the perovskite surface by the intramolecular bonding between the perovskite and PMMA/borax mixture in the thin film, as proved by the effective suppression of the electron–hole recombination. The FLIM results from Fig. 3D to I show the longer lifespans of the PMMA/borax-treated perovskite layers and the enhanced average fluorescence intensity. These figures show a sequential increment of the lifetime as indicated by the color change in the pixels (from black/dark green pixels to yellow/red pixels), corresponding to the lifetime difference obtained from the total counts of the luminescence events at each pixel. The FLIM results demonstrate that the incorporation of borax salts enables the reduction of the nonradiative recombination pathways in the perovskite film. This reduction is also related to the lower trap density and higher Vbi results, exhibiting increased efficiencies as the borax concentration increases.
To examine the long-term air stability, non-encapsulated PCEs with and without PMMA/borax treatment were recorded under ambient conditions at 22 °C and less than 10% RH for 45 days. As shown in Fig. 4A, the PMMA/borax-treated PSC shows superior long-term stability, maintaining approximately 90% (average) of its initial PCE. In contrast, the untreated devices retained only 66% (average) of their initial PCEs during the same period. We expect the enhanced confinement effect produced by the strong intermolecular bonding of the perovskite layer at the GBs to prevent the leakage of the decomposed intermediates from the perovskite film to the outside environment, thereby improving the stability of the PMMA/borax-treated devices. The moisture stability of the devices was examined by exposing the as-prepared samples with and without borax treatment at 22 °C and 50% RH for 1084 h, as shown in Fig. 4B. The PMMA/borax-treated devices exhibited superior moisture stability by retaining ∼80% of their initial PCEs, whereas the reference devices show only 32% of their original state after 1084 h. Furthermore, the hygroscopic behavior of the PMMA/borax-treated samples was confirmed via contact angle measurements. As shown in Fig. 4D and S11, the contact angle of the deionized water droplets on the reference perovskite is 32.3°, much lower than that of the PMMA/borax-treated sample (66.3°; 2.0 mg mL−1) after 30 s. Interestingly, the PMMA-only and borax-only treated samples showed contact angles of 48.6° and 50.7°, respectively. These values indicate the superior cross-linking behavior between the PMMA and borax in the borax-embedded perovskite films. A similar tendency is observed in Fig. S12, indicating that compared to the reference and PMMA-only thin films, the PMMA/borax-treated perovskite thin films maintain their phase with minimal degradation under ambient conditions at 22 °C, 20 ± 10% RH after 30 days. In addition, the photostability recovery of the reference and PMMA/borax-treated perovskite films was investigated, and the corresponding results are shown in Fig. 4C. We measured the PCE of each device exposed to 1 sun illumination for 10 h by recording the PCE every 2 h under ambient conditions (22–25 °C, 45–55% RH). After resting for 12 h under dark conditions (in a glove box with an Ar atmosphere, 22–23 °C), the PMMA/borax-treated perovskite PSCs recovered from their degraded states to their initial states, retaining over 95% of their initial PCEs after 44 h exposure. In contrast, the reference device showed retarded healing, recovering at most 80% of its initial PCE after the same period.
The mechanistic processes are illustrated in Fig. 4E: (1) PMMA/borax forms a dense moisture barrier to prevent moisture penetration into the thin film, by absorbing the water molecules, then (2) the FAI or MAI species are strongly bonded by the PMMA/borax mixture such that the decomposed intermediate species cannot escape and instead react with PbI2 to regenerate the perovskite phase. Thus, the borax salts were utilized for making dense “confinement cages” to promote the self-healing process in the blended perovskite films with PMMA/borax. This decomposition–regeneration mechanism explains the improved stability and self-healing effect in the PMMA/borax-treated perovskite film. And the comprehensive understanding of the role of PMMA/borax additives will help researchers adopt rational use and design of additives for solving stability issues of various perovskite-based optoelectronic applications.

In this study, we investigated the effect of adding PMMA/sodium borate in perovskite films by employing an anti-solvent dripping method. This process provided unique features that enhanced the hydrogen bond formation between the PMMA/sodium borate mixture and perovskite, changing the crystal growth direction and surface morphology and significantly improving the device performance and stability. The strong binding by hydrogen bonding enabled both superior passivation and retardation of the phase decomposition process in the perovskite absorber. Finally, it facilitated the recrystallization of the film, resulting in improved solar cell performance. The non-encapsulated PMMA/sodium borate-embedded device showed excellent stability in air, retaining over 90% of its initial efficiency over 45 days (averaged 20.52%). Additionally, it demonstrated remarkable reproducibility under humid conditions, maintaining 80% of the device performance over 1084 h at 22 °C and 50% RH. We believe that this technology will significantly contribute to the commercialization of various optoelectronic devices such as photovoltaics, photodetectors, and light-emitting diodes.


Indium tin oxide (ITO) was supplied by Hanalintech (Republic of Korea, ROK). Ethyl alcohol (EtOH, 99.5%) and acetone (99.5%) were purchased from DaeJung Chemicals & Metals (ROK). Tin(IV) oxide (c-SnO2, 15% in H2O colloidal dispersion) was purchased from Alfa Aesar (USA). Hellmanex III (detergent), polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA, Mw ∼ 15000), cesium iodide (99.9%), ethyl acetate (99.8%), N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF, 99.8%), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO, 99.9%), anisole (anhydrous, 99.7%), toluene (99.8%), chlorobenzene (99.8%), 4-tert-butyl pyridine (tBP, 98%), acetonitrile (99.8%), and bis(trifluoromethane)sulfonimide lithium salt (Li-TFSI, 99.95%) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (USA). Formamidinium iodide (99.9%), methylammonium bromide (99.9%), and methylammonium chloride (MACl, 98%) were purchased from GreatCell Solar (Australia). 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (Spiro-OMeTAD, LT-S922) was purchased from Luminescence Technology Corp. Poly[bis(4-phenyl)(2,4,6-trimethylphenyl)amine] (PTAA, Mn = 3200, Mw = 4900) was purchased from Xi'an Polymer Light Technology Corp (China). All materials were used as received without post-treatment or further purification.


PSCs were fabricated on glasses coated with ITO patterned by laser etching. The etched substrates were cleaned sequentially using a detergent solution (2 vol% of Hellmanex in DI water), DI water, acetone, and ethanol in an ultrasonic bath for 10 min each. Then, the cleaned substrates were treated with ultraviolet–ozone to remove residual organic contaminants and enhance the wettability of the resulting hole-transporting layer over 30 min. Next, a SnO2 nanoparticle solution (c-SnO2:DI-water = 1:3 volume ratio) was spun on the ITO layer (at 3000 rpm for 30 s), and the coated substrate was annealed at 100 °C for 10 min. Then, 1.6 M (FAPbI3)0.95(MAPbBr3)0.05 perovskite precursor solutions were prepared by dissolving corresponding amounts of FAI (0.263 g), MABr (0.009 g), PbI2 (0.726 g), PbBr2 (0.029 g), and MACl (0.035 g) in a DMSO/DMF (2:8; 1 mL) mixed solvent (with 3% molar ratio and excess PbI2). The solution was stirred at room temperature (20–22 °C) for at least 30 min before use and filtered through a polytetrafluoroethylene filter (0.45 μm mesh).

The anti-solvent solution was prepared by dissolving PMMA (0.3 mg mL−1) in a chlorobenzene/toluene mixed solvent (9:1), followed by the addition of sodium borate salts, which were dispersed in ethyl acetate via ultrasonication over 12 h. Notably, it is very important to grind sodium borate finely with a mortar before its addition. After preparing a well-dispersed solution, the PMMA and borax solutions were mixed in a 9:1 ratio. The perovskite layer was formed on the electron transporting layer via one-step spinning at 5000 rpm for 25 s. The substrate was treated with the anti-solvent (0.5 mL) solution by drop-casting before 20 s of spinning. The substrate was annealed on a hot plate at 150 °C for 10 min. Next, the hole transfer materials were deposited by preparing Spiro-OMeTAD in chlorobenzene (90 mg mL−1) and mixing with 39 μL 4-tertbutylpyridine (tBP), 23 μL Li-TFSI (520 mg mL−1 in acetonitrile), and 10 μL tris[2-(1H-pyrazol-1-yl)-4-tert-butylpyridine]-cobalt(III)-tris[bis-(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide] (FK209, great solar cell; 375 mg mL−1 acetonitrile). In the last stage, the samples were transferred into a thermal evaporator, and a 100 nm-thick Ag layer was deposited at a pressure of 5 × 10−6 Torr to develop devices with ITO/SnO2/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag configurations.

The J–V characteristics of the prepared solar cells were measured using a solar simulator (Newport Oriel Solar 3A Class AAA, 64023A) and a potentiostat (CHI 660D, CH Instruments) under the illumination of an AM 1.5 G spectrum (100 mA cm−2). The potentiostat was calibrated using a standard Si solar cell (Oriel, VLSI standards) and a light sensor current controller (Newport Oriel digital exposure controller, Model 68945). All the devices were tested by masking their active areas with a thin mask (0.14 cm2). The J–V curves were recorded at a scan rate of 300 mV s−1 under AM 1.5G (100 mW cm−2) conditions at room temperature (22–23 °C) with less than 10% RH. The EQE values were measured under the short-circuit condition using a solar simulator (ABET Technologies 10500 solar simulator) as the light source and a light solution (SPECTRO Mmac-200).

The TRPL curves were recorded using a commercial TCSPC system (FluoTime 200, PicoQuant). The samples were excited using a 670 nm picosecond diode laser (LDH-P-C-670, PicoQuant) with a repetition rate of 4 MHz. The emitted PL signal was accumulated using a fast photomultiplier tube detector (PMA 182, PicoQuant) with a magic angle (54.7°) arrangement. The incident angle of the excitation pulse was set at ∼30° with respect to the sample. The resulting instrumental response function was 160 ps (full width at half maximum). The PL decays were measured from the emission peak (770 nm) of the perovskite. In addition, a cut-off filter (FF01-692 nm, Semrock) was applied to block the scattering. The FLIM measurements were conducted using an inverted-type scanning confocal microscope (SP8 FALCON, Leica Microsystems, Germany) with a 100× (oil) objective lens. A 535 nm picosecond laser line from a white-light laser source was used as the excitation source. A hybrid photon detector was used to detect the emitted radiation from the samples. Fluorescence confocal and lifetime images of 512 pixels × 512 pixels were simultaneously recorded using a galvo-stage and time-correlated single-photon counting technique. The obtained fluorescence decays were fitted with an exponential function using the Leica suited software (LAS X Ver.3.5.2).
For FTIR spectroscopy, the samples were prepared with the c-Si/perovskite configuration. Their FTIR spectra were recorded using a Nicolet 5700 instrument (Thermofisher Scientific, USA) from 4000 to 400 cm−1 with a resolution of 4 cm−1.
The XRD patterns were collected via an Ultima III (Rigaku) diffractometer using Cu Kα radiation by step scanning at a scanning speed of 4° min−1, from 5° to 60°. The 2θ scans were obtained from the perovskite samples deposited on the ITO glasses.

B. J. and G. S. H. contributed equally to this work. G. N., T. K. A., and H. S. J. supervised the project. B. J. conceived the idea, designed all experiments, and analyzed data. H. M. Y. performed PL mapping, and FLIM. J. C. performed the XRD experiment to check the crystallization. G. S. H. and J. Z. provided helpful discussions for paper writing. All authors made substantial contributions to the discussion of the content and reviewed and edited the manuscript before submission. B. J., G. S. H., H. S. J. and G. N. wrote the manuscript with input from all authors.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This research was supported by the Future Materials Discovery Program (2019M3D1A2104108), and the Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning (KETEP) grant funded by the Korean Government (MOTIE) (No. 20203040010320). This work is also partially supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korean Government (2020R1I1A1A01063958), the Brain Pool Program (the 2020H1D3A2A01064555), and the National Science Foundation (under project no. 1547771).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ta02565e
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022