 DOI: 10.1039/C8EE02542H
(Communication)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3358-3366


Tianqi
Niu
,

Jing
Lu
,

Ming-Chun
Tang
,

Dounya
Barrit
,

Detlef-M.
Smilgies
,

Zhou
Yang
,

Jianbo
Li
,

Yuanyuan
Fan
,

Tao
Luo
,

Iain
McCulloch
,

Aram
Amassian
*,

Shengzhong (Frank)
Liu
* and 

Kui
Zhao
*

Key Laboratory of Applied Surface and Colloid Chemistry, Ministry of Education, Shaanxi Key Laboratory for Advanced Energy Devices, Shaanxi Engineering Lab for Advanced Energy Technology, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Shaanxi Normal University, Xi’an 710119, China. E-mail: zhaok@snnu.edu.cn

King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), KAUST Solar Center (KSC) and Physical Science and Engineering Division (PSE), Thuwal 23955-6900, Saudi Arabia. E-mail: aram.amassian@kaust.edu.sa

Cornell High Energy Synchrotron Source, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14850, USA

Dalian National Laboratory for Clean Energy, iChEM, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Dalian, 116023, China. E-mail: szliu@dicp.ac.cn

Received
31st August 2018
, Accepted 31st October 2018
First published on 1st November 2018
Ambient stability remains a critical hurdle for commercialization of perovskite solar cells. Two-dimensional Ruddlesden–Popper (RP) perovskite solar cells exhibit excellent stability but suffer from low photovoltaic performance so far. Herein, a RP/3D heterostructure passivated by semiconducting molecules is reported, which systematically addresses both charge dynamics and degradation mechanisms in concert for cesium-free FAPbI3 solar cells, delivering a power-conversion efficiency as high as 20.62% and remarkable long-term ambient stability with a t80 lifetime exceeding 2880 hours without encapsulation. In situ characterizations were carried out to gain insight into structural evolution and crystal growth mechanisms during spin coating. Comprehensive film and device characterizations were performed to understand the influences of the RP perovskite and molecule passivation on the film quality, photovoltaic performance and degradation mechanisms. This enables fabrication of a superior quality film with significantly improved optoelectronic properties, which lead to higher charge collection efficiency. The underlying mitigated degradation mechanisms of the passivated RP/3D devices were further elucidated. The understanding of the necessity of addressing both the charge dynamics and degradation mechanisms of solar cells will guide the future design and fabrication of chemically stable, high-efficiency photovoltaic devices.

Hybrid organic–inorganic perovskite (HOIP) solar cells as a kind of solution-processed thin film photovoltaics have been attracting extensive attention due to their excellent optoelectronic properties and superb power conversion efficiency (PCE). However, the poor environmental stability severely hinders their further commercial application. Here, we demonstrate a new strategy through combining the RP/3D heterostructure with molecule passivation. The significantly improved optoelectronic properties lead to higher charge collection efficiency and better device performance as high as 20.62% for the passivated RP/3D heterostructured devices. Furthermore, the passivated devices exhibit remarkable long-term ambient stability with a t80 lifetime exceeding 2880 hours without encapsulation. This work raises the possibility of developing more controlled perovskite heterostructures for systematically addressing both charge dynamics and degradation mechanisms in concert for the timely commercialization of perovskite solar cells.


The rapid advance of organic–inorganic halide perovskite semiconductors represents a breakthrough for next-generation thin-film optoelectronics. Perovskite solar cells have achieved a certified power conversion efficiency (PCE) as high as 23.3%, which is now on par with that of commercial photovoltaic modules. However, long-term ambient stability remains a critical hurdle for commercialization. This has been ascribed to the instability of three-dimensional perovskites under ambient operation conditions such as weather changes, light, temperature, oxygen and humidity. The methylammonium (MA)-based MAPbI3 perovskite exhibits intrinsic thermal instability due to its low formation energy and volatility of the organic cations. The formamidinium (FA)-based FAPbI3 perovskite, although more thermally-stable than MAPbI3, has both a photoactive trigonal α-phase and an undesired hexagonal δ-phase. The photoactive trigonal α-phase tends to convert to the δ-phase at room temperature, and this conversion is accelerated in the presence of moisture. Perovskites react with water to form hydrates, leading to phase changes or crystal degradation so that they lose photo-activity. This challenge has motivated efforts to improve device stability, and progress in this direction has been made by developing novel perovskite materials.

Recent studies have indicated technique-dependent durability of two-dimensional (2D) Ruddlesden–Popper (RP) phase perovskite solar cells. These perovskites exhibit a multiple-quantum-well structure with a general formula (RNH3)2(A)n−1MnX3n+1, where RNH3+ is a large aliphatic or aromatic alkyl ammonium cation, the A+, M2+ and X− form the perovskite framework and n refers to the layers of [MX6]4−, which are stacked via van der Waals interactions. Importantly, these 2D RP perovskites offer more tunability of their optoelectronic properties and, more importantly, environmental stability due to their higher formation energy and moisture-resistance. Previous studies have indicated that ligand chemistries and quantum well numbers (n) are critical for exciton dissociation, optical resonances, charge mobility, and photovoltaic performance. Meanwhile, it is also important to align the quantum well perpendicular to the electrodes to achieve efficient charge transport. We previously reported superior moisture and thermal stabilities along with a record efficiency of 13.7% for 2D RP-based solar cells. However, the PCEs based on these 2D RP perovskites have thus far lagged behind those of 3D perovskite based solar cells. It has proven to be a feasible strategy to improve the stability while ensuring high efficiency through incorporating RP phase perovskites into 3D perovskites. Very recently, Snaith et al. introduced n-butylammonium (BA) into the FA0.83Cs0.17Pb(IxBr1−x)3 3D perovskite and achieved both efficiency and stability improvement of the device, while the incorporation of BA undesirably limited the photovoltaic performance due to the larger bandgap and decreased the charge mobility of the RP perovskite. Previous reports demonstrated improved optoelectronic properties with simultaneously enhanced device performance and stability for the MAPbI3 perovskite film via introducing molecules with Lewis base groups for trap state passivation at grain boundaries. Importantly, molecules with better energetic parity with the perovskite yield shallower trap states and intergrain charge transport. These achievements illustrate the indispensability of the RP phase to the device stability and the molecular passivation to the MAPbI3 optoelectronic properties. It is therefore imperative to take advantage of both the RP phase and molecular passivation to address both ambient phase stability and device performance in concert for the α-phase FAPbI3 perovskite with realization of highly-efficient and ambient-air-stable perovskite solar cells for widespread deployment. It is also urgent to increase understanding of the mechanism by which the perovskite assembles, and synergetic effects of the RP phase and molecular passivation on the final outcome and device performance.
Herein, we demonstrate a Ruddlesden–Popper (RP)/3D heterostructure combined with molecule passivation within α-phase FAPbI3 films for high-performance and ambient-air-stable solar cells. The crystallization kinetics during film formation was thoroughly investigated to provide a comprehensive picture of chemical reaction at the molecular scale for the different halide-based RP/3D films using time-resolved grazing incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS). The film and device characterizations indicate the RP perovskite-assisted optimized film quality and highlight the roles of the halogen in determining the optoelectronic properties of the RP/3D films. Further grain boundary passivation by semiconducting molecules with Lewis base groups enables significantly optimized charge dynamics including exciton separation, intergrain charge transfer, trap density, charge mobility and charge collection efficiency. The device degradation mechanisms mitigated by the inclusion of the RP perovskite and molecule passivation were systematically revealed. In complete solar cells, we achieved a champion stabilized PCE as high as 20.62% and remarkable long-term environmental stability with a t80 lifetime exceeding 2880 hours under ambient exposure without encapsulation.

The RP/3D heterostructured films were fabricated from a perovskite precursor with a formula (FAPbI3)n(BA2PbX4) (n = 60) in a solvent mixture of dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO), γ-butyrolactone (GBL) and N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF), where BA is n-butylammonium, FA is formamidinium, and X is chlorine (Cl), bromine (Br) or iodine (I). Consequently, we tuned the halide X to yield a series of RP/3D heterostructured films (FAPbI3)60(BA2PbCl4) (abbreviated as FABACl), (FAPbI3)60(BA2PbBr4) (abbreviated as FABABr), and (FAPbI3)60(BA2PbI4) (abbreviated as FABAI). Semiconducting molecules of (3,9-bis(2-methylene-(3-(1,1-dicyanomethylene)-indanone))-5,5,11,11-tetrakis(4-hexylphenyl)-dithieno[2,3-d:2′,3′-d′]-s-indaceno[1,2-b:5,6-b′]dithiophene) (ITIC) or rhodanine-benzothiadiazole-coupled indacenodithiophene (IDTBR) with Lewis base functional groups were then introduced into the sol–gel RP/3D films to passivate grain boundaries (GBs) within the bulk films (see the schematic model and molecular structures in Fig. S1, ESI). The FAPbI3 film was also fabricated as a control (abbreviated as control FA) for comparison. We illustrate the molecule-passivated RP/3D heterostructure in Fig. 1a. The RP phase is interspersed between the 3D grains with semiconducting molecules decorating GBs within the films. The molecule-passivated RP/3D heterostructured films exhibit superior morphological quality. The cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images are displayed for the representative IDTBR-passivated FABABr film (IDTBR-FABABr) in Fig. 1b and for the control FA in Fig. S2a (ESI). The IDTBR-FABABr film exhibits better-connected perovskite crystals with seamless GBs in contrast to the control FA one. The plan-view SEM and atomic-force microscopy (AFM) images further demonstrate larger grain size, fewer GBs and smoother surfaces for the passivated RP/3D films (Fig. 1c and Fig. S2b, ESI) compared to the control FA one.

We began by evaluating the photovoltaic performance of the molecule-passivated RP/3D heterostructured films. The photovoltaic devices were fabricated with the n–i–p architecture of glass/FTO/c-TiO2/perovskite/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au (Fig. 2a). The photovoltaic performance figures of merit are listed in Table S1 (ESI) for the control FA and IDTBR-FABABr devices. The light J–V characteristics for the champion devices are illustrated in Fig. 2b. The devices exhibit average PCEs (and PCEmax) of 18.6 ± 0.5% (19.15%) and 19.5 ± 0.5% (20.62%) for the control FA and IDTBR-FABABr devices, respectively. The improved average and champion PCEs highlight the effectiveness of the molecule-passivated RP/3D heterostructure for constructing high-performance solar cells. The champion IDTBR-FABABr cell with PCEmax of 20.62% exhibits a short-circuit current (Jsc) of 24.40 mA cm−2, a fill factor (FF) of 76.9%, and an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.10 V (Table S2, ESI). This PCE is among the highest reported for planar perovskite devices. The integrated current density from the external quantum efficiency (EQE) matches the Jsc values measured under AM 1.5G one sun illumination (Fig. S3, ESI). The histogram of two batches of cells shows the superior reproducibility and further verifies the PCE enhancement for the IDTBR-FABABr device in contrast to the control FA one (Fig. 2c). The stable output PCEs of the control FA and IDTBR-FABABr champion cells were obtained under standard 1 sun illumination (Fig. 2d). The IDTBR-FABABr device exhibits better photo-stability under illumination, with the PCE stabilizing at 20.54%, whereas the control FA device (19.02%) shows a slight drop with time. This observation suggests improved trap-assisted recombination in the IDTBR-FABABr device, which is in contrast to the observation of the simple Cs-free and pure-halide constituents. The improved trap-assisted recombination and suppressed FA cations further contribute to eliminated hysteresis in the molecule-passivated RP/3D devices, as evidenced by the J–V characteristics from the forward and reverse scans of the champion cells (Fig. 2e). The hysteresis index is determined using the equation:
(1)
Indeed, the hysteresis index decreases from 10.7% to 3.4% for the control FA and IDTBR-FAPbBr devices (Table S2, ESI
), respectively.

Correlating the changes in photovoltaic parameters suggests that the enhanced PCE originates from improvements in the Voc and FF. For example, prominent increases were observed in the Voc from 1.06 to 1.10 V and in the FF from 74.8 to 76.9% in the IDTBR-FABABr device compared to the control FA one, whereas the variation of the Jsc between two devices is negligible. The enhancements in the Voc and FF suggest higher charge collection efficiency in the IDTBR-FABABr devices with respect to the control FA ones. This can be verified from Fig. 2f by examining the slope of the light J–V characteristics as a function of applied voltage. A mild S-shaped curve near the open circuit (OC) voltage was observed for the control FA device, which diminishes for the IDTBR-FABABr case, suggesting a lower barrier for charge collection. Indeed, the charge collection efficiency at OC increases from 9.2 to 11.5 (Fig. 2g). We attribute this improvement to the reduced nonradiative recombination, which consequently yields the increased Voc and FF. Note that the charge collection efficiency at short circuit (SC) remains nearly unchanged (ca. 0.007), indicating similar drift transport for the two devices.
Aging tests were performed for non-encapsulated control FA and IDTBR-FABABr champion cells (19.15% vs. 20.62%) under ambient conditions (humidity and temperature of ca. 40% RH and 25 °C, respectively) in the dark. The aging results are illustrated in Fig. 2h. Quantitative analysis was performed by fitting the degradation curves to determine the lifetime to 80% of the initial value (t80). The t80 lifetime is 2208 hours for the IDTBR-FABABr cell, which significantly surpasses the value of 408 hours for the control FA one. The ultra-long ambient stability achieved for the IDTBR-FABABr device is quite striking and highlights the significant importance of the RP/3D heterostructure and molecule passivation for technologically-relevant durability of Cs-free FAPbI3 perovskite solar cells with excellent photovoltaic performance.

In light of the significant enhancements in photovoltaic performance and ambient stability of the molecule-passivated RP/3D heterostructured devices, we anticipate improved charge dynamics and degradation mechanisms of solar cells. To understand the underlying mechanisms, we first assessed the influences of the RP perovskite on the crystallization kinetics, crystalline morphology, optoelectronic properties and photovoltaic performance. Fig. S4 (ESI) illustrates the SEM images and light J–V characteristics for the (FAPbI3)n(BA2PbI4) RP/3D heterostructured films with n = 60, 40 and 10. Lower-n leads to more RP platelets, whereas there is a significant decrease in the PCE from 18.84% to 16.75% and 14.79% (Fig. S4 and Table S3, ESI). The PCE drop is due to the significant decreases in the Jsc and FF. For example, the Jsc decreases from 23.92 to 22.80 and 21.46 mA cm−2, along with FF decreasing from 74.0 to 71.4 and 66.2% going from n = 60 to 40 to 10. We attribute these drops in the Jsc and FF to higher exciton binding energies and reduced mobilities of the RP perovskite, which lead to higher radiative recombination losses in the RP/3D heterostructured films. The n = 60 device achieves Jsc, FF, Voc and PCE values comparable with the control FA one, suggesting that it is possible to include a small amount of RP perovskite in the 3D perovskite in solar cells without sacrificing performance.

The crystallization mechanism of the control FA, FABAI, FABABr and FABACl samples during spin coating was investigated by performing in situ time-resolved grazing incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS). The time evolutions of the diffraction features as a function of scattering vector q and time are illustrated in Fig. 3a–d. Representative 2D GIWAXS snapshots taken at the end of spin coating are shown in Fig. S5a–d (ESI). A scattering halo at low q values (2–6 nm−1) was found during the first 25 s prior to anti-solvent dripping, corresponding to the disordered precursor colloidal gel (Fig. 3a). A fast transformation from the disordered sol–gel to the δ-phase FAPbI3 crystals (located at q = 8.45 nm−1) was observed to be induced by anti-solvent dripping for the control FA sample. Importantly, the feature associated with the α-phase FAPbI3 crystals (located at q = 9.76 nm−1) was not observed during spin coating, suggesting conversion from the δ-phase to the α-phase occurs exclusively during thermal annealing. The absence of crystalline precursor–solvent intermediate phases at lower q for the control FA sample is quite distinct from the MAPbI3 case, which tends to form intermediate solvates MAI·PbI2·DMF or MAI·PbI2·DMSO during spin coating followed by phase transformation to MAPbI3 crystals during thermal annealing. The distinct film formation of the FAPbI3 compared to the MAPbI3 system suggests a key role of the cation–solvent interaction or larger FA+ cation size in preventing formation of crystalline intermediates. This is naturally expected to impact the nucleation and crystallization behaviors of the perovskite phase.
Inclusion of the RP perovskite in the control FA changes the crystallization kinetics (Fig. 3b–f). Additional scattering at q = 8.32, 8.28 and 8.16 nm−1 was observed for the FABAI, FABABr, and FABACl systems, respectively. Interestingly, the main scattering of the δ-phase shifts from 8.45 to 8.52, 8.55 and 8.64 nm−1 for the control FA and FABAI, FABABr, and FABACl systems, respectively. The appearance of scattering at lower q indicates the formation of the δ-phase BA-based perovskite, which exhibits a relatively larger unit cell volume in comparison with the δ-phase FAPbI3 crystal (Fig. 3g), while the shift of the main scattering to higher q is a signature of the formation of Br- or Cl-incorporating δ-phase FAPbI3 crystals (Fig. 3h), which have relatively small ionic radii compared with that of the I ion. Note that the scattering shift to higher q of the δ-phase FAPbI3 is accompanied by a lower scattering shift of the δ-phase BA-based perovskite when changing the halogen from I to Br and Cl. There are two possible reasons for this effect. On the one hand, the incorporation of the Br or Cl ions might cause distortion of the Pb–I inorganic framework, which consequently impacts the BA+ stacking. Moreover, the Cl-based system exhibits drastically changed crystallization kinetics with respect to the pure halide one. The scattering intensity of the δ-phase perovskite is drastically weakened for the Cl-based system, which might cause different lattice strain and manifest effects on the ionic stacking.
We sought to ascertain the influences of the RP perovskite on the final solid state (after thermal annealing). The three RP/3D heterostructured films exhibit larger grain sizes and fewer GBs in contrast to the control FA one (Fig. S4c and S6, ESI), suggesting that the effect of inclusion of the RP perovskite is directly reflected by fewer nuclei of the 3D crystals. The crystal texture was then investigated using ex situ GIWAXS diagnostics. The GIWAXS patterns are shown in Fig. 4a for the representative FABABr film and in Fig. S7 (ESI) for the control FA, FABAI and FABACl cases. The intensity vs. q curves for the scattering features are plotted in Fig. 4b for the control FA and three RP/3D heterostructured films. The control FA film exhibits scattering peaks at 9.76 and 8.33 nm−1 assigned to the α-phase and δ-phase FAPbI3, respectively. The unexpected appearance of the δ-phase is attributed to phase conversion from the α-phase during long-term shipment to the synchrotron and measurement in air. This undesirable phase conversion or degradation of the FAPbI3 or the MAPbI3 crystals during shipment and measurement was also observed previously. In contrast, the δ-phase is negligible for the three RP/3D heterostructured films under identical conditions, indicating effectively suppressed phase conversion and more stable α-phases. Note that the peak of the α-phase is located at 9.76 nm−1 without any observable shift for the four films, in stark contrast to the halogen-dependent peak shift of the δ-phase during spin coating. This indicates that the lattice constant of the α-phase RP perovskite is quite close to that of the α-phase FAPbI3 perovskite. Here, we do not exclude the possibility of partial loss of the halogen during thermal annealing, which is well-known for the 3D perovskites. Note that we did not observe any strong feature of 2D perovskites at low q for the three RP/3D heterostructured films. This suggests that the amount and size of 2D perovskite domains might lie below the detection limit of GIWAXS, or the quantum well width of the RP perovskite is quite large.Fig. 4c illustrates the intensity versus azimuth angle for the four films. The control FA film exhibits three peaks along the same rings at 90°, 123° and 156°, suggesting orientation randomness of the crystal. A similar phenomenon was observed for the FABAI case, suggesting a negligible influence of the inclusion of a small quantity of the RP perovskite on the crystal orientation. In contrast, we did observe much higher intensity at 90° for the FABABr film and at 123° for the FABACl film. This observation indicates a preferential out-of-plane crystal orientation with respect to the substrate for the FABABr sample, which might contribute to better charge transport in the vertical direction. However, the vertical charge transport in the FABACl film might be deteriorated.
The optoelectronic properties of the films were then investigated. The three RP/3D heterostructured films exhibit absorption spectra quite similar to the control FA one (Fig. 4d). Interestingly, the excitonic peaks slightly shift from 1.53 to 1.53, 1.54 and 1.55 eV for the control FA, FABAI, FABABr and FABACl films, respectively (see the Tauc-plots in Fig. S8, ESI). These observations indicate a negligible influence of a small amount of the RP perovskite on the light absorption for the devices. The slight shift of the excitonic peak from I- to Cl-based RP/3D films is possibly ascribed to a decrease of the antibonding overlap between the X-np (X = Br and Cl) and Pb-6s orbitals with respect to the I-based case. The halogen-dependent antibonding overlap can be further verified from the photoluminescence (PL) as shown in Fig. S9 (ESI). The PL peak slightly shifts from 1.53 to 1.53, 1.54 and 1.55 eV, consistent with the trend observed in the absorption spectra.
The trap densities and charge mobilities of the RP/3D heterostructured films were evaluated. The dark I–V characteristics for electron-only devices with the architecture FTO/TiO2/PVK/PCBM/Ag are shown in Fig. S10 (ESI) for the four films. The trap density was determined using the following equation:
(2)
where
ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, εr is the relative dielectric constant,VTFL is the onset voltage of the trap-filled limit region, e is the elementary charge, and L is the distance between the electrodes. The electron mobility was further extracted using the Mott–Gurney law:

(3)
where
JD is the current density and V is the applied voltage. The average trap density increases from 1.1 ± 0.3 to 0.8 ± 0.2, 1.4 ± 0.3 and 1.8 ± 0.3 × 1016 cm−3, along with the electron mobility decreasing from 3.7 ± 0.4 to 3.2 ± 0.3, 3.0 ± 0.4 and 1.6 ± 0.4 cm2 V−1 s−1 for the control FA, FABAI, FABABr and FABACl films, respectively (Fig. 4e). The trap density and electron mobility are slightly deteriorated in FABAI and FABABr films with respect to the control FA one. To the contrary, the FABACl exhibits a significant reduction in the electron mobility and an appreciable increase in the trap density. From the optoelectronic observations, one can conclude that the FABAI and FABABr films retain superior optoelectronic properties, which might help retain device performance comparable to that of the control FA case. The deteriorated optoelectronic properties for the FABACl film might originate from the poor crystallization during spin coating or partial Cl loss during thermal annealing, which would cause defects in the Pb–halide framework. Superior optoelectronic properties and film morphology of the FABAI and FABABr films lead to average PCEs (and PCEmax) of 18.2 ± 0.4% (18.84%) and 18.1 ± 0.4% (18.76%), respectively (Fig. 4f and Table S4, see Fig. S11 for J–V and EQE characteristics, ESI). The performances of these two RP/3D devices are comparable to that of the control FA 18.6 ± 0.5% (19.15%). In contrast, the poor optoelectronic properties of the FABACl film result in a significant reduction of the average PCE (and PCEmax) to 17.1 ± 0.5% (17.66%) and large hysteresis of the solar cells (see Fig. S12 for the stable output of PCE, and Fig. S13 and Table S5 for the reverse/forward I–V scans for the three RP/3D devices, ESI).

Having verified the influences of inclusion of the RP perovskite on the crystallization kinetics, optoelectronic properties and photovoltaic performance, we further seek to understand the charge dynamics related to molecule passivation in the RP/3D heterostructured films. Fig. 5a illustrates the concept of multipurpose molecule passivation for the representative IDTBR-FABABr heterostructured film (see Fig. S14 (ESI) for the energy diagrams of a complete device, where the energy diagram of the FABABr film was determined by UPS and Tauc plot results). The interaction between the Lewis base functional groups of IDTBR or ITIC molecules and the Lewis acid traps of under-coordinated Pb2+ ions of the perovskite is responsible for defect passivation. The IDTBR and ITIC molecules exhibit <0.04 eV difference between the conduction band minimum (CBM) of the FABABr and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of the molecules, as well as <0.07 eV difference between the valence band maximum (VBM) of the FABABr and the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of the molecules. The negligible energy offset between the perovskite and molecules leads to a shallow trap state, which is expected to benefit charge separation at the molecule–perovskite heterojunction and behave as a highly effective bridge for intergrain charge transfer.
We experimentally confirmed the passivation-assisted improvements in exciton separation and charge transfer at the molecule–perovskite heterojunction, as well as the trap state within the film. The IDTBR- and ITIC-passivated FABABr heterostructured films exhibit crystal texture (Fig. 5b), film morphology (Fig. S2 and S15, ESI) and absorption spectra (Fig. S16, ESI) comparable to those of the bare FABABr. This observation indicates that the introduction of molecules into the perovskite sol–gel via anti-solvent dripping does not interfere with the stacking behavior of the precursors. We also confirm inclusion of the RP perovskite as a dominant factor leading to the improved film quality with seamless GBs, larger grain sizes and smoother surfaces observed for the passivated RP/3D films. Interestingly, we did observe a significant PL quenching of 60% (or 42%) for the IDTBR-FABABr (or ITIC-FABABr) film with respect to the FABABr one (Fig. 5c), which is a signature of charge transfer at the perovskite–molecule heterojunction, as reported previously. The electrical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) of complete devices further provides values for the recombination resistance (Rrec) and the contact resistance (Rco) at the perovskite–contact interface (Fig. 5d and Fig. S17, ESI). The extracted Rco value decreases from 39.4 to 32.5 and 29.5 Ω for the FABABr, ITIC-FABABr and IDTBR-FABABr devices, respectively, along with an increase in the Rrec value from 349.6 to 373.9 and 473.1 Ω (Table S6, ESI). The decreased Rco and increased Rrec for the passivated devices indicate that charge recombination within the perovskite layer and contact resistance at the perovskite–contact interface are indeed improved.
The trap density and electron mobility were further evaluated to better understand the charge dynamics. The average trap density determined from the dark current–voltage characteristics (electron-only, Fig. S18, ESI) decreases appreciably from 1.4 ± 0.3 to 0.4 ± 0.1 and 0.4 ± 0.1 × 1016 cm−3 for the FABABr, ITIC-FABABr and IDTBR-FABABr films (Fig. 5e), respectively, accompanied by a significant increase in the average electron mobility from 3.0 ± 0.4 to 5.4 ± 0.5 and 5.8 ± 0.2 cm2 V−1 s−1. This result is direct evidence that the optoelectronic properties of the passivated RP/3D films improve significantly. It also unambiguously demonstrates that molecule passivation is the dominant mechanism responsible for the significantly improved charge dynamics and photovoltaic performance of the final passivated RP/3D devices with respect to the control FA one. The negligible variations in trap density and electron mobility for the ITIC-FABABr and IDTBR-FABABr films are consistent with the similarity of the energy diagrams for the ITIC and IDTBR molecules, confirming the energy offset between the perovskite and molecules dominates the trap passivation.
We verified that molecular passivation is crucial for the enhanced device performance of the RP/3D heterostructured films. The average PCEs (and PCEmax) are 19.2 ± 0.4% (20.10%) and 19.5 ± 0.5% (20.62%) for devices based on the ITIC-FABABr and IDTBR-FABABr films, respectively (Fig. 5f and 2c and Tables S1, S7, ESI). These PCEs significantly surpass 18.76% (PCEmax) for the FABABr device (Fig. 4f and Table S4, ESI), which mainly originates from improvements of Jsc and FF. This observation is consistent with the above observations of passivation-assisted improvements in the charge dynamics. We found that the hysteresis is further reduced after molecule passivation (see Fig. S19 for reverse/forward scanning, stable output of PCE and EQE, ESI). The hysteresis index significantly decreases from 10.7 to 5.3 with inclusion of the RP perovskite, followed by a further decrease to 3.4 after molecule passivation (Tables S2, S5 and S8, ESI).
Finally, we demonstrated that the significantly improved air stability of the passivated RP/3D devices is due to the retarded conversion of FAPbI3 from the α-phase to the δ-phase assisted by inclusion of the RP perovskite and molecule passivation. Inclusion of the RP perovskite greatly improves the environmental stability of the films. The color fades to yellow after 10 days for the control FA film in air without encapsulation (30–40% relative humidity and 25 °C) (Fig. S20a, ESI), suggesting phase degradation as evidenced by the appearance of the δ-phase in the XRD analysis (Fig. S20b, ESI). Partial phase degradation was observed for the FABAI film in air after 60 days of ambient exposure. In contrast, FA ions are stabilized in the cubo-octahedral cages as α-phase without observable phase degradation for the FABABr and FABACl films under identical conditions. The contact-angle analysis indicates a ∼10–13° increase in the contact angle for the RP/3D heterostructured films with respect to the control FA (Fig. S20c, ESI). The higher hydrophobicity is believed to be one of the factors contributing to the enhanced long-term environmental stability of the RP/3D heterostructured films and solar cells. As a result, the t80 lifetime increases drastically from 480 to ∼720–1000 hours for the control FA and RP/3D champion cells after ambient exposure without encapsulation, with the highest value achieved for the FABABr device (Fig. S20d, ESI). Surprisingly, we achieved further improvements of stable RP/3D heterostructured devices by molecular passivation due to extremely high hydrophobicity (Fig. S21a, ESI) and diminished active defects (Fig. 5e). The IDTBR-FABABr cell delivering a 20.62% PCE exhibits 13% loss after 60 days of ambient exposure, with the determined t80 lifetime as high as 2208 hours (Fig. S21b, ESI). The ITIC-FABABr cell with a 20.10% PCE shows only 10% loss under identical condition, with the t80 lifetime increasing to 2880 hours. The operational stability was also tested for all devices under continuous illumination in air (50–60% relative humidity and 50 °C) without encapsulation (Fig. S22, ESI). The ITIC-FABABr and IDTBR-FABABr cells outperform significantly the control 3D one under continuous illumination.

In conclusion, we have demonstrated a molecule-passivated RP/3D heterostructure, which systematically addressed both charge dynamics and device degradation mechanisms in concert for cesium-free FAPbI3 solar cells. The inclusion of the RP perovskite into the 3D FAPbI3, significantly changed the crystallization kinetics of the δ-phase perovskite during spin coating. Film and device characterizations highlight the key role of the RP perovskite in determining the morphology of the passivated RP/3D heterostructured film, while molecule passivation dominates the charge dynamics in the passivated RP/3D heterostructured devices. Equally importantly, we have demonstrated the individual roles of the RP/3D heterostructure and molecule passivation in the device degradation mechanisms. Finally, we achieved a PCE as high as 20.62% and remarkable long-term ambient stability with a t80 lifetime exceeding 2880 hours without encapsulation. Our findings raise the possibility of developing more controlled perovskite heterostructures for systematically addressing both charge dynamics and degradation mechanisms in concert for the timely commercialization of perovskite solar cells.


T. N. and J. L. contributed equally to this work. T. N. and J. L. performed most of the measurements. D. B., M. T., D.-M. S. and A. A. assisted with the GIWAXS measurements. Z. Y. and J. L. helped with the SEM measurements. Y. F. and T. L. assisted with the EIS measurements. I. M. contributed to useful discussion on the IDTBR molecule. K. Z. supervised the project. K. Z., T. N., A. A., and S. L. contributed to the writing of the paper.


The authors declare no conflicts of interest.


This work was supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2017YFA0204800, 2016YFA0202403), National Natural Science Foundation of China (61604092, 61674098), National University Research Fund (GK201802005), the 111 Project (B14041), the National 1000 Talents Plan program (1110010341), and the King Abdullah University for Science and Technology (KAUST). GIWAXS measurements were performed on the D-line of the Cornell High Energy Synchrotron Source (CHESS). CHESS is supported by the NSF Award DMR-1332208.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Fig. S1–S22 and Tables S1–S8. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ee02542h
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018