 DOI: 10.1039/C2CP44468B
(Communication)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 1788-1792

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Ji Hoon
Seo
,

Dong-Ho
Kim
,

Se-Hun
Kwon
,

Yun Chang
Park
,

Hyung Hwan
Jung
,

Hyung Woo
Lee
,

Jung-Dae
Kwon
,

Sung-Gyu
Park
,

Kee-Seok
Nam
,

Yongsoo
Jeong
,

Seung Yoon
Ryu
*,

Jae-Wook
Kang
* and 

Chang Su
Kim
*

Advanced Functional Thin Films Department, Korea Institute of Materials Science, Changwon, 641-831, Republic of Korea. E-mail: cskim1025@kims.re.kr; jwkang@kims.re.kr; justie74@kims.re.kr; Fax: +82-55-280-3570

National Core Research Center for Hybrid Materials Solution, Pusan National University, Busan, 609-735, Republic of Korea

Measurement & Analysis Team, National Nanofab Center, Daejeon, 305-806, Republic of Korea

Received
19th October 2012
, Accepted 13th December 2012
First published on 13th December 2012
We report the origin of the improvement of the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of hybrid thin-film solar cells when a soluble C60 derivative, [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM), is introduced as a hole-blocking layer. The PCBM layer could establish better interfacial contact by decreasing the reverse dark-saturation current density, resulting in a decrease in the probability of carrier recombination. The PCE of this optimized device reached a maximum value of 8.34% and is the highest yet reported for hybrid thin-film solar cells.

Silicon thin-film solar cells have attracted enormous interest as a cheap alternative to Si bulk-crystalline solar cells. Compared to their conventional bulk crystalline counterparts, silicon thin-film technologies, which typically have Si absorber layer thicknesses of only a few hundred nanometers, require much less photoactive material to fully absorb sunlight. In addition, the photoactive material can be deposited on various cheap substrates, such as glass, stainless steel, and plastic. The use of thinner Si absorber layers not only results in a reduction in cost but is also advantageous in terms of energy payback time. The fabrication of conventional Si thin-film solar cells involves doping processes, which are required for the formation of PIN diodes. These processes entail the use of hazardous doping gases such as BH4 for the P-type Si layer (P-Si) and PH3 for the N-type Si layer (N-Si). However, leakage of these gases poses significant occupational risks, and continuous attention by management is needed to safeguard personnel. These environmental issues can increase the cost and complexity of dealing with end-of-life solar cells. Therefore, there is an economic incentive to design solar cells that will not be hazardous or to design them in such a way that they can be recycled at a reasonable cost. Additionally, doping has a detrimental effect on the quality of the Si layer. This is because it leads to the creation of a number of additional Si dangling bonds, which are the main recombination centers in this material.

In this study, the soluble C60 derivative [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) has been used as a pure N-type material, as an alternative to N-Si. PCBM is an N-type semiconductor, which means that this only (or primarily) conducts electrons. The molecular structure of PCBM is shown in Fig. 1(a). PCBM exhibits relatively high electron carrier mobility and good solubility in common organic solvents.Fig. 1(b) shows the structure of the N-doping free hybrid thin-film solar cells incorporating the PCBM that were designed in this study. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of this optimized device reached a maximum value of 8.34% and is the highest yet reported for hybrid thin-film solar cells. Owing to its ease of implementation and the drastic improvement in efficiency that it results in, this method of fabricating thin-film solar cells using a pure N-type material opens new opportunities for the production of N-doping free Si thin-film solar cells from various material systems such that they exhibit improvements in efficiency upwards of 10%.


Fig. 1(c) shows the energy-band diagrams of the N-silicon-based and hybrid-film-based solar cells. The energy levels corresponding to the conduction band (CB) and valence band (VB) for silicon are those previously reported in the literature. The positions of the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) in the case of PCBM are also those previously reported. When light irradiates the photoactive layer, which comprises intrinsic Si (I-Si), through the fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) electrode, the I-Si in the layer absorbs photons and produces excitons as a result of the internal electrical potential, and the photogenerated electrons diffuse toward the Al top electrode. On the other hand, the photogenerated holes do not migrate towards the top electrode, thus preventing carrier recombination. The CB and VB energy levels in the case of N-Si are 4.0 eV and 5.8 eV, respectively, compared to 3.8 eV and 6.0 eV for the LUMO and the HOMO in the case of PCBM, respectively. Since the energy level of the HOMO in the case of PCBM is much higher than that of the VB of N-Si, it presents a large barrier to holes, decreasing their degree of recombination at the top electrode. PCBM can be used both as an electron-transporting layer and a hole-blocking layer. Thus, keeping the energy levels in mind, the hybrid thin-film solar cells incorporating a layer of PCBM ought to exhibit a higher power conversion efficiency.


Fig. 2(a) and (b) shows high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of the cross-sections of hybrid thin-film solar cells without and with the PCBM layer, respectively. In the case of the latter device, a solution of PCBM in chlorobenzene was spin-coated on the I-Si layer, resulting in a PCBM film with a thickness of 10–20 nm. The TEM image in Fig. 2(b) distinctly shows a well-defined spin-coated PCBM layer as well as the other layers of the device. Fig. 2(c) and (d) shows the results of the TEM/energy-dispersive X-ray spectrometry (EDX)-based element mapping of the two solar cells. In both the cases, uniform distributions of the elemental components can be observed clearly. In the case of the solar cell that has the PCBM layer, the interfaces appear sharp, and there is no evidence of interlayer mixing or any physical damage to the layers resulting from the spin coating of PCBM. Fig. 2(e) and (f) show depth profiles of the two devices, determined using quantitative secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS). The carbon profile, seen in Fig. 2(f), also suggests the formation of a well-defined spin-coated PCBM layer. In addition, the uniform surface feature and distribution of their individual layers are easy to see on the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images as shown in ESI 1.
The current density versus voltage (J–V) characteristics of the devices measured under simulated AM1.5 illuminations having an intensity of 100 mW cm−2 are presented in Fig. 3(a). The values of the short circuit current density (Jsc), open circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (FF), PCE, shunt resistance (Rshunt), and series resistance (Rseries) of each device are listed in Table 1. The Rshunt and Rseries values were calculated using the inverse of the slope of the high current regime of the J–V curves as determined in the dark. We fabricated over 10 devices for each set of experimental conditions; the devices exhibited similar characteristics with the variation in the measurements being less than 5%. The device without a layer of N-Si (FTO/P-I Si/Al) exhibited a Jsc of 14.64 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.43 V, a FF of 0.45, and a PCE of 2.92%. This poor photovoltaic performance of the device that did not have an N-type layer was caused by the inefficient built-in electrical potential of the Si PN junction. The doped layers set up an internal electrical potential across the I-Si photoactive layer. The electrical potential should be high enough to ensure that the photogenerated carriers in the I-Si photoactive layer are collected. The strength of this electrical potential depends on the level of doping in the doped layers.
Device structure

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
Fill factor
PCE (%)

R
shunt (Ω cm2)

R
series (Ω cm2)
FTO/P-I Si/Al
14.64
0.43
0.45
2.92
207
9.19
FTO/P-I Si/LiF/Al
15.81
0.77
0.58
7.07
5970
34.27
FTO/P-I Si/PCBM/LiF/Al
15.94
0.81
0.64
8.34
6290
5.41
FTO/P-I-N Si/LiF/Al
15.90
0.81
0.60
7.83
6191
5.92
FTO/P-I-N Si/Al
15.15
0.82
0.61
7.60
6060
6.38
The insertion of a 1.5 nm-thick layer of lithium fluoride (LiF) between the I-Si and the top electrode, which is made of Al, resulting in a device whose structure was FTO/P-I Si/LiF/Al, enhanced the performance of the device markedly, resulting in a PCE value of 7.07% with a Jsc of 15.81 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.77 V, and an FF of 0.58. It has been well documented that LiF has a high dipole moment at the molecular scale and that there is an effective decrease in the surface potential owing to the polarization of LiF when placed beneath the Al layer. Accordingly, LiF/Al electrodes are being widely used as the cathodes in organic light-emitting diodes and organic solar cells in order to increase the degree of electron injection and extraction. This dipole–electrode combination could also be applied to Si thin-film solar cells. The presence of the interfacial LiF layer between the layer of I-Si and the top Al electrode results in surface passivation, which prevents the density of the metal-induced gap states from being high, resulting in a suppression of the shunt leakage current and an increase in the photocarrier collection in the long-wavelength regime. The best performing solar cell, which was the device that had a layer of PCBM inserted between the I-Si and LiF/Al layers, exhibited a PCE value of 8.34% with a Jsc of 15.94 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.81 V, and an FF of 0.64. Notably, the Voc and FF values of the device with the PCBM layer (FTO/P-I Si/PCBM/LiF/Al) were simultaneously enhanced, in contrast to those of the equivalent device that did not have the layer of PCBM. This led to an improvement in the overall performance, with the performance of the device with the PCBM layer being better, even though the Jsc values of the two devices were nearly similar.
In order to elucidate the reason for this increase in the Voc and FF values as a result of the insertion of the PCBM layer, we analyzed the J–V characteristics of devices as determined in the dark, using the equivalent circuit model shown in the inset of Fig. 3(b). For this model, the J–V characteristics can be derived by the following equation:
(1)
where
J is the total current density, Jph is the voltage-dependent photocurrent density, Jo is the reverse dark-saturation current density, q is the elementary charge, n is the diode ideality factor, k is the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature, and A is the active area of the device. Under open-circuit conditions (i.e., with J = 0 and V = Voc), eqn (1) becomes

(2)
Thus, for solar cells with a very large
Rshunt and a small Rseries, the equation above can be further simplified, resulting in:

(3)
 As per
eqn (3), a decrease in the reverse dark-saturation current density Jo should increase the value of Voc in the devices. The lowest value of Jo was observed in the case of the device with the PCBM layer, and this indicated that carrier recombination was suppressed by the insertion of the PCBM layer, as shown in Fig. 3(b). The suppression of carrier recombination could be ascribed to hole blocking by the PCBM layer, whose HOMO has a much higher energy level compared to that of the CB of N-Si, leading to a suppression of the carrier recombination process. We, therefore, conclude that the improvement in Voc is mainly ascribable to the significant reduction in Jo because of the insertion of the PCBM layer. Moreover, the Rshunt value and rectification ratio of the device that did not have the PCBM layer reflect the presence of leakage current paths within the solar cell as well as carrier recombination within the cell. The insertion of the PCBM layer can efficiently increase the Rshunt value and rectification ratio, indicating a reduction in the leakage current and suppression of carrier recombination, thereby increasing the FF values.


Fig. 4(a) shows the J–V characteristics of a conventional Si thin-film solar cell and a hybrid thin-film solar cell that has the PCBM layer, under illumination. The higher PCE (8.34%) was achieved in the case of the hybrid thin-film solar cell, while the conventional Si thin-film solar cell (FTO/P-I-N Si/Al) showed a PCE of 7.60%. The better device performance in the case of the hybrid thin-film solar cell is mainly due to the higher values of Jsc (15.94 mA cm−2versus 15.15 mA cm−2) and FF (0.64 versus 0.61) exhibited by it as compared to the conventional Si thin-film solar cell, because the value of Voc was almost identical for both solar cells.

Fig. 4(b) shows a comparison of the external quantum efficiency (EQE) curves of the conventional Si thin-film solar cell and the hybrid thin-film solar cell with the PCBM layer. The hybrid thin-film solar cell with the PCBM layer exhibited a markedly higher response for wavelengths ranging from 350 nm to 600 nm as compared to that of the conventional Si thin-film solar cell. This difference is most likely because of the difference in the internal optical electric field distributions of the two devices. This, in turn, is due to the complex index of refraction, layer thickness, and reflectivity of the top electrode. This indicated that the contact between the I-Si layer and the PCBM/LiF/Al structure is preferable to there being direct contact between the I-Si layer and the top Al electrode.

The architecture of the hybrid thin-film solar cells with a layer of PCBM is shown in Fig. 1(b). The Si (P-type/intrinsic/N-type stack: 12 nm/450 nm/25 nm) thin films used in the conventional Si thin-film solar cells were deposited on FTO-coated glass substrates using plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition. A mixture of SiH4 and H2 was used to obtain the intrinsic layer, whereas BH4 and PH3 were used to obtain the P- and N-Si layers, respectively. The layers were individually optimized by tuning the deposition parameters such that their properties were suitable for solar cells. To prepare the N-doping free hybrid thin-film solar cells, a solution of 1 wt% PCBM in chlorobenzene was spin coated on I-Si layer and dried at 150 °C for 10 min on a hot plate in a glove box. ESI 2 shows the effects of the conditions for coating the PCBM layer as well as the thermal annealing conditions. We should mention that 150 °C is the commonly used temperature for thermal annealing in the case of solar cells. ESI 3 shows the effects of using different top-electrode combinations. The device was completed by thermally depositing the layer of LiF and the layer of Al, which acted as the top electrode.


The J–V characteristics of the solar cells were measured under simulated AM1.5 illumination having an intensity of 100 mW cm−2. For each set of experimental conditions, over 10 devices were fabricated, and the average PCE parameters together with their standard deviations are reported. The EQE values were measured using an incident-photon-to-current-conversion efficiency measurement system. The cross-sectional microstructures and surface features of the devices were observed by TEM and SEM, respectively. In addition, EDX and SIMS depth profiling were employed for elemental analysis.


In conclusion, we were able to fabricate high-performance N-doping free hybrid thin-film solar cells successfully by inserting a layer of PCBM as a hole-blocking layer, which resulted in power conversion efficiency above 8%. The PCBM layer could establish better interfacial contact by decreasing the reverse dark-saturation current density, resulting in a decrease in the probability of carrier recombination. Further increases in efficiency may be possible through plasmonic light trapping and the use of backside reflection. The results reported here may provide useful design guidelines for future work on Si thin-film solar cells and other classes of solar cell systems.


The present research was supported by the research fund (2012-PNK2860) of the Korea Institute of Materials Science. The New and Renewable Energy (Grant no. 20113010010030 and 20103020010050) of the Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning also supported this research in part. Prof. H. W. Lee gratefully acknowledges support from the Basic Science Research Program (2011-0014709) through the National Research Foundation of Korea.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2cp44468b
This journal is © the Owner Societies 2013