 DOI: 10.1039/D2TC00427E
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 7423-7436


Jun-Jie
Cao
,

Yan-Hui
Lou
*,

Kai-Li
Wang
 and 

Zhao-Kui
Wang
*

Institute of Functional Nano & Soft Materials (FUNSOM), Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Carbon-Based Functional Materials & Devices, Soochow University, Suzhou, Jiangsu 215123, China. E-mail: zkwang@suda.edu.cn

College of Energy, Soochow Institute for Energy and Materials Innovations, Soochow University, Suzhou 215006, China. E-mail: yhlou@suda.edu.cn

Received
29th January 2022
, Accepted 5th April 2022
First published on 7th April 2022
Over recent years, the efficiency of lead-based perovskite solar cells (PSCs) has exceeded 25%, which confirms their significant potential in the photovoltaic field. However, the toxicity of lead is still one of the critical hurdles. Therefore, more attention has been paid to tin halide PSCs, whose certified efficiency has exceeded 14% recently. Despite the tunable bandgap, high theoretical efficiency, and large carrier mobility, tin-based PSCs still face the problem of uncontrollable and rapid crystallization, which will influence the fabrication of high-performance perovskite films and inevitably impede the future development of solar cells. In this review, we introduce the fundamental crystal mechanism for tin-based perovskites. Then, up-to-date studies on crystallization control are discussed. Finally, we will give a summary and overview for the further development of tin-based PSCs.

After rapid development, lead-based perovskite solar cells (PSCs) are considered one of the most promising candidates for next-generation photovoltaic technology. In the past decade, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of PSCs has rocketed from 3.8% to 25.7% which is close to the efficiency of silicon solar cells. Moreover, the facile solution fabrication method, low cost, and enhanced stability of lead-based PSCs further confirm their state-of-the-art performance for commercialization. However, the toxicity of lead has aroused great concern from all over the world, which would hinder the widespread application of PSCs. Therefore, it is necessary to develop environmentally friendly lead-free PSCs.

Here, lower toxic metals as substitutes for lead have attracted much attention, such as copper (Cu), antimony (Sb), bismuth (Bi), germanium (Ge), and tin (Sn). Among them, tin-based PSCs have shown remarkable potential over the past five years. Compared with lead, tin comes from the same group and has a similar ionic radius. Tin-based perovskites have a tunable bandgap with a wide range and FASnI3-based perovskites reported by many studies show an ideal bandgap close to the Shockley–Queisser (SQ) limit under the 1.5 solar spectrum, whose theoretical efficiency is around 33%. In 2014, the first CH3NH3SnI3 based PSC with a normal structure was reported and its PCE was around 6%. Nowadays, the certified efficiency of tin-based PSCs has exceeded 14% with an inverted structure. The impressive performance of tin-based devices deserves numerous efforts from researchers and it will soon be a prospective photovoltaic technology.
Despite the rapid development, tin-based PSCs are still confronted with much lower efficiency compared to their lead-based counterparts. Bad energy alignment, easy oxidation, and fast crystallization retard the further improvement of tin-based PSCs. Notably different from the lead analog, the reaction between SnI2 and formamidinium iodide/methylammonium iodide (FAI/MAI) is much faster and the solubility of SnI2 in N,N-dimethylformamide/dimethyl sulfoxide (DMF/DMSO) is much lower, which is due to the greater Lewis acidity of Sn2+. These factors lead to the uncontrolled and rapid crystallization of tin-based films. Different from the Pb-based perovskites which need an annealing process to crystallize, tin-based perovskites tend to crystallize at room temperature. When the spin-coating is conducted, tin-based perovskites crystallize directly, which has also previously been observed for MAPbBr3 perovskites. Then the perovskite films will typically show random orientation and many defects, which hinder the formation of high-crystallinity films. Therefore, developing perovskite films with homogeneous crystal quality is highly critical for high-performance tin-based PSCs.
In this review, we will analyze the crystallization mechanism of tin halide perovskites, including the process of nucleation and crystal growth. Then, the strategies to facilitate film formation and ameliorate the crystallization of perovskites will be summed up, including intermediate adduct formation, low-dimensional tin-based perovskites, antioxidant additives, and surface engineering. Finally, we will give a summary and overview of the morphological control strategies for tin-based perovskite films and further development for stable and promising tin-based PSCs.

Uniform perovskite films with homogeneous crystals and few defects are particularly crucial to compensate for the relatively low efficiency of tin-based PSCs. The whole crystallization of the tin-based perovskite film is generally divided into two processes, namely the nucleation process, and crystal growth. An in-depth knowledge of the crystal growth mechanism is fundamental to subtly modulate the morphology of tin-based perovskite films.


The nucleation process originates from the supersaturated perovskite precursors when the tin-based perovskite solubility is much lower than the precursor concentration. Homogeneous nucleation often occurs spontaneously and randomly and requires supercooling or superheating of the medium. When the solution is in a supersaturated state, the nanoparticles in the solution are equivalent to the spherical particle with r radius. Based on the classical nucleation theory, the total Gibbs free energy ΔG can be calculated using the equation

ΔG(r) = ΔGV + ΔGS
(1)
(2)
ΔGS = 4πr2 × σ
(3)
where
r is the radius, kB is Boltzmann's constant, T is the temperature, V is the molar volume of the nucleus and σ is the surface free energy of unit square. Thus ΔG is defined as the sum of the bulk free energy (ΔGV, negative) and the surface free energy (ΔGS, positive), as plotted in Fig. 1a.

There must be a maximum value for ΔG(r) because of the negative ΔGV and the positive ΔGS. The critical free energy (ΔGc) can be obtained through the differentiation of ΔG(r) to r, dΔG(r)/dr = 0.
(4)
(5)
where
rc is the critical radius. When the radius of the nuclei is larger than rc, the nuclei are thermodynamically stable and begin to grow further without a solution. Hence rc means the maximum radius that nuclei can dissolve back into the solution. The nucleation rate can be defined using the Arrhenius type equation

(6)
where
N is the nuclei number, t is the time and A is the pre-exponential factor, S is the supersaturating level in S solution, which can be defined as S = CS/C0 (CS > C0), where CS is the concentration of solution and C0 is the solubility. According to eqn (6), supersaturating S, temperature T, and surface energy σ influence the rate of nucleation, among which, supersaturating plays a dominant role in the change of dN/dt.

Heterogeneous nucleation is another nucleation method when the saturation is much lower and the substrate can be considered as a heterogeneous nucleation site (Fig. 1b). The process can be corrected by the following equation, where θ is the contact angle of the solution.
ΔGheteroc = ϕΔGhemoc
(7)
(8)

The crystallization process of the tin-based perovskite film can be interpreted by the LaMer model as depicted in Fig. 1c. There are three different stages in the LaMer diagram which presents the change of perovskite precursor concentration (Ct) as a function of time (t). In the beginning (stage I), the perovskite monomers accumulated initially with the spin-coating of the films. Ct reached a supersaturation state (Cmin) immediately upon annealing of the perovskite film. Then (stage II), nuclei appeared and Ct reached a maximum point (Cmax). As the rate of solution consumption was faster than that of the solvent evaporation, Ct began to decrease. Finally (stage III), when Ct was smaller than Cmin, nucleation finished followed by the only growth of the formed nuclei. Finally, the crystal growth process finished when Ct decreased below the solubility value (CS).

Ostwald ripening is another theory to explain the growth process of tin-based perovskites. When small particles dissolve, they will redeposit on the surface of larger particles. According to the Gibbs–Thompson principle, smaller particles have a higher chemical potential, so they can dissolve more easily. Then, they tend to deposit on the larger particles. Finally, the small particles disappear gradually and the large particles grow further. Thus, during the process of Ostwald ripening, the average size of the particles increases and the particle concentration decreases.
In 2021, Han et al. reported a facial method by using cold FASnI3 precursors to control the process of crystal growth. Under lower temperatures, the nucleation rate decreased and spared space for the subsequent Ostwald ripening, which led to a larger grain size (Fig. 1d). According to the LaMer mechanism, when the temperature was decreased, the nucleation process was restrained and crystal growth was prolonged. The retarded rapid-crystallization process facilitated the oriented growth of perovskite nuclei. The post-treatment PSCs demonstrated an efficiency of 12.11%.

The crystallization kinetics of tin-based perovskites is mainly governed by nucleation and crystal growth. Because of the stronger Lewis acidity of Sn2+, the crystallization process of tin-based films is rapid and uncontrolled. According to the fundamental theory, fast nucleation followed by slow crystal growth is a desirable process to fabricate high coverage and uniform perovskite films. Forming an intermediate adduct is a facile and compatible method to control crystallization.


The introduction of Lewis base additives is certified as an effective method to retard the crystallization process. The base is an electron-pair donor, such as oxygen (O), nitrogen (N), and sulfur (S), which can react with Lewis acid Sn2+ and form a Lewis acid–base intermediate adduct.

In 2015, Kanatzidis et al. reported a highly uniform and pinhole-free CH3NH3SnI3 based perovskite film obtained from a transitional SnI2·DMSO intermediate phase. It was noted that DMSO has a higher coordination affinity, relatively high boiling point (189 °C), and much larger viscosity (2.00 cP) compared with DMF. These physical properties should be considered in solvent engineering and the specific solvent content of DMSO and DMF would be more conducive to the control of the tin-based perovskite crystallization process. In 2020, Meng et al. reported a pre-nucleation cluster (PNC) method by introducing piperazine dihydriodide (PDI2) in FASnI3 to modulate the crystallinity. The PNCs in the precursors were easier to reach rc and reduced ΔGc, which accelerated the nucleation and presented a higher-quality perovskite film with decreased defects. The modified PSCs delivered a PEC of 11.39% with higher stability. Han et al. introduced a Lewis base agent, 2-cyano-3-[5-[4-(diphenylamino) phenyl]-2-thienyl]-propenoic acid (CDTA) in FASnI3 perovskite. High electron density of π-conjugated CDTA is beneficial to form a more stable intermediate adduct through the coordination of carbonyl and cyano groups with the Sn–I framework. The treated film showed a homogeneous morphology and the treated devices achieved an efficiency of 10.1%. In 2021, Wu et al. introduced another two Lewis base additives, N-methylformanilide (NMF) and 4-acetamidophenol (AP), in FASnI3 perovskite precursors. The carbonyl groups in the additives could connect with Sn atoms, which significantly improved the crystallinity. The treatment devices presented a PCE of 10.03%. Recently, Ning et al. reported a one-step synthetic method as shown in Fig. 2a to form SnI2·(DMSO)x complexes with enhanced coordination, which enabled uniform and orientated perovskite films. A certified PCE of 14.6% was obtained.

Organic ammonium salts and long-chain ammonium salts containing lone pairs of electrons also function as superior composition modulators in tin-based perovskites. In 2017, Zhao et al. first reported mixed-organic composition engineering for (FA)x(MA)1–xSnI3 based perovskites (FA = NH2CH = NH2+, MA = CH3NH3+). For the pure MASnI3, perovskite films showed a continuous distribution of perovskite grains which turned to merge with each other. With the increased content of FA, the grain boundaries became more evident. He et al. made a further study on FA–MA composition engineering. They incorporated methylammonium bromide (MABr) in FASnI3 perovskites. With the optimal ratio, FA0.75MA0.25SnI2.75Br0.25 perovskite films showed the best crystallization. In 2018, Diau et al. investigated the additive engineering of butylammonium iodide (BAI) and ethylenediammonium diiodide (EDAI2) in the FASnI3 perovskite. Both organic ammonium salts altered the film morphology. 15% proportions of BAI improved the orientation of crystal growth and 1% proportions of EDAI2 passivated the surface defects. In 2019, Diau et al. introduced again a new organic ammonium composition of guanidinium (GA+) in FASnI3–1%EDAI2. GAI2 slowed down the crystal growth with the conjoint function of EDAI2. After 2000 hours, a PCE of 9.6% has been attained. In 2019, Wu et al. reported a conjugated large volume amine (LVAs), 3-phenyl-2-propen-1-amine (PPA), in FASnI3 perovskite. PPA encouraged the formation of grain boundaries and enlarged the grain size. Moreover, a self-healing phenomenon was observed in the modified PSCs whose PCE reached 9.61% finally. In 2020, Wu et al. introduced three kinds of fluoro-aniline isomers in FASnI3 perovskite precursors. With the incorporation of fluoro-phenethylammonium iodide (F-PEAI) the modified films displayed a larger grain size and uniform surface morphology. The modified PSCs showed an efficiency of 10.17%. In 2020, Han et al. gave an in-depth study on the tin-based perovskite crystallization process and revealed that the perovskite nucleation proceeded from the solution–air surface with the non-crystalline precursors in the bulk layer. As shown in Fig. 2b, they introduced pentafluorophenoxyethylammonium iodide (FOEI) in the FASnI3 perovskite precursors to reduce the solution–air surface energy and finally obtained smoother and more oriented perovskite films with a reduced trap density. The FOEI-treated perovskite obtained an efficiency of 10.16%. Recently, Yin et al. incorporated organic piperazine cations (PZ2+) into FASnI3 perovskites to optimize the orientation and suppress the bulk defect formation.


Polar hydrogen groups can interact with electronegative ions to form hydrogen bonding. Hydrogen bonding was widely applied for cross-linking grains in lead-based PSCs for surface passivation and film modulation. For tin-based PSCs, hydrogen bonding interaction is an operative processing methodology to retard the rapid crystallization and improve the device stability.

In 2018, Islam et al. introduced 5-ammonium valeric acid iodide (5-AVAI) in FASnI3 perovskites. The iodine ions in SnI64− connected with carboxylic acid (−COOH) and ammonium (−NH3+) groups, forming O–H⋯I and N–H⋯I hydrogen bonding, respectively. The additive passivated the perovskite grain boundaries and improved the device stability. Hu et al. reported another new long-chain ammonium, aminoguanidine hydrochloride ((NH2GACl)) in EA0.1FA0.9SnI3 perovskite. Aminos in NH2GACl connected with exposed SnI64− by six hydrogen bonds in the perovskite crystal, which resulted in improved device stability. In 2019, Han et al. introduced poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) in FASnI3 perovskite to control the crystal process with the interaction of the O–H⋯I− hydrogen bonding. The strong hydrogen bonding between PVA and the perovskite provided an extra nucleation site and slowed down the crystal growth, which brought about better film coverage. In 2021, Chen et al. introduced a two-dimensional network structure of graphite phase-C3N4 (g-C3N4) into the FASnI3 perovskite. The nitrogen atom (N) in g-C3N4 interacted with FA+ through the double hydrogen bond and the binding site distance of g-C3N4 is larger than the lattice size of tin-based perovskite, which improved the critical concentration and suppressed the nucleation in the crystallization process. A PCE of 8.56% was achieved on flexible substrates (Fig. 2c). Recently, Abate et al. first reported an ionic liquid, n-butylammonium acetate (BAAc), in FASnI3 perovskites. BA+ and I− formed NH⋯I hydrogen bonds. Ac− and Sn2+ formed O⋯Sn chelating bonds. The coordination in the BAAC-treated tin-based perovskite led to more compact films with preferential crystal orientation. The treated devices showed a PCE of 10.4%. Chen et al. introduced acetic acid (HAc) in Sn-based perovskites. The hydrogen bonding of −OH⋯I− immobilized the volatile I− and the undissociated HAc formed pre-nucleation clusters in precursor solution which contributed to faster nucleation. The HAc-assisted devices showed a PCE of 12.26%.

Long-chain organic materials are introduced in tin-based perovskites to isolate the corner-sharing tin octahedral sheet, deriving low-dimensional (LD) perovskites. Compared to three-dimensional (3D) tin-based perovskites, two-dimensional (2D) or mixed-dimensional counterparts usually exhibit remarkably enhanced moisture tolerance, lower oxidation reaction enthalpy, and higher orientation. According to many previous reports, LD tin-based perovskite films could be easily self-assembled and effectively control the crystallization due to the chemical heterogeneity effect, which contributes to the formation of well-defined and high-coverage perovskite films. Moreover, the LD tin-based PSCs exhibited superior efficiency and stability from recent research. Many large organic cations have been incorporated into LD tin-based perovskites. As shown in Fig. 3a, molecular structures, like n-butylamine (BA), 5-ammoniumvaleric acid (5-AVA), phenylethylammonium (PEA), 4-(aminomethyl) piperidinium (4-AMP) and 1,4 butane diamine (BEA) are favorable to form LD tin-based perovskites. As for 2D/3D structure perovskites, molecular PEA is most commonly used. In addition, many other ammonium cations, like hexylammonium (HA), octylamine (OA), allyl ammonium (ALA), cyclohexylammonium (CHA), and benzimidazolium (Bn) need further research on LD tin-based perovskites.


Due to the high exciton binding energy, pure 2D tin-based perovskites are not competitive, which will damage the free charge generation capability in solar cells. By comparison, quasi-2D tin-based perovskites exhibit a weaker quantum confinement effect and dielectric confinement effects, which combines the advantages of 2D and 3D structure tin-based perovskites. The performance of quasi-2D perovskites is highly relative to the crystallinity and orientation because most charges in the perovskite only transport in the inorganic-octahedra contact area, rather than cross the insulating organic spacer cations.

In 2017, Kanatzidis et al. reported a quasi-2D RP phase BA2MA2Sn3nI10 perovskite for the first time using BA. They used single-phase and high-purity perovskites as the raw materials and dissolved them with DMSO or DMF solvents. On the basis of it, Huang et al. introduced ion liquid solvent methylammonium acetate (MAAc) into BA2MA3Sn4I13. Through the ion exchange between I and Ac, the intermediate BAMASn-Ac formed in the perovskite crystallization process. In 2019, Huang et al. mixed BA and phenylethylamine (PEA) in a tin-based perovskite to form a 2D RP phase (BA0.5PEA0.5)2FA3Sn4I13 perovskite. The co-work of BA and PEA in the perovskite could impede the formation of the intermediate phase and enable ordered nucleation of the crystal. To compare the influence of alkylamine chain length on the quasi-2D perovskites, in 2020, Liu et al. employed three different spacer cations, BA, OA, and dodecylamine (DA) and concluded that the shorter chain length organic cation formed a more oriented perovskite film and improved the transport properties of solar cells.
Chen et al. reported a new quasi-2D perovskite AVA2FA4Sn5I16 using 5-ammoniumvaleric acid (5-AVA) as the organic spacer which improved the device stability. In addition, they introduced NH4Cl in the perovskite, which promoted vertical orientation.
Phenylethylammonium (PEA) has been widely used to fabricate LD perovskites. In 2017, Ning et al. first reported a highly oriented (PEA)2(FA)8Sn9I28 perovskite with a quasi-2D structure. The compact film retarded the oxygen diffusion and the perpendicular growth improved the carrier transportation. As shown in Fig. 3a, Abate et al. reported a more ordered 2D Ruddlesden–Popper (RP) phase tin-based perovskite of FASnI3 assisted with phenylethylammonium chloride (PEACl). After 100 °C annealing, a higher member vertical orientation 2D perovskite structure with large-grained and pinhole-free perovskite films was formed. Oh et al. incorporated formamidinium thiocyanate (FASCN) in quasi-2D PEA0.1FA0.9SnI3 perovskite which boosted the device performance.

After the pioneering studies of quasi-2D tin-based perovskites, in 2018, Loi et al. first reported a 3D/2D tin-based perovskite by mixing a 2D PEA2SnI4 perovskite and a 3D FASnI3 perovskite. The integrity of the perovskite structure was improved through the extended ordering, which prompted the preferential crystal growth. The next year, they incorporated ethylammonium iodide (EAI) in the same structure, which perfected the perovskite orientation in the out-of-plane direction.

Soon after, Ning et al. introduced removable pseudohalogen ammonium thiocyanate (NH4SCN) in (PEA)2(FA)n−1SnnI3n+1 to form a 2D-quasi-2D–3D hierarchically structuredperovskite. At the beginning, a 3D structured perovskite would form at the bottom. Then, during the annealing process, the 2D PEA2SnI4 structure would distribute on top of the 3D FASnI3 structure with the removal of HSCN. The hierarchy structure retarded the oxidation and promoted the parallel orientation on the film surface.
In 2018, Zhu et al. introduced a PEABr layer between the PEDOT:PSS layer and FASnI3 layer, which would contribute to the formation of a 3D/2D planar heterojunction structure. It facilitated the perovskite growth close to the bottom surface and improved the film morphology. In 2018, Wu et al. evaporated the PEAI molecule to modify the FAI film followed by the evaporation of SnI2 and finally formed a (PEA, FA)SnI3 bulk heterojunction film. The yielded 2D–3D bulk heterojunction film displayed higher surface coverage. Recently, He et al. reported a novel 2D/3D heterogeneous tin-perovskite. They introduced 4-fluoro-phenethylammonium bromide (FPEABr) to form a 2D structure, which is located on the 3D FASnI3 surface. Compared with hydrogen atoms, highly electronegative fluorine atoms contribute to the higher dipole moment and strong polarity of the perovskite crystal lattice, which will help in the carrier transport. As shown in Fig. 3c, the surface of the 3D perovskite film was closely packed with grains with pinholes. When adding FPEABr into the 3D films, the grains became fused which indicated the formation of a 2D perovskite. The 2D capping layer suppresses the oxidation and reduces the defect density. The treated PSCs obtained an ultra-high PCE of 14.81%.
In 2021, Diau et al. reported a sequential method to fabricate a 2D/3D tin-based perovskite (Fig. 3d). The 2D layer was prepared by eight kinds of bulky ammonium cations dissolved in hexafluoro-2-propanol (HFP) and then deposited on a 3D GA0.2FA0.8SnI3 layer. This planar 2D/3D perovskite structure reduced Sn vacancies on the surface and passivated the grain boundary. Finally, a PCE of 10.96% was obtained.

The Sn2+ in the tin-based perovskite is easy to oxidize into Sn4+ because of the active outer electrons, 5s. Besides, Sn–I bonds can be easily broken because of a high energy level of Sn–5s, which expedites the reaction between SnI2 and H2O/O2. Even in an inert ambient atmosphere without H2O and O2, it is inevitable that Sn2+ will be oxidized and react with p-type dopants (e.g., Sn vacancy and Sn4+). Sn vacancy (VSn) defects are the most common shallow-level defects in tin-based perovskites because of their low formation energy and the ionization of the perovskite crystal structure. Although the shallow-level defects won’t influence the performance of the perovskite photovoltaics profoundly, their huge concentration will still result in a highly p-type doped Sn-based perovskite. Then, it will induce a large density of defects, limited carrier diffusion length, and poor film morphology. Therefore, it is essential to add anti-oxidants to the tin-based perovskite to reduce VSn and the generated film defects, like cracks and pinholes.

SnF2 is a typical reducing agent widely used in tin-based perovskites. In 2014, Mathews et al. first introduced SnF2 in CsSnI3, which helped to reduce the Sn vacancies. In 2016, Yan et al. introduced SnF2 in an FASnI3 perovskite and demonstrated that SnF2 is crucial to optimizing the perovskite morphology. An excess amount of SnF2 would aggregate at the grain boundaries. Seok et al. pointed out that an excess of SnF2 would induce phase separation. So they used the SnF2-pyrazine complex to facilitate the homogeneous dispersion of SnF2. In 2017, Zhu et al. reported the important function of SnF2 in the crystal nucleation process. They employed MASnIBr2 perovskite films with the SnF2 additive which could serve as heterogeneous nucleation sites and encourage homogeneous crystal growth. Recently, Abate et al. reported the complete working mechanism of SnF2 in tin-based perovskites. The fluoride altered the essential formation of pre-organized perovskite clusters and improved the overall crystal quality (Fig. 4a). They concluded that an Sn-rich environment with a hard Lewis-base, like SnF2 and SnCl2, would be especially suitable for the tin perovskites.
Hydrazine is also known as a strong reducing agent. In 2016, Song et al. employed the hydrazine (N2H4) vapor atmosphere as a reductant in MASnI3, CsSnI3, and CsSnBr3 based PSCs with a p–i–n structure. There was no obvious evidence of the existence of hydrazine in the perovskite because of its high volatility. Hydrazine vapor treatment perovskite films showed good coverage and better crystallinity. In 2018, Islam et al. added hydrazinium chloride (N2H5Cl) in FASnI3 with a DMSO solvent system. The dissolved hydrazine would release electrons and suppress the oxidation of Sn2+. As shown in Fig. 4b, with 2.5 mol% N2H5Cl, the coverage of the perovskite film was significantly improved. When the N2H5Cl amount was in excess, some white dot particles appeared.
In 2018, Gu et al. reported a low-cost method to purify SnI2 through Sn powder. It acted as a reducing agent and improved the ratio of Sn2+, which helped to reduce the vacancy and the defects of Sn, I, and FA. The perovskite films processed by Sn powder were more compact and smooth, compared with the pristine films filled with pinholes and coarser particles. In 2020, Nakamura et al. reported an ingenious method to introduce tin(0) nanoparticles in perovskite precursors. The nanoparticles were generated from the reaction of SnF2 and a dihydropyrazine derivative (TM-DHP). Finally, the FASnI3 based PSCs reached a PCE of 11.5%.
Sometimes, the anti-oxidant not only functions as an O2 scavenger but also serves as a Lewis base agent. The dual-function additive can control the morphology of perovskite films. For CsSnIBr2 perovskites, Wang et al. introduced hypophosphorous acid (HPA) as a reduction agent whose P–O band could coordinate with Sn2+. The additives tended to speed up the perovskite nucleation and reduced the Sn vacancies. In 2019, Yan et al. introduced hydroxybenzene sulfonic acid and its salts in FASnI3 perovskites with an SnCl2 additive. The hydroxybenzene group in the additives functioned as the antioxidant to prevent the oxidation of Sn2+ in the perovskite and meanwhile, the sulfonate group (SO3−) could coordinate with Sn2+ which contributed to the formation of a SnCl2–SO3− complex. Therefore, the complex led to a slower nucleation rate, and there was a decreased size of perovskite grains compared with the pristine large branched crystal coming from SnCl2 (Fig. 4c).
All in all, reducing agents are widely used to suppress VSn and tin oxidation, such as SnX2 compounds, Sn(0), and hydrazine compounds. In addition, Lewis-base additives with C, S, and O can coordinate with the tin vacancy and suppress the SnF2 segregation simultaneously. Remarkably, from the previous research, Sn2+ on the surface is more prone to oxidize than that in the bulk. Bulk Sn4+ tends to release two holes to the valence band and be reduced to Sn2+. Therefore, it is meaningful to make more efforts on surface antioxidation, including interfacial modification reductants, a surface reducing atmosphere, or 2D/3D perovskites.

Anti-solvent engineering is widely used in the fabrication of high-performance PSCs. During the process of spin-coating, anti-solvent dripping will remove the solvent in the solution and intensely increase the supersaturation of the precursors, which accelerates the nucleation. Then the homogeneous nucleation at the surface will proceed and promote the formation of full-coverage films. Considering the fast crystal process of tin-based perovskite, it is proposed to increase the amount of the anti-solvent and speed up the drip rate, which helps to prolong the crystal growth.

Wakamiya et al. reported a hot anti-solvent method to increase the film coverage of FA0.75MA0.25SnI3 perovskites. As shown in Fig. 5a, the perovskite films prepared from room temperature chlorobenzene showed randomly distributed pinholes, which could be ascribed to the relatively low number density of perovskite crystallites. Chlorobenzene preheated to 65 °C as an antisolvent would increase the nucleation sites of perovskites and contribute to the high-coverage films. In 2018, Huang et al. compared the influence of different anti-solvents (diethyl ether, toluene, and chlorobenzene) on the morphology of the perovskite films. Chlorobenzene was found to be the most suitable anti-solvent because of its high boiling point, which resulted in a pin-hole-free and uniform perovskite surface. In contrast, Yan et al. considered that the diethyl ether anti-solvent produced the highest-quality perovskite films because of its slowest process of perovskite crystallization. For the advanced tin-based PSCs nowadays, chlorobenzene and toluene antisolvents are utilized in most studies. This may originate from the miscibility of chlorobenzene and toluene in DMSO, which results in a nonstoichiometric intermediate phase.
Introducing additives to anti-solvents is an effective strategy to control the surface of the perovskite. In 2019, Han et al. conducted an anti-solvent engineering method using chlorobenzene containing 4- fluorobenzohydrazide (FBH), followed by the annealing process of FASnI3 perovskite films with an FBH surface layer. The carbonyl group coordinated the FBH molecules and tin perovskites, which led to the lower Gibbs free energy of the crystallization and larger distributed textures of perovskite films. In 2020, Chen et al. adopted poly(ethylene-co-vinyl acetate) (EVA) into the anti-solvent. EVA would function as a self-sealing polymer in FASnI3 perovskites, which prevents oxygen and moisture. Simultaneously, the carbonyl groups in EVA and tin formed Lewis acid–base complexation, which retarded the growth rate of the perovskite and improved the orientation of the films.

As is known, the deep-level trap states in tin-based perovskites mainly come from bulk defects. Precise control of crystallization is effective to passivate the bulk defects. As for surface defects, they mainly come from the weak van der Waals's interaction between organic and inorganic components, which will easily induce the non-stoichiometric decomposition at the surface. So, the tin and halide vacancies, as well as many active dangling bonds at the film surface, will result in large amounts of trap density. The upper surface-modified layer can encapsulate the perovskite grain and passivate the surface to reduce nonradiative charge recombination effectively. In 2019, Han et al. innovatively proposed a template growth method by spin-coating n-propylammonium iodide (PAI) on the FASnI3 perovskite film before annealing (Fig. 5b). A little DMSO in the solvent of PAI would create a liquid phase environment and then PAI gathered to form a template that would facilitate more oriented growth of tin-perovskite crystals. A certified efficiency of 11.22% was obtained and the encapsulated devices maintained 95% of their initial efficiency after 1000 hours at max point tracking under simulated illumination of AM 1.5G. Kamarudin et al. reported a facile surface modification technique through ethane-1,2-diamine (EDA) diluted in chlorobenzene. Such Lewis base post-treatment could interact with unreacted SnI2 on the perovskite surface and lead to smoother morphology as well as larger grain size.


The bottom surface layer can provide a template and induce the orientated growth of the perovskite films. For the first time, Yan et al. introduced 2D transition-metal dichalcogenides MX2 (i.e., WSe2, WS2, and MoS2) fabricated by liquid-phase exfoliation as the growth templates between the NiOx layer and FASnI3 perovskite layer. The smoother MX2 would contribute to the van der Waals epitaxial growth of perovskite films with a larger grain size and more oriented growth direction (Fig. 5c). Recently, Cao et al. introduced a KSCN interlayer between the PEDOT:PSS layer and the perovskite layer. The multiple ordered crystal orientation of the perovskite film tended to grow along the out-plane direction after the modification of the KSCN film which was beneficial for the charge mobility of the devices. The PCE of KSCN-modified tin-perovskite devices increased to 11.17% and the highest indoor efficiency of 17.57% under 334.41 μW cm−2 was achieved. In 2019, Chen et al. introduced poly[tetraphenylethene 3,3′-(((2,2-diphenylethene-1,1-diyl)bis(4,1-phenylene))bis(oxy))bis(N,N-dimethylpropan-1-amine)tetraphenylethene] (PTN–Br) to form a bulk heterojunction film. The π-conjugated PTN–Br could form Lewis adducts with tin to fill the grain boundaries and passivate the trap state.


The LaMer model and Ostwald ripening theory govern the main crystallization mechanism of the tin halide perovskites. When the nucleation process is slow, the restricted nuclei number will be unable to keep pace with the crystal growth rate. Similarly, coming from the high supersaturation of tin-based perovskite precursors, the rapid crystal will also induce an imbalance with nucleation. Therefore, fast nucleation followed by slow crystal growth is a desirable process to fabricate high coverage and uniform perovskite films.


As shown in the formerly mentioned manipulation strategies, the effective methods to facilitate nucleation include perovskite precursor engineering and surface engineering. According to the classical nucleation theory and eqn (6), the nucleation rate of the colloidal dispersion perovskite precursors is determined by the values of critical free energy (ΔGc) and temperature T. A higher supersaturating level S will bring about a smaller critical radius rc of the nucleus. At the same time, together with a lower surface free energy σ, ΔGc will decrease obviously. However, when S is higher, the nucleation rate will increase exponentially until infinity. So, there is a critical value for S, or the nucleation rate will be hard to control.

Perovskite precursor engineering is available to increase the size of perovskite colloids and make them quicker to achieve a critical radius. The engineering includes changing the halogen ratio of the perovskite component, forming a transitional SnI2·DMSO intermediate phase, and using pre-nucleation clusters.
Surface engineering is another effective method, including anti-solvent and interfacial modification. The nucleation rate is dominantly influenced by the supersaturating degree which can be directly regulated by the anti-solvents. The widely employed anti-solvents in the spin-coating process of the perovskites can remove the solvent in the solution instantaneously and increase the supersaturating of the precursors. Chlorobenzene, toluene, and diethyl ether are the most common anti-solvents for tin-based perovskites. Heating anti-solvents is a versatile way, as well as increasing the amount of the anti-solvent and speeding up the drip rate from the aspect of the dripping technique. What's more, attempting a new kind of green anti-solvent or introducing anti-solvent additives is also an effective method to control the nucleation rate.
The interfacial modification layer can fix the active dangling bonds on the surface of the perovskite layer, thus decreasing the surface free energy. The modulated surface energy on the top surface, as well as the bottom surface, will greatly control the growth kinetics of perovskites. Moreover, the bottom-surface interlayer especially provides a suitable template for perovskite growth and improves the wettability of perovskite precursors, which will improve the orientation and increase the nuclei sites of the perovskite film.

Coming from the greater Lewis acidity of Sn2+, tin-based perovskites crystalize much faster than the lead counterparts at room temperature which will induce much more defects and random orientation of the perovskite films. So, it is critical to suppress the rapid crystal growth so as for dense and high-quality tin-based perovskite films.

Forming intermediate adducts in the tin-based perovskites was proved to be a facile and effective method to retard crystal growth. Lewis base additives containing electron-pair donors, such as oxygen, nitrogen and sulfur, can react with Lewis acid Sn2+ and form a Lewis acid–base intermediate adduct. In particular, organic ammonium salts and long-chain ammoniums can function as superior composition modulators in the tin-based perovskites. In addition, hydrogen bonding can be utilized to link polar hydrogen groups and electronegative ions for cross-linking grains and retarding crystallization. Combined with the Lewis base and antioxidant properties, we can look for some novel dual-function additives.
The introduction of long-chain organic materials, mainly long-chain ammoniums in the A-site of tin-based perovskites, will facilitate the formation of LD orientated tin perovskites. The substituted A-site organic materials basically involve PEA, BA, FPEA, 4-AMP, 5-AVA and BEA, all of which contain ammoniums or benzene. Compared with three dimensional perovskites, the crystal growth mechanism of LD tin-based perovskites influences their crystal orientation which improves their moisture, thermal, and oxygen tolerance as well as the stability of the perovskite photovoltaics. Due to the quantum confinement effect, LD tin-based perovskites tend to reduce their self-doping and ion migration, which benefits the formation of well-defined and full-coverage perovskite films. In addition, it is noted that, in the range of long-chain ammoniums, a shorter chain length is more favourable to improve the orientation and charge transfer of tin-based perovskites.
In addition, it can be considered to adjust the physical properties of tin-based perovskite precursors to control the process of crystal growth and gain fabrication techniques from lead-based perovskites. For example, it can be promising to change the temperature of the precursors, choose different host solvents with suitable viscosity, boiling point, or solubility, and apply different scalable deposition techniques.

Tin-based PSCs have developed rapidly over the past five years. They have high potential to substitute for lead-based PSCs and become promising candidates for next-generation photovoltaics. Currently, the efficiency of tin-based PSCs has reached 15%, which is a milestone in the development of solar cells. Different from lead perovskites, because of the higher Lewis acidity of Sn2+, the crystallization process of the tin-based perovskites is considerably uncontrollable, which will influence the film quality and the performance of the device. In our review, we have systematically summarized the morphological control strategies and up-to-date studies to provide an intensive understanding of the crystallization process of tin-based perovskites.

Film quality is especially crucial for device performance as well as PCE. On the one hand, crystal quality is positively related to the absorbance and carrier diffusion length of the tin-based perovskite layer, which will further affect the light-harvesting efficiency and short-circuit current density (JSC). Some pin-holes and low crystallinity of the tin-based perovskite film have led to large current leakage and fluctuating JSC, which is also the reason that the JSC of tin-based PSCs is far from the theoretical JSC. On the other hand, the trap states generated in the crystal process will act as the nonradiative recombination centers and result in the decrease of open-circuit voltage (VOC). In addition, the film pinholes will also influence the shunt resistance and the fill factor (FF). Thus, it is necessary to fabricate homogeneous and highly-oriented perovskite films.
The major challenge of film control is the facile crystallization in the spin-coating process of the perovskite film even at room temperature. From the crystal growth mechanism of the tin-based perovskites, facilitating the nucleation rate as well as suppressing the crystal growth simultaneously to reach a balance is the most desirable method to manipulate the crystallization and optimize the morphology of the tin-based perovskites. In summary, the strategies to accelerate nucleation include precursor engineering and surface engineering. Meanwhile, to retard the rapid crystal growth, intermediate adduct formation, and LD perovskite introduction will be mainly adopted. According to the crystallization mechanism and concluded control strategies, we provide some extra ideas to further improve the performance and the stability of tin-based perovskite photovoltaics.
We can develop and utilize dual or multiple functional additives. For example, hypophosphorous acid and hydroxybenzene sulfonic not only function as reduction agents but also form an intermediate complex in tin-based perovskites. In addition, we can also unite the surface engineering and hydrogen bonding, or low dimensional molecular and anti-oxidation properties. The functional groups with the various features can be combined to design a new additive that will be more suitable for tin-based perovskites.
The recorded efficiency of tin-based PSCs comes from LD perovskites, which normally reveal the merits of full film coverage, highly oriented crystals, and notably better stability. Compared with three-dimensional tin-based perovskites, LD counterparts could be the most promising candidates to solve the obstacles of rapid crystallization and easy oxidation to achieve high-performance and more stable tin-based PSCs. Thus, the molecular design principles and more reproducible fabrication techniques for LD tin-based perovskites need further research, which will help in the future development of ultra-stable tin-based PSCs.
Anti-solvents play a critical role in the crystallization of tin-based perovskites. However, the widely used anti-solvents, chlorobenzene, and toluene are toxic, which conflicts with the concept of low toxicity in tin-based perovskites. So, it is necessary to choose a more environmentally friendly anti-solvent alternative. Considering the boiling point and the dipole moment of solvents, ethyl acetate, n-hexane, and anisole could be further explored to minimize the health risks. Furthermore, it is also necessary to consider green precursor host solvents. When spin-coating the perovskite precursors, the physical properties of the host solvents are important, such as viscosity, evaporation rate, and dielectric constant, which will influence the crystallization dynamics of tin-based perovskites.
This review outlines the crystallization manipulation strategies for tin-based perovskites. Combining the latest studies and perspectives of the perovskite crystallization process is anticipated to provide new insight and promote the further development of tin-based PSCs. Drawing on the advanced experience of lead-based PSCs, we believe an innovative and key technique will be applied one day which will confirm the great breakthroughs of tin-based PSCs and other photovoltaics.

There are no conflicts to declare.


The authors acknowledge financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 52073197 and 62075148), and the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (No. BK20201413, BK20211314). This work is supported by Suzhou Key Laboratory of Functional Nano & Soft Materials, Collaborative Innovation Center of Suzhou Nano Science & Technology, the 111 Project, Joint International Research Laboratory of Carbon-Based Functional Materials and Devices, and Soochow University Tang Scholar.


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022