 DOI: 10.1039/C5CC10444K
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 3356-3359


Jing M.
Ren
,

Jegadesan
Subbiah
,

Bolong
Zhang
,

Kenji
Ishitake
,

Kotaro
Satoh
,

Masami
Kamigaito
,

Greg G.
Qiao
*,

Edgar H. H.
Wong
* and 

Wallace W. H.
Wong
*

Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia. E-mail: gregghq@unimelb.edu.au; edgar.wong@unsw.edu.au

School of Chemistry, Bio21 Institute, The University of Melbourne, 30 Flemington Road, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia. E-mail: wwhwong@unimelb.edu.au

Department of Applied Chemistry, Graduate School of Engineering, Nagoya University, Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya 464-8603, Japan

Received
21st December 2015
, Accepted 19th January 2016
First published on 29th January 2016
A syndiotactic poly(methyl methacrylate) bottlebrush polymer has been shown to complex with C60 fullerene and assemble into nanoparticles that can be dispersed in polar organic solvents. This composite material was used as an electrode interlayer in organic solar cell (OSC) devices leading to enhanced device performance.

Flexible electronics are part of the next wave of technology that promises light-weight, conformable, integrated devices that can be produced at a low-cost. The development of high performance, solution-processed functional materials is a key area of research in this important technology trend. Fullerenes, a class of highly symmetric cage-shaped molecules comprising only carbon atoms, are amongst the most widely used materials in organic electronic thin films because of their reversible reduction behaviour and good electron transport properties. However, pure fullerenes are only sparingly soluble in solvents, and generally modified fullerene derivatives are used instead to improve miscibility/solubility for thin film processing. The ability to disperse fullerene molecules effectively is crucial towards controlling the film morphology and consequently the device performance. In spite of the availability of fullerene derivatives, morphological control in thin films remains challenging.

Recently, Yashima and co-workers reported a versatile method to encapsulate unmodified fullerene C60 (or C70) into the helical cavities of syndiotactic poly(methyl methacrylate) (st-PMMA), forming distinct one-dimensional (1D) arrays of fullerenes within the st-PMMA scaffold. These supramolecular complexes, termed fullerene molecular peapods, have several advantages compared to conventional fullerene derivatives: (i) the st-PMMA scaffold is a commodity plastic and is easy to process and produce on a large scale; (ii) fullerene peapods disperse efficiently in solutions due to the excellent compatibility of PMMA with many organic solvents and prevent phase separation when deposited as thin films; (iii) the photophysical properties of fullerenes are largely retained and differ from those of the fullerene derivatives; and (iv) unmodified fullerenes are cheaper than their derivatives. Despite the many interesting properties and the potential of these fullerene peapods, their application in electronic materials is still relatively new.
Encouraged by the work from the Yashima group, we herein describe the preparation of a novel st-PMMA bottlebrush (st-PMMA-BB) polymer with encapsulated C60, termed the fullerene peapod nanoparticle (FPN), as an organic semiconductor–electrode interface layer (Scheme 1). By encasing native C60 within the st-PMMA-BB, the formed FPNs have excellent solubility in organic solvents and can be easily processed into thin films. In addition, bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) solar cells made using FPN films as the solar cell–electrode interface layer yield higher power conversion efficiency (PCE) (ca. 10–30% more) than those fabricated using a ZnO interface layer. This study crucially demonstrates the advantage of macromolecular engineering in improving the performance of organic electronic materials. In the following sections, the synthetic strategy leading to the formation of FPNs is elucidated, and various BHJ solar cells have been fabricated to confirm the efficacy of FPNs as an effective interface layer.
The st-PMMA-BB bottlebrush polymer was prepared via ring-opening metathesis polymerization (ROMP) using exo-norbornene chain-end functionalized syndiotactic poly(methyl methacrylate) (st-PMMA-NB) as the macromonomer (Scheme 1). The synthesis of the macromonomer was achieved via stereospecific living radical polymerization (SLRP). The SLRP technique afforded polymer products with simultaneous control over their molecular weight (MW), chain-end group and tacticity (Scheme S1, ESI).
Although SLRP offers a lower level of syndiotacticity control than anionic polymerization because of the less regulated stereospecific propagation environment, a well-defined linear st-PMMA with a sufficient degree of tacticity to form a PMMA stereocomplex (rr = 74%) was achieved nonetheless. After modifying the ω-chain end from chloride to azide, the ROMP-polymerizable norbornene functionality was installed via the classical ‘click’ chemistry to afford st-PMMA-NB (with number-average MW (Mn) = 5.5 kDa, dispersity (Đ) = 1.10, mm/mr/rr (%) = 1.5/24.5/74.0, and the ω-end group functionality (F(ω)) = 0.88, Fig. S1, ESI). It is noteworthy that as the exo-isomer of norbornene is more reactive towards ROMP than the endo-isomer, an exo-norbornene derivative was specifically designed to introduce the polymerizable functionality, subsequently allowing for the rapid and highly-efficient formation of a well-defined bottlebrush polymer via a grafting-through approach.
The st-PMMA-BB was successfully synthesized via the ROMP of st-PMMA-NB initiated by the highly active pyridine-modified 2nd generation Grubbs catalyst. The GPC differential refractive index (DRI) traces (Fig. 1a) showed a near-quantitative conversion (>90%) of the st-PMMA-NB into a high MW species (Mn = 183.7 kDa and Đ = 1.38), indicating the successful formation of st-PMMA-BB. Unconverted macromonomers were removed via preparative GPC, which were characterized via1H NMR spectroscopic analysis and found to possess no polymerizable terminus. To accurately determine the MW of st-PMMA-BB and account for the structural deviation of the bottlebrush polymer from the GPC calibration standards (i.e., linear PMMAs), GPC coupled with a multi-angle laser light scattering detector (GPC-MALLS) – a technique which allows for the determination of the absolute MW independent of the polymer architecture – was used to re-characterize st-PMMA-BB and it was found to have Mn(MALS) = 815.9 kDa and Đ = 1.12, which translates to a ca. 148 st-PMMA side-chains per bottlebrush polymer on average (i.e., m = 148). The 1H NMR spectrum of the st-PMMA-BB (Fig. 1b) displayed characteristic resonance peaks of st-PMMA and also a broad, weak resonance peak of the CC backbone from 5.0 to 5.5 ppm, verifying the successful synthesis of the targeted bottlebrush polymer. Furthermore, the degree of syndiotacticity of st-PMMA-BB was evaluated via13C NMR spectroscopic analysis, and found to be identical to that of the macromonomer (rr = 74%).
The complexation of st-PMMA-BB and C60 was then performed in acetonitrile (MeCN) – an excellent complexing solvent in which C60 is completely insoluble to yield the stereocomplex st-PMMA/C60 SC. In specific solvents (like MeCN), the stereoregularity allows the st-PMMA side-chains of the bottlebrush polymer to re-arrange themselves into single-stranded helical conformations. Internal cavities of these helices are thus able to accommodate C60 molecules through the formation of an inclusion complex (Scheme 1). It was anticipated that the C60-incorporated side-chains would cause chain-folding of the st-PMMA-BB and finally result in a spherical nanoparticle, i.e. a FPN, whereas uncomplexed, free polymer side-chains help stabilize the core domain and prevent intermolecular aggregation of the nanoparticles. Both DLS and TEM (Fig. 2a and b, respectively) analysis clearly demonstrated a substantial increase in particle size increase after complexation. The average hydrodynamic diameter (DH) increased from 10.8 to 44.6 nm (Fig. 2a and Fig. S2, ESI), and similarly, the average particle diameter measured from TEM micrographs (DTEM) increased from 17.9 to 32.9 nm (Fig. 2b and Fig. S3, ESI). The changes in the particle size implied the successful encapsulation of C60 by the st-PMMA-BB.
The UV-Vis spectrum of st-PMMA/C60 SC in MeCN solution showed the characteristic absorption peak of C60 at λ = 330 nm. This result showed that the st-PMMA-BB was able to endow fullerene with solubility in polar solvents such as MeCN, and further proved the inclusion complexation of C60 into the st-PMMA-BB. X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) was also used to characterize the isolated FPN; however, no discernable diffraction peak was observed. This is because the surrounding uncomplexed st-PMMA chains prevent the complexed st-PMMA/C60 core of the nanoparticles from forming crystallite domains via inter-particle aggregation. This can be verified by both DLS and TEM particle size plots of the st-PMMA/C60 SC that showed monomodal distributions with low values of percentage standard deviations (% dispersity = 23.4 and 20.5 from DLS and TEM analyses, respectively), suggesting no or minimal particle aggregation. Using the previously established UV-Vis calibration method, the amount of encapsulated C60 was determined to be 1.6 wt% of the total nanoparticle, which is equivalent to the 26 C60 molecules per FPN (Fig. 2c and Fig. S4, ESI). The degree of inclusion complexation judging from the C60 content was lower than that of the previously reported system by Kawauchi et al. (5.8 wt%) under the same reaction conditions. However, the previous system utilized anionically polymerized linear st-PMMA with higher stereoregularity (Mn = 322 kDa, Đ = 1.29, mm/mr/rr (%) = 0/6/94) as the polymer precursor. A higher degree of syndiotacticity means smaller amounts of irregular st-PMMA helical sequences that cannot participate in inclusion complexation, and therefore higher C60 loading. In addition, the architecture of the bottlebrush polymer means that the st-PMMA brushes may be too sterically hindered for a higher degree of complexation with C60 molecules. It must be emphasized, however, that this study provides a novel C60 nanocarrier (i.e., st-PMMA-BB) that employs less demanding, more accessible chemistries (i.e., SLRP and ‘click’ reaction) compared to living anionic polymerization.
For organic solar cells, the electrical contact between an inorganic electrode and an organic active layer is a critical factor for the fabrication of efficient photovoltaic devices. Recently, it was reported that ultra-thin fullerene derivative interlayers on the metal oxide surfaces enhanced the photovoltaic device performance significantly due to efficient charge extraction. We wanted to see whether device enhancement could be observed if the st-PMMA/C60 SC was used in a similar fashion. Polymer solar cells with an inverted device geometry were fabricated with a ZnO nanoparticle interlayer and polymer: PCBM blend as the active layer (Fig. 3b). Three interlayer structures were examined and compared: (i) ZnO only; (ii) st-PMMA-BB on ZnO; and (iii) st-PMMA/C60 SC on ZnO. The current density–voltage data for the devices containing P3HT:PC61BM 1:1 active layer are shown in Fig. 3c.
The device performance characteristics are summarized in Table 1. The control device with a ZnO interlayer showed a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 8.3 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.60 V, a fill factor (FF) of 64% and a corresponding PCE of 3.21%. For the st-PMMA/C60 SC layer, both Voc and Jsc slightly increased resulting in the enhancement of PCE to 3.6%. Since the open-circuit voltage of an OSC is determined by the work function difference between the two electrodes; here, the enhancement of Voc can be attributed to the reduced work function of the cathode electrode due to surface passivation of the ZnO layer. Pleasingly, the polymer interlayer without C60, i.e.st-PMMA-BB, led to a slight decrease in the device performance primarily as a result of smaller Jsc. This can be attributed to the fact that the st-PMMA-BB is an electrically insulating material and is not expected to promote any charge extraction.
Active layer
Cathode interlayer

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
P3HT:PC61BM
ZnO
8.30
0.60
64
3.20 (3.1 ± 0.10)
ZnO/st-PMMA-BB
6.85
0.64
65
2.95 (2.8 ± 0.15)
ZnO/st-PMMA-C60
8.60
0.64
65
3.60 (3.4 ± 0.20)
PBDT-BT:PC71BM
ZnO
11.6
0.88
44
4.70 (4.5 ± 0.20)
ZnO/st-PMMA-BB
10.7
0.90
49
4.75 (4.6 ± 0.15)
ZnO/st-PMMA-C60
13.5
0.90
50
6.10 (6.0 ± 0.10)
In addition to a P3HT:PCBM active layer, we have also studied the effect of the st-PMMA-BB and st-PMMA/C60 SC interlayers using a donor–acceptor polymer PBDT-BT (Fig. 3a) and PC71BM blend as an active layer in an inverted device geometry (Table 1 and Fig. S5, ESI). As observed with P3HT-based photovoltaic device, PDBT-BT-based solar cells showed enhanced performance (PCE of 6.1%) with the st-PMMA/C60 SC interlayer compared to devices with the ZnO layer only. As with the P3HT/PC61BM devices, the enhanced performance can be attributed to the suppression of charge recombination at the interface due to surface passivation of the ZnO layer. From Table 1, it can be observed that the enhancement in the device performance of PBDT-BT solar cells was higher compared to P3HT devices, which might be due to the difference in vertical morphology of the active layer. The surface morphology of the interlayers were examined using atomic force microscopy, AFM (Fig. S6, ESI). Interestingly, the st-PMMA/C60 SC nanoparticles observed in the TEM experiment (Fig. 2b) was also apparent in the AFM experiment.
In conclusion, a syndiotactic PMMA bottlebrush polymer material st-PMMA-BB was synthesized. This polymer assembled into nanoparticle structures when complexed with C60 in favourable solvent systems. The polymer–fullerene composite st-PMMA/C60 SC was used as the electrode interlayer in polymer solar cells leading to enhancement in the device performance.
This work was initiated through the Melbourne Materials Institute Seed Funding program (W. W. H. W. and E. H. H. W.) and was partly supported by funds from the Australian Renewable Energy Agency through the Australian Centre for Advanced Photovoltaics. W. W. H. W. is supported by an Australian Research Council Future Fellowship (FT130100500). Responsibility for the views, information, or advice herein is not accepted by the Australian government.
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental methods and full characterization data. See DOI: 10.1039/c5cc10444k
‡ These authors contributed equally to this study.
§ Present address: Centre for Advanced Macromolecular Design and Australian Centre for Nanomedicine, School of Chemical Engineering, The University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016