 DOI: 10.1039/C7CP00563F
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 13147-13152


Tongyu
Su
,

Xinhang
Li
,

Yongzhuan
Zhang
,

Fapei
Zhang
* and 

Zhigao
Sheng
*

Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Condensed Matter Physics at Extreme Conditions, High Magnetic Field Laboratory, Chinese Academy of Science, Hefei 230031, China. E-mail: fzhang@hmfl.ac.cn; zhigaosheng@hmfl.ac.cn

University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026, China

Collaborative Innovation Center of Advanced Microstructures, Nanjing University, Nanjing, 210093, China

Received
25th January 2017
, Accepted 18th April 2017
First published on 10th May 2017
The annealing temperature (Ta) effect on CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite solar cells (PSCs) was studied. By utilizing a two-step technique, the Ta dependences of the optical absorption, grain size, and crystallinity of a CH3NH3PbI3 thin film have been revealed. It is found that the grain size of the CH3NH3PbI3 film increases monotonically with Ta. Meanwhile, the decomposed PbI2 emerges when Ta exceeds 120 °C and its content increases rapidly as Ta increases further. Consequently, the optical absorption of the CH3NH3PbI3 film and the efficiency of PSCs reach their maximum at Ta = 120 °C simultaneously. The highest and average device performances of PSCs achieved via this method are 17.61% and 16.40%, respectively. These results confirm the key role played by temperature and provide a route to the performance-optimization of PSCs.

Recently, metal halide perovskites such as CH3NH3PbI3 have received intensive attention as promising photovoltaic materials due to their large absorption coefficients, tunable band gaps, long diffusion lengths, and high carrier mobilities. With the intense efforts devoted towards developing PSCs, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) was improved from 3.8% to state-of-the-art values over 20%. High-performance perovskite solar cells (PSCs) depend on high-quality perovskite films, which require careful control of the preparation process. In order to obtain high-efficiency and high-stability devices, various preparation approaches have been proposed to produce uniform and dense perovskite films with good crystallinity, including a single step approach, a two-step approach, solvent engineering, vapor deposition and vapor-assisted deposition.

Compared to other approaches, the two-step approach provides an efficient pathway to yield perovskite films for high-performance PSCs. In a typical two-step solution process, a PbI2 film is first deposited from dimethylformamide (DMF) solution on an electron transport layer, and then immersed in or spin-coated from a solution of methylammonium iodide (MAI) to form perovskite films. Such a technique effectively avoids pinhole formation and incomplete surface coverage of the film, but suffers from peeling-off of the perovskite film in solution during dipping, incomplete conversion of PbI2 and difficulty in fabricating planar-structured PSCs. To address these issues, solvent engineering was used by introducing strong coordinative dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) as a solvent for PbI2 to inhibit PbI2 crystallization and form a dense and uniform film. By the technical improvement of thin films, highly reproducible performance of PSCs was achieved and the best efficiency of 17.16% was achieved.
In addition to solvent engineering, controlling the growth of crystalline perovskite films is another important factor in obtaining high-efficiency PSCs, which is strongly dependent upon the precursor concentration, solution composition, growth conditions, and so on. To date, a number of studies have focused on the heat treatment of PSCs. A hot-casting technique was recently introduced to prepare pinhole-free perovskite films with millimeter-scale grains. It was found that the grain size increases markedly with substrate temperature during the casting. Meng et al. found that increasing the reaction temperature during the soaking process of crystalline PbI2 enlarges the grain size of CH3NH3PbI3 crystals, leading to enhanced charge transport and device performance. Additionally, Huang et al. developed a method for forming pin-hole free perovskite films by interdiffusion of crystalline PbI2 and MAI stacking layers and found that a thermal annealing process is necessary to make sure full reaction occurs between crystalline PbI2 and MAI. These studies have suggested that the annealing or growth temperature plays a key role in manipulating the nucleation and growth of perovskite films, and thus the morphology, chemical composition and crystallinity of the film. However, only a few studies have focused on the annealing temperature (Ta) effect on the precursor of perovskite which is prepared through a reaction between amorphous PbI2(DMSO)x and MAI. In contrast to the crystalline PbI2 film, the amorphous PbI2 film is formed without heating by mixing appropriate amounts of DMSO and DMF as solvents for PbI2, which favors the promotion of the perovskite conversion rate. More importantly, the Ta effects on the conversion process and consequently the formation of the perovskite film are still presently unclear. Thus, it is of critical importance to explore the Ta effect on the perovskite film properties that optimize the photovoltaic performance in PSCs.
In this work, we have systematically studied how Ta influences the formation of CH3NH3PbI3 films containing an amorphous PbI2 precursor via a two-step approach. With optimized Ta, high-efficiency PSCs with the best PCE of 17.61% were obtained. Such simple modulation of Ta provides a significant and efficient route to further improve the perovskite film quality and the device performance.

We use two-step sequential deposition to prepare perovskite thin films. First, PbI2 is dissolved in a mixed solvent of DMF and DMSO. Due to the strong coordination ability of DMSO with PbI2, PbI2(DMSO)x complexes are formed in the solution and remain within the PbI2 layer after the evaporation of DMF during the spin-coating process. The existence of such complexes enables the formation of mirror-like amorphous precursor films. For the growth of perovskite, the MAI solution is dropped and permeated into the precursor films of PbI2. The DMSO in the PbI2(DMSO)x complexes is exchanged with MAI. Subsequently, the CH3NH3PbI3 film is induced by post-annealing to initiate the conversion and nucleation of the perovskite phase. The annealing temperature (Ta) in the range of 80 to 160 °C accelerates interdiffusion between MAI and the precursor layer and modulates the processes of crystallization and film growth. PSCs are fabricated in a planar structure where a perovskite absorber is located between an electron transport layer (TiO2) and a hole transport layer (spiro-OMeTAD). The details are provided in the experimental section.


Fig. 1(a) presents the photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) curves of the optimized devices prepared at different Tas. Clearly, the device obtained at Ta = 120 °C exhibits the highest PCE of 17.61%, with a short-circuit current (JSC) of 21.97 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 1.08 V and a fill factor (FF) of 74.45. The reproducibility of device performance was checked by characterizing nine devices from the same Ta. Fig. 1(b) depicts the statistical data of JSC, VOC, FF, and PCE of these devices. It is found that the average JSC, VOC and FF of these devices exhibit relatively low values for the 80 °C device and they increase monotonically with Ta at first (<120 °C) and then decrease after reaching a maximum value at Ta = 120 °C. For instance, the JSC increases from 19.19 mA cm−2 for the device prepared at Ta = 80 °C to a maximum value of 20.85 mA cm−2 at Ta = 120 °C, and then decreases down to JSC of 19.62 mA cm−2 at Ta = 160 °C. It is interesting to find that the photovoltaic parameters for the 120 °C device have lower standard deviations about 0.78 and are comparably more reproducible than devices obtained at the other Tas. The modulation of photovoltaic performance and reproducibility indicates that the Ta can act as an important parameter for such perovskite solar cells.
To explore the Ta effect further, we measured the ultraviolet-visible absorption spectra of CH3NH3PbI3 films prepared at various Tas. The typical results are shown in Fig. 2. The 120 °C film has a maximum value in absorption intensity, which indicates the better optical properties than the films prepared at the other Tas. The optical band gap energy (Eg) can be determined using the Tauc equation:
(αhν)2 = A(hν − Eg)
where
α is the absorption coefficient, hν is the photon energy and A is the constant for a direct transition. An extrapolation of the linear portion of (αhν)2versus hν plots can give the Eg value for these CH3NH3PbI3 films in the range of 1.590 to 1.597 eV, which is close to the reported value of about 1.5 to 1.6 eV. In order to compare the optical density, we draw the curve of Ta and the area inside this curve with approximately 0.4% error in the inset. The area value increases monotonically with Ta first and then decreases for Ta >120 °C. The increase of JSC observed for the 120 °C device is directly related to the higher optical density, which is responsible for the increased light-harvesting efficiency. As a result, it is observed that the Ta dependence of the optical absorption of perovskite films is consistent with that of the device performance.


Fig. 3(a–e) show the top-view SEM images of the CH3NH3PbI3 films prepared at different Tas, respectively. It is found that the surface morphology and grain size distribution of perovskite thin films depend strongly on Ta. The complete coverage on the substrate surface for all samples is observed, which is beneficial to obtain high-performance devices. In order to precisely quantify the grain size and distribution of CH3NH3PbI3 films, Nano Measurer software was used to analyze the FE-SEM images. The obtained statistics are shown in Fig. 3(f), where the size distribution broadens as Ta increases. The average grain size is determined to be ∼110 nm for the 80 °C film, ∼250 nm for the120 °C film and ∼320 nm for the 160 °C film. As shown in Fig. 3(g), the CH3NH3PbI3 grain size is plotted as a function of Ta, which shows that the grain size of CH3NH3PbI3 films increases monotonically with Ta. The precursor of perovskite is formed by combining PbI2(DMSO)x and CH3NH3I, which is sensitive to Ta. For such a precursor annealed at 80 °C, the slow exchange between MAI and DMSO retards the growth of perovskite seed crystals. Consequently, a small grain and inhomogeneous morphology is formed. At higher Ta, the rapid volatilization of DMSO would accelerate crystal growth and form larger grains. In general, a large grain size could reduce the number of grain boundaries and suppress charge trapping and recombination, leading to enhanced extraction of charge carriers in the interface and an improved FF as well as VOC. This is consistent with our result when the perovskite films are annealed at Ta ≤120 °C but not at Ta >120 °C and the possible reason will be discussed as follows.

Fig. 4(a) presents the X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the CH3NH3PbI3 films which are prepared at different Tas. The diffraction peaks for all films at 2θ values of 14.17°, 28.49°, 31.86°, and 43.19° correspond to the characteristic (110), (220), (310), and (314) lattice planes for the CH3NH3PbI3 tetragonal phase (I4/mcm), respectively. The diffraction patterns for the films annealed at Ta (≤120 °C) reveal a pure CH3NH3PbI3 phase, indicating the complete conversion of PbI2 to perovskite. It is worth noting that the intensity of the (110) peak increases with Ta, which implies the enhanced crystallinity of the perovskite thin film. However, for the film prepared at Ta > 120 °C, a peak at 12.67° appears and increases further in intensity with higher Ta. The diffraction peak belongs to the (001) plane of the PbI2 crystal, which should be attributed to the decomposition of CH3NH3PbI3. For comparison, the intensity ratio of the (001) peak of PbI2 to the (110) peak of perovskite was calculated for the films prepared at different Tas. Fig. 4(b) displays the curve of relative intensity as a function of Ta. The result shows the value of the intensity ratio is almost zero first and then increases from 3.02% at Ta = 140 °C to 12.67% at Ta = 160 °C. The PbI2 from CH3NH3PbI3 decomposition could possibly lead to lower light harvesting of the films as there is an insufficient amount of the perovskite absorber. Meanwhile, it is more likely that the generated PbI2 for the Ta (>120 °C) devices causes the decrease of the photovoltaic performance of the device.
Impedance spectroscopy (IS) measurements were carried out to explore the charge transfer process in the dark. The typical results, for the devices with the CH3NH3PbI3 film annealed at 80, 120 and 160 °C at 0.6 V, are shown in Fig. S2(a) (ESI) with Nyquist plots (details can be found in Fig. S1, ESI). It is found that the data can be well fitted with an equivalent circuit consisting of a series resistance (Rs), a constant phase element (CPE), and a recombination resistance (Rrec) (see the inset of Fig. S2(b), ESI). While Rrec is dependent on the recombination between electrons and holes in the perovskite layer, the CPE is related to the interface capacitor between the perovskite layer and charge extraction layers. Additionally, Rs is correlated with the internal resistance.
Comparing the fitted value of Rs, we find that the Rs for the 120 °C device is smaller than that of the 160 °C device, as shown in Fig. S3(a) (ESI). According to previous research studies, the resistivity of PbI2 and CH3NH3PbI3 is ∼1.0 × 1010 Ω cm and ∼3.4 × 103 Ω cm, respectively, which demonstrates the presence of PbI2. Compared with the 120 °C device, the 80 °C device has a higher value of Rs possibly due to the poor crystallization and the traps from the small grains of perovskite. It is found that the Rrec increases with Ta in Fig. S3(c) (ESI). It can be speculated that the large grains in the perovskite layer decrease the bulk recombination rate. In spite of this, the interface effect still limits charge transfer at high Ta. Fig. S3(b) (ESI) shows the CPE as a function of bias at different Tas, which is affected by charging and discharging of the interface and bulk defect levels present in the depletion region. The highest efficiency in the 120 °C device exhibits the lowest value of the CPE, which suggests that the charge carriers transfer fast along the device. The results indicate that the 120 °C device has lower defect densities than the 80 °C device and a purer perovskite phase than the 160 °C device, which enhances the ability of charge transfer.
Based on the above results, Ta provides good control over the CH3NH3PbI3 crystallization and growth. The improvement in PCE with increase in Ta could be due to the high collection capability of incident photons that increase JSC. Furthermore, the large grains and good crystallization of the CH3NH3PbI3 film decrease trap states and defects and thus increase VOC and FF. However, the reduction of PCE with further increase of Ta could originate from the presence of PbI2. As the DMSO in the PbI2(DMSO)x complexes is exchanged by MAI, PbI2 would emerge in the grain boundaries of perovskites or the interfaces between the absorber and the charge transport layer after thermal annealing. Based on the data given in the literature, energy level alignment of CH3NH3PbI3, PbI2, TiO2 and spiro-OMeTAD is obtained, as shown in Fig. S4 (ESI). It can be seen that the energy mismatching of the band edge is formed between CH3NH3PbI3 and PbI2, where PbI2 would block charge transfer and cause a drop in VOC and FF. When PbI2 is present in the interface between CH3NH3PbI3 and spiro-OMeTAD or TiO2, an energy barrier is created, which would block the carrier injection along the device to some extent. With the increase of the thickness or coverage of the PbI2 layer on the grain surface, charge transfer would further be blocked. Previous studies have indicated that an appropriate amount of PbI2 species in the CH3NH3PbI3 film results in improved carrier behavior possibly due to surface passivation or band edge matching between the selective contacts, PbI2 and the perovskite. Jacobsson et al. reported that unreacted PbI2 is a double-edged sword for enhancing the performance of PSCs. Herein, we speculate that the decomposed PbI2 may emerge as a charge carrier barrier to suppress charge transfer as a result of the mismatched energy offset. Further efforts will be toward this aspect in order to deeply understand the role of lead iodide in carrier transport.

In this work, Ta has been certified as a key parameter in manipulating the film fabrication of CH3NH3PbI3 material by a two-step approach. With the optimized Ta (120 °C), perovskite films showed the largest light absorption without PbI2 residues and the efficiency of PSCs improved to 17.61%. It was found that the grain size of the perovskite films increased monotonically with Ta. However, the decomposed PbI2 is formed in the as-prepared film when Ta exceeded 120 °C, which was adverse to the photovoltaic performance. The high efficiency and reproducibility of the devices fabricated via this approach demonstrated promising prospects for planar heterojunction solar cells. We believe that the planar device architectures will be suitably applied to simplify device manufacture, save processing cost and further fabricate flexible solar cells.


Lead(II) iodide (PbI2, 99.9%), Li-bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl) imide (Li-TFSI, 99%), chlorobenzene (99.5%), 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP, 96%), and N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF, 99.8%) were purchased from Aladdin-Reagent Co. Methylammonium iodide (MAI, 99%) and 2,2,7,7′-tetrakis-(N,N-di-4-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD, 99.7%) were purchased from Ed-Becrel (Chengdu) Technology Co., Ltd. Titanium(IV) isopropanol (95%), acetonitrile (99.8%), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO, 99.9%) and 2-propanol (99.5%) were purchased from Alfa Aesar. The spiro-OMeTAD solution was prepared by dissolving 72.3 mg of spiro-OMeTAD in 1 ml of chlorobenzene, and adding 28.8 μl of 4-tert-butyl pyridine and 17.5 μl of Li-TFSI solution (520 mg of LI-TSFI in 1 ml of acetonitrile). All of the reagents and chemicals were used without further purification.


The etched fluorine-doped tin oxide-coated (FTO) glass was ultrasonically cleaned with soap (5% detergent in water), ultrapure water, acetone, and ethanol in sequence for 15 min and then thoroughly dried under a stream of nitrogen. To deposit a compact layer of TiO2, a mildly acidic solution of titanium isopropoxide in isopropanol was spin-coated on the FTO substrate at 2000 rpm for 60 s, followed by heating at 500 °C for 0.5 h. CH3NH3PbI3 films were formed using a two-step procedure. A PbI2 precursor solution was prepared by dissolving 690 mg of PbI2 in a mixed solvent containing 1250 μl of DMF and 250 μl of DMSO and heated at 60 °C under magnetic stirring overnight. The PbI2 solution was spin-coated on a planar TiO2 film at 3000 rpm for 5 s and subsequently 6000 rpm for 5 s in a glovebox to form a PbI2 film. A solution of CH3NH3I in 2-propanol (30 mg ml−1) was loaded onto the as-cast PbI2 film for 1 min at room temperature, and then was spun at 5000 rpm for 30 s. The resultant precursor films were annealed at 80 °C, 100 °C, 120 °C, 140 °C, and 160 °C for 40 min, respectively. Afterward, a hole transport layer was deposited by spin-coating 30 μl of spiro-OMeTAD solution at 4000 rpm for 30 s. Finally, a 60 nm gold layer was thermally evaporated through a metal mask at a rate of ∼0.2 nm s−1, as a top electrode, which defines the active cell area of 0.12 cm2.


X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements were performed on a Rigaku-TTR3 X-ray diffractometer using Cu Kα radiation at a scanning rate of 10 deg min−1. A field-emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM, Helios NanoLab 600i) was employed to analyze the surface of the perovskite films with an electron beam accelerated to 5 kV and an in-lens detector. An ultraviolet-visible-near infrared spectrophotometer (UV-Vis-NIR, Cary-5E) was used to characterize the absorption spectra of the perovskite films. The photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) curves were recorded under 1 Sun light intensity (100 mW cm−2) with a Keithley model 2400 digital source meter and the measured conditions were 10 s delay time and 50 mV voltage steps in air. Impedance spectroscopy (IS) measurements were performed in the dark on a computer-controlled electrochemical workstation (CHI 760D) with the frequency range from 0.1 Hz to 1 MHz and the bias from 0.6 V to 1.0 V. The resulting Nyquist plots were fitted using ZView software. In order to improve the testing accuracy, the square aperture (0.09 cm2) in a dark-colored mask was aligned with the centre of the solar cells and closely back-contacted.


We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC; Grant No. U1532155, U1532156, and 11574316), the National Key Research and Development Program of China (Grant No. 2016YFA0401803), the Instrument Developing Project of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (Grant No. YZ201423), Hefei Science Center CAS (2016HSC-IU006), and the One Thousand Young Talents Program of China. We thank Shimao Wang from the Anhui Institute of Optics and Fine Mechanics, the Chinese Academy of Sciences, and Junwei Chen from the Institute of Plasma Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, for fruitful discussions and improvement of our manuscript.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7cp00563f
This journal is © the Owner Societies 2017