 DOI: 10.1039/C2JM30417A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 9077-9081


Hyun-Sub
Shim
,

Hyo Jung
Kim
,

Ji Whan
Kim
,

Sei-Yong
Kim
,

Won-Ik
Jeong
,

Tae-Min
Kim
 and 

Jang-Joo
Kim
*

WCU Hybrid Materials Program, Department of Materials Science and Engineering and the Center for Organic Light Emitting Diode, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-74, South Korea. E-mail: jjkim@snu.ac.kr

Received
20th January 2012
, Accepted 29th February 2012
First published on 1st March 2012
Enhancing the short circuit current (JSC) by extending the absorption to the near-infrared (NIR) spectrum, which has 50% of the total solar photon flux, is a remaining task in small molecular solar cells. Here, high efficiency NIR absorbing solar cells based on lead phthalocyanine (PbPc) are reported using copper iodide (CuI) as a templating layer to control the crystal structure of PbPc. Devices with CuI inserted between the ITO and PbPc layers exhibit a two times enhancement of the JSC compared to the case in the absence of the CuI layer. This is explained by the increase of crystallinity in the molecules grown on the CuI templating layer, which is investigated via an X-ray diffraction study. Moreover, fill factor is also enhanced to 0.63 from 0.57 due to low series resistance although the additional CuI layer is inserted between the ITO and the PbPc layer. As a result, the corrected power conversion efficiency of 2.5% was obtained, which is the highest one reported up to now among the PbPc based solar cells.

Organic photovoltaics (OPVs) show lower power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) compared with inorganic solar cells. One of the reasons is the limited absorption matching of active materials in OPVs with solar spectra. Over 60% of the total solar photon flux is located at wavelengths greater than 600 nm, with 50% in the red and near-infrared (NIR) spectra (600–1000 nm), where organic materials exhibit a low absorption coefficient, resulting in a low short circuit current (JSC). To overcome this problem, new organic materials sensitive to the NIR spectrum, or processing techniques for extending the absorption to the NIR spectrum, are required to efficiently convert the solar photon flux into current. In tandem applications, for instance, long-range absorption from wavelengths of 300 nm to 1000 nm can be achieved when one of the cells is sensitive to the NIR spectrum.

Lead phthalocyanine (PbPc) has been used in OPVs due to its high absorption coefficient in the NIR region, and it is also a good candidate for tandem applications. PbPc has two peaks in the red and NIR regions located at the wavelengths of 740 nm and 900 nm, related to the amorphous or the monoclinic phases, and the triclinic phases, respectively. Therefore, the formation of the triclinic phases and increasing the crystallinity are critical factors for PbPc to enhance its NIR absorption. Two methods have been reported to form the triclinic phase. One method is to control the deposition conditions such as the film thickness, evaporation rate, substrate temperature, and the materials of substrate or post-thermal annealing of the deposited film. This method was applied to PbPc based planar heterojunction solar cells to get the significantly enhanced JSC. Since a thick layer is required to increase the triclinic phase in the film by the method, a relatively thick (∼40 nm) layer was used in the solar cells. Unfortunately, the thick layer leads to the lowering of the fill factor (FF) probably due to the low hole mobility in the film. The other method to control the crystal structures is by using templating layers such as oxovanadium phthalocyanine (VOPc), sexithiophene (6T), para-sexiphenylene (p-6P), copper phthalocyanine (CuPc), zinc phthalocyanine (ZnPc), and pentacene between the ITO and PbPc layer. This method can enlarge JSC due to the structural change of the PbPc layer, resulting in the enhancement of the NIR absorption using a thin PbPc layer (∼20 to 30 nm). This method supplements the drawbacks of controlling the evaporation conditions. Especially for tandem applications, increasing the temperature for structural control can negatively affect previously evaporated layers, resulting in a degradation of the solar cell performance. Unfortunately, FF is reduced in the solar cells even with the thin PbPc layer probably due to the increased series resistance coming from the templating interfacial layers. Up to now there are few reports of increasing the JSC and FF at the same time using the methods to the best of our knowledge. We need a templating layer which can increase the triclinic phase in the film without increasing the series resistance to obtain enhanced JSC and FF at the same time.
Here, we report enhanced JSC and FF at the same time using copper iodide (CuI) as the interfacial layer between the ITO and the PbPc layer to control the crystal structures of PbPc and to form Ohmic contact with ITO in planar heterojunction solar cells with C60 used as an acceptor. CuI leads the PbPc layer to a more crystalline formation, so that JSC, FF, and power conversion efficiency (PCE) are remarkably enhanced, from 4.6 mA cm−2 to 8.9 mA cm−2 (solar spectrum corrected JSC of 8.7 mA cm−2), 0.57 to 0.63 and 1.3% to 2.6% (solar spectrum corrected PCE of 2.5%), respectively, without changing any fabricating conditions such as the film thickness, evaporation rate, substrate temperature, and additional processes. The corrected PCE is the highest one reported up to now among the PbPc based solar cells to the best of our knowledge. CuI was first introduced as a p-dopant in organic light emitting diodes by our group. Recently CuI was also used as an interfacial layer in planar heterojunction solar cells, leading to a significant enhancement of the solar cell performance. Planar-shaped copper phthalocyanine molecules have been used in the devices. However, CuI has not been applied in the non-planar-shaped phthalocyanines to control the crystal structure, especially, for the purpose of enhancing the NIR absorption.

To fabricate the devices discussed here, CuI, BCP (purchased from Lumtec), PbPc (purchased from Jilin OLED Optoelectronic Materials Co.), and C60 (purchased from SES Research) were used without performing any purification process before use. The devices have the structure of ITO/(CuI)/PbPc/C60/BCP/Al. All the materials were thermally evaporated under a base pressure of <10−7 Torr on ITO pre-coated glass substrates which were cleaned with acetone and isopropyl alcohol, and exposed to UV-O3 for 10 min before use. The evaporation rate was 1 Å s−1 for all the organic materials except CuI (0.1 Å s−1).


The UV-vis absorption spectra of the films were recorded with a VARIAN Cary 5000 UV-vis spectrophotometer. The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics were measured under AM 1.5G solar simulator illumination (Oriel, 91160), and recorded with a Keithley 237 source measurement unit. The light intensity was calibrated to the wavelength of 650 nm by using a standard Si-solar cell with KG-5 filter. In the IPCE set up, a 1000 W Xe lamp was used with a monochromator and its intensity was calibrated with a Si photodiode. The IPCE data were used to correct the measured JSC using the AM 1.5G solar spectrum. More than 4 devices with the cell area of 2 × 2 mm2 were averaged to calculate the cell performance. X-Ray diffraction (XRD) measurements were performed on a D8 Advance diffractometer (Bruker) using Cu Kα radiation. PbPc was deposited on the CuI film to investigate the structural changes of the PbPc. The reference data were used in the analysis of the peak position of the monoclinic and triclinic phases.



Fig. 1 shows the absorption coefficient of PbPc as a function of the PbPc thickness on the quartz substrate and on the CuI layer (0.5 nm) inserted between the quartz substrate and the PbPc layer. The absorption peaks are located at λ = 350 nm and 740 nm in the 20 nm thick PbPc film deposited on the substrate without the CuI layer. Above a thickness of 20 nm, the absorption shoulder appears at a wavelength of 900 nm, which increases with increasing PbPc thickness. This is due to the increase of the triclinic phase which is dependent on the thickness. In the CuI inserted film, however, the absorption shoulder at a wavelength of around 900 nm is dramatically enhanced more than twice compared to the film in the absence of CuI, although the thickness of the PbPc is only 20 nm. This indicates that only the 0.5 nm thick CuI affects the formation of the PbPc crystal structures regardless of the PbPc thickness.


Fig. 2(a) displays the J–V characteristics of an ITO/PbPc (20 nm)/C60 (40 nm)/BCP (8 nm)/Al (100 nm) PV cell, and an ITO/CuI (0.5 nm)/PbPc (20 nm)/C60 (40 nm)/BCP (8 nm)/Al (100 nm) PV cell. Table 1 summarizes the solar cell performance of JSC, open circuit voltage (VOC), FF, and PCE. The series resistance (RS) and parallel resistance (RP) obtained by fitting the dark J–V curve with the Shockley diode equation are also indicated. The PV cell without the CuI templating layer shows comparably high FF up to 0.57 which is consistent with previous reports. This result is originated from the low RS of 2.4 Ω cm2, indicating that good electric contact between the ITO and the PbPc layer is formed. Under the condition of AM 1.5G illumination, JSC is dramatically enhanced from 4.6 mA cm−2 to 8.6 mA cm−2 using CuI as the templating layer. FF is also enhanced from 0.57 to 0.62. Therefore, PCE significantly increases up to 2.5% in the CuI using device, from 1.3% in the absence of CuI (see Table 1). The enhanced FF indicates that the electrical contact between the ITO and the PbPc layer is not deteriorated by the CuI layer. The incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) of the OPV with and without the CuI templating layer is also measured as shown in Fig. 2(b). The IPCE remarkably increases from an excitation wavelength of 500 nm to 1100 nm. An IPCE result of 28.7% was obtained in the CuI-inserted OPV at the excitation wavelength of 732 nm, compared to 18.6% for the OPV without the CuI buffer layer. However, even more importantly, the IPCE at the excitation wavelength of 900 nm is 4.8 times higher, with an increase from 5.9% to 28.8%, when using the CuI templating layer. The IPCE data were used to correct JSC using the AM 1.5G solar spectrum. The resulting JSC of the CuI-inserted OPV was 8.4 mA cm−2, resulting in the corrected PCE of 2.4%. It is worth noting that the difference between the measured and corrected JSC is rather small in our measurements.
Measured PCE (%)
Corrected PCE (%)
Measured JSC (mA cm−2)
Corrected JSC (mA cm−2)
FF

V
OC (V)

R
S (Ω cm2)

R
P (× 105 Ω cm2)
PbPc (20)
1.34 ± 0.01
1.41
4.57 ± 0.06
4.86
0.57
0.51
2.40
5.16
CuI (0.5)–PbPc (20)
2.54 ± 0.04
2.44
8.61 ± 0.14
8.39
0.62
0.47
2.40
7.32
CuI (0.5)–PbPc (30)
2.58 ± 0.02
2.51
8.85 ± 0.04
8.67
0.63
0.46
1.94
10.94
The performance of OPV cells depends on the morphology and crystalline structure of the constituent materials even in small molecule based solar cells. In order to investigate the crystalline phase of PbPc deposited on the CuI templating layer, XRD measurements were performed as shown in Fig. 3. Vasseur et al. showed that the diffraction peak positions of 12.12°, 12.35°, and 12.52° represent the triclinic (020), triclinic (11), and monoclinic (320) peaks, respectively. Moreover, 16.49°, 16.52°, and 16.64° correspond to the triclinic structures whose reflection planes are (11), (10), and (21), respectively. All the films have no diffraction peaks under 11°, and over 18°. The low intense diffraction peak is measured at 12.47° in the 20 nm thick film on ITO pre-coated glass, indicating that the film is composed of an amorphous phase and a monoclinic phase. In contrast, an additional diffraction peak is obtained at 16.4° when the thickness of the PbPc on ITO pre-coated glass is 50 nm, implying that a triclinic phase is additionally formed. This is consistent with the previously reported result that the portion of triclinic increases with increasing thickness in the PbPc films. However, the 20 nm thick PbPc film grown on the CuI layer shows no peak at around 16.4°. All of the films have a diffraction peak at around 12.45°, representing the triclinic phase with the reflection plane of (11) or the monoclinic phase with the reflection plane of (320). In this case, it is difficult to distinguish between the monoclinic and triclinic phases due to the close peak positions. However, it is certain that the CuI acts as a template for the PbPc molecules so that they have a preferred orientation. Most importantly, the full width at half-maximum (FWHM) values are 1.03°, 0.72°, and 0.73°, when the thicknesses of the PbPc layer are 20 nm and 50 nm on ITO pre-coated glass, and 20 nm on CuI, corresponding to crystallite sizes of 7.7 nm, 11.01 nm, and 10.82 nm, respectively. Moreover, the diffraction peak intensity is the highest in the CuI inserted film. These facts suggest that the templating CuI layer leads PbPc molecules to form long-range ordering of high crystallinity.
To investigate the correlation between the crystallinity and the exciton diffusion length (LD), the transfer matrix method was used to calculate LD, extracted from the measured IPCE data shown in Fig. 4. In this calculation, we referred to the refractive index of the 60 nm thick PbPc film from the literature for the 20 nm thick PbPc film deposited on the 0.5 nm thick CuI film because the overall absorption spectrum is similar. From the simulation, LD increases from 6.2 nm to 8.8 nm when the CuI templating layer is inserted, implying that LD increases with increasing crystalline order and size which is consistent with previous reports. Therefore, the increase of LD leads to the enhancement of JSC. The exciton diffusion length also increased with increasing the thickness of the PbPc layer in the PbPc–C60 based planar heterojunction solar cells without CuI. However, the devices showed lower FFs than the devices in this study, probably due to the existence of the thin monoclinic or amorphous layer near the ITO substrate.
The enhanced FF can be explained by the increase of JSC and the low series resistance (RS). When the CuI templating layer is inserted, RS and RP are not significantly changed (see Table 1). It means that the contact resistance between the ITO and the organic layer is still low although the additional layer is inserted between the ITO and the PbPc layer. Therefore, the slope of the J–V curve is maintained whether or not the CuI templating layer is inserted, indicating that increasing JSC leads the J–V curve to the parallel translation by the amount of photocurrent without any change of the slope in the J–V curve, resulting in the increase of FF.
To investigate the effect of the thickness on the OPV performances, the PbPc thickness is varied from 20 nm to 50 nm in increasing steps of 10 nm, as shown in Fig. 5. Four cells were measured, and the average values with the respective standard deviations are indicated for each device. From Fig. 5(a), VOC does not significantly change with increasing PbPc thickness because it is more related to the gap between the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) level of the donor and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) level of the acceptor. From Fig. 5(b), FF also does not change significantly; this is because there is no change in the contact resistance. However, JSC increases up to 8.9 mA cm−2 when the PbPc thickness is changed from 20 nm to 30 nm (see Table 1), and it decreases as the thickness of the PbPc layer increases further. Therefore, the PCE is maximized when the PbPc thickness is 30 nm.

Fig. 6 displays the IPCE spectrum as a function of the PbPc thickness. In the measurement of the IPCE, the best performing solar cells were used among the four devices. There is no certain difference in the whole wavelength when the PbPc thickness is changed from 20 nm to 30 nm. Further increase of the PbPc thickness from 30 nm reduces the IPCE in the wavelength region corresponding to the PbPc absorption. This can be explained by the decreasing electric field within the exciton diffusion length from the PbPc–C60 interface, resulting in the reduced charge generation efficiency at the interface.

In summary, we have demonstrated remarkable enhancement of the NIR absorption by using a CuI templating layer in PbPc-based organic solar cells. The IPCE result was 4.8 times higher, from 5.9% to 28.8% at the excitation wavelength of 900 nm, when using the CuI templating layer. This is due to the fact that CuI leads the PbPc molecules to form a more crystalline structure with a preferred orientation. Furthermore the contact resistance between the ITO and the organic layer is still low although the additional CuI layer is inserted between the ITO and the PbPc layer, which resulted in an increase of JSC from 4.6 mA cm−2 to 8.9 mA cm−2, FF from 0.57 to 0.63, and PCE from 1.3% to 2.6% when the thickness of PbPc was 30 nm deposited on the 0.5 nm thick CuI, when compared with the device in the absence of CuI. These results can be applied to tandem structures for the efficient use of the solar photon flux for light with a broad range of wavelengths.


This work was supported by the New & Renewable Energy Technology Development Program of the Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning (KETEP) grant funded by the Korea government Ministry of Knowledge Economy (no. 20113020010070), and by WCU (World Class University) project through National Research Foundation of Korea, funded by the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology (R31-2008-000-10075-0), and RIAM (Research Institute of Advanced Materials).


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012