 DOI: 10.1039/D0NR00459F
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 8425-8431


Zhou
Liu
,

Longlong
Wu
,

Xiao
Wang
,

Qiaofei
Xu
,

Youdi
Hu
,

Ke
Meng
* and 

Gang
Chen
*

School of Physical Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai, 201210, China. E-mail: gchen@shanghaitech.edu.cn; mengke@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility, Shanghai Institute of Applied Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, 201204, China

Received
16th January 2020
, Accepted 27th March 2020
First published on 27th March 2020
Colorful solar cells have been much sought after because they can generate electricity and concurrently satisfy ornamentation purposes. Owing to their outstanding power conversion efficiency and flexibility in processing, perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have the great potential to become both efficient and aesthetically appealing. Here, we specially devise and fabricate two novel electron transport layers (ETLs) for PSCs with two-dimensional (2D) photonic crystal structures, namely the 2D inverse opal (IO) structured SnO2 (IOS) and SnO2–TiO2 composite (IOST), using the template-assisted spin-coating method. The synergistic structure and material modifications to the ETLs lead to a number of unique features, including the remarkable electron transfer ability, vivid colors and good protection to the infiltrated perovskite films. Furthermore, the IOS and IOST ETLs are effectively incorporated into the CH3NH3PbI3-based PSC devices that deliver the best efficiency of 16.8% with structural colors.

Emerging as a disruptive photovoltaic technology, metal halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have attracted enormous attention in recent years. Significant progresses have been made in the advancement of device power conversion efficiency (PCE) by introducing new materials and designs. In general, a typical PSC device contains a transparent conductive substrate, an electron transport layer (ETL), an optional mesoscopic layer, a perovskite layer, a hole transport layer (HTL), and a metal cathode. The perovskite film functionalizes as the light absorber that generates electron–hole pairs upon illumination, while ETL and HTL extract and transport the photon-induced charge carriers separately to external terminals. As an indispensable component of PSCs, the charge separation and transportation properties of ETL have profound influences on the overall performance of PSCs. Likewise, carefully selecting ETL materials and rationally designing its structures are important for improving PSC efficiencies and hold the potential to introduce new functionality.

So far, TiO2 is the most widely adopted material for ETLs. Most of the PSC devices employ TiO2 as ETL materials in view of its chronical and successful implementation in other photovoltaic technologies. Recently, SnO2 has emerged as an alternative ETL material for PSCs with promising performances. SnO2 has a bandgap above 3.6 eV and a lower conduction band edge (vs. vacuum) than TiO2, which facilitates electron transfer from perovskites. In fact, bulk SnO2 has high electron mobility up to 240 cm2 V−1 s−1, making it a superior charge mediator. Moreover, it has been reported that the TiO2 and SnO2 composite ETL possesses gradient energy levels which would further enhance the electron transfer and transport abilities. In addition, structural engineering of ETLs at nanometer scale could bring in tailored properties and likely new features. For examples, the incorporations of nanotubes, nanorods and nanofibers in ETLs effectively facilitate electron transportation. Inverse opal (IO) structures, the replicas of artificial opals, can affect light propagation and alter the optical properties of thin films. It is thus rational to expect that ETLs casted into IO structures would induce novel optical properties. In fact, it is inspiring that highly efficient PSCs with tunable structural color were obtained by introducing a porous SiO2 photonic crystal scaffold. Furthermore, the IO-structured ETLs would possess all the merits of an IO framework, such as large surface areas, short diffusion lengths and fast transport channels for charge carriers, that could improve their electrical properties. For instance, it is previously demonstrated that the TiO2 based mesoscopic film with a multilayer IO structure can act as an effective electron transporter in PSCs.
Herein, we report the fabrication of two IO-structured ETLs, including IO SnO2 (IOS) and IO SnO2–TiO2 composite (IOST), and their implementation in PSC devices. The IO ETLs exhibit 2D hexagonal superlattice structures with both microscopic and macroscopic ordering, as confirmed by scanning electron microscope (SEM) and grazing-incidence small-angle X-ray scattering (GISAXS). The ordered IO nanostructures endow the ETLs with vivid colors, which is rationalized by the variable-angle reflection spectroscopy study. The chemical compositions and crystal structures of the IO ETLs are analyzed by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and grazing-incidence X-ray diffraction (GI-XRD). By infiltrating them with CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite, the IO ETLs demonstrate the remarkable electron transport ability and the capability to preserve perovskite materials. The IOS and IOST ETLs are subsequently integrated into the CH3NH3PbI3-based PSCs, resulting in efficient devices with fascinating structural colors.

The 550 nm diameter polystyrene microspheres (PS-MSs) were assembled on the fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) substrates using the gas–liquid–solid interface self-assembly method. Specifically, a 1.5 wt% 550 nm PS-MS solution in water/ethanol (volume ratio 6:4) was slowly added into an 8 cm diameter Petri dish. Several drops of 2 wt% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) aqueous solution were then added into the dish to induce the formation of ordered monolayers on the air–water interface. The ordered templates were subsequently formed by transferring the PS-MS monolayer from the water surface onto the FTO substrates. To prepare the IOS film, the PS-MS template was firstly infiltrated with 0.4 M SnCl4·5H2O ethanol solution by spin-coating at 4000 rpm for 10 s, followed by sintering at 100 °C for 5 min to remove residual ethanol. This spin-coating/drying process was repeated for four times to ensure the good filling of the voids in the PS-MS template by the SnO2 precursors. The substrates were subsequently annealed at 500 °C for 2 h for SnO2 crystallization and PS removal. To prepare the IOST film, an additional TiO2 layer was deposited on the IOS films by spray pyrolysis. The spray pyrolysis of TiO2 layer was conducted employing precursor solution containing 0.6 ml titanium diisopropoxidebis (acetylacetonate) (75 wt% in IPA) in 9 ml ethanol and 0.4 ml acetylacetone, with oxygen as carrier gas at 450 °C.


The perovskite films were prepared using the ‘solvent engineering’ spin-coating method. Briefly, the mixture of 600 mg of PbI2, 207 mg of MAI, 200 μL of DMSO and 800 μL of DMF was prepared at room temperature and stirred for 1 h. The completely dissolved precursor solution was spin-coated on the IO substrates at 5000 rpm for 30 s, when 0.3 mL of chlorobenzene was dripped on the rotating substrate 20 s before the end of the progress. The substrates were then annealed at 105 °C for 10 min for perovskite crystallization. The spiro-OMeTAD layer was deposited on top of the perovskite film by spin-coating the precursor solution at 2000 rpm for 20 s. The solution was prepared by dissolving 72.3 mg of spiro-MeOTAD, 9.1 mg of Li-TFSI dissolved in 17.5 μL ACN and 28.8 μL of tBP in 1 ml chlorobenzene. The 60 nm Ag layer was then deposited using a thermal evaporator at the rate of 0.5 Å s−1.


The SEM images of the PS-MS templates, the IOS and IOST films and the IOST based solar cells were recorded using a Nova NanoSEM 450 (FEI) scanning electron microscope. Electron dispersed X-ray scattering spectra were obtained using an Oxford EDX integrated in the FEI SEM system. Grazing-incidence small-angle X-ray scattering (GISAXS) measurements on the PS-MS templates and the IOS and IOST films were conducted using an Xeuss 2.0 system with the X-ray beam size of 100 × 100 μm. The scattering signals from the samples were collected using a Pilatus 300k detector at a distance of 6400 mm. The GI-XRD data of the IOS and IOST films were recorded at the BL14B1 beamline of Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility (SSRF). The incident photon (10 keV, 1.2398 Å) was illuminated on the sample and the diffraction signals were recorded employing a Mar225 CCD detector. The distance from the sample to the detector was 382 mm. The XRD patterns for tracing the degradation of the perovskites on IO ETLs were recorded using a Bruker D2 PHASER X-ray diffractometer; the samples were stored in 50–60% relative humidity atmosphere during the whole experiment. The XPS of IO-ETLs was realized using an ESCALAB 250Xi X-ray photoelectron spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) with Al Kα X-ray source. The radiation of the ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) was generated by a He-gas discharge lamp (He I α at 21.22 eV). The electron binding energy scale was calibrated using the Fermi edge of clean gold. The UV-vis absorption spectra of the IOST and IOS films on glass substrates were measured by UV-vis spectrophotometer (Agilent cary5000). The J–V measurement was performed employing the solar simulator (SS-F5-3A, Enlitech) along with AM 1.5G spectra whose intensity was calibrated by the certified standard silicon solar cell (SRC-2020, Enlitech) at 100 mw cm−2. Reverse scan direction and 30 mV s−1 scan rate were employed for the device maximized PCE characterization. The scan direction and scan rate were varied for hysteresis analysis. The cells were covered with a shadow mask having an aperture area of 0.052 cm2. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) data were obtained by using the solar-cell spectral-response measurement system (QE-R, Enlitech).


A schematic illustration of the fabrication process of IO ETLs is shown in Fig. 1a. The IOS film was fabricated using the template-assisted spin-coating method. Specifically, the monolayer PS-MS template was firstly self-assembled onto the FTO substrate (step I). Then, the SnO2 precursor, SnCl4 ethanol solution, was infiltrated into the voids of the PS-MS template by spin-coating (step II). Subsequently, the IOS film was formed by annealing it at 500 °C for SnO2 crystallization and PS-MS removal (step III). To prepare the IOST film, an additional thin layer of TiO2 was coated onto the IOS film by the spray pyrolysis method (step IV). As shown in Fig. 1b, the template contains the 2D hexagonal close-packed (hcp) PS-MSs of 550 nm in diameter. Fig. 1c presents the top-view and cross-sectional SEM images of the large-area ordered IOS film on the FTO substrate. The IOS film shows the 2D hexagonal honeycomb-like lattice with the void size of ∼500 nm and the wall thickness of ∼50 nm, producing the pattern with the lattice spacing of around 550 nm. The computed Fourier transform patterns of the SEM images (Fig. 1b–d) are shown in Fig. S1, which further ascertains the hcp symmetry of the IO ETLs with a repetitive unit of 550 nm. It is noteworthy that the precursor concentration and spin speed should be carefully adjusted to obtain high-quality IOS films. As shown in Fig. S2, for a given precursor concentration, low spin speed causes large crystals on top of the films, while high spin speed results in noncontinuous IO films. The optimal precursor concentration and spin speed are determined to be 0.4 M and 5000 rpm, respectively. In addition, the annealing process also profoundly affects the quality of the resultant IOS films. A slow ramp in temperature (1 °C min−1) is required since rapid heating up destroys the interconnected nanostructures (Fig. S3). The SEM images of the IOST film are presented in Fig. 1d. Despite the coating of the TiO2 overlayer as confirmed by the energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) mapping (inset of Fig. 1d), the IOST film inherits the ordered hexagonal structure of IOS. The void diameter and the well thickness are nearly unchanged due to the small thickness of the TiO2 overlayer. The cross-sectional image of the IOST film further reveals its ordered structure and height of ∼250 nm which is about half of the diameter of the PS-MSs employed. In fact, using templates containing different PS-MS sizes enables fine control of the void size and wall thickness of the resultant IO films. Here, the thickness of the IO ETLs is carefully chosen to suit the subsequent perovskite infiltration and coating processes.

It is well known that IO photonic crystals show structural colors. We also find that the IOS and IOST films exhibit vivid colors at various viewing angles (Fig. 2a). Notably, the vibrant structural color is a good indicator of the large-scale ordering of the IO structures in the ETLs. We thus employ the grazing-incidence small-angle X-ray scattering (GISAXS) technique to investigate the unique structure of the IO ETLs. In a GISAXS experiment, the incident X-ray beam is scattered off the substrate-supported thin film which produces Bragg diffraction rods characteristic of the lattice spacing and symmetry of the sample. The black line in Fig. 2b shows the one-dimensional scattering curve of the IOST film extracted from its 2D GISAXS pattern (the PS template and the IOS film show the similar GISAXS results as given in Fig. S4). By fitting the Bragg scattering profile, the lattice spacing of the IOST film is determined to be 550 nm which is in high accordance with the value obtained from the SEM measurements. The simulated pattern (red lines in Fig. 2b) matches well with the experimental scattering curve, confirming the large-scale ordering of the IOST film. The ability to prepare large device-size ordered IO ETLs is crucial for their application in PSCs. Variable-angle reflection spectroscopy is introduced to further analyze the color spectra of the IO ETLs. The reflection geometry is shown schematically in Fig. 2c. For the IOS film (Fig. 2d), four reflection peaks in the wavelength range between 450 and 900 nm are observed, which shift to longer wavelengths as the incident angle, θ, decreases. For the IOST film (Fig. 2e), although it exhibits more complex spectral features than the IOS film, its main reflection peaks also show redshift as the incident angle decreases. The shifts of the reflection peaks in the visible region can well explain the distinct colors of the IO ETLs exhibiting at different viewing angles.
The chemical compositions and surface states of the IO ETLs are investigated by XPS. Fig. S5a presents the XPS survey spectrum of the IOS film, which indicates the existence of the Sn and O elements. The high-resolution XPS spectrum in the Sn 3d region (Fig. 3a) reveals two peaks with the binding energies of 487.1 and 495.5 eV which correspond to the Sn 3d5/2 and 3d3/2 orbits and is attributed to Sn4+ in SnO2. While the peak centered at 530.1 eV in Fig. 3b is ascribed to Sn–O bonding in SnO2. Fig. S5b shows the XPS survey spectrum of the IOST film with two distinct peaks representing the Ti and O elements. The XPS spectrum in Fig. 3c shows the peaks at the binding energies of 459.2 eV and 465.1 eV and the satellite peak at the binding energy of 472.6 eV. They can be ascribed to the Ti 2p3/2 and 2p1/2 orbits, indicating the presence of Ti4+. For the O element, the main peak at the binding energy of 529.7 eV (Fig. 3d) is attributed to the O 1s orbit, originating from the O2− state in TiO2, while the minor peak at 531.4 eV could be attributed to the O2− state in –OH. It is previously reported that the –OH groups act as donor impurities, which can increase electron concentrations and cause energy level shifts in metal oxides. The presence of –OH in the IOST film could thus improve its electronic properties. Notably, the peak corresponding to the Sn 3d orbit at ∼496 eV in the XPS spectrum of IOST is very weak (Fig. S5b and c), which confirms the complete coverage of the TiO2 overlayer on the IOS film. The TiO2 overlayer could act as a blocking layer preventing charge carrier recombination as well as an intermediate layer for efficient charge transfer.
The crystal structures of the IOS and IOST films are characterized by the XRD technique. Due to their small thicknesses, the traditional XRD method can barely detect any distinct Bragg peak, so the GI-XRD technique with better sensitivity for thin films is employed. Fig. 4a and b present the GI-XRD images of the IOS and IOST films deposited on FTO substrates and the integrated XRD patterns are shown in Fig. 4c. The main peaks from the IOS film centered at 26.5, 33.7, 37.8, 51.6, 54.5 and 61.6° (black line in Fig. 4c) can be well indexed to the diffraction peaks of the cassiterite SnO2 (PDF 77-0452). The XRD pattern of the IOST film (red line in Fig. 4c) is overall similar to that of the IOS film except a weak peak centered at 24.2° which is attributed to the anatase TiO2 overlayer. The GI-XRD results are consistent with those obtained from the EDS and XPS studies.
It has been widely reported that the structure and composition modifications on ETLs will give rise to novel properties. The unique architecture of the IO ETLs could be beneficial to device performances and bring in additional functionality. Therefore, the influence of the various substrates on the morphology of the deposited perovskite films has been studied. The top-view and cross-sectional SEM images of the perovskite films deposited on the FTO, IOS and IOST substrates are separately presented in Fig. S6. It is evident that the substrates with the IO structures have larger average perovskite grain sizes, which would benefit their photovoltaic applications. The variation in the perovskite film morphology may originate from the different wettability of the substrates which alters the perovskite crystallization kinetics. The photoluminescence (PL) spectra are further recorded and compared for the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite films deposited on the FTO, IOS and IOST substrates, to investigate the charge transfer process at the interface. As shown in Fig. 5a, all three samples show the emission peaks centered at the wavelength of 773 nm and their PL intensities follow the order of IOST < IOS < FTO. As is well known, efficient charge transfer from perovskite to ETL would quench PL and lead to reduced intensities. The lower PL intensities for the perovskite films deposited on the IOS and IOST substrates manifest their remarkable electron transfer abilities, which could be attributed to the large surface area of the IO structure and the favorable energy level alignment of the employed materials.
The stability issue of PSCs is one of the major obstacles for their commercial applications. The widely adopted CH3NH3PbI3 material degrades into PbI2 upon exposure to moisture or heat stresses. We investigate the influence of the IO ETLs on the stability of the incorporated perovskite films by tracking their XRD patterns. Two samples are prepared for this purpose: one is the perovskite film deposited on IOST, the other is on the thin TiO2 coated FTO substrate (FTO/TiO2) as a reference. The XRD pattern evolutions of the samples over the aging time are shown in Fig. 5b. The spectra of the as-prepared perovskite films on both substrates show diffraction peaks centered at 14.1°, representing the pure phase of CH3NH3PbI3. After 10 days of aging (relative humidity 50–60%), the diffraction peak centered at 12.6° emerges in the XRD pattern of the sample on the FTO/TiO2 substrate, indicating the formation of PbI2. The intensity of the PbI2 peak increases after 40 days due to further degradation of the perovskite film. For the sample deposited on IOST, no obvious peak of PbI2 is observed for 10 days and only a weak peak emerges after 40 days. We also perform the device stability test which shows the IOST based device retain 95% of its initial efficiency under illumination in N2 atmosphere (Fig. S7). These results demonstrate the IO ETL can provide good protection to the infiltrated perovskite film and decelerate its degradation process. It is noteworthy that previous studies employed IO-TiO2 ETLs could also enhance the stability of the infiltrated perovskite.
Encouraged by these unique features, we consequently employ the IO ETLs in the PSC devices with the architecture of FTO/IOS (IOST)/CH3NH3PbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD/Ag. Fig. 6a and b show the cross-sectional SEM image of the typical IOST based PSC device and the corresponding EDS mapping. The thickness of the IO ETL-perovskite composite film is around 460 nm. A perovskite overlayer of ∼210 nm exists on top of the 250 nm thick IOST, ensuring sufficient light absorption. The EDS mapping clearly demonstrates the infiltration of the perovskite material into the voids of the IO ETL and the intimate contact is beneficial for efficient electron transfer at the perovskite/ETL interface. Fig. 6c shows the J–V characteristics of the champion PSCs based on the IOS and IOST ETLs. The PCE of the best IOS based PSC is 10.2% with an open circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.98 V, a short circuit current (Jsc) of 20.2 mA cm−2 and a fill factor (FF) of 51%. The device based on IOST exhibits the exceptional PCE of 16.8% with Voc of 1.09 V, Jsc of 20.3 mA cm−2, and FF of 75%. The statistical PCE data of 15 cells based on IOST is presented in Fig. S8, which shows a narrow distribution, indicating good reproducibility of the results. To further confirm the validity of the J–V results, we perform J–V tests in different scan directions and rates and evaluate the stabilized device power output as given in Fig. S9–11. The device based on IOST exhibits PCE of 15.4% in forward scan and a stabilized PCE of 15.9%. No obvious change in the cell performance is observed for different scan rates. We also show the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectrum and the integrated Jsc for the PSC employing IOS and IOST in Fig. 6d. The Jsc of the PSCs based on two IO ETLs are almost identical and the PCE improvement of the IOST based device mainly originates from the higher Voc and FF. As is known, Voc is a function of Jsc and the charge recombination current density (J0), , where A is the ideal factor of a cell, Kb is the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature and e is the elementary charge. Considering the similar Jsc values of the two devices, the lower Voc of the IOS based PSC is ascribed to the higher J0 value, indicating more charge carrier recombination due to the limited filling of SnO2 at the bottom of the IOS film. In the IOST based device, the addition of the TiO2 overlayer can prevent the direct contact between the FTO substrate and perovskite film, which effectively reduces the electron–hole recombination, leading to J0 reduction and Voc and FF improvements. Using UPS and UV-vis absorption spectroscopy, we can estimate the energy levels and construct the band diagrams for the two IO ETLs. As shown in Fig. S12, the IOST possesses a more favorable conduction band edge which can facilitate charge transfer from perovskite and suppress charge recombination. The superiority of the IOST is further confirmed by the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (Fig. S13), where the IOST based device shows much smaller charge transfer resistance as compared to that of the IOS based cell. Notably, like the 2D IO films, the PSC devices employing IOS and IOST ETLs also exhibit vivid structural colors. The images of the IOST based perovskite film taken at different viewing angles are shown in Fig. 6e. We further verify that the color variation is originated from the IO structure rather than the thin film effect as shown by the distinct variable-angle reflection spectra in Fig. S14. The color hue of the perovskite film based on IOST is also calculated by the reflectance spectra and displayed on the CIE (Comission Internationale de l’éclairage) 1931 chromaticity diagram as shown in Fig. S15. The results further confirm the vivid color of the film at various viewing angles, which is in good accordance with the digital photos in Fig. 6e. The unique 2D photonic crystal structure of the IO ETLs can simultaneously refine the optical and electrical properties of devices, allowing the IOST based PSC to attain encouraging PCE for solar cells with structural colors.

In summary, we have successfully prepared two 2D IO-structured photonic crystals, namely IOS and IOST, using the template-assisted spin-coating method. The IO ETLs possess large-scale 2D hexagonal superlattice structures and exhibit vivid structural colors at various viewing angles. The distinctive material and structure configurations endow the IO ETLs with exceptional charge transfer abilities and offer protection to the infiltrated perovskites. The IOS and IOST ETLs are further integrated into the CH3NH3PbI3-based PSCs which deliver PCEs of 10.2% and 16.8% with enchanting colors. The outperformance of the IOST ETL is attributed to the reduced charge recombination at the perovskite/ETL interface. The unique architectures of the IO ETLs have an excellent perspective in fabricating multifunctional PSCs.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (U1632265, 11375256), the Science and Technology Commission of Shanghai Municipality (14JC1493300), and the Shanghai Sailing Program (17YF1412000). The authors thank beamline BL14B1 at Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility (SSRF) for providing the beam time.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0nr00459f
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020