 DOI: 10.1039/C5NJ00551E
(Paper)
New J. Chem., 2015, 39, 7961-7970


Ahmad
Umar
*,

Mohammad Shaheer
Akhtar
,

Mohammed Sultan
Al-Assiri
,

Ali
Al-Hajry
,

Hamed
Algarni
,

Vagner Romito
de Mendonça
,

Yoshitake
Masuda
,

Sang Hoon
Kim
 and 

Qazi Inamur
Rahman


Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Sciences and Arts, Najran University, Najran University, P. O. Box 1988, Najran, 11001, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. E-mail: ahmadumar786@gmail.com; Fax: +966-7-5442-135; Tel: +966-534-574-597

Promising Centre for Sensors and Electronic Devices (PCSED), Najran University, P. O. Box 1988, Najran, 11001, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia

New and Renewable Energy Materials Development Center (New REC), Chonbuk National University, South Korea

Department of Physics, Faculty of Sciences and Arts, Najran University, Najran University, P. O. Box 1988, Najran, 11001, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia

Department of Physics, Faculty of Science, King Khalid University, P. O. Box 9004, Abha, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia

Federal Institute of Education, Science and Technology of São Paulo, 18208-000, Itapetininga-SP, Brazil

National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), 2266-98 Anagahora, Shimoshidami, Moriyama-ku, Nagoya 463-8560, Japan

Department of Applied Science, Jahangirabad Institute of Technology, Barabanki-225203, India

Received
(in Montpellier, France)
5th March 2015
, Accepted 27th July 2015
First published on 28th July 2015
This paper reports a facile low temperature hydrothermal process to grow highly porous ZnO nanosheets, self-assembled in rosette-like morphology, over the transparent indium tin oxide (ITO) glass substrate for dye-sensitized solar cell application. The prepared porous nanosheets were examined in detail using several techniques to understand the morphological, structural, compositional, optical and photovoltaic properties. The detailed morphological investigations reveal that the prepared nanosheets are made by the accumulation of small ZnO nanoparticles with typical diameters of 28 ± 3 nm. A systematic growth process to prepare such ZnO nanosheets is also discussed in terms of chemical reactions involved. The prepared nanosheets possess the stoichiometric elemental ratios of Zn and oxygen and exhibiting good crystallinity and wurtzite hexagonal phase along with good optical properties. Furthermore, the prepared ZnO nanosheets on ITO substrates were directly utilized as a photo-anode to fabricate an efficient dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC), which demonstrated a reasonable light-to-electricity conversion efficiency of ∼3.4% with high short circuit current (JSC) of 9.45 mA cm−2, open circuit voltage (VOC) of 0.654 and fill factor of 0.55. The obtained JSC and the performance of the fabricated DSSC are attributed to the high surface to volume ratio of porous ZnO nanosheets, which delivers the high light harvesting efficiency.

A relatively low cost photo-electrochemical solar cell device, namely, a dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC), is presumed to be the promising alternative to the conventional silicon-based solar cell. After the first report in 1991, extensive efforts have been made to enhance the solar-to-electricity conversion efficiencies of DSSCs. TiO2-based DSSCs fabricated by Gratzel's group with over 12% conversion efficiencies, close to that for the conventional solar cells, are reported in the literature. Typically, the DSSCs are composed of three major components: a photoanode, charge-transporting redox electrolyte and metal-coated counter electrode. The choice of photoanode material is one of the most important factors in fabricating a highly efficient DSSC; therefore, generally metal oxides and metal-based semiconductor materials were used as efficient anode materials for DSSCs. In DSSCs, the dye molecules absorb sunlight and lead to photoexcitation in which the photoexcited electrons inject into the metal oxide and quickly collect at the photoanode. There are several metal oxide semiconductor nanomaterials, such as TiO2, SnO2, ZnO, and Nb2O5, which have been used as photoanode materials to fabricate DSSCs. It has been observed that the sunlight-to-electricity conversion efficiencies of the DSSCs also depend upon the morphological, structural and optical properties of the photoanode materials. Few reports demonstrated the mechanistic studies of DSSCs based on the specific characteristics of the photoanode (TiO2) materials.

Among various photoanode materials, the II–VI n-type semiconductor ZnO nanomaterials could be considered as important potential photoanode materials to fabricate DSSCs because of their environmentally benign nature, low-cost, high purity and crystalline growth and the vast diversity in the morphologies. Furthermore, due to several interesting properties, such as the wide band gap (3.37 eV at 300 K), high exciton binding energy (60 meV), biocompatibility, and piezoelectricity, ZnO is considered as one of most important multifunctional nanomaterials for a variety of applications, including sensors, actuators, nanoelectronics, optoelectronics, nanogenerators, cancer therapy and detection, DSSCs, electroluminescent and photoluminescent devices.
Including other applications, ZnO is considered as a promising photoanode material to fabricate efficient DSSCs as it possesses some specific properties comparable to TiO2, which exhibited the highest light-to-electricity conversion efficiency for a DSSC. There are several reports in the literature, which demonstrate the successful use of ZnO nanomaterials as photoanode materials for the fabrication of DSSCs. ZnO nanorod-based DSSCs were fabricated by Hsu et al. who reported low light-to-electricity conversion efficiency of 0.22%. Suh et al. fabricated branched ZnO nanowire-based DSSCs with conversion efficiencies of ∼0.46%, which were prepared by a high temperature thermal evaporation process. Similarly, Baxter et al. fabricated branched ZnO nanowire-based DSSCs with a light-to-electricity conversion efficiency of 0.5%. In another report, Cheng et al. demonstrated the fabrication and characterization of hydrothermally grown ZnO nanorod-based DSSCs with a conversion efficiency of 0.6%. Law et al. further reported ZnO nanorod/nanowire-based DSSCs, which revealed a relatively good efficiency of 1.5%. Hydrothermally grown ZnO nanoparticle-based DSSCs with conversion efficiencies of ∼1.55% were reported by Suliman et al. Umar et al. demonstrated ZnO nanorod-based photoanodes for DSSCs and achieved a light-to-electricity conversion efficiency of 1.86%. Flower-shaped ZnO nanostructures were also used as a photoanode material to fabricate DSSCs and exhibited light-to-electricity conversion efficiencies of ∼1.9%. Even though several reports are available regarding the use of ZnO nanomaterials as photoanode materials for DSSCs still there are huge concerns for the selection of proper morphologies to fabricate efficient DSSCs with better light-to-electricity conversion efficiencies. In this regard, it is expected that the use of 2D ZnO nanostructures such nanosheets may enhance the conversion efficiencies for the fabricated DSSCs.
This paper reports the facile growth and detailed characterizations of highly porous 2D ZnO nanosheets assembled in rosette-like morphologies for dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC) applications. Interestingly, the porous nanosheets were grown directly on transparent conducting glass (TCO) substrate thus avoiding the complexity of DSSC fabrications such as film formation on TCO substrates and adhesion issues. Therefore, this study presents a simple and effective way to prepare highly porous ZnO nanosheets assembled in rosette-like morphologies for DSSC applications.

Highly porous ZnO nanosheets assembled in rosette-like morphology thin films were grown by a hydrothermal process directly on TCO substrate. In a typical reaction process, the precursor solution was prepared by mixing the aqueous solution of 0.05 M zinc nitrate hexahydrate (Zn(NO3)2·6H2O, Sigma-Aldrich) with 0.05 M liquid ammonia, both prepared in 75 mL DI water. Afterwards, 0.11 g of polyethylene glycol (Sigma-Aldrich, MW = 100000) was added to the precursor solution, in which the PEG amount was fixed at 1/10 corresponding to the zinc precursor. The resultant solution (75 mL) was stirred for 30 min and then transferred to a Teflon beaker. A few cleaned indium tin oxide (ITO) substrates (1.5 × 1.5 cm) were placed at the bottom of a Teflon beaker, which was finally placed in the Teflon-lined stainless steel autoclave, tightly sealed and heated up to 150 °C for 8 h. After completing the reaction, the autoclave was naturally cooled to room-temperature and it was observed that the ITO substrates were covered with tightly attached white colored powders. The substrates were washed with DI water and ethanol and then annealed at 250 °C for 2 h to remove the carbon impurities. Finally, the prepared substrates were examined in detail in terms of their morphological, structural, compositional, optical and photovoltaic properties.


The deposited highly porous ZnO nanosheets assembled in rosette-like morphologies were characterized by several techniques. The morphologies were investigated by field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM; JEOL-JSM-7600F) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM; JEOL-JEM-2100F) equipped with high-resolution TEM. The crystallinity and structural properties of the prepared porous nanosheets were examined by X-ray diffraction (XRD; PANalytical X'Pert PRO) measured with Cu-Kα radiation (λ = 1.54056 Å) at 45 kV and 40 mA in the range of 2θ = 20°–65° with a scan speed of 5° min−1. Furthermore, the elemental composition of the deposited film was characterized by energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS), attached to FESEM. To examine the scattering properties and purity, the deposited nanosheets were further examined by a Raman scattering spectrophotometer (Raman Station 400; Perkin Elmer) in the range of 200–800 cm−1. The surface species and properties of the thin film were analyzed by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy analysis (XPS, AXIS-NOVA, Kratos analytical Ltd, UK).


To fabricate the DSSC, the prepared thin film of highly porous ZnO nanosheets assembled in rosette-like morphologies on ITO substrates was dipped in an ethanolic solution of 0.3 mM ruthenium(II) 535 bis-TBA (N-719, Solaronix) dye for 12 h at room-temperature under dark conditions. After dipping for a particular time, the ZnO/ITO substrate was washed with ethanol to remove the un-absorbed dye and dried under a nitrogen flow. Furthermore, the dye-absorbed ZnO/ITO substrate was placed over the platinum (Pt) coated ITO substrate, which acted as a counter electrode and both electrodes were sealed using hot press with a 60 μm thick Surlyn sheet (SX 1170-60, Solaronix). The liquid electrolyte, made of 0.5 M LiI, 0.05 mM I2, and 0.2 M tert-butyl pyridine in acetonitrile, was introduced into the cell through one of the two small holes drilled in the counter electrode. In addition, these holes were sealed with a small microscopic glass and a Surlyn sheet. The active layer of the resulting cell was approximately 0.25 cm2 (0.5 cm × 0.5 cm).

The performances of the fabricated DSSC were analyzed by measuring the current density (J)–voltage (V) curves using a solar stimulator (I–V measurement system, PV measurement Inc., USA). The light source was a 1000 W metal halide lamp and its radiant power was adjusted with respect to a Si reference solar cell to about one-sun-light intensity (100 mW cm−2, AM 1.5G). During the measurement, a black tape mask was placed over the cells, except the active area part, to avoid any interference. The incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) was measured by specially designed absorption spectrum response spectroscopy (PV measurements, Inc., USA). IPCE result of the fabricated DSSC was recorded using a 75 W Xe lamp as a monochromatic beam light source with a low chopping frequency. The calibration of IPCE system was done with a standard silicon photodiode before performing the IPCE measurement.

Highly porous ZnO nanosheet thin films were directly grown on an ITO substrate, which was used as the photoanode material to fabricate an efficient DSSC. The general morphologies of deposited ZnO material on ITO substrate were characterized by FESEM. Fig. 1 exhibits the typical FESEM images, which reveals that the deposited ZnO materials possess rosette-like morphologies. Interestingly, the rosette-like morphologies are uniformly grown on the substrate with very high density in the form of a film (Fig. 1(a)). It was fascinating to see that the deposited rosette-like morphologies are obtained by the accumulation of several nanosheets, which are arranged in a special fashion such that they made rosette-like structures (Fig. 1(b)). The average size of the nanosheets is in the range 2–4 μm, whereas the thickness is in the range 40–50 nm. The prepared nanosheets were further examined with high-resolution FESEM and it was very interesting to see that the nanosheets are obtained by the accumulation of several thousand nanoparticles (Fig. 1(c) and (d)). The nanoparticles are stacked upon each other in such a special and particular manner that they make sheet-like morphologies (Fig. 1(d)). It was also observed that even though nanoparticles are densely packed with each other there are still many voids among the nanoparticles, which make these nanosheets highly porous. Thus, this special highly porous architecture makes the nanosheets assemble in rosette-like morphologies, which can be used as a promising material to fabricate highly efficient DSSCs. The detailed morphological properties of the prepared nanosheets were further examined by TEM and HRTEM.


Fig. 2 exhibits the typical TEM and HRTEM images of the deposited highly porous ZnO nanosheets. For the TEM analysis, the deposited porous ZnO nanosheets were detached from the ITO substrate through ultrasonication in isopropyl alcohol (IPA) and a drop of IPA that contains the nanosheet was placed on the TEM grid and examined. Fig. 2(a) and (b) demonstrate the typical low-magnification TEM images of a side portion of the prepared porous nanosheets. The TEM images exhibit full consistency with the observed FESEM results in terms of morphology and reveal that the nanosheets are highly porous. It is clear from the observed TEM images that the nanosheets are made by the accumulation of several thousand small irregularly shaped nanoparticles, which are joined to each other through their surfaces with the adjacent nanoparticles and form the nanosheet-like morphologies.
From the HRTEM images, it is clear that even though nanoparticles are densely packed with each other, there are still many voids that make these nanosheets highly porous (Fig. 2(c) and (d)). For a clearer understanding, the nanoparticles' outer surfaces are highlighted with white color (Fig. 2(d)). Furthermore, the HRTEM images clearly reveal the well defined lattice fringes with the interplanar distance of 0.52 nm, which is equal to the lattice constant of wurtzite hexagonal ZnO. Thus, it can be confirmed that the prepared nanosheets are well crystalline and possess a wurtzite hexagonal phase.

Fig. 3 depicts the crystallization and deposition process of highly porous ZnO nanosheets assembled in rosette-like morphologies. Basically, the growth process of ZnO nanoparticles can be separated into two steps, i.e. nucleation during the Zn2+ hydrolysis followed by a further growth under hydrothermal conditions. As previously described in the literature, the hydrolysis of Zn2+ under basic conditions yields small nuclei of a metastable phase of zinc hydroxide. During the hydrothermal growth process, the crystallization and growth of ZnO structures takes place. As reported in the literature, ZnO possesses a wurtzite anisotropic structure with a preferred growth along the [0001] direction, due to the fact that ZnO(0001) polar surfaces present higher energy compared to non-polar surfaces. Thus, the growth in a particular direction can be explained by the reduction of total surface energy. However, in the prepared ZnO nanosheets, the crystallographic coherence obtained by the Scherrer equation presents isotropic structures, as presented in the ESI, Fig. S1. It is noticed that the estimated crystallographic coherences [(100), (002) and (101)] display the average crystallite size of around 30 nm for the prepared highly porous ZnO nanosheets assembled in rosette-like morphologies. Therefore, it is expected that this may be related to the presence of PEG molecules in the synthetic process during ZnO crystallization under hydrothermal treatment. As reported, the PEG macromolecules bond with the ZnO solid surface mainly via –OH groups to the polar surface of the ZnO nanoparticles, which may interact with PEG through hydrogen bonding. Therefore, according to the kinetics of colloid growth, the addition of PEG in the suspension containing ZnO modifies the growth kinetics, leading to isotropic growth of crystallites. PEG adsorption over ZnO surface has been employed to obtain 1D nanostructures. However, obtaining such structures is directly related to the PEG concentration.
Over a specific PEG concentration range, spherical nanoparticles are expected to be formed, as occurred in this case. Therefore, it can be proposed that bonding with PEG makes the (0001) surface energy to decrease and prevents the growth in this particular crystallographic direction. It is known that PEG exhibits both hydrophobic and hydrophilic groups. Moreover, according to the literature, due to the hydrophobic headgroups of PEG (i.e. alcohol groups in PEG), there could be formation of aggregations in the solution. These formed aggregates act as templates, which led to the formation of nanoparticles. Furthermore, the surfaces of formed nanoparticles possess confined regions and the adjacent nanoparticles undergo a multiplying growth through a cementing mechanism or oriented attachment and finally due to this phenomenon, the sheet-like morphologies are obtained. However, during the formation of nanosheets, the nanoparticles did not assembled in a perfect way and their surfaces are not totally matched with the surfaces of the adjacent nanoparticles. Thus, during the multiplying growth and cementing process, the adjacent nanoparticles possess voids that make the nanosheets highly porous and hence finally, porous nanosheet morphologies are observed.
According to thermodynamic principles, polar faces with surface dipoles are thermodynamically less stable compared to non-polar faces, which repeatedly go through the rearrangement process to minimize their surface energies. As the prepared ZnO nanosheets, composed of ZnO nanoparticles, possess quite high surface energy due to the exposure of two main planes, the surface energies can be minimized by reducing the exposed areas through the aggregation of the nanosheets. Consequently, by the aggregation and self-assembly of the neighboring nanosheets, the surface energies of the system are significantly decreased. Therefore, the prepared porous ZnO nanosheets were self-assembled in a special way that rosette-like morphologies are formed. Furthermore, as the growth velocities of ZnO crystals in various directions are different under hydrothermal conditions, the growth of ZnO crystals at different surfaces is not the same, hence nanosheets are formed in irregular sizes. This might be the reason that the nanosheets have various sizes and therefore, the sizes of the final rosette-like morphologies are different, which is evident from the observed FESEM results (Fig. 1(a) and (b)).
To explain the role of PEG, the hydrophobic head groups of PEG first facilitate the formation of aggregations in the solution due to the incomplete mixing at the molecular level and the retention of remnants of the 3D hydrogen bonded network structure of the bulk solution. These PEG aggregates act as templates, which lead to the formation of nanoparticles. These nanoparticles further undergo a multiplying growth through a cementing mechanism or orientational attachment and finally form the sheet-like morphologies over the ITO substrate surface. It is reported that usually the pore diameter of the nanomaterials are associated with the size of hydrophobic aggregations. Moreover, the sizes of hydrophobic aggregations are dependent on the molecular weight of PEG, i.e. with higher PEG molecular weight, larger hydrophobic aggregations can be produced. For the synthesis of porous ZnO nanosheets, high molecular weight (∼100000) PEG was used, which might create larger hydrophobic aggregates in the reaction solution and considerably forms large pores and highly porous nanostructures. In addition, the hydrated zinc ions could be trapped in the hydrophobic PEG aggregates and mounted into large hydrophobic aggregations, which might split into several smaller ones, and result in the production of the small and highly dense pores in the final ZnO products.
To examine the influence of reaction time on the growth of porous nanostructures, different hydrothermal experiments have been performed by varying the growth reaction times, i.e. 2, 4, 6, 8, 12, and 16 h at 150 °C. Fig. 4 depicts the FESEM images of grown ZnO thin films with different reaction times. It can be noted that the variation in reaction time has shown great impact on the porous nature of the final ZnO nanostructure. As is evident from Fig. 4(a), the formation of ZnO nanosheets started at a time of 2 h, indicating the emergence of nucleation sites. The nucleation of nanosheets continues with the increase of reaction time, and highly porous, uniform and well defined ZnO nanosheets are formed on the ITO substrate in 8 h, as shown in Fig. 4(d). When the reaction time was further increased to 12 h (Fig. 4(e)), slight distortions in the porous nanosheet structures were observed. However, the basic nanosheet morphology was similar to the ones prepared at the 8 h reaction time. By further increasing the reaction time to 16 h, the nanosheets were almost completely deformed and it is very clear from the observed FESEM image (Fig. 4(e)) that the nanosheets are made of small nanoparticles. The reason for this drastic change might be related to less entrapping of hydrated zinc ions with PEG molecules, which might result in less formation of large hydrophobic PEG aggregations during the long reaction time. Therefore, the continuous and steady growth of porous ZnO nanostructures continues until the reaction time of 8 h and afterward, the system would be in the closure-precipitation equilibrium stage, as depicted in Fig. 4(f).
Furthermore, the elemental compositions of the grown highly porous ZnO nanosheets assembled in rosette-like morphologies were characterized by energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) and the observed result is shown in Fig. 5(a). For the EDS analysis, the deposited ZnO materials were detached from the ITO substrate and placed on a carbon tape and examined. The observed EDS spectrum revealed well defined peaks for only zinc (Zn) and oxygen (O), which confirmed that the prepared nanosheets are mainly composed of Zn and O. No peak related to any impurity was seen in the observed spectrum, which further confirmed the purity of the prepared nanosheets.
To examine the crystallinity, crystal phases and structural properties, the deposited highly porous ZnO nanosheets assembled in rosette-like morphologies were further examined by X-ray diffraction (XRD). Fig. 5(b) shows the typical XRD pattern of the prepared nanosheets, which shows various well defined reflections at 2θ = 31.7°, 34.3°, 36.2°, 47.5°, 56.5° and 63.1°, corresponding to the wurtzite hexagonal phase of ZnO and can be assigned to ZnO(100), (002), (101), (102), (110) and (103), respectively. The observed reflections matched well with the reported Joint Committee on Powder Diffraction Standards (JCPDS) card no. 036-1451. In addition to the well defined peaks related to ZnO, some other reflections relating to the ITO substrate were also seen at 26.1°, 33.7°, 52.2° and 62.7°. Interestingly, all the observed diffraction reflections are sharp with high intensity, thus confirming that the prepared porous nanosheets are highly crystalline.

Fig. 5(c) shows the FTIR spectrum of the grown highly porous ZnO thin film to define the structural quality of the materials. The observation of an intense IR band at 483 cm−1 corresponds to that typical for metal–oxygen (i.e. Zn–O), deducing the formation of ZnO. Two weak IR bands at 1641 and 1379 cm−1 are related to the fundamental O–H from the physisorbed water over the surface and the C–H stretching band. A broad and small IR band at 3454 cm−1 originates from the O–H stretching vibrations for porous ZnO materials. This observation clearly confirms the high purity of the grown porous ZnO nanomaterials with few traces of carbon impurities.
To evaluate the structural and vibrational properties, the prepared porous ZnO nanosheets assembled in rosette-like morphology thin films were further characterized by Raman scattering spectroscopy at room-temperature. In general, the wurtzite hexagonal phase ZnO possesses C6V4 symmetry in space group P63mc having two formula units per primitive cell, in which all the atoms encompass the C3V symmetry. According to group theory, eight sets of optical phonon modes at the Γ point of the Brillouin zone, i.e. Γ = A1 + 2B1 + E1 + 2E2, are present in ZnO in which A1, E1, and E2 modes are Raman active, whereas B1 modes are silent. Fig. S2 (ESI) exhibits the typical Raman scattering spectrum of prepared highly porous ZnO nanosheets assembled in rosette-like morphologies. The observed Raman scattering spectrum demonstrates several Raman shift peaks at 332, 437, 584 and 673 cm−1. The existence of a sharp and strong peak at 437.4 cm−1 indicates the presence of a high E2 mode, which is assigned to ZnO non-polar optical phonon. The appearance of sharp E2 mode in the Raman spectrum is usually representative of the wurtzite hexagonal nature of ZnO materials. Furthermore, a Raman peak appearing at 332 cm−1 in the ZnO nanomaterials can be assigned as E2H–E2L and it is believed that the origin of this peak confirms the single and highly crystalline nature of the sample prepared. Two other small Raman peaks at 584 and 673 cm−1 can be assigned to the E1L and A1 phonon modes. It is believed that these peaks usually correspond to the structural disorder and impurities in grown ZnO materials. Finally, the presence of strong and sharp Raman active E2 high mode and suppressed E1L mode affirmed that the prepared nanosheets are highly crystalline and possess a wurtzite hexagonal phase structure.
The detailed chemical composition and state of elements of grown porous ZnO nanosheets assembled in rosette-like morphology thin films were elucidated by XPS. Fig. 6(a) depicts the Zn 2p spectrum, which exhibits the doublet binding energy peaks at ∼1021.7 eV and ∼1046.1 eV. These binding energies are assigned to Zn 2p3/2 and Zn 2p1/2 with the binding energy difference of 24.4 eV, which is very close to the standard reference value for bulk ZnO. The appearance of these binding energies in the Zn 2p spectrum are assigned to the lattice zinc phases in ZnO.
Furthermore, the binding energy at ∼1021.7 eV corresponds to the Zn2+ for a typical wurtzite hexagonal structure of ZnO. Thus, the obtained Zn 2p binding energy and the binding energy difference values confirm the +2 oxidation state Zn atoms in ZnO. The deconvolution of the O 1s spectrum is shown in Fig. 6(b), which is composed of a center peak at ∼531 eV with three deconvoluted binding energy peaks at ∼532.1 eV, ∼532.8 eV and ∼533.9 eV. The main centered binding energy at ∼531 eV corresponds to the existence of O2− ions on the wurtzite structure of the hexagonal Zn2+ ions and each O2− ion is associated with nearest neighboring Zn atoms. Other three binding energies at ∼532.1 eV, ∼532.8 eV and ∼533.9 eV are assigned to the adsorbed moisture and few oxygen deficiencies or oxygen vacancies within the ZnO materials. From Fig. 6(c), a broad binding energy at ∼285.2 eV belonging to C 1s generally originates from the calibration analysis for other binding energies in order to avoid specimen charging. Thus, the strong Zn 2p and O 1s binding energies confirm the formation of pure ZnO materials by the association of Zn2+ and O2− ions to form Zn–O bonds in ZnO crystals.

The prepared highly porous ZnO nanosheets assembled in rosette-like morphology thin films grown on an ITO substrate were directly used as the photoanode to fabricate efficient DSSCs. Fig. 7(a) shows the typically current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the fabricated DSSC based on the porous ZnO nanosheets photoanode. Several photovoltaic properties such as conversion efficiency (η), short-circuit current (JSC), open-circuit voltage (VOC) and fill factor (FF) of the fabricated DSSC can be calculated from the observed J–V curve. The calculated short circuit current (JSC) and open circuit voltage (VOC) for the fabricated DSSC, according to the observed J–V curve, are ∼9.45 mA cm−2 and 0.645 V, respectively. Furthermore, the fill factor of the fabricated DSSC was calculated according to eqn (1) mentioned below:

(1)
where
Jmax and Vmax are the voltage and current density, respectively, at maximum power output.

The calculated FF for the fabricated DSSC was found to be 0.55. Furthermore, the light-to-electricity conversion efficiency (η) of the fabricated DSSC based on highly porous ZnO nanosheets assembled in rosette-like morphology thin films was also calculated using eqn (2)
(2)
where
Pin is the power density of incident radiation.

Thus, the calculated light-to-electricity conversion efficiency for the fabricated DSSC was ∼3.4%. The observed high light-to-electricity conversion efficiency of the fabricated DSSC based on highly porous ZnO nanosheets assembled in rosette-like morphology thin films was due to the special morphology of the photoanode material. Such a photoanode material with a highly porous nature and high surface area significantly improves the performance and JSC of the fabricated DSSC. Moreover, it is known that the high generation of photocurrent is usually associated with the film morphology, surface texturing, surface area and crystallinity of the photoanode materials. From the surface analysis, it was observed that the grown highly porous ZnO nanosheets assembled in rosette-like morphology thin films exhibited reasonable surface area, i.e. ∼26.7 m2 g−1, which provides a suitable environment for large amount of dye absorption (4.1 × 10−5 mol cm−2) through their highly porous surfaces. Herein, the high surface area of ZnO thin film is sufficient for the higher dye absorption and enhances the light harvesting efficiency of the photoanode.
Interestingly, from the literature, it was observed that the fabricated DSSC based on highly porous ZnO nanosheets assembled in rosette-like morphology thin films is exhibiting superior photovoltaic properties compared to other ZnO-based DSSCs reported in the literature, as compared in Table 1. Thus, it can be confirmed that the special morphology of the photoanode material, i.e. a highly porous nanosheets structure, is one of the major factors for enhanced JSC and η of the fabricated DSSC.
ZnO morphology
Photovoltaic performances
Ref.

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF

η (%)
Nanoparticles
3.64
0.68
0.49
0.92

7a

Branched nanowires
1.84
0.62
0.4
0.46

20

Nanoparticles
0.3704
0.4796
0.56
0.1

21

Nanorods
2.01–2.21
0.63–0.64
0.58–0.63
0.73–0.83

22

Nanorods
1.11–1.41
0.351–0.387
0.461–0.441
0.18–0.24

24

Nanorods
1.84
0.76
0.472
0.7

52

Nanorods
4.2
0.266
0.3
0.67

53

Nanofibres
2.87
0.69
0.44
0.88

54

Nanosheets
0.301
0.37
0.58
0.124

55

Nanocrystal
5.06
0.61
0.65
2.04

56

Microspheres
6.65
0.676
0.65
2.94

57

Nanorods
7.29
0.572
0.588
2.42

58

Highly porous nanosheets
9.45
0.654
0.55
3.4
Present work
Recently, Ganesh et al. demonstrated that the choice of dye is one of the important parameters, which severely affects the photovoltaic properties of fabricated DSSCs. The authors showed that the power-conversion efficiencies of the fabricated DSSCs can be improved by applying appropriate dyes. Thus, using newly synthesized di-substituted tri-phenyl amine (HMP-9) and carbazole (HMP-11) dyes (with limited acidic carboxyl anchor groups), a ZnO nanocrystallite-based DSSC was fabricated, which exhibited a power conversion efficiency of 7.03%.
The incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) was measured to determine the explanation of the high photocurrent density for the fabricated DSSC based on highly porous ZnO nanosheets assembled in rosette-like morphology thin films photoanode. The ratio between the number of generated charge carriers contributing to the photocurrent and the number of incident photons can be observed by IPCE, which can be calculated at a particular wavelength using eqn (3)
(3)
where
λ and Pin are the wavelength and the intensity of the monochromatic light, respectively, and JSC is the short-circuit photocurrent density for monochromatic incident light. Fig. 7(b) exhibits the typical IPCE graph for the fabricated DSSC, which reveals a broad absorption in the range of 450–650 nm with the reasonable maximum IPCE value of 24.8% at 520 nm. The observed moderate IPCE is attributed to the high dye absorption via the highly porous ZnO nanosheets assembled in rosette-like morphology thin films. It has been reported that ZnO materials at nanoscale size usually provide a larger surface area as well as a pathway for electron transport, resulting in the high JSC. Thus, the unique morphology, i.e. highly porous nanosheet structure, and high surface area of the photoanode might enhance the electron injection and charge-transfer efficiency, which significantly improves the JSC and η of the fabricated DSSC.


In summary, highly porous ZnO nanosheets assembled in rosette-like morphology thin films were directly grown on transparent conducting glass substrate (ITO) using a facile low-temperature hydrothermal process and used as a photoanode for the fabrication of a high efficiency DSSC. The grown highly porous nanosheets were examined in detail using several characterization techniques, which revealed that the grown nanosheets are made by the accumulation of thousands of nanoparticles and possess good crystal quality. Furthermore, because of the excellent morphological properties, i.e. highly porous surface area, the fabricated DSSC exhibited a reasonable light-to-electricity conversion efficiency of ∼3.4% with a high JSC of 9.45 mA cm−2, VOC of 0.654 and FF of 0.55. The presented results demonstrate that ZnO nanomaterials can efficiently be used as effective photoanode materials to fabricate highly efficient DSSCs.


This study was supported by the Ministry of Higher Education, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia for the research grant (PCSED-021-13) under the Promising Centre for Sensors and Electronic Devices (PCSED) at Najran University.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5nj00551e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2015