 DOI: 10.1039/C3TA01525D
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 4589-4594

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Dan
He
,

Xiaoyan
Du
,

Wei
Zhang
,

Zuo
Xiao
* and 

Liming
Ding
*

National Center for Nanoscience and Technology, Beijing 100190, China. E-mail: OPV.CHINA@yahoo.com; xiaoz@nanoctr.cn

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China

Received
17th December 2012
, Accepted 4th February 2013
First published on 4th February 2013
Stabilizing the optimal film morphology of bulk heterojunction polymer solar cells is key for realizing long-term stable devices. A crosslinker, octane-1,8-diyl bis(1,4-dihydrobenzo[d][1,2]oxathiine-6-carboxylate 3-oxide) (OBOCO), was designed to crosslink PC61BM through a heat-triggered Diels–Alder reaction to suppress the aggregation tendency of fullerene molecules, thus helping to stabilize the film morphology and to improve device stability. Devices containing OBOCO (0–25% wt) in the active layer were fabricated and studied. Open-circuit voltage (Voc) shows an interesting increasing tendency as the OBOCO content increases from 0% to 20%. Short-circuit current (Jsc) continuously decreases as the crosslinker content increases. Fill factor (FF) remains stable (>60%) at low OBOCO content (0–15%) but decreases quickly at high OBOCO content (20–25%). The power conversion efficiency (PCE) shows a decreasing tendency with OBOCO content increasing. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) indicates that the nanoscale polymer/fullerene phase separation is retained with 5% addition of OBOCO but deteriorates when more crosslinker is added. Space Charge Limited Current (SCLC) measurements indicate that the electron mobility of fullerene continuously decreases while the hole mobility of P3HT remains stable as the OBOCO content increases, suggesting that the crosslinking took place at the fullerene domains. After the devices were heated at 150 °C for 4 days, the PCE of the devices without OBOCO decreased significantly from 2.74% to 0.78%, while that of the devices with 5% OBOCO decreased from 2.77% to 1.72%. Morphological studies indicate that the OBOCO crosslinker can effectively impede heat-promoted fullerene aggregation, thus leading to a stable morphology and stable device performance.

Bulk heterojunction (BHJ) polymer solar cells (PSCs) based on a polymer donor and a fullerene acceptor have received considerable attention for the advantages of low-cost, light-weight, mechanical flexibility, and roll-to-roll fabrication. In recent years, many studies have focused on pursuing high power conversion efficiency (PCE) of PSCs by developing new low-bandgap conjugated polymers, high LUMO fullerene acceptors, and interfacial materials. The PCEs of PSCs have exceeded 8%. A key feature for an efficient polymer solar cell is the bicontinuous architecture in its active layer, in which polymer and fullerene present phase separation with domain size at 10–20 nm. This bicontinuous nano-structure not only maximizes the donor–acceptor interfaces, but also offers fast pathways for charge carrier transport and collection. However, such optimal morphology is metastable and will degrade gradually even at ambient temperature. It has been demonstrated that nano-scale fullerene domains tend to grow into micro-scale domains due to the aggregation tendency of fullerene molecules. When solar cells are working, such an aggregation process accelerates because of sunlight heating, leading to reduction of donor–acceptor interface and device performance deterioration. Therefore, to realize long-term stability of PSCs for practical application, it is essential to stabilize their optimal film morphology. An effective strategy is to “freeze” the initial nano-structure of the active layer by crosslinking reactions. A number of crosslinkable groups such as halide, azide, oxirane, oxetane, and acrylates have been installed into the side chains of the polymer or fullerene. The crosslinking reactions can be activated by external stimuli such as heat, UV light, or chemicals. As a result, very stable film morphology and long device lifetime can be realized for these “crosslinked” devices. However, drawbacks accompanied these crosslinkable materials. First, the introduction of crosslinkable groups leads to tedious and expensive synthesis of the polymer and fullerene materials. Second, the modification of the side chains of polymer and fullerene may significantly change their original phase behavior, leading to unfavored phase separation and low device performance. To circumvent these problems, we propose a new strategy by adding a crosslinkable additive into a polymer/fullerene blend. Such facilely prepared crosslinkers are designed to react with the polymer or fullerene and help to stabilize the film morphology without interrupting polymer/fullerene phase separation. Herein, we report a prototype of such crosslinkers, octane-1,8-diyl bis(1,4-dihydrobenzo[d][1,2]oxathiine-6-carboxylate 3-oxide) (OBOCO), which can crosslink fullerene through a heat-triggered Diels–Alder reaction. By adding 5% (wt) OBOCO into a P3HT/PC61BM blend, the devices show significantly improved thermal stability compared with the untreated cells and show no decrease in PCE. Variation of device performance parameters, active layer morphology and charge carrier mobilities with the OBOCO content will be discussed.


Fullerenes show similar reactivity as electron-deficient olefins and can be easily functionalized through Diels–Alder (D–A) reaction with o-quinodimethane type dienes. OBOCO was designed to be a dumbbell-like crosslinker with two sultine fragments, the o-quinodimethane precursor, at the ends and a flexible alkyl chain as the spacer to connect them (Scheme 1). Over 80 °C, the sultine moiety can release SO2 to produce o-quinodimethane diene, which can react with fullerene. Therefore, the crosslinking can take place during the thermal annealing process. The synthetic route for OBOCO is shown in Scheme 1. Condensation of 3,4-dimethylbenzoic acid 1 with 1,8-octanediol afforded compound 2 in 74% yield. Bromination of the four methyl groups of compound 2 with N-bromosuccinimide (NBS) and further annulation reaction with rongalite afforded the target molecule OBOCO in 36% yield. MALDI-TOF mass spectra show the expected molecular ion peak for OBOCO. Both 1H and 13C NMR spectra indicate the existence of OBOCO regioisomers resulting from the switching of the locations of S and O atoms on the oxathiane ring (Fig. S5 and S6). The regioisomerism was further confirmed by synthesis of a simple methyl ester analogue (see ESI).

To prove the reaction between OBOCO and fullerene (PC61BM) during the thermal annealing process, we studied the absorption spectra changes for PC61BM/OBOCO (1.7:1, w/w, equimolar) and PC61BM-only films after annealing the films at 150 °C for 20 min (Fig. 1). As shown in Fig. 1a, the characteristic absorption peak of PC61BM at ∼338 nm disappeared for the PC61BM/OBOCO film but remained for the PC61BM-only film after the thermal treatment. The heat-triggered D–A reaction between OBOCO and PC61BM alters the fullerene π-conjugation system, leading to the disappearance of the PC61BM characteristic absorption. The same absorption spectra were obtained for the film before and after rinsing with o-dichlorobenzene (ODCB), indicating the crosslinked PC61BM/OBOCO film exhibits good solvent-resistant behavior. However, the thermal treatment of the P3HT/OBOCO (1.7:1, w/w) film neither changed the characteristic absorption of P3HT nor made the film solvent-resistant (Fig. 1b). The above results demonstrate that OBOCO can selectively crosslink fullerenes in the active layer.
To evaluate the effect of OBOCO on device performance, solar cells with a conventional structure, ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PC61BM:OBOCO/Ca/Al, were fabricated. The weight ratio between OBOCO and the P3HT/PC61BM blend varied from 0% to 25%. The P3HT/PC61BM weight ratio was 1:1. The blend solution was spin-coated onto the PEDOT:PSS layer and was annealed at 150 °C for 20 min to ensure complete crosslinking. Fig. 2 shows the changes of device performance parameters with OBOCO content. In Fig. 2a, Voc continuously increases from 0.636 V to 0.684 V as OBOCO content increases from 0% to 20%. When the OBOCO content reaches 25%, Voc drops to 0.643 V. Voc is proportional to the energy level difference between the donor HOMO and the acceptor LUMO. The initial increase of Voc with OBOCO content can be attributed to the raising of the fullerene LUMO level caused by crosslinking, since the D–A reaction on PC61BM shrinks fullerene π-conjugation and decreases the fullerene electron affinity, thus raising the fullerene LUMO level. However, the insulating additive could also affect the polymer/fullerene phase separation and charge carrier transport. Such negative effects may become significant when a large amount of OBOCO is added. Low Voc at 25% OBOCO content might result from the reduction of charge carrier concentration in the active layer. The decrease of Jsc with OBOCO content reflects the negative effects of OBOCO on device performance (Fig. 2b). Jsc decreases from 6.92 mA cm−2 to 1.10 mA cm−2 as OBOCO content increases from 0% to 25%. FF reaches 65.5% at 5% OBOCO content and remains over 60% till the OBOCO content reaches 15% (Fig. 2c). FF drops quickly when more OBOCO is added and is only 43.5% at 25% OBOCO content. The low Jsc and FF at high OBOCO content suggest that too much insulating additive severely disrupts charge carrier transport. The PCE of the solar cells decreases with increasing OBOCO content (Fig. 2d). By adding 5% OBOCO, the PCE (2.77%) is almost identical to that of the solar cells without crosslinker (2.74%) indicating that the negative effect of the crosslinker is negligible at this content.
To figure out the effect of OBOCO on film morphology and charge carrier transport, we investigated the changes of film morphology and electron/hole mobility of the active layer with OBOCO content by AFM and SCLC, respectively. From AFM height images, the root-mean-square (RMS) roughnesses of the films with 0%, 5%, 10%, 15%, 20%, and 25% OBOCO content are 0.66 nm, 1.03 nm, 4.56 nm, 6.22 nm, 10.50 nm, and 11.30 nm, respectively, indicating that the addition of OBOCO drastically increases the roughness of the film (Fig. 3). Phase images indicate the films with 0% and 5% OBOCO show fine nanoscale morphology with well-developed bicontinuous interpenetrating networks, suggesting that the polymer–fullerene phase separation is not interrupted by 5% OBOCO. High OBOCO content (10–25%) induces significant aggregation of PC61BM in the active layer and deteriorates device performance. To find out whether the morphology changes are caused by the additive itself or by crosslinking reactions, we tried compound 2 (0–25%), which has a similar structure as OBOCO but can not crosslink PC61BM. AFM indicates that compound 2 slightly affects the film morphology (Fig. S11). RMS roughnesses are 0.59 nm, 0.61 nm, 1.33 nm, 1.43 nm, 1.22 nm, and 2.10 nm, for the films containing 0%, 5%, 10%, 15%, 20%, and 25% compound 2, respectively. Phase images show small changes with increasing additive content. These results are in sharp contrast to OBOCO addition, indicating that the morphology changes did result from the crosslinking between OBOCO and PC61BM. Electron and hole mobilities were obtained by fabricating the electron-only and hole-only devices and measuring the SCLC. It is interesting to find that the electron mobility of PC61BM continuously decreases with OBOCO content, from 6.6 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 at 0% to 1.6 × 10−6 cm2 V−1 s−1 at 25%, while the hole mobility remains stable (∼10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1) with changing OBOCO content (Fig. 4). This result proves our hypothesis that the crosslinking takes place in the fullerene domains and lowers the electron mobility of fullerene because the insulating additive can hinder fullerene packing and block electron transport. The mobility change can be used to explain Jsc and FF changes with crosslinker content in Fig. 2. The continuous decrease in fullerene electron mobility leads to continuous decrease in conductivity of the active layer, thus a continuous decrease in Jsc. FF relates to the balance of charge carrier transport in devices. As shown in Fig. 4, the electron and hole mobilities at low OBOCO content are relatively close to each other, suggesting that the electron and hole transport are more balanced at low additive content. So, FF values are higher at low OBOCO content.
The thermal stability of the devices without and with 5% OBOCO was investigated by continuously heating the devices at 150 °C for 4 days and tracking their performance (Fig. 5). It is quite clear that the devices with OBOCO show significantly improved thermal stability compared with the untreated devices. In Fig. 5a, the devices with 5% OBOCO show quite stable Voc, which remains at ∼0.64 V after 4 days' thermal treatment, while Voc for the devices without OBOCO decreases from 0.636 V to 0.506 V (by 20%) after the thermal treatment. Jsc and FF for both devices decrease with continuous heating but the decrease is smaller for the devices with OBOCO. The PCE for the device with 5% OBOCO decreases from 2.77% to 1.72% (by 38%) while that for the device without OBOCO decreases from 2.74% to 0.78% (by 72%) (Fig. 5d). These results indicate that the OBOCO crosslinker can effectively enhance solar cell stability, probably by stabilizing the morphology of the active layer.
To clarify the effect of the crosslinker on the morphology stability of the active layer, AFM and optical microscopy were performed for both devices without and with crosslinking treatment (Fig. 6). After thermal treatment at 150 °C for 100 h, the RMS roughness of the film without OBOCO significantly increases from 0.66 nm to 2.05 nm (Fig. 6a), while that of the film with 5% OBOCO shows a slight increment from 1.03 nm to 1.31 nm (Fig. 6b). Optical microscopy indicates that distinct fullerene micro-crystals appear in the films without OBOCO (Fig. 6c and S15). This is due to the heat-promoted fullerene aggregation. In contrast, no fullerene aggregates were observed for the films with 5% OBOCO after thermal treatment (Fig. 6d). OBOCO crosslinker can enhance the morphology stability of the active layer by impeding fullerene aggregation.

In conclusion, an innovative crosslinker OBOCO has been successfully developed to enhance the stability of P3HT/PC61BM solar cells. The crosslinking was realized by a heat-triggered D–A reaction between sultine groups on OBOCO and fullerene double bonds. By adding 5% OBOCO into the active layer, the polymer/fullerene phase separation was not interrupted while the heat-promoted fullerene aggregation was dramatically inhibited, leading to significantly enhanced thermal stability of the optimal film morphology. Consequently, a very stable device can be obtained. Further efforts on developing crosslinkers that can simultaneously improve device performance and stability are currently ongoing.


Patterned ITO glass with a sheet resistance of 15 Ω sq−1 was ultrasonically cleaned using detergent, distilled water, acetone, isopropanol sequentially and then given UV–ozone treatment. A 30 nm thick poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)-polystyrene sulfonic acid (PEDOT:PSS, Clevios™ P VP Al 4083) layer was formed on ITO substrates by spin coating an aqueous dispersion onto ITO glass. PEDOT:PSS coated substrates were dried at 140 °C for 10 min. P3HT/PC61BM (1:1) blend in ODCB (20 mg mL−1) with OBOCO (0–25%) was spin-coated (800 rpm for 60 s) onto the PEDOT:PSS layer. Then, the films were annealed at 150 °C for 20 min. Finally, Ca (∼10 nm) and Al (∼100 nm) were thermally evaporated under a shadow mask (pressure ca. 10−4 Pa). The effective area for the devices is 4 mm2. J–V curves were measured on a computerized Keithley 2420 SourceMeter. Device characterization was done in air using a xenon-lamp-based solar simulator (Newport, AM1.5G, 100 mW cm−2). Thermal stability was investigated by putting the cells on a hotplate (150 °C) and tracking their performance. AFM was carried out on a Dimension 3100 microscope (Veeco). Optical microscopy images were obtained by using a DM4000 microscope (Leica).


The structure for electron-only devices was Al/active layer/Ca/Al. Al (∼80 nm) was firstly evaporated onto a glass substrate. The P3HT:PC61BM blends in ODCB with different amounts of OBOCO were spin-coated onto the Al layer. The films were annealed at 150 °C for 20 min. Finally, Ca (∼5 nm) and Al (∼100 nm) were thermally evaporated under a shadow mask (pressure ca. 10−4 Pa). J–V curves were measured on a computerized Keithley 2420 SourceMeter in the dark. The thicknesses of the active layers were measured by a KLA Tencor D-120 profilometer.


The structure for hole-only devices was ITO/PEDOT:PSS/active layer/MoO3/Al. Patterned ITO glass with a sheet resistance of 15 Ω sq−1 was ultrasonically cleaned using detergent, distilled water, acetone, isopropanol sequentially, and then given UV–ozone treatment. A 30 nm thick PEDOT:PSS layer was formed on the ITO substrates by spin coating an aqueous dispersion onto ITO glass. PEDOT:PSS coated substrates were dried at 140 °C for 10 min. The P3HT:PC61BM blends in ODCB with different amounts of OBOCO were spin-coated onto the PEDOT:PSS layer. The films were annealed at 150 °C for 20 min. Finally, MoO3 (∼5 nm) and Al (∼100 nm) were successively evaporated onto the active layer under a shadow mask (pressure ca. 10−4 Pa). J–V curves were measured on a computerized Keithley 2420 SourceMeter in the dark. The thicknesses of the active layers were measured by a KLA Tencor D-120 profilometer.


This work was supported by the “100 Talents Program” of Chinese Academy of Sciences, and National Natural Science Foundation of China (21102028).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details including synthesis, measurements, and instruments. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ta01525d
‡ D. He and X. Du contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013