 DOI: 10.1039/C7TC05252A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 4746-4752


Zhongzhong
Xu
,

Xiong
Yin
*,

Yanjun
Guo
,

Yuan
Pu
* and 

Meng
He
*

State Key Laboratory of Organic–Inorganic Composites, State Key Laboratory of Chemical Resource Engineering, Beijing University of Chemical Technology, Beijing 100029, P. R. China. E-mail: yinxiong@mail.buct.edu.cn; puyuan@mail.buct.edu.cn

CAS Key Laboratory of Nanosystem and Hierarchical Fabrication, CAS Center for Excellence in Nanoscience, National Center for Nanoscience and Technology, Beijing 100190, P. R. China. E-mail: mhe@nanoctr.cn

School of Physical Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, P. R. China

Received
17th November 2017
, Accepted 23rd March 2018
First published on 24th March 2018
TiO2 is widely used as an electron transport layer (ETL) material for perovskite solar cells, and various methods have been used to engineer the properties of TiO2 ETLs for further improving the performance of perovskite solar cells. In this study, compact Ru-doped TiO2 films, prepared via a one-step spray pyrolysis method, have been employed as ETLs for planar perovskite solar cells. Compared to the pristine TiO2 film, the doped counterpart exhibits remarkably improved conductivity, as revealed by the conducting atomic force microscopy measurement. Consequently, the optimized device containing a 1% Ru-doped TiO2 ETL presents a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of up to 15.7% (with an average value of 14.74%), which is 17% higher than that of the device using the pristine TiO2 layer (13.42%, with an average value of 12.20%). The mechanism behind the enhancement in photovoltaic parameters has been investigated intensively via physicochemical characterization. A slight upshift of the conduction band minimum (CBM) is observed in the case of Ru-doped TiO2 films. More importantly, fast injection of the photo-generated electrons from a perovskite layer into an ETL is also found when Ru-doped TiO2 is applied as the ETL. Meanwhile, impedance spectroscopy suggests that the application of Ru-doped TiO2 films leads to an increase in recombination resistance and a decrease in selective contact resistance. The enhancement in PCE is attributed to the improved charge injection and transport properties of the Ru-doped TiO2 film, as well as its better band matching with the perovskite layer. These results demonstrate that doping TiO2 ETLs with Ru is an efficient approach to improve the photovoltaic performance of perovskite solar cells. The presented work will provide a potential approach for developing materials with high-quality electron transport layers for efficient perovskite-based photovoltaic devices.

Organic–inorganic halide perovskite solar cells have attracted great attention over the past few years, which are considered as one of the most promising candidates for next-generation photovoltaic devices due to their high efficiency, potentially low cost, and solution fabrication processes. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of this type of photovoltaic devices has been improved from an initial efficiency of 3.8% to a verified efficiency up to 22.1%. Charge carrier pairs (electrons and holes) will be produced under light illumination in the organic–inorganic halide perovskite layer. Photoluminescence quenching measurements reveal that the diffusion lengths of electrons and holes exceed 1 micrometer within a CH3NH3PbI3−xClx perovskite layer, which benefits the efficiencies of the devices. As an efficient solar cell device, it is required that photo-generated electrons and holes should be selectively and efficiently extracted at the anode and the cathode, respectively. Therefore, highly-efficient planar perovskite solar cells typically construct p–i–n structures using both electron transport layers and hole transport layers to promote transport and collection of photo-generated holes and electrons for achieving high photovoltaic performance. The physical transporting properties of both hole transport layers and electron transport layers (ETLs) should be finely tuned to reach a balance for reducing the charge recombination within the perovskite layer. Although a perovskite solar cell can work even without an ETL, its efficiency is still low, compared to the device containing one. Consequently, the properties of the ETL significantly affect the photovoltaic performance of perovskite solar cells.

Generally, titania is most widely used as the ETL for perovskite solar cells owing to its appropriate energy levels and good transparency for visible light. Various alternative materials, including In2O3, Nb2O5, SnO2 and ZnO, have been employed as ETL materials in perovskite solar cells. Although rapid progress has been made on alternatives, TiO2 is still the commonly used ETL for perovskite solar cells. Consequently, it is worth engineering the TiO2-based ETLs for further improving the performance of perovskite solar cells. As is well known, the physical properties of TiO2, including conductivity, carrier concentration and transparency, can be facilely tuned by doping treatment. Doping TiO2 with metal or non-metal elements has been widely attempted to controllably tune the properties of photoanodes in dye-sensitized solar cells, with a large enhancement in photovoltaic performance. Meanwhile, doping treatment on ETLs in mesoscopic perovskite solar cells also promotes the performance of solar cells. For example, doping TiO2 with aluminum has a striking impact upon the performance: both the PCE and long-term stability of the device improved. We also once introduced Nb5+ into TiO2 ETLs of mesoscopic perovskite solar cells. As expected, the photovoltaic performance of the devices was enhanced, which was attributed to the decreased selective contact resistance and the increased charge recombination resistance in devices. Doping treatment on TiO2 ETLs is also expected to improve the performance of planar perovskite solar cells. Up to now, there have been very few studies which focused on improving the performance of planar perovskite solar cells by doping the TiO2 ETLs. Previous reports reveal that ruthenium (Ru) is an efficient donor element for TiO2 to improve its conductivity. Ru-Doped TiO2 nanoparticles or nanotubes were once synthesized and used as photoanodes for dye-sensitized solar cells. The PCE of the devices was enhanced and the improvement was mainly ascribed to the enhanced conductivity after the doping treatment. Nevertheless, to the best of knowledge, Ru-doped TiO2 has not been applied as ETLs for perovskite solar cells.
In this work, we for the first time reported the compact Ru-doped TiO2 ETL prepared via the spray pyrolysis method and its application in planar perovskite solar cells incorporating the mixed halide perovskite CH3NH3PbI3−xClx as the light absorbing layer. The device with the Ru-doped TiO2 ETL reached an improved PCE of 15.70%, while devices using pristine TiO2 ETLs exhibited an efficiency of 13.42%. The enhanced performance was attributed to the increased conductivity of the ETL and the improved band alignment at the ETL/perovskite interfaces. In addition, the impedance spectroscopy analysis revealed that Ru-doping resulted in decreased selective contact resistance and increased recombination resistance, which benefit the performance of the devices.

Methylamine and hydroiodic acid (1:1 molar ratio) were mixed at 0 °C and stirred for 2 h. The resultant precipitate was collected by evaporating solvents at 50 °C for 1 h. Finally, the as-synthesized powder was washed three times with diethyl ether and dried at 60 °C in a vacuum oven for 24 h to get purified white powder.


Fluorine-doped SnO2 (FTO) substrates were prepared under ambient conditions. FTO was firstly etched using Zn and HCl (2 M) diluted in deionized water to form the desired electrode patterns (15 mm × 10 mm). The FTO-coated glass substrate was then cleaned with detergent, deionized water, acetone, ethanol and 2-propanol in an ultrasonic bath for 15 min, respectively. To make a dense TiO2 ETL, the cleaned FTO glasses were deposited with 0.1 M titanium diisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate) solution at 450 °C via the spray pyrolysis method. In the case of the Ru-doped TiO2 ETL, different quantities of ruthenium trichloride were added to the above-mentioned precursor solution. For each spray process, 100 μl of the precursor solution was sprayed on the substrate for 15 s. The interval between the cycles was set to be 2 minutes in the study. The thickness of the ETL was controlled by changing the number of spraying cycles. These as-obtained electrodes were then immersed in 0.02 M aqueous TiCl4 solution at 70 °C for 30 min. After washing with deionized water and drying, the film was heated at 500 °C for 30 min. The perovskite layer was deposited by spin-coating a N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF, Sigma-Aldrich) solution of methylammonium iodide (CH3NH3I) and PbCl2 (3:1 molar ratio) at 2000 rpm for 45 s, followed by heating at 100 °C for 90 min on a hot plate. The hole transporting layer solution (72.3 mg of spiro-OMeTAD (2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene), 28.8 μl of 4-tert-butylpyridine and 17.5 μl of lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (Li-TFSI) solution (520 mg Li-TFSI in 1 ml acetonitrile) all dissolved in 1 ml of chlorobenzene) was deposited by spin coating at 2000 rpm for 45 s. Finally, a gold layer (thickness of 80 nm) was deposited on the hole-transporting layer by thermal evaporation at a pressure of 1 × 10−6 mbar.


The morphology of the electron transport layers and the perovskite films was characterized by field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM, Hitachi S-4800). The crystal structure of the electron transport layers and the perovskite films was examined using an X-ray diffractometer (Rigaku D/MAX-TTRIII (CBO)) with Cu Kα irradiation. Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy measurements were carried out using a Kratos Axis Ultra DLD spectrometer. The energy is calibrated with respect to the He I photon energy (21.21 eV). Transmission spectra were characterized using an ultraviolet-visible spectrophotometer (Hitachi U3010). The UV-Vis diffuse reflectance spectra (DRS) of the samples were measured by using a Lambda 950 ultraviolet-visible spectrophotometer. The rectifying behaviors of the ETLs were characterized using a Metrohm PGSTAT302N Autolab in the scanning range from −1.0 V to 1.0 V at a scanning rate of 75 mV s−1. The conductivity of the pristine and Ru-doped TiO2 ETLs was investigated by using a conducting atomic force microscope (CAFM, Multimode 8) operating in a contact-current mode. For measuring J–V curves, a solar simulator (Oriel Newport, 150 W, AM 1.5G) was employed as the light source. A Keithley 2420 SourceMeter was used to apply the bias voltage to the solar cells while the current was recorded. The active area of the solar cells was fixed to 0.1 cm2 using a metal mask, and the J–V curves were recorded by reverse scanning from the forward bias of 1.1 V to the short circuit. A light intensity of 100 mW cm−2 was calibrated using a Si reference cell (Oriel Newport PN91150V). The external quantum efficiency (EQE) was measured using a 300 W xenon lamp (Newport 66902), a lock-in amplifier (Newport Merlin digital 70140) and a monochromator (Cornerstone CS260). Impedance spectroscopy (IS) measurements under illumination were carried out using a Metrohm PGSTAT302N Autolab with a FRA module. IS measurements were performed using a 20 mV perturbation in the frequency range from 600 kHz to 0.01 Hz at different bias voltages, and the data were analyzed using the ZView software (Scribner Associates Inc.). All of the measurements were performed under ambient conditions.



Fig. 1a shows the schematic of the device structure of planar perovskite solar cells. The planar heterojunction device includes a conductive substrate (FTO), an electron transport layer (TiO2 or Ru-doped TiO2), a layer of mixed halide perovskite CH3NH3PbI3−xClx as the light absorber, a spiro-OMeTAD hole-transport layer, and a gold contact electrode. The cross-sectional SEM image of the device and a partial enlarged cross-sectional image are shown in Fig. 1c and d, respectively. The cross-sectional SEM image confirms the designed configuration. The thickness of each layer can significantly influence the photovoltaic performance of the devices. The thicknesses of the pristine or Ru-doped TiO2 ETL could be easily controlled by changing the number of spraying cycles. The optimized thickness for the ETL is about 60 nm in the study. Additionally, a 400 nm CH3NH3PbI3−xClx perovskite film provides a high photovoltaic performance with a hole-transport layer of 100 nm and a gold electrode of 60 nm in thickness. In control experiments, the thickness of each layer is set to the same values as the one reported above.

Scanning electron microscopy images of the bare and TiO2 covered FTO substrates are presented in Fig. 2(a1–c1). Both the pristine and Ru-doped TiO2 ETLs are smooth and homogeneous, which are significantly different from the bare FTO substrate. The deposited TiO2 layers are formed by the compact aggregation of the nanoparticles. As shown in Fig. 2b1 and c1, Ru-doping did not result in an obvious variation in the morphology of the TiO2 films. Perovskite layers deposited on the bare and TiO2 covered FTO substrates were also characterized by FESEM, and the representative images are given in Fig. 2(a2–c2). As shown in Fig. 2a2, the perovskite layer deposited on the bare FTO did not fully cover the substrate, and the exposed FTO layer can be readily found in SEM observations. In contrast, the perovskite layers deposited on the TiO2 films covered the substrate well, as shown in Fig. 2b2 and c2. It is noteworthy that no discernible difference in morphology can be identified between the perovskite layers deposited on the pristine and Ru-doped TiO2 films. Therefore, the difference in performance between the perovskite solar cells using the pristine or Ru-doped TiO2 ETLs is considered to be due to the ETL rather than the perovskite layer.
The electric current mapping images of the pristine and Ru-doped TiO2 ETLs obtained using a CAFM are presented in Fig. 3a and b. Clearly, the current recorded on Ru-doped TiO2 ETLs is significantly higher than that measured on the pristine one. The J–V curves measured using a CAFM are given in Fig. 3c. At a bias potential of 4.5 V, the electric current increased from 0.71 nA for the pristine film to 24 nA for the Ru-doped TiO2 film. These results indicated that the conductivity of the TiO2 ETL was much improved via Ru-doping.
The XRD patterns of the blank FTO substrate and the as-prepared ETLs are shown in Fig. 4a and Fig. S1 (ESI). As expected, only reflections corresponding to the rutile-type SnO2 were observed for the blank FTO substrate. In all XRD patterns of the ETLs deposited on the FTO substrates (shown in Fig. S1, ESI), weak reflections of anatase were identified in addition to the reflections resulting from the FTO substrate. The XRD patterns were also recorded for perovskite layers and are presented in Fig. 4b. In the XRD patterns of perovskite layers deposited on pristine or Ru-doped ETLs, only sharp reflections of perovskite with the indices hh0 (h = 1, 2, 3, and 4) were observed, indicating that the perovskite layer was well crystallized, and the perovskite crystallites exhibit strongly preferred orientation. Such a XRD pattern has been commonly observed in previous studies for perovskite layers deposited on ETLs. In contrast, in the XRD pattern of the perovskite layer deposited on the bare FTO substrate, the reflections of FTO were identified in addition to those from perovskite. This is consistent with the SEM observations that perovskite layers did not fully cover the FTO substrate. Besides, a weak reflection at 12.65° in 2θ indicates the presence of PbI2 in this sample. It is noteworthy that PbI2 was not identified in the perovskite layers deposited on both pristine and Ru-doped ETLs.
A quality ETL of the perovskite solar cell should efficiently extract the electrons from the light-harvester and then transport the electrons to the external circuit, meanwhile, strongly block the backward transport of electrons from FTO to the light-harvester or hole-transport materials. The rectifying properties of an ETL provide important information on its performance. To investigate the rectifying behavior of the interface between the FTO and ETL, simple devices with a structure of “FTO substrate/ETL/hole-transport layer/Au electrode” were fabricated. The pristine and Ru-doped TiO2 layers had the same optimized thickness of 60 nm. The bias potential between the FTO electrode and the Au electrode continuously increased from −1 V to 1 V. The typical current–voltage curves measured under the dark for different ETLs are shown in Fig. 5a. In the absence of ETLs, a linear J–V relationship is observed, implying that an ohmic contact is formed under this condition. When the compact pristine or Ru-doped TiO2 film was inserted between the FTO and hole-transport layer, a strong rectifying characteristic is observed, which is ascribed to the Schottky contact between the metallic FTO and semiconductor TiO2. It is noteworthy that the Ru-doped TiO2 layer carries a slightly higher forward and lower backward current in comparison with its pristine counterpart. A device with the Ru-doped TiO2 film presents a high rectification ratio, compared with pristine TiO2. These results imply that Ru doping can result in slightly improved rectifying properties, which will benefit the device performance. Doping with Ru is able to increase the carrier density and subsequently the Fermi level of TiO2. Therefore, a narrower but higher Schottky barrier is formed at the interface between the FTO and ETL, as compared to that formed in the case of the pristine TiO2 ETL. Such a higher Schottky barrier is able to block the backward electron transport more efficiently, and the narrower barrier should benefit the forward electron flow. These effects will benefit the photovoltaic performance of the perovskite solar cells.
The effect of doping treatment on the transmittance of the films was characterized by UV-Vis spectroscopy. Fig. 5b shows the transmittance spectra of both the bare and ETL-covered FTO substrates. The Ru-doped and pristine TiO2 ETL-covered FTO substrates presented a similar transmittance within the wavelength range from 300 nm to 800 nm. To determine the band gaps of the as-prepared films, the UV-Vis diffuse reflectance spectra of the two films deposited on quartz substrates were also recorded, and the Kubelka–Munk plots are given in Fig. 5c. The optical band gaps obtained from the Kubelka–Munk plots are 3.25 and 3.15 eV for the pristine and Ru-doped TiO2 films, respectively. Ultraviolet photoelectron spectra (UPS) were recorded to estimate the valence band maximum (VBM) of the films, and are presented in Fig. 5d. The VBM deduced from the UPS for the pristine and Ru-doped films is −7.15 and −6.95 eV, respectively, with respect to the vacuum level. The CBM of the pristine and Ru-doped films is then calculated to be −3.9 and −3.8 eV, respectively. The corresponding energy-level diagram of the fabricated device is shown in Fig. 1b. The up-shifted CBM in the case of the Ru-doped TiO2 film is believed to be more compatible with the perovskite layer, and will reduce the energy loss of electrons in the transportation.
The photovoltaic performance of champion solar cells with different ETLs is shown in Fig. 6a. Obviously, the ETL has an important effect on the performance of the solar cells. The device using bare FTO (without any ETL) presented the lowest PCE of 3.95%, with an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.756 V, a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 10.87 mA cm−2 and a fill factor (FF) of 0.481. After incorporating the pristine TiO2 ETL into the device, the performance of the device showed a qualitative leap. The perovskite solar cell containing the pristine TiO2 ETL demonstrated a Voc of 0.980 V, a Jsc of 20.66 mA cm−2 and a FF of 0.663, resulting in a PCE of 13.42%. The performance of perovskite solar cells was further improved by using Ru-doped TiO2 ETLs. With the doping treatment, the Voc, Jsc, FF, and PCE increased from 0.980 to 0.994 V, 20.66 to 21.91 mA cm−2, 0.663 to 0.721, and 13.42% to 15.70%, respectively. Recently, obvious hysteresis in the J–V curves of perovskite solar cells has been widely observed and considered as a critical issue for photovoltaic performance. However, the origins for the hysteresis in perovskite solar cells have not been fully understood. In this study, the J–V curves of the perovskite solar cells containing different ETLs were also recorded in reverse and forward scan modes under illumination of simulated solar light of 100 mW cm−2 (AM 1.5G). The corresponding J–V curves and photovoltaic parameters are shown in Fig. S2 and Table S1 (ESI), respectively. The photovoltaic parameters of the cell using Ru-doped ETLs are better than those of the device with pristine ETLs, regardless of the scanning directions. The dark current–voltage characteristic curves of the corresponding devices were also measured to investigate the performance of the ETLs in blocking the backward flow of the electrons. As shown in Fig. 6a, the Ru-doped TiO2 ETL exhibited the better blocking performance, as indicated by its higher onset bias in comparison with that of the pristine TiO2 ETL. This implies that the recombination of electrons and holes at the interfaces of ETL/perovskite is more efficiently suppressed in devices using Ru-doped ETLs. The reduction of the recombination benefits the improvement of both the Jsc and Voc. The corresponding incident photo-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) curves for each device are shown in Fig. 6b. The device containing the Ru-doped ETL exhibited higher IPCE values in the wavelength range from 400 to 750 nm. The integrated current densities calculated from the IPCE curves are 19.86 and 21.20 mA cm−2, respectively. These values are in good agreement with those obtained from J–V measurements, as shown in Table 1. Furthermore, the effect of doping concentration of ETLs on the photovoltaic performance of the devices was also investigated (Fig. 6c). The detailed photovoltaic parameters of various devices are summarized in Table 1. It was found that increasing the doping concentration from 0.5% to 1% resulted in further enhancement of the PCE. However, the PCE of the devices declined when the doping concentration was improved to 2%. Then 1% was taken as the optimized concentration of Ru-doping. Thirty devices were fabricated for each kind of ETL, and the histograms of the PCEs of the devices using pristine or 1% Ru-doped ETLs are shown in Fig. 6d. The detailed photovoltaic parameters are listed in Tables S2–S4 (ESI). The efficiency averaged over 30 cells using the 1% Ru-doped TiO2 ETL is 14.74%, with a Voc of 0.991 V, a Jsc of 21.65 mA cm−2, and an FF of 0.687. In comparison, the average efficiency of the 30 devices using the pristine TiO2 ETL is 12.21%, with a Voc of 0.962 V, a Jsc of 20.37 mA cm−2 and an FF of 0.623. The histogram for each kind of device was fitted with a normal distributed model, and the fitting results are also illustrated in Fig. 6d. Both the histograms and the fitting results indicate that doping the TiO2 ETL with 1% Ru indeed statistically improves the performance of the perovskite solar cells.
Device

V
oc
/V

J
sc
/mA cm−2
FF
PCE/%

J
sc
/mA cm−2

R
s/Ω

R
sh/Ω

a 
V
oc: open-circuit photovoltage.
b 
J
sc: short-circuit photocurrent density.
c FF: fill factor.
d PCE: power conversion efficiency.
e 
J
sc: integrated value calculated from the IPCE curve.

Bare FTO
0.756
10.87
0.481
3.95
10.22
TiO2
0.980
20.66
0.663
13.42
19.86
95.65
16522
Ru(0.5%)-Doped TiO2
0.985
21.68
0.677
14.46
21.07
72.31
21025
Ru(1%)-Doped TiO2
0.994
21.91
0.721
15.70
21.20
58.95
24355
Ru(2%)-Doped TiO2
0.990
21.75
0.714
15.37
21.11
61.97
22869
The stability of the perovskite solar cells was investigated by keeping these unpackaged devices in a desiccator and then measuring the J–V curves everyday. As shown in Fig. S3 (ESI), over 80% PCE was retained after the devices were kept in a desiccator for two weeks. Ru-Doping in the TiO2 ETL seems to have little effect on the stability of the devices.
Impedance spectra (IS) of the perovskite solar cells were also recorded to understand the underlying carrier transport behavior in the perovskite solar cells with different ETLs. The measurements were performed under light illumination at various forward biases. The typical Nyquist plots are shown in Fig. S4 (ESI) together with an equivalent circuit used to fit the data. There are two semicircles in the Nyquist plots within the measured frequency range. The fitted parameters, selective contact resistance (Rsc) and recombination resistance (Rrec), are plotted with respect to the applied forward biases and are shown in Fig. 7. As shown in Fig. 7, the doping treatment on the TiO2 ETL reduces the Rsc while enhances the Rrec of the device at the applied forward biases. The reduction of Rsc benefits the injection of charge carriers into selective contact electrodes while the improved Rrec implies less hole–electron recombination in the device. Thus, the Ru-doping of the TiO2 ETL improves the collection efficiency of photo-generated electrons and subsequently the performance of the perovskite solar cells.

In summary, we have successfully demonstrated that doping treatment with Ru on a TiO2 ETL is an efficient approach to improve the photovoltaic performance of planar heterojunction perovskite solar cells. The conductivity of the ETL was largely enhanced after Ru-doping treatment. The optimized concentration of Ru was 1% in the precursor solution. The resultant planar perovskite solar cell with Ru-doped TiO2 ETL yielded a PCE of 15.70%, which is 17% higher than that of the device containing a pristine TiO2 layer (13.42%). Characterization indicated that the conductivity of the TiO2 ETL has been improved by Ru-doping, and the doping also results in a slight upshift of the CBM and VBM.


There are no conflicts to declare.


The authors are very grateful to Dr Jing Liu and Prof. Lang Jiang at Institute of Chemistry, CAS, for their help in the electron mobility measurements, and to Ms Yi Wang and Dr Jieyun Zheng at Institute of Physics, CAS for their help in XPS measurements. This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 21771019, 11574060, 21306005, and 51272049) and the CAS Key Laboratory of Nanosystem and Hierarchical Fabrication. X. Y. would like to acknowledge the support from the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (buctrc201706) and the Key Laboratory of Applied Surface and Colloid Chemistry, Ministry of Education (Shaanxi Normal University) (2017028).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: XRD patterns of blank FTO, pristine and Ru-doped TiO2 ETLs deposited on FTO substrates, J–V curves of solar cells measured at different scan directions, stability data of the devices, typical Nyquist plots, summary of photovoltaic parameters of the cells with different ETLs, detailed photovoltaic parameters of 30 cells with the pristine and 1% Ru-doped ETLs. See DOI: 10.1039/c7tc05252a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018