 DOI: 10.1039/C4CP03022B
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 25799-25808


Shuang-Bao
Li
,

Yu-Ai
Duan
,

Yun
Geng
,

Hai-Bin
Li
,

Jian-Zhao
Zhang
,

Hong-Liang
Xu
,

Min
Zhang
* and 

Zhong-Min
Su
*

Institute of Functional Material Chemistry, Faculty of Chemistry, Northeast Normal University, Changchun 130024, Jilin, P. R. China. E-mail: mzhang@nenu.edu.cn; zmsu@nenu.edu.cn

Received
10th July 2014
, Accepted 3rd September 2014
First published on 3rd September 2014
In the current work, a series of bithiopheneimide (BTI)-based D–A copolymers were investigated based on the reported PDTSBTI (1) to screen excellent molecules toward organic photovoltaic (OPV) donor materials. It is found that the PCE based on the proposed derivative 4, where the silicon atom is replaced with vinyl and cyano groups on the DTS unit, shows a 70 percent improvement by Scharber diagrams compared with its prototype 1. Then, the charge transfer dynamics of 1/PC71BM and 4/PC71BM were investigated, including the intermolecular charge transfer (inter-CT) and recombination (inter-CR) rates. The theoretical data demonstrate that the ratio kinter-CT/kinter-CR of 4/PC71BM heterojunction is about 1 × 105 times higher than that of 1/PC71BM. These results clearly reveal that the designed donor molecule 4 will be a promising candidate for high-performance OPV device. We expect that this work from electron processing at the D/A interface may provide a theoretical guideline for further optimization and design of organic copolymer donor materials.

Organic photovoltaics (OPVs) utilizing conjugated polymers as donor materials are receiving increasing attention nowadays because of their potential advantages, such as low cost, flexibility, transparency, ease of processing, low toxicity, etc. Among all kinds of OPVs, bulk heterojunction (BHJ) OPV, composed of a blend of bicontinuous and interpenetrating donor (D) and acceptor (A) components, is one kind of bulk material, which is among the best OPV device architectures so far. In general, there are three elementary electronic processes in OPVs: (i) absorption of solar photons and generation of excitons (bound electron–hole pairs) in the active layer, (ii) dissociation of excitons into free charge carriers at D/A interface and (iii) charge transporting into the respective electrodes for charge collection through the organic semiconductors. These processes involving the most important parameters to affect the performance of OPV devices determine the power conversion efficiency (PCE) cooperatively, which has also been the research focus of experimentalists and theoreticians during the past decades. In recent years, PCEs have been rapidly improved, especially for polymer solar cells. Recently, Yang and co-workers reported a solution-processed tandem OPV device employing poly-(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and poly[2,7-(5,5-bis-(3,7-dimethyloctyl)-5H-dithieno [3,2-b:2′,3′d]pyran)-alt-4,7-(5,6-difluoro-2,1,3-benzothiadiazole)] (PDTP-DFBT) as donor materials, [6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM) as acceptor material. The PCE reached up to 10.6%, which is the highest PCE for conjugated polymer OPV, certified by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory. Although it still lagging behind that of inorganic solar cells (25% for Si-based cell), the research on this kind of stable, low-cost, and environmentally-friendly OPV material is still very valuable. Therefore, developing an effective way to enhance the PCE through decoration by a functional group is still a key aspect in improving the performance of polymer OPVs.

In the operation of OPV devices, the PCE is dominated intricately by many factors with respect to electron processing, which are mainly classified into three dominant ones, namely, open circuit voltage (Voc), short-circuit current density (Jsc) and fill factor (FF). Consequently, three steps for improving the performance are as follows: (i) decreasing the energy gap between the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of the donor molecule to harvest more sunlight, which leads to higher Jsc, (ii) reducing the HOMO level of the donor to increase Voc, which is closely related to the HOMO level of the donor and the LUMO level of the acceptor, (iii) increasing the charge carrier mobility of the donor material to enlarge Jsc and increase FF. Moreover, the differences between LUMOs of D and A, i.e., energetic driving force (ΔEL–L), should be larger than 0.3 eV to ensure quantitative charge separation at the D/A interface. In addition, the intermolecular charge transfer (inter-CT, namely exciton dissociation) and intermolecular charge recombination (inter-CR) between D and A are the two pivotal interfacial processes whose competition strongly influences the entire device efficiency. Therefore, the dynamic rate of inter-CT (kinter-CT) should be as rapid as possible to improve Jsc and FF, while the rate of inter-CR (kinter-CR) should be as slow as possible.
In general, for D–A copolymer donor materials, the effective combination of donor moiety and acceptor moiety may tune the PCE significantly. Yang and co-workers reported a D–A copolymer PDTSBT, which is composed of dithienosilole (DTS) donor moiety and benzothiadiazole (BT) acceptor moiety, exhibiting broad absorption spectrum and good hole transport property. Simultaneously, the PCE of an OPV device constructed from PDTSBT/PC71BM reached 5.1%. Subsequently, based on this donor unit, an improved D–A copolymer PDTSBTI (1) with bithiopheneimide (BTI) unit was synthesized by Marks and colleagues, and the OPV constructed from 1/PC71BM showed a high PCE of 6.41%. It is clear that imide-functionalized arene BTI, in comparison with BT, can increase polymer solubility and provide stronger electron-withdrawing capacity than amide fragments. With the rapid progresses in computer technology and quantum mechanics, theoretical calculations also provide a convenient and efficient way for rapidly screening high-efficiency OPV materials. Nevertheless, for material design, most theoretical investigations only focus on the assessment of fundamental properties such as geometries, electronic structures, and optical properties. Thus, it is of great significance to investigate the inter-CT and inter-CR processes at the D/A interface, which have a considerable impact on photo-induced charge generation. Recent studies have reported a new developments in theoretical methods to probe the dynamics of inter-CT and inter-CR at the D/A interface. For example, Troisi and co-workers showed that the Marcus–Levich–Jortner rate equation, including the effect of the quantum vibrational modes, could provide reasonable kinter-CT and kinter-CR. The calculated rate values are in agreement with the range of available experimental data for the model P3MT/PCBM (P3MT is poly(3-hexylthiophene), and PCBM is [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester). Sun and co-workers have revealed that the Marcus equation can rationally simulate the dynamics of inter-CT and inter-CR at D/A interface. Subsequently, they incorporated the external electric field into the generalized Mulliken–Hush model and Marcus model and found that the kinter-CT and kinter-CR get faster when the strength of the external electric field is increased, which was considered to be induced by the increase in electronic coupling. Therefore, in this paper, combining the advantages of BTI, we designed a series of D–A copolymers 2–5 using BTI as the acceptor unit with different donor units cyclopentadithiophene (CPDT, 2), methylene-CPDT (3), cyanomethylene-CPDT (4), and biscyanomethylene-CPDT (5). The energy matching of frontier molecular orbitals (FMOs) of D and A, absorption spectra, the inter-CT and inter-CR rates as evaluation criterion are utilized to screen these donors with high charge transfer rates. Here, the introduction of carbon and vinyl group is aimed at tuning the energy levels, and introducing cyano groups is to broaden absorption spectra for matching the solar spectrum as much as possible. All the repeated units of copolymers and simplified interface structure are shown in Fig. 1. Our work is expected to not only offer promising donor candidates for OPV devices, but also to provide a theoretical guideline for further optimization of OPV devices.
The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 displays the theoretical methods used for the characterization of donor materials, kinter-CT and kinter-CR (based on Marcus formula). Then, Section 3 shows (i) the geometry structures; (ii) FMO energy levels and Voc; (iii) absorption spectra and intramolecular charge transfer (intra-CT); (iv) the estimated PCE of the BHJ OPVs based on 1–4/PC71BM by employing the Scharber diagram; (v) the inter-CT and inter-CR dynamics of D/PC71BM. Finally, the conclusions are summarised in Section 4.

According to previous studies, the alkyl-branched chain has already been proven to possess negligible influence on the electronic structures and optical properties of materials. Thus, to save the computational cost, methyl groups were employed to replace all the alkyl-branched chains (R1 and R2), and the hydrogen atoms were utilized to cap the oligomers. Recent studies have demonstrated that the PBE0 functional can give a very good estimate regarding thiophene derivatives, and thus the ground-state geometries of all the investigated systems and PC71BM were optimized at PBE0/6-31G(d) level. For the absorption spectra and excited-state energies based on the TD-DFT calculations, CAM-B3LYP and PBE0 with 6-31G(d) basis set were employed to calculate the first singlet excitation energy of the dimer model of 1, corresponding to the maximum absorption wavelength. The effect of the solvent (o-dichlorobenzene (DCB)) within conductor-like polarizable continuum model (CPCM) in a linear response (LR) and nonequilibrium regime was also taken into account during the TD-DFT calculations. The results with the experimental data are collected in Table S1 in the ESI, and the simulated absorption spectra are plotted in Fig. S1 (ESI). According to Table S1 (ESI), the difference between maximum absorption wavelength values of PBE0 functional and experiment is only 7 nm. Combining Table S1 with Fig. S1, ESI, it is confirmed that PBE0 is more reasonable than CAM-B3LYP. Thus, the absorption spectra and excited-state energies of all the investigated systems were simulated at the TD-CPCM-PBE0/6-31G(d) level. It is crucial to recognize that the same solvent with 1 in experiment for these systems was adopted to compare their performance in OPV. The charge density difference (CDD) maps which were used to investigate intra-CT upon electronic transition were implemented in Multiwfn 3.0.

For the interface model, the intermolecular distance between the isolated donor (monomer, n = 1) and PC71BM is fixed at 3.5 Å, which is often exploited to investigate intermolecular coupling with fullerene derivative. Based on this model, the ground-state geometries of 1/PC71BM and 4/PC71BM were optimized by B3LYP/6-31G(d) method, which has been demonstrated to present a reasonable description of the heterojunction structure by Troisi and co-workers, and the initial structures are shown in Fig. 1(c). The excited-state energies were calculated at the TD-CAM-B3LYP/6-31G(d) level. The long-range-corrected CAM-B3LYP functional, which was proven to be more appropriate for inter-CT excitations between D and A, was chosen to calculate the vertical excitation energies and the oscillator intensities within the framework of TDDFT. Absorption spectra and CDD maps of heterojunctions were simulated by GaussSum2.2. All the abovementioned model calculations were performed in the Gaussian 09 software package.

Considering the weak electronic coupling between D and A, it is assumed that the inter-CT and inter-CR can be described by the nonadiabatic electron transfer theory. The kinter-CT and kinter-CR at the interface constructed by these copolymers and PC71BM can be expressed by the Marcus semi-classical model:

(1)
where
λ represents the reorganization energy, VDA is the electronic coupling between D and A, ΔG is the Gibbs free energy change of the reaction, h is the Planck constant, kB is the Boltzmann constant, and T is the temperature, which is set as 300 K for our calculations.

In principle, the total reorganization energy (λ) is decomposed into internal reorganization energy (λint) and external reorganization energy (λext). The former originates from the changes in the equilibrium geometries of D and A when they gain or lose charge upon electron transfer, and the latter is derived from the surrounding medium. The former λint can be approximately evaluated by:
λint = [E(A−) − E(A)] + [E(D) − E(D+)]
(2)
where
E(A−) and E(A) are the energies of the neutral acceptor A at the anionic and optimal ground-state geometries, respectively. E(D) and E(D+) are the energies of the cation donor D at the neutral and optimal cation geometries, respectively. However, λext, which is not easy to estimate quantitatively in solid state, is usually significantly smaller in solids than in liquids, but it still accounts for a good fraction of the λ. Recently, Troisi and co-workers have reported that maintaining λext within the physically plausible range would modify the rate only by one order of magnitude, which is not considered to be a very large error in that context. As a consequence, 0.11 eV, which is the average reference value for P3HT/PC61BM interface, was used as a constant value for λext in our calculations.

The electronic coupling can be estimated directly from the generalized Mulliken–Hush (GMH) formalism in a diabatic description, which refers to a vertical transition from the initial state (S0) to the final excited-state (Sn):
(3)
where
μtr is the calculated transition dipole moment along the z axis (Fig. 1(c)), the direction of vertical transition. Δμ is the dipole moment difference between S0 and Sn, and ΔE corresponds to the vertical excitation energy. The transfer integrals of 1/PC71BM and 4/PC71BM heterojunctions were evaluated by M062X/6-31G(d) method in Q-chem 4.0 software. Note that the M062X functional was usually used for considering the weak interaction between the molecules.

In the exciton dissociation and charge recombination processes, Gibbs free energy change of charge recombination, ΔGinter-CR, can be expressed under the thermodynamic criteria as:
ΔGinter-CR = EIP(D) − EEA(A)
(4)
where
EIP(D) represents the ionization potential of the donor that can be estimated by the HOMO energy of the donor, and EEA(A) represents the electron affinity of the acceptor, which is considered to be the LUMO energy of the acceptor.

While the Gibbs free energy change of exciton dissociation, ΔGinter-CT, is written as the Rehm–Weller equation:
ΔGinter-CT = −ΔGinter-CT − ΔE0–0 − Eb
(5)
where Δ
E0–0 is the lowest excited state energy of free-base donor and Eb is the exciton binding energy, defined as the energy difference between the electronic and optical band-gap energy. As defined above, ΔGinter-CT can be deduced from the parameters ΔGinter-CR, ΔE0–0 and Eb, which are strongly related to the FMO energy levels.


All the molecular geometries were fully optimized at the PBE0/6-31G(d) level as mentioned above. All the optimized monomer structures are plotted in Fig. S2 (ESI). Their computed dihedral angles between the planes of BTI and DTS units are 11°, 9°, 12°, 11°, and 13°, which present similar planarity.


To our knowledge, Voc, charge separation ability, and absorption of solar photons in solar cells are extremely affected by the FMO levels. Herein, we discussed their FMOs first in detail to analyse the parameters related to the performance of OPVs such as ΔEL–L, Voc, and absorption spectra. Recent studies showed that the HOMO energy levels of the copolymers calculated with the monomer model are good enough to represent the performance of the bulk material, and the HOMO–LUMO energy gaps can be expected to be the first singlet excitation energies of the dimer models calculated by TD-DFT method. To verify the benchmark of energy level in OPV, we tested three hybrid functionals B3LYP, PBE0 and BHandHLYP to calculate the HOMO energy level with 6-31G(d) basis set for the monomer model 1 as a reference. The results listed in Table S2 (ESI) indicate that PBE0 functional gives the best value compared with the experimental result (only 0.04 eV difference). Therefore, the PBE0/6-31G(d) method was used to evaluate the HOMO energies of model 1–5. Meanwhile, the polymer band-gaps were estimated as the first singlet excitation energies of the dimers, and LUMO energy levels of 1–5 were derived by adding the band-gap to the HOMO level. Currently, fullerene derivatives are the most widely-used electron acceptor materials because of their stability, their generous capacity to accept electrons, the relatively-low cost and commercial availability. Hence, we followed the experimental precognition and chose PC71BM as the electron acceptor in this work, whose HOMO and LUMO energy levels in experiments are −6.1 and −4.3 eV, respectively. Based on these approximations, the FMO levels of all the copolymers are estimated and depicted in Fig. 2, along with those of PC71BM measured in experiment. According to the FMO energy levels of the five donors and PC71BM, the energetic driving forces ΔEL–L, namely, the energy differences between the LUMOs of the donor polymers 1–5 and PC71BM, are obtained and listed in Table 1. The values for 1–4 are 0.86, 0.89, 0.94 and 0.46 eV, respectively, which are all larger than 0.3 eV. This confirms the favourable capacity of electron transfer from D to A materials and ensures the effective exciton dissociation at the D/A interface. However, when considering PC71BM as the acceptor, the driving force ΔEL–L of 5 is a negative value (−0.37), which indicates the heterojunction based on 5/PC71BM possesses the poor capacity of electron transfer from D to A. Therefore, model 5 is seldom mentioned in the next analysis.


1


2


3


4


5

ΔEL–L
0.86
0.89
0.94
0.46
−0.37

V
oc (exp.)
0.87 (0.80)
0.79
0.74
1.02
—
A significant parameter to evaluate the PCE of BHJ OPVs is the Voc. We note that Voc is pinned to the material and environmental parameters such as semiconductor energy levels, work functions of the electrodes, light intensity, solar cell and light-source temperatures, charge-carrier recombination, and external fluorescence efficiency. However, several theoretical and experimental researches support the view that energy-gap between the acceptor LUMO and donor HOMO gives the dominant contribution to Voc for polymer BHJ OPVs. Thus, a simple and effective way to estimate Voc could be described by:
Voc = 1/e(|EH(D) − EL(A)|) − 0.3 V
(6)
where
e is the elementary charge, EH(D) is the HOMO energy level of the donor, EL(A) is the LUMO energy level of the acceptor, and 0.3 V is an empirical factor for efficient charge separation. Based on this approach, we preliminarily estimated the values of Voc. The results summarized in Table 1 suggest that the Voc of 1 is in accordance with the experimental value. The Voc values of 1–4 systems are found to be in the order of 4 > 1 > 2 > 3, referring to Table 1, implying that the designed material 4 could possess a higher Voc than those of 1–3. As a result, 4 could become a potential promising candidate in high-performance OPVs according to its high Voc.


It is commonly accepted that the absorption spectra of the polymers should match the solar spectrum as much as possible to harvest more photons and increase the Jsc. Therefore, we investigated the photoexcitation properties of 1–4 to understand the underlying physical processes involved in the photocurrent generation. The simulated absorption spectra and involved oscillator strengths of 1–4 (n = 2) estimated at the TD-CPCM-PBE0/6-31G(d) level are presented in Fig. S3 (ESI). The results reveal that the designed 2 and 3 possess a similar peak shape, intensity and width with 1. Only compound 4 exhibits an extra peak at 400–600 nm and a broad and bathochromic-shifted absorption in the visible region. Combining the abovementioned discussion of Voc, the designed 4 is expected to be a promising donor material applied in OPV device. Herein, in the following section, we investigated the photophysical processes of 1 and 4 in detail.

The simulated absorption spectra of 1 and 4 (n = 2) are presented in Fig. 3(a), and the corresponding excitation energies, oscillator strengths and dominant excitation characters are all listed in Table 2. As seen from the top part of Fig. 3(a), the simulated absorption spectrum of 1 matches the experimental spectrum very well, including transition energy and transition intensity, which also further verify the reliability of our simulation strategy. For systems 1, the maximum absorption peak with the largest oscillator strength arises from S0 → S1 transition, corresponding to the transition from HOMO (H) to LUMO (L) (Table 2). Excitingly, compared with 1, the designed 4 displays a considerably broader and bathochromic-shifted absorption in lowest-energy region from 500 to 900 nm, which is composed of two absorption peaks at 697 and 537 nm. The absorption peak at 697 nm arises from S0 → S1 transition, associated with the electronic transitions of H → L. Meanwhile, the absorption peak at 537 nm is traced to the transition of S0 → S3, majorly attributed to H → L + 2 transition. For the other strong absorption peak in high-energy region, 1 exhibits a weak peak at around 400 nm, which originates from the S0 → S4 transition; while 4 possesses a similar strong absorption peak around 350 nm with two low-energy peaks. This new peak is attributed to several transitions (from S0 to higher excited states, such as S11, S14, and S18). Consequently, the analysis of electronic transitions confirms that the designed system 4 will be an excellent promising donor material for OPVs because of its broad and red-shifted absorption in the 300–900 nm region, which is beneficial for improving Jsc. Moreover, as expected, 4 would possess higher PCE than 1 due to its large Voc and Jsc.

E/eV (nm)

f

Composition

a H denotes HOMO and L denotes LUMO.


1

S1
2.03 (610)
2.5118
H → L (95%)
S4
2.97 (418)
0.3085
H − 1 → L + 1 (84%)
H → L + 2 (9%)

4

S1
1.78 (697)
1.0253
H → L (88%)
S3
2.31 (537)
0.9072
H − 1 → L + 1 (10%)
H → L + 2 (74%)
S11
3.47 (357)
0.2626
H → L + 4 (89%)
S14
3.63 (341)
0.3111
H − 4 → L (40%)
H − 2 → L + 2 (42%)
S18
3.82 (324)
0.2817
H − 3 → L (15%)
H − 3 → L + 1 (68%)
The intra-CT process is normally a key factor to evaluate the capacity of the exciton dissociation into free charges because an effective exciton separation can increase photogenerated charge carriers. It is necessary to investigate the intra-CT of donor materials. The intra-CT in 1 and 4 was visualized by the charge difference density (CDD) maps to analyse the charge and energy transfer from the ground state to excited states in conjugated polymers. The intra-CT and related transferred charge values of major excited states are given in Fig. 4. The region where electron density increased or decreased during the transition process is clearly shown in Fig. 4. The intra-CT characteristics from D to A moieties for 1 and 4 are observed mainly in the involved excited states. Note that the charge transfer from CPDT to the cyanomethylene group for S0 → S1 and S0 → S3 transitions in 4 may increase the intra-CT intensity. Simultaneously, the evaluated transferred charge of 4 is larger than 1. Thus, the exciton generated through photoexcitation in 4 may easily dissociate into the separated charges due to the introduction of the cyanomethylene group. The PCE of OPV because of the donor 4 may be larger than those constructed from 1. In conclusion, 4 will present a considerably better performance from the view of CDD and transferred charge compared with 1.

To estimate the efficiencies of the designed molecules, Scharber diagrams which have been widely applied for evaluating the performance of the PCBM-based BHJ OPVs, were used to predict the PCEs of OPVs based on 1–4 donors and PC71BM. In this prediction, under the design rule proposed by Scharber and co-workers, the charge carrier mobility and FF are assumed to be 10−3 cm2 V−1 S−1 and 0.65, respectively. Based on these parameters, the PCEs could be evaluated from the band-gaps and the LUMO energy levels of the donors. The values for the PCEs of four OPV devices constructed from 1/PC71BM, 2/PC71BM, 3/PC71BM and 4/PC71BM are depicted in Fig. 5, and are ∼5.0%, ∼5.0%, ∼4.5%, and ∼8.5%, respectively. Nevertheless, the experimental PCEs of 1/PC71BM is 6.41%, which is slightly larger than the predicted values. It may result from a higher FF assumed for 1. In addition, the purpose of our investigation is to gain insight into the qualitative relationship between the structures and their PCEs. Thus, we expect that the performance of OPV performance using Scharber diagrams is credible to some extent. From this prediction, the obtained PCE of 4/PC71BM is again confirmed to be the largest among them, which further illustrates that 4 will be a more promising photovoltaic polymer donor material for high-efficiency OPVs. Subsequently, the charge transfer dynamics of 1/PC71BM and 4/PC71BM is investigated to further verify the super performance of 4 employed in OPV.


During the photocurrent generation process, it is also possible for the hole–electron pair to recombine at the D/A interface, i.e., charge recombination, which impedes the exciton dissociation. The inter-CT and inter-CR are two key interfacial processes whose competition directly influences the PCE. To work as a high-efficiency OPV device, the inter-CT, which produces the photocurrent, needs to be maximized, while the inter-CR, which decreases the photocurrent, needs to be minimized. Thus, the inter-CT excited state, playing an important role in inter-CT and inter-CR processes, needs to be identified in detail. Based on the optimized geometries of interfacial models to stand for the exciton dissociation at the D/A interface (Fig. 6), the transition energies and oscillator strengths of all the investigated complexes are detailed in Fig. 3(b) and Table S3 (ESI), and the corresponding CDD maps are plotted in Fig. S4 and S5 in ESI.Fig. 3(b) illustrates that the strongest absorption peaks for 1/PC71BM and 4/PC71BM are S10 and S15, respectively, which are all assigned to the intra-CT in each donor and weak inter-CT from D to A molecules. They are mainly classified as the intra-CT from D to A moiety for different donors. From the CDD map of 1/PC71BM depicted in Fig. S4 (ESI), we infer that S13–S16, S19 and S20 are likely to be the inter-CT excited states because the hole is mainly localized on 1 and PC71BM and the electron is only localized on PC71BM, and for PC71BM it is a localized excited state. Similarly, the inter-CT excited states are possibly S1, S3, S4, S19 and S20 for 4/PC71BM (Fig. S5, ESI). It is worth noting that we only considered the inter-CT excited states characterized charge transfer from D to A, and the pure inter-CT excited state is identified as the fully charged separation state, corresponding to the hole localized on D and electron localized on A.

All the parameters to evaluate kinter-CT and kinter-CR theoretically are listed in Table 3, as mentioned in Section 2.2. Consequently, there is almost no difference for the λ values between 1/PC71BM and 4/PC71BM, suggesting that this factor will not cause differences in inter-CT and inter-CR rates for the two systems. The results shown in Table 3 suggest that the total VDA of the designed system 4/PC71BM is smaller than that of 1/PC71BM. The VDA of the involved excitations in 1/PC71BM and 4/PC71BM are exposed in Table S4 (ESI). The decreasing VDA value of 4/PC71BM may result in the reduction of the kinter-CT and kinter-CR. However, it is not the only decisive factor for the final kinter-CT and kinter-CR. Therefore, the ΔG which is exponentially related to kinter-CT and kinter-CR was then focused on.

λ
int


λ


V
DA

ΔGinter-CR
ΔGinter-CT

k
inter-CR


k
inter-CT


k
inter-CT/kinter-CR

1/PC71BM

0.31
0.42
5.42
−1.17
−0.86

1.80 × 1012


8.80 × 1015


4.89 × 103


4/PC71BM

0.30
0.41
2.87
−1.32
−0.46

7.09 × 108


2.03 × 1017


2.86 × 108

According to eqn (1), the ΔG is an important factor for the final kinter-CT and kinter-CR. In general, all the inter-CT and inter-CR processes were considered to be exothermal reactions, i.e., ΔG < 0. In Marcus theory, the electron-transfer rates will reach a maximum when ΔG + λ = 0. In addition, when ΔG + λ < 0, i.e., the absolute value of ΔG is larger than λ, the electron-transfer rate will increase with increasing ΔG. Therefore, a better donor material would endow larger ΔGinter-CT and smaller ΔGinter-CR to ensure effective exciton dissociation and weak charge recombination. In eqn (4), the calculated ΔGinter-CR of 1/PC71BM and 4/PC71BM are −1.17 and −1.32 eV, respectively. Thus, the kinter-CR of 4/PC71BM is considered to be the lowest among these interfaces because its absolute value of ΔGinter-CR is the largest. On the premise of the same acceptor PC71BM, the lower LUMO energy level of 4 than that of 1 led to the smaller absolute value of ΔGinter-CT for 4/PC71BM, which will obviously increase the kinter-CT at 4/PC71BM interface according to eqn (1).
Combining the aforementioned parameters with eqn (1), we estimated the kinter-CT and kinter-CR of two complexes here. The results are listed in Table 3. From Table 3, we find that both the kinter-CT values are higher than 1015 s−1. Although the value at 1/PC71BM interfaces is very high, kinter-CT at 4/PC71BM interface is surprisingly up to 1017 s−1. While the kinter-CR for 4/PC71BM interface is significantly lower than the other. To highlight the differences, the ratio of kinter-CT/kinter-CR is also calculated in Table 3. It is clear that the ratio at 4/PC71BM interface is about 1 × 105 times larger than that at 1/PC71BM interfaces. It indicates that the OPV device constructed by 4 and PC71BM may have much stronger effective exciton dissociation into the separated positive and negative charges before transfer, and thus exhibits higher Jsc than that based on the reported 1 and PC71BM. Overall, 4 is considered to be a promising candidate for high-performance BHJ OPVs using PC71BM as an acceptor material because of its high Voc, broad absorption in 300–900 nm region, large intra-CT, fast kinter-CT and slow kinter-CR.

In summary, we have systematically characterized the proposed systems 1–5, including geometry and electronic structures, Voc, and key parameters in close connection with Jsc for OPV devices, to confirm the superiority of the designed systems by DFT and TD-DFT methods. The results of FMO show well-matched energy levels between 1–4 and acceptor PC71BM, and the ΔEL–L is enough to realize a desirable forward electron transfer from D to A and ensure the effective exciton splitting and charge separation at the D/A interface. Compared to the reported system 1, the designed 4 possesses higher Voc, and a broader and bathochromic shift absorption in the region from 300 to 900 nm. Then, we also predicted PCEs of OPVs composed of 1–4 donor materials by Scharber diagram, and the predicted value based on 4/PC71BM is approximately 8.5%, which has a 70% increase for 1/PC71BM. It confirms that 4 will be an excellent material among all the investigated molecules here. Importantly, inter-CT dynamics at 1/PC71BM and 4/PC71BM interfaces was discussed in depth, which is considered to be the major limitation of photocurrent generation upon material parameters that determine the final efficiency. Our calculations show that the device based on 4/PC71BM heterojunctions has fast kinter-CT (2.03 × 1017 s−1) and slow kinter-CR (7.09 × 108 s−1). Furthermore, the ratio of kinter-CT/kinter-CR for 4/PC71BM heterojunction presents about 1 × 105 times improvement compared with the heterojunctions constructed from 1, which promotes the effective exciton dissociation into the fully separated positive and negative charges effectively and will further improve the Jsc and PCE. Therefore, we believe that 4 will be a promising candidate for superior performance BHJ OPVs using PC71BM as an acceptor material. Moreover, an effective and integrated recipe to predict D–A polymer donor materials of OPVs is represented systematically.


The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from NSFC (21203020, 21131001, 21273030, and 21363025), SRFDP and RGC ERG Joint Research Program (20120043140001) and the Science and Technology Development Planning of Jilin Province (201201071 and 201201067).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Lists of functional tests for optimization and absorption by different functionals using 1 as a reference, the excitation energies (E) and oscillator strengths (f) for 1/PC71BM and 4/PC71BM heterojunctions (n = 1, n represents the number of repeating units), and electronic couplings (VDA) of inter-CT excited states in 1/PC71BM and 4/PC71BM heterojunctions. Plots of functional test for 1 (n = 2) absorption spectra optical, optimized geometries for 1–5, simulated absorption spectra and related oscillator strengths of 1–4, and charge density difference (CDD) maps for heterojunctions based upon 1 and 4. See DOI: 10.1039/c4cp03022b
This journal is © the Owner Societies 2014