 DOI: 10.1039/C4CC03767G
(Feature Article)
Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 11984-11993


Wallace C. H.
Choy


Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong, China. E-mail: chchoy@eee.hku.hk

Received
17th May 2014
, Accepted 4th July 2014
First published on 4th July 2014
Recently, various metal nanostructures have been introduced into organic solar cells (OSCs) for performance enhancement. Here, we review the recent progress in OSCs incorporated with multiple metal nanostructures including various metal nanopatterns and metal nanomaterials. Multiple physical effects arise from these incorporated nanostructures, which require careful distinction. Changes induced by the metal nanostructures are examined in detail from the optical and electrical aspects. With the comprehensive understanding of the physical mechanisms for various metal nanostructures, further improvement in device performance and emerging applications can be expected for the new class of nanostructure-incorporated OSCs.

With the interesting features of low cost, low-temperature fabrication, semi-transparency, and mechanical flexibility, organic thin-film solar cells (OSCs) are currently one of the emerging optoelectronic devices and show a bright outlook for green energy industry. Over the last several years, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of OSCs has increased from 0.1% in 2001 to nearly 9% nowadays. Currently, a critical challenge for OSCs lies in surpassing the performance even beyond the 10% PCE barrier.

The persisting issues of the short exciton diffusion length and the low carrier mobility in organic semiconductors are intrinsic. In consideration of these limitations, the active layers of OSCs are commonly kept thin, hence limiting the absorption efficiency of incident light. To address this issue, many light-trapping strategies have been developed including non-plasmonic design (the light-trapping design functions not mainly due to the plasmonic effect) and plasmonic design (the light-trapping design functions mainly due to the plasmonic effect). Patterned substrates and random wrinkles are two typical light-trapping examples which can be attributed to non-plasmonic design in OSCs. In this review, we focus on OSCs with plasmonically enhanced performance realized through the incorporation of various types of metal nanostructures including metal nanopatterns and metal nanomaterials for achieving highly efficient devices. Here, we will examine the optical and electrical effects of metal nanopatterns and nanomaterials incorporated in the different layers of OSCs. The interfacial effects of metal nanostructures incorporated in the carrier transport layers (CTLs) on the performance of OSCs will also be described.

Recently, plasmonic metal nanostructures have been extensively introduced into solar cells for highly efficient light harvesting. Through the various optical modes such as localized surface plasmon resonances (LSPRs), surface plasmonic resonances (SPRs), quasi-guided modes, Fabry–Perot modes, their hybrids, etc., nanoscale metal structures with unique optical properties on multilayered device structures have attracted extensive research interests.

Patterned metal nanostructures such as 2-D metal nanogratings have been investigated experimentally and theoretically for improving light trapping in solar cells. A number of approaches can be employed to fabricate these patterned structures experimentally. For instance, the metal can be directly deposited on diffraction grating substrates to form periodic grating patterns, onto which the active layer is spin-coated and a top semi-transparent electrode is required. Alternatively, patterns can be directly formed on the active layer via an imprint method. Furthermore, due to the very thin nature of the interface layer (∼10 nm), the subsequently deposited silver anode can develop a metal grating pattern accordingly. As shown in Fig. 1(a), patterns can be observed on the active layer of P3HT:PC61BM. On the other hand for the device with the finished silver grating, different diffraction colors can be seen at different tilted angles as shown in Fig. 1(b)–(d). Besides 2-D gratings, 3-D gratings and randomly patterned metal nanostructures have also been reported to address the optical polarization dependency, as will be discussed later. Examples of 3-D gratings and 3-D random nanostructures can be seen in Fig. 2–4, respectively.

Besides patterned metal nanostructures, various metal nanomaterials such as nanoparticles (NPs), nanorods, nanowires, nanocubes, nanoplates and nanoprisms have been introduced into the different layers of the multilayered structure of OSCs. The influence of metal nanomaterials on the optical and electrical properties of OSCs is strongly related to the geometry, material composition, size and concentration of the nanomaterials, which can be adjusted according to different effects. For instance, the plasmon resonance band position is easily tunable by changing the size of Au NPs, as shown in Fig. 5. Plasmonic nanomaterials can be prepared by thermal evaporation of a thin metal film followed by annealing to form island-like structures, or deposition of a metal through a template. As a more feasible and controllable and thus more prevalent approach, chemical synthesis of metal nanomaterials of NPs and other geometries through a solution process has been extensively reported.


Up to now, many reports have focused on the effects of a single type of metal nanostructures within a single layer of the same device, for which the combinational or coupling effects between various structures have not been fully considered. Very recently, in order to further increase OSC efficiency, multiple metal nanostructures have been simultaneously incorporated into a single device to achieve optimal performance. The reported simultaneous incorporation of multiple metal nanostructures includes blending of metal NPs with different materials (one instance is shown in Fig. 6) or geometries (as shown in Fig. 7), doping NPs of different size into both the front and rear interfacial layers, or combining a metal grating electrode and metal NPs within a single device (as shown in Fig. 8).

Metal nanostructures incorporated into OSCs can affect the device in a wide range of aspects, including changes in the optical and electrical properties. As a result, the origin of the performance enhancement may be many-fold. Furthermore, the incorporation of multiple metal nanostructures into a single device brings an even greater challenge in studying the introduced effects: besides the combined influence from each of the individual nanostructures, coupling or interaction between these nanostructures (e.g. coupling or hybridization between multiple SPRs or SPR and LSPR, as will be discussed later) can occur which can be utilized to further improve the device performance (e.g. realizing broadband absorption enhancement). Consequently, it is crucial to carefully distinguish the different physical mechanisms at play when investigating OSCs incorporated with various metal nanostructures. In the following section, we will examine the effects of multiple metal nanostructures on OSCs from the optical and electrical aspects.

Optically speaking, metal nanostructures can improve light harvesting in OSCs by light scattering and strong surface plasmon polariton (SPP) effects. Surface plasmons refer to waves interacting with the free electrons of certain metals, resulting in strongly enhanced electromagnetic fields on the surface. Commonly used metals are gold, copper, silver, and their alloys, the plasmon resonant frequency of which lies in the visible region. SPR and LSPR are induced by light excitation of plasmons for planar metal surface and metal nanomaterials, respectively. For the former case, SPRs are excited as guided surface waves bounded at the metal/dielectric interface when the wave-vector matching requirement between incident light and SPR is met, which can trap light effectively and propagate along the interface. Unlike SPRs which propagate along the metal/dielectric interface and are confined perpendicularly, LSPRs are non-propagating oscillation of electrons in the sub-wavelength metal coupled to electromagnetic fields. When an oscillating electromagnetic field penetrates the sub-wavelength metal nanomaterials, electrons will be driven by a restoring force exerted by the electric field on the metal surface, giving rise to strong resonance with concentrated local electromagnetic field. In addition to the LSPR which is only with dipole mode and usually prominent in small metal nanomaterials, high order multipole resonances can be supported by large size metals which can be used for enhancing light absorption.

For metal nanomaterials with LSPRs, the strong near field of resonance will distribute around the nanomaterials within tens to a few hundred nanometers, which is very similar to the thickness of the active layer of OSCs. In addition, the light path in the active layer can be elongated by metal nanomaterials through scattering, particularly for large size metal nanomaterials. Therefore, a direct approach to enhance light absorption and thus device performance of OSCs is to incorporate metal nanomaterials into the active layer region, where light absorption and photoexcited carrier generation occur. Improved optical absorption has been reported theoretically and experimentally with strongly distributed LSPR near field inside the active layer of poly[2,7-(9,9-dioctylfluorene)-alt-2-((4-(diphenylamino) phenyl)thiophen-2-yl)malononitrile] (PFSDCN):[6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PC61BM) embedded with small Au NPs (average diameter of 18 nm), as shown in Fig. 9. Importantly, the theoretical results demonstrate that the strong near field from LSPR of NPs mainly distributes laterally along the active layer, as shown in Fig. 9(b). The small Au NPs in the active layer contribute to the increase of short-circuit current (Jsc) from 4.16 mA cm−2 to 4.67 mW cm−2. Together with the improvement of open-circuit voltage (Voc) and fill factor (FF) due to the electrical effects of Au NPs as will be discussed in Section 3.2, a 32% increase in OSC power conversion efficiency (PCE) from 1.64% to 2.17% has been reported. In another report, the reflectance spectra of the OSCs fabricated with and without Au NPs in poly(3-hexyl thiophene) (P3HT):[6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM) were characterized, as shown in Fig. 10. By introducing large Au NPs (70 nm), the diffused reflectivity of the device is lowered, indicating stronger optical absorption. Consequently, the incorporation of large Au NPs gives rise to improved Jsc and PCE from 10.3 mA cm−2 to 11.18 mA cm−2 and 3.54% to 4.36% respectively for P3HT:PC71BM and from 12.9 mA cm−2 to 13.8 mA cm−2 and 3.92% to 4.54% respectively for poly{[4,4′-bis(2-ethylhexyl) dithieno(3,2-b:2′,3′-d)silole]-2,6-diyl-alt-[4,7-bis(2-thienyl)-2,1,3-benzothiadiazole]-5,5′-diyl} (Si-PCPDTBT):PC71BM OSCs, respectively. The authors attribute the enhanced optical absorption of the device to the strong light scattering of the large Au NPs. In addition to Au NPs, Ag NP clusters were shown to promote increased absorption in the active layer of poly[N-9′′-hepta-decanyl-2,7-carbazole-alt-5,5-(4′,7′-di-2-thienyl-2′,1′,3′-benzothiadiazole)] (PCDTBT):PC71BM OSCs, as shown in Fig. 11. Using Ag NPs of different size and concentration, the optimal NP-incorporated OSCs (40 nm Ag NPs, 1 wt%) were shown to exhibit enhanced PCE of 7.1% compared to PCE of 6.3% for OSCs without NPs. Investigation of different metal materials such as metal alloys, Cu and Al as well as different geometries including nanorods, nanowires, nanocubes, nanoplates and nanoprisms has also been reported.
Meanwhile, numerous reports have been published on incorporating metal nanomaterials into the charge transport layers (CTLs) of OSCs including commonly used hole transport layers of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) and MoOx and electron transport layers such as TiO2 in order to improve OSC performance. Regarding the physical origins, it is still under debate whether direct optical effects (if any) are the dominant contributor to the enhanced device performance, instead of any other possible effects including electrical or interfacial influence.
Yang et al. blended Au NPs of 70–80 nm with the interconnecting layer of PEDOT:PSS in an inverted polymer tandem solar cell. Simultaneously increased efficiencies in both the top and bottom subcells were demonstrated. As shown in Fig. 12, the authors attribute the enhanced performance to the improved optical absorption from the blended Au NPs, while the electrical characteristics of the tandem cell are not compromised. In another study, Ag NPs of various size were embedded in the hole transport layer of PEDOT:PSS. The optimal device PCE was increased from 6.4% to 7.6% in PCDTBT:PC71BM OSCs, and from 7.9% to 8.6% in thieno[3,4-b]thiophene/benzodithiophene (PTB7):PC71BM OSCs. As shown in Fig. 13(a)–(c), enhancement in the external quantum efficiency (EQE) which depends on both the optical and electrical properties follows a similar trend to the enhancement of optical absorption, while the internal quantum efficiency (IQE) which is determined solely from electrical properties remains mostly unaffected. The authors conclude that the enhanced photocurrent results from the absorption enhancement due to the strong optical scattering by the Ag NPs.
Differently, in a recent study, direct optical effects are proven theoretically and experimentally to be a minor contributor to device performance improvement when Au NPs are doped in the PEDOT:PSS layer, in particular for NP size smaller than the thickness of the CTL. The conclusion is based on the following: (1) theoretical modeling shows that the strong near field around NPs from LSPRs mainly distributes laterally along the PEDOT:PSS layer rather than vertically into the adjacent active layer, as shown in Fig. 14(a); (2) no clear optical absorption enhancement can be observed in the active layer when NPs are embedded in the CTL, as shown in Fig. 14(b). Further characterization conducted by the authors revealed that rather than optical effects, changes in electrical and morphology are mainly responsible for the improved performance, including reduced resistivity of PEDOT:PSS and increased CTL roughness, which improve charge collection and reduce exciton quenching.
Besides metal nanomaterials, electrodes with metal nanopatterns have been demonstrated to be effective in further improving OSC performance. By using an imprint method to pattern the active layer and deposit metal oxide/Ag, a 2-D metal grating electrode is introduced to increase the device PCE from 3.09% to 3.68% for P3HT:PC61BM OSCs, and from 7.20% to 7.73% for PTB7:PC71BM OSCs (Fig. 15(a)). As shown in Fig. 15(b)–(d), it can be found that the EQE of the device is considerably improved after Ag electrode patterning, while the extracted IQE of OSCs does not change noticeably before and after patterning. This indicates that the EQE and thus performance enhancement after grating patterning is mainly due to improved optical absorption from the surface plasmonic and scattering effects of the Ag grating.
2-D grating structures typically are optically sensitive to light polarization, with their diffractive properties largely dependent on the polarization. In order to overcome this issue, 3-D gratings have been proposed and reported. In one of the studies, side-by-side comparison was made between OSCs using a 3-D grating electrode and a 2-D grating electrode with similar periodicity (Fig. 2). While the PCE of P3HT:PC61BM OSCs using a 2-D grating electrode increased from 3.09% (planar electrode) to 3.63%, a further enhancement was observed for OSCs using a 3-D grating electrode, with the PCE improved to 3.85%, achieving a 24.6% PCE enhancement from the planar electrode. The authors conclude that the further enhancement from 2-D to 3-D grating can be explained by the polarization independent optical response, increased effective interfacial area and decreased series resistance. Similarly, randomly patterned metal nanostructures have been reported which can address the polarization dependence of 2-D gratings.
As discussed previously, the simultaneous incorporation of multiple plasmonic metal nanostructures into a single OSC device has been reported recently by blending of metal NPs with different materials or geometries, doping NPs of different size into both the front and rear interfacial layers, or combining a metal grating electrode and metal NPs within a single device. While the resonance peak for metal nanomaterials can be tuned by adjusting the size, shape, and optical environment of the nanomaterials, the wavelength region for plasmonic resonance of a single type of metal nanomaterials remains narrow, which consequently limits the spectral region for enhanced optical absorption provided by metal nanostructures. Therefore, it is desirable to extend the resonance region to achieve broadband absorption enhancement of metal nanomaterials. By using a dual NP scheme of Au and Ag NPs blended into the PEDOT:PSS layer, the PCE of PTB7:PC71BM OSCs is increased from 7.25% to 8.67%, accounting for a 20% enhancement. From the absorption spectrum of the PTB7:PC71BM device (Fig. 16) and of different NPs in water (Fig. 16, inset), it is observed that dual NPs greatly broaden the wavelength range for absorption enhancement compared with either Ag or Au NPs. Similarly, broadband absorption enhancement is also reported for dual metal nanomaterials of different geometries. In a recent study, a combination of Ag NPs and nanoprisms was incorporated into the active layer of P3HT:PC61BM OSCs. Enhanced broadband plasmonic absorption as well as improved device performance was observed, as shown in Fig. 17. Through theoretical and experimental studies, the authors conclude that the observed enhancement is due to the simultaneous excitation of many plasmonic low- and high-order resonance modes, which depend on the material, shape, size and polarization. Besides multiple metal nanomaterials, dual plasmonic nanostructures (a combination of metal NPs and nanopatterns) incorporated into a single OSC for improving device performance have been reported, leading to a high average efficiency of 8.79% (best PCE of 9.21%) in single-junction OSCs. Broadband absorption enhancement is enabled by the simultaneously introduced hybridized SPRs (from the Ag nanograting) and LSPRs (from the Au NPs) in addition to waveguide modes and light diffraction, as shown in Fig. 18.

Besides optical effects, another important factor contributing to the enhanced device performance in OSCs incorporated with metal nanostructures is the electrical effects induced by the nanostructures. Changes in the electrical properties of active layers and CTLs have been reported by various groups, which play an equally important role in affecting OSC performance.

An approximately two-fold increase in hole mobility (as shown in Fig. 19) and increased conductivity were observed for the PFSDCN:PC61BM active layer embedded with 2 wt% Au NPs (from 1.26 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 to 4.25 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1). Since charge transport in many OSCs is dominantly limited by the slow carrier (hole), the improved OSC performance can be ascribed to the increased hole mobility as well as better balance between the electron and hole mobility. Nevertheless, a trade-off with other non-optical effects is also observed when adjusting Au NP concentrations, since the optimal performance does not correspond to the hole mobility maximum (0.5 wt% Au NPs). While optical enhancement usually changes monotonically with NP characteristics such as concentration or size, the final device performance will be the combined result of all the optical and electrical effects as described previously. The non-optical effects of Au NPs in the active layer may be manifold: on the one hand, dopant states can be introduced by the NPs which provide hopping sites for improving hole mobility; on the other hand, modification of the nanoscale morphology of the polymer–fullerene blend is observed, especially at high NP concentration. It has also been reported that the hole injection barrier is increased by introducing Ag NPs in the PCDTBT:PC71BM active layer, leading to a smaller electron transport barrier and thus increased short-circuit current (Jsc) and fill factor (FF). In a study of OSCs using 3-D grating electrodes as discussed previously, besides polarization independent plasmonic effects, the authors also find the increased interfacial layer and thus the decreased series resistance of OSCs introduced by the 3-D grating electrode to be contributing factors in performance enhancement. Since not all of the introduced changes in electrical properties are beneficial to device performance depending on the metal nanostructures, it is a critical issue in the design of plasmonically enhanced OSCs to carefully investigate both the optical and electrical effects of the nanostructure incorporated OSCs, in order to fully understand the influence and further improve device efficiency.
While direct optical and direct electrical effects have been separately studied with regard to the influence of incorporating metal nanomaterials on OSCs, a recent study reported an interesting optically induced electrical effect, i.e., plasmonic-electrical effect, in which the charge extraction of the TiO2 electron transport layer and thus the performance of OSCs is significantly enhanced by the embedded Au NPs in the presence of plasmonic excitation. UV light soaking in wide-bandgap semiconducting metal oxides such as TiO2 and ZnO is a well known issue, where UV light is required to transform the oxides into good electron transport materials. For TiO2 CTLs without Au NPs, the OSC device shows poor S-shaped current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics under monochromatic light unless exposed to short wavelength UV light (<400 nm). Meanwhile, plasmonic light with far longer wavelength of 560–600 nm can activate efficient device operation of OSCs using NP–TiO2 CTLs, as shown in Fig. 20(a). Furthermore, the incorporation of Au NPs into the TiO2 CTL leads to enhanced OSC efficiency of 8.74%, as shown in Fig. 20(b). The plasmonic electrical effect is studied theoretically and experimentally, and is attributed to the charge injection of plasmonically generated hot carriers from NPs into TiO2, which can fill the trap states in TiO2 and lower the effective extraction barrier, thereby facilitating electron extraction in OSCs.
A subsequent report of incorporating Au or Ag NPs into TiO2 studied another optically induced charge accumulation effect in the metal–semiconductor composite, in which the transfer of UV-excited electrons in the TiO2 CTL to metal NPs and the enhanced accumulation of electrons in the metal NP–TiO2 composite is observed. Under UV illumination, the accumulation of electrons in the NP–TiO2 composite is evidenced by the blue shift of plasmonic absorption peaks after UV exposure, for both the Ag and Au NPs (Fig. 21). As a result, the work function of the composite CTL is effectively reduced by introducing metal NPs under UV illumination, as shown in Fig. 22. As characterized by electron-only devices (Fig. 23), electron extraction in OSCs is improved by the accumulated charges in the UV-irradiated NP–TiO2 composite, leading to enhanced device performance.
In addition to the various effects discussed above, metal nanomaterials can give rise to surface or interfacial modifications of the substrate material (such as electrodes). For instance, the work function of the indium tin oxide (ITO) anode can be increased to 5.01 eV by depositing UV ozone (UVO) treated Au NPs. On modification by the UVO-treated Au NPs, the ITO anode shows improved hole extraction properties, which can enhance the PCE of P3HT:PC61BM OSCs. A more recent report on OSCs using graphene anodes demonstrates that the approach is applicable to other electrode materials. UVO-treated Au nanoclusters were shown to increase the work function of graphene from 4.1 eV to 4.8 eV, favoring hole extraction in OSCs while avoiding the use of the PEDOT:PSS hole transport layer which is usually problematic for the hydrophobic graphene electrode. For cathode applications, it has been reported that thin Al nanoclusters on single-layer graphene can considerably decrease its work function from 4.56 eV to 4.14 eV, which can align well with the LUMO of P3HT in the P3HT:PC61BM active layer, and facilitate electron extraction. Furthermore, the wettability of the hydrophobic graphene electrode is significantly improved, as shown by the changes in the water contact angle of the graphene surface (Fig. 24). While the contact angle of pristine graphene is large (95.7°) indicating a hydrophobic surface, it is considerably reduced to only 48.0° after Al nanoclusters of 0.5 nm are deposited which promotes uniform coating of subsequent solutions, without compromising the optical transparency of the graphene electrode.

In conclusion, we have reviewed the recent progress of OSCs incorporated with various types of metal nanostructures including metal nanopatterns and metal nanomaterials for further improving device performance. The incorporation of multiple metal nanostructures into OSCs can induce significant changes with different physical origins including optical and electrical effects. In the case of simultaneous incorporation of multiple nanostructures into a single device, coupling between the nanostructures can occur which offers an extra degree of freedom to further enhance the performance of OSCs. As a result, we discuss in detail the influence of various metal nanostructures from different aspects. Primary optical effects such as SPR (for metal nanopatterns) and LSPR (for metal nanomaterials) on the performance of OSCs are summarized and discussed, which are largely dependent on the characteristics of the nanoscale metals (shape, size, concentration, optical environment, etc.). Meanwhile, changes in the electrical properties are usually introduced in nanostructure-incorporated OSCs as well, which are equally important for enhancing performance and should be taken into account in device design. Interesting optically induced electrical effects such as the plasmonic electrical effect and the charge accumulation effect in the metal nanomaterial–metal oxide semiconductor composite are also reviewed in detail. Finally, additional interfacial modifications such as work function tuning and wettability enhancement by using metal nanomaterials are also described. Consequently, the comprehensive understanding of the detailed physical mechanisms for various metal nanostructures can promote the further development of a new class of nanostructure-incorporated OSCs and their emerging applications.


This work was supported by the General Research Fund (grants: HKU711813 and HKU711612E), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC)/Research Grants Council (RGC) grant (N_HKU709/12) and the Ministry of Education (MOE)/Research Grants Council (RGC) (M-HKU703/12) from RGC of Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China. This project was also supported by the Collaborated Research Fund (CUHK1/CRF/12G) of RGC. Choy would like to acknowledge the help of Di Zhang in preparing the manuscript.


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014