 DOI: 10.1039/D2TC02497G
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 12776-12788


Ting
Wei
,

Hemraj
Dahiya
,

Xu
Liang
,

Weihua
Zhu
,

Sarvesh Kumar
Pandey
,

Manish Kumar
Singh
,

Haijun
Xu
* and 

Ganesh D.
Sharma
*

Jiangsu Co-innovation Center of Efficient Processing and Utilization of Forest Resources, College of Chemical Engineering, Nanjing Forestry University, Nanjing 210037, P. R. China. E-mail: xuhaijun@njfu.edu.cn

Department of Physics, The LNM Institute of Information Technology, Jamdoli, Jaipur, Rajasthan 302017, India. E-mail: gdsharma@lnmiit.ac.in; gdsharma273@gmail.com

School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang 212013, P. R. China

Department of Inorganic and Physical Chemistry, Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru, Karnataka 560012, India

School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Henan Normal University, Xinxiang 453007, P. R. China

Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering, The LNM Institute of Information Technology, Jamdoli, Jaipur, Rajasthan 302017, India

Received
14th June 2022
, Accepted 1st August 2022
First published on 1st August 2022
Two non-fullerene small molecule acceptors based on CF3-4,4-difluoro-4-bora-3a,4a-diaza-s-indacene (BODIPY) as the central acceptor core and different donor terminal triphenylamine and carbazole units denoted as CF3-BDP-TPA and CF3-BDP-Cz, respectively, were designed and synthesized, and their optical and electrochemical properties were investigated. Both CF3-BDP-TPA and CF3-BDP-Cz showed a narrow bandgap, similar to the well-known Y6 acceptor. The molecular dipole moment of CF3-BDP-Cz is 5.53 D, which is significantly larger than that of CF3-BDP-TPA (3.347 D) and leads to strengthening the intramolecular (C–H⋯π) interaction, thereby enhancing molecular packing. We have used conjugated polymer PBDB-T as the donor (HOMO = −5.22 eV and LUMO = −3.45 eV), having complementary absorption spectra to both CF3-BDP-TPA and CF3-BDP-Cz. The optimized polymer solar cells based on CF3-BDP-TPA and CF3-BDP-Cz attained power conversion efficiencies of 9.89% and 13.07%, respectively. The higher PCE for the CF3-BDP-Cz-based device is linked with the larger dipole moment of CF3-BDP-Cz compared to that of CF3-BDP-TPA, which leads to a lower exciton binding energy and apparently increases both short circuit current and open circuit voltage. The increased value of the fill factor for the CF3-BDP-Cz-based device compared to that of CF3-BDP-TPA counterpart is associated with the balanced charge transport and suppressed recombination processes.

Faced with the increasingly severe energy crisis and environmental problems, clean and renewable sources such as solar energy and wind energy need to be developed. Solar cells are a kind of photovoltaic technology, which can directly convert solar energy into electricity. Photon energy coming from the sun can be converted into electricity using the photovoltaic principle of semiconducting materials. As an important part of the solar cell, organic solar cells (OSCs) based on a bulk heterojunction (BHJ) active layer as a promising photovoltaic technology have attracted more and more attention for their possible commercialization. Compared with silicon-based solar cells, perovskite cells, and dye-sensitized cells, organic solar cells possess many unique advantages, such as adjustable color, lightweightness, wide material sources, low manufacturing cost, and large area manufacturing on flexible substrates. In the early stage of development, OSC-based BHJ active layers, which consist of a blend of polymer or small molecule donors and fullerene acceptors as light-absorbing active layers, have achieved energy conversion efficiencies exceeding 10%. However, some disadvantages of fullerene acceptor materials limit the further improvement of organic solar energy performance, including weak light absorption and insufficient utilization in the visible region, difficult preparation and purification, high synthesis cost, and poor energy level adjustment. Therefore, the development of new electron acceptor materials to replace fullerene derivatives has become a new focus in the field of organic solar cell research. In this regard, non-fullerene small molecule acceptors (NFSMAs) have shown significant advantages due to their low synthesis cost, strong absorption of the solar spectrum in the visible region, higher stability, easy adjustable energy levels, and higher open circuit voltage over fullerene-based acceptor materials. Since Zhan et al. synthesized a non-fullerene receptor material called ITIC in 2015, the energy conversion efficiency of organic photovoltaic (OPV) cells based on non-fullerene acceptor materials has been continuously making breakthroughs, which further promoted the development of non-fullerene acceptors (NFAs) having an acceptor–donor–acceptor (A–D–A) structure with an optimized power conversion efficiency (PCE) in the range of 12–15%. In 2019, Zou et al. reported a novel narrow-band gap star acceptor molecule, Y6, and the OPV devices based on Y6 further achieved a PCE exceeding 15%. The single junction OSC devices based on NFSMAs with a power conversion efficiency (PCE) exceeding 18% have been acquired in recent years. Although non-fullerene organic solar cells show great commercial application prospects, the device efficiency achieved so far is still not enough to meet the requirements of commercial applications. Therefore, it is essential and desirable to develop new NFSMAs with easy synthesis and high photovoltaic performance.

4,4-Difluoro-4-bora-3a,4a-diaza-s-indacene (BODIPY) dyes are a class of versatile fluorophores with excellent properties, such as relatively high fluorescence quantum yield, large molar extinction coefficient, good light and thermal stability, low optical band gap, and outstanding redox activity. Furthermore, their photophysical and electrochemical characteristics can be easily fine-tuned via chemical modification at the periphery and at the boron atom of the BODIPY skeleton by the introduction of appropriate electron donors and electron acceptors. In addition, BODIPY dyes often possess deep highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) energy levels, which can result in a high open circuit voltage (VOC). These predominant photoelectronic properties of BODIPYs make them attractive candidates for OSC applications. In recent years, many BODIPY derivatives were applied in OSCs as donors and exhibited PCE in the range of 1.62–7.47%. However, to the best of our knowledge, only two BODIPY derivatives were used as NFSMAs in OSCs, with an optimized PCE of 13.41% reported by our group. On the other hand, carbazole and triphenylamine (TPA) groups are excellent building blocks with strong electron donating ability, low redox potential, and high hole mobility and have been extensively applied in the OSC field.
With these considerations, in this study, we have designed and synthesized two BODIPY dyes, namely CF3-BDP-TPA and CF3-BDP-Cz, respectively (Chart 1) by Knoevenagel condensation reaction. Importantly, the meso-carbon of BODIPY is the best position for charge injection, and the introduction of an electron-withdrawing group at the meso position of BODIPY can reduce the HOMO–LUMO gap. Therefore, the introduction of a –CF3 group into the meso position of BODIPY can induce significant variations in its chemical and physical properties and lower the HOMO–LUMO gap owing to the strong electron-withdrawing nature (electronegativity = 3.5), and specific steric repulsion of fluorine. The optical properties, electrochemical behavior, and photovoltaic performances of CF3-BDP-TPA and CF3-BDP-Cz were investigated, and the influence of the donor's electron donating ability and substituted positions on their electronic and photovoltaic properties was also comparatively investigated. Both CF3-BDP-TPA and CF3-BDP-Cz show a deep LUMO energy level and elevated HOMO energy level, which are beneficial to the high open circuit voltage of OSCs. We have investigated the photovoltaic performance of these two molecules as acceptors along with conjugated polymer PBDB-T as a donor (chemical structure shown in Chart 1). The OSCs based on PBDB-T:CF3-BDP-TPA and PBDB-T:CF3-BDP-Cz showed an overall PCE of about 9.89% and 13.07%. The higher value of PCE for CF3-BDP-Cz-based PSCs compared to that for the CF3-BDP-TPA counterpart is attributed to the simultaneously improved values of JSC, FF, and VOC. The dipole moment of CF3-BDP-Cz is that of higher than CF3-BDP-TPA, which decreases the exciton binding energy in the CF3-BDP-Cz-based active layer. The high value of dipole moment can lead to a simultaneous increase in JSC and VOC and reduced energy loss. In addition, it is also beneficial for increasing crystallinity and decreasing π–π stacking distance, which leads to the suppression of charge recombination. Therefore, PSCs based on CF3-BDP-Cz have a high value of FF. Our study would be beneficial to designing novel π-conjugated NFSMAs based on BODIPY derivatives and boosting the photovoltaic functioning of BHJ-OSCs using a narrow band gap NFSMA.

The synthetic routes of BODIPY derivatives CF3-BDP-TPA and CF3-BDP-Cz are shown in Scheme 1. CF3-BDP-TPA and CF3-BDP-Cz were synthesized by Knoevenagel condensation reactions of CF3-BDP with 4-(diphenylamino)benzaldehyde or 9-butyl-9H-carbazole-3-carbaldehyde under the action of p-toluenesulfonic acid and piperidine in dry toluene in 40% and 56% yields, respectively. Their structures were characterized by NMR and HRM spectroscopy (see the ESI). For example, CF3-BDP-TPA shows the characteristic peaks of methyl groups at 2.32 ppm. All other protons could be assigned to the β-protons of the BODIPY core, double bond, and phenyl ring. In addition, the high resolution ESI mass spectra of CF3-BDP-TPA and CF3-BDP-Cz display an intense parent peak at m/z = 826.3261 and 782.3562 (calcd [M]+ = 826.3266 and 782.3579) (Fig. S5 and S8, see the ESI), respectively, which provided a direct evidence that the two target BODIPY derivatives were successfully synthesized. All NMR and HRMS results are coherent with the targeted molecular structures.


The normalized absorption spectra of compounds CF3-BDP-TPA and CF3-BDP-Cz in CH2Cl2 are shown in Fig. S9a (ESI), and the photo-physical data are provided in Table 1. As we have fabricated the OSCs using chloroform, the absorption spectra in dilute chloroform solution and thin films cast from chloroform on quartz substrate were also measured (Fig. 1(a)). The BODIPY derivatives exhibit typical BODIPY fluorophore absorption spectra deriving from π–π* transitions. Compounds CF3-BDP-TPA and CF3-BDP-Cz exhibit intense absorption bands centered at 791 nm and 769 nm, deriving from S0–S1 (π–π*) transitions with molar extinction coefficients of 1.02 × 105 M−1 cm−1 and 1.12 × 105 M−1 cm−1, respectively. The broad absorption in the range of 400–600 nm of CF3-BDP-TPA and CF3-BDP-Cz observed was attributed to the S0–Sn (n ≥ 2) transitions. In addition, the absorption of CF3-BDP-TPA and CF3-BDP-Cz in the UV region should be attributed to the typical absorption of carbazole and triphenylamine groups, respectively. Compared with compound CF3-BDP-Cz, the maximum absorption wavelength of compound CF3-BDP-TPA was red-shifted, which may be attributed to the stronger electron-donating ability of triphenylamine, showing the stronger push–pull effect. The thin film absorption spectra of CF3-BDP-TPA and CF3-BDP-Cz cast from the chloroform solution on the quartz substrate are shown in Fig. 1(b). Compared to the solution, the absorption band observed in the film red-shifted in both the molecules. However, the absorption of CF3-BDP-Cz in the thin film is a more prominent redshift and broader than that of CF3-BDP-TPA, which may correspond to ICT and be associated with stronger intermolecular interactions and enhanced molecular packing in CF3-BDP-Cz. The optical bandgap, estimated from the onset of thin film absorption spectra, is about 1.38 for CF3-BDP-TPA and 1.40 eV for CF3-BDP-Cz, respectively. The lower value of the optical bandgap of CF3-BDP-TPA may be associated with the stronger electron-donating nature of TPA relative to carbazole. The thin film absorption spectrum of PBDB-T is also shown in Fig. 1(b). Both the acceptors show complementary absorption spectra relative to PBDB-T, indicating that the blends of these acceptors show wide band absorption spectra, which is beneficial for the light harvesting efficiency of OSCs and thereby JSC.

Compounds

λ
abs [nm]

λ
em [nm]
Stokes shift [nm]

ε/103 M−1 cm−1

CF3-BDP-TPA

791
824
33
102

CF3-BDP-Cz

769
812
43
112
The fluorescence emission spectra of compounds CF3-BDP-TPA and CF3-BDP-2 are shown in Fig. S9b (ESI). CF3-BDP-TPA and CF3-BDP-Cz display emission peaks at 824 nm and 812 nm, respectively. Both of them display the characteristic emission peaks of BODIPY derivatives.

Cyclic voltammograms of the BODIPY derivatives CF3-BDP-TPA and CF3-BDP-Cz were measured in CH2Cl2 with 0.1 M TBAP at a scan rate of 0.1 V s−1. Redox potentials of CF3-BDP-TPA and CF3-BDP-Cz are listed in Table 2. The cyclic voltammetry curves of reduction and oxidation are shown in Fig. 2. Compound CF3-BDP-TPA has two quasi reversible reduction peaks at −0.773 V and −1.253 V, and two quasi reversible oxidation peaks at 0.837 V and 0.547 V, respectively. A similar result is observed in CF3-BDP-Cz, which shows two reversible reduction peaks at −0.833 V and −1.373 V, and two reversible oxidation peaks at 0.737 V and 0.507 V, respectively. The HOMO and LUMO energy levels were evaluated using the following equations: HOMO = − (4.8 + E1/2(Ox1)) and LUMO = −(4.8 + E1/2(Red1)). The HOMO- LUMO gaps of CF3-BDP-TPA and CF3-BDP-Cz are 1.32 eV and 1.34 eV, respectively. Their narrow energy levels are ascribed to the good conjugation effect and induced effect from the strong electron-withdrawing –CF3 and strong electron-donating carbazole or triphenylamine groups in the BODIPY molecules. In summary, CF3-BDP-TPA and CF3-BDP-Cz both have low LUMO levels, high HOMO levels, and narrow level gaps, which are beneficial in obtaining a higher open circuit voltage.

Compounds
Ox2 [V]
Ox1 [V]
Red1 [V]
Red2 [V]

E
HOMO [eV]

E
LUMO [eV]
H–L gap [V]

CF3-BDP-1

0.837
0.547
−0.773
−1.253
−5.35
−4.03
1.32

CF3-BDP-2

0.737
0.507
−0.833
−1.373
−5.31
−3.97
1.34

As the π-linkage unit plays a key role in altering the molecular conformation and electronic distribution of donor–acceptor (D–A) type conjugated dye compounds, adding the alkylene moiety as a π-linker into the conjugated D–π–A conjugated dyes is indeed profitable. The D–A type approach (experimentally or theoretically) is one of the favorable tactics in designing, fabricating, and characterizing a low bandgap species, which is usually known as a push-pull moiety, where electron-rich (D) units and electron-poor moieties (A) are connected into a single conjugated fashion. Therefore, this technique enhances the energy levels of the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and reduces the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) simultaneously, instantly providing a low bandgap material, thus resulting in a large number of photons of solar radiation. The density functional theory (DFT) calculations have been performed with the deployment of the M06-2X/6-311g(d,p) method using Gaussian 09, electronic structure calculations package. In the first step of the computational experiment, both designed and synthesized BODIPY-based dyes, CF3-BDP-TPA and CF3-BDP-Cz have been modelled theoretically by keeping in mind the experimental facts. Electronic structure calculations have been executed to get some important properties of the geometries (molecular structures), stability, and electronic feature (HOMO, LUMO, and HOMO–LUMO) gap (H–L gap) values, some QTAIM-based topological parameters, dipole moments, and three dimensional (3D) iso-surfaces of the HOMOs, LUMOs, and molecular electrostatic potential (MESP) of both species. In order to get a deep insight into the structure, stability, and electronic features, comprehensive computational investigations have been performed on a variety of chemical moieties and materials.


The optimized structures of the two BODIPY based dyes (CF3-BDP-TPA and CF3-BDP-Cz) can be seen in Fig. 3 where the numbering scheme 1, 2, and 3 indicate three C–N bonds (like N–H bonds in ammonia). It should be noted that the representation of l, r, f, and b as shown in Table 3 indicate the left, right, front, and back sides, respectively. The C–F bonds of the CF3 group in both the optimized structures give the impression that the bond distance of the C–F bond lying at the front side is 1.336 Å, whereas the bond distance of two equivalent C–F bonds located at the back side is 1.345 Å. Table 3 clearly illustrates that the substitution of the carbazole group in the latter one (CF3-BDP-Cz) and the TPA group in the former one (CF3-BDP-TPA) equally affect the C–F and B–F bonds. By looking at the C–N bonds (displayed by 1, 2, and 3 numbering schemes as shown in Fig. 3) of both the species, as shown in Table S2 (ESI), the C–N bond distance order is C–N(1) < C–N(2) < C–N(3). The order of the bond length of the C–N bonds lying at the left and right sides in CF3-BDP-TPA is C–N(1) (1.408 Å) < C–N(2) (1.417 Å) < C–N(3) (1.419 Å) and C–N(1) (1.406 Å) < C–N(2) (1.418 Å) < C–N(3) (1.421 Å), respectively. The outer CCN bond angles (i.e., adjacent to the B–N bond) are slightly decreased by the substitution of carbazole groups [∠CCN = 121.4° (1) and 127.5° (2)] as compared to the TPA group [∠CCN = 122.4° (1) and 127.7° (2)], which could be due to the significant π–π stacking between one benzene ring of the carbazole group (left) and one benzene ring of the other carbazole group (right).

Species

CF3-BDP-1


CF3-BDP-2

C–F
1.345(b), 1.336(f)
1.345(b), 1.336(f)
B–F
1.393(b), 1.39(f)
1.396 (b), 1.39 (f)
C–N(1)
1.406(r), 1.408(l)
1.377(r), 1.379(l)
C–N(2)
1.418(r), 1.417(l)
1.389(r), 1.385(l)
C–N(3)
1.421(r), 1.419(l)
1.447(r), 1.448(l)
C–C–N
122.4(r), 127.7(l)
121.4(r), 127.5(l)
C–N–C(12)
121.1(r), 120.5(l)
108.8(r), 108.7(l)
C–N–C(23)
118.7(r), 119.5(l)
125.4(r), 125.7(l)
C–N–C(13)
120.1(r), 120(l)
125.5(r), 125.3(l)
C–CC–C
179(r), 178.7(l)
180(r), 175.6(l)
In the case of the TPA-based dye (CF3-BDP-TPA), the CNC (12, 13, 23) bond angles (left and right sides) are (120.5°, 120°, 119.5°) and (121.1°, 120.1°, 118.7°), which are close to the CNC bond angle (121.2°) of a free triphenylamine species. Moreover, the CNC bond angles of the carbazole-based dyes are (108.7°, 125.3°, 125.7°) and (108.8°, 125.5°, 125.4°) for left and right sides of the same moiety, respectively, which are in proximity (110.8°, 124.6°, 124.6°), similar to the isolated TPA compound. The CCCC torsion angle of the trans alkene (left) in the CF3-BDP-Cz is 175.6°, which is 3.1° smaller than the same torsional angle of CF3-BDP-TPA (178.7°), suggests a planar or nearly planar structures. Some important and selected optimized parameters of CF3-BDP-TPA and CF3-BDP-Cz molecules are compiled in Table 3. The equilibrium structures of both optimized compounds, CF3-BDP-TPA and CF3-BDP-Cz, suggest that the latter shows high planarity and stability, which are most profitable to endorse effective interactions like C–H⋯π interaction, facilitating the charge transfer (CT) phenomenon (efficient electron mobility) and optical charge among the molecular fragments.

The HOMOs and LUMOs are usually known as Frontier molecular orbitals (FMOs) in the FMO theory, and the energy change between the HOMO and LUMO energies is termed as the HOMO–LUMO energy gap (H–L gap). Some frequently used interesting optical features of the particular species are described by the H–L gap value. As the amount of absorption of light can be altered with the H–L gap value of a system, the H–L gap is directly linked to the valence and conduction bands. A smaller energy (electrons are capable of moving freely and efficiently) is required when the H–L gap value tends to zero, implying easy photochemical excitation and high electrical conductivity. Moreover, the H–L gap is also diagnostic of the chemical behavior of molecular moieties; the higher H–L gap indicates lower chemical reactivity (i.e., higher stability). Here, in this report, the structural and fascinating electronic features like HOMOs, LUMOs, H–L gap, dipole moments, and MESP of both dyes have been analyzed along with visualizing the HOMOs, LUMOs, and MESP 3D-isosurfaces.

The high HOMO values of CF3-BDP-TPA and CF3-BDP-Cz moieties are −5.957 eV and −5.913 eV, whereas the low LUMO values are −2.612 eV and −2.484 eV, respectively, which are supported by the experimentally detected HOMO–LUMO values (for CF3-BDP-TPA, the HOMO is −5.365 eV and the LUMO is −4.03 eV whereas for CF3-BDP-Cz, the HOMO is −5.31 eV and the LUMO is −3.97 eV).
As given above, for the analyzed FMOs of CF3-BDP-TPA and CF3-BDP-2 species, the HOMO and LUMO values of the former are greater than the latter. Such findings show that it could be advantageous in getting high open circuit voltage (i.e., narrow band gap can be generated by reducing the H–L gap values through designing BODIPY derivative based novel π-conjugated NFSMAs followed by substituting the –CF3, >BF2, and incorporating alkene group) of the OSCs.
The H–L gap values for CF3-BDP-TPA and CF3-BDP-Cz are 3.345 eV and 3.429 eV, respectively, indicating that the latter compound is more stable (less reactive) than the former. Such stability trend was verified by employing the quantum theory of atoms in molecule (QTAIM) tool via inspecting the bond critical point (BCP) based bond paths (BPs). These BPs indicated the stabilization interactions in both species displayed in Fig. S10 of the ESI and showed four C–H⋯F (–CF3 group) and three C–H⋯F (>BF2 group), which show almost equivalent noncovalent (H-bonding) through-space intramolecular interactions. Moreover, the QTAIM-based molecular graph of two stabilizing interactions (via one C⋯H and one H⋯H BPs in the case of CF3-BDP-TPA) and three stabilizing interactions (through two H⋯H and one C–H⋯π BPs in the case of CF3-BDP-Cz) can be seen in Fig. S10 of the ESI for which some useful and selected QTAIM based topological parameters can be seen in Table S1 of the ESI.
In the case of CF3-BDP-TPA and CF3-BDP-Cz dyes (see Fig. 4), the HOMOs are mainly distributed symmetrically on the five membered heterocyclic ring of s-indacene, alkene, and one benzene ring of the TPA. A minor contribution can also be perceived from the N-atoms and other two benzene rings of the TPA units of the CF3-BDP-TPA system. However, for the CF3-BDP-Cz species, the HOMOs are slightly spread symmetrically over one of the benzene rings of the carbazole groups, including N-atoms, whereas symmetrical distribution of the LUMOs can be seen on the diaza-s-indacene rings of both species. Hence, with these HOMO–LUMO isosurface findings, it appears that there could be a swift formation of neutral excitation and a high CT process because of the suitable orbital overlay (delocalized over the backbone of both species) among the HOMOs and LUMOs. The HOMO and LUMO 3D isosurfaces of both species fairly show π–π* transitions. The molecular dipole moment of CF3-BDP-Cz is 5.53 D, which is significantly larger than that for CF3-BDP-TPA (3.347 D) and should strengthen the intramolecular (C–H⋯π) interaction, thereby enhancing molecular packing.

To visualize the charge distribution on the atoms and to evaluate the stability, MESPs of both dyes (CF3-BDP-TPA and CF3-BDP-Cz) have been inspected carefully. As visualized in Fig. 5, the equal distribution of the negative charges (shown in red) can be seen around the CF3 groups in both species. The contribution of negative charges on some C-atoms of the two benzene rings and N-atoms of the TPA group appears due to the π-electron cloud (via ring CC bonds) of the benzene rings and the lone pairs on the N-atoms of the TPA unit of the former. Interestingly, in the latter species, the negative charges have been completely spread over the carbazole rings existing on both sides. Remarkably, the positive charges (displayed in blue) are located close to the hydrogen atoms of the five membered heterocyclic rings of the s-indacene unit, including the H-atoms of the alkene groups in both cases. Having a closer look into the CF3-BDP-Cz molecule, charge distribution appears to be similar (almost equal spreading of positive and negative charges), showing a higher magnitude of photostability.


In PSCs, after the photogenerated exciton dissociation, the electron transfer (ET) from the LUMO of the donor to the acceptor and hole transfer (HT) from the HOMO of the acceptor to the donor in the D/A interfaces in the BHJ photoactive layer depends upon the LUMO offset between the donor and acceptor (ΔELUMO(D/A)) and HOMO offset between the acceptor and donor (ΔEHOMO(D/A)), respectively. The energy levels of PBDB-T, CF3-BDP-TPA, and CF3-BDP-Cz are shown in Chart 1. The ΔELUMO(D/A for PBDB-T/CF3-BDP-TPA and PBDB-T/CF3-BDP-Cz is about 0.58 and 0.52 eV and provides sufficient driving forces for exciton dissociation and subsequent electron transfer from PBDB-T to either CF3-BDP-TPA or CF3-BDP-Cz in their respective BHJ active layers. The ΔEHOMO(D/A) for PBDB-T/CF3-BDP-TPA and PBDB-T/CF3-BDP-Cz is about 0.13 and 0.09 eV, respectively, and both are very small. Therefore, in order to get information about the exciton dissociation and subsequent hole transfer from either CF3-BDP-TPA or CF3-BDP-Cz to PBDB-T, we have recorded the thin film photoluminescence (PL) spectra of pristine CF3-BDP-TPA and CF3-BDP-Cz and their blend with PBDB-T, when excited at the wavelength corresponds to the absorption maxima of pristine acceptor films (Fig. 6). The pristine CF3-BDP-TPA and CF3-BDP-Cz showed strong PL peaks at 876 nm and 906 nm, respectively, which are strongly quenched when blended with PBDB-T, indicating the occurrence of effective hole transfer from either CF3-BDP-TPA or CF3-BDP-Cz to PBDB-T. Even the ΔEHOMO(D/A) is very small, which is commonly observed in the PSCs based on NFSMAs.

In order to examine the photovoltaic performance of these NFSMAs as acceptors, we have used a wide band gap polymer PBDB-T as the donor and employed a conventional structure ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PBDB-T:CF3-BDP-TPA or CF3-BDP-Cz/PFN/Al. The details of device fabrication and characterization are described in the ESI. The photovoltaic performance was optimized via screening the weight ratio between the donor (PBDB-T) and acceptor (CF3-BDP-TPA or CF3-BDP-Cz), and we found that the active layer with a weight ratio of 1:1.4 showed the best photovoltaic performance. Subsequently, solvent vapor annealing is done by exposing the optimized weight ratio active layer to the THF environment for 40 s. The current–voltage (J–V) characteristics of illuminated optimized PSCs (AM1.5 G, 100 mW cm−2) are shown in Fig. 7(a), and the corresponding photovoltaic parameters are compiled in Table 4. The PSCs prepared from CF3-BDP-TPA and CF3-BDP-Cz showed PCE of 9.89% and 13.07%, respectively. The device with CF3-BDP-Cz showed a higher open circuit voltage compared to CF3-BDP-TPA owing to its high lying LUMO energy level compared to CF3-BDP-TPA. As the molecular dipole moment for CF3-BDP-Cz is higher than that of CF3-BDP-TPA, we assume that the exciton binding energy for the active layer formed from CF3-BDP-Cz is lower than that for the CF3-BDP-TPA counterpart, leading to a low energy loss in the corresponding PSCs and thereby leads to high VOC. The JSC for the CF3-BDP-Cz based PSCs may be linked to its broader absorption spectra of CF3-BDP-Cz and its blend with PBDB-T and is beneficial for exciton generation rate in the PSCs.
Acceptors

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF
PCE (%)

a Average of 8 identical devices.


CF3-BDP-TPA

18.78
0.85
0.62
9.89 (9.74)

CF3-BDP-Cz

21.20
0.92
0.67
13.07 (12.95)
As there is a large difference in the JSC values for these two PSCs, we have recorded the external quantum efficiency (EQE) of the PSCs, which are presented in Fig. 7(b). The EQE spectra of the PSCs showed a broad photoresponse, which signifies that after the absorption of light, the excitons are generated in both the donor and acceptor and contribute to the photocurrent generation. The EQE spectra of CF3-BDP-Cz based PSCs are broader as well as the values are higher than that for the CF3-BDP-TPA counterpart, which also validate the higher value of JSC for the former device compared to the latter. The JSC values estimated from the integration of the EQE spectra are about 18.62 mA cm−2 and 21.03 mA cm−2 for CF3-BDP-TPA and CF3-BDP-Cz, respectively, and these values are very close to the values observed in J–V characteristics.
The JSC and FF of the PSCs mainly depend on the charge transport processes in the BHJ active layer towards the respective electrodes. The charge transport depends on the charge carrier mobilities in the devices, and we have measured hole mobility (μh) and electron mobility (μe) in the BHJ active layers via the dark J–V plots for hole and electron only devices, respectively, and fitted these with space charge limited current model. The result is shown in Fig. 8. The μh and μe are 2.45 × 10−4 and 1.56 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 (μh/μe ratio of 1.57) for CF3-BDP-Cz, which are bigger than that for CF3-BDP-TPA (μh and μe are 2.18 × 10−4 and 0.99 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 with μh/μe ratio of 2.16), demonstrating that the charge transport is more balanced for CF3-BDP-Cz as compared to CF3-BDP-TPA and may be one of the causes for the high value of JSC and FF for the CF3-BDP-Cz based PSCs.
The PCE of the PSCs is related to the maximum exciton generation rate (Gmax), exciton dissociation efficiency (ηdiss), and charge collection efficiency (ηcc). In general, the FF and JSC are associated with exciton extraction and charge recombination. The above-mentioned parameters were analyzed from the variation of photocurrent density (Jph) with effective voltage (Veff) for the devices (Fig. 9). Jph = JL − JD, where JL and JD are the current densities under illumination and in the dark, respectively. Veff = Vo − Va, where Vo is the voltage, when JL = JD and Va is the applied voltage. As observed in Fig. 9, after the initial increase in photocurrent with the increase in Veff, the Jph reaches a saturation value, i.e., Jsat at a high value of Veff, indicating that the Jph does not depend upon the Veff and only depends upon the light harvesting efficiency of the active layer. Moreover, this also demonstrates that most of the photogenerated excitons are dissociated into free charge carriers. It can be seen from the figure that the Jsat for CF3-BDP-Cz based device arrives at a lower value of Veff as compared to the CF3-BDP-TPA counterpart, demonstrating that exciton dissociation in the former device is more effective than the latter. The value of Gmax is estimated as Gmax = Jsat/qL, where q and L are the elementary charge and thickness of the active layer, respectively. The value of Gmax is higher for CF3-BDP-Cz (1.45 × 1028 m−3 s−1) than CF3-BDP-TPA (1.25 × 1028 m−3 s−1), which is consistent with the absorption profile of the active layers. The values ηdiss and ηcc are estimated from Jph/Jsat under short circuit and maximum power point conditions, respectively. Both the values of ηdiss (0.952) and ηcc (0.783) are higher for CF3-BDP-Cz based PSCs compared to CF3-BDP-TPA (ηdiss = 0.902 and ηcc = 0.732), demonstrating both exciton dissociation and charge collection by the electrodes are more effective for the former device than the latter and associated with the high value of FF for the PSCs.
The existence of charge recombination processes was examined by the analysis of the variation of JSC and VOC with illumination intensity (Pin) and presented in Fig. 10. The relationship between JSC and Pin (Fig. 10(a)) can be expressed as JSC ∝ (Pin)α, where α is the exponent factor and gives information about the degree of bimolecular recombination. In any device, if this value is close to unity, then bimolecular recombination is negligible. The value of α for CF3-BDP-Cz device (0.954) is higher than that for CF3-BDP-TPA (0.904), demonstrating the bimolecular recombination is reduced in the former device as compared to the latter. The variation of VOC with Pin (Fig. 10(b)) is linked with the expression VOC = (nkT/q)ln(Pin), where n, k, and T are the ideality factor, Boltzmann's constant, and temperature in Kelvin, respectively. The value of n gives the extent of trap-assisted recombination. When the value is near two, then the trap-assisted recombination is dominant. The value of n for the CF3-BDP-Cz based device (1.29) is smaller than that for CF3-BDP-TPA (1.41), indicating that the trap-assisted recombination is also suppressed for the former device compared to the latter. The above results also validated the high value of FF for CF3-BDP-Cz based PSCs.
The energy loss (Eloss) in the PSCs is an important parameter and can be expressed as Eloss = Eg − qVOC, where Eg is estimated from the onset of the EQE spectra of the device. The values of Eloss for the PSCs based on CF3-BDP-TPA and CF3-BDP-Cz are about 0.52 eV and 0.47 eV, respectively. In the case of PSCs, the large HOMO and LUMO offset between the donor and acceptor is needed for exciton dissociation and subsequent charge transfer owing to the high exciton binding energy and leads to a high value of Eloss. As the dipole moment for CF3-BDP-Cz is significantly larger than that for CF3-BDP-TPA, which leads to low exciton binding energy for the former, indicating that lower values of the HOMO and LUMO offsets are needed for exciton dissociation and charge transfer in the PBDB-T:CF3-BDP-Cz as compared to the PBDB-T:CF3-BDP-TPA counterpart and results in a low value of Eloss.
We have investigated the molecular stacking and packing via the X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of pristine films and their blends with PBDB-T. The XRD patterns of the pristine films are shown in Fig. S12 (ESI). Both the molecules showed two characteristic diffraction peaks, i.e., first peaks located at 2θ = 4.98° and 5.22° for CF3-BDP-TPA and CF3-BDP-Cz, respectively, corresponding to lamellar stacking, and second peaks located at 2θ = 23.64° and 23.96° for CF3-BDP-TPA and CF3-BDP-Cz, respectively, corresponding to π–π stacking. Both the diffraction peaks for CF3-BDP-Cz are stronger than those for CF3-BDP-TPA, indicating a large crystal coherence length (CCL) for CF3-BDP-Cz. The larger CCL of CF3-BDP-Cz suggests an enhanced aggregation property that can be attributed to the large dipole moment. The XRD patterns of PDBD-T:CF3-BDP-TPA and PDBD-T:CF3-BDP-TPA thin films are shown in Fig. 11. Both the blends showed similar diffraction peaks as observed in their pristine films with a slight difference in the 2θ values, which may be due to the presence of PDBD-T. The values of π–π stacking distance/CCL are 0.376/4.56 nm and 0.368/3.45 nm for PDBD-T:CF3-BDP-TPA and PDBD-T:CF3-BDP-Cz, respectively. The smaller π–π stacking distance of CF3-BDP-Cz corresponds to the large CCLs of blend films, indicating that π–π stacking may be the key factor dictating the crystalline morphology in the blend film. The smaller value of π–π stacking and large value of CCL may result in efficient charge transport, thereby suppressing the recombination and leading to high values of both JSC and FF for the PSCs based on CF3-BDP-Cz.
The morphology of the active layer also plays an important role in the charge recombination processes and therefore is the deciding factor for the overall PCE of the PSCs. A proper domain size of donor and acceptor phase is needed for efficient exciton dissociation into free charge carriers and their subsequent charge transport. If the domain sizes of the donor and acceptor phases are too small, the exciton dissociation is high, and it reduces the interpenetrating pathways for charge carrier transport towards the respective electrode and increases the charge recombination. However, if the domain sizes of the donor and acceptor are too large (above exciton diffusion length ∼10–15 nm), the exciton dissociation is hampered. Therefore, an appropriate nanoscale morphology is required for effective exciton dissociation and charge transport. We have recorded the transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of optimized PBDB-T:CF3-BDP-TPA and PBDB-T:CF3-BDP-Cz blended films and shown in Fig. 12. PBDB-T:CF3-BDP-2 showed a slight phase separation as compared to PBDB-T:CF3-BDP-TPA. This phase separation creates proper nanoscale interpenetrating pathways in the active layer and charge transport, which is more effective in the device based on CF3-BDP-Cz as compared to CF3-BDP-TPA and results in high values of FF and PCE, about 0.67 and 13.07% for the CF3-BDP-TPA-based PSC.

We have designed and synthesized two simple narrow bandgap NFSMAs with the same central CF3 substituted BODIPY and different terminal donors, i.e., TPA (CF3-BDP-TPA) and carbazole (CF3-BDP-Cz), and investigated their optical and electrochemical properties. Both CF3-BDP-TPA and CF3-BDP-Cz showed broad absorption profiles up to 900 nm. Theoretical DFT simulations showed that the molecular dipole moment is higher with a more planar configuration for CF3-BDP-2 than CF3-BDP-TPA, resulting in a low value of exciton binding energy and efficient charge transport in the former. Employing a wide bandgap copolymer PBDB-T as the donor, the solution processed optimized BHJ-PSCs based on CF3-BDP-TPA and CF3-BDP-2 attain the PCE of 9.89% and 13.07%, respectively. The higher value of PCE for CF3-BDP-2 may be associated with efficient exciton dissociation, low energy loss, more nanoscale morphology of the active layer, and reduced charge recombination. These investigations demonstrated that increasing the molecular dipole moment via the simple modification of donor terminal units can improve the PCE of the PSC and reduce the energy loss in the PSCs.


There are no conflicts to declare.


SKP is thankful to the University Grant Commission, New Delhi, India for providing a fellowship (CH/19-20/0028). Support was also provided by the Open Research Fund of the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Henan Normal University, P. R. China.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2tc02497g
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022