 DOI: 10.1039/D2QI02029G
(Research Article)
Inorg. Chem. Front., 2023, 10, 460-467


Chunmei
Lv
,

Tao
Zhang
,

Xiuwen
Wang
*,

Hong
Pan
,

Zhiyu
Xie
,

Hong
Lu
,

Kai
Pan
* and 

Ying
Xie
*

Heilongjiang Province Key Laboratory of Polymeric Composition Material, Qiqihar University, Qiqihar, 161006, China. E-mail: xwwang@qqhru.edu.cn

Key Laboratory of Functional Inorganic Material Chemistry, Ministry of Education, Heilongjiang University, Harbin, 150080, China. E-mail: kaipan@hlju.edu.cn; xieying@hlju.edu.cn

Received
20th September 2022
, Accepted 12th November 2022
First published on 15th November 2022
Heterogeneous metal atom doping is considered as an effective strategy to boost catalytic activity through the coordinated modulation of metal active sites and the electronic structure, which is also beneficial for establishing the relationship between structure and performance in energy conversion devices. Herein, we developed Mo-doped NiSe hierarchical microspheres with different Mo doping amounts by a simple solvothermal method. DFT calculation results including the more appropriate adsorption energy for adsorption of I3−, the further elongated I1–I2 bond length of I3−, and efficient interaction between metal 3d and I 5p states collectively indicated that the catalytic activity for the IRR can be significantly enhanced by doping molybdenum in NiSe. Subsequently, dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) fabricated with the optimized Mo0.10–NiSe display a remarkable power conversion efficiency of 8.92%, superior to that of the Mo0.05–NiSe (8.40%), Mo0.15–NiSe (8.62%), NiSe (7.51%), and Pt-based devices (7.74%) in comparison. The impressive performance endows Mo0.10–NiSe with a new opportunity to achieve the substitution of noble Pt in low-cost DSSCs.

In response to the serious environmental problems caused by the excessive consumption of the conventional fossil fuels, clean renewable energy is drawing more and more attention and has promoted a growing body of research looking at the development of high-performance energy conversion devices to achieve low-carbon development. As a promising third-generation photovoltaic device, dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) possess great merit in converting solar radiation into available electrical energy. Not only that, the relatively simple assembly technology, low manufacture cost, minimal environmental pollution, and great potential application under dark conditions have made DSSCs attract extensive interest in recent years. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of DSSCs can be maximized by optimizing the dye-sensitized TiO2 photoanode, electrolyte containing a redox couple (such as I3−/I−, Co2+/3+(bpy)3), and counter electrode (CE). From the perspective of reducing cost and achieving a satisfactory PCE, developing cost-effective CE catalysts is indispensable as the main function of the CE is to collect electrons from the external circuit and then catalyse I3− to I−. Although enormous efforts have been made to improve the activity of catalysts for future large-scale application, appropriate materials with excellent catalytic activity, fast charge-transfer capability, and satisfactory electrochemical stability are still needed for design by a mature and reliable strategy. It is common knowledge that noble Pt has been regarded as the most representative CE material in DSSCs, however its fatal drawbacks cannot be ignored. Therefore, the controllable synthesis of Pt-free CE catalysts with satisfactory performance has become an important goal of researchers.

Due to the Earth abundance, inherent catalytic activity, and outstanding durability, Ni-based selenides with different stoichiometric ratios have been designed for use as CE catalysts for the triiodide reduction reaction (IRR) in DSSCs. For instance, Wang's group applied NiSe2 octahedra with an average size of 2–3 μm as CE catalysts, and then a high PCE was obtained. Ho's group revealed the influence of the morphology of Ni3Se4 nanoparticles on the catalytic activity and photovoltaic performance. Subsequently, mesoporous Ni0.85Se@reduced graphene oxide was also developed and used as a CE catalyst for DSSCs, and the positive synergetic effect between Ni0.85Se and reduced graphene oxide endows Ni0.85Se@reduced graphene oxide with a higher PCE than that of Pt. Inspired by the unique three-dimensional micro/nanostructure, our group prepared well-defined NiSe hierarchical microspheres. When used as the CE for DSSCs, their PCE was comparable to that of the Pt-based devices. Besides, small-sized NiSe2 nanowires and NiSe2 nanoparticles were controllably synthesized by tailoring the reactivity of Ni-based precursors, and an impressive PCE was obtained when DSSCs were fabricated with the two mentioned materials.
Although the catalytic activity of catalysts can be tailored from the point of the chemical component and morphology (structure), the performance of single-metal selenides such as the mentioned NiSe and NiSe2 still has room for further improvement. Constructing heterogeneous metal-doped selenides by integrating foreign metals has been widely explored to modulate the inherent electronic structures and accelerate the reaction kinetics. In this regard, the combination between early (Mo, V, etc.) and late transition (Ni, Co, etc.) metals endows heteroatom-doped compounds with uncommon catalytic activity due to the unusual d-band electron complementary effect. Encouraged by the above, coordinating nickel selenide by Mo doping and simultaneously modulating accessible micro/nanostructures seem to be an effective strategy to further improve IRR activity.
Herein, we successfully manipulated NiSe hierarchical microspheres for IRR by modulating the electronic structure with different molybdenum incorporation amounts. As demonstrated by the DFT calculation, the enhancement of the IRR by doping molybdenum in NiSe can be described as follows: first is the enhanced adsorption energy for I3−; second is that the I1–I2 bond of I3− is easier to break; and third is that the interaction between 3d of the metal (Mo 3d, Ni 3d) and I 5p states were identified, revealing the positively synergistic effect between Mo and Ni metal atoms owing to the complementary effect of d-band electrons. Accordingly, an optimized PCE of 8.92% was achieved when the as-designed Mo0.10–NiSe was used as the CE material for iodine-based DSSCs, which is significantly higher than that of the Pt-based DSSCs (7.74%) in comparison. Furthermore, the performance differences caused by different molybdenum doping amounts were also investigated by the relevant electrochemical measurements. So, this work provides a theoretical and experimental approach to uncover the structure–performance relationship, which is beneficial for guiding the preparation of cost-effective catalysts in the field of energy conversion.

The experimental details including materials, preparation of CEs, fabrication of DSSCs, characterization and measurements, and computational method are given in the ESI.


Well-defined Mo0.10–NiSe hierarchical microspheres were prepared by a facile one-step solvothermal method. The concrete preparation process can be described as follows. Firstly, a homogeneous mixed solution is obtained by mixing 20 mL of diethyltriamine (DETA) and 20 mL of N2H4·H2O into deionized water (40 mL) under vigorous stirring. Then 2 mmol of Ni(CH3COO)2·4H2O and 2 mmol of Na2SeO3 were added into the mixed solution and followed by sonication and vigorous stirring until a homogeneous solution was formed. Finally, 0.10 mmol of Na2MoO4·2H2O was dissolved into the mentioned solution and stirred for 2 h before transferring into a 100 mL Teflon-lined autoclave. After the solvothermal reaction at 180 °C for 12 h, the obtained samples containing the black precipitate were centrifuged and washed with ethanol and deionized water several times. Consequently, the resulting black samples were reserved and denoted as Mo0.10–NiSe. Moreover, NiSe, Mo0.05–NiSe and Mo0.15–NiSe were synthesized by a similar procedure with the mentioned Mo0.10–NiSe, except that the amount of Na2MoO4·2H2O was changed to 0 mmol, 0.05 mmol and 0.15 mmol, respectively.


Theoretical calculations based on density functional theory (DFT) were performed to identify the benefit of Mo doping on NiSe by combining preferred adsorption sites for I3−, adsorption energy, electron density difference (EDD), and density of states (DOSs). After geometry optimization, I3− was preferentially adsorbed on the top site of NiSe (Fig. 1a) and the adsorption energy of I3− on the NiSe surface was calculated and found to be −1.08 eV (Table S1). According to the side view of the NiSe surface after I3− adsorption depicted in Fig. 1b, the bond length of I1–I2 was elongated from the original 2.98 Å to 3.155 Å, while the I2–I3 changed to 2.797 Å, which is conducive to the dissociation of I3− to I−. Moreover, the EDD was calculated and is shown in Fig. 1c. It is worth noting that the typical electron depletion phenomenon between I1 and I2 can be observed, implying that a covalent bond had been formed between the Ni atom of NiSe and I1 of I3−, which suggested that NiSe possesses certain catalytic activity towards the IRR. In order to thoroughly unveil the interaction between Ni sites and I3− species, the DOSs of NiSe after I3− adsorption were calculated (Fig. 1g). It is easily found that the TDOSs of the NiSe/I3− system changed significantly after the adsorption of I3− on the NiSe surface. In detail, the 5p states of I obviously shifted to the lower energy position, while the TDOSs of the contacting Ni atom also changed noticeably. Through the in-depth observation of partial DOSs, it can be further proved that the change of the DOSs of the NiSe/I3− system is mainly due to the change of the Ni 3d state, meaning the bond between Ni 3d and I 5p has been formed. Therefore, the mentioned results demonstrated that the excellent catalytic activity for the IRR depends not only on NiSe (i.e. chemical component), but also on the d-band activity of metal atoms.

Inspired by the “d-band electron complementary effect”, introducing an early transition metal such as Mo into NiSe to construct Mo-doped NiSe (denoted as Mo–NiSe) is an effective strategy to further improve the catalytic activity for the IRR. For this, the DFT was also calculated to explore the influence of Mo doping on the catalytic activity of Mo–NiSe for I3− dissociation. As shown in Fig. 1d and e, the I3− complex will be preferentially adsorbed on the metal atoms of Mo–NiSe. The adsorption energy of I3− on Mo and Ni atoms was −1.84 eV and −1.65 eV (Table S1), respectively, meaning that the dissociation of I3− to I− occurred easily at the Mo atom. Meanwhile, the activity of the Ni atom also improved under these conditions. The further extended bond length (Fig. 1e) and more significantly the electron depletion phenomenon around I1–I2 (Fig. 1f) revealed that excellent catalytic activity for the IRR can be delivered due to the formation of the covalent bond between Mo atom and I1. The TDOS and partial DOSs demonstrated that the formed bonds stemmed from the Mo 3d, Ni 3d, and I 5p states, indicating that these sites played the role of active centers for the IRR (Fig. 1h). Based on the mentioned considerations, the enhanced adsorption energy, prolonged I1–I2 bond length, and positively covalent bond between the metal atom and I1 of I3− endows Mo–NiSe with higher catalytic activity for the IRR than that of NiSe in comparison.

In order to verify the mentioned theoretical results, Mo–NiSe hierarchical microspheres were synthesized by a facile one-step solvothermal reaction and used as the CE catalysts for low-cost DSSCs.

Mo–NiSe was synthesized by dispersing Ni(CH3COO)2·4H2O, Na2SeO3, and a certain amount of Na2MoO4·2H2O into an aqueous solution containing DETA and N2H4·H2O with vigorous stirring, followed by the simple solvothermal reaction at 180 °C for 12 h. The detailed preparation process can be seen in the Experimental section. Powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) was used to characterize the crystallographic structure of the as-prepared materials. As depicted in Fig. 2a, the diffraction peaks at 32.778°, 44.369°, 49.931°, 59.555°, 61.164°, 69.055°, and 70.417° were indexed to the (101), (102), (110), (103), (201), (202), and (004) planes of hexagonal NiSe (JCPDS no. 02-0892). No phase of Mo-based compound was found, meaning that the doped molybdenum was distributed in the NiSe lattice. It is worth noting that all diffraction peaks shifted to the higher angles with Mo doping (Fig. 2b). Such a peak position shift can be attributed to the replacement of Ni2+ (ionic radius, 6.9 Å) by Mo4+ with a smaller ionic radius (6.8 Å). These results demonstrated that Mo–NiSe with different Mo doping amounts had been successfully synthesized. Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) suggested that the doping amount of the molybdenum atoms gradually increases with the increase of sodium molybdate content (Table S2). The atomic ratios of Ni and Mo in Mo0.05–NiSe, Mo0.10–NiSe, and Mo0.15–NiSe were 187:1, 100:1, and 68:1, respectively.
The surface elemental composition and chemical valence of the as-prepared Mo0.10–NiSe were examined by X-ray photo electron spectroscopy (XPS). Mo 3d, Ni 2p, and Se 3d were found in the survey spectrum (Fig. 2c). As shown in Fig. 2d, the Mo 3d5/2 and Mo 3d3/2 orbital peaks were observed at 228.7 eV and 231.9 eV, respectively, indicating the presence of Mo4+. As for the XPS spectra of Ni 2p (Fig. 2e), the peaks located at 855.3 eV and 873.2 eV were assigned to the Ni 2p3/2 and Ni 2p1/2, respectively, accompanied by two satellites at 860.5 eV and 878.8 eV suggesting the coexistence of Ni2+ and Ni3+. The Se 3d XPS spectra in Fig. 2f implies two peaks at 53.9 eV and 54.7 eV, agreeing with Se 3d5/2 and Se 3d3/2, suggesting the −2 valence of Se, while the peak around at 58.26 eV can be ascribed to SeOx.
The morphologies of the as-synthesized samples were investigated by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and the corresponding images are depicted in Fig. 3. It was observed that Mo0.05–NiSe, Mo0.10–NiSe, and Mo0.15–NiSe maintained good uniformity and a typical 3D spherical structure (Fig. 3a, d, and g). The average size of the obtained samples was 2.0 μm. Through the in-depth observation of high-resolution SEM images (Fig. 3b–c, e–f, and h–i), the Mo–NiSe microspheres were shown to be composed of numerous small-sized nanoparticles. Notably, the surface morphology of the samples obviously converges from small particles to aggregated large particles with the increase of molybdenum doping amount, which proves from another point of view that the doping of molybdenum affects the surface morphology of the sample, indicating that molybdenum had been successfully incorporated. The detailed microstructure of Mo0.10–NiSe was further investigated by transmission electron microscopy (TEM). As shown in the TEM images of different resolutions (Fig. 4a and b), the surface of Mo0.10–NiSe microspheres is composed of crisscrossed nanoparticles and nanosheets, accompanied by dispersed pore structures. HRTEM characterization on an individual nanoparticle that was distributed at the edge of the microsphere displays clearly the lattice fringes with a lattice spacing of 0.273 nm (Fig. 4c–e), corresponding to the (101) plane of NiSe. Meanwhile, the elemental mapping graphs in Fig. 4f–h revealed the existence of elements Mo, Ni and Se and the homogeneous distribution of Mo along with Ni throughout the Mo0.10–NiSe microsphere.

In order to evaluate the photovoltaic performance of the aforementioned materials, Mo0.05–NiSe, Mo0.10–NiSe, and Mo0.15–NiSe CEs were fabricated by the same doctor-blade technique. Taking Mo0.10–NiSe as an example, the its thickness was found to be about 6 μm by observing the cross-sectional SEM image of Mo0.10–NiSe CE as shown in Fig. 5a. Meanwhile, the thickness of Pt was about 340 nm (Fig. 5b). The photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) curves of DSSCs based on Mo0.05–NiSe, Mo0.10–NiSe, Mo0.15–NiSe, and Pt CEs were obtained at the irradiation of 1 sun (Fig. 5c). The relevant photovoltaic parameters including PCE, open circuit voltage (Voc), short circuit current density (Jsc), and fill factor (FF) are listed in Table S3. It is worth noting that the value of these parameters was extracted from the average values of eight devices, then the average value was selected as the final performance of devices. As shown in Fig. 5c, d and Table S3, the PCE values attained by DSSCs fabricated with Mo0.05–NiSe, Mo0.10–NiSe, and Mo0.15–NiSe CEs are 8.40% (Jsc = 16.92 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.773 V, FF = 0.64), 8.92% (Jsc = 18.07 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.768 V, FF = 0.64), and 8.62% (Jsc = 17.72 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.768 V, FF = 0.63), respectively, superior to those of a Pt-based device (PCE = 7.74%, Jsc = 16.18 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.755 V, FF = 0.63) and pure NiSe (PCE = 7.51%, Jsc = 16.03 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.761 V, FF = 0.62) in comparison. On the one hand, the difference in performance among these Pt-free catalysts indicated that the amount of molybdenum doping has a great influence on the whole of performance. On the other hand, the intrinsic catalytic activity for the IRR can be enhanced by introducing Mo in the NiSe lattice, as shown by the “d-band electron complementary effect”, which has been demonstrated by the DFT calculation (Fig. 1). Moreover, the photovoltaic performance of DSSCs assembled with Mo0.10–NiSe CE was also higher than that of the recently reported works (Table S4). The above results further revealed that the heterometal atom doping strategy is an effective method to further enhance the intrinsic catalytic activity of CE catalysts.


The electrochemical behaviors including catalytic activity for the IRR, charge-transfer capability at the interface, electrochemical stability of the as-synthesized CE catalysts were evaluated by cyclic voltammetry (CV), electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), and Tafel polarization curves.

CV curves based on the three-electrode system using Pt plate as the CE, Ag/AgCl as the reference electrode, and the as-prepared materials as work electrodes were implemented to assess the catalytic activity of those materials. Two pairs of the reduction and oxidation peaks are observed in Fig. 6a, where the Red-1/Ox-1 and Red-2/Ox-2 represents the redox of I3− + 2e− ↔ 3I− at the relative negative potential region and 3I2 + 2e− ↔ 2I3− at the positive potential region, respectively. Considering that the main role of the CE catalyst in iodine-based electrolyte is to catalyze I3− to I−, the redox of Red-1/Ox-1 is of greater interest. To be even more specific, the cathodic peak current density (Jpc) and oxidation peak-to-peak reduction separation (Epp) were defined to evaluate the performance of the obtained samples. It is noticeable that the Jpc and Epp values of Mo-doped NiSe including Mo0.05–NiSe, Mo0.10–NiSe and Mo0.15–NiSe were obviously better than that of Pt and pure NiSe (Fig. S1b), revealing the impressive catalytic activity and reversibility that can be achieved by introducing Mo. Meanwhile, the activities of these Pt-free CE catalysts can be marked in the following order: Mo0.10–NiSe > Mo0.15–NiSe > Mo0.05–NiSe > NiSe, meaning that the performance of Mo-doped NiSe can be optimized by tailoring the doping amount of molybdenum, which was consistent with the mentioned J–V curve.
EIS was measured using dummy cells (CEs/iodine-based electrolyte/CEs) to elucidate the interfacial charge-transfer capability. The corresponding electrochemical parameters can be obtained by fitting the appropriate equivalent circuit (inset in Fig. 6b) and are summarized in Table S2. Typically, the series resistance (Rs) can be extracted from the intercept of the left arc on the x-real axis, while the charge-transfer resistance (Rct) is reflected by the diameter of the left arc in the high frequency region. The former represents the inherent resistance of the catalysts and the contact resistance between the CE catalyst films and FTO conductive substrate. The latter refers to the charge-transfer ability at the CE catalyst/electrolyte interface, which is inversely related to the catalytic activity for the IRR. As depicted in Fig. 6b and Table S2, the Rs and Rct values of Mo0.10–NiSe (Rs = 23.17 Ω and Rct = 3.67 Ω) were significantly lower than that of Mo0.05–NiSe (Rs = 24.07 Ω and Rct = 8.11 Ω), Mo0.15–NiSe (Rs = 24.03 Ω and Rct = 5.69 Ω), Pt (Rs = 24.17 Ω and Rct = 11.03 Ω), and NiSe (Rs = 32.43 Ω and Rct = 17.62 Ω, Fig. S1c) in comparison, demonstrating that the obtained Mo0.10–NiSe possesses faster charge-transfer ability than that of the these mentioned samples. In principle, the resistance of Pt CE should be minimal because of its metallic properties. It should be noted that the slightly low Rs value of Pt-free CEs may be attributed to the application of polyvinylidene fluoride (binder) during the preparation process of these CEs, which is conducive to improve the adhesion capability between the CE film and conductive FTO substrate, and then the Rs value of Mo–NiSe-based CEs can be effectively reduced. Therefore, the as-designed Mo0.10–NiSe has great potential to achieve enhanced catalytic activity, which can be attributed to the optimized electronic structure of Mo0.10–NiSe by integrating a certain amount of Mo in the NiSe lattice.
The Tafel polarization curve, one of the important electrochemical measurement methods, was used to estimate the catalytic activity of the as-prepared CE catalysts, which can be measured using the aforementioned dummy cells. The exchange current density (J0), referring to the catalytic activity for the IRR, can be extracted from the intersection of the linear extrapolation of the cathodic branch. The limiting diffusion current density (Jlim) represents the diffusion rate of I3− at the CE surface, which can be obtained from the equilibrium potential line and intersection of the cathodic branch with the Y-axis. Generally, the higher the J0 and Jlim values of CE, the higher its catalytic activity that can be delivered. As shown in Fig. 6c and Fig. S1d, it is easily found that the J0 and Jlim values of Mo0.10–NiSe were obviously higher than that of Mo0.05–NiSe, Mo0.15–NiSe, NiSe and Pt, suggesting that the catalytic performance of Mo0.10–NiSe is the strongest among these CE catalysts, as proved by the mentioned CV and EIS results. Meanwhile, the J0 value can be calculated using the equation of J0 = RT/nFRct, where T is the temperature, R is the gas constant, n is the number of electrons involved in the reaction, and F is Faraday's constant. It further demonstrated that the catalytic activity of Mo0.10–NiSe is significantly better than that of other samples.
Electrochemical stability of the as-synthesized CE catalysts has been considered to be a useful parameter to evaluate potential for long-term application in DSSCs, which was also evaluated by the continuous CV tests in an iodine-based electrolyte (I3−/I−). For this, CV tests of 100 successive cycles of the as-prepared Mo0.05–NiSe, Mo0.10–NiSe, and Mo0.15–NiSe were measured at a scanning rate of 50 mV s−1. As depicted in Fig. 6d–i, the Jpc and Epp of the as-designed Mo0.05–NiSe, Mo0.10–NiSe, and Mo0.15–NiSe showed a negligible decrease, revealing that impressive stability can be achieved. Similarly, 100 consecutive CV curves of the Pt CEs were also measured and are depicted in Fig. S2, revealing that good electrochemical stability of Pt CEs can be achieved. So, the above results demonstrated that the as-prepared catalysts have potential to be used as novel CE materials for the development of low-cost DSSCs.

“A combined theoretical and experimental study” was performed to elucidate in depth the reason for the much enhanced IRR performance on constructing Mo-doped NiSe. Through the intensive comparison of DFT calculations before and after molybdenum doping, the improved IRR performance from NiSe to Mo–NiSe can be attributed to the much enhanced adsorption energy, the increased I1–I2 bond length from 3.155 Å (NiSe) to 3.348 Å (Mo–NiSe), and the more efficient d-band electron complementary effect resulting from the covalent bond between the 3d of metal (Mo 3d, Ni 3d) and I 5p states. Subsequently, we successfully prepared Mo-doped NiSe hierarchical microspheres with different Mo-doping amounts by the facile one-step solvothermal reaction. The PCE reached 8.40%, 8.92%, and 8.62% when the as-prepared Mo0.05–NiSe, Mo0.10–NiSe, and Mo0.15–NiSe were used as novel CE catalysts for iodine-based DSSCs, respectively, which is obviously higher than that of the Pt-based device (7.74%) and pure NiSe (7.51%). Meanwhile, the relevant electrochemical results proved that Mo0.10–NiSe exhibited excellent catalytic activity for the IRR, faster charge-transfer capability, and satisfactory durability compared to Mo0.05–NiSe and Mo0.15–NiSe in comparison. The above results suggested that the doping amount of Mo has a great influence on the IRR performance. Therefore, reliable support from the theoretical and experimental study is provided for the design of efficient CE catalysts for low-cost DSSCs.


The authors declare that there are no competing interests.


We gratefully acknowledge the support of the National Natural Science Foundation of China (22005161), the Fundamental Research Funds in Heilongjiang Provincial Universities of China (145109209), and the Heilongjiang Provincial Key Laboratory of Surface Active Agent and Auxiliary (BMHXJKF006).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2qi02029g
This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2023