 DOI: 10.1039/C6TA08215G
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 18378-18382


Azat F.
Akbulatov
,

Lyubov A.
Frolova
,

Denis V.
Anokhin
,

Kirill L.
Gerasimov
,

Nadezhda N.
Dremova
 and 

Pavel A.
Troshin
*

IPCP RAS, Semenov Prospect 1, Chernogolovka, 142432, Russia. E-mail: troshin2003@inbox.ru; Fax: +7 496515 5420; Tel: +7 496522 1418

M. V. Lomonosov Moscow State University, Faculty of Fundamental Physical and Chemical Engineering, GSP-1, 1-51 Leninskie Gory, Moscow, 119991, Russia

Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, Nobel St. 3, Moscow, Russia

Received
21st September 2016
, Accepted 14th October 2016
First published on 14th October 2016
In this study, we investigated the effects of partial substitution of methylammonium (MA) with hydrazinium (HA) cations on the optical properties, film morphology, crystal structure and photovoltaic performance of the hybrid perovskites MA1−xHAxPbI3. Planar heterojunction solar cells with an optimal hydrazinium loading demonstrated an enhanced power conversion efficiency of 11.6% and improved operation stability.

The continuous depletion of fossil fuels makes renewable energy technologies increasingly relevant. The discovery of perovskite solar cells holds a promise to deliver high solar power conversion efficiencies at very low module costs, making renewable energy much cheaper than that generated by the combustion of fossil fuels. Indeed, current generation of perovskite solar cells is based on cheap and abundant organolead halides (e.g. MAPbI3), demonstrating record efficiencies of >20% similar to crystalline silicon. However, the fabrication of perovskite solar cells does not require any sophisticated equipment or processes and it can be potentially accomplished using high throughput solution coating methods (e.g. slot die coating). This represents the major advantage of the perovskite solar cells over all other existing inorganic thin film and silicon PV technologies.

The most severe limitation of organoinorganic hybrid perovskites is their poor stability with respect to the action of light, electric fields, elevated temperatures, moisture and oxygen. This problem can be solved partially by compositional engineering of the perovskite films.
It has been shown, in particular, that the FAPbI3 structure can be stabilized by partial replacement of the formamidinium cations (FA) with methylammonium (MA). The resulting hybrid FAxMA1−xPbI3 material delivered enhanced phase stability and improved photovoltaic performance. A similar caesium-containing CsxFA1−xPbI3 salt provided significantly increased ambient stability of the thin films and completed devices. The partial replacement of iodine with bromine and even chlorine provides a straightforward approach for controlling the optoelectronic, physicochemical and photovoltaic properties of the hybrid perovskite films. One of the highest efficiencies was reported for a mixed FAxMA1−xPbI3−yBry salt, which also showed somewhat improved ambient stability. These examples highlight the potential of compositional engineering of lead-based perovskite materials; however, the problem of their poor operational stability remains unresolved.
Recently, we showed that the electrochemical and photochemical degradation of MAPbI3 proceeds, most probably, with the liberation of molecular iodine. Iodine is a strongly corrosive and chemically active material. Therefore, its production in the active layer of the perovskite solar cells should have a deleterious effect on their stability. To overcome this problem, one might introduce an iodine quencher in the lattice of MAPbI3, which would regenerate I− from I2. The hydrazinium cations fit well for this purpose. On one hand, hydrazinium can easily convert molecular iodine to iodide. On the other hand, hydrazinium can undergo additional protonation and form a dication, thus maintaining electrical neutrality of the system after the loss of some oxidized HA cations. Finally, hydrazine has a relatively high boiling temperature (>100 °C) compared to methylamine (∼−6 °C); therefore, the decreased volatility of amine should also lead to the enhanced stability of the material.

In the present study, we focused on the experimental verification of the aforementioned hypotheses via the preparation and investigation of the hydrazinium-loaded hybrid perovskite materials. Hydrazinium cation (HA) is comparable in size to methylammonium (MA), but their molecular geometry is slightly different because the CH3 group in MA is replaced with the NH2 group in HA (Fig. 1). Nevertheless, one could expect to reveal the perovskite structure even for HAPbI3 following the Goldschmidt model because this compound is characterized by the geometrical tolerance factor of 0.912, which is almost the same as for MAPbI3.

This comparison suggests that an entire family of the hybrid MA1−xHAxPbI3 systems with x ranging from 0 to 1 can be obtained easily. The MA1−xHAxPbI3 thin films were grown using a single-step solvent-induced crystallization method. In particular, PbI2 was treated with DMF overnight with a stoichiometric amount of methylammonium iodide (MAI) or hydrazinium iodide (HAI) or their mixture. The resulting solution was spin-coated at 5000 rpm inside a nitrogen glove box. Toluene (200 μL) was dropped on the film 4–5 s after initiation of spin-coating, inducing film crystallization. Spinning was continued for 45 s and the deposited films were then annealed at 100 °C for 15 min on a hotplate installed inside the glove box.
The optical properties of the resulting MA1−xHAxPbI3 films were found to be very different, depending on the hydrazinium content. Fig. 2 shows that incorporation of 10% of HA cations (x = 0.1) leads to a notable increase in the absorbance of the films in the 400–800 nm spectral range. However, the films with a HA content of 20% (x = 0.2) and 30% (x = 0.3) showed very similar absorption profiles to that of the pristine MAPbI3. Further increases in the HA concentration from 40% to 100% resulted in decreased absorbance of the films at long wavelengths and the emergence of new distinct bands at 300–500 nm, which suggested the formation of some new non-perovskite phases. This is a surprising because HAPbI3 might have a perovskite structure according to the Goldschmidt model (see above).
We applied grazing incidence wide angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) to characterize the crystal structures of MA1−xHAxPbI3 thin films (Fig. 3). The diffraction pattern of MAPbI3 revealed the formation of the crystalline β-phase (symmetry group I4cm, a = b = 8.85 Å; c = 12.64 Å) (Fig. 3a) with a weak orientation of c-parameter normal to the film surface.
The addition of 10% HA resulted in the shift of the (110) peak to wider angles, which revealed the formation of a more compact tetragonal lattice with integrated HA cations (Fig. S1, ESI). The appearance of an additional peak at 7.1 Å (indicated with arrow in Fig. 3b) can be attributed tentatively to the enlarged (001) peak of PbI2 due to the inclusion of solvent molecules between the crystalline layers. Increasing the HA loading to 20% and 40% was accompanied by an increase in the content of intercalated PbI2 phase (Fig. 3c and d). However, MA0.5HA0.5PbI3 with equal HA and MA ratio showed the appearance of a series of new reflections in the small angle region (Fig. 3e). These peaks can be attributed to the formation of some novel phase, resulting from the co-crystallization of species with both MA and HA cations. In addition, some reflections of pure HAPbI3 phase were detected for this sample. Therefore, depending on the concentration, HA groups can be integrated into the unit cell of MAPbI3 or cause the formation of co-crystals. Indexation of the diffractogram of HAPbI3 showed that it has a hexagonal (symmetry P63mc) unit cell with the following parameters: a = b = 8.94 Å, c = 8.25 Å (Fig. 3f). The a-parameter is oriented normal to the film surface. This phase is similar to the δ-phase of FAPbI3 but with an increased unit cell volume. A non-oriented peak at 10.5 Å is probably due to the PbI2/DMF structure mentioned above.
The MA1−xHAxPbI3 films were further investigated by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) to reveal their surface morphology. The MAPbI3 film demonstrated well-shaped crystallites with an average lateral size of 100–150 nm (Fig. 4). Surprisingly, the mixed MA0.9HA0.1PbI3 films show a considerable increase in grain size up to 400–700 nm, which appears to be related to the presence of hydrazinium ions in this system. Several thin vertically-oriented plates grown at the grain boundaries might correspond to the phase-separated PbI2 crystals observed by GIWAXS. Further increases in the content of the hydrazinium ions brings more vertically-oriented plates on the film surface (Fig. S2, ESI). No significant defects were observed for the HAPbI3 film (Fig. S2b), which demonstrates a well-crystalline densely covered surface.
We explored the effect of HA substitution in MAPbI3 on the performance of the perovskite solar cells. Planar junction devices were fabricated by spin-coating MA1−xHAxPbI3 thin films on the ITO/PEDOT:PSS electrodes followed by the deposition of PCBM (details are given in ESI) and evaporation of the top silver electrodes (Fig. 5a).
The photovoltaic performance of the MA1−xHAxPbI3 films with HA contents ranging from 0% to 100% was investigated systematically. The current–voltage characteristics were measured in the forward direction with the voltage sweeping rate of 100 mV s−1 (Fig. S3). Fig. 5b shows the evolution of the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the devices as a function of the HA concentration in the active layer.
One can notice that the incorporation of 10% of HA results in a notable increase in the PCE of the solar cells. However, the use of a higher HA loading leads to significant deterioration of the device performance, which comes close to zero for MA0.4HA0.6PbI3 (Fig. 5b, S3 and Table S1, ESI). This suggests that hydrazine-rich systems cannot perform well in photovoltaic devices due to, perhaps, structural evolution revealed by GIWAXS (Fig. 3).

Table 1 lists the open-circuit voltages (Voc), short-circuit current densities (Jsc), fill factors (FF), and PCEs of the most representative devices based on the MA0.9HA0.1PbI3 and MAPbI3 films. The mixed system, MA0.9HA0.1PbI3, outperforms the pristine MAPbI3 considerably. In particular, the introduction of hydrazinium enhances the short circuit current densities of the devices by almost 3 mA cm−2. This result was also reconfirmed by the integration of the EQE spectra of the solar cells based on pristine MAPbI3 and MA0.9HA0.1PbI3 (Fig. 5d). We believe that the observed increase in photocurrent is related to the better light harvesting properties of the hydrazinium-loaded films (Fig. 2), their enhanced crystallinity and, most likely the reduced recombination of charge carriers at the grain boundaries.
Perovskite

V
oc, mV

J
sc (calc Jsc), mA cm−2
FF, %

η, %
MAPbI3
914 ± 25
12.7 ± 1.4 (13.9)
69 ± 7
9.2 ± 0.9
MA0.9HA0.1PbI3
909 ± 18
15.2 ± 1.7 (16.2)
70 ± 4
10.7 ± 0.9
In addition, the solar cells based on the hydrazinium-containing MA0.9HA0.1PbI3 system demonstrated the hysteresis-free behaviour in their current–voltage characteristics (Fig. 5b and S4). This is in contrast to the reference devices based on the pristine MAPbI3 and fabricated under the same conditions. It might be that the incorporation of hydrazinium ions in the active layer of the devices eliminates some of the trap states localized at the grain boundaries, which might result in suppressed hysteresis.
Finally, we evaluated the effect of the hydrazinium ions on the operation stability of the planar junction devices based on the pristine MAPbI3 and the mixed material comprising 10% of hydrazinium ions instead of MA. While running the photostability test, the non-encapsulated solar cells comprising MAPbI3 and MA0.9HA0.1PbI3 were exposed to continuous white light illumination (metal halide lamps) with the intensity of about 60 mW cm−2 inside the nitrogen glove box (O2 and H2O content below 0.1 ppm). The efficiency of all perovskite solar cells decreased rapidly. However, the hydrazinium-loaded devices demonstrated somewhat higher stability than the reference solar cells based on the conventional MAPbI3 (Fig. 6). It was mentioned above that the photodegradation of MAPbI3 proceeds via the oxidation of I− to molecular I2, which is known as a strongly corrosive agent. The incorporation of the hydrazinium cations cannot block the photodegradation of the perovskite films. However, the hydrazinium ions incorporated in the structure of the MA0.9HA0.1PbI3 should quench I2 efficiently and regenerate I−. Most probably, this iodine deactivation mechanism explains the observed improvement in the photostability of the perovskite solar cells incorporating the hydrazinium cations. The obtained results can be considered good proof of the proposed “self-curing” concept focused on the integration of some reducing agents in the perovskite structure, which might be explored further to enhance the stability of perovskite solar cells.

CH3NH3I was synthesized by stirring methylamine (CH3NH2) (33 wt% in absolute ethanol, Sigma Aldrich) with hydroiodic acid (57 wt% in water, Aldrich) in a round-bottom flask at 0 °C for 2 hours. The solution was concentrated to dryness in the vacuum of the rotary evaporator. Methylammonium iodide (CH3NH3I) was washed carefully with diethyl ether and then recrystallized from a diethyl ether–ethanol mixture and dried at 60 °C in a vacuum oven overnight.


Hydrazinium iodide (N2H5I) was synthesized by stirring hydrazine hydrate (∼98%, Sigma Aldrich) and hydroiodic acid (57 wt% in water, Aldrich) in a round-bottom flask at 0 °C. The isolation and purification of HAI was performed in a similar way as for MAI.


Lead iodide PbI2 (578 mg, 1.25 mmol) and methylammonium iodide MAI (200 mg, 1.25 mmol) were dissolved in 1 mL of dimethylformamide (DMF) to obtain the precursor solution I. PbI2 (578 mg, 1.25 mmol) and hydrazinium iodide HAI (201 mg, 1.25 mmol) were then dissolved in 1 mL of DMF to obtain the precursor solution II. Both solutions were stirred overnight at 70 °C. Afterwards, precursor solutions I and II were mixed in the volume ratios of 0.5:9.5, 1:9, 2:8, 3:7, 4:6, 5:5, 6:4, and 8:2 to obtain a series of MA1−xHAxPbI3 precursor solutions.


The absorption spectra were obtained using an AvaSpec-2048-2 UV-VIS fiber spectrometer integrated inside the glove box.

Scanning electron microscopy images were obtained on a Zeiss SUPRA 25 instrument. The samples were prefixed on a microscope stage inside the glove box to reduce the exposure time in air down to ∼1 min.
GIWAXS measurements of thin films were performed using a XeuSS SAXS/WAXS (Xenocs, France) machine coupled to a GeniX3D generator (λ = 1.54 Å). The 2D data were collected with an incidence angle of 0.2° using a Rayonix LX170-HS detector with a sample to detector distance of 16 cm. The modulus of the scattering vector s (s = 2sinθ/λ, where θ is the Bragg angle) was calibrated using several diffraction orders of silver behenate powder.

Glass/ITO substrates (5 Ω/□, Luminescence Technology Corp.) were sequentially cleaned with toluene and acetone and sonicated in deionized water, acetone and isopropanol. PEDOT:PSS (Clevios PH) was filtered through a 0.45 mm PES filter and spin-coated onto ITO slides at 3000 rpm. The resulting PEDOT:PSS films were then dried at 165 °C for 15 min in air. The MA1−xHAxPbI3 precursor solutions were spin-coated at 5000 rpm inside a nitrogen glove box. Toluene (200 μL) was dropped on the film 4–5 s after the initiation of spin-coating, inducing film crystallization. Spinning was continued for 45 s and then the deposited films were annealed at 100 °C for 15 min on a hotplate installed inside the glove box. A 30 mg mL−1 solution of PCBM in chlorobenzene was spin-coated at 1500 rpm on the top of the MA1−xHAxPbI3 films prepared as described above. Silver electrodes (100 nm) were deposited through thermal evaporation in high vacuum (10−6 mbar). The device active area was 0.5 cm2 as defined by a shadow mask. All steps of the device fabrication procedure following the annealing of the PEDOT:PSS films in air were carried out under an inert atmosphere inside the nitrogen glove box.

The current–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the devices were obtained under an inert atmosphere using the simulated 100 mW cm−2 AM1.5 solar irradiation provided by a KHS Steuernagel solar simulator integrated with a MBraun glove box. The intensity of illumination was checked every time before each measurement using a calibrated silicon diode with a known spectral response. J–V curves were recorded using a Kethley 2400 source-measurement unit. The active areas of all the devices were measured with the best possible accuracy just after the J–V measurements to estimate the short circuit current densities. The obtained Jsc values were reconfirmed by integrating the EQE spectra against the standard AM1.5G spectrum. The EQE spectra were obtained under normal atmospheric conditions without applying any special encapsulation or protection to the photovoltaic devices using a specially designed setup (LOMO instruments, Russia and Stanford Research Instruments, USA).

The optical properties, surface morphology, crystal structure and photovoltaic characteristics of the MAPbI3 perovskite films can be tuned efficiently by partial substitution of methylammonium by hydrazinium cations. GIWAXS measurements show the formation of several crystalline phases comprising both MA and HA cations. Finally, we demonstrated that hydrazinium-loaded material MA0.9HA0.1PbI3 delivered planar junction hybrid solar cells with a considerably improved power conversion efficiency and operational stability compared to the reference devices based on the conventional MAPbI3. The positive effects arising from the incorporation of hydrazinium cations in the perovskite lattice open up new opportunities for designing efficient and stable materials for hybrid solar cells.


This study was supported by the Russian Foundation for Basic Research (grant No. 16-03-00793 А).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental procedures, Fig. S1–S3 and Table S1 with photovoltaic characteristics. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta08215g
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016