 DOI: 10.1039/C4TC01302F
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 8295-8302


Jun
Zhang
,

Jiantai
Wang
,

Yingying
Fu
,

Baohua
Zhang
 and 

Zhiyuan
Xie
*

State Key Laboratory of Polymer Physics and Chemistry, Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Changchun 130022, P. R. China. E-mail: xiezy_n@ciac.ac.cn

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, P. R. China

Received
19th June 2014
, Accepted 6th August 2014
First published on 3rd September 2014
Annealing-free solution-processible nickel oxide (NiO) nanoparticles are prepared via sonochemical synthesis. In contrast to the common sol–gel route to prepare a NiOx film that had to undergo high-temperature post-annealing to be converted into NiO nanoparticles, herein, colloidal crystalline NiO nanoparticles with diameters of 4–8 nm are prepared with the metal salt at low temperature via ultrasonic irradiation. The colloidal crystalline NiO nanoparticles were directly used as the anode buffer layer in polymer solar cells (PSCs) without post-thermal annealing, which was compatible with flexible substrates and low-cost high-throughput fabrication. After O2-plasma treatment to the as-deposited buffer layer of NiO nanoparticles, the ITO/NiO contact work function was increased from −4.8 to −5.3 eV, providing superior contact with the highest occupied molecular orbital energy levels of polymer donors. Compared to PCDTBT:PC70BM PSCs with a PEDOT:PSS buffer layer, the power conversion efficiency of PSCs with an O2-plasma treated anode buffer layer of NiO nanoparticles was increased from 5.84% to 6.30% and the device stability was also enhanced.

Polymer solar cells (PSCs) have drawn intense interest in the past few decades due to their compatibility with large-scale thin film deposition technologies such as roll-to-roll processing, spray coating, inkjet printing, etc., and the combined merits of low cost, light weight and mechanical flexibility. The PSCs have commonly a sandwich structure with a bulk heterojunction (BHJ) active layer comprising conjugated polymer donors and fullerene derivative acceptors between two asymmetry electrodes. Limited by the short exciton diffusion length (∼5–10 nm) in organic semiconductors, the donor/acceptor blend is required to form nanoscale interpenetrating networks for efficient exciton dissociation and charge transport. Based on this consideration, a variety of approaches have been developed to construct the nanoscale phase-separated morphology including the choice of different solvents, thermal annealing, controlling the drying time of the blend film, adding processing additives, etc. In addition to the manipulation of the BHJ active layer morphology, tailoring the active layer/electrode contacts is equally important, which strongly affects the free charge collection and the open circuit voltage (VOC). Various buffer layers have been introduced between the BHJ active layer and the electrodes in order to improve interfacial contacts and reduce the charge carrier recombination. Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly (styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) is the most popular anode interfacial material due to its high work function, high conductivity and favorable solution processibility. However, PSCs with PEDOT:PSS as the anode buffer layer usually suffer from serious physical and chemical degradation due to the acidic and hygroscopic nature of PEDOT:PSS, which promotes to develop more stable and efficient solution-processible anode interfacial materials.

High work-function solution-processed transition metal oxides have become promising candidates to replace PEDOT:PSS as the anode buffer layer in PSCs due to their good environmental stability, high optical transparency and facile synthesis. Until now, solution-processed nickel oxide (NiO), molybdenum oxide (MoO3) and vanadium oxide (V2O5) have been prepared as the anode buffer layer to fabricate efficient PSCs. In contrast to n-type MoO3 and V2O5, NiO is a p-type semiconducting metal oxide. The small electron affinity (1.8–2.1 eV), high work function (5.0–5.6 eV) and wide band gap (>3.0 eV) of NiO render it a more promising anode interfacial material in PSCs. As a most successful example, the pulsed laser deposited NiO film was first applied in PSCs as the anode buffer layer by Marks et al., and the enhanced photovoltaic performance was achieved compared to the PEDOT:PSS-based PSCs. Since then, the NiO interfacial layers have been prepared by various approaches including thermal deposition, sputtering and solution processing. Solution-processed NiO is more compatible with low-temperature and large-scale manufacturing of PSCs. However, in all the reported sol–gel synthesis of NiO nanoparticles, the precursors have to be subject to high temperature annealing at 250–400 °C to induce decomposition and crystallization. More recently, Ma and co-workers have successfully reduced the processing temperature of the solution-processed NiO buffer layer to 150 °C by applying thermal annealing and UV–ozone treatment simultaneously. Unlike the sol–gel route to prepare ZnO and TiO2 nanoparticles, wet chemical synthesis of colloidal crystalline NiO nanoparticles at low temperatures has not been demonstrated.
Herein, solution-processed crystalline NiO nanoparticles are prepared via sonochemical synthesis. Sonochemical synthesis is based on acoustic cavitation resulting from the continuous formation, growth and implosive collapse of bubbles in liquid, and becomes a routine method for preparing a wide variety of nanostructured materials. In contrast to the common sol–gel routes to prepare a NiO film that requires high-temperature post-annealing to convert precursors into oxides, colloidal crystalline NiO nanoparticles with diameters of 4–8 nm are prepared from the metal salt NiCl2 at low temperature via ultrasonic irradiation. The colloidal NiO nanoparticles are directly used as the anode buffer layer in PSCs without high temperature post-annealing to induce decomposition and crystallization. By applying O2 plasma treatment to the pristine layer of NiO nanoparticles, the work function of NiO is increased from −4.8 to −5.3 eV, thus providing ohmic contact with the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) level of the polymer donor. Compared to the control photovoltaic device based on the PCDTBT:PC70BM blend with PEDOT:PSS as the anode buffer layer, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of PSCs with the O2-plasma treated NiO buffer layer is increased from 5.84% to 6.30% and the device stability under ambient conditions is also improved. This work provides the facile low-temperature preparation of crystalline NiO nanoparticles, which allows the processing compatible with the fabrication of PSCs on plastic substrates.

The aqueous solution of PEDOT:PSS (Clevios P VP AI 4083) was purchased from Heraeus and filtered with a 0.45 μm PTFE filter before use. [6,6]-Phenyl C70-butyric acid methyl ester (PC70BM) was purchased from Nano C and used as received. Poly[N-9′′-hepta-decanyl-2,7-carbazole-alt-5,5-(4′,7′-di-thienyl-2′,1′,3′-benzothiadiazole)] (PCDTBT) with a weight-average molecular weight of 24000 and a polydispersity index of 1.8 was synthesized in our laboratory. Anhydrous 1,2-dichlorobenzene was obtained from Aldrich Co. and purged with nitrogen in order to remove residual oxygen prior to use. NiCl2 was of analytical purity and was used as received from Shanghai Chemical Company.


The metal salt NiCl2 was dissolved in ethanol with a concentration of 0.01 M and the solution was kept at 80 °C for 30 minutes. Then, tetramethylammonium hydroxide (TMAH) was added into the NiCl2 solution and the pH value of the final suspension was adjusted to about 10. The mixture solution was stirred at room temperature for one hour. Subsequently, the mixture solution was exposed to high-intensity ultrasonic irradiation (6 mm diameter Ti-horn, 300 W, 20 kHz) at room temperature under ambient conditions for 45 min. The NiO nanoparticles cannot be readily formed when the ultrasonic power is below 300 W. In the range of 300–400 W of ultrasonic irradiation, the size of NiO nanoparticles did not show distinct changes. Finally, the supernatant was removed and the resulting dispersion in ethanol was centrifuged at 5000 rpm for 3 min. The product was dispersed again in ethanol at a concentration of 2 mg ml−1 by ultrasonication. The ethanol sol of NiO nanoparticles was obtained.


The patterned indium tin oxide (ITO)-coated glass substrates were cleaned with detergent, and were ultrasonicated in de-ionized water, acetone, and isopropyl alcohol sequentially. The cleaned ITO substrates were subsequently dried at 120 °C in an oven overnight. The ITO substrates were subject to UV–ozone treatment for 30 min before use. For the control solar cell with a PEDOT:PSS buffer layer, the aqueous PEDOT:PSS solution was spin-coated onto the ITO glass substrate to produce a 30 nm thick PEDOT:PSS buffer layer. The PEDOT:PSS-coated substrate was subject to thermal annealing on a hot plate at 130 °C for 30 minutes. Alternatively, the ethanol sol of NiO nanoparticles with a concentration of 2 mg ml−1 was deposited on the ITO glass substrate via spin coating with different spin rates and times, and then the samples were subject to thermal annealing at 60 °C for 10 min to remove the ethanol solvent. Some of the NiO-coated substrates were subject to O2 plasma treatment with a power 155 W for 2 min at a pressure of 0.8 Torr. A solution containing a mixture of PCDTBT:PC70BM (1:4 in weight) was prepared in an inert atmosphere with a total concentration of 17.5 mg ml−1 in 1,2-dichlorobenzene. The solution was stirred at 90 °C for at least two hours and kept overnight before use. The PCDTBT:PC70BM solution in 1,2-dichlorobenzene was spin-cast on top of the PEDOT:PSS or NiO layers at a spin rate of 600 rpm for 3 minutes to produce ca. 80 nm thick active layers. Subsequently, the samples were transferred into a vacuum chamber and a cathode structure of LiF(0.5 nm)/Al (100 nm) was thermally evaporated at a base pressure of 4 × 10−6 Torr. The cell active area was about 16 mm2, which was defined by the overlapping area of the ITO and Al electrodes. An Oriel 150 W solar simulator with an AM 1.5G filter was used to provide an intensity of 100 mW cm−2 for illumination of the photovoltaic cells. The light intensity was determined by using a calibrated silicon diode with a KG-5 visible color filter. Current–voltage (J–V) traces were obtained with a Keithley 236 source meter. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) measurement was performed under short circuit conditions using Enlitech QE-R equipment.


The ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements were carried out using a Thermo ESCALAB 250 with an ultrahigh vacuum chamber providing a base pressure of <10−10 Torr. Monochromatized Al Kα (hv = 1486.8 eV) excitation and a He–I (21.2 eV) discharge lamp were used for the XPS and UPS measurements, respectively. For UPS measurement, a sample bias of −10 V was applied in order to separate the sample and the secondary edge for the analyzer. The transmission electron microscopy (TEM) samples were prepared by drop-casting the diluted sol solution of NiO nanoparticles onto a copper grid, and imaged using a FEI TECNAI F20 system operated at a working voltage of 200 kV. The atomic force microscopy (AFM) images were obtained using a SPA-300HV instrument with a SPI3800N Controller (Seiko Instruments Inc., Japan) in tapping mode.


It has been demonstrated that ultrasonic irradiation can boost the sol–gel process and attain nanostructured metal oxides in an extreme physical environment posed by the acoustic cavitation effect. When ultrasound waves propagate through liquid media, alternating expansive and compressive wave bubbles will be generated. The acoustic cavitation is resulted from the continuous formation, growth, and implosive collapse of bubbles. The acoustic cavitation can create an extreme physical environment with a high temperature of ∼5000 K and a pressure of ∼1000 bar in the bubbles and a temperature of ∼1900 K at the interfaces between a collapsing bubble and the bulk solution. The ultrasonic wavelengths are from roughly 10 cm down to 100 μm over a frequency range of 20 kHz to 15 MHz, much larger than the molecular size scale. The effect of the ultrasound on chemical reaction arises more from the extremely physical environment posed by acoustic cavitation than from a direct interaction between chemical species and sound waves. Herein, the metal salt NiCl2 first reacted with the alkali (TMAH) to get a Ni(OH)2 suspension. The scale of the interface between a collapsing bubble and the bulk solution is in nanometers, so the suspension precursor can only enter the region and convert into a product. Then the Ni(OH)2 suspension at the interfaces was converted into crystalline NiO nanoparticles under ultrasonic irradiation. As only a very small scope is in the high temperature environment, the bulk solution temperature remains approximately constant at room temperature. This synthesis process can avoid completely the high temperature post-annealing that is required in the sol–gel route. Fig. 1(a and b) show the low-magnification and high-magnification TEM images of the as-synthesized NiO nanoparticles. It can be seen that the NiO nanoparticles with diameters of 4–8 nm are readily prepared. The selected-area electron diffraction pattern of the NiO nanoparticles shown in the inset of Fig. 1(a) demonstrates that the NiO nanoparticles are polycrystalline. The high-resolution TEM image of one nanoparticle is given in the inset of Fig. 1(b), in which a periodic lattice spacing of 2.4 Å assigning to the (111) planes verifies the crystalline nature of NiO nanoparticles. These results indicate that the crystalline NiO nanoparticles are successfully prepared at low temperatures via sonochemical synthesis.

The surface chemical composition of the NiO film may strongly influence the interfacial energy level alignment with organic active layers, and thereby the final photovoltaic performance of the devices. Herein the XPS technique was used to analyze the surface composition of the NiO nanoparticle film prepared by sonochemical synthesis. As the O2 plasma treatment is an important method to modify the surface chemistry of metal oxide nanoparticles, the O2 plasma treated NiO nanoparticles are also included for investigation. Fig. 2 shows the XPS spectra of O 1s and Ni 2p3/2 core levels of the as-deposited and O2 plasma treated NiO nanoparticle films. The O 1s XPS spectrum of the pristine NiO nanoparticle film can be separated into two distinct peaks, originating from two different species of Ni(OH)2 and NiO, respectively. While the Ni 2p3/2 XPS spectrum of the pristine NiO nanoparticles can be separated into four distinct peaks with the peak at 861.2 eV ascribing to a shake-up process in the NiO structure and the peak at 856.1 eV corresponding to the intersites of Ni 2p3/2. The peaks of O 1s centered at 530.5 and 531.5 eV and Ni 2p3/2 of 853.9 eV confirm the appearance of NiO and Ni(OH)2 species. It is reported that the peak of 855.1 eV was indicative of either nickel hydroxides or Ni3+ (Ni2O3), which was especially discussed in the NiO films synthesized via the sol–gel process. Different from the NiO films prepared with the sol–gel process that requires high temperature annealing to induce decomposition and crystallization, the sonochemical synthesis of crystalline NiO nanoparticles was a low temperature process, which could not introduce higher-order oxide components of Ni2O3. So the peak of 855.1 eV indicated the presence of nickel hydroxides. When the NiO nanoparticles were subject to O2 plasma treatment, the O 1s and Ni 2p3/2 spectra were broadened in the higher binding energy region, indicating that a new species is presented. The new peaks at 532.2 eV for O 1s and 856.6 eV for Ni 2p3/2 indicated the presence of oxyhydroxide species (NiOOH) in O2-plasma treated NiO films. Ni2O3 has a trigonal hexagonal crystal structure while β-NiOOH and Ni(OH)2 have the same rhombohedral structure. Only the O2-plasma process does not provide the sufficient energy to induce such a crystallographic reorganization. As dehydration/dehydroxylation to form the higher order oxide required in excess of 250 °C, the O2-plasma treatment also did not reach such high temperature. The new components can therefore be attributed to the appearance of NiOOH.
The work function of the resulted NiO films was studied by UPS measurement. The UPS spectra of the pristine and O2 plasma treated NiO nanoparticles are displayed in Fig. 3, together with the PEDOT:PSS film for comparison. All the samples were deposited on the ITO glass substrate. Fig. 3(a) displays the photoemission cut-off of the NiO and PEDOT:PSS films. It can be seen that a dramatic shift of the secondary electron cutoff towards the low binding energy region when the NiO nanoparticle film was subject to O2 plasma treatment. It indicates that the work function of the NiO nanoparticles film was increased after O2 plasma treatment. The work function values of the pristine and O2 plasma treated NiO films are −4.8 and −5.3 eV, respectively. The work function of the O2 plasma treated NiO film is even higher than that of PEDOT:PSS. Based on the above analysis of XPS results, the O2-plasma treatment did not form Ni2O3 species to p-dope the NiO nanoparticles, but changed the composition of the NiO surface by forming NiOOH. The large vacuum level shift level of the NiO film after O2 plasma treatment is attributed to the presence of NiOOH species, which forms strong dipoles at ITO/NiO interfaces. As shown in Fig. 3(c), the O2-plasma treatment made the valence band (VB) of the NiO film to shift close to the Fermi energy level, indicating an enhanced p-type semiconductor characteristic of the NiO film after O2 plasma treatment. The p-type property of NiO nanoparticles is consistent with the previous observations and can help to improve the film conductivity. The increased work function value, enhanced p-type semiconducting property, and low conduction band may help to block electrons and enhance hole extraction when the solution-processed NiO nanoparticles are used as the anode buffer layer in PSCs.
The synthesized NiO nanoparticles via the sonochemical approach are applied as the anode buffer layer in PSCs with polymer PCDTBT as the donor and PC70BM as the acceptor. The devices have a structure of ITO/NiO/PCDTBT:PC70BM (70–80 nm)/LiF/Al. The control device with PEDOT:PSS as the anode buffer layer was also fabricated for comparison study. The thicknesses of the NiO films were adjusted by changing the spin-coating conditions of the NiO ethanol sol. The surface morphologies of the bare ITO, PEDOT:PSS/ITO and NiO/ITO films were studied by AFM measurement and the corresponding AFM images are shown in Fig. 4. The root mean square roughnesses are 7.08, 1.92, 8.63 and 5.82 nm, respectively, for the bare ITO, PEDOT:PSS/ITO, as-pristine NiO/ITO and O2-plasma treated NiO/ITO samples. The O2-plasma treated NiO film is a little more coarse than the PEDOT:PSS film, but it is smoother than the reported solution-processed MoO3 nanoparticle film. The illuminated J–V characteristics of the PSCs with different anode buffer layers are shown in Fig. 5(a) and the detailed photovoltaic parameters of the devices are summarized in Table 1. About 20 devices were fabricated for each type of cells and the average PCE is also given in the table. The control device with PEDOT:PSS as the anode buffer layer shows a VOC of 0.89 V, a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 10.10 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 0.65, leading to an overall PCE of 5.84%. When the pristine NiO nanoparticles are directly used as the anode buffer to replace PEDOT:PSS, the resulted device shows a much lower VOC of 0.38 V and a FF of 0.40, giving a low PCE of 1.61%, mainly due to the poor contact between the NiO buffer layer and the PCDTBT donor. When the buffer layer of pristine NiO nanoparticles was subject to O2 plasma treatment, the VOC and FF of the resulted cells were greatly increased. The cell with the optimized O2-plasma treated NiO buffer layer demonstrates a VOC of 0.89 V, a JSC of 10.88 mA cm−2, and a FF of 0.65, leading to a final PCE of 6.30%. This result is higher than that of the cell with the PEDOT:PSS anode buffer layer. The enhancement is attributed to the increased work function of NiO after O2 plasma treatment and to form a favorable energy level alignment at the interface between the anode and the PCDTBT donor. The enhanced p-semiconductor characteristic of the O2 plasma treated NiO film is also favorable to reduce interfacial resistance as stoichiometric NiO is almost insulated at room temperature with a conductivity as low as ∼10−12 S cm−1.Fig. 5(b) shows the EQE plots of the PSCs with PEDOT:PSS and O2-plasma treated NiO as the anode buffer layers. It can be seen that the PSCs with the O2-plasma treated NiO buffer layer showed a remarkable increase of quantum efficiencies in the region of 380–520 nm compared with the cell with the PEDOT:PSS buffer layer. The maximum EQE peak of the O2-plasma treated NiO-based PSC reaches about 72.0% at 480 nm. The maximum EQE peak of the cell with the PEDOT:PSS buffer layer is about 66.5% located at 515 nm. The calculated JSCs of the two cells are 10.90 and 10.18 mA cm−2, respectively, very close to their measured values of 10.88 and 10.10 mA cm−2, indicating a small spectral mismatch. The comparable and even higher photovoltaic performance of PSCs with the NiO buffer layer than the PEDOT:PSS-based cell implies that this kind of NiO nanoparticle is a promising anode interfacial material for PSCs.
Buffer layer

V
OC [V]

J
SC [mA cm−2]
FF

R
s [Ω cm−2]
PCE [%]
Best
Average
NiO 400r/min 15s O2-plasma
0.89
10.22
0.54
31.00
4.91
4.70 ± 0.20
NiO 800r/min 30s O2-plasma
0.89
10.88
0.65
11.47
6.30
6.10 ± 0.20
NiO 2000r/min 30s O2-plasma
0.89
10.58
0.63
13.72
5.93
5.80 ± 0.10
NiO 800r/min 30s
0.38
10.58
0.40
12.25
1.61
1.50 ± 0.10
PEDOT
0.89
10.10
0.65
9.86
5.84
5.80 ± 0.10
The device stability of the PSCs with the O2 plasma-treated NiO buffer layer was also tested under ambient conditions. Two kinds of cells having structures of ITO/O2 plasma-treated NiO/PCDTBT:PC70BM/LiF/Al and ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PCDTBT:PC70BM/LiF/Al were tested without encapsulation. The photovoltaic performance of the devices was measured under 100 mW cm−2 of simulated solar light every 8 or 12 hours. Fig. 6(a and b) show the degradation of the normalized VOC, JSC, FF and PCE parameters for the two cells with PEDOT:PSS and O2 plasma treated NiO buffer layers, respectively. It can be seen that the VOC and FF of the device with the O2-plasma treated NiO buffer layer degrade much slower than those of the device with the PEDOT:PSS buffer layer. Especially the VOC of the cell with the O2-plasma treated NiO buffer layer almost keeps constant. It is inferred that the VOC degradation of the cell with the PEDOT:PSS buffer layer is possibly originated from the hygroscopic nature of PEDOT:PSS. This was in agreement with previous work on degradation of the solar cell with the NiO anode buffer layer as compared to the PEDOT:PSS-based cell. Both of the two solar cells show a similar trend of JSC degradation. This is mainly due to a similar negative effect of oxygen and water on the PCDTBT:PC70BM active layer under ambient conditions. The overall PCE of the cell with the O2-plasma treated NiO buffer layer degrades much slowly than that of the PEDOT:PSS-based cell under ambient conditions. Compared to the commonly used PEDOT:PSS, the comparable and even higher photovoltaic performance, better environmental stability and low temperature processing make the sonochemically synthesized NiO a promising anode interfacial material for solution-processed flexible PSCs.

In summary, in contrast to the common sol–gel route to prepare a nickel oxide precursor that had to undergo high-temperature post-annealing to be converted into NiO nanoparticles, a kind of annealing-free solution-processible NiO nanoparticle has been prepared via sonochemical synthesis. Colloidal crystalline NiO nanoparticles with diameters of 4–8 nm can be prepared from the nickel metal salt at low temperature via ultrasonic irradiation. The photoelectron spectroscopy investigation discloses that the work function of the as-synthesized crystalline NiO nanoparticles can be increased to −5.3 eV after O2 plasma treatment due to the presence of nickel oxyhydroxide species, and thus allows the formation of superior contact with the HOMO level of the polymer donor in the active layer. The low-temperature synthesized crystalline NiO nanoparticles were successfully applied as the anode buffer layer to fabricate efficient polymer solar cells without the high temperature annealing process. Compared to the commonly used PEDOT:PSS, the comparable and even higher photovoltaic performance, better environmental stability and low temperature processing make the sonochemically synthesized NiO a promising anode interfacial material for solution-processed flexible PSCs.


This work was supported by the National Basic Research Program of China (2014CB643504), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (nos 51325303, 51273193 and 21334006) and the Strategic Priority Research Program of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (XDB12030200). J. Zhang thanks Dr H. B. Wang and X. L. Li for helpful discussions about the XPS and UPS measurement and relevant data analysis.


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014