 DOI: 10.1039/C5TA00407A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9999-10004


H. P.
Dong
,

Y.
Li
,

S. F.
Wang
,

W. Z.
Li
,

N.
Li
,

X. D.
Guo
 and 

L. D.
Wang
*

Key Lab of Organic Optoelectronics and Molecular Engineering of Ministry of Education, Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua University, Beijing, P. R. China. E-mail: chldwang@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Institute of Modern Optics & State Key Laboratory for Artificial Microstructure and Mesoscopic Physics, School of Physics, Peking University, Beijing, P. R. China

Received
18th January 2015
, Accepted 26th March 2015
First published on 27th March 2015
Interface engineering is an important and efficient way to further improve the conversion efficiency of perovskite solar cells. In this study, we report the modification of the electron transport layer (ETL) using a thin layer of PEO. Characterizations showed that PEO was uniformly coated on top of the original TiOx ETL, without resulting in an evident change of the surface morphology, hydrophilic ability or transparency. With the interface dipole formed at the interface, the work function of the ETL greatly decreased. Compared with devices with TiOx only, devices based on the modified ETL gave a nearly 15% enhancement to the overall conversion efficiency, with both Voc and Jsc improved. Further studies showed that the improved performance could mainly be attributed to the better retardation of back recombination and the enhanced electron collection efficiency by means of the PEO thin layer modification.

Organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells have been a quite hot research topic recently, due to their rapid and improved power conversion efficiency (PCE). The latest record certified by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) was 20.1%, which is very close to its theoretical PCE. With the increase in the PCE, also new structures with this kind of solar cell have been developed. At the beginning, a classical structure of dye-sensitized solar cells was adopted, with mesoporous TiO2 as the electron collection and transport layer, but now devices with insulating nanoparticles (such as Al2O3, ZrO2) as scaffolds have also been reported and have achieved great success. Planar structured perovskite solar cells have also been widely researched and have given quite good results.

For most of the structures, a thin layer of TiO2 or ZnO is commonly used on a transparent conductive electrode (usually FTO or ITO) as the electron transport layer (ETL). Matching the energy level could prevent holes formed in the perovskite or hole transport layer (HTL) from reaching the conductive electrode, which would otherwise lead to a back recombination and reduced short-circuit current. Optimization of this layer is an effective means to further improve the performance of the solar cells. Snaith et al. developed a low temperature route for creating a TiO2 compact layer with decreased series resistance, which, hence, resulted in an improved fill factor and efficiency. Yang's group doped TiO2 with yttrium to enhance this layer's electron extraction and transport ability. The highest efficiency of 19.3% in a planar geometry was finally achieved. Except for a doping strategy, modifying this layer with other materials is also a good choice to improve the device's overall performance. This is the usual method adopted by researchers for organic solar cells and polymer solar cells. For the modification, a self-assembled functional molecular layer or a thin layer of polymer (such as polyoxyethylene, polyethylenimine) have been reported. The work function of the ETL could be tuned and back electron–hole recombination could be retarded due to the presence of the interfacial dipole; additionally, the series resistance could also be reduced with modification. All these should contribute to improved performance.
Herein, we report using a thin layer of polyoxyethylene (PEO) to modify the TiOx blocking layer for perovskite solar cells with Al2O3 mesoporous films as scaffolds. As a type of widely used polymer, PEO has various advantages as an ideal material for the interfacial engineering of ETL, such as low cost, environmentally friendly, high transmittance, high polarity and easy to form uniform film. Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) results showed that with the PEO modification thin layer, the work function of the ETL greatly decreased. Devices with PEO modified TiOx as the ETL had improved Voc and Jsc, and gave a nearly 15% enhanced overall power conversion efficiency (PCE) compared with control devices with bare TiOx as the ETL. Further characterizations showed that the electron–hole recombination was significantly retarded with the PEO modification, leading to higher electron collection efficiency and ultimately to an improved performance.

All the solvents and reagents were used as received. PbCl2 (99.999%), Al2O3 nanoparticles dispersion in isopropanol (<50 nm, 20 wt%), and poly(ethylene oxide) (average Mv 2000000) were all purchased from Sigma Aldrich. Super dehydrated solvents of dimethyl formamide, toluene and acetonitrile were purchased from J&K. CH3NH3I (MAI) was purchased from Xi'an Polymer Light Technology Corp., China.


TiOx ETL was fabricated on FTO glass through the atomic layer deposition (ALD) method. The perovskite solar cells were fabricated using a similar process to Snaith's group, with the optimized parameters, whereby a thin layer of Al2O3 scaffold was spin-coated on the substrate at a rotation speed of 6000 rpm for 60 s, then dried at 150 °C on a hotplate for 30 min. The perovskite layer was prepared by spin-coating from a homogeneous 40 wt% precursor solution (PbCl2:MAI = 1:3, in DMF) and annealed at 100 °C for 90 min. After cooling down to room temperature, the HTL layer was spin-coated on top with a spinning speed of 2500 rpm, for 60 s. Finally, a 50 nm thick gold electrode was deposited by thermal evaporation through a shadow mask. The active area of the studied devices was 10 mm2. For the devices with PEO modification, a solution of PEO/acetonitrile was spin-coated on to the ALD-TiOx layer at 5000 rpm for 60 s and then dried at 60 °C for 15 min to remove the residual solvent.


The current–voltage curves (J–V curves) and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) were measured by a ZAHNER CIMPS electrochemical workstation (Germany) under solar simulation (Xenon lamp, Oriel, AM 1.5). The incident light intensity was calibrated with a standard crystalline silicon solar cell. The total active area of the device was 10 mm2. The IPCE spectra were measured in air with equipment developed by the Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences. The UV-vis absorption spectra were tested with the Hitachi Model U-3010 UV-vis spectrophotometer. XPS spectra were tested with the PHI 5300 ESCA instrument and the spectra were calibrated with the C1s peak (284.8 eV). PL decay spectra were recorded by a high resolution streak camera system (Hamamatsu C10910). All the samples were excited by 517 nm at room temperature with 135 nJ per cm2 per pulse. Steady-state PL spectra were tested with a fluorospectrophotometer (Jobin Yvon, FluroMax-3). The AFM images were taken with a SPA-400, Seiko.


AFM was carried out to characterize the surface morphology of the ETL without and with the PEO thin layer. As shown in Fig. 1, no clear morphology change was noted. The surface root-mean-square (RMS) roughness decreased a little after spinning a thin layer of PEO. The result was as we expected, because both the ALD TiOx and PEO should form a uniform coating on the surface of FTO. Fig. S1 shows the contact angle tests for the surfaces. Both the films showed a quite good hydrophilic ability. This is quite important for high conversion efficiency perovskite solar cells, because it ensures that the perovskite precursor solution can infiltrate into the mesoporous Al2O3 scaffolding and form a good and compact contact with the ETL. We tested the dissolving ability of PEO in isopropanol (IPA, solvent for Al2O3 nanoparticles) and dimethyl formamide (DMF, solvent for perovskite precursor) to indirectly check the solvent resistance of the PEO layer, and the results are shown in Fig. S2. PEO with high molecular weight had a quite poor solubility in IPA and DMF. As a result, the PEO layer should not be changed much by the process followed. The cross-section image of the device with PEO is shown in Fig. S3. No clear PEO layer was noted, indicating that this layer is thin.


Fig. 2 shows the UV-vis absorption spectra of the TiOx and TiOx/PEO films deposited on FTO glass. In wavelengths longer than 400 nm, both the films showed little absorption, allowing most of the incident light to reach the active layer. The absorption onset of the TiOx/PEO film exhibited a blue-shift compared with the bare TiOx film, which might be due to the change in the scattering cross-section of the TiOx/PEO layer.
The X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) of the TiOx and TiOx/PEO are shown in Fig. 3(a) and (b), and the survey of the XPS spectra is shown in Fig. S4. To check the position of the O1s peak from PEO, a thick PEO film deposited on FTO with a 10 mg mL−1 concentration at 5000 rpm was used. We could notice that, with a thin layer of PEO on top, the Ti2p and O1s peaks belonging to the TiOx films were shifted to a lower binding energy, indicating an electronic interaction between the TiOx and PEO. The similar shift of peaks was also found for the PEI-modified TiOx films. The Ti2p peak was clearly observed from the TiOx/PEO film. This indicated that the PEO layer was quite thin, and should only be several nanometers. Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) was further carried out to measure the energy level change of the ETL. The results (Fig. 3(c)) showed that the work function of ETL dropped from 4.15 to 3.25 eV with a thin layer of PEO spun on. This work function change could be contributed to the dipole layer formed by the PEO. Similar phenomena have been extensively observed by others. The decrease of the work function of the ETL could increase the built-in potential inside the devices, which could not only lead to the increased Voc but might also enhance the extraction of the charge carriers from the absorption layer, and therefore increase Jsc.

The current–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the devices based on ETL without and with PEO are shown in Table 1 and Fig. 4. The results were obtained in the reverse scanning direction with a 50 mV s−1 scanning speed, from 1.1 V to 0 V. To optimize the thickness of the PEO film, solutions with different concentrations were used for the spin coating. The control device with bare TiOx showed an open-circuit voltage (Voc), a short-circuit photocurrent density (Jsc), and a fill factor (FF) of 1.00 V, 17.9 mA cm−2 and 0.66, respectively, leading to a PCE of 11.8%. With a thin layer of PEO, both the Voc and Jsc of the solar cells increased. For the optimized thickness (from 2.5 mg mL−1 solution), a PCE of 13.8% was obtained, which is enhanced by more than 15% compared with the control device. Further increasing the thickness of PEO gave a reduced PCE. We thought that was due to the decreased electron transport ability of the ETL. The distribution of the photovoltaic parameters from 18 devices is shown in Fig. S5.J–V curves tested under different scanning direction are shown in Fig. S6. For both devices with TiOx and TiOx/PEO used as the ETL, a hysteretic behaviour was observed. Though this was a common problem for perovskite solar cells, the reasons for it are still under research.


V
oc [V]

J
sc [mA cm−2]
FF
PCE [%]

a The average and standard deviation (s.d.) of the 18 cells from 3 different batches processed under the same conditions.

Control
1.00
17.9
0.66
11.8
1 mg mL−1
1.01
18.6
0.67
12.5
2.5 mg mL−1
1.02
20.7
0.65
13.8
5 mg mL−1
1.01
18.7
0.60
11.4
Control (average ± s.d.)
1.03 ± 0.03
17.1 ± 1.1
0.61 ± 0.03
10.8 ± 0.90
2.5 mg mL−1 (average ± s.d.)
1.05 ± 0.03
19.0 ± 0.8
0.62 ± 0.02
12.3 ± 0.64
The incident photo-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectrum of the control device and optimized device are presented in Fig. 5. In the range of 400–750 nm, the device with PEO-modified ETL gave an enhanced IPCE, which is consistent with the improved Jsc.

We tried to better understand the improved IPCE, which could be given by the following equation:
IPCE(λ) = LHE(λ)φinjηcol
where LHE is the light-harvesting efficiency by the active layer,
φinj is the electron injection efficiency from the perovskite layer to the electron collection layer, and ηcol is the charge collection efficiency at the electrodes.

We firstly measured the absorption spectrum of the perovskite films to check the active layers' LHE. As shown in Fig. 6(a), no difference was found for the films without or with the PEO layer. This is not hard to understand. As mentioned before, both the morphology and the surfaces' hydrophilicity do not change a lot after spinning a layer of PEO, so the active layer should not be affected by the inserted PEO layer. The φinj was positively related to the ETL's electron extraction ability from the perovskite layer, which could be measured by the photoluminescence spectroscopy (PL) decay. As shown in Fig. 6(b), with a thin layer of PEO, the PL quenching was slightly reduced, indicating it was a little hard for the electrons to inject into the hole-blocking layer. This suggested that the PEO reduced the φinj mildly due to its insulating property. This was also confirmed by the enhanced steady state PL for the TiOx/PEO/perovskite sample, as shown in Fig. S7. Now that the LHE remains constant and the φinj is even a little decreased, the enhancement of IPCE should contribute to the improved ηcol.
The charge collection efficiency (ηcol) cumulatively takes into account the transport and recombination dynamics and could be defined by the following equation:
ηcol = transport rate/(transport rate + recombination rate)
We measured the J–V curves and EIS spectra to check the charge collection situations inside the devices. Fig. 7(a) shows the J–V curves of the devices measured in the dark. The onset of the dark current of the device based on TiOx/PEO ETL shifted to a higher voltage with respect to the device based on TiOx ETL. As reported, the shift in the onset of the dark current and the corresponding increase in the Voc could have resulted from the reduced electron–hole recombination at the interfaces, mainly due to the back flow of electrons from the blocking layer to the perovskite layer or hole transport layer. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was carried out to further characterize the blocking effect of the PEO layer inside the solar cells. Fig. 7(b) shows the EIS spectra measured in the dark at an applied potential of 0.9 V, from 105 to 0.1 Hz. Most of the spectra correspond to the lower frequency. As reported, spectra in the low-frequency range are related to the interfacial recombination between electrons and holes, which has a positive correlation with the recombination resistance of the solar cells (Rrec). It could be clearly seen that Rrec increased largely for the TiOx/PEO blocking layer. As was found in the dye-sensitized solar cells, the increase of Rrec reduces the recombination kinetics by about 2 orders of magnitude, so the charge recombination at the interface would be significantly retarded, which is consistent with the conclusion from the dark J–V curves. Anyway, both the dark current and the EIS results indicated that inside the devices, the back recombination was retarded with a thin layer of PEO, leading to a higher ηcol.
Thus, out of the three parameters defining the IPCE, LHE remained constant and φinj decreased a little upon addition of the PEO modification overlayer on the TiOx blocking layer. In contrast, the appreciable gain in charge collection efficiency offset the loss in injection efficiency and served to explain the enhanced IPCE and Jsc observed for devices with a PEO modification layer.

In summary, we introduced a PEO thin layer into perovskite solar cells for surface engineering of the electron transport layer. This thin layer was uniformly coated on top of the TiOx, without changing the ETL's morphology, transparency or hydrophilicity. Due to the dipole formed at the interface, the work function of the ETL decreased with a thin layer of PEO. Compared with devices with TiOx only, devices based on the modified ETL gave a nearly 15% enhancement on the overall conversion efficiency, with both Voc and Jsc improved too. This could mainly be attributed to the better retardation of the back recombination and the enhanced electron collection efficiency by means of the PEO thin modification layer. Our results suggest that interface engineering could be an effective approach to further improve the performance of the perovskite solar cells.


This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant no. 51273104 and the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant no. 91433205.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Contact angle test, cross section image, PEO dissolving situation in solvents, distribution of photovoltaic parameters, J–V curves tested with different scanning direction and steady-state PL results. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta00407a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015