 DOI: 10.1039/C3TA12533E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 13814-13820
Xiaoyu Hou, Yanjie Hu*, Hao Jiang, Junchao Huo, Yunfeng Li and Chunzhong Li*
Key Laboratory for Ultrafine Materials of Ministry of Education, School of Materials Science and Engineering, East China University of Science and Technology, Shanghai 200237, China. E-mail: czli@ecust.edu.cn; huyanjie@ecust.edu.cn; Fax: +86 21 6425 0624; Tel: +86 21 6425 0949
Received 28th June 2013, Accepted 10th September 2013
First published on 10th September 2013
Branch-type SnO2 nanowires with high crystallinity have been successfully prepared by a rapid and continuous flame spray pyrolysis (FSP) route. The SnO2 branch has an average diameter of 15–20 nm and a length of 200–700 nm. As is known, this is the first time one dimensional SnO2 nanowires with branch-type nanostructures have been synthesized using flame synthesis. The average growth rate of nanowires could reach 1 μm s−1, which is thousand times faster than other methods. Interestingly, it is found that Au nanoclusters appear at the tip of SnO2 nanowires. An in situ Au-catalyzed vapour–liquid–solid (VLS) model is proposed to explain the growth mechanism of branch-type SnO2 nanowires in flame. As photoanodes, the DSSCs based on branch-type SnO2 nanowires (with TiCl4 post-treatment) show a higher short-circuit current (JSC = 10.60 mA cm−2) and a superior power conversion efficiency of 4.23%, improved by 99.5% compared to pure SnO2 nanoparticles (2.12%). The efficiency improvement could be attributed to the unique branch-type nanowire architecture, which provides a highly efficient electron channel and excellent ability of light scattering.

Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) with the advantages of low cost and simple fabrication processes have attracted increasing attention since the great breakthrough work by O'Regan and Grätzel in 1991. It is well known that the composition and structure of photoelectrode materials are key factors to determine the photovoltaic performance of DSSCs. Among the semiconductor metal oxides utilized as photoanode materials, TiO2-based nanomaterials have been widely investigated and employed as photoanodes due to the higher amount of dye-loading, good ability of light scattering and high photoelectron injection rates. In the last few decades, TiO2-based DSSCs have been tremendously studied and have shown more than 12% power conversion efficiency. However, the ultra-fast electron injection rates from excited dye into TiO2 have clashed with high electron recombination rates caused by low electron transport properties. Therefore, it is necessary to pay more attention to alternative metal oxides with high electron mobility such as ZnO, Nb2O5, and SnO2. The former two candidates have a more negative conduction band edge than TiO2 while suffering from chemical instability. On the other hand, SnO2 is a promising metal oxide for utilizing solar energy because of its high electron mobility, wide band gap (3.8 eV) and chemical stability. However, the low open circuit voltage (VOC) extremely limits the application of SnO2-based materials in DSSCs. So far, there have been lots of strategies for overcoming these disadvantages, e.g., TiCl4 post-treatment could coat an ultrathin TiO2 layer on SnO2 and greatly enhance the VOC; UV-treatment removed most of the organics in the precursor SnO2 colloid and gave more hydroxylated materials, leading to a higher VOC and FF; the design of anisotropic SnO2 cells with high crystallinity showed a record VOC of 700 mV and up to 3% power conversion efficiency without any further chemical post-treatment. Besides, modification of electrolytes is regarded as a different route to improve the photovoltaic performance of SnO2-based DSSCs.

The unique nanostructures are significantly important for high performance solar cells. Recently, different structures of SnO2 such as hollow, mesoporous, octahedral and nanowires have been applied as photoanode materials in DSSCs. The nanoparticles, due to the facile fabrication process and high specific surface area to achieve high loading of dye, are regarded as one of the ideal photoelectrode morphologies. Nevertheless, the main drawback of nanoparticle based cells is the poor connection between particles, resulting in more recombination losses. In comparison, nanowires are more suitable for DSSCs due to the following two merits: firstly, one-dimensional nanostructures with high aspect ratios could provide highly efficient transport channels for the injected electrons. In addition, one-dimensional nanostructures have less grain boundaries, which could reduce the number of dead-ends. Many studies have reported that SnO2 nanowire-based DSSCs exhibit fast electron transport, high VOC values and power conversion efficiency. However, it is still a great challenge to use these SnO2 materials in industrial production considering the defects in the synthetic routes like low yield, complicated process and high costs. In contrast, gas-phase methods such as the aerotaxy growth method can be employed to grow nanowires with controlled nanoscale dimensions, high crystallinity and reproducibility, and at a remarkable growth rate.
The flame spray pyrolysis (FSP) route, an important continuous gas phase process, has been employed to design a series of nanomaterials, especially for metal oxides such as SnO2, TiO2, SiO2, Al2O3 and Fe2O3. Compared to the liquid-phase method, the distinct features of the FSP process are rapid, continuous and without post-treatment. So far, our group has successfully designed many metal oxides with intriguing structure and composition by FSP, such as ball in shell TiO2, TiO2 hollow spheres, SnO2 nanorods and double-faced Fe2O3||SiO2 nanohybrids. Since the synthetic process is rapid and continuous, the output of production could reach 10 g h−1 by our FSP route, which can hardly be achieved by the liquid phase route, making it more possible for industrialization. Furthermore, there are extremely few reports on the fabrication of one dimensional nanomaterials by FSP. Only ZnO and SnO2 nanorods are synthesized through the incorporation of other atoms such as In, Sn, and Fe via a single-step flame process. However, these nanorods have a low aspect ratio, eventually limiting their application. Although SnO2 nanowires have been synthesized by flat flame deposition, the process still needs a long growth time and assistance of an expensive single-crystal substrate. Therefore, the synthesis of high aspect ratio SnO2 nanowires without the assistance of a substrate is still a challenge in the rapid flame process. More importantly, considering the average residence time of grown nanowires is less than 1 second in flame synthesis, the growth-rate of nanowires could reach a value which is hundreds of times higher than that previously reported for substrate-assisted growth of nanowires.
In this paper, branch-type SnO2 nanowires with high crystallinity have been prepared by a continuous FSP route using a spray precursor solution containing Sn and Au components. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time branch-type SnO2 nanowires have been synthesized by a rapid and continuous flame route. An in situ Au-catalysis vapor–liquid–solid (VLS) mechanism is proposed to explain the growth process of SnO2 nanowires. Furthermore, the as-prepared SnO2 nanowires as photoanode materials in DSSCs show an improved photovoltaic performance compared to SnO2 nanoparticles. The reason for the enhanced performance is also investigated and discussed.

In a typical FSP experiment, 0.2 mol L−1 SnCl4·5H2O and 1% HAuCl4 (molar ratio) dissolved in ethanol (50 mL) were employed as precursor solution. The precursor solution was fed at 5 mL min−1 through a spray nozzle and dispersed by external 5 L min−1 O2 forming a fine spray with a diffuse pressure of 0.06 MPa. Then the spray was ignited and reacted in the flame high temperature zone. The combustion atmospheres were controlled by adjusting the flammable gas flow of 1.14 m3 h−1 H2 and the assisted-oxide gas flow of 1.5 m3 h−1 air. The fresh products were collected using a glass fiber filter (ADVTECH/GA55, Toyo Roshi Kaisha Ltd. Japan) in the downstream of FSP equipment with the aid of a vacuum pump.


SnO2 paste was prepared by dispersing SnO2 nanowire powders (0.2 g) and PEG20000 (0.06 g) in deionized water (0.8 mL). A small quantity of acetylacetone and Triton X-100 was added into the solution to adjust the viscosity. The SnO2 slurry was uniformly coated onto the FTO glass (pre-coated by a 40 mM TiCl4 solution with an active area of 0.25 cm2) by a screen-print technique. The films were annealed at 450 °C for 30 min in air. Then, the SnO2 films were immersed into a 50 mM TiCl4 aqueous solution at 80 °C for 30 min and sintered at 450 °C for 30 min. After cooling down to 80 °C, the SnO2 films were put into 0.5 mM N719 dye in ethanol and the resultant films were kept for 20 h at room temperature. The Pt-coated FTO glass was prepared by spin-coating H2PtCl6 solution onto the FTO glass followed by heating at 400 °C for 15 min. These as-prepared photoanodes were assembled into sealed cells with Pt-coated FTO (counter electrode) and electrolyte consisting of 1-propyl-3-methylimidazoliumiodide (PMII, 0.6 M), I2 (0.03 M), LiI (0.05 M), guanidine thiocyanate (GSCN, 0.1 M, Aldrich), and 4-tert-butylpyridine (t-BP, 0.5 M, Aldrich) in acetonitrile and valeronitrile (85:15 (v/v)).


The as-prepared samples were characterized by field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM: HITACHI S-4800) to investigate the structure and morphology. A transmission electron microscope (TEM) and a high resolution transmission electron microscope (HRTEM: JEOL JEM-2100) were utilized to further determine the intrinsic structure. Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) was employed to analyse the elemental composition. X-ray diffraction (XRD: D/max 2550V) was characterized to identify the phase composition. The specific surface area was measured by Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) nitrogen adsorption–desorption (Micromerities ASAP2010N). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) experiments were carried out on a VG Scientific ESCALAB 220IXL instrument using aluminum Kα X-ray radiation. The UV-vis absorption spectrum was measured using a Varian cary-500 spectrometer. Photocurrent–voltage I–V measurements were performed using a Newport I-V tester (Oriel Class A 91160A) at 1 sun condition (100 mW cm−2 at AM1.5). Dye loading measurements were conducted by immersing the films in 0.05 M NaOH solution and monitoring the concentration of the desorbed dye by UV/vis spectroscopy. The electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were performed with a Zennium electrochemical workstation (ZAHNER) at a bias potential of 0.75 V in the frequency range from 10 mHz to 10 MHz in the dark.


The inherent structure of the obtained branch-type SnO2 nanowires was characterized by SEM, TEM and HRTEM. Fig. 1a and b are typical TEM and SEM images of the as-prepared samples, showing a large amount of nanowires with an average diameter of 15–20 nm. The length of these nanowires is 200–700 nm and, more interestingly, the SnO2 nanowires with different directions and lengths assembled into a branch-like morphology. Especially, it is obviously observed that each nanowire has an Au nanoparticle at the tip of the nanowire as shown in Fig. 1c. EDS was used to further confirm the composition of these nanoparticles. The EDS spectrum (inset of Fig. 1c) was derived from the A red box zone. The presence of the Au element in the A zone and the absence of the Au element in other parts of nanowires (Fig. S1 in ESI-1) prove that the nanoparticle at the tip of the nanowires is Au. The growth of SnO2 nanowires may be attributed to the in situ Au-catalyzed effect in flame. The detailed mechanism will be explained and discussed later in the discussion section.
The HRTEM images in Fig. 1d further confirmed the detailed crystal properties of SnO2 nanowires. The interplanar distances are measured to be 3.3 Å and 1.8 Å, which correspond to the (110) and (211) planes of rutile SnO2, respectively. The SAED pattern (inset of Fig. 1d) is also in good agreement with (110) and (211) planes and indicates the single-crystallinity of SnO2. According to the HRTEM image (Fig. 1d) and SAED pattern, it is concluded that the growth of nanowires is along the [101] direction. The phase composition of as-prepared SnO2 nanowires was characterized by the XRD pattern (Fig. 1e). It is obviously noted that all the diffraction peaks can be indexed to rutile SnO2 (JCPDS no. 41-1445). The strongest three peaks belong to (110), (101) and (211) crystal planes, respectively. Furthermore, strong and sharp diffraction peaks indicate high crystallinity of as-synthesized branch-type SnO2 nanowires. However, no trace of Au nanoparticles is observed in the corresponding XRD pattern. This may be mainly attributed to the extremely low Au content (Au:Sn = 1:100). The specific surface area of branch-type SnO2 nanowires is 21.4 m2 g−1 (Fig. S2 in ESI-1).
FSP synthesis has been demonstrated to be a rapid and continuous route for preparing multifunctional nanomaterials. Fig. 2 shows the schematic diagram of the FSP route. In brief, the precursor solution was sprayed into fine droplets by an external O2-assisted nozzle. Then the formed spray droplets went into diffusion H2/air flame and reacted at high temperature (usually above 1500 °C). After rapid processes such as solvent evaporation, hydrolysis, decomposition, nucleation and aggregation, the final products were obtained and collected using a glass fiber filter with an aid of a vacuum pump. As shown in Fig. 2, since the diameter of the flame reactor is 5 cm while the length is 100 cm, the flowage in the reactor room could be estimated as a plug flow and the average residence time of the as-prepared nanowires can be calculated to be 0.67 second by the whole gas flow rate (2.94 m3 h−1) and the area of the reactor room (19.63 cm2). The average growth rates of nanowires could reach 1 μm s−1 according to the length range of SnO2 nanowires (200–700 nm) and residence time (0.67 s), which is thousand times faster than other solutions or CVD methods.
Herein, an in situ Au-catalysis vapour–liquid–solid model is proposed to explain the growth mechanism of branch-type SnO2 nanowires in flame. As is known, many growth models have been developed to describe the growth process of 1D materials, such as VLS (vapor–liquid–solid) and VS (vapor–solid) mechanisms. The results demonstrate that suitable catalysts such as Au play an important role in the formation of 1D nanomaterials. Therefore, HAuCl4 was added into the precursor solution for the formation of the Au catalyst, which could catalyze the growth of SnO2 nanowires. Fig. 3 illustrates the formation mechanism of branch-type SnO2 nanowires in flame. Firstly, the precursor droplets containing SnCl4 and HAuCl4 hydrolyzed and decomposed into SnO2/Au vapors in the high temperature flame zone (above 1500 °C). It is noticed that the reaction temperature gradually decreases along the flame direction. When the temperature dropped to the melting point of SnO2 (1127 °C) and Au (1063 °C), the vapors condensate into droplets, a uniform mixture of liquid state SnO2 and Au. With a further decrease of temperature, Au nanoclusters are supported on the surface of the SnO2 nanoparticles, eventually leading to the formation of unique SnO2/Au heterostructured interfaces. This could be attributed to the limited miscibility of the two liquid components, leading to phase separation prior to solidification of the particles.
The SnO2/Au interface is of importance for the growth of SnO2 nanowires. Owing to the catalytic effect of Au, the fresh synthesized SnO2 vapor readily gathers and condenses in the unique SnO2/Au interface and the SnO2 nucleus starts to grow along the [101] direction to form 1D nanowires. Finally, Au nanoclusters locate at the tip of the SnO2 nanowires, which could be demonstrated by the corresponding TEM observation (Fig. 1c). Meanwhile, the other fresh Au nanoclusters can stick to the “trunk” of the grown SnO2 nanowires and then new catalytic sites are formed. With additional SnO2 vapor resources, SnO2 branches grow along different directions. Obviously, the diameter and length of the “trunk” are larger than those of the “branch”. This may be attributed to the longer residence time of the “trunk” in flame. The further decreased temperature can block the growth of nanowires. Finally, branch-type SnO2 nanowires have been successfully obtained by a simple FSP method.
For comparison, the precursor solution without HAuCl4 was employed to obtain SnO2 nanomaterials by the FSP technique. As shown in the corresponding SEM image (Fig. S3 in the ESI), it is clearly noted that the as-prepared SnO2 nanomaterials have a perfect octahedral morphology and no trace of 1D SnO2 nanowires is observed. These results further indicate that Au nanoclusters have a significant catalytic effect on the growth of branch-type SnO2 nanowires and the in situ Au-catalysis vapour–liquid–solid model proposed is reasonable.
With the unique properties of one-dimensional nanowire materials such as low dimensions and high aspect ratio, SnO2 nanowires are determined to have advantages of highly efficient electron transport and low impedance employed as photoanode materials in DSSCs. The photoanode was assembled on FTO glass with a work area of 0.25 cm2. For comparison, SnO2 nanoparticles synthesized by FSP were also fabricated as electrodes (TEM, XRD, and BET, see ESI-S4). The photoanode films consisting of branch-type SnO2 nanowires are porous (SEM, see ESI-S5) owing to the particular structure of branch-type nanowires and the further thermal treatment for removing organics during the fabrication of DSSCs. The photocurrent density vs. voltage characteristics of branch-type SnO2 nanowires and nanoparticles are shown in Fig. 4a. Both SnO2 nanowires and nanoparticle cells were post-treated with TiCl4 solution while two samples without TiCl4 treatment were also investigated for comparison. The I–V curves show that the branch-type SnO2 nanowire cell provides a much higher photoelectric conversion efficiency of 4.23% than SnO2 nanoparticles (2.12%). Specifically, the assembled cell by SnO2 nanowires shows a relatively higher current density of 10.60 mA cm−2 (4.73 mA cm−2 for the SnO2 nanoparticle cell) with a similar open-circuit voltage (737.4 mV for the SnO2 nanowire cell and 776.9 mV for the SnO2 nanoparticles) and fill factor (54.3% for the nanowires and 57.6% for the nanoparticles). It can be concluded that the higher power conversion mostly arises from the enhanced short circuit current density. On the other hand, the photovoltaic performance of two cells without TiCl4 treatment is greatly lower than that with the post-treatment (η = 1.16%, VOC = 358.1 mV, and JSC = 6.93 mA cm−2 for SnO2 nanowires and η = 0.69%, VOC = 330.7 mV, and JSC = 4.37 mA cm−2 for SnO2 nanoparticles). The influence of TiCl4 treatment on the morphology and structure of SnO2 nanowires and the enhanced photovoltaic performance by TiCl4 post-treatment has been discussed in the ESI. The detailed photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table 1.
Sample
JSC [mA cm−2]
VOC [mV]
FF [%]
η [%]
Adsorbed dye [× 10−8 mol cm−2]
SnO2 NWs + TiCl4
10.60
737.4
54.3
4.23
5.94
SnO2 NPs + TiCl4
4.73
776.9
57.6
2.12
9.88
SnO2 NWs
6.93
358.1
46.6
1.16
3.91
SnO2 NPs
4.37
330.7
47.7
0.69
6.86
The incident photo-to-current efficiency (IPCE) curve of SnO2 nanowire and nanoparticle cells is shown in Fig. 4b, indicating the number of incident photons. The quantum efficiency of two cells with the maximum at 525 nm corresponds to the N719 absorption peak. The IPCE value of the SnO2 nanowire electrode is much higher than that of the SnO2 nanoparticle electrode in the whole spectral range while a higher IPCE value notes higher current density. Obviously, the IPCE results are in great agreement with the observed I–V curve. The dye-loading of two sample cells is also listed in Table 1. The dye-loading of two sample cells (5.94 × 10−8 mol cm−2 for SnO2 nanowires and 9.88 × 10−8 mol cm−2 for SnO2 nanoparticles) suggests that the amount of dye-loading is not the main factor affecting the photocurrent performance.
The enhanced performance of SnO2 nanowire cells compared to SnO2 nanoparticles can be attributed to the following aspects: firstly, the 1D nanowires have a faster electron transfer rate compared to nanoparticles. Further, the unique branch-type structure decreases the electron transfer path owing to its constructed branch-network connections. Besides, the branch-type SnO2 nanowires have better ability of light scattering. The above analysis is further confirmed by the following characterization of UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra and EIS measurement as illustrated in Fig. 4c and d. Clearly, the film assembled from SnO2 nanowires shows higher reflectance than that of SnO2 nanoparticles and the gap gets larger with increasing wavelength from 400 nm to 800 nm, implying that nanowires with 1-D structure can reflect more light than nanoparticles. As is well known, higher ability of light scattering facilitates the photocurrent performance. On the other hand, the EIS measurement of solar cells based on two samples was performed under the same conditions. It can be recognized that there are two semi-circles in each curve, which correspond to an equivalent model (inset of Fig. 4d). The first semicircle (“R1”) in the high frequency zone (above 1000 Hz) represents the charge transfer on the counter electrode–electrolyte interface, while the second semicircle (“R2”) in the mid-frequency (10–100 Hz) region reflects the charge transfer on the photoelectrode–electrolyte interface. The curve shows that the R1 values of SnO2 nanowires (4.1 Ω) and nanoparticles (4.3 Ω) are similar while the R2 value of SnO2 nanowires (63.1 Ω) is much larger than that of nanoparticles (29.4 Ω), which is mainly determined by charge recombination resistance.
The lifetime of electrons in the SnO2-based films could be calculated from the following formula:
where
ƒmax is the peak frequency in the mid-frequency range. As shown in Fig. 5, the ƒmax value for SnO2 nanowires is 8.1 Hz, smaller than the value for SnO2 nanoparticles (14.9 Hz). The larger value of τ suggests that electrons have a longer lifetime and faster diffusion rate. The increased electron lifetime is believed to retard the charge recombination reactions between photoinjected electrons with I3− during the electron transport in the DSSC films. As mentioned above, the reflections and EIS facts indicate that the 1-D nanowires, especially for the branch-type nanowires, providing a high efficient conductive path for electrons injected from the sensitized dying, could reduce the electron diffusion time immensely. For comparison, the electron transport in random nanoparticles undergoes a trap-limited process, meaning that the electrons must pass through a series of particles adjacent to each other like the way of hopping steps to transfer. The results reasonably explain the superior photovoltaic performance of branch-type SnO2 nanowire-based cells.

In summary, branch-type SnO2 nanowires with high crystallinity have been successfully prepared through co-pyrolysis of tin and gold precursors by a simple, rapid and continuous FSP process. The SnO2 branch has an average diameter of 15–20 nm and a length of 200–700 nm. The average growth rate of as-prepared nanowires is calculated to reach an extremely fast rate of 1 μm s−1. Furthermore, Au nanoclusters have been found at the tip of the SnO2 nanowires. The detailed characterization and experimental results indicate that Au nanoclusters play a key role in the formation of branch-type SnO2 nanowires. An in situ Au-catalyzed vapour–liquid–solid model is proposed to explain the corresponding growth mechanism in flame. As photoanodes, the DSSCs based on branch-type SnO2 nanowires (with TiCl4 post-treatment) show a higher short-circuit current (JSC = 10.60 mA cm−2) and a superior power conversion efficiency of 4.23%, improved by 99.5% compared to pure SnO2 nanoparticles (2.12%). The efficiency improvement could be attributed to the unique branch-type nanowire architectures, which provide a highly efficient electron channel and excellent ability of light scattering. In addition, the FSP approach provides a new path to design and prepare hierarchical structures assembled by 1D SnO2 nanowires via the in situ Au-catalysis mechanism. We believe that the as-prepared branch-type SnO2 nanowires have an intriguing potential application of utilizing solar energy owing to the advantages combining the high photovoltaic performance with a rapid and continuous fabrication route.


This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (20925621, 21236003, 81071994), the Shanghai Rising-Star Program (13QA1401100), the Basic Research Program of Shanghai (11JC1403000), the Special Research Fund for the Doctoral Program of Higher Education of China (20110074110010, 20120074120004) and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities.

† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: EDS, BET, SEM, and Fig. 1–3. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ta12533e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013