 DOI: 10.1039/C5TA09011C
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3970-3990


Guang
Yang
,

Hong
Tao
,

Pingli
Qin
,

Weijun
Ke
 and 

Guojia
Fang
*

Key Laboratory of Artificial Micro- and Nano-structures of Ministry of Education of China, School of Physics and Technology, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, PR China. E-mail: gjfang@whu.edu.cn; Fax: +86 (0)27 68752569; Tel: +86 (0)27 68752147

Received
7th November 2015
, Accepted 26th January 2016
First published on 29th January 2016
Thin-film photovoltaics based on organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite light absorbers have recently emerged as a promising low-cost solar energy harvesting technology. Over the past several years, we have witnessed a great and unexpected progress in organic–inorganic perovskite solar cells (PSCs). The power conversion efficiency (PCE) increased from 3.8% to 20.1% and exceeded the highest efficiency of conventional dye-sensitized solar cells. Here, the focus is specifically on the recent developments of the electron transport layer (ETL) in PSCs, which is an important part for high performing PSCs. This review briefly discusses the development of the structure of PSCs, and we attempt to give a systematic introduction about the optimization of ETL and its related interfaces for efficient PSCs. Moreover, the introduction of appropriate interfacial materials is another important issue to improve PSC performance by optimizing the interfacial electronic properties between the perovskite layer and the charge-collecting electrode. Besides, some related issues such as device stability and hysteresis behavior are also discussed here.
Guang Yang
Guang Yang is a Ph.D. candidate guided by Prof. Guojia Fang in the group of Energy Materials & Semiconductor Devices at the School of Physics and Technology, Wuhan University. His current research interest is perovskite solar cells.
Hong Tao
Tao Hong is a Ph.D. student studying in the group guided by Prof. Guojia Fang at the School of Physics and Technology, Wuhan University. Her research interests are dye sensitized solar cells and perovskite solar cells.
Pingli Qin
Pingli Qin is an associate professor at the School of Science, Wuhan University of Technology. He received his Ph.D. in 2012 from the Wuhan University, where he worked on metal oxide hole-transporting layer materials of organic solar cells. Recently, he joined the Key Laboratory of Artificial Micro- and Nano-structures of the Ministry of Education as a postdoctoral researcher. His research is currently devoted to perovskite solar cells.
Weijun Ke
Weijun Ke is a Ph.D. student supervised by Prof. Guojia Fang at the School of Physics and Technology, Wuhan University. Currently, he is also a visiting scholar supervised by Prof. Yanfa Yan in the Department of Physics and Astronomy and Wright Center for Photovoltaics Innovation and Commercialization at The University of Toledo. His main research interest is perovskite solar cells.
Guojia Fang
Guojia Fang received his Ph.D. in Physical Electronics from Huazhong University of Science & Technology in 2001. He was a research associate at the department of electrical & electronic engineering of Imperial College London in 1996–1997. He was a postdoctoral associate in the department of electronic engineering at Tsinghua University (Beijing) from 2001 to 2003. In 2003, he joined the Wuhan University, Hubei, China, where he is currently a professor. He worked as a visiting professor at the Department of Electrical Engineering of Imperial College from 2003 to 2004. His research interests include thin film photovoltaic devices, light emitting diodes and related devices.

Global energy consumption has been continually increasing. Inexpensive, clean and renewable energy sources are needed for mankind with reduction of fossil fuels. Photovoltaic technology is an excellent means of alleviating this problem. Until now, photovoltaic devices with high efficiency, low cost and large scale fabrication are not available. Although CuInxGa1−xSe2 thin film solar cells exhibit good performance, some limited factors such as the scarcity of indium may become a roadblock for their broad applications. Fortunately, perovskite solar cells (PSCs), a highly efficient newcomer to the solar cell family, possess great potentiality to become a leading next-generation photovoltaic technology.

Organometallic lead halide perovskite was first introduced as a sensitizer in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) in 2006, and further development was achieved by using CH3NH3PbI3 as a sensitizer in 2009. However, the performance of these devices decreased rapidly due to the dissolution of the perovskite. This problem was alleviated by introducing solid-state hole transport materials rather than liquid electrolytes. Two years later, Park's group achieved efficiency of 6.5% through depositing CH3NH3PbI3 quantum dots on a nanocrystalline TiO2 surface. In the same year, Park, Grätzel and co-workers realized a remarkable progress by using spiro-OMeTAD as a solid-state hole transporting material and achieved a reported power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 9.7%. Improved efficiency was realized by adopting nanoporous Al2O3 as a scaffold instead of TiO2 and it was the first time the mixed-halide perovskite CH3NH3PbCl3−xIx was used as a light absorber, which was obviously stable in an air atmosphere compared to the traditional CH3NH3PbI3. We have witnessed unexpected progress in the PSCs, that is, the PCE of PSCs improving from an initial 3.8% to 20.1% over the past five years.
In order to meet the commercial requirement of high throughput manufacturing processes, low cost, easy fabrication, scalability, and low temperature processing technology are indispensable for obtaining highly efficient PSCs with long term stability. Previous reports mainly concentrated on the design of device structures, controlling the morphology of each function layer, modification of different interfaces, and development of various hole transport materials (HTMs). Besides, more and more mature fabrication methods have been developed for high-quality perovskite films, such as one-step solution deposition, sequential solution deposition, dual-source vacuum evaporation deposition, vapor-assisted solution process method, blade-coating deposition, 3D printing fabrication and so on. Electron transport materials (ETMs), which extract photogenerated electrons from perovskite and transport these charges to electrodes, play an important role in high-performing PSCs. Besides, improving the contact between ETLs and electrodes and modifying the interfaces between ETLs and perovskite layers are also vital.
This review article briefly discusses the developments in the structure of PSCs, and attempts to give a systematic introduction about the optimization of the electron transport layer (ETL) for efficient PSCs. In addition, modification of the interface between the ETL and perovskite layer as well as the interface between the ETL and metal electrode is also discussed.

The rapid development of PSCs should be attributed to both dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) and organic photovoltaics (OPVs) by fine tuning the functional materials and device architectures for the mesoscopic and planar heterojunction structured PSCs respectively. Mesoscopic PSCs, conventional planar PSCs, and inverted planar PSCs are the basic architectures of PSCs, which are depicted in Fig. 1.


Sensitized perovskite solar cells (or mesoscopic PSCs) were evolved from DSSCs, which were first reported by Miyasaka. In his work, CH3NH3PbI3 and CH3NH3PbBr3 replaced dye molecules and served as sensitizers on mesoporous TiO2 and the corresponding devices yielded PCEs of 3.81% and 3.13% with an organic liquid electrolyte. Later work performed by Park and co-workers firstly introduced spiro-OMeTAD as the solid hole transporting material into the mesoscopic PSCs in order to avoid the dissolution of the perovskite material in the liquid electrolyte. Most state-of-the-art mesoscopic PSCs normally utilize TiO2 compact thin films as the ETLs (mesoporous TiO2, Al2O3 or ZrO2 as a scaffold), and they play the vital role of selective charge collection. TiO2 scaffolds can elongate the optical light path and retard recombination. Improved efficiency was realized by adopting nanoporous Al2O3 as a scaffold instead of TiO2 and it was the first time the mixed-halide perovskite CH3NH3PbCl3−xIx was used as a light absorber, which was obviously stable in an air atmosphere compared to the traditional CH3NH3PbI3. Until now, mesoscopic structures have been used in state-of-the-art PSCs and the efficiency has exceeded 20%. We summarize the performances of mesoscopic perovskite solar cells with different compact layers or mesoporous layers as ETLs available in the literature in Table 1.

Perovskite absorber
ETL
PCE (%) (rev./forw.)
Ref.

a Bl refers to blocking layer, and mp refers to mesoporous layer. Rev. and forw. refer to the performances of devices measured under reverse voltage scanning and forward voltage scanning, respectively.

(FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15
Bl-TiO2/mp-TiO2
19.0/17.8

85

(FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15
Bl-TiO2/mp-TiO2
20.2%

8

Adduct-induced MAPbI3
Bl-TiO2/mp-TiO2
19.7%

25

MAPbI3−xClx
Bl-TiO2/mp-Al2O3
15.9%

26

MAPbI3
ZnO nanorods
16.1%

119

MAPbI3
Bl-SnO2/mp-SnO2
10.18%

71

MAPbI3−xClx
TiO2 (Y)
19.3

27

(FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15
SnO2
18.4/18.1

74

MAPbI3
SnO2
17.21/14.8

73

MAPbI3
ZnO
15.7

16

MAPbI3−xClx
TiO2/(C60-SAM)
17.3

114

MAPbI3
TiO2
17.2 (Average)

34

MAPbI3
TiOx/60–PCBM
17.6 (Steady-state efficiency)

125

MAPbI3−xClx
PCBM
17.7/17.7

31

MAPbI3
PCBM
18.1

28

MAPbI3−xClx
PCBM
17.1

29


Since Snaith et al. firstly reported PSCs with planar thin-film architecture and achieved a PCE of 4.9%, more and more research on planar PSCs achieved great progress. The planar architecture consists of conventional planar PSCs based on a compact TiO2, ZnO or SnO2 layer and inverted planar PSCs. Remarkably, planar PSCs based on CH3NH3PbI3−xClx prepared by dual-source vapor deposition yield a high efficiency of 15.4%, which demonstrated that this simpler planar heterojunction solar cell was quite efficient. In Kelly's work, a low temperature solution-processed thin compact ZnO ETL was used to fabricate a highly efficient planar perovskite solar cell with a champion efficiency of 15.7% and an average efficiency of 13.7%, in which ZnO had superior electron mobility and the ETL film was fabricated without any sintering steps. Yang et al. fabricated PSCs with a device architecture similar to the commonly used planar configuration, but with some modifications (e.g., ITO modified with polyethyleneimine ethoxylated (PEIE), TiO2 modified with Y doping), enabling the device to show excellent photovoltaic performance with a PCE up to 19.3%, which is the highest efficiency for planar PSCs reported in the literature until now. As another kind of planar PSCs, inverted planar PSCs commonly use C60 and its derivatives (e.g., PC61M, PC71M, ICBA) as organic electron transporting materials (ETMs). Devices with this structure developed very rapidly, with increasing efficiency from 3.9% in the beginning (ref. 36) to over 18%.


In terms of conventional planar PSCs (FTO/c-TiO2/perovskite/HTM/Au), a compact n-type metal oxide film (TiO2 or ZnO, SnO2 (ref. 38)) is always required on a transparent conducting oxide (TCO) substrate as a blocking layer for electron selective contacts. In the Gong group's work, alkali salt solution was used to modify the TCO surface to achieve optimized interface energy level alignment, resulting in a remarkable PCE of 15.1%. Kelly demonstrated a new compact layer-free perovskite solar cell with a planar heterojunction structure and this structure device achieved an efficiency of 13.5%. Comparing with the ZnO based planar perovskite solar cell, this simpler architecture device shows better stability and involves less processing procedures, although it demonstrates very little drop in the device performance. Recently, a simpler structure and hole blocking layer-free perovskite solar cell has been reported by our group. A PCE of over 14% has been achieved with a planar Au/hole-transporting material/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/FTO substrate cell structure processed by a solution method. The device structure and performance of compact layer-free PSCs are shown in Fig. 2a–d. Additionally, by applying ultraviolet-ozone treatment to the FTO substrates, residual organic species can be effectively removed, which is beneficial to the formation of smooth and high quality perovskite thin films. Besides UVO treatment, we find that involving Cl in the synthesis is another key for realizing high Voc of perovskite solar cells without conventional ETLs. These efforts aim at realizing simple processing procedures and high efficiency for future PSCs on flexible substrates.


In conventional mesoscopic PSCs (FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/perovskite/HTM/Au), hole transporting materials (HTMs) are necessary for achieving high efficiency devices. Normally, most highly efficient PSCs employ the small organic molecule spiro-OMeTAD, which has high hole conductivity and mobility, and a suitable HOMO energy level (here, spiro-OMeTAD refers to what has been optimized by adding some functional additives, such as LiTFSI, cobalt(III), and TBP). However, the complicated and low-yielding synthesis procedure of spiro-OMeTAD makes it difficult to be further applied in large scale and cost-effective PSCs. Therefore, in recent years many studies have paid much attention to use simple methods to develop low cost and excellent HTMs. In view of this, several small molecules or polymer-based HTMs have also been synthesized and applied in PSCs. For example, a certified PCE of 16.2% has been achieved by using PTAA as the HTM via a solvent engineering method. These progresses greatly broaden researchers' freedom in the choice of hole transporting materials.

To some extent, the application of organic HTMs in PSCs may be an impediment to the future commercialization of this type solar cell because of its relatively high cost. In view of this, several groups have attempted to utilize some inorganic HTMs (CuI, CuSCN, CuO/CuO2, NiO, V2O5 (ref. 31)), which commonly exhibit better stability and would greatly reduce the cost. Nevertheless, although they show promising performance, the relevant efficiency is still inferior to those of PSCs based on spiro-OMeTAD.
As mentioned above, extensive efforts have been taken to introduce various novel HTMs to PSCs and promising progress has been achieved. However, HTM-free mesoscopic heterojunction PSCs as a simple structure also aroused increasing interest in this field. In 2012, Etgar et al. reported the successful fabrication of a hole conductor-free mesoscopic methylammonium lead iodide (CH3NH3PbI3) perovskite/TiO2 heterojunction solar cell for the first time, indicating that CH3NH3PbI3 played the roles of both a light harvester and hole conductor. Later studies reported a depleted hole conductor-free CH3NH3PbI3/TiO2 heterojunction solar cell, yielding an efficiency of 8% (ref. 63) and 10.85%, and they confirmed the heterojunction diode nature of the cell. The CH3NH3PbI3/TiO2 heterojunction solar cell has a depletion layer due to charge transfer from the electron accepting contact to the CH3NH3PbI3 layer. Shi et al. reported a modified two step deposition (MTSD) method to fabricate a HTM-free perovskite solar cell with an efficiency of 10.47%, which behaved better in open-circuit voltages (the highest Voc is about 948 mV). The relatively high open-circuit voltage is due to the lower Fermi energy of CH3NH3PbI3 than that of spiro-OMeTAD. Remarkably, a certified efficiency of 12.8% was achieved in a fully printable mesoscopic perovskite solar cell without a hole-conducting layer by using a double layer of mesoporous TiO2 and ZrO2 covered by a porous carbon film, in which 5-aminovaleric acid (5-AVA) cations were introduced to form a new perovskite (5-AVA)x(MA)1−xPbI3. Meanwhile, this device exhibited excellent stability in ambient air. The simple, fully printable and stable mesoscopic PSC opens up new avenues for future development of high-efficiency, low-cost photovoltaic cells. However, the relatively low efficiency of HTM-free PSCs may originate from the hard charge separation and strong charge recombination at the interface, which result in poor performance in (of) both Voc and FF. Therefore, enhancing the quality of perovskite film and optimizing the contact of interface are important to the further improvement of the efficiency of HTM-free PSCs.
In the following sections, the recent developments of electron transport layers in different device structures have been reviewed. The progress of electron transport layer/interface modification has also been discussed so as to give a comprehensive understanding of interface investigation and engineering for achieving high performance PSCs.

The regular architecture of a PSC is FTO (ITO)/ETL/perovskite absorber/HTL/metal (carbon) electrode, in which the perovskite absorber layer is sandwiched between the electron transport layer (ETL) and hole transport layer (HTL). In this section, we aim at summarizing some recent progress and efforts related to ETLs and their relevant optimizations.


Until now, TiO2 ETLs have been used in most frequently reported PSCs. The electron injection rates from the perovskite absorber to TiO2 ETLs are very fast, but the electron recombination rates are also very high due to the low electron mobility and transport properties. Hence, there is a necessity and interest to try and investigate some alternative ETMs to obtain efficient PSCs. ZnO is known to have better electron mobility (bulk mobility: 205–300 cm2 V−1 s−1) than TiO2, which makes it an ideal candidate for an electron-selective contact. ZnO nanorods and nanoparticles have both been introduced into the PSCs as ETLs, showing PCEs of 11.13% and 15.7%, respectively. However, ZnO suffers from the issue of chemical unstability. Hence, some researchers have made attempts to find other new functional materials as ETLs. Recently, SnO2 has emerged as another promising ETL with a wide band-gap, high transparency and large electron mobility (bulk mobility: 240 cm2 V−1 s−1). Li et al. successfully utilized SnO2 nanoparticle films as ETLs in PSCs; combined with TiCl4 treatment, the efficiency of the device with SnO2 films exceeded 10%. Dong further investigated SnO2-based mesoscopic PSCs (S-PSCs), and revealed that the photovoltaic performance of S-PSCs was highly dependent on measurement means. Song et al. demonstrated that low-temperature processed SnO2 compact layer based planar PSCs could achieve a high PCE of 13.0%, which is highly durable with exposure to the ambient air environment for 30 days. Using low temperature sol–gel derived SnO2 as the ETL, we achieved an average efficiency of 16.02% obtained from efficiencies measured from both reverse and forward voltage scans. These results show that low temperature processed SnO2 with excellent optical and electrical properties is an excellent alternative ETL material for efficient PSCs. Although SnO2 layers have shown great potential for fabricating efficient planar PSCs, the somewhat serious hysteresis behavior may be a problem of SnO2 based devices that needs to be addressed. Recently, in order to improve the interfacial behavior of SnO2 based planar devices, a 15 nm thick electron selective layer (ESL) of SnO2 processed by a low-temperature atomic layer deposition (ALD) technique was investigated. Herein, the author demonstrated a barrier-free band alignment between the perovskite light harvester and the charge selective contact using the mixed (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15 perovskite material and SnO2 layer, respectively. And thus, a hysteresis-free, highly efficient planar perovskite solar cell with a high voltage of 1.19 V was achieved. High stabilized efficiency and negligible hysteresis behavior are found in ALD-SnO2 based planar PSCs compared to TiO2 based devices. It was reported that WOx is a chemically stable, wide band-gap semiconductor with higher electron mobility (10–20 cm2 V−1 s−1). These favorable properties enable efficient transportation of photogenerated electrons. A low-temperature prepared WOx ETL with good light transmittance and relatively high electron mobility was successfully applied in planar PSCs.

In general, owing to the favorable energy level, easy fabrication, and long electron lifetimes of TiO2, it is most commonly used as the ETM in PSCs. However, the low electron mobility and relatively high density of electronic trap states below the conduction band (CB) of TiO2 may influence the efficiency and stability (under UV illumination) of the corresponding device. Besides, most state-of-the-art PSCs still require high temperature sintering of the TiO2 mesoporous layer, which is disadvantageous for further application of PSCs. Thus, a highly efficient PSC with a low-temperature processed TiO2 ETL is the key point and target of new research. Compared to TiO2, ZnO has better electron mobility and is suitable for low-temperature preparation. Meanwhile, the perovskite solar cell based ZnO ETL exhibited good photovoltaic performance. Nevertheless, the chemical instability of ZnO and evident thermal instability of the ZnO/perovskite bilayer may hinder its further application as an ETL in PSCs. SnO2 exhibits much higher electron mobility than TiO2 and it also has excellent optical properties and good stability. Low-temperature solution-processed SnO2 and atomic layer deposition (ALD) processed SnO2 have been successfully employed as ETLs in efficient planar PSCs, indicating its enormous potentiality. We believe that more and more in-depth studies on using SnO2 as the electron selective contact in efficient PSCs will be carried out. WOx is a chemically stable and wide band gap material, with high electron mobility. Until now, PSCs solely using WOx as the ETL have displayed poorer performance than the devices based on TiO2, SnO2 and ZnO. Through combining with TiO2 and other functional layers (such as SAMs), devices using WOx as ETLs have achieved enhanced photovoltaic performance.

Evolving from OPVs, fullerene and its derivatives are the most widely used n-type materials for ETLs in inverted PSCs. C60 and its derivatives with different energy levels and electron mobilities, such as PC61BM, ICBA and PC71BM, are ideal candidates as efficient electron extraction materials because of their low temperature fabrication, suitable energy level alignment, and decent electron mobility. The energy levels of some ETLs (organic and inorganic ETLs) used in PSCs are shown in Fig. 4. Jeng et al. utilized various fullerene derivatives as ETLs in inverted planar PSCs with the highest efficiency of 3.9% in 2013. The application of ICBA significantly increased the Voc. Tris(2,4,6-trimethyl-3-(pyridin-3-yl)phenyl)borane (3TPYMB) was also employed in inverted planar PSCs as an organic charge transport material. It exhibited a difference of 0.6 eV between the CB of perovskite and the LUMO of 3TPYMB and resulted in a barrier for electron extraction. Although the efficiency was relatively low, further improvement was achieved by optimizing the fullerene ETLs, modifying the morphology of the perovskite layer, and introducing various buffer layers or interlayers at the fullerene/electrode interface to simultaneously improve charge extraction and tune the work function (WF) of electrodes. Besides, organic semiconductors such as C60 films fabricated by a solution-processed or vacuum-processed method are also employed in conventional planar PSCs. The device using C60 electron selective layers showed an improved hysteresis phenomenon, which might result from the improvement in electron extraction from the photoexcited perovskite to the C60.


The ETL, one of the most important components in highly efficient PSCs, plays a significant role in extracting and transporting photogenerated electrons and simultaneously serves as a hole blocking layer to suppress charge recombination. The characteristics of the ETL, especially its charge mobility, energy level alignment, trap states, morphology and related interfacial properties are very vital to determine the final photovoltaic performance of PSCs. Some processes of charge carrier injection, transport and recombination within PSCs are shown in Fig. 3. These kinetic processes and influence factors play important roles in device performance. The schematic representation of the work mechanism of PSCs and summary of the factors that influence the function of ETLs are very helpful to figure out the underlying causes of photovoltaic performance improvement of PSCs by optimizing the ETL.

The electron mobility of ETL is an important factor that determines a device's photovoltaic performance. A relatively high electron mobility is desirable for ETLs because electrons can be efficiently transported and collected. Energy level alignment is another factor we need to consider when we design a photovoltaic device. Tailoring the energy level of ETLs to match better with that of the perovskite layer can facilitate electron extraction and transport, contributing to the increase of Jsc and FF. Meanwhile, the Voc is normally determined by the energy differences between the Fermi levels (EF) of the ETL and EF of the HTL. Therefore, energy-level adjustment is widely used to enhance the Voc of a device. Charge extraction, transfer and recombination at the interface play important roles in determining device performance. Trap states in the ETLs also influence charge transport. Hence, interface engineering is an efficient method to enhance charge transport and optimize device performance. Morphologies of the ETL are also designed to improve its contact with the perovskite layer, aiming at achieving better device behavior. As discussed above, all factors influence each other and simultaneously determine the properties of a device.

So far, a high-temperature processed mesoscopic TiO2 layer was required for high-performance PSCs. Although mesoporous oxides, such as TiO2, ZrO2, ZnO, and Al2O3, were found to be very effective scaffolds to support the perovskite absorber material, high-temperature sintering and the large resistance resulting from the insulating properties of these materials may act as impediments to their further application. Hence, reducing the processing temperature and simplifying the fabrication procedures are critical for developing low cost and large area perovskite solar cells on various flexible substrates. The degree of crystallization of a material is normally determined by the sintering temperature. Typically, TiO2 films need to be sintered at 500 °C in order to transform the amorphous oxide layer into the crystalline form (anatase or rutile), which exhibits certain electrical conductivity and provides good charge transport abilities. Hence, formation of crystalline TiO2 at a low temperature is important to achieve efficient PSCs. Low-temperature processed nanocrystalline TiO2 was employed via a chemical bath deposition (CBD) method at 70 °C and an excellent PCE was achieved. In addition, nanocomposites of graphene and TiO2 nanoparticles are utilized for low-temperature processed ETLs in PSCs, and a remarkable PCE of 15.6% was achieved (Fig. 5a). Snaith and co-workers firstly developed a low temperature processing route for mesoscopic Al2O3 (ref. 26 and 88) and compact TiO2, to facilitate low cost fabrication, and applicability on flexible organic substrates and multi-junction device architectures. In addition, we adopted a one-step sintering process for mesoporous TiO2 ETL fabrication and achieved a high PCE of 15.07% and the TiO2 compact film was prepared by thermal oxidation. This strategy can also simplify the fabrication process. Hence, development of conventional PSCs without high temperature sintered mesoscopic films may be a good choice for low temperature processability of the device. Different kinds of low-temperature processed ETLs such as TiO2, ZnO, WOx, SnO2, and fullerene derivatives were already reported for this simple planar structure. Several advanced deposition approaches have therefore been developed for low temperature processed ETLs or HBLs, e.g. magnetron sputtering, atomic layer deposition, spin-coating, slot-die coating, chemical bath deposition and electrodeposition. In Kelly's work, a low temperature solution-processed thin compact ZnO layer was used to fabricate a highly efficient planar perovskite solar cell with an efficiency of 15.7% and an average efficiency of 13.7%, in which ZnO film had superior electron mobility with low temperature deposition without the annealing process (Fig. 5b). Recently, a low temperature solution-processed Zn2SnO4 (ZSO) nanoparticle layer was successfully introduced into flexible PSCs, and a high PCE of 15.3% for flexible PSCs was achieved (Fig. 5e). Besides using high-temperature crystalline metal oxide as the ETL, low-temperature processed amorphous TiO2 was also investigated for PSCs. A flexible perovskite solar cell based amorphous TiO2 ETL prepared by magnetron sputtering at room temperature shows good performance, which is attributed to the improved electron injection and reduced transfer resistance (compared to PSCs based on an anatase TiO2 ETL). Kim et al. reported a low-temperature-processed, annealing-free TiOx layer through atomic layer deposition (ALD), and a flexible PSC with a PCE of 12.2% was eventually obtained (Fig. 5d). An amorphous WOx electron selective layer (ESL) with comparable light transmittance and relatively high electrical conductivity was prepared facilely at low temperature for planar PSCs, and an average PCE of 8.99% was achieved (Fig. 5g). Very recently, SAMs modified low-temperature WOx layers were employed in the regular planar PSCs, which exhibited hysteresis-free and efficient performance (Fig. 5f). A low-temperature, solution processed, transparent ETL of TiOx/-PC60BM was successfully incorporated into a regular planar PSC and such a device reached a stabilized PCE of 17.6% with negligible hysteresis. Recently, amorphous WOx–TiOx composites fabricated at a relatively low temperature of 70 °C or 25 °C were found to be very efficient as ETLs in PSCs.

As shown above, we have discussed the influences of the crystallinity of ETLs. Generally, crystalline ETLs formed via a high temperature process have higher electron mobility than amorphous ETLs obtained at a relatively low temperature. In the case of TiO2 ETLs, anatase and rutile TiO2 that exhibit high free carrier mobility tend to facilitate fast carrier transportation, which are the most frequently utilized ETLs in efficient PSCs. Moreover, for efficient ETLs, appropriate energy level alignment with the perovskite absorber layer and suitable free charge carrier concentrations of ETLs also need to be considered. Therefore, some amorphous ETLs can be used in highly efficient PSCs, due to their favorable optical and electrical properties. In the case of SnO2, low-temperature annealed SnO2 (LT-SnO2) ETLs exhibit much better performance than high-temperature annealed SnO2 (HT-SnO2) in planar PSCs, owing to the better film coverage, higher electron mobility and wider band gap of the LT-SnO2 ETL. HT-SnO2 exhibits much higher crystallinity than LT-SnO2, however, HT-SnO2 film does not appear compact due to the agglomeration of SnO2 particles at high temperature. Through Hall effect measurements, the LT-SnO2 film shows a lower electron concentration, but much higher electron mobility, which leads to an effective ability to block holes. These results give us an insight into the effect of the crystallinity of ETL on its performance.

The regular architecture of a PSC is FTO (ITO)/ETL/perovskite/HTL/metal (carbon) electrode, in which the perovskite absorber layer is sandwiched between the electron transport layer (ETL) and hole transport layer (HTL). Previous reports have shown that various functional layers in PSCs and the interfaces among them are very essential to the performance of a device. Hence, modifying the quality of each functional layer and optimizing the interfaces are crucial to achieve highly efficient, cost effective and stable PSCs. Herein, we present some recent progress and efforts related to the optimization of ETL and modification of ETL/perovskite interfaces and ETL/metal electrode interfaces.


Different nanostructures of TiO2 materials, such as nanorods, nanotubes, nanofibers and core–shells were also investigated for PSCs. TiO2 nanorods, nanotubes, and nanofibers were reported to be better in terms of electron transport than nanoparticle films, owing to their directional charge transport properties. Meanwhile, these open porous structures may also be advantageous for filling of perovskite materials. Highly branched anatase TiO2 nanowires were applied in mesoscopic PSCs, which exhibited superior light harvesting efficiency and effective hole-blocking as well as electron-transporting properties. TiO2 nanorods can be synthesized by a hydrothermal route with water–HCl and ethanol–HCl solution. Hence, the morphology, optical and electrical properties of TiO2 nanorods can be enhanced, resulting in an obvious performance improvement of PSCs based on TiO2 nanorods. Recently, one-dimensional ETLs comprised of single-crystalline SnO2 nanowires as cores and epitaxial TiO2 nanolayers as shells have been successfully applied in perovskite solar cells, exhibiting enhanced electron transport and excellent pore-filling with the perovskite material. What's more, the intrinsic characters of TiO2 films are also important for device performance. The optical, electrical and physical properties of ETLs such as good transmittance, crystal phase, carrier mobility and morphology of thin films, diameters of nanoparticles, and trap states in the surface ought to be considered. The effect of the crystal phase and morphology of the TiO2 layer (Fig. 6a and b) on the performance of PSCs was also investigated by Park. The rutile TiO2 film was found to be better than the anatase TiO2 film because of the infiltration of the perovskite, the smooth surface of the perovskite capping layer and a lower conduction band position of the rutile TiO2 film than that of the perovskite (Fig. 6c and d). Deposition of perovskite crystals on TiO2 may result in defects formed on the perovskite/TiO2 interface, which are detrimental to the device performance. Therefore, good electron mobility and low surface recombination rate at the interface are vital for an ideal ETL. A low temperature processed graphene TiO2 composite was used as the ETL with higher conductivity and reduced contact resistance compared to pristine anatase-TiO2 nanoparticles. Recently, an ultrathin ALD-passivated TiO2 layer was deposited on the surface of 1D TiO2 nanorods, which not only boosted light absorption but also avoided the high-temperature-processed TiCl4 treatment.


The electrical/optical characteristics of TiO2 or ZnO can be tuned easily by manipulating the morphology, doping, and composition. Modification of TiO2 with appropriate substitution of Al3+, Y3+, Mg2+, Sn4+, Nb5+, and Nd3+ has been demonstrated for mesoscopic PSCs. Doping TiO2 with Y3+ was found to be an efficient way to modify the morphology of the perovskite layer and enhance the electron transfer properties. TiO2 contains numerous oxygen vacancies, particularly at the surface, which are not only unfavorable for charge transport but are also detrimental to the device stability upon UV-illumination in TiO2-based PSCs. Al-doped TiO2 could remove oxygen defects from the TiO2 lattice, leading to the improvement of the performance and enhancement in stability. The high recombination rates of photoinduced electron hole pairs formed in the photocatalytic processes for anatase TiO2 would have a passive impact on TiO2-based PSCs. We modulated TiO2 with Mg-doping resulting in better optical transmission properties and better energy level alignment, which provided better electron transport and hole blocking effects within the device. Mg(0.10)–TiO2 showed an elevated position of CBM (−4.14 eV) than pure TiO2 (−4.18 eV), which made a contribution to the improvement of the Voc (Fig. 7). Mg-doped TiO2 nanorods were also applied in PSCs, achieving significant Voc increase. Sn-doped TiO2 nanorod arrays with high electron mobility were successfully incorporated into PSCs, enhancing light capture and changing the band gap structure of TiO2. Nb-doping of TiO2 compact layers resulted in improved recombination resistance (Rrec), decreased selective contact resistance (Rsc) of the device and enhanced device performance. Recent work demonstrated that employing Zr–TiO2 electrodes and pyridine treatment could enhance device performance and decrease hysteresis. Recently, Yang et al. developed a facile and quantitative method to improve the electron transport properties via incorporating acetylacetonate additives consisting of elements of various valencies ranging from Zn(II), Y(III), and Zr(IV) to Mo(VI), and thus improved device performances, particularly short circuit current density (Jsc) and fill factor (FF). The conductivities of pristine TiO2 and modified TiO2 are provided in Table 2. Incorporation of additives into the TiO2 film largely increases its electrical conductivity, which contributes to carrier transport and subsequently benefits the Jsc and FF. Engineering ETL nanocrystals with selected additives or dopants may be suitable for some other selective contact materials, such as ZnO and SnO2. Al-doped ZnO films, which were deposited through the electrospraying method, could suppress charge recombination at the ZnO/perovskite interface, enhancing the efficiency from 10.8% to 12%. The charge recombination of the ZnO based device was suppressed by appropriate Mg-doping, which was mainly attributed to the conduction band offset at the ZnO layer/perovskite absorber layer interface. Optimization of ZnO electron materials by nitrogen doping, combined with using a dipole layer can increase electron concentration, improve perovskite infiltration as well as reduce the work function. Here, we give a summary of the device performance of ETLs with different substitutions in Table 3.

w/o additives
0.05% YAc3
0.1% MoO2Ac2
0.1% ZnAc2
0.1% ZrAc2
Conductivity (S cm−1)
1.42 × 10−4
2.60 × 10−4
2.32 × 10−4
3.72 × 10−4
1.86 × 10−4
ETLs modified with substitution

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Ref.
Y–TiO2
1.13
22.75
75.01
19.3

27

Y–TiO2
1.017
20.2
74.8
15.4

116

Y–TiO2
0.945
18.1
66
11.2

107

Zr–TiO2
1.021
20.3
76
15.7

116

Zr–TiO2
0.93
14.4
67
9.1

115

Mg–TiO2
1.08
18.34
62
12.28

111

Al–TiO2
1.07
20
65
13.8

109

N:ZnO
0.995
22.1
74
16.27

119

Mg–ZnO
0.99
22.7
68
15.3

118

Al–ZnO
1.045
15.1
76
12

117

Above all, doping is an effective way to modify the electrical properties of TiO2. There are some reports on the effect of p-type dopants, such as Mg2+, Al3+, Y3+, and Nd3+. Al and Nd could passivate the oxygen defects at the surface of the TiO2, which can act as a deep electronic trap, and thus significantly enhance the performance and stability of PSCs. Mg doped TiO2 or Mg doped ZnO could lead to an upshift of the CB (TiO2 or ZnO), and therefore improve the Voc of the device. Meanwhile, the charge recombination of the interface between the ETL and perovskite layer could be suppressed, resulting in the enhancement of FF and Voc simultaneously. N-type dopants (e.g., Nb5+) of TiO2 are believed to improve electron injection and transport, leading to a higher Jsc. Moreover, doping TiO2 with Zr4+ gives rise to a decrease in hysteresis.

Literature reports revealed that self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) could modify the dielectric and source/drain electrode surfaces or passivate the surface of commonly used SiO2 or Al2O3 dielectrics. These surface treatments can decrease the number of charge carrier traps and tailor the surface energy of dielectrics. Modification of the interface of solar cells with functional SAMs has also been proved to be an effective method to improve device performance. For PSCs, SAMs can be used in combination with functional metal oxides, such as TiO2 and ZnO, to further improve the interface properties. As fullerene molecules could act as a good electron transporter (collector), a compact TiO2 layer modified by incorporating self-assembled fullerene monolayers (Fig. 8a and b) was used as the ETL. As a result, electron transport improved and the efficiency reached 17.3% with significantly reduced hysteresis and a stabilized power output of 15.7%. This remarkable enhancement may be attributed to the passivation effects of trap states formed at the interface between TiO2 and perovskite. Modifying the compact ZnO layer with 3-aminopropanoic acid (C3-SAM) not only improved the interfacial energy level alignment owing to the formation of permanent dipole moments (which decreased the WF of ZnO from 4.17 to 3.52 eV), but also helped in obtaining highly crystalline perovskite film with reduced pin-hole and trap state density (Fig. 8c). Recently, an organic silane self-assembled monolayer was introduced to modify the interface between the TiO2 surface and the perovskite layer in hole-conductor free solar cells. Herein, the interface electronic structure was tuned and the recombination process was retarded with the help of the silane SAM (Fig. 8d). Low temperature processed WOx nanoparticles in combination with mixed fullerene functionalized SAMs were incorporated into a regular planar structure PSC, and the corresponding device exhibited hysteresis-free behavior.


Charge recombination mainly occurs at the interfaces between charge transport layers and perovskite absorber layers. An effective way of controlling the charge recombination is to introduce some wide band gap semiconductors at the TiO2 surface. An ultrathin MgO nanolayer was coated onto TiO2 nanoparticles via a sol–gel process in order to modify the interface between the TiO2 layer and perovskite layer. This MgO-coated TiO2 film could retard the electron/hole recombination at the TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3 surface, thus leading to the enhancement in both Voc and FF, and an increase of PCE from 11.4% to 12.7% was demonstrated. Similarly, controlling charge-generation interfaces by Y2O3 or Al2O3 passivation could effectively improve the photovoltaic performance of PSCs (Fig. 9a).


Inserting a HOCO–R–NH3+I− monolayer between a porous TiO2 layer and the perovskite absorber layer, to some degree, can not only passivate the surface traps of porous TiO2 and retard the recombination rates, but also result in the formation of uniform perovskite films. Meanwhile, electron injection from perovskite into TiO2 was also promoted (Fig. 9b). As a result, the PCE increased from 8% to 10% (optimized PCE of 12%). Introducing a ZnO compact layer between the TiO2 layer and perovskite absorber can enhance electron transport and avoid charge accumulation, which results in significantly suppressed surface recombination. Glycine, an amino acid, was also employed to modify the TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3 interface and the crystallization quality of perovskite was improved. Recently, a thin layer of polyoxyethylene (PEO) was used to modify the TiO2 ETL. Due to the dipole formed at the interface, the work function of the ETL dropped largely from 4.15 to 3.25 eV, resulting in enhanced electron collection efficiency and improved overall PCE of the modified device (Fig. 9c). The interface of perovskite/TiO2 was also modified by incorporating an HOOC–Ph–SH interlayer, which facilitated the electron transfer from perovskite to TiO2 and also increased the PCE by altering the morphology of perovskite crystal growth (Fig. 9d).


In DSSCs, TiCl4 treatment for modifying the surface of mesoporous TiO2 films is a standard procedure to improve the device performance. A low temperature processed compact TiO2 layer with the addition of titanium diisopropoxide-bis(acetylacetonate) (TiAcAc) could also induce higher conductivity and lower overall series resistance. Zhao demonstrated that TiCl4 treatment of the mesoporous TiO2 film prior to device fabrication could reduce the charge recombination kinetics substantially. These enhanced properties of TiO2 materials are beneficial for the improvement of the photovoltaic performance of the devices. Our group's work also illustrated that device performance could be improved thorough TiCl4 post-treatment on the TiO2 ETL. In order to inhibit charge recombination, the interface between the SnO2 and perovskite layer was modified via TiCl4 treatment. In conventional planar PSCs, the influence of surface treatment of the compact TiO2 layer with TiCl4 and UV (O3) on the performance was also investigated.


The barrier at the contact interface between Fermi levels of various electrode metals (e.g., Ag, Au) and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of the organic material (PCBM) still exists in organic optoelectronic devices, leading to poor electron injection and extraction. Hence, introducing appropriate interfacial materials to improve the electronic and electrical properties of the interfaces between the light-harvesting perovskite layer and the charge-collecting electrode is essential to improve the performances of inverted PSCs.


ZnO (ref. 140–143) and TiO2 are well investigated n-type interfacial layers for inverted planar PSCs. Snaith et al. introduced a thin compact TiO2 film between PC61BM and Al electrode and an efficiency of up to 9.8% has been obtained with CH3NH3PbI3−xClx as the absorber. Recently, Ryu et al. reported that PC61BM was successfully introduced into conventional planar PSCs, yielding an overall PCE of 15.3% with a large hysteresis but a steady-state efficiency of 13.9%. Moreover, a thin dense TiO2 layer in conjunction with the PCBM layer enabled fabrication of a flexible device with a PCE of 11.1%. ZnO has also been applied as an ETL in inverted planar PSCs. Meanwhile, the well-established ZnO cathode interface layer was also used for optimizing the contact properties of the PCBM/Ag interface. Min et al. introduced a thickness-insensitive perylene-diimide (PDINO) layer and ZnO layer to effectively modify the PCBM/Ag interface, and achieved PCEs of 14% and 11.3%, respectively. Bai et al. also improved the cathode interface by integrating ZnO nanocrystals, and thus the device achieved a high PCE of 15.9% with high reproducibility and excellent ambient stability. The ZnO interlayer could enhance the electrical contact, and contribute greatly to the stability of PSCs.


Bathocuproine (BCP) has widely been used as an electron transport/hole blocking layer in OLEDs and OPVs, and a thermally evaporated C60/BCP double layer could modify the cathode contact and help realize efficient PSCs. A novel double fullerene layer structure is adopted, which has a better passivation effect on the traps in perovskite. And this method enabled the device with C60/BCP double fullerene layers to achieve a PCE of 12.2%. Liang et al. employed a bis-C60 surfactant as an efficient electron-selective interfacial layer between the PC61BM layer and metal electrode to align the energy levels. A similar concept was also employed by Chen et al. who used a C60/bathophenanthroline (Bphen) ETL to modify the Ca/Ag electrode, and a remarkable 15.4% PCE with high productivity was achieved. Some other interfacial materials were also used to improve the contact between the fullerene layer and top electrode, such as LiF and polyelectrolytes (e.g., PEIE, P3TMAHT, PFN). A new amino-functionalized polymer, PN4N, could reduce the contact resistance and suppress interfacial charge recombination as an efficient cathode interlayer, and therefore led to a remarkable enhancement of PCE from 12.4% to 15.0%. A TIPD buffer layer showed remarkable ability to improve charge extraction and suppress charge recombination. Chemical structures of some organic interfacial materials are shown in Fig. 10.


A combination of a low work function metal (Ca, Ba) with Al or Ag is preferred to reduce the work function of the electrode, which is essential for performance enhancement. Alkali metal salts (e.g., LiF (ref. 148 and 149)) are widely used as cathodes/ETLs to facilitate electron injection in OLEDs. It was reported that the electron extraction was improved by the reduced energy barrier through inserting LiF layer in organic solar cells. For PSCs, introducing a LiF buffer layer could simultaneously improve the FF and Jsc of the device. Meanwhile, the leakage current under reverse bias can be suppressed using an LiF interlayer.

For the ETL–perovskite interface, modification with some interfacial materials can effectively passivate the trap states at the interface and reduce the recombination. Time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) and steady state photoluminescence are usually employed to investigate the ability of extracting photoinduced electrons from the perovskite to ETL. As shown in Fig. 11a, PL quenching is slightly enhanced, which was positively related to the better electron extraction ability of TiO2 from the perovskite layer via a modification of PEO. Fig. 11b also illustrates that improved PL quenching intensity is consistent with the better electron extraction property of the C60-SAM monolayer. Similar results have also been obtained in the case of ZnO–ETL. It can be clearly observed from Fig. 11c and d that deposition of C3-SAM on the ZnO layer could significantly reduce the number of trap states at the interfaces between ZnO and the perovskite layer.

Long-term operational stability is also an important issue for PSCs. Many factors influence the stability of a perovskite solar cell, such as ambient air stability (moisture, oxygen), thermal stability (perovskite, HTM), and ultraviolet (UV) light stability. Some studies have focused on improving the stability of PSCs by introducing moisture resistant layers, such as polymer-functionalized single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWNTs) embedded in an insulating polymer matrix, a thin Al2O3 blocking/buffer layer, hydrophobic hole transporting layers and so on. Besides, the widely used mesostructured TiO2, Al2O3 and ZrO2 are also ideal protective structures for improving the environmental stability of a device. Previous work reported that the presence of mesostructured TiO2 could be helpful for device stability, and a device without mp-TiO2 exhibits profound sensitivity to ambient conditions. Enhancement of PSC stability in ambient air can also be achieved by controlling the thickness of the mesoporous TiO2 layer (Fig. 12a). These results demonstrated that the mesoporous TiO2 layer could prevent the perovskite layer from being damaged by moisture and provide a stable charge transportation channel. Very recently, it has been reported that solution-processed ZnO as the ETL in inverted planar PSCs can apparently improve the stability of a device. Here, the dense ZnO layer behaves as a protective layer, and thus prevents degradation of the device. In contrast, a device with an organic charge transport layer (PCBM) shows poor stability, which may be owing to self-degradation in air through the absorption of oxygen/water (Fig. 12b).


Anomalous photocurrent hysteresis was observed in many organometal trihalide PSCs, which may originate from several root causes, including the ferroelectric effect, ion motion and charge accumulation. Some observations showed that I–V hysteresis depended on the p- and n-type contact materials and mesoscopic versus planar structures. Park et al. investigated the effects of perovskite crystal size and mesoscopic TiO2 layer thickness on the hysteresis behavior. It was found that the I–V hysteresis could be substantially suppressed with a large CH3NH3PbI3 crystal and the presence of mp-TiO2. Trap states on the surface and grain boundaries of the perovskite materials were shown to be the origin of the I–V hysteresis. The perovskite–PCBM hybrid process and in situ passivation mechanism were discussed. DFT analysis and spectroscopy results indicate that PCBM plays a passivating role at the iodide-rich trap sites on the surfaces of these grains (Fig. 13). Mitigation of the defect states of perovskite film with PCBM passivation could reduce the I–V hysteresis. Various methods have been employed to reduce the hysteresis in planar PSCs which may originate from the trap states existing at the perovskite/ETL interfaces. Xing's work indicated that an electron transfer potential barrier, which originated from the strong interfacial dipole formed at the CH3NH3PbI3/TiO2 interface, may result in large I–V hysteresis in the planar CH3NH3PbI3/TiO2 devices. With the measurement of the time-resolved photoluminescent (PL) decay, results showed that the transfer of charge carriers from MAPbI3 into the PCBM electron conductor is faster than that to the TiO2 electron conductor. Compared to that of normal planar PSCs, the reduced I–V hysteresis of inverted planar structure PSCs could be attributed to a more balanced electron flux (Je) and hole flux (Jh), and a reduced number of surface traps. However, regular planar PSCs employing organic ETLs (C60, PCBM) showed a mild hysteresis phenomenon. For solving the serious I–V hysteresis issue in conventional planar PSCs, modifying the surface of TiO2 or WOx ETLs with fullerene or fullerene SAM molecules is an efficient method (Fig. 13c). Zr–TiO2 electrodes and pyridine treatment give rise to an increase in the overall PCE and a decrease in hysteresis (Fig. 13a). Engineering the band alignment between the perovskite layer and electron selective contact layer by using ALD-SnO2 can be an effective method to retard hysteresis behavior (Fig. 11b).


In this review article, we have given an overview of the efforts focused on the optimization of ETLs and modification of interfaces between the ETL and perovskite layer as well as interfaces between the ETL and metal electrode. Various electron transport materials have been developed and applied in PSCs, including some metal oxides such as TiO2, ZnO, SnO2, and WOx, as well as fullerene and its derivatives. Since charge extraction, transfer, and recombination mainly occur at the interfaces of a cell, the interfacial layer between the perovskite layer and the bottom (or top) electrode needs to be rationally engineered. The interfacial defect density should be minimized and the energy levels need to be closely aligned by introducing efficient interfacial materials. For conventional PSCs, a uniform and pinhole-free ETL is necessary for high-performance perovskite-based thin-film solar cells. Meanwhile, suitable work function, good electron transport ability and a low recombination rate at the interface are also important for efficient PSCs. The charge transport properties of the TiO2-based ETL can be significantly improved with appropriate substitution of Nb5+, Y3+, Zr4+, Al3+, etc. This approach can be extended to other systems, such as ZnO and SnO2, through systematically engineering nanocrystals with selected additives or dopants. In addition, a thin wide bandgap metal oxide (e.g., MgO, Y2O3, Al2O3) can be introduced as an interfacial layer to enhance the cell performance. Interfacial modifications with functional SAMs between the perovskite absorbers and charge-transporting interlayers are very important in enhancing charge extraction and overall performance. Other interfacial materials, such as hydrophobic thiols, PEO, and HOCO–R–NH3+I− insertion layer, are also applied for interfacial modification. For inverted planar PSCs, C60 and its derivatives, such as PC61BM, ICBA and PC71BM, are ideal candidates as ETLs. Moreover, many interfacial materials were employed to modify the fullerene/electrode interface for better energy level alignment, improvement of electron selectivity at the cathode by efficiently blocking holes, and enhancement of interfacial charge transport properties.

In summary, optimization of the ETL and its related interfaces is an efficient method to enhance the performance of PSCs, such as efficiency improvement, stability enhancement as well as hysteresis reduction.

This work was financially supported by the National High Technology Research and Development Program (No. 2015AA050601), the National Basic Research Program (No.2011CB933300) of China, the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 61376013, 91433203, and J1210061), the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (BK20131186), and Suzhou Science and Technology Bureau (SYG201449).


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016