 DOI: 10.1039/C5NR02371H
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 10039-10049


Belete Atomsa
Gonfa
,

Mee Rahn
Kim
,

Nazar
Delegan
,

Ana C.
Tavares
,

Ricardo
Izquierdo
,

Nianqiang
Wu
,

My Ali
El Khakani
 and 

Dongling
Ma
*

Institut National de la Recherche Scientifique (INRS), Centre-Énergie, Matériaux et Télécommunications, 1650 Boulevard Lionel-Boulet, Varennes, QC, Canada J3X 1S2. E-mail: ma@emt.inrs.ca; Fax: +(450) 929-8102; Tel: +(514) 228-6920

Département d'informatique, University of Quebec at Montreal (UQAM), Case postale 8888, succursale Centre-ville, Montréal, Québec H3C 3P8, Canada

Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, West Virginia University, Morgantown, WV 26506-6106, USA

Received
13th April 2015
, Accepted 8th May 2015
First published on 11th May 2015
Near infrared (NIR) PbS quantum dots (QDs) have attracted significant research interest in solar cell applications as they offer several advantages, such as tunable band gaps, capability of absorbing NIR photons, low cost solution processability and high potential for multiple exciton generation. Nonetheless, reports on solar cells based on NIR PbS/CdS core–shell QDs, which are in general more stable and better passivated than PbS QDs and thus more promising for solar cell applications, remain very rare. Herein we report high efficiency bulk heterojunction QD solar cells involving hydrothermally grown TiO2 nanorod arrays and PbS/CdS core–shell QDs processed in air (except for a device thermal annealing step) with a photoresponse extended to wavelengths >1200 nm and with a power conversion efficiency (PCE) as high as 4.43%. This efficiency was achieved by introducing a thin, sputter-deposited, uniform TiO2 seed layer to improve the interface between the TiO2 nanorod arrays and the front electrode, by optimizing TiO2 nanorod length and by conducting QD annealing treatment to enhance charge carrier transport. It was found that the effect of the seed layer became more obvious when the TiO2 nanorods were longer. Although photocurrent did not change much, both open circuit voltage and fill factor clearly changed with TiO2 nanorod length. This was mainly attributed to the variation of charge transport and recombination processes, as evidenced by series and shunt resistance studies. The optimal PCE was obtained at the nanorod length of ∼450 nm. Annealing is shown to further increase the PCE by ∼18%, because of the improvement of charge carrier transport in the devices as evidenced by considerably increased photocurrent. Our results clearly demonstrate the potential of the PbS/CdS core–shell QDs for the achievement of high PCE, solution processable and NIR responsive QD solar cells.

Colloidal quantum dots (QDs) are promising for applications in third generation solar cells due to their potential to achieve high power conversion efficiency (PCE) at low cost. In general they offer the following advantages: (1) low temperature solution processability, enabling solar cell fabrication on inexpensive flexible substrates and large scale roll-to-roll fabrication, (2) size tunable band gaps, allowing better matching with other materials and/or the solar spectrum, (3) possibility of facile fabrication of multi-junction solar cells, and (4) high potential for efficient multiple exciton generation and hot electron extraction, promising to surpass the Shockley–Queisser limit of 31%. Near-infrared (NIR) QDs are particularly attractive since they harvest not only higher energy photons, but also NIR photons, which account for ∼50% of solar irradiation and are largely wasted in most solar cells. Among all types of QD solar cells, NIR QDs have led to the highest certified PCE of ∼8.6%.

Rapid progress in QD based solar cells has been made in the past several years, mainly on device architecture designing and QDs surface engineering. Several types of QD based solar cell architectures, such as QD-sensitized solar cells, hybrid QD-polymer solar cells, Schottky junction solar cells and p–n heterojunction solar cells have been studied with p–n heterojunction solar cells being so far the leading one in terms of PCE. In these devices, p-type QDs like PbS and PbSe are combined with n-type materials like TiO2, ZnO, Bi2S3 and CdS to form a heterojunction. The built in electric field at the junction drives the separation and transport of photogenerated charge carriers. However, since the charge carrier diffusion length in QD film is small (in the range of 10–100 nm), the thickness of QD layer (e.g. PbS QDs) used in the planar heterojunction configuration is limited to about 250 nm, which is the sum of the depletion width and the electron diffusion length in the quasi-neutral region of QD film. Therefore, light absorption is limited. The use of porous n-type semiconductors like Bi2S3, ZnO and TiO2 allows the infiltration of QDs to form bulk heterojunction, and thus enabling more QD adsorption without compromising for charge carrier transport. In this regard, one-dimensional (1D) nanostructures of n-type semiconductor materials aligned vertically on an electrode substrate are also very attractive as easy QD infiltration has been reported. In addition, they offer extra advantages by directing charge transport towards the electrode and enabling designing mechanically flexible devices. Low cost, wet chemical synthesis has been developed to grow these nanostructures on different types of electrodes, and even on relatively large area, which holds high potential for scaling up, highly relevant for practical applications.
On the other hand QD surface engineering has been playing a pivotal role in improving the performance of QD based solar cells. The surface engineering of QDs has focused on the replacement of the long chain ligands capping QDs with shorter ones, which ideally can decrease the inter-particle distance (and thus improving charge carrier transport in the QD film) and can bind strongly to and well passivate the QD surface (and thus reducing the trap states in the QD film). Recently important progress has been made by applying inorganic halide ligands to QDs, which was shown to significantly decrease the number of traps and thereby improve overall solar cell performance. Recognizing the importance of surface passivation of QDs in QD based solar cells, the design and application of type-I core–shell QDs could be an interesting alternative. In such QDs both anionic and cationic dangling bonds are in principle passivated. In addition, considerably increased stability, attributed to the presence of a robust, inorganic shell, represents another attractive feature for solar cells.
However, some concerns may arise from the charge carrier transfer properties as the shell could act as a barrier. Interestingly, Dworak et al. found that electrons generated inside the photoexcited CdSe core could be extracted from type-I CdSe/CdS core–shell QDs with their transfer rate strongly depending on the shell thickness. We studied the charge transfer behavior between PbS/CdS core–shell QDs and carbon nanotubes as well as that between PbS/CdS core–shell QDs and molecular charge carrier acceptors, and we observed similar phenomena. It was also found to hold true for the charge transfer between PbS/CdS core–shell QDs and metal oxide semiconductors like TiO2 and SnO2. We, for the first time, demonstrated the advantages of colloidal PbS/CdS core–shell QDs in bulk heterojunction solar cells, including higher PCE and air processability, as compared to similar PbS QD solar cells fabricated and characterized under the same conditions with the only exception being that the latter had to be processed under inert atmosphere in a glove box. However, the PCE of 2.14% achieved at that time was not very high and device optimization was highly desired. While preparing this manuscript, we noticed another group also reported colloidal PbS/CdS core–shell QD solar cells, but with an opposite structure and different n-type metal oxide that had a different morphology, i.e., involving colloidal ZnO nanocrystal film in contact with the back contact, while the QD layer in contact with the front electrode. They demonstrated that higher PCE was possible with appropriate ligand exchange. It is important to underline that despite the significant recent research done on UV-visible QD and/or NIR PbS QD based solar cells, the investigation of colloidal NIR PbS/CdS core–shell QD based solar cells is a novel alternative. Very scarce work has been reported so far on the use of NIR PbS/CdS core–shell QDs in solar cell applications, not to mention systematic study of the effect of important parameters, such as TiO2 nanorod length, on the core–shell QD solar cell performance.
In the current work, by introducing a thin, uniform, sputter deposited TiO2 seed layer, optimizing TiO2 nanorod array length, and performing mild thermal annealing, we are able to double the PCE of the air-processed bulk heterojunction solar cell devices fabricated by combining colloidal PbS/CdS core–shell QDs with hydrothermally grown rutile TiO2 nanorod arrays and achieve a high PCE of 4.43%. Short circuit current density (Jsc), open circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (FF), AM1.5 PCE, series resistance (Rs), and shunt resistance (Rsh) were compared and analyzed in detail in order to understand the effects of the seed layer, TiO2 nanorod arrays length, and annealing on device performance. It was found that the beneficial effect of the TiO2 nanorod/electrode interface modification with the introduction of the seed layer became more obvious at longer nanorods. The optimal TiO2 nanorod arrays length of ∼450 nm was the result of the interplay of multiple factors such as the variation of the charge carrier recombination at the QD/TiO2 interface and of charge transport resistance with nanorod length. The considerable improvement of the device performance with annealing was attributed to the enhancement of charge carrier transport in the QD layer due to better inter-dot coupling.

Titanium(IV) butoxide (reagent grade, 97%), concentrated HCl (ACS reagent, ca. 37%), Pb(OAc)2·3H2O (≥99.99%), oleic acid (OA) (≥99% (GC)), 1-octadecene (ODE) (technical grade, 90%), bis(trimethylsilyl) sulfide (synthesis grade), trioctylphosphine (technical grade, 90%), methanol (anhydrous, 99.8%), CdO (≥99.99% trace metals basis), octane (puriss. p.a., ≥99.0% (GC)), decane (anhydrous, ≥99%), 3-mercaptopropionic acid (≥99%) and MoO3 powder (ACS reagent, ≥99.5%), were purchased from Sigma Aldrich and used as received without any purification. FTO glass substrates (TEC 15, R = 12–14 Ohm sq−1) were purchased from MTI corporation. Hexane (certified ACS) and toluene (certified ACS) were purchased from Fisher Scientific Company.


A ∼40 nm thick TiO2 seed layer was deposited on a cleaned FTO glass substrate by sputtering following a modified procedure from ref. 37. The deposition was done by sputtering a TiO2 target (3 inch in diameter) using an RF (13.56 MHz) magnetron sputtering system at a constant power density of 7.7 W cm−2. Prior to deposition, the chamber was cryo-pumped to a base pressure of 2 × 10−8 Torr. High purity Ar (99.999%) and O2 (99.995%) gases were then introduced into the chamber. The gas flow rates were monitored to keep a constant pressure of 1.4 mTorr in the chamber during the sputter-deposition process. In order to counteract sputtering effect on deposited TiO2 film stoichiometry, the relative oxygen mass flow rate ratio (i.e.; [O2]/([O2] + [Ar]) was kept at 15%. The FTO substrates were mounted on a holder located off-axis at a distance of 20 cm from the target, and heated by a quartz lamp heater of which temperature was kept constant at 300 °C during deposition (which corresponded to an on-substrate temperature of ∼200 °C). The thickness of the TiO2 films was in situ monitored by means of a calibrated quartz-crystal microbalance and ex situ measured through cross-section scanning electron microscopy (SEM) observations. No post acceleration voltage was intentionally applied to the substrates during the sputter-deposition process (they were nonetheless subjected to a built-in plasma sheath bias of ∼−13 V during their growth).

TiO2 nanorod arrays with different length were grown by hydrothermal technique on plain FTO glass substrates as well as those covered by the seed layer. First FTO glass substrates were cleaned by sonicating in isopropanol, ethanol and pure water for 15 minutes each before drying under airflow. The precursor solution for the growth of TiO2 nanorod arrays was prepared by dissolving 1 ml of titanium(IV) butoxide, added dropwise while stirring, in a mixture of 20 ml of pure water and 20 ml of concentrated HCl (ca. 37%). Two FTO glass substrates (1 inch by 1 inch) were placed at an angle in a 23 ml Teflon cup with the conducting sides facing the wall and 12 ml of the precursor solution was added. The Teflon cup was placed inside a stainless steel autoclave, which was then sealed tightly and put in a preheated oven at 150 °C. The autoclave was kept at 150 °C for 1 hour to 20 hours to obtain TiO2 nanorods of different length. Finally, the autoclave was cooled down naturally in air to room temperature. The FTO substrates with the grown TiO2 nanorod arrays were then taken out and washed thoroughly with dilute HCl solution first, then with pure water, and subsequently dried under airflow followed by heating at 80 °C for 30 minutes in an oven. The growth of TiO2 nanorod arrays was evident visually as white film could be observed on the FTO glass.

PbS/CdS core–shell QDs were synthesized from PbS QDs and Cd precursor via cation exchange technique following our previous work. The PbS QDs were synthesized according to the procedure from ref. 40 and 41. Typically, 760 mg of Pb(OAc)2·3H2O, 2.4 ml of OA and 15 ml of ODE were added to a 50 ml three neck round bottom flask and then heated to 150 °C for 1 h while being stirred and purged with N2 flow. It was then cooled under vacuum to 130 °C and the N2 flow was recovered. Subsequently, 2 ml of mixture of bis(trimethylsilyl) sulfide and trioctylphosphine (1:10 volume ratio) was quickly injected into the flask and the reaction temperature was decreased to 100 °C quickly. The reaction was allowed to last for 5 minutes and then stopped by quenching with cold water. The QDs were then dispersed in toluene and purified after being kept at 4 °C for two days by repeated addition of methanol followed by centrifugation and re-dispersion in toluene. Finally, the QDs were dispersed in toluene for the next step of preparation, i.e., the synthesis of core–shell QDs.

For PbS/CdS core–shell QD synthesis, the Cd precursor was first prepared by heating a mixture of CdO (25 mg), OA (24 mL) and ODE (40 mL) to 255 °C under N2 for 20 min while stirring. The obtained clear solution was cooled to 155 °C under vacuum for 15 min and the N2 flux was restored. PbS QDs solution in toluene (20 mL, absorbance: ∼12 at the first excitonic absorption peak) was further diluted to 150 ml by toluene in round bottom flask and bubbled with N2 for 30 min and heated rapidly to 90 °C. While stirring, the Cd/OA mixture was injected and the reaction was carried out at 90 °C and stopped by submerging the round bottom flask in cold water. The PbS/CdS core–shell QDs were purified 3 times and suspended in mixture of octane and decane (3:1 volume ratio) for solar cell fabrication.

Bulk heterojunction solar cell devices were fabricated via air-ambient, layer-by-layer spin coating technique on TiO2 nanorod arrays films. Each layer was spin coated by dropping 200 μl of the QD suspension on a 1 inch by 1 inch substrate and rotating at 2500 rpm for 20 seconds. Ligand exchange was performed three times for each layer by treating it with 10% v/v solution of 3-mercaptopropionic acid in methanol for 1 minute and subsequently washing it with methanol and hexane. For studying annealing effect, devices were kept in a tubular furnace at 110 °C under nitrogen flow for 30 minutes. Finally ∼20 nm thick MoO3 layer followed by ∼40 nm Au was deposited by thermal evaporation of MoO3 powder and Au pellets from alumina coated tungsten wire baskets through a shadow mask of 4 by 4 circular arrays with circular aperture of 4 mm in diameter, resulting in photoactive area of about 0.13 cm2. The pressure in the vacuum chamber was set at <10−6 mbar and the distance between the source and the sample was ∼22.5 cm.


SEM images were taken with a JEOL JSM-6300F SEM. Transmission electron microscope (TEM) images and selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern were taken by a JEOL 2100F TEM. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern of TiO2 nanorod arrays was acquired using a Philips X'pert diffractometer using Cu-Kα radiation source. Absorption spectra were recorded using a Cary 5000 UV-Vis-NIR spectrophotometer (Varian). Fluorescence spectra were acquired with a Fluorolog®-3 system (Horiba Jobin Yvon) with excitation wavelength of 670 nm.

Solar cell devices were characterized by conducting current–voltage (I–V) measurements using an Agilent B2901A instrument in ambient atmosphere in dark and under calibrated AM1.5 simulated sunlight from an Oriel Sol3A Class AAA Solar Simulator (Oriel Instruments, Newport Corporation). The external quantum efficiency (EQE) of the solar cell devices was measured using Oriel® IQE-200™ quantum efficiency measurement system, by scanning from 380 nm to 1250 nm with a 10 nm resolution.

The TiO2 seed layer of ∼40 nm in thickness was sputter deposited onto FTO substrates. The film appeared quite smooth, composed of uniformly distributed small particles (Fig. 1a). Such uniformity is considered beneficial for the uniform growth of TiO2 nanorods in the next step. Based on the XRD study (Fig. 1b), both rutile and anatase TiO2 phases were present in the seed layer.

TiO2 nanorod arrays were grown on the seed layer via hydrothermal synthesis, which involved the controlled hydrolysis of titanium precursor in concentrated HCl solution. Their length was controlled by varying growth time. Fig. 2a–f shows cross-sectional and top view SEM images of the TiO2 nanorod arrays of different length. The array structure seemed to be more aligned and regular at longer lengths (please note at the edge some nanorods appeared to be relatively tilted due to the disturbance during SEM sample preparation). When the nanorods were relatively short, e.g., at 250 nm, they were less densely packed and the growth was not vertical, but at random angles. As a consequence, the structure was more open in this case, as supported by the top view SEM image (Fig. 2b). The XRD pattern (Fig. S1), high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) images and SAED pattern (Fig. S2) of the nanorod arrays confirm that the TiO2 nanorods were of rutile crystal structure, most likely single crystalline with oriented preferential growth direction of (001), in good agreement with literature reports for TiO2 nanorods grown with similar technique. The crystalline structure of the TiO2 nanorods was thus not affected by the presence of the anatase phase in the seed layer. For comparison, the TiO2 nanorods were also grown on plain FTO substrates. No discernable difference was noticed in terms of both morphology and crystalline structure, suggesting the evenness of the surface of the seed layer (Fig. 2i and j). Although the presence of the seed layer did not considerably interfere with the nanorod growth, it was observed that when the nanorods became quite long (≥2 μm), they easily peeled off from the substrates when the seed layer was absent. The presence of the seed layer clearly enhanced the adhesion of the nanorods to the underlying substrate and enhanced the TiO2 nanorods/bottom electrode interface, which is expected to improve the overall solar cell performance.

PbS/CdS core–shell QDs were synthesized via partial cation exchange of PbS QDs with Cd ions. Fig. 2g and S3 show the TEM image of PbS/CdS core–shell QDs; the visible-NIR absorption and photoluminescence (PL) emission spectra of parent PbS QDs and PbS/CdS core–shell QDs dispersed in toluene are shown in Fig. 2h. The QDs of ∼3 nm in diameter were well dispersed. Because the shell was very thin, it is difficult to directly resolve the core size and shell thickness from TEM images in our case. We therefore resorted to optical techniques. It is known that the diameter (d) of the PbS QDs and the PbS cores of the PbS/CdS core–shell QDs can be estimated from the equation:Eg = 0.41 + 1/(0.0252d2 + 0.283d), where Eg is the band gap of the QDs that can be conveniently derived from the wavelength of the first excitonic absorption peak. Accordingly based on our calculations, the parent PbS QDs, which were used to synthesize the PbS/CdS core–shell QDs, had a band gap of ∼1.27 eV and an average diameter of ∼3.2 nm. From the first excitonic absorption peak at ∼925 nm, the resulting PbS/CdS core–shell QDs were estimated to have a band gap of ∼1.34 eV and PbS core diameter of ∼3.0 nm. Since the overall size of the QDs remains the same during the cation exchange process for the formation of the core–shell structure, the CdS shell thickness was calculated by subtracting the radius of the PbS core from the radius of the parent QDs, which yielded CdS shell thickness of ∼0.1 nm in our case. This shell thickness is suitable for solar cell applications even though the thicker shell may act as a barrier for charge transfer.


The fabrication of solid state QD solar cells involved layer-by-layer QD deposition via spin coating and ligand exchange that replaced longer oleic acid ligands with short chain 3-mercaptopropionic acid ligands. Based on our recent report, the use of PbS/CdS core–shell QDs enabled easier processability of solar cell devices in the air, instead of a glove box. To be more specific, PbS/CdS core–shell QDs based soar cells processed in ambient atmosphere showed a maximum PCE 40% higher than that can be achieved by PbS QDs based solar cells processed in a glove box, under otherwise same fabrication conditions. It clearly suggests the advantages of the PbS/CdS core–shell QDs in solar cell applications, including stability and reduced surface defect states. In addition, it was found that ∼300 nm thick QD film on the top of TiO2 nanorod arrays yielded the maximum PCE. Therefore in the current work the QD layer thickness on the top of TiO2 nanorod arrays was fixed at around 300 nm and further, all the devices were fabricated in the air.

The solar cell devices were comprised of PbS/CdS core–shell QDs spin coated onto the TiO2 nanorod arrays grown on the TiO2 seed layer or on bare FTO substrates. Representative cross-sectional SEM images of the PbS/CdS core–shell QD film combined with the TiO2 nanorod arrays grown on the seed/FTO substrate are shown in Fig. 3a and in Fig. S4. In addition to forming a compact QD film on the top of the nanorod arrays, the QDs appeared to infiltrate into the empty spaces between the nanorods to form the bulk heterojunction, as previously reported. The level of infiltration was quite high when the length of the TiO2 nanorods were 250 nm or shorter. As the short nanorod arrays had a more open structure (Fig. 2a and b), the QDs seemed to fully infiltrate into the nanorod arrays (Fig. S4a). The device fabrication was completed by sequentially depositing a thermally evaporated thin MoO3 hole extracting layer and gold back electrode on the top of the QD films. The schematic representation of typical bulk heterojunction devices investigated in this work is shown in Fig. 3b. All devices were fabricated and characterized in air.
The energy diagram of the involved components is shown in Fig. 3c. When the solar cell device is illuminated through the FTO glass substrate, the QD film absorbs photons and generate excitons (electron–hole pairs). The photogenerated excitons dissociate into electrons and holes due to the presence of the built-in electric field developed in the depleted region at the interface of the p-type QDs and n-type TiO2 nanorod arrays, and their conduction band offset as well. The electrons are transported to the FTO electrode via the rutile nanorods, while the holes are collected by the gold back electrode. The thin MoO3 layer between the QD film and the gold electrode facilitates the efficient extraction of holes by the gold electrode and prevents back recombination.

Bulk heterojunction devices were constructed on the thin TiO2 seed layer as well as on the bare FTO substrate for comparison. As shown in Fig. 1b, the TiO2 seed layer had mixed rutile and anatase phases of TiO2. Theoretical and experimental studies on the band alignment between rutile and anatase TiO2 have shown that the electron affinity of anatase TiO2 is higher than that of rutile and electron transfer from rutile to anatase is thus favorable. This means that the presence of the anatase phase in the seed layer in principle will not introduce any additional barrier for electron transport, rather, it may even facilitate the electron transport from the TiO2 nanorods to the front electrode.

The performance of solar cells were studied at various TiO2 nanorod length of 100 nm, 250 nm, 450 nm, 650 nm, 950 nm, 1.2 μm and 2 μm and was found to largely depend on TiO2 nanorod length. For figure clarity, we only show the J–V curves of three devices (nanorod length: 100 nm, 450 nm and 1.2 μm) under AM 1.5 simulated sunlight, with the presence of the seed layer, in Fig. 4a. Basically, the PCE first increased with increasing TiO2 nanorod length and then decreased. The highest PCE of 3.76% was obtained at the TiO2 nanorod length of ∼450 nm. It could be the result of the interplay of several factors, whose positive or negative effect on the device performance varied with TiO2 nanorod length.
In order to better understand the effect of TiO2 nanorod length on solar cell performance, major performance parameters Jsc, Voc and FF were extracted from the J–V curves under AM1.5 illumination and are shown as a function of TiO2 nanorod length along with PCE data in Fig. 5. It can be clearly seen that Jsc did not change significantly, whereas Voc and FF varied with TiO2 nanorod length, and the PCE followed a similar trend. This is in agreement with the report on the dependence of the performance of solid state perovskite sensitized solar cells on the thickness of TiO2 film, where the Voc and FF decreased with TiO2 film thickness while the Jsc was less affected.Voc first slightly increased until the nanorods reached 450 nm and then showed the trend of decrease with increasing nanorod length, which could be caused by the increase in charge recombination sites in the junction due to the introduction of more defects in longer nanorods. As for shorter nanorods, the enlarged QD/TiO2 interface arising from a higher level of QD infiltration must account for the increased charge carrier recombination events, and thus the decrease in Voc. The degree of variation in FF was much larger, although it followed the similar trend. When the TiO2 nanorod length was decreased from 2 μm to 450 nm, average FF showed a considerable increase of ∼40%, whereas average Voc was only improved by ∼4%. Therefore, FF was more closely associated with the PCE variation of ∼56% when the nanorod length changed from 2 μm to 450 nm. FF is known to be influenced by several factors, including charge carrier recombination and charge transport resistance.

R
s and Rsh were thus further extracted from J–V curves. Basically Rsh exhibited the same trend with TiO2 nanorod length as Voc and FF, while Rs presented the opposite trend. The average Rs dropped from 17.8 Ω cm2 (100 nm nanorod arrays) to 6.0 Ω cm2 (450 nm nanorod arrays) and then increased to 17.1 Ω cm2 (2 μm nanorod arrays). In contrast, Rsh reached the maximum at the nanorod length of 450 nm, reflecting the charge carrier recombination was minimal at this length. The increases of Rs with TiO2 nanorod length can be easily understood. However the increase toward shorter nanorods below 450 nm was not usual. In our case, it could be related to significant QD infiltration into the array structure, which increased the overall Rs. Based on these analyses, it is clear that the change of the nanorod length affected the overall charge carrier recombination at the QD/TiO2 interface and the Rs of the photoactive layer, which were the causes of the variation of Voc and FF, and eventually the overall PCE.
The effect of nanorod length on the optical absorption in QDs, and thus PCE, cannot be ruled out either. Although longer nanorod arrays are believed to enhance the absorption of photons by scattering more light into the QD film, it has to be noted that the growth of TiO2 nanorod arrays via hydrothermal synthesis involves the formation of a continuous TiO2 film before it separates into individual nanorods and the longer nanorods can become more fused at the bottom. As a consequence, longer nanorod arrays can prevent some higher energy photons from reaching the QDs. The optical transmittance spectra of the TiO2 nanorod arrays of different length are shown in ESI (Fig. S5). With increasing length, less photons were transmitted. In addition, as expected, the difference in the transmittance was much bigger at shorter wavelengths. The optimal performance at 450 nm represented the best tradeoff between the light absorption and the charge collection (determined in part by charge transport and recombination as discussed above). But in any case, the nanorod length induced variation of photons reaching the QDs is not considered to be a dominant factor for the nanorod length dependence of PCE (otherwise, the PCE would monotonically decrease with nanorod length). In addition, it should be noted that such results only yielded “qualitative” meaning. After QD spin coating, far more complex interactions could arise due to QD infiltration as some photons can be caught by QDs distributed inside the TiO2 nanorod arrays before even escaping from the TiO2 layer altogether.

Fig. 4b shows the typical EQE spectrum of the solar cell devices containing 450 nm long nanorods grown on the seed layer, along with the absorption spectrum of PbS/CdS core–shell QD film spin coated on a quartz substrate (ligand exchange was also done in the same way as for solar cell fabrication). The EQE basically followed the absorption spectrum of the QDs, showing a peak at the same wavelength (∼967 nm) of the first excitonic absorption peak of the QDs and reached a maximum of about 75% at a shorter wavelength of ∼400 nm. It is evident that the photoresponse of the solar cell devices was mainly due to the absorption of light by the QDs, which allowed the photogeneration of current to extend to wavelengths of up to 1200 nm, clearly demonstrating the capability of harvesting the NIR part of the solar spectrum for photocurrent generation with NIR-absorbing QDs.
For comparison, solar cell devices were also fabricated on bare FTO glass substrates without the presence of the TiO2 seed layer. Table S1 summarizes major photovoltaic parameters at various nanorod lengths. The maximum PCE, although slightly lower than that with the seed layer (3.56% vs. 3.76%), was again achieved with 450 nm long nanorods. In addition, like the devices containing the seed layer, Jsc essentially did not change much with nanorod length. Moreover, these devices generally showed a similar trend in the variation of Voc and FF with nanorod length as in the case where the seed layer was involved (Fig. 6). Larger difference was noticed at longer TiO2 nanorod arrays. Instead of showing the gradual decrease with nanorod length changing from 450 nm to 2 μm, the drop of Voc without the seed layer clearly showed two stages (Fig. 6a). It decreased sharply as the TiO2 nanorod arrays length varied from 650 to 950 nm and then somewhat levelled off. Such a sudden drop should not be related to the gradual deterioration of charge carrier recombination with the length of the TiO2 nanorods themselves, but rather should be due to a dramatic change, quite likely due to the introduction of considerable amounts of trap states at the TiO2 nanorod-FTO interface. The interfacial adhesion between the FTO substrate and the TiO2 nanorod arrays could degrade when the nanorod length was beyond a certain value, as supported by our observation of easy peeling of longer TiO2 nanorod arrays and also reported by other groups. Such interface weakening was reported to result in the increase of charge carrier recombination sites. Theoretically, Voc of such solar cells is determined by the difference in quasi Fermi levels of the QDs and the TiO2 under illumination. However in reality the presence of trap states can reduce Voc from its theoretical limit. In addition, in the current case, average Voc changed by ∼9%, when the nanorod length varied from 2 μm to 450 nm, which was much less than the variation of ∼40% in average FF. Hence, for the devices with no seed layer, FF was once again a dominant factor for the variation of PCE by ∼60%.
In comparing the devices with and without the seed layer, the overall improvement of the former devices in Voc, FF and PCE at different nanorod length could also be reasonably attributed to the modification of the TiO2/FTO interface, which suppresses charge carrier recombination and facilitates charge transport and collection. Once again, this was supported by the decrease in Rs and increase in Rsh upon introduction of the seed layer in devices of similar TiO2 nanorod length. For example, in devices involving 450 nm long TiO2 nanorods the average Rs decreased from 8.2 to 6.0 Ω cm2 and the Rsh increased from 104.1 to 153.2 Ω cm2 by introducing the TiO2 seed layer. In devices involving 2 μm long TiO2 nanorod arrays the average Rs decreased from 17.1 to 13.1 Ω cm2 and the Rsh increased from 57.0 to 95.0 Ω cm2. It has been reported in literature that employing a seed layer for the growth of nanorod arrays (TiO2 and ZnO) on transparent conducting oxide (FTO or ITO) will improve the adhesion of the nanorods to the substrate. Even slight enhancement of interface can help to reduce the charge carrier recombination at the interface, and thus improving photovoltaic performance. Our results underline the beneficial effect of the seed layer.

Solar cell devices involving optimum 450 nm long TiO2 nanorod arrays, grown on both bare FTO and seed/FTO substrates were further subjected to thermal annealing treatment (at 110 °C under N2 atmosphere) after QD deposition. Fig. 7 shows the J–V curves of both devices after annealing. This mild thermal annealing process was found to largely increase the PCE of both devices. For the device involving the seed layer, the PCE was improved to a value as high as 4.43%, corresponding to an important increase of PCE by ∼18%. Without the seed layer, the PCE was increased by ∼16% to reach up to 4.13%. Based on the examination of major photovoltaic parameters (Table S2), the PCE enhancement was mainly due to the increase in Jsc. It is in accordance with previous finding that mild post-deposition thermal annealing of QD films resulted in the improvement of the PCE by increasing the charge carrier transport because of the better coupling of the QDs, arising from the decrease in inter-QD distance and decrease of the activation energy of shallow traps. Although annealing increased Jsc, it was noticed that Voc was slightly decreased. The decrease may be due to the decrease in the QD band gap resulting from the necking or fusing of some QDs and/or decreased confinement of excitons in the annealed QDs. This was further confirmed by a slight red shift of ∼16 nm in both the EQE spectrum of the devices and the absorption spectrum of the QD layer following annealing (Fig. S6).


In summary air-processed bulk heterojunction solar cell devices involving wet chemically synthesized NIR PbS/CdS core–shell QDs and hydrothermally grown TiO2 nanorod arrays were investigated in this work. A high PCE of 4.43% has been attained by these devices after optimizing their architecture. This device structure optimization included the intercalation of a uniform sputter-deposited thin TiO2 seed layer between the front FTO electrode and the nanorod arrays, the use of the optimal length of TiO2 nanorod arrays, and finally appropriate post-deposition thermal annealing treatment. In particular, we found that the performance of these core–shell QD based bulk heterojunction devices strongly depends on the length of the TiO2 nanorod arrays. An optimal TiO2 nanorod arrays length leading to the highest PCE was identified to be 450 nm, with or without the presence of the TiO2 seed layer. The presence of the TiO2 seed layer was nonetheless demonstrated to be particularly beneficial for the structural and electrical quality of the TiO2/FTO interface. At the optimal length, TiO2 nanorod arrays yielded the best tradeoff between charge transport and recombination processes, as evidenced by Rs and Rsh extracted from J–V curves. Thermal annealing of the QD film in inert atmosphere after QD deposition further improved the PCE by ∼18% due to the improved charge carrier transport in the QD film. The EQE spectra of the devices clearly suggest the contribution of the QDs in extending the photon harvesting to wavelengths in the NIR range (>1200 nm). In general, the work demonstrates the positive contribution from the seed layer and thermal annealing as well as the importance of identifying the optimal TiO2 nanorod length. It further suggests the high potential of NIR PbS/CdS core–shell QDs for solar cell applications and contributes to the development of high PCE, solution processable, NIR responsive QD solar cells.


Financial support from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSREC) of Canada, Canadian Solar Inc. and OLA Display Corp. in the context of the NSREC-Strategic grant is greatly appreciated. The authors also acknowledge the financial support from the FRQNT (Le Fonds de Recherche du Québec-Nature et Technologies) through its strategic Network “Plasma-Québec” and “CQMF”, and from Nano-Québec (the Québec Organization for the promotion of nanoscience and nanotechnologies).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: XRD patterns of TiO2 nanorod arrays, TEM images of TiO2 nanorod and PbS/CdS core–shell QDs, cross-sectional SEM images of PbS/CdS core–shell QDs spin coated on TiO2 nanorod arrays, optical transmittance of TiO2 nanorod arrays, EQE spectrum of solar cell device annealed in N2 along with absorption spectrum of PbS/CdS core–shell QDs also annealed in N2, and tables of detailed performance of solar cell devices. See DOI: 10.1039/c5nr02371h
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015