 DOI: 10.1039/B615915J
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 1602-1607

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Zhigang
Chen
,

Hong
Yang
,

Xianghong
Li
,

Fuyou
Li
*,

Tao
Yi
 and 

Chunhui
Huang
*

Department of Chemistry & Laboratory of Advanced Materials, Fudan University, Handan Road 220, Shanghai 200433, P. R. China. E-mail: fyli@fudan.edu.cn; chhuang@pku.edu.cn; Fax: +86-21-55664621

Received
1st November 2006
, Accepted 11th January 2007
First published on 31st January 2007
Succinonitrile, a molecular plastic crystal, can be modified to become gel by introducing the hydrogen bond (O–H⋯F) network upon addition of silica nanoparticles and 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate (BMI·BF4). The succinonitrile–BMI·BF4–silica gel system is thermostable over a wide temperature range. The gel electrolyte based on this system containing I− and I3− is also thermostable and highly conductive (6.6–18.2 mS cm−1) in the measured temperature region (20–80 °C). The appropriate addition of silica nanoparticles and BMI·BF4 has no adverse effects on the mobility capability of I−/I3− ions, and the absence of succinonitrile deteriorates the mobility capability. Importantly, dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) with this gel electrolyte show solar-to-electric energy conversion efficiency of 5.0–5.3% over a wide temperature range (20–80 °C). Furthermore, the aging test reveals that the cell still maintains 93% of its initial value for the conversion efficiency after being stored at 60 °C for 1000 h, indicating an excellent long-time durability.

Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) have currently been attracting widespread scientific and technological interest as a cost-effective alternative to conventional solar cells. The power conversion efficiency of DSSCs with organic solvent-based electrolyte was reported to exceed 11%. However, the use of organic solvent-based electrolyte also caused some practical problems, such as leakage, evaporation of solvent, high-temperature instability and flammability. At present, many attempts have been made to substitute liquid electrolytes with quasi-solid electrolytes (such as ionic liquid-based gel electrolytes, polymer gel, low molecular weight gel, and ureasil/sulfolane gel) or solid-state electrolytes(such as p-type semiconductors, organic hole-transport materials, solid polymer electrolytes). Unfortunately, DSSCs with quasi-solid/solid state electrolytes have low conversion efficiencies compared with the liquid versions, because of the low conductivity and/or the poor interfacial contact between the dye-sensitized TiO2 film and the electrolytes. On the other hand, since the working temperature of DSSCs may reach 60 °C under full sunlight, it is necessary that at high temperature (≥60 °C), the electrolytes are still quasi-solid/solid state and DSSCs with the electrolytes still maintaining high overall energy conversion efficiency (>4%). Up to now, there are few reports on electrolytes that can satisfy these aims. Therefore, it is still a challenge to design thermostable quasi-solid/all-solid state electrolytes for efficient, long-life DSSCs.

Succinonitrile, a molecular plastic crystal, has potentially good solvent properties. It exists exclusively in the gauche conformation below 233 K and undergoes a first-order transition (gauche–trans isomerization) to a plastic phase at 233 K. This plastic phase is stable between 233 and 331 K. The molecules in the plastic phase exist in three isomeric conformations: two (identical) gauche isomers and one trans isomer, which are interrelated by a 120° rotation around the central C–C bond. Hawthorne and Sherwood have suggested that the availability of three possible conformers in succinonitrile has a major effect on the diffusion capability of the molecules, where the trans isomers act as “impurities” that create monovacancies in the lattice and hence lead to high molecular diffusivity. Wang et al. and Dai et al. have demonstrated the rapid I−/I3− diffusion in succinonitrile-based electrolytes and the striking performance of DSSCs with these electrolytes. However, the reported succinonitrile-based electrolytes have a low melting point (40–45 °C), and they would also face practical problems (such as leakage and/or high-temperature instability) and therefore should be further improved.
Our group have recently found that by self-assembly through hydrogen bonding (O–H⋯F) between BF4− and the surface hydroxyl group on SiO2, the room-temperature ionic liquid 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate (BMI·BF4) can be solidified by silica nanoparticles. The solid composite was used to prepare a high temperature solid-state electrolyte, DSSCs with which exhibited a conversion efficiency of 4.7% at room temperature and 5.0% at 60 °C. Herein, we modify the succinonitrile-based electrolytes by introducing the hydrogen bond (O–H⋯F) network upon addition of silica and BMI·BF4. This electrolyte exhibits an excellent thermostability and high conductivity. The performances of DSSCs with this electrolyte at different temperature and the long-time stability are also investigated.

1-Butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate (BMI·BF4), I2, tetrabutylammonium iodide (Bu4NI), CH3CN, t-butanol and TiCl4 were purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co. (China). Succinonitrile was obtained from Alfa Aesar. Fumed silica nanoparticles (12 nm primary particle size and surface area of 380 m2 g−1) were purchased from Degussa. Titanium isopropoxide was from Aldrich. Z-907 (cis-Ru(H2dcbpy)(dnbpy)(NCS)2, where the ligand H2dcbpy is 4,4′-dicarboxylic acid-2,2′-bipyridine and dnbpy is 4,4′-dinonyl-2,2′-bipyridine) was synthesized in our laboratory according to the literature. Optically transparent electrodes were made from F-doped SnO2-coated glass plate (CTO, 85% transmittance in the visible, 15 Ω per square) received as a gift from the General Electronics Company.


Three kinds of electrolytes were prepared as follows. The components and states of all electrolytes are listed in Table 1.

Electrolyte
I2/M
Bu4NI/M
Solvent
Silica
State

a 6–8 wt% fumed silica is the appropriate content for the gelation of the succinonitrile–BMI·BF4 system.
b 3–5 wt% fumed silica is the appropriate content for the gelation of the BMI·BF4 system.
c The solid has a low melting point of about 43 °C.

Electrolyte-A
0.1
0.5
Mixture of succinonitrile and BMI·BF4 (ratio = 3 g : 1 mL)
7 wt%
Gel
Electrolyte-B
0.1
0.5
Succinontrile
—
Solid
Electrolyte-C
0.1
0.5
BMI·BF4
4 wt%
Gel

1 mL of BMI·BF4 was mixed with 3.0 g of succinonitrile to give a clear liquid (succinonitrile–BMI·BF4 system, as shown in Fig. S2 in the ESI). Then a liquid electrolyte consisting of 0.1 M I2 and 0.5 M Bu4NI in the liquid succinonitrile–BMI·BF4 system was prepared. Finally, a stable gel electrolyte was obtained by mixing fumed silica nanoparticles (7 wt%) with the above liquid electrolyte through stirring and subsequently sonicating.


To evaluate the effects of the addition of silica nanoparticles and BMI·BF4 on electrolyte-A, a solid electrolyte (electrolyte-B) composed of 0.1 M I2 and 0.5 M Bu4NI in pure succinonitrile was prepared, which was similar to the electrolytes reported by Wang et al. and Dai et al.


To reveal the effects of succinonitrile, a gel electrolyte (electrolyte-C) without succinonitrile was designed by mixing fumed silica nanoparticles (4 wt% of the liquid electrolyte) with the liquid electrolyte composed of 0.1 M I2 and 0.5 M Bu4NI in pure BMI·BF4.


The thermal properties of the succinonitrile systems were measured on a Shimadzu DSC-60A at a scanning rate of 10 °C min−1. The ionic conductivity of the electrolytes was determined by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) technique using an Autolab P20 electrochemical workstation with a modulation amplitude of 5 mV. For impedance measurements, a two-electrode thin-layer cell, consisting of two pieces of stainless steels separated by a 2 mm-thick Teflon spacer, was designed. Effective areas of the electrodes were 0.56 cm2. An oven was used to control the temperature of the electrolytes. In addition, a two-electrode electrochemical cell, consisting of a Pt ultramicroelectrode with a radius of 10 µm as the working electrode and Pt foil as the counter electrode, was used to study mass transport in the electrolyte. Steady-state voltammograms were recorded at 25 °C.


TiO2 films (about 10 µm thick) were prepared according to previous study. These films were soaked in a 0.2 M aqueous TiCl4 solution overnight. After being washed with deionized water, they were heated at 450 °C for 30 min. When cooled to about 80 °C, they were immersed into a 0.3 mM solution of dye Z-907 in CH3CN and t-butanol (volume ratio of 1 : 1) at room temperature for 12 h. Electrolyte-A and electrolyte-C were respectively spin-coated onto the dye-absorbed TiO2 electrode, and kept in the vacuum oven for 2 h. The counter electrode was transparent conducting optical glass on which a 200 nm thick layer of Pt was deposited by sputtering. Subsequently, the cells were sealed with thermal adhesive films (Surlyn 1702, DuPont) for the measurement. Electrolyte-B was heated until it became a liquid and injected into the sandwiched and sealed cells for the measurement.

Photocurrent density–voltage curves of the DSSCs were measured between 20 and 80 °C under standard AM 1.5 solar illumination with an intensity of 75 mW cm−2 (corrected by standard Si solar cell) using a computerized Keithley Model 2400 SourceMeter unit. A 1000 W xenon lamp (Thermo Oriel, USA) served as the light source. The active electrode area was typically 0.15 cm2. The results were not corrected with respect to transmission losses in the conducting substrate. Monochromatic light in the range of 400 to 800 nm was obtained by using a series of filters, and the incident photo to current conversion efficiency (IPCE) measurement was performed on a Keithley Model 2400 SourceMeter. Hermetically sealed cells were used for long-term stability tests. The cells were stored at 60 °C for 1000 h, and their photoelectric conversion efficiencies were measured at 20 °C once per week.

Pure succinonitrile is a solid at room temperature (Fig. S1A in the ESI) and has a low melting point of 58 °C. It becomes a liquid and can flow easily at 60 °C (Fig. 1A). Grätzel’s group and our group have revealed that silica nanoparticles can be used to gelate the room-temperature ionic liquid. Here we tried to change the physical state of succinonitrile with silica nanoparticles. When 7 wt% fumed silica nanoparticles were added to succinonitrile, the succinonitrile–silica system remained solid-state at room temperature (Fig. S1B) and could still flow at 60 °C (Fig. 1B). Therefore, no obvious change of its physical state was observed upon addition of fumed silica. In addition, when 1 mL BMI·BF4 was mixed with 3.0 g succinonitrile, the succinonitrile–BMI·BF4 mixture even became liquid at room temperature (Fig. S2). Here BMI·BF4 was selected because it is a room-temperature ionic liquid and can be used as a solvent and a source of F atoms. Subsequently, fumed silica nanoparticles (3–9 wt%) were added into the liquid succinonitrile–BMI·BF4 system. Interestingly, when the content of fumed silica nanoparticles was over 5 wt%, the succinonitrile–BMI·BF4–silica system became a gel (Fig. S3). The succinonitrile–BMI·BF4–silica (7 wt%) system still remained in the gel state even at 80 °C (Fig. 1C). In addition, the ratio of BMI·BF4 to succinonitrile should be beyond the value (0.8 mL per 3 g), otherwise the gelation of the mixture system is difficult although more silica nanoparticles are added.

To further investigate the thermal properties of succinonitrile-based systems, differential scanning calorimetric (DSC) scans were recorded and are shown in Fig. 2. The solid–solid transition temperature and the melting point of pure succinonitrile are about −40 and 58 °C, respectively (Fig. 2A). In addition, it can be found that the solid–solid transition temperature of succinonitrile does not change significantly upon addition of other materials (such as silica, BMI·BF4, as shown in Fig. 2B and C), as would be expected if the transition is an equilibrium thermodynamic phase change related to structural changes of the matrix phase. The melting behavior of succinonitrile-based mixtures is very complex. The succinonitrile–silica system exhibits a melting point of about 43 °C (Fig. 2B). However, the succinonitrile–BMI·BF4–silica (7 wt%) system has no obvious endothermic peak between 0 and 140 °C (Fig. 2C). This fact suggests that the succinonitrile–BMI·BF4–silica system is a gel in the measured temperature range, and may broaden the temperature region of the plastic phase for succinonitrile (pure succinonitrile will melt and can not exist in the plastic phase at temperatures higher than 58 °C). Furthermore, there are some exothermic peaks for the succinonitrile–silica and succinonitrile–BMI·BF4–silica systems, which may result from the aggregation and/or phase change, and which are still under investigation.
It is clear that both BMI·BF4 and silica nanoparticles are necessary for the gelation of the succinonitrile-based system. In fact, the room-temperature ionic liquid BMI·BF4 can be successfully solidified by silica nanoparticles without succinonitrile (Fig. S4), which indicates that the gelation in the succinonitrile–BMI·BF4–silica system should be attributed to the strong interaction between silica nanoparticles and BMI·BF4. Our group has confirmed that this interaction between fumed silica and the anion (BF4−) is contributed by the formation of hydrogen bonds (O–H⋯F). Based on our previous results, it is deduced that the hydrogen bond (O–H⋯F) network in the succinonitrile–BMI·BF4–silica system results in the formation of the stable succinonitrile–BMI·BF4–silica gel.
The succinonitrile–BMI·BF4–silica gel system has a potential application as a quasi-solid electrolyte, because of its thermostability and the preservation of the solid–solid transition of succinonitrile. Herein, the gel electrolyte (Electrolyte-A) was prepared based on the succinonitrile–BMI·BF4–silica gel system containing I2 and tetrabutylammonium iodide. As shown in Fig. 3, electrolyte-A still remains in the gel state at high temperature (80 °C). In fact, it may be also thermostable at higher temperatures (>80 °C), but the highest temperature (80 °C) we measured is adequate because the working temperature of DSSCs may only reach 60 °C under full sunlight. In addition, electrolyte-B was prepared to investigate the effects of silica nanoparticles and BMI·BF4. It is a solid at room temperature and becomes a liquid at 45 °C (Fig. 3). These results also confirm that the addition of silica nanoparticles and BMI·BF4 is critical for the gelation of succinonitrile-based electrolytes. Moreover, to reveal the functions of succinonitrile, electrolyte-C without succinonitrile was prepared. It is a gel over a wide temperature range similar to electrolyte-A.

The conductivity of electrolyte-A was investigated at different temperatures (Fig. 4). It can be seen that electrolyte-A is highly conductive (6.6–18.2 mS cm−1) in the measured region of the temperature (20–80 °C). The conductivity–temperature dependence shows a classical Arrhenius behavior obeying the equation
σ = σ0 exp(−EA/kT)
where
σ is the conductivity, EA is the activation energy, and k is Boltzmann's constant. The activation energy of electrolyte-A has been calculated to be 14.5 kJ mol−1. It is noteworthy that succinonitrile should exist in the plastic phase in the measured region (20–80 °C) of the temperature according to the conductivity–temperature dependence. For comparison, the conductivities of solid succinonitrile-based electrolyte (Electrolyte-B) and BMI·BF4–silica gel electrolyte (Electrolyte-C) at 25 °C were also studied and found to be 3.1 and 0.6 mS cm−1, respectively. It is clear that electrolyte-A has a conductivity of 7.2 mS cm−1 at 25 °C, which is higher than that of electrolyte-B (3.1 mS cm−1) and the succinonitrile-based electrolyte (3.3 mS cm−1) reported previously. Such high conductivity of electrolyte-A should be attributed to the presence of other ions such as BF4−, BMI+ in succinonitrile besides I−, I3− and Bu4N+. Furthermore, electrolyte-C exhibits a lower conductivity (0.6 mS cm−1), although it has more ions than electrolyte-A. This phenomenon may be due to more rapid ion diffusion in succinonitrile and was further investigated.

The steady-state voltammograms of electrolyte-A, electrolyte-B and electrolyte-C were recorded to investigate the diffusion of I−/I3− (Fig. 5). The apparent diffusion coefficients (Dapp) of iodide and triiodide can be calculated from the anodic and cathodic steady-state currents (Iss) using the following equation:
Iss = 4nCaFDapp
where
n is the electron-transfer number per species, F is the Faraday constant, a is the radius of the ultramicroelectrode, and C is the bulk concentration of the electroactive species. The diffusion coefficients are listed in Table 2. It is clear that the diffusion coefficients of iodide and triiodide in electrolyte-A are respectively 1.9 × 10−6 and 1.2 × 10−6 cm2 s−1, which are similar to those in electrolyte-B (Table 2). This fact confirms the rapid diffusion of I−/I3− in electrolyte-A and suggests that the appropriate addition of silica and BMI·BF4 into succinonitrile has no obvious adverse effect on the mobility of the ions. In addition, electrolyte-C (without succinonitrile) has much lower diffusion coefficients than electrolyte-A. We also found that the diffusion coefficients of iodide and triiodide would go down with further decrease of succinonitrile content in electrolyte-A. These facts reveal the critical effect of succinonitrile content on the diffusion coefficients. The present ratio (3 g : 1 mL) of succinonitrile to BMI·BF4 in electrolyte-A satisfies the need of both high ionic diffusion coefficients and thermostability for the electrolyte. Furthermore, it should be noted that the diffusion coefficients of iodide and triiodide in electrolyte-A are higher than those in solvent-free ionic liquid electrolytes. Diffusivities that are higher in the solid state than in the liquid state have been observed previously and this phenomenon is related to defect motion in the ordered crystalline lattice.

Electrolyte
I−/10−6 cm2 s−1
I3−/10−6 cm2 s−1
Electrolyte-A
1.9
1.2
Electrolyte-B
2.2
1.4
Electrolyte-C
0.25
0.19

Photocurrent density–voltage characteristics of DSSCs based on the different electrolytes were measured under standard AM 1.5 solar illumination with an intensity of 75 mW cm−2 (Fig. 6). Open-circuit voltage (Voc), short-circuit current density (Jsc), fill factor (FF) and overall solar-to-electric energy conversion efficiencies (defined by η = VocJscFF/Iph, where Iph is the incident photon flux) are presented in Table 3. At 20 °C, the cell with electrolyte-A exhibits a Voc of 0.621 V, a Jsc of 8.60 mA cm−2, and a FF of 0.699, yielding a conversion efficiency (η) of 4.98%. This efficiency is one of the highest values in all reported quasi-solid/solid state DSSCs. The conversion efficiency (5.02%) from electrolyte-B at 20 °C is very close to that from electrolyte-A as a result of the similar diffusion coefficients of iodide and triiodide in both electrolytes, suggesting that the effect of the appropriate addition of silica and BMI·BF4 into succinonitrile on the conversion efficiency is negligible. Moreover, the cell with electrolyte-C gives a lower conversion efficiency (3.88%) at 20 °C, which should be related to the low conductivity and the diffusion coefficients of iodide and triiodide. The great difference between the efficiencies of DSSCs with electrolyte-A and electrolyte-C indicates that the presence of succinonitrile in the electrolytes is critical for the improvement of the conversion efficiency.

Electrolyte
Temperature/°C

V
oc/V

J
sc/mA cm−2

FF


η (%)
Electrolyte-A
20
0.621
8.60
0.699
4.98
Electrolyte-A
40
0.611
9.20
0.689
5.16
Electrolyte-A
60
0.594
9.74
0.678
5.23
Electrolyte-A
80
0.584
10.1
0.673
5.29
Electrolyte-B
20
0.607
9.06
0.685
5.02
Electrolyte-C
20
0.678
6.67
0.644
3.88
IPCE spectra of DSSCs with all electrolytes were recorded and are shown in Fig. 7. The IPCE from electrolyte-A reaches a maximum efficiency of about 66% at 540 nm. It is very similar to that from electrolyte-B, but is much higher than that from electrolyte-C. These results further confirm the importance of succinonitrile and the fact that there is no adverse effect of the appropriate addition of silica and BMI·BF4 on the cell performance.
Electrolyte-A is the best promising among these electrolytes for the application in DSSCs because of its high conversion efficiency and excellent thermostability. The performance of the cell with electrolyte-A at different temperatures was also investigated (Fig. 6 and Table 3). As expected, short-circuit current densities (Jsc) go up from 8.60 to 10.1 mA cm−2 with the increase of temperature from 20 to 80 °C, in accordance with the conductivity data (Fig. 4). However, it is clear that the open-circuit voltage (Voc) decreases to 0.584 V at 80 °C. A Voc drop with increasing temperature has been analyzed previously, and it is considered to be a complex function of the semiconductor Fermi level, electrolyte redox potential and the recombination rates of the electron–hole couples. More importantly, the efficiency of DSSCs rises with increasing temperature and can exceed 5.2% at higher temperatures (60–80 °C), which indicates that the present DSSCs with electrolyte-A can work well over a wide temperature range.
To investigate the long-time practical stability of DSSCs with electrolyte-A, the aging test on the sealed DSSCs were carried out. The cells were stored at 60 °C for 1000 h and their efficiencies were measured once per week. Fig. 8 shows the time-dependent change in the photoelectric conversion efficiency of such DSSCs. After the first week of aging, the efficiency is moderately enhanced due to an increase of the regeneration rate of dye Z907 and thus an increase of Jsc. After 1000 h, the cell still maintains 93% of its initial value. These results prove that the present electrolyte-A should suppress leaking or evaporation of the electrolyte, and therefore results in an excellent durability of the device.

A succinonitrile-based gel electrolyte has been prepared by introducing a hydrogen bond (O–H⋯F) network upon addition of silica and BMI·BF4 to succinonitrile. The appropriate addition of BMI·BF4 and silica nanoparticles in this gel electrolyte can greatly improve the thermostability but has no adverse effects on the conductivity, ionic diffusion coefficients and the cell performance. Moreover, the relatively high succinonitrile content in the electrolyte is very important because the electrolyte without succinonitrile has very low conductivity and ionic diffusion coefficients and poor cell performance. The present succinonitrile-based gel electrolyte satisfies the need for both thermostability and high conductivity (high ionic diffusion coefficients) in electrolytes. DSSCs with this gel electrolyte give a conversion efficiency of 4.98% at room temperature. Importantly, the cell can work well at high temperatures (60–80 °C) and shows excellent long-time stability, making the device viable for practical outdoor application.


The authors thank the Huo Yingdong Education Foundation (104012), the National Science Foundation of China (Grant 20490210 and 20501006) and the Shanghai Sci. Tech. Comm. (05DJ14004 and 06QH14002) for financial support.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Colour versions of Fig. 1 and Fig. 3; photos of pure succinonitrile, succinonitrile–silica (silica: 7 wt% of succinonitrile), succinontrile–BMI·BF4, succinontrile–BMI·BF4–silica (silica: 3–9 wt% of succinontrile–BMI·BF4) and BMI·BF4–silica (silica: 3 wt% of BMI·BF4) at 20 °C. See DOI: 10.1039/b615915j
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2007