 DOI: 10.1039/C8TA00492G
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 4443-4448


Fei
Wu
,

Wei
Gao
,

Hui
Yu
,

Linna
Zhu
*,

Lu
Li
* and 

Chuluo
Yang
*

Chongqing Key Laboratory for Advanced Materials and Technologies of Clean Energy, Faculty of Materials & Energy, Southwest University, Chongqing 400715, P. R. China

Hubei Collaborative Innovation Center for Advanced Organic Chemical Materials, Hubei Key Lab on Organic and Polymeric Optoelectronic Materials, Department of Chemistry, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, P. R. China. E-mail: clyang@whu.edu.cn

New Materials Technology Institute, Co-Innovation Center for Micro/Nano Optoelectronic Materials and Devices, Chongqing University of Arts and Sciences, Chongqing, 402160, P. R. China

Received
16th January 2018
, Accepted 8th February 2018
First published on 14th February 2018
Two π-conjugated small molecules based on the multifused rigid ladder-type backbone of ITCPTC are employed as the electron transporting materials in inverted perovskite solar cells. The two compounds are distinguished by the side chain thiophene and selenophene groups. Their energy levels match well with perovskite materials. Results demonstrate that the thiophene side chain endows ITCPTC-Th with smoother morphology, higher electron mobility, and more efficient electron extraction and electron transporting properties. Inverted PSCs with the ITCPTC-Th electron transporting material (ETL) show a high efficiency of 17.11%, which is higher than the efficiency of 16.12% obtained from the ITCPTC-Se-based PSCs. Notably, the performances of the ITCPTC-based ETLs are slightly higher than those of PCBM (with the highest PCE of 15.97%) under identical conditions. In addition, the two compounds also show excellent performance when applied as the interlayer between perovskite and the C60 electron transporting layer. High efficiencies approaching 19% are obtained in devices containing the ITCPTC interlayers, further confirming their decent electron transporting properties. The ITCPTC compounds thus have great potential as efficient alternatives for the expensive PCBM ETL in inverted perovskite solar cells.

Recent years have witnessed the rapid development of the emerging hybrid organic–inorganic perovskites. Being a rising star in optoelectronic materials, perovskites have found wide applications in light-emitting diodes, photodetectors, and photovoltaics. In particular, they show inherent advantages for photovoltaics, including a broad absorption range, long charge diffusion lengths, tunable band gaps, as well as solution processability. Consequently, perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have attracted worldwide attention, and the power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) have dramatically increased from 3.8% to 22.1% within just ten years. The development of PSCs is unprecedented, owing to the improvement in processing techniques, device architectures as well as the exploration of functional materials.

Currently, the conventional n–i–p and the inverted p–i–n device configurations are mostly studied in PSCs. The n–i–p structure has been largely investigated and remarkable efficiencies have been accomplished, while relatively less attention is paid to the inverted PSCs. Recently, p–i–n PSCs have gained more and more attention, because the device manufacturing process is relatively simple and the device could be deposited at low temperature. In addition, the hysteresis in J–V curves scanning from different directions are less reported in the inverted PSCs than in the n–i–p devices. A typical p–i–n type device is constituted by the perovskite active layer, a hole transporting layer (HTL), for example poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS), and an electron transporting layer (ETL), usually fullerene and its derivatives. To enhance the performance of inverted PSCs, it is important to develop charge transporting layers that could efficiently transfer charge carriers from the absorber to both electrodes. Compared to the efforts devoted to HTLs to improve the hole transporting properties, the exploration of ETLs is relatively less. Metal oxides such as TiO2, ZnO, SnO2, etc. have been utilized as ETLs in n–i–p devices. Although decent device performances have been achieved, high annealing temperature often limits the large-scale production and flexible application. Organic materials like fullerene and its derivatives (such as C60, PCBM, and ICBA) are also developed for the low-temperature fabrication of inverted PSCs, and PCBM represents the most promising ETL. However, fullerenes suffer from several drawbacks, such as high cost and poor ambient stability, and their energy levels cannot be facilely adjusted because structurally they cannot easily undergo chemical modifications. Moreover, they are prone to aggregate upon annealing, thus may result in poor film morphology. Therefore, it is an urgent need to explore new ETLs that are able to overcome the abovementioned deficiencies.
Small organic molecules are attractive as ETLs because they are usually cheaper than fullerene derivatives, and the energy levels can be easily tuned by variable structural modification. Rational design will provide small organic molecules with similar electron affinity to that of PCBM. Hexaazatrinaphthylene (HATNA) derivatives, hexaazatrinaphtho[2,3-c][1,2,5]thiadiazole (HATNT), naphthalene diimide (NDI), and perylene diimide (PDI) have been devised to construct efficient ETLs. In these structures, the high electron affinity as well as rigid planar structure of the fused aromatic rings is beneficial for electron transport. The multifused rigid ladder-type backbone of indacenodithieno[3,2-b]thiophene, when modified with suitable electron-withdrawing end groups, has potential to act as efficient charge extraction and charge transporting materials in perovskite solar cells. Zhan and coworkers reported π-conjugated n-type semiconductors (IDIC and INIC series) as efficient interfacial materials. The interlayers were proved to modify the surface of perovskite film, promote charge extraction, and also contribute to the ambient stability of the devices. It is well-recognized that non-fullerene small-molecule acceptors have been well developed in organic solar cells, and excellent performances have been achieved. In addition, they also find important applications as acceptors in organic photodetectors. However, so far, they have been less explored as the electron transporting materials for inverted PSCs, when compared to the hole transport materials in n–i–p PSCs, and there are even fewer examples in which the n-type small molecules outperform the archetypal PCBM ETL.
In this work, we demonstrate the successful application of the multifused rigid ladder-type backbone of ITCPTC (3,9-bis(2-methylene-(3-(1,1-dicyanomethylene)-cyclopentane-1,3-dione-[c]-thiophen))-5,5,11,11-tetrakis(4-hexylphenyl)-dithieno[2,3-d:2′,3′-d′]-s-indaceno[1,2-b:5,6-b′]dithiophene)-based n-type small molecules as highly efficient electron transporting materials as well as interfacial materials for the inverted PSCs (structures shown in Scheme 1). Based on the modified thiophene or selenophene side groups, two compounds, namely, ITCPTC-Se and ITCPTC-Th, were obtained. The molecules were developed as non-fullerene acceptors in organic solar cells, and delivered high power conversion efficiency (PCE) around 10% when working with a suitable polymeric donor. Both molecules show low LUMO levels around −4.0 eV, close to that of PCBM. ITCPTC with the thiophene side group exhibits higher electron mobility, better electron extraction and electron transporting properties, and smoother film morphology than the selenophene modified counterpart. Consequently, ITCPTC-Th as the ETL in perovskite solar cells delivers a high PCE of 17.11%, with a short-circuit current (Jsc) of 21.77 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 1029 mV, and a fill factor (FF) of 0.76. The Se-based ITCPTC shows an inferior efficiency of 16.12%, with a Jsc of 21.24 mA cm−2, a Voc of 1030 mV, and a fill factor (FF) of 0.74. Notably, the performances of the ITCPTC-based ETLs are slightly higher than those of PCBM (with the highest PCE of 15.97%) measured under the same conditions. In addition, the two compounds also exhibit excellent performance when applied as the interlayer between perovskite and the C60 ETL, and efficiencies approaching 19% are achieved.

The synthetic procedures and characterizations of the ITCPTC-based ETLs were reported in our previous work. The HOMO (highest occupied molecular orbital) and LUMO (lowest unoccupied molecular orbital) energy levels for ITCPTC-Th and ITCPTC-Se were −5.68 eV/−4.03 eV and −5.65 eV/−4.00 eV, respectively. The energy levels of the two compounds match well with those of perovskite, as shown in Scheme 1. The σ-inductive effect of Se leads to a slightly higher LUMO energy level of ITCPTC-Se. Meanwhile, the two compounds have decent electron mobility, making it possible for them to work as electron transporting materials in inverted PSCs.

The morphology of the ITCPTC layer on top of perovskite was investigated by atomic force microscopy (AFM) in tapping mode. CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite film was prepared by a typical anti-solvent procedure. ITCPTC-Th/Se dissolved in chlorobenzene was spin-coated on the perovskite substrate. Fig. 1a shows the surface morphology of the perovskite film with a high root-mean-square (RMS) roughness of 24.6 nm. After depositing ITCPTC-Se/Th on the perovskite layer, the surface shows lower RMS roughness of 17.8 nm for ITCPTC-Se and 13.9 nm for ITCPTC-Th, respectively. Obviously, the coverage of ETL on the perovskite leads to a smoother surface morphology. Compared with ITCPTC-Se, ITCPTC-Th shows smaller surface roughness, which may guarantee a better contact between the ETL and the perovskite layer beneath, and is favourable for increasing selective charge extraction at the ITCPTC-Th/perovskite interface. According to our previous report, ITCPTC-Th showed more ordered molecular packing than ITCPTC-Se, facilitating charge transfer. And this is consistent with the slightly higher electron mobility in ITCPTC-Th.
To further explore the charge extraction properties of the newly developed ETLs, steady-state photoluminescence (PL) and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) spectroscopy were performed on glass/perovskite and glass/perovskite/ETLs. Steady-state PL curves are shown in Fig. 2a, the excitation wavelength is 480 nm, and the maximum emission band at 780 nm is recorded. A distinct PL quenching is observed for the ITCPTC compounds, and ITCPTC-Th has a little stronger quenching effect than ITCPTC-Se. TRPL spectra in Fig. 2b depict the PL lifetime changes of perovskite, and a sharp decline of the TRPL curve is observed when the perovskite is covered by ETLs. The fitted PL lifetimes for perovskite, perovskite/ITCPTC-Se, perovskite/ITCPTC-Th and perovskite/PCBM are 246.5 ns, 52.7 ns, 15.4 ns and 56.7 ns, respectively (Fig. S9). Apparently, the photo-generated carriers decay faster in ITCPTC-Th-coated perovskite film. These results confirm the efficient charge extraction properties of ITCPTC-based compounds, and clearly point to the feasibility of employing ITCPTC-Th/Se as the ETL or interlayer in inverted PSCs.

The p–i–n type inverted planar perovskite solar cells are fabricated, with the configuration of ITO/P3CT-Na/perovskite/ITCPTC-(Se or Th)/rhodamine 101/LiF/Ag. P3CT-Na, the hole transporting layer, is spin-coated onto the ITO substrate according to literature reports. ITCPTC-Se/Th works as the electron transporting layer, and rhodamine 101/LiF as the thin buffer layer. Then 1 nm thick LiF was thermally evaporated followed by deposition of the Ag counter electrode. The cross-sectional SEM images of PSCs using different ETLs are shown in Fig. S1. In both cases, we can see a perovskite layer with large grains sandwiched between the P3CT-Na HTL and the electron transporting layer. In addition, the perovskite layer expands across the whole thickness, suggesting a high coverage on the substrate.

Photovoltaic performances are investigated under 100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5G illumination. The device architecture is depicted in Fig. 3a. The current density–voltage (J–V) curves of PSCs with ITCPTC-Se/Th in different thicknesses are shown in Fig. 3b and c, and the data are summarized in Table S1. With thin ETL films (less than 10 nm), quite low Voc, Jsc and FF values are obtained due to the leakage current behaviour. For both ETLs, the performance of corresponding PSCs is enhanced with increased ETL thickness. Further increasing the ETL thickness, however, leads to decreased performance, because the series resistance increases and affects the FF of the device. For ITCPTC-Se-based devices, the optimized solar cell performance is obtained with ∼34 nm thick ETL, with a Voc of 1030 mV, a Jsc of 21.24 mA cm−2, and FF of 0.74, leading to a PCE of 16.12%. While for devices using ITCPTC-Th ETL, the highest efficiency of 17.11% is achieved with ∼42 nm thick ETL, with a Voc of 1029 mV, Jsc of 21.77 mA cm−2, and FF of 0.76. Moreover, 20 devices are fabricated in one batch, and good reproducibility is observed from the PCE distributions shown in Fig. S2.
Average PCEs of 15.52% and 16.55% are obtained for ITCPTC-Se and ITCPTC-Th-based PSCs, respectively. In contrast, the control device using PCBM ETL, under the same testing conditions, shows the highest PCE of 15.97%, confirming the good electron transporting ability of the ITCPTC ETLs (Fig. S4). It is also noteworthy that thiophene-modified ITCPTC shows better performance as ETL than the selenophene-based one, which is consistent with the abovementioned higher electron mobility, smoother film morphology and the superior charge extraction properties of ITCPTC-Th as reflected from PL decays.
The hysteresis of the PSCs is studied by scanning from forward and reverse directions, and the corresponding J–V curves are shown in Fig. 3d. Apparently, little hysteresis is observed for the ITCPTC-based PSCs, revealing that ion migration is efficiently suppressed. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra of the ITCPTC-based device show high responses ranging from 400 nm to 750 nm. The integrated Jsc is about 20.56 mA cm−2 for ITCPTC-Se, and 20.81 mA cm−2 for ITCPTC-Th as determined from EQE, which is also in agreement with the results measured from J–V curves. The stabilized photocurrent and PCE over 120 s under a certain voltage bias (845 mV for ITCPTC-Se and 850 mV for ITCPTC-Th) for PSCs employing ITCPTC-based ETLs are shown in Fig. 3f. A stabilized photocurrent density of 18.86 mA cm−2/20.06 mA cm−2, and a stable power output of 15.94%/17.05% are recorded for ITCPTC-Se/Th, respectively. From the above results, the two ITCPTC compounds are qualified as efficient ETLs for inverted PSCs. More importantly, they are comparable with PCBM ETL in the same device structure (Fig. S4), and ITCPTC-Th is slightly superior to ITCPTC-Se (Table 1).
ETLs

V
oc (mV)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)

a The data in parentheses represent the average values obtained from 20 cells.

ITCPTC-Se
1030 (1027 ± 10)
21.24 (20.99 ± 0.43)
0.74 (0.72 ± 0.03)
16.12 (15.52 ± 0.65)
ITCPTC-Th
1029 (1026 ± 13)
21.77 (21.46 ± 0.38)
0.76 (0.75 ± 0.02)
17.11 (16.55 ± 0.60)
We perfomed electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) to further understand the interfacial charge transport properties. EIS was measured at an applied voltage close to Voc (0.9 V) under dark conditions as shown in Fig. S8, and the equivalent circuit model consists of the series resistance (Rs) and the charge transfer resistance (Rct) at the interfaces. As shown in Fig. S8,Rct of PSCs using ITCPTC-Th is smaller than that using ITCPTC-Se, indicating more efficient charge transfer at the perovskite/ITCPTC-Th interface. The results are consistent with the photovoltaic performances; moreover, the improved charge transfer also contributes to the enhanced FF value in ITCPTC-Th-based devices.
To further develop potential applications of ITCPTC-Se/Th, the two compounds are also employed as the interfacial layer between perovskite and the C60 ETL. Consequently, PSCs with the structure of ITO/P3CT-Na/perovskite/ITCPTC-Se or Th/C60/BCP/Ag are fabricated (Fig. 4a). The C60 layer (20 nm) is evaporated as the electron transporting layer; meanwhile, the hole blocking layer BCP of ∼8 nm thickness is evaporated for cathode modification, and the ITCPTC-Se/Th thin interlayer is spin-coated onto the perovskite layer (with several nanometres thickness). J–V curves of PSCs with and without the ITCPTC-based interlayers are presented in Fig. 4b, and the photovoltaic data are summarized in Table 2. The effect of ITCPTC interlayer thickness is also investigated, as shown in Fig. S6, and 6 nm is demonstrated to be the optimized thickness for both interlayers (Table S5 and S6). We can see that the device containing the interlayer exhibits higher efficiency than the control device without the interlayer. Moreover, the thiophene and selenophene-modified ITCPTC compounds show similar performances, and high efficiencies approaching 19% are achieved. In contrast, the control device without the interlayer shows a lower efficiency of 17.10%. It is noteworthy that the enhanced PCE mainly comes from the increased Jsc value as a result of the introduction of the interlayer. Therefore, the ITCPTC compounds as interlayers promote electron transport from perovskite to the metal electrode. Furthermore, little hysteresis is observed in these devices studied. EQEs for the champion devices using the two interlayers (ITCPTC-Th/Se) are shown in Fig. 4d. For both interlayers, strong spectral responses ranging from 400 to 750 nm can be observed. The integrated current density derived from EQE is 21.71 mA cm−2 for the Se-based interlayer, and 21.63 mA cm−2 for the thiophene-based interlayer, which are consistent with the Jsc values recorded from J–V curves. 20 cells are fabricated, and the PCE distributions are shown in Fig. 4d. For devices with the interlayer, most of the cells show PCE exceeding 18%, suggesting good reproducibility of these devices.
Device

V
oc (mV)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)

a The data in parentheses are the average values based on 20 devices.

ITCPTC-Se
1053 (1051 ± 11)
22.32 (22.11 ± 0.33)
0.79 (0.78 ± 0.02)
18.62 (18.14 ± 0.41)
ITCPTC-Th
1064 (1053 ± 15)
22.54 (22.25 ± 0.36)
0.78 (0.78 ± 0.02)
18.75 (18.29 ± 0.44)
Control
1038 (1026 ± 12)
21.51 (21.22 ± 0.39)
0.77 (0.76 ± 0.02)
17.10 (16.63 ± 0.41)
The stabilities of the inverted PSCs with and without the ITCPTC-based ETLs are measured in a N2 atmosphere as well as under ambient conditions with controlled humidity at 35–40%. The control device using the PCBM electron transporting material is also measured for comparison. From Fig. 5, the PSCs using different ETLs all exhibit good stability in a N2-filled glove box, and 95% of the efficiencies are retained in 400 h, whereas in air with controlled humidity, significant decrease in PCE is observed. Specifically, about 47% decrease in PCE is observed for the PCBM-based control device, and around 30% decrease in efficiency is observed for the ITCPTC-based devices in 170 h. The result might be elucidated from the difference in water resistivity of different ETLs. As shown in Fig. 5, the water contact angle of PCBM film on the perovskite layer is smaller than that of the other two ETLs. Therefore, ITCPTC-Se/Th are more hydrophobic than PCBM, and could more effectively protect the perovskite layer underneath from moisture attack, thus providing the corresponding devices with better ambient stability.

In summary, two multifused rigid ladder-type compounds with n-hexylthienyl and n-hexylselenophenyl as side chains were applied as electron transporting layers in inverted perovskite solar cells. ITCPTC-Th with the thiophene side chain showed smoother film morphology, higher electron mobility, and more efficient electron extraction and electron transporting properties. As a result, the inverted PSCs with ITCPTC-Th ETL exhibited a high efficiency of 17.11%, which was superior to that of the ITCPTC-Se-based PSCs (16.12%). Noteworthy, the two compounds as ETLs outperform the commonly used PCBM ETL. In addition, they also show excellent performances when used as the interlayer, further demonstrating the good electron transporting properties of the ITCPTC-based compounds. This work reveals that the small-molecule non-fullerene acceptors are potential as efficient electron transporting materials for perovskite solar cells.


There are no conflicts of interest to declare.


The authors thank the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51703183, 21572171, U1663229 and 51503022), the “Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities” (XDJK2017A002), and the Basic and Frontier Research Program of Chongqing Municipality (cstc2015jcyjA50036 and cstc2016jcyjA0367) for financial support. The authors also acknowledge support from “Project supported by Program for Innovation Team Building at Institutions of Higher Education in Chongqing (CXTDX201601011)”.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Details of device fabrication and characterization. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta00492g
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018