 DOI: 10.1039/C1EE01315G
(Communication)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2807-2812

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Thirumal
Krishnamoorthy
,

Velmurugan
Thavasi
*,

Mhaisalkar
Subodh G
 and 

Seeram
Ramakrishna
*

NUS Nanoscience and Nanotechnology Initiative (NUSNNI)-NanoCore, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117576

School of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, 50 Nanyang Avenue, Singapore 639798

NUS Nanoscience and Nanotechnology Initiative (NUSNNI)-NanoCore, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117576. E-mail: velnanotech@gmail.com

School of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, 50 Nanyang Avenue, Singapore 639798

National University of Singapore, Singapore 117576. E-mail: seeram@nus.edu.sg

King Suad University, Riyadh 11451, King Saudi Arabia

Received
18th March 2011
, Accepted 9th May 2011
First published on 15th June 2011
Higher performance is expected in electronic devices that utilize metal oxide semiconductors in vertical architecture owing to the direct and effective electron transport. Producing anatase phase vertical TiO2 nanowires on conductive substrate has been challenging. Herein we demonstrate for the first time not only the facile fabrication of vertical arrays of anatase TiO2 nanowires, but also fabricating the wires by using electrospinning method. Firstly aligned nanofiberous TiO2 ribbons were produced by electrospinning and then erected to vertical nanowires after the post-treatment. As-produced vertical ceramic TiO2 nanowires possessed the area of 0.2 cm2 with wire diameter of 90 ± 30 nm, and height up to 27 μm. This approach can be a better alternative to the currently available methods like hydrothermal synthesis and template assisted fabrication as the diameter, height of the wires, and spacing between the wires can be effectively controlled by this method. With vertical nanowires of anatase phase TiO2 as photoelectrode in dye sensitized solar cells (DSSC), the solar-to-current conversion efficiency (η), short circuit current (Jsc), open circuit voltage (Voc), and fill factor (FF) were measured as 2.87% and 5.71 mA cm−2, 0.782 V, 64.2% respectively.

It is prefereed for metal oxide semiconductors to be in a vertical architecture for applications in solar cells (dye sensitized solar cells, DSSC) and other electronic devices owing to high electron mobility. Growing of dense vertical arrays of anatase phase TiO2 directly on conductive substrate by currently available methods such as chemical synthesis or other fabrication methods is not possible. In this report, we demonstrate the fabrication of nanowires of anatase TiO2 in vertical arrays for the first time using electrospinning followed by a top-down process. As-produced high quality anatase TiO2 vertical nanowires of diameter 100 nm, height up to 27 μm, and with an area of 0.2 cm2 yielded a power conversion efficiency of 2.89%. These vertically aligned electrospun TiO2 nanowires can facilitate for better light harvesting and charge collection, and even better efficiency can be expected upon fine tuning of the diameter, height and surface area of the wires and also the interspacing between the wires, which are very much feasible by our proposed method in this report.


Several approaches to prepare vertically aligned one dimensional nanostructured (ODNS) ceramic material have been developed in last decade. Vertical ODNS ceramic material has been prepared either by the synthesis or the fabrication method. The synthesis method basically allows the anisotropic growth of different facets with different energies of the crystals and produces single crystalline materials, whereas fabrication methods such as anodic oxidation and the template assisted method depend on the external bias/templates and mainly yield polycrystalline materials. In the case of TiO2, it was reported that synthesis method formed only single crystalline rutile phase nanowires on fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) substrate. This was mainly because the lattice of rutile phase TiO2 closely matched with the FTO lattice i.e. greater than 98% compared to 71% with anatase phase which facilitates the nucleation of stable rutile TiO2. Anatase phase TiO2 is preferred for electronic applications because of its crystal plane (1 0 1) that exhibits better electron transport, lower charge carrier recombination rate, better optical transparency and higher surface area. Fabrication methods produce facile vertical anatase phase polycrystalline TiO2 nanotubes. Despite the drawback that they cannot produce single-crystalline phase materials, the resultant polycrystalline vertical TiO2 nanotubes should eliminate random grain networks compared to nanoparticulate film, and also increase contact points for electrical connection, both of which have been vital for improving the efficiency of solar cells, batteries, and water splitting. In principle, poor surface roughness (and surface area) is found in vertical tube architectures compared to vertical wire arrays. The surface roughness of a material is one of the major properties that enhance the electronic device efficiency. In particular, nanomaterials with a higher surface area per unit volume support better dye loading, light absorption and charge separation in Dye Sensitized Solar Cell (DSSC) devices. Berlinguette et al. prepared anatase TiO2 nanowires directly on fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO), a conductive substrate by molecular self-assembly method, but the resulting nanowire arrays were found to be loosely packed and randomly oriented. No literature to date is available on the method of producing anatase TiO2 in vertical nanowires architecture. Furthermore, synthesis methods are limited in tuning the vertical nanowires' diameter, height, porosity and packing density concurrently. Hence, there has been growing demand for new methods which can create vertical nanoarrays and also allow tuning of the materials features such as packing density, height and diameter of the vertical nanowires.


Electrospinning, a fabrication method, produces one dimensional anatase TiO2 nanofibers by passing the sol–gel solution through an electrically conductive nozzle tip where a solution droplet is formed. Upon applying a high voltage, the droplet gets charged and changes its shape into a cone, which is then elongated into a fiber of micron or nano-size depending on the surface tension/molecular weight/viscosity of the solution. These fibers were collected on a metal collector. The electrospinning method has been explored for producing anatase one dimensional TiO2 in hollow, porous, and core-shell nanostructures in random architectures. Despite its great potential for scalability and cost effectiveness, the use of electrospinning in the domain of nanoelectronics has remained less explored until now, owing to its inability to produce vertically aligned nanomaterials on any conductive substrate. Electrospinning, due to its nature, cannot create vertically aligned nanowires directly because the nanofibers are influenced by gravitational forces during the deposition on a collector. Hence, there has been a great demand for a method to fabricate vertically aligned nanowires on a transparent conductive oxide (TCO) substrate from electrospun nanofibers.
In this communication, we not only demonstrate for the first time the vertical alignment of anatase phase TiO2 nanowires on conductive substrate but also propose electrospinning as the method of fabrication. Horizontally aligned TiO2 nanofibers were produced by using the modified electrospinning set-up and then erected to vertical nanowires on a TCO substrate after a post-treatment process. The vertically aligned nanoarray architectures were analyzed using scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The improvement of this method with high-throughput electrospinning should open new doors to potential applications such as nanostructured solar cells, batteries and water splitting.

The sol–gel solution for electrospinning was prepared by blending 0.2 g of polyvinylpyrolidone (PVP) polymer (Mw = 1300000, Sigma Aldrich), 0.5 g of titanium(IV) isopropoxide (Sigma Aldrich), 1 mL acetic acid (99.7%, ACS. reagent) and 3.5 mL ethanol. The solution was stirred for about 0.5 h and then immediately loaded in two plastic syringes equipped with a 27 G stainless steel needle which has an inner diameter of 250 μm. As shown in Fig. 1, the two needles were connected (with a gap of 1 cm between them) by a 1.5 cm × 1.0 cm size aluminium disc and the disc was connected to a high voltage supply (Gauss High Voltage Research Inc. model RR50-1). The solution feed rate was set to 0.2 mL h−1 using a syringe pump (KDS 200). The needle voltage was held at 15 kV dc voltage between needle and ground. A copper strip with a width of 2 cm was rolled over the rotating disc of diameter of 20 cm, which was then set at a distance of 10 cm from the needles to collect the electrospun fiber. The rotating disc was placed with the air-shield at a distance 5 cm from the needle. The speed of the rotating disc was set at 750 rpm to collect the aligned nanofibers on copper strips. Fibers were collected for 4 h and the fiberous ribbon was peeled off from the copper strip without any damage.


Aligning the fibers to a higher thickness and larger area are the key factors to achieve the vertical wires. Xia et al. used two pieces of conductive collector placed several centimetre apart to uniaxially align the nanofibers. Chase et al. used a slower speed copper wire-framed drum for producing the aligned nanofibers. However, both methods were unable to produce nanofiberous film of micron-level thickness and large area. We modified the electrospinning set up with an air-shield, and used a copper strip rolled around a rotating disc as the collector. The schematic of the instrument setup is shown in Fig. 1

Disc rotation above 750 rpm facilitated for the better alignment of nanofibers initially. However, during electrospinning over the period of time, it was observed that the majority of the TiO2 composite nanofibers were found to have flown away instead of being deposited on the copper strip-collector. This was due to the air turbulence generated by the high speed rotating disc that affected the light-weight and non-sticky TiO2 composite nanofibers. Furthermore, air turbulence also caused poor alignment of the fibers. A non-conductive block with a gap of size 14 cm × 3.5 cm at the centre was designed and it allowed the collection of aligned nanofibers with a higher degree of alignment onto the copper strip without much air disturbance. The design also reduced the collection time. At high voltage, the charged TiO2 composite fibers were quickly attracted towards the collector which in turn, reduced the time required to align the fibers. Therefore, the sol gel composition was optimized in this study such that the voltage applied and the flow rate of the sol–gel solution was as low as possible.
The fiberous ribbon (Fig. 2A) was peeled off from the copper strip without any damage after continuously collecting for 4 h. The fiberous film was sintered in a muffle furnace at 500 °C for 4 h. The samples of the aligned nanofibers were prepared by sticking the fiberous film on a carbon tape then sputter coating with gold for 2 min to reduce the charging effect for the scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM, Quanta 200 FEG System, FEI Company, USA). The SEM analysis was used to examine the alignment and to measure diameter and thickness. The cross sectional analysis using SEM shows that the thickness is 25 μm and that the alignment is uniform throughout its height (Fig. 2). SEM images in Fig. 2B confirm that better alignment of ceramic TiO2 nanofibers was achieved and that the alignment was also continuous over a minimum of a centimetre in length after sintering. Fig. 2A shows the image of the as-spun TiO2 ribbon of size 60 cm × 2 cm containing horizontally aligned nanofibers. This composite ribbon was cut into small pieces with dimension of 1 cm × 2 cm (Fig. 2C), after sintering the size was reduced to 0.6 cm × 1.2 cm (Fig. 2D). There is a 40% size reduction along the fiber length, which is a crucial parameter in producing the approx. 30 μm height vertical nanowires. The resultant nanofiberous ribbon with 60 cm length and 2 cm width was folded along its aligned direction to get a width of 1 cm. A metal strip of size 2 cm × 0.2 cm was placed on one edge of the ribbon as shown in Fig. 3A. It was rolled up together with the fiberous ribbon tightly against the fibers aligned direction such that it forms a compact ribbon-roll, and finally it was removed from the ribbon-roll. Similarly, five such ribbon-rolls were prepared by repeating the electrospinning experiment and above mentioned process. The purpose of making fibers in ribbon-rolls using the plate as a roller was to retain the fibers’ integrity and alignment upon rolling.
The as-prepared six ribbon-rolls were stacked one over one another and hot pressed at 110 °C for 15 min to form a single ribbon sheet, then the sheet was transferred to a paraffin-wax bath of 110 °C and soaked for 1 h. This process enabled the wax to penetrate to the entire portion of the sheet, which helped the fibers to maintain smoothness during the cutting and filing processes. Furthermore, as the paraffin wax is chemically inert, it neither affected the fiber composition nor the morphology. It was observed that processing the TiO2 fiberous sheet beyond 110 °C introduced hardness to the fiberous sheet that made the fiberous sheet brittle during the cutting process. The wax coated fiberous sheet was cut using a very fine bandsaw blade in a direction perpendicular to the fibers alignment. The cut-fiberous sheet was affixed in a vice such that the aligned fibers were standing upright, the top surface of cut-side of the sheet was levelled using a sharp-edge knife, and then vertically erected on a glass plate (Fig. 3E) using polyacrylic glue.
The aligned fiberous sheet was transformed into vertically erected fibers of height more than 5 mm because of this inventive step. It is known that most of the micro/nanoelectronic devices require the active semiconductor film thickness (or height) of the vertical 1D nanostructure to be about a few tens of microns. We have therefore introduced a top-down approach on the vertically erected TiO2/PVP composite fibers to give sizes down to a height of 30 μm.
It was expected that the sintering of TiO2/PVP composite fibers would cause ca. 40% size reduction along the fiber length upon removal of the organic matrix due to the sol–gel composition. A metal spacer with a thickness of 60 μm was chosen for this top-down process and placed on the plate as shown in Fig. 3F. The fibers protruding above the spacer (beyond 60 μm) were trimmed using a penknife to the level of the fibers leveled uniformly throughout the film. This process produced the overall film of thickness of 60 μm (Fig. 4A). The vertically erected nanofibers were of 45– 50 μm height initially, and the acrylic glue layer covered the thickness up to 10–15 μm. The fiberous sheet should therefore be pressed such that the polyacrylic glue occupies minimum thickness (∼10 μm) in between the glass plate and the fiberous sheet during the erection process. This also played a crucial role in producing the ceramic vertical TiO2 nanowires film of desired thickness in the later stage.
The vertical-composite-fiber-based glass plate was placed in an oven for sintering at 500 °C at a ramp rate of 2 °C min−1 and dwell period of 4 h. The organic matrix that contains PVP, paraffin wax, and polyacrylic glue was removed upon sintering, and resulted in the formation of a free-standing vertically aligned ceramic TiO2 nanofiberous film to a total thickness of 27 μm (Fig. 4B) and area size of 0.5 cm × 0.4 cm. Such a thickness range is more preferable for solar cells where the electron diffusion is limited. For example, it was reported in the literature that for the high performance dye solar cells (DSC), the effective electron diffusion length in TiO2 nanotubes could be up to 100 μm.
The SEM images of vertically aligned ceramic TiO2 nanofibers indicated that the average diameter of the ceramic fibers was 90 ± 30 nm (Fig. 4C). The side view of SEM images showed that the fibers were a little wavy, which is also advantageous for applications in solar cells as such an architecture should enhance the internal reflection of sunlight. In the perfectly straight vertical fibers obtained by hydrothermal growth process, the photons from the sunlight could possibly fall between adjacent nanowires without being able to be absorbed by the light harvester. The fiberous film was found to be continuous as well as free from cracks and damage, which is due to the intrinsic entanglement of the fibers and better mechanical strength of the fibers. Vertically aligned fibers processed without wax treatment induced the amalgamation at the top surface of the film during the levelling process, which can be clearly seen in SEMFig. 5.
The thickness of the sintered vertical TiO2 nanowires film was measured to be 27 μm, and was uniform throughout the film. This was confirmed by measuring the thickness at different places of the film. Wax usually decomposes below 300 °C which is lower than the crystallization temperature of the TiO2. This was also confirmed by TEM analysis. Fig. 6A shows the bright-field image TEM images of the nanowires made of crystalline titania nanoparticles with a diameter of ∼12 nm. The selected-area electron-diffraction (SAED) ring patterns the debye-Scherrer concentric rings of (101), (004), (200), (105) and (204) confirmed that the nanofibers were composed of polycrystalline and indexed for anatase phase of TiO2. Fig. 6B shows that the width of neighbouring lattice fringes is 0.35 nm, which corresponds to the (101) plane of anatase TiO2, suggesting that wax treatment did not affect the TiO2 crystalline phase evolution. It also served to avoid the clumping of the fibers during the cutting process. This vertical TiO2 nanowires film with the area of 0.15cm2 was then attached on a FTO substrate by using TiO2 nanoparticles adhesion layer as reported in the literature, shown in Fig. 7.
It was decided to construct a DSSC to investigate the significance of vertically aligned TiO2 nanowires for energy/electronic device applications. As such, 27 μm thick vertically aligned TiO2 nanowires with nanoparticle adhesive layer on FTOs were soaked for 24 h in a 1:1 volume mixture of acetonitrile and tert-butanol of N-719, a light harvesting dye. The dye-adsorbed vertical TiO2 nanowires/FTO was then washed in ethanol, dried and used as the photoelectrode in a DSSC. Platinum (Pt) was sputtered on another FTO which was used as the counter electrode. The photo electrode and the counter electrode (FTO/Pt) were sandwiched together using paraffin film spacer to make the solar cell. The electrolyte containing 0.1 M LiI, 0.03 M iodine, 0.5 M 4-tert-butylpyridine, and 0.6 M 1-propyl-2,3-dimethyl imidazolium iodide in acetonitrile was injected between photo and counter electrodes. Vertically aligned nanowires based DSSC was illuminated at 100 mW cm−2 by using a solar simulator (San Ei, Japan equipped with an AM1.5 filter). The photocurrent density and photocurrent voltage (J–V) characteristics of the device is shown in Fig. 8. As-fabricated DSSC exhibited a short-circuit current (Jsc) of 5.71 mA cm−2, open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.782 V, fill factor (FF) of 64.2%, and with an overall conversion efficiency of 2.87%. Kumar et al. grew a vertical array of rutileTiO2 nanowires on FTO using hydrothermal method and demonstrated an efficiency of 2.9% after optimization. Feng et al. obtained a photoconversion efficiency of 3.39% for TiO2 vertical nanowire arrays grown by solvo-hydrothermal method, with an open circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.769 V, short circuit current density (Jsc) of 7.29 mA cm−2, and fill factor (FF) of 0.62. Better device performance can be achieved by attaching more dye molecules to the facets of the nanowire by making them porous, obtaining lower diameter (<50 nm) wires. Such investigations are underway and will be communicated soon for publication. While hydro-thermal and solvo-thermal synthetic methods are also effective in obtaining vertical nanowires, the safety concern due to high pressure and high temperature conditions, especially during scaling up as industrial processes, empower our method as a good alternative.
It is also to be noted that so far only rutile phase TiO2 nanowires were demonstrated in vertical architecture by the researchers. This is the first report on fabrication of the anatase phase TiO2 as vertical nanowires and also their demonstration in DSSC that resulted in an efficiency of 2.87%. The device results clearly show that vertically erected TiO2 nanowires are electrically connected with FTO, indicating a facile and an expeditious route towards the fabrication of vertically-standing TiO2 nanowires. Using our method, it can be expected that TiO2 nanowires arrays longer than 10 μm can be fabricated, which would enable greater light absorption and effective charge transfer capabilities.

In summary, we have developed a facile and effective approach for the fabrication of vertically aligned anatase TiO2 nanowires by the electrospinning method. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of anatase phase TiO2 nanowires in a vertical architecture, and also the first demonstration of fabricating the vertical nanowires on FTO substrate using electrospinning. Aligned nanofiberous TiO2 ribbons with a thickness of 25 μm and area of 60 cm × 2 cm were produced by using a modified electrospinning set-up and then erected to vertical nanowires on a TCO substrate after the post-treatment. As-produced vertical ceramic TiO2 nanowires possessed an area of 0.2 cm2 with wire diameter 90 ± 30 nm, and wire height up to 27 μm. This is the only possible method by which the height of the vertical nanowires can be easily varied from 10 to 100 μm. Although the present work was demonstrated for preparing vertical anatase TiO2 nanowires, this method could be extended to provide a generic route to vertical nanowires of other metal oxides. Moreover porous, hollow and core-shell vertical nanowires can also be prepared. Conversion efficiency of 2.87% with photocurrent density of 5.71 mA cm−2 and open circuit voltage of 0.782 V was achieved using vertical anatase TiO2 nanowires as the photoelectrode in a DSSC. Enhanced photo conversion efficiency is very likely possible by using this method upon optimizing the height of the vertical nanowires, improving the porosity, and reducing the diameter, which are currently under investigation. We strongly believe that the method developed here will offer benefits to the researchers who work in the alternative energy and electronic domains where the semiconducting materials cannot be grown vertically and directly on conductive substrates.


This work was supported by Singapore NRF-CRP grant on “Nanonets for harnessing solar energy and storage” and also NUS and NTU for providing facilities to carry out the research. Dr Thavasi acknowledges NUSNNI-NanoCore for the support.


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011