 DOI: 10.1039/C0JM01593H
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 9740-9747

Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical Terms


Yijie
Xia
,

Hongmei
Zhang
 and 

Jianyong
Ouyang
*

Department of Materials and Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117574. E-mail: mseoj@nus.edu.sg

Received
25th May 2010
, Accepted 21st July 2010
First published on
20th September 2010

This paper reports the significant conductivity enhancement of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) films through a treatment with aqueous solutions of zwitterions for the first time. The conductivity enhancement was dependent on the structure of the zwitterions and the experimental conditions during the treatment, such as the concentration of the zwitterions and the temperature. Conductivity enhancement from 0.2 to 92.4 S cm−1 was observed on PEDOT:PSS films after a zwitterion treatment. The chemical and physical characterizations indicate the lowering of the energy barrier for charge hopping across the PEDOT chains, the loss of poly(styrene sulfonate) acid (PSSH) chains from the PEDOT:PSS film, and the conformational change of the PEDOT chains after the zwitterion treatment. These highly conductive PEDOT:PSS films could be used to replace indium tin oxide (ITO) as the transparent anode of polymer photovoltaic cells (PVs). Power conversion efficiency as high as 2.48% was observed on the polymer PVs with a zwitterion-treated PEDOT:PSS film as the transparent anode.

Optoelectronic devices, such as liquid crystal displays (LCDs), light-emitting diodes (LEDs), solar cells, and touch panel displays, have been attracting intense attention, due to their strong application in many aspects. The market for optoelectronic devices has been rapidly expanding. At least one electrode is required to be transparent for the purpose of emitting or harvesting light in optoelectronic devices. Traditionally, indium tin oxide (ITO) is the material as the transparent electrode of optoelectronic devices. However, ITO has some drawbacks, such as high mechanical brittleness, poor adhesion on organic and polymeric materials, and the limited availability of indium that has resulted in a skyrocketing in price. Therefore, new conductive materials are urgently needed to replace ITO as the transparent electrode. Many materials, including conducting polymers, carbon nanotubes, and graphenes, have been investigated as the transparent electrode of optoelectronic devices.

Among these materials, poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) (chemical structure shown in Scheme 1) is quite promising as a next-generation transparent electrode material. PEDOT:PSS is the most successful conducting polymer in terms of the commercial application. It can be dispersed in water and some organic solvents, and its films can be readily fabricated through conventional solution processing, such as spin coating. PEDOT:PSS films have a high transparency in the visible range, high mechanical flexibility, and excellent thermal stability. However, PEDOT:PSS suffers a problem of low conductivity. An as-prepared PEDOT:PSS film fabricated from aqueous solution usually has a conductivity below 1 S cm−1, which is remarkably lower than ITO. Hence, it is important to significantly enhance the conductivity of the PEDOT:PSS film to be comparable to that of ITO.
It is highly possible to significantly improve the conductivity of PEDOT:PSS, because PEDOTs doped with small anions can have a conductivity comparable to that of ITO. Great effort has been made in improving the conductivity of PEDOT:PSS, and several methods have been reported to significantly enhance the conductivity of PEDOT:PSS. The first method is to add a polar organic compound with a high boiling point, such as ethylene glycol or dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), into PEDOT:PSS aqueous solution or treat PEDOT:PSS films with such a compound. This method can enhance the conductivity of PEDOT:PSS to 102 S cm−1. Their application as the transparent electrode of organic/polymeric LEDs and photovoltaic cells (PVs) and the electrodes of field-effect transistors were demonstrated as well. Later, significant conductivity enhancement was also observed on PEDOT:PSS by introducing ionic liquids or anionic surfactants into the PEDOT:PSS aqueous solution. Recently, we discovered that the conductivity of a PEDOT:PSS film could be significantly enhanced through a treatment with certain salts, carboxylic acids or inorganic acids. Yoo et al. also reported the conductivity enhancement of PEDOT:PSS through a similar treatment with dichloroacetic acid.
The method to significantly enhance the conductivity of PEDOT:PSS through a treatment with a salt, such as CuCl2 or InCl3, is simple and effective. The conductivity enhancement was attributed to the loss of PSSH from the PEDOT:PSS films and the conformational change of the PEDOT chains as the result of the ion-induced charge screening between PEDOT and PSS. Conductivity enhancement by a factor of more than 1000 was observed. One concern for the salt-treated PEDOT:PSS films is related to the presence of ions that can diffuse in the films. In fact, a high leakage current caused by the metal ion diffusion from PEDOT:PSS into the organic layer was observed. In this manuscript, we report the use of zwitterions, which have both positive and negative charges in one molecule, to solve this problem. The zwitterions can effectively induce a charge screening between PEDOT and PSS and consequently lead to significant conductivity enhancement, while their large size and coulombic interactions lead to difficulty in diffusing in the PEDOT:PSS films. We also demonstrated high-performance polymer PVs with the zwitterion-treated PEDOT:PSS films as the transparent electrode.

PEDOT:PSS aqueous solution (Baytron P, renamed to Clevios™ P, Item No. 1802705, Lot No. HCE07P107) was purchased from H. C. Starck. The concentration of PEDOT:PSS was 1.3% by weight, and the weight ratio of PSS to PEDOT was 2.5. All other chemicals were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. These materials were used without further purification.


PEDOT:PSS films were prepared by spin-coating the PEDOT:PSS aqueous solution on 1.3 × 1.3 cm2 glass substrates, which were pre-cleaned by detergent, de-ionized (DI) water, acetone and isopropyl alcohol in sequence. The PEDOT:PSS films were dried at 110 °C on a hot plate for 30 min. The film thickness was ca. 130 nm. The treatment with a zwitterion solution was performed by dropping 150 μL aqueous solution of a zwitterion on a PEDOT:PSS film on a hot plate at 140 °C. The film dried after about 5 min. The zwitterion-treated PEDOT:PSS films were cooled to room temperature in air and successively rinsed with DI water three times. Then, they were dried at 140 °C for 5 min again. The film thickness was ca. 110 nm after the treatment.


The conductivities of the polymer films were measured by the van der Pauw four-point probe technique with a Keithley 2400 source/meter. The electrical contacts were made by pressing indium on the four corners of each PEDOT:PSS film on a glass substrate. The UV-Vis-NIR absorption spectra of the polymer films were taken with a Varian Cary 5000 UV-Vis-NIR spectrometer, and the atomic force microscopic (AFM) images of the polymer films were acquired using a Veeco NanoScope IV Multi-Mode AFM with the tapping mode. The thicknesses of the polymer films were determined with an Alpha 500 step profiler. The temperature dependences of the resistivities of the untreated and zwitterion-treated PEDOT:PSS films were tested using a Janis Research VPF-475 Dewar with liquid nitrogen as coolant and a Conductus LTC-11 temperature controller. The Raman spectra of the polymer films were taken in a back scattering configuration using a Jobin Yvon Horiba LabRam HR800 Raman system with a 514.5 nm Ar+ laser as the excitation source. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurements were carried out with a ECO CHEMIE AUTOLAB PGSTAT 302N + FRA2 system in 0.1 M NaCl solution with a Au disc coated with a PEDOT:PSS film as the working electrode, a Pt wire as the counter electrode, and Ag/AgCl (3 M NaCl) as the reference electrode. The PEDOT:PSS film was coated by dropping PEDOT:PSS aqueous solution on the Au disc of 2.0 mm in diameter, which was then dried at 140 °C. After measuring the CVs, the PEDOT:PSS film was treated with a zwitterion solution and subsequently dried at 140 °C. Then, CVs were carried out on this zwitterion-treated PEDOT:PSS film again.


The highly conductive PEDOT:PSS films with a thickness of 130 nm on glass substrate were used as the bottom electrode of polymer PVs. The active layer was formed by spin coating a chlorobenzene solution consisting of 17 mg ml−1 poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and 17 mg ml−1 [6,6]-phenyl-C60-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) (chemical structure shown in Scheme 1) at 500 rpm for 1 min in a glove-box filled with N2; it dried after 20 min at room temperature. Then, it was annealed at 120 °C for 10 min in the glove-box. The top electrode was fabricated by thermally depositing a LiF layer of 0.5 nm in thickness and subsequently a Al layer of 110 nm in thickness in a vacuum of 10−7 mbar. Each PV had an active area of 0.11 cm2. The polymer PVs were encapsulated in the glove box with a UV-curable epoxy and glass sheets and then taken out for the photovoltaic study in air. The photovoltaic performance of the devices was measured with a computer-programmed Keithley 2400 source/meter. The light source was a Newport's Oriel class A solar simulator, which simulated AM1.5 sunlight (100 mW cm−2) and was certified to the JIS C 8912 standard.


A zwitterion is a compound that has both the cation and anion in one molecule, and the cationic and anionic charges are immobile. This unique characteristic renders zwitterions important applications, such as surfactants, detergents, and in rechargeable lithium batteries and drug delivery. Their interesting structure stimulates us to study the zwitterion effect on the structure and properties of PEDOT:PSS. Three zwitterions, 1-(N,N-dimethylcarbamoyl)-4-(2-sulfoethyl)pyridinium hydroxide (DMCSP), N-dodecyl-N,N-dimethyl-3-ammonio-1-propanesulfonate (DDMAP), and N,N-dimethyl-N-[3-(sulfooxy)propyl]-1-nonanaminium hydroxide (DNSPN), were used to treat PEDOT:PSS films. Their chemical structures are shown in Scheme 1. The positive charge is located on a nitrogen atom, and the negative charge is present as SO3− or OSO3− in these zwitterions. Zwitterions present in PEDOT:PSS should diffuse slowly due to their bulky size and the coulombic interactions with the positively charged PEDOT and negatively charged PSS chains.

Significant conductivity enhancement was observed on the PEDOT:PSS films after treatment with solutions of these zwitterions. The conductivity enhancement depends on the structure of the zwitterions. The conductivity was 0.2 S cm−1 for an as-prepared PEDOT:PSS film. It increased to 5.9, 49.2 and 57.7 S cm−1 after the PEDOT:PSS films were treated with 0.01 M solutions of DMCSP, DDMAP and DNSPN, respectively. The lower conductivity enhancement by a treatment with DMCSP than with the other two zwitterions may be related to the rigid aromatic ring in DMCSP.
The conductivity enhancement is also affected by the concentration of the zwitterion solutions (Fig. 1). Significant conductivity enhancement was observed even at a low concentration of the zwitterions. The highest conductivities were 81.2 and 92.4 S cm−1 for PEDOT:PSS after treatment with 3 M DMCSP and 0.5 M DNSPN, respectively (the highest concentrations used for these two zwitterions). The concentration effect of the zwitterions on the conductivity of PEDOT:PSS is quite similar to that found through treatment with a normal salt like CuCl2 or InCl3. The concentration effect of DDMAP on the conductivity of PEDOT:PSS was not studied, because DDMAP solutions became viscous even at a low concentration and were difficult to wash away from the PEDOT:PSS films.
Besides the structure and the concentration of the zwitterions, the temperature during the treatment also affected the conductivity. Fig. 2 shows the dependence of the conductivity of the PEDOT:PSS films treated with 3 M DMCSP on the treatment temperature from 80 up to 200 °C. The conductivity increased with increasing treatment temperature from 80 to 140 °C, then dropped when the temperature was further increased to 200 °C. The conductivity drop may be related to the degradation of PEDOT:PSS at such a high temperature. The optimal temperature for the zwitterion treatment of PEDOT:PSS is 140 °C, which coincides with that by a treatment with salts or acids. It is believed that the effect of the temperature during the treatment on the conductivity of the PEDOT:PSS film is related to the thermal properties of the PEDOT:PSS film.
This research work to enhance the conductivity of PEDOT:PSS with zwitterions is different from that reported by Bhandari et al. They reported the electrochromism of PEDOTs doped with electrochromic zwitterionic viologen, which was induced into PEDOTs during the electrochemical polymerization of the monomer and was used to enhance the electrochromic properties of PEDOTs. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time to observe the significant conductivity enhancement of PEDOT:PSS films induced by zwitterions.

The mechanism for the conductivity enhancement though the zwitterion treatment was studied by various chemical and physical characterizations. The UV-Vis-NIR absorption spectra of untreated- and zwitterion-treated PEDOT:PSS films are shown in Fig. 3. The decrease in the absorption intensity of two bands in the UV range, which originate from PSS, after the zwitterion treatment indicates the decrease of the PSSH amount in PEDOT:PSS. The results are similar to that with the salt treatments.

The PSS decrease is confirmed by the observation of PEDOT:PSS precipitation after adding 300 μL 3 M DMCSP into 500 μL PEDOT:PSS aqueous solution. The stable dispersion of PEDOT:PSS in water is due to the presence of excess PSSH. When the zwitterion induces the leaving of some PSSH from PEDOT:PSS, PEDOT becomes unstable and precipitates.
The decreasing PSSH amount in PEDOT:PSS can facilitate the charge transport across the conjugated PEDOT chains. As Lang et al. pointed out, there is a core–shell structure in an as-prepared PEDOT:PSS film. The core rich in conductive PEDOT is surrounded with a shell rich in insulating PSSH. The decreasing PSSH amount will reduce the thickness of the insulating shell. Consequently, the interchain charge transport will be improved. This is confirmed by the temperature dependences of the resistivities of the PEDOT:PSS films before and after the treatment. The resistivities of the PEDOT:PSS films were measured from 300 down to 110 K (Fig. 4). The temperature dependences of the resistivities can be fitted by the one-dimensional variable range hopping (VRH) model:
R(T) = R0exp[(T0/T)1/2]
where
T0 = 16/kBN(EF)L‖L⊥2 is the energy barrier between the localized states, N(EF) the density of the states at the Fermi level, and L‖ (L⊥) the localization length in the parallel (perpendicular) direction. The T0 value remarkably decreased for the PEDOT:PSS film after the zwitterion treatment. It was 2660 K for the untreated PEDOT:PSS film, and decreased to 1191, 858 and 288 K for the PEDOT:PSS films treated with 0.01 M DDMAP, 3 M DMCSP and 0.5 M DNSPN, respectively. The T0 values are consistent with the conductivities of these PEDOT:PSS films at room temperature, which are 0.2, 49.2, 81.2 and 92.4 S cm−1 for the untreated, DDMAP, DMCSP and DNSPN treated PEDOT:PSS films, respectively. Obviously, T0 decreases with the increasing conductivity and suggests that the zwitterion treatment lowers the energy barrier for the charge transport across the conductive PEDOT chains and increases the localization length.

The morphology of the PEDOT:PSS films was studied by AFM before and after the zwitterion treatment. As shown in Fig. 5, an untreated PEDOT:PSS film was quite smooth with a roughness of 1.06 nm. The surface became rougher after the zwitterion solution treatment. The roughnesses were 4.59, 3.02 and 2.39 nm for the PEDOT:PSS films treated with DNSPN, DMCSP and DDMAP, respectively. This suggests the conformational change of the polymer chains during the zwitterion treatment.
The conformational change of the PEDOT chains after the zwitterion treatment was further studied by Raman spectroscopy. Fig. 6 shows the Raman spectra of untreated and 3 M DMCSP-treated PEDOT:PSS films. The PEDOT:PSS films treated with DNSPN and DDMAP were also studied by Raman spectroscopy. The spectra are similar to that of the DMCSP-treated Raman spectrum, and so are not shown. The Raman band between 1400 and 1500 cm−1, which corresponds to the stretching vibration of the CC bonds of PEDOT, is red-shifted and becomes narrower after the DMCSP treatment. This change is similar to that of PEDOT:PSS by a treatment with ethylene glycol and indicates that some PEDOT chains change from a benzenoid to a quinoid structure.
The electrochemical activity of the PEDOT:PSS film is quite sensitive to its conductivity. The zwitterion-treated PEDOT:PSS films were investigated by CV in a 0.1 M NaCl aqueous solution (Fig. 7). The CVs of the DNSPN- and DDMAP-treated PEDOT:PSS films are similar to that of the DMCSP-treated PEDOT:PSS film and are not shown. The PEDOT:PSS film exhibited electrochemical activity only at potentials higher than −0.2 V before the treatment, while additional electrochemical activity appeared at potentials below −0.2 V after the DMCSP treatment. The change in the electrochemical behavior is similar to that of PEDOT:PSS treated with ethylene glycol. It can be attributed to the decreasing PSSH amount and the conformational change of the PEDOT chains after the treatment.
The dynamic process of the zwitterion treatment was studied by monitoring the resistances of the PEDOT:PSS films during the treatment (Fig. 8). The configuration for the resistance measured is schematically shown in the inset of Fig. 8. Indium (In) was pressed at the four corners of each PEDOT:PSS film to facilitate the electrical contact. The areas of the PEDOT:PSS films under indium were not treated by the zwitterions, so that the value of the transient resistances was not very meaningful. However, their change provided important information for the dynamic process during the zwitterion treatment. The transient resistances of the PEDOT:PSS film treated with 1 M CuBr2 aqueous solution were also presented for comparison. The resistance immediately decreased when the PEDOT:PSS film was treated with 1 M CuBr2 or 0.5 M DNSPN solution. This indicates that the dynamic process of zwitterion treatment is similar to the treatment with a simple salt. Two processes occuring during the treatment can affect the transient resistance of the PEDOT:PSS film. One is the water-induced swelling of the PEDOT:PSS film. This will lower the inter-PEDOT interactions and lead to the increase of the resistance. Another is the resistance decrease induced by the salt or a zwitterion. The hump observed for the transient resistances upon treatment with 3 M DMCSP suggests that the resistance decrease during the DMCSP treatment is slower than during the DNSPN treatment. On the other hand, the big hump for the transient resistances through the treatment with 0.01 M DDMAP may be related to the low DDMAP concentration. The resistance increases at the beginning is due to the water-induced swelling of the polymer chains, while the zwitterion-induced resistance decrease takes place after the evaporation of water.
The experimental results indicate that the mechanism for the conductivity enhancement of PEDOT:PSS by the zwitterion treatment is similar to that by the treatment with a simple salt such as CuBr2 or InCl3. A zwitterion can have coulombic interactions with both the positively charged PEDOT and negatively charged PSS, so that it can effectively screen the coulombic attraction between PEDOT and PSS (Scheme 2). The decrease in the coulombic attraction between PEDOT and PSS can give rise to the PSSH loss from the PEDOT:PSS film and the conformational change of the PEDOT chains. These changes in the compositions and structure of PEDOT:PSS result into the conductivity enhancement.

PEDOT:PSS used in the electronic devices usually has an electronic purity to minimize the diffusion of small ions. Zwitterions are difficult to diffuse or drift under electrical field due to their bulky size and the presence of both positive and negative charges in the same molecule. The ionic conductivity of zwitterions should be significantly lower than for small normal ions in conducting polymers. The zwitterion-treated PEDOT:PSS films were then used as the transparent electrode of polymer PVs.

The architecture of the polymer PVs is illustrated in the inset of Fig. 9(a). There is no ITO in these PVs. The zwitterion-treated PEDOT:PSS films with a thickness of 130 nm were used as the transparent anode. Highly conductive PEDOT:PSS films obtained through a treatment with solutions of 1 M CuCl2 and 1 M CuBr2 were used as the anode of polymer PVs for comparison. The current density (J)–voltage (V) curves of these polymer PVs are presented in Fig. 9. The photovoltaic parameters, including the short-circuit current (Jsc), open-circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (FF), and power conversion efficiency (PCE), are summarized in Table 1.
Anode
Conductivity/S cm−1

J
sc/mA cm−2

V
oc/V

FF

PCE (%)
DMCSP–PEDOT:PSS
81.2
7.00
0.60
0.30
1.24
DDMAP–PEDOT:PSS
49.2
8.51
0.57
0.43
2.08
DNSPN–PEDOT:PSS
92.4
8.25
0.55
0.40
1.79
CuCl2–PEDOT:PSS
168.7
2.85
0.52
0.29
0.43
CuBr2–PEDOT:PSS
187.5
6.62
0.52
0.31
1.08
Untreated PEDOT:PSS
0.2
0.49
0.60
0.31
0.09
The photovoltaic performance of these polymer PVs is strongly affected by the PEDOT:PSS anode. Though the PEDOT:PSS films treated with CuCl2 and CuBr2 had higher conductivities than that treated with the zwitterions, the OPVs with the latter exhibited saliently better photovoltaic efficiency than that with the former. In addition, the dark currents of the polymer PVs with the zwitterion-treated PEDOT:PSS films are remarkably lower than that with the CuCl2- and CuBr2-treated PEDOT:PSS films. This can be attributed to the presence of the small ions in the salt-treated PEDOT:PSS films. It has been realized that the presence of small ions in PEDOT:PSS can deteriorate the performance of the polymer light-emitting diodes and polymer PVs. The migration of metal ions in to the active layer can cause a high leakage current or electrical shorting of the device.
The photovoltaic stability of the polymer PVs is also dependent on the PEDOT:PSS anode. The polymer PVs encapsulated with glass sheets were put in air and tested after 24 h. The photovoltaic efficiency of the PVs with the DMCSP-treated PEDOT:PSS anode decreased by 13% after 24 h, whereas that with the CuCl2-treated PEDOT:PSS anode exhibited a decreased in the photovoltaic efficiency of 42% under the same experimental conditions. The different stability can be attributed to the ion diffusion of small ions such as Cu2+ and Cl− from the PEDOT:PSS film into the active P3HT:PCBM layer. Similar ion diffusion is however difficult for the zwitterions.
We also fabricated control polymer PVs with an untreated PEDOT:PSS film as the anode (Fig. 9c). The devices exhibited a photovoltaic efficiency of 0.09% which can be attributed to the low conductivity of the polymer anode.
It seems that the photovoltaic efficiencies of the polymer PVs are inconsistent with the conductivities of the zwitterion-treated PEDOT:PSS films. The DDMAP-treated PEDOT:PSS film has a conductivity lower than the PEDOT:PSS films treated with the other two zwitterions, whereas the polymer PV with the DDMAP-treated PEDOT:PSS anode has the highest photovoltaic efficiency. This can be attributed to the different morphologies of the PEDOT:PSS films treated with different zwitterions. Device performance depends not only on the conductivity of anode but also on the roughness of the anode surface. Though the PEDOT:PSS film treated by DDMAP has the lowest conductivity among the PEDOT:PSS films treated with the three zwitterions, it has the smoothest surface as revealed by AFM as shown in Fig. 5. This is further confirmed by putting a MoO3 layer of 6 nm in thickness as the buffer layer between a zwitterion-treated PEDOT:PSS film and the active P3HT:PCBM layer. Such a buffer layer can make the electrode surface smoother and help the charge collection, The performance of the devices was improved after adding the MoO3 buffer layer (Fig. 10). The polymer PVs with PEDOT:PSS films treated with the three zwitterions exhibited quite similar photovoltaic performance. The device with the DDMAP-treated PEDOT:PSS film as the anode exhibited the highest photovoltaic performance: Jsc of 9.49 mA cm−2, Voc of 0.56 V, FF of 0.47, and PCE of 2.48%. The PCEs of the OPVs with DMCSP- and DNSPN-treated PEDOT:PSS films as the anode were significantly improved to 2.22% and 2.28%, respectively.

The conductivity of PEDOT:PSS films could be significantly enhanced to close to 100 S cm−1 through a treatment with aqueous solutions of zwitterions. The mechanism for the conduction enhancement is attributed to the zwitterion-induced charge screening. The zwitterions effectively screen the coulombic attraction between the PEDOT and PSS chains, resulting in PSSH loss from the PEDOT:PSS film and the conformational change of PEDOT chains. The zwitterion-treated PEDOT:PSS films have a low ion diffusion due to the bulky size and the two opposite charges in the same molecule of the zwitterion. They are more suitable to replace ITO as the anode of PVs than PEDOT:PSS films treated with normal salts. Photovoltaic efficiency as high as 2.48% was achieved on the P3HT:PCBM PVs with zwitterion-treated PEDOT:PSS films as the anode.


This research work was financially supported by a grant from the National University of Singapore (Project NO: RG-284-001-136).


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010