 DOI: 10.1039/C3NJ00406F
(Paper)
New J. Chem., 2013, 37, 2440-2447

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Zhiming
Wang
*,

Xiaohui
Song
,

Lingling
Ma
,

Ying
Feng
,

Cheng
Gu
,

Xiaojuan
Zhang
,

Ping
Lu
* and 

Yuguang
Ma


School of Petrochemical Engineering, Shenyang University of Technology, 30 Guanghua Street, Liaoyang, 111003, P. R. China. E-mail: wangzm2011@yahoo.com.cn; Fax: +86 419 5319409; Tel: +86 419 5319409

State Key Laboratory of Supramolecular Structure and Materials, Jilin University, 2699 Qianjin Avenue, Changchun, 130012, P. R. China. E-mail: lup@jlu.edu.cn; Fax: +86 431 85168480; Tel: +86 431 85168480

Research Institute of Liaoyang Petrochemical Company, Petro-China, Liaoyang, 111003, P. R. China

Received
(in Montpellier, France)
18th April 2013
, Accepted 14th May 2013
First published on 15th May 2013
A triphenylamine-capped solution-processable wholly aromatic conjugated molecule, TPA-TVBP, was designed and synthesized. It exhibited a high thermodynamic stability and good film forming ability as expected, originating from the absence of alkyl and alkoxyl moieties. The triphenylamine cap provided a good solubility because of three-dimensional propeller structure and a donor moiety to construct the organic D–π–A molecule with the electron-deficient tribenzo[a,c,i]phenazine moiety as the acceptor. The special electrochemical stability was discussed through cyclic voltammetry and potential switching step measurements, and the photocurrent generation in photovoltaic device application was described further. Simple bulk heterojunction photovoltaic cells were fabricated using TPA-TVBP and PCBM, and the higher short circuit current and fill factor than the similar structures were achieved. Based on the mechanism of the photocurrent generation, the TPA-TVBP molecule would be a good model molecule to investigate the electrochemical properties of the triphenylamine-capped material in photovoltaic device application.

Solution-processable molecules have attracted increasing attention for application in organic light-emitting diodes (OLED) and organic photovoltaic (OPV) devices. With respect to their polymer counterparts, small molecule compounds presenting a better reproducibility of synthesis and easier purification, together with their precise (monodisperse) chemical structures facilitate the establishment of structure–property relationships. Their solution processability offers the possibility of avoiding the troublesome high-precision mask alignment during the vacuum deposition process, particularly to produce large-area colour display and solar panels. Based on the development of OLED and OPV materials for possible commercial applications, some of the alkyl and alkoxyl moieties are introduced to enhance solution processability, which is beneficial to adjust the efficiency and reduce the fabricating cost. However, these alkyl and alkoxyl moieties can be readily decomposed than their aryl block because of their instability upon exposure to the sun and oxygen. Therefore, the wholly aromatic organic molecule should be a better choice to extend the service life of photoelectric material. Generally, the wholly aromatic structure possesses high photo-thermal stability and robust morphology, while the solubility remains a key issue.

The triphenylamine (TPA) moiety possesses three-dimensional propeller structure, which can effectively avoid molecular aggregation, and is usually chosen as a block to increase solution-processability, TPA has been reported as a good p-doping unit in photoelectric research and used as a hole-injection and transport moiety. As shown in Scheme 1, many solution-processable molecules containing TPA reported exhibit excellent performance in photoelectric devices, while their reversibility (stability) in the redox process is ignored, which is important for their service life.
Tribenzo[a,c,i]phenazine (TBP) is a famous liquid crystal molecule, which has good thermal and environmental stability. The low electron injection barrier and the reversible re-dox process in reduction are suitable for balancing the carrier transport. Recently, we designed a model molecule to investigate the electrochemical stability of the TPA-capped material in OPV application. With the TPA unit, we chose TBP as an accepter unit to construct the wholly aromatic organic D–π–A molecule TPA-TVBP (Scheme 2), which consists of a rigid moiety of TBP and a flexible moiety of TPA linked via a conjugated bridge. As expected, TPA-TVBP exhibits good solution-processability and space-charge-separation capability, high thermodynamic stability and good film forming ability. The stable electrochemical property in the doping state is discussed by cyclic voltammetry and potential switching step measurements further. Here, we report its synthesis, characterization and primary photovoltaic application as a solution-processable OPV material.

As shown in Scheme 2, TPA-TVBP was synthesized via cross-coupling of 2,7-dibromotribenzo[a,c,i]phenazine (M3) with two equivalents of 4-N,N-diphenylaminostyrene (M2) under typical Heck reaction conditions, catalyzed by Pd(OAc)2 and K3PO4.M2 was prepared as reported in the literature, and M3 was prepared starting from 2,7-dibromophenanthrene-9,10-dione and naphthalene-2,3-diamine using a similar method described in our previous report with a little modification. The NMR spectrum of TPA-TVBP is shown in Fig. 1, and all of the peaks observed in the aromatic range corresponded well to its expected structure as marked.


Thermal properties of the molecule were investigated using thermo-gravimetric analysis (TGA) and differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) at a heating rate of 10 °C min−1 under a nitrogen atmosphere (Fig. 2). The molecule showed a small weight loss (<5%) at 510 °C, and the weight loss below 200 °C may be due to the loss of the trapped solvent (DMAC) in the material. The Tg value was measured to be 178 °C (Fig. 2 inset), and this implied that the TPA-TVBP molecule exhibited glass phase properties. Such high Td and Tg indicate that TPA-TVBP could form morphologically stable amorphous films upon thermal evaporation, which is very important for its application in OLED and OPV.


Benefited from its donor–acceptor structure linked with a conjugated bridge as designed, TPA-TVBP showed a broad absorption band covering the wavelength range from 250 to 650 nm (Fig. 3a), which is favorable for the application in photovoltaic devices. The normalized optical absorption spectra of TPA-TVBP in dilute (10−5 M) THF solutions exhibited two strong absorption peaks at 308 and 406 nm and an absorption band at 505 nm respectively. In the film state, they were red-shifted to 312, 414, and 535 nm, respectively. The absorption edge of the film extended to 650 nm, from which the corresponding optical energy gap (Eoptg) was calculated to be 1.9 eV.


TPA-TVBP showed a low and broad emission band at 495 nm in THF (10−5 M), while the emission of its film was too weak to be observed with a band at around 650 nm. Solvatochromism experiments of the TPA-TVBP were done in different polarity solvents and some fluorescence spectra were split into two parts obviously, which might have originated from the donor part and the ICT state. When the solvent polarity is increased, the emission maximum of TPA-TVBP was blue-shifted, from 596 nm in hexane, 551 nm in toluene, 494 nm in THF to 462 nm in acetonitrile, accompanying the full width at half maximum (FWHM) significantly broadened from 150 nm in hexane to 300 nm in acetonitrile. Such a change indicated that the dipole moment or the molecular excited state structure of TPA-TVBP had been affected by the solvent, inducing the change in the intramolecular charge and the energy transfer process. Meanwhile, it was suggested that the quinoxaline structure (TBP) had strong electron-withdrawing ability and was suitable to construct the space charge separation system, which was also confirmed by the data of electrochemistry and molecule simulation discussed below.

The electronic properties of compound TPA-TVBP had been investigated by theoretical calculations. Calculations were done using the restricted B3LYP/6-31G(d)* functions. The orbital distribution of HOMO and LUMO levels of neutral molecule TPA-TVBP is shown in Fig. 4. The HOMO state density was mainly distributed on the two triphenylamine (TPA) moieties and the phenanthrene part of the tribenzo[a,c,i]phenazine moiety. The electron density of LUMO was mainly localized at the naphthalene part of the tribenzo[a,c,i]phenazine moiety. This was a strong proof of space-charge-separation and could greatly enhance exciton dissociation and decrease the recombination of charged species to increase the light-current intensity at the electrode.

The optimized geometry of TPA-TVBP indicated that the two TPA moieties at the end of the molecule were in 3-D spatial arrangement. The nonplanar conformation of TPA-TVBP could be beneficial to increase solution-processability and the amorphous film forming ability. While the obvious planar structure of TVBP indicated that the molecule would be prone to aggregate under proper conditions, and increase the charge mobility when they aggregated in blend. Such a molecular structure balanced rigidity and flexibility, determining its excellent film forming abilities.

As expected, TPA-TVBP was soluble in common organic solvents such as THF, toluene, and chlorobenzene. High quality amorphous films could be obtained by spin-coating from solution as shown in Fig. 4. The AFM images of TPA-TVBP film on an indium-tin-oxide (ITO) substrate (10 mg mL−1 in chlorobenzene, 1000 rps) revealed that the surface roughness was 0.6 nm, the same as the polymer roughness. This proved that the planar unit had no influence on film morphology. After annealing at 90 °C in a N2 atmosphere for 30 min, the film remained unchanged. It suggested that the film of the molecule was suitable for applications such as thin film devices with good film-forming ability and morphological stability under Joule heating and solar irradiation during operation. This was derived from the all aromatic structure and high thermodynamic stability of the wholly aromatic structure. When the annealing temperature was increased to 160 °C in a N2 atmosphere for 10 min, the roughness changed only from 1.09 nm to 1.69 nm.

As shown in Fig. 5, the blend film of TPA-TVBP and PCBM (on the ITO substrate 10 mg mL−1 in chlorobenzene, 1000 rps) revealed that the surface roughness was only 0.7 nm, which implied that the PCBM had no influence on the film of TPA-TVBP. Significantly, the blend became even flatter than original spin-coated film after annealing at 90 °C and 160 °C in a N2 atmosphere for 30 min and 10 min, respectively. This may be properly ascribed to the restrained aggregation of PCBM doping. All of this proved that the wholly aromatic structure TPA-TVBP was suitable as a better film material with solution-processable ability.

The electrochemical behavior and the electrochemical energy levels of the TPA-TVBP were investigated using cyclic voltammetry (CV) in a standard three-electrode electrochemical cell. The CV measurement in solution was conducted in CH2Cl2 and DMF (1:1) with 0.1 M tetra-n-butylammonium hexafluorophosphate (n-Bu4NPF6) as an electrolyte at room temperature. HOMO and LUMO levels were estimated using the energy level of the ferrocene (Fc) reference (4.8 eV) and calibrated with E1/2(Fc/Fc+) = 0.11 V.

As shown in Fig. 6, in the positive potential region there was a couple of oxidation/re-reduction peaks with the onset oxidation potential (Eonsetox) at 0.53 V vs. Ag wire which was from the TPA unit. And a couple of reduction peaks in the negative potential region with onset reduction potential (Eonsetred) at −1.30 V vs. Ag wire was observed, which is affirmed from the TBP unit. This was consistent with the results of molecular simulation fact that HOMO was localized at the TPA unit and LUMO was localized at the TBP unit. HOMO and LUMO levels were calculated to be −5.10 eV and −3.41 eV, respectively, and the electrochemical band gap was 1.69 eV.

Interestingly, when the repetitive cyclic voltammograms were performed in solution, the reduction was kept unchanged on subsequent scans, meaning that TPA-TVBP in the anion state was very stable and the doping/dedoping process was completely reversible as shown in Fig. 7a. During the oxidation process, on subsequent scans in the potential range of 0 V to +0.80 V, the peak current was gradually increased, and in the successive cycles the potential was decreased (Fig. 7b). As shown in Fig. 7c, the TPA-TVBP radical cation formed by oxidation was involved in a dimerization reaction, indicating the cross-linking between the TPA units and the growth of tetraphenylbenzidine (TPB). The oxidation potential was gradually decreased because of the more extended π-electron delocalization of the TPB unit. The electrochemical processes could be described by an EC2E mechanism. That meant the molecule in solution would be electro-deposited on the electrode to form the film.


To discuss the stability of the TPA-TVBP film, the method of potential switching step was introduced, which was widely applied in electrochromism to validate the stability of molecules. TPA-TVBP was spin-coated on the ITO surface to form the film. Its reduction state was switched by stepping the potential between −1.6 and −0.2 V during oxidation with time intervals of 10 s and between −0.8 and 0.8 V during oxidation with time intervals of 5 s, and the current was monitored versus time. As shown in Fig. 8, the current transient shapes of the oxidation and reduction current peaks were different, reaching zero in a few seconds during the potential pulses, but the charge injected in both processes was the same. Mostly, the amount of charge (Q) in each current curve in both processes was very similar, in agreement with the stable anodic electrochemical properties of molecules in film. The current kept unchanged in the successive cycles during the reduction process (Fig. 8a). But during the oxidation process (Fig. 8b), on subsequent scans, the peak current was increased firstly, indicating that the cross-linking reaction occurred between the TPA units. And then it was gradually decreased in the successive cycles, which was normally observed and suggested that the dimerization reaction was finished. This showed that the electropolymerization process could also form the TPB-TVBP film in the solid state.

For further understanding the electrochemical stability of the TPB-TVBP, which was formed by the cross-linking of TPA-TVBP (Fig. 9a), a film on an ITO electrode was got by the way of electro-deposition using the CV method from the TPA-TVBP solution. In the successive scan measurements, the current was increased and the potential changed in the same way as the scan cycle increased. The formed TPB-TVBP film can be treated as the TPA-TVBP film by the potential switching step method, and the pulse time was tuned twice. The amount of charge in each current curve in two processes was very similar as shown in Fig. 9b and c, and the results suggested that the film of TPB-TVBP had better n/p doping capability than the TPA-TVBP film. Meanwhile, this method could be applied to the preparation of photo-electro film devices.
Actually, the reversible redox process of the film is important in photovoltaic devices. To get a persistent current, the molecule must switch between the doping and the neutral state, thus the reversibility of the materials in doping and dedoping processes is inherently required for long lifetime and high-efficiency devices. The electrochemical measurement can reflect the molecule doping and dedoping process, so the method was introduced to discuss the “bipolar property” of the molecule.
In n-doping process of TPA-TVBP, the film was very stable as shown by the above potential switching step measurements. In p-doping process, the polymerization might be gained, which meant that the TPA unit possibly underwent radical cation dimerization forming the dimer TPB unit. The film of TPB-TVBP exhibited better n/p doping capability than that of TPA-TVBP. In other words, if the spin-coated film of TPA-TVBP was applied in solar cells, it would possess better electrochemical properties (stability) even after dimerization reaction happened. This was a surprising harvest for the TPA-capped material.

Based on the above results of TPA-TVBP, the photovoltaic properties in OPVs were investigated. Bulk-heterojunction OPVs were fabricated based on the spin-coated blend films of TPA-TVBP and PCBM (1:1, w/w) as the active layer, with LiF/Al as the cathode. Fig. 10 shows the current–voltage (I–V) curves of the OPVs in the dark and under AM 1.5 illumination of 100 mW cm−2. The open circuit voltage (VOC), short circuit current (JSC), fill factor (FF) and power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the OPVs based on TPA-TVBP reached 0.61 V, 1.48 mA cm−2, 0.33 and 0.29% respectively. Although the short circuit current and fill factor were very low, they were still higher than those of similar structures of TPA-TH1 and TDOX, and this was considered to be due to the compositive peculiarity of TPA-TVBP involving the good solution-processability, the space-charge-separation capability, the good thermal and film forming stability, the broad absorption spectrum and especially the stable electrochemical properties in redox process. Further optimization in OPVs with TPA-TVBP as an active layer or with electro-deposited film (TPB-TVBP film) as a functional layer would be reported in the next research work.


In summary, the tribenzo[a,c,i]phenazine (TBP) was chosen as an accepter unit to construct a wholly aromatic organic D–π–A molecule with a TPA unit, named TPA-TVBP as a model molecule to investigate the electrochemical stability of the TPA-capped material in OPV application. TPA-TVBP exhibited a good solution-processability and space-charge-separation capability, high thermodynamic stability and good film forming ability as expected. The special electrochemical stability was discussed by cyclic voltammetry and potential switching step measurements, and the doping and dedoping process in OPV applications was described further. Thus, the result was important not only in terms of developing a new kind of triphenylamine-capped material containing a TBP unit, but also exploring the TPA moiety as a capped unit in OPV film application.


All the reagents and solvents used for the syntheses were purchased from Aldrich or Acros companies and used without further purification. All reactions were performed under a dry nitrogen atmosphere.

The 1H NMR spectra were recorded on AVANCZ 500 spectrometers at 298 K by utilizing deuterated chloroform (CDCl3) or dimethyl sulphoxide (DMSO) as solvent and tetramethylsilane (TMS) as standard. The elemental analysis was carried out using Flash EA 1112, CHNS-O elemental analysis instrument for these compounds. The MALDI-TOF mass spectra were recorded using an AXIMA-CFRTM plus instrument. UV-vis absorption spectra were recorded on a UV-3100 spectrophotometer. Fluorescence measurements were carried out using a RF-5301PC. The differential scanning calorimeter (DSC) analysis was performed using a NETZSCH (DSC-204) instrument at 10 °C min−1 under nitrogen flushing. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) was performed with a BAS 100W (Bioanalytical Systems), using a glass carbon disk (Φ = 3 mm) as a working electrode, a platinum wire as an auxiliary electrode and Ag/Ag+ as a reference electrode. Cyclic voltammetric studies were carried out using 0.1 M [n-NBu4][PF6] dried in an oil pump vacuum at 80 °C as a supporting electrolyte. All solutions were purged with nitrogen stream for 10 min before measurements. The procedure was performed at room temperature and a nitrogen atmosphere was maintained over the solution during measurements. The atomic force microscopy (AFM) measurement was conducted on a Nanoscope III (DI, USA) in tapping mode with a 100 μm scanner.

The bulk heterojunction photovoltaic cells were fabricated with the active layer consisting of TPA-TVBP:PCBM in blend ratios (1:1, w/w). ITO glass was cleaned with detergent and acetone and boiled in H2O2. A 50 nm layer of poly(3,4-ethylene dioxythiophene): poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT: PSS) z(Bayer PVP Al 4083) as a modified layer was spin-coated onto the pre-cleaned ITO glass substrate and then dried at 120 °C for 15 min on a hot plate. The TPA-TVBP was dissolved in chlorobenzene to make 10 mg mL−1 solutions, followed by blending with PCBM (purchased from Lumtec Corp.) in blend ratios (1:1, w/w). The active layers were obtained by spin-coating the blend solutions and the thickness of films was about 70 nm, as measured with the Ambios Technology XP-2. Finally, the cathode of LiF (0.5 nm)/Al (100 nm) was thermally deposited to finish the device fabrication. The active area was about 5 mm2. Current–voltage (J–V) characteristics were recorded using a Keithley 2400 Source Meter in the dark and under 100 mW cm−2 simulated AM 1.5 G irradiation (Sciencetech SS-0.5 K Solar Simulator). The spectral response was recorded using a SR830 lock-in amplifier under short circuit conditions when devices were illuminated with monochromatic light from a xenon lamp. All fabrication and characterizations were performed under an ambient atmosphere at room temperature.


Triphenylamine (5.0 g, 20.2 mmol) was dissolved in distilled DMF (15 mL) in a 250 mL two-necked round bottom flask. At −20 °C in an ice-water bath, phosphorus oxychloride (POCl3, 14.7 mL) was added dropwise to the mixture with a strong stirrer bar. Then the mixture was warmed to 45 °C for 2 h until the drop process stopped. This mixture was poured into ice water to stop the reaction with proper pH adjustment (pH 7) with 20% NaOH aq. The yellow precipitate was formed and filtered off, and the mixture was recrystallized from ethyl acetate to afford light-yellow crystals of M1. Yield: 89%. 1H NMR (CDCl3, ppm), δ: 7.0–8.0 (m, 14H), 9.8 (s, 1H). MALDI-TOF-MS (m/z): [M+H]+ calcd for C19H15NO, 273.1; found: 273.6. Anal. calcd for C19H15NO: C, 83.49; H, 5.53; N, 5.12%. Found: C, 83.90; H, 6.01; N, 5.07%.


5.46 g (20.0 mmol) of 4-(diphenylamino)benzaldehyde (M1) and 8.57 g (24.0 mmol) of triphenylmethylphosphonium bromide were dissolved in 50 mL of dry THF. The resulting solution was added dropwise slowly to 280 mg (2.5 mmol) of t-BuOK in 20 mL of dry THF at 0 °C, then the reaction mixture was warmed to room temperature and stirred under N2 overnight. The mixture was poured into water and extracted with dichloromethane. The organic phase was washed with water and brine, and dried over MgSO4. After removing the solvent, the product was purified by column chromatography using dichloromethane/petroleum ether (v:v = 1:4) to give M2 (4.06 mg, 73%) as a yellow solid. 1H NMR (CDCl3, ppm) δ 5.06 (d, 1H), 5.53 (d, 1H), 6.54 (dd, 1H), 6.92–7.03 (m, 10H), 7.15–7.22 (m, 4H). MALDI/TOF MS: calcd for C20H17N 271.1, found: 271.6. Anal. calcd for C20H17N: C, 88.52; H, 6.31; N, 5.16%. Found: C, 88.46; H, 6.53; N, 5.07%.


In a 100 mL round bottom flask, 2.08 mg (10 mmol) of 2,7-dibromophenanthrene-9,10-dione and 3.16 mg (20 mmol) of naphthalene-2,3-diamine were placed, and then 50 mL of glacial acetic acid was added. The mixture was stirred vigorously at 80 °C for 4 h in air. The whole mixture was then poured into water and then the precipitate was filtered. Then the solid was chromatographed on a silica column using CHCl3 as an eluent and recrystallized from DMSO twice to give deep-red needle crystals in 85% yield. C24H12N2Br2: calcd. C, 59.05; H, 2.48; Br, 32.74; N, 5.74; found C, 59.25; H, 2.45; Br, 32.64; N, 5.62. MS (MALDI-TOF): m/z = 488.93 (M+). 1H NMR (DMSO, ppm): δ 9.24 (dd, 2H), 8.39 (s, 2H), 8.30 (d, 2H), 8.08 (d, 2H), 7.68 (d, 4H), 7.38 (d, 2H).


17.8 mg (0.5 mmol) of M3, 27.2 mg (1 mmol) of M2, 5 mg of Pd (OAc)2, and 254.4 mg of K3PO4 were added to a 50 mL flask, and then 5 mL of dimethylacetamide (DMAC) was injected using syringe under nitrogen flow. The mixture solution was heated to 140 °C under the dark and kept at that temperature overnight, and the solution was poured into methanol after cooling to the room temperature. The precipitate was filtered, washed with water, dissolved in methylene chloride, and dried over MgSO4. After column separation (petroleum ether/ethyl acetate v:v = 3:1), 166 mg of deep red powder of TPA-TVBP was obtained with a yield of 38%. 1H NMR (CDCl3, ppm): δ 9.02 (s, 2H, naphthalene unit), 8.71 (s, 2H, phenanthrene unit), 8.03 (d, 4H, phenanthrene unit), 7.58 (d, 2H, naphthalene unit), 7.48 (d, 2H, naphthalene unit), 7.43 (d, 2H, CC), 7.29 (t, 4H, Ph-H of TPA), 7.03 (m, 20H, N-Ph-H). MALDI-TOF-MS confirmed the chemical structure of TPA-TVBP (m/z): 868. 6, calcd for C64H44N4, 868.36. Anal. calcd. for (C64H44N4): C, 88.45; H, 5.10; N, 6.45%. Found: C, 88.31; H, 5.32; N, 6.48%.


We are grateful for support from the National Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51203091, 21107050, 60906021), the Ministry of Science and Technology of China (grant number 2009CB623605), and PCSIRT.


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2013