 DOI: 10.1039/C9TA00280D
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 7430-7436


Kai
Wu
,

Huanhuan
Ma
,

Yunzhi
Gao
,

Wei
Hu
* and 

Jinlong
Yang
*

Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at Microscale, Department of Chemical Physics, Synergetic Innovation Center of Quantum Information and Quantum Physics, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui 230026, China. E-mail: whuustc@ustc.edu.cn; jlyang@ustc.edu.cn

Received
8th January 2019
, Accepted 1st March 2019
First published on 4th March 2019
Two-dimensional (2D) semiconductors, such as graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4), molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) and phosphorene, with desirable optoelectronic properties and large photoreactive contact area for light absorption, have been widely used as donors and acceptors in high-quality heterojunction solar cells. In this work, by using first-principles density functional theory calculations, we demonstrate that tellurene is a promising candidate 2D semiconductor for designing highly-efficient solar cells due to its desirable optoelectronic properties (an ideal band gap of 1.47 eV, a high carrier mobility up to 2.87 × 103 cm2 V−1 s−1, strong visible light absorption up to 5.0 × 105 cm−1 and high stability in ambient conditions) superior to existing 2D semiconductors used in solar cells. Furthermore, we find that tellurene and TMDs show desirable type II band alignment for constructing highly-efficient heterojunction solar cells with strong charge separation and enhanced sunlight absorption. In particular, the calculated maximum power conversion efficiency (PCE) of our designed Te/WTe2 and Te/MoTe2 heterojunction solar cells can reach as high as 22.5% and 20.1%, respectively.

We are in need of highly efficient, low cost and reliable sources of energy. Solar cells, which convert sunlight directly into electricity, are promising candidates for large scale commercialization. Heterojunctions consisting of two types of donor and acceptor semiconductors have been suggested as a promising mechanism for designing highly-efficient solar cells. However, a high-quality heterojunction solar cell requires both donor and acceptor semiconductors to have a direct band gap of about 1.2–1.6 eV to absorb solar radiation, a high carrier mobility to promote efficient electron transport and a high stability in ambient conditions. The dependence on donor and acceptor semiconductors makes it imperative to seek appropriate materials with ideal band gap, high carrier mobility and high stability.

After the mechanical exfoliation of graphene, many 2D materials are predicted in theory or fabricated in experiments, including silicene, hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN), transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs, e.g., MoS2), graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) and phosphorene. 2D materials can exhibit exotic optoelectronic properties far beyond those of their bulk counterparts, especially large photoreactive contact area, making them more attractive for designing novel optoelectronic devices. With the development of 2D materials, 2D van der Waals heterojunctions combining the electronic structures of 2D materials have also been proposed theoretically and experimentally to explore new properties and potential applications. Although the van der Waals interlayer coupling in 2D van der Waals heterojunctions is weak, it not only preserves the intrinsic properties of corresponding components, but also induces new properties, such as band gap opening in graphene, semiconductor band alignment, charge transfer and new optical absorption. Thus, 2D van der Waals heterojunctions can be used to fabricate novel electronic and optoelectronic devices, among which solar cells are the most important optoelectronic devices in both theory and experiment. Several highly-efficient heterojunction solar cells, which combine the electronic structures of 2D donor and acceptor semiconductors with desirable band alignments have been predicted theoretically or synthesized experimentally, such as graphene/BN, graphene/MoS2, MoS2/MoSe2, and phosphorene/MoS2. These heterojunction solar cells show high stability due to strong intralayer covalent bonds, meanwhile relatively weak interlayer van der Waals interactions keep them stacked together with their intrinsic optoelectronic properties preserved. Light absorption produces localized excited states, then charge carriers can be separated efficiently at the heterojunction interface if donor and acceptor semiconductors are well chosen. Large photoreactive contact area, interlayer interaction and charge transfer can enhance optical absorption of heterojunction solar cells. However, few 2D materials possesses all desirable optoelectronic properties required in heterojunction solar cells (see ESI). For example, graphene is metallic and does not have a band gap. The carrier mobility of MoS2 is too low (only 3.4 × 102 cm2 V−1 s−1), and the band gap of g-C3N4 is too large (2.88 eV). Phosphorene has a ideal band gap of 1.51 eV and a high carrier mobility up to 1 × 105 cm2 V−1 s−1, but it is sensitive to oxygen molecules and easily degrades in ambient conditions.
Tellurium is a metalloid which possesses the properties of both metals and nonmetals. It is primarily used to manufacturing films essential to photovoltaic solar cells, and the photovoltaic and thermoelectric applications of which account for over two thirds of global tellurium consumption. Tellurium exhibits enhanced electrical conductivity when it forms compounds with other elements, and its nanostructures can be controlled by compositions, sizes, shapes and structures, which make them excellent candidates for modern applications. Thin tellurium films can absorb and convert sunlight into electricity efficiently, and tellurium nanoparticles also show broadband solar radiation absorption of more than 85%. Recently, Zhu et al. have predicted a new category of Te-based monolayers with different structures, among which α-Te and β-Te are semiconductors and possess much higher mobility than MoS2. In particular, β-Te has been synthesized experimentally, also named tellurene, and shows a direct band gap of 1.47 eV, which is more proper than α-Te (indirect band gap of 0.75 eV) for photovoltaic devices. Large-area and high-quality tellurene has been reported and fabricated in experiments as field-effect transistors with air-stable performance at room temperature. Furthermore, tellurene shows extraordinary electronic transport properties.
In this work, by using first-principles density functional theory calculations, we demonstrate that tellurene is a promising candidate 2D semiconductor for designing highly-efficient heterojunction solar cells due to its desirable optoelectronic properties (an ideal band gap of 1.47 eV, a high carrier mobility up to 2.87 × 103 cm2 V−1 s−1, high stability and strong visible light absorption up to 5.0 × 105 cm−1) superior to others 2D semiconductors. Furthermore, we find that tellurene and TMDs show desirable type II band alignment with strong charge separation and enhanced visible light absorption. The calculated maximum PCE of our designed Te/WTe2 and Te/MoTe2 heterojunction solar cells can reach as high as 22.5% and 20.1%, respectively.

Our first-principles calculations are implemented in Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP). The generalized gradient approximation of Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof (GGA-PBE) is adopted to roughly compute the electronic structures of tellurene and TMDs. For structure optimization and band structure calculations of tellurene and TMDs, the Heyd–Scuseria–Ernzerhof hybrid functional (HSE06) and spin–orbit coupling (SOC) are employed to correct the overestimation of lattice constants and underestimation of band gaps. Since the GGA-PBE and HSE06 calculations are unable to correctly describe the weak van der Waals (vdW) interactions in heterojunctions, we adopt the optB88-vdW correction (vdW-DF) proposed by J. Klimeš et al. Both lattice constant and atoms are relaxed until the force is less than 0.01 eV Å−1. The plan-wave cutoff energy for wave function is set to 500 eV. The lattice parameters of monolayer tellurene are a = 4.18 and b = 5.57 Å as shown in Fig. 1, which are in good agreement with previous theoretical calculations (see ESI).

We perform Ab Initio Molecular Dynamics (AIMD) simulations on the tellurene and TMDs heterojunctions to check the dynamical stability. The simulations are performed for about 10.0 ps with a time step of 1.0 fs. The temperature is set to T = 300 K and it is controlled by a Nosé–Hoover thermostat.
To study the optical properties, the frequency-dependent dielectric matrix is computed using the first-order time-dependent perturbation theory. The imaginary part of dielectric matrix is determined by a summation over empty states:
where
Ω is the volume of the primitive cell, wk is the k-point weight, c and v are the conduction and valence band states, respectively, εck and uck are the conduction band eigenvalues and wavefunctions at k, eα and eβ are the unit vectors for the Cartesian directions. The absorption coefficients are calculated according to the frequency-dependent dielectric function. Doubled number of bands with respect to the VASP default and 2000 grid points in density of states are adopted to accurately calculate the optical properties.


In order to construct atomic structures of tellurene/TMDs heterojunctions, two supercells are required for both tellurene and TMDs with different lattice constants, which make the lattice mismatch between tellurene and TMDs as small as possible (<2%). Hu et al. developed a method named LatticeMatch, which finds the optimal minimum supercell models under constraints based on the rotation matrix. This method has been applied to various heterojunctions successfully. We reconstructed and optimized the code of LatticeMatch (see ESI).

Here, we need to construct six types of tellurene/TMDs heterojunctions, including Te/MoS2, Te/MoSe2, Te/MoTe2, Te/WS2, Te/WSe2, and Te/WTe2. Notice that MoS2 and WS2, MoSe2 and WSe2, MoTe2 and WTe2 have similar lattice constants, respectively, six types of TMDs only have three types of lattice constants, and only three types of supercell heterostructures are required to construct tellurene/TMDs heterojunctions. We adopt the LatticeMatch method to construct three types of supercell heterostructures, which are shown in Fig. 2. The detailed parameters of supercell parameters of tellurene/TMDs heterojunctions are listed in Table 1. Notice that tellurene and TMD layers can slide relatively, which may affect the electronic structures and optoelectronic properties of heterojunctions. Through constructing different stacking structures by sliding TMDs layers with respect to tellurene, we verify that the van der Waals interactions between tellurene and TMDs are rather weak, and different stacking manners have little effect on the electronic structures and absorption spectra of heterojunctions (see ESI).
Layer


a′



b′


θ


ε (%)
XS2
3a − b
4a + 8b
−13.9
0.82
Tellurene
2a
−a + 5b
0
XSe2
2a + b

5b

30
0.69
Tellurene

a


4b

0
XTe2
4a + 2b

5b

30
0.22
Tellurene
4a + 2b
−a + 4b
20.3

We first determine the electronic structures of tellurene and TMDs monolayers. Fig. 1(b) shows the electronic band structures of tellurene obtained within both PBE and HSE schemes. Tellurene is a direct band gap semiconductor with the valence band maximum (VBM) and conduction band minimum (CBM) both locating at the Γ point. Furthermore, tellurene has an ideal band gap of 1.47 eV for solar absorption and a high carrier mobility up to 2.87 × 103 cm2 V−1 s−1 (see ESI) for electron transport. Notice that band gap is crucial to the application of 2D semiconductors in photovoltaic devices since it determines the optoelectronic properties.

We also check the stability of tellurene in ambient conditions. Our DFT calculations confirm that common molecules (H2, O2, H2O, CO, CO2) are all physically adsorbed on tellurene (see ESI), which have little effect on the electronic structures of tellurene, different from the case of phosphorene. These results are consistent with previous experimental and theoretical studies. Therefore, such a high stability can avoid the degradation of tellurene under ambient conditions and improve its photovoltaic performance as highly-efficient solar cells.
We then demonstrate that tellurene and TMDs show desirable properties (ideal band gap and high carrier mobility) and type II band alignment with small conduction band offsets for constructing highly-efficient heterojunction solar cells as shown in Fig. 3. The band gap of MoS2, WS2, MoSe2, WSe2, MoTe2 and WTe2 are calculated to be 2.11, 2.10, 1.81, 1.75, 1.35 and 1.14 eV, respectively. In particular, MoTe2 and WTe2 show optimal band gap values (∼1.2 to 1.6 eV), desirable type II band alignment and small conduction band offsets (0.14 and 0.03 eV) with tellurene. A proper bandgap guarantees wide-range sunlight absorption and high carrier mobility, and a smaller conduction band offset means higher open-circuit voltage. Therefore, MoTe2 and WTe2 are promising semiconductors to construct 2D composite heterostructures with tellurene for designing highly-efficient solar cells.

In this section, we propose highly-efficient heterojunction solar cells combining desirable optoelectronic properties of tellurene and TMDs. We construct six types of tellurene/TMDs heterojunctions, their geometric structures are plotted in Fig. 2 and corresponding structural parameters are shown in Table 1. Except for Te/WSe2 (type I), other five tellurene/TMDs composite heterostructures serve as type II donor–acceptor interface band alignment heterojunctions. Their band structures and absorption spectra are computed and shown in ESI. Type II heterojunction can promote carrier transfer and separation at the heterojunction interface, and localized VBM and CBM states within distinctive donor and acceptor regions will further enhance charge separation and enable carriers to be easily collected.

We demonstrate that tellurene and TMDs form 2D van der Waals heterojunctions. As shown in Table 2, the binding energies of tellurene/TMD heterojunctions are about 30–40 meV per atom, and the equilibrium interfacial distances are in the range of 3.15–3.35 Å. Both low binding energies and long interfacial distances indicate that tellurene and TMDs layers are combined by weak van der Waals interactions, which can preserve their intrinsic optoelectronic properties in tellurene/TMDs heterojunctions. We also check the stability of these heterojunctions under such weak van der Waals interactions by computing their formation energies and performing AIMD simulations (see ESI). Te/MoTe2 and Te/WTe2 heterojunctions show high thermodynamic stability with large negative formation energies and keep dynamic equilibrium structures without dissociation within 10.0 ps at room temperature of T = 300 K.
Tellurene/TMDs

E
b


D
0

Te/MoS2
34.1
3.15
Te/WS2
32.5
3.20
Te/MoSe2
34.6
3.23
Te/WSe2
40.1
3.23
Te/MoTe2
41.1
3.35
Te/WTe2
39.9
3.33
For the Te/WTe2 heterojunctions, the CBM and VBM states separated on different monolayers are illustrated in Fig. 4. Consistent with our previous predictions shown in Fig. 3, the CBM and VBM states are separately located at the tellurene and WTe2 regions, indicating the efficient electron–hole separation. Such strong charge separation not only promotes the dissociation of excitons into free electrons and holes, but also reduces the electron–hole recombination rates significantly, which may contribute to the long minority carrier lifetime.
Type II donor–acceptor interface band alignment heterojunction shows a reduced band gap, which can increase the absorption range of sunlight. Moreover, interlayer interaction and charge transfer at the heterojunction interface can induce new optical transitions between overlapped electronic states, thus enhancing optical absorption intensity in heterojunction solar cells. Absorption spectra of tellurene, MoTe2, WTe2, Te/MoTe2 and Te/WTe2 are plotted in Fig. 5. Compared to MoTe2 and WTe2, tellurene shows higher absorption coefficient in the visible light region (wavelength that ranges from 390–760 nm), up to 5.0 × 105 cm−1 around the wavelength of 360 nm. Furthermore, Te/MoTe2 and Te/WTe2 heterojunctions show wider absorption range and stronger optical absorption compared to isolated tellurene, MoTe2 and WTe2. Their absorption coefficients can reach 5.4 × 105 cm−1 around the wavelength of 400 nm. Therefore, Te/WTe2 and Te/MoTe2 heterojunctions are ideal solar absorbers for highly-efficient solar cells.

The interface band alignment between donor and acceptor materials is critical to the maximum PCE. To evaluate the quality of tellurene/TMDs heterojunction solar cells, we estimate the efficiency by the method proposed by Scharber et al., which is widely used in efficiency estimation. The maximum PCE of heterojunction solar cells can be described as
where 0.65 is the fill factor (
βFF), P(ℏω) is the AM1.5 solar energy flux at the photon energy ℏω. Eg is the band gap of the donor and ΔEc is the conduction band offset between donor and accepter. The (Eg − ΔEc − 0.3) term is an estimation of the open-circuit voltage (Voc) and the integral term in the numerator is the short-circuit current density (Jsc) assuming external quantum efficiency to be 100%. The energy integral from 0 to infinity in the denominator is the power of incident solar radiation.

We compute the PCEs of tellurene/TMDs heterojunctions as shown in Fig. 6. As we predict, the PCEs of Te/WTe2 and Te/MoTe2 heterojunctions are calculated to be as high as 22.5% and 20.1%, separately. As donor materials, tellurene has a band gap of 1.47 eV, which is very suitable for the absorption of the solar spectrum. That's the reason why the PCE of Te/MoTe2 can reach 20.1%. Though the donor band gap of Te/WTe2 is a bit lower out of the most appropriate region, its conduction band offset is about 0.03 eV, which is much better than other materials, so the PCE of Te/WTe2 reaches as high as 22.5%.
In Table 3, the PCE of Te/WTe2, Te/MoTe2 and other existing 2D heterojunction solar cells are compared, including CBN/PCBM heterojunctions (10–20%), G-SiC2 nanotube/ZnO monolayer XSCs (12–20%), phosphorene/MoS2 heterobilayer (17.5%), MoS2/bilayer phosphorene (16–18%), edge-modified phosphorene nanoflakes (20%), α-AsP/GaN bilayer XSCs (22.1%), devices based on gradient heterojunction electron transport layer (18.08%), MoSe2/Ψ-phosphorene (20.26%), 2D MA3Bi2I9/3D MAPbI3 (18.97%), TiNF/TiNCl (22%). Therefore, our proposed Te/WTe2 and Te/MoTe2 heterojunctions have competitive edge over existing 2D heterojunction solar cells.
Heterojunction solar cells
PCE (%)
References
Years
CBN/PCBM heterojunctions
10–20

37

2012
G-SiC2 nanotube/ZnO monolayer XSCs
12–20

68

2013
Phosphorene/MoS2 heterobilayer
17.5

71

2014
MoS2/bilayer phosphorene
16–18

40

2014
Edge-modified phosphorene nanoflakes
20

25

2016
α-AsP/GaN bilayer XSCs
22.1

69

2016
Devices based on GHJ ETL
18.08

72

2017
MoSe2/Ψ-phosphorene
20.26

73

2017
2D MA3Bi2I9/3D MAPbI3
18.97

74

2018
TiNF/TiNCl
22

75

2018
Te/MoTe2
20.1
This work
2019
Te/WTe2
22.5
This work
2019

In summary, we study the feasibility and the performance of heterojunction solar cells based on monolayer tellurene and TMDs. The electronic structure, mobility and stability of tellurene is calculated. The direct band gap of 1.47 eV, high carrier mobility up to 2.87 × 103 cm2 V−1 s−1 and efficient optical absorption make tellurene promising candidate for heterojunction solar cells. Then, tellurene is matched with TMDs to construct heterojunctions, geometrical structures, binding energies, band alignments, band decomposed charge densities and absorption spectra of heterojunctions are studied. The designed Te/WTe2 and Te/MoTe2 heterojunctions show PCE of 22.5% and 20.1%, separately. This work reveals that tellurene can be the next material that promotes the development of photovoltaic devices.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21503204, 21688102, 21803066), the National Key Research & Development Program of China (2016YFA0200604), the Special Fund for Strategic Pilot Technology of Chinese Academy of Sciences (XDC01040000), the Research Start-Up Grants (KY2340000094) from University of Science and Technology of China, and the Chinese Academy of Sciences Pioneer Hundred Talents Program. The authors thank USTC, CAS, Tianjin, and Shanghai Supercomputer Centers for the computational resources.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta00280d
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019