 DOI: 10.1039/C1JM11887K
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 13371-13379

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Luisa
De Marco
,

Michele
Manca
*,

Raffaella
Buonsanti
,

Roberto
Giannuzzi
,

Francesco
Malara
,

Paola
Pareo
,

Luigi
Martiradonna
,

Nunzia M.
Giancaspro
,

P. Davide
Cozzoli
 and 

Giuseppe
Gigli


CBN—Center for Biomolecular Nanotechnologies of Italian Institute of Technology, Via Barsanti, Arnesano, 73010, LECCE, Italy. E-mail: michele.manca@iit.it

NNL—National Nanotechnology Laboratory, CNR Istituto Nanoscienze, Distretto Tecnologico, via per Arnesano 16, 73100, Lecce, Italy

Dipartimento di Ingegneria dell'Innovazione, Università del Salento, Via per Arnesano, 73100, Lecce, Italy

Received
29th April 2011
, Accepted 30th June 2011
First published on 5th August 2011
We demonstrate a general approach by which colloidal anatase TiO2 nanocrystals with anisotropically tailored linear and branched shapes can safely be processed into high-quality mesoporous photoelectrodes for dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). A detailed study has been carried out to elucidate how the nanoscale architecture underlying the photoelectrodes impacts their ultimate performances. From the analysis of the most relevant electrochemical parameters, an intrinsic correlation between the photovoltaic performances and the structure of the nanocrystal building blocks has been deduced and explained on the basis of relative contributions of the electron transport and light-harvesting properties of the photoelectrodes. Depending on the nanocrystals incorporated, these devices can exhibit an energy conversion efficiency of 5.2% to 7.8%, which ranks 38% to 53% higher than that achievable with corresponding cells based on reference spherical nanoparticles. It has been ascertained that DSSCs based on high aspect-ratio linear nanorods allow for a remarkable improvement in the charge-collection efficiency due to minimization of detrimental charge-recombination processes at the photoelectrode/electrolyte interface. On the other hand, DSSCs fabricated from branched nanocrystals with a peculiar bundle-like configuration are characterized by a drastic reduction of undesired charge-trapping phenomena. These findings can be useful in the design and fabrication of future generations of high-performing DSSCs based on colloidal nanocrystals with properly engineered size and shape parameters.


Titanium dioxide (TiO2) nanomaterials have attracted a great deal of interest because of their unique chemical–physical properties and promising applications in solar energy conversion, photocatalysis and sensing.

In dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) incident photons excite the dye molecules anchored to a mesoporous film of nanocrystalline TiO2, typically in the anatase phase; the photoelectrodes composed of interconnected nanometre-sized domain particles provide a high specific surface area for the adsorption of dye sensitizers; however, electron mobility in such films is more than two orders of magnitude lower than in corresponding bulk crystals.Transport of the photoinjected electrons across the oxide network is believed to occur by diffusion and be strongly limited by charge trapping and detrapping at crystal defects within individual particles and at contact boundaries between neighboring particles. Recognition of these mechanisms has promoted intensive research toward realization of photoanodes made of one-dimensional nanocrystalline domains, where an overall reduced number of inter-grain defective interfaces can indeed lead to enhanced transport properties. On the other hand, it is easy to realize that at relatively large volumes one-dimensional nanostructures may be less advantageous in terms of dye adsorption capability, relative to their spherical counterparts. Such drawback can be expected to be offset by introduction or creation of nanoarchitectures with branched morphologies, in which the relevant anisotropic arm components are already interconnected prior to the sintering step, thereby allowing minimization of the overall occurrence of defective boundaries with trap states in the photoelectrode.
To date, it has been reported that highly porous nanotextured TiO2 films, which were fabricated by employing 20–30 nm × 100–300 nm nanorods, allowed reaching a power conversion efficiency of 7.1% with 16 μm thick photoanodes. More recently, the effect of shape anisotropy on photovoltaic characteristics has been investigated in the comparative examination of DSSCs based either on 20 nm spherical nanocrystals or on nanorods with equally sized diameter and lengths selectable from 100 nm to 200 nm. It was found that the nanorods offered the advantage of reducing charge recombination; nevertheless the overall energy conversion efficiency value of 4.7% was lower with respect to that achievable with their spherical counterparts. In addition, the relatively modest photocurrent density observed was related to the lower specific surface area, as expected for cells incorporating building blocks with such size features. On the other hand, further developments have demonstrated that both electron transport and photocurrent density could be improved through implementation of photoelectrodes based on smaller 4–5 nm × 20–30 nm sized nanorods, which allowed maximizing the dye uptake, thereby giving rise to DSSCs with large current density and high photon-to-current conversion efficiency. In this case, photoanodes thinner than 16 μm led to devices reaching an efficiency as high as 7.9%.
As regards the application of branched nanostructures in DSSCs, only two cases have been reported to date, one concerning star-like architectures composed of assembled 25 nm × 450 nm rod-shaped arms and the other one addressing saw-shaped nanostructures individually made of a 20 nm × 150 nm rod-like backbone decorated with 4–5 × 20–40 nm branch teeth. Unfortunately, in contrast to expectations, the maximum efficiencies achieved were around 2–4%, a result that could be accounted partly by the involvement of the less performing rutile phase and partly by the attainment of low-quality photoelectrodes with inhomogeneous topology (e.g., due to aggregates and/or cracks), modest surface area, and/or poor adhesion to their respective supporting electrodes upon processing of unsuitable pastes. Furthermore, in both cases, the actual photoelectrode structure and morphology were not disclosed.
Currently, assessment of photoelectrode structure–property correlation has been elusive due to the availability of insufficient information on the film nanostructure and/or on its inherent photoelectrochemical transport properties.
Herein we demonstrate a fabrication strategy to DSSCs for which the two main performance-dictating parameters, namely the light harvesting capability and charge-collection efficiency, can be improved and optimized by suitable photoanode design and engineering. We have developed a series of high-quality photoelectrodes based on five different families of TiO2 nanocrystals with finely tailored anisotropic shapes synthesized by means of advanced colloidal surfactant-assisted methods. Linear nanorods with variable aspect ratios (4, 8 and 16, respectively) and relatively bulkier branched nanostructures (in the form of open-framework sheaf-like nanorods and more compact braid-like nanorod bundles, respectively) were effectively employed to fabricate mesoporous TiO2 film photoelectrodes in which the original crystal structure, dimensions and shape of individual nanocrystals were substantially preserved. The key fabrication strategy allowing such structure retention relied on using a suitably formulated printable TiO2 paste in which the as-prepared surfactant-capped nanocrystals were directly incorporated.
The as-fabricated DSSCs exhibited a solar conversion efficiency ranging from 5.2% to 7.8%, depending on the nanocrystal geometric parameters. On the basis of the values of the most important electrochemical parameters we deduced an intrinsic correlation between the nanocrystal morphology and the performances of the corresponding devices thereof.

Anisotropically shaped TiO2 nanocrystals were prepared by different surfactant-assisted wet-chemical routes using standard air-free techniques.

Three families of alkyl-carboxylate-capped anatase TiO2 linear nanorods (NRs) with a variable aspect ratio (AR), henceforth referred to as sample “AR4-NRs”,“AR8-NRs”, and “AR16-NRs”, respectively, were synthesized by applying previously reported protocols with minor modifications as follows.

AR4-NRs and AR8-NRs were obtained by low-temperature trimethylamine N-oxide catalyzed hydrolysis of titanium isopropoxide (TTIP) in nonanoic acid and oleic acid, respectively. In a typical synthesis, 15 mmol of TTIP were dissolved in 70 g of degassed nonanoic acid or oleic acid and the resulting solution was then reacted with 5 mL of an aqueous 2 M trimethylamine N-oxide solution at 100 °C for 96 h.

AR16-NRs were obtained by high-temperature nonhydrolytic condensation of TTIP with oleic acid. In a typical synthesis TTIP (17.7 mL, 60 mmol) was added to 50 g of oleic acid at room temperature. Then, the resulting mixture was gradually heated to 270 °C at a rate of about 10 °C min−1 and then kept at this temperature for 2 h.
Two families of alkyl-carboxylate-capped anatase branched TiO2 nanostructures, namely sheaf-like branched nanorods, henceforth referred to as sample “B-NRs”, and thereof derived braid-like nanorod bundles, labelled as “BB-NRs”, were synthesized by aminolytic decomposition of titanium oleate complexes at high temperatures. A protocol previously devised to synthesize brookite TiO2 nanorods was modified as follows. As a general procedure, 3 g of 1-octadecene, 3 mmol of oleyl amine and 11 mmol of oleic acid were loaded in a three-neck flask and degassed at 120 °C for 45 min, after which the mixture is cooled down to 50 °C under N2 flow. At this point, 1 mmol of titanium tetrachloride (TiCl4) dissolved in 1 mL of 1-octadecene was added and the flask was heated up to 290 °C at a ramp rate of 25 °C min−1. After heating for 1 h at 290 °C, the reaction could be either stopped to collect B-NRs or continued by performing alternated additions of a 0.5 M oleic acid/1-octadecene solution (injected in single portion) and of a 0.5 M TiCl4/1-octadecene solution (delivered at a constant rate of 0.1 mL min−1 by means of a syringe pump). The BB-NRs were obtained upon adding an extra 16 mmol of TiCl4 after the primary injection.
After the synthesis, the TiO2 nanocrystals were precipitated upon addition of ethanol or 2-propanol: acetone mixtures, separated by centrifugation, and then washed with acetone to remove the excess surfactant residuals. Then, the resulting products were easily redispersed in an apolar organic solvent, such as toluene or chloroform.
For comparison purposes, nearly spherical anatase TiO2 nanocrystals (referred to as s-NCs) with an average size of 15–20 nm were prepared by the nonhydrolytic reaction of benzyl alcohol with titanium tetraisopropoxide as described elsewhere.


Nanocrystal suspensions (containing 4% w/w of TiO2 as revealed by ICP-AES analysis) were stirred at 60 °C for 6 h with ethylcellulose previously dissolved in toluene (10% w/w). Then, terpineol was added and the resulting mixture was stirred again for 1 h. Finally toluene was removed by a rotary evaporator to obtain pastes suitable for doctor-blade deposition. The paste had the following weight percentage composition: TiO2: 12%; organic capping residuals: 15%; ethylcellulose: 5%; terpineol: 68%.

The TiO2 paste was deposited onto FTO glass (10 ohm per sq., provided by Solaronix S.A.) by doctor blading and dried at 160 °C for 15 minutes. This procedure was repeated several times in order to obtain the desired film thickness. The film thickness and the dimensions of the active area (0.28 cm2) were measured using a profilometer. For comparison a Degussa P25-based TiO2 paste was prepared according the reported literature. The electrodes coated with the TiO2 pastes were gradually heated under an air flow and sintered at 480 °C for 30 min. After cooling to 80 °C, the TiO2 electrodes were immersed into a solution of 0.3 mM (bis(tetrabutylammonium)-cis-di(thiocyanato)-N,N′-bis-(4-carboxylato-4′-carboxylic acid-2,2-bipyridine) ruthenium(II) (N719, provided by Solaronix S.A.) in a mixture of acetonitrile and tert-butyl alcohol (v/v, 1:1) and kept at room temperature for 14 h. The solar cells were assembled by placing a platinum-coated conducting glass (counter electrode) on the N719 dye-sensitized photoelectrode (working electrode). The two electrodes were assembled into a sandwich type cell and sealed with a 50 μm thick Surlyn hot-melt gasket. The redox electrolyte was introduced into the inter-electrode void space through a hole pre-drilled on the back of the counter electrode. The holes were sealed up using the Surlyn hot-melt film and a cover glass. The redox electrolyte used was 0.1 M LiI, 0.05 M I2, 0.6 M 1,2-dimethyl-3-propylimidazolium iodide, and 0.5 M tert-butylpyridine in dried acetonitrile.

The Ti atomic content in the nanocrystal slurry was measured by inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES) measurements with a Varian Vista AX spectrometer. The samples for analyses were digested in concentrated HF/HNO3 (2/2, v/v).

Low-magnification transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of TiO2 nanocrystals were recorded with a Jeol Jem 1011 microscope operating at an accelerating voltage of 100 kV. The crystal structure of the samples was identified by X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements performed using a Panalytical X'PERT PRO diffractometer with Cu-Kα radiation (45 kV, 40 mA). XRD patterns were collected before and after the sintering step at grazing angle from films of TiO2 nanocrystals obtained by deposition of the colloidal pastes on miscut Si substrates. The thickness of the films was measured with a Tencor Alpha-Step 500 Surface Profiler. A Varian Cary 5000 UV-Vis Spectrophotometer was used to measure the UV-Vis absorption spectra of the as-prepared films and the dye-desorbed solutions.

Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) characterization of the TiO2 photoelectrode morphology was performed with a RAITH 150 EBL instrument. Typically, the images were acquired at 5 kV accelerating voltages using short exposure times.
Photocurrent–voltage (I–V) measurements were performed using a Keithley unit (Model 2400 Source Meter). A Newport AM 1.5 Solar Simulator (Model 91160A equipped with a 300 W Xenon Arc Lamp) serves as a light source. The light intensity (or radiant power) was calibrated to 100 mW cm−2 using as reference a Si solar cell.
Three parallel samples for each kind of layered structure were realized and tested in DSCs in order to attest the reproducibility and an as low percentage deviation as 5% was revealed.

Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) spectra were recorded using an AUTOLAB PGSTAT 100 potentiostat operating in a two-electrode mode. Measurements were carried out under dark conditions at open circuit potential in the 300 kHz to 30 mHz frequency range and applying an AC voltage of 10 mV. The frequency-dependent impedance was fitted by using the EC-LAB software (from BioLOGIC).

Among the various synthetic approaches employed to produce TiO2 nanocrystals, wet-chemical routes allow for the highest control over the size, shape and crystal phase. These routes are essentially based on the reaction of proper molecular precursor species in a coordinating mixture of a solvent and suitable ligands and/or surfactants. The latter play several fundamental roles during the synthesis: they modulate the degree of solution supersaturation by forming complexes with the precursors, thereby tuning their reactivity; they govern the lattice development mode of the growing nanocrystals by dynamically adhering to selected crystal facets; and they guarantee kinetic stabilization of the nanocrystals against undesired irreversible coalescence phenomena by providing their surface with a robust organic shell that ensures high solubility in liquid media and easy post-synthesis processing.

For the purpose of the present study, established colloidal protocols were exploited to generate two classes of anisotropically shaped TiO2 nanocrystals, all of which were capped with a hydrophobic organic shell of oleate anion ligands: (1) linear [001]-elongated anatase nanorods (NRs) with different sizes: 3–4 × 12–14 nm (aspect ratio = 4, henceforth referred to as AR4-NRs, Fig. 1a and b), 4–5 × 35–40 nm (aspect ratio = 8, AR8-NRs, Fig. 1c and d) and 3–4 × 45–50 nm (aspect ratio = 16, AR16-NRs, Fig. 1e and f); (2) one-dimensional nanocrystals with multi-armed topology, including (i) smaller branched nanorods (B-NRs, Fig. 1g and h) of 10–20 × 80–100 nm, individually constituting a few (<10) 3–5 × 30–50 nm segments arranged into a sheaf-like geometry, and (ii) larger nanorod bundles (BB-NRs, Fig. 1i and l) of 30–50 × 180–200 nm, characterized by a braid-like profile arising from the bandaging of a high number (>10 to 12) of interconnected 3–5 and 80–100 nm filaments, respectively. A TEM overview of the as-prepared NRs is shown in Fig. 1.
For comparison purposes, two different kinds of conventional isotropic nanoparticles were used as references: commercial TiO2 Degussa P25 nanopowders (made of irregular polyhedral NCs with sizes in the 25–60 nm interval and relative anatase/rutile weight percentage of about 80/20) and smaller spherical anatase TiO2 nanocrystals (s-NCs) (15–20 nm), obtained by the nonhydrolytic reaction of benzyl alcohol with titanium tetraisopropoxide. Corresponding TEM images are shown in the ESI (Fig. 1S).

Fig. 2 illustrates the XRD patterns of the as-synthesized TiO2 nanocrystals referred above. In all of the cases, only pure anatase without any secondary phases was detectable; moreover, no extra reflections appeared after sintering, indicating that the crystal structure of the original nanocrystals was preserved in the final photoelectrodes. The slight narrowing of the peak widths after the thermal treatment could be attributed to an increased degree of crystallinity and to slight crystalline domain growth.

In the photoelectrode fabrication process, a major challenge concerns the preservation of the original size and shape of the nanocrystals. In fact, uncontrolled inter-particle aggregation phenomena that most commonly occur during TiO2 paste preparation and extensive crystal coalescence that almost inevitably takes place during the sintering process could have dramatic effects on the ultimate energy conversion efficiency of a DSSC. These are crucial issues to be addressed in order to create mesoporous films that safely incorporate nanocrystal building blocks of any desired shape and understand how the nanoscale TiO2 architectures that underlie the resulting photoelectrode influence the device performance. Although several studies have examined the effect of TiO2 nanocrystals with anisotropic morphologies on the performances of a DSSC, the preservation of such types of nanostructures in the sintered photoelectrodes was rarely proven.

We have recently demonstrated that, in order to maintain the original morphology of colloidal TiO2 nanocrystals in the sintered film thereof, a key required step is represented by the formulation of an appropriate printable paste. Commonly reported methods for preparing pastes are based on subjecting the targeted nanoparticles to repeated washing cycles, drying, and redispersion by an ultrasonic bath. However, such conventional approaches resulted in being unsuitable to manipulate our organic-capped nanocrystals, which in fact suffered from irreversible coalescence after processing. Corresponding photoelectrodes revealed extensive cracking across the film and loss of the original shape of the nanorods used as building blocks (see SEM images in Fig. 2S in the ESI).
In the new approach devised by us, the as-prepared surfactant-capped nanocrystals were processed to produce printable pastes without removing their organic coating.
A polymeric binder, ethylcellulose, dissolved in a proper carrier solvent (toluene), was directly added to a suspension of the colloidal nanocrystals. The resulting mixture was thoroughly stirred to assure close interactions between the binder and nanocrystals. Finally, a solvent exchange process was carried out by adding terpineol (which is more suitable for the formulation of printable pastes) and removing toluene under vacuum.
Several paste formulations were designed and the best outcomes in terms of both processability and photoelectrode performances were achieved with pastes having the following weight percentage composition: 12% TiO2 nanocrystals, 15% organic capping, 5% ethylcellulose, and 68% terpineol.

Fig. 3 illustrates SEM overview images of the AR4-NR-, AR8-NR-, AR16-NR-, B-NR-, and BB-NR-based photoelectrodes, respectively, obtained after the sintering cycle (maximum temperature of 480 °C). The TiO2 mesoporous films were characterized by excellent adhesion to the conductive glass, good homogeneity and the absence of aggregates and cracks. In all cases the elongated nanocrystal morphology appeared to have been adequately preserved. Actually, the mean size of the constitutive elements of the photoelectrodes was coherent with the dimensions of the original nanocrystals, and no coarsened nanostructures were observed.
It can be suggested that the strong interaction (e.g., via alkyl chain intercalation) between the organic capping ligands (originated from the synthesis step) and ethylcellulose (added during the paste preparation step) resulted in the build-up of a ‘soft template’ layer on the surface of the nanocrystals, which effectively allowed the latter to be kept well separated, retarding any tendency towards irreversible coalescence. At the same time, burning and decomposition of the organics are of fundamental benefit for the formation of a highly porous structure that is required for enabling an efficient dye uptaking process and deep electrolyte penetration through the film, both of which are essential prerequisites for a high-performing working electrode.
Two different kinds of reference photoelectrodes were also prepared by using small spherical TiO2 nanoparticles, s-NCs, as well as commercial P25 nanopowders. SEM images of such films are shown in the ESI (Fig. 3S).
The overall surface area of the sintered films was estimated by measuring their dye-loading capability. In Fig. 4, the absorption spectra of 5 μm thick AR4-NR-, AR8-NR-, AR16-NR-, B-NR-, and BB-NR-based photoelectrodes, respectively, before and after the N719 up-taking process, are reported. All the as-sintered films exhibited a comparably high level of transparency as a confirmation of the absence of light-scattering phenomena. After the dye-sensitization process, the photoelectrodes showed the typical absorption peak of the N719 molecule. As expected, its intensity increased as the average size of the nanocrystals was reduced.
The exact amount of N719 anchored on these films was determined by completely desorbing the dye molecules from the TiO2 film in a 0.1 M NaOH water/ethanol (1:1, v/v) solution and measuring the absorbance of the latter spectrophotometrically.
In accordance with the absorption spectra of dye-sensitized films, the dye loading capability of the AR4-NR film (see Table 1) resulted in being 1.34 and 1.45 times higher than that of the AR8-NR and AR16-NR films, respectively. In addition, the spectrophotometric measurement revealed also that the B-NRs, in spite of their bigger size, could achieve a relatively good light-harvesting capability. Actually, a film made of 80–100 nm sized B-NRs adsorbed a dye molecule amount of 1.46 × 10−7 mol cm−2, nearly the same as that adsorbed by films made of 3 × 50 nm sized nanorods (AR16-NRs). In contrast, BB-NR-based photoelectrodes showed a relatively lower dye-loading capability with respect to that demonstrated by films based on linear NRs, which was intrinsically associated with their larger dimensions. However, it deserves to be underlined that both types of branched nanocrystals, B-NRs and BB-NRs, could adsorb a significantly larger amount of N719 molecules, compared with what was afforded with commercial P25 nanocrystals.
Sample

Dye loading/mol cm−2

AR4-NRs
2.16 × 10−7

AR8-NRs
1.61 × 10−7

AR16-NRs
1.47 × 10−7

B-NRs
1.46 × 10−7

BB-NRs
0.96 × 10−7

P25

0.66 × 10−7

s-NCs
1.63 × 10−7

The values of the efficiency (η%), fill factor (FF), open circuit voltage (VOC) and short-circuit current density (Jsc) measured for DSSCs implementing 9 μm thick photoelectrodes made starting from differently shaped building blocks are reported in Table 2. Fig. 5 shows the I–V (current–voltage) curves of such devices.

Sample

η (%)

V
oc/V

J
sc/mA cm−2
FF

AR4-NRs
5.2
0.77
9.8
0.69

AR8-NRs
6.7
0.77
12.5
0.70

AR16-NRs
7.8
0.78
14.7
0.68

B-NRs
5.8
0.78
10.2
0.73

BB-NRs
5.7
0.82
9.7
0.72

P25

4.2
0.71
8.5
0.70

s-NCs
5.1
0.76
9.7
0.70
As mentioned above, the size of photoelectrode-constitutive elements must be taken into account when analyzing their performances. Therefore, we selected a 15 nm spherical s-NC-based photoelectrode as an appropriate reference for DSSCs fabricated from the small linear NRs, whereas a TiO2 P25-based one was considered as a benchmark in the evaluation of the larger branched nanocrystals.
As well known, the photocurrent intensity produced by a DSSC is mainly determined by the dye loading capability of the TiO2 mesoporous film as well as by its electron transport properties, these phenomena being in general competitive. In the present study, we aimed at evaluating the relative weight of these factors in dictating the performances of the DSSCs fabricated from the five different breeds of nanocrystals developed here.
Concerning DSSCs fabricated from linear NRs with increasing aspect ratio, they exhibited a trend in the photocurrent density that was just opposite to the trend featuring their dye-adsorption capabilities. For example, the AR4NR-based film loaded a number of N719 dye molecules as high as 2.16 × 10−7 mol cm−2, whereas AR16NR-based ones adsorbed only 1.47 × 10−7 mol cm−2 (see Table 1). The former produced a photocurrent of only 9.8 mA cm−2, whereas the latter showed a photocurrent as high as 14.7 mA cm−2 (see Table 2). From these data it could therefore be deduced that the inherent electron transport properties of the films overwhelmed the effect of the film surface area on the ultimate photocurrent that could be generated. Photoelectrodes made of branched nanorods, B-NRs, exhibited dramatically lower values of the photocurrent density (10.2 mA cm−2) with respect to those made of linear NRs, despite the former showing a good dye-loading capability. On the other hand, surprisingly, photoelectrodes constituted of the large nanorod bundles, BB-NRs, presented a relatively high photocurrent density (9.7 mA cm−2) when taking into account their reduced amount of adsorbed dye molecules. In addition, BB-NR-based devices showed the highest VOC value of 0.82 V, which can be reasonably explained as being due to the reduced number of nanocrystal interconnections, hence of charge-recombination sites. Our shape-engineered nanocrystals exhibited a conspicuous enhancement of the energy conversion efficiency with respect to the isotropically shaped reference nanoparticles: linear NR-based DSSCs yielded an overall power conversion efficiency of 7.8% for AR16-NRs, 6.7% for AR8-NRs and 5.2% for AR4-NRs, all of them ranking higher than 5.1% obtained for s-NCs. These results represent a significant improvement, when compared with the performances so far reported for photoelectrodes made from similar organic-capped nanorods. Moreover, both B-NR- and BB-NR-based devices, which exhibited overall efficienciesc of 5.8% and 5.7%, respectively, performed better than previously reported examples of DSSCs employing branched nanocrystal-based films as photoelectrodes.
These pieces of evidence demonstrate the effectiveness of our film preparation procedure in producing photoelectrodes that can satisfactorily exploit the intrinsically beneficial transport properties of anisotropically shaped nanocrystals.
It has been, however, remarked that all the reported results have been obtained by implementing 9 μm thick transparent photoelectrodes, which do not necessarily correspond to the performances maximizing condition. Better performances can be surely demonstrated with the implementation of thicker photoelectrodes and/or with the optimization of both the optical (by the introduction of a scattering layer) and the electrical design (by the introduction of a passivating layer).


Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) analysis at various bias voltages in the dark conditions was carried out for all the different mesoporous TiO2 photoelectrodes studied in this work with the aim of understanding how the striking photovoltaic behavior of the devices correlated with the morphologies of the relevant TiO2 building blocks. Fig. 6 presents the semilogarithmic plot of the potential dependence for the three most meaningful electrochemical parameters extrapolated by fitting the measured EIS spectra with an equivalent circuit model, namely the charge-transfer resistance Rct (Fig. 6a), the chemical capacitance Cμ (Fig. 6b) and the apparent electron lifetime (Fig. 6c).

In the dark Rct shows an exponential dependence on the bias voltage, which can be well described by the expression:
(1)
As observed in Fig. 6a, above 0.4 V, the slope of the exponential potential dependence curve of the charge transfer of liquid ionic cell increased, indicating the switch to the potential domain in which charge transfer from TiO2 to the electrolyte dominated the recombination losses in the cell.
A huge enhancement of the charge-transfer resistance Rct was observed for BB-NR-based photoelectrodes with respect to cells built using all the other shapes of nanocrystals, and in particular with respect to B-NRs. At 0.8 V Rct of BB-NRs resulted in, in fact, practically three times as large as Rct of B-NRs (142.0 Ω vs. 56.3 Ω). This effect is basically associated with a remarkable increase in the energy barrier against the spontaneous interfacial red-ox reactions involving the photogenerated electrons, which dramatically reduces recombination phenomena during the cell operation. This attribution was indeed demonstrated by the superior values of VOC measured for BB-NR-based DSSCs and further confirmed by the following analysis of the charge-transport properties.

Fig. 6b reports the fitted values of the photoelectrode capacitance, which is given by the sum of the capacitance at the interface FTO/photoelectrode and the chemical capacitance of the film calculated according to:
(2)
(3)
In all the cases for V > 0.4 V the chemical capacitance of the photoelectrodes increased exponentially with the increasing forward bias voltage. It has to be highlighted that as the applied voltage became comparable or higher than Voc, the cells made of linear NRs (AR4-NRs, AR8-NRs and AR16-NRs) started to exhibit a more remarkably intense capacitive behavior with respect to the photoelectrodes made of bigger NRs (BB-NRs and B-NRs). In particular, at 0.8 V, we found the following sets of capacitance values: s-NC: 950.3 μF; AR4-NRs: 900.2 μF; AR8-NRs 739.2 μF; AR16-NRs: 1035 μF; BB-NRs: 323 μF; and B-NRs: 283.4 μF. This effect could be attributed to a broader density of the electron trap state distribution below the edge of the conduction band in the case of films with higher surface area (which are indeed made with relatively smaller nanocrystals) as a consequence of the higher number of inter-grain connections holding in the sintered films.
The most relevant parameter to be considered is, however, the diffusive contribution to the intermediate-frequency impedance or transport resistance, Rt. The electron diffusion resistance is inversely proportional to the density of electrons at the transport level and can be expressed as:
(4)
Differences in Rt values are even strongly affected by the overall differences among the various photoelectrodes in terms of the number and typology of interconnections between neighboring nanocrystals. It has to be put in evidence, in fact, that the absolute values of extrapolated Rt (Table 3) cannot be reliably compared, since Rt is an extensive parameter, thus related to the effective surface area of the photoelectrodes. What possesses a relevant physical meaning is instead the effective electron diffusion length (Le) that reflects the competition between charge collection and recombination phenomena. The effective diffusion length within the mesoporous photoelectrode was deduced by using the following equation:
Le = d × (Rct/Rt)1/2
(5)
where
d is the photoelectrode's thickness. Values of Le, as extrapolated from the fitted EIS data measured at 0.8 V in the dark, are presented in Table 3.

Sample

R
ct/Ω

R
t/Ω

L
e/μm

AR4-NRs
86.4
14.3
22.03

AR8-NRs
59.1
7.8
24.68

AR16-NRs
50.7
4.2
31.01

B-NRs
56.3
15.7
16.97

BB-NRs
142.0
9.6
34.63

s-NCs
42.8
7.8
21.02
Therefore, BB-NR-based films revealed the highest average electron diffusion length, according to the order: BB-NRs > AR16-NRs > AR8-NRs > AR4-NRs > s-NCs > B-NRs. This sequence suggested a corresponding meaningful hierarchy holding among the values of the photo-generated charge carrier collection efficiency. To experimentally support such hypothesis, we evaluated the apparent electron lifetime τe by implementing the quasi-static treatment developed by Bisquert et al. According to this model, the product of the charge-transfer resistance (Rct) times the chemical capacitance (Cμ) yields τe:
τe = Cμ × Rct
(6)

Fig. 6c compares apparent electrons lifetimes (τe) for all the different mesoporous TiO2 photoelectrodes studied in this work at various bias voltages in the dark conditions.

Cells from linear NRs exhibited an easily explainable trend that was indeed in perfect accordance with the effective diffusion length hierarchy highlighted above, whereby higher aspect ratios corresponded to a longer electron lifetime as a direct consequence of the improved electron transport properties associated with their specific lattice directionality.
Different arguments have to be instead used to rationalize the parameters extracted for branched nanocrystals: BB-NR-based photoanodes exhibited an increase in τe by a factor 3 to 6, relative to equally thick photoelectrodes based on B-NRs: at 0.8 V we estimated τe = 53.8 ms for BB-NRs and τe = 17.6 ms for B-NRs. The lower lifetime of the B-NR-based films might be due to the increased charge recombination rate that can be attested by the relatively low Rct values. These results mainly elucidated the effects of surface traps that introduced intraband gap states and enormous electron losses at grain boundaries where tens of thousands trapping/detrapping events took place during electron transit through the film. Such losses contribute to explain the unexpected relatively low values of photocurrent density revealed for this kind of high surface area photoelectrodes. In contrast, a drastic reduction of the trapping phenomena associated with recombination of photogenerated carriers could possibly be ascribed to the particular bundle-like architecture concerned with the BB-NRs, as an effect of the coherent crystallographic orientation of the individual rod-shaped units that were assembled into BB-NRs along a specific directionality. The existence of interconnected nanorod branches prior to the sintering step is here supposed to be the most favorable condition to produce photoelectrodes that can maximize charge collection efficiency. This assumption could explain the relatively high electron concentration in the conduction band as well as the reduction of electron recombination (as demonstrated by the charge transfer resistance measurements), being in perfect agreement with the highest open-circuit voltage values exhibited by BB-NR-based photoanodes.

We have systematically analyzed the impact of five different TiO2 nanocrystal morphologies on the photovoltaic behavior of high-quality photoelectrodes thereof to be used for DSSCs. This has been possible through the implementation of an effective printable paste preparation method that allows the original shape and dimensions of individual nanocrystals to be preserved in the final photoelectrodes.

On the basis of device characterization results, we have deduced an intrinsic correlation between the nanocrystal morphology and the performances of the corresponding DSSCs. In particular, we found that DSSCs made from higher AR linear NRs produced higher photocurrent densities in spite of the comparatively lower dye amount adsorbed. This effect was ascribed to the longer electron lifetime that resulted from the superior electron transport properties associated with the specific lattice directionality of the individual NRs. Accordingly, DSSCs based on linear NRs with the highest AR of 16 provided the best compromise between light-harvesting and electron transport capabilities, allowing a remarkable improvement in energy conversion efficiency with respect to conventional spherical nanoparticles with sizes approaching the NR diameter (7.8% vs. 5.1% in the case of 9 μm thick films). On the other hand, a drastic reduction of the trapping phenomena associated with recombination of photogenerated carriers could be achieved in the case of branched nanocrystals with a bundle-like architecture, as a consequence of their particular configuration whereby linear rod-shaped branches are already interconnected by direct bonding junctions along a preferential direction prior to the sintering step. Nanostructures of this type are expected to offer the most favorable conditions for realizing photoelectrodes that can maximize the charge-collection efficiency.
Taken together, our findings suggest useful criteria to realize optimized TiO2 network structures based on the processing of properly shape-tailored colloidal nanocrystals, which could lead to future generations of DSSCs capable of having an increasingly high level of performance.

This work has been partially supported by Regione PUGLIA (APQ Reti di Laboratorio, Project PHOEBUS, cod. 31). The authors thank Benedetta Antonazzo for performing TEM measurements and Silvio Pappadà (Cuscinusa Sape) and Fabio Morrison for helpful discussions.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: TEM images of the reference spherical nanocrystals; SEM images showing the morphology of an AR16-NR-based photoelectrode prepared by deposition of a conventional screen-printable paste; SEM images showing the morphology of the sintered films prepared from spherical TiO2 nanocrystals; and cross-section SEM images showing the morphology of the sintered films. See DOI: 10.1039/c1jm11887k
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011