 DOI: 10.1039/C3TA11331K
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 8471-8478

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Rui-Xuan
Dong
,

Sheng-Yen
Shen
,

Hsin-Wei
Chen
,

Chun-Chieh
Wang
,

Po-Ta
Shih
,

Chung-Te
Liu
,

R.
Vittal
,

Jiang-Jen
Lin
* and 

Kuo-Chuan
Ho
*

Institute of Polymer Science and Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan. E-mail: jianglin@ntu.edu.tw; Fax: +886-2-3366-5237; Tel: +886-2-3366-5312

Department of Chemical Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan. E-mail: kcho@ntu.edu.tw; Fax: +886-2-2362-3040; Tel: +886-2-2366-0739

Received
2nd April 2013
, Accepted 10th May 2013
First published on 13th May 2013
A structurally interconnected block copolymer was facilely prepared by the oligomerization of poly(oxyethylene)-segmented diamine and 4,4′-oxydiphthalic anhydride, followed by a late-stage curing to generate amide-imide cross-linked gels. The gel structure, with multiple functionalities including poly(oxyethylene) segments, amido-acid linkers, amine termini, and amide cross-linker was characterized by Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy. The gel-like copolymer was used to absorb a liquid electrolyte; formation of 3D interconnected nanochannels, as could be observed by field emission scanning electronic microscopy has confirmed this absorption of the liquid electrolyte by the copolymer. This elastomeric copolymer was used as the matrix of a polymer gel electrolyte (PGE) for a dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC), which shows extremely high photovoltaic performance (soaking for 1 h in the electrolyte). In particular, the PGE containing 76.8 wt% of the liquid electrolyte renders a power conversion efficiency of 9.48% for its DSSC, with a short-circuit photocurrent density of 19.50 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage of 0.76 V, and a fill factor of 0.64. The outstanding performance of the gel-state DSSC, superior to that (8.84%) of the DSSC with the liquid electrolyte, is mainly ascribed to the suppression of the back electron transfer through the PGE. Electrochemical impedance spectra, and dark current measurements were used to substantiate the explanations of the photovoltaic parameters.

It is well known that the presence of traditional organic liquid electrolytes in dye-sensitized solar cells is associated with problems such as hermitic sealing of the cell, precipitation of salts in the electrolyte at low temperature, evaporation of liquids of the electrolyte at high temperature, dissociation of the adsorbed dye, corrosion and lack of long-term stability of the cells. Therefore, solidification and quasi-solidification of the DSSCs have been intensely studied with various approaches, such as using p-type inorganic semiconductors, organic and inorganic hole conducting materials, gel materials, and ionic liquids (IL). The solar-to-electricity conversion efficiency (η) of a quasi-solid-state dye-sensitized solar cell (QSS-DSSC) is presently less than that of a liquid electrolyte cell, because a quasi-solid electrolyte is viscous and cannot permeate easily into the pores of the TiO2 film of the DSSC. Ionic mobility is usually retarded in a polymer gel electrolyte (PGE) owing to the polymer matrix restriction and the viscous nature of the electrolyte, hence, a QSS-DSSC generally affords the reduction in performance with reference to that of a liquid electrolyte DSSC. The poor contact of a quasi-solid electrolyte with the porous TiO2 film or the counter electrode also aggravates the problem.

PGEs are the most promising substitutes for liquid electrolytes for the fabrication of practically applicable QSS-DSSCs, because of their superior properties, such as ionic conductivity, thermal stability, interactive ability with the TiO2 electrode, good interfacial filling property, long-term stability, and, above all non-propensity to leakage. The general PGE composition comprises polymer cages in a three-dimensional network and the absorbed liquid electrolyte. Free movement of ions in the solution phase is the main function of a PGE. The preparation of a PGE for a DSSC was first reported in 1995, where the gel electrolyte was prepared with poly(acrylonitrile). Various forms of polymers, including poly(ethylene oxide)–poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PEO–PVDF), poly(acrylonitrile) (PANI), poly(methyl acrylate) (PMA), poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA), and poly(vinylidene fluoride-co-hexafluoropropylene) (PVDF-HFP) were used for the fabrication of quasi-solid state DSSCs. The poly(vinylidene fluoride-co-hexafluoropropylene) (PVDF-HFP) copolymer is well-known for its good mechanical stability and for its feasibility to form a film; it is also known to be a good supporter of liquid electrolyte in terms of the latter's ionic conductivity. The DSSC fabricated with PVDF-HFP gel electrolyte was reported to have a conversion efficiency of 6.1%, by utilizing a hydrophobic ruthenium dye. Nanomaterials including TiO2, SiO2, graphite nanoparticles, and nanosilicate platelets were incorporated as fillers into PGEs to enhance both the cell efficiency and the long-term stability of DSSCs. Various effects were reported for the incorporation of nanomaterials into PGEs, including reduction of crystallinity of the polymer, formation of transfer channels for the redox couple, and enhancement of thermal stability of the pertinent QSS-DSSC. Further, the use of poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) has attracted much attention in the PGE studies, owing to its high polarity for absorbing liquid electrolytes, good ability to dissolve redox couples, and high chemical stability. PEG could interact well with TiO2 through the –(CH2CH2O)x– segment, and thereby could minimize the back electron transfer from TiO2 to I3− at the TiO2/electrolyte interface. The PEG-based electrolytes for QSS-DSSCs are well documented, especially those with polymers such as poly(acrylic acid), poly(acrylamide), and so on. However, the power conversion efficiencies of the QSS-DSSCs with gel electrolytes are almost always lower than those of the corresponding cells with liquid electrolytes.
We have created a new class of elastomeric type copolymers which can be used as a PGE for highly efficient DSSCs. The synthesis involved the reaction of a poly(oxyethylene) – (POE) segmented diamine and a dianhydride to afford amide-imide copolymer (POE-PAI), which is capable of absorbing the liquid electrolyte in forming the PGE with well-defined nano-structural channels. The tailoring of composition and functional groups allowed the polymer to absorb the liquid electrolyte, and thereby form the corresponding PGE for a QSS-DSSC. The effect of electrolyte concentration in the PGE on the photovoltaic performance of the pertinent QSS-DSSC was examined. A high ionic mobility in the gel channels and a good contact of the electrolyte with the TiO2 photoanode enabled a high photovoltaic performance for the pertinent QSS-DSSC.

Hydrophobic poly(oxypropylene) (POP) and hydrophilic poly(oxyethylene)-diamine (POE-amine) were obtained from Huntsman Chemical Co. The poly(oxyethylene)-diamine with the backbone of mixed blocks of poly(oxypropylene–oxyethylene–oxypropylene) in the structure of bis(2-aminopropyl ether) polyether, at 2000 g mol−1 (POE2000) is a water soluble, crystalline product (waxy solid, mp 37–40 °C, amine content 0.95 mequiv. g−1, with 39 oxyethylene and 6 oxypropylene units, on an average, in the structure). The anhydride, i.e., 4,4′-oxydiphthalic anhydride (ODPA, 97% purity), hydrogen chloride (HCl), and nitric acid (HNO3, 65%) were purchased from Aldrich Chemical Co. and further purified by sublimation. Anhydrous LiI, I2, acetonitrile (ACN), and PEG (Mw = 20000 g mol−1) were purchased from Merck Chemical Co. Titanium(IV) isopropoxide (TTIP, 98%), 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP, 96%), and t-butanol (TBA, 99.5%) were obtained from Acros. Solvent, 3-methoxypropionitrile (MPN, 99%) was purchased from Fluka Chemical Co. and used as such. Other materials, cis-bis(isothio-cyanato)-bis(2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylato) ruthenium(II)-bis-tetra-butylammonium (so-called N719), 1,2-dimethyl-3-propylimidazolium iodide (DMPII), ionomer resin (Surlyn®, SX1170-25, thickness = 25 μm), fluorine-doped SnO2 glass (FTO, surface resistivity = 15 Ω square−1), Ti-nanoxide HT/SP were supplied by Solaronix S. Tetrahydrofuran (THF) was procured from Tedia Company, Inc.


The synthesis of the polymer gel was accomplished as follows. The solution of POE2000 (20.0 g, 0.01 mole) in THF (15 ml) was added into a 100 ml three-necked round-bottomed flask (R.B. flask), equipped with a magnetic stirrer, a nitrogen inlet–outlet line, and a heating device. A solution of ODPA (1.55 g, 0.005 mole) in THF (5 ml) was added into the R.B. flask through an additional funnel in a drop-wise manner. During the second addition, the mixture was stirred vigorously and the temperature was maintained at 150 °C. The product, POE-PAI, appeared to be a yellow-brown waxy solid after cooling to ambient temperature. The product was kept in the ambient environment for a period of days and even over one week to allow the slow self-curing into an elastomeric solid (Fig. 1b). The portion of the POE-PAI product was added with aqueous hydrogen chloride (0.03 g, 0.001 mole). The acidified sample was shown to be different from the normal product: it became less elastomeric but remained in a waxy form under the same ambient conditions.


The elastomer-like POE-PAI (0.5 g) in lump shape was soaked in the liquid electrolyte (0.6 M DMPII, 0.1 M LiI, 0.05 M I2, and 0.5 M TBP in MPN) and was allowed to swell into a gel. The polymer started absorbing the liquid electrolyte and gaining weight over time. The weight gain increased with time, from 50.6 wt% to 91.4 wt% during the period of 10 min to 24 h.


As the initial step, the FTO glass was cleaned sequentially by a neutral cleaner, water, acetone, and IPA. Then a compact layer was coated on the FTO glass from a solution consisting of TTIP (0.5 g) and 2-methoxyethanol (1.5 g), for the purpose of a good mechanical contact between the FTO and the TiO2 and also for insulating the FTO glass from the electrolyte. The TTIP was hydrolyzed into TiO2 in a medium containing 0.1 M HNO3, by a typical sol–gel method. Then, the TiO2 solution was autoclaved through a hydrothermal process at 240 °C for 12 h, until the concentration of the TiO2 reached 13 wt%; the product was a paste of TiO2. In order to prevent the paste from cracking and to control the pore size of the TiO2, 30 wt% of PEG was added to the paste, based on the weight of TiO2. The TiO2 paste was then coated onto the FTO glass by a doctor-blade technique. The FTO glass was then annealed at 450 °C for 30 min. This coating and annealing was repeated one more time. Finally, another layer of TiO2, containing light scattering particles of 300 nm was coated, and the annealing was repeated under the same conditions. The thickness of the TiO2 film was controlled to be 16 μm. The final film included one compact layer of commercial TiO2 (thickness: 2 μm, particle size: 9 nm), two layers of home-made TiO2 (thickness of each layer: 5 μm, particle size: 20 nm), and one scattering layer of TiO2 (thickness: 4 μm, particle size: 300 nm). A portion of 0.4 × 0.4 cm2 was selected from the final film as the active area by removing the side portions by scraping. The TiO2 film was immersed in a 0.3 mM solution of the dye (N719) at room temperature for 24 h. N719 was previously dissolved in ACN and tert-butanol (volume ratio of 1:1) to prepare the dye solution. The TiO2 photoanode was thus obtained.


The DSSC was assembled using the photoanode and a counter electrode (CE), which was prepared by sputtering platinum (Pt) on a conducting FTO glass. The two electrodes were separated by 25 μm-thick Surlyn® (Surlyn®, SX1170-25) as the spacer. The PGE, containing 0.6 M DMPII, 0.1 M LiI, 0.05 M I2, and 0.5 M TBP in MPN was sandwiched between the photo-electrode and counter electrode. The cell was then placed in a hot-presser at 100 °C in a chamber for 4 min; the lamination process was thus completed.


The Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) spectra were recorded using a PerkinElmer spectrometer. The solid samples in films were placed on KBr pellets, and the measurements were performed in the 800–4000 cm−1 range. A field emission scanning electronic microscope (FE-SEM, Zeiss EM 902A) was employed to obtain surface micrographs. The surface of the DSSC was illuminated by a class A quality solar simulator (PEC-L11, AM1.5G, Peccell Technologies, Inc.), and the incident light intensity (100 mW cm−2) was calibrated with a standard Si cell (PECSI01, Peccell Technologies, Inc., Kanagawa, Japan). The photoelectrochemical characteristics of the DSSC and its EIS were recorded with a potentiostat/galvanostat (PGSTAT 30, Autolab, Eco Chemie, the Netherlands) equipped with an FRA2 module, under a constant light illumination of 100 mW cm−2. The frequency range explored was 10 mHz to 65 kHz. The applied bias voltage was set at the open-circuit voltage (VOC) of the DSSC, between the CE and the FTO/TiO2/dye working electrode, starting from the short-circuit condition; the corresponding ac amplitude was 10 mV. Impedance spectra were analysed by fitting them to an equivalent circuit model. Incident photo-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) curves were obtained at the short-circuit condition. The light source was a class A quality solar simulator (PEC-L11, AM1.5G, Peccell Technologies, Inc.); light was focused through a monochromator (Oriel Instruments, model 74100) onto the photovoltaic cell.


The procedures for the preparation of the POE-block-amide-imide copolymers and the comparative products with amine-salt termini are schematically shown in Fig. 1. We have created a new class of copolymers by adopting the general polyimide synthesis but generating the controlled molecular length of the oligomers. The generic products are the oligomers of the POE-PAI. The copolymers were facilely prepared through the oligomerization of POE2000 and ODPA at 2:1 to 5:4 molar ratios. The synthetic scheme involves the formation of amido-acid intermediates and then their cyclization into imide products at an elevated temperature. The expected structure of the POE-PAI comprises POE segments or –(CH2CH2O)x–, aromatic imide –(CONCO)–, and amine terminus functionalities, as presented in Fig. 1a. To our surprise, the product became an elastomer-like solid when it was placed under ambient conditions (Fig. 1b). To determine the cross-linking behavior, we have monitored the formation of this elastomeric product from the reaction between POE2000 and ODPA by using FTIR as shown in Fig. 2. The reactive anhydride generally undergoes step-wise ring opening and closing into the corresponding imides. Without the addition of a catalyst, however, the structure partially contained amido-acid intermediates at 150 °C. The chemical structure of POE-PAI is revealed by a strong absorption peak at 1713 cm−1 (asymmetric stretch of CO for imide) and a weak absorption peak at 1770 cm−1 (imide carbonyl symmetric stretch), as shown in Fig. 2a. When the elastomeric product was maintained for over a week in ambient atmosphere, we observed new infrared absorption peaks at 1657 cm−1 corresponding to the symmetric stretch of CO in amide, and at 1547 cm−1 for the stretch of C–N and the bend of N–H in amide (Fig. 2b). The formation of the amide during the setting period was accompanied by gel formation of the elastomers (Fig. 2c). According to the intensity of amide and imide peaks, the m/n value can be estimated. For the case of the POE-PAI at POE2000/ODPA = 3:2, we estimated the m/n ratio to be 1/7 by analyzing FTIR absorption peaks of amide (1547 cm−1) and imide (1770 cm−1). The values of m and n can be estimated to be 0.25 and 1.75, respectively. This process of forming an amide linked elastomer could be shortened in time if the intermediate was exposed to oven heating at a higher temperature than 50 °C. The formation of the amide cross-linkages was further indirectly evidenced by adding aqueous hydrogen chloride to the POE-PAI before the late-curing process of forming a solid gel. As expected, the corresponding POE-PAI amine-salt remained in the same form for a long period (Fig. 1c) due to the intercept of amide formation. It is reasonably assumed that the amides are derived from the reaction of the terminal amines and the amido-acid functionalities in POE-PAI, as conceptually illustrated in Fig. 3. Ultimately, the slow curing process via the amide formation afforded the polymer gels with the functionalities of aromatic imides, hydrophilic POE segments, amido-acids, and cross-linked amides.


The synthesized POE-PAI material appeared to be rubber-like (Fig. 4a); this material was capable of swelling and absorbing solvents such as water, toluene, MPN, and so on. When the POE-PAI was soaked in the liquid electrolyte containing 0.6 M DMPII, 0.1 M LiI, 0.05 M I2, and 0.5 M TBP in MPN, it swelled and absorbed the electrolyte, and gained weight, twelve-times higher than its original weight, as shown in Fig. 4b. The swollen polymer gel with the electrolyte was dissected and examined for cross-sectional surface morphologies by FE-SEM. The pristine POE-PAI surface (Fig. 4c and d) and the swollen POE-PAI after soaking in the electrolyte (Fig. 4e and f) was observed. The POE-PAI surface is amorphous before the electrolyte soaking while it gains porous channels with diameters in the 300–700 nm range after soaking in the electrolyte. The swelling ability of the microstructure of POE-PAI is thus demonstrated through its absorption of the liquid electrolyte in its 3D interconnected nanochannels. Three representative samples with different degrees of electrolyte absorption are prepared for 91.4, 76.8 and 50.6 wt% of liquid electrolyte contents (Table 1), roughly corresponding to ten-, three- and two-fold weight gain, respectively. It is important to note that all of these swollen polymers maintained their dimensional stability after embedding a large amount of the liquid electrolyte in their porous channels.

Polymer conc. (wt%)

σ (mS cm−1)

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF
Eff. (η) (%)
Liquid electrolyte (LE)
0
12.70 ± 0.07
0.72 ± 0.01
19.20 ± 0.13
0.64 ± 0.01
8.84 ± 0.13
PGE (91.4 wt% LE in PGE)
8.60 ± 0.22
12.72 ± 0.06
0.73 ± 0.01
19.25 ± 0.20
0.63 ± 0.01
8.85 ± 0.09
PGE (76.8 wt% LE in PGE)
23.15 ± 0.49
12.77 ± 0.11
0.76 ± 0.01
19.50 ± 0.05
0.64 ± 0.01
9.48 ± 0.03
PGE (50.6 wt% LE in PGE)
49.38 ± 1.26
11.64 ± 0.16
0.76 ± 0.01
18.02 ± 0.18
0.62 ± 0.01
8.41 ± 0.08

The effect of electrolyte concentration was examined on the photovoltaic performance of a DSSC with the PGE made from POE-PAI. As shown in Fig. 5a, the fraction of the electrolyte increases in the polymer matrix by increasing the soaking time in the electrolyte, specifically, 50.6 wt% and 76.8 wt% after 10 min and 1 h of soaking, respectively. The polymer could reach a maximum saturation of 91.4 wt% in soaking up the electrolyte into the matrix after 24 h.

Correspondingly, the ionic conductivity (σ) and behaviors of the photovoltaic parameters of the DSSCs varied at an irradiation of AM 1.5 (100 mW cm−2), as shown in Table 1 and Fig. 5b. The σ was measured for the POE-PAI PGEs and demonstrated higher values than that of the liquid electrolyte. The σ can be influenced by a number of factors such as the nature of the ionic species, the electrolyte fraction in the polymer matrix, and the type of charge exchange reactions (e.g., Grotthuss-type charge-transfer in the case of electrolytes with high ionic strength). The observation of a slight increase in σ, mainly depending on the concentration of the redox couple, I3−/I−, has reached a maximum conductivity of 12.77 × 10−3 S cm−1 for the electrolyte concentration of 76.8 wt%. In previous work, we have confirmed the relationship of chelating interaction between the lithium ions and the POE segments. The anions can be accelerated in the electrolyte in the presence of appropriate POE-PAI. However, high concentration of salts on reducing the polymer segmental motion and in turn decreasing the σ, as in the case with 91.4 wt% of the liquid electrolyte in the polymer matrix. The DSSC performance of the PEG with 76.8 wt% fraction at the highest conductivity is consistent with the highest JSC, FF, and η of the cell. To our best knowledge, the 100% liquid electrolyte ought to perform the best. However, the difference in liquid electrolyte concentration is not the most important factor in determining the performance since the performance follows the trend of 76.8 wt% > 91.4 wt% > 100 wt% (liquid electrolyte) > 50.6 wt%.

Fig. 6 shows the photocurrent density–voltage (I–V) characteristics of the DSSCs having PGEs with different weight fractions of the liquid electrolyte in the PGE, at an irradiation of AM 1.5 (100 mW cm−2); the figure also shows the corresponding dark current density–voltage curves. The corresponding values of open-circuit voltage (VOC), short-circuit current (JSC), fill factor (FF), and power conversion efficiency (η) are listed in Table 1, which also includes the values of these parameters for a reference DSSC with a standard liquid electrolyte. It is clearly indicated that the three DSSCs with the PGEs exhibit equal or far higher power conversion efficiencies than that with the standard liquid electrolyte. The one with the PGE of 76.8 wt% electrolyte exhibits the highest η of 9.48% among the three PGEs with different electrolyte loadings and the liquid electrolyte (η = 8.84%). This represents a significant development in the field of dye sensitized solar cells, because the advanced DSSC not only shows higher power conversion efficiency, but, by being a quasi-solid-state DSSC avoids the aforementioned problems of a liquid-state DSSC. The I–V curves measured in dark conditions, as shown in the lower part of Fig. 6, reveal that the dark currents of different PGEs are consistent with the VOC values, with respect to the electrolyte fraction in the polymer.
Further, IPCE curves were obtained to confirm the JSC values of the DSSCs with the liquid electrolyte and the PGEs. The broad IPCE curves in Fig. S1, covering almost the entire visible spectrum from 400 nm to 800 nm exhibit the maximum value of 90% at 520 nm for the cell with 76.8 wt% of the liquid electrolyte, 85% for the cells with 91.4 wt% and 100 wt% of the liquid electrolyte, and 83% for the cell with 50.6 wt% of the liquid electrolyte. These values are also in good agreement with the corresponding JSC values of the cells (Table 1).
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was used to quantify various resistances, and the results are shown in Fig. 7; the equivalent circuit is shown as an inset in the figure. The values of charge transfer resistance at the counter electrode (Rct1) and charge transfer resistance at the TiO2/dye/electrolyte are given in Table 2. In general, the EIS spectrum of a DSSC shows three semi-circles in the frequency range of 10 mHz to 65 kHz. The first and second semicircles correspond to the charge-transfer resistances at the counter electrode (Rct1) and the TiO2/dye/electrolyte (Rct2), respectively, while the third one represents the resistance against the Warburg diffusion process (RW) of I−/I3− in the electrolyte. The variations in Rct1 and Rct2 for the DSSCs (Table 2) are the induced variations due to the differences in the conductivities of the pertinent electrolytes. That is, if the conductivity of an electrolyte is high, the diffusion rate of the I− and I3− ions in it will be high and, consequently, the Rct1 and Rct2 values will be small, as in the case of the DSSC with 76.8 wt% of the liquid electrolyte. Owing to changes in the composition of the PGE, variation is expected in the value of RW as shown in Fig. 7 and Table 2. The RW values are consistent with the FF and JSC of the corresponding DSSCs.
Electrolyte
Polymer conc. (wt%)

R
ct1
 (Ω)

R
ct2
 (Ω)

R
W
 (Ω)

a Charge-transfer resistance at the counter electrode/electrolyte.
b Charge-transfer resistance at the TiO2/dye/electrolyte.
c Resistance against the Warburg diffusion process (RW) of I−/I3− in the electrolyte. These resistance values were evaluated from Fig. 7.

Liquid electrolyte (LE)
0
8.52 ± 0.21
21.04 ± 0.20
8.96 ± 0.12
PGE (91.4 wt% LE in PGE)
8.60 ± 0.22
8.46 ± 0.25
21.10 ± 0.22
9.30 ± 0.18
PGE (76.8 wt% LE in PGE)
23.15 ± 0.49
6.46 ± 0.22
19.52 ± 0.16
7.58 ± 0.14
PGE (50.6 wt% LE in PGE)
49.38 ± 1.26
16.58 ± 0.32
23.26 ± 0.12
17.28 ± 0.22

It is demonstrated that using the synthesized polymer gel may produce a DSSC that outperforms the cell with the bare liquid electrolyte. The observation of higher performance for a quasi-solid-state DSSC than that of its counterpart with the liquid electrolyte is unprecedented in the literature. In view of the fact that the absorbed amount of liquid electrolyte in the polymer matrices may largely affect the cell efficiency, we propose the diagram in Fig. 8 to explain the mechanism. In this conceptual illustration, the variation of the VOC values by changing PGEs with the absorbed amount of liquid electrolyte is correlated. It is mentioned above that the increase in VOC can be derived from the suppression of the dark current at the TiO2/electrolyte junction. It is known that the dark current arises from the reduction of triiodide ions by the conduction band electrons of TiO2. A high interfacial potential barrier between TiO2 and the PGE can block the interface reaction between TiO2 and I3− ions. The PGE can reduce the extent of direct contact between the TiO2 film and the electrolytic solution and, thus, can lead to the suppression of the rate of back electron transfer from the conduction band of TiO2 to I3− ions in the electrolyte. In the present case, the suppression of dark current can occur through the wrapping of TiO2 particles and enveloping of dye molecules by the POE segments, and consequently hindering the back electron transfer. As a result, the dark current can be restricted and the VOC can be enhanced. The degree of suppression of the dark current appears to be the same for the liquid electrolyte fraction at 50.6 wt% and 76.8 wt%, as the VOC values are nearly the same for the PGEs with these fractions. The PGE with 91.4 wt% can be similar to the liquid electrolyte, and thus the VOC values are similar. The PGE interfacial contacts with the photoanode substrates are expected to be dependent on the morphology and the liquid electrolyte in the 3D interconnected nanochannels. As presented schematically in Fig. 8a, the lower loading of the liquid electrolyte in the gel channels could largely increase the coverage of TiO2 particles by the polymer, allowing the suppression of the back electron transfer and thereby rendering a high VOC of the pertinent cell. In contrast, as shown in Fig. 8c, the high loading of the liquid electrolyte should lead to low VOC due to the low area of polymer coverage toward TiO2 particles. Apparently, the experimentally optimized fraction of 76.8 wt% liquid electrolyte rendered the PGE with a suitable coverage of the TiO2 surface (Fig. 8b), and ultimately the highest VOC in this system. Overall, the combination of the optimized 3D nanochannel morphology and the fractal amount of the filled electrolyte in the PEG is attributed to the enhanced power efficiency of the quasi-solid-state DSSC outperforming the liquid electrolyte counterpart cell.


A novel polymer gel was prepared from the two-stage reaction and late-curing to afford the chemical functionalities of poly(oxyethylene)-segments, amido-acids, imides and amide cross-linking sites. The polymer gel was capable of absorbing liquid electrolyte more than ten times its own weight. The electrolyte-absorbed polymer gel was examined by scanning electron microcopy for the presence of 3D interconnected nanochannels in the microstructures, and allowed the easy fabrication of a DSSC in the quasi-solid form which gave rise to the higher power efficiency than the pristine cell with the liquid electrolyte. The optimized 76.8% of absorbed liquid by weight in the polymer gel showed a power conversion efficiency (η) of 9.48%, superior to the liquid electrolyte of only 8.84%. This achievement represents a significant advance in DSSC development because of the advantages in higher power conversion efficiency besides the longevity of cell performance by circumventing the general leaking problem of a conventional liquid-state DSSC. The high performance is attributed to the high conductivity of the PGE with 76.8 wt% of the liquid electrolyte, and the best reduction of the dark currents of the pertinent DSSC. Furthermore, the RW values were in agreement with the FF and JSC values. The higher performance with a PGE than that with a liquid electrolyte is achieved unprecedentedly for advancing DSSC development. Because the efficiency of DSSCs using PGE (76.8 wt% LE in PGE) would be cut by about 15% after illuminated for 1000 h, our future work and collaborative efforts will focus on the improvement of the sealing process and the option of solvents with high boiling points for the electrolyte to maintain the efficiency for over 1000 h.


We acknowledge financial support from the Ministry of Economic Affairs (101-EC-17-A-08-S1-205) and the National Science Council (NSC) of Taiwan. This literature contains work presented at the 2012 Materials Research Society Spring Meeting & Exhibit, San Francisco, California, USA.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: IPCE curves of the DSSCs with the PGEs having different fractions of the liquid electrolyte. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ta11331k
‡ These authors contributed equally.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013