 DOI: 10.1039/B923477B
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 9249-9255

Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical Terms


Chuan-Pei
Lee
,

Po-Yen
Chen
,

R.
Vittal
 and 

Kuo-Chuan
Ho
*

Department of Chemical Engineering, National Taiwan University, No. 1, Sec. 4, Roosevelt Road, Taipei, 10617 Taiwan. E-mail: kcho@ntu.edu.tw; Fax: +886-2-23623040; Tel: +886-2-23660739

Institute of Polymer Science and Engineering, National Taiwan University, No. 1, Sec. 4, Roosevelt Road, Taipei, 10617 Taiwan

Received
10th November 2009
, Accepted 16th April 2010
First published on
23rd June 2010

The effects of incorporation of various weight percentages of titanium carbide (TiC) into TiO2 matrices on the photovoltaics of the respective dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) were investigated. It is established through relevant photographs, XRD and EDX analysis that TiC was partially converted into anatase TiO2 (a-TiO2) when the TiC was sintered at 450 °C. With the incorporation of 3.0 wt% of the TiC in the TiO2 film, the solar-to-electricity conversion efficiency (η) of the cell reached 7.56% from its value of 6.61% with a bare TiO2 film. “In situ” incorporation of this TiC/a-TiO2 composite in the commercial TiO2 is considered as the basis for enhanced cell efficiency of the benefited cell. The variations in JSC, FF, and VOC are explained by analyzing the data of dark currents, UV-absorption spectra, transparency spectra, and electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) which were obtained under illumination and darkness. Enhancement in the VOC for the promoted cell is explained through pertinent electron lifetime in the TiO2 film, which was obtained by using laser-induced photo-voltage transient studies. Electron diffusion coefficient was also measured by using laser-induced photo-current transient studies.

Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) have been extensively investigated since O'Regan and Grätzel reported a 7.1% solar energy conversion efficiency in 1991. In this type of solar cell, nanocrystallinity and porosity of TiO2 play important roles since they increase, respectively, the connectivity among TiO2 particles and the specific surface area of the TiO2 semiconductor. However, the inherent conductivity of the TiO2 film is very low with an electron transport rate close to that of the interfacial recombination, both in the range of a few milliseconds. Strategies to enhance the cell efficiency include the promotion of the rate of electron transfer through TiO2 and the reduction of the rate of recombination between injected conduction band electrons and I3− ions. Efforts have been made to retard the charge recombination by modifying the TiO2 surface with a thin insulating layer of a metal oxide, e.g., ZnO, Al2O3, Y2O3, MgO, Nb2O5, and CaCO3. Carbon nanotubes (CNT) have also been introduced into the TiO2 film to improve its electrical conductivity. A very thin layer of TiO2/CNT film was used in a DSSC, to avoid needless dark films in the presence of CNT.

One of the routes to improve the performance of a DSSC is to replace the TiO2 with a structurally analogous material with higher electron mobility, such as SnO2. Our approach in this study is to complement the TiO2 with titanium carbide (TiC) to achieve higher electron mobility. The basis for this idea was a report by Kormann et al. that carbide-derived carbon coated TiC/TiO2 ceramics with predominantly anatase phase show enhanced photo catalytic activity. Titanium carbide (TiC) belongs to a class of extremely hard conducting ceramic materials, and is often used as a hard coating for titanium alloys, steels and aluminium components owing to its high mechanical stiffness, high thermal and electrical conductivity. It is also used in the metal matrix composites because of its advantages such as high hardness, good wetability, low density, chemical stability, economically producing methods, high melting point, and satisfactory resistance against thermal shocks. A few applications of TiC are surface coating of stainless steel, fabrication of anodes (Si/TiC) for Li–ion batteries, and TiC/C-thermal stress-relieving layers.
In the present paper, the effects of incorporation of various weight percentages of titanium carbide (TiC) into the TiO2 films on the photovoltaics of the pertinent DSSCs are studied. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) technique was employed to quantify the charge transport resistance (Rct) and recombination resistance (Rrec). Electron lifetime (τe) and electron diffusion coefficient in TiO2 (De) were estimated by a laser-induced photo-voltage and photo-current transient technique, respectively.

Lithium iodide (LiI, analytical grade), iodine (I2, analytical grade), and poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG, M.W. 20000) were obtained from Merk. N-methylbenzimidazole (NMBI, 99%) and tert-butyl alcohol (tBA, 96%) were obtained from Acros. γ-Butyrolactone (GBL, 99.6%), guanidine thiocyanate (GuSCN, 99%), Ti(IV) tetraisopropoxide (TTIP, >98%), acetonitrile (ACN, 99.99%), acetylacetone (AA, 99.5%), ethanol (99.5%), and isopropyl alcohol (IPA, 99.5%) were obtained from Aldrich.

Commercial titanium dioxide (ST-21, 50 m2 g−1, 6 g, purchased from Ya Chung Industrial Co. Ltd., Taiwan) was thoroughly mixed with a solution of acetylacetone (500 μl) in DI-water (11 g). This was stirred for 3 days and 1.8 g of PEG was then added to the well-dispersed colloidal solution. The final mixture was stirred for an additional 2 days, and the TiO2 paste was thus obtained. TiO2/TiC pastes were obtained by mixing various amounts of titanium carbide (TiC, Aldrich, 30 nm-sized) with TiO2 powders and using the same procedure, as described above.
A fluorine-doped SnO2 conducting glass (FTO, 15 Ω sq.−1, Solaronix S.A., Aubonne, Switzerland) was first cleaned with a neutral cleaner, and then washed with DI-water, acetone, and IPA, sequentially. The conducting surface of the FTO was treated with a solution of TTIP (0.028 g) in ethanol (10 ml) for obtaining a good mechanical contact between the conducting glass and the TiO2 film, with and without TiC. A 10 μm-thick film of TiO2/TiC was coated by doctor blade method onto the treated conducting glass and a portion of 0.4 × 0.4 cm2 was selected as the active area by removing the side portions by scrapping. The TiO2/TiC film was gradually heated to 450 °C in an oxygen atmosphere, and subsequently sintered at that temperature for 30 min. After sintering at 450 °C and cooling to 80 °C, the TiO2/TiC film was immersed in a 3 × 10−4 M solution of N719 (Solaronix S.A., Aubonne, Switzerland) in acetonitrile and tert-butyl alcohol (volume ratio of 1:1) at room temperature for 24 h. The thus prepared TiO2/dye electrode was attached to a platinum-sputtered conducting glass electrode (ITO, 7 Ω sq.−1, Ritek Corporation, Hsinchu, Taiwan). The two electrodes were separated by a 25 μm-thick surlyn (SX1170-25, Solaronix S.A., Aubonne, Switzerland) and sealed by heating.
A mixture of 0.1 M LiI, 0.6 M DMPII (Solaronix S.A., Aubonne, Switzerland), 0.05 M I2, 0.5 M NMBI, and 0.15 M GuSCN in 3-methoxypropionitrile (MPN, Fluka)/GBL (volume ratio of 1:1) was used as the electrolyte. The electrolyte was injected into the gap between the electrodes by capillarity; the electrolyte-injecting hole was previously made in the counter electrode with a drilling machine, and the hole was sealed with hot-melt glue after injection of the electrolyte. A reference DSSC was also fabricated using a bare TiO2 photoanode (without TiC) for making a comparative study.
The surface of the DSSC was illuminated by a class A quality solar simulator (PEC-L11, AM1.5G, Peccell Technologies, Inc.) and the incident light intensity (100 mW cm−2) was calibrated with a standard Si Cell (PECSI01, Peccell Technologies, Inc.). The photoelectrochemical characteristics of the DSSCs were recorded with a potentiostat/galvanostat (PGSTAT 30, Autolab, Eco-Chemie, the Netherlands).
The film thickness was determined using a surface profilometer (Sloan Dektak 3030). The crystal phase of the TiC nanoparticles before and after sintering was analyzed using X-ray diffraction (XRD, MO3XHF, MAC). The morphology and elemental analysis of the films were obtained using a scanning electron microscope (SEM, Nova NanoSEM 230, FEI Ultra-High Resolution FE-SEM with low vacuum mode) equipped with in situ energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectra. For UV-absorption spectra, dye was dissolved from the TiO2/TiC film into 0.1 M NaOH aqueous solution and the corresponding spectra were obtained by the UV-visible spectrophotometer (V-570, Jasco, Japan). The transparency spectra of each TiO2/TiC film were also measured. 
Electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) were obtained by the above-mentioned potentiostat/galvanostat equipped with an FRA2 module, under a constant light illumination of 100 mW cm−2. The frequency range explored was 10 mHz to 65 kHz. The applied bias voltage and the ac amplitude were set at the open-circuit voltage of each DSSC and 10 mV, respectively, between the ITO-Pt counter electrode and the FTO-TiO2-dye working electrode, starting from the short-circuit condition. The impedance spectra were analyzed using an equivalent circuit model. The photovoltage transients of the assembled devices were recorded with a digital oscilloscope (model LT322, LeCroy, USA). Pulsed laser excitation was applied by a frequency-doubled Q-switched Nd:YAG laser (model Quanta-Ray GCR-3-10, Spectra-Physics laser) with a 2 Hz repetition rate at 532 nm, and a 7 ns pulse width at half-height. The average electron lifetime could approximately be estimated by fitting a decay of the open-circuit voltage transient with exp (−t τe−1), where t is the time and τe is an average time constant before recombination. Diffusion coefficient of electron (De) was estimated by fitting a decay of the transient photocurrent with exp (−t τc−1), which was derived from the equation of continuity for electrons in the conduction band, where t and τc are the time and average time constant, respectively. Then, the apparent diffusion coefficient of the electron can be calculated by using the equation
De = w2/(2.35τc)
(1)
where
w is the film thickness and the factor 2.35 arises from the geometry of the diffusion problem.


TiC is a conducting ceramic material with high electrical and thermal conductivity and satisfactory resistance against thermal shocks. As shown in the photograph of Fig. 1a, the color of a TiC film is black. However, the black film turns into a pale gray film after sintering at 450 °C for 30 min, as shown in Fig. 1b. The color change reflects a change in the chemical composition of the TiC film, most likely the formation of TiO2, which indeed is confirmed by XRD analysis in further discussions. Fig. 1c shows the photo of dye-adsorbed TiC/a-TiO2 film. In order to get an idea about the extent of conversion of TiC into TiO2, the photograph of bare sintered TiO2 film is shown in Fig. 1d for reference. A comparative glance at the images of Fig. 1b and d clearly indicates that the conversion from TiC to TiO2 is only partial, because the sintered TiC film (Fig. 1b) is pale gray and the pure sintered TiO2 film is white-transparent (Fig. 1d). The partial conversion of TiC into TiO2 will be evidenced with the help of XRD patterns in further discussions.


Fig. 2 shows the SEM image of the sintered TiC film; it shows a three dimensional porous structure with connectivity between the particles required for a typical photoanode in a DSSC. Fig. 3a shows the XRD spectra of the TiC film before sintering and Fig. 3b that of the film after sintering; Fig. 3c shows the XRD pattern of a bare sintered TiO2 film. The composite film obtained after sintering (Fig. 3b) shows the 101 peak of the TiO2 at 25.2°, which is associated with the anatase crystal phase of TiO2; other peaks of anatase are located at 37.7°, 48°, and 54° (JCPDS file 21-1272). A glance of the XRD pattern of the composite film in comparison with that of bare TiC powder, clearly shows the conversion of TiC into TiO2. This implies that the TiO2 film now obtained additional anatase TiO2 due to the conversion of TiC into anatase TiO2. The conversion, however, is not full, as can be seen from the undiminished peaks of TiC at 36.5°, 42°, and at about 60° in the case of the composite film. A comparison among Fig. 3a–c also indicates that the sintered TiC film (Fig. 3b) has a mixture of TiC and anatase TiO2, and thus the conversion of TiC into anatase TiO2 is partial. More information on the partial conversion of TiC is obtained through energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) analysis of TiC and thermally treated TiC (tt-TiC) films. The data reveals that the atomic ratio of carbon has decreased from 37.95% to 9.95% after sintering the TiC at 450 °C. The EDX data are shown in supporting information (Fig. S1, page S-II). It also contains the SEM images of both TiC and tt-TiC films. The additional anatase TiO2 has significance, because this is obtained without increasing the thickness and basic structure of the initial matrix of the TiO2 film, which would have a detrimental effect on the overall performance of the cell. It is well known that the electron transporting property of the anatase phase is superior to other crystalline phases of TiO2. Therefore, the TiC/a-TiO2 composite formed from the TiC in the porous matrix was expected to enhance the electron transport in the TiO2 film.
The current–voltage (I–V) characteristics of the DSSCs with different weight percentages of TiC in their TiO2 films were measured under an illumination of 100 mW cm−2. The photovoltaic performances are shown in Fig. 4 and the values are listed in Table 1. All the photovoltaic parameters are the average values obtained with three separate devices for each condition. It can be seen in Table 1 that the open-circuit voltage (VOC), fill factor (FF), and short-circuit current density (JSC) of the DSSC with bare TiO2 electrode are 759 mV, 0.63, and 13.87 mA cm−2, respectively, which yielded an overall solar-to-electricity conversion efficiency (η) of 6.61%. It can also be seen in the table that the overall power conversion efficiencies are higher for the DSSCs with the additions of 1 to 5 wt% of TiC, than for the cell without TiC; this phenomena is owing to substantial increases in VOC and FF for the improved cells. The DSSC with the best performance showed an η value of 7.56%, with the VOC, the FF, and the JSC being 803 mV, 0.66, and 14.27 mA cm−2, respectively. The main reason for the large improvements in VOC was expected to be the reduction in dark currents and this was verified by measuring the I–V characteristics of the devices under the dark condition for all TiC additions. The dark current results from the reduction of triiodide ions by the conduction band electrons of TiO2.
TiC

V
OC/mV

J
SC/mA cm−2

η/%

FF


R

ct2
/ohm
0 wt (%)
759 ± 2.37
13.87 ± 0.47
6.61 ± 0.23
0.63 ± 0.04
30.0
1 wt (%)
777 ± 5.11
14.44 ± 0.07
7.26 ± 0.01
0.65 ± 0.02
25.6
3 wt (%)
803 ± 5.14
14.27 ± 0.15
7.56 ± 0.08
0.66 ± 0.01
23.7
5 wt (%)
792 ± 4.73
13.20 ± 0.30
6.97 ± 0.17
0.67 ± 0.01
33.8
10 wt (%)
793 ± 5.57
12.03 ± 0.35
6.30 ± 0.13
0.66 ± 0.01
48.3

Fig. 5 demonstrates the current–voltage characteristics of the DSSCs with various wt% of TiC in their TiO2 films, measured in dark. The onsets of the dark currents of DSSCs with five wt% of TiC occur at 680, 695, 705, 720, and 745 mV, corresponding to 0%, 1%, 10%, 5%, and 3% of TiC, respectively. These values were obtained by drawing tangents to the curves starting from voltage scale and a tangent at the zero current of the curves (zero-current line) and measuring the voltages corresponding to the intersection points of the tangents at zero current-line. The onset of the dark current of DSSC with 3 wt% of TiC occurs at the highest forward bias, which indicates that 3 wt% of TiC can most efficiently suppress the dark current. A decrease in the dark currents can be noticed for the cells with TiC, compared to that of the cell without any TiC. The decrease in the dark currents, leading to the improvements in the VOC's, is due to improved electron transfer in the TiO2/TiC matrixes. The incorporation of TiC in TiO2 films is thus a new approach for improving the VOC, along with other approaches of using an insulating layer, co-adsorbent, or other additives. Even though 10 wt% TiC renders a higher VOC and FF for its DSSC (Table 1), compared to those of the cell without TiC, the substantial decrease in JSC has resulted in the lowest overall power conversion efficiency of 6.30% (more information regarding the photovoltaic performance of a collection of cells with and without 3 wt% of TiC is available in the supporting information, Fig. S2).

Fig. 6 shows the UV-visible spectra of dyes desorbed from different TiO2 films that contained various weight percentages of TiC. The spectra indicate that the dye-adsorption in general is less on TiC/a-TiO2 films, compared to that of the film without TiC, and the dye-adsorption decreases with the increase in the TiC addition. The decrease in dye adsorption due to the addition of TiC can be explained by the decreased TiO2 surface area available for dye-loading. This may also be explained in terms of transparency of the TiO2 films with and without TiC. We measured the transparency spectra of TiO2 films with various weight percentages of TiC (shown in supporting information, Fig. S3). It is found that the transparency is lower for TiC/a-TiO2 films, compared to that of the film without TiC, and the transparency decreases with the increase in the TiC content. Decreased dye-adsorption along with decreased transparency caused decreased JSC to the DSSCs with TiC contents, except in the case with 1 wt% of TiC. The slight increase in JSC for the cell with 1 and 3 wt% of TiC can be rationalized by considering the possibility that the beneficial effect of faster electron transport in its TiO2 matrix can overcompensate the detrimental effects of reduced dye-adsorption and slightly-lower transparency with its TiO2 matrix; this is a possibility at those wt% of TiC.

Fig. 7 shows the Nyquist plots of electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) of the solar cells containing different weight percentages of TiC in their TiO2 matrixes. The equivalent circuit is illustrated as the inset of Fig. 7. The Nyquist plots essentially consist of two sets of semicircles. Each smaller semicircle at higher frequencies (kilohertz range) corresponds to the charge-transfer resistances at the counter electrode/electrolyte interface (Rct1) and at the electrical contacts between conductive substrate/TiO2 or among TiO2 particles. Each larger circle at lower frequencies (10–100 Hz range) represents the resistance against electron transport in the TiO2 layer, the charge-transfer process at the TiO2/dye/electrolyte interface (Rct2), and ion diffusion within the electrolyte (Rdiff). Though Rdiff is virtually overlapped by Rct2, a careful observation, however, indicates it to be at about 53 ohms on Z′ scale. Identical semicircles for the high frequency region indicate, as expected, that the addition of TiC does not affect the charge transfer at the counter electrode/electrolyte interface. It can be seen that Rct2 decreases with the incorporation of 1–3 wt% of TiC and Rct2 increases with further addition of TiC (Table 1). The decrease and increase of Rct2 values are in general consistent with the JSC values of the respective cells, i.e., when the Rct2 value decreases, the JSC value increases and vice versa. The exception is however with the case of 3 wt% of TiC, where there is no increase in JSC, even though the associated Rct2 value is minimum. This discrepancy is most probably because of the possibility that, at this particular wt% of TiC, the beneficial effect of reduced Rct2 is partially affected by the adverse effect of reduced dye-adsorption, caused by the presence of TiC in the TiO2 matrix.
Further, in order to understand the significant enhancement in VOC, EIS was performed at an applied bias of −0.82 V in the dark to elucidate the correlation of electron transport with different wt% of TiC; the applied bias potential was close to the VOC value of the best cell in this study. In these cells operated in the dark, electrons are transported through the mesoscopic TiO2/TiC and they react with I3−; at the same time, I− is oxidized to I3− at the counter electrode.Fig. 8 shows the Nyquist plots for incorporating 0–10 wt% TiC into the TiO2 matrixes. The largest circles at the middle frequencies represent the recombination resistance, Rrec, i.e., the resistance to the direct transfer of electrons from the TiO2 conduction band to trioxide ions at the TiO2/dye/electrolyte interface or in the electrolyte. Recently, Hoshikawa et al. has shown that the semicircles occurring in the middle frequency range are closely related to the back reaction from injected electrons in TiO2 to I3− in the electrolyte; the EIS measurements, however, were done under illumination. Under dark conditions, the larger the Rrec, the smaller the charge recombination rate. The largest value of Rrec was obtained for 3.0 wt% of TiC. This suggests that the charge recombination between the injected electrons and I3− was remarkably retarded with this addition. This is consistent with the highest VOC obtained for the pertinent cell with 3.0 wt% of TiC.
The average electron lifetime (τe) was also obtained by a laser-induced photo-voltage transient technique, and the curves are shown in Fig. 9. The average electron lifetime can be estimated by fitting a decay of the open-circuit voltage transient with exp (−t τe−1), where t is the time and τe is an average time constant before recombination. Values of τe were found to be 3.57 and 4.93 ms for TiO2 electrodes without and with 3 wt% of TiC, respectively. The study of τe further proved the rationale that the TiO2 electrode containing 3 wt% of TiC reduced injected-electron recombination with triiodide ions and prolonged electron lifetime in the TiO2 matrix. In addition, the transient photo-current curves for TiO2 electrodes without and with 3 wt% of TiC were also obtained to confirm the enhanced electron transport in the TiO2 film (Supporting information: Fig. S4). The characteristic time constant τc can be fitted by exponential decay process, and the electron diffusion coefficient De can be calculated from eqn (1). The fitted τc values are 1.35 and 0.80 ms, and the calculated De are 3.15 × 10−4 and 5.32 × 10−4 cm2 s−1 for TiO2 electrodes without and with 3 wt% of TiC, respectively.
The enhanced electron transport in the TiO2 film and the longer electron lifetime in the TiO2 matrix in the case of the cell with 3 wt% of TiC thus explain the higher JSC of the pertinent DSSC. This enhanced electron transport in the TiO2 film and the longer electron lifetime in the TiO2 matrix is precisely the reason for the higher VOC's for the cells with TiC, because such enhanced electron transport and longer electron lifetime in TiO2 matrix is unfavorable for injected-electron recombination with triiodide ions. Fill factors (FF) for DSSCs are usually limited by series resistance losses, light-intensity dependent recombination, and dark currents. Apparently reduction in dark currents, as discussed above, should have caused increases in FF for the DSSCs with TiC (Table 1).

DSSCs with 1 to 5 wt% of TiC in their TiO2 matrixes exhibited considerably higher solar-to-electricity conversion efficiencies, compared to that without any TiC. “In situ” partial conversion of TiC into anatase TiO2 due to the sintering of the TiC/TiO2 mixture was verified through XRD and EDX analysis, and was supported by relevant photographs. The improved efficiencies are related to substantial increases in corresponding VOC's and FFs. The best performance with 803 mV, 0.66, 14.27 mA cm−2, and 7.56% for VOC, FF, JSC, and η, respectively, was obtained when the TiO2 matrix contained 3 wt% of TiC. The JSC behavior of the DSSCs was verified to be essentially consistent with the corresponding Rct values obtained by EIS. The increases in VOC were verified by the corresponding decreases in the respective dark currents; this was also established by EIS measured in darkness. Improved photovoltaic performance of the cell with 3 wt% of TiC in its TiO2 film can essentially be attributed to improved electron transport and electron lifetime in its TiO2 film, as evidenced by both the relevant photo-voltage transients and the photo-current transients.


This work was supported in part by the National Research Council of Taiwan under grant numbers NSC 96-2120-M-002-016 and NSC 97-2120-M-002-012. Some of the instruments used in this study were made available through the financial support of Academia Sinica, Nankang, Taipei, Taiwan.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: EDX data corresponding to TiC films before and after thermal treatment of TiC at 450 oC are shown in the supporting information (Fig. S1, page S-II). A collection of cells with no TiC and a set of cells with 3% TiC were made; their photocurrent–voltage curves are shown in the supporting information (Fig. S2, Page S-III). The photovoltaic statistics of these new DSSCs are listed in a table in the supporting information (Table S1, Page S-VI). It can be derived from Table S1 that all the cells without TiC are inferior in performance to all those cells with TiC; it is also shown in Table S1 that the average efficiency for a cell with TiC is 7.56%, while that for a cell without TiC is 6.61%, which, we think is a robust gain in favor of the cell with TiC. Transmittance spectra of TiO2 films with various weight percentages of TiC are shown in the supporting information (Fig. S3, page S-IV). Transient photo-current curves of the DSSCs with 3 wt% TiC and without any TiC in their TiO2 films are shown in the supporting information (Fig. S4, page S-V). See DOI: 10.1039/b923477b
This journal is © the Owner Societies 2010