 DOI: 10.1039/C9QM00366E
(Research Article)
Mater. Chem. Front., 2019, 3, 2627-2636


Zhanwen
Xu
,

Jiaping
Lin
*,

Liangshun
Zhang
,

Xiaohui
Tian
 and 

Liquan
Wang
*

Shanghai Key Laboratory of Advanced Polymeric Materials, State Key Laboratory of Bioreactor Engineering, Key Laboratory for Ultrafine Materials of Ministry of Education, School of Materials Science and Engineering, East China University of Science and Technology, Shanghai 200237, China. E-mail: jlin@ecust.edu.cn; lq_wang@ecust.edu.cn

Received
5th June 2019
, Accepted 8th July 2019
First published on 10th July 2019
Block copolymer self-assembly is a promising strategy for high-performance polymer solar cells. However, the power conversion efficiencies of block-copolymer-based solar cells are still not as high as expected. Herein, by means of theoretical simulations we show a distinct improvement in the photovoltaic performance of donor–acceptor block copolymer thin films via regulating the molecular orientation. Self-assembled lamellae perpendicular to electrodes with modulated molecular orientation were obtained by applying electric fields during the block copolymer self-assembly. Our theoretical calculations indicate that compared with the general ones without external field treatment, the power conversion efficiencies of the block copolymer nanostructures with modulated molecular orientation can be improved by more than 150% with high values of short current density and fill factor. The improvement in the photovoltaic performance is ascribed to the simultaneous enhancement in exciton diffusion to donor/acceptor interfaces and charge carrier transport to electrodes. Our findings could yield guidelines for the design of photovoltaic materials with improved photovoltaic performance via control over the molecular orientation.

Polymer solar cells (PSCs), offering advantages such as low cost, high mechanical flexibility, light weight and large-area manufacturing compatibility at relatively low processing temperatures, have received increasing attention. The performance of polymer solar cells has been greatly improved since the introduction of bulk heterojunctions (BHJ) for the active layer. Recently, many studies have been conducted on BHJ PSCs with nonfullerene acceptors, and power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of up to 14% for single-junction solar cells and 17% for tandem solar cells were achieved. However, the efficiencies required to compete in the energy market have not yet been realized. Notably, block-copolymer-based polymer solar cells, which are very promising, have not yet shown efficiencies that are high as expected. Enhancing the photovoltaic performance of polymer solar cells presents a pressing challenge.

High photovoltaic performance in PSCs requires optimization of photovoltaic processes, including light absorption, exciton dissociation (charge carrier generation) at the donor/acceptor (D/A) interface, and transport and collection of charge carriers. These photovoltaic processes are strongly dependent on structural characteristics such as domain size, domain purity, interfacial area and crystal structures. Among these characteristics, molecular orientation has also been shown to affect the performance of polymer photovoltaics, which results from the anisotropic transport of excitons and charge carriers in semiconducting polymers. It was reported that molecular orientation in polymer blend solar cells can be tuned through optimization of processing conditions including choice of solvents, thermal treatment and external field treatment, or through chemical strategies. However, in polymer blend systems, modulation of the alignment of molecules is inevitably associated with changes in blend nanostructures, such as domain size and phase purity. In contrast, block copolymers can self-assemble into highly ordered and controllable nanostructures, which can be used to prepare highly efficient PSCs. However, for block-copolymer-based solar cells, precise modulation and positive effects of molecular orientation are rarely acknowledged. The modulation and effects of molecular orientation on the performance of block-copolymer-based solar cells should be systematically studied to level up the efficiency, which could be facilitated by model construction and theoretical simulations.
Theoretical simulations have been used to analyze the relationship between the nanostructures and the photovoltaic properties of complex polymer systems. For example, Buxton et al. developed a drift-diffusion model for polymer solar cells and combined it with the Cahn–Hilliard model to study the effect of the morphologies formed by diblock copolymers on photovoltaic performance. Their results indicated that the performance of the diblock copolymers can be improved by forming ordered structures. Recently, we proposed a multi-scale approach coupling dissipative particle dynamics (DPD) with a drift-diffusion model to study the photovoltaic properties of donor–acceptor multiblock copolymers. Information on the molecular packing of the complex block copolymers in the nanostructures can be easily obtained through DPD simulations. It was found that modulating the nanostructures via molecular design is an effective way to improve the photovoltaic performance of block copolymers. However, the effect of molecular orientation, which is crucial for determining the photovoltaic performance, has not been considered in previous studies. Herein, we extend the multi-scale approach to include the effect of molecular orientation on the photovoltaic performance of block copolymer thin films. In the extended approach, the anisotropic characteristics of the mobility of excitons and charge carriers are considered, given that the mobility can be varied significantly by modulating the orientation of the polymer chains.
In this work, we applied the extended multi-scale approach to investigate the effect of the molecular orientation on the photovoltaic performance of donor–acceptor (DA) diblock copolymer thin films. To the best of our knowledge, we report the first investigation of improving the photovoltaic performance of block copolymer thin films via modulating the molecular orientation. The molecular orientation in diblock copolymer thin films was modulated through external field treatment. The calculations on photovoltaic properties demonstrate that the photovoltaic performance of the block copolymer thin films can be significantly improved when the molecular orientation is optimized. We expect this work to provide useful information for designing advanced photovoltaic materials based on block copolymers.

Molecular orientation markedly influences the photovoltaic performance of PSCs. To incorporate the effect of molecular orientation into theoretical simulations, we introduced an external electric field into the DPD simulations to modulate the molecular orientation and considered the anisotropic transport of excitons and charge carriers in the drift-diffusion model. In the DPD simulations, we constructed a coarse-grained model of donor–acceptor block copolymers (D4A4) confined between two parallel substrates, as characteristically shown in Fig. 1. The photovoltaic performance of DA diblock copolymers with different molecular weights, such as D5A5 and D6A6, was also examined, and the findings in this work are general to a broad range of block copolymers with various molecular weights. The top and bottom plates, corresponding to the anode and cathode respectively, are modeled by a set of fixed substrate particles that are placed at the lattice points of the FCC crystal in three layers. An electric field treatment was applied during the self-assembly of the donor–acceptor diblock copolymers. The interaction between the block copolymers and the external electric field is modeled by coupling the unit vector P along the long axis of the donor blocks to the external field Etreat.

The photovoltaic performance of the self-assembled nanostructures was obtained by solving the extended drift-diffusion equations. In the extended formalism, the anisotropy of the mobility is determined by the order parameter and inherent anisotropic characteristic of the block copolymers. The anisotropic characteristic of the block copolymers is described by the anisotropic transport characteristic parameter (CA), which is defined as the ratio of the mobility μ‖ along the backbone of the block copolymers to the mobility μ⊥ perpendicular to the backbone. Details about drift-diffusion theory, such as the choices of parameters, can be found in Section 2 of the ESI.

In this subsection, the effect of the molecular orientation on the photovoltaic performance in thin films of DA diblock copolymers was examined. An external field was applied to manipulate the molecular orientation of the block copolymers in the thin films. The electrodes were set to be neutral to both the donor and acceptor blocks, and thus they do not prefer either block. The thickness was set to 4l0, where l0 is the period of the lamellae of the DA diblock copolymers without external field treament.

To obtain block copolymer nanostructures with different molecular orientations, we applied various external treated fields with different values and orientations during the self-assembly processes. Fig. 2a–c show the three-dimensional structures of the DA block copolymer films with and without external field treatment during the self-assembly process. In all the self-assembled nanostructures, the domains are perpendicular to the electrodes. From the 3-dimensional views of the nanostructures, one can identify that the external field has a significant effect on the molecular orientation of the block copolymers. As shown in Fig. 2a, when no external field is applied during the self-assembly process, the diblock copolymers form nanostructures with most of the donor and acceptor blocks perpendicular to the D/A interfaces (see Fig. 2a). When the external field is applied upward, the free ends of the donor and acceptor blocks point towards the anode and cathode, respectively (see Fig. 2b). When the external field is applied downward, the free ends of the donor and acceptor blocks in the self-assembled nanostructures point towards the cathode and anode, respectively (see Fig. 2c).
To gain further insight into the effect of external field treatment on the self-assembled nanostructures, the molecular orientation of the block copolymers, domain size and interface width were characterized. We used the orientation angle (θ) and order parameter (S) to quantitatively describe the molecular orientation. The orientation angle is defined as the angle between the donor block and the vector perpendicular to the electrodes (see Fig. 2d). The average values of the angle (〈θ〉) are calculated and plotted in Fig. 2e. The 〈θ〉 changes markedly within the Etreat range from −10 to 10 (the negative and positive values of Etreat indicate that the external field is applied downward and upward respectively). When the Etreat is 0, the 〈θ〉 is 90°, which indicates that most of the block copolymers are perpendicular to the D/A interfaces. In the two nanostructures treated with negative and positive Etreat, the 〈θ〉 changes slightly when |Etreat| is larger than 10. The external field treatment can also affect the orientation order of the block copolymers (see Fig. 2e). The order parameters in these structures increase steadily with increasing |Etreat|. Compared with the molecular orientation, the domain size and interface width show lower sensitivity to the variation in Etreat under the present conditions employed, as shown in Fig. 2f.
The effect of molecular orientation on the photovoltaic performance was then examined. We took the nanostructures treated with Etreat = 0, Etreat = −10 and Etreat = 10 as representatives, since they were obviously different in molecular orientation but nearly the same in domain size and interfacial width. We termed these nanostructures treated with Etreat = 0, Etreat = −10 and Etreat = 10 as SPE (structures with block copolymers parallel to the electrodes), SDC (structures with free ends of donor blocks pointing towards the cathode) and SDA (structures with free ends of donor blocks pointing towards the anode) nanostructures, respectively. By solving the extended drift-diffusion equations, we obtained J–V (current density–applied voltage) curves for these representative nanostructures. In the calculations, most of the input parameters are typical for polymeric materials used in polymer photovoltaic cells. The anisotropic transport characteristic parameters of electron, hole and exciton mobility were set to 50, which is a moderate value chosen according to the reported values obtained in experiments.Fig. 3 shows the J–V curves for these representative nanostructures with applied voltages varying from 0 to 1.3 V. With the variation in the molecular orientation, the photovoltaic performance of these self-assembled nanostructures undergoes distinct changes. According to the J–V curves, we calculated the photovoltaic properties, i.e., the power conversion efficiency PCE, short-circuit current density Jsc, open-circuit voltage Voc and fill factor FF, which are listed in Table 1. The Voc values of these self-assembled nanostructures with and without external field treatment are comparable. In contrast to the Voc, the Jsc, FF and PCE of the field-treated nanostructures (SDC and SDA) are significantly superior to those of the nanostructure without external field treatment (SPE). Additionally, the values of Jsc, FF and PCE of SDA are much higher than those of SDC. These results indicate that molecular orientation plays a critical role in the improvement of the photovoltaic performance of the self-assembled nanostructures. Among the nanostructures with various molecular orientations of the block copolymers, the SDA structure, with the free ends of the donor and acceptor blocks pointing towards the anode and cathode respectively, performs better than the others. Notably, in comparison with that of the SPE structure without external field treatment, the PCE of the SDA structure with external field treatment is improved by more than 150%. We also examined the photovoltaic performance of self-assembled nanostructures treated with a series of different external fields (Etreat = −15 to 15). It was found that most of the nanostructures obtained with field treatment perform better than the SPE structure.
Nanostructures

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
SPE
11.7
1.24
35.4
5.23
SDC
14.1
1.25
44.6
7.75
SDA
15.5
1.24
71.8
13.9
SPA
10.8
1.23
77.1
10.4
To further confirm the performance advantage of the SDA structure, we also compared its photovoltaic properties with that of an ideal nanostructure. We constructed a nanostructure representing an ideal case for the phase-separated morphologies achieved in blends of donor and acceptors. The ideal nanostructure is also a lamellar structure (see the inset in Fig. 3). The backbones of the donor and acceptor molecules in the ideal nanostructure are assumed to be parallel to the D/A interfaces. We termed the ideal nanostructure SPA (structures with donor and acceptor molecules parallel to the D/A interfaces). The J–V curve and photovoltaic properties of the SPA nanostructure are also provided in Fig. 3 and Table 1. The SPA structure exhibits a higher value of FF than the other structures, but the value of Jsc for SPA is lower. As a result, the photovoltaic performance of SPA is also lower than that of SDA.
The performance of polymer solar cells is dependent not only on molecular orientation but also on the anisotropic transport characteristic of the charge carriers and excitons in the conjugated polymers. Therefore, we further examined the dependence of the photovoltaic properties on the anisotropic transport parameter (CA) in the above four nanostructures. Fig. 4 shows the photovoltaic properties against CA in these nanostructures. The impact of molecular orientation on the photovoltaic performance is strongly dependent on the anisotropic transport parameter. In Fig. 4a we observe that, for the isotropic block copolymers with CA = 0, all four nanostructures exhibit a similar Jsc. The similar Jsc values among these structures indicate that the molecular orientation cannot affect the photovoltaic performance when CA = 0. With increasing CA, the difference in Jsc among these nanostructures becomes more obvious. The Jsc of SDA remains the highest. Compared with Jsc, Voc is less sensitive to the variation in CA, as shown in Fig. 4b. The differences in FF and PCE also become more obvious with the increase in CA. These results indicate that the difference in the performance caused by the distinct molecular orientation among these nanostructures is strongly dependent on the anisotropic transport characteristic.

The mechanism underlying the enhancement of photovoltaic performance is related to the photovoltaic processes, which can be revealed by analyzing the equilibrium distributions of the exciton concentrations, photogenerated current densities and charge recombination rates. Fig. 5a shows the one-dimensional distribution of excitons in the SPE, SDC, SDA and SPA structures. As shown in the figure, the exciton concentrations drop to very low values near the D/A interfaces, since the excitons dissociate in these regions. Among these four structures, we found that the exciton concentrations in SPE, SDC and SDA are much lower than those in the SPA structure, which means that more excitons in SPE, SDC and SDA can diffuse to the D/A interfaces. As more excitons diffuse to the D/A interfaces, the exciton dissociation rates (generation rates of charge carriers) in SPE, SDC and SDA are higher than those in SPA. These results suggest that the molecules perpendicular to the D/A interfaces (as in SPE) favor the diffusion of the excitons to the D/A interfaces and then the generation of charge carriers. In the SDA and SDC structures where the free ends of the donor blocks respectively point towards the anode and cathode, the molecular orientation of the block copolymers is also beneficial for exciton diffusion and dissociation.


Fig. 5b and c show the hole-current density (Jpy) and electron-current density (Jny) along the y-direction perpendicular to the electrodes in the SDA, SDC, SPE and SPA nanostructures. In the SPE and SDC structures, most holes and electrons transporting to the electrodes are near the D/A interfaces. These charge carriers near the D/A interface in these two structures are more likely to recombine with the opposite charge carriers, leading to a higher recombination rate (see Fig. 5d). In the SPA structure, since the charge carrier mobility along the y-direction is very high, the charge carriers rapidly transport to the electrodes. With rapid transport of the charge carriers, a higher possibility of recombination of holes and electrons can be avoided, resulting in a lower recombination rate in SPA than in SPE and SDC. Contrary to the distribution of Jpy and Jny in SPA, SPE and SDC, the Jpy and Jny in the center of the donor-rich and acceptor-rich domains in SDA are much higher than those along the D/A interfaces, which indicates that most holes and electrons concentrate in the center of the donor-rich and acceptor-rich domains and then transport to the anode and cathode, respectively. As a consequence, the recombination rates in SDA are significantly lower than those in the other three nanostructures.
The performance enhancement mechanism for the SDA structure can be further understood by referring to the cartoon in Fig. 6. In the SPE, SDC and SDA structures, there are projection components of block copolymers on the vector normal to the D/A interface. The mobility of excitons along the polymer backbone is higher than that in the direction perpendicular to the backbone. Therefore, the projections of block copolymers on the vector normal to the D/A interface in the SPE, SDC and SDA structures make the excitons diffuse faster to the interface and then avoid decay. The faster diffusion of excitons to the D/A interface results in lower exciton concentrations in the donor-rich domains and higher charge generation rates near the interfaces of the SPE, SDC and SDA structures than the SPA structure (see Fig. 5a).
For the charge carriers (holes and electrons), the mobility along the polymer backbone is also higher than that in the direction perpendicular to the backbone. Therefore, in the SDC, SDA and SPA structures, the block copolymers with projections perpendicular to the electrodes can favor the transport of charge carriers to the electrodes, as illustrated in Fig. 6b. However, since the free ends of the donor and acceptor blocks in the SDC structures point towards the wrong electrodes, the charge carriers have a tendency to flux back to the D/A interface and go into recombination with the opposite charge carriers. This behavior results in higher recombination rates in the SDC structure (see Fig. 5d). Consequently, only the SDA and SPA structures enhance the transport of the charge carriers to the anodes. The above results indicate that, while the SPE, SDC and SPA structures can enhance either the generation or extraction of charge carriers, the SDA structure enhances both of these processes simultaneously. The simultaneous enhancement of charge generation and extraction results in the higher values of Jsc and FF in the SDA structure. Eventually, the SDA structure exhibits the best photovoltaic performance among these nanostructures.

Although the molecular orientation has been shown to have a critical influence on the photovoltaic performance of nanostructures self-assembled from donor–acceptor diblock copolymers, demonstrations of structure–property relationships in polymer photovoltaics are often limited to one kind of material and cannot be applied universally across material systems. To confirm the generality of our findings, we compare the photovoltaic performances among the SPA, SPE, SDA and SDC structures with alterations in some important parameters such as the mobility of charge carriers and the diffusion length of excitons. Both the charge carrier mobility and the exciton diffusion length significantly affect the photovoltaic performance.

The effect of the isotropic mobility of charge carriers was also studied. As shown in Fig. 7a, with the increase in mobility, the Jsc value in SDA is always higher than that in the other structures. The Jscs in the SDC and SPE structures are sensitive to the changes in mobility. When the mobility is 10−10 m2 V−1 s−1, the Jscs in the SDC and SPE are much lower than that in SDA. As the mobility increases to a value larger than 10−7 m2 V−1 s−1, the Jscs increase to a value comparable to that in SDA. The FF values in SDA and SPA are always higher than those in SDC and SPE with the variation in mobility (see Fig. 7b). With the higher values of Jsc and FF, SDA performs better than the other structures with various mobilities, as shown in Fig. 7c.
The effect of the exciton diffusion length on the performance of the four nanostructures was first investigated. As shown in Fig. 7d, the Jsc values of the SDA and SDC nanostructures remain higher than those of the SPA and SPE nanostructures as the diffusion length of excitons increases from 4 nm to 24 nm. Fig. 7e shows that the FF values of these four structures remain almost constant when the diffusion length is varied. Additionally, the FFs of SDA and SPA remain higher than those of the other two structures. With the Jsc and FF maintained at higher levels, SDA always exhibits the highest power conversion efficiency among the four systems with various exciton diffusion lengths (see Fig. 7f).
The structural parameters, including the domain size and thickness of the active layer, can affect the photovoltaic properties as well. We also compared the photovoltaic performances among the SDA, SDC, SPA and SPE structures with alterations in the domain size and thickness of the active layer (for details, see Fig. S2, ESI). It was found that the SDA structure always exhibits higher values of Jsc and FF and then performs much better than the other structures. As mentioned above, the finding that SDA performs better than the other structures is general over a large parameter space.

So far, there has been no direct experimental study demonstrating the improved photovoltaic performance of block copolymers by modulating the molecular orientation. However, our prediction can be supported by some experimental evidences from the works on polymer blend systems. External electric field treatment has been applied to modulate the molecular orientation of polymer blend solar cells and improved photovoltaic performance was obtained. For example, Solanki et al. applied an external electric field to treat the self-organization of conjugated polymers containing P3HT (poly(3-hexylthiophene)) and P3BT (poly(3-butylthiophene)) in polymer solar cells. When an external E-field is applied during thermal annealing of the films, thiophene molecules get polarized and the polymer chains in the amorphous region align themselves with the E-field. As the vertical ordering of the polymer chains increases, the Jsc and FF are enhanced and the power conversion efficiency is improved. In our simulations, we also observed that the block copolymers aligned themselves with the E-field and the vertical ordering of polymer chains in the SDA and SDC structures increased when external fields were applied. The power conversion efficiencies of the SDA and SDC structures are found to be much higher than that for the general ones (SPE) without external field treatment. This result is qualitatively consistent with the experimental observations.

The finding about the high values of FF of the SPA structure in our simulations can be supported by some experimental works. We observed in the simulations that for a SPA nanostructure with molecules parallel to the D/A interfaces, the charge carriers transport rapidly to the electrodes and therefore the recombination rate is low. The rapid transport and low recombination of charge carriers lead to a high FF. In experiments, Yang et al. have obtained high FF via modulating the molecular orientation in nanoimprinted polymer solar cells. They found that the molecular orientation could be altered from parallel to vertical alignment along the D/A interfaces by either narrowing the width or increasing the height of a P3HT nanograting. In the nanostructure with the narrowest and highest nanogratings, the P3HT molecules which are parallel to the D/A interface are in vertical alignment, similar to the ideal SPA nanostructure in our simulations. They observed that the nanoimprinted structures with the backbones of P3HT parallel to the D/A interfaces exhibit high FF, which is similar to the simulation results.
Modulating molecular orientation could be an effective way to enhance the photovoltaic performance of both polymer blend and block copolymer self-assembly systems. However, it should be noted that there are substantial differences between them. In polymer blend systems, modulation of molecular orientation is inevitably associated with changes in some structural factors such as phase purity and characteristic size. The inability to decouple these structural factors makes it a challenge to directly correlate molecular orientation with device performance. Additionally, the nanostructures formed in polymer blends are not well controlled and are prone to further macrophase separation. Thus, the photovoltaic performance of polymer blend systems with modulated molecular orientation is not well repeatable and degrades with time. Block copolymers, which can form highly ordered and stable nanostructures with controllable molecular orientation, can overcome the shortcomings noted in the context of blend systems. External fields, including magnetic fields and electric fields, have been extensively utilized to control the molecular orientation and microdomain orientation of the block copolymer nanostructures. For example, Tao et al. demonstrated that the molecular orientation of poly-(2,5-di(2-ethylhexyloxy)-1,4-phenylenevinylene-block-1,4-isoprene) block copolymers can be modulated by coupling the magnetic field to the diamagnetic moment of individual conjugated blocks. These works indicate that the high-efficiency block-copolymer system designed here could be realized by applying external fields to modulate the molecular orientation.
In this work, to the best of our knowledge, we provide the first indication that the photovoltaic performance of nanostructures formed by block copolymers can be improved markedly by modulating the molecular orientation. Applying external fields during the self-assembly process is proved to be an effective way to regulate the molecular orientation in block-copolymer-based solar cells. Interestingly, we found that the self-assembled nanostructures with external field treatment performed much better than the ones without treatment. This conclusion is general over a wide range of electronic parameters and structural parameters. Our simulation results show qualitative consistency with experimental evidence.

The multi-scale approach coupling DPD with a drift-diffusion model is extended to investigate the photovoltaic properties of nanostructures self-assembled from donor–acceptor diblock copolymers with various molecular orientations. We modulated the molecular orientation in the self-assembled nanostructures by applying external electric fields. Among the self-assembled nanostructures, the ones with the free ends of the donor and acceptor blocks respectively pointing towards the anode and cathode exhibit the highest efficiency with high Jsc and FF. This high efficiency is a result of the simultaneous enhancement of the generation and collection of charge carriers. Our simulation results could pave the way for preparing efficient block-copolymer-based photovoltaic devices by modulating molecular orientation.


In our previous work, we proposed a multi-scale approach coupling the DPD simulations with a drift-diffusion model to study the relationship between the photovoltaic properties and the self-assembled morphologies of block copolymers. The DPD method was employed for determining the morphologies, while the drift-diffusion equations were solved for the photovoltaic properties. Here, to study the effect of molecular orientation on the photovoltaic performance of block copolymer films, we extended this multi-scale approach by introducing an external electric field into the DPD simulations and considering the anisotropic transport characteristics in the drift-diffusion model.

Mesoscopic simulations based on the DPD are performed to investigate the self-assembled morphologies. DPD is a powerful tool that can be used for modeling physical phenomena occurring at larger time and length scales than typical molecular dynamics (MD). In the DPD method, a coarse-grained bead (DPD bead) represents a cluster of atoms. The evolution of the DPD beads is described by Newton's equations of motion. Newton's equations of motion for all bead positions and velocities are integrated by a modified velocity-Verlet algorithm. The force acting on a DPD bead α, fα, includes the conservative force (FCαβ), dissipative force (FDαβ), and random force (FRαβ). It is given by
(1)
More details of the DPD simulation method can be found in Section 1 of the ESI.
In the DPD simulations, we consider a series of diblock copolymers consisting of donor and acceptor blocks. The neighboring beads in the copolymers are connected by spring bonds. The bonds are represented by a harmonic spring potential
Uαβ = Kb(1 − rαβ/req)2
(2)
where the spring constant and the equilibrium bond distance are set to
Kb = 50 and req = 0.5, respectively. Since most semiconductor polymers are rigid, we include a three-body stiffness potential along the copolymer with the form

Uangle = Ka(cosθ − cosθ0)2
(3)
where
Ka = 20 and θ0 = π.

In the DPD simulations, external fields are applied to modulate the molecular orientation through the interaction between the external field and donor blocks. The interaction between the donor blocks and external fields is modeled by coupling the unit vector Pi along the long axis of the ith donor block to an external field Etreat pointing along the z-axis (the axis perpendicular to the electrodes) through the interaction potential
Ucontrol = EtreatPi
(4)
Within the interaction, a torque was applied to rotate the block copolymers to align them with the direction of Etreat. The polymer blocks with a net dipole moment along the long axis of the donor block were constructed according to the work reported by Solanki et al. They found that the direction of the intrinsic dipole moment in poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and poly(3-butylthiophene) (P3BT) is along the polymer chain, by analyzing the electrostatic potential distribution in the monomer of these donor polymers. Their works indicate that the model of block copolymers with donor blocks having a net dipole moment along the long axis is realistic. The model of block copolymers with donor blocks with dipole moments along the long axis is based on experiments.
In the DPD simulation boxes, the NVT ensemble and periodic boundary conditions are adopted. The particle density ρ is set to 4. The interaction strengths aij between DPD beads of the same type are given by aDD = aAA = 20, where D and A stand for the beads in the donor and acceptor blocks, respectively. The interaction strengths aij (i ≠ j) between DPD beads of different types are set to 70. The friction coefficient γ and the noise amplitude σ are respectively set to 4.5 and 3.0, and thus kBT = 1.0. In this work, more than 2 × 107 DPD steps are performed so that the computing time is long enough for the system to achieve an equilibrium state. To establish a correlation between simulation parameters and experimental values and thus establish a physical length scale in our system, we equate the thickness of a lamellar domain obtained from DPD for the D4A4 diblock without external field treatment to 10 nm.
After obtaining the self-assembled nanostructures via DPD simulation, we calculate the photovoltaic properties of these nanostructures by solving the drift-diffusion equations involving the electric potential ψ [V] and the charge carrier number densities e, h, and X [m−3] of electrons, holes and excitons, respectively. The current densities of the holes and electrons are calculated using the formulas
Je = −μ(r)e(r)∇ψ(r) − De(r)∇e(r)
(5)
Jh = μ(r)h(r)∇ψ(r) −De(r)∇h(r)
(6)
The total current density J is the summation of Je and Jh. More details of the drift-diffusion model are shown in Section 2 of the ESI. The drift-diffusion equations in the drift-diffusion model are numerically solved by the finite difference method.
In the extended drift-diffusion model, we account for the anisotropic nature of transport both in the donor and acceptor phases by describing the mobilities of the charge carriers and excitons as anisotropic mobility tensors. The mobility tensors were determined by the molecular orientation:
(7)
where
 is the local nematic director (director of backbones of block copolymers), and μm‖ and μm⊥ are the mobilities in the directions parallel and perpendicular to the local nematic director, respectively. I is the identity matrix. μm‖ and μm⊥ were determined by the local orientational order parameter S(r):

(8)
where
μm,iso and μm,ani are the isotropic and anisotropic contributions to the mobilities, respectively, and μm‖,S=1 and μm⊥,S=1 are the mobilities in the directions parallel and perpendicular to the backbones of block copolymers, respectively.

The output of the DPD simulations serves as the input to estimate the local dielectric constants and mobility constants at the centre of mesh cells in the finite difference method for the drift-diffusion equations. The total dielectric constants ε(r) and mobility constants μ(r) at each point are obtained by linearly weighting the contributions of the different components based on the respective volume fractions, i.e.,
(9)
(10)
where
εi and μi denote the permittivity and mobility constant of component i, and φi(r) refers to the volume fraction of component i at r.

The electrical parameters used in the photovoltaic calculations are listed in Table S1 (ESI). Most of the parameters are typical values of polymeric materials used in polymer photovoltaic cells. The energy levels of the acceptor and donor are taken from ref. 11. The LUMO energy level of the acceptor is taken to be 3.5 eV, and the HOMO energy level of the donor is taken to be 4.9 eV. Both the electron and the isotropic parts of the hole mobilities are set to 5 × 10−9 m−2 V−1 s−1, which is close to the magnitude of the charge mobilities of P3HT (poly(3-hexylthiophene)) and PFTBT (poly-((9,9-dioctylfluorene)-2,7-diyl-alt-[4,7-bis(thiophen-5-yl)-2,1,3-benzothiadiazole]-2′,2′′-diyl)).

There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21774032, 51833003 and 51621002). Support from a Project of Shanghai Municipality (16520721900) is also appreciated.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9qm00366e
This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2019