 DOI: 10.1039/D2EE03418B
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2023, 16, 629-640


Jiacheng
He
,

Wangping
Sheng
,

Jia
Yang
,

Yang
Zhong
,

Yang
Su
,

Licheng
Tan
* and 

Yiwang
Chen
*

College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering/Institute of Polymers and Energy Chemistry (IPEC), Nanchang University, 999 Xuefu Avenue, Nanchang 330031, China. E-mail: tanlicheng@ncu.edu.cn; ywchen@ncu.edu.cn

National Engineering Research Center for Carbohydrate Synthesis/Key Lab of Fluorine and Silicon for Energy Materials and Chemistry of Ministry of Education, Jiangxi Normal University, 99 Ziyang Avenue, Nanchang 330022, China

Peking University Yangtze Delta Institute of Optoelectronics, Nantong 226010, China

Received
21st October 2022
, Accepted 5th January 2023
First published on 7th January 2023
The perovskite film prepared by traditional two-step sequential deposition possesses numerous defects and excess lead iodide (PbI2), which is mainly due to the formation of a dense PbI2 layer and the incomplete solid–liquid reaction. It has been shown that the presence of the PbI2 species has some positive effects on the power conversion efficiency (PCE), but the random distribution of excess PbI2 can be detrimental to the device stability. Herein, we demonstrate the feasibility of fabricating a porous PbI2 layer with ordered array structure by integrating a succinamide (SA) additive with a nanoimprinting technology, which can confine the organic amine salts in PbI2 arrays to facilitate the omnidirectional diffusion and realize sufficient conversion to perovskites. Consequently, an unencapsulated device (active area of 0.04 cm2) is obtained with 23.56% efficiency and excellent long-term humidity stability (∼90% efficiency retention after 1800 h) in ambient air (relative humidity of 50 ± 5%). Moreover, the fabricated perovskite solar cell (1.01 cm2) and module (14.63 cm2) achieve impressive efficiencies of 21.57% and 16.42%, respectively. This work paves the way for the expansion of the two-step sequential deposition method from the laboratory to the large-scale fabrication of high-performance perovskite photovoltaic devices.

The quality of perovskite films is one of the fundamental factors determining the photovoltaic performance and stability of perovskite solar cells (PVSCs). The perovskite film prepared by traditional two-step sequential deposition possesses a large number of defects and excess lead iodide (PbI2). This is mainly due to the formation of a dense PbI2 layer and the incomplete solid–liquid reaction. However, conventionally modified porous PbI2 films are disordered and lack steric confinement effects, which may produce numerous defects. Here, we demonstrate the feasibility of fabricating a porous PbI2 layer with an ordered array structure by integrating a succinamide (SA) additive with nanoimprinting technology. This combination can confine the organic amine salts in the PbI2 arrays to facilitate the omnidirectional diffusion and space constraint effect, thus obtaining the desired perovskite film with an appropriate stoichiometric ratio. As a result, we achieve an excellent PCE of 23.56% (0.04 cm2), and the nonencapsulated device maintains 90% of the initial PCE after aging at 25 °C and 50 ± 5% relative humidity in ambient conditions. In addition, a PVSCs device (1.01 cm2) with impressive PCE of 21.57% and a perovskite solar module (14.63 cm2) with superior PCE of 16.42% are achieved, respectively.


Organic–inorganic perovskite solar cells (PVSCs) have triggered advanced developments in the photovoltaic field attributed to their exceptional properties, including the high light absorption coefficient, low exciton binding energy, long carrier diffusion length and adjustable direct bandgap. Over the past decade, the power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of PVSCs have increased rapidly from the initial values of 3.8% to 25.7% in 2021, which render them comparable to monocrystalline silicon solar cells. Thus far, tremendous strategies have been dedicated to improving the device performance, including composition/additive engineering, interface modification, morphological control, and defect passivation. Among the above-mentioned methods, the quality of the perovskite film is crucial in determining the photovoltaic performance and stability of PVSCs to further achieve commercialization. Consequently, growing a highly uniform, dense and low-defect-density perovskite film is always the ultimate goal of device optimization.

Regarding the fabrication of perovskite films at the laboratory-scale, there are mainly two methods: one-step deposition and two-step sequential deposition. As for the one-step deposition method, it is difficult to acquire uniform and compact perovskite films owing to its uncontrollable crystallization kinetics and time sensitivity. Compared with the one-step method, the two-step sequential deposition has been demonstrated to provide a better control of the morphology and retardation of the crystallization process. Unfortunately, it is difficult for organic amine salts to penetrate adequately due to the existence of a dense PbI2 layer in the traditional two-step sequential deposition process, causing an incomplete solid–liquid reaction. The resultant perovskite film inevitably possesses abundant defects, resulting in severe non-radiative recombination. Moreover, the excessive unreacted PbI2 can affect the photovoltaic performance and accelerate the device degradation. To address these issues, Grätzel et al. have promoted the reaction of PbI2 and CH3NH3I (MAI) by spin-coating PbI2 on a mesoporous TiO2 layer. However, the compact TiO2 layer requires high temperature preparation, which is not conductive to large-scale research and commercial applications. In addition, solvent engineering and crystal-assisted growth have been utilized to alter the orientation of PbI2 to facilitate perovskite crystallization. The formation of a PbI2 scaffold network can promote the permeation reaction of organic amine salts by introducing self-poly(methyl methacrylate) (sMMA) or polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) and dabcoHReO4 (DH). Inspired by this, it is a feasible to fabricate porous PbI2 films to accelerate solid–liquid reactions. Heterogeneous nucleation sites have been reported to lower the nucleation energy barrier, which can increase the nucleation rate. Further, hydrogen bonding has the effect of introducing heterogeneous nucleation sites and retarding the crystal growth. It is deduced that the adoption of hydrogen bonds may lead to the loose packing of large-sized particles, which provides conditions for the formation of a fluffy and porous morphology. However, the morphological changes of the above-formed PbI2 films are disordered and lack steric confinement effects, which may produce numerous defects in perovskite films due to much of the organic cation solution on the upper surface being thrown off by the centrifugal force during the top-down permeation process in the PbI2 layer. Therefore, it is consequential to fabricate PbI2 films with an ordered array structure to promote the omnidirectional permeation of organic amine salts and confine them in the arrays to realize sufficient solid–liquid reaction. Furthermore, in recent years, the ordered array structure prepared by nanoimprinting technology has been widely exploited in the field of photovoltaics due to excellent controllability and reproducibility.
Herein, we fabricate the porous PbI2 layer with ordered array structure by integrating the succinamide (SA) additive with nanoimprinting technology to improve the PCE and stability of PVSCs. The SA is firstly introduced into the PbI2 precursor solution to form N–H⋯I hydrogen bonds, which can reduce the nucleation energy barrier, thus resulting in the porous PbI2-SA film. The ordered arrays structure of PbI2-SA (defined as imprinted PbI2-SA) is then obtained after combining with the imprinting technique. Unlike the conventional layer-by-layer permeation of organic amine salts, the organic cation solution achieves omnidirectional diffusion and space constraint effect in virtue of the porous and ordered arrays structure, which effectively promotes the complete conversion to perovskite and obtains the desired perovskite film with an appropriate stoichiometric ratio. Furthermore, the PbI2 array structure is vertically aligned on the substrate, which can promote the perpendicular growth of perovskite and facilitate the carrier transportation. As a result, the unencapsulated device (active area of 0.04 cm2) exhibits a high efficiency of 23.56% and dramatically enhanced humidity stability (retaining ∼90% of the initial efficiency over 1800 h at 50 ± 5% relative humidity). More importantly, high-quality large-area perovskite films are realized using this strategy. The PVSCs device (1.01 cm2) with impressive PCE of 21.57% and perovskite solar module (14.63 cm2) with superior PCE of 16.42% are achieved, respectively. This strategy provides a reliable technique for the preparation of a large-area high-quality perovskite film, which can help to further improve the PCE and stability of PVSCs, as well as promote the commercial application.

The preparation procedure of porous PbI2 with ordered array structure and target perovskite film is illustrated in Fig. 1(a). In the conventional process (I), the underlying dense PbI2 layer hinders the permeation of organic amine salts, leading to an incomplete reaction and excess unreacted PbI2. With respect to the PbI2-SA sample (II), the succinamide (SA) tends to form N–H⋯I hydrogen bonds with PbI2 (Fig. 1(b)), which can contribute toward the formation of a disordered porous PbI2 film. However, most of the organic cation solution on the upper surface is thrown off by centrifugal force during the initial stage due to the absence of the space confinement effect, leading to the resultant perovskite film having non-stoichiometric ratios. Surprisingly, for the imprinted PbI2-SA sample (III), the PbI2-SA precursor solution is spin-coated on the SnO2/ITO substrate. A silicon cylinder arrays stamp with moderate pressure (3 MPa) is then placed on the PbI2-SA layer, which can provide the space confinement effect to form ordered arrays structure after heat treatment at 70 °C for 1 min (Fig. 1(c)). The silicon cylinder arrays stamp (2 μm diameter, 2 μm depth) employed here is shown in Fig. S1 (ESI). Then, the organic cation solution is deposited and diffused omnidirectionally through the ordered arrays in porous PbI2, which can facilitate the complete solid–liquid reaction, thus resulting in a uniform and high-quality perovskite film.

To investigate the chemical interaction between SA and PbI2, 1H nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (1H-NMR) and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) were carried out. As shown in Fig. 2(a) and (b), the chemical shift of H in –NH2 of PbI2-SA moves to the lower field direction by approximately 0.12 parts per million (ppm) compared with the pure SA (from 6.69 to 6.81 ppm and 7.24 to 7.36 ppm, respectively) owing to the formation of the hydrogen bond weakening the shielding of the hydrogen-bonded protons. This indicates the strong N–H⋯I hydrogen bonding interaction between SA and PbI2. This is also verified by the FTIR spectra (Fig. 2(c)). In comparison with pure SA, the N–H stretching vibration frequency of PbI2-SA shifts to the lower frequency from 3342 to 3330 cm−1 and 3167 to 3152 cm−1, respectively. The broadening of the peak shape due to intermolecular association suggests a hydrogen bonding interaction between –NH2 of SA with iodide ions of PbI2. In addition, the stretching vibration of the carbonyl (CO) of SA shifts from 1681 to 1670 cm−1, which is mainly attributed to the electron delocalization from CO. This demonstrates a strong interaction between the CO bond. Furthermore, the uncoordinated Pb2+ can contribute to defects passivation in the grain boundaries (GBs). Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and atomic force microscopy (AFM) measurements were further examined to scrutinize the morphologies of the PbI2 films, as shown in Fig. 2(d)–(i) and Fig. S2 (ESI). Compared to the pristine dense PbI2 (Fig. 2(d)), a disordered mesoporous morphology can be obtained when SA is incorporated into PbI2 (Fig. 2(e)). An ordered array structure is also observed after the nanoimprint processing, which can act as a omnidirectional diffusion channel for the organic amine salts (Fig. 2(f)). Moreover, the vertical columnar and shaggy PbI2 morphology is also observed by cross-sectional SEM measurement (Fig. S3, ESI). The SEM images at different magnifications illustrate the uniformity of the imprinted PbI2 film (Fig. S4, ESI). The AFM results further reveal the changes in the morphologies of the PbI2 films, which are in accordance with the SEM images (Fig. 2(g)–(i)). Fascinatingly, the transformation of the micro morphology of PbI2 films is further confirmed by the macro visual images (Fig. S5, ESI). Compared with the transparent pristine PbI2, the PbI2-SA film becomes more opaque, which is attributed to the light scattering effect of the porous structure. The imprinted PbI2-SA film also shows a colorful visual effect due to the optical interference. Furthermore, the nitrogen adsorption–desorption technique is further utilized to investigate the porosity of the PbI2 film (Fig. S6, ESI). The Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface area of the imprinted PbI2-SA is as high as 84.94 m2 g−1, which is much higher than those of pristine PbI2 (30.33 m2 g−1) and PbI2-SA (39.03 m2 g−1) in Fig. S6a (ESI). The corresponding parameters are displayed in Table S1 (ESI). Fig. S6b (ESI) illustrates the pore-size distribution and cumulative pore volume for the nitrogen adsorption–desorption profile. The imprinted PbI2-SA film represents a larger pore volume of up to 0.076 cc g−1 in comparison with pristine PbI2 (0.025 cc g−1) and PbI2-SA (0.034 cc g−1). In addition, compared to the pristine PbI2 film, the enhancement of the (001) peak of PbI2-SA and imprinted PbI2-SA samples from X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns (Fig. S7, ESI) reveals the increased crystallinity and better vertical orientation, which are favorable to the direct insertion of organic amine salts into the lattice of [PbI6]4− for further vertical growth of perovskite.
To investigate the effect of different PbI2 structures on the perovskite morphologies, the top-view SEM images of the perovskite films are shown in Fig. 3(a)–(c) and Fig. S8 (ESI), and the insets show the corresponding cross-sectional SEM images. The variations in the average grain size described by the statistical distribution diagrams are presented in Fig. S9 (ESI). The SEM image of the control FAMAPbI3 film shows tremendous unreacted PbI2 marked with white circles (Fig. 3(a)), which may accelerate the device degradation. Compared with the control film (∼0.49 μm) and SA modified film (namely PVK-SA, ∼0.87 μm, Fig. 3(b)), the imprinted PbI2-SA film yields a high quality perovskite film (namely imprinted PVK-SA, ∼1.23 μm, Fig. 3(c)) with increased average grain size of over 1 μm. The phenomenon is consistent with the AFM images (Fig. S10, ESI). Furthermore, the corresponding cross-section SEM images further reflect the thicknesses of the PVK-SA and imprinted PVK-SA film up to 758 nm and 806 nm, respectively, accompanied by a large grain size with vertical orientation, which can facilitate the charge carrier transportation. Meanwhile, the control film (thickness: 693 nm) displays a disordered orientation and numerous grain boundaries, which cause severe non-radiative recombination and inhibited carrier extraction. The difference in the thickness of the perovskite film may be attributed to the ordered arrays in the porous PbI2 film, contributing to a more efficient solid–liquid reaction. In addition, the energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS) mapping of the imprinted PbI2-SA perovskite film section is taken. As shown in Fig. S11 (ESI), the Pb, I and N elements are uniformly distributed in the perovskite film, further indicating that the organic amine salts in the PbI2 layer enable facilitate the omnidirectional diffusion and realize sufficient conversion to perovskite. Furthermore, 2D-grazing incidence X-ray diffraction (GIXRD) experiments were carried out to investigate the crystal structures and orientations of the perovskite films in detail. As shown in Fig. 3(d)–(f), both the control and PVK-SA films exhibit bright reflections at the scattering vector q = 0.9 Å−1, which is assigned to the (001) plane of PbI2. Meanwhile, the imprinted PVK-SA sample shows no obvious diffraction ring at q = 0.9 Å−1. In the control film, the 2D GIXRD pattern also shows an isotropic intensity distribution along the azimuthal angle, indicating random orientation of perovskite crystals. In contrast, the imprinted PVK-SA film shows an anisotropic annular pattern and the typical diffraction ring intensity located at q = 1.0 Å−1 for the (110) plane soars sharply, which is in favor of the vertical transport of carriers. Additionally, the azimuthal integrated scattering intensity of the imprinted PVK-SA film in the region around 90° is significantly higher than that of the control, which further proves the vertical preferred orientation (Fig. S12, ESI). Likewise, this consequence can also be determined by XRD measurement. As evidenced from the XRD patterns (Fig. 3(g)), the PVK-SA and imprinted PVK-SA films show decreased diffraction peak intensity of PbI2 at 12.6° and enhanced characteristic peak of perovskite at 14.0° (110), suggesting the higher crystallinity and sufficient reaction between the organic amine salts and PbI2. The optical properties of the corresponding perovskite films have been characterized by ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) absorbance and photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy. As illustrated in Fig. 3(h), a considerable absorption improvement in the whole wavelength range and significantly enhanced PL intensity are observed in the imprinted PVK-SA sample, owing to the better crystallinity and fewer defects as discussed earlier. The emission features were investigated by time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) spectra to evaluate the charge carrier dynamics. The PL intensity decay curves were fitted by a biexponential decay equation of y = A + B1exp(−t/τ1) + B2exp(−t/τ2), where A is the offset of the curve, and B1 and B2 are amplitudes, respectively. The average lifetime (τave) is obtained via the relation τave = (B1τ12 + B2τ22)/(B1τ1 + A2τ2). In Fig. 3(i), the imprinted PVK-SA sample displays the longer average lifetime (τave) of 1870 ns compared with the control (τave = 494 ns) and PVK-SA (τave = 1194 ns), indicating the suppressed carrier non-radiative recombination and increased crystallinity. The corresponding TRPL parameters are summarized in Table S2 (ESI). Furthermore, confocal laser scanning fluorescence microscopy (CLSM) was carried out to visually investigate the optical properties, which can clearly observe the luminescence of single perovskite crystal grains. Compared to the control (Fig. 3(j)) and PVK-SA (Fig. 3(k)) samples with many heterogeneous flecks and black holes along grain boundaries, the imprinted PVK-SA film (Fig. 3(l)) shows larger crystal grains and significantly stronger single crystal grain luminescence, indicating that the imprinted PVK-SA film possesses higher crystallinity and fewer defects.
In order to gain an in-depth understanding of the solid–liquid reaction extent and the crystallization kinetics of perovskite, in situ UV-vis absorption spectroscopy and semi in situ XRD measurements were carried out. Fig. 4(a)–(c) indicate the wavelength (nm) versus time (s) during annealing periods of up to 120 s at 150 °C with the absorbance intensity of the films to show the overall information at a glance. Different absorbances are represented by the different colors in the scale bar. The absorption in the longer wavelength range (>500 nm) is ascribed to the perovskite crystallites or the intermediate (Lewis acid–base type adduct) in the precursor solid film. After annealing for around 100 s, the absorption of the control film (Fig. 4(a)) in the wavelength range of 500–600 nm is intensified slowly with time until it is stabilized, which means that the organic amine salts react slowly with PbI2 owing to the dense PbI2 layer. In contrast, the PVK-SA (Fig. 4(b)) and the imprinted PVK-SA (Fig. 4(c)) perovskite films demonstrate that the full conversion of PbI2 to perovskite starts immediately upon drop-casting of the organic cation solution, as verified by the rapidly enhanced absorbance after annealing for about 40 s and 20 s, respectively. To further visualize the effect of PbI2 morphology on the extent of its conversion to perovskite, the crystal structure and internal profile of the unannealed perovskite films were investigated by XRD measurement. By controlling the incident angle, the penetration depth of the X-rays can be altered to probe the perovskite internal structure in a layer-by-layer manner. In Fig. 4(d)–(f), when the incident angle is 0.1°, the diffraction peak on the (110) side is dominant in all samples. However, upon further increasing the incidence angle, the PbI2 diffraction peaks emerge in the control and PVK-SA films. Conversely, the imprinted PVK-SA film always shows the perovskite characteristic (110) peak, which is mainly due to the omnidirectional diffusion of the organic amine salts and complete conversion to perovskite. The incident angle was fixed at 1.0° (because it is deep enough) to further explore the evolution of the perovskite crystal structure with the annealing time. The semi-in situ XRD patterns during the annealing process at the incident angle of 1.0° are shown in Fig. 4(g)–(i) and Fig. S13 (ESI). Compared with the control (Fig. 4(g)) and PVK-SA (Fig. 4(h)), the imprinted PbI2-SA film can convert into perovskite completely within 20 s. Thus, the main diffraction (110) peak intensity of the imprinted PVK-SA (Fig. 4(i)) is the highest and no significant residual PbI2 peak is detected (Fig. S12, ESI). Moreover, a series of photographs of the control and modified perovskite films show the macroscopic changes during natural crystallization of perovskite films at room temperature (Fig. S14, ESI). The above results indicate that the ordered arrays channels are beneficial for the effective diffusion of the organic amine salts throughout the PbI2 film.
To investigate the chemical interaction between SA and perovskite, as well as the defect-passivation at GBs, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements (Fig. 4(j)–(l)) were performed to examine the I− 3d and Pb2+ 4f signals. As shown in Fig. 4(j), the binding energies of the control sample at 143.25 and 138.35 eV are assigned to 4f5/2 and 4f7/2 of divalent Pb2+, respectively, and the two weaker peaks are associated with metallic Pb0. After incorporating SA, the variation of the Pb peaks in the PVK-SA and the imprinted PVK-SA samples towards lower binding energy and the disappearance of metallic Pb clusters indicate that the CO of SA can better passivate the noncoordinated Pb2+, thereby reducing the formation of metallic lead. Similarly, the binding energy of the I 3d core level in Fig. 4(k) shows the same trend. The reason for the decrease in binding energy is mainly attributed to the Pb2+ and CO of SA forming the coordination bond, resulting in a higher electron density. Moreover, nanoimprint technology is a physical process and does not affect the chemical environment around the Pb atom, resulting in the same binding energy for the PVK-SA and imprinted PVK-SA samples. The XPS spectra of the N 1s (Fig. S15a, ESI) orbital peak for the PVK-SA and imprinted PVK-SA perovskite films both show a significant deviation, which indicates a hydrogen bond interaction between SA and perovskite. The full XPS spectra of the corresponding perovskite films are shown in Fig. S15b (ESI). We have calculated the I/Pb ratios from the integrated areas of the Pb 4f and I 3d peaks. The I/Pb ratios in the PVK-SA and imprinted PVK-SA perovskite films are 2.72 and 2.92, respectively, while that of the control film is only 2.46 (Fig. 4(l)). It further implies that the morphology of the imprinted PbI2-SA film is favorable for the formation of a more precise stoichiometric perovskite structure and the reduction of I vacancy defects.
With the superior optoelectronic properties discussed above, n–i–p planar PVSCs have been fabricated with the architecture of ITO/SnO2/FAxMA1−xPbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD/Ag. The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristic curves are shown in Fig. 5(a) and the corresponding photovoltaic performance parameters are summarized in Table 1. The imprinted PVK-SA modified PVSCs device achieves a champion PCE of 23.56% with negligible hysteresis, where the simultaneous improvements of the open circuit voltage (Voc of 1.150 V), short circuit current (Jsc of 25.68 mA cm−2), and fill factor (FF of 79.78%) are observed. The best performing PVK-SA based device delivers a mediocre PCE of 22.29% with Voc of 1.133 V, Jsc of 24.96 mA cm−2, and FF of 78.83%, whereas the control device yields the lowest PCE of 20.50%. The photovoltaic parameters of recently reported high-efficiency PVSCs devices fabricated by two-step sequential deposition method have been summarized in Table S3 (ESI). The hysteresis factors for the control, PVK-SA and imprinted PVK-SA PVSCs devices are calculated to be 5.3%, 3.2% and 1.5%, respectively. As shown in Fig. 5(b), the integrated Jsc from the external quantum efficiency spectra (EQE) of the imprinted PVK-SA device matches well with the measured value from the J–V curve. Moreover, the imprinted PVK-SA device yields the highest photocurrent and stabilized PCE output at the maximum power point (Fig. 5(c)). The statistical distributions of the corresponding photovoltaic parameters are shown in Fig. S16 (ESI), which definitely confirms the overwhelming superiority of the imprinted PVK-SA device. Subsequently, the Nyquist plots from electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) were carried out to investigate the carrier transport processes at the interface. Generally, the single semicircle indicates the charge recombination resistance values (Rrec). In Fig. 5(d), the imprinted PVK-SA device possesses the highest Rrec, which is predominately attributed to the improved perovskite film quality and suppressed non-radiative charge recombination. To completely comprehend the charge transportation and carrier recombination mechanisms, the dependence of the corresponding device current and voltage on the illumination intensity is plotted in Fig. 5(e). The slope of the imprinted PVK-SA device (1.54 kT q−1) is lower relative to the control (1.95 kT q−1) and the PVK-SA (1.65 kT q−1) devices, which reveals a decrease in trap-assisted recombination. Fig. S17 (ESI) shows the plot of Jscversus illumination intensity. The exponential factor α value of the imprinted PVK-SA device calculated from Jsc ∝ Iα is 0.995, which is closer to 1 than other samples, indicating the improved charge drift and decreased interfacial charge recombination. To obtain more insight into the decay kinetics in fully operating devices, transient photovoltage (TPV) and transient photocurrent (TPC) measurements were carried out. Compared with the control and PVK-SA devices, the imprinted PVK-SA device exhibits the slowest photovoltage decay (Fig. 5(f)) and the fastest photocurrent decay (Fig. S18, ESI), demonstrating the efficient charge transportation and suppressed carrier recombination. Furthermore, the dark-current measurement was conducted to investigate the leakage current (J0) in the PVSCs device, which expounds more information on the carrier recombination process. In Fig. S19 (ESI), the imprinted PVK-SA modified device shows the lowest J0 compared with the other samples. The decreased leakage current and inhibited charge carrier recombination can contribute to the improvements on Voc and FF. The Mott–Schottky analysis was undertaken to evaluate the built-in potential (Vbi) (Fig. S20, ESI). The increased Vbi represents a larger driving force for more efficient charge transportation and collection by the electrodes, resulting in a higher VOC of the imprinted PVK-SA devices. As illustrated in Fig. 5(g) and Fig. S21 (ESI), the space charge-limited current (SCLC) measurement is utilized to precisely quantify the defect state density of the perovskite films in the hole-only device with a structure of ITO/NiOx/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag and the electron-only device with a structure of ITO/SnO2/perovskite/PCBM/Ag. The trap density (nt) can be calculated by the following equation:
(1)
where
ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, ε is the relative dielectric constant of perovskite, L is the perovskite film thickness, VTFL is the trap-filling voltage and e is the elementary charge. It was found that the imprinted PVK-SA device shows lower hole trap density (1.10 × 1015 cm−3) in comparison with the PVK-SA device (3.13 × 1015 cm−3) and the control device (5.90 × 1015 cm−3). Moreover, the calculated electron trap densities of the control, PVK-SA and imprinted PVK-SA based devices are 4.24 × 1015 cm−3, 3.60 × 1015 cm−3 and 1.10 × 1015 cm−3, respectively. The corresponding parameters are summarized in Table S4 (ESI). The lowest trap density for the imprinted PVK-SA device demonstrates the superior perovskite film quality and greater effectiveness in defect passivation. Furthermore, the results of conductivity by the vertical dark J–V measurements reveal the improved carrier mobility of the imprinted PVK-SA device (Fig. S22, ESI). Thermal admittance spectroscopy measurement was carried out to explore the defect distribution in real PVSCs, and the trap density of state (tDOS) is plotted in Fig. 5(h) as a function of the energy-level depth. Band 1 and band 2 are related to shallow trap states. The imprinted PVK-SA sample exhibits the significantly reduced tDOS in almost the entire energy-level depth region, particularly in the deeper band 3 which is related to the GBs and interface defects. The aforementioned results confirm that a higher Voc value can be obtained by the imprinted PVK-SA device. This is because the majority of Voc losses in solar cells are proven to be affected by the charge traps. Given the more uniform and better-quality of the imprinted PVK-SA perovskite film, the PVSCs device with an active area of 1.01 cm2 was further fabricated to evaluate its uniformity and an excellent PCE of 21.57% was achieved (Fig. 5(i)). The perovskite solar module with an active area of 14.63 cm2 shows an impressive efficiency of 16.42%. The photovoltaic parameters of the recently reported 5 cm × 5 cm perovskite solar modules fabricated by two-step sequential deposition method are summarized in Table S5 (ESI). The above results confirm that the proposed approach is a reliable strategy to obtain high-efficiency PVSCs.

Device

V
oc [V]

J
sc [mA cm−2]
FF [%]
PCE [%]
HF [%]
Control
Forward
1.096
24.66
75.86
20.50
5.3
Reverse
1.071
24.61
73.66
19.41
PVK-SA
Forward
1.133
24.96
78.83
22.29
3.2
Reverse
1.112
24.85
78.11
21.58
Imprinted PVK-SA
Forward
1.150
25.68
79.78
23.56
1.5
Reverse
1.141
25.41
80.00
23.20
The homogeneity of different perovskite films prepared by blade-coating process with a substrate area of 25 cm2 was further characterized by UV-vis uniformity test, as shown in Fig. 6(a)–(c). Compared with the control and PVK-SA films, the UV-vis absorption of the imprinted PVK-SA film possessed a more obvious overlap, suggesting that a large-area uniform perovskite was obtained. The insets are the corresponding cross-sectional SEM images, and are consistent with previous mentioned results. In addition, the peak intensity of the (110) orientation was measured for 25 points at different locations of the perovskite films by XRD measurements. As shown in Fig. 6(d)–(f), the imprinted PVK-SA film exhibits superior reproducibility and crystallinity on the large-area substrate (25 cm2) compared with the control and PVK-SA films. Therefore, it is favorable to obtain a large-area uniform film by ordered array structure in PbI2, which lays the groundwork for enhancing the photovoltaic performance of large-area PVSCs. Stability issues remain an essential factor in the commercialization of PVSCs. Therefore, stability tests of the perovskite films and PVSCs devices under different conditions were conducted. In Fig. 6(g)–(i), the XRD patterns of the imprinted PVK-SA sample exhibit no obvious decomposition relative to the initial one after 2160 h under ambient conditions (50 ± 5% relative humidity, 25 °C). However, the control film is almost completely decomposed, and exhibits a strong PbI2 peak and δ-phase peak due to the accelerated degradation of the perovskite by excessive PbI2. The well-preserved morphology of the imprinted PVK-SA sample demonstrates the enhancement of the moisture stability, which is ascribed to the improved hydrophobicity (evidenced by the increased contact angle in Fig. S23, ESI). Besides the moisture stability, the improvement of thermal stability can also be observed in the imprinted PVK-SA perovskite film. The XRD variation in the peaks of all samples at 85 °C for 300 h are shown in Fig. S24 (ESI). The imprinted PVK-SA perovskite film displays a negligible diffraction peak of PbI2, while the control film turns completely yellow in color and shows a pronounced PbI2 peak. It is worth mentioning that the PVK-SA and imprinted PVK-SA-based devices retain 78.0% and 90.0% of their primitive PCEs for 1800 h after storing in air conditions (50 ± 5% relative humidity, 25 °C), respectively, while the efficiency of the control device decreases by more than 70% (Fig. 6(j)). The remarkably improved stability mentioned above can be attributed to the higher crystallinity and better quality of the imprinted PVK-SA perovskite film compared with the control and PVK-SA samples, which significantly reduce the degradation sites in the initial state and mitigate moisture-induced decomposition.

In summary, we report an efficient strategy for fabricating a large-area high-quality and stable perovskite film in two-step deposition method by constructing a porous PbI2 layer with ordered array structure. With the assistance of integrating the SA additive with nanoimprinting technology, the organic amine salts are confined in the porous PbI2 arrays to promote omnidirectional diffusion and realize sufficient conversion to perovskites. Consequently, the resulting PVSCs (0.04 cm2) yield a champion efficiency of 23.56% and the unencapsulated modified device sustains 90% of its initial PCE after 1800 h under the relative humidity of 50 ± 5% in ambient conditions. Additionally, the fabricated PVSCs device (1.01 cm2) and module (14.63 cm2) achieve superior efficiencies of 21.57% and 16.42%, respectively. This method provides a feasible avenue for the preparation of a large-area high-quality perovskite film, which is beneficial for future development and commercial application.


J. H. and W. S. contributed equally to this work. J. H. and W. S. conceived the experiments, performed the data analysis and wrote the manuscript. J. Y. helped with the sample preparation for characterization. Y. Z., Y. S. and L. T. participated in the discussion about the feasibility of the experiments. All authors contributed to the data analysis, discussed the results, and commented on the manuscript.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) (52063019, 51973088, U20A20128 and 51833004), “Double Thousand Plan” Science and Technology Innovation High-end Talent Project of Jiangxi Province (jxsq2019201107) and Key Project of Jiangxi Provincial Natural Science Foundation (20224ACB203007).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ee03418b
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023