 DOI: 10.1039/C3EE40481A
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1597-1603

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Zhaolai
Chen
,

Hao
Zhang
,

Xiaohang
Du
,

Xiao
Cheng
,

Xigao
Chen
,

Yingying
Jiang
 and 

Bai
Yang
*

State Key Laboratory of Supramolecular Structure and Materials, College of Chemistry, Jilin University, Changchun, P. R. China. E-mail: byangchem@jlu.edu.cn; Fax: +86 431 8519 3423; Tel: +86 431 8516 8478

Received
7th December 2012
, Accepted 6th March 2013
First published on 6th March 2013
In this paper, inverted hybrid solar cells (HSCs) with planar heterojunction (PHJ) and n–i structure are fabricated from an aqueous-solution-processed poly(p-phenylenevinylene) (PPV) precursor and 2-mercaptoethylamine (MA)-stabilized CdTe nanocrystals (NCs). Firstly, one densely stacked, smooth CdTe film with a wide absorption range and sufficient water resistance is obtained and used for fabricating the PHJ device. A PCE of 3.75% is obtained, which is comparable to the bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) devices. Secondly, the n–i structure is constructed by replacing the PPV layer with a mixed solution consisting of the PPV precursor and CdTe NCs. The n–i structure shows improved photocurrent with lowered fill factor (FF). The low FF is attributed to the severe phase separation of the PPV:CdTe layer, which is caused by the hydrophobicity of the annealed CdTe layer. Subsequently, the hydrophilicity of the annealed CdTe layer is improved by spin-coating an aqueous solution of CdCl2, which greatly increases the FF. Eventually, a record power conversion efficiency of 4.76% is achieved and the maximum Jsc can reach 16.08 mA cm−2.

Exploring novel approaches to produce efficient, low-cost solar cells has attracted great academic and industrial interest due to the urgent need for renewable energy sources and the problem of global climate change. Bulk heterojuction (BHJ) solar cells based on conjugated polymers are currently regarded as the most promising OPV devices, due to their high efficiencies and low processing costs. Over the past decade, a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of over 9% has been achieved. However, in all reports, the material preparation and device fabrication are based on organic solvents, which typically include chloroform, chlorobenzene, toluene, etc. The organic solvents need careful handling and personal protective equipment and will inevitably give rise to environmental pollution. Recently, solar devices from aqueous materials have drawn a lot of attention, which may provide an environmentally-friendly protocol to fabricate efficient photovoltaic devices. However, the PCE is still at a low level. This work provides a facile and feasible protocol to improve the PCE of aqueous-solution-processed hybrid solar cells.


Polymer-nanocrystal hybrid solar cells (HSCs) have attracted increased research attention, owing to the combination of the solution processability of polymers, the high electron mobility, and the adjustable absorption properties of the nanocrystals (NCs). Over the past decade, stepwise improvement of device performance has been achieved by changing the size and shape of NCs, ligand exchange, thermal annealing, solvent-vapor annealing and functionalizing the polymers with substituents capable of binding to the surface of NCs. However, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) is still far below the polymer–fullerene solar cells (PSCs). Relative to fullerenes, NCs exhibit adjustable absorption properties and significantly contribute to the charge generation and collection. Accordingly, the photoresponse range of the HSCs is usually wider than PSCs, even though a low-bandgap polymer is used in PSCs. Nevertheless, the photocurrent of the HSCs is not obviously higher than PSCs due to the relatively low (usually lower than 40%) incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE). The IPCE is determined by photon absorption, charge generation, charge transport and charge collection. High charge collection efficiency can be obtained when the energy levels of the components and the interfacial contacts between the active layer and the electrodes can be well controlled. To achieve high photon absorption yield, increasing the thickness of the active layer is needed, however, this will increase the distance for charge transport and the probability of recombination. Usually, a compromising thickness of active layer is adopted to obtain the highest photocurrent. Therefore, it's difficult for HSCs to achieve very high photocurrents when a single active layer, which consists of the donor and acceptor, is used to absorb photons.

Pioneered by Hiramoto, a donor–acceptor blend film can be inserted between donor and acceptor layers, resulting in the p–i–n structure. The p–i–n structure, where p, i, n refers to the donor, blend of donor and acceptor, and acceptor, respectively, is widely used in vacuum-evaporated small molecule organic solar cells as the exciton collection can be greatly enhanced. However, in the previous reports concerning solution-processed solar cells, the p–i–n structure is rarely adopted, which may be due to diffusion during multilayer solution processing.
Recently, solar cells from aqueous materials have been investigated by several groups as they provide an environmentally-friendly protocol to fabricate efficient photovoltaic devices and the PCE of the inverted HSCs is comparable to its counterpart based on organic solvent. Herein, inverted HSCs with planar heterojunction (PHJ) and n–i structures are fabricated from an aqueous-solution-processed poly(p-phenylenevinylene) (PPV) precursor and 2-mercaptoethylamine (MA)-stabilized CdTe NCs. Firstly, the planar heterojunction HSC is fabricated and a PCE of 3.75% is achieved, which is comparable to the bulk heterojunction (BHJ) structure (PCE of 3.64%). Based on the aforementioned two structures, a HSC with n–i structure is fabricated. The best device shows a PCE of 4.76% and the maximum Jsc can reach 16.08 mA cm−2. To the best of our knowledge, the Jsc and PCE obtained in this work are both the highest reported for the hybrid solar cells.

PPV precursor was prepared according to the previous report. Briefly, the monomer p-xylene-bis(tetrahydrothiophenium chloride) was prepared by reaction of dichloro-p-xylene (3 g) with tetrahydrothiophene (3 mL) at 50 °C in methanol (40 mL) for 24 h. The product was purified by concentrating the reaction solution and then precipitating the condensed solution in cold acetone (0 °C). The solid was collected by filtration and dried thoroughly in a vacuum oven. After that, 11.6 mL of 0.4 M NaOH solution was added into the p-xylene-bis(tetrahydrothiophenium chloride) aqueous solution in 30 min. The reaction proceeded at 0 °C for 30 min and then was terminated by the addition of 0.4 M HCl aqueous solution to neutralize the reaction solution. Then precursor solution was dialyzed in distilled water for a week. The concentration of the polymer was obtained by evaporating known volumes to dryness and weighing. The solution of PPV precursor in this case was measured to be 5 mg mL−1.


CdTe NCs were prepared according to our previous work. 0.28 mL NaHTe (2/3 M) solution was injected into 12.5 mM N2-saturated CdCl2 solution in the presence of MA in the pH range 5.70–5.74. The molar ratio of Cd/MA/Te was set as 1:2.4:0.2. The resultant precursor solution was refluxed for 30 min to maintain the growth of CdTe NCs. After that, the NCs solution was concentrated to 8 mL and then centrifuged at 6000 rpm for 5 min after adding isopropanol to remove ligands and superfluous salts. Subsequently, the NCs were dried in a vacuum oven and then dissolved in 1 mL deionized water. The final concentration of the CdTe NCs was 72 mg mL−1.


The ITO was cleaned using chloroform, acetone, isopropanol and ethanol before drying in a N2 flow. Next, the ITO substrate was treated by O2 plasma for 5 min and immediately coated with the TiO2 precursor at a speed of 2000 rpm for 10 s. Afterwards, the samples were annealed for 15 min at 350 °C to convert the TiO2 precursor into anatase-phase TiO2. The CdTe layer was obtained by spin-coating an aqueous solution of CdTe NCs (72 mg mL−1) at a speed of 700 rpm for 60 s in ambient condition. Subsequently, the film was annealed at 250 °C in the glove box for 5 min. After that, for the PHJ device, an aqueous solution of PPV precursor was spin-coated to obtain one PPV layer with a thickness of about 60 nm. For the n–i structure, a blend solution containing both PPV precursor and CdTe NCs (weight ratio: 1:18) was spin-coated at a speed of 700 rpm for 60 s to obtain a blending layer with a thickness of 80 nm in ambient conditions. To improve the hydrophilicity of the annealed CdTe layer, an aqueous solution of CdCl2 (0.1 M) was spin-coated at speed of 2000 rpm for 60 s to get an ultrathin CdCl2 layer. The above-mentioned three films were then annealed at 250 °C in the glove box for 1 h. Finally, a 10 nm MoO3 film and a 60 nm gold electrode were evaporated through a mask at a pressure below 10−5 Torr, leading to an active area of 0.05 cm2.


Space-charge-limited-current (SCLC) method was used for the measurement of carrier mobility. For electron mobility, the devices with a configuration of ITO/TiO2/active layer/LiF (1 nm)/Al (100 nm) were fabricated. For hole mobility, the devices with a configuration of ITO/MoO3 (10 nm)/active layer/MoO3 (10 nm)/Au (60 nm) were fabricated.


UV-visible absorption spectra were obtained using a Shimadzu 3600 UV-visible-NIR spectrophotometer. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) micrographs were recorded with a JEOL FESEM 6700F electron microscope with a primary electron energy of 3 kV. The samples were sputtered with a thin layer of Pt prior to imaging. The contact angles were measured with a commercial contact angle system (DataPhysics, OCA 20) at ambient temperature using a 4 μL water droplet as the indicator. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) micrographs were recorded in tapping mode with a Nanoscope IIIa scanning probe microscope from Digital Instruments. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was conducted using a Hitachi H-800 electron microscope at an acceleration voltage of 200 kV with a CCD camera. Current density versus voltage (J–V) characteristics were measured by a computer-controlled Keithley 2400 source meter measurement system under 100 mW cm−2 illumination with an AM1.5G filter. The incident photon to current efficiency (IPCE) was recorded under illumination of monochromatic light from the xenon lamp using a monochromator (Jobin Yvon, TRIAX 320) and detected by a computer-controlled Stanford SR830 lock-in amplifier with a Stanford SR540 chopper.



Fig. 1 shows the device structure, relative energy level diagram and the detailed information of the active layer. TiO2 and MoO3 are selected as electron transport layer (ETL) and hole transport layer (HTL), respectively. Water-soluble PPV precursor and CdTe NCs serve as the donor and acceptor. The synthetic route to PPV and the UV-vis absorption spectrum, as well as TEM image, of CdTe are shown in Fig. S1.


For organic semiconductor materials, excitons are generated upon excitation. In order to obtain a high photocurrent, the excitons need to diffuse effectively to the D–A interface to generate free carriers. As a result, the size of the donor domains must be in the range of 10–20 nm and the BHJ structure is favored. However, with regard to inorganic bulk semiconductor materials, free carriers instead of excitons are generated when excited. Considering that the absorption of CdTe significantly contributes to the photocurrent, PHJ devices with an inverted structure (ITO/TiO2/CdTe/PPV/MoO3/Au) were fabricated. Firstly, one film of CdTe NCs is spin-coated on the TiO2 substrate and then an annealing step is adopted. Fig. 2 shows the absorption spectra of the CdTe film before and after annealing. The absorption peak of the CdTe film shifts from 543 to 811 nm, attributed to the growth of CdTe NCs. It is worth noting that two new peaks at 310 and 365 nm appear in the absorption spectra after annealing. This may imply that the crystallinity of CdTe increases after annealing, which may enhance the electron mobility. The TEM images of the CdTe films before and after annealing are shown in Fig. 2 inset. It can be seen that the stack of CdTe NCs is relatively dense with little empty space, which is vital for transporting electrons and avoiding the occurrence of pinholes. The surface morphology of the CdTe film is characterized by atomic force microscopy (AFM, Fig. S2). Before annealing, a homogeneous and smooth surface topology is observed with a RMS value of 0.41 nm. After annealing, the RMS values increase to 2.64 nm, which results from the growth of the CdTe NCs.

One of the most important problems for fabricating solution-processed multilayer devices is diffusion as the first layer is easily dissolved by the second layer. As shown in Fig. 3a, the absorption spectra of the annealed CdTe film experiences almost no change before and after spin-coating water. This means that the annealed CdTe film exhibits sufficient water resistance, which enables the subsequent process of spin-coating. As mentioned above, one densely stacked, smooth CdTe film with a wide absorption range and sufficient water resistance is obtained. Afterwards, the CdTe film is used to fabricate an inverted PHJ device. The cross sectional image of the PHJ device is investigated by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Fig. S3). As shown in the SEM image, no diffusion is found, and there is a clear interface between the CdTe layer and PPV layer. Fig. 3b shows the J–V characteristics of the best PHJ device under AM 1.5G illumination. A PCE of 3.75% is achieved with Voc = 0.594 V, Jsc = 11.85 mA cm−2 and FF = 0.533, which is comparable to the BHJ device (Table S1). It is interesting that the efficiency of the PHJ structure is slightly higher than the BHJ structure (PCE of 3.64%). Commonly, BHJ structure gives higher efficiency than PHJ structure for polymer–fullerene solar cells. However, in our system, annealing promotes the size increase of CdTe NCs to about 20 nm, which is more than twice its exciton Bohr radius (7.3 nm). In this case, free carriers instead of excitons are generated upon excitation. As a result, unlike the usual PHJ structure, light absorbed by CdTe, which is far from the PPV/CdTe interface, also contributes to photocurrent. Meanwhile, the inverted structure makes light be firstly absorbed by the CdTe layer. Furthermore, our result is consistent with the previous work by Alivisatos and co-workers in which they fabricated efficient planar donor–acceptor heterojunction solar cells based on inorganic nanorods.
The contribution of the PPV layer to the photocurrent should be negligible, which is due to three reasons: (1) PPV shows a narrow photoabsorption range with an absorption onset of 520 nm. (2) Only about 10 nm PPV that is close to the PPV/CdTe interface contributes to the photocurrent. (3) The incident light is firstly absorbed by the CdTe layer. That is to say, the CdTe component contributes mostly to the photoabsorption. Therefore, the thickness of the CdTe layer should correlate intimately with the photocurrent. As shown in Fig. S4, when the thickness of the CdTe layer is in the range of 0–60 nm, the Jsc varies directly with the thickness. The highest Jsc is obtained when the thickness of the CdTe layer is about 60 nm. Based on the Beer–Lambert law, a thicker CdTe layer is able to absorb more photons and create more free carriers, and thus a higher photocurrent is expected. However, to obtain a CdTe layer with a large thickness needs high concentration and low spin-coating rate. Considering the high aggregation tendency of NCs, it's difficult to obtain a homogeneous CdTe film with a large thickness.

To increase the photocurrent, the n–i structure is constructed by replacing the PPV layer with a mixed solution consisting of PPV precursor and CdTe NCs or introducing a CdTe buffer layer between the TiO2 and blend layer (Fig. 1a). The J–V characteristics of the devices with different structures are shown in Fig. 4a and corresponding device parameters are illustrated in Table S1. The optimized device with n–i structure shows a PCE of 3.82%, Jsc of 15.87 mA cm−2, open circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.596 V and fill factor (FF) of 0.404. The enhanced Jsc is attributed to the increased photoresponse between 300 and 900 nm (Fig. 4b). It is worth noting that the EQE values between 340 and 700 nm are above 45%, which is higher than high-efficiency HSCs based on organic solvent reported before. The high Jsc is in accordance with the calculated value (17.21 mA cm−2) based on integration of the EQE.

However, in spite of the significantly increased Jsc, the improvement of PCE is negligible, which is due to the low FF. To understand the origin of the low FF, contact angle measurement is adopted to trace the change of hydrophilicity of the different substrate. As shown in Fig. 5, the TiO2 film shows a hydrophilic surface with a contact angle of 18° and spin-coating a pristine CdTe film makes the contact angle decrease to 5°. After annealing, the removal of ligand leads to a less hydrophilic CdTe film with a contact angle of 37°. AFM characterization is used to trace differences in the surface topography of the PPV:CdTe overlayer on substrates with different hydrophilicity. As shown in Fig. 6a and d, a homogeneous PPV:CdTe film with the surface rms roughness of 4.2 nm is obtained when the underlayer is TiO2, which agrees with our previous report. However, when PPV:CdTe is spin-coated on the annealed CdTe film, an inhomogeneous film with severe phase separation is obtained, which should adversely influence the charge separation and transport. On the other hand, the surface rms roughness increases to 13.1 nm, which is higher than that on TiO2. Based on our previous report, the increased surface rms roughness should cause a bad effect on the contact between PPV and MoO3 and therefore leads to unbalanced transport of electrons and holes and low FF. To confirm this, carrier mobility is measured by using the SCLC method. As shown in Fig. S5 and Table S2, compared to the BHJ structure, the electron mobility of the n–i structure increases slightly, whereas the hole mobility decreases a lot. Fig. S6 shows reverse bias photocurrent (Jph) behaviour of the hybrid devices with different structures. For the bulk heterojunction device, the Jph shows mild field dependence, while for the n–i structure, stronger reverse bias photocurrent behaviour can be seen, which can reduce the FF significantly. To solve the problem, an aqueous solution of CdCl2 is spin-coated on the annealed CdTe film before spin-coating the mixed solution of PPV:CdTe. As shown in Fig. 5, the contact angle of the CdTe film decreases to 12° after the CdCl2 layer is introduced. As a result, the surface morphology of the resultant PPV:CdTe is as good as that on TiO2 (Fig. 6c and f) and the surface rms roughness decreases to 8.2 nm, which improves the hole transport (Table S2).
As shown in Fig. 7, the device performances of the BHJ and n–i structures are both greatly determined by the PPV/CdTe ratio. Based on our previous work, when the PPV/CdTe weight ratio is 1:9, the size of CdTe-rich domains is relative small and the CdTe-rich domains are mostly isolated by PPV which will cause inferior effect on the electron transport. When PPV/CdTe weight ratio is 1:27, the excessive CdTe NCs in the blend film lead to serious aggregation of CdTe NCs, which may destroy the pathway for hole transport. The optimized PPV/CdTe ratio is 1:18, in which case, the device shows the highest PCE of 4.76%, Voc = 0.591 V, Jsc = 16.08 mA cm−2, FF = 0.501. To the best of our knowledge, the PCE and short-circuit current obtained in this work are both the highest reported for hybrid solar cells.
Although the improvement of the n–i devices is mainly attributed to the change of surface wetting properties of the CdTe layer, the effect of CdCl2 treatment on the surface properties of CdTe NCs must also be considered since Sargent and coworkers recently reported that Cd and Cl ions can effectively passivate the trap sites of the CdSe layer. To investigate this effect in our system, the performance of PHJ structures with and without CdCl2 treatment are compared (Fig. 8). The PHJ device with CdCl2 treatment shows PCE of 3.71%, Jsc of 11.69 mA cm−2, Voc of 0.587 V and FF of 0.541, which are similar to the PHJ device without CdCl2 treatment. This implies that no additional CdCl2 is needed to passivate the trap sites of the CdTe NCs. As the CdTe NCs used in our system are synthesized in water and purified by centrifuging with only one time, it is inevitable that small quantity of Cd and Cl ions exist in the NC solution, which can effectively passivate the trap sites of the CdTe layer during the annealing step.

In conclusion, hybrid solar cells with n–i structure are demonstrated to achieve improved short-circuit current and power conversion efficiency. Firstly, devices with planar-heterojunction are fabricated and a PCE of 3.75% is obtained, which is comparable to the bulk-heterojunction devices. Secondly, based on the aforementioned two structures, hybrid solar cells with an n–i structure are fabricated and an improved photocurrent is achieved with lowered fill factor. Finally, we use CdCl2 to improve the hydrophilicity of the annealed CdTe layer and greatly improve the fill factor. Eventually, a record power conversion efficiency of 4.76% is achieved and the maximum Jsc can reach 16.08 mA cm−2.


This work was supported by NSFC (50973039, 21221063, and 91123031), and the 973 Program of China (2012CB933802).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Details of materials synthesis and characterization, devices fabrication procedures, TEM and AFM images of the CdTe layer, SEM image of the device, contact angle measurement. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ee40481a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013