 DOI: 10.1039/C6TA08119C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 18952-18962


Qing-Dong
Ou
,

Hao-Jun
Xie
,

Jing-De
Chen
,

Lei
Zhou
,

Yan-Qing
Li
* and 

Jian-Xin
Tang
*

Institute of Functional Nano & Soft Materials (FUNSOM), Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Carbon-Based Functional Materials & Devices, Soochow University, Suzhou 215123, China. E-mail: jxtang@suda.edu.cn; yqli@suda.edu.cn

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia

Faculty of Mathematics and Physics, Huaiyin Institute of Technology, Huai'an 223003, PR China

Received
19th September 2016
, Accepted 4th November 2016
First published on 7th November 2016
To fully unlock the potential of metallic electrodes in flexible polymer solar cells (PSCs), tuning their optical properties is urgently required. Here we report an efficient light harvesting scheme involving the combination of a silver mesowire grid-based front transparent electrode and a plasmonic meta-mirror-based back reflector electrode. As an alternative to the indium-tin-oxide transparent conductor, the silver mesowire grid on a plastic substrate enables the reduced ohmic loss with competitive mechanical, electrical and optical properties, verifying its superiority in large-area flexible devices. Further implementation of the plasmonic meta-mirror back reflector allows broadband enhancement of light harvesting efficiency over the entire visible wavelength range, yielding a power conversion efficiency of 9.50% due to a 23.2% increase in photocurrent compared to the reference flat device. Experimental and theoretical analysis of light propagation in PSCs elucidates that the optical harvesting enhancement benefits from the synergistic effects of wide-area redistribution of an optical field induced by the silver mesowire grid electrode and broadband recovery of photon loss via surface plasmon and scattering enabled by the meta-mirror back reflector. This method provides a convenient and scalable way for developing high-performance flexible PSCs towards the future photovoltaic applications.

Polymer solar cells (PSCs) have been attracting considerable interest as one of the promising photovoltaic technologies because of their potential in realizing low-cost mass production of large-area, lightweight, and mechanically flexible solar panels via roll-to-roll printing techniques. To date, the power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of single-junction PSCs on glass substrates have exceeded 10% due to advanced materials design, morphology control, and interface engineering. Regardless of recent advances in highly efficient PSCs, the state-of-the-art device architectures are normally achieved on glass substrates, which are incompatible with future roll-to-roll printing technology. Moreover, the cell performance highly relies on the conventional indium-tin-oxide (ITO) based front transparent electrodes, whose brittle nature and sputtering fabrication procedure conflict with solution processing and plastic substrates. To realize high-performance flexible PSCs with printing compatibility, it is urgent to replace the ITO with a novel front transparent electrode having superior capabilities of mechanical flexibility, electrical conductance and optical transparency. Recently, flexible PSCs on plastic substrates have made significant progress with the PCE over 9%.

Various strategies of flexible transparent electrodes with intriguing electrical and optical properties have been introduced as an alternative to replace ITO in optoelectronic devices, such as carbon-based materials (e.g., graphene, carbon nanotubes, and conductive polymers), metallic structures (e.g., metal nanowires, metal mesh, metal–dielectric multilayered films), or hybrid composite conductors. Among these potential methods, mesoscale metallic wires hold great promise in reaching excellent optoelectronic performances of high optical transmittance and low sheet resistance. For example, Cui et al. introduced a transparent electrode with a copper mesowire array (1–5 μm in diameter with spacing ranging from 200 to 500 μm) through an electrospinning method, yielding extraordinary optoelectronic performance (0.36 Ω sq.−1, 92%). This indicates the potential applicability of mesoscale metal-wire design for energy-efficient flexible PSCs.
In addition to the front transparent electrode, subtly designing a high-quality back reflector in PSCs is indispensable to enable sufficient absorption of incident light in the organic photoactive layer for photocurrent generation. A metallic mirror is traditionally used in solar cells, which inevitably incurs photon flux loss when an incident light reflects off of a planar semiconductor/metal interface. This is a ubiquitous issue in PSCs with ultrathin photoactive layers (∼100–200 nm) because the optical absorption strength is significantly suppressed near the metal surface as a result of the decreasing magnitude of local electric field within the quarter-wave region off the mirror. To alleviate this problem, various schemes of optical engineering have been implemented into thin-film photovoltaic devices by increasing the light propagation path, engineering optical cavities, introducing the localized metallic nanoparticles for near-field enhancement, or exciting the surface plasmonic resonance/polariton (SPR/SPP) by metallic corrugations. However, some of these strategies featuring resonant photon absorption show the limited capacity for manipulating the electromagnetic field and preclude their applicability towards large-scale manufacturing.
More recently, metamaterials have demonstrated extraordinary abilities to control the intensity and momentum of light on the subwavelength scale, revealing their enormous potential in optoelectronic applications. Plasmonic metasurfaces involving a nanostructured metallic layer have been introduced to achieve broadband light trapping for water splitting, thermophotovoltaics, photodetectors and solar cells. Especially, the interactions between organic absorbers and plasmonic metasurfaces (e.g., disordered silver nanoparticle array and deep diffraction grating) are exploited preliminarily, showing various distinct optical modes such as localized and propagating surface plasmons and nanophotonic scattering phenomena. Therefore, capitalizing on plasmonic metasurfaces (e.g., meta-mirrors) as the back reflector in PSCs provides a route to capture more solar radiation as compared to the conventional utilization of a flat metallic mirror.
In this paper, we present an approach to enhance light harvesting for flexible PSCs by combining a silver mesowire grid-based front transparent electrode and a plasmonic meta-mirror-based back reflector electrode. The Ag mesowire grid as a flexible transparent electrode shows competitive mechanical, electrical and optical properties, enabling the reduced ohmic losses on large-area flexible devices surpassing that of the ITO reference. Further implementation of imprinted nanostructure-based plasmonic meta-mirrors into the back reflector electrode of flexible PSCs allows broadband light harvesting enhancement. When compared with the reference device with a flat metallic mirror fabricated and measured under the same conditions, the flexible PSC with a meta-mirror shows a 23.2% increase in photocurrent, yielding an improved PCE up to 9.5% with the use of a poly[[4,8-bis[(2-ethylhexyl)oxy]benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]-dithiophene-2,6-diyl][3-fluoro-2-[(2-ethylhexyl)carbonyl]thieno-[3,4-b]thiophenediyl]]:[6,6]-phenyl-C71 butyric acid methyl ester (PTB7:PC71BM) blend as the photoactive layer.

The Ag mesowire grid front electrode was fabricated by a series of micro/nanofabrication procedures, including the nickel mold design and fabrication, pattern transfer to the UV resin-coated polyethylene terephthalate (PET) film by imprinting, filling of conductive Ag ink into the embedded groove structure by scraping, and final sintering. The detailed procedure was described elsewhere. In order to reduce the fluctuation of the Ag mesowire grid surface during the sintering process, the fabrication procedure was optimized by repeating the scraping and sintering at least three times for complete filling. Prior to PSC fabrication, the PET and ITO-coated glass substrates were cleaned with ethanol and dried in an oven. To improve the adhesion capacity and reduce the surface roughness, a 70 nm-thick poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS, PH1000, with 5 vol% dimethyl sulfoxide and mixed with 0.5 vol% Zonyl FS-300 fluorosurfactant from Fluka) was firstly spin-coated onto the Ag grid-PET substrates at a speed of 2000 rpm min−1 for 1 min under ambient conditions, and then heated on a hot plate at 60 °C in a vacuum oven for 30 min. A 30 nm-thick PEDOT:PSS (AI4083) layer was subsequently spin-coated at 4000 rpm min−1 for 40 s and heated under the same conditions. Then, the resulting substrates were transferred into a nitrogen filled glovebox for the coating of the polymer photoactive layers. The poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl):indene-C60 bis-adduct (P3HT:ICBA) (1:1 by weight) blend was dissolved in ortho-dichlorobenzene and spin-coated at 500 rpm min−1 for 1 min onto the PEDOT:PSS surface, which was followed by thermal annealing at 100 °C for 10 min. The active layer of PTB7:PC71BM (1:1.5 by weight) was prepared by spin-coating the solution of PTB7:PC71BM in chlorobenzene/1,8-diiodoctane (97:3% by volume) mixed solvent (concentration, 25 mg mL−1) at 1000 rpm min−1 for 2 min on top of the PEDOT:PSS layer and dried in vacuum, forming a nominal thickness of 100 nm. The meta-mirror back electrode was prepared mainly by duplicating the surface morphology of the nanopatterned photoactive layer. To obtain the quasi-random nanostructures on the photoactive layer, a thermal-assisted nanoimprinting method was introduced with a flexible perfluoropolyether (PFPE) mold that was fabricated with the assistance of an anodized aluminum oxide template transfer and multiple mold duplication processes. The depth profile of the quasi-random nanostructures on the photoactive layer was controlled by changing the imprinting pressure, annealing temperature and time. It should be mentioned that the flexible substrates were attached to a flat glass substrate to avoid distortion during the spin-coating process. The samples were then transferred into the interconnected high vacuum system with a base pressure of 2 × 10−6 Torr for the deposition of the back electrode. A LiF layer (1 nm) and an Al layer (120 nm) were subsequently evaporated to form the back electrode, and a shadow mask was used to define the Al cathode, resulting in an active area of 0.1 cm2. Finally, the flexible PSCs were constructed with a structure of Ag mesowire grid/PEDOT:PSS (PH1000, 70 nm)/PEDOT:PSS (AI4083, 30 nm)/P3HT:ICBA (1:1 by weight, 180 nm) or PTB7:PC71BM (1:1.5 by weight, 100 nm)/LiF (1 nm)/Al (120 nm). The reference devices on the ITO glass substrate had a structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS (AI4083, 40 nm)/P3HT:ICBA (1:1 by weight, 180 nm) or PTB7:PC71BM (1:1.5 by weight, 100 nm)/LiF (1 nm)/Al (120 nm).


Surface morphologies were characterized by atomic force microscopy (AFM) (Veeco MultiMode V) in tapping mode and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (FEI, Quanta 200FEG). Optical transmission, reflection, and absorption spectra were recorded by a UV-vis/near-IR spectrophotometer (Perkin Elmer Lambda 750) with an integrating sphere. The figure of merit σDC/σOp is calculated from the relationship of T = [1 + (188.5 × σOp)/(RS × σDC)]−2, where T is the optical transmittance at a given wavelength and RS is the sheet resistance of the film. The sheet resistance of the Ag mesowire grid electrode was determined using a digital multimeter (Keithley 2100) with a four-point probe configuration to eliminate contact resistance. The thickness, refractive index (n) and extinction coefficient (k) of all the films were measured using the alpha-SE™ Spectroscopic Ellipsometer (J. A. Woollam Co., Inc). The photovoltaic characteristics of PSCs were examined in air at room temperature using a programmable Keithley 2612 source measurement unit under a 1 sun, AM 1.5G spectrum from a solar simulator (Oriel model 91160; 100 mW m−2). The external quantum efficiency (EQE) measurement was conducted with a photo-modulation spectroscopic setup (Newport monochromator). The illumination intensity of the solar simulator was calibrated using a standard Si reference cell with known spectral response.


Full-field electromagnetic simulations were performed using commercially available finite-difference-time-domain (FDTD) software (Lumerical FDTD Solutions) to simulate the optical reflection and scattering properties of the meta-mirror, and the optical absorption efficiency of the devices by employing sophisticated boundary conditions. The optical properties of polarized incident light, absorption, and surface plasmonic resonance were considered in PSC modeling. For simplification, the quasi-random nanostructures were set with hexagonally packed nanocones with a sinusoidal cross section profile, whereas the groove depth, period and fill factor data were set as determined from the AFM images. To find optical absorption in PSCs as a function of incident light wavelength, the rigorous coupled wave analysis (RCWA) method was adopted to model the PSCs with commercial RSoft 8.1 (RSoft Design Group, Inc). Up to the fifth diffraction order was taken into account for the calculation of the diffraction efficiency, resulting in total absorption. To keep a relatively precise comparison, the simulation of PSCs with the same photoactive layer thickness and perfectly matched boundary layers was implemented in all dimensions with the incident light passing through the semi-infinite substrate. The one-dimensional transfer matrix formalism was applied to modelize the one-dimensional spatial distribution of normalized incident light intensity within the multilayer-structured PSCs. After solving the matrix equations, the spatial distribution of the absorbed photon flux density was obtained with the assumption of 100% internal quantum efficiency for all the wavelengths. For the optical calculations, the experimentally measured layer thicknesses, refractive indices and extinction coefficients were used as determined by spectroscopic ellipsometry.



Fig. 1a–c schematically illustrates the detailed structures of the Ag mesowire grid on the polyethylene terephthalate (PET) substrate, imprinted nanostructure-based Al meta-mirror, and device architecture of flexible PSCs. The hexagonally embedded Ag mesowire grid on the PET substrate was fabricated via Ag paste scratch technology, nanoimprint lithography, and precise pattern photolithography (see the detailed processing description in the Experimental section). A representative scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the hexagonal Ag mesowire grid film is presented in Fig. 1d, where the mesoscale wires have a groove width of ∼3 μm and a spacing of ∼100 μm. As reported previously, the spacing of this Ag mesowire grid can be easily tuned by adjusting the patterns during the digital micromirror device-based photolithography, and the large-area Ag mesowire grid can be fabricated on a PET substrate with a diagonal size of 30 inches. Fig. 1e shows the surface micrograph and profile of the nanostructured photoactive layer on the PET substrate taken by atomic force microscopy (AFM). The patterned photoactive layer with highly compact quasi-random nanostructures was prepared via perfluoropolyether (PFPE) mold-assisted soft nanoimprint lithography, displaying a three-dimensional tapered morphology with a deep sub-wavelength periodicity of ∼160 nm and an average depth of ∼60 nm, as well as a surface root-mean-square (RMS) roughness of ∼5.8 nm as obtained from the AFM image in Fig. 1e. The low-magnification SEM image of the patterned photoactive layer on the Ag grid substrate is shown in the ESI, Fig. S1, demonstrating the successful transfer of highly compact quasi-random nanostructures. Additionally, it has been demonstrated that the transfer of highly compact quasi-random nanostructures into polymer films on PET substrates can be extended to a large-area up to 80 cm × 90 cm, showing the possibility towards large-scale manufacturing. It is also found that the surface morphology of the patterned photoactive layer could be effectively followed by the subsequently deposited aluminum back electrode, leading to the construction of the meta-mirror. The photograph of the complete flexible PSCs on the PET substrate is displayed in Fig. 1f, showing a nearly black image due to highly efficient light absorption.



Fig. 2a shows the optical transmittance characteristics of Ag mesowire grids with the spacing ranging from 15 to 150 μm. It is apparent that the transmittance of Ag mesowire grids can be tuned by tailoring the spacing of the hexagonal array. Particularly, the Ag mesowire grid on the PET substrate with a spacing of over 100 μm exhibits a comparatively uniform transmittance exceeding 90% through the entire visible wavelength range, which is better than the performance of the conventional ITO on a glass substrate. The optical properties of Ag mesowire grids match well with the solar spectral window in photovoltaic applications. It is also noteworthy that the light diffraction effect is negligible for Ag mesowire grids since the grid spacings are of orders of magnitude larger than the visible wavelength. At the same time, the Ag mesowire grids with an increased spacing from 15 μm to 150 μm retain a low electrical conductivity with the sheet resistance of <5 Ω sq.−1 (Fig. 2b). It should be mentioned that the Ag mesowire grids coated with a thick poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) can keep the almost identical optical transmittance, while the sheet resistance of the Ag mesowire grid (100 μm)/PEDOT:PSS is still lower than 10 Ω sq.−1, which is superior to that of the ITO counterpart (∼10–20 Ω sq.−1). To gain further insight into the optoelectronic properties of Ag mesowire grids, the ratio of direct-current conductivity to optical conductivity (σDC/σOp) is calculated, which is normally regarded as an important figure of merit for transparent conductors (see the Experimental section for the detailed calculation method). As summarized in Fig. 2b, the σDC/σOp value of the Ag mesowire grid with a spacing of 100 μm is ∼1175 at a wavelength of 550 nm, which is extremely higher than that of the ITO electrode (∼130 used here). In addition, the σDC/σOp values shown in Fig. 2b are even higher than those of previously reported metallic nanowires and metallic thin films. It is noted that the further increase in the grid spacing from 100 μm to 150 μm only results in a slight change of the σDC/σOp value but a rapid increase of the sheet resistance. Considering the poor electrical connection to the top organic films, the Ag mesowire grid with a spacing of 150 μm was not used as the front transparent electrode in PSCs.

The influence of the Al meta-mirror back electrode on light reflection is theoretically evaluated by using the finite-difference-time-domain (FDTD) method by Lumerical FDTD Solutions (see the Experimental section for the details of the optical modeling calculations). The ESI, Fig. S2 illustrates the optical effect of the meta-mirror back electrode on the reflection of normal incident light at a specific wavelength, 600 nm. It is noted that a conventional flat mirror (ESI, Fig. S2a) results in a standing wave with a suppressed electric field near its surface. The field distribution of transverse electric (TE) polarized incident light from the meta-mirror is quite similar to that of the flat mirror illumination (ESI, Fig. S2b), whereas about a fifth wavelength shift of the field profile is observed for transverse magnetic (TM) polarized incident light with the maximum electric field at the top surface of nanostructures (ESI, Fig. S2c), which is consistent with the proposed properties of a meta-mirror.Fig. 2c and d compare the simulated broadband optical response between the Al flat mirror and meta-mirror. As plotted in Fig. 2c, the meta-mirror exhibits a significantly reduced reflection intensity than that of a flat mirror due to the conversion of the incident photons into stored energy in the meta-mirror. As compared to the case of a flat mirror, the light scattering spectrum of the meta-mirror (Fig. 2d) shows a notable peak around 380 nm, originating from plasmonic resonance of the metallic quasi-random nanostructures.

To examine the charge collection and light harvesting capacities of Ag mesowire grids as a front transparent electrode, flexible PSCs with a photoactive layer of poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl):indene-C60 bis-adduct (P3HT:ICBA) were fabricated on PET substrates (see the Experimental section for more material information and device structure). As a comparison, the reference device with an identical polymer absorber was simultaneously fabricated on the ITO-glass substrate. Fig. 3a plots the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of flexible PSCs constructed on Ag mesowire grid electrodes with various spacings under 100 mW cm−2 air mass 1.5 global (AM 1.5G) illumination. The detailed parameters of photovoltaic characteristics are summarized in Table 1, and the dark J–V characteristics are plotted in the ESI, Fig. S3. It is obvious in Fig. 3a that the Ag mesowire grid electrodes with larger spacing cause more remarkable increase in short-circuit current density (JSC). More specifically, the JSC is dramatically enhanced from 7.06 mA cm−2 for the 15 μm Ag mesowire grid device to 12.34 mA cm−2 for the 100 μm Ag grid device without sacrificing the charge transport properties such as open-circuit voltage (VOC) and fill factor (FF). Moreover, the flexible PSC with a 100 μm Ag mesowire grid electrode yields a higher JSC and a marked PCE increase to 6.30% compared to that of the ITO glass device (4.45%). The external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra in Fig. 3b are well consistent with the J–V characteristics, showing substantial improvement for flexible PSCs with Ag mesowire grid electrodes.

Devices
Active area (0.1 cm2)
Active area (1.44 cm2)

J
SC [mA cm−2]

V
OC [V]
FF [%]
PCE [%]

J
SC [mA cm−2]

V
OC [V]
FF [%]
PCE [%]
ITO-glass
9.74 ± 0.07
0.75 ± 0.01
60.9 ± 1.04
4.45 ± 0.11
10.02 ± 0.08
0.73 ± 0.01
30.2 ± 1.05
2.21 ± 0.12
Ag grid (15 μm)
7.06 ± 0.27
0.78 ± 0.01
59.6 ± 1.16
3.28 ± 0.28
6.31 ± 0.26
0.80 ± 0.01
54.2 ± 1.17
2.74 ± 0.27
Ag grid (25 μm)
10.53 ± 0.23
0.80 ± 0.01
63.4 ± 1.14
5.34 ± 0.24
8.82 ± 0.24
0.80 ± 0.01
56.4 ± 1.15
3.98 ± 0.25
Ag grid (50 μm)
12.03 ± 0.25
0.80 ± 0.01
60.5 ± 1.21
5.82 ± 0.26
10.16 ± 0.26
0.80 ± 0.01
50.9 ± 1.25
4.14 ± 0.28
Ag grid (100 μm)
12.34 ± 0.21
0.83 ± 0.02
61.5 ± 1.18
6.30 ± 0.22
10.56 ± 0.22
0.80 ± 0.01
57.3 ± 1.16
4.84 ± 0.20
The compatibility of the Ag mesowire grid concept with large-area PSCs was further testified as shown in the ESI, Fig. S4. The detailed photovoltaic parameters are also summarized in Table 1. Notably, the cell performance of flexible PSC with a 100 μm Ag mesowire grid significantly exceeds that of the ITO-based reference device. For example, the large-area flexible PSC with the Ag mesowire grid shows a 23.1% decrease in PCE to 4.84%, while the ITO-based device displays a drastic efficiency reduction over 50% down to 2.21%. The superiority of the large-area flexible PSC with the Ag mesowire grid is mainly ascribed to the enhanced charge collection and transport properties as a result of the greatly reduced sheet resistance of Ag mesowire grids as compared to the ITO electrode.
Besides the experimental evidence of good photocurrent extraction of the Ag mesowire grid electrode, the enhanced light harvesting in flexible PSCs may result from the increased absorption of photons or a combination of both electrical and optical effects induced by the Ag mesowire grid electrode. The optical absorption in flexible PSCs with ITO and Ag mesowire grid electrodes was thus simulated by optical modeling calculations with a one-dimensional transfer matrix formalism approach (see the Experimental section for the simulation details).Fig. 3c shows the calculated absorbed incident photon flux intensity in flexible PSCs with the Ag mesowire grid and ITO electrodes, respectively, revealing that the use of the Ag mesowire grid electrode can harvest more photons than the ITO-based device due to the spatial redistribution of the incident light intensity inside the photoactive layer. Such a difference in optical absorption originates from the removal of the ITO electrode in flexible PSCs, which leads to changes in optical interferences. Consequently, we can conclude that the substantial increase in JSC of flexible PSCs with Ag mesowire grid electrodes arises primarily from a combination of the drastically enhanced charge collection and the increased optical absorption.
To utilize the flexible PSCs, mechanical flexibility and durability under bending stress are important in practical applications. The bending tests concerning bending radius and cycles, therefore, were carried out to evaluate the device stability against mechanical bending. As shown in Fig. 3d, the conventional ITO–PET device displays a remarkable degradation of device performance via multiple-cycles bending (e.g., less than half PCE sustained after 300 bending cycles at a 6 mm bending radius). This is mainly due to the fracture in the ITO polycrystalline structure and thereby the dramatic increase in sheet resistance. In contrast, the flexible PSC based on the Ag mesowire grid electrode exhibits superior mechanical bending stability. For example, the device still retains over 90% of its initial PCE after 600 bending cycles. The effects of mechanical bending on the Ag grid electrode were further evaluated by applying different strains (ESI, Fig. S5). The Ag grid-based PSC at various radii of curvature (∞, 8, 6, 4 and 2 mm) shows almost no decrease in PCE even with a bending radius of 2 mm , retaining 97% of the original efficiency. Hence, these results reveal the excellent mechanical flexibility and durability of PSCs on the flexible composite substrates, which is mostly attributed to the embedded Ag mesowire charge-transport networks of high conductivity and low coverage in the PET substrate.

With the demonstration of efficient flexible PSCs using Ag mesowire grids as a front transparent electrode, we extended to implement an efficient back meta-mirror as depicted in Fig. 1. These flexible PSCs were constructed on 100 μm Ag mesowire grid-covered PET substrates by using a PTB7:PC71BM blend as the photoactive layer (see the Experimental section for more material information and device structure). Fig. 4 compares the J–V characteristics, EQE, internal quantum efficiency (IQE), and absorption spectra of the flexible devices with and without meta-mirrors. The detailed characteristics of these PSCs are listed in Table 2. As displayed in Fig. 4a, the flexible PSC with a flat mirror achieves a JSC of 16.80 mA cm−2, a VOC of 0.70 V, a FF of 64.0%, and a resulting PCE of 7.53%. However, the implementation of a meta-mirror into the back electrode achieves a remarkable performance improvement with a JSC of 20.69 mA cm−2, a VOC of 0.71 V, a FF of 64.7%, and thus an enhanced PCE of 9.50%. As shown in Fig. 4b, the increase in JSC is caused by the broadband EQE improvement in the entire visible wavelength range. Note that the theoretical JSC values obtained by integrating the product of the EQE spectra and the AM 1.5G solar spectrum (Fig. 4b) are 16.13 mA cm−2 for the device with a flat mirror and 19.90 mA cm−2 for the meta-mirror, respectively, which are in the acceptable deviation levels with the data obtained from the J–V characteristics in Fig. 4a. As can be seen in the ESI, Fig. S6, there is negligible change in the dark J–V curves of flexible PSCs with and without a meta-mirror. Also, these flexible PSCs hold the almost identical FF values. Given the same batch processing of the PTB7:PC71BM photoactive layer, it is thus reasonable to infer that the remarkable increase of 26.2% in PCE for flexible PSCs with a meta-mirror back electrode is mainly attributed to the light manipulation effect rather than the interfacial electrical engineering for charge collection. Meanwhile, the influence of the possible contamination on the photoactive layer during the mold duplication process can be neglected due to the almost identical dark current and FF values.

Devices

J
SC [mA cm−2]

V
OC [V]
FF [%]
PCE [%]
ΔPCE [%]
Ag grid + flat mirror
16.80 (16.64)
0.70 (0.70)
64.0 (63.4)
7.53 (7.41)
—
Ag grid + meta-mirror
20.69 (20.40)
0.71 (0.70)
64.7 (64.2)
9.50 (9.34)
26.2
To identify the effect of the meta-mirror on light harvesting in flexible PSCs, the absorption spectra of these devices were characterized and are shown in Fig. 4c, which were extracted from the reflection (R) and transmission (T) spectra by (1 − R − T). For comparison, the enhancement ratios of absorption (Δα) and EQE (ΔEQE) spectra between flexible PSCs with and without a meta-mirror are also shown in Fig. 4c. It is noted that the absorption of the PSC integrating a meta-mirror shows a remarkable enhancement to ∼95% over a nearly entire visible range 450–700 nm, which is supported by a black visual image of the fabricated PSCs (Fig. 1f). According to previous reports, such a broad absorption enhancement is closely related to the quasirandom nanostructures of the meta-mirror back electrode with broadened periodicities and the gradient refractive index of the photoactive layer modulated with the meta-mirror back electrode, leading to highly efficient broad-band light trapping over the visible wavelength range. This is supported by the fast Fourier transform (FFT) pattern of the nanostructures (ESI, Fig. S7), indicating the suitability for photon management over the broad visible and near-infrared portion of the spectrum. Moreover, the Δα spectral shape is consistent with the ΔEQE spectrum, having two prime enhancement regions around 400 nm and beyond 700 nm. Yet, the average Δα is slightly lower than ΔEQE as shown in Fig. 4c. According to the absorption spectra in Fig. 4c, it is reasonable to infer that the exciton creation in the photoactive layer of PSCs with a meta-mirror is more efficient than that with a flat mirror, which contributes to the increase in EQE as shown in Fig. 4b.
To further understand the effect of the meta-mirror on optical absorption and harvesting, we calculated the IQE by measuring the EQE and total absorption spectra (Fig. 4d) of the PSCs. It is known that the IQE is the ratio of the number of photo-generated carriers collected by the PSC to the number of photons of a given energy that are incident from outside and absorbed by the cell. Surprisingly, the IQE of the meta-mirror based device pins over 95% throughout a broad absorption spectrum (410–630 nm), which is primarily ascribed to the extremely efficient exciton dissociation and charge extraction processes inside. This is supported by the relation of photocurrent density (Jph) versus effective voltage (Veff) under illumination at 100 mW cm−2, as displayed on a double-logarithmic scale in the inset of Fig. 4d. The Jph is determined by the difference between the current densities under illumination and in the dark, while the Veff can be obtained by subtracting the applied voltage from the compensation voltage at which Jph = 0. It is obvious that Jph has a nearly linear dependence on Veff at a low value, and tends to reach the saturation photocurrent density (Jsat) when Veff is beyond 1 V. The Jsat is independent of the bias voltage but related to the absorbed incident photon flux. In this regard, it is thus deduced that the flexible PSC with a meta-mirror yields a higher maximum exciton generation rate (Gmax, given by Jsat = eGmaxL, where e is the elementary charge and L is the photoactive layer thickness) than that of the flat device, indicating the enhanced light absorption and harvesting in the photoactive layer when integrating a meta-mirror into the back reflector electrode. Furthermore, the larger Jph of the meta-mirror device is observed in the lower Veff region, indicating a higher charge extraction efficiency in the device with a meta-mirror.
Besides the optical properties induced by the meta-mirror, the mechanical stability of flexible PSCs was tested under repeated bending stress. As shown in the ESI, Fig. S8, the evolution of the normalized PCEs of flexible PSCs with and without a meta-mirror on Ag mesowire grid electrodes were recorded as a function of the bending cycles. The slight difference in performance degradation indicates that the presence of a meta-mirror does not deteriorate the inherent mechanical properties of flexible devices and each component remains intact during the repeated bending process. It has been proposed that the introduction of nanostructures into the electrode can increase the robustness by relieving mechanical stress via metallic corrugation.

The optical effects of the meta-mirror back electrode on the photogeneration in PSCs were theoretically studied. In the first stage, we numerically assessed the light trapping effect of the meta-mirror by simulating the device absorption spectra with the rigorous coupled wave analysis (RCWA) method with commercial RSoft 8.1 (Fig. 5a). A broadband absorption enhancement in the whole visible wavelength range can be observed for the device using a meta-mirror, which is accompanied by two main enhancement peaks around 400 and over 700 nm. This modeled result is in line with the experimental observation of the light absorption as plotted in Fig. 4c. The simulated absorption spectra under TE and TM polarized light illuminations were also calculated to clarify the polarization dependence (Fig. 5b). Compared to the PSC with a flat mirror, it is notable that the use of a meta-mirror causes the broadband enhancement under either TE or TM polarization conditions. However, the absorption features of the device with a meta-mirror under polarized incident light illumination are polarization-dependent, and the absorption enhancement for TM polarization at the wavelength beyond 700 nm is obviously larger than that for TE polarization.

To get a visualized map of light propagation, the simulation of the field distributions in the photoactive layers at representative enhancement wavelengths was conducted using Lumerical FDTD Solutions. Fig. 6a and b display the simulated electric and magnetic field distributions in the meta-mirror device for TE and TM polarized incident light at a wavelength of 760 nm. The modeled results show that the distributions of field profiles in the photoactive layer are remarkably modified with the electric field funneled at the normal position of the grooves and with the magnetic field concentrated right at the bottom of the grooves, revealing a polarization-dependent absorption enhancement induced by the meta-mirror. According to the theoretical analysis in previous reports, this near-field enhancement beyond the absorption edge is mainly attributed to the hybridization of SPPs and absorption-induced scattering effect supported by electromagnetic coupling between the absorber optical transition and scattering mode.
In contrast, the electric and magnetic field intensity distributions at 400 nm tend to focus at the normal position and the surface of the grooves for TE and TM polarizations, respectively (Fig. 6c and d). According to previous reports, the focusing and funneling of optical energy in tapered subwavelength metallic grooves is most probably related to the magnetoelectric interference of the incident wave with the evanescent field that originates from the resonant wave escaping from the grooves. Therefore, the absorption enhancement around 400 nm can be associated with the excitation of localized SPRs in quasi-random photonic nanostructures that enhance light scattering in wave components propagating in the photoactive layer corresponding to the scattering spectrum of the meta-mirror (Fig. 2d).

In summary, we have demonstrated an efficient light harvesting scheme to achieve high-performance flexible polymer solar cells by combining a silver mesowire grid-based front transparent electrode and a plasmonic meta-mirror-based back reflector electrode. The Ag mesowire grid as a flexible transparent electrode verifies its superiority in mechanical, electrical and optical properties as compared to the ITO conductor, enabling the reduced ohmic loss in large-area flexible devices. Further implementation of plasmonic meta-mirror back reflector enables the broadband (310–800 nm) light harvesting enhancement, producing a power conversion efficiency of 9.50% with an enhancement ratio of 26.2% compared to the reference flat device. We anticipate that the method of simultaneously implementing mesoscale metal wires into plastic substrates and photonic nanostructures into metallic surfaces provides a potential route to achieving advanced electrodes and device architecture for the fabrication of large-area flexible photovoltaics.


The authors acknowledge financial support from the National Basic Research Program of China (Grant No. 2014CB932600), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 91433116, 61520106012, 61522505, 11474214), Jiangsu Science and Technology Department (Grant No. BK20140053), Qing Lan Project, Bureau of Science and Technology of Suzhou Municipality (Grant No. SYG201525, ZXG201422), Collaborative Innovation Center of Suzhou Nano Science and Technology, and the project of the Priority Academic Program Development (PAPD) of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Basic information about the topographic images of the nanostructured photoactive layer, simulated optical properties of the meta-mirror, the dark current density–voltage characteristics, large-area device performances, the surface morphology of the quasi-random nanopattern, device bending stability, and calculated optical absorption in various devices. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta08119c
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016