 DOI: 10.1039/C3NR01294H
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 7838-7843

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Jeong
Kwon
,

Veerappan
Ganapathy
,

Young Hun
Kim
,

Kyung-Deok
Song
,

Hong-Gyu
Park
,

Yongseok
Jun
,

Pil J.
Yoo
 and 

Jong Hyeok
Park
*

School of Chemical Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 440-746, Republic of Korea. E-mail: lutts@skku.edu

SKKU Advanced Institute of Nanotechnology, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 440-746, Republic of Korea

Department of Physics, Korea University, Seoul 136-701, Republic of Korea

School of Energy Engineering, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology, San194 Banyeon Eonyang Ulju, Ulsan 689-805, Korea

Received
14th March 2013
, Accepted 10th June 2013
First published on 14th June 2013
A low-cost nanopatterned highly conductive poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) thin film was fabricated on a flexible plastic substrate via a chemical polymerization method combined with a nanoimprinting technique and used as a platinum (Pt), TCO-free counter electrode for dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). The catalytic properties of the nanopatterned PEDOT as the counter electrode in DSSCs were studied using cyclic voltammetry, J–V measurements, impedance spectroscopy, and finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) simulations. The nanopatterned PEDOT counter electrodes exhibit better functionality as a counter electrode for tri-iodide reduction when compared to non-patterned PEDOT-based counter electrodes. The Pt and TCO-free DSSCs with a nanopatterned PEDOT-based counter electrode exhibited a power conversion efficiency of 7.1% under one sunlight illumination (100 mW cm−2), which is comparable to that of conventional DSSCs with standard platinum Pt/FTO paired counter electrodes. The ability to modulate catalytic functionality with changes in nanoscale morphology represents a promising route for developing new counter electrodes of Pt and TCO-free DSSCs.

Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) have attracted the scientific and technological interest of researchers as a high efficiency and low-cost alternative to conventional silicon p–n junction photovoltaic devices. In general, DSSCs consist of mesoporous interconnected TiO2 nanoparticles, a ruthenium-based dye, an iodine-based electrolyte, and platinum (Pt) as a counter electrode (CE). In DSSCs, the CE is an important component, as it plays a crucial role in the reduction of iodide to tri-iodide ions so as to complete the electrical circuit. Generally, Pt has been used as a counter electrode catalyst in DSSCs because of its good catalytic properties and high conductivity. Despite these benefits, the need for high temperature sintering and high vacuum deposition processes, as well as issues related to corrosion in the redox electrolyte and cost, has spurred research into alternative low-cost CEs with good catalytic properties and a simple fabrication process.

In the past, many efforts have been made to replace Pt with low-cost carbon materials or conducting polymers. While high efficiency was achieved for DSSCs with carbon-based CEs, the conversion efficiency is still lower than that obtained with a standard Pt CE. Another disadvantage of carbon-based CEs is that they are highly opaque and require high temperature sintering. The use of thick carbon films (10–20 μm) also increases the series resistance and total resistance of the device, which leads to lower photovoltaic performance. To overcome these drawbacks, several groups have attempted to replace Pt with conductive polymers such as PEDOT:PSS (poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate)), PEDOT, and PANI (polyaniline).
Typical Pt-less CE materials in DSSCs should be prepared on fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) coated glass substrates to have efficient electron transport. Given that the FTO is also expensive, the development of a cost-effective counter electrode should simultaneously remove the use of Pt and FTO. Previously, our group reported on a PEDOT-based Pt, TCO-free CE fabricated by an in situ chemical polymerization method for use in a DSSC. However, the power conversion efficiency obtained with the PEDOT CE was lower than that achieved with a Pt/FTO counter electrode, mainly due to the poor fill factor (FF). Because the low FF originated from the low electrical conductivity of the PEDOT, graphene/PEDOT bilayers were used to increase the FF. Although PEDOT or graphene/PEDOT films show good potential for use as Pt, TCO-free CEs in DSSCs, the problem of low efficiency still makes it hard to compete with the Pt/FTO based counter electrode.
From a knowledge that the surface area of catalysts is important in the evaluation of their properties, Choi et al. recently reported on a micropatterned Pt counter electrode for high efficiency DSSCs in order to increase the active surface area in the CE, and many other methods have been employed to improve Pt and carbon-based CEs. A larger active surface area plays a crucial role in the catalytic activity for iodide to tri-iodide ions. But in the case of a polymer counter electrode, the use of a nanoimprinting technique to make nanopatterns has never been used to increase the active surface area of Pt, TCO-free CEs.
In this paper, for the first time, we report on a nanopatterned PEDOT CE for a Pt, TCO-free CE in DSSCs. The performance obtained with the nanopatterned PEDOT CE was compared to that achieved with flat PEDOT and Pt/TCO counter electrodes. With an increase in the active surface area of the PEDOT film from the simple nanopatterning process, the catalytic effectiveness also increased, which leads to a higher power conversion efficiency. This systematic study gives fundamental information on CEs and will broaden the use of conductive polymers in DSSCs.

FTO glass substrates were cleaned with acetone, ethanol, and deionized water, then dried with nitrogen gas. A 40 mM titanium tetrachloride (TiCl4, Aldrich) treatment conducted at 70 °C for 30 min was used to fabricate a TiO2 blocking layer on the cleaned FTO glass substrate. The substrate was subsequently rinsed with ethanol. Nanocrystalline transparent TiO2 electrodes (the area is 0.1 cm2, TiO2 paste-20 nm EnB Korea) were also doctor bladed on previously prepared FTO glass substrates and sintered at 550 °C for 30 min. After cooling to 80 °C, the sintered TiO2 electrodes were immediately immersed in a 0.3 mM solution of N719 dye in ethanol for 24 h. Dye-adsorbed nanocrystalline TiO2 electrodes were removed from the dye solution, rinsed with ethanol, and then dried with nitrogen gas. The as-prepared N719 dye adsorbed TiO2 photoanode and CE were sandwiched using a 60 μm thick Surlyn spacer (Surlyn-1702, Dupont). The electrolyte was introduced into the sandwiched cell through a hole drilled in the CE, and the hole was then sealed with a Surlyn spacer and cover glass. The electrolyte was composed of 0.6 M butylmethylimidazolium iodide, 0.03 M I2, 0.1 M guanidinium thiocyanate, and 0.5 M 4-tert-butylpyridine in a mixture of acetonitrile and valeronitrile (v/v, 85:15).


Current–voltage (I–V) measurements of the DSSCs were obtained under AM 1.5 simulated solar light irradiation; a 300 W xenon lamp (Newport, USA) was used as a light source and a standard Si solar cell was employed for calibration. Electrochemical investigation was conducted on the cells via cyclic voltammetry (CV) and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). EIS was carried out under a 1 sun solar light illumination condition through the use of an impedance analyzer (Zahner IM6), while CV was performed with the CEs in an acetonitrile solution containing 10 mM LiI, 1 mM I2, and 0.1 M LiClO4 at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1 with Ag/AgCl as a reference electrode. IPCE was measured in AC mode under bias light using a specially designed IPCE system (PV measurement Inc.) equipped with a 75 W xenon lamp as a light source for monochromatic beam and a 75 W–12 V halogen lamp as a bias light source. A field-emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM, JEOL JSM 7000F) was used to investigate morphology of the nanopatterned PEDOT. The changes in the surface topology of the nanopatterned PEDOT were observed with an atomic force microscope (AFM, Dimension 3100, Veeco, Plainview, NY).


A liquid composite material, UV-curable poly(urethane acrylate) (PUA) with a low viscosity (12 cp), was dispensed onto the Si master substrate with a negative hole pattern prepared by e-beam lithography. The resin-coated Si master substrate was then attached to the transparent polycarbonate (PC) substrate, and the assembly was exposed to UV-light through the transparent side. After the UV curing process, the patterned PUA mold with a positive hole pattern was detached from the Si master substrate and the edges were trimmed to yield the replica mold. Next, 550 nm thick polystyrene (PS) was spin-coated onto the PET substrate. The PUA/PC mold with the master pattern and the PS-coated PET substrate were subsequently brought into contact and pressed at a pressure of 3 to 4 bar for 30 min at 130 °C (Fig. 1a). After being cooled to room temperature, the patterned PS/PET substrates were ready to use in DSSCs (Fig. 1b).

A nanopatterned PEDOT thin film was fabricated via the spin-coating of a PEDOT oligomer solution on top of the PS/PET substrates with a hole pattern, followed by thermal polymerization at 70 °C for various polymerization times. The homogeneous EDOT oligomer solution was spin-coated on the nanopatterned PS/PET substrates (Fig. 1c). Thermal polymerization was subsequently carried out at 70 °C for different times, followed by washing with methanol and drying (Fig. 1d). Because only a polymerized film can survive the washing process, the resulting PEDOTs could have various film thicknesses with a good electrical conductivity of about 800 S cm−1. To study the specific surface area effect of PEDOT on the cell performance of Pt, TCO-free DSSCs, the PEDOT polymerization time was controlled from 5 to 20 min. For a comparison, a Pt/TCO CE was simultaneously prepared by drop-casting a Pt precursor solution on an FTO glass substrate, followed by sintering at 400 °C for 15 min.
DSSCs with the Pt, TCO-free CE are shown in Fig. 2; the photoanode is composed of an FTO/glass substrate coated with mesoporous TiO2, while the CE is nanopatterned PEDOT on a PS/PET substrate. In this study, we used a glass-based photoanode as a model system to investigate the influence of the counter electrode on cell performances of DSSCs. However, the flexible nature of the nanopatterned counter electrode allows for the fabrication of flexible DSSCs when combined with a flexible photoanode. Fig. 3 shows top-view SEM images of the morphologies of the nanopatterned PS/PET and nanopatterned PEDOT films on PS/PET after chemical polymerization. It was obvious that all of the PS films have uniform hole patterns with ∼100 nm diameter. As shown in Fig. 3a (SEM image), pure PS/PET after nanoimprinting has a nanosized hole pattern before PEDOT deposition. By varying the polymerization time, PEDOT coverage on the PS/PET substrate can be controlled. It was revealed that the thickness of the PEDOT was proportional to the polymerization time, as shown in Fig. 3b–d. As the polymerization time increased, the PEDOT completely covered the nanopatterned PS film, which leads to a decrease in the specific surface area for contact with the electrolytes and consequently affects the catalytic ability of the CE in a DSSC. Only the 10 min polymerization time allows the initial nanopattern shape of the PS nanostructure to be maintained, as demonstrated by comparing Fig. 3b (10 min) with Fig. 3a (bare PS) and Fig. 3c (15 min). Fig. 3d displays a completely covered nanopatterned PEDOT structure, which will have a negative effect on tri-iodide reduction because of the decreased surface area.
This was further confirmed by CV, EIS, and J–V measurements. We also synthesized a nanopatterned PEDOT CE using a polymerization time of less than 10 min, but the cell performance was very poor because of a lack of PEDOT film formation from the pre-polymerized oligomer (ESI, Fig. S1). Thus, 10 min was chosen as the minimum polymerization time in this study. AFM height images, as shown in Fig. 4, also confirmed the morphology changes during the polymerization time of PEDOT CEs and represented very similar results to the SEM observation. From height profile data for the PEDOT nanopatterns (Fig. S2), the initial pattern depth is gradually decreased with increase in polymerization time.
To understand the influence of the porous nanopattern structure on the electrochemical activity of the Pt, TCO-free counter electrode, an analysis of cyclic voltammograms (CV) was conducted for nanopatterned PEDOT and Pt/TCO CEs (Fig. 5a).
CV is an important tool for analyzing the ion diffusivity and catalytic mechanism in an electrochemical system. Here, CV was measured in a standard three-electrode system composed of a reference electrode, counter electrode, and working electrode. Fig. 5a shows the CV spectra obtained from the nanopatterned PEDOT CEs and Pt/FTO CE. In the CV curves, two pairs of redox peaks were observed; the peaks obtained on the positive side are known as anodic peaks (oxidation of iodide to tri-iodide), while the peaks on the negative side are cathodic peaks (reduction of tri-iodide). All of the PEDOT samples showed anodic and cathodic peaks that were similar to those obtained with the Pt electrode, which demonstrates the promising catalytic properties of PEDOT as a CE. In addition, it can be confirmed from long-term CV scans that the nanopatterned PEDOT CE shows stable anodic and cathodic peak current densities and positions (Fig. S3). The Pt/FTO CE showed a slightly higher current density than the other PEDOT CEs due to the superior catalytic properties and low series resistance (RS) achieved with Pt/FTO. However, the nanopatterned PEDOT CEs exhibit a higher current density in the cathodic and anodic peaks when compared to the non-patterned PEDOT, which may be attributed to the higher surface area in these patterned structures. Among the PEDOT CEs, the 10 min polymerized structure has a higher current density in the cathodic peak when compared to the 15 min and 20 min polymerized PEDOT CE. As expected from the SEM and AFM images, the nanopatterned PEDOT in the 10 min sample has more reaction sites to reduce tri-iodide than the 15 and 20 min polymerized PEDOT CEs. This high specific surface area will lead to a low charge transfer resistance (RCT), which in turn affects the catalytic ability and results in better photovoltaic performance (Table 1).
Counter electrode

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF (%)

η (%)
Pt/FTO/glass
15.6
0.692
69.8
7.6
Non-patterned PEDOT on glass
13.5
0.681
62.7
5.8
Non-patterned PEDOT on PS/PET
13.8
0.703
62.1
6.0
Nanopatterned PEDOT (10 min) on PS/PET
15.4
0.692
66.6
7.1
Nanopatterned PEDOT (15 min) on PS/PET
14.5
0.703
65.9
6.7
Nanopatterned PEDOT (20 min) on PS/PET
12.7
0.703
65.4
5.9
EIS analysis was conducted to gain more insight into the charge transfer and electrocatalytic properties of the PEDOT and Pt/FTO CEs. In general, a Nyquist plot for a DSSC consists of two or three semicircles, with the first semicircle in the high frequency region attributed to an interfacial charge transfer process at the CE. The equivalent circuit for the analysis is given in the figure, where RS, RCT(TiO2), CPE(TiO2), ZW, RCT(CE), and CPE(CE) are series resistance, charge transfer resistance at an interface between TiO2 and electrolyte, capacitance of TiO2 and electrolyte interface, diffusion impedance in an electrolyte, charge transfer resistance at an interface between the counter electrode and electrolyte, and capacitance of an interface between the electrolyte and counter electrode, respectively. Resistance values for all the samples with PEDOT CEs are relatively high as expected. Among newly prepared samples, there is no significant variation in the second (TiO2/dye/electrolyte) and third (electrolyte diffusion) semicircles (Table S1). However, in the high-frequency semicircle which corresponds to the catalytic activity of the counter electrode (RCT), the values slightly increased with the PEDOT polymerization time. This is also due to the decreased surface area because the porous PS film was gradually filled with PEDOT as the polymerization time was increased above 10 min. The RCT and RS values measured for all of the nanopatterned PEDOT-based DSSCs were lower than or comparable to those for the non-patterned system. Specifically, the following results were obtained: non-patterned PEDOT (RCT: 4.5 Ω cm2, RS: 4.0 Ω cm2), 20 min polymerized PEDOT (RCT: 4.8 Ω cm2, RS: 4.4 Ω cm2), 15 min polymerized PEDOT (RCT: 4.4 Ω cm2, RS: 3.4 Ω cm2), and 10 min polymerized PEDOT (RCT: 4.3 Ω cm2, RS: 2.8 Ω cm2). The CV and EIS findings show good agreement and prove that the 10 min patterned PEDOT is a good alternative CE material for highly efficient Pt and TCO-free DSSCs.
The J–V characteristics of DSSCs with either nanopatterned PEDOT CEs prepared at different polymerization times or a non-patterned flat PEDOT CE are shown in Fig. 5c. When the 10 min patterned PEDOT film was used as a CE, the DSSC exhibits a short circuit current (JSC) of 15.4 mA cm−2, an open circuit voltage (VOC) of 0.69 V, a FF of 66.6%, and a power conversion efficiency (η) of 7.1%, which is comparable to that measured for a standard Pt/FTO CE (7.6%) even without using an FTO substrate. As expected from the EIS and CV analysis, the nano-pattern effect is obvious, but the effectiveness of the structure gradually faded with an increase in the polymerization time. These results also confirm that an enlarged contact area between the PEDOT and electrolyte may be one possible way to improve the performance of Pt, TCO-free CEs for DSSCs. Fig. 5d shows the IPCE spectra for DSSCs made with nanopatterned PEDOT and non-patterned flat PEDOT CEs. The IPCE spectra were measured as a function of wavelength from 300 nm to 800 nm using an IPCE system. The DSSCs with 10 min patterned PEDOT exhibited the highest quantum efficiency of nearly 72.0% at 530 nm.
Another positive effect for the increased photo-current density of the DSSC with nanopatterned CEs is enhanced optical absorption due to the uniformly fabricated patterned CEs. In particular, increased optical absorption of the photoanode is possible due to light reflection by the imprint pattern. We quantitatively studied optical reflection from nanopatterned PEDOT CE resonances using finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) simulation.Fig. 6a shows the schematic diagram of the 10 min polymerized PEDOT nanostructure for the calculation. For comparison, optical light reflection of non-patterned PEDOT CE was also calculated. As shown in Fig. 6b, light reflection enhancement due to the nanopatterns is observed in the wavelength range of 300 nm to 600 nm. However, the maximum enhancement value is less than 1.5% for whole visible light. When this value is compared with the EQE improvements from IPCE data, we can conclude that the enhanced cell performances from the nanopatterned CEs are mainly due to their improved catalytic functionality, not from optical reflection.

Many studies have been carried out with the aim of finding an alternative CE material for Pt and TCO-free DSSCs. Here, we proposed an inexpensive and facile approach for developing highly efficient DSSCs through the use of a nano-imprinting technique combined with the chemical polymerization of PEDOT. The DSSCs showed a reasonable efficiency of 7.1%, while a reference device with a Pt/FTO CE exhibited an efficiency of 7.6%. An increased photocurrent density and decreased charge transfer resistance mainly originated from the nanopatterning of the PEDOT, which can increase the number of reactive sites in the CEs. Interestingly, the nanopatterned PEDOT has a specific surface area that is only 1.3 times higher than that of the non-patterned PEDOT CE, but the cell efficiency was greatly improved from 6.0 to 7.1%. Because we only tried to characterize the counter electrode structure in this work, a high temperature sintered TiO2 photoanode on an FTO substrate was employed. However, we believe that the flexible nature of PEDOT-coated nanopatterned PS/PET CEs allows for their integration into flexible DSSCs.


This work was supported by an NRF grant funded by the Korea Ministry of Education, Science and Technology (MEST) (2011-0030254, 2013014038, 2011-0006268). J.H.P. acknowledges the support from the MKE (20123010010070). J. Kwon and V. Ganapathy contributed to this work equally.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c3nr01294h
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013