 DOI: 10.1039/D0TC02078H
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 9697-9706


Jeann Carlos
da Silva
,

Francineide Lopes
de Araújo
,

Rodrigo
Szostak
,

Paulo Ernesto
Marchezi
,

Raphael Fernando
Moral
,

Jilian Nei
de Freitas
 and 

Ana Flávia
Nogueira
*

University of Campinas, Laboratório de Nanotecnologia e Energia Solar, Chemistry Institute, Campinas, SP, PO Box 6154, 13083-970, Brazil. E-mail: anafla@unicamp.br

Brazilian Synchrotron Light Laboratory (LNLS), Brazilian Center for Research in Energy and Materials (CNPEM), Campinas, SP 13083-970, Brazil

Center for Information Technology Renato Archer (CTI), Campinas-SP, Brazil

Received
29th April 2020
, Accepted 22nd June 2020
First published on 22nd June 2020
The incorporation of a well-established copolymer based on poly(ethylene oxide) was investigated towards maximizing the stability of perovskite solar cells based on methylammonium lead iodide (MAPbI3). Poly(ethylene oxide-co-epichlorohydrin) P(EO/EP) was chosen as an additive to the precursor solution to minimize the degradation process under ambient conditions. A power conversion efficiency of 17.04% was obtained for the standard solar cell, and the efficiency was gradually decreased as the concentration of P(EO/EP) was increased. In spite of the efficiency loss, the stability of the films against aggressive humidity and illumination conditions was investigated and the perovskite films containing the copolymer showed enhanced stability. Through H-NMR spectroscopy, it was possible to verify the existence of hydrogen bonding between the polymer and methylammonium cation. This interaction is responsible for retaining the cation in the structure, thus conferring stability to the film. It was also observed that the polymer incorporation delays the perovskite crystallization, which was accompanied by in situ grazing incidence wide angle X-ray scattering. The incorporation of P(EO/EP) has also decreased the average grain size and passivated the surface defects of the perovskite layer. The device without P(EO/EP) and the device containing 1.5 mg mL−1 P(EO/EP) retained 47% and 68% of the starting PCE values, respectively, after 480 hours (20 days) exposed to environmental conditions (relative humidity ∼53%), indicating that the incorporation of P(EO/EP) in the perovskite active layer provided greater stability to the perovskite film.

Hybrid organic–inorganic perovskites (general formula ABX3, where A represents an organic cation, B an inorganic cation and X a halide anion) have attracted great interest in the field of photovoltaics due to their excellent optoelectronic properties, such as high optical absorption coefficient, low exciton binding energy, long diffusion length, high carrier mobility, and ease of fabrication. In just a few years, the perovskite solar cells (PCSs) in lab-scale reached a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of over 25.2%, which exceeds the efficiencies of polycrystalline silicon and second generation thin-film photovoltaic devices.

This advance occurred as a result of intense research in the area, including the synthesis of new materials, device fabrication optimization including new architectures, interface engineering, among other strategies. However, despite the rapid progress in terms of efficiency, there is still room to improve all photovoltaic parameters. Besides, stability of the PSCs under environmental conditions is not less important and both are key challenges for their commercialization. Environmental factors such as oxygen, humidity, heat and UV irradiation are responsible for the degradation of these devices, mainly affecting the integrity of the active layer (perovskite film) and the interfaces of the solar cells. Thus, investigating the causes and finding solutions to improve the stability of these devices in environmental conditions has been a matter of utmost importance.
The stability of the perovskite active layer is directly linked to its composition, so that changing the perovskite chemical composition is a way to obtain enhanced stability. The difficulty of this strategy is that the replacement of the cations and anions within the structure must be done in compliance with the structural parameters of the material. Besides that, the optoelectronic properties of the perovskites come precisely from their particular band structure, a direct result of their composition. Li et al. studied the tolerance factor (t) of the solid-state alloying of FAPbI3 (large t) and CsPbI3 (small t) and showed that, with proper tuning of the tolerance factor, the alloyed material displays a more stable α-phase, leading to devices with better stability. FAPbI3 solar cells had a loss of 50% of the initial PCE after 15 days (at 15% relative humidity), while FA0.85Cs0.15PbI3 solar cells had an increase of the initial PCE during the first three days and then maintained its performance almost unchanged. Saliba et al. produced perovskites with general formula Csx(MA0.17FA0.83)(100−x)Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3 containing a mixture of cesium (Cs+), formamidinium (FA+) and methylammonium (MA+) as cations, in addition to iodide and bromide as anions, obtaining efficiency above 21% after stabilization, and 18% after 250 hours of operation. In a later study, Saliba and co-workers incorporated the rubidium cation to perovskite and the devices achieved an efficiency of 21% after stabilization and maintained 95% of their initial efficiency after 500 hours of operation under ambient conditions. The decrease in the dimensionality of perovskites from 3D to 2D through the insertion of large cations such as butylamine is another strategy to increase the stability of the active layer. The increased stability with the decrease in the dimensionality of perovskite is mainly due to the formation of more compact films and the protection provided by organic binders.
The use of materials deposited on the top of the active layer, or added to the precursor solution of perovskites, has also been a promising alternative to increase the lifetime of PSCs. Among the materials used, ethylene oxide-based polymers are promising alternatives. Dong et al. applied a thin layer of an poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) between the perovskite active layer and the electron transport layer (ETL), obtaining a 15% improvement in the PCE, a result attributed to a decrease in the recombination at the ETL/perovskite interface. Subsequently, Chang et al. incorporated 1% w/w of PEO into the perovskite active layer, obtaining a 25% increase in the efficiency, attributed to an improvement of the film morphology. Zhao et al. reported that the incorporation of PEO in the perovskite film enhanced the device resistance to humidity conditions above 70%, in addition to a faster regeneration capacity of the film after removing the moisture source. They attributed this healing effect to the formation of a hydrogen bond between the polymer and the methylammonium cations, which immobilizes the organic cation in the structure, hindering the evolution of methylamine in gas phase. With this approach, the PSCs maintained 65% of their efficiency after 300 hours of aging without any encapsulation. However, the dynamics about the formation of perovskite containing polymer was not evaluated, establishing a gap in the understanding of how the polymer influences other perovskite's properties. Another point of discussion is that, in their work, the control device performed poorly, and this led us to conclude whether the impact of the polymer would not only be on the stability gain, but on the performance.
In this work, we investigated the stability of perovskite solar cells with structure glass/FTO/c-TiO2/meso-TiO2/MAPbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au after incorporation of different concentrations of the copolymer poly(ethylene oxide-co-epichlorohydrin) (P(EO/EP)) into the methylammonium lead iodide perovskite (MAPbI3) active layer. P(EO/EP) is a copolymer that has been successfully used by our group in solid-state dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). We employed in situ grazing incidence wide angle X-ray scattering analysis to investigate the formation of the perovskite layer in the presence of P(EO/EP). The incorporation of P(EO/EP) has also decreased the average grain size and passivated the surface defects of the perovskite layer. The device without P(EO/EP) and the device containing 1.5 mg mL−1 P(EO/EP) retained 47% and 68% of the starting PCE values, respectively, after 480 hours (20 days) exposed to environmental conditions (relative humidity ∼53%), indicating that the incorporation of P(EO/EP) in the perovskite active layer provided greater stability to the perovskite film.

Methylammonium lead iodide (MAPbI3) perovskite stock solution was prepared by dissolving 645 mg of PbI2 (TCI America) and 222 mg of methylammonium iodide (MAI) (GreatCell Solar) in 1 mL of a mixture of N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) and dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) 4:1 v/v. Copolymer P(EO/EP) with average molar mass 1.3 × 106 g mol−1 was supplied by Daiso Co., Ltd (Japan). Stock solution was prepared by dissolving 18.75 mg of P(EO/EP) in 1 mL of a mixture of N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) 4:1 v/v. The final solutions were prepared from mixtures between the MAPbI3 perovskite stock solution and the P(EO/EP) stock solution, as displayed in Table S1 (ESI).


PSCs with structure glass/FTO/c-TiO2/meso-TiO2/MAPbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au and active area of 0.12 cm were fabricated in ambient conditions, under a controlled relative humidity of 35%, at room temperature. A scheme of the perovskite solar cell architecture, energy level of the individual materials and molecular structure of copolymer poly(ethylene oxide-co-epichlorohydrin) (P(EO/EP)) are shown in Fig. 1.

Fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO – 7 Ω sq−1) glass substrates were cleaned in an ultrasonic bath (60 °C) with Hellmanex 2% solution for 25 minutes, followed by water and isopropyl alcohol for 10 minutes each, dried under nitrogen gas flow, and UV-ozone treatment for 15 minutes. A TiO2 compact layer (c-TiO2) was deposited onto the FTO substrates by spray pyrolysis at 450 °C, from a solution of 0.4 mL of acetylacetone and 0.6 mL of titanium diisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate) in 9 mL of ethanol. Then, a mesoporous TiO2 layer (meso-TiO2) was deposited by spin-coating at 4000 rpm and 2000 rpm s−1 acceleration for 20 s from a 30 N-RD Dyesol TiO2 paste diluted as 150 mg mL−1 in ethanol. After deposition, the TiO2 layer was sintered (at 450 °C) in multiple temperature steps as reported by Saliba and co-workers.
The perovskite active layer was prepared by one-step solvent engineering method, using ethyl acetate (EA) as anti-solvent. Ethyl acetate is more convenient when assembling the devices outside the glove box, as this solvent is known to remove water during the perovskite crystallization process, resulting in a more uniform and compact films. MAPbI3 perovskite solutions (with and without P(EO/EP), according to the conditions presented in Table S1, ESI) were deposited by spin-coating at 1000 rpm for 10 s, followed by 4000 rpm for 20 s. Ten seconds before the end of the spinning process, 150 μL of the EA anti-solvent was dropped to induce film crystallization. Finally, a thermal treatment at 100 °C for 30 minutes in a hot plate was preformed to complete crystallization.
The hole transport layer was prepared from a solution containing 70 mM of 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis-(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)9,9′-spirobifluorene (Spiro-OMeTAD) in 1 mL chlorobenzene (continuous stirring for 30 minutes at room temperature). After stirring, 36 μL of tert-butylpyridine (t-BP), 20 μL of lithium bis(trifluoromethy isyfonyl)imide salt (Li-TFSI) (517 mg of Li-TFSI in 1 mL of acetonitrile), and 8 μL of tris(2-(1H-pyrazol-1-yl)-4-tertbutylpyridine)cobalt(III)tris(bis (trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide) (FK209) (375 mg in 1 mL of acetonitrile) were added into the Spiro-OMeTAD solution. This solution was deposited by spin-coating at 4000 rpm for 20 s. Finally, the Au electrode (80 nm) was deposited by thermal evaporation at a rate of 1.0 A s−1 inside the glove box. It is important to point out that only of the evaporation of gold layer and deposition of Spiro-OMeTAD layer this was carried out in nitrogen atmosphere. All other steps were done under a controlled relative humidity of 35%, at room temperature.

The current–voltage characteristics (J–V curves) of the PSCs were measured under 100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5 G illumination of a class AAA Solar Simulator (HAL-320, Asahi Spectra Co., Ltd), using a source-meter (Keithley 2400 SourceMeter), in a voltage range of −0.1 to 1.1 V (forward scan) and +1.1 to −0.1 V (reverse scan) with steps of 10 mV and delay time of 0.25 s. Solar Simulator was calibrated with a silicon reference solar cell with a KG5 filter. Stability tests were performed in ambient conditions at room temperature (25.3 ± 1.2) °C, relative humidity (53.5 ± 11.1)% and in dark, without any encapsulation.

X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were acquired with a Shimadzu diffractometer model (XRD-6000) with X-ray wavelength of CuKα = 0.154 nm. The morphology of the perovskite films without and with the addition of P(EO/EP) was obtained by an NX10 atomic force microscope (AFM) from Park Systems using a tip NSC14/Cr-Au, and by scanning electron microscopy using a Quanta 250 microscope coupled with a field emission-scanning (FEG-SEM). The hydrogen nuclear magnetic resonance (1H NMR) spectra were obtained using a Bruker spectrometer, model Avance 500 MHz and the data were processed using the software Topspin 3.5.
The regeneration test of the perovskite films was carried out with the sample exposed at a distance of 3 cm from a commercial humidifier outlet for 30 seconds and, after that time, photographs of the films were captured 20 to 30 s after the end of the exposure. X-Ray diffractograms were collected before and after exposure.
Experiments of in situ GIWAXS (grazing incidence wide angle X-ray scattering) during the spin coating stage were conducted on the XRD2 beam line at the National Synchrotron Light Laboratory (LNLS), Campinas, Brazil. The X-ray energy was 7 kV and the scattering signal was collected by a Dectris Pilatus 300 K detector with an integration time of 1 s. The angle of incidence of the X-ray beam was set to 3°. The detector was placed at 290.7 mm from the sample. The antisolvent (150 μL of ethyl acetate) injection was carried out using an automatic syringe coupled to a hose. Data were collected during spin coating deposition using the same parameters used for film and solar cell preparation. After, the sample was kept for more 600 seconds (10 minutes) after the end of the rotation process. Each GIWAXS image was calibrated using AgBE (silver behenate) standard and azimuthally integrated to obtain 1D X-ray diffraction patterns using pyFAI python libraries. Fig. S1 (ESI) displays the photographs of the experimental setup at XRD2/LNLS beamline used for in situ GIWAXS measurements. Fig. S2–S5 (ESI) show the GIWAXS reciprocal lattice maps.


Fig. 2a shows the J–V curves under illumination and reverse voltage scanning for the best devices, where the active layers were prepared without or with 0.5, 1.0, 1.5 and 2.0 mg mL−1 of the copolymer P(EO/EP), according to the mixtures described in Table S1 (ESI). The photovoltaic parameters (reverse scan) short-circuit current (Jsc), open-circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (FF), and power conversion efficiency (PCE) as a function of the concentration of P(EO/EP) in the perovskite active layer are shown in Fig. 2b.

According to Fig. 2b, we observe a decrease in the PCE of the devices containing the P(EO/EP) copolymer in the perovskite layer, varying from 17.04% (without P(EO/EP)) to 13.31% (with 2.0 mg mL−1 of P(EO/EP)). The detailed photovoltaic parameters of the devices measured under simulated AM 1.5G solar illumination (intensity = 100 mW cm−2) using forward scan (F) and reverse scan (R), were summarized in Table S2 (ESI). The lower efficiency of the devices containing P(EO/EP) can be attributed to the insulating nature of this copolymer, which can hinder the charge transfer between the perovskite grains, as well as between the perovskite layer and the charge transport layers ETL and HTL. This result is different from the work of Chang et al. We believe that the difference relies on the quality of the control device which presented poor performance in their work. From our experience with hybrid polymer/quantum dots solar cells, the addition of even small amounts of an insulating polymer is expected to deteriorate the transport properties. Other gains, however, can be obtained from the addition of polymers to semiconductors materials, but definitively, transport is not one of them. In fact, in the next sections, the gain in ambient stability upon polymer addition will be further explored. However, the hysteresis (H = PCEreverse − PCEForward/PCEreverse) decreased from 12.39 ± 4.27% to 7.27 ± 5.03% (standard to the sample with 1.5 mg mL−1 of P(EO/EP), see Table S2, ESI). It can be attributed to Lewis base nature of the PEO polymer which may passivate halide vacancies and grain boundaries. The movement of ionic species when bias is applied is expected to be mediated by them. We cannot discard however, a simple blocking effect, as PEO derivatives is well-known by their strong coordination to positive species.
Addition of P(EO/EP) also influences the morphology and the profile of the perovskite grains which depends on the amount of P(EO/EP) incorporated. AFM images of perovskite films fabricated without and with 0.5 mg mL−1, 1.0 mg mL−1, 1.5 mg mL−1 and 2.0 mg mL−1 of P(EO/EP) are shown in Fig. 3. It was noted that there is a decrease in the grain size as the copolymer P(EO/EP) is incorporated into the perovskite film, an indication that the presence of the copolymer disturbs the growth of the grains during film deposition. Not only do the grains shrink in size compared to the standard film, but a new morphology emerges. This new morphology is made up of even smaller grains at the bottom of the film, with larger grains coming out of the surface (see SEM images in Fig. S6 ESI). In the next section the effect of PEO on the crystallization of the perovskite film will be detailed.
X-Ray diffraction patterns of the perovskite films (Fig. 4) show that the formation of perovskite outside the glove box by the solvent engineering method was not accompanied by the formation of PbI2. It is also noticed that the presence of P(EO/EP) did not cause any significant change in the crystalline structure of the perovskite as the main peaks of the tetragonal structure were detected. We also did not observe any change in the background, as for example, halo formation associated to the presence of the amorphous P(EO/EP) copolymer.
The devices were submitted to stability tests by exposing them to an ambient atmosphere under a relative humidity of 53.3 ± 11.1% for 480 hours. J–V measurements (under 1 sun illumination) were performed every 24 hours, during a period of 20 days. Fig. 5 shows the evolution of the PCE values of the devices containing different concentrations of P(EO/EP). Among the concentrations used, the device containing 1.5 mg mL−1 of P(EO/EP) showed better stability after 480 hours of exposure to environmental conditions, with only 32% of efficiency loss. In contrast, a 53% loss was observed for the standard (control) device. P(EO/EP) is a copolymer based on C–O–C units capable of interacting with water by hydrogen bond, which makes this material a barrier against moisture, which may be primarily responsible for improving the stability of the devices.
The nature of the interaction between P(EO/EP) and the perovskite was analyzed by 1H NMR spectroscopy (Fig. 6a). Three dispersions were prepared in deuterated acetonitrile, the first sample being a mixture of the perovskite precursors (PbI2 and MAI), the second sample a dispersion of the P(EO/EP) and the third sample a mixture between the perovskite precursors and the polymer.
The 1H NMR spectrum of the sample containing the perovskite precursors shows the presence of two characteristic signals of methylammonium iodide. The signal at 2.54 ppm corresponds to the hydrogen atoms of the –CH3 group, and the signal at 6.35 ppm refers to the hydrogen atoms bound to the nitrogen. As expected, given the same number of hydrogen atoms in the –NH3+ and –CH3 groups, the ratio between the integrated area of the two signals was 1:1. The signal at 1.98 ppm corresponds to acetonitrile. For the perovskite + P(EO/EP) mixture, there is a shift in the signal of the hydrogen atoms bound to the nitrogen of the methylammonium iodide in the direction of higher shielding, from 6.35 ppm to 6.00 ppm, accompanied by a signal broadening, characteristic of the establishment of hydrogen bonds. This shift can be understood by the establishment of a hydrogen bond between the hydrogen from the amino group and the oxygen from P(EO/EP). Fig. 6b illustrates how this interaction may occur and how it can contribute to the increase of the electronic density on the hydrogen atom. This interaction between perovskite and P(EO/EP) copolymer is expected to enhance the stability of the films, promoting the trapping of the methylammonium cation or methylamine in the structure. This hinders or minimizes the evolution of the deprotonated species into the gas phase.
The effect of P(EO/EP) copolymer incorporation during the formation of the MAPbI3 perovskite crystalline phases was also accompanied by in situ GIWAXS measurements. Data were collected during the spin coating step and 10 minutes after the end of the deposition. It is important to point out that, no thermal treatment was carried out after deposition. Fig. 7 shows the diffraction patterns as a function of time for a standard sample, containing 0.5 mg mL−1, 1.0 mg mL−1 and 1.5 mg mL−1 of P(EO/EP), respectively. Immediately after the dripping of ethyl acetate antisolvent (indicated by the dashed line), the peaks referring to the intermediate species MA2Pb3I8·2DMSO are observed, with main signs at q = 4.7 nm−1, 5.1 nm−1 and 6.6 nm−1, where, |q| = [4π × sin(θ)/λ]. These signals decrease in intensity simultaneously with the appearance of the peaks (110) and (002), both at q ∼ 9.9 nm−1 (2θ = 14°), attributed to the formation of tetragonal perovskite. The conversion of the intermediate species to perovskite is evidenced by the increase in the intensity of the signal at q = 9.9 nm−1, which occurs more slowly in samples containing higher concentration of the copolymer. Thus, the incorporation of P(EO/EP) slows down the formation of the perovskite phase because of a stronger interaction with the intermediate phases via DMSO. The different morphology for the samples with P(EO/EP) might be though as a consequence the interaction between polymer and intermediate crystals. We suspect that the long polymer chains envelope many intermediate crystals, making their transformation to black phase perovskite slower as observed in Fig. 7e. At the same time this agglomeration turns into larger clusters originating from the coalescence of smaller grains. This may explain the two different sizes of perovskite grains observed previously. Indeed, the crystallization kinetics is different. Looking closely to Fig. 7e there is a change in the slope of the intensity versus time curve for the standard sample, what is not observed for the samples with PEO. This result differs from those reported by Zhao and collaborators, where the authors obtained denser films with better substrate coverage after PEO addition. The authors attributed this improvement to the polymer's ability to form a three-dimensional scaffold that would support the growth of perovskite crystals, in addition to decreasing the crystallization speed. In that work, the crystallization of perovskite was achieved by spin coating a solution containing MAI and PbCl2 in DMF (3:1 volume ratio) without the use of anti-solvent. Besides, the molecular weight of the polymer was much lower in their work. As the crystallinity and morphology of the film are closely linked to the deposition methodology, there is further evidence that the interaction of the polymer with the DMSO and, consequently, with the intermediate species, is responsible for the different morphologies of the samples with different concentrations of polymer,
A visual stability test of films was performed with a polymer concentration of 0 to 2 mg mL−1 (Fig. 8). The films were kept under ambient lighting and humidity conditions for 9 days. The images show that, with the increase in the amount of P(EO/EP) copolymer, the appearance of yellowish regions, characteristic of PbI2, is delayed in the films with higher concentration of the copolymer. This stability is justified by the MAI retention in the structure, caused by the establishment of hydrogen bonds between the polymer and the –NH3 group, a previously discussed. However, we cannot discard an additional protective effect by the insulating polymer.
The incorporation of P(EO/EP) copolymer also gives the film the ability to regenerate in the face of even more aggressive exposure to moisture. In the regeneration test (see also Video S1, ESI), a standard perovskite film and a film with 1.5 mg mL−1 of P(EO/EP) were compared considering the time of the appearance of the first yellowish spots and the recovery in the face of an extreme humidity condition. In the experiment, the films were kept for 30 seconds at 3 cm from the outlet of an air humidifier and the degradation and successive regeneration was observed by photography (Fig. 9a) and XRD (Fig. 9b). Preliminary tests were performed on PSCs fabricated without P(EO/EP) and with 0.5 mg mL−1 P(EO/EP) under the same conditions as the visual regeneration test, described in the Experimental section. Fig. S6 (ESI) shows the normalized PCE as a function of the spray time. It is observed that even in extreme humidity conditions and with a low concentration of PEO, the copolymer proved to be effective in maintaining the efficiency in comparison to the device without the additive.
The images and the X-ray diffraction patterns of the samples indicate that there was a more intense PbI2 peak (2θ = 12.7° CuKα) for the perovskite film without the incorporation of the copolymer, indicating that the perovskite film with the copolymer has a greater ability to resist to an aggressive exposure to moisture. P(EO/EP) is a copolymer capable of interacting with water by hydrogen bonding, which makes this material a first barrier against moisture, although it is not enough to fully prevent the degradation process of films exposed to such aggressive conditions. In addition to absorbing part of the moisture, P(EO/EP) interacts with methylammonium through hydrogen bonding and prevents its evolution to the gas phase. As these are equilibrium reactions (eqn (1) and (2)), after the end of the moisture flow, methylamine can again be converted into methylammonium iodide and re-establish the structure of the perovskite. In the standard perovskite film, as there is no external agent capable of trapping methylamine in the structure, even after removing the moisture source, the perovskite phase is not completely restored, since part of the methylamine has already evolved to the gas phase.
(1)
(2)
On the other hand, the P(EO/EP) copolymer is not able to trap the methylammonium cation in the structure for a long period of time and, once methylamine has evolved into the gas phase, the structure can no longer be restored. This explains why the excellent ability of a small amount of polymer to stabilize perovskite in the face of extreme humidity conditions (Fig. 9), as long as it is for short periods, is not observed when exposure to moisture is done continuously.
The incorporation of P(EO/EP) copolymer in perovskite film prevents not only degradation because of humidity, but also prevents degradation processes activated by light. The supply of light energy is involved in some degradation pathways based on methylammonium iodide, (eqn (3) and (4)):
(3)
(4)
In order to investigate the influence of the incorporation of P(EO/EP) in perovskite film against light induced degradation processes, a standard perovskite film and a film prepared from a precursor solution containing 2.5 mg mL−1 of P(EO/EP) were exposed to a 442 nm continuous He–Cd laser (Kimmon IK Series, 300 mW). The drop in the fluorescence intensity value (Fig. 10), observed at the maximum emission of the films (760 nm), represents the degradation of the perovskite phase. The evolution of methylamine to the gas phase, leaving only PbI2 in the film, is evidenced by the appearance of a yellowish spot in the area irradiated with the laser. The copolymer can trap the methylamine in the structure, considerably stabilizing the perovskite. Thus, as in the case of the protection against moisture induced degradation, the addition of the copolymer P(EO/EP) to MAPbI3 perovskite also protects this material against light induced degradation.

The preparation of perovskite-based photovoltaic devices in the absence of a controlled environment was possible using ethyl acetate as an anti-solvent during the deposition of the perovskite layer by spin-coating. The choice for ethyl acetate as anti-solvent allowed us the assembly of devices with 17.04% efficiency based on MAPbI3 in ambient conditions. This solvent had a good ability to solubilize water, being capable of protecting the intermediate species from moisture, simplifying the deposition process. It was observed that the incorporation of P(EO/EP) copolymer modifies the crystallization dynamics and the morphology of the black phase perovskite films. Results from in situ GIWAXS indicated that this copolymer is capable of stabilizing the MA2Pb3I8·2DMSO intermediate phase in the film through interaction with DMSO. The photovoltaic performance decreased upon polymer addition, with all parameters being affected, but with more influence on FF and Jsc values. The apparent buffer effect on the Voc values might be explained by the strong donor character of PEO and its ability to passivate defects. The morphology is also drastically changed and we believe that the decrease in the PCE values is a sum of the insulating character of the polymer and decrease in the grain size. On the other hand, the addition of P(EO/EP) provided greater stability to the perovskite film in the face of moisture, either under continuous or aggressive exposure conditions, mainly due to the hydrogen bond formed between the –NH3+ group of perovskite and the oxygen of the polymer; an interaction that impairs the loss of the organic cation to from the structure. This effect also assisted in the protection of the perovskite from light-induced degradation processes. Therefore, incorporation of P(EO/EP) copolymer to the MAPbI3 perovskite was found to be beneficial for the stability of the cells, even though some loss of efficiency was observed. The best trade-off was achieved for the device containing 1.5 mg mL−1 of P(EO/EP).


The authors declare no conflict of interest.


The authors acknowledge FAPESP, CNPq, CAPES and INEO for financial and technical support. A. F. N., J. N. F. and F. L. A. gratefully acknowledges support from FAPESP (Grant 2017/11986-5) and Shell and the strategic importance of the support given by ANP (Brazil's National Oil, Natural Gas and Biofuels Agency) through the R&D levy regulation. R. S. thanks the Sao Paulo Research Foundation (FAPESP, grant 2017/12582-5). R. F. M. thanks the Sao Paulo Research Foundation (FAPESP, grant 2019/25765-6). The authors thank Laboratório Nacional de Luz Sincrotron (LNLS) for providing beamtime at XRD2.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0tc02078h
‡ J. C. S. and F. L. A. contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020