 DOI: 10.1039/C9TA04367E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 14712-14722


David
Kiermasch
,

Lidón
Gil-Escrig
,

Andreas
Baumann
,

Henk J.
Bolink
,

Vladimir
Dyakonov
* and 

Kristofer
Tvingstedt
*

Experimental Physics VI, Julius-Maximilian University of Würzburg, Am Hubland, 97074 Würzburg, Germany. E-mail: ktvingstedt@physik.uni-wuerzburg.de; dyakonov@physik.uni-wuerzburg.de

Instituto de Ciencia Molecular, Universidad de Valencia, C/J. Beltrán 2, 46980, Paterna, Spain

Bavarian Center for Applied Energy Research, Magdalene-Schoch-Str. 3, 97074 Würzburg, Germany

Received
26th April 2019
, Accepted 17th May 2019
First published on 17th May 2019
Accurately identifying and understanding the dominant charge carrier recombination mechanism in perovskite solar cells are of crucial importance for further improvements of this already promising photovoltaic technology. Both optical and electrical transient methods have previously been employed to strive for this warranted goal. However, electrical techniques can be strongly influenced by the capacitive response of the device which hides the carrier recombination dynamics that are relevant under steady state conditions. To ascertain the identification of steady state relevant charge carrier dynamics, it is beneficial to evaluate thicker films to minimize the impact of device capacitance. Herein, the electrical transient response in very efficient planar co-evaporated n–i–p solar cells is studied by varying the active layer thickness from 500 nm to 820 nm and is compared to a solution-processed perovskite device with an active layer of 350 nm thickness. In the case of the n–i–p devices, the capacitance of the 500 nm solar cell leads to longer perceived decay times in the lower voltage regime, while in the higher voltage regime quite similar kinetics independent of the active layer thickness are observed, allowing us to identify the transition from capacitance-affected to the sought-after bulk charge carrier dynamics. We show that increasing the perovskite thickness by more than 50% does not affect the recombination dynamics significantly, confirming the high quality of the vacuum-processed perovskite solar cells. Finally, it is demonstrated for the first time for perovskite solar cells that the recombination order in both thicker devices ranges between 1.6 and 2, pointing towards trap-assisted and free-carrier recombination under operating conditions. We emphasize that the observed low recombination orders are in strong contrast to earlier literature as well as to the thinner solution-processed device, which suffers from both shorter carrier lifetimes and a larger device capacitance.

Perovskite solar cells are expected to be very cost-effective as they, just like organic photovoltaics (OPVs), can be easily processed via simple printing and vacuum techniques. A very low cost of module production is hence envisaged, but as for any photovoltaic technology, a high power conversion efficiency (PCE) and long-term stability are paramount for making devices attractive for the energy market. The remarkable rise in PCEs for perovskite photovoltaics can be mainly attributed to a very exhaustive optimization of material combinations and deposition methods that today has enabled high crystal quality of the formed photoactive layers. The current PCE record of above 24% is already very impressive, and the device film formation of these high efficiency cells is a work of art in processing optimization.

Despite the remarkable development of this photovoltaic material class, there however remains a deficiency in the overall fundamental understanding of the physics of charge carrier recombination. Further improvements in the performance can now only be achieved with a higher detailed understanding of the dynamics that govern the remaining loss mechanisms. The correct assignment of non-radiative losses and their carrier density dependence is yet to be completed. A first step towards this identification requires assigning both the correct recombination rate and order to the dominant loss process at each charge carrier density. Currently, several speculations exist, for example regarding a non-radiative second-order process. For this process, however, no clear physical origin is easily identified. In OPVs, a similar non-radiative recombination was described and assigned to coupling to high energy vibrational modes, of which not many are needed to allow for non-radiative transitions. In perovskites, such high energetic phonons do not exist and justifying the existence of second order non-radiative recombination behavior becomes harder.
Although lead halide perovskites are considered defect tolerant, solar cells still partially suffer from deep energy states acting like charge carrier traps and the associated recombination centers are believed to still be a prominent source of non-radiative recombination. In addition to this, the influence of imperfect charge carrier selectivity of the currently employed electrodes embodies a potential source of surface recombination. Most efforts on recombination dynamics made up to now have however been focused on lifetime assignments of the pure absorber layer itself. Carrier lifetime determination in perovskite films was already conducted using contact-free techniques such as terahertz spectroscopy, photoluminescence (PL) transients and transient microwave photoconductivity (TRMC). More recent studies have included the contribution of trap-mediated recombination in the bulk of the perovskites, leading to longer assigned lifetimes indicative of the existence of a distribution of shallow trap states. This is in contrast to earlier assignments of mid-gap defect distributions which instead have the effect of speeding up recombination. Staub and coworkers later clarified the role of photon recycling effects that strongly enhances the perceived lifetime obtained from PL decay measurements. Nevertheless, they were able to account for this and provided internal radiative rate constants as well as minority and majority trap-assisted Shockley–Read–Hall (SRH) lifetimes in pure perovskite films. The work on complete devices by Paulke showed in contrast that the recombination can be described by second-order free-carrier dynamics, however with the need to invoke a “time-dependent” rate constant. A clear picture of the true nature and dynamics of photogenerated charge carriers in the perovskite layer itself as well as at the electrode interfaces in actual operational devices, is generally still largely missing.
Insights into recombination losses, which occur in complete devices, can be gained by studying the transient behavior of the open-circuit voltage (Voc). During the past few decades, transient electrical measurement techniques have been frequently employed, as these methods in principle allow to access charge carrier lifetimes, densities, recombination orders and mobilities. In earlier dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC) and OPV evaluation, a frequently employed method to assess the dynamics of excess carrier recombination in complete devices is based on combining small-perturbation transient photovoltage (TPV) with either transient photocurrent (TPC) (combined with a procedure called differential charging) or charge extraction (CE) (the term “excess carriers” is used to distinguish them from the equilibrium carriers that are also present in the device under dark and zero voltage conditions). Carrier lifetime and density determination via these transient methods is thus already being widely implemented for DSSCs and OPVs, and recently also for perovskites. First attempts of employing these methods for mesoporous perovskite devices were carried out by O'Regan who emphasized the difficulties of obtaining the correct number of extracted charge carriers and the necessity to distinguish bulk and interface contributions. Electrical transient methods may therefore in principle provide very useful information on full devices, but only if conducted with care and interpreted correctly. Very recently, we outlined that these methods can in fact be rather limited when it comes to correctly determining true bulk lifetimes relevant under steady-state conditions. We showed that the measured charge carrier lifetime must significantly exceed a characteristic capacitive lifetime limit set by the ratio of the device capacitance and the recombination current to at all be associated with a relevant steady-state value. Recent studies have up until now observed a quite strong dependence of the carrier lifetime on the density of charge carrier concentration. These studies accordingly provided kinetics in devices with recombination orders ranging between 3 and 7 by employing electrical transient methods. Reconciling such high recombination orders under steady-state operational conditions is however not straightforward. We here argue first that a third-order Auger recombination is very unlikely in perovskite devices operating around sun illumination conditions, and we are more convinced that even higher order processes are tremendously more unlikely. To be able to reliably determine correct recombination orders in thin film solar cells it is accordingly imperative to reduce the factors that are known to obstruct the assignment of lifetimes and carrier densities. Kirchartz et al. and Deledalle et al. have previously shown that for organic solar cells the most crucial necessity to carry out a correct evaluation of recombination dynamics of complete devices is to ensure both high light intensities and thick devices. The basis of these requirements is that it is impossible to access the correct recombination order in devices where the spatial distribution of excess carriers is not homogeneous. For thinner devices and lower light intensities, the gradients of excess carrier concentration inside the active layer are simply too large to allow for the assumption of one single average carrier concentration and decay rate at each evaluated intensity. However, as the device thickness and light intensities are increased, the flatter the distribution of excess charge carriers becomes, and the more justified the assumption of Δn(x) = Δnaverage becomes.
Herein, we therefore put in our efforts to ensure both these requirements by evaluating thick devices under high illumination conditions. Ensuring these conditions in planar solar cells, we believe that our work possesses the uniqueness of reaching very homogeneous carrier distributions inside the active layer which allows us for the first time to also observe recombination orders which are in line with those measured in pure films, and noticeably lower than what have been observed previously in complete devices. To strengthen our argument, we performed reference measurements on a thinner solution-processed perovskite device, which has a larger capacitance, more inhomogeneous carrier distribution and shorter charge carrier lifetimes due to a larger amount of interface recombination losses at a poorly selective PEDOT:PSS interface. Indeed, this solar cell does not reveal any bulk recombination parameters at all as it is universally ruled by the capacitive discharge of spatially separated charge carriers, even though measured at intensities of up to 3 suns.

Perovskite active layers can be processed either from solution or by (co-)evaporation of the constituting materials. Even though research is mostly focused on solution-based preparation techniques, the 20% PCE limit was recently exceeded by co-evaporation methods as well. To avoid substantial changes in the morphology, topography and surface coverage observed when varying the thickness by solution-based methods, we employ the more controlled process of co-evaporation to establish a uniform film thickness of 500 nm and 820 nm for methylammonium lead iodide (MAPbI3). X-ray diffraction patterns of pure films are shown in Fig. S1 in the ESI confirming a similar crystallinity independent of the thickness. Complete details on planar device preparation in the n–i–p layout can be found in the ESI.Fig. 1a shows the current–voltage (j–V) characteristics under simulated AM1.5G solar irradiation for the two devices with different MAPbI3 layer thicknesses in forward (solid) and backward (dashed) directions. Interestingly, both kinds of solar cells show the same fill factor (FF) of 72% and similar Voc's exceeding 1.1 V. The identical FF thus confirms that charge transport is not limiting the PCE. In contrast to several earlier publications, where an increase in perovskite thickness led to a decreased performance due to drops in the Voc,jsc and FF, we observe only an increase in jsc due to increased light absorption. The 820 nm device (64% thicker) retains a slightly higher short circuit current density leading to a higher PCE of 18.2% compared to 17.6% for the 500 nm solar cell. We also did not notice any changes in hysteresis upon increasing the active layer thickness as recently reported by Li et al. PCE statistics of the studied solar cells (4 devices for each layer thickness) can be found in Fig. S2 in the ESI. The corresponding j–V curves in the dark are presented in Fig. 1b together with the jsc(Voc) relation determined by measuring at different illumination intensities in the range of 10−5 to almost 3 suns. The non-ideal Shockley equation

(1)
with the dark saturation current
j0, the elementary charge q, the thermal voltage kbT and the ideality factor nid is used to describe steady-state recombination currents in diodes (fits are represented as dashed lines). Since real devices suffer from series resistance (Rseries) the intensity(Voc) or jsc(Voc) method is more suited to provide more accurate values of nid at higher voltages. Both methods however lead to quite similar values of the ideality factor in the range of 1.54–1.58 for the 500 nm device and 1.58–1.60 for the 820 nm device in the voltage regime between 0.8 and 1.0 V. These values indicate that SRH recombination is present in our devices and furthermore that the active layer thickness does not have a significant influence on its value (Fig. 1c shows an enlarged view of the grey rectangle in Fig. 1b). We observe an additional minor bending at voltages higher than 1.1 V. This is in line with previously observed voltage saturation effects, often seen in a multitude of solar cells when evaluated at higher intensities. Such a behavior was earlier assigned to an increased recombination rate due to enhanced surface recombination, but was very recently suggested to have a much simpler origin instead, namely device heating. Ullbrich et al. showed that just accounting for the thermal resistance of the cell is quite accurately able to explain such voltage saturation effects at higher illumination intensities. This effect is not surprising in our studied samples as we approach intensities of around 3 suns. The reduced voltages at the higher intensities can thus be explained by the fact that the heated device has an increased number of thermally generated background carriers present, forcing the Voc to saturate. To demonstrate the effect of device heating we fitted the jsc(Voc) data at intermediate voltages (0.75–1.00 V), where heating is negligible, to determine isothermal nid and j0. By then extrapolating this relation to higher voltages we determine the isothermal open-circuit voltage also at higher corresponding illumination intensities/short-circuit currents (shown as triangles). The difference between the measured (heated) and isothermal voltages reveals that the voltage saturation of the thicker, and thus more absorbing, device is slightly more pronounced and a slightly larger thermal resistance is, as expected, associated. To reduce the effect of device heating, we performed our transient electrical measurements with illumination times as short as possible but still paying attention to that a steady-state voltage has been established. As can be seen in Fig. S3 in the ESI, it takes only a few hundred milliseconds for our devices to reach a stable Voc, which is much faster compared to TiO2-based perovskite solar cells, for which times up to hundreds of seconds are sometimes needed. With the ambition to determine as accurately as possible how the excess charge carrier density and charge carrier lifetime vary with internal voltage (and not device heating) we in the following present the measured charge carrier density and lifetime versus the determined isothermal 300 K voltages.


A true picture of the dominant recombination losses in complete solar cells can only be gained by determining the recombination order δ and the respective rate at which the charge carriers recombine at each concentration of excess charge carriers. While first-order processes (∼n) via trap states are characterized by a constant lifetime, independent of the charge carrier density, band-to-band free-carrier recombination instead shows a quadratic (second-order, ∼n2) dependence on the density. At higher intensities the possibility of the onset of third-order Auger recombination processes must also be considered, whereas higher orders than three must certainly always be treated with greater suspicion.

To determine the charge carrier density and lifetime and the corresponding dominant recombination order, we used the transient techniques of CE and TPV. In general, CE can measure the excess charge carriers stored in a photovoltaic device at a fixed illumination intensity/open-circuit voltage. Further details concerning the techniques and the used setup are found in the ESI.Fig. 2a summarizes the extracted charge (normalized to the active area) of the studied devices over a plethora of open-circuit voltages measured at illumination intensities ranging from 10−5 suns to almost 3 suns. Earlier publications stated that CE measurements performed on mesoporous perovskite solar cells display long extraction times in the range of tens of microseconds leading to an unrealistically high amount of extracted charge, which is probably caused by ion migration. In contrast, charge extraction signals obtained in this work were usually characterized by a very realistic extraction time of only a few hundred nanoseconds (Fig. S4, ESI) leading also to a very reasonable amount of total extracted charges. This is also in line with our previous work, where we showed that planar TiO2-free devices do not necessarily lead to an unrealistic amount of extracted charge. Unlike recent studies, we also do not note any major differences between CE and differential charging (see text and Fig. S5 in the ESI). This methodological similarity can however only be obtained if capacitance corrected CE (see following text) is compared to capacitance corrected differential charging, something we believe was not the case in the recent work by Wheeler. To determine the geometrical capacitance of a device and correct for the charges located at the electrodes, we performed complementary CE measurements in the dark at low negative voltages in the range from −0.35 V to −0.05 V. The linear behavior C = Q/U (Fig. S6, ESI) ratifies the values for geometrical capacitance to be Cgeo (500 nm) = 3.65 nF and Cgeo (820 nm) = 2.88 nF confirming that a thicker perovskite layer decreases the device capacitance. The dashed lines in Fig. 2a represent the geometrical capacitances multiplied with the studied open-circuit voltages to quantify the amount of geometric capacitive charge carriers. This amount of charge carriers must thus be subtracted from the illuminated measurements to correct for the geometrical capacitance.
The measured CE data for the illuminated case shows a clear transition into a much steeper slope at an open circuit voltage of around 1.05 V. At low voltages, both n–i–p devices demonstrate differences in the amount of total extracted charge, while it appears more similar after the 1.05 V transition. At higher voltages the total extracted charge from the 820 nm cell however still outnumbers the amount of charge measured for the 500 nm device. The larger amount of charges in the thinner device at lower Voc's (<1.05 V) confirms that these are indeed capacitive charge carriers located at the surfaces, while the larger amount of charges at the highest Voc's (>1.05 V) in the thicker device (highlighted by dashed arrows) instead indicates bulk dominated volume charges. For a better comparison to the existing literature, we also performed CE measurements on a 350 nm thick solution-processed MAPbI3 device with PEDOT:PSS as a hole transport layer and C60, PC60BM and BCP as electron transport layers (see the ESI for further details and j–V curves in Fig. S7). In comparison to both n–i–p cells, more charges are extracted at substantially lower voltages. In addition, no transition can be observed leading to the conclusion that the extracted charge carriers are dominated by the capacitance of the device. It is extremely important to consider here that, in general, the spatial distribution of excess charge carriers in a device can be very inhomogeneous and accordingly that the determination of excess carrier density from the measured amount of extracted charge is not at all straightforward. Only in the case of a homogeneous excess carrier distribution is it reasonable to divide the total extracted charge with the active layer thickness to obtain a relevant density value. As outlined in the above-mentioned studies, ensuring thick devices and higher illumination conditions will force the distribution of excess carriers to become more homogeneous. More importantly, the voltage dependence of inhomogeneously distributed excess carriers will be weaker than that of evenly spatially distributed excess carriers. In our measured two thicker n–i–p devices, we ensure these conditions and when accounting for the different volumes (Fig. 2b) we can indeed confirm that both the determined excess charge carrier densities in the bulk of the two thick devices and their voltage dependency are in fact quite similar, something that would not have been the case if the distribution were inhomogeneous. In contrast, the uncorrected extracted charge carrier density of the thinner PEDOT:PSS device shows much weaker voltage dependence, signifying that this device displays a much more inhomogeneous excess carrier distribution. We note here that the capacitive-to-bulk transition observed in our thick devices occurs at voltages substantially higher than that present in MAPbI3 devices in a recent study. In addition, the corrected extracted charge in both n–i–p devices is covering more than one entire order of magnitude of excess carrier density data, far exceeding that in a majority of earlier published studies, allowing us to also assign the important slope of the exponential relationship between the voltage and excess carrier density with greater certainty. This relationship is usually described by
(2)
where
n0 corresponds to the equilibrium carrier density and m accounts for the deviation from the thermal voltage kbT/q. Using this expression, we determined the m-values in both the capacitive and bulk regime for both n–i–p devices. While the low voltage data for the n–i–p devices assigned to the capacitive regime show (m = 9.4 for the 500 nm device and m = 11.3 for the 820 nm device) very high and different m-values of no significant meaning, the relevant high voltage regime can be described by substantially lower and very similar m-values of 2.8 and 2.7 for both devices, respectively. This again points to the fact that relevant steady-state m-values should not be affected by the active layer thickness, but only by the representative recombination process. The PEDOT:PSS based solar cell reveals a considerably higher m-value of 3.8. An early study on thickness variation noted different slopes when instead altering the thickness of their transport layers (PEDOT:PSS and PC70BM), highlighting also that these layers substantially contribute to the overall capacitance of the device, obstructing meaningful deductions of the bulk carrier density slope parameter m. In this work, we have instead ensured the combination of highly conducting doped organic layers in contact with the metal electrode and very thin (10 nm) undoped charge selective membranes adjacent to the active layer. This extra added dielectric material is thus negligible with respect to the very thick perovskite film, implying minimal capacitive contribution and assuring that, at high voltages, the excess charges are indeed evenly distributed within the active layer.


To determine how charge carrier lifetimes vary with the Voc (and carrier density) TPV is employed for the same range of steady-state background intensities (10−5–3 suns) as for CE. TPV monitors the decay of the small photovoltage generated by a small optical perturbation light pulse on top of the steady-state open-circuit voltage defined by a continuous light source (see the ESI for further information). The induced small voltage transients are analyzed by fitting the data with a mono-exponential decay function to extract pseudo-first-order charge carrier lifetimes. In the literature regarding perovskite photovoltaics, we note that both single and double exponential functions have been used to determine TPV decay times. Thereby, it appears that studies employing a double exponential fit have the presence of TiO2 in common, while planar devices in the p–i–n layout more often show single exponential TPV decays. This is in line with reports where (mesoporous) TiO2 was proposed as the main cause of the second and slower exponential decay, also in the small perturbation regime. Fig. 3 summarizes the measured small-perturbation TPV lifetimes for the three perovskite solar cells determined by fitting the transients with a single exponential decay. However, for high light intensities (Voc ≥ 1.10 V) the transients start to reveal more of a double exponential nature (with two lifetimes τ1 and τ2) for the n–i–p devices (Fig. S8 in the ESI displays two examples of raw TPV signals with exponential fits for a low and high intensity/voltage regime). The high voltage part is zoomed in the inset of Fig. 3 implying a difference by a factor of 3 to 4 between the observed τ1 and τ2 for both layer thicknesses. Since the studied devices do not contain planar or mesoporous TiO2 it cannot be the origin of the two measured lifetimes. Furthermore, in the high intensity region we note that τ1 exhibits a stronger voltage dependence compared to τ2, which seems to be nearly constant at around 1 μs. We remind here that voltage-independent charge carrier lifetimes describe a first-order recombination process and accordingly that it is conceivable that both first- and second-order carrier lifetimes are being measured at these high voltages. Another possible explanation could be that one lifetime corresponds to the interface and the other one can be assigned to charge carriers from the bulk of the perovskite. In general, the dependency of the lifetime (thus pseudo first-order) on the open-circuit voltage can be expressed by

(3)
where
τ0 is the intercept at 0 V and corresponds to the equilibrium charge carrier lifetime and the factor ϑ accounts again for slope deviations from the thermal voltage kbT/q. In line with the voltage dependency of the charge carrier density, the small-perturbation lifetimes also show a clear transition at around 1.05 V, where the slopes for both devices change substantially. We emphasize that this transition in the relationship between charge carrier lifetime and Voc has, to the best of our knowledge, previously not been identified in perovskite solar cells. For the 500 nm device, ϑ is determined to be 1.6 in the low voltage regime and 2.4 in the high voltage regime. Quite similar values are obtained for the 820 nm device where ϑ equals 1.7 at voltages below 1.05 V and 2.5 for voltages above 1.05 V. However, in agreement with previous reports, the PEDOT:PSS device does not show any slope alterations over the studied open-circuit voltage range and reveals ϑ to be 1.4. Under 1 sun illumination conditions, the PEDOT:PSS cell shows a charge carrier lifetime of about 400 ns, while both thicker n–i–p devices demonstrate a lifetime of around 800 ns. It is however unphysical, that the huge difference in the open-circuit voltage of these devices could be caused by such a small discrepancy in the charge carrier lifetime. For equal bulk carrier concentrations, an increase of a first-order carrier lifetime by a factor of 2 would merely lead to an increase of voltage by 18 mV (kTln2) at room temperature; a factor of 13 less than what was observed. This fact solidifies that the measured lifetimes cannot be related to bulk carriers but that the PEDOT:PSS cell displays kinetics associated with a capacitive discharge instead. In line with Street’s earlier note, we derived a condition under which relevant bulk lifetimes τbulk are accessible by these methods:

(4)
The bulk lifetime has to therefore exceed this characteristic time, which is entirely caused by the relaxation of spatially separated charge carriers. The fact that this discharging process can be slower than the relevant bulk processes is hence what makes it difficult to assign the steady-state relevant charge carrier lifetimes correctly. As recently pointed out by Du et al., TPV decay times can also be prolonged by the storage and release of charge carriers from shallow trap states. To distinguish between bulk recombination lifetimes and capacitive discharging rates, we therefore calculated the characteristic time τcap according to eqn (4) using the ideality factor nid and the jsc(Voc) relation from Fig. 1b and the geometrical capacitance Cgeo determined by CE measurements without illumination (see Fig. 2a and S6). These values are drawn as dashed lines in Fig. 3. The following can therefore be concluded for both n–i–p devices: at low voltages (Voc < 1.05 V) the measured TPV lifetime is determined by the time it takes for charge carriers located at the respective majority carrier electrode or interface of the electrodes to find their counterpart at the other end of the device. The lifetime is accordingly well described by a capacitor that is emptied via the diode itself. For voltages above 1.05 V, the charge carriers get more evenly distributed and the measured lifetimes clearly exceed the limit of eqn (4), allowing for the identification of bulk carrier lifetimes. For the highest intensities, the difference between the theoretical capacitive limit and the measured lifetimes is more than one order of magnitude. In the case of the thinner PEDOT:PSS device, no clear difference between the calculated capacitive limit and the measured decay times can be observed; clearly proving that these lifetimes are not real bulk carrier lifetimes. Even at the highest illumination intensities, the capacitive discharge is still longer than the bulk carrier lifetimes, which are usually in the range of a few ns in PEDOT:PSS based devices, since these cells suffer more from surface/interface recombination. The small difference between the calculated and measured lifetimes for the PEDOT:PSS device can be explained by the fact that the measured lifetimes do not originate from a pure geometric discharge but are rather a combination of voltage independent (geometric) and voltage dependent (for example, depletion layer) capacitance.

Performing TPV and CE at the same illumination intensities and thus open-circuit voltages allows us to correlate the measured lifetimes with the corresponding charge carrier density as displayed in Fig. 4a for the PEDOT:PSS based device and Fig. 4b for both n–i–p devices. The dashed lines correspond to the capacitive lifetime limit according to eqn (4) but now plotted versus the charge carrier density instead of the voltage. While the PEDOT:PSS solar cell has a constant slope and is completely limited by capacitive discharge, both n–i–p devices show the transition from a steeper slope below 1 × 1021 m−3 to a flatter slope at high charge carrier densities. At low carrier concentrations (grey region), the decay times are longer for the 500 nm device at a fixed charge carrier density. This behavior is expected since these decay times originate from a device with a larger capacitance (and the discharging time of a capacitor is directly proportional to its capacitance) and thus confirms the statements made so far. In contrast, the lifetime–density correlation is quite similar for both devices at the higher carrier densities meaning that both devices reveal essentially very similar bulk carrier recombination dynamics. We also note that the capacitance-to-bulk transition can be already observed at slightly lower carrier densities for the thicker device, which can be explained by the reduced impact of capacitive charge carriers on the charge carrier dynamics. In addition, τ2 is included in Fig. 4b, showing an almost constant lifetime–density relationship pointing towards the contribution from a pure first-order recombination process. Combining eqn (2) and (3), the relationship between the pseudo first-order carrier lifetime and carrier density can be described using the power law expression

(5)
where the ratio
m/ϑ is now abbreviated to λ. The parameter λ, describing the slope of the power law, represents the recombination order via the relation δ = λ + 1. Values for δ are provided in Fig. 4, revealing a high recombination order of 3.8 for the PEDOT:PSS sample, in line with values presented in earlier studies. In the case of the n–i–p devices, even higher values of 6–7 for the 500 nm device and 8–9 for the 820 nm device are obtained for densities below 1 × 1021 m−3, but without any physical meaning as they originate from the capacitive regime. However, for charge carrier densities above 1 × 1021 m−3, quite similar orders in the range of 1.7–2.0 (500 nm) and 1.6–2.0 (820 nm) can be determined. Whereas most of the earlier publications on both perovskite and organic solar cells have commonly observed noticeably higher recombination orders, the thicker n–i–p devices used in this study are the first to reveal recombination orders lower than or around 2 when determined by electrical means on complete perovskite solar cells. These determined values of recombination order are also more in line with the literature where transient photoconductivity and photoluminescence revealed similar values in neat MAPbI3 films (not integrated into a device architecture) at similar charge carrier densities of around ∼1022 m−3.


Transient electrical techniques can be used not only to determine charge carrier lifetimes and densities but also steady-state parameters like the ideality factor nid. The diode ideality factor is linked to the determined experimental parameters m and ϑ via

(6)
By combining eqn (6) with the relation δ = (m/ϑ) + 1, the recombination order can thus always be determined from
(7)
This clarifies that the recombination order is in principle also accessible by determining merely the voltage dependence of charge carrier density and the steady state parameter nid. Both eqn (6) and (7) are therefore of general importance for our contribution, since they link steady-state and transient recombination parameters with each other and provide an alternative route to the one illustrated in Fig. 4 for the determination of the recombination order δ. However, a prerequisite for this to work is again that the excess charge carriers are homogeneously distributed. A few rules of thumb are worthy of bearing in mind with respect to the above equations; if the steady-state ideality factor nid equals the charge carrier density slope m, then the dynamics must be first-order (δ = 1). If on the other hand the lifetime slope ϑ instead equals the density slope m, we have pure second-order recombination (δ = 2). The latter is for example the case for an intrinsic solar cell operating in the radiative limit with pure band-to-band recombination. Then m and ϑ are not only equal but must also have the value 2, which will always result in an ideality factor nid of unity. However, these clear cases are often not observed in real thin-film solar cells.

Table 1 summarizes the measured and calculated recombination parameters determined in this work. For the n–i–p devices, the values are separated into parameters determined in the capacitive and the relevant bulk regime, as discussed in Fig. 2–4. Using eqn (6), four calculated values for the nid are thus provided and compared to the values obtained from the steady state Jsc(Voc) measurements. Depending on which regime the nid has been determined in, the values are close or slightly underestimated compared to the steady-state value. We note that the ideality factor determined in the higher voltage regime, which we assigned to the reliable bulk values, still might be limited by a minor contribution from capacitive effects. A lower nid is also observed for the PEDOT:PSS based device (eqn (6) leads to 1.02, while the dark j–V in Fig. S7 revealed 1.2). The recombination order δ was also subsequently calculated in two ways: first, by using the slopes in Fig. 4 (relying only on TPV and CE) and second, taking eqn (7) with m-values from CE and idealities from steady-state experiments (Fig. 1b). Both methods demonstrate that the parameters determined in the capacitive regime yield completely unrealistic values for δ, while representative and realistic orders (1.6–2.0) can be obtained only in the higher voltage regime for the 500 nm and 820 nm n–i–p devices, justifying our focus on the separation of the measured transient data into these two regimes. The deduced recombination order in the relevant carrier density regime thus largely rules out the occurrence of Auger effects and confirms that devices are mostly ruled by first- and second-order dynamics independent of the active layer thickness. Under 1 sun illumination conditions, we identify a steady-state excess charge carrier concentration of ∼7 × 1021 m−3 and emphasize that this is a value of carrier concentration that non-electrical methods such as TRPL, TA, THz spectroscopy and TRMC should always strive for and include in efforts to determine perovskite PV relevant decay kinetics. Our work thus contributes to the enduring discussion on the correct analysis of electrical transient data, where long lifetimes and high recombination orders are sometimes observed for low carrier concentrations/illumination intensities in different solar cells technologies, possibly originating from measurements performed in the capacitance limited region. On the other hand, we clearly show that transient electrical techniques can be used to determine reliable recombination parameters in fully working perovskite devices under operating conditions if both thick active layers and high illumination conditions are ensured. In line with the j–V characteristics in Fig. 1a, we can conclude from our transient opto-electrical analysis that the additional 320 nm perovskite layer in this device configuration does not affect the recombination dynamics negatively, which is remarkable compared to the existing literature.

In conclusion, we demonstrated that highly efficient planar perovskite devices can be manufactured with active layer thicknesses exceeding 800 nm without any noticeable loss in efficiency. Furthermore, accounting for the increase of the equilibrium charge carrier density, originating from the induced temperature rise at the required higher intensities, we provide steady-state relevant charge carrier concentrations and lifetimes versus isothermal voltages. We showed that while it was not possible to extract useful bulk recombination parameters from the PEDOT:PSS device due to short lifetimes and a high device capacitance, we identified a capacitance-to-bulk transition in the studied n–i–p perovskite photovoltaic devices. With these thick and well-performing solar cells and by measuring in the high intensity regime of up to 3 suns it is possible to generate homogeneously distributed excess carrier concentrations which allow us to obtain accurate and meaningful values of charge carrier densities and lifetimes in complete devices. Having eliminated the influence of spatially separated carriers, the obtained densities, lifetimes and associated recombination order are for the first time more in line with reported values for perovskite films, as determined by optical contact-less transient methods. We find that bulk recombination dynamics are not dependent on the perovskite thickness which is in accordance with the very similar open-circuit voltages (charge carrier densities) in thicker co-evaporated devices. This work therefore demonstrates that transient electrical techniques can, if correct bulk dynamics are identified, help to understand recombination losses in solar cells that will allow future opportunities to also study how to suppress them.


There are no conflicts to declare.


The work was supported by the German Research Foundation (DFG) through project 382633022 (RECOLPER) and the German Federal Ministry for Education and Research (BMBF) through the grant 03SF0514A/B (HYPER). V. D. further acknowledges the Bavarian State Ministry of Education and Culture, Science and Arts for funding of the Collaborative Research Network “Solar Technologies go Hybrid”. A. B.'s studies at the ZAE Bayern are financed by the Bavarian Ministry of Economic Affairs and Media, Energy and Technology. L. G. E. and H. J. B. acknowledge financial support from the Spanish Ministry of Science, Innovation and Universities via the Unidad de Excelencia María de Maeztu MDM-2015-0538, MAT2017-88821-R, PCIN-2015-255 and PCIN-2017-014. K. T., D. K., A. B., H. J. B., and V. D. designed the study which D. K. and L. G. E. implemented experimentally. L. G. E. manufactured the devices in Valencia which D. K. measured in Würzburg. D. K. analyzed the data. D. K. and K. T. wrote the paper to which all authors contributed with feedback and comments. K. T., V. D., and H. B. supervised the project.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta04367e
‡ Current address: Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin für Materialien und Energie GmbH, Kekuléstraße 5, 12489 Berlin, Germany.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019