 DOI: 10.1039/C3CP52525B
(Communication)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 14182-14187

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Chunlei
Wang
,

Fanning
Meng
,

Mingxing
Wu
,

Xiao
Lin
,

Tonghua
Wang
*,

Jieshan
Qiu
 and 

Tingli
Ma
*

State Key Laboratory of Fine Chemicals, Carbon Research Laboratory, School of Chemical Engineering, Dalian University of Technology, 116024, China. E-mail: wangth@dlut.edu.cn; tinglima@dlut.edu.cn

Received
15th April 2013
, Accepted 25th June 2013
First published on 27th June 2013
A novel bio-inspired Pt- and FTO-free integrated pure carbon counter electrode (CE) for dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) has been designed and fabricated using a porous carbon sheet as a conducting substrate and ordered mesoporous carbon (OMC) as the catalytic layer. A rigid, crustose lichen-like, integrated carbon–carbon composite architecture with a catalytic layer rooted in a porous conducting substrate was formed by a process of polymer precursor spin coating, infiltration and pyrolysis. The integrated pure carbon CE shows very low series resistance (Rs), owing to the high conductivity of the carbon sheet (sheet resistance of 488 mΩ □−1) and low charge-transfer resistance (Rct), due to the large specific surface area of the OMC layer that is accessible to the redox couple. The values of Rs and Rct are much lower than those of a platinized fluorine-doped thin oxide glass (Pt/FTO) electrode. Cells with this CE show high solar-to-electricity conversion efficiencies (8.11%), comparable to that of Pt/FTO based devices (8.16%).

In past decades, dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) have drawn widespread attention due to their low cost, low environmental impact, and ease of fabrication compared with silicon solar cells. Efficiency and cost are two key issues which are of concern regarding the future application of DSSCs. As an important component of a DSSC, the counter electrode (CE) serves as a catalyst for the reduction of triiodide and as an electron collector. Generally, the CE is composed of a fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) transparent conductive glass and a Pt catalytic layer. In order to reduce the cost of DSSCs, the Pt-free CE has been a subject of interest in recent years. Carbon materials such as carbon black, activated carbon, carbon nanotubes, graphite, carbon nanofibers, mesoporous carbon, and graphene are attractive substitutes due to their low cost and favorable efficiency. FTO, the most commonly used conductive substrate for DSSCs, however, accounts for nearly 50% of the total cost of a DSSC. Cells with only one transparent oxide electrode have been suggested, to further reduce the cost of DSSCs. Although opaque CEs based on metal foil (stainless steel, titanium and nickel) demonstrate excellent energy conversion efficiencies, they can easily be corroded by the electrolyte. In the case of plastic substrates such as polyester-based counter electrodes, their low power conversion efficiency and thermal stability are limiting factors. Therefore, as carbon materials possess the merits of low-cost, high conductivity, excellent chemical/thermal stability, and superior corrosion resistance against redox electrolyte, they are more favorable alternatives to FTO. Several Pt-free and FTO-free pure carbon counter electrodes have been reported, but their conversion efficiencies were still low due to poor catalytic activities, high internal resistances, and poor mechanical properties.

Standard procedures for the loading of the catalyst onto the flat conductive substrate (such as FTO, metal foil, and flexible graphite sheet) include the doctor-blade technique, screen-printing, spray-coating, drop-casting, electrophoretic deposition, electrostatic spray, and spin-coating. In such configurations, the CEs usually had poor mechanical properties and a high internal resistance due to the weak interactions (usually non-covalent bonding) between the catalyst and the conductive substrate and/or between the boundaries of catalytic particles. These weak interactions lead to low conductivity within the catalytic layers and low electrical contact at the interface of catalyst and conductive substrate, which results in low conductivity of the substrate (FTO). To tackle these problems, several strategies have been proposed, such as low temperature chemical vapor deposition growth of vertically aligned carbon nanotubes, construction of fiber-shaped DSSCs, and bulk molding compound of carbon and thermosetting resin. The drawbacks of these strategies are the high cost, the poor thermal stability, and/or the low activity. So far, poor mechanical properties and high internal resistances are still a big challenge.
Inspired by crustose lichens, one of the most common lichens that can grow within rocks, with a root-like fungal structure growing within the rock itself and only a crust-like fruiting body above the surface, we designed a novel integrated counter electrode architecture, in which a porous carbon plate (PCP) was used as a conductive substrate and continuous, vertically oriented ordered mesoporous carbon (OMC) monolithic films were rooted in the porous substrate to serve as catalytic layers (Scheme 1). Morphologically, the main body of crustose lichens (thallus) is made up of a few distinct layers. The lowermost layer consists of densely packed fungal hyphae with a root-like structure (rhizines) that can attach the thallus to various substrates such as rocks, plants, buildings, and even coral reefs. The root-like structure not only enables the lichen to adhere strongly to the substrate, thus preventing it from being peeled off by the wind or waves, but it also ensures the symbiont a much larger active area for mineral and water uptake, and photosynthesis. Herein, instead of a condensed flat conductive substrate such as FTO or metal foil, a porous carbon plate with both high conductivity and high mechanical strength was used as the CE substrate. A root-like integrated OMC–C composite structure formed by a precursor inflation pyrolysis process can harvest the electrons that arrive at the counter electrode and transfer them to the catalytic layer/electrolyte interface efficiently (Scheme 1). It should be stressed that the porous substrate successfully triggered the vertically oriented growth of the mesochannels without the exertion of any external fields or use of specially designed substrates. The rich porosity of the oriented OMC catalytic layer (which functions similarly to the algae layer) with a narrowly distributed mesopore size ensures the fast diffusion of the electrolyte; and the large specific area provides enough catalytic active sites for the reduction of triiodide ions. The extremely low internal resistance of the pure carbon integrated CE is due to the contiguous conductive network, enlarged in the heterogeneous interface between catalyst particles and substrate, that slows down the electron transfer in a traditional CE configuration. The excellent performance of integrated pure carbon (IPC) CEs in such a configuration can be attributed to the high catalytic activity of the oriented OMC and the high conductivity of the integrated carbon–carbon composite.
To prepare the integrated pure carbon electrode, porous carbon plates were firstly prepared by a bulk molding–carbonization process using cheap coal powder as precursor. The permeation of electrolyte through the porous substrate has been fairly resolved by impermeable pretreatment through a repeat pitch impregnation–carbonization treatment of paraffin protected PCPs. A phenol-formaldehyde resin solution containing the template, Pluronic F127 (EO106PO70EO106), was spin coated onto the open pore side of the conductive substrate, then carbonized at 800 °C under nitrogen. A uniform mesostructured resin film was formed through an evaporation-induced self-assembly (EISA) mechanism. A catalytic mesoporous carbon layer that was rooted in the porous carbon plate was subsequently produced by carbonization (Scheme S1, ESI).
The morphology and geometry of the OMC catalytic layer were first investigated by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Fig. 1(a) reveals that the mesoporous carbon layer consists of well ordered hexagonal mesopores with an average size of 6 nm. In Fig. 1(b), the cross-section image of the integrated pure carbon CE shows that the catalytic layer is rooted deeply into the conductive substrate through the formation of an integrated carbon–carbon composite; the inset is a high resolution SEM image confirming that the tubular mesochannels are perpendicular to the surface. The thickness of the OMC catalytic layer is about 4–8 μm. The penetration of the polymer precursor ensures that parts of the mesostructure are deeply embedded in the porous substrate. The mesochannels can be oriented with the carbon particles on the external surface via a shear flow effect during the penetration of OMC into the substrate. Triggered by the oriented mesochannels of the substrate, a continual monolithic film of vertically arranged mesochannels is achieved (Fig. S2, ESI). In addition, the strong adhesion due to the formation of a carbon–carbon composite after carbonization, adheres the catalytic layer so well to the substrate that it can not be peeled off with scotch tape (Fig. 2(c)). In the case of PCP and GA CE, a black powder residue can be clearly observed on the tape (Fig. 2(a) and (b)). Meanwhile, the substrate made from coal powder is itself very stiff, and is comparable with graphite in this regard. Therefore, the integrated pure carbon CE won't cause trouble with the assembly of the device due to its good mechanical properties.Fig. 1(c) and (d) are TEM images of the OMC. Typical stripe-like and hexagonally arranged mesopores, together with the electron diffraction patterns shown in the inset, confirm its 2D ordered hexagonal mesostructure (P6mm symmetry). In comparison with PCP which displays a very low surface area of 5.7 m2 g−1, OMC has a large surface area of 832.5 m2 g−1, as calculated by the BET method. The pore size of the OMC is narrowly distributed with an average of 6.4 nm (Fig. S3, ESI).
To investigate the catalytic activity of the IPC-CE, photocurrent–voltage experiments were carried out. For comparison, we also measured the performance of the non-porous graphite anode (GA-CE), PCP-CE, and the conventional Pt/FTO electrodes under the same conditions (Fig. 3). The photovoltaic performances of the DSSCs with different CEs are summarized in Table 1. The PCP-CE has a good photovoltaic performance compared with non-porous graphite because of its coarse surface (Fig. S2(a), ESI); an incident photon to energy conversion efficiency of up to 84.2% that of the device with a Pt CE was achieved. Devices equipped with an IPC-CE yield high energy conversion efficiencies of 8.11%, which is comparable to that of those with a Pt/FTO CE (η = 8.16%). The carbon-based CE displays higher open circuit voltages (Voc) than Pt-FTO; among them, the Voc of IPC-CE has reached up to 0.78 V. The IPC-CE exhibits the highest fill factor (FF) of 0.73. Pt/FTO shows a much higher short circuit current density (Jsc) of up to 18.21 mA cm−2; and the Jsc of the PCP-CE is slightly higher than that of the IPC-CE or the GA-CE (Table 1). This result was consistent with the IPCE spectra (Fig. 4).
Sample

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF

η (%)

R
s (Ω)

R
ct (Ω)

R
h (Ω □−1)
GA-CE
0.72
13.78
0.57
5.64
1.53
28.20
0.11
PCP-CE
0.75
14.54
0.63
6.87
3.33
20.41
0.16
IPC-CE
0.78
14.26
0.73
8.11
4.49
6.99
0.49
Pt/FTO
0.66
18.21
0.67
8.16
20.90
12.11
14.0
To reveal the electrochemical characteristics of the PCP-CE and the IPC-CE, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) experiments were performed. In Fig. 5, the high-frequency intercept on the real axis represents the series resistance (Rs). Two semi-cycles in the middle- and low-frequency regions indicate the charge-transfer resistance (Rct) at the CE/electrolyte interface, and the Nernst diffusion impedance (ZN) of the triiodide/iodide couple in the electrolyte (Fig. S1, ESI). According to previous studies, reduction of the sheet resistance is an important way to improve the cell performance. The selection of an appropriate precursor and carbonization temperature allows a perfect degree of graphitization of the conductive substrate to be achieved, therefore a low sheet resistance (Rh) of 162 mΩ □−1 was obtained for the PCP-CE. In the field of conventional heterogeneous catalysis, catalysts are usually dispersed on porous supports in order to maximize the reactant/catalyst interface. However, it is more complicated in electrocatalysis, because the substrate acts not only as a catalyst support but also as a medium to collect electrons. To improve the performance of a cell, a large electric connective interface is required. Herein, the porous structure of the highly conductive substrate, the monolithic mesoporous carbon catalytic layer with root-like penetrative ends, and the strong interaction between them (by formation of covalent bonding during the carbonization process) can strengthen the interaction of the mesoporous carbon catalytic layer with the substrate and enlarge the interface between them. This not only increases the mechanical properties of the integrated CE, but also facilitates the harvesting and transportation of the charge carrier. Moreover, in contrast to the poor electrical connectivity of the conductive network composed of individual carbon particles, the continuous monolithic thin film of mesoporous carbon should exhibit a higher conductivity. Thus the sheet resistance of the CE in such an architecture with the OMC catalyst layer is only 488 mΩ □−1, which is slightly higher than that of the PCP-CE or the GA-CE, but much smaller than that of Pt/FTO (about 13–20 Ω □−1, Table 1). It is well known that the Rs value is related to the Rh, bulk resistance of catalyst, and the contact resistance. Owing to the low resistance of the porous carbon substrate and the mesoporous carbon film, as well as the strong electrical connection between them, the PCP-CE and the IPC-CE show very low Rs values of only 3.47 and 4.49 Ω, respectively, which are comparable to metal (or graphite) and much smaller than that of Pt/FTO (Fig. 5 and Table 1).
Currently, the primary issue for the substitution of a Pt catalyst with carbon materials lies in the improvement of their catalytic performances for the reduction of triiodide. Two general strategies have been proposed: (1) enhancing the activity of the carbon catalyst; (2) increasing the number of activated sites by enlargement of the active surface of the catalyst and/or developing a highly porous texture. The Rct value calculated by fitting the first semicircle varies inversely with the electrocatalytic activity for the reduction of triiodide. It has been demonstrated by us and other groups, that highly textured CEs are of benefit to the power conversion efficiency of DSSCs, and a smaller Rct will then be obtained (Table 1 and Fig. S2, ESI). For the IPC-CE, the vertically aligned mesochannels offer a much larger active surface than that of the PCP-CE. Since the existence of perpendicular mesochannels together with the root-like, integrated OMC-C structure that is capable of more effective electron harvest/transfer, the IPC-CE displays a much higher energy conversion efficiency (8.11%); correspondingly the Rct value of the IPC-CE (6.99 Ω) is much less than those of the PCP-CE (20.41 Ω) and the GA-CE (28.20 Ω). However, the effect of triggered oriented growth of mesochannels is limited. When the OMC layer grows thicker through repeated spin coating, the mesochannels are no longer perpendicular to the surface (Fig. S4, ESI), and the energy conversion efficiency decreased (down to only 4.5%), owing to the significant loss of the electrochemical active surface area. In addition, the loading of monolithic mesoporous carbon can also reduce the Nernst diffusion impedance to a great extent, which also contributes to the internal resistance, according to the second semicircle of the EIS plots. The low ZN can be attributed to a larger ion concentration gradient between the bulk electrolyte and the region close to the IPC-CE surface, due to its high catalytic activity.
In conclusion, we have proposed a novel counter electrode architecture for DSSCs, with high conductivity and high mechanical strength, by using a porous carbon plate as a conductive substrate and vertically oriented ordered mesoporous carbon film as a catalytic layer. The uniform mesoporous carbon catalytic layer was firmly anchored to the porous substrate by the formation of an integrated carbon–carbon composite. In comparison with the flat conductive substrate, the porous structure enlarged the interface between the catalytic layer and the substrate. The high mechanical stability and the high conductivity are a result of the increased number of chemical bonding sites and the improved electrical connectivity. Perpendicular mesoporous carbon channels that are easily accessible to the electrolyte exhibit excellent electrocatalytic performance for the reduction of triiodide. Furthermore, the present work proposed a novel way to overcome the universal adhesion problem with a view to increase the efficiency. Finally it is demonstrated that the integrated pure carbon electrodes with an oriented OMC film catalytic layer are promising alternatives to the expensive Pt CE for low-cost and high-efficiency DSSCs.

The porous carbon plate was first prepared from coal powder by a bulk molding process, and then carbonized at 950 °C in a N2 atmosphere. The porous carbon plate was vacuum dried at 80 °C for 2 h before use. One side of the plate was protected by drop-casting of liquid paraffin and air drying, followed by vacuum drying at 80 °C for 2 h before being wax sealed. The paraffin protected carbon plate was impregnated with a 30% petroleum pitch and 70% chinoline (v/v) solution for 1 h, then dried by airing, followed by carbonization at 950 °C in a N2 atmosphere. This process was repeated three times, at which point, a carbon substrate with open pores on the top-side was obtained. The thickness of the resulting substrate (denoted as PCP-CE) was 1.5 mm, and the rigidity was comparable to glass. The phenol-formaldehyde resin solution containing Pluronic F127 (EO106PO70EO106, Sigma Aldrich) was spin coated (4000 rpm, 1 min) onto the surface of the carbon substrate. The resulting film was dried at 90 °C for 24 h, and the integrated pure carbon counter electrode (IPC-CE) with an OMC catalytic layer was obtained by carbonization at 800 °C in a N2 atmosphere. The thickness of the OMC catalytic layer was about 4–10 μm. The phenol-formaldehyde resin precursor solution was synthesized according to the literature. The Pt/FTO was prepared by spray coating of a 5% solution of H2PtCl4 in isopropanol, and then annealing at 450 °C for 30 min. The GA-CE was prepared by cutting and polishing a commercial graphite anode (30 mm in diameter) into plates of about 2 mm in thickness.


This work was supported by the Nature Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 50773008, 21003016), and the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (Grant No. 20100481227).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c3cp52525b
This journal is © the Owner Societies 2013