 DOI: 10.1039/C6TC03948K
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 11278-11283


Yuan
Liu
,

Wenjun
Zhang
,

Guohua
Xie
,

Xuan
Zeng
,

Junfeng
Fang
* and 

Chuluo
Yang
*

School of Chemical Engineering and Light Industry, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, People's Republic of China

Hubei Collaborative Innovation Center for Advanced Organic Chemical Materials, Hubei Key Lab on Organic and Polymeric Optoelectronic Materials, Department of Chemistry, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, People's Republic of China. E-mail: clyang@whu.edu.cn

Ningbo Institute of Materials Technology and Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Ningbo 315201, People's Republic of China. E-mail: fangjf@nimte.ac.cn

Received
11th September 2016
, Accepted 10th November 2016
First published on 10th November 2016
Two novel star-shaped compounds with 1,3,5-triazine as the core and fluorene as the arms, denoted as Tf1 and Tf2, were designed and synthesized. Compared with Tf1, Tf2 was found to have a π-extended structure with its additional inner fluorene arms. Owing to the diethylamino end groups, both compounds reduced the work function of ITO effectively. Enhanced device performances were obtained by incorporating these compounds as the cathode interlayers in inverted polymer solar cells with PTB7:PC71BM as the active layer. As revealed by Kelvin probe measurements, the work function of Tf1-modified ITO was lower than that of Tf2-modified ITO. As shown by atomic force microscopy (AFM), the morphology of the Tf1-coated surface was relatively smooth and homogenous, which provided a relatively good contact between the active layer and the cathode. As a result, a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 8.97% was achieved with Tf1 as the cathode interlayer in an inverted polymer solar cell.

Polymer solar cells (PSCs) have attracted extensive attention due to their advantages, such as low cost of fabrication, lightweight physical features and ease for integration into flexible large-area devices. Single-junction PSCs with much improved power conversion efficiency (PCE) values, up to greater than 10%, have been recently developed. PSCs with the inverted structure have been recently shown to exhibit superior efficiency and long-term stability compared with the conventional counterparts. In the inverted device, a metal oxide layer (e.g., V2O5, MoO3, and WO3) with a high work function is frequently used as the hole-collecting layer, replacing the acidic poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(polystyrene sulfonic acid) (PEDOT:PSS) of the conventional device. Besides, the devices with the inverted structure do not use the metals with low work functions such as Ba and Ca, which are easily oxidized in an oxygen- and moisture-containing atmosphere. However, indium tin oxide (ITO) is not an ideal cathode because of its high work function, which generates a Schottky barrier between the ITO and the fullerene. Thus, ITO hinders effective electron extraction. Interface modification has been identified as an effective way to reduce the work function of ITO and make the ITO suitable for use as a cathode in inverted PSCs.

Many interlayer materials for PSCs have been investigated, including metal oxides, alkali-metal compounds, fullerene derivatives, self-assembled molecules (SAMs), and, most importantly, alcohol-soluble conjugated or nonconjugated polymers. All of these interlayers can simultaneously improve the open-circuit voltage (Voc), short-circuit current density (Jsc) and fill factor (FF) and thus result in a significantly enhanced PCE of the device. Polymeric interlayer materials are believed to be more compatible with the active layer than those small molecules. One successful example is poly[9,9-bis(6′-(N,N-diethylamino)propyl)-fluorene] (PFN), which has dimethylamino groups on the side chains. Other kinds of conjugated polymers with different polar groups, such as ammonium, diethanolamine, phosphonate, and amino oxide, have also proved to be efficient interlayers in PSCs. The polar groups on the side chains offer these conjugated polymers good solubility in water and methanol, and avoid erosion of the interface with the upper layer when spin-coated. In addition, the polar groups generate interfacial dipoles, and thus reduce the work function of the electrode and facilitate effective electron extraction. However, because properties of a polymer partially depend on its molecular weight and polydispersity index (PDI), and because of variations in production from batch to batch, it is a great challenge to guarantee the reproducibility of the performance of such polymer-containing devices.
Recently, some small molecules with well-defined structures have been applied as the interlayers in inverted PSCs with excellent device performances and completely reproducible properties. Small molecules with π-conjugated structures seem rather attractive because their properties can be precisely fine-tuned by modifying their chemical structures. Compared with the linear counterparts, star-shaped conjugated molecules have been shown to exhibit advantages due to their unique architecture, and they have been used in various optoelectronic devices due to their attractive properties such as excellent solubility, film-forming ability and high thermal stability. The 1,3,5-triazine unit has a strong electron-accepting ability and high symmetry. Moreover, the peripheral fluorene units and the triazine core are coplanar, resulting in a large π-conjugated structure, which would be expected to benefit charge transport.
In the current work, two star-shaped conjugated oligomers with 1,3,5-triazine as the core and fluorenes as the arms were designed and synthesized, and are denoted as Tf1 and Tf2 (see Fig. 1). The polar diethylamino groups were grafted on the 9-position of the fluorene arms. Tf2 showed a π-extended structure with additional inner fluorene arms. These oligomers were utilized as cathode interlayers in the inverted PSCs with the active blend layer of poly[4,8-bis(2-ethylhexyloxyl)-benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl-alt-ethylhexyl-3-fluorothithieno[3,4-b]thiophene-2-carboxylate-4,6-diyl] (PTB7) and (6,6)-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM). The device configuration was ITO/interlayer/PTB7:PC71BM/MoO3/Al (shown in Fig. 1). The device achieved a maximum PCE of 8.97%, indicating that these star-shaped triazine compounds are efficient cathode interlayers in the inverted PSCs. This work also revealed relationships between the molecular structure and the device performance, and provided new ways to carry out a more precise chemical and structural optimization of the interfacial materials.

The star-shaped triazine conjugated oligomers were synthesized by applying the modified convergent core-creating approach (see Fig. 2). The key intermediates were synthesized via palladium-catalyzed Suzuki coupling. The 1,3,5-triazine core was constructed by carrying out a cyclization reaction catalyzed by trifluoromethanesulfonic acid, and then the bromohexyl groups were transformed to diethylamino groups by carrying out a simple nucleophilic substitution reaction to afford the final star-shaped compounds in high yields. The expected structures of the key intermediates and the desired products were fully verified by 1H, 13C NMR spectroscopy and mass spectrometry (see ESI). Owing to the diethylamino end groups, both compounds exhibited excellent solubility in polar solvents such as methanol, ethyl acetate, and N,N-dimethylformamide, and were nearly insoluble in chloroform or chlorobenzene.


The photophysical and electrochemical properties of Tf1 and Tf2 were characterized by performing UV-Vis and cyclic voltammetry (CV) experiments (Fig. S1, ESI), and the detailed data are summarized in Table S1 (ESI). When spin-coated in film, the maximum absorption values for Tf1 and Tf2 occurred at 358 and 386 nm, respectively. These compounds were observed to not absorb light in the visible and near-infrared region, and thus provided optical transparency for efficient light harvesting when incorporated as the interlayers in PSCs. The significant red shift from Tf1 to Tf2 resulted from their π-extended structures. As the electrochemical properties of these compounds are mainly defined by their common triazine core and fluorene arms, Tf1 and Tf2 showed similar CV curves. The highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) energy levels of Tf1 and Tf2 were estimated to be −5.49 and −5.48 eV, respectively. Their lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) values were calculated, from the optical band gaps (Eoptg), to be −2.21 and −2.51 eV, respectively.


To evaluate the performances resulting from these star-shaped compounds as interlayers in inverted PSCs, a blend of PC71BM and PTB7 was chosen as the active layer, with the configuration ITO/interlayer/PTB7:PC71BM/MoO3/Al. Control devices with PFN as the interlayer were also fabricated. The thicknesses of the interlayers were first measured. For Tf1-based devices, the thicknesses of the interlayers were approximate 1, 3 and 6 nm, respectively. For Tf2-based devices, the thicknesses of the interlayers were approximate 1, 3, 6 and 15 nm, respectively. The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the optimized devices under illumination of AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2 and in the dark are shown in Fig. S2 (ESI). The detailed device parameters are summarized in Table S2 (ESI). All of the devices with Tf1 and Tf2 as the cathode interlayers showed high PCEs, and the device performances depended on the thickness of each interlayer. For Tf1, the optimized interlayer thicknesses were about 3 nm, while for Tf2, they were about 6 nm. On the one hand, further increasing the thickness led to an inferior device performance with the reduction of Jsc, which can be attributed to the lower conductivity of the interlayers and larger series resistance. On the other hand, thinner interlayers yielded an “S-shaped” J–V curve (shown in Fig. S2, ESI) with a low fill factor (FF), which may have been due to these interlayers being too thin to fully cover the ITO substrate. The performances of the device with the optimized interlayer thickness are shown in Fig. 3, and the detailed device parameters are summarized in Table 1.

Interlayer

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
The values without parentheses are those for the best device, and the values in parentheses are average values calculated over six devices.
Tf1
0.74
16.78
71.72
8.97
(0.74)
(16.58)
(71.67)
(8.86)
Tf2
0.74
16.08
70.13
8.33
(0.74)
(15.99)
(69.62)
(8.21)
PFN
0.74
15.86
71.78
8.46
(0.74)
(15.56)
(71.44)
(8.28)
The inverted PSCs with Tf1 and Tf2 interlayers exhibited average PCE values of 8.86% and 8.21%, respectively. The superior performance achieved with Tf1 as the interlayer was even better than those with the commonly used PFN interlayer (which have shown an average PCE of 8.28%). Fig. 3b shows the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra of the inverted devices with the different interlayers. The EQE values were above 50% through the range 350–700 nm in all of the devices, indicating efficient photon-to-electron conversion.

In order to illustrate how the interlayers with the triazine core affect the device performances, the interfacial properties of these interlayers were investigated in the device. The work functions of the ITO modified with either Tf1 or Tf2 were measured by using a Kelvin probe. The details of the results are summarized in Table 2.

Interlayer
Thickness (nm)
WF (eV)
Interlayer
Thickness (nm)
WF (eV)

a For all the interlayers, the work function (WF) values were measured at least 100 times and then averaged. Graphene was used as the reference and it yielded a value of −0.131 eV. The work functions of the interlayers were calculated from the equation EinterlayerWF = 4.60 eV − (−0.131 − EexperimentWF) eV.

Tf1
1
4.25
Tf2
1
4.24
3
4.11
3
4.15
6
4.10
6
4.13
15
4.09
Device performance was affected by interlayer thickness, since this thickness affects the work function of the ITO. As shown in Table 2, the work function of the ITO decreased as the thickness of the interlayer increased. Thinner films (i.e., less than 3 nm) yielded higher work functions, which may have been due to their inability to fully cover the ITO substrates, and the thinner interlayers also yielded relatively low Voc values (Fig. S2 and Table S2, ESI). These results together were consistent with the active layer and electrode having a non-ohmic contact. The work functions of the ITO modified by the interlayers with the optimized thicknesses were observed to be 4.11 and 4.13 eV for Tf1 and Tf2, respectively. As the work functions of the modified ITO substrates were higher than the electron affinity of PC71BM (−4.2 eV), the modified ITO and PC71BM were in ohmic contact. Therefore, the Voc of the devices were determined by the active layer, and exhibited the same values for all devices regardless of the interlayers. The energy-level diagrams of the inverted PSCs and the modified ITO are illustrated in Fig. 4.
The work functions of the ITO substrates with and without the interlayer modification were further confirmed by performing ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS). As demonstrated in Fig. S3 (ESI), the work function shifted from 4.41 eV for the bare ITO substrate to 3.47 eV and 3.48 eV after the ITO was coated with Tf1 and Tf2, respectively. Discrepancies between the two techniques (Kelvin probe and UPS experiments) were caused by the differences in the atmospheres and other experimental conditions. However, the trends of the work function results for the two techniques were consistent. The work function of the ITO modified with Tf1 was lower than that of the ITO modified with Tf2. We speculated that Tf1 had a higher density of dipoles than did Tf2 under the same conditions, resulting in a higher intensity of the interfacial dipole, which we expect was responsible for the lower work function of the Tf1-modified ITO.

In order to investigate the charge transport properties of these interlayers, electron-only devices with the ITO/ZnO/interlayer/Al configuration were prepared and the electron mobilities of the interlayers were determined by fitting the data of J–V curves to the modified Mott-Gurney equation using the space-charge-limited current (SCLC) method. The thicknesses of both interlayers were approximately 150 nm. The electron mobility values of Tf1 and Tf2 were calculated from the J–V characteristics (Fig. 5) to be 1.3 × 10−6 and 5.5 × 10−7 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively. The electron mobility of Tf1 being twice that of Tf2 was probably in part due to the different ratios of electron-withdrawing triazine core in their molecular structures.

The wetting properties of the interlayers were assessed by measuring the water contact angles on the surfaces of Tf1- and Tf2-coated ITO substrates. As shown in Fig. 6, the water contact angle for Tf1 was 70.7°. In contrast, Tf2 yielded an increased water contact angle of 81.2°, indicating it to be a bit more hydrophobic, which we attributed to the additional hydrophobic n-hexyl chains in the inner fluorene arms. The surfaces modified by the interlayers exhibited larger water contact angles than did the bare ITO surface, which showed a valued of only 24.5°. Our previous research indicated that a hydrophobic cathode surface would benefit the PTB7:PC71BM solution by spreading it better, leading to interpenetrating networks and more effective phase separation.
To further investigate the interfacial properties, the surface morphologies were also characterized using atomic force microscopy (AFM). The AFM images of the upper active layers atop of Tf1 and Tf2 are shown in Fig. S4 (ESI). The root mean square (RMS) deviations of the heights of the active layers were 1.78 and 2.07 nm for the Tf1- and Tf2-based devices, respectively. The active layer deposited on different interlayers exhibited homogeneous phase separation and continuously interpenetrating networks, which we attributed to the hydrophobic properties of the interlayers. Moreover, the differences between the active layers were small and could not be distinguished by comparing the AFM images. In contrast, the roughness values of Tf1 and Tf2 on the ITO substrates showed a considerable difference (Fig. 7), with root mean square (RMS) deviations of 3.76 and 8.05 nm, respectively. The Tf1-coated surface was relatively smooth and homogenous, while the Tf2-coated surface exhibited increased roughness with many more raised islands over the films. In terms of the structure–property relationship, Tf2 might have aggregated to a greater extent than did Tf1 when spin-coated. Tf1 provided a better contact between the active layer and the cathode, which resulted in its yielding a slightly higher Jsc and FF.
Previous investigations focused on reducing the work function of ITO in inverted solar cells by incorporating interlayers. In the current work, the diethylamino end groups were found to play an important role in reducing the work function of ITO, which resulted in an increased Voc and an improved PCE. Meanwhile, it was shown that the wetting properties and surface morphologies of the interlayers could be tuned by modifying the star-shaped molecules with a π-conjugated structure, and that producing suitably hydrophobic and smooth interlayers benefited the device performance with enhanced Jsc and FF values.

In conclusion, we developed two star-shaped triazine-core-containing compounds, Tf1 and Tf2, and demonstrated them to be excellent interlayer materials in inverted polymer solar cells owing to their abilities to reduce the work function of ITO effectively. Moreover, these suitably hydrophobic and smooth interlayers could benefit the device performance as well. A PCE value as high as 8.97% was achieved with Tf1 as the cathode interlayer in inverted PSCs with PTB7:PC71BM as the active layer. The well-defined structure of this interlayer and its processability in an alcohol solution suggests that it may find promising use in polymer solar cells.


This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21572171), the National Basic Research Program of China (973 Program 2013CB834805), the Innovative Research Group of Hubei Province (No. 2015CFA014), and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities of China (No. 2042015KF0190).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6tc03948k
‡ These authors contributed equally.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016