 DOI: 10.1039/D0TA02807J
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 10226-10232


Cheng
Liu
,

Yi
Yang
,

Xin
Liu
,

Yong
Ding
*,

Zulqarnain
Arain
,

Xinye
Li
,

Yuanlong
Li
,

Zian
Zhou
,

Songyuan
Dai
* and 

Mohammad Khaja
Nazeeruddin
*

State Key Laboratory of Alternate Electrical Power System with Renewable Energy Sources, North China Electric Power University, Beijing 102206, P. R. China. E-mail: dingy@ncepu.edu.cn; sydai@ncepu.edu.cn

Group for Molecular Engineering of Functional Materials, Institute of Chemical Sciences and Engineering, EPFL VALAIS, 1951, Sion, Switzerland. E-mail: mdkhaja.nazeeruddin@epfl.ch

School of Chemistry and Materials Science, Anhui Normal University, Wuhu 241002, P. R. China

Energy System Engineering Department, Sukkur IBA University, Sukkur 65200, Pakistan

Received
10th March 2020
, Accepted 22nd April 2020
First published on 22nd April 2020
All-inorganic cesium lead iodide perovskites (CsPbI3) are promising materials for efficient solar cells. However, they suffer from the formation of an undesired yellow δ-phase under ambient conditions. Herein, we provide a novel strategy to in situ prepare quasi-quantum dot (QQD) CsPbI3 films by using a new ligand, adamantan-1-yl methanammonium (AMDA), with ultralow contents (∼0.25 wt%) in the perovskite films. Strong interaction and charge coupling between the ligands and nanocrystals significantly increase the surface Gibbs energy of CsPbI3 and suppresses the grain sizes to around 30 nm, which effectively protects the black α-phase from the destruction of moisture and heat. By reducing the trap density of states in the QQD CsPbI3 films, the all-inorganic PSCs exhibit a power conversion efficiency of 13.5%. Most importantly, the QQD CsPbI3 films can substantially maintain an α-phase and the QQD-based PSCs retain 90% of their initial efficiency after storage either under ambient conditions for 30 days or 85 °C heating for 336 h. These results indicate that in situ prepared QQD films are a potential strategy to effectively improve the long-term stability of all inorganic perovskite materials.

Organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have achieved unprecedented progress with the certified power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 25.2% in a few years. However, the thermal instability due to the volatility of organic components has become a major roadblock towards large-scale commercial applications. Alternatively, all-inorganic perovskite materials (CsPbX3) have attracted great attention because of their intrinsic composition stability under thermal stress. Among them, CsPbI3 with a cubic crystal structure (α phase) exhibits a band gap of ∼1.73 eV, and PSCs constructed with it attain over 18% efficiency. However, unfortunately, α-CsPbI3 is structurally unstable at temperatures below 320 °C and spontaneously transits into an undesired δ-phase (yellow phase) with a poor response to the solar spectrum. Researchers have proposed different strategies to address this problem, such as tolerance factor tuning, dimension control, crystal regulation, surface passivation,etc. Aside from these, colloidal CsPbI3 quantum dots (QDs), with crystal size lower than the Bohr diameter (12 nm), have shown a much more stable symmetrical cubic structure due to the strong quantum confinement effect and high surface Gibbs energy from the dominant contribution of large surface/volume ratio. Solar cells based on CsPbI3 QDs have shown PCEs over 10%. However, the complicated previous synthesis, multiple-cycle coating, and purification processes hinder the further assembling of CsPbI3 QDs into solar cells.

Recently, a simplified method inspired by CsPbI3 QDs suggests that introducing ligands (such as sulfobetaine zwitterion, ethylenediamine cations, ascorbic acid, diethylenetriamine iodide, 4-fluorophenyl ethylammonium iodide, etc.) into the CsPbI3 film can reduce the grain size to sub 100 nm, increase surface Gibbs energy and thereby stabilize α-CsPbI3. The modified method is much easier compared with fabricating CsPbI3 QDs, while the excessive introduction of ligands blocks the charge transfer at the grain boundary and hinders the further PCE improvement. Therefore, a simple strategy to increase the surface Gibbs energy of CsPbI3 with less ligands is urgently required to maintain long-term stability of CsPbI3 PSCs without the cost of efficiency loss.
In this study, we report a simple method to stabilize the α phase via in situ processing quasi-quantum dot CsPbI3 films based on (adamantan-1-yl)methanammonium (ADMA), which avoids tedious chemical synthesis and the content is successfully driven down to only 0.25 wt% in the films. The ligands are tightly adsorbed to the crystal surface and rapidly squeeze the CsPbI3 crystals to form quasi-quantum dots (QQDs) with an average grain size of ∼30 nm through the strong steric effect, which dramatically contributes to the size-dependent phase stability. Solar cells based on the QQD-stabilized α-CsPbI3 achieve an efficiency of 13.5% and retain 90% of its initial efficiency after storage either under ambient conditions for 30 days or 85 °C heating for 336 h.

The CsPbI3 films in this study were fabricated by a typical one-step method using a common precursor containing CsI and PbI2 dissolved in N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF). Hydroiodic acid (HI) is introduced as the reference precursor to format a low-temperature processed α-phase CsPbI3 film by taking advantage of strain in the crystal. The in situ formation of QQD CsPbI3 films was realized by directly adding a small amount (0.25 wt%) of ADMA together with HI to the precursor to replace the conventionally complicated synthesis. The scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images (Fig. 1a) show that the HI-assisted CsPbI3 films (control) contain large grains with an average grain size of 180 nm and numerous pinholes uniformly appearing at the grain boundaries. Differently, our method enables an in situ formation of QQD CsPbI3 films with remarkably decreased grain sizes to ∼30 nm without any pinholes (Fig. 1b).

Cross-section SEM (Fig. 1c and d) indicates that the thickness of both control and QQD CsPbI3 films is around 400 nm, while the QQD CsPbI3 films show much more compact and uniform morphology than that of the control. These pinholes uniformly distributed in the control film may act as defects and result in severe charge recombination in the PSCs. As shown in Fig. 1e and f, the atomic force microscopy (AFM) images reveal that the QQD CsPbI3 films have a smoother surface morphology with a root-mean-square (RMS) roughness of 4 nm, which is much lower than that of the control film (RMS = 22 nm). The decreased roughness of the QQD CsPbI3 films is expected to generate a better interfacial contact between perovskite layers and the hole transport layers (HTLs).
As for the mechanism of the QQD film formation, the interaction between CsPbI3 and ADMA ligands has been simulated by density functional theory (DFT) calculations in our previous report. Despite a strong adsorption energy of −3.89 eV evaluated for the equilibrated system of Cs-adsorbed at the crystal surface, the ADMA-adsorbed system shows a larger adsorption energy of −4.85 eV which indicates ADMA has a stronger interaction with the CsPbI3 crystal surface than Cs cations. And a strong charge transfer of 1.02e is observed from the NH3+ groups in ADMA to the I atoms at the CsPbI3 crystal surface, while the Cs-adsorbed system exhibits a quite weaker charge transfer (0.87e) between Cs cations and the I atoms. This result indicates that the charge distribution between the amine and the I atoms is much greater than that of the Cs cations. Thus, the tight interaction is mainly attributed to the strong charge transfer-induced large adsorption energy between ADMA and CsPbI3.
Besides the interaction mechanism, the growth process is also important for the QQD film formation. The light scattering behaviour for CsPbI3 precursor solutions was investigated with dynamic light scattering (DLS) measurements (Fig. S1a). With the ADMA ligands added in the precursor solution, the radius of CsPbI3–DMF rapidly decreases from 975 nm to 270 nm, indicating the reduction in colloid size by the ADMA interaction. Also, a bright beam path indicating a strong Tyndall effect was observed for the control CsPbI3 precursor solution as shown in the inset picture in Fig. S1a. By contrast, the ADMA–CsPbI3 precursor solution shows a negligible Tyndall effect, well consistent with DLS results. Based on the above characterization experiments and discussion, we propose a plausible mechanism for the CsPbI3 perovskite formation as shown in Fig. 2a and b. For the QQD CsPbI3 perovskite formation process which is different from that of the control, CsI, PbI2, and ADMA are first dissolved in the DMF solvent and then the precursor solution is spin-coated onto the substrate. With the solvent evaporation, a nearly amorphous QQD spun film is obtained compared to the well-crystallized control spun film, as X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns show in Fig. S1b. The suppressed crystallization of the QQD spun film indicates the formation of an CsI·PbI2·ADMA intermediate phase by a strong steric effect. During the annealing procedure, the CsI·PbI2·ADMA intermediate phase gradually converts into crystalline α-CsPbI3 and finally develops into a small-grained and uniform film with multidimensional division by ADMA. Both of the increased rotation barriers of the PbI6 octahedron and the improved surface Gibbs energy of CsPbI3 stabilize the black phase CsPbI3 under external pressure.
To explore the effect of the spacer groups linked with methylammonium, five ligands are chosen and equally added to the precursor solution to fabricate smaller grain-size CsPbI3 films and the geometries of the ligands are shown in Fig. S2a. Firstly, we compared the spacer group size by adopting ADMA, cyclohexanemethylamine (CHMA) and butylamine (BA) as the ligands. The spacer groups of ADMA, CHMA, and BA are cyclic tetrahedral hydrocarbons, benzene ring and chain propane, respectively. The histograms of CsPbI3 grain sizes (Fig. S2b) show that the grain size reduces from 80 nm to 30 nm with the spacer group size increasing. This indicates that the spacer group size determines the effectiveness of the steric effect and thereby influences the grain sizes. Secondly, ADMA, benzylamine (BEA) and 2,4,6-trifluorobenzylamine (TFA) were introduced as ligands to investigate the effect of electronegativity. With the increasing of the electron-withdrawing ability, the CsPbI3 grain sizes increase from 30 nm to 120 nm. Thus, the electron-donating ability of methylammonium, which determines the interaction between ligands and perovskite, is significantly influenced by the electron-withdrawing ability of the spacer groups. Considering both the two effects, ADMA is an ideal ligand for growing QQD CsPbI3 films with contents as low as 0.25 wt% in the film.

Fig. 3a presents the absorption spectra of the CsPbI3 films. Both the control and the QQD films have an absorption cut-off at ∼720 nm, corresponding to an optical band gap of 1.72 eV. The steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra of the CsPbI3 films exhibit a single emission peak at ∼710 nm, and the increased intensity of the QQD film indicates that the defect-induced charge recombination has been effectively retarded. Typical XRD patterns of the CsPbI3 films are shown in Fig. 3b, and both CsPbI3 films behave as an α-phase because of the presence of strain in the crystal. The decreased crystallinity of the QQD film suggests its ultra-small grain sizes which is consistent with the SEM images (Fig. 1b).
The trap state densities and charge transport properties of the CsPbI3 films are investigated by dark current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of electron-only devices with the structure fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO)/TiO2/CsPbI3/PCBM/Ag. As shown in Fig. 3c, the trap-filled limit voltage (VTFL) of the control- and the QQD-based devices are located at 0.86 V and 0.74 V, respectively. And the corresponding trap-state density (Nt) is calculated using the equation Nt = 2εrε0VTFL/qL2, where εr is the relative dielectric constant of the inorganic perovskite, ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, q is the electron charge, and L is the thickness of the CsPbI3 film. The calculated Nt of the CsPbI3 film is decreased by 15.7% from 3.8 × 1015 cm−3 (the control film) to 3.2 × 1015 cm−3 (the QQD film). The decreased trap-state density could be attributed to the eliminated pinholes and improved film morphology. To ascertain the impacts of the lower trap-state density, time-resolved PL (TRPL) characterization was carried out on the CsPbI3 films (Fig. 3d). The average lifetimes related to the nonradiative recombination in the control film and the QQD film are calculated to be 2.2 and 9.7 ns, respectively, demonstrating a lower trap density and suppressed carrier recombination in the QQD film. To visually and in situ characterize the defects and emission distribution, we applied confocal PL mapping on the CsPbI3 films. The PL intensity maps (Fig. 3e) of the control film shows a lower absolute intensity and extensive heterogeneity in the emission, consistent with the PL data in Fig. 3a. The nonuniformity of the PL map may be mainly attributed to the inferior morphology and the numerous pinholes in the control CsPbI3 film. In contrast, a uniform emission distribution and a higher absolute intensity were observed for the QQD film (Fig. 3f), suggesting a high-quality CsPbI3 perovskite film with fewer defects.
To demonstrate the photovoltaic performance of the outstanding QQD film, solar cells with a planar heterojunction architecture (FTO/TiO2/CsPbI3/2,2,7,7-tetrakis[N,N-di(4-methoxyphenyl)amino]-9,9-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD)/Au) were fabricated. The cross-section SEM images of the PSCs (Fig. 4a and b) demonstrate that the thickness and grain sizes of CsPbI3 films agree well with the film SEM results, while numerous pinholes in the control film may act as severe defects and decrease the device performance.

Fig. 4c shows the J–V curves of the PSCs with different CsPbI3 films measured under simulated AM 1.5G sunlight at 100 mW cm−2. The control device shows the best performance with a short circuit current density (JSC) of 16.03 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 1.01 V, a fill factor (FF) of 62.5%, and a PCE of 10.1%. In contrast, the devices with QQD films show a significantly improved performance with a JSC of 16.87 mA cm−2, a VOC of 1.06 V, an FF of 75.49%, and a PCE of 13.48% for the best device. The JSC is in good agreement with the external quantum efficiencies (EQEs) shown in Fig. S3a. The performance enhancement and low hysteresis behaviour (Fig. 4c and S3b–d) are tentatively attributed to the reduced trap density in the QQD-based device. To further understand the trap-induced charge recombination, transient photovoltage decay was performed on the operating CsPbI3-based PSCs. Fig. 4d shows the exponential decay distribution which corresponds to the continuing charge trapped and de-trapped processes, and the VOC decay time constants are fitted from the decay curves. The QQD-based device displays much slower photovoltage decay and exhibits a longer VOC decay time constant (0.62 ms) than that of the control device (0.23 ms). Corresponding to the slower photovoltage decay, a prolonged electron lifetime of QQD-based PSCs is obtained over the same voltage region in Fig. S4. These results reveal that the QQD-based device has a longer carrier lifetime and slower charge recombination rate. Moreover, the light intensity dependence of VOC (Fig. 4e) shows the ideality factors (n) of the device notably reduced from 1.87 to 1.35 after using the QQD film, which well matches the transient photovoltage decay measurement (Fig. 4d) and confirms a suppressed non-radiative trap-assisted recombination according to the Shockley–Read–Hall theory.Fig. 4f shows the steady-state photocurrent and PCE as a function of time at the maximum power point (MPPT). The slightly increased current of the QQD-based device agrees well with the minor hysteresis (Fig. S3c) and the photocurrent as well as PCE and is close to the value from J–V measurements. The control device shows a more obvious increase of the photocurrent and PCE, which indicates that pinhole-induced defects generate charge transport limitations and the following charge recombination.
In addition to their higher photovoltaic performance, most importantly, the QQD-based PSCs also exhibited much better stability than the control device. Fig. 5a demonstrates that the QQD-based PSC almost retains 90% of its initial PCE when kept in an ambient environment for 30 days with the relative humidity (RH) less than 15% at room temperature. The XRD pattern (Fig. 5b) indicates that the rapid performance decay of the control device is mainly attributed to the complete phase transfer from the α phase to the δ phase. The QQD CsPbI3 film primarily maintains the α phase even after storage for 30 days with RH ∼ 15% (Fig. 5c). Though a slight improvement of waterproof ability is also found for the QQD CsPbI3 film by contact angle measurements (Fig. S5), we mainly attributed its stable α phase to the increased surface Gibbs energy and the increased rotation barriers of the PbI6 octahedron.
Moreover, the QQD-based device exhibits excellent thermal stability as shown in Fig. 5d. Under continuous heating at 85 °C in a nitrogen atmosphere, the control device dies only after 24 h. In contrast, the QQD-based device maintains 92% of its initial PCE after 336 h of continuous heating at 85 °C. A fast thermal-induced phase transfer happens on the control CsPbI3 film (Fig. 5e), while the QQD CsPbI3 film maintains the crystal structure as the α phase after long-term heating in N2 (Fig. 5f). To further understand the improved thermal stability, we determined the mass loss behaviour of the QQD CsPbI3 system by using thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) measurements (Fig. S6). Like previous reports, there is a falling edge above 460 °C corresponding to the sublimation temperature of CsPbI3. Interestingly, the QQD CsPbI3 sample undergoes an obvious weight loss in one step, which occurs above 210 °C and suggests the loss of ADMA ligands. That is to say, the strong interaction between ligands and CsPbI3 dramatically increases the sublimation temperature of ADMA in the current CsPbI3 system from the boiling point of ADMA (∼84 °C). Therefore, the ADMA ligands could effectively stabilize the α-CsPbI3 crystal structure even under the temperature of 85 °C.

We propose a simple strategy for the in situ fabrication of QQD CsPbI3 films by using a new ligand, ADMA, without any previous chemical synthesis. Based on this design, the contents of the ligands are reduced to only 0.25 wt%, which benefits the charge transport and reduces the charge recombination a lot. The QQD-based all-inorganic PSCs are optimized to a high PCE of 13.5%. Most importantly, strong interaction and charge coupling between ligands and nanocrystals significantly increases surface Gibbs energy of CsPbI3 and suppress the grain sizes to around 30 nm, which effectively protects the black α-phase from the induction of moisture and heat. The QQD CsPbI3 films substantially maintain an α-phase and the QQD-based PSCs retain 90% of their initial PCEs after either storage under ambient conditions for 30 days or 85 °C heating for 336 h. The present study points out a new direction to simplify the fabrication process of quantum dot films and improve the long-term stability of all-inorganic PSCs.


There are no conflicts to declare.


The authors acknowledge the support of the 111 Project (No. B16016), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. U1705256, 51702096, 51961165106 and 61904053).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta02807j
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020