 DOI: 10.1039/C1EE01544C
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3617-3624

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


William
Kylberg
,

Prashant
Sonar
*,

Jakob
Heier
,

Jean-Nicolas
Tisserant
,

Christian
Müller
,

Frank
Nüesch
,

Zhi-Kuan
Chen
,

Ananth
Dodabalapur
,

Songhak
Yoon
 and 

Roland
Hany
*

Institute of Materials Research and Engineering (IMRE), Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), 3 Research Link, Singapore 117602. E-mail: sonarp@imre.a-star.edu.sg

Empa, Swiss Federal Institute for Materials Science and Technology, Laboratory for Functional Polymers, Überlandstrasse 129, CH-8600, Dübendorf, Switzerland. E-mail: roland.hany@empa.ch; Fax: +41 58 765 4012; Tel: +41 58 765 4084

Empa, Laboratory for Solid State Chemistry and Catalysis, CH-8600 Duebendorf, Switzerland

Biomolecular and Organic Electronics, Department of Physics, Chemistry & Biology, Linköping University, 58183, Linköping, Sweden

Microelectronic Research Centre, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78758, USA

Received
25th April 2011
, Accepted 10th June 2011
First published on 25th July 2011

Diketopyrrolopyrrole (DPP)-based organic semiconductors EH-DPP-TFP and EH-DPP-TFPV with branched ethyl-hexyl solubilizing alkyl chains and end capped with trifluoromethyl phenyl groups were designed and synthesized via Suzuki coupling. These compounds show intense absorptions up to 700 nm, and thin film-forming characteristics that sensitively depend on the solvent and coating conditions. Both materials have been used as electron donors in bulk heterojunction and bilayer organic photovoltaic (OPV) devices with fullerenes as acceptors and their performance has been studied in detail. The best power conversion efficiency of 3.3% under AM1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2) was achieved for bilayer solar cells when EH-DPP-TFPV was used with C60, after a thermal annealing step to induce dye aggregation and interdiffusion of C60 with the donor material. To date, this is one of the highest efficiencies reported for simple bilayer OPV devices.

Solar energy conversion based on organic materials is an emerging field. With the potential for low-cost fabrication on flexible substrates by large-area compatible roll-to-roll and printing techniques, organic photovoltaics is expected to find cost-effective applications in various fields in the near future, such as portable electronics, building-integrated photovoltaics or smart textiles. Polymer solar cells are still leading the field, but recent work has demonstrated that, with soluble small molecules, high-performing organic solar cells can be fabricated as well. Small molecules possess some intrinsic merits over polymers, such as high charge carrier mobility or ease of synthesis and purification; however, control over the nanoscale morphology of the active components, which is key for maximised charge generation and transport, is comparatively more challenging. Recently, the diketopyrrolopyrrole dye pigment proved to be a particularly versatile chromophore for the synthesis of stable, solution-processable low-band gap molecular semiconductors with promising optoelectronic device applications. Here, we report on the synthesis of new diketopyrrolopyrrole derivatives and on their morphology and aggregation/crystallization tendency in thin films, which sensitively depends on, and can be adjusted by the processing conditions. Heterojunction solar cells were systematically optimized, and, for the first time, we reached a promising power conversion efficiency of 3.3% with simple diketopyrrolopyrrole/fullerene bilayer devices.


Semiconducting organic materials are important for emerging applications in electronic devices such as organic thin film transistors (OTFTs), organic photovoltaics (OPV) and organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs). OPV cells are attracting tremendous attention in the academic and industrial community due to their potential as low-cost and light-weight devices for renewable energy applications. Thereby, band gap-tuned and tailor-made stable, solution-processable organic semiconductors with high mobilities for charge carriers are key for the fabrication of such solar cells on flexible substrates via large-area compatible roll-to-roll and printing methods.

Power conversion efficiencies (PCE) of OPV devices have been rapidly increasing in various device architectures including bulk heterojunction (BHJ), planar heterojunction, cascade structures and tandem geometries.BHJ cells that are based on interpenetrating networks of electron donating polymers and fullerene electron acceptors derivatives, as well as tandem multilayer devices possess the highest efficiencies for solution-processed OPV cells, with certified values above 7%. Notably, OPV cells based on soluble small molecular organic semiconductors performed lower than solution-processed polymers so far, with PCE of 4.4% and 4.3% for small-molecule BHJ reported only recently. The limited success of small-molecule materials is usually ascribed to the poorer film-formation properties, and the adjustment of a nanoscale phase separation between the donor dye molecule and the fullerene acceptor in a BHJ thin film is particularly challenging. On the other hand, small molecules do have important merits over polymers, such as ease of synthesis, purification and monodispersity.
The first breakthrough for small molecule-based OPV, with a PCE of ∼1%, was a planar heterojunction device consisting of copper phthalocyanine and a perylene tetracarboxylic derivative. Interestingly, both materials belong to the dye-pigment category, and related compounds that exploit the stability of the pigment chromophore with chemical design criteria for tuneable absorption range, redox levels and improved solubility are attracting considerable interest.
Among various studied dyes and pigments, 2,5-diketopyrrolopyrrole (DPP)-based materials stand out for organic electronic device applications. Small molecule and polymer derivatives based on DPP have shown excellent performance in OLEDs, OFETs and OPVs.DPP is a unique pigment, which can be utilized as the core moiety for a variety of functional derivatives. DPP itself possesses a high photo- and mechanical/thermal stability, and is applied in the form of inks or paints for colouring fibers, plastics and surface coatings. The insolubility of DPP is due to π–π stacking and the hydrogen atoms at the lactam nitrogens, resulting in strong intermolecular hydrogen bonding interactions. In a multitude of work it has been shown that DPP small molecule and polymer derivatives become soluble when replacing hydrogen with alkyl side chains, and the optical and electronic properties can be adjusted with donor blocks attached to the 3,6-position of the DPP moiety.
Still, a recurring theme is the pronounced aggregation and crystallization tendency of these soluble DPP derivatives, and the adjustment of the desired film morphology for OPV applications is a key issue. Recently, DPP-based acceptors with trifluoromethylphenyl end capped side groups and dodecyl solubilizing chains, in conjunction with the donor poly-3-hexylthiophene (P3HT), have been successfully demonstrated for BHJ OPV devices. Due to solubility problems when processing these blends at ambient conditions, we decided here to introduce ethyl hexyl branched alkyl chains on the nitrogen atoms of the DPP core, while keeping the conjugated backbone system. However, preliminary tests with the resulting compounds EH-DPP-TFP and EH-DPP-TFPV for the fabrication of BHJ cells using P3HT were of limited success. Interestingly, the dyes performed much better as electron donors with fullerenes in BHJ and bilayer solar cells. The highest PCE of 3.3% was achieved when using EH-DPP-TFPV with C60 in a bilayer device configuration after annealing. We demonstrate the sensitive film-formation properties of these materials in the blend and the bilayer, and explain that EH-DPP-TFPV aggregation, combined with the intermixing of C60 into the dye layer leading to an extended zone where efficient charge generation and extraction can take place, is the possible reason for this high device performance.

Chemicals were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and Strem and were used without further purification. 1H and 13C NMR data were measured on a Bruker DPX 400 MHz spectrometer with chemical shifts referenced to tetramethylsilane (δ = 0 ppm). Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight (MALDI-TOF) mass spectra were obtained on a Bruker Autoflex TOF/TOF instrument using dithranol as the matrix. UV-Vis spectra were recorded on a Shimadzu model 2501-PC. AFM measurements were performed on a Nanosurf Mobile S in tapping mode at a resonance frequency of 170 kHz using silicon cantilevers. Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) was carried out under nitrogen on a TA Instrument DSC Q100 with a scanning rate of 10 °C min−1. Thermal gravimetric analysis (TGA) was carried out using a TA Instrument TGA Q500 and a heating rate of 10 °C min−1. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) experiments were performed using an Autolab potentiostat (model PGSTAT30) by Echochimie. Measurements were recorded in dichloromethane solutions of EH-DPP-TFP and EH-DPP-TFPV under argon at room temperature with a conventional three-electrode arrangement consisting of a platinum wire working electrode, a gold counter electrode, and an Ag/AgCl in 3 M KCl reference electrode, respectively. HOMO values were calculated from the corresponding oxidation onsets which were converted to SCE (saturated calomel electrode), based on a −4.4 eV SCE energy level relative to vacuum using IP = −(Eox-onset + 4.4) eV. Likewise, LUMO levels were obtained from the reduction onsets viaEA = −(Ered-onset + 4.4) eV.

The starting compound 2,5-dihydro-1,4-dioxo-3,6-dithienylpyrrolo[3,4-c]-pyrrole (DPP) was synthesized in good yield following a previously reported procedure using 2-thiophenecarbonitirile with 0.5 eq. of di-n-butyl succinate ester, an excess of potassium tert-butoxide and 2-methyl-2-butanol as solvent. The soluble derivative 3,6-bis-[2,2′]bithiophenyl-5-yl-2,5-di-ethylhexylpyrrolo[3,4-c]pyrrole-1,4-dione (EH-DPP) was obtained viaalkylation of DPP using 3 eq. of 2-ethylhexylbromide with 3 eq. of anhydrous K2CO3 in anhydrous DMF. The dibromo derivative of EH-DPP was synthesized by bromination using molecular bromine in chloroform at low temperature and the crude compound was purified by column chromatography. Dibromo EH-DPP was used for attaching the electron withdrawing trifluoromethyl phenyl and trifluoromethyl phenyl-vinylene groups using Suzuki coupling reactions for synthesizing EH-DPP-TFP and EH-DPP-TFPV, respectively. Details of the chemical synthesis route are given in the ESI.

Solutions of pure dyes and blend mixtures with PCBM ([6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester) were filtered (0.45 μm) before spin coating on ITO/PEDOT:PSS (ITO from Thin Film Devices, 140 nm, resistivity 20 ohms square−1; PEDOT:PSS, 40–60 nm, annealed at 120 °C for 15 min after coating, from Sigma-Aldrich, conductivity 1 S cm−1). For bilayer devices, a 40 nm thick C60 layer was evaporated on top of the dyes. As cathode, Al (40 nm, from Cerac, 99.999%) was deposited by thermal sublimation under vacuum at a pressure of ∼4 × 10−6 mbar through a shadow mask to define solar cells with diameters of 0.2 cm or 0.3 cm, respectively. For bilayer devices, a thin (∼2.5 nm) Alq3 layer was inserted viaevaporation between C60 and Al. Solar cells were fabricated and stored inside a glove box (H2O < 1 ppm, O2 < 10 ppm). Current–voltage (JV) characteristics were measured under simulated solar irradiation using the spectrum of a 300 W Xe lamp together with an AM1.5 filter set. The light intensity was calibrated in order to correspond to standard solar irradiation at 100 mW cm−2 for full sun. A monochromator was used together with the Xe lamp to measure the incident photon-to-current conversion efficiencies (IPCE). JV and IPCE measurements were performed outside the glove box, and the solar cells were encapsulated into an air-tight box with a quartz cover glass through which the light was focused onto the cell.


A similar synthetic pathway for EH-DPP-TFP and EH-DPP-TFPV as described in ref. 41 was followed (see the ESI). First, the starting dithienyl-substituted diketopyrrolopyrrole was synthesized in a one pot reaction according to a literature procedure.Ethyl hexyl groups were then introduced on both lactam N-atoms of DPP. After bromination, EH-DPP-TFP and EH-DPP-TFPV were isolated from a Suzuki coupling reaction carried out with commercially available fluorophenyl-boronic acids. Yields were between 50 and 70% after final purification.

Both compounds are dark purple in colour and well soluble in tetrahydrofuran, toluene and chlorinated solvents. 1H and 13C NMR spectra and MALDI-TOF associated with elemental analysis were employed to confirm the structure and purity of all compounds (see ESI). An excellent thermal stability, as well as a pronounced melting endotherm and crystallization behaviour for both EH-DPP-TFP and EH-DPP-TFPV were inferred from TGA and DSC measurements, respectively (see Table 1 and ESI). CV experiments were performed to determine the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) levels, and electrochemical band gaps were calculated from HOMO–LUMO differences (see Table 1).
Compound

UV-vis
λmax in CHCl3 solution/nm

UV-vis
λmax in CB solution/nm

UV-vis
λmax film coated from CHCl3/nm

UV-vis
λmax film coated from (CHCl3/CB)/nm
Optical band gap/eV

a Measured from the UV-vis absorption onset of films coated from CHCl3.
b From the CV oxidation onset.
c From the CV reduction onset.
d 
Crystallization (Tc) and melting temperature (Tm) from DSC measurement (peak temperatures).
e 
Decomposition temperature (Td) from TGA measurement (temperature at 5% weight loss under nitrogen, 10 °C min−1 ramp).


EH-DPP-TFP

340, 561, 598
343, 567, 607
350, 573, 625
350, 538, 638
1.77

EH-DPP-TFPV

368, 593, 634
371, 598, 644
380, 622, 692
380, 611, 670
1.65
HOMO/eV
LUMO/eV
Electrochemical band gap/eV
(Tc/Tm)/°C

T
d/°C

EH-DPP-TFP

−5.24
−3.50
1.74
171/210
368

EH-DPP-TFPV

−5.13
−3.46
1.67
170/206, 235 (weak)
389


Absorption spectra of EH-DPP-TFP and EH-DPP-TFPV in solutions are shown in Fig. 1. Both materials show absorption bands in the ultraviolet (300–400 nm) and visible (∼500 to 700 nm) regions of the spectrum (see Table 1). These can be attributed to π–π* transitions (at shorter wavelengths) and to intramolecular charge transfer transitions between the donor moieties (thienylene-phenylene) and the DPP acceptor core (at longer wavelengths). The spectral appearance for both dyes in CHCl3 and CB is rather similar, and for EH-DPP-TFPV, the three absorption maxima are shifted by 28–37 nm to longer wavelengths, as compared to EH-DPP-TFP. This can be attributed to the extra vinylene linkage in EH-DPP-TFPV, effectively extending the π-conjugated system. The spectral appearances did change neither for solutions that were diluted by a factor of ten, nor for heated CB-solution measured at approximately 80 °C. We also notice that identical UV spectra in solution were measured for re-dissolved spin-coated dye films, without or after annealing (120 °C, 30 min) under nitrogen atmosphere or in ambient air (see below).

Thin films of EH-DPP-TFP and EH-DPP-TFPV were spin coated from CHCl3, CB and CHCl3/CB solvent mixtures. Both, the film optical properties and morphologies showed a remarkably strong dependence on the particular processing conditions, including dye concentration, nature of the solvent, spin coating conditions and thermal treatment. For EH-DPP-TFP, discontinuous surface coverage ensued when spin coating from CB. As we observed by optical microscopy, this was due to the growth of large, snowflake-like crystals (data not shown). On the other hand, EH-DPP-TFP formed a visually flat and smooth film when coated from CHCl3 (see the ESI). The absorption spectrum of an EH-DPP-TFP film coated from CHCl3 (see Fig. 2(i)a) is considerably broadened and extends to longer wavelength (λmax = 625 nm) than the solution spectrum. Similar observation for soluble DPP derivatives has been explained with strong intermolecular interactions, increased molecular ordering and aggregate formation. In an aggregate, π-electrons are neutrally delocalized over multiple molecules in both the ground and excited states, leading to a characteristic, red-shifted ground state absorption. The characteristics of the visible absorption band changed and the intensity decreased substantially when the film prepared from CHCl3 was heated (see Fig. 2(i)b). The spectrum then almost matched the absorbance of an EH-DPP-TFP film coated from a CHCl3/CB solvent mixture (see Fig. 2(i)c).
Interestingly, we observed that CHCl3 vapour treatment of as-coated or heated CHCl3 EH-DPP-TFP films changed the spectra and a dominant absorption at 660 nm appeared (see the ESI). Re-annealing of the vapour-treated films restored the spectrum of the annealed film shown in Fig. 2(i)b. From this, we conclude that the solvent-induced molecular rearrangement is reversible. Repeated CHCl3 vapour treatment followed by annealing provided a means to grow large, needle-like EH-DPP-TFP crystals (see the ESI). X-Ray diffraction experiments indicated crystallinity for all CHCl3-coated EH-DPP-TFP films (see the ESI). Notably, the spectrum for EH-DPP-TFP coated from a CHCl3/CB solvent mixture (see Fig. 2(i)c) was not affected by thermal annealing.

Absorption spectra for EH-DPP-TFPV films are shown in Fig. 2(ii). Again, the film spectrum from CHCl3 is broadened, with a long-wavelength absorption extending to λmax = 692 nm (Fig. 2(ii)a). Annealing increased the intensity in the visible slightly, but the peak maxima remained unchanged (b). When coated from CB (c), film annealing (d) induced a red shift and the absorption spectrum matched with CHCl3-coated films. The same behaviour was observed for an EH-DPP-TFPV film coated from a CHCl3/CB solvent mixture (not shown).
These results demonstrate that the molecular ordering and aggregation behaviour between EH-DPP-TFP and EH-DPP-TFPV thin films is substantially different, and critically depends on the processing conditions. For EH-DPP-TFPV and after annealing, aggregates seem to be present with a similar and characteristic absorption band extending almost to 700 nm, irrespective of the solvent used for film coating. For EH-DPP-TFP, on the other hand, our results suggest a strong tendency for the formation of large macroscopic crystals, and the aggregate absorption band is comparably weaker than for EH-DPP-TFPV. This is consistent with the visual observation of EH-DPP-TFP crystal formation when using the slowly evaporating solvent CB. When coated from CHCl3, the rapid solvent removal appears to freeze a prevailing amorphous phase morphology for EH-DPP-TFP, which crystallizes upon thermal annealing or CHCl3 solvent annealing. Details of these mechanisms, however, remain unknown at this stage. In any case, we exclude trivial reasons like dye degradation at higher temperatures that explain the absorption changes upon annealing, since the coated films could be readily re-dissolved and showed identical solution UV spectra as the starting materials (see above).

AFM images of coated dye films before and after heat treatment provide some clues that support this view. Fig. 3a and e show smooth and unstructured films for EH-DPP-TFP (coated from CHCl3) and EH-DPP-TFPV (from CB). Annealing induced a film roughening (b and f), meaning that the molecules are able to substantially re-arrange at higher temperature, with associated changes in optical absorption as shown in Fig. 2. On the contrary, the film topography of EH-DPP-TFPV coated from CHCl3 consists of larger crystalline domains and does not change with temperature (see Fig. 3c and d), consistent with an immobilized dye morphology and the unaltered UV spectra after annealing. From optical microscope images (see ESI), however, we found that the EH-DPP-TFPV thin film quality from CHCl3 was poor on macroscopic length scales and unsuitable for the fabrication of high-performing solar cells (see below). Pronounced crystallinity with domain sizes of several hundred nanometres was finally also observed for EH-DPP-TFP films coated from CHCl3/CB, both at room temperature and after annealing (see ESI).


EH-DPP-TFP and EH-DPP-TFPV were tested with PCBM in BHJ solar cells. Ratios of 1:2, 1:1 and 2:1 by weight between the dyes and PCBM were used with concentrations of 10 mg mL−1 and 20 mg mL−1solvent, respectively. As observed for the pure dyes, the film morphology and associated solar cell performance were critically dependent on the coating conditions. Using CHCl3 or CHCl3/CB solvent mixtures, unsuitable blended EH-DPP-TFPV/PCBM films with coarse phase-separated domains were obtained (see Fig. 4a). For CB and a 2:1 ratio between EH-DPP-TFP or EH-DPP-TFPV and PCBM, a slow coating acceleration produced 50 nm thick films, but devices had a tendency to be shorted and no clear diode behaviour was observed. The AFM image (see Fig. 4b) of such an EH-DPP-TFPV/PCBM film shows phase-separated domains between the two components. The domain sizes are in the order of 100–200 nm, much bigger than the actual film thickness; therefore, if the film topography reflects the film composition, each component forms connecting channels to and is in simultaneous electrical contact with the anode and the cathode. Thus, electrons (transported by the PCBM network) and holes (transported by EH-DPP-TFPV) have a non-negligible probability to be collected by both electrodes, which erodes device efficiency.

Working BHJ cells from CB were obtained when using a faster acceleration (3000 rpm s−1, final speed 700 rpm for 60 s). Also in this case, film thicknesses were between 50 nm and 65 nm, and for the best-performing 1:1 mixture in CB and using EH-DPP-TFPV, we measured Jsc = 2.5 mA cm−2 for the short-circuit current, Voc = 0.45 V for the open-circuit voltage, and FF = 0.31 for the fill factor, resulting in a power conversion efficiency of η = 0.4% (see Table 2, entry a). The performance further improved when the completed device was annealed (η = 1.4%, Table 2, entry b); for longer annealing times than 30 min or higher temperatures (150 °C), the performance degraded quickly (data not shown). The increase in overall white-light solar cell performance upon annealing is also clearly confirmed from the corresponding IPCE curves (Fig. 4c); the IPCE markedly increased after annealing, and both EH-DPP-TFPV (from approx. 500 nm to 750 nm) and PCBM (below 500 nm) contribute to the photocurrent.
Sample (film thickness, nm)

Solvent


Δi
|Jsc|/mA cm−2

V
oc/V
FF (%)

η (%)

a 
Solvent used for spin coating; CHCl3 is chloroform, CB is chlorobenzene.
b 
Δi refers to the specific heat treatment; Δ1 means heating the completed solar cell at 120 °C for 30 min on a digitally controlled hotplate inside the glove box, Δ2 means heating (120 °C, 30 min) the dye film only.
c 
J
sc is the short-circuit current, Voc the open-circuit voltage, FF the fill factor, and η the external power conversion efficiency.

a

EH-DPP-TFPV:PCBM 1:1 (50)

CB

—
2.51
0.45
31
0.4
b
Δ1
3.30
0.86
50
1.4
c

EH-DPP-TFP (30)

CB:CHCl3 (3:2)
—
1.91
0.48
35
0.3
d
Δ1
2.19
0.46
34
0.3
e

EH-DPP-TFPV (20)

CB

—
4.42
0.74
41
1.3
5.26
0.61
43
1.4
f
Δ1
7.65
0.86
51
3.4
8.13
0.72
55
3.2
g
Δ2
4.64
0.62
68
2.0
h
Δ2 then Δ1
4.74
0.61
63
1.8
i

EH-DPP-TFPV (30)

CB

-
4.74
0.61
40
1.2
k
Δ1
7.03
0.69
48
2.3
l

EH-DPP-TFPV (55)

CHCl3:CB (7:1)
—
2.50
0.65
41
0.7
m
Δ1
3.10
0.74
41
0.9
n

EH-DPP-TFPV (150)

CHCl3
—
0.49
0.57
25
0.1
o
Δ1
1.52
0.84
66
0.8

Fig. 4d shows that annealing induced also in the blend film a red shift and significant increase of the EH-DPP-TFPV absorption. Interestingly, the visible dye absorption bands before and after annealing exactly match the peaks of the pure EH-DPP-TFPV film coated from CB (see Fig. 2(ii)c and d). This is different from recent observations where dye absorptions were blue shifted in the blends, due to disruption of the solid-state packing by the addition of PCBM. Therefore, even if the blend film does develop a favourable morphology with annealing that promotes increased solar cell performance, PCBM seems not to substantially intermix with EH-DPP-TFPV on a molecular scale that prevents aggregation; we suggest this to be a signature of the strong ordering tendency of EH-DPP-TFPV itself.
Poor photovoltaic cells were obtained from EH-DPP-TFP/PCBM blends, and the best performance was measured for a 80 nm thick film, coated from a 1:1 mixture from CHCl3/CB, after annealing the completed device (Jsc = 0.3 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.51 V, FF = 0.13, η = 0.02%). In agreement with pure EH-DPP-TFP (Fig. 2(i)c), the absorption spectrum of the blend film remained unchanged with annealing (data not shown). Probably, the crystallization ability of EH-DPP-TFP (see the ESI) is not importantly hindered by the presence of PCBM, resulting in coarse blend morphology with large phase-separated domains. An unfavourably blend morphology was finally also suggested for films coated from dye/P3HT mixtures. In this case, the DPP derivatives acted as the electron acceptor component; in our hands, however, initial cell performances were disappointingly low (η < 0.1%, see the ESI), resembling recent findings where low performance was obtained for BHJ solar cells consisting of DPP ethyl hexyl substituted derivatives and P3HT due to a coarse morphology of the blend.

For bilayer devices, a 40 nm thick layer of C60 was evaporated on the DPP donor dye films, and a thin Alq3 layer was inserted between C60 and the aluminium top contact to provide ohmic contact for electron extraction. For EH-DPP-TFP films (thickness ∼150 nm) spin-coated from CHCl3, device performance was poor for as-coated films (Jsc = 0.16, Voc = 0.3, FF = 0.33, η = 0.02%) and decreased by a factor of ten after annealing the completed solar cell (120 °C, 30 min). Improved performance was measured for an EH-DPP-TFP (30 nm)/C60 bilayer cell coated from a 3:2 CHCl3/CB solvent mixture (see Table 2, entry c). The performance remained unchanged after annealing (Table 2, entry d), again consistent with the frozen morphology and high crystallization tendency of EH-DPP-TFP when coated from CHCl3/CB (see Fig. 2(i)c and the ESI).

Best solar cells were obtained from EH-DPP-TFPV/C60 bilayer cells (Table 2, entries e–o). DPP donor films with thicknesses ranging from ∼20 nm to 150 nm were coated with concentrations of 20 mg mL−1, using varying spin speeds and solvents. Photovoltaic devices were characterized using both as-prepared and annealed devices. Several performance trends emerge from these results. Initially, the performance increased with decreasing EH-DPP-TFPV film thickness. One reason for this is that for thicker films, light is predominantly absorbed far away from the dye/C60 heterojunction and EH-DPP-TFPV just acts as an ineffective light filter. In addition, a thicker dye film increases the series resistance and decreases the effective charge transport to the anode, as evidenced by a smaller Jsc observed for thicker films.
Second, annealing was essential for further device improvement. For an EH-DPP-TFPV (20 nm)/C60 (40 nm) bilayer film, absorption spectra showed an identical dye red shift in the visible with annealing (see the ESI) as was observed for pure EH-DPP-TFPV (see Fig. 2(ii)c and d). Aggregation is often accompanied by increasing charge mobility, which facilitates hole transport out of the film. From the matched EH-DPP-TFPV absorption spectra for the heated pure and bilayer film, we suggest that C60 does not substantially disrupt dye aggregation, similar to BHJ with PCBM (see above). Despite this observation, we assume that annealing the completed solar cell leads to a much rougher interfacial layer, due to interdiffusion along grain boundaries and the formation of small crystallites of both components. This results in an extended mixed zone where charge generation can take place, in agreement with similar observations for polymer/C60 bilayer films and the IPCE curves shown in Fig. 5a. The increase in IPCE with annealing is more pronounced in the region of EH-DPP-TFPV absorption than at wavelengths where predominantly C60 is excited (<500 nm). This can be explained with the large exciton diffusion length of C60 (∼40 nm) compared to many other semiconducting organic materials (5–10 nm), and intermixing of dye and C60 leads to a larger relative increase of the active donor–acceptor interface for EH-DPP-TFPV. The best-performing solar cells (η ≈ 3.3%) were obtained from 20 nm thick EH-DPP-TFPV/C60 bilayer devices, after annealing the completed cell (see Fig. 5b and Table 2, entry f).
We finally observed that a sequence of annealing steps was less beneficial than heating the complete cell after fabrication (see Table 2, entries e–h). When the EH-DPP-TFPV film was heated before evaporation of C60, the performance increased slightly from η ≈ 1.4% to η = 2.0%, probably due to aggregation as suggested by an increase in FF. A very similar performance was measured when dye annealing was followed by an annealing step of the finished cell (Table 2, entry h). This suggests that the merits of annealing cannot be ascribed to better contact and electron extraction at the C60/Alq3/Al interface, but that indeed interdiffusion of C60 with EH-DPP-TFPV is the most important step for improved performance; intermixing seems to be favoured while dye molecules increase their molecular order and aggregation at the same time.

Small-molecule based organic solar cells are attracting tremendous research interest, and might soon provide a valuable alternative to polymers, considering inherent merits such as ease of synthesis or stability that small molecules offer. Our results agree with recent work on soluble DPP-derivatives and demonstrate the potential of this class of molecules for organic solar cell applications. While we concentrated here on the thin-film morphology and its influence on device performance, the rich photophysics in these systems after primary light absorption, leading to charge separation between DPP and fullerene as the first necessary step for efficient current generation, needs to be addressed in detail as well.

In line with reports on the ambipolar nature of some DPP-based organic semiconductors, we demonstrate that trifluoromethylphenyl end capped DPP derivatives can act both as donors as well as acceptors in OPV devices. The key to high performance seems to be the ability to adjust the EH-DPP-TFP and EH-DPP-TFPV film morphologies, both in bilayer and BHJ devices. The two dyes differ by a vinylene group “only”, with understandable changes in the optical transitions due to the increased co-planarization of the dye donor moiety in EH-DPP-TFPV. However, this chemical difference also had a pronounced influence on the degree of dye aggregation and crystallization in general. Likewise, it is known that differences in the solubilizing DPP side chain groups strongly influence the film morphology and solar cell performance.Solvent selection and coating conditions were critical factors to coat smooth and covering films, and the type of morphology had a pronounced influence on the absorption spectra. Combined optical and AFM studies on pure dye film suggest that (i) initially rough and structured films do neither change the morphology nor the absorption spectrum with annealing, and (ii) initially smooth and featureless films show an increase of surface roughness at higher temperature, accompanied by a tendency for increased molecular ordering and aggregation. Strong dye aggregation is also suggested by the inability of PCBM and C60 do disrupt dye ordering on a length scale relevant for aggregation. Although there are several reports of using DPP derivatives in BHJ devices, we report here for the first time on DPP bilayer solar cells with a promising performance. Further work does focus on understanding these results in detail, and on using a range of alternative film deposition methods, such as using solvent additives or processing agents to optimize morphologies.

The authors thank the Institute of Materials Research and Engineering (IMRE), the Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), the Visiting Investigator Program (VIP), the Swedish Energy Agency, and Empa for financial support.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c1ee01544c
‡ Present address: Institut de Ciència de Materials de Barcelona (ICMAB-CSIC), Esfera UAB, ES-08193 Bellaterra, Spain.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011