 DOI: 10.1039/C4CC04020A
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 10251-10254


Hang
Gao
,

Yanqin
Li
,

Lihui
Wang
,

Changyan
Ji
,

Yue
Wang
,

Wenjing
Tian
,

Xichuan
Yang
 and 

Lunxiang
Yin
*

School of Chemistry, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, China. E-mail: lxyin@dlut.edu.cn; Fax: +86-411-84986040; Tel: +86-411-84986040

State Key Laboratory of Supramolecular Structure and Materials, College of Chemistry, Jilin University, Changchun, China

Received
26th May 2014
, Accepted 15th July 2014
First published on 23rd July 2014
Two novel asymmetrical push–pull small molecules have been synthesized successfully, consisting of triphenylamine and diketopyrrolopyrrole as a fundamental dipolar D–π–A structure with ethynylbenzene as the π-bridge. TPATDPPCN end-capped with cyanophenyl exhibits a low optical band gap of 1.65 eV, and an impressive PCE of 5.94% has been achieved.

Solution-processed bulk heterojunction (BHJ) organic solar cells (OSCs) have experienced rapid development during the past two decades because they represent one of the most promising technologies for environmentally friendly solar energy conversion. So far, fullerene derivatives such as PC61BM and PC71BM have been widely used as representative n-type acceptor materials for BHJ OSCs. Much work has been done to develop novel p-type donors in order to maximize photovoltaic (PV) efficiency for commercialization. Small molecular donors (SMDs) have attracted considerable attention for preparing BHJ OSCs due to the advantages over their polymer counterparts, including well-defined molecular structures, easier purification and better batch-to-batch reproducibility. SMD-based BHJ single cells reported to date exhibit an encouraging power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 9.02%, which is comparable with the best PCE of 9.2% for polymers, making solution-processed SMD-based OSCs a fast growing field. However, the overall performance of SMD-based BHJ devices is still behind those of their polymer counterparts. Hence, solution-processed SMD-based OSCs still require better material design toward 10–15% efficiency for future applications.

To design ideal SMDs, alternating electron-donating (D) and electron-accepting (A) units in the conjugated backbone are commonly applied to improve PV performance, because such architecture can not only easily reduce the energy band gap (Eg), but also effectively control the PV properties of materials. In general, the molecular configurations of most SMDs can be classified into two main categories: symmetrical D–A–D and A–D–A systems. In contrast, the solution-processed asymmetric dipolar D–A or D–A–A systems are relatively less explored, and their PV performance lags far behind those of symmetrical SMD-based OSCs. From the study of dye-sensitized solar cells, we learned that excellent organic dyes with D–A molecular architectures exhibited remarkably high PCEs of over 10%. In addition, important progress has been made on vacuum-deposited SMD-based OSCs with a PCE of 6.8%. Consequently, we believe that these asymmetrical push–pull small molecules possess attractive potential for BHJ OSCs. However, such types of molecules generally suffer from an insufficient light-absorption range, which may be one of the main impediments to further improvement of their performance. Therefore, it is highly desired to design new asymmetrical push–pull small molecules with narrow Eg for BHJ OSCs.
In this communication, two new asymmetrical push–pull small molecules TPATDPP and TPATDPPCN have been designed and synthesized, consisting of triphenylamine (TPA) and diketopyrrolopyrrole (DPP) as a fundamental dipolar D–π–A structure with ethynylbenzene as π-linkage, as shown in Fig. 1(a). In these molecules, the TPA unit behaves as the D building block due to its good hole-transporting capability and excellent electron-donating properties. On the other hand, DPP has been regarded as a promising A group owing to its prominent electron-deficient properties and strong light-harvesting capacity, as well as excellent photochemical stability. Moreover, ethynylbenzene-linkage could not only improve the molecular planarity but also facilitate the intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) process because of the coplanar and rigid nature of CC. In order to further extend the spectral regions, the cyano-group was introduced into the molecule as an A unit, which could effectively reduce Eg. Accordingly, an asymmetrical D–A–A-type TPATDPPCN end-capped with cyanophenyl (CP) was synthesized and studied, resulting in a low optical Eg of 1.65 eV in film. Finally, their PV properties were investigated using a simple spin-coating device. Among them, the TPATDPPCN-based device showed an impressive PCE of 5.94%, which is the highest efficiency reported to date for solution-processed D–A–A-type small molecule OSCs. The results indicate the great potential of such asymmetrical push–pull SMDs in creating high performance solution-processed OSCs.
The synthesis of TPATDPP and TPATDPPCN is described in Scheme 1. Starting from TPA, compound 1 was obtained by Pd-catalyzed Sonogashira reaction. By Miyaura borylation of compound 1 using Pd(PPh3)2Cl2 as a catalyst, borate ester 2 was obtained in a yield of 80%. Compound 4 was prepared by Suzuki coupling of bromide 3 in a high yield of 94%. Bromide 5 was obtained by the NBS bromination of 4 under mild conditions with a high yield of 98%. Finally, TPATDPP and TPATDPPCN were facilely synthesized by Pd-assisted Suzuki coupling in high yields of 89% and 92%, respectively. Detailed synthetic procedures and characterization are given in the ESI. Their thermal stability was studied by thermogravimetric-analysis (TGA, see Fig. 1(b)). Their onset decomposition temperatures with 5% weight-loss are 397 °C and 408 °C, respectively, which demonstrate the exceptional thermal stability for their long-term PV applications.
The density functional theory (DFT) calculations were carried out to preliminarily investigate the influence of molecular structure on their electronic properties (the calculation method is given in the ESI). The calculated energy levels and electronic-density distribution are shown in Fig. 2(a). The electronic density of the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) is distributed on the entire molecule whereas that of the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) is located on A units, showing an apparent ICT process existing in the push–pull molecules. In addition, both the HOMO and the LUMO of TPATDPPCN are lower than those of TPATDPP, which are attributed to the introduction of the CP unit. Moreover, the end-capped CP provoked a greater decrease of the LUMO, resulting in a large decrease of Eg from 2.22 eV of TPATDPP to 2.04 eV of TPATDPPCN.
The UV-vis absorption spectra of two SMDs in chloroform and in thin film are depicted in Fig. 2(b), and the corresponding optical data are summarized in Table 1. Both molecules exhibit a strong absorption in the long-wavelength region due to the ICT transition. It is worth mentioning that TPATDPPCN exhibits a higher molar extinction coefficient (ε) than that of TPATDPP (see Fig. S10 in ESI). The solution of TPATDPP shows an absorption peak at 582 nm, and the spectrum of its film is broadened and red-shifted by 37 nm due to solid-state packing. In comparison with TPATDPP, spectra of TPATDPPCN both in solution and in film are greatly broadened and red-shifted to 614 and 671 nm, respectively, probably due to the stronger ICT transition and the stronger intermolecular interaction in the solid-state. As a result, the optical Eg of TPATDPP and TPATDPPCN corresponding to their absorption onsets is 1.80 eV and 1.65 eV, respectively.
Compound

λ
solmax nm

λ
filmmax nm

E
optg eV
HOMOCV eV
LUMOCV eV

E
CVg eV

μ
h cm2 V−1 s−1

R
S Ω cm2

R
Sh Ω cm2

V
oc V

J
sc mA cm−2
FF
PCE (%)

TAPTDPP

582
619
1.80
−5.28
−3.38
1.90
7.49 × 10−5
56.00
156
0.97
7.07
0.30
2.06

TPATDPPCN

614
671
1.65
−5.25
−3.48
1.77
1.51 × 10−4
11.40
251
0.93
14.86
0.43
5.94
The cyclic voltammogram (CV) measurements in dichloromethane were carried out to evaluate approximately the energy levels of the two molecules. The CV curves are shown in Fig. 3(a), and the pertinent electrochemical data are summarized in Table 1 (experimental details and calculation are given in the ESI). TPATDPP exhibits the onset reduction potential at −1.37 V, corresponding to the reduction of the DPP fragment. On the other hand, two reduction waves are observed in the cathodic potential regime for TPATDPPCN. The first onset reduction potential at −1.27 V can be ascribed to the reduction of the DPP fragment and the second one is assigned to the reduction of the CP group. In contrast to the reduction behavior, the oxidation potentials of the two molecules are relatively insensitive, and the first onset oxidation potentials are observed at 0.53 V and 0.50 V for TPATDPP and TPATDPPCN, respectively, corresponding to the oxidation of the TPA. As a result, the less-negative reduction potential and the slightly less-positive oxidation potential of TPATDPPCN relative to TPATDPP can be rationally ascribed to the presence of the electron-withdrawing CP block, resulting in a relatively low Eg of 1.77 eV. The energy level diagram of the components for the PV device is schematically depicted in Fig. 3(b). Both TPATDPP and TPATDPPCN in principle can behave as donors in BHJ OSCs, and the fairly low-lying HOMO would ensure a relatively large open-circuit voltage (Voc). Notably, the narrow Eg of TPATDPPCN would result in an increased short-circuit current density (Jsc).
To investigate the PV properties of two SMDs, BHJ devices based on the SMDs:PC61BM active layer with an area of 0.05 cm2 were fabricated and characterized. The related current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the devices are described in Fig. 4(a) and the PV parameters are summarized in Table 1. The device based on TPATDPP with a lower HOMO level gave a relatively high Voc of 0.97 V, a Jsc of 7.07 mA cm−2, a fill factor (FF) of 0.30 and a PCE of 2.06%. Remarkably, the TPATDPPCN based device exhibits higher performance, with a Voc of 0.93 V, a Jsc of 14.86 mA cm−2, a FF of 0.43 and a PCE of 5.94%, in agreement with its higher photon-to-current response (see Fig. S11 in the ESI). The high PV performance of the TPATDPPCN-based device can be attributed to both the narrow Eg induced by the CP group and the better carrier transporting capacity as evidenced by hole mobility (μh) measurements. Moreover, TPATDPPCN shows a stronger intermolecular interaction as evidenced by a more red-shifted absorption in film, contributing to its carrier transporting properties. Bear in mind that the charge mobility of the active layer might be closely related to the charge stability, and the film morphology as well as the intermolecular interaction. In order to investigate the μh of the synthesized SMDs, J–V characteristics of the hole-only devices were measured in the dark (details are given in the ESI), as depicted in Fig. 4(b). By fitting the J–V curves in a double logarithmic scale to a space-charge-limited current (SCLC) model, as shown in the inset of Fig. 4(b), the μh can be derived. The μh values of TPATDPP and TPATDPPCN are 7.49 × 10−5 and 1.51 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively, and the data are summarized in Table 1. It is interesting to note that TPATDPPCN exhibits about 2 times higher μh than that of TPATDPP, which is consistent with its high PV performance. Further experimental proof of better PV performance for TPATDPPCN is supported by its higher crystallinity (XRD patterns in Fig. S12, ESI) and its better bicontinuous interpenetrating network (AFM images in Fig. S13, ESI). In addition, the resistance changes are shown in Table 1. In contrast, the optimized D–A–A-typed TPATDPPCN reduces the series resistance (RS) from 56 Ω cm2 to 11.40 Ω cm2 and increases the shunt resistance (RSh) from 156 Ω cm2 to 251 Ω cm2, which leads to the increase of FF, Jsc and PCE. Further experiments on device optimization are underway in our laboratory.
In conclusion, two novel asymmetrical push–pull SMDs, TPATDPP and TPATDPPCN, have been synthesized and applied in the investigation of solution-processed BHJ OSCs. The dipolar D–A–A structural design end-capped with the CP unit enables TPATDPPCN to exhibit a narrow Eg, resulting in a high Jsc of 14.86 mA cm−2 with a high PCE of 5.94%. The efficiency is among the highest ever reported for solution-processed D–A–A-type small molecule-based BHJ OSCs. The high performance is primarily attributed to the narrow Eg and the reasonably low-lying HOMO level as well as the high hole-mobility. The results gave an important guide for developing novel asymmetrical push–pull small molecule PV materials.
This work was supported by the NSFC (No. 21102013, 51173065), the Dalian Committee of Science and Technology (2011J21DW001), the SRF for ROCS-SEM (No. 201001438, 201001439), the Fundamental Funds for the Central Universities (DUT11LK20) and the RFDP (No. 20090041120017).
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Measurement, characterization and calculation, synthesis and characterization, as well as PV device fabrication and hole-mobility measurement details. See DOI: 10.1039/c4cc04020a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014