 DOI: 10.1039/C6TA05288F
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 13458-13467


Qian-Qing
Ge
,

Jie
Ding
,

Jie
Liu
,

Jing-Yuan
Ma
,

Yao-Xuan
Chen
,

Xiao-Xin
Gao
,

Li-Jun
Wan
 and 

Jin-Song
Hu
*

Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, Key Laboratory of Molecular Nanostructure and Nanotechnology, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Science, 2 North First Street, Zhongguancun, Beijing 100190, China. E-mail: hujs@iccas.ac.cn

University of Chinese Academy of Science, Beijing 100049, China

Received
23rd June 2016
, Accepted 1st August 2016
First published on 1st August 2016
Mixed organic–inorganic halide perovskite materials have been successfully used as light harvesters in efficient solar cells. Developing reproducible and manageable processes to prepare large-scale highly-crystalline perovskite films with large grains for reducing charge recombination at grain boundaries and thus enhancing the efficiency of large-area perovskite solar cells will advance their practical application. Here we report a reproducible and easily-scalable method using solvent-extraction and water vapor modulated post-annealing to promote the grain growth and simultaneously heal the pinholes in perovskite thin films. Significant enhancement in crystalline grain size and elimination of pinholes are achieved by introducing water vapor in the post-annealing atmosphere. The grain size and morphology are closely related to the amount of water vapor. 2 vol% water in the DMF modulated annealing atmosphere can effectively facilitate the integration of small primary perovskite grains and the merging of grain boundaries as well as the healing of the pinholes during post-annealing, leading to high-quality pinhole-free perovskite films with large-aspect-ratio crystalline grains. As a result, PSCs with a device efficiency of over 17%, corresponding to 14.4% improvement of average efficiency over the devices post-annealed in DMF only atmosphere with the absence of water vapor, and better stability and reduced hysteresis can be readily achieved. Compared with the prevailing anti-solvent dripping method which need precise control of the dripping timing, the present method combining solvent-extraction and water vapor modulated post-annealing is more compatible and reproducible for preparing large-area high-quality perovskite thin films, opening up opportunities for the development of large-area high-performance perovskite solar cells and other optoelectronic devices.

Hybrid organic–inorganic organometal halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have recently attracted increasing attention and have shown potential to be alternatives to traditional thin-film photovoltaic devices due to the astonishing increase in their power conversion efficiency (PCE). Since the organometal halide perovskite was first reported as a light harvester by Miyasaka et al. in a mesoscopic dye-sensitized solar cell, a variety of device fabrication processes, methods for interface engineering, and the material combinations for each functional layer have been intensively investigated for the fabrication of organometal halide perovskite solar cells with a mesoscopic structure or planar heterojunction structure, aiming at the enhancement of their photovoltaic performance. Until now, KRICT and UNIST have boosted the certified PCE of PSCs up to 22.1% with a mesoscopic structure in early 2016. Recently, there has been growing interest in developing efficient planar structure PSCs without mesoporous TiO2 or Al2O3 scaffolds because of the simpler device configuration, fabrication procedure and significantly lower processing costs.

The perovskite film can be deposited through in situ crystallization of precursors by a few innovative methods, such as dual-source vapor deposition technique, sequential deposition, solvent engineering deposition, additive-assisted deposition, solvent-induced crystallization,etc. By modulating perovskite crystallization to improve the film quality, the device performance has been substantially enhanced. Despite the noticeable improvement in the device efficiency, the fabrication of efficient PSCs has to carefully follow strict processes. Among these methods, the one-step solvent engineering method is frequently used in many reports which can effectively improve the quality of perovskite films and thus the device efficiency. However, the need for specialized and delicate control during the spin-coating step results in poor maneuverability and difficulty in device fabrication, especially for large-area devices. With this concern, an anti-solvent extraction method has been demonstrated by Zhu and Padture et al. recently, which used diethyl ether as an anti-solvent bath after spinning instead of solvent dripping upon spinning to extract the perovskite solvent. Nonetheless, the initialized fast crystallization of the perovskite films in their fabrication method will lead to dense nuclei from heterogeneous nucleation and small grains. Though annealing in air can partially merge the grain boundaries with the assistance of moisture, it has a limited effect of improving the crystallinity of individual grains on a microscale. Furthermore, it was reported that the crystalline grain size and the coverage of perovskite significantly influence the device performance. Several processing strategies have been developed to increase the grain size and improve film coverage, including non-wetting surface-driven crystallization, hot-casting, doctor-bladed coating,etc. However, some issues like pinholes and large surface undulation due to the unfavorable crystallization process still need to be improved. It is known that the atmospheric humidity has an appreciable effect on the crystallization and stability of organometal halide perovskite films. Recently, Grätzel et al. interestingly explored water as an additive to enhance the solubility of PbI2 in precursor solution for improving the morphology of PbI2 films and thus perovskite films. Liao et al. added water into perovskite precursor solution to improve the morphology of perovskite films. Although, tremendous progress has been made in PSCs, it is still desirable and challenging to develop a manageable and easily scalable method to produce high-quality perovskite thin films with larger crystalline grains for efficient PSCs.
Herein, inspired by these studies, we developed a water vapor modulated post-annealing method to promote the crystalline grain growth and prepare highly uniform perovskite thin films with less grain boundaries and pinholes. It was found that the presence of water vapor during post-annealing remarkably increased the grain size and healed the pinholes from annealing solvent-extracted perovskite films. An appropriate small amount of water vapor effectively assisted the integration of primary grains and the merging of grain boundaries during the post-annealing, leading to large-aspect-ratio crystalline grains and flattened perovskite films. By reducing the charge recombination at grain boundaries and eliminating the pinholes to restrain the dark current, the device efficiency of over 17% can be readily achieved. Compared to the devices with post-annealing in the absence of water vapor or without solvent modulation, the average device efficiency increased by 14.4% and 73.9%, respectively. Different from the previous methods, we used chlorobenzene as an antisolvent to extract the DMF/DMSO mixed solvent in order to obtain multiporous structured films, followed by the water vapor modulated post-annealing process. The multiporous structure was expected to facilitate post-annealing vapor to diffuse through. Besides, the high surface energy in the no-modulated porous films benefits the growth of large grains. While Grätzel and Liao et al. used water as an additive to enhance the solubility of the precursor and thus improved the morphology of the film, water vapor in our post-annealing atmosphere has explicitly demonstrated its capability of modulating the crystallization and fusing the small grains via in situ recrystallization to achieve a continuous smooth film composed of larger crystalline grains. Moreover, in contrast to the prevailing anti-solvent dripping method, the present method using solvent-extraction and water vapor modulated post-annealing is more manageable and reproducible in the preparation of high-quality perovskite thin films with a large grain size, paving the way for the fabrication of large-area efficient PSCs.

Methylammonium iodide (CH3NH3I, MAI) was first prepared by mixing methylamine (18 mL, 33 wt% in absolute ethanol, Sigma-Aldrich) and hydroiodic acid (10 mL, 57 wt% aqueous solutions, Sigma-Aldrich) at 0 °C under stirring for 2 h. The CH3NH3I raw precipitate was collected after the evaporation at 50 °C for 1 hour, which was then washed with diethyl ether several times and finally dried at 60 °C in a vacuum oven for 24 hours.

The 45 wt% perovskite precursor solution was prepared by dissolving 1.2 mmol of PbI2 (99%, Aldrich) and 1.2 mmol of CH3NH3I in the mixture of 1 mL anhydrous N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF, 99.8%, Aldrich) and 1 mL dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO, ≥99.9%, Aldrich). The precursor solution was spin-coated onto the pre-treated F-doped SnO2 glass (FTO) substrate covered by a compact TiO2 layer at a speed of 5000 rpm for 10 s. After spin-coating, the film was bathed into anhydrous chlorobenzene (99.8%, Aldrich) immediately for 15 seconds until its color turned light brown. Then, the film was transferred into an evaporation chamber with a size of ϕ 70 mm × 35 mm (volume of 135 mL) on a hotplate at 110 °C for post-annealing. A small container with 180 μL of DMF or H2O/DMF mixed solvents was placed in the chamber to modulate the post-annealing atmosphere. The volume percentages of H2O in DMF were adjusted from 0.5, 1, 2, 4, 8, and 16 vol% in the experiments to investigate the influence of the amount of H2O vapor on the morphology and structure of the CH3NH3PbI3 film. The post-annealing process was carried out for 20 min, during which the solvent was completely vaporized.

Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images were obtained using a FEI Quanta FEG 250. The grain sizes were analyzed by the ASTM method based on SEM images using iTEM software from Olympus Soft Imaging Solutions GmbH. X-ray diffraction (XRD) experiments were performed on a Rigaku D/max-2500 diffractometer using Cu Kα radiation at a scan rate of 4° min−1. The UV-vis absorption spectra of the perovskite films were collected on a UV-vis spectrophotometer (UH4150, HITACHI). The steady-state PL and time-resolved PL spectra were measured in an Edinburgh Instrument FLS 980 spectrophotometer. For PL measurements, the perovskite thin-films were deposited using the exactly same procedures as mentioned above except for using ultra-clean quartz glass as substrates instead of bl-TiO2-coated FTO. TRPL measurements were conducted by a time-correlated single photon counting method. Samples were pulsed by using a supercontinuum laser source with an excitation wavelength of 532 nm at a frequency of 0.5 MHz. The lifetime was obtained by fitting the TRPL results with a bi-exponential decay function:

FTO (NSG, 15 Ω sq−1) substrates were cleaned with water, acetone and ethanol in an ultrasonic bath, and subsequently treated in a UV-ozone cleaner at 200 W for 10 min. A compact hole-blocking TiO2 layer (bl-TiO2, about 50 nm in thickness) was deposited onto the FTO substrate by spray pyrolysis of 20 mM titanium diisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate) (75 wt% in isopropanol, Aldrich) solution in dehydrated alcohol (≥99.8%, Aldrich) at 450 °C, followed by calcination at 500 °C for 1 h in air to remove organic components. The perovskite layer was then fabricated as mentioned above. After that, 30 μL of 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis (N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9-spirobifluorene (Spiro-OMeTAD) solution was spin-coated on the perovskite layer at 3000 r.p.m. for 30 s as a hole transport layer (HTL). The spiro-OMeTAD solution was formulated by 72.3 mg of spiro-OMeTAD (LT-s922, Lumtec, Taiwan) in 1 mL of chlorobenzene with 28.8 μL of 4-tert-butylpyridine (96%, Aldrich) and 17.5 μL bis(trifluoromethane)sulfonimide lithium salt (Li-TFSI) solution (520 mg Li-TSFI in 1 mL acetonitrile, 99.8%, Aldrich) as additives. Then, the as-prepared films were stored in ambient atmosphere with a humidity below 30% for 12 h. Finally, 80 nm of Au layer was thermally evaporated as a top electrode to finish the fabrication of the device. The active areas of all devices were defined to 0.16 cm2. All these procedures were carried out in a dry N2 environment (humidity is less than 2 g m−3).


A solar simulator (450W Model 91150, Newport) with an AM 1.5 spectrum distribution was used as the irradiation source, which was calibrated against a NREL reference cell before each measurement. Photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) measurements were carried out using Keithley 2420 at room temperature. The active area of the device was defined by the cross area of top and bottom electrodes and a home-made black metal mask. The mask area was measured using a microscope (ECLIPSE LV150N, Nicon). A QE-R3011 measurement system (Enli Technology) in AC mode was calibrated using a standard silicon detector and used for all IPCE tests.



Scheme 1 illustrates the schematic deposition of high-quality CH3NH3PbI3 (MAPbI3) perovskite thin films by the present method combing solvent-extraction and water vapor-assisted post-annealing. Instead of conventionally dripping anti-solvent upon spin-coating, the spin-coated film was soaked into the anti-solvent (chlorobenzene) for a short time to extract out the precursor solvent (N,N-dimethyl formamide, DMF) for the fast crystallization of MAPbI3 (Step I), resulting in a uniform and flat film A composed of initial small grains. The film was then transferred into a chamber set up on a hot plate at 110 °C with a certain amount of solvent inside to modulate the atmosphere, followed by post-annealing under the solvent vapor atmosphere to obtain the final film (Step II). It was found that the presence of water vapor in the post-annealing atmosphere could significantly affect the morphology of the MAPbI3 film. An appropriate small amount of water (such as 2 vol% vs. DMF) remarkably promoted the crystalline grain growth and eliminated the pinholes during post-annealing (film B) compared with the DMF-only atmosphere (film A). For comparison, the film prepared in parallel was also subject to post-annealing directly in a N2 glove box without solvent modulation and used as the control film.


Fig. 1a shows the typical photograph of a 5 cm × 5 cm MAPbI3 film on the FTO/TiO2 substrate prepared by the above-mentioned method with post annealing in the DMF/2 vol% H2O atmosphere in natural light. The translucent mirror-like film covered on the entire substrate indicates that the developed method is able to prepare large-area highly uniform and smooth perovskite films, which is favorable for fabricating efficient large-scale PSCs. The crystal structures of the perovskite films prepared using solvent-extraction and post-annealing in different atmospheres were first investigated by X-ray diffraction (XRD). As shown in Fig. 1b, XRD patterns of all MAPbI3 films show similar features which can be well-indexed to tetragonal perovskite. The diffraction peaks at 14.04, 28.34, 31.78, and 43.10° correspond to the diffractions from (110), (220), (310), and (330) crystallographic planes of tetragonal MAPbI3 crystals with lattice parameters of a = 8.831 Å, b = 8.831 Å, c = 12.685 Å as previously reported, respectively, indicating that the water vapor modulated post-annealing did not change the perovskite structure. Given that all XRD patterns were recorded directly on the perovskite films prepared in parallel with the exactly same procedures except for the content of H2O vapor during post-annealing, all films should have very close thicknesses and thus the diffraction intensities of XRD peaks should be indicative of the crystallinity of the prepared films. It can be seen that the film with no solvent modulation in post-annealing exhibits the weakest diffraction, suggesting poor crystallinity. The post-annealing in the DMF only atmosphere appreciably improved the crystallinity of the films as indicated by an about three-fold intensity increase in (110) diffraction (purple vs. black curves in Fig. 1b). With the introduction of H2O vapor, the crystallinity of the perovskite film was further enhanced in terms of the decreased X-ray diffraction (110) peak full width at half maximum (FWHM) and increased relative intensity of the (110) peak compared to the film with no solvent modulation (Fig. 1c). For example, the intensity ratio of (110) peaks increased from 3.2 for the film annealed in DMF only to 4.7 for the one annealed in DMF/2 vol% H2O. However, when the amount of H2O vapor increased to 16 vol% the diffractions of MAPbI3 considerably decreased with the reduced intensity ratio of the (110) peak down to 1.6 and the increased FWHM from 0.14° to 0.18°, implying that the crystallinity of MAPbI3 deteriorates severely. Moreover, the tiny peak at 12.58° assignable to the diffraction of PbI2 (001) planes starts to show up (yellow curves in Fig. 1b), which is a sign of the decomposition of perovskite MAPbI3 to PbI2 after exposure to excessive H2O. It is noted that there is no such a peak or any additional peaks from impurities in other XRD patterns, which indicates that the perovskite films prepared by solvent-modulated post-annealing in the DMF atmosphere containing 0–8 vol% H2O should be PbI2-free MAPbI3 films.
The morphology and coverage of perovskite films were investigated by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Fig. 2 presents the typical top-view and corresponding cross-sectional SEM images of the MAPbI3 film post-annealed in different atmospheres. Additional SEM images for other conditions are provided in Fig. S1. The grain sizes and pinhole densities were analyzed using standard ASTM methods as summarized in Fig. 3, S3 and Table S1. Without solvent modulation in post-annealing, the film is composed of small crystals in an average size of ∼150 nm and a large quantity of pinholes (Fig. 2a). The cross-sectional image shows that the film consisted of 2–3 layers of small grains in the vertical direction and the voids can be seen in the layer (Fig. 2d). After annealing in the DMF atmosphere, the crystalline grains grow up to the size of ∼500 nm and the quantity of visible pinholes decreases to 157 pinholes/100 μm2 with a total area of 3.61 μm2 and an average area of 0.0229 μm2 (Fig. 2b and 3), indicating that the post-annealing apparently improves the film quality. Interestingly, it is found that the introduction of H2O vapor in the post-annealing atmosphere can sharply diminish the pinhole density and increase the grain size to the micrometer scale; and the content of H2O vapor significantly influences the grain size and film morphology since the appropriate selection of solvent mixture would allow the crystallization to occur in the retrograde solubility regime. As shown in Fig. 2c, when 1 vol% H2O is added in the DMF annealing atmosphere, the average grain size slightly increases from ∼500 nm to ∼600 nm and the pinholes appreciably reduce by five folds to 33 pinholes/100 μm2 with a total area of 0.744 μm2 and an average area of 0.0226 μm2 (Fig. 2c and 3). As the content of H2O vapor further increases to 2 vol%, it is attractively noted that the crystalline grains start to integrate and merge together to form larger grains with an average size of ∼2 μm and some grains can reach ∼5 μm (Fig. 2g). More importantly, the pinholes are remarkably eliminated. The smooth and almost pinhole-free MAPbI3 film with large crystalline grains can be achieved by post-annealing in the DMF/2 vol% H2O atmosphere, which is expectable to favor the photovoltaic performance of the device. The cross-sectional SEM image in Fig. 2j shows that the film consists of continuous single-layer crystals without visible pinholes or voids in the layer, consistent with the top-view image (Fig. 2g). While the content of H2O vapor goes up to 4 vol% and 8 vol%, the perovskite grain size does not change much but the grain boundaries become clearer. The pinholes through the entire perovskite film are visible and the total area of pinholes increases again as the H2O content increases (0.175 μm2/100 μm2 at 4 vol% H2O and 0.350 μm2/100 μm2 at 8 vol% H2O, respectively) (Fig. 2h, k and 3h). If the H2O amount reaches 16 vol%, the perovskite grain size incredibly decreases to ∼500 nm (Fig. 2i) and the impurity PbI2 in the form of white particles shows up on the surface, indicating that the film surface has been subjected to decomposition. The number of pinholes further increases and lots of detects can be clearly seen in the perovskite crystals as shown by black arrows in Fig. 2l. This observation on the degradation of crystallinity and the decomposition of the film is consistent with the XRD results mentioned above (Fig. 1b). Furthermore, when the film was post-annealed in the H2O vapor-only atmosphere, the perovskite film decomposed more severely and a plenty of pinholes appeared as shown in Fig. S2a. In addition, we investigated the effect of annealing environment (N2 or air) on the film morphology. When the film was annealed in the same 2 vol% H2O/DMF (the optimal atmosphere in N2) but in air instead of N2, it was surprisingly found that the crystalline grains did not grow as large as that in the N2 atmosphere although the pinholes were still healed (Fig. S2b). We suspected that the instability of open air system might have a negative effect on the recrystallization process. In-depth investigation is still in need. Based on these facts and the previous reports about the effect of water additives in precursor solution on the perovskite formation, the following processes is expected to take place during the post-annealing. Solvent vapor will adsorb on the film surface and solvate/dissolve the superficial perovskite. The recrystallization will take place upon the evaporation of the solvents. Therefore, the solvation/surface dissolution and recrystallization continue during the post-annealing, resulting in the growth of perovskite crystalline grains. Grätzel et al. have reported that appropriate water addition can promote the solubility of PbI2 in DMF but the excess water would decrease its solution. In our case, an appropriate amount of H2O in solvent vapor is expected to enhance the surface solvation/dissolution of perovskite primary crystals, facilitating the integration and merging of initial perovskite crystals into larger grains and simultaneously healing the pinholes upon the annealing. This effect is enhanced while the H2O fraction in solvent vapor increases. On the other hand, the surface tension of water (71.99 mN m−1, 25 °C) is much larger than that of DMF (35.87 mN m−1, 25 °C). Although the surface tension of a liquid exhibits a linear decrease before reaching a critical temperature (TC), the surface tension of water at 110 °C (56.96 mN m−1) is still appreciably larger than that of DMF at 25 °C. When the water content increases to some extent, the de-wetting effect will induce the growth of grains with high-angle boundaries, leading to the formation of pinholes again. While the water content goes too high, the excessive water will deteriorate the process of surface dissolution and recrystallization and cause the decomposition of perovskite.
Moreover, the steady photoluminescence (PL) and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) measurements were carried out to investigate the influence of the modulated film morphology on charge separation. Fig. 4 shows the steady-state PL and TRPL curves of perovskite thin films prepared on quartz substrates after post-annealing in different atmospheres. As the H2O amount in post-annealing changes, PL intensities enhanced along with the improvement of crystallinity and the diminishment of grain boundaries, indicating that the trap states decrease and the non-radiative carrier recombination is significantly inhibited when water vapor is involved in post-annealing. This is consistent with the fact that the non-radiative traps most likely locate in surfaces and grain boundaries. Bi-exponential fits are further performed on TRPL curves to quantify the carrier dynamics, as shown in Fig. 4b. The fitting results are summarized in Table 1. The results exhibit a coupling of fast and slow dynamics presenting the lifetime of carrier propagation. The fast decay process can be considered as the result of the quenching of surface recombination while the slow decay process corresponds to radiative decay with bulk components. The relative contribution of these two components can be evaluated by individually integrating the exponential traces. The weight fractions of slow decay are 71.2% for no-modulation films, 88.8% for DMF-modulated films, and 82.7% for DMF/2 vol% H2O-modulated films, indicating that the radiative decay in the bulk component dominates the decay mechanism. Compared with the perovskite film post-annealed in the DMF-only atmosphere, the DMF/2 vol% H2O atmosphere significantly increases both the fast decay lifetime (21.1 ± 1.1 ns vs. 4.4 ± 0.3 ns) and the slow decay lifetime (164.2 ± 3.0 ns vs. 94.9 ± 1.3 ns), while the DMF/8 vol% H2O atmosphere gives a slightly decreased lifetime. This result is consistent with the above analysis on the grain size and grain boundaries in these films, and suggests that non-radiative recombination in both surface and bulk components is substantially suppressed as the diminishment of grain boundaries. Therefore, the photoluminescence measurements imply that the increase of grain size with less grain boundaries and the diminishment of pinholes, resulting from H2O modulated post-annealing, effectively inhibit the trap-induced recombination and the potential loss of photocurrent in device measurements.
Post-annealing atmosphere

τ
1 (ns)
Rel. (%)

τ
2 (ns)
Rel. (%)
No modulation
9.3 ± 0.4
24.8
72.8 ± 1.4
71.2
DMF
4.4 ± 0.3
11.2
94.9 ± 1.3
88.8
DMF + 2 vol% H2O
21.1 ± 1.1
17.3
164.2 ± 3.0
82.7
DMF + 8 vol% H2O
9.7 ± 0.4
20.1
91.3 ± 1.4
79.9
The planar heterojunction PSCs were fabricated to evaluate the photovoltaic performance of these films and the influence of the crystallinity and morphology of the films on the device performance. As presented in the experimental section, the devices had the configuration of glass/FTO/cp-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au. The current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the PCSs were measured under AM 1.5 G (100 mW cm−2) (Fig. 5a). The corresponding photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table 2 and are plotted in Fig. S4. As shown in Fig. 5a and Table 2, the device with the film post-annealed without the modulation atmosphere exhibits the worst performance with the lowest average PCE of 9.68%. By annealing the perovskite layer in DMF vapor, the average device efficiency jumps to 14.71%. After the introduction of 2 vol% H2O in the post-annealing atmosphere, the average PCE of 16.83% can be achieved, corresponding to 14.4% improvement. The best device shows an efficiency of 17.39%. All three photovoltaic parameters, especially fill factor (FF, 68.0% vs. 63.5%), are enhanced by modulating the post-annealing atmosphere with 2 vol% H2O. This enhancement should be ascribed to the reduction of charge recombination at grain boundaries due to the growth of grains as evidenced by PL measurements, as well as the elimination of pinholes as indicated by SEM observation (Fig. 2). As the water content increases to 8 vol%, the average device PCE decreases to 14.90% although a similar or even slightly higher open circuit voltage (Voc) is obtained. Similar grain size and even slightly better crystallinity implied by the smoother crystalline grain with clearer facets contribute to the preservation of Voc, but the appreciable increase of pinholes and inter-boundary voids severely degrade the fill factor, causing a considerable decrease of PCE. For the device with the film annealed under DMF/16 vol% H2O, the device efficiency dramatically downgrades to 4.90% as predicted from the emergence of the impurity and detects in the perovskite film.
Post-annealing atmosphere

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF (%)
PCEBest (%)
PCEAve (%)
No modulation
19.94
1.06
52.7
11.15
9.68 ± 0.89
DMF
22.46
1.08
63.5
15.40
14.71 ± 0.41
DMF + 2 vol% H2O
23.01
1.11
68.0
17.39
16.83 ± 0.32
DMF + 8 vol% H2O
22.64
1.12
64.7
16.34
14.90 ± 0.27
The corresponding incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) were further measured as shown in Fig. 5b. Consistent with J–V measurements, the highest integrated current density from IPCE curve is 21.74 mA cm−2 for PSCs with the film annealed in DMF/2 vol% H2O, which is only 5.5% of deviation from the measured short-circuit current density (Jsc, 23.01 mA cm−2). Its IPCE curve exhibits a high response in the entire range of 380 nm to 750 nm with the highest EQE about 95% at 450 nm. This result is in accordance with the UV-vis absorption measurement in Fig. 5c, where the perovskite film treated with DMF/2 vol% H2O shows the higher light absorption in the entire range as well compared to other films. The full surface coverage without pinholes should contribute to the enhanced light absorption on the film. Furthermore, we have noticed that the fill factors of our devices, even the best device (68.0%), are still lower than the values reported in the literatures (over 70–80%), which is probably because the compact TiO2 transport layer and its interface with the perovskite layer have not been optimized yet. We expected that the device efficiency could be further enhanced after these optimizations in the future work.
It is known that PSCs with a TiO2-based heterojunction planar structure commonly exhibit serious hysteresis between forward and reverse scanning. Some researchers suggested that the hysteresis might be attributed to crystal size, trapping/de-trapping of charge carriers, low-frequency response or ion displacement, whereas its origin still remains unclear. In order to understand the effect of H2O modulated post-annealing on hysteresis, Fig. 6a shows the typical J–V curves of PSCs with 2 vol% H2O modulated post-annealing under reverse and forward scanning. The PCE in the reverse scan is 16.4% while it is 15.3% under the forward scan, corresponding to 6.7% hysteresis. In contrast, the device post-annealed in the DMF-only atmosphere exhibits 29.1% hysteresis of PCEs between reverse and forward scans (14.8% vs. 10.5%). Apparently, the introduction of water vapor in the post-annealing process not only improves the efficiency to a great extent but also alleviates the hysteresis effect. This result is in good agreement with the above analysis. As suggested the perovskite layers may have a large defect density, especially within generated interface states. These defects could serve as carrier traps. Therefore, smaller grains require longer time to reach the steady-state photocurrent. As shown in Fig. 2b, the film annealed in the DMF only atmosphere exhibits a grain size of ∼500 nm with a large number of pinholes and grain boundaries, which causes severe carrier recombination and hinders the carrier transportation, leading to the deteriorated hysteresis and photovoltaic performance. Furthermore, a stabilized current output over time at the maximum power output of steady-state forward voltage bias (0.84 V) was measured to further evaluate the stability of the devices in Fig. 6a. As shown in Fig. 6b, both devices show good stability. 98.3% of photocurrent output is preserved after 300 s consecutive operation for the device annealed in the DMF/2 vol% H2O modulated atmosphere, while 95.7% current output remains for the device annealed in DMF-only. The stability test over time of both devices recorded under ambient conditions (Fig. 6c) indicates about 5% increase in PCE during the first two days. Although the mechanism for this PCE increase is still unclear, multiple factors could contribute to the initial PCE increase, including the positive effects of the ambient conditions on spiro-OMeTAD and the forward voltage bias during light soaking which internally modifies the distribution of defects. The induced dipolar polarization of the perovskite film under the applied bias influences the photovoltaic behavior when exposed to different light-soaking times. Under appropriate conditions, the polarized field will favor the separation of the photo-generated charge carriers and enhance their mobility, thus changing the performance of tested devices. After 2-week measurements, the PCE of the device annealed in DMF/2 vol% H2O still remains 87%, which is appreciably superior to 63% for the device annealed in DMF only, corroborating that H2O modulated post-annealing improves the device stability. The results clearly indicate that the stability of the device with small-size grains is still lower than that of the device with large grains. Since the grain boundaries are the dominating ion migration channel in polycrystalline perovskites and much stronger hysteresis occur both for photocurrent and dark-current at the grain boundaries, a quicker non-radiative charge recombination among the grain boundaries in organic–inorganic halide perovskite materials overall is still unfavorable for causing the degradation of device stability. Finally, a statistical analysis was carried out on 30 devices in each case. The histograms of PCE (Fig. 6d) and each photovoltaic parameter (Jsc, Voc, and FF, Fig. S5) clearly show that the device annealed in DMF/2 vol% H2O demonstrates the narrower distributions in all parameters and PCE with an average efficiency to 16.83%, indicating that the above experimental results are reliable and the present H2O modulated post-annealing also improves the reproducibility of device fabrication.
It should be noted that the present method combining solvent-extraction and H2O modulated post-annealing is able to produce a large-area uniform perovskite film as shown in Fig. 1a. The preliminary tests show that the PSCs annealed in DMF/2 vol% H2O with an active area of 2.25 cm2 demonstrate a 45% increase in PCE compared to that annealed in DMF only. The external quantum efficiency curves measured on five different locations on a 5 cm × 5 cm MAPbI3 film (Fig. S6) present almost the same shape and well-consistent integrated current densities, indicating that a high-quality uniform MAPbI3 film was achieved. Further investigation on large-scale efficient PSCs using the developed method is still in progress.

In summary, by combining solvent-extraction and water modulated post-annealing, we present here a reproducible and easily scalable method for the fabrication of high-quality pinhole-free perovskite films with large-aspect-ratio crystalline grains. Distinct from the conventional anti-solvent dripping method, solvent-extraction is more manageable and reproducible for preparing large-area high-quality perovskite thin films, but usually causes a certain number of pinholes in the film after post-annealing. We found that the presence of an appropriate amount of water vapor in the post-annealing atmosphere not only promoted the growth of crystalline grains, but also efficiently healed the pinholes in perovskite thin films, which reduced charge recombination and thus enhanced the device efficiency of PSCs. The water-content-dependent experiments and detailed analysis on the grain sizes and pinholes density revealed that 2 vol% water modulation in the post-annealing atmosphere achieved the best results in terms of the largest grain size and almost free pinholes in perovskite films. Consequently, PSCs with a PCE of over 17% and better stability and reduced hysteresis were readily achieved. In particular, a 45% increase in PCE was observed on a large-area PSC with an active area of 2.25 cm2. These results suggest that the present method integrating solvent-extraction and water-modulated post-annealing may inspire the development of large-area high-performance perovskite solar cells and other optoelectronic devices due to their compatibility for large-scale thin film production and capability of delivering high-quality perovskite films.


We thank Dr Bo Guan and Yang Liu at the Analytical and Testing Center, ICCAS for the help for the grain size analysis. We acknowledge the financial support from the National Key Project on Basic Research (2015CB932302), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21573249), and the Strategic Priority Research Program of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (Grant No. XDB12020100).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Fig. S1–S6 and Table S1. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta05288f
‡ These authors contributed equally.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016