 DOI: 10.1039/C5NJ00400D
(Paper)
New J. Chem., 2015, 39, 4805-4813


Hee-Je
Kim
,

Hyun-Dong
Lee
,

Challa Shesha Sai
Pavan Kumar
,

Sunkara Srinivasa
Rao
,

Sang-Hwa
Chung
 and 

Dinah
Punnoose
*

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Pusan National University, Gumjeong-Gu, Jangjeong-Dong, Busan 609-735, South Korea. E-mail: dinahpunnoose@gmail.com

Department of Physics, Pusan National University, Gumjeong-Gu, Jangjeong-Dong, Busan 609-735, South Korea

Department of Computer Engineering, Pusan National University, Gumjeong-Gu, Jangjeong-Dong, Busan 609-735, South Korea

Received
(in Montpellier, France)
14th February 2015
, Accepted 3rd April 2015
First published on 9th April 2015
Herein, we demonstrate for the first time the impact of Mn on PbS and CdS using a simple successive ion layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR) technique on TiO2. The CdS passivation layer over PbS can reduce the recombination of photo-injected electrons with the electrolyte and enhance the overall performance and stability of quantum dot sensitized solar cells (QDSSCs). The doping of Mn has a drastic impact on the host material (PbS/CdS) and can create new energy states that can delay the exciton recombination time and can allow charge separation. The surface roughness and morphology of the PbS/Mn-CdS nanoparticles can be observed from atomic force microscopy images. The performance of the QDSSCs was examined in detail using a polysulfide electrolyte with a copper sulfide (CuS) counter electrode. Under illumination of one sun (AM 1.5 G, 100 mW cm−2), the TiO2/PbS/Mn-CdS QDSSCs exhibits a power conversion efficiency (η) of 3.55%.

Research on low dimensional systems has led to great advancements in understanding the effects of quantum confinement and its physical properties. Quantum confinement allows the fine tuning of optical properties and is expected to favour efficient multiple exciton generation (MEG), breaking the theoretical efficiencies of quantum dot solar cells (QDSSC) and is gaining more attention towards the development of next generation solar cells. The fabrication of QDSSC is analogous to that of dye sensitized solar cells (DSSC), which includes the deposition of narrow band gap semiconductors on mesoscopic TiO2. Upon excitation of the nanostructured quantum dots (QD), electrons are injected into TiO2. The photo-current achieved from QDSSC is comparable with that of DSSC but the power conversion efficiencies are quite low due to open circuit voltage and low fill factor. The I3−/I− electrolyte used in DSSCs is not suitable for QDSSCs as it induces corrosion at the photo-electrode.

QDSSCs show remarkable efficiencies and high photo-current in depleted hetero junctions and also in the Schottky configuration with values of up to 7.3% and 5.2%, respectively. QDSSCs still show limited efficiencies because of its charge recombination at the interface of the QDs.In situ growth methods have been widely used for the preparation of PbS, CdS and CdSe QD-decorated photo-anodes. In situ growth techniques include chemical bath deposition (CBD) and successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR). QDs, such as CdS, CdSe, Bi2S3 and PbS, have been reported as a potential photon sensitizer for QDSSCs. Lead sulfide (PbS) QDs show a high absorption coefficient with a tunable band gap of 0.41 eV; thus, it is beneficial as an efficient sensitizer for QDSSCs. The quantized discrete band structures and achievement of multiple exciton generation have pushed the theoretical efficiency of PbS sensitized QDSSCs beyond the Shockley–Queisser limit. These encouraging properties open windows for research in exploring and developing the performance of PbS based QDSSCs. However, several cycles of PbS sensitization show a tremendous improvement in the short circuit current density (JSC), but their back reaction of photo-injected electrons with the electrolyte causes a large drop in the open circuit voltage (VOC).
Braga et al. reported that a few passivation layers of CdS over the PbS sensitized surface of the photo-anode can reduce the recombination of photo-injected electrons with the electrolyte and enhance the overall performance of the solar cells. Furthermore, increasing more than two cycles of PbS layers shows a drastic decrease in the performance of the QDSSCs with a large drop in the open circuit voltage of the cell. Owing to the partial passivation provided by the organic ligands, the dangling bonds remaining on the QD surface can perform as carrier trapping sites, which cut down the solar cell performance. Inorganic materials, such as CdS and ZnS, are known to provide a more complete passivation of the QD surface. The ZnS SILAR coating technique has been used to protect QDs from photo-corrosion and to suppress electron recombination with the electrolyte.
In QDSSCs, the limitation is the integration of QDs into the TiO2 mesoporous matrix when attaining a good monolayer on the inner body of the TiO2 electrode, which results in decreased efficiency. To overcome this, bilayer electrodes must be used, in which metal chalcogenides are sensitized with infrared dyes. Several approaches are used, such as crystal size control, introducing dopants, and optimizing the QD-sensitized electrode and its type, and the concentration of dopant, which can result in enhanced electrical and optical properties. These properties can be enhanced by doping Mn2+, Fe2+, and Co2+ into the QDs.
The incorporation of Mn into PbS is an important methodology because it imparts paramagnetic properties. Carrier-dopant exchange interactions occur in Mn doped PbS colloidal quantum dots, which indicates enhancements in both the valence and the conduction electrons. Justin et al. worked on ZnO nano-rods with CdS/CdSe/ZnS and presented a promising passivation layer for PbS QDs. The open circuit potential (VOC) was not affected; moreover, it defends against the polysulfide electrolyte and the large accumulation of photo-injected electrons in the conduction band of the photo-anode using this approach. This method lowers the recombination of photoelectrons and increases the photovoltaic efficiency but there is not an appreciable increase in efficiency. Furthermore, ZnO has the disadvantage of which it is susceptible to dissolution processes during the heterogeneous photo-catalytic process. Henceforth, we use a TiO2 semiconductor, which is frequently used because of its good chemical and photochemical stability; moreover, it exhibits high photo-catalytic activity, is non-toxic and is an abundant and cheap decorated photo-anode.
The work of Kamat et al. on Mn-doped CdS photo-anodes opens windows for research in exploring new methodologies to achieve high photovoltaic performance in QDSSCs under a standard simulated AM 1.5 G (100 mW cm−2) illumination. A solar-cell-based CdS QD-sensitized TiO2 electrode presented a power conversion efficiency of 1.93%. Most importantly, by exchanging CdS with an Mn-CdS shell, the conversion efficiency of Mn-CdS QDSSCs has been further improved to 2.53%, which is one of the best results for CdS-based QDSSCs. Recently, Yu et al. reported that Mn-doped CdS QDSSCs achieved a conversion efficiency of 1.19%. Such results motivated us to explore Mn doped CdS quantum dots to improve the photovoltaic performance in QDSSCs. In addition, to the best of our knowledge, no efficient study has been performed to distinctly understand the influence of manganese in PbS and CdS colloidal quantum dots. One of the main reasons for the enhanced photovoltaic properties is the combination of successive layers of PbS, which has better light harvesting ability and results in a large accumulation of photo-injected electrons in the conduction band of TiO2. Moreover, Mn impurities have a drastic impact on the host material and can create new energy states that can delay the exciton recombination time and can allow charge separation. The PbS QDs with paramagnetic and optical properties can be tunable by their Mn content.
We fabricated CdS, PbS/CdS, Mn-PbS/CdS, and PbS/Mn-CdS co-sensitized TiO2 for QDSSCs. A polysulfide electrolyte and a CuS counter electrode were used, as shown in Fig. 1. Doping Mn with both CdS and PbS QDs distinctly was carried out to reduce the recombination reactions in the TiO2 system. Due to the increase in QD deposition and reduced electron recombination, QDSSCs based on PbS/Mn-CdS showed a significant increase in power conversion efficiency of 3.55%, which is higher than that found for CdS-sensitized bare TiO2.

All chemicals used were purchased from Aldrich and employed without any further purification. An FTO substrate with a sheet resistance of 10 Ω square−1 (Sigma-Aldrich) was used to prepare the photo-anodes. CE. TiO2 paste (Ti-Nanoxide HT/SP) was supplied by Solaronix.


With the aim of preparing QDSSCs, a fluorine-doped tin oxide glass (FTO) was used as the substrate for both the photo-anode and CE. TiO2 photo-anodes were fabricated on an ultrasonically cleaned FTO substrate using the doctor blade method. Anatase TiO2 particles (Ti-Nanoxide HT/SP, Solaronix) were first deposited on the FTO substrate with an active area of 0.27 cm2, followed by sintering at 450 °C for about 30 min. A thickness of ∼7 μm was obtained. The prepared TiO2 electrodes were used for further sensitization with CdS, PbS/CdS, Mn-PbS/CdS and PbS/Mn-CdS. The CdS QDs were sensitized on TiO2 using the SILAR technique. The TiO2 photo-anodes were immersed in a solution containing 0.1 M cadmium acetate dehydrate solution for 5 minutes to allow the Cd2+ ions to adsorb, and then it was rinsed with DI water and ethanol to remove the excess Cd2+ ions and in 0.1 M Na2S for 5 minutes, wherein the pre-adsorbed Cd2+ ions react with S2− ions to form CdS. Then, the electrodes were rinsed with DI water and ethanol, and dried under N2 gas. These two dipping procedures constitute one cycle, and five cycles were applied.

The TiO2 photo-anodes were immersed in a solution containing 25 mM Pb(NO3)2 for 5 minutes to allow Pb2+ ions to adsorb, and then rinsed with DI water and ethanol to remove the excess Pb2+ ions. The photo-anodes were then dipped into an aqueous solution containing 0.1 M sodium sulfide (Na2S) for 5 minutes, wherein the pre-adsorbed Pb2+ ions react with S2− ions to form PbS. Then, the electrodes were rinsed with DI water and ethanol, and dried under N2 gas. These two dipping procedures constitute one cycle, and two cycles were applied. Then, CdS was sensitized for five cycles using an aqueous solution of 0.1 M cadmium acetate dihydrate and 0.1 M Na2S to achieve good adsorption over the PbS/TiO2 photo-anode. Fig. 2 shows a schematic of the fabrication process used to prepare the TiO2 photo-anodes and CdS, PbS/CdS, Mn-PbS/CdS and PbS/Mn-CdS electrodes.
For the doping of Mn2+ to PbS, Mn(CH3COO)2·4H2O was mixed with Pb(NO3)2 to enable the co-adsorption of Mn2+ and Pb2+ ions. For the doping of Mn2+ to CdS, Mn(CH3COO)2·4H2O was mixed with cadmium acetate dehydrate to enable the co-adsorption of Mn2+ and Cd2+ ions. Finally, two cycles of ZnS passivizing layers were coated over CdS, CdS/PbS, CdS/Mn-PbS and Mn-CdS/PbS sensitized photo-anodes using the SILAR method with an aqueous solution of 0.1 M Zn(NO3)2 and 0.1 M (Na2S). Each photo-anode was dipped for 5 min per cycle and washed several times, dried, and used for the fabrication of QDSSCs. The ZnS can proficiently cover the bare TiO2 and QDs, resulting in the strong inhibition of the electron leakage from either the QDs or TiO2 to the electrolyte.

CBD is a modest and easy method for preparing the metal sulfide CE and FTO substrate. Prior to deposition, the FTO samples were cleaned ultrasonically using acetone, ethanol, and DI water for 10 minutes each. The prepared substrates were dried with N2 gas. A CuS aqueous solution was prepared using 0.1 M CuSO4·5H2O and 0.4 M Na2S2O3 as sources of Cu2+ and S2− ions, respectively. 0.4 M CH4N2O was used as a reagent for depositing CuS thin films. The substrates were then dipped horizontally into the solutions of CuS and kept in a hot air oven at 65 °C for about 2 h. The CuS-coated films were washed several times with DI water and ethanol.


The CdS, PbS/CdS, Mn-PbS/CdS and PbS/Mn-CdS QD-sensitized TiO2 electrodes and the CuS CE were assembled and sealed in layers using a transparent 50 μm hot melt sealing sheet (double sheet of SX 1170-25, Solaronix). The polysulfide electrolyte was injected through a pin-hole made in the CE. The cells were left for a few hours to complete the diffusion of electrolyte within the photo-anode and the cells were tested under one sun illumination (AM 1.5 G, 100 mW cm−2).


The surface morphology of the thin films was characterized using field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM, S-4200, Hitachi) equipped with energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) at an operating voltage of 15 kV to determine the elemental composition. QD adsorption was measured using UV-vis spectroscopy (Mecasys, OPTIZEN 3220UV) over the wavelength range of 300–800 nm. The current–voltage characteristics of the QDSSCs were investigated under 1 sun illumination (AM 1.5 G, 100 mW cm−2) using an ABET Technologies (USA) solar simulator. The surface roughness of the substrates prepared using SILAR was characterized by atomic force microscopy (JPK NanoWizard II AFM, JPK instruments, 158 Berlin, Germany) at a scan rate of 0.8 Hz in the contact mode. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was also used on the QDSSCs with CuS CEs using a BioLogic potentiostat/galvanostat/EIS analyzer (SP-150, France) under 1 sun illumination. The frequency ranged from 100 MHz to 500 kHz.


The QDs were synthesized by adapting the reported procedures. An illustrative scheme of the QDs is shown in Fig. 3. The formation of Mn-CdS on PbS induces a notable enhancement in the photoluminescence properties of the QDs due to an efficient surface defect passivation.


Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images, which reveal the surface morphology of bare CdS, PbS/CdS and Mn-PbS/CdS, PbS/Mn-CdS on TiO2, are shown in Fig. 4. The bare CdS electrode has a uniformly distributed nano round-shaped structure and thus renders a high surface area with uniform distribution of nanoparticles on the TiO2 surface as shown in Fig. 4(a). When CdS was passivized on PbS, the surface becomes closer than bare CdS QDs, as shown in Fig. 4(b). The gaps between the nano round-shaped QDs were reduced by incorporating Mn to PbS/CdS, as shown in Fig. 4(c). This methodology produces well dispersed round-shaped QDs with good size uniformity. The PbS/Mn-CdS describes a permeable inland with a large number of nano round-shaped QDs (Fig. 4(d)) due to which there could be a better photovoltaic performance because there are still a lower number of gaps observed when Mn was incorporated to CdS when compared with Mn-PbS/CdS.

The decrease in recombination, which was attributed to doping Mn, leads to an increase in efficiency. The amount of adhesion in the active materials on FTO is a vital factor in determining the efficiency of the QDSSCs. If the materials do not stick to the FTO, they may be peeled off from the FTO substrate and released into the electrolyte, thereby decreasing the efficiency of the QDSSCs. Accordingly, the efficiency of the QDSSCs was enriched by refining the surface morphology of the electrode from compact to porous together with a particle ornamented surface architecture.
In order to confirm the crystal structure and phase purity of the as-obtained thin films, they were examined using XRD analysis. The XRD analysis was conducted for bare CdS, PbS/CdS, Mn-PbS/CdS and PbS/Mn-CdS films on TiO2, which is shown in Fig. 5. The sensitized films were dried in air and examined without calcination. The detailed observations are shown in Table 1. All the diffraction peaks match with the standard XRD pattern obtained through the prepared process. The diffraction peaks match with the observed diffraction peaks. However, the XRD patterns of the films did not exhibit any characteristic peaks, which might be due to the very thin thickness of the materials to be analysed and/or due to the interference of the XRD patterns from the high crystallinity of the FTO substrate. In general, it is reported that wet deposited composite films are amorphous and/or nano crystalline.
S. no.
Name
2θ (degrees)
JCPDS card no. and its corresponding planes
1
TiO2
25.272, 37.799, 48.049, 53.331

001-084-1286

[1 0 1] [0 0 4]
[2 0 0] [1 0 5]
2
PbS
30.069, 43.08, 62.521

05-0592

[2 0 0] [2 2 0]
[4 0 0]
3
CdS
30.737, 44.039, 54.669

01-080-0019

[2 0 0] [2 2 0]
[4 0 0]
4
ZnS
33.676, 47.739, 57.641, 73.055

00-039-1363

[1 0 5] [1 1 0]
[2 0 4] [2 2 0]
To study the surface roughness of the CdS, PbS/CdS, Mn-PbS/CdS and PbS/Mn-CdS films, high-resolution tapping-mode atomic force microscopy (AFM) was carried out. The corresponding 2-dimensional (2D) and 3-dimensional (3D) images are shown in Fig. 6.
The smoothest film with a root-mean square (RMS) roughness value of 23.46 nm was due to the PbS/Mn-CdS electrode. The lower surface roughness was mainly due to the large particle sizes of PbS/Mn-CdS compared with the CdS, PbS/CdS and Mn-PbS/CdS nanostructures, which might be due to the smaller radii of Mn compared to Cd. Therefore, during the deposition of PbS/Mn-CdS by SILAR, some Mn ions are easily substituted by Mn-ion in the CdS nanostructures. The power conversion efficiency of the CdS, PbS/CdS and Mn-PbS/CdS solar cells mainly depends on the low roughness of the surface. A reduction in the surface roughness of PbS/Mn-CdS tends to improve the conversion efficiency of the QDSSCs, which affects the optical properties.

The UV-vis absorption of each substrate according to the deposited material is shown in Fig. 7. The absorption edge of the TiO2 photo-anode appears at about 360 nm. The absorption of bare CdS photo-anode is near 500 nm, and the absorption of other substrates shifted towards longer wavelengths. The intensity of the absorbance was higher for Pbs/Mn-CdS than for the bare CdS and PbS/CdS photo-anodes and Mn-PbS/CdS. This indicates that the addition of manganese to the Pbs/Mn-CdS QDs can improve the light harvesting ability of the photo-anode because of PbS. Moreover, there is an increase in absorption intensity after Mn2+ doping into CdS.

This was attributed to the 3d-orbital energy level splitting of Mn2+, which can be generally observed in transition metal complexes. Next, Mn-PbS/CdS possessed the second highest absorption, which could be due to the slightly broader size distribution in the doped sample or the incorporation of Mn ions into the crystal lattice of PbS. The longer wavelength response of PbS/Mn-CdS parallels the behavior seen in the absorption spectra. In general, in PbS sensitized solar cells, the low band gap of bulk PbS (0.41 eV) shows an inability of electron transfer to the conduction band of the semiconductor photo-anode, i.e., the conduction band position of PbS is much lower than that of semiconductor. However, in the case of PbS quantum confinement, the conduction band of PbS have a tendency to upshift, which allows the fast electrons into the semiconductor photo-anode. Apart from this, the consecutive CdS passivation layers over PbS can also favour more stability against the polysulfide electrolyte.
Even though the conduction band alignment shows an excellent electron transfer, the valence band shows a slight variation (i.e. the valence band of Mn-CdS is lower than the PbS), which can seriously affect the overall performance of the cell due to the inefficient hole transfer. This could be the reason for the existence of a lower fill factor and efficiency than the expected overall performance of the QDSSCs. The device stability was found to depend more on the interface and band alignment between the QDs and anodes rather than on the bulk QD layer itself. The band gap of PbS (1.56 eV) and CdS (2.54 eV) was obtained from the absorption spectrum and was higher than that of the bulk by the indication of the quantum confinement effect.

The ultimate performance of the devices has been studied. The deposition of the CdS, PbS/CdS, Mn-PbS/CdS and PbS/Mn-CdS on the TiO2 surface was conducted. The cells were fabricated using FTO/TiO2/CdS, PbS/CdS, Mn-PbS/CdS, PbS/Mn-CdS and a polysulfide electrolyte was used as the hole transporter. The photocurrent of the electrodes changes indicating that the incorporation of Mn affects the absorbance of visible light and induces a higher current density. This also shows that Mn must be doped in the PbS/CdS material. The J–V curves of the CdS, PbS/CdS, Mn-PbS/CdS and PbS/Mn-CdS cells under one full sun (100 mW cm−2) are shown in Fig. 8. Photovoltaic parameters, such as open circuit voltage (VOC), short circuit current (JSC), fill factor (FF), and total energy conversion efficiency (η), are listed in Table 2. However, an increase in the VOC was seen in PbS/Mn-CdS (0.56) and Mn-PbS/CdS (0.51).

Parameter
CdS
PbS/CdS
Mn-PbS/CdS
PbS/Mn-CdS

V
OC

0.49
0.50
0.51
0.56

J
SC (mA cm−2)
7.4
9.8
11.38
12.9
FF
0.52
0.52
0.54
0.49

η (%)
1.93
2.46
3.06
3.55
Similarly, Mn-doped films also exhibited a significant increase in the JSC compared to the corresponding semiconductor films without dopants. The fill factor remained almost the same for all four QDSSCS, implying similar electrochemical limitations during the conversion of light into electricity. The increase seen in the JSC and the VOC values with the Mn doped system was reflected in the overall power conversion efficiency. The efficiency of 3.55% obtained for the PbS/Mn-CdS film is one of the highest performing QDSSCs. The current density (JSC) for the PbS sensitized cell shows a higher order of increase from 9.8 to 12.9 mA cm2. This increase in current density was responsible for the enhancement of conversion efficiency. This is due to the positive influence of PbS QDs on the overall performance of the QDSSCs by enhancing the photoelectron harvesting efficiency of the photo-anode.
The enhancement in the photoelectrochemical performance seen with quantum dot sensitization of TiO2 is another milestone for achieving greater efficiencies. It confirms that the presence of a Mn-CdS passivation layer over the PbS photo-anode has considerably increased the stability of the PbS QDs in the photo-anode. The main reason for the enhanced photovoltaic properties is that the Mn impurities have a drastic impact on the host material and can create new energy states that can delay the exciton recombination time and can allow charge separation. VOC can be calculated using the potential difference between the Fermi energy levels near the conduction band edge and the redox potential of the electrolyte. Consequently, the pre-treated interfacial doped buffer layers can help electron accumulation inside the TiO2 photo-anode. The doping of CdS films with Mn has enabled us to achieve a significant improvement compared to the undoped films.

Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) is a powerful tool for characterizing the performance of each component in QDSSCs and it is used to investigate the interior resistance, recombination and charge transfer kinetics of QDSSCs. The Nyquist plots of QDSSCs with CdS, PbS/CdS, Mn-PbS/CdS and PbS/Mn-CdS photo-anodes were measured under a simulated light source. The equivalent circuit diagram model (inset of Fig. 9) consists of the series resistance (RS), which is the non-zero intercept on the real axis of the plot. It represents the sheet resistance of the transparent conducting film (TCO) and the resistance of FTO/TiO2. The electron transfer resistance (RCT) is associated with electron recombination at the photo-anode/electrolyte interface and is parallel with the chemical capacitance (Cμ). The finite Warburg impedance (Zd) elements are associated with diffusion processes, which are influenced by the behaviour of the porous electrode/electrolyte interface and the counter electrode/electrolyte. Zd in the lowest frequency region is because of the Warburg impedance for the redox couple in the electrolyte. The RCE and CCE are related to the counter electrode resistance and capacitance, respectively.

To understand the carrier transport dynamics in these devices, the parameters were determined. The parameters obtained from the EIS analysis are shown in Table 3. Fig. 9 shows the Nyquist plots for the QDSSCs fabricated using CdS, PbS/CdS, Mn-PbS/CdS and PbS/Mn-CdS. The PbS/Mn-CdS photo-anode has the highest charge transfer resistance RCT (40.04 Ω) among the other electrodes and the highest chemical capacitance Cμ (3954 μF), indicating more rapid charge transport at the TiO2/electrolyte/QD interface. The relatively high values for RCT and Cμ (PbS/Mn-CdS) yields the excellent value of lifetime, which contributes to keep VOC at a high level by avoiding electron loss in the semiconductor. The bare CdS has a lower RCT (6.19 Ω) and the lowest Cμ (1399 μF) because of the much lower electron transfer at the TiO2/QDs/electrolyte interface.
Parameter
CdS
PbS/CdS
Mn-PbS/CdS
PbS/Mn-CdS

R
S (Ω)
9.24
9.61
8.29
8.32

R
CE (Ω)
5.01
6.33
5.39
4.04

R
CT (Ω)
6.19
7.35
30.05
40.04

C
μ (μF)
1399
3899
3887
3954

Z
d (Ω)
0.99
1.29
5.54
8.11
Mn leads to an increased electron transfer rate and improved efficiency for the solar cells. The increase in RCT on PbS/Mn-CdS was with Mn ions on CdS, which leads to higher resistance of the photo-anode. The reduced Cμ indicates a lower electron density due to the absence of Mn ions. The higher Zd was because of the thicker porousity of the PbS/Mn-CdS materials, which increased the diffusion length.
The Bode phase plots for the cells with different configurations are shown in Fig. 10. The electron life times (τr) can be obtained according to the following equation,
τr = 1/(2πfmax),
(1)
where
fmax is the maximum frequency of the middle-frequency peak in the Bode plot. The τr values of CdS, PbS/CdS, Mn-PbS/CdS and PbS/Mn-CdS were found to be 24.36, 30.74, 50.8 and 47.2 ms, respectively. The higher τr value for PbS/Mn-CdS suggests that electrons have a longer lifetime and are effectively transferred, resulting in a higher JSC and energy conversion efficiency for the QDSSCs. The frequency peak for PbS/Mn-CdS shifted to a lower frequency, which was ascribed to the enhanced electron transport. Electrons with higher mobility can travel a longer distance with fewer surface traps.


Cell device stability is often overlooked, but it is crucial for any real application. The stability of the working state of the CdS, PbS/CdS, Mn-PbS/CdS and PbS/Mn-CdS photo-anodes of QDSSCs with a CuS CE was measured in our study. Fig. 11 shows a comparison of the extracted photovoltaic parameters (VOC, η, JSC and FF) for the CdS, PbS/CdS, Mn-PbS/CdS and PbS/Mn-CdS curves from stability tests for nearly 10 h. The devices were stored in air under ambient light illumination and without further encapsulation.

The η values for the CdS photo-anode declined continuously from 1.93% to 1.69% within 10 h, the PbS/CdS values were stably maintained, Mn-PbS/CdS values started to decrease from 3.06 to 2.8%, whereas the power conversion efficiency values for the PbS/Mn-CdS photo-anode decreased in the first 2 h from 3.55% to 3.3%, but excellent constant η values were maintained thereafter. The mid gap states created by Mn doping cause electrons to become trapped and screen them from charge recombination with holes and oxidized polysulfide electrolyte. Therefore, the spatial separation of electrons can be efficiently collected using an external circuit. In Mn-CdS, the enhanced photo-stability could be attributed to the efficient hole scavenging capability of the polysulfide electrolyte, which successfully suppresses hole-induced anodic corrosion. The reduced recombination could improve the photo-stability of the QDSSCs.
The PCE improvement is likely derived from two factors: the reduced recombination loss due to the combination of Mn and PbS passivation. A more complete passivation of QD surfaces is also a likely reason for the improved device stability. We have demonstrated high-performance QDSSCs through the engineering of the band alignment at the QDs and the QDs/anode interface. These solar cells were processed in air at room temperature and exhibit excellent stability. We expect that determining the origin of the high VOC and the combination of Mn with PbS and CdS QDs will result in continued efficiency improvements. Greater understanding of the QD optoelectronic properties and further progress in materials development could lead to the generation of much more stable QDSSCs with higher efficiency.

In summary, we have fabricated PbS/Mn-CdS quantum dots on the surface of TiO2 using a simple successive ion layer adsorption and reaction method. We obtained a comparison between CdS, PbS/CdS, Mn-PbS/CdS and Mn-doped CdS photo-anodes, which revealed that PbS/Mn-CdS can be considered as an alternative photo-anode to CdS PbS/CdS and Mn-PbS/CdS in many applications, owing to its faster charge transport, more efficient charge separation, recombination resistance, and greater stability. A maximum current density of 12.9 mA cm−2 and 3.55% conversion efficiency under one sun illumination have been achieved by doping Mn in CdS. The quantum dot sensitised solar cell (QDSSC) performance was enhanced, which was attributed due to the better light harvesting ability of the PbS quantum dots and allows a large accumulation of photo-injected electrons in the conduction band of TiO2. The doping of CdS films with Mn has enabled us to achieve improvement in the power conversion efficiency when compared to CdS, PbS/CdS and Mn-PbS/CdS. This result confirms that the Mn ions on CdS are very effective for improving the surface properties in regard to both the chemical stability and electronic surface state by reinforcing the surface network in the QDSSC compared with Mn-PbS/CdS. We believe that the QDSSC with an efficiency exceeding 6% can be achieved with the co-sensitization of longer absorption wavelength materials such as CdSe or PbS on the surface of PbS/Mn-doped CdS with ZnS passivation layer. Future work will be devoted to a systematic study of the role of quantum confinement on tuning the exchange interactions.


This research is supported by the Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology (2011-0014437).


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2015