 DOI: 10.1039/C9NJ05367K
(Paper)
New J. Chem., 2020, 44, 791-796


Yi
Di
*,

Suping
Jia
,

Xiaoshuang
Yan
,

Junfei
Liang
 and 

Shengliang
Hu
*

School of Energy and Power Engineering, North University of China, Taiyuan 030051, P. R. China. E-mail: diyuanyu@yeah.net; hsliang@yeah.net

Wuhan institute of Physics and Mathematics, Chinese Academy of Science, Wuhan 430071, P. R. China

Received
30th October 2019
, Accepted 29th November 2019
First published on 2nd December 2019
The development of self-chargeable lithium-ion batteries is of great significance for expanding the usable range of the lithium-ion battery and it has received intensive attention from numerous researchers. Solar cells can generate electricity from the sunlight and ensure sustainable access to electrical power for charging lithium-ion batteries. Herein, a photo-charging integrated device is constructed by combining four conventional dye-sensitized solar cells and a three-electrode hybrid lithium-ion battery, including a dye-sensitized TiO2 photo-anode, LiFePO4 electrode and metal lithium electrode. When the device is operated under solar illumination, DSSCs can match the charging voltage for the hybrid lithium-ion battery. The LiFePO4 electrode in the three-electrode device plays two roles, serving as a reversible redox agent for the regeneration of dye and as the cathode for lithium-ion batteries. The integrated device can effectively harvest solar energy and store it in situ within the hybrid lithium-ion battery through the photo-charging process. The proposed strategy is in favor of exploiting the small-sized, light-weight, self-chargeable battery and may have the potential to be employed as the power supply for miniaturized sensors and mobile devices.

With the large-scale popularity of electric vehicles and intelligent terminals, the lithium-ion battery (LIB) as an energy storage device has been extensively utilized since holding the high theoretical capacity and energy density. Currently, climate warming resulting from greenhouse gas emissions has become a global concern. Generally, LIBs do not generate carbon emission during operation, but the power grids that charge the batteries still consume vast amounts of fossil fuels and then lead to significant carbon emission. On the other hand, the batteries will face energy depletion after being in operation for long hours. When this occurs in remote regions, there may be no charging piles to provide electrical energy for the battery. Therefore, it is a practical necessity to exploit the self-chargeable LIBs by using electricity generated from sustainable energy sources. As the most widespread and free renewable resource, solar energy can be captured and transformed by various forms of devices. The photovoltaic technology can efficiently utilize solar energy to generate electricity. Constructing integrated devices from LIBs and solar cells is an approach that can achieve self-chargeable LIBs and suitable energy storage. In recent years, several reports about solar-rechargeable batteries have emerged and related advances have attracted intense attention from researchers and industries; these works offer some unique strategies for addressing the issues regarding the integration of solar cells and batteries.

According to the different assembly methods, the solar-rechargeable LIB can be roughly divided into two types. In one type, the LIB and solar cells are independent of each other and are connected through an auxiliary tool or electric wires. For instance, Xu et al. employed several perovskite solar cells to directly charge a LIB assembled with a LiFePO4 cathode and a Li4Ti5O12 anode, and the fabricated system presented moderate photo-electric conversion and storage efficiency. The other type of self-chargeable LIB involves the construction of a hybrid three-electrode device for fulfilling photo-assisted charging through coupling a built-in dye-sensitized TiO2 photo-electrode or bare TiO2 photo-electrode into the structure of the conventional LIB. Li et al. reported a photo-assisted chargeable LIB containing a LiFePO4 cathode, a lithium anode and a bare TiO2 photo-electrode for saving electric energy. With the assistance of photovoltage, the charging voltage of the LiFePO4 cathode was reduced from 3.41 V to 2.78 V. Yu et al. introduced a dye-sensitized TiO2 photo-electrode into a non-aqueous Li–O2 battery, and the photovoltage generated on the photo-electrode could compensate the charging voltage of the battery. For this kind of photo-charging LIB, the dominant charging voltage is still provided by an external power supply.
Although previous solar-rechargeable LIBs have achieved certain effects, there are several aspects that need to be further improved. The new-style solar-rechargeable LIB system should combine the advantages from each of the aforementioned two types of photo-charging LIBs, which should be further integrated and fully charged by solar cells. Among the diversiform photovoltaic devices, dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) possess some unique advantages including relatively high power conversion efficiency, low cost and eco-friendliness. Moreover, dye-sensitized TiO2 photo-electrodes generally adopt rigid conductive glasses as substrates, thus facilitating the photo-electrode being integrated into one unit with other electrodes. In this work, a simple and available photo-charging LIB system is designed, which is composed of four single-junction DSSCs and a hybrid three-electrode battery consisting of a dye-sensitized TiO2 photo-electrode, a LiFePO4 cathode and a lithium anode. On charging under illumination, the photovoltage derived from serial DSSCs and the photo-electrode in the hybrid battery can afford sufficient voltage for the LIB. The fabricated photo-charging LIB units demonstrate a feasible photo-electric conversion and storage effect and relatively good cycling stability. This strategy can provide a viable approach to realize the self-charging LIBs and lay the foundation for developing more efficient solar energy conversion and storage systems.

The dye-sensitized TiO2 photo-electrodes were prepared as follows. The dried TiO2 films (0.25 cm2) were immersed in 0.5 mM N719 dye ethanol solution for 12 h at 60 °C, then the films were adequately washed with absolute ethanol to remove any residual unabsorbed dye and then dried at 80 °C for 2 h. The yielded TiO2 photo-electrodes were placed in a sealed container away from light for further use. Pt electrodes were prepared as the DSSC counter electrodes by pyrolyzing the deposited chloroplatinic acid on the FTO glass surface in an argon atmosphere.

The LiFePO4 electrode was fabricated as described below. Commercial LiFePO4, conductive carbon black, terpineol and ethyl cellulosic ethanol solution (10 wt%) were added to a stainless steel milling pot for ball milling to yield a homogeneous and viscous paste. Subsequently, the viscous paste was coated onto the conductive titanium mesh (200 mesh) via the doctor-blade method. After the achieved LiFePO4 cathode was dried, it was transferred to an Ar-filled glove box for standby application. The dosage of active LiFePO4 in the yielded electrode was about 0.3 mg cm−2.
The manufacture of the Li anode was carried out in an Ar-filled glove box. The metal Li foil (0.75 mm thick, 99.9%, Aladdin) was pressed onto a titanium mesh (100 mesh), then it was placed in a packet fabricated with the LIB polymer electrolyte membrane (Celgard2500, USA). The packet was then filled with an organic electrolyte of 1 M LiClO4 in ethylene carbonate/dimethyl carbonate with a volume ratio of 1:1 and sealed, thus yielding the Li anode.

Fabrication of DSSCs adopted the familiar sandwich-type structure. The dye-sensitized TiO2 photo-electrode and Pt electrode were coupled together via a 30 μm Surlyn film as the spacer. Through the hole at the Pt counter electrode, the acetonitrile electrolyte containing 0.05 M LiI, 0.03 M I2, 0.6 M 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium iodide, 0.5 M 4-tert-butylpyridine, and 0.1 M guanidinium thiocyanate was injected into the interspace of the sandwiched DSSC, then the hole was sealed with a Surlyn film, thus completing the assembly of the DSSC.

The three-electrode hybrid battery was fabricated in an argon-filled glovebox. The dye-sensitized TiO2 photo-electrode was fixed in the top slot of the customized cuboidal battery box and served as the outer wall for receiving the illumination of sunlight; the gap of the slot was sealed using silicone rubber to prevent electrolyte leakage. The LiFePO4 composite cathode was embedded in the middle slot of the battery box and the Li anode was fixed in the bottom slot. The battery box was then completely sealed, except for the hole on the TiO2 photo-electrode. After the binder was cured, acetonitrile electrolyte composed of 1 M LiClO4 and 100 mM LiI was injected into the battery box through the hole on the TiO2 photo-electrode, sealing the hole and obtaining the hybrid battery. Afterward, the three-electrode battery was connected with the series DSSCs pack through conducting wires. When implementing the solar-charging process, the Li anode was connected to the DSSC photo-electrode and the dye-sensitized TiO2 photo-electrode of the hybrid battery was linked to the counter electrode of the DSSC. For discharging, the Li anode and LiFePO4 composite cathode were connected to the outside circuit, thus accomplishing the fabrication of the photo-charging LIB unit.

The crystallographic structures of various LiFePO4 electrode materials were characterized using XRD (D8 Advance, Germany). The chemical compositions of the products were investigated by employing X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) with an Al Kα radiation source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK). Delithiation tests of the LiFePO4 electrode material were conducted in a three-electrode system in acetonitrile supporting electrolyte through successive cyclic voltammetry (CV) on an electrochemical workstation (CHI660C, China), where the three-electrode system adopted Pt wire as the counter electrode, Ag wire as the reference electrode and the LiFePO4 electrode as the working electrode. The electrolyte was constituted with 0.1 M NaClO4, 10 mM NaI, and 1 mM I2. After finishing the successive CV testing, the LiFePO4 electrode material was again analyzed by XRD. Meanwhile the content of Li+ ions in the supporting electrolyte in different CV determinations was qualitatively investigated by 7Li liquid-state NMR spectroscopy (500M, Bruker). The photovoltaic performance of DSSC was measured under the irradiation of a solar simulator providing solar AM1.5 light of 100 mW cm−2 (SolarIV, Zolix, China). The solar-charging period of the photo-charging LIB unit was also executed under the irradiation of a solar simulator. The electrochemical performance of the hybrid LIB was measured using an automatic battery tester system (Land, China) and the related charge–discharge current density in this work was 0.2 mA cm−2.



Scheme 1 presents the schematic diagram of the fabricated photo-charging LIB system. The theoretical charging voltage of the hybrid LIB is generally determined by the energy difference between the redox potential of the Li+/Li redox potential and the quasi-Fermi level of electrons in the TiO2 photo-electrode (near to its conduction band). The global photoelectrochemical mechanism of the integrated device is almost identical to that of previous reports and is described as follows. During photo-charging, the TiO2 photo-electrode of the hybrid battery and Li anode are connected together via the outside DSSCs pack. Charging voltage is supplied by the photovoltage from the series DSSC units and the TiO2 photo-electrode of the hybrid battery. When the dye-sensitized TiO2 photo-electrode of hybrid battery is illuminated by sunlight, the dye becomes excited and then generates the electrons. Subsequently, the photoexcited dye converts I− into I3−, which in turn diffuses into the LiFePO4 cathodes and oxidizes LiFePO4 to FePO4 along with releasing Li+ ions. The electrons from the photoelectrode of the hybrid battery and the DSSC power pack are transported to the Li anode through the external circuit, and the Li+ ions around the Li anode surface are reduced to Li with the aid of the charging voltage. On discharge, the LiFePO4 composite cathode and Li anode are linked together by the outside load. The LiFePO4 cathode receives the electrons released by the Li anode, and the Li+ ions are again inserted into the FePO4 structure under the effect of charge balance, which results in FePO4 being reduced to LiFePO4, thus completing the total charge–discharge process.

The conversion between LiFePO4 and FePO4 plays a vital role in the operation of the photo-charging LIB device. There have been several reports that I−/I3− ions match the oxidation properties of LiFePO4. To investigate the states of the LiFePO4 composite electrode in the iodine-based redox shuttle in detail, sequential cyclic voltammetry (CV) was performed on the LiFePO4 electrode. Moreover, to exactly monitor the deintercalation of Li+ ions as well as exclude the interference of Li+ ions in electrolyte compositions, all supporting electrolytes in the CV test adopted sodium-based constituents. Fig. 1A displays the XRD patterns from the fresh LiFePO4 electrode and the yielded material after the LiFePO4 electrode underwent 30 successive CV scans. Obviously, the main diffraction peaks of the fresh LiFePO4 electrode were in accord with the typical LiFePO4 JCPDF card No. 40-1499. The material after the CV tests demonstrated a distinct curve, and the existing characteristic peaks could be ascribed to the heterosite FePO4 (JCPDF card No. 37-0478). The chemical states of Fe element in two kinds of electrode materials were further analyzed by XPS measurements and the fitting results are displayed in Fig. 1B. In the high-resolution spectra of Fe2p, the Fe element from the pristine LiFePO4 electrode shows two peaks of Fe2p3/2 (710.3 eV) and Fe2p1/2 (723.8 eV), illustrating that the oxidation state of Fe is +2. Through the successive CV scans, the central peak for Fe2p3/2 shifted from 710.3 to 711.6 eV and the corresponding Fe2p1/2 peak was located at 725.1 eV. These variations can be assigned to Fe2+ oxidation to Fe3+ and are consistent with previous reports. Both XRD and XPS results indicate the feasible oxidation reaction from LiFePO4 to FePO4 due to the presence of the I−/I3− ion couple. The chemical constituents of the supporting electrolyte during successive CV scans were also investigated to further confirm the effective delithiation. Fig. 2 presents the 7Li NMR spectra from the supporting electrolyte at different CV times. When the 1st CV test was completed, the intense signal from Li+ ions was detected. Due to the absence of Li element in the original electrolyte, the appearance of the Li signal can be unambiguously ascribed to the deintercalation of Li from the LiFePO4 electrode, which again demonstrates the practicable oxidation effect from the iodine-based shuttle. With the increase in the cycle number, the concentration of Li+ ions in the supporting electrolyte gradually increased. When the number of successive CV tests exceeded 20, the integral area of the 7Li NMR spectra was no longer enlarged, implying that the concentration of Li+ ions remained unchanged and LiFePO4 was completely oxidized. The above-mentioned measurements forcefully declare that the LiFePO4 electrode can serve as a favourable bridge to combine DSSC and LIB.
Before evaluating the specific photo-charging effect, the electrochemical performance of hybrid LIB in the dark conditions was investigated via an automatic charge–discharge tester system and results are shown in Fig. 3. At a current flow of 0.2 mA cm−2, the battery can be charged with an average voltage of 3.49 V. On discharging, the hybrid battery showed a voltage plateau at about 3.38 V. The specific charging and discharging capacity for the hybrid LIB are 110.4 and 97.9 mA h g−1, respectively. The coulombic efficiency (CE) of the hybrid LIB was about 88%. The low CE performance can be ascribed to the preparation technology of the hybrid battery being relatively inferior, which intensely affects the charge/discharge capacity. On the other hand, the three-electrode hybrid LIB contains two kinds of electrolyte that are separated by a membrane. Although the Li+ ion from the two kinds of electrolyte can migrate via the separator under the drive of an outside voltage, the migration impedance between the two different electrolytes is still higher than that in the normal LIB, which further results in low CE performance. Fig. 4 describes the photo-assisted charge curves of the hybrid LIB under illumination. It is remarkable that the battery gives a charging voltage of 2.85 V, which is lower than that in dark conditions. The decrease in the charging voltage can be ascribed to the compensation from the photovoltage. In addition, the photovoltaic performance of a single standard DSSC was also evaluated and the corresponding current density–voltage curve (J–V) is presented in Fig. 5A. The single-junction DSSC exhibited a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 13.14 mA cm−2, open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.77 V, fill factor (FF) of 0.70 and power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 7.15%. Obviously, the single solar cell cannot supply a sufficiently high voltage for the hybrid LIB. To realize the direct photo-charging LIB, the DSSC pack was fabricated by connecting four single cells in series, thus obtaining a sufficiently high operating voltage.Fig. 5B displays the J–V curve of the series DSSCs pack, which generated a Jsc of 2.85 mA cm−2, Voc of 3.13 V, FF of 0.69, and PCE of 6.19%. The delivered open-circuit voltage was adequately matched with the charging voltage of the hybrid LIB on illumination.
The direct photo-charging performance of the yielded DSSCs-hybrid LIB system was carefully assessed. Fig. 6 shows the discharging curves of the integrated system photo-charged under illumination for different times. After photo-charging for 6 h, the hybrid LIB delivered a discharge voltage of around 3.4 V and a discharge capacity of 95.4 mA h g−1, which is comparable to that of the LIB charged by an automatic charge–discharge instrument. As a comparison, the discharging curve of LIB for the 4 h photo-charging process is also provided. The analogous discharge voltage plateau with 6 h photo-charging was observed and the corresponding discharge capacity was 61.3 mA h g−1. For practical application, repeatable performance is an important issue that needs to be considered. Therefore, 7 cycles of photocharging-discharging were performed on the DSSCs-hybrid LIB units and the photo-charging time for all cycles was 6 h. The discharge capacity of the hybrid LIB for each cycle is summarized in Fig. 7A. The voltage–time curves of the hybrid LIB system during the photo-charging process for some cycle numbers are displayed in Fig. 7B. After 7 photo-charge and galvanostatic discharge cycles, the hybrid LIB maintained a capacity of 70.2 mA h g−1, which is about 73.6% of the initial capacity. On the other hand, the charging voltage of the hybrid LIB presented a gradual upward trend as cycling continued. The possible reason is that the dye molecules on the TiO2 photoelectrode gradually decomposed under the strong oxidizing environment, thus affecting the stable operation of the hybrid battery, and then led to the increase in the charging voltage. The operation stability of the series DSSC pack was also studied. Fig. 8 summarizes the parameters Voc and Jsc extracted from seven cycling tests, where the DSSC pack demonstrates relative reliability with a small reduction. The value of the crucial parameter Voc fell by 4.8% after 7 cycling tests compared to that of initial Voc. The decrease in the output power of the series DSSC pack can be ascribed to the aging of the DSSC device, which also resulted in the decline in the hybrid LIB capacity in the cycling test. The stability of the integrated device can be further improved by optimizing the preparation technologies regarding DSSCs and hybrid LIBs.

In this work, a direct photo-charging system was fabricated by combining a hybrid three-electrode LIB and series DSSC pack. For the hybrid LIB, the LiFePO4 electrode plays a vital mediating role in integrating the LIB and dye-sensitized TiO2 photo-electrode, and the introduction of the photo-electrode effectively reduces the charging voltage and then saves energy. The hybrid LIB can be charged at a voltage of 2.85 V, which is lower than that of a typical LIB. Through further connection with the series DSSC pack, the DSSCs-hybrid LIB system was obtained, which demonstrated an available photo-charging effect. The specific discharge performance is comparable to that of charging by conventional power. Moreover, when the integrated system underwent cycle testing, it demonstrated relative stability. The discharge capacity after cycle testing retained 73.6% relative to the initial capacity. In subsequent research, various optimizations in the aspects of device configuration and preparation technologies can further improve the general performance of the DSSCs-hybrid LIB system. The proposed strategy may provide a viable option for self-charging LIBs for potential applications.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was financially supported by the Scientific Research Start-up Funds of North University of China (11012304).


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2020