 DOI: 10.1039/C4NR06969B
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 7078-7083


Yuhua
Xue
,

Janice M.
Baek
,

Hao
Chen
*,

Jia
Qu
* and 

Liming
Dai
*

Institute of Advanced Materials for Nano-Bio Applications, School of Ophthalmology & Optometry, Wenzhou Medical College, 270 Xueyuan Xi Road, Wenzhou, Zhejiang 325027, China. E-mail: chenhao@mail.eye.ac.cn; jia.qu@163.com

Center of Advanced Science and Engineering for Carbon (Case4Carbon), Department of Macromolecular Science and Engineering, Case Western Reserve University, 10900 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, Ohio 44106, USA. E-mail: liming.dai@case.edu

Received
25th November 2014
, Accepted 20th December 2014
First published on 8th January 2015
Nitrogen-doped graphene nanoribbons (N-GNRs) were prepared by thermal treatment of the as-zipped graphene oxide nanoribbons in NH3 gas. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements revealed a high nitrogen content up to 6.5 atom% for the as-prepared N-GNRs. This, together with the high Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface area of about 751 cm2 g−1, prompted us to use the N-GNR as the first low-cost, metal-free counter electrode for disulfide/thiolate redox mediated dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). Compared with the widely-used platinum electrode, the newly-developed N-GNR counter electrode showed a dramatically improved power conversion efficiency for DSSCs based on the thiolate/disulfide redox shuttle. The observed superior cell performance was attributed to the enhanced charge transfer capability and electrocatalytic activity induced by N-doping of the graphene nanoribbon.

Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) have attracted a great deal of interest due to their high energy conversion efficiency and simple, inexpensive device fabrication. A typical DSSC device consists of a photoanode, counter electrode, and electrolyte. The electrolyte, which transfers the electrons from the counter electrode to the photoanode electrode within the cell, plays an important role in regulating the device performance of DSSCs. The most commonly used electrolyte in the DSSCs is the triiodide/iodide (I3−/I−) redox couple. Although the triiodide/iodide couple is efficient for high-performance DSSCs, it suffers from corrosion of the silver-based current collector and partial absorption of visible light around 430 nm. Therefore, iodide-free DSSCs have been developed as an alternative choice. Interestingly, Gratzel and co-workers have developed a new electrolyte based on the disulfide/thiolate (T2/T−) redox couple of negligible optical absorption in the visible region, and hence with potential applications in transparent DSSCs. However, DSSCs with the disulfide/thiolate (T2/T−) redox couple electrolyte often show a relatively low fill factor when platinum (Pt) is used as a counter electrode. Besides, Pt is expensive and has a limited reserve in nature. In this study, we used nitrogen-doped graphene nanoribbons (N-GNRs) as metal-free electrocatalysts to replace Pt in DSSCs based on the T2/T− electrolyte.

Graphene nanoribbons (GNRs) are elongated strips of graphene with straight edges, which have attracted considerable attention due to their unique structure and bandgap properties. Various methods, including lithographic engineering, chemical vapour deposition (CVD), and unzipping of carbon nanotubes, have been devised to prepare graphene nanoribbons. In the present study, we prepared N-GNRs by unzipping carbon nanotubes, followed by thermal annealing under an ammonia–argon gas mixture. Compared with pure carbon nanomaterials, the incorporation of nitrogen into carbon nanomaterials has been shown to be an effective way to controllably alter their electronic and surface characteristics. As a result, nitrogen-doped carbon nanomaterials have been demonstrated to show an excellent electrocatalytic performance for the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) in fuel cells and triiodide reduction in DSSCs. While nitrogen-doped carbon nanotubes and nitrogen-doped graphene have been extensively studied, nitrogen-doped graphene nanoribbons have been scarcely reported.
In this paper we report the preparation of nitrogen-doped graphene nanoribbons (N-GNRs) by unzipping carbon nanotubes, followed by thermal annealing under an ammonia–argon gas mixture. The resulting N-GNRs showed a high nitrogen content up to 6.5 atom% and a large Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface area of 751 cm2 g−1. The use of our N-GNRs as a metal-free counter electrode to replace Pt in DSSCs with a T2/T− electrolyte led to an energy conversion efficiency even higher than their counterparts with the Pt counter electrode. The observed superior cell performance was attributed to an enhanced charge transfer capability and the electrocatalytic activity induced by N-doping of the graphene nanoribbon.


Scheme 1a schematically shows the route to N-GNRs by unzipping carbon nanotubes according to the reported procedure, followed by N-doping via thermal annealing under an ammonia–argon gas mixture (see the Experimental section for details). The resulting N-GNR was then used as a counter electrode in DSSCs with the T2/T− redox couple electrolyte (Scheme 1b).


Fig. 1a and b show scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the resulting N-GNRs under different magnifications. As can be seen, most of the carbon nanotubes have been unzipped into strip-like graphene. Fig. 1c shows the corresponding AFM image, confirming the nanoribbon structure.
The nitrogen content of N-GNRs was measured by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). Fig. 2a shows an XPS survey spectrum, from which the carbon, nitrogen and oxygen contents were estimated to be 90.4 atom%, 6.5 atom%, and 3.1 atom%, respectively. The high resolution XPS N1s spectrum in Fig. 2b shows two component peaks at 398 and 401 eV corresponding to the pyridinic nitrogen and the graphitic nitrogen, respectively.
The Raman spectrum of the N-GNR is given in Fig. 2c, which shows a higher D band than the G band with a ratio of ID/IG = 1.07. The observed higher D band than the G band is attributable to the large number of edge and nitrogen-doping induced defects intrinsically associated with the N-GNR, providing an advantage for electrocatalysis. The XRD profile of N-GNR given in Fig. 2d shows a peak at about 2θ = 26° equivalent to the lattice spacing of 0.34 nm corresponding to the (002) facet of the graphitic carbon. Nitrogen-doping caused a lattice expansion as evidenced by the appearance of another relatively weak band at 2θ = 19°, corresponding to an interlayer distance of 0.47 nm. The surface area was determined by BET measurements (Fig. S1) to be as high as 751 cm2 g−1 for the N-GNR, which is higher than that of a nitrogen-doped graphene or nitrogen-doped carbon nanotubes. The large surface is an additional advantage for electrocatalysis at the counter electrode of a DSSC.
To use the N-GNR as a counter electrode in DSSCs, we transferred it onto a piece of FTO glass. Fig. 3a shows a photograph of the N-GNR counter electrode, which is rather uniform and flat. Fig. 3b and c reproduce a side view of the N-GNR counter electrode under different magnifications, showing a foam-like structure. The thickness of the N-GNR counter electrode can be controlled by regulating the conditions for blade coating. Fig. 3d and e show the top-view SEM images of the N-GNR counter electrode under different magnifications.
The N-GNR counter electrode thus prepared was then tested in DSSCs with the T2/T− electrolyte. T− (i.e., 5-mercapto-1-methyltetrazole ion) and T2 (i.e., the dimer of T−) were synthesized following the published method and confirmed by NMR (Fig. S2). Using the T2/T− redox couple electrolyte, we have prepared several DSSCs with either Pt or N-GNR as the counter electrode. Three N-GNR counter electrodes with the N-GNR foam thickness of 7, 13, and 19 μm (designated as: N-GNRs-1, N-GNRs-2, and N-GNRs-3, respectively) were tested. Fig. 4a shows the obtained photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) curves. The corresponding numerical data, including the short circuit current (Jsc), open circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (FF), and power conversion efficiency (PCE), are listed in Table 1. As can be seen in Table 1, the PCE for DSSCs with the N-GNR counter electrodes is much higher than that of the DSSC with Pt as a counter electrode. The FF for the DSSC with Pt as a counter electrode is only 0.36, which is much lower than those of DSSCs with the N-GNRs as counter electrodes. Furthermore, the short circuit current for DSSCs based on the N-GNR counter electrode increased with increasing the N-GNR thickness, leading to an increased power transfer efficiency (Table 1). The incident photon to charge carrier efficiency (IPCE) for DSSCs with the N-GNRs-3 and Pt counter electrodes, respectively, is given in Fig. 4b, which, as expected, shows a relatively high IPCE for the DSSC with the N-GNR counter electrode. This is consistent with the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements on the asymmetric dummy cells with Pt and N-GNRs as the counter electrodes, respectively. As seen in Fig. 4c, the semicircles of the Nyquist plots for the two N-GNR electrodes are both smaller than that of the Pt electrode, indicating smaller charge transfer resistances for the N-GNR electrodes. The charge transfer resistances calculated from the EIS spectra are 12.7, 74.1, and 559.6 Ω for the N-GNRs-3, N-GNRs-1, and Pt electrodes, respectively, showing a strong dependence on the electrode thickness. The series resistances of the N-GNR counter electrodes are also smaller than that of the Pt counter electrode (Fig. 4d).
Counter electrode

J
sc [mA cm−2]

V
oc [V]
FF
PCE [%]
Pt
13.20
0.65
0.36
3.09
N-GNRs-1 (7 μm)
10.82
0.62
0.57
3.82
N-GNRs-2 (13 μm)
12.47
0.63
0.59
4.64
N-GNRs-3 (19 μm)
13.43
0.64
0.59
5.07
In order to investigate the role of nitrogen-doping to the DSSC performance, we also compared the N-GNR counter electrodes with the reduced graphene oxide nanoribbon (rGOR) counter electrode without nitrogen-doping. The photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) curves for DSSCs with the Pt, rGOR, and N-GNR counter electrodes (i.e., N-GNRs-3), respectively, are shown in Fig. 5a while the corresponding numerical data of the Jsc, Voc, FF and PCE are presented in Table 2. As can be seen in Table 2, the PEC of the DSSC with the N-GNRs-3 counter electrode is much higher than that of the DSSC with rGORs as a counter electrode. Furthermore, the resistances of the N-GNR, rGOR and Pt electrodes were also calculated from the EIS measurements on asymmetric dummy cells. The obtained Nyquist plots were given in Fig. 5b, which shows a lower charge-transfer resistance and series resistance for the N-GNR counter electrode with respect to the rGOR counter electrode.
Counter electrode

J
sc [mA cm−2]

V
oc [V]
Fill factor
Efficiency [%]
Pt
13.20
0.65
0.36
3.09
rGORs
13.88
0.61
0.46
3.89
N-GNRs-3
13.43
0.64
0.59
5.07

In summary, we have synthesized nitrogen-doped graphene nanoribbons with a high nitrogen content up to 6.5 atom%. The resulting N-GNR was demonstrated to be efficient counter electrode material, better than the platinum, for DSSCs with the disulfide/thiolate (T2/T−) redox couple electrolyte. Compared with a Pt counter electrode, the N-GNR counter electrodes possess very low charge transfer resistances. This, together with the large surface area and large number of the edge/doping-induced defects, makes N-GNRs very efficient counter electrodes for high-performance DSSCs of practical significance.


Graphene oxide nanoribbons were synthesized by chemical unzipping of carbon nanotubes according to the published procedure. The as-prepared graphene oxide nanoribbons in water solution were freeze dried for 3 days to obtain the graphene oxide nanoribbon foam.

Nitrogen-doped graphene nanoribbons were then prepared by annealing the freeze-dried graphene oxide nanoribbon foams in a quartz tube furnace under an ammonia–argon gas mixture. Typically, the graphene oxide nanoribbon foam was firstly placed in a horizontal quartz tube and an ammonia–argon gas mixture (NH3:Ar = 400 s.c.c.m.:400 s.c.c.m.) was introduced into the tube. Then, the furnace was heated up from room temperature to 800 °C within 1 hour, and kept at 800 °C for another hour. Thereafter, the quartz tube was air-cooled from the outside to room temperature while keeping the ammonia–argon mixture gas flow rate inside of the quartz tube unchanged. Finally, ammonia was turned off and the sample was taken out from the quartz tube.

The N-GNR counter electrode was prepared by mixing the N-GNR with 5% (wt) PEO solution, which was then coated on the FTO glass and heat treated at 400 °C under air for 3 hours. The Pt counter electrode was prepared by coating the Pt catalyst (Pt-Catalyst T/SP, Solaronix) on a FTO glass and calcination at 400 °C for 30 min.


The FTO glass was cleaned by ultrasonication in the scouring agent, isopropanol and ethanol for 10 min, respectively. After drying, FTO was further cleaned by the UV-O3 system at room temperature for 18 min. DSSC was prepared by blade coating of the TiO2 paste (Ti-Nanoxide T, Solaronix) on the freshly cleaned FTO glass substrate using the 3M Scotch Magic tape to control the thickness. The TiO2 paste was then calcinated at 450 °C for 1 h. The resulting electrode was immersed in a solvent mixture of acetonitrile and isobutanol (v/v = 1/1) containing 0.5 mM N719 dye (Solaronix) for 24 h to form the sensitized photoanode. Finally, the DSSC cell was fabricated by packaging the photoanode and the counter electrode, and sealed by 60 μm think sealant film (SX1170-60, Solaronix Co) after an electrolyte (Iodolyte AN-50 from Solaronix) was added.


X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements were carried out on a VG Microtech ESCA 2000 using a monochromic Al X-ray source (97.9 W, 93.9 eV). The Raman spectra were recorded using a Raman spectrometer (Renishaw) with a 514 nm laser. The thermogravimetric analysis was performed on a TA instrument with a heating rate of 10 °C. X-ray diffraction (XRD) was measured using a Miniflex II Desktop X-ray diffractometer. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images were taken on a JEOL JSM-6510LV SEM.


This work was supported financially by the AFOSR (FA-9550-12-1-0069), DOD-Army (W911NF-11-1-0209), NSF (CMMI-1400274, IIP-1343270), NSFC-NSF (DMR-1106160), CWRU-WMU (CON115346), NSFC (51202167), and the “Thousand Talents Program” of China.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c4nr06969b
‡ On leave of absence from La Lumiece School, 6801 N. Wilhelm Rd, LaPorte, IN 46250, USA.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015