 DOI: 10.1039/D0EE03312J
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 2419-2428


Min Ju
Jeong
,

Kyung Mun
Yeom
,

Se Jin
Kim
,

Eui Hyuk
Jung
* and 

Jun Hong
Noh
*

School of Civil, Environmental and Architectural Engineering, Korea University, Seoul 02841, Republic of Korea. E-mail: junhnoh@korea.ac.kr

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 3G4, Canada. E-mail: euihyuk.jung@utoronto.ca

KU-KIST Green School Graduate School of Energy and Environment, Korea University, Seoul 02841, Republic of Korea

Received
19th October 2020
, Accepted 1st March 2021
First published on 2nd March 2021
Halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have recently shown a leap forward in performance by reducing the recombination loss at the interface between the perovskite and hole-transporting layers through surface treatment. However, additional surface treatment processes such as spin-coating or annealing are undesirable for commercialization in terms of the production cost. In addition, commonly used organic hole-transporting materials (HTMs) such as 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis[N,N-di(4methoxylphenyl)amino]-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD) and poly(triarylamine) (PTAA) are used with hygroscopic additives, which deteriorate the long-term stability and hinder the commercialization of PSCs. Herein, we report an efficient strategy for interface engineering by directly incorporating gallium(III) acetylacetonate (Ga(acac)3) into HTMs without subsequent processes and hygroscopic dopants. The incorporated Ga(acac)3 spontaneously interacts with the surface of the perovskite layer, yielding a reduction of the interfacial recombination loss for various organic HTMs. In particular, by applying Ga(acac)3 in poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT), the PSCs showed a significant improvement in the power conversion efficiency (PCE) from 17.7% for the control device to 21.8%. The Ga(acac)3-devices also showed superior moisture stability for 2000 hours under 85% relative humidity at room temperature without any encapsulation, maintaining a complete initial performance. We also demonstrated that the incorporated Ga(acac)3 successfully works on the best-known PSCs with the aligned P3HT, showing an enhanced PCE of 24.6%. We believe that this work presents a route for the high performance and commercialization of PSCs.

Herein, we report the effective and simple interface engineering strategy of adding an additive in hole transporting materials (HTMs) without the additional processes. We introduced gallium(III) acetylacetonate (Ga(acac)3) into poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT), which is known as a cost-effective and stable polymer. The incorporated Ga(acac)3 in P3HT spontaneously passivates the surface defects of the perovskite layer, resulting in reduced non-radiative recombination at the perovskite/P3HT interface and improved photovoltaic properties of the devices. This strategy also dramatically improved the moisture stability for 2000 hours under 85% relative humidity at room temperature without any encapsulation. Furthermore, to enhance the PCE of PSCs based on P3HT, we applied a double halide architecture (DHA) by using an n-hexyl trimethyl ammonium bromide (HTAB) treatment on the perovskite layer. On combining the DHA device with GA-P3HT, the device showed an improved power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 24.6%, which is the highest value among dopant-free HTM-based PSCs reported thus far. This present study provides a simple and facile way to improve the photovoltaic performance of PSCs based on P3HT.


In recent years, halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have attracted considerable attention and are considered as next-generation solar cells owing to their long charge carrier diffusion length, tunable bandgaps, low-temperature processing, and superior optoelectronic properties. Through many effective strategies such as composition engineering, interfacial engineering, and an optimized device structure, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of PSCs has been rapidly improved from the first reported 3.81% to a currently certified value of 25.5% in less than 10 years. It is crucial to control the defects on the perovskite surface for the PCE improvement of PSCs.

In the n–i–p structure, the solution deposition process of the perovskite layer easily causes uncontrollable surface defects such as ionic vacancies, uncoordinated ions, and a grain boundary, which cause energy losses at the perovskite/charge selective layer interface. A surface treatment strategy used to passivate defects that are inevitably formed on top of the perovskite layer during the fabrication process has emerged, resulting in the state-of-the-art performance by reduction of non-radiative recombination. A variety of chemicals for surface passivation have been reported to improve the efficiency and long-term stability, but most of the methods require additional meticulous processes with a narrow processing window in terms of the solution concentration, reaction time and annealing temperature, which acts as a significant impediment to commercialization.
To date, 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis[N,N-di(4methoxylphenyl)amino]-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD) has been commonly used as a hole transporting material (HTM) in most high-performance PSCs with an n–i–p structure. Pristine spiro-OMeTAD has a low hole mobility (10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1) owing to the triangular pyramid configuration and large intermolecular distance. Mixture of bis(trifluoromethane)sulfonimide lithium salt (Li-TFSI) and 4-tert-butylpyridine (tBP) renders oxidized spiro-OMeTAD to enhance conductivity, leading to efficient hole transfer and transport properties. However, the dopants inhibit the long-term stability of PSCs by causing degradation of the perovskite layer. Li-TFSI has a hygroscopic property, which causes a degradation of the perovskite layer and tBP induces a chemical decomposition of the perovskite layer by forming a complex with PbI2 and gradually evaporates at room temperature. These problems act as a hindrance to the commercialization of PSCs. Recently, poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) was suggested as a promising HTM toward PSC commercialization demonstrating non-use of hygroscopic additives, high-performance, long-term durability, and large-area processability.
In this study, we report an immediate and efficient passivation method using gallium-based ligand, gallium(III) acetylacetonate (Ga(acac)3), added to the HTM layer without any additional processes or hygroscopic additives. In particular, the incorporation of Ga(acac)3 into P3HT showed the most synergetic effects leading to an improved junction quality at the perovskite/P3HT interface by a spontaneous interaction with defects on the perovskite surface. The P3HT mixed with Ga(acac)3 (GA-P3HT) device showed a PCE of 21.8% based on an improved open-circuit voltage (VOC) and fill factor (FF) compared to the control device. Moreover, this strategy results in a high endurance of the device against humidity owing to the water-proof function of hydrophobic Ga(acac)3 on the perovskite surface. The GA-P3HT device maintained a consistent performance for 2000 hours under 85% relative humidity at room temperature without encapsulation. Furthermore, we demonstrate that the double-layered halide architecture (DHA) strategy additionally boosted the performance of the GA-P3HT device up to a PCE of 24.6% with a VOC of 1.15 V and FF of 83.8%. We consider that this effective and immediate passivation strategy provides a novel route to improve the PSCs as well as strengthens a variety of strategies previously reported in terms of performance and stability toward commercial PSCs.


Fig. 1a shows a scheme for the interaction between Ga(acac)3 and the perovskite surface. The Ga(acac)3 molecule has an octahedron structure consisting of three acetylacetonate chelate groups surrounding a gallium metal atom. The oxygen atoms in deprotonated acetylacetone forming an electron resonance render a favorable interaction with perovskite through hydrogen bonding between the Ga(acac)3 and organic cation, influencing the electrical properties of the adjacent layers. We investigated the effects of Ga(acac)3 on the perovskite surface by using the photoluminescence (PL) technique. The perovskite layer has a composition of (FAPbI3)0.95(MAPbBr3)0.05. Although Ga(acac)3 will be incorporated in the HTM layer in PSCs, an inert material should be introduced instead of HTM for a PL measurement because HTM causes PL quenching for the perovskite layer. We chose polystyrene (PS) as an inert polymer because PS is an insulating polymer without a functional moiety for interaction with perovskite. As in Fig. 1a, the specimens were prepared by spin-coating of pristine PS solution or Ga(acac)3-mixed PS solution on the perovskite layer.


Fig. 1b and c show the PL spectra and time-resolved photoluminescence (TR-PL) results for pristine PS-coated perovskite and Ga(acac)3-mixed PS (GA-PS)-coated perovskite layers, respectively. The GA-PS-coated perovskite layer shows an enhanced PL intensity and longer PL lifetime. On considering the first-order recombination constants (Fig. S1 and Table S1, ESI), it is indicated that the trap-assisted recombination is suppressed in the GA-PS-coated perovskite. These PL results demonstrate that Ga(acac)3 molecules on the perovskite surface suppress the non-radiative recombination, which occurs mainly at the defect sites. In Fig. 1e and d, 2D fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy (FLIM) results also show that the GA-PS-coated perovskite has a higher carrier lifetime over the entire surface, indicating that the Ga(acac)3 addition in the PS uniformly induces a healing of the defects. These results revealed that Ga(acac)3 molecules in the HTM layer also might heal the non-radiative recombination traps on the perovskite surface without the need for surface passivation through additional processes prior to the HTM deposition during the fabrication of PSCs.
To demonstrate the trap-healing effect of Ga(acac)3 incorporated in HTM on photovoltaic performance, we fabricated planar n–i–p PSCs with an FTO/SnO2/(FAPbI3)0.95(MAPbBr3)0.05/P3HT/Au structure. Here, we chose P3HT instead of conventional HTMs such as spiro-OMeTAD and poly(triarylamine) (PTAA) to avoid the use of problematic additives. As a representative of the device architecture, a cross-sectional SEM image of the GA-P3HT device is shown in Fig. S2 (ESI), which shows a dense and compact perovskite film. Fig. 2a shows the current density–voltage (J–V) curves of PSCs with pristine P3HT and Ga(acac)3-incorporated P3HT (GA-P3HT). As shown in Table 1, the GA-P3HT device showed a 21.8% efficiency with a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 25.3 mA cm−2, VOC of 1.09 V, and FF of 79.1% and a reverse-forward average efficiency (R-F average PCE) of 21.4%, whereas the control device showed a PCE of 17.7% with a JSC of 24.9 mA cm−2, VOC of 1.02 V, and FF of 69.6% as measured under the forward scan direction and an R-F average PCE of 16.0%. As compared with photovoltaic behaviors for both devices, the minute amount of addition of Ga(acac)3 in P3HT leads to an improved performance by an enhanced VOC and FF as well as a significantly reduced current hysteresis, which are attributed to a passivation of the defects on the perovskite surface through the addition of Ga(acac)3. The improvement in the photovoltaic performance was also confirmed by measuring the stabilized PCE at the maximum power point, as shown in Fig. 2b. The GA-P3HT device showed a constant performance of 21.1% which is comparable to the performance obtained from the J–V curve, while the control device showed 17.0%. The statistics of the photovoltaic parameters for the 20 devices demonstrate the reliability for a performance improvement by introducing Ga(acac)3 into P3HT (Fig. S3, ESI). The optimized Ga(acac)3 concentration was determined by finely controlling the concentration (Fig. S4 and Table S2, ESI). We also highlight that the P3HT layers for all devices were fabricated without any dopant or additive causing perovskite degradation.
Devices
Scan direction

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
R–F average PCE (%)
Control
Rev.
24.7
1.00
58.4
14.4
16.0
Fwd.
24.9
1.02
69.6
17.7
Rev. (average)
24.9 ± 0.2
1.00 ± 0.01
60.9 ± 3.3
15.2 ± 0.9
15.7
Fwd. (average)
25.0 ± 0.1
1.00 ± 0.02
64.4 ± 5.3
16.1 ± 1.5
GA-P3HT
Rev.
25.3
1.09
75.7
20.9
21.4
Fwd.
25.3
1.09
79.1
21.8
Rev. (average)
25.3 ± 0.2
1.08 ± 0.02
74.4 ± 1.0
20.3 ± 0.3
20.7
Fwd. (average)
25.2 ± 0.1
1.08 ± 0.02
77.2 ± 1.1
21.0 ± 0.3
In order to elucidate the excellent effects of Ga(acac)3 on photovoltaic performance as incorporated in a P3HT layer, we further investigated various metal acetylacetonate complexes. On testing the solubility of the complexes in chlorobenzene with the same molar concentration (Fig. S5, ESI), the trivalent metal acetylacetonate complexes were completely soluble at room temperature, whereas monovalent metal acetylacetonate complexes are rarely soluble and divalent metal acetylacetonate complexes are partially soluble. Therefore, only trivalent metal complexes are appropriate for the spontaneous interface engineering strategy. However, among various trivalent metal acetylacetonates, we exclude the transition metal acetylacetonates as an additive of P3HT due to their redox reaction in the air. On exploring the influences of different trivalent metal complexes and acetylacetonate on the perovskite surface by using XPS measurements, it was found that the binding energies of Pb 4f and I 3d on the perovskite surface are lower-shifted in the order of Acac – Al(acac)3 – Ga(acac)3 as compared to those of the untreated perovskite surface, indicating that the metal element of the complex determines the electron donating ability (Fig. S6a, b, ESI). And on examining the photovoltaic performance of devices with the corresponding complexes, the degree of performance improvement corresponds with the order of the binding energy shift (Fig. S6c and Table S3, ESI). Based on these results, we consider that the electron donating ability of a metal complex can be altered by the metal element and the extent of the interaction with perovskite would be related to the performance improvement of PSCs. Previous literature reported that the metal-ligand bond strength is associated with a kind of metal element, leading to other characteristics of the metal complex. Therefore, Ga(acac)3 is the most suitable for the spontaneous interface engineering strategy.
To investigate the impact of Ga(acac)3 in other hole-transporting layers on the photovoltaic performance, we fabricated devices including various HTMs without hygroscopic additives and compared the photovoltaic performance with regard to the Ga(acac)3 addition in the HTMs (Fig. S7 and Table S4, ESI). The results reveal that Ga(acac)3 incorporation in the HTM functions universally for an enhanced performance, and a combination with P3HT demonstrated the highest synergetic effects. The P3HT layer has a high hole mobility without dopants to transport free-charge carriers to an electrode and a well-matched energy level with a perovskite film, whereas the low junction quality between P3HT and perovskite originated from an inferior contact disrupts the photovoltaic performance. Therefore, we consider that the drawback of P3HT as an HTM related to the contact is effectively remedied by Ga(acac)3 incorporation accompanying a spontaneous and simple method.
The improved VOC for the GA-P3HT device was proven by performing a capacitance–voltage (C–V) measurement, which is the so-called Mott–Schottky analysis, at 10 kHz under dark conditions to estimate the flat-band potentials (VFBs), as shown in Fig. 2c. The intercept along the x-axis indicates a VFB of the corresponding sample. Samples fabricated on an FTO substrate without an electron transporting layer were employed only to demonstrate the influence of Ga(acac)3 in the P3HT layer. The VFBs obtained from the samples denote the gap of the quasi-Fermi energy levels of the perovskite film and P3HT layer. A VFB of 0.75 V for the GA-P3HT sample is higher than a VFB of 0.70 V for the control sample, resulting in an enhanced VOC for the full-stacked device. Fig. 2d exhibits the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra of the control and GA-P3HT devices. The EQE spectrum for the GA-P3HT device was recorded to be higher over the entire wavelength range than a spectrum for the control device, arising from the improved hole extraction efficiency. The integrated JSCs of the control and GA-P3HT devices are calculated to be 24.2 mA cm−2 and 24.7 mA cm−2 with 2.4% deviation from JSCs obtained from J–V curves, respectively. We further analysed the properties with respect to the hole transfer from perovskite to P3HT by the addition of Ga(acac)3, as shown in Fig. 3a and b. On measuring the PL emission for samples coated with pristine P3HT and GA-P3HT on a perovskite/fused silica glass substrate, both samples showed quenched PL intensities. The GA-P3HT sample yielded a higher quenching efficiency of 92% compared to the PL intensity for the reference perovskite, whereas the pristine P3HT sample showed a quenching efficiency of 80%, indicating that Ga(acac)3 leads to a more efficient charge transfer from the perovskite to P3HT. In Fig. 3b, moreover, the TR-PL curves of the corresponding samples reveal that both samples have a fast decay component with a carrier lifetime below 1.0 ns, which is attributed to hole transfer from the perovskite to P3HT compared to the reference perovskite film. Here, it is notable that the pristine P3HT sample shows a tri-exponential decay behavior with fast and slow decay lifetimes, whereas the GA-P3HT film shows a mono-exponential decay behavior without the slow decay lifetimes. The fitting parameters are summarized in Table S5 (ESI). This means that almost all the charge carriers effectively transfer from the perovskite to the GA-P3HT layer. This efficient charge transfer is attributed to the improved contact between the perovskite and P3HT, resulting in the increased hole transfer paths. 2D FLIM images for the corresponding samples also demonstrated that GA-P3HT facilitates a higher carrier lifetime over the entire sample area (Fig. S8, ESI). These results present a way to alleviate the previously reported low hole transport at the perovskite/P3HT interface.

Fig. 3c represents the plots of VOC as a function of the light intensity at a semi-logarithm scale to explore the non-radiative recombination in full devices. The linear slope for the GA-P3HT device (1.38kBT/e) is lower than that for the control device (1.88 kBT/e) where kB, T, and e represent the Boltzmann constant, temperature, and elementary charge, respectively. This indicates that the trap-assisted recombination in the GA-P3HT device remarkably decreases as compared to the recombination occurring in the control device owing to effective defect passivation at the perovskite/P3HT interface. The diode characteristics for the full devices were also estimated by measuring the J–V curves under dark conditions, as shown in Fig. 3d. The leakage current density along the bias from −0.9 V to 0 V for the GA-P3HT device is almost one order of magnitude lower than that for the control device. To elucidate the charge carrier recombination and diffusion, we fitted the dark J–V with the following eqn (1) and calculated the shunt resistance (Rsh), recombination current density (Jr), and diffusion current density (Jd).
(1)
where
mr and md are constants. The fitting parameters are summarized in Table S6 (ESI). The GA-P3HT device shows an increased Rsh and a reduced Jr compared to the control device, which indicates a suppressed charge carrier recombination by Ga(acac)3 incorporation in P3HT. In particular, the GA-P3HT device yielded a higher Jd of 6.87 × 10−9 mA cm−2 compared to a Jd of 2.05 × 10−9 mA cm−2 for the P3HT device, which indicates that GA-P3HT enhances hole transfer and extraction. This result supports the TR-PL results shown in Fig. 3b.

To investigate the interaction between Ga(acac)3 and perovskite in the GA-P3HT device, we conducted a surface analysis after removing the P3HT layer of the corresponding devices by using chlorobenzene as a processing solvent. The detailed procedure for preparing the samples by washing P3HT is represented in Fig. S9 (ESI). Fig. 4a shows a scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the surface for pristine P3HT coated perovskite after washing with chlorobenzene, revealing that the P3HT layer was completely removed. Whereas in the case of the GA-P3HT coated perovskite, one can clearly observe the altered perovskite surface with the appearance of tiny particles and blurring grain boundaries in Fig. 4b, indicating that Ga(acac)3 molecules incorporated in P3HT induce an interaction with the perovskite surface. Moreover, Fig. 4c and d show the peaks of the Ga 2p and O 1s core levels for the GA-P3HT sample after removing the P3HT layer by using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurement, whereas the control sample has no signal for the elements. This indicates that Ga(acac)3 remained on the perovskite surface, although the P3HT layer was washed by the processing solvent. Furthermore, by checking the peaks of the Pb 4f and I 3d core levels for the corresponding samples, residual Ga(acac)3 on the perovskite surface gives rise to a binding energy shift toward a lower energy as compared to the control sample, as shown in Fig. 4e and f. These shifts are attributed to the donation of electron-abundant oxygen atoms to perovskite, leading to electron release under a lower output energy. The XPS results directly demonstrate that Ga(acac)3 in the process of HTM deposition effectively interacts with the perovskite surface. In addition to the interaction of Ga(acac)3 with perovskite, we investigated whether Ga(acac)3 affects the P3HT layer itself by using atomic force microscopy (AFM) (Fig. S10, ESI), XPS, UV-vis absorption spectroscopy, Raman spectroscopy, and hole-only devices (Fig. S11, ESI). Although the AFM images show that Ga(acac)3 in P3HT renders the layer surface smoother, the addition rarely influences the effective conjugation length and orientation of the polymer backbone because a shoulder near to the absorption peak indicates that the degree of aggregation between the polymers and Raman spectra of the P3HT layer denotes polymer orientation in the layer. The hole-only devices show that the pristine P3HT layer has a drift-diffusion characteristic mainly dominated from disorder of polymers, whereas charge transporting features of the Ga(acac)3-incorporated P3HT layer follow the model associated with the disorder and trap filling behaviors. And at high bias above the ohmic and trap-filling region, both slopes of the curves for the hole-only devices are comparable, meaning that the effect of Ga(acac)3 addition on the mobility of P3HT is negligible.
We examined the effect of a Ga(acac)3 interaction on the perovskite layer in terms of protection from moisture. Fig. 5 shows the long-term durability of the PSCs under high humidity conditions (85% relative humidity) at room temperature without encapsulation. The GA-P3HT device maintained 99% of the initial PCE for 2000 hours, whereas the control device suffered severe performance deterioration as compared to an initial PCE. This demonstrates that Ga(acac)3 incorporation in the P3HT layer causes the device to possess high humidity stability attributed to the hydrophobicity of Ga(acac)3. We further confirmed how Ga(acac)3 improves the stability against moisture penetration by measuring the water contact angles on the perovskite and P3HT layers with or without Ga(acac)3, respectively (Fig. S12, ESI). Compared to the contact angles on perovskites with regard to Ga(acac)3 treatment, the perovskite treated with Ga(acac)3 showed a higher water contact angle than pristine perovskite, whereas GA-P3HT coated on perovskite showed a similar angle to pristine P3HT. This indicates that the improvement of humidity stability is derived from the water-proof effect of hydrophobic Ga(acac)3 on the perovskite surface rather than in the P3HT layer. Although P3HT is a highly hydrophobic material, an imperfection generated during the arrangement for P3HT polymers, a so-called “nanovoid”, can make a porous pathway to infiltrate the moisture molecules. Therefore passivation on a perovskite surface with a hydrophobic material is important to ensure high-tolerance against moisture penetration. Furthermore, thermal stability of the devices was estimated under 10% relative humidity at 85 °C without encapsulation in an oven (Fig. S13, ESI). For 408 hours, both devices showed similar durability against thermal stress.
Furthermore, to enhance the PCE of PSCs based on P3HT, we applied a double halide architecture (DHA) by using an n-hexyl trimethyl ammonium bromide (HTAB) treatment on the perovskite layer. A previous report showed that the P3HT device had the best PCE of 23.3% so far among PSCs with a dopant-free HTM by using a DHA, which is a successful strategy to achieve highly stable and efficient PSCs by using P3HT. Thus, we adopted the DHA strategy and conflated the introduction of Ga(acac)3 in the P3HT layer with DHA devices for further improving the performance of dopant-free P3HT PSCs. Fig. 6a shows the photovoltaic performance for DHA devices with regard to Ga(acac)3 incorporation, and all photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table 2. The control DHA device showed 23.2% efficiency with a JSC of 25.1 mA cm−2, a VOC of 1.12 V, and an FF of 82.5%. On combining the DHA device with GA-P3HT, the device showed an improved PCE of 24.6% with a JSC of 25.5 mA cm−2, a VOC of 1.15 V, and an FF of 83.8%. To the best of our knowledge, this efficiency is the highest among dopant-free HTM-based PSCs reported thus far. We checked the PL properties affected by the Ga(acac)3 incorporation on the DHA sample, as shown in Fig. 6b and c. The steady-state PL for the DHA sample with GA-PS showed an enhanced PL peak intensity as compared with the control DHA sample. Moreover, the carrier lifetime increases for the GA-PS DHA sample, and the first-order recombination constant of pristine PS-coated DHA is faster than that of the GA-PS-coated DHA sample (Fig. S14 and Table S7, ESI). These PL results indicate that Ga(acac)3 incorporation in the PS layer on the DHA surface leads to a complementary consolidation of junction quality accomplished by the DHA strategy, resulting in a further improvement in the performance. On comparing the GA-P3HT DHA device with the GA-P3HT device in Fig. 2a, a well-organized alignment of the P3HT layer on the DHA surface could also result in a further enhancement of the efficiency along with a synergetic improvement of the junction quality. On further investigating the effects of Ga(acac)3 on the DHA surface, we observed lifetime mapping and conductive morphology (Fig. S15 and S16, ESI). These results demonstrate that Ga(acac)3 on the DHA surface uniformly enhances the carrier lifetime through the entire surface and covers voids of the thin 2D perovskite layer on the DHA surface, indicating that Ga(acac)3 incorporation leads to functional intensification by passivating the uncovered surface by organic ligands. It should be noted that even though plenty of literature reports have shown, so far, that the 2D/3D heterojunction strategy using organic ligands effectively passivates the defects on 3D perovskite surface and improves the photovoltaic performance, it has rarely been reported that the strategy could be improved by covering the unreacted voids. We expect that the issue of strengthening the 2D/3D heterojunction strategy will lead to further performance improvement.
Devices
Scan direction

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
R–F average PCE (%)
Control
Rev.
25.1
1.11
80.8
22.5
22.9
Fwd.
25.1
1.12
82.5
23.2
GA-P3HT
Rev.
25.5
1.16
81.8
24.2
24.4
Fwd.
25.5
1.15
83.8
24.6

Gallium acetylacetonate (Ga(acac)3), methyl ammonium chloride, tin(II) chloride dihydrate, urea, mercaptoacetic acid, N,N-dimethylformamide, and dimethyl sulfoxide were purchased from Sigma Aldrich. Formamidinium iodide was purchased from Alfa Aesar. Lead iodide, lead bromide, methyl ammonium bromide, and n-hexyl trimethyl ammonium bromide were purchased from Tokyo Chemical Industry Co. Poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and poly[4,8-bis ((2-ethylhexyl)oxy)benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl] [3-fluoro-2-((2-ethylhexyl)carbonyl)thieno[3,4-b]thiophenediyl] (PTB7) were purchased from 1-Material. Poly(triarylamine) was purchased from the MS solution. 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis (N,N-di-4-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD) was purchased from Lumtec. All chemicals were used without further purification.


Fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) substrates (Asahi glass) were chemically etched using a zinc powder and HCl solution (concentrated hydrochloric acid:water = 1:3.5 v/v). The etched substrates were sequentially washed with detergent, water and isopropanol. After drying the substrates, all substrates were treated with UV-ozone for 30 min before tin oxide (SnO2) deposition. The SnO2 layer was prepared by the chemical bath deposition method referring to previously reported literature. A solution for the perovskite precursor was prepared by dissolving 569 mg mL−1 of lead iodide, 212 mg mL−1 of formamidinium iodide, 31 mg mL−1 of methyl ammonium lead bromide, and 25 mg mL−1 of methyl ammonium chloride in N,N-demethylformamide:dimethyl sulfoxide (8:1 v/v) mixed solvent. Then, the precursor solution was spin-coated on a SnO2/FTO substrate at a spin rate of 1000 rpm and 5000 rpm for 5 s and 15 s, respectively. During the second step, 1 mL of diethyl ether was quickly dropped on the substrate. The intermediate film substrate was annealed on a 150 °C hot plate for 10 min. A double-layered halide architecture was fabricated by following previously reported literature. The optimized Ga(acac)3-mixed P3HT layer was deposited onto perovskite film by spin-coating Ga(acac)3-mixed P3HT solution [P3HT (10 mg), diphenyl ether (30 μL) and Ga(acac)3 (1 mg) in 1 mL chlorobenzene] at 3000 rpm for 30 s. Finally, the gold electrode was deposited by thermal evaporation.



J–V curves were measured using a solar simulator (Newport, Oriel Class A, 91195A) with a source meter (Keithley 2420) under illumination at AM 1.5G, which was calibrated using a Si-reference cell certificated by NREL. For the J–V curve characterization, the step voltage and scan speed were fixed at 10 mV and 100 mV s−1, respectively. For the measurement of high-performance devices, an anti-reflective coating was applied to the surface. When measuring photovoltaic performance, all devices were attached with a metal mask with a circle-type aperture of 0.096 cm2. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) was measured using QUANTX-300 QE measurement with a 100 W xenon lamp source and 130 mm focal length monochromator with dual gratings. The morphology of the films was measured using a scanning electron microscope (Quanta 250 FEG). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis was measured by using Ulvac PHI (X-tool) equipment with Al Kα as the X-ray source and a beam diameter of 100 μm × 100 μm. The optical properties of the films were measured using UV-vis spectroscopy (Cary 5000, Agilent Technologies). Raman measurements were conducted by RFS 100/S (Bruker). The steady state photoluminescence (PL) and time-resolved PL (TR-PL) studies were performed using an inverted-type scanning confocal microscope (MicroTime-200, Picoquant, Germany) with a 40× (air) objective. The lifetime measurements were performed at the Korea Basic Science Institute (KBSI), Daegu Center, Korea. A single-mode pulsed diode laser (470 nm with a pulse width of ∼30 ps, repetition rate of 500 kHz, and average power of ∼50 nW) was used as the excitation source. A dichroic mirror (490 DCXR, AHF), a 75 μm pinhole, and a single-photon avalanche diode (PDM series, MPD) were used to collect emission from the samples. The time-correlated single-photon counting (TCSPC) technique was used to count emission photons. TRPL images consisting of 200 × 200 pixels were recorded using the time-tagged time-resolved (TTTR) data acquisition method. Exponential fittings for the obtained PL decays were performed using Symphotime-64 software (Ver. 2.2). The contact angles of the films were measured using Attention Theta Auto3 equipment.


We report a simple and efficient perovskite passivation strategy by depositing a Ga(acac)3-mixed P3HT on perovskite, leading to the improvements of photovoltaic performance and long-term moisture durability, simultaneously. This approach provides a reduced non-radiative recombination generated by trap sites at the perovskite/P3HT interface, and an enhanced resistance against water invasion into the perovskite film. Most of all, it has the most significant merit to achieve these improvements without a supplementary process for making passivation on perovskite. Furthermore, on combining with Ga(acac)3-mixed P3HT and the DHA strategy, the performance for the device is further boosted to over 24% efficiency, which is the highest value for dopant-free HTM-based PSCs. We estimate that this work sets the cornerstone for the research on spontaneous and efficient perovskite passivation and suggests a novel direction for commercial perovskite photovoltaics.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by Korea Electric Power Corporation (Grant number: R20XO02-1) and the National Research Foundation of Korea grant funded by the Korea government (MSIP) (Grant number: NRF-2020R1A2C3009115).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ee03312j
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021