 DOI: 10.1039/C3CC40899J
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 5730-5732

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Shanfeng
Xue
,

Suijun
Liu
,

Feng
He
,

Liang
Yao
,

Cheng
Gu
,

Hai
Xu
,

Zengqi
Xie
,

Hongbin
Wu
 and 

Yuguang
Ma
*

State Key Laboratory of Luminescent Materials and Devices, Institute of Polymer Optoelectronic Materials and Devices, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510640, P. R. China. E-mail: ygma@jlu.edu.cn; Fax: +86 20 87110606; Tel: +86 20 87114346

State Key Lab of Supramolecular Structure and Materials, Jilin University, 2699 Qianjin Avenue, Changchun 130012, P. R. China

Received
2nd February 2013
, Accepted 12th March 2013
First published on 22nd March 2013
D–A compounds constructed from a novel building block 5,5′-bibenzo[c][1,2,5]thiadiazole (BBTz) possess a special configuration of swivel cruciform, which exhibits promising potential in the solution-processed small molecule optoelectronic devices, e.g. OSCs and OLEDs.

Benzothiadiazole (BTz) has become a basic building block to construct the high performance optoelectronic materials. Typical materials include the best green emitting copolymer of BTz and fluorene (F8BTz), and the best photovoltaic copolymer of BTz and thiophen. Meanwhile, a series of BTz-based donor–acceptor (D–A) molecules were developed and demonstrated to have great potential in light-emitting and photovoltaic devices. However, the strong intermolecular interactions of electric dipole and π–π exist in these planar D–A molecules causing them to possess a strong tendency towards crystallinity and low solubility. This was the intrinsic drawback of these D–A molecules in device applications, for which high-quality films especially prepared from solution are required. One concept of molecular design to improve the solubility and suppress molecular aggregation (crystalline) is the introduction of alkyl side-chains. However, such alkyl side-chains in conjugated compounds may decrease their glass transition temperature (Tg) and morphologic stability, which negatively influences the operating lifetimes of devices. All-aromatic compounds with the molecular configurations contributing to the amorphous materials have been considered, such as dendrimeric forms, starburst, spiro-compounds and swivel type compounds. The key molecular design is that the compounds can keep the excellent optical properties of D–A chromophores while simultaneously achieving amorphous molecular packing. This is a challenge in synthetic chemistry.

In this study, we present a molecular design and synthetic chemistry for D–A molecules based on 5,5′-bibenzo[c][1,2,5]thiadiazole (BBTz) (as shown in Scheme 1). A series of compounds derived from BBTz showed a cruciform configuration consisting of two linear D–A chromophores (named here as arms). The important specialty of such structural compounds is that the two arms are relatively independent due to a large torsion angle between them which ensures the basic optical and electronic properties of compounds determined by linear D–A chromophores. On the other hand, these arms are relatively rotational due to conjugation and steric repulsive effect which ensure materials of fully amorphous nature. Thus, these types of compounds can be named as swivel cruciform as compared to planar type cruciform, which was developed by Bunz et al.
The synthesis of the series of BBT based D–A compounds was initiated from a key precursor 4,4′,7,7′-tetrabromo-5,5′-bibenzo[c][1,2,5]thiadiazole. Such a tetrabromo BBTz precursor was obtained with a high yield of 60% via a two step reaction: cyclization from 1,1′-bi(cyclohexa-1,5-diene)-3,3′,4,4′-tetraamine to obtain BBTz with a yield of 80% and bromination of BBTz to obtain tetrabromo BBTz with a yield of 70%. The purified tetrabromo BBTz is a white solid, and can be dissolved in organic solvents e.g. toluene, N,N-dimethylacetamide (DMAC) with acceptable solubility, which is of great benefit to the further coupling reaction via four bromine active positions. Following, three typical coupling reactions and consequent products based on tetrabromo BBTz precursor were prepared. Firstly, tetrabromo-BBTz reacted with a boronizing aniline compound (N,N-diphenyl-4-(4,4,5,5-tetramethyl-1,3,2-dioxaborolan-2-yl)aniline) under the typical Suzuki conditions to produce D–A compound C1 with a yield of 60%. Secondly, tetrabromo-BBTz reacted with a stannyl thiophen aniline compound (N,N-diphenyl-4-(5-(tributylstannyl)thiophen-2-yl)aniline) under Stille conditions to produce D–A compound C2 with a yield of 72%. Thirdly, tetrabromo-BBTz reacted with N,N-diphenyl-4-vinylaniline via the HECK reaction to produce C3, however the yield is relatively low (<10%) compared to the preceding Suzuki and Stille reaction. As a substitute route, a direct coupling from bromo- and boronizing linear compound (L3) under Suzuki conditions gave C3 with a high yield of 72% (in ESI, Schemes S1–S4). All compounds were characterized well using 1H- and 13C-NMR, Maldi-TOF and elemental analysis, which confirmed the chemical structure of the final compounds.
All cruciform products show better solubility in common organic solvents than that of relatively linear compounds (in ESI, Table S1), even though these cruciform molecules have the molecular weight doubled to their linear compounds. The differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) analysis indicates that the cruciform materials display fully amorphous morphology relative to the crystalline morphology of the linear ones (in ESI, Fig. S2). The molecular simulations based on density functional theory (DFT) indicate that in the most stable conformations, the molecules of C1, C2 and C3 are cruciform-like and centrally symmetrical in which there are dihedral angles of the BBTz core from 50° to 70°. The twist structures of molecules endow them better solubility relative to the linear ones. These conformations are also the predominant conformation in the ground state, and the structures of the corresponding conformers are shown in Fig. 1. Furthermore, DFT total energy analysis (in ESI, Fig. S3) reveals an important characteristic of swivel in these cruciform-like molecules. The cruciform compound (C3) showed a series of conformations with dihedral angles located from 58° to 113°, which had approximate energy (energy difference below 25 meV, an energy equivalent to room temperature (RT)). This indicated that the rotation about the aryl–aryl bond of the BBTz core is relatively free with angles ranging from 58° to 113° at RT, which provided proper flexibility and processable property to such type of molecules compared with other cruciform molecules. The rotation of the BBTz core was strongly depressed at angles beyond 58° or 113°, because the rotation barrier rose sharply. Such a restricted swivel endows the molecule with appropriate rigidity, especially in the solid state. Accordingly, the molecules with partial flexibility and rigidity may be superior to the molecules with full rigidity, since partial flexibility of molecules may assist the molecules in assembling into a less-interstitial, dense, and amorphous film formed via solution-processing or vacuum depositing processes.
The measured data of UV-vis, photoluminescence (PL), and electrochemistry display very similar characteristics of cruciform compounds and linear ones (in ESI, Tables S1 and S2). This is an inevitable result from the dihedral structure of the BBTz core, which makes two linear arms (equal to linear compounds) with a large separation in space and weak interaction. These D–A compounds showed a broad absorption band covered UV-vis spectral area (from 300–700 nm) with large absorption coefficients (εmax = 70597 at 530 nm for C2). The distinct solvatochromic effects were observed for both cruciform and linear compounds. For examples the C1 solutions showed broad fluorescent spectra without vibrational band, and the red-shift of 47 nm from low polarity toluene (565 nm) to high polarity DMF (614 nm), which indicated the low-lying excited state S1 of these D–A compounds with a strong charge transfer (CT) state characteristic. DFT (B3LYP/6-31G) analysis for the electronic density distribution of the frontier molecular orbitals (HOMO and LUMO) revealed that the HOMOs are mainly extended along the arms while the LUMOs are mainly localized on the central BBTz part, indicating a natural tendency of charge separation as photo excitation (in ESI, Fig. S6). Because of the strong CT-characteristic of these D–A compounds (C-and L-series), their fluorescence was not very strong and only C1 and L1 showed fluorescence with medium efficiency (∼10% in film).
Recently, the organic solar cells (OSCs) based on solution-processed (SP) small molecules (SM) have attracted attention, and their power conversion efficiency (PCE) has reached 7.38%. Considering the CT property and the broad and strong absorption band of these D–A compounds, they may be suitable SM materials for SPOSCs. The SPOSCs were fabricated by using a blend of these D–A compounds (L-series and C-series) and [6,6]-phenyl C71butyric acid methylester (PC71BM) as an active layer with a structure of ITO/poly(3,4-ethylene-dioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) (∼40 nm)/(L or C):PC71BM (1:4, w/w) (∼80 nm)/Ca (9 nm)/Al (90 nm). The device performances based on spin-coated blend films from dichlorobenzene solutions are shown in Fig. 2a and the detailed data are listed in Table 1. The OSCs based on cruciform compound C3, which exhibited an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.92 V, a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 6.20 mA cm−2, a fill factor (FF) of 0.57, showed the highest PCE of 3.25%. For comparison, a similar device with L3 has a PCE of 2.05%. The results indicated that the C-series compounds showed a PCE of 50% higher than L-series on average. Fig. 2b shows the external quantum efficiency (EQE) of OSCs with (L3, C3):PC71BM (1:4, w/w) as the active layer. The maximum EQE values for the solar cells with donor L3 and a donor C3 were 32% and 43% at 480 nm, respectively. About 40% enhancement in EQE values for OSCs with the cruciform compound C3 was investigated in the wavelength range between 400 nm and 700 nm. Thus the improved PCE should be relative to the contribution of enhanced EQE in C-series compounds. A more dense morphology and enhancement in optical absorption of solar cells may be the reason for the increased EQE.
Blend [1:4, w/w, DCB]

V
oc [V]

J
sc [mA cm−2]
FF [%]
PCE [%]
C1:PC71BM
0.98
4.73
0.41
1.90
C2:PC71BM
0.90
5.43
0.33
1.61
C3:PC71BM
0.92
6.20
0.57
3.25
L3:PC71BM
0.90
5.56
0.41
2.05
Compounds L1 and C1 showed red fluorescence both in solution and film with an efficiency of 10%, thus we tried to fabricate the organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs) to cognize the role of the cruciform molecular structure on electroluminescent (EL) properties The EL properties of C1 and L1 were tested by utilizing them as an emitting-layer with the structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS (40 nm)/PVK (40 nm)/C1 or L1 (∼60 nm)/CsF (1.5 nm)/Al (120 nm), where the emitting layer was prepared by spin-coating from chlorobenzene solution. The maximum luminance efficiency (0.34 cd A−1) and maximum luminance (761 cd m−2) of C1 exhibited about 1-fold enhancement compared with the linear compound L1 (0.19 cd A−1, 324 cd m−2) (for details see ESI).
In conclusion, we presented a molecular design based on a novel building block BBTz applied for optical electronics. The synthetic chemistry based on BBTz was developed, and resultant D–A compounds with swivel cruciform configuration (C-series compounds) exhibited excellent solubility, thermal stability, fully amorphous state, and ability of film-formation from solution. The performances of OSCs and OLEDs devices by using these swivel cruciform compounds as active layers were found to be improved obviously compared to relatively linear compounds (L-series compounds). The molecular materials, with combined rigidity and flexibility, have been demonstrated to have promising potential in next-generation optoelectronic materials.
We are grateful for the financial support from National Science Foundation of China (grant numbers 91233113) and National Basic Research Program of China (973 Program grant numbers 2013CB834705).
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Details of the synthesis and characterization of cruciform molecules, electrochemical properties, photophysical properties, theoretical simulation, and details of EL performance. See DOI: 10.1039/c3cc40899j
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013