 DOI: 10.1039/C7TA09494A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 469-477


Wiley A.
Dunlap-Shohl
,

Trey B.
Daunis
,

Xiaoming
Wang
,

Jian
Wang
,

Boya
Zhang
,

Diego
Barrera
,

Yanfa
Yan
*,

Julia W. P.
Hsu
* and 

David B.
Mitzi
*

Department of Mechanical Engineering and Materials Science, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA. E-mail: david.mitzi@duke.edu

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, The University of Texas at Dallas, Richardson, TX, USA. E-mail: jwhsu@utdallas.edu

Department of Physics and Astronomy, The University of Toledo, Toledo, OH, USA. E-mail: yanfa.yan@utoledo.edu

Wright Center for Photovoltaic Innovation and Commercialization, The University of Toledo, Toledo, OH, USA

Department of Chemistry, The University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA

Department of Chemistry, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA

Received
27th October 2017
, Accepted 1st December 2017
First published on 4th December 2017
Delafossite oxides are promising hole transport layer (HTL) candidates for perovskite solar cells, due to their wide band gap, favorable energy band alignment relative to the perovskite absorber and simplicity of processing. In this paper, we investigate the properties of CuCrO2 (CCO) delafossite films using an integration of experimental and computational techniques. Phase-pure CCO films are deposited at room temperature by spin-casting suspensions of hydrothermally-synthesized nanoparticles, for use in a glass/ITO/CCO/CH3NH3PbI3/C60/BCP/Ag device structure. Although density functional theory (DFT) calculations predict an elevated hole effective mass along certain crystallographic directions, the nearly isotropic shape and small size of the CCO nanoparticles preserves transport properties within the films by randomizing particle orientation, preventing these unfavorable directions from dominating the film conductivity. Experimental measurements confirm that the CCO films display appropriate optical and electrical properties for use as an HTL, in good agreement with the DFT calculations. Solar cells made using these films exhibit stabilized power conversion efficiencies exceeding 14%, with only minor hysteresis in the current–voltage characteristics.

Perovskite solar cells offer an unprecedented combination of high efficiency and simplicity of processing, with cells of power conversion efficiency (PCE) >20% prepared through a variety of straightforward solution deposition methods. Further optimizing the devices will require a strong focus on other aspects of device design beyond the perovskite absorber—e.g., hole and electron transport layers (HTL and ETL) play a vital role in photogenerated carrier extraction. These layers should be selected not only according to their effectiveness (i.e., high conductivity, proper band alignment with respect to the perovskite, low optical absorption if located between the light source and the absorber), but also according to their compatibility with low-cost manufacturing (i.e., use of only earth-abundant elements, low-temperature processing). Durability of the solar cells can be of further concern, as the perovskite exhibits interfacial instability in contact with a number of otherwise promising ETLs and HTLs (e.g., ZnO, CdS, CuSCN, TiO2, MoO3), limiting the choice of materials for building efficient and stable devices. It is therefore productive to explore cheap and easy-to-process transport materials that, not only fulfill their primary purpose of selectively extracting and transporting charge carriers, but also remain inert with respect to the decomposition of the perovskite. These requirements generally preclude the use of organic semiconductors, which perform well in terms of charge extraction but are typically less robust than inorganic semiconductors and are often ineffective at preventing the layers on either side from interacting. Many of these organic materials are also priced similarly to precious metals, substantially increasing the cost of producing solar cells relying on them. Inorganic hole and electron transport materials are more effective at improving device robustness but can be challenging to work with, particularly those that require aggressive and/or high temperature processing methods that may damage the layers beneath, restricting substrate choice and overall design flexibility.

An interesting class of materials that may provide a resolution to the problem of finding effective inorganic carrier transport layers compatible with gentle deposition methods are oxides adopting the delafossite crystal structure and chemical formula CuMO2, where a variety of trivalent metal ions occupy the M site, including B, Al, Sc, Cr, Fe, Co, Ga, Y, Rh, In, or La, and other monovalent metals may also substitute on the Cu site, such as Ag, Pt, or Pd. Several of these materials have been reported to have nearly ideal band alignment with the prototypical hybrid perovskite methylammonium lead iodide (MAPbI3) as well as intrinsic p-type conductivity, without the need for external dopants, indicating their suitability as prospective HTLs for perovskite solar cells. There are a few reports detailing successful integration of delafossite oxide HTLs into perovskite solar cells, including CuGaO2 (ref. 19) and mixtures of CuCr2O4, CuCrO2 (CCO), and other binary oxides. CuGaO2 in particular has proven attractive in terms of absolute power conversion efficiency (>18%), and can even be deposited on top of the perovskite at room temperature, conferring not only a stable interface but also a moisture barrier that extends the life of the devices when exposed to moderately humid air. While CuGaO2 is an effective HTL, its platelet morphology (for nanoparticle deposition) with generally large sizes (75 nm lateral and 20 nm thick) results in rough and non-compact films. CCO is an attractive alternative, consisting of earth-abundant, non-toxic elements (here, Cr adopts the benign trivalent oxidation state, rather than the toxic hexavalent state). Binary metal–oxide mixtures prepared by a sol–gel process and containing CCO as a component have also yielded efficient perovskite solar cells, though the films are not phase pure, containing components such as CrO3 that have unfavorable band structure for hole extraction from the perovskite, or CuOx, which has a favorable band structure and been used successfully as an HTL, but whose low band gap can lead to parasitic light absorption. Phase pure CCO films, like CuGaO2, can be prepared using microwave-assisted hydrothermal synthesis methods, which provide a more isotropic morphology for the component nanoparticles and enable thinner and more compact films to be fabricated. In this work, we apply a conventional hydrothermal synthesis method for the preparation of the CCO nanoparticles that enables room-temperature spin-coating of the delafossite HTL film, undertake an investigation of the film properties using an integration of computational property prediction and materials characterization, and investigate their performance in perovskite solar cells, yielding cells with stabilized power conversion efficiency >14%.

Band alignment for the CCO was calculated based on Anderson's rule, where the vacuum levels across all the materials are aligned. The ionization energy (IE) was calculated by adopting the “bulk + slab” scheme. The VBM and CBM (band gap) were obtained from a bulk calculation. The vacuum level was evaluated from a slab calculation. The energy scales of the two separate calculations were aligned based on the planar averaged electrostatic potential. We used the neutral (10) surface for the delafossite for the slab calculations to eliminate the surface dipole effects. A slab thickness of 10 atomic layers was found to converge the electrostatic potential to within 0.01 eV and was used for all the calculations.

All the band structure calculations were performed using the VASP code and projector augmented-wave (PAW) potentials. We employed the GW approximations to correct the density functional theory (DFT) band gap. GW calculation details can be found in Wang et al. For the slab, we used normal DFT-PBE calculations, since the wave function that determines the electrostatic potential is fixed at the PBE level in GW calculations. The effective mass was calculated at the bands' extrema using a finite difference method.
All of the above calculations were conducted on the 3R structure of CCO in its rhombohedral representation. To compare the band structures of the 3R and 2H polytypes, we used the hexagonal representation of the 3R structure. Since the hexagonal representation has a larger unit cell, it is not favourable for the demanding GW calculations. To this end, we adopted the LDA + U scheme to deal with the strong-correlated Cr 3d states. Despite its theoretical simplicity, LDA + U captures the main physics in the band structure of CCO, i.e., the correct band order and the band characters at CBM and VBM, as shown in Fig. S1.

CCO nanoparticles are synthesized hydrothermally following Xiong et al. All chemicals were used as received without further purification. First, 15 mmol Cr(NO3)3·9H2O (Alfa Aesar, ACS grade) and 15 mmol Cu(NO3)2·2.5H2O (Alfa Aesar, ACS grade) were dissolved in 70 mL 18 MΩ cm deionized water and stirred for 15 minutes. Second, 5 g NaOH (Sigma Aldrich, ≥97.0%) was added into the above mixture and stirred for 10 minutes. Then the precursor solution was transferred into a 50 mL autoclave reactor (Col-Int Tech) and held at 240 °C for 60 hours. After synthesis, the powders were washed using 1 M hydrochloric acid (Fisher Scientific, 37%) and ethanol (Fisher Scientific, 95.27%) sequentially for six times, then centrifuged and dried in vacuum at room temperature overnight.


60 mg of CCO nanoparticle powder was added into 15 mL of methanol (Fisher Scientific, 99.8%) to make a 4 mg mL−1 suspension. The suspension was then sonicated for 90 min, filtered through a 1 μm filter, re-sonicated for another 90 min, and filtered through a 0.45 μm filter; after which the suspension is ready for making films on glass (Fisher Scientific, Cat. No. 12-544-4) (for UV-visible (UV-vis) absorption, IE, and ellipsometry), indium tin oxide (ITO, Kintec, 10 Ω sq−1) (for devices, scanning electron microscopy (SEM), atomic force microscopy (AFM), and Kelvin probe measurements), and gold-coated Si substrates (for X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS)). Dynamic light scattering (Malvern Zetasizer Nano ZS) shows a hydrodynamic radius of 20 nm, consistent with our previous published results. Right before spin coating, the suspension was re-sonicated for 30 min. The thickness of CCO films is controlled by the number of coats deposited.


CCO nanoparticle powder was characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD) using a Rigaku Ultima III diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.5418 Å) at an operating voltage/current of 40 kV/44 mA. For transmission electron microscopy (TEM), particles deposited from MeOH suspension onto a carbon grid were imaged by a JEOL JEM2100 TEM at 200 kV. CCO films deposited on glass were characterized by UV-vis spectrometry (Ocean Optics USB 4000) from 178 nm to 890 nm, spectroscopic ellipsometry (J. A. Woollam M-2000DI) from 280 to 1690 nm at 55°, 65°, and 75° incident angle, and photoelectron spectroscopy in air (PESA) (RKI Instruments Model AC-2) from 4.6 to 6.0 eV with a 0.05 eV step using a 100 nW deuterium lamp. CCO films on ITO substrates were characterized by SEM (Zeiss Supra 40), AFM (Asylum Research MFP-3D) in tapping mode, and Kelvin probe (KP Technology SKP 5050) using Au (work function = 5.15 eV) as the reference. Films deposited on gold-coated Si substrates were used for XPS analysis using a PHI 5000 Versa Probe II equipped with a hemispherical analyser and Al Kα radiation source; data were taken at a detection takeoff angle of 45° and pass energy of 23.5 eV.


The ITO/CCO substrates, prepared as described above, were heated on a ceramic hot plate at 100 °C for 10 min to remove any moisture immediately prior to the perovskite deposition. The perovskite precursor solution was formed by dissolving 1 g of PbI2 (TCI, 99.99%), 327.6 mg of methylammonium iodide (Dyesol), and 18.0 mg of KI (Alfa Aesar, 99.998%) in 1.38 mL of DMF and 153.8 μL of DMSO (both solvents anhydrous grade from Sigma Aldrich) and filtering through a 0.2 μm PTFE filter before the deposition. Addition of K has been indicated to improve solar cell performance, possibly through passivation of trap states or increasing crystallinity of the perovskite. MAPbI3 films were deposited following the recipe from Ahn et al. (with all non-vacuum steps being performed in a nitrogen-filled glovebox); briefly, 60 μL of the above solution was deposited on an ITO/CCO substrate, then spun at 4000 rpm for 25 s. 10 s into the spin procedure, 1 mL of diethyl ether (anhydrous, Sigma Aldrich) was applied to the substrate. The substrate was then annealed at 60 °C for 1 min and 100 °C for 10 min. The ETL was deposited by thermally evaporating 30 nm of C60 (Lumtec, >99.5%) from a Mo boat, followed by 5 nm of bathocuproine (BCP) (Sigma Aldrich, 96%) from a Mo boat onto the freshly fabricated perovskite films. Devices were completed by evaporating 60 nm of Ag (Alfa Aesar, 99.9%) from an Al2O3-coated W boat onto the freshly deposited ETL. All thermal evaporation processes were conducted at a base pressure of 2 × 10−6 Torr. Immediately after Ag deposition, cells were encapsulated by attaching a glass slip with Ossila E131 epoxy, and thereafter curing the epoxy under the light from a solar simulator for approximately 5 min.


X-ray diffraction patterns were collected using a Panalytical Empyrean powder X-ray diffractometer using Cu Kα radiation and operating voltage/current of 45 kV/40 mA. SEM images were collected using a Hitachi S-4700 Field-Emission SEM at an accelerating voltage of 2 kV. X-ray photoelectron spectra were collected using a Kratos Analytical Axis Ultra spectrometer using a monochromated Al Kα X-ray source.


Current–voltage curves were taken using a Keithley 2401 sourcemeter and an Oriel solar simulator, initially calibrated by a reference solar cell from Newport Corp. and maintained at 1 sun intensity by a reference photodiode. The active area of all devices was defined by a shadow mask with 0.1 cm2 apertures. Each (J, V) point was sampled after a 1 second delay, immediately following application of the bias. Stabilized photocurrent measurements were also taken using the device measurement arrangement described above; while biasing at a specified voltage, photocurrent was sampled at a rate of 1 Hz. AC external quantum efficiency measurements were taken on an Enlitech QE-R tool using a monochromated Xe light source with a 165 Hz chopping frequency and no applied electrical bias.


In order to better understand the prospective performance of the delafossite HTL, we have investigated the band structure of CCO using DFT calculations. The delafossite phase consists of layers composed of edge-sharing CrO6 octahedra, which are linked by triangular sheets of the Cu ions. Two polytypes may be formed depending on the stacking sequence of the layers: the hexagonal 2H polytype (space group P63/mmc) forms when stacked in an ABAB… sequence, while the rhombohedral 3R phase (space group Rm) forms from an ABCABC… sequence (with “A”, “B” and “C” referring to the relative shifting of the layers of CrO6 octahedra and Cu atoms). A ball and stick model of each polytype is shown in Fig. 1a. Previous reports have indicated that the 3R phase is stable while the 2H phase is metastable, and others have indicated that nanoparticles of each different polytype can be prepared by adjusting parameters of the hydrothermal synthesis methods. Our calculations predict that there is no significant difference in the stability of these polytypes, with only 1 meV per formula unit difference between their total energies; it is therefore prudent to consider that both may be present in CCO thin films and to explore the ramifications for device performance. Accordingly, we have calculated the band structures of both polytypes (Fig. 1c). Band structures of the 3R and 2H configurations were calculated at the LDA + U level with U of 3.7 eV and 6.5 eV for Cr and Cu, respectively. Only the majority spin states are shown for clarity. Fortuitously, we find that, while some small differences exist, the location and dispersion of the bands near the conduction band minimum and valence band maximum do not change substantially, and the band gap shifts by only 0.01 eV between the 3R and 2H polytypes. It may therefore be reasonably assumed that the CCO HTL films will function the same regardless of which polytype dominates. Note that the band gap calculated for these structures is underestimated relative to the more accurate GW calculations (as in Fig. 1b) due to the use of the LDA + U approximation.

Due to its layered structure, the band structure of CCO at VBM shows considerable anisotropy, with the smallest in-plane hole effective mass of 2.1m0 and the largest out-of-plane value at 47.7m0. While the existence of such a large effective mass is undesirable, using films composed of nanoparticles can reduce the effect on the charge mobility from the out-of-plane crystallographic direction by randomizing the orientation of the crystallites, if appropriate morphology nanoparticles can be synthesized to effect this randomization. We have also calculated the valence and conduction band positions for CCO relative to those of MAPbI3 using the GW approximation (Fig. 1b). The IE of CCO is calculated to be 5.1 eV, which, compared to the IE of 5.4 eV for MAPbI3, indicates suitable alignment for hole extraction.

XRD patterns of the CCO nanoparticles (Fig. 2a) closely resemble those obtained by Xiong et al., as well as others that have been previously reported in the literature, and can be plausibly assigned to a combination of the 2H and 3R polytypes of the delafossite structure. Exact determination of the relative presence of each phase is complicated by the broadening and asymmetry of the (10l) peaks in the range of 35–40°, which were also seen in the XRD of other hydrothermally grown CCO work, yet their origins were not discussed. Similar features have, however, been observed in CuScO2 (ref. 43) (as well as other layered materials such as MoS2 (ref. 44) and graphite that are vulnerable to stacking disorder), wherein (110) and (00l) reflections (which are indistinguishable between 2H and 3R polytypes) are undistorted, but others suffer broadening and asymmetry in the presence of stacking faults oriented perpendicular to the c axis. Given the negligible difference in formation energy between the polytypes, it is reasonable to expect such defects to form; however, it is unlikely that their existence will compromise the electrical properties of the CCO film, as the ordering of the CrO6 octahedra in the basal plane is undisturbed by these defects. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images (Fig. 2b and c) show clear lattice fringes of 5.75 Å, corresponding to the 15.4° peak in the XRD pattern ((003) in 3R and (002) in 2H), and 2.51 Å, corresponding to the feature at 35.7° in the XRD pattern ((101) in 2H, or possibly either (101) or (012) in 3R, with respective d-spacings of 2.55 and 2.47 Å). The XRD patterns are otherwise free of peaks that would indicate the presence of detrimental secondary phases such as CuO, Cu2O, Cr2O3, or CuCr2O4. XPS results (Fig. S2) show that as-synthesized powders have only Cu1+ and Cr3+, without any other oxidation state being detected for these metals; the O 1s region shows a clear metal oxide contribution (OI). The absence of Cu2+ precludes the detectable existence of impurity phases containing divalent copper, such as CuO and CuCr2O4. We therefore conclude that the nanoparticles consist of delafossite CCO—likely a mixture of 2H and 3R polytypes, which our calculations predict should function essentially identically in terms of their optoelectronic response.


CCO films were prepared by spin-coating suspensions of the nanoparticles onto glass or glass/ITO substrates; film thickness could be controlled by repeating the coating steps. TEM measurements (Fig. S3) indicate that the nanoparticles comprising the CCO film are ∼10 nm in diameter, demonstrating that very thin, compact films may be formed from appropriately dispersed suspensions of these particles. The small size of nanoparticles and room temperature processability enable us to build the devices on smoother ITO (sensitive to high temperature processing) rather than the rougher fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) substrates. Furthermore, these particles are slightly elongated but roughly spherical, indicating that the nanoparticles are likely to deposit with random orientation, compensating for the large cross-plane carrier effective mass. SEM images of CCO films prepared using 3, 6, and 9 coating steps (Fig. S4) show that the ITO substrates are well covered, even for the 3-coat sample. AFM (Fig. S5) images confirm the SEM results and show an increasing RMS roughness (over 5 μm × 5 μm area) with the number of coats: 9.0, 13.7 and 14.3 nm, corresponding to 3, 6 and 9 coats, respectively, while bare ITO has a roughness of 0.8 nm.


Fig. 3 shows the UV-vis absorption spectra for 3, 6, and 9 coats of CCO on glass substrates (Fig. 3a), Tauc plots obtained from UV-vis spectra assuming a direct transition (Fig. 3b), wavelength dependence of refractive index (n) and extinction coefficient (k) obtained from ellipsometry (Fig. 3c). The UV-vis spectra and Tauc plots demonstrate that the CCO films are highly transparent with a direct band gap of 3.25 eV, reducing the likelihood of photocurrent loss due to parasitic absorption, though a modest increase in the absorbance is still evident at wavelengths longer than that corresponding to the band gap. Note that while electronic calculations indicate that CCO is an indirect band gap semiconductor, the difference between the direct and indirect gaps is small; a Tauc plot of the indirect gap (Fig. S6) estimates a value of ∼3.1 eV. Therefore, the effect of the indirect gap on light absorption is expected to be slight. Ellipsometry fitting to all 3-thickness films show that 3, 6, and 9 coats correspond to thicknesses of 15, 30, and 45 nm, respectively. The valence band maximum/ionization energy (IE) and Fermi level position (work function) of the CCO films were measured using photoelectron spectroscopy in air (PESA) and Kelvin probe techniques, respectively. Fig. 3d shows the PESA signal vs. energy for the CCO film, yielding an IE value of 5.31 eV, which is in close agreement with the band structure calculations; the work function of this film is 5.36 eV. These measurements demonstrate that the CCO possesses both good valence band alignment with MAPbI3 as well as strong p-type conductivity, both of which are essential for establishing efficient hole extraction. In summary, it is evident that the CCO nanoparticle films display properties characteristic of a nearly ideal HTL: a conformal morphology (even for very small thicknesses), good optical properties (wide band gap, overall low optical absorption), and good electrical properties (good band alignment with MAPbI3, strong p-type conductivity, partially dispersive band structure).

The substrate can have a considerable effect on the growth of the perovskite films, playing a key role in the final grain structure as well as phase or impurity composition. To ascertain the effects of the CCO substrate on the perovskite film, we have examined these films by XRD, XPS and SEM. The XRD pattern (Fig. 4a) of the perovskite on an ITO/CCO substrate does not indicate the presence of impurity phases, demonstrating peaks belonging only to the ITO substrate and the perovskite itself. XRD peaks belonging to the perovskite are sharp and well defined (i.e., FWHM of ∼0.06° for the (110) and (220) peaks), indicating a well-crystallized film. Correspondingly, top-down SEM images of the perovskite film (Fig. 4b and c) show a compact, large-grain microstructure ideally suited for the photovoltaic absorber. Lower-magnification images of the perovskite film reveal some rod-like features (presumably a minor incorporation of PbI2, below the level that can be detected by XRD).

A possible concern for certain substrates is the diffusion of elements from other layers into the MAPbI3 layer, which can lead to unwanted reactions, as previously observed in perovskite films fabricated on CdS. Even in the absence of such reactions, substitutional impurity defects might lead to trap states, especially in the case of transition metals such as Cu and Cr. To probe this possibility, we performed XPS measurements on the surface of the fully-processed perovskite film on ITO/CCO, with particular attention to whether peaks belonging to Cu or Cr can be observed. The broad survey XPS spectrum (Fig. 4d) only displays peaks belonging to the component elements of MAPbI3 (namely, C, N, I, and Pb), and scans of binding energy regions corresponding to the Cu and Cr 2p orbitals do not indicate the presence of these elements. In summary, the XRD, SEM, and XPS data do not indicate any abnormal substrate–perovskite interactions that might be detrimental to device performance, and the morphology (large, compact grain network free of obvious pinholes) of the perovskite film is desirable for integration into solar cells.

The CCO film thickness was optimized by fabricating devices using 7 different coating recipes, which produced films 15, 17, 21, 23, 30, 33, and 45 nm thick on ITO-coated glass substrates, as estimated by ellipsometry measurements. Solar cells were completed thereafter by depositing MAPbI3, C60, BCP, and Ag onto the ITO/CCO films. A schematic of the device architecture is shown in Fig. 5a, along with a cross-sectional SEM image of a completed solar cell (Fig. 5b), detailing the location of each layer, and a band diagram showing the corresponding band positions, with CCO data taken from the PESA and optical measurements and other data from literature (Fig. 5c).

Device results are summarized in Fig. 6a–d and Table S1, demonstrating that 23 nm-thick CCO films provide the optimal thickness in terms of overall PCE. A modest and gradual decrease is evident in the short-circuit current (Jsc), as a function of increasing CCO thickness, indicating minor parasitic absorption despite the high transparency of the CCO films. Consistent with this trend, weak losses with increasing thickness may also be seen in the external quantum efficiency (EQE) of representative cells at energies below the CCO direct band gap value (∼3.25 eV → 381 nm) (Fig. 6e); a much more obvious trend is seen at energies above the band gap, due to much greater parasitic absorption of these photons. The open-circuit voltage (Voc) does not appear to be especially sensitive to CCO thickness. Fill factor (FF) appears to be the most significant device parameter determining the optimal thickness. Fill factor (and efficiency) declines as thickness increases from the optimal value, most likely due to an increase in the series resistance of the CCO layer; it (and efficiency) also declines as the thickness is reduced, presumably as a result of the formation of voids or pinholes as the thickness of the CCO layer approaches the diameter of the component nanoparticles.
Overall, the devices display only slight hysteresis (as seen in Fig. 6 and the Table S1 data), indicating that the perovskite/CCO interface is relatively free of trap states. Devices were found to improve slightly with aging overnight in a nitrogen-filled glovebox; measuring one of the best-performing devices (using 23 nm CCO) yielded an improved forward (reverse) scan power conversion efficiency of 14.33% (13.94%), up from 13.25% (13.10%), after aging; J–V curves corresponding to this device are plotted in Fig. 6f. Time-dependent photocurrent measurements taken at a bias of 0.8 V agree well with these values, yielding a stabilized efficiency of 14.2% (Fig. 6g).

CCO is a promising HTL candidate for perovskite solar cells by virtue of its material properties (low optical absorption, high work function, and good band alignment relative to the perovskite) as well as the simple, low-energy methods by which it may be incorporated into the devices. We have determined via DFT calculations that, although either 2H or 3R polytypes of the delafossite crystal structure are likely to form due to their similar stabilities, the optoelectronic properties of these polytypes relevant to their suitability as an HTL are essentially identical. We have hydrothermally synthesized ∼10 nm CCO nanoparticles and formed films by spin-coating suspensions of these nanoparticles at room temperature. The small size of the nanoparticles and room temperature processability enable us to build the devices on smoother ITO rather than the rougher FTO substrates. The properties (e.g., band gap and IE) of these CCO films are in good agreement with those predicted by DFT.

As an HTL in perovskite solar cells using a glass/ITO/CCO/MAPbI3/C60/BCP/Ag structure, the optimal CCO film thickness is found to be 23 nm. Test devices with the above structure exhibit moderately high Voc and EQE as well as low hysteresis, showing that the interface with the absorber is relatively defect-free, and that holes can readily be extracted by the CCO due to its strong p-type nature and favorable valence band alignment with the perovskite. The initial devices yield power conversion efficiencies exceeding 14%, demonstrating the promise of CCO as an earth-abundant, non-toxic HTL compatible with room-temperature deposition. These results pave the way for the study of other potentially interesting delafossites such as CuScO2, CuAlO2, and CuYO2, if suitable nanoparticle fabrication and deposition methods can be developed for these materials.

The authors declare no competing financial interest.


The authors thank M. Womble and Dr S. Nam for their assistance in CCO nanoparticle XRD and TEM, respectively, and Prof. R. Wallace for the use of the spectroscopic ellipsometer. The authors also thank Dr A. S. Kumbhar for assistance in taking SEM measurements. The work done at University of Texas at Dallas (J. W. P. H., T. B. D., J. W., B. Z., D. B.) was sponsored by the National Science Foundation (NSF) (Grant No. DMR-1305893). J. W. P. H. acknowledges the support from Texas Instruments Distinguished Chair in Nanoelectronics. The work done at Duke University and University of Toledo was funded by the Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy (EERE), U.S. Department of Energy, under Award Number DE-EE0006712 (W. A. D.-S., D. B. M., X. W., Y. Y.). W. A. D.-S. acknowledges support from the Fitzpatrick Institute for Photonics John T. Chambers Scholarship. The DFT calculations used the resources of the National Energy Research Scientific Computing Center, which is supported by the Office of Science of the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231. This work was performed in part at the Duke University Shared Materials Instrumentation Facility (SMIF) and at the Chapel Hill Analytical and Nanofabrication Laboratory (CHANL). Both are members of the North Carolina Research Triangle Nanotechnology Network (RTNN), which is supported by the National Science Foundation (Grant ECCS-1542015) as part of the National Nanotechnology Coordinated Infrastructure (NNCI). All opinions expressed in this paper are the authors' and do not necessarily reflect the policies and views of DOE or NSF. See the ESI Section of this article for more information.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta09494a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018