 DOI: 10.1039/C7QI00329C
(Research Article)
Inorg. Chem. Front., 2017, 4, 1665-1678


R.
Krishnapriya
,

S.
Praneetha
 and 

A.
Vadivel Murugan
*

Advanced Functional Nanostructured Materials Laboratory, Centre for Nanoscience and Technology, Madanjeet School of Green Energy Technologies, Pondicherry University (A Central University), Dr. R. V. Nagar, Kalapet, Puducherry-605014, India. E-mail: avmrajeshwar@gmail.com; avmurugan.nst@pondiuni.edu.in

Received
11th June 2017
, Accepted 14th August 2017
First published on 14th August 2017
Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) have been fabricated with various nanostructured TiO2 morphologies, including interconnected beads-like (IBL), square platelets-like (SPL), spindle shape-like (SSL), and porous spheres-like (PSL), synthesized in different solvents (ethanol, mixture of ethanol + H2O and HF), and size and shape-tuned Ni-NCs of mixed triangular and hexagonal morphological crystals with sizes ranging from 15 to 62 nm in ethylene glycol (polyol) medium. These different TiO2 and Ni-NCs were constructed via a rapid, facile microwave-assisted solvothermal (MW-ST) route. The application potential of these TiO2 NCs as photoanodes unveiled excellent morphology-dependent PCEs (5.3% to 9.33%) using a conventional electrolyte and N719 dye as a photosensitizer. Subsequently, after impregnating Ni-NCs in the I−/I3− electrolyte, the nanoparticles on the surface of each TiO2 morphology acted as excellent scattering centers to provide a potential interface between TiO2 and Ni-NCs and enhance both light absorption and scattering, leading to improvements in the PCEs to 5.8%, 8.37%, 9.19% and 10.02% for the PSL, SSL, SPL and IBL-based photoanodes, respectively. This enhanced PCE was accomplished by systematic optimization of factors such as the surface morphology of the TiO2 photoanode and the size and concentration of the Ni-NCs in the electrolyte to attain the best advantages of scattering-induced effective light utilization and size-mismatching effects at the photoanode and Ni-NCs integrated electrolyte interface. The incorporated Ni-NCs effectively trap incident light and successively improve the rate of electron–hole pair formation and short circuit current (Jsc); they also exhibit excellent stability in the conventional I−/I3− electrolyte over a period of 30 days.

Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) have recently received significant scientific and technological attention because of their low cost and ease of fabrication. The size and morphology control of nanostructured semiconductor materials and their interfacial interactions after incorporation into DSSCs indeed play crucial roles in device enactment. Extensive research efforts have focused on manipulation and effective utilization of incident light in order to foster the light harvesting efficiency (LHE) of DSSCs by enhancing visible light absorption through fabricating thick photoanodes, dimensionally modulated semiconducting oxides as scattering layers and back reflectors, modified sensitizers, co-sensitizers, size-mismatching/integrating of sub-micrometer-sized spherical structures in photoanodes, etc. Among these perspectives, molecular engineering of the photosensitizer has increased the efficiency of these devices beyond 13%. However, the novel design of semiconductor photoanodes is a simpler methodology to enhance the LHE and power conversion efficiency (PCE) of DSSCs.

A promising practice to improve LHE and subsequently PCE is the incorporation of noble metal nanoparticles (Ag and Au) in the DSSC photoanode because they can increase scattering by the collective oscillation of electrons in the conduction band and can confine adequate sunlight within the photoanode. Specifically, localised surface plasmon resonance (LSPR), i.e. the charge density oscillations confined to metallic nanoparticles by an electric field (light) at an incident wavelength where resonance occurs, resulting in strong light scattering, in the presence of intense surface plasmon (SP) absorption bands is an emerging approach for better LHE. In DSSCs, effective light trapping is possible only if all incident photons are reflected and concentrated inside the semiconductor; meanwhile, in LSPR, this is accomplished via large nanostructures (40 to 50 nm in size) which resonate at a lower energy than the inter-band transition of the metal. By altering the size and shape of the metal nanostructures, the scattering effect can be manipulated to obtain unique optical properties for several technological applications. Plasmonic nanostructures of gold or silver with different geometries/morphologies have been tested to improve DSSC efficiency; they were found to be highly corrosive to the conventional I−/I3− redox electrolyte, resulting in decreased stability. To address this particular issue, corrosion-resistant core–shell nanostructures such as Au@SiO2, Ag@SiO2 and Au–Ag alloy have been applied; however, their fabrication procedures are more challenging. Additionally, the insulating nature of the SiO2 layer resulted in loss of photoinjected electrons from the dye molecules, resulting in decreased efficiency. Consequently, low-cost metal ions which are stable in I−/I3− electrolyte with facile synthesis procedures are appealing to satisfy the efficiency requirements of DSSCs. In this regard, Ni-NCs with LSPR behaviour are extremely promising, as they have been demonstrated to be highly corrosion-resistant to KI salts in concentrated acidic conditions. In general, metal nanoparticles are deposited on semiconductor photoanodes to study the LSPR effect in DSSCs. However, Rahman et al. demonstrated a very simple methodology to exploit highly stable and corrosion-resistant Ni-NCs with the LSPR phenomenon, prepared by the reduction of NiSO4 with NaBH4 in aqueous medium and successfully applied in I−/I3− redox electrolyte to improve the PCE of DSSCs from 8.72% to 9.83%. The strong optical absorption of Ni-NCs was found to be a highly favourable method to improve LSPR-induced dye molecule absorption over a broad wavelength range. However, the use of toxic NaBH4 to reduce NiSO4 to Ni-NCs is undesirable and requires a prolonged reaction time. Therefore, it is necessary to design a simple and green synthetic route to fabricate plasmonic Ni-NCs.
To date, various metal oxide semiconductor NCs, such as SnO2, Nb2O5 and Bi2O3, have been prepared using different synthetic approaches, such as sol–gel, hydrothermal, solvothermal, sonochemical, electrospinning and molten salt methods (MSM), to control their morphologies and properties for use in DSSC photoanode applications. A large number of metal oxides with desired 1-D nanostructures with large surface areas and suitable pore distributions have been synthesized using the electrospinning technique. Meanwhile, nano/submicron/micronsized particles with high diffusivity and high purity have been obtained via MSM. Zhu et al. reported molten salt fabrication of mesoporous anatase TiO2 (high surface area of 200 m2 g−1) and SnO2 nanoparticles, which showed an impressive PCE of ∼7.5% in DSSCs. However, these methods involve longer heat treatments or several instrumental and challenging reaction optimization steps to achieve narrow nanoparticle size dispersion with good crystallinity.
Also, nanocrystalline photoanode films based on anatase TiO2 with small particle sizes have been proven capable of offering larger surface areas for proper anchoring of adequate dye molecules and shorter electron diffusion for DSSC applications. Thus, it is important to explore new synthetic strategies to finely tune the crystal phase properties of TiO2 using a novel, cost-effective and simple one-step process. At present, the microwave-assisted hydrothermal/solvothermal (MW-HT/ST) method is gaining considerable attention owing to its rapid synthesis, homogenous selective heating and scalability. Moreover, this method is highly suitable for obtaining TiO2 nanocrystals with high phase purity and good crystallinity. Recently, MW-HT/ST synthesis strategies have been successfully implemented to fabricate TiO2 nanoparticles with suitable sizes, morphologies and crystal quality for photoanode applications in DSSCs. Dar et al. synthesized TiO2 nanoparticles 7 nm in size and nanospheres 100 to 400 nm in size as photoanode materials using the MW-HT method and achieved a PCE of 6.5%. Manseki et al. prepared highly crystalline TiO2 nanorod morphology-based photoanodes for DSSCs. Shen et al. prepared TiO2 nanocrystals 20 nm in size as photoanode materials and obtained a PCE of 7.7%. Parmar et al. reported PCEs as high as 8.05% from unique anisotropic single-crystalline rice-shaped TiO2 nanoparticles prepared via the MW-HT route.
Based on the above considerations, here, we describe a rapid, simple microwave-solvothermal (MW-ST)-guided synthesis strategy to prepare tetragonal TiO2 NCs with diverse morphologies and good phase purity and crystallinity for DSSC photoanode applications. Morphology control of TiO2via systematic tuning of the MW-ST reaction conditions within 10 min yielded NCs with distinctive morphologies such as interconnected beads, square platelets, spindles, and porous spheres with good crystallinity. The obtained TiO2 NCs-based photoanodes showed morphology-dependent PCEs ranging from 5.30% to 9.33% when sensitized with N719 dye. Further, we explored the MW-ST method for size-controlled synthesis of Ni-NCs via a microwave polyol reduction method using ethylene glycol as the polyol medium. We also systematically investigated the size-dependent “scattering” effect of Ni-NCs incorporated in I−/I3− redox electrolyte on the photovoltaic performance of different TiO2 morphology-based photoanodes. We found a significant enhancement of LHE; thereby, a 17% improvement in PCE for TiO2-based DSSCs has been achieved using impregnated Ni-NCs (45 ± 5 nm in size) in I−/I3− redox electrolyte. The systematic optimization of DSSC efficiency factors, such as surface morphology, thickness of the TiO2 photoanode, and size and concentration of plasmonic nickel nanoparticles in the electrolyte, were investigated in detail to attain the best advantages of scattering-induced effective light entrapment and size-mismatching effects at the photoanode–electrolyte interface. Thus, the present work remarkably highlights the superiority of the MW-ST synthesis route for morphology tuning of TiO2 and size tuning of Ni-NCs to study morphology-dependent PCEs along with the scattering effect of Ni-NCs for dye-sensitized solar cells.

All chemicals were used as received without further purification. Titanium butoxide, dodecyl amine, and P25-Degussa powder were purchased from Sigma Aldrich; sodium hydroxide, acetic acid, oxalic acid, hydrofluoric acid, nickel acetate tetrahydrate, polyvinyl pyrrolidine (Mw = 40000), and ethylene glycol were all purchased from Fischer Scientific and used as received. Deionized water was used for all precursor solution preparation and for proper washing of the synthesized products.


Different morphologies of TiO2 NCs, including interconnected beads-like (IBL), square platelets-like (SPL), spindle shape-like (SSL) and porous sphere-like (PSL), were synthesized using an Anton Paar (Multiwave PRO) microwave synthesizer SOLV, as illustrated in Fig. 1. The particulars of the various reaction precursors, reaction conditions and solvents used to synthesize the respective TiO2 morphologies are precisely given in Table S1, ESI. The synthesis incorporates corresponding precursors which are added to the appropriate solvents in Quartz/Teflon vessels and are carefully placed on a rotating platform for uniform heat treatment in the Anton-Paar microwave reactor. The reaction period, which changes with power and temperature, was automated with Anton-Paar Multiwave PRO software. The microwave synthesis controls the reaction time and temperature inside the reaction vessels at microwave frequency of 2.45 GHz. After the completion of the reaction, the quartz vessels were cooled by a rapid cooling fan. Finally, TiO2 NCs in the form of a colloidal white solution were retrieved by the process of centrifugation and subsequently washed using absolute ethanol. The formed white TiO2 powder was then air dried and subjected to all characterizations and to DSSC device fabrication. The details regarding the MW/ST reaction conditions and the images of the as-synthesized products are illustrated in Fig. 1.


Ni-NCs were prepared from Ni(OCOCH3)2·4H2O using ethylene glycol (EG) as the solvent by modifying an earlier reported procedure. Here, EG plays a dual role as a reducing agent to obtain the metallic Ni-NCs from Ni salt and also as a solvent with a chelating effect to prevent agglomeration of the Ni-NCs. Our synthesis strategy involved the use of polyvinyl pyrrolidone (PVP) and dodecylamine (DDA) as additional protecting agents to control the size of the Ni-NCs. The detailed reaction conditions and the solvents used to synthesize the size-controlled Ni-NCs are given in Table S2 (ESI). In a typical MW-ST process, to prepare the size-controlled Ni-NCs, the protecting agents PVP (120 mg) and DDA (5 mg) were sequentially dissolved in 20 mL of EG by constant stirring. Metal precursors with different concentrations were mixed with the above solution. The homogenous precursor solution obtained after stirring was subjected to microwave heating at 220 °C for 15 min. The microwave-assisted polyol reduction of the Ni precursor took place inside the reactor during the solvothermal process; subsequently, a black precipitate of Ni-NCs was obtained, centrifuged and washed three times using acetone. The obtained powder was dried at 80 °C in a vacuum oven for 2 h and is shown in Fig. 1. The details of the MW/ST reaction conditions are given in Table S2 (ESI).


The typical fabrication procedure for DSSCs was reported earlier by our group for different ZnO morphologies fabricated via MW-HT/ST methods. Here, 0.5 g of the as-synthesized TiO2 NCs were dispersed into 4 mL ethanol to form a homogenous solution by sonication for 10 minutes. To this solution, two drops of Triton™ X-100 binder solution were added and stirred for 2 minutes. Further, the photoanode films were formed on a well-cleaned (using soap solution, acetone and isopropyl alcohol, respectively) fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) glass substrate by a simple spin-coating technique at 3000 rpm for 30 seconds to obtain a thickness of 6 ± 2 μm and an active area of 0.25 cm2. After air-drying, the coated FTO substrates were subjected to sintering at 400 °C for 2 hours with a heating rate of 5 °C min−1. When cooled to 80 °C, the hot substrates were instantaneously soaked in a 0.5 mM ethanolic solution of N719 dye (Sigma-Aldrich) solution for 12 h. After the dye-loading, the photoanodes were dipped into absolute ethanol to remove the excess dye molecules on the photoanode surface.

Conventional platinum (Pt) counter-electrodes were fabricated via drop-casting of 5 mM H2PtCl6 solution in isopropanol onto a cleaned FTO-coated glass substrate and subsequent annealing at 400 °C for 20 min. Further, the prepared electrodes were sandwiched together with Surlyn film with a thickness of 30 μm as a spacer using two binder clips. The I−/I3− redox electrolyte solutions were prepared with 0.06 M 1-butyl-3-methyl imidazolium iodide, 0.03 M iodine solution (I2), 0.10 M guanidinium thiocyanate, and 0.5 M 4-tert-butylpyridine in a solvent mixture of acetonitrile and valeronitrile (volume ratio, 85:15). Finally, the redox electrolyte was introduced between the two electrodes using a syringe. In order to investigate the effects of Ni-NCs on photovoltaic performance, different amounts (1, 1.5 and 2 mg) of prepared Ni-NCs were added to 1 mL of I−/I3− redox electrolyte.

The crystal structures of the synthesized samples were analyzed by X-ray diffraction (XRD) studies using a Rigaku Ultima IV X-ray diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.54 Å) at 40 kV and 30 mA to scan the diffraction angles from 10 to 80°. The phases were identified using standards from the International Centre for Diffraction Data (ICDD). The surface morphologies of the synthesized samples were imaged with a field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM-SUPRA-55-Carl Zeiss, Germany) equipped with an energy-dispersive X-ray spectrometer (EDX). High Resolution Transmission Electron Microscopy (HR-TEM) images were acquired with a transmission electron microscope (JOEL/JEM 2100), USA. The specific surface areas (Brunauer–Emmett–Teller, BET) of the samples were measured using a micromeritics Jemini VII 2390 series. Raman spectra were recorded using a room-temperature confocal Raman spectrometer (Renishaw inVia) with a laser excitation energy of 514 nm. Photovoltaic (PV) characterization of the DSSCs was achieved by a Newport® 150 W 96000 solar simulator at 100 mW cm−2 full spectrum power using the standard AM 1.5G filter. The photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) responses of the devices and the corresponding curves were plotted using data obtained using a Keithley 2400 Source Meter. The spectral responses of the DSSCs were determined by measuring the wavelength dependence of the incident photon-to-current efficiency (EQE) by focusing light from a xenon lamp through a monochromator onto the cell using a Bentham PVE300 system.


Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope (FESEM) images acquired to investigate the surface morphological features of the synthesized samples are illustrated in Fig. 2(a)–(d). The FE – SEM images of the samples at lower and higher magnifications exhibited divergent morphologies depending on the different MW-ST reaction conditions; these include interconnected beads-like (IBL), square platelets-like (SPL), spindle shape-like (SSL) and porous sphere-like (PSL) morphologies. Precisely, hydrolysis and condensation reactions of titanium butoxide with acetic acid/hydrofluoric acid under MW-ST conditions resulted in interconnected bead-like (IBL) and square platelets-like (SPL) NCs, as visualized by FESEM and shown in Fig. 2(a) and (b). From the obtained images, it is evident that the morphologies of the samples were strongly influenced by the hydrolyzing agent. The IBL sample consists of several interconnected bead-shaped particles with an average diameter of 10 ± 5 nm. However, the SPL sample exhibits a stalked square platelet-like morphology with 30 ± 5 nm sizes. Both the IBL and SPL samples showed superior inter-connections, which is beneficial for fast electron transport in the TiO2 photoanode film and for good PCE for DSSCs. In order to obtain one-dimensional morphological TiO2 samples, commercially available TiO2 nanocrystals were treated with 10 M NaOH by the MW-ST method, which subsequently resulted in a long spindle shape-like (SSL) morphology with a smooth surface, as shown in Fig. 2(c). The FESEM analysis of this specific sample revealed aggregated spindles with an average diameter of 40 ± 2 nm and whose morphological features are highly desirable to significantly enhance electron transport within a photoanode. Further, the mesoporous sphere-like (PSL) TiO2 sample was prepared by hydrolysis and polycondensation of titanium butoxide through an oxalic acid route in ethanol as the solvent with modified MW-ST conditions, as shown in Table S1 (ESI). Fig. 2(d) demonstrates its porous nature, which can provide an effective surface area for better dye adsorption. The inset figures are magnified FESEM images of the respective TiO2 samples, revealing several aggregated spheres with diameters of 60 ± 5 nm consisting of numerous particles. The surface areas of the IBL, SPL, SSL and PSL samples were analysed and were found to be 50.24 m2 g−1, 42.16 m2 g−1, 22.46 m2 g−1 and 95.74 m2 g−1, respectively, as given in Table S3 (ESI). The obtained BET surface area results are well correlated with the XRD and FESEM analysis.


Fig. 3(a)–(d) present the XRD patterns of the different samples prepared by different MW-ST methods. The XRD patterns of the samples indicated the complete transformation of the precursors into phase pure anatase structures devoid of any rutile phase. All the peaks are indexed to standard anatase TiO2 with a tetragonal structure (ICDD no. 004-0477). Using the Scherrer equation, the average crystal sizes of the anatase TiO2 crystals were about 18, 23, 40 and 13 nm, as estimated from the full widths at half maximum of the (101) peak for the IBL, SPL, SSL and PSL TiO2-NCs samples, respectively. The sharp diffraction peaks illustrate the highly crystalline nature of the TiO2 achieved by the MW-ST process within 10 min at temperatures as low as 200 °C. The MW-ST process receives the benefits of both microwave and solvothermal effects to yield nanocrystalline TiO2. It can be observed that the XRD peaks obtained for SSL sample in Fig. 3(c) are very sharp when compared to those of IBL, SPL and PSL (Fig. 3(a), (b) and (d)); this is due to the use of P25 Degussa powder itself as the precursor. The subsequent MW-ST reaction with a 10 min ramp and 10 min hold at 180 °C accounts for the high crystallinity of the SSL sample. Moreover, the PSL (Fig. 3(d)) sample exhibited peak broadening, which can be attributed to the small crystalline size of the sample. Fig. 3(e) and (f) shows the XRD patterns of the Ni-NCs (I, II and III) with average sizes of 12, 45 and 56 nm, respectively, obtained by the MW-ST reaction using ethylene glycol as a solvent as well as a reducing medium. The obtained XRD patterns reveal the nanocrystalline nature of the samples and affirm the formation of pure metallic Ni-NCs demonstrating (111), (200) and (220) face-centred cubic (fcc) diffraction patterns according to standard JCPDS card no. 01-071-4655. The average crystalline sizes were calculated using Scherer's formula and were found to be 56.8, 82.6 and 97.5 nm for Ni-I, Ni-II and Ni-III, respectively. To better envision the morphologies and crystal structures of the TiO2 NCs, we specifically characterized the IBL sample by HRTEM, as illustrated in Fig. 4. Here, Fig. 4(a) depicts the morphology of IBL at high magnification; it can be observed that the interconnected bead-like TiO2 particles are fine, discrete and separated and constitute packed NCs with close particle interconnections. The inter-particle voids between these structures can offer better dye loading and surface adsorption, thus facilitating faster electrolyte transport inside the NCs; this ultimately results in enhanced PCE. The average diameter of the TiO2 particles in Fig. 4(a) was found to be 13.5 nm; these results corroborated the XRD and FESEM results. The HR-TEM images in Fig. 4(b) display lattice fringes with a d-spacing of 3.6 Å, corresponding to the (101) plane of highly crystalline tetragonal anatase phase TiO2. Fig. 5 illustrates the detailed morphological analysis of the size-varied Ni-NCs by HR-TEM and FESEM analysis. Fig. 5(a–e) are HR-TEM images of the Ni-NCs, demonstrating hexagonal and triangular mixed morphological crystals with controlled sizes calculated within the ranges of 17 ± 3 nm, 45 ± 5 nm and 56 ± 6 nm, respectively, obtained by the MW-ST method. When the metal precursor concentration was as low as 3.9 mg, well-dispersed NCs were obtained with many hexagonal and triangular morphologies consisting of several sharp edges. The average size of the NCs obtained from the size distribution graph (inset figure) was calculated to be 17 ± 3 nm, as illustrated in Fig. 5(a). On increasing the concentration of the precursor to 5.8 mg, we observed the formation of NCs as aggregated triangular structures with a size distribution of 45 ± 5 nm, as shown in Fig. 5(c). The inset image in Fig. 5(c) is a FESEM micrograph of the corresponding Ni-II NCs, showing clusters of aggregated nanocrystals. It can also be observed from the magnified TEM images that the Ni-II NCs comprise sharp edges, as shown in Fig. 5(c–e). The crystalline nature of the Ni-II sample was again confirmed by the selected-area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern, as shown in Fig. 5(f). The obtained ring pattern further suggests a polycrystalline material consisting of many crystals with different orientations. From the SAED pattern, the Ni-II crystal planes are indexed as (111), (200), (220) and (222), which is in agreement with the XRD results. Moreover, large NCs 56 ± 6 nm in size were obtained (as shown in Fig. 5b) when a metal precursor concentration as high as 7.8 mg was used for the MW-ST synthesis. Thus, it can be clearly understood that the concentration of the metal precursor can directly affect the size of the NCs. As the concentration of metal precursor in the reaction mixture was increased, there was no distinguishable morphological change; however, the size of the Ni-NCs changed instantaneously. The inset figures with higher magnification reveal the d-spacing between the lattice fringes of 2 Å, which corresponds to the growth of Ni-NCs along one of the easy magnetic axes of the (111) plane. The growth plane was found to be same for all the samples.

The molecular vibration properties of the as-synthesized TiO2-NCs were analyzed by confocal Raman spectroscopic characterization. Fig. S1 (ESI) illustrates the Raman spectra of all the TiO2 samples. The spectra are typical of anatase TiO2 phase, which substantiates the results obtained from XRD. According to Group theory, bulk anatase TiO2 has a tetragonal structure and belongs to the space group D4h-I41/amd. The fifteen normal modes of pure anatase TiO2 phase have the irreducible representation 1A1g + 1A2u + 2B1g + 1B2u + 3Eg + 2Eu. The six Raman active vibration modes include A1g + 2B1g + 3Eg. A1g mode is predicted due to oxygen vibration and B1g mode is due to pure Ti-atom vibration. All the remaining vibrations are mixtures of both O and Ti atom. Fig. S1 (ESI) shows four vibration peaks centered at 146, 400, 517 and 643 cm−1, which are mainly attributed to the Raman-active modes of anatase phase and assigned to the Eg(1), B1g, A1g and Eg modes, respectively. The obtained peaks correspond to the typical Raman bands of pure anatase TiO2 phase at room temperature, in accordance with the reported literature. The intense Eg(1) mode indicates a certain degree of long range order. Broadening of the Eg(1) peak and shifts in the frequencies were observed; these are more dominant in the case of the PSL sample due to the small crystallite size, phonon confinement, nonstoichiometry and internal stress/surface tension. A weak broader peak in the high wavenumber region indicates a lack of short-range order. Increased content of oxygen vacancies can also contribute to peak broadening. Thus, the Raman results were found to be consistent with the XRD data. The optical properties of the samples were also analysed by UV-VIS spectroscopy. All the TiO2-NCs showed absorption edges around 382 to 385 nm, as illustrated in Fig. S2 (ESI). The band gaps calculated in the UV-absorption range were 3.22, 3.23, 3.20 and 3.24 eV, respectively, for the IBL, SPL, SSL and PSL samples.


The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of three DSSCs with different TiO2 photoanodes were analyzed simultaneously to investigate the morphology-induced photovoltaic performance of the TiO2 nanoarchitectures and also the size-dependent LSPR effects of Ni-NCs on DSSC performance. We fabricated DSSCs using different TiO2 photoanodes with thicknesses of 6, 8, 12 and 15 μm; the best conversion efficiency was obtained for the 12 μm-thick photoanode. In order to correlate the photoanode film morphology to PV performance, FESEM images of the TiO2-coated FTO samples were acquired and are given in Fig. S3 (ESI). From the top-view FESEM images (Fig. S3(a)–(d) (ESI)) of the fabricated photoanode, it is confirmed that the TiO2 NCs morphology did not considerably change after the photoanode film fabrication, which involved the use of binder and subsequent sintering at temperatures as high as 400 °C. Fig. 6 illustrates the comparative J–V plots of the fabricated TiO2-based DSSCs, and Table S3 (ESI) lists the average extracted parameters from the J–V curves, such as short-circuit current density (Jsc), open circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (FF), and power conversion efficiency (η), for each DSSC. In general, short-circuit current density is principally determined by the number of initial photogenerated electrons, which can be significantly affected by the different morphologies of TiO2. It is clear from the J–V curves that the IBL sample with an interconnected bead structure demonstrates high photovoltaic performance, with Jsc = 20.38 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.78 V, FF = 58.7% and a PCE of 9.33%. This is ascribed to the better electronic transport and greater surface area provided by the unique interconnected bead morphology. The square platelet-shaped SPL and spindle shape-like SSL samples also showed promising PCEs, as high as 9.02% and 7.14%, respectively. Compared to the IBL, SPL and SSL samples, the PSL sample showed a much lower PCE of 5.30%; this can be attributed to the highly porous nature of the PSL sample (as evident from XRD, FESEM, BET and Raman spectroscopic data), which resulted in excess dye-adsorption, leading to increased recombination of the photoinjected electrons. The maximum Jsc was obtained for the IBL sample, which is due to the high exposed surface area provided by the nanosized bead structure. Interestingly, from the obtained J–V plots, it is clear that the maximum FF was obtained for SSL; this may be due to the unique morphological features of the spindles, including a smooth surface which enables fast electron transport and reduced recombination loss. Among all the samples, the DSSCs fabricated with SPL as the photoanode exhibited the maximum Voc due to the better contact of sheetlike TiO2 on the surface of the FTO. In order to compare the photovoltaic performances of the different TiO2 morphologies, the EQEs of all TiO2-based DSSCs were analysed and are shown in Fig. 7(e)–(h). These spectra indicated the same trend as the photovoltaic performance data. Among the four different TiO2 morphologies, the DSSCs fabricated with IBL and SPL displayed the highest EQE values over a wide range from 400 to 700 nm. Fig. 7(e) and (f) exhibit the minima for the PSL-based photoanodes (Fig. 7(h)). Subsequently, the highest EQE value of the IBL and SPL based DSSCs could be specifically maximized by the use of incident sunlight, which further enhanced the light harvesting efficiency and improved the overall Jsc. Thus, the EQE spectra are well correlated with the morphology-dependent PCE values of the different TiO2-based photoanodes. Also, the performances of all the TiO2-based DSSCs prepared via the MW-ST method were highly promising compared to most reported TiO2 prepared by conventional hydrothermal and solvothermal methods (MW-HT/ST), demonstrating the relevance of the MW-ST method. The high photovoltaic performance of the prepared TiO2 may be due to the unique crystalline properties caused by the MW-ST process, which can offer a greater surface area for dye adsorption and better inter-particle connections for efficient electron transport and electrolyte diffusion.


To further enhance the photovoltaic performance, we employed the method of incorporating size-tuned Ni-NCs into the redox electrolyte (1 mg mL−1), and the PV performances of the DSSCs were studied systematically. We also investigated the PV performance by varying the photoanode thickness to determine the optimum thickness. Four sets of DSSCs each consisting of five identical cells were fabricated using the morphology-tuned TiO2 IBL, SPL, SSL and PSL samples, respectively. Subsequently, the I−/I3− redox electrolyte was impregnated with various size-tuned Ni-NCs with size distributions of 17 ± 3 nm (Ni-I), 45 ± 5 nm (Ni-II) and 56 ± 6 nm (Ni-III) which were introduced into the DSSCs. Fig. S4 (ESI) shows the J–V curves of the fabricated DSSCs; it is clear that among the different Ni-NCs synthesized via the MW-ST method, the particles with a size distribution of 45 ± 5 nm (Ni-II) showed improved PCEs for all TiO2 samples. DSSCs fabricated using Ni-I and Ni-III impregnated electrolyte resulted in lower Jsc and PCE values. From a previous report, this size-dependency of the nanostructures suggests that in the 45 nm size regime, the nanoparticles mainly absorb incident light, causing a strong electromagnetic field at the edges and corners. The detailed PV parameters obtained for the DSSCs with different size-controlled Ni-NCs are given in Table S4 (ESI). It is noteworthy to mention that enhanced performance was obtained for photoanodes with a minimum thickness of 8 μm. The enhanced photovoltaic efficiency can be explained as follows. At resonance, nanoparticles exhibit LSPR and can act as optical antennae to concentrate light. This highly confined and enhanced plasmonic field improves the perfect mismatch between the photons and molecules and greatly enhances the light–matter interactions at the nanoscale. In order to understand these size preferences for improved plasmonic effects in detail, we systematically studied the photovoltaic performances of the DSSCs fabricated with four different TiO2 morphologies by specifically incorporating Ni-II nickel NCs with a size of 45 ± 5 nm (consisting of mixed triangular and hexagonal morphologies) in redox electrolyte. Subsequently, we also varied the loading concentration of the Ni-II NCs (1, 1.5 and 2 mg mL−1); the obtained J–V curves are illustrated in Fig. 7. Among all the synthesized NCs of TiO2, maximum PCE and Jsc values were observed for the IBL sample; after the impregnation of Ni-NCs in the electrolyte, it exhibited a significant improvement in Jsc from 20.38 mA cm−2 to 21.8 mA cm−2 and a higher PCE (net improvement of 6.3%) after adding 1 mg of Ni NCs to the electrolyte (Fig. 7(a)). When the amount of Ni-NCs was further increased to 1.5 mg and 2 mg, the Jsc decreases to 21.12 mA cm−2 and 19.96 mA cm−2 respectively. Therefore, the improved Jsc obtained for 1 mg of Ni-NCs incorporated into the IBL photoanode can be attributed to the collective oscillation of conductive electrons at wavelengths near the plasmon resonance of the metal NCs, which improves the visible light absorption by scattering and subsequently increases the PCE. When the amount of Ni-NCs was increased in the electrolyte (1.5 and 2 mg), the total number of dye molecules exposed on the semiconductor surface for direct absorption of photons became limited. This resulted in lower light-harvesting efficiency and, thus, lower Jsc. In the case of the SPL sample, a similar trend was observed, i.e. an improvement in Jsc from 19.09 mA cm−2 to 19.90 mA cm−2; consequently, a 2% overall enhancement in PCE was observed by adding 1 mg Ni-NCs. A further increase of Ni-NCs in the electrolyte resulted in both decreased Jsc and PCE (Fig. 7(b)). Thus, the optimum amounts of Ni-NCs for the IBL and SPL samples were fixed as 1 mg. A similar observation was performed for the SSL sample. In the case of the PSL sample, the PCE increased from 5.3% to 5.87% after adding 1.5 mg of Ni-NCs, with enhancement in Jsc from 13.13 mA cm−2 to 15.53 mA cm−2 (Fig. 7(c)). For the SSL sample, after adding 1 mg of Ni-NCs to the electrolyte, the Jsc improved from 14.58 mA cm−2 to 16.12 mA cm−2, and a subsequent increase in PCE by 17% was obtained (Fig. 7(d)). Thus, a net enhancement of 18% in Jsc followed by 11% in PCE was observed. It is noteworthy that for the PSL sample, the optimum amount of Ni-NCs was found to be 1.5 mg. This can be explained by the highly porous structure of this particular sample, as inferred from the FESEM results. The maximum enhancement of PCE (by 17%) was obtained for the SSL sample; this is attributed to the spindle morphology, which has the best advantages of a smooth surface that facilitates electron transport and mobility resulting from the perfect mismatching interface between the spindle morphology of the photoanode and the plasmonic Ni-NCs (hexagonal and triangular mixed morphology NCs), which is clearly understood from the comparatively large FF value obtained for the DSSCs fabricated using SSL. Photographs of the fabricated DSSCs and the color of the electrolyte before and after the addition of Ni-NCs are given in Fig. 7(k). Schematics of the plasmonic enhancement by Ni-NCs in the electrolyte for the best photoanodes, IBL-TiO2 and SSL-TiO2, are given in Fig. 8(a) and (b). As illustrated in the schemes, effective utilization of incident light occurs in the presence of plasmonic Ni-NCs by the scattering effect. The incident light is absorbed by multiple reflections within the device, thereby minimizing the transmittance. The IBL morphology has the advantage of interconnected TiO2 particles for better electron transport, while the SSL morphology consists of smooth surfaces which facilitate fast electron transport with less recombination loss of photoinjected electrons. Moreover, the smooth surface of SSL can accommodate more plasmonic metal NCs. Thus, it is evident that the size-mismatch interface of the plasmonic Ni-NCs and the photoanode plays a crucial role in improving the PCE of the DSSC. The significance of the size-mismatching effect in DSSCs for ZnO nanohybrid architecture-based photoanodes comprising rod and particle morphologies was previously reported by our group. Here, we found that a shorter size of the Ni-NCs is mainly preferred in order to obtain stronger plasmonic enhancement. When the size is too short, i.e., in the case of the Ni-I NCs-incorporated DSSCs, the photoinjected electrons near the metallic surface undergo quenching; thus, additional non-radiative channels can be formed, which results in the lowest PCEs of all the DSSCs with Ni-I NCs, as understood from the J–V curves in Fig. S4 (ESI). Subsequently, when the size of the Ni-NCs was greater (in the case of Ni-III), the PCE drastically decreased for all the TiO2-based DSSCs. This is because when the concentration of metal nanoparticles on the photoanode surface is high, the electron–hole recombination probability increases, which results in a reduced number of charge carriers and consequently a lower photocurrent. The maximum enhancement in performance was obtained for the Ni-II NCs. Thus, the obtained results again confirmed the strong influence of the size and shape of the NCs on both the absorption and scattering efficiencies. A comparative plot of the increments in Jsc and PCE upon incorporating precise amounts of Ni-NCs in the DSSCs with different morphologies of TiO2-NCs as photoanodes is illustrated in Fig. 7(i) and (j). From these graphs, it is undoubtedly evident that the variations in PCE are directly related to the Jsc values, thus justifying the LSPR effect of the impregnated Ni-NCs in the redox electrolyte. More details of the variation of the PV parameters for five sets of each TiO2-based DSSC fabricated using different amounts of Ni-NCs can be clearly understood from Table 1. The PV performance of each set shows a maximum standard deviation of ±0.02%.

Cell

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)

J
max (mA cm−2)

V
max (V)
FF
PCE (%)
IBL
20.38 (±0.01)
0.78 (±0.01)
16.05 (±0.01)
0.58 (±0.01)
58.69(±0.01)
9.33 (±0.01)
IBL-1
21.78 (±0.01)
0.79 (±0.01)
17.06 (±0.01)
0.58 (±0.01)
58.23 (±0.02)
10.02 (±0.01)
IBL-1.5
21.12 (±0.03)
0.74 (±0.01)
16.66 (±0.05)
0.52 (±0.01)
55.46 (±0.01)
8.66 (±0.01)
IBL-2
19.96 (±0.03)
0.80 (±0.01)
15.90 (±0.01)
0.55 (±0.01)
55.06 (±0.01)
8.75 (±0.01)
SPL
19.09 (±0.02)
0.82 (±0.02)
15.36 (±0.02)
0.59 (±0.01)
57.62 (±0.01)
9.02 (±0.15)
SPL-1
19.90 (±0.03)
0.82 (±0.01)
15.90 (±0.01)
0.58 (±0.01)
56.32 (±0.01)
9.19 (±0.01)
SPL-1.5
18.29 (±0.05)
0.82 (±0.01)
15.25 (±0.01)
0.56 (±0.01)
57.37 (±0.01)
8.56 (±0.01)
SPL-2
18.58 (±0.01)
0.81 (±0.01)
15.07 (±0.02)
0.55 (±0.01)
54.47 (±0.01)
8.21 (±0.01)
SSL
14.58 (±0.01)
0.75 (±0.01)
12.20 (±0.01)
0.59 (±0.01)
65.57 (±0.01)
7.17 (±0.01)
SSL-1
16.12 (±0.02)
0.73 (±0.01)
14.95 (±0.01)
0.56 (±0.01)
71.14 (±0.01)
8.37 (±0.02)
SSL-1.5
15.94 (±0.01)
0.71 (±0.00)
14.37 (±0.01)
0.55 (±0.01)
69.83 (±0.01)
7.90 (±0.01)
SSL-2
11.80 (±0.02)
0.73 (±0.01)
10.96 (±0.01)
0.56 (±0.01)
71.25 (±0.01)
6.14 (±0.07)
PSL
13.13 (±0.02)
0.72 (±0.01)
10.64 (±0.02)
0.56 (±0.01)
56.31 (±0.01)
5.30 (±0.02)
PSL-1
12.07 (±0.01)
0.69 (±0.01)
9.65 (±0.01)
0.49 (±0.01)
56.78 (±0.01)
4.73 (±0.10)
PSL-1.5
15.53 (±0.01)
0.69 (±0.01)
11.99 (±0.02)
0.49 (±0.01)
54.82 (±0.01)
5.87 (±0.02)
PSL-2
10.56 (±0.04)
0.69 (±0.01)
8.39 (±0.01)
0.49 (±0.01)
56.42 (±0.01)
4.11 (±0.07)
The improvement in Jsc of all four samples was attributed to the improvement in the net absorption of photons by the scattering of light by plasmonic Ni-NCs, which could increase photo-injected electron generation within the anode. The LSPR effects of the synthesized Ni NCs were studied in detail for different TiO2-based thin films and in the solution phase. The significant enhancement in Jsc caused by the LSPR effect of Ni-NCs in I−/I3− liquid electrolyte was clearly understood from the UV-Vis spectroscopy data (Fig. 9(a)) of the best performing photoanode (IBL) as an example. Fig. 9(a) displays the absorbance spectra of the pristine TiO2 photoanode, the TiO2 photoanode with spin-coated Ni-NCs on top and the dye-sensitized photoanode with redox electrolyte (before and after impregnation with the optimum amount of Ni-NCs in I−/I3− redox electrolyte). It is clear that the optical absorption spectra of pristine TiO2 and sensitized TiO2 were significantly enhanced after the incorporation of Ni-NCs, as shown in Fig. 9(b) and (c). The Ni-NCs showed a broad absorption behavior with an SPR band around 555 nm (Fig. 9(d)–(f)). The absorption enhancement of N719 dye was also monitored in the Ni-NCs solution; it clearly indicated the enhancement of the net absorption of N719 dye in the presence of Ni-NCs without altering the absorption maxima. Thus, the absorption spectra of the photoanode film and solution corroborated the LSPR phenomena of the Ni-NCs. Also, the obtained results were in accordance with the LSPR enhancement of the photosensitizer in the presence of various metal nanoparticles, as previously reported in the literature. A schematic of the DSSC photoanode surface and a closer look at the surface of the TiO2 photoanode containing mixed hexagonal and trigonal morphologies of Ni-NCs on the monolayer coating of the dye are presented in Fig. 9(g), (h) and (i), respectively, to represent the scattering-induced effective light utilization occurring in the photoanode. The adsorption spectrum of the Ni-NCs (average size of 45 nm) showing a broad absorption over the region from 300 to 600 nm is provided in Fig. S5 (ESI). Generally, the Voc of DSSCs is related to the semiconductor electronic structure and the redox potential of the electrolyte. Minor discrepancies in the Voc values were noted in our results; this may be due to the variations in the thickness and surface properties of the fabricated photoanodes or interactions of the quasi-Fermi level of TiO2 with localised surface plasmon energy levels of the Ni-NCs. Enhanced Voc was also observed for thinner photoanodes, which can reduce charge recombination and, subsequently, voltage loss. The quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra can provide further confirmation of the enhanced LHE by LSPR of the DSSCs after incorporation of Ni-NCs in the electrolyte. Fig. 7(e)–(h) represents the EQE spectra of the IBL, SPL, SSL and PSL TiO2-based DSSCs, respectively, with and without Ni-NCs as a function of wavelength from 400 to 750 nm. The absorption spectra of the IBL photoanode were also analysed for comparison. The maximum EQE was attained at 550 nm. The EQE enhancement of the Ni NCs-based DSSCs in comparison to the pristine TiO2 photoanode over a wide absorption range (400 to 700 nm) was highly consistent with the improved Jsc. A comparative EQE plot for the best-performing DSSCs is shown in Fig. 10(a). The spectra follow the same order as the trend in Jsc; the maximum efficiency was obtained for the IBL photoanode-based DSSCs, whereas the lowest efficiency was obtained for the PSR photoanode-based DSSCs. Further, the stabilities of the best-performing DSSCs were studied over a period of 30 days, as shown in Fig. 10(b). The IBL, SPL, SSL and PSL DSSCs with Ni-NCs retained PCEs up to 97.46%, 97.5%, 97.85% and 97.44%, respectively, compared to the initial values. Interestingly, the highest stability was also shown by the SSL photoanode-based DSSC.
From the J–V, UV-visible and quantum efficiency spectroscopic data, a possible plasmonic energy transfer mechanism for enhanced Jsc can be suggested and illustrated via the plasmonic energy transfer diagram given in Fig. 9(d). In brief, when the DSSC is illuminated, photons are absorbed by the dye molecules along with preferable absorption by Ni-NCs. The metallic core concentrates light, and absorbed photons form confined electromagnetic fields on their surfaces. Although some photons, mostly in the longer wavelength region, are transmitted through the dye-loaded TiO2 film, the transmitted photons are again captured and reflected back to the dye molecules by the Ni-NCs. Thus, the dye molecules obtain an additional light source, as the Ni-NCs function like light harvesting antennae; this in turn creates additional electron–hole pairs in the sensitizer, resulting in a large amount of light transfer from the LUMO to the conduction band of TiO2 so that the LHE of the photoanode is enhanced, and improved Jsc and PCE are subsequently obtained for the DSSCs. Thus, in the fabricated plasmonic DSSCs, the LSPR arising from Ni-NCs increased the LHE and allowed the use of thin photoanodes (8 to 9 μm). A lower amount of electrode material, decreased rate of recombination and back reaction of photocarriers were achieved, which collectively improved the electron collection efficiency and photovoltaic performance. Further, studies on the incorporation and optimization of Ni-NCs for different semiconductor photoanodes of DSSCs, such as ZnO and SnO2, are progressing.

In summary, the efficiency of DSSCs was improved by 2% to 17% via incorporation of size-controlled Ni-NCs into I−/I3− redox electrolyte for different morphology-tuned TiO2 photoanodes, such as IBL, SPL, SSL and PSR. The significance of this work is the use of a facile synthetic methodology for the morphology and size tuning of TiO2 and Ni-NCs, followed by single-step modification of incorporating the Ni-NCs scatterer directly into I−/I3− redox electrolyte for improved LHE in the DSSCs. Both the MW-ST synthesis protocol and the Ni-NCs incorporation are highly advantageous over other reported procedures. The improvement in efficiency is entirely driven by the improvement in Jsc, which is addressed in terms of the following reasons. First, the scattering effect of Ni-NCs (in the electrolyte) provided improved LHE, which maximised the photon absorption and charge carrier generation. Second, the better interparticle contact between IBL and SPL and the fast electron transport by the spindle-shaped SSL enabled reduced recombination by using thinner photoanodes (thickness of 8 μm). We also observed a strong influence of the morphology and size oft he Ni-NCs on the PCE; the enhancement mechanism of the Ni-NCs was found to vary with the nanocrystal size, and Ni-NCs with sizes of 45 ± 5 nm showed improved Jsc due to increased scattering. The maximum net enhancement in PCE (∼17%) and stability were achieved by the SSL-TiO2 photoanode-based DSSCs by systematic optimization of factors such as the surface morphology of the TiO2 photoanode and the size and concentration of the Ni-NCs in the electrolyte to attain the best advantages of scattering-induced effective light utilization and size-mismatching effects at the photoanode and Ni-NCs integrated electrolyte interface. Thus, our studies demonstrated new opportunities for enhancement of the photovoltaic performance of DSSCs by coupling Ni-NCs and spindle-like TiO2 (by achieving maximum PCEs of ∼10%) synthesized via innovative MW-ST processes. Due to the intrinsic properties of the so-formed TiO2 and Ni-NCs, they are promising for a wide range of photocatalytic and optoelectronic systems beyond DSSCs, such as pervoskite solar cells.


There are no conflicts to declare.


We express thanks to the funding agencies: University Grants Commission (UGC), Government of India, New Delhi under development of DSSCs major research project no. 41-376/2012 and DST-TSD project grant no PT/2011/178-G and DST/TM/CERI/C264(G). We also thank Central Instrumentation Facilities (CIF) – Pondicherry University for material characterizations.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Table and figures showing Raman, FESEM and UV-Vis, experimental conditions to synthesize different TiO2 and Ni-NCs, photovoltaic parameters of different TiO2 morphologies-based DSSCs. See DOI: 10.1039/c7qi00329c
This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2017