 DOI: 10.1039/C7TC04669C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 12591-12596


Pan
Ye
,

Yusheng
Chen
,

Jianfei
Wu
,

Xiaoxi
Wu
,

Simiao
Yu
,

Wang
Xing
,

Qi
Liu
,

Xiangli
Jia
,

Aidong
Peng
* and 

Hui
Huang
*

College of Materials Science and Opto-Electronic Technology and Key Laboratory of Vacuum Physics, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100048, P. R. China. E-mail: paidong@ucas.ac.cn; huihuang@ucas.ac.cn

Beijing Key Laboratory of Function Materials for Molecular & Structure Construction School of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing, 100083, P. R. China

Key Laboratory of Flexible Electronics (KLOFE) & Institute of Advanced Materials (IAM), Jiangsu National Synergetic Innovation Center for Advanced Materials (SICAM), Nanjing Tech University, 30 South Puzhu Road, Nanjing, 211816, Jiangsu, P. R. China

Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences (BNLMS), CAS Key Laboratory of Molecular Recognition and Function, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100190, P. R. China

Received
13th October 2017
, Accepted 13th November 2017
First published on 14th November 2017
Non-fullerene organic solar cells (OSCs) have attracted great attention due to their advantages including tunable light absorption and low cost fabrication. Many important strategies have been used to achieve high performing OSCs including increasing the charge transport mobility and reducing the energy loss (Eloss). In this contribution, two wide bandgap small molecular acceptors (IDTzCR and IDTCR) were designed and synthesized for OSCs. Through replacing the thiophene moieties with thiazole ones, charge transport mobility was increased due to introducing S⋯N noncovalent conformational locks, resulting in a significant enhancement of photovoltaic performances. Furthermore, IDTCR based OSCs afforded a record low Eloss value for “narrow bandgap donor:wide bandgap acceptor” systems due to the small LUMO/LUMO energy offset. This contribution showed a novel method to achieve excellent wide bandgap acceptors for OSCs and sheds lights on understanding the relationship between the materials properties and device performances.

Non-fullerene solar cells have attracted extensive research interests in the past several years due to their advantages including a low-production cost, a tunable chemical structure, and a high absorption coefficient in the visible wavelength range compared to fullerene-based acceptors. Various non-fullerene acceptors with different bandgaps have been developed for high performing OSCs, resulting in a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of over 13% for OSCs based on narrow-bandgap non-fullerene acceptors, showing promising prospects for commercialization.

The high performing non-fullerene acceptors usually contain aromatic fused ring building blocks to exhibit high planarity and high charge transport mobility. However, synthesis of aromatic fused rings usually requires extra synthetic steps, which may be detrimental for long-term commercialization. In 2012, Huang et al. firstly employed “noncovalent conformational locks” to construct highly planar conjugated systems for high performing organic electronics. Afterwards, various noncovalent conformational locks, including S⋯O, S⋯N, Se⋯Oetc., gradually became important tools for constructing highly planar conjugated materials. Specifically, upon introducing S⋯N noncovalent conformational locks into the backbone of a narrow-bandgap small molecule by replacing thiophenes with thiazoles, we successfully improved the efficiency of solar cells from 4% to over 8%. Thus, we decided to further develop this tool for wide-bandgap small molecular acceptors to enhance their photovoltaic performances.
Compared to perovskite or c-Si solar cells, polymer solar cells usually possess higher energy loss (Eloss, defined as Eloss = Egap − eVOC, where Egap is the lowest optical bandgap among the donor and acceptor components, and VOC represents open-circuit voltage), resulting in relatively low VOC and PCE. Thus, one important strategy for improving PCE is to increase VOC through reducing Eloss. For fullerene solar cells, the offset of frontier molecular orbitals between the donor and the acceptor should be larger than 0.3 eV for efficient exciton dissociation, which usually led to a large energy loss (∼0.8 eV). In comparison, low Eloss below 0.5 eV, which is comparable to that of perovskite solar cells, has been reported for non-fullerene based solar cells by a few groups. In general, these solar cells utilized a wide bandgap polymer as a donor and a narrow bandgap small molecule as an acceptor, whose low energy loss originated from the low HOMO/HOMO (highest occupied molecular orbital) energy offset, ΔHOMO, of two materials. On the other side, Eloss of non-fullerene polymer solar cells based on narrow bandgap donors and wide bandgap acceptors originates from the LUMO/LUMO (lowest unoccupied molecular orbital) energy offset, ΔLUMO, of two materials. However, these systems with Eloss below 0.50 eV have never been reported.
Herein, we designed and synthesized two analogous wide bandgap small molecular acceptors (IDTzCR and IDTCR) with A–π–D–π–A structures, which include indacenodithiophene (IDT) as the D group, thiazole or thiophene as π bridges, and rhodanine-(CN)2 as the A-type end group. As di-cyano-substituted end groups can generate a strong dipole effect, rhodanine-(CN)2 was introduced to facilitate the charge transfer process with low energy driving force, ΔLUMO, when it approaches the electron-enriched backbone of the polymer donor. In combination with a narrow bandgap polymer PTB7-Th, both acceptor based OSCs have afforded excellent efficiency. Upon introducing the S⋯N noncovalent conformational locks through replacing thiophene with thiazole, the efficiency of the solar cells was improved from 6.10% to 8.71%. Significantly, IDTCR based solar cells afforded a high VOC due to extremely low Eloss (∼0.47 eV) originating from 0.01 eV ΔLUMO. To the best of our knowledge, this Eloss value is the lowest for “narrow-bandgap donor:wide-bandgap acceptor” systems, comparable to the perovskite solar cells. To understand the photon absorption and exciton separation process of solar cells, ultraviolet-visible spectroscopy (UV-vis), external quantum efficiency (EQE), space-charge limit current (SCLC) mobility and photoluminescence spectroscopy (PL) were investigated. Moreover, atomic force microscopy (AFM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) were used to probe the relationship between the morphology of the blend films and photovoltaic performances.

IDTCR and IDTzCR (Fig. 1) were synthesized using the Stille coupling reaction and Knoevenagel condensation with moderate yields. These compounds were fully characterized using 1H and 13C-NMR, mass spectra and elemental analysis (ESI). Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA, Fig. S2, ESI) showed that both materials possess excellent thermal stability as the decomposition temperatures determined at 5% weight loss were over 350 °C under a N2 atmosphere. Furthermore, IDTCR and IDTzCR exhibit good solubility in common organic solvents (e.g., tetrahydrofuran, chloroform, and chlorobenzene).

To investigate the difference between the chemical geometry structure and the molecular frontier orbital of the small molecules, density functional theory (DFT) calculations at the B3LYP/6-31G(d,p) level were performed for the structures with simplified alkyl chains as shown in Fig. 1. The DFT results revealed that IDTCR molecules possess a twisted backbone with a dihedral angle between the central IDT unit and the π-bridge thiophene unit of ∼6°. In contrast, IDTzCR molecules have a highly planar structure with a much smaller dihedral angle (<0.1°) between IDT and thiazole units. This difference may be reasonably ascribed to the existence of S⋯N weak interactions between sulfur of the thiophene group and nitrogen of the thiazole group in IDTzCR, which is supported by the distance between S⋯N (3.04 Å), much shorter than the sum of van der Waals radii (∼3.5 Å). Moreover, the DFT calculations showed that the torsional potential between the central core and π-bridge units of IDTzCR (5.7 kJ mol−1) is higher than that of IDTCR (3.3 kJ mol−1), supporting the existence of S⋯N interactions (Fig. 2c). Note that the HOMO and LUMO are well distributed along the backbone. Furthermore, both thiophene and thiazole units exhibit HOMO and LUMO densities, which suggests that replacement of the thiophene group with the electron-deficient thiazole group may reduce both HOMO and LUMO energy levels, similar to the previous examples. This acceptor may be suitable for donors with a low-lying LUMO, such as PTB7-Th (−3.66 eV) for efficient exciton split.
The UV-vis absorption spectra of pristine films of PTB7-Th, IDTzCR and IDTCR are shown in Fig. 2a, and those in solution are shown in Fig. S2 (ESI). The thin films of IDTzCR show a remarkable bathochromic absorption peak at 616 nm with a maximum absorption coefficient of 0.91 × 105 cm−1 relative to the 593 nm peak for its solution, suggesting the strong intermolecular packing in the solid state. And the IDTCR films show an absorption peak at 622 nm with a maximum absorption coefficient of 0.82 × 105 cm−1, slightly red shifted in comparison to the absorption peak of the solution (603 nm), which indicates the relatively moderate intermolecular packing in the solid state. The optical band gaps of IDTzCR and IDTCR estimated from the onset of the film absorption are 1.76 eV and 1.79 eV, respectively. In addition, both acceptors of IDTzCR and IDTCR demonstrate complementary absorption with PTB7-Th in the wavelength range between 450 and 780 nm, which is beneficial for light harvesting in the non-fullerene OSCs (Table 1).
Compound
Solution
Film

E
gopt (eV)
LUMO (eV)
HOMO (eV)

λ
max (nm)

λ
onset (nm)

λ
max (nm)

λ
onset (nm)

a Optical bandgaps were calculated using the equation of Egopt = 1240/λonset.
b Calculated from the cyclic voltammogram.

IDTzCR
593
646
616
690
1.79
−3.77
−5.67
IDTCR
603
674
622
704
1.76
−3.67
−5.46
Cyclic voltammetry (CV) was employed to investigate the electrochemical properties of the materials. The potential was internally calibrated by employing ferrocene/ferrocenium of the (Fc/Fc+) redox couple (4.8 eV below the vacuum level) in 0.1 M Bu4NPF6 acetonitrile solution. The HOMO/LUMO levels were calculated based on the formula of EHOMO/ELUMO = −(φoxd/φred + 4.80 − φFc/Fc+). As shown in Fig. 2b, the onset potentials of oxidation/reduction of the IDTzCR and IDTCR films are located at 1.27/−0.65 V and 1.06/−0.75 V, corresponding to the calculated HOMO/LUMO level as −5.67/−3.77 eV and −5.46/−3.67 eV, respectively. It should be pointed out that the EHOMO and ELUMO values of IDTzCR are deeper than those of IDTCR, which can be attributed to the electron-deficient hetero-cycling moiety with an electron-withdrawing nitrogen of imine (CN) effectively lowering the HOMO and LOMO energy levels of conjugate molecules, consistent with the theoretical calculations. Note that the HOMO/LUMO energy levels of PTB7-Th are −5.24/−3.66 eV.
OSC devices were fabricated with an inverted structure of ITO/ZnO/PEIE/donor:acceptor/MoO3/Ag, where PEIE performed as an efficient cathode electrode buffer layer. The photovoltaic performances of systematic optimization of the device fabrication are listed in Tables S2–S4 (ESI). The typical J–V curves are shown in Fig. 3a, and the photovoltaic data are summarized in Table 2. The devices based on PTB7-Th:IDTCR after vapor annealing exhibited a PCE of 6.10% with an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 1.11 V, a short-circuit current (JSC) of 11.01 mA cm−2, and a low fill factor (FF) of 49.9%. Since PTB7-Th exhibits a narrow bandgap of 1.58 eV, this high VOC led to a record low Eloss (0.47 eV) for narrow-bandgap donor/wide-bandgap acceptor systems. Meanwhile, the relatively small JSC and FF may be ascribed to the inefficient exciton split due to the tiny LUMO/LUMO offset (0.01 eV). To increase the LUMO/LUMO offset for efficient exciton split, IDTzCR with a lower LUMO was used to fabricate solar cells, resulting in a promising PCE of 8.71% with a VOC of 1.04 V, a JSC of 13.80 mA cm−2, and a FF of 60.7%. Obviously, the significant enhancement of JSC and FF and a decrease of VOC may be attributed to the increased LUMO/LUMO offset in the PTBT-Th:IDTzCR system, leading to the significant improvement of PCE.
Device

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)

J
SC
 (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)

a Integrated current densities were calculated using the EQE spectrum.
b Average PCE values determined using 10 individual devices are shown in parentheses.

PTB7-Th:IDTzCR
1.04
13.80
13.44
60.7
8.71 (8.55)
PTB7-Th:IDTCR
1.11
11.01
10.68
49.9
6.10 (5.97)
The external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra of IDTzCR and IDTCR based devices are shown in Fig. 3b. The photovoltaic devices have a clear response across the wavelength range of 350–780 nm, consistent with the trend of the UV-vis absorption spectra. However, higher EQE values in the range of 500–600 nm than 600–700 nm indicated that a larger amount of excitons was split from the acceptor than the donor, in accordance with a larger energy difference between HOMOs than LUMOs. The JSC values calculated by integration of the EQE spectrum are 13.44 mA cm−2 and 10.68 mA cm−2 for IDTzCR and IDTCR based devices, respectively, which are in agreement with those values obtained from the J–V curves. The charge transport mobility is critical for the fill factor of blend films, which is related to the planarity of the conjugated materials and solid state packing. The space charge limited current (SCLC) method was used to investigate the electron and hole mobilities of the blend films to probe the charge transport mechanism. The hole mobility was investigated with a device structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/active layer/MoO3/Ag, while electron mobility was investigated with a device structure of ITO/ZnO/active layer/Al. The hole and electron mobilities of PTB7-Th:IDTzCR blend films are estimated to be 3.10 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 1.61 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively, while those of PTB7-Th:IDTCR are 5.62 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 5.91 × 10−6 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively. Obviously, the PTB7-Th:IDTzCR blend films exhibited a more balanced electron/hole mobility due to the increase of the electron mobility, which may be ascribed to the enhancement of the planarity of the backbone of IDTzCR due to the existence of S⋯N conformation locks and the reduction of molecular reorganization energy (see Table S2, ESI). These observations are consistent with FFs of these two systems.
To further investigate the charge dynamics in the IDTzCR and IDTCR based devices, the dependencies of photocurrent density (Jph) on effective voltage (Veff), and JSC on light density (Plight) were measured. Fig. 3a displays the curves of Jphvs. Veff of both devices, where Jph is defined as the difference between the light current and dark current, and Veff represents the difference between applied voltage and the voltage at which Jph = 0. Saturation photocurrent (Jsat) of the IDTzCR based device was calculated to be 13.87 mA cm−2, larger than that of the IDTCR based device (11.33 mA cm−2). Furthermore, the exciton dissociation probabilities under short circuit current of IDTzCR and IDTCR based devices were calculated to be 96% and 94%, respectively. These results indicate that the process of charge collection is more efficient in IDTzCR based devices. Fig. 3d shows the curves of JSCvs. Plight, which can be described as JSC ∝ Pαlight, where the exponent α closing to 1.00 means that the charge recombination is negligible. The power-law exponent α for the IDTzCR based devices is 0.988, while that of IDTCR-based devices is 0.956, implying that the bimolecular recombination is more efficiently restrained in IDTzCR based devices. Steady-state photoluminescene spectroscopy (PL) was performed to probe the efficiency of exciton split. As shown in Fig. 3e and f, the donor and acceptor materials were excited at 700 nm and 600 nm, respectively. The high planarity and rigidity in IDTzCR, compared to IDTCR, endow the material with a high fluorescence quantum yield. In addition, the fluorescence intensity of blend films showed the negligible excited peak of the acceptor, which indicates that the exciton generated by the acceptor can be split quantitatively. However, the weak excited peak of the donor (764 nm) was observed in both blend films, whose quenching efficiency can be calculated to be 90% and 70% for PTB7-Th:IDTzCR and PTB7-Th:IDTCR blend films, respectively. These results demonstrate that a low LUMO difference between the donor and the acceptor can also result in a high exciton quenching efficiency in these non-fullerene organic solar cells. Moreover, a higher quenching efficiency of PTB7-Th:IDTzCR blend films may afford a higher FF, which is important to promote the PCE.
Atomic force microscopy (AFM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) were employed to investigate the morphology of the active layers. As shown in Fig. 4a and b, the PTB7-Th:IDTzCR blend film exhibited a root-mean-square (RMS) roughness of about 1.18 nm, which is essentially similar to that of the PTB7-th:IDTCR blend film (1.07 nm). The smooth morphology suggests excellent contact between the active layer and the interfacial layer, which is beneficial for charge transport from the active layer to the electrode. TEM images (Fig. 4c and d) showed that the PTB7-Th:IDTCR blend film exhibited a less homogeneous morphology with large domains. In contrast, the PTB7-Th:IDTzCR blend film presented a homogeneous morphology with small domains, which facilitates the exciton dissociation and charge transport, and thus resulting in a high FF and JSC.

In conclusion, two novel wide bandgap small molecular acceptors with an A–π–D–π–A structure were designed and synthesized for OSCs. Replacement of the π bridge thiophene group with the thiazole group can tune the planarity/rigidity of the backbone, photo-physical and charge transport properties of the materials, and morphologies of the blend films, due to the introduction of S⋯N conformational locks and the electron deficient thiazole moiety. As a result, the efficiency of the OSCs was greatly improved from 6.10% (IDTCR) to 8.71% (IDTzCR). Significantly, IDTCR based OSCs afforded an extremely low Eloss (∼0.47 eV), which is the lowest Eloss for “narrow-bandgap donor:wide-bandgap acceptor” systems. This contribution demonstrates a novel method to achieve high performing OSCs with low energy loss based on wide bandgap molecular acceptors and sheds lights on understanding the relationship between the materials characteristics and photovoltaic performances.


There are no conflicts to declare.


We acknowledge the NSFC (51303180, 21574135 and 21473214), Beijing Natural Science Foundation (2162043), One Hundred Talents Program of Chinese Academy of Sciences, and the University of Chinese Academy of Sciences for financial support. The DFT results described in this communication are obtained on the China Scientific Computing Gird (SCGrid).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7tc04669c
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017