 DOI: 10.1039/C7CP01936J
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 13679-13686


Yangyang
Du
,

Hongkun
Cai
*,

Yunhao
Wu
,

Zhixue
Xing
,

Zhenglong
Li
,

Jian
Xu
,

Like
Huang
,

Jian
Ni
,

Juan
Li
 and 

Jianjun
Zhang


College of Electronic Information and Optical Engineering, Nankai University, Key Laboratory of Opto-electronic Information Science and Technology for Ministry of Education, Tianjin, 300071, China. E-mail: caihongkun@nankai.edu.cn

Received
27th March 2017
, Accepted 24th April 2017
First published on 28th April 2017
In this work, the influence of oxygen vacancy defect (OVD) in compact titanium oxide (c-TiO2) on the performance of planar perovskite solar cells (p-PSCs) is investigated, and the possible mechanisms are also proposed. To meet our objective, anatase c-TiO2 thin films with various OVD concentrations are prepared by changing the oxygen flux during the DC magnetron sputtering process and are characterized by the intensity of defect signals in the X-ray photoelectron spectra. We conclude that abundant OVDs can trigger an obviously increased majority carrier accumulation zone at the metal oxide/perovskite interface and enhanced capacitance, thereby greatly deteriorating photogenerated carrier collection efficiency. A detailed analysis of the study results also reveals that the presence of OVD in the bulk and surface of c-TiO2 can slow down electronic carrier transport and lower its electron quasi-Fermi level under illumination, leading to the detrimental charge recombination in p-PSCs. Furthermore, we report a remarkably enhanced p-PSC efficiency via preparing c-TiO2 using high oxygen flux and subsequent ultraviolet ozone treatment. As a consequence, repeatable power conversion efficiency (PCE) is propelled to as high as 16.62%, coupled with negligible hysteresis and increased stability. These results provide a significant implication for further perfecting efficient and stable p-PSCs for their record efficiency.

Hybrid lead halide planar perovskite solar cells (p-PSCs) have constituted a promising solar cell competitor in the past few years for their relatively low cost, efficient power conversion efficiency (PCE), ease of fabrication, as well as flexible application, yielding a swarm in photovoltaics research activity. Nowadays, the most extensively studied p-PSC structure basically comprises fluorine-doped SnO2 glass (FTO), compact TiO2 (c-TiO2) thin film as electron transport layer (ETL), CH3NH3PbI3−xClx as sunlight capture material, organic spiro-OMeTAD as hole transport layer (HTL), and metallic silver (or gold) electrode (shown in Fig. 1a). A rapid succession of previous works concerning perovskite material synthesis methods, solvent engineering, and the exploration of carrier mechanisms that increase the PCE of PSCs to values greater than 22% have been conducted. Further progress beyond 25% are expected. Despite spectacular advances in cell efficiency, many observations of this system are still marginal because of the influence of microscopic characteristics in c-TiO2 on the performance of p-PSCs. This may result from the fact that most reported c-TiO2 films are prepared by wet processes such as sol–gel method, which are inadequate in accurately controlling their microscopic properties. However, c-TiO2 thin film possessing excellent chemical stability and optical transmittance in fact plays a critical role for high-efficiency p-PSC performance by selectively collecting electrons from CH3NH3PbI3−xClx layers and blocking holes at the same time to reduce carrier recombination. It is therefore not trivial to investigate how c-TiO2 characteristics affect the performance of p-PSCs and to better understand the related mechanisms.

Typically, defects induced by non-stoichiometry in c-TiO2, well known as oxygen vacancy defects (OVDs), can be easily produced during the process of high-temperature annealing (above 500 °C). Intensive studies have confirmed that OVD appears to be a detrimental factor for the further improvement of efficiency in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs). Zhang et al. argue that OVDs, acting as charge recombination centers, aggravate the carrier recombination in DSCs by introducing a defect energy level in the band gap of anatase TiO2. Tang et al. state that the achievement of high photo-voltage in DSCs is supposed to benefit from the reduction of OVD concentration, giving rise to improved electron transport property in TiO2 films. In addition, Peter et al. declare that deep electron traps caused by oxygen vacancy should reduce the splitting of injected electron quasi-Fermi levels corresponding to decreased open-circuit voltage (Voc) for DSCs. Worse still, some related reports also suggest that the presence of OVD could be responsible for the underdeveloped long-term UV stability of cells. Hence, enormous efforts have been proposed, such as treating TiO2 with oxygen plasma or optimizing the TiO2 surface to relieve the undesirable influence caused by OVDs and upgrade device performance. Considering the ever-so-close relationship between p-PSCs and DSCs in their working mechanisms, it is therefore reasonable to assume that OVDs have a significant effect on p-PSC performance as well.
In this article, sputtering technology is proposed for preparing c-TiO2 thin films on FTO glass with good uniformity over a large area. One knows that partial oxygen pressure can strongly affect the microscopic properties of sputtered c-TiO2 film. Hence, the experiments were performed on an anatase c-TiO2 (110) surface with various OVD concentrations by controlling the oxygen flux during the process of DC magnetron sputtering. The photovoltaic performance of p-PSCs based on the controlled c-TiO2 shows increased PCE of the p-PSCs from 12.51% to 15.4% with increasing oxygen flux value, along with negligible hysteresis effect and enhanced stability. By further treating the optimal c-TiO2 with ultraviolet ozone (UVO), the PCE is further promoted to 16.62%. The study results indicate that device performance is very sensitive to the OVD concentration of c-TiO2, and low OVD concentration of c-TiO2 thin film contributes to optimized device performance. The elimination of OVD in c-TiO2 alleviates the capacitance phenomena and accelerates electron transport, thereby facilitating the reduction of carrier recombination in the interface between c-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx and leading to an acceleration of carrier collection efficiency. The conclusions here provide a certain link between p-PSC performance and the OVD concentration of c-TiO2.

The p-PSCs were fabricated according to the construction shown in Fig. 1a. The etched FTO glasses were rinsed with ethanol and acetone (with 1:1 volume ratio) via sonication for 15 min, and then consequently rinsed with isopropanol for 15 min. Then, the c-TiO2 thin films were deposited onto the rinsed FTO substrates by reactive DC magnetron sputtering with different thicknesses by changing the sputtering time, ranging from 1 min to 4 min. Other sputtering conditions are listed in Table 1. The final c-TiO2 thickness of films was also carefully measured and are discussed in the following analysis. To enable the c-TiO2 films to possess various OVD concentrations, the value of oxygen flux, ranging from 2 Sccm to 6 Sccm, was solely altered. The target was a titanium metal (99.9% purity) of 10 cm diameter, and the discharge during the deposition was kept stable. After that, the resultant c-TiO2 films were completed by annealing at 500 °C for 30 min in nitrogen environment to attain the high crystallization and electron mobility of c-TiO2. Some practical pictures for c-TiO2via sputtering are shown in Fig. S1 (ESI). The 45 wt% CH3NH3PbI3−xClx solution was prepared by blending PbI2, PbCl2 and CH3NH3I (with 1:1:4 molar ratio) in N,N′-dimethylformamide (DMF). The CH3NH3PbI3−xClx films were formed by spinning the prepared solution onto the c-TiO2/FTO substrate at 3500 rpm. After a specific delay time, 50 μl orthogonal solvent (e.g., chlorobenzene) was quickly added to the substrate to promote fast nucleation and growth of crystals in the film. The films were then subjected to annealing at 100 °C for 60 min. Fig. 1b shows that the perovskite film was pinhole-free and the c-TiO2 surface was completely covered with large grain size that effectively removed the losses of photogenerated carriers due to shunting recombination between injected electrons in c-TiO2 and holes in the hole-transport layer. Meanwhile, it ensured a favorable sunlight capture, which is one of the prerequisites for high-efficiency p-PSCs. X-ray diffraction (XRD) showed three palpable peaks centered at 14.12°, 28.43°, and 31.8°, assigned to the (110), (220) and (330) lattice planes of tetragonal perovskite crystal structure, respectively (shown in Fig. S2, ESI). A spiro-OMeTAD solution was prepared by dissolving 72.3 mg of spiro-OMeTAD in 1 ml chlorobenzene, to which 18 μl of lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfony)imide (LiTFSI) solution (520 mg ml−1 acetonitrile) and 28 μl of 4-tert-butylpyidine were added. The HTL was prepared by spinning spiro-OMeTAD solution at 3500 rpm for 30 s. Finally, a 200 nm-thick silver counter electrode was deposited by thermal evaporation in high vacuum (under 10−4 Pa) atmosphere, and the area of p-PSCs was 0.06 cm2.

Oxygen flux (Sccm)
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
6.0
Total pressure (Pa)
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
Argon flux (Sccm)
10
10
10
10
10
10
Sputtering current (A)
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4

The sputtered c-TiO2 crystallization and phase identification were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD) (Philips PANalytical X’Pert Pro, Cu K). The morphology of sputtered c-TiO2 films was probed via atomic force microscopy (AFM). The charge states of fabricated c-TiO2 were further analyzed using X-ray photoelectron spectra (XPS). The device J–V characteristics of p-PSCs were measured with an Abet sun 2000 solar simulator under the illumination of AM 1.5G (100 mW cm−2). The external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectrum was tested to explore p-PSCs’ current response to sunlight spectrum. Impedance spectroscopy (IS) and cyclic voltammetry (CV) were operated to characterize the carrier transfer dynamics (VersaSTAT 4) for p-PSCs and the electrode state difference for c-TiO2. The film surface morphology was observed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (Hitachi SU8010). The Kelvin probe was used to determine the work function of sputtered c-TiO2 electrodes. The electrical conductivity measurement was carried out by photo-dark conductivity (PDC-40A). Hall mobility characterization was conducted using a Hall measurement system (Semishare). The contact angle was obtained by KRUSS (DSA100).


The phase identification of c-TiO2 films sputtered with monitored oxygen flux value was confirmed by XRD evolution patterns (shown in Fig. 2). Three preferential XRD diffraction peaks at 25.37°, 37.88° and 53.97° were detected, assigned to the (101), (004) and (105) planes, implying that all c-TiO2 samples exhibited anatase phase. Intriguingly, by closely investigating the high-resolution image of its (101) peak location, the fact that the (101) anatase peak exhibited a slight shift towards a lower diffraction angle with decreasing oxygen flux value was noted. It is universally acknowledged that oxygen binds the cations in TiO2 films. Therefore, we reasonably considered that the cation–cation overlap decreased due to underdeveloped oxygen content, leading to an enlargement in lattice constant of c-TiO2. The higher OVD concentration, the bigger lattice constant corresponding to lower diffraction angle, consistent with our results. Thus, the anatase c-TiO2 films were prepared by sputtering method and their OVD concentrations were also tuned with the variation of oxygen flux value.

As further information to substantiate our hypothesis, XPS were also recorded to verify the charge state of sputtered c-TiO2 films. Nevertheless, we only measured the samples fabricated by 2 Sccm, 4 Sccm and 6 Sccm oxygen flux as representatives. The survey XPS spectrum is shown in Fig. 3a, which implies that the sputtered c-TiO2 films mainly contained Ti and O elements and that the impurities were not evident. At the same time, Fig. 3b shows the high-resolution XPS of O1s. The shoulder peak at 532.5 eV appeared clearly, and it should be ascribed to the existence of Ti3+ state (Ti2O3) induced by OVD. Further comparing to the O1s spectra in relation to the Ti3+ state of controlled c-TiO2, it could be investigated that OVD was indeed suppressed by fabricating c-TiO2 film with 6 Sccm oxygen flux value. As a consequence, the confluence of findings from XRD and XPS verify that OVD concentration for c-TiO2 was well suppressed by utilizing high oxygen flux (6 Sccm). The higher oxygen flux value was attributed to lower OVD concentration in c-TiO2.
Apart from lattice structure and the OVD defects, the morphology of sputtered c-TiO2 films was also vital for efficient p-PSCs. The previous study had identified that a smoother surface could establish a better foundation for the perovskite to grow and facilitate a better electronic contact between c-TiO2 and perovskite. As shown in Fig. 4, the AFM images of sputtered c-TiO2 prepared with different oxygen flux values were measured. Also, the corresponding three-dimensional AFM images are shown in Fig. S3 (ESI). The thicknesses of c-TiO2 samples in Fig. 4 were 67 nm, 71 nm, 60 nm, 55 nm, 49 nm and 47 nm, respectively. A detectable difference in RMS roughness was observed among the controlled samples. The overall tendency firstly increased, and then decreased. The irregular changes for the 2 Sccm sample might result from its thicker film. Meanwhile, the grain size of c-TiO2 also presented an increased tendency with boosting the oxygen flux, ranging from 2 Sccm to 6 Sccm. During the experiment, we observed that the thickness of c-TiO2 prepared by different oxygen flux values had some differences even with the same sputtering time. The higher oxygen flux, such as 6 Sccm, facilitated a slow growth rate for c-TiO2 film, which enhanced the morphology characteristic of c-TiO2 ETL film. Theoretically, this behavior benefited from the reduction of interfacial defect state density, thereby promoting carrier collection efficiency. Thus, by the aforementioned analysis, we showed that the c-TiO2 film with high oxygen flux could possess beneficial quality, including good morphology and low OVD concentration.
Afterwards, devices based on the structure illustrated in Fig. 1a were fabricated to further investigate the effect of OVD concentration in c-TiO2 on the photovoltaic performance of p-PSCs. The J–V curves of p-PSCs are presented in Fig. 5a, and corresponding photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table 2. On the basis of the results shown in Table 2, we note that the p-PSC performance was highly dependent on the OVD concentration in c-TiO2 film. When oxygen flux value was changed from 2 Sccm to 6 Sccm, the PCE improved from 12.51% to 15.4%. All parameters driving PCE enhancement, including open-circuit voltage (Voc) and short-circuit current density (Jsc), were promoted, apparently due to an increased fill factor (FF). The trend was that the device based on c-TiO2 (6 Sccm) generated FF and Voc that were 6.25% and 70 mV higher than those generated by c-TiO2 (2 Sccm), respectively. And the improvement of Jsc was moreover verified by the external quantum efficiency (EQE) measurements (shown in Fig. 5b) exhibiting uniform tendency, measured by J–V curves. In our case, the differences among all specimens were only in the oxygen flux value for fabrication of c-TiO2. Hence, it was rationalized that the increased device performance was closely related to the characteristics of c-TiO2. Besides, confirmation of J–V hysteresis for p-PSCs was also investigated by scanning the devices with both reverse direction (Voc to Jsc) and forward direction (Jsc to Voc). Results showed that all the samples had negligible influence. Finally, the influence of c-TiO2 film thickness on p-PSC performance was investigated. As shown in Table S1 (ESI), the thickness of c-TiO2 film prepared with 6 Sccm oxygen flux could be tuned by altering the sputtering time. The optimal photovoltaic performance for p-PSCs was attained by means of employing 2 min sputtering time (shown in Fig. S4 and Table S2, ESI). A thin c-TiO2 (15 nm) film resulted in poor barrier against FTO and CH3NH3PbI3−xClx contact, generating numerous charge recombinations. In turn, thick c-TiO2 (above 47 nm) film was responsible for increased series resistance due to the inferior conductivity of c-TiO2 film.
Samples

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
2 Sccm and RS
0.98
19.33
66
12.51
4 Sccm and RS
0.99
19.60
71.8
13.94
6 Sccm and RS
1.05
20.30
72.25
15.40
2 Sccm and FS
0.95
19.28
64.8
11.87
4 Sccm and FS
0.95
19.56
71.3
13.25
6 Sccm and FS
1.03
20.27
69.1
14.63
In order to explore the basis for enhanced PCE with decreasing OVD concentration in c-TiO2, the interpretation of capacitance effect was put forward. The charge transport mechanism for p-PSCs is proposed via the schematic diagram shown in Fig. 6. In principle, the photogenerated electrons are extracted into the conduction band (CB) of c-TiO2 (shown in Fig. 6a). Then, the extracted electrons are independently transferred from the CB to the FTO electrode, resulting in higher Voc as well as lower charge recombination. Nevertheless, it was widely proved that OVD in TiO2 caused defect levels locating at 0.4–1.18 eV below the CB of c-TiO2. As shown in Fig. 6b, once electrons are injected into c-TiO2, some of them could be trapped by the OVD level, making it difficult to escape from the OVD because of the large energy gap between the CB and oxygen vacancy states. As we know, the conceivable recombination pathways for photogenerated carriers are interfacial recombination or bulk material recombination resulting from poor charge extraction increasing the carrier density at the bulk material. Thus, the trapped electrons in the pitfalls are partially transferred to FTO electrode through the defect energy level by trapping and detrapping means, which slow down electron transport ability. In addition, the electrons in pitfalls lead to the increased capacitance effect, resulting in accelerated recombination with holes remaining in the CH3NH3PbI3−xClx layer. Moreover, due to the trapped electrons filling the OVD energy level, charge accumulation depresses the quasi-Fermi energy level for extracted electrons that was attributed to the Voc value for p-PSCs.
Then, to substantiate our aforementioned assumption about how oxygen vacancy affects the entire performance of p-PSCs, impedance spectroscopy (IS) for p-PSCs was performed. IS was extensively utilized for the characterization of different photovoltaic devices and consequently provided abundant and useful information on the device working mechanism as a function of frequency change. High-frequency section (low Z′) corresponds to contact resistance of the perovskite/c-TiO2 interface or device series resistance. Fig. 7a shows typical Nyquist plots of p-PSCs measured under 1 Sun illumination at forward bias (1 V). The contact resistance indeed exhibited a detectable tendency of decline with oxygen flux increase, which should be attributed to the fact that the resistance and electron mobility of sputtered c-TiO2 could be optimized as the OVD concentration decreased (shown in Fig. S5 and S6, ESI). On the other hand, low/intermediate frequency feature (high Z′) was widely attributed to the recombination resistance within the perovskite/c-TiO2 layer. High recombination resistance is crucial to high-efficiency p-PSCs suppressing the accumulation of charge, which is inversely proportional to the recombination rate. Consequently, we calculate the recombination resistance of p-PSCs based on sputtered c-TiO2 with various oxygen flux values according to the model reported in ref. 22. The recombination resistance values were obtained to be 606 Ohm, 606 Ohm and 835.6 Ohm for 2 Sccm, 4 Sccm and 6 Sccm, respectively. As a result, the reduced series resistance and enhanced recombination resistance for p-PSCs based on sputtered c-TiO2 with 6 Sccm oxygen flux gave rise to desirable carrier transport and collection, in accord with the aforementioned viewpoint. This was because the charge loss of carriers by recombination pathway is tampered with decreasing OVD concentration of c-TiO2, facilitating the FF and Jsc increase.
Meanwhile, the electron transport differences among c-TiO2/FTO electrodes with various OVD concentrations were also probed. Fig. 7b shows the typical CV of c-TiO2/FTO electrodes in the 1 M Na2SO4 solution. It could be observed that the current situation for varied electrodes presented slight variation with increasing oxygen flux value. Scanning the electrode potential in anodic current direction, the anodic current started to flow at −0.41 V under 6 Sccm, whereas under 2 Sccm and 4 Sccm, the current started to flow at a lower potential (−0.35 V and −0.38 V, respectively). It was illustrated that the electrode for 6 Sccm had an enhanced oxidation capability corresponding to the ease of releasing electrons and its transport ability. Meanwhile, lower bias voltage for the electrode based on 6 Sccm suggested that its electron quasi-Fermi energy level moved more positively toward the vacuum level, agreeing well with our conclusion and the results extracted from Kelvin probe measurement (shown in Table S3, ESI). These results accounted for the fact that with the suppression of OVD by high oxygen flux, the electron Fermi energy level was upgraded. This was because the filling degrees were depressed due to the reduction of OVD defect energy level resulting in a lower capacitance effect presence. On the basis of the above analysis, the reduction of OVD in c-TiO2 by high oxygen flux and its desirable effect on p-PSC performance are unveiled.
Finally, judging from previous reports, we further optimized the sputtered c-TiO2 with 6 Sccm oxygen flux via UVO treatment for p-PSC application, which is well known as an effective way to optimize the surface property of film. It could not only cut down the work function of sputtered c-TiO2 by eliminating oxygen vacancy defects, but also bring about an enhanced interface adhesion between c-TiO2 and CH3NH3PbI3−xClx. To demonstrate our statement, comparative characterization between c-TiO2 films was conducted. c-TiO2 fabricated via 6 Sccm oxygen flux possessed the work function value of 3.8 eV. However, after UVO treatment, its work function was 3.77 eV, which indeed benefited from the reduction of energy losses for carrier transport and the improvement of device Voc. Furthermore, the interface adhesion of c-TiO2 could directly determine the subsequent CH3NH3PbI3−xClx growth. Consequently, the contact angle measurements for c-TiO2 on FTO were observed as well. Obviously, the contact angle for UVO- treated c-TiO2 attained more favorable interface adhesion (23.13° vs. 28.56°, shown in Fig. S7, ESI), implying the superior interface adhesion characteristic. As shown in Fig. 8a and b, a final efficiency as high as 16.52% was obtained. Moreover, the stability of controlled p-PSCs stored in dark atmosphere was recorded by measuring the device every four hours (shown in Fig. 8c). Surprisingly, the PCE could be even higher than its original value when the cell was measured 60 hours before, which might be partially attributed to the merits such as efficient oxidation for HTL to enhance conductivity and interfacial improvement between silver electrode and HTL. In addition, the efficiency of p-PSCs still retained 50% of its original efficiency value, suggesting the good device stability compared with our previous reported result. We assumed that the enhanced stability should be ascribed to the reduction of OVD. Just as in the reported conclusion, the OVD could increase the photocatalysis ability of c-TiO2 by absorbing the UV light, resulting in the migration of oxygen vacancy defects and poor p-PSC stability.

In conclusion, we have directly observed a correlation between photovoltaic performance of p-PSCs with the OVD concentration in c-TiO2 films, demonstrating that enhanced device performance can be obtained with the reduction of OVD concentration. By varying the oxygen flux value during the sputtering process, the microscopic characteristics of c-TiO2 films, including OVD concentration value, RMS, quasi-Fermi level, electron mobility etc., have been controlled, establishing a better foundation for the perovskite to grow and facilitate better electronic contact between c-TiO2 and perovskite to enhance carrier collection efficiency. Moreover, enhanced PCE and stability of p-PSCs via preparing c-TiO2 with high oxygen flux (6 Sccm) as well as UVO treatment are achieved, as high as 16.62% and with feeble J–V hysteresis. Moreover, the origin of how OVD affects the p-PSC performance is also discussed. Based on these results, a more promising improvement of p-PSCs could be realized, offering an effective clue to further promote p-PSC performance.


The authors declare no competing financial interest.


We appreciate financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 61504068) and Natural Science Foundation of Tianjin (Grant No. 16JCYBJC16800).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Some practical pictures for c-TiO2via sputtering with various oxygen flux. X-ray diffraction (XRD) for the identification of CH3NH3PbI3−xClx film. Three-dimensional AFM topography images for c-TiO2via sputtering with various oxygen flux. J–V curve performance in light for p-PSCs based on sputtered c-TiO2 as the function of sputtering time. The work function for c-TiO2versus the variation of oxygen flux. The electrical conductivity and hall mobility measurement for sputtered c-TiO2 film. Contact angle measurements between H2O and c-TiO2. See DOI: 10.1039/c7cp01936j
This journal is © the Owner Societies 2017