 DOI: 10.1039/D2CC02346F
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2022, 58, 7940-7943


Xinxing
Yin
*,

Jiaxing
Song
,

Lin
Hu
,

Yingzhi
Jin
,

Lei
Lu
,

Zhen
Su
 and 

Zaifang
Li
*

China-Australia Institute for Advanced Materials and Manufacturing (IAMM), Jiaxing University, Jiaxing, 314001, China. E-mail: xxyin@zjxu.edu.cn; zaifang.li@zjxu.edu.cn

College of Biological, Chemical Science and Chemical Engineering, Jiaxing University, Jiaxing, 314001, China

Received
26th April 2022
, Accepted 17th June 2022
First published on 18th June 2022
Two novel donor–acceptor–donor (D–A–D) type dopant-free hole transport materials (HTMs), named BDD-T and BTT-T, were developed and applied in perovskite solar cells. An impressive power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 20.9% was acquired, which is one of the highest PCEs for D–A–D type dopant-free HTMs.

Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have attracted considerable attention due to their outstanding photovoltaic performance. The certified PCE of PSCs has quickly increased from 3.9% to 25.7% since 2009, which can almost compete with that of silicon-based solar cells (26.7%). Moreover, the facile processing capability and low fabrication cost make PSCs a promising game changer for next-generation photovoltaic solutions. Before the real commercialization of PSCs, the stability issue is a key problem that needs to be solved. In a PSC device, HTMs play an important role in blocking the electrons, and extracting and transporting the holes as well as protecting the perovskite absorbers from moisture and diffused ions, which is crucial for long-term stability. Currently, spiro-OMeTAD is still the only choice for top-performing PSCs with a certified PCE of over 25%. However, the device stability can be greatly influenced by the dopants used in spiro-OMeTAD. Because of the low hole mobility (∼10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1), hygroscopic dopants such as lithium salts are required for improving the hole transport properties of spiro-OMeTAD. However, the moisture and ionic diffusion/migration issues brought by these dopants will accelerate the device degradation, resulting in a shorter lifespan. Although many strategies including optimizing doping methods, molecular modification and the use of PTAA as an alternative have been used to overcome the problems mentioned above, the resultant increase in fabrication complexity and total cost makes them unsuitable for commercialization. Therefore, the development of efficient dopant-free HTMs is urgently needed.

According to previous results, the triphenylamine (TPA) end groups of spiro-OMeTAD are responsible for the hopping-based hole injection and transportation, while the central orthogonal spirofluorene unit is responsible for weak intermolecular interactions and poor hole transport. Therefore, replacing the spirofluorene core with a planar unit with good π–π stacking is a promising strategy for dopant-free HTM design. Another promising method is to introduce electron-withdrawing groups to form D–A alternating structures, which is beneficial for intramolecular charge delocalization and intermolecular interactions, resulting in enhanced hole transport. Based on this knowledge, it is easy to trigger an optimized design strategy by introducing a planar electron-withdrawing group as the central core. By taking advantage of both planar structures and electron withdrawing groups, HTMs with a planar acceptor core are expected to have enhanced hole mobilities and device efficiencies. Surprisingly, only several D–A–D type HTMs have been developed so far, and few of them are dopant-free (see Table S2, ESI).
In this work, two novel D–A–D type dopant-free HTMs have been developed with a methoxy-substituted TPA as the D end group and 1,3-bis(4-(2-ethylhexyl)-thiophen-2-yl)-5,7-bis(2-ethylhexyl)benzo[1,2-c:4,5-c′]-dithiophene-4,8-dione (BDD) or dithieno[3′,2′:3,4;2′′,3′′:5,6]benzo[1,2-c][1,2,5]thiadiazole (BTT) as the central A core (Fig. 1a and b). It has been proven in organic photovoltaics that both BDD and BTT groups have a planar π-conjugation, good electron-withdrawing capabilities and appropriate energy levels, making them suitable for constructing D–A–D type dopant-free HTMs. BDD-T and BTT-T show similar highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) levels around −4.9 eV and high hole mobilities over 5 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1. N-i-p type PSCs based on dopant-free BTT-T deliver an impressive PCE of 20.9% with a high open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 1.14 V, a short circuit current (JSC) of 23.4 mA cm−2 and a fill factor (FF) of 78.9%. To the best of our knowledge, this PCE is one of the highest PCEs for D–A–D type dopant-free HTMs.
As shown in Fig. 1a and b, planar electron acceptors including BDD and BTT are introduced as the central A core with a thiophene or alkylthiophene used as a π-linker. It is clearly shown in electrostatic surface potential (ESP) figures that BDD and BTT groups together with thiophene bridges show negative potentials while TPA groups exhibit positive potentials. The S atom of the thiophene bridge shows a more negative potential than BTT-T, indicating a strong intramolecular S⋯O interaction between the carbonyl and adjacent thiophene units. This is expected to enhance the planarity of the BDD-T molecular framework. Moreover, the electron-rich property of the central area may lead to perovskite passivation by forming coordination bonds between the Lewis base and the under-coordinated Pb2+ ions. The optimized electronic geometries and properties of BDD-T and BTT-T by density functional theory (DFT) using the Gaussian 16 program are shown in Fig. S9–S11 (ESI). Thiadiazole units are known to have better intermolecular π–π interactions than their BDD counterpart. Thiadiazole is connected to the fused thiophene segments that increased the rigidity, planarity, and π-conjugation length. The LUMO isosurface clearly demonstrates that a major portion of the electron density involves in π-delocalization. On the other hand, thiophene flanked BDD core abstracts more electron density. Additionally, the calculated HOMO level of BDD-T (−4.51 eV) is slightly higher than that of BTT-T (−4.59 eV). All these simulation results indicate that BTT-T may have a higher hole mobility and a better energy level alignment with perovskites than BDD-T.
The synthesis routes of BDD-T and BTT-T are shown in the ESI (Scheme S1 and S2). Generally, a Pd catalyzed Suzuki or Stille coupling reaction was carried out between the D end unit and A cores. Detailed synthesis procedures are given in the ESI. The chemical structures of intermediate and target HTMs were carefully characterized (Fig. S1–S8, ESI).
As shown in Fig. 2a, BDD-T demonstrates a maximum absorption peak located at 500 nm while the value for BTT-T is 479 nm in chloroform solutions. Both BDD-T and BTT-T show a 13 nm maximum peak bathochromic shifting when tested in solid films. The band cutting edges of BDD-T and BTT-T are located at 619 and 572 nm, leading to a calculated bandgap of 2.00 and 2.17 eV, respectively. The thermal properties of two HTMs were investigated through thermogravimetric analysis (TGA, Fig. 2b) and differential scanning calorimetry (DSC, Fig. 2c). The thermal decomposition temperature of BDD-T and BTT-T at 5% weight loss (Td) reached 394 and 439 °C, respectively, indicating good thermal stabilities of the two novel HTMs. The obvious glass transition can be found at 68 and 82 °C in Fig. 2c, revealing the amorphous nature of BDD-T and BTT-T, respectively. As proven in the literature, amorphous HTMs with high thermal stabilities are expected to form stable and uniform organic films.
Both cyclic voltammetry (CV) and ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) were used to determine the energy levels of new HTMs. According to the CV plots (Fig. S12, ESI), the calculated HOMO levels for BDD-T and BTT-T are −5.15 and −5.18 eV, respectively. Considering the fact that HTMs function as solid films in real PSCs, the UPS method was applied to obtain the ionization potentials (IPs) of both HTMs. As shown in Fig. 2d, the IPs of BDD-T and BTT-T were calculated to be −4.90 and −4.94 eV, respectively. Both CV and UPS results indicate the slightly deeper HOMO level of BTT-T, which agrees well with the previous DFT simulation result. Usually, a deeper HOMO level of HTMs contributes to a reduced VOC loss.

Fig. 3a shows the energy level diagram of our n-i-p PSCs. Both BDD-T and BTT-T show suitable HOMO and LUMO levels for extracting holes as well as blocking electrons. To investigate the hole mobility of BDD-T and BTT-T films, the space-charge-limited-current (SCLC) method was adopted, and the SCLC curves are collected and presented in Fig. 3b. The estimated hole mobility of BTT-T is 9.04 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, which is almost twice that of BDD-T (5.08 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1). This higher hole mobility is expected to help BTT-T-based PSCs deliver a better device performance due to the improved hole transport and reduced recombination loss. It is also worth noting that the hole mobility of spiro-OMeTAD is only around 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1, which is one order of magnitude lower than those of BDD-T and BTT-T. According to the literature, most dopant-free HTMs show hole mobilities higher than 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1. Therefore, these two newly synthesized HTMs are expected to function as efficient HTMs without dopants.
Besides hole mobilities, the hole extraction and transport properties at the perovskite/HTM interface are also crucial for the whole hole transfer process. Steady-state photoluminescence (PL) and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) measurements were conducted to probe the charge transfer properties. The PL results depicted in Fig. 3c show over 90% PL quenching when two dopant-free HTMs were coated on a perovskite surface. Compared with BDD-T, BTT-T shows more significant PL quenching, probably indicating more efficient hole transfer from perovskites to HTMs. The relatively weak PL quenching of the BDD-T-based sample may be attributed to the poor surface contact and relatively low hole mobility, leading to inefficient wiping out of holes from the contact interface. The TRPL test (Fig. 3d) was further performed to obtain the charge dynamics. A bi-exponential decay model was used to fit the TRPL curves to obtain an average carrier lifetime. The calculated average carrier lifetimes for pristine perovskite, perovskite/BDD-T and perovskite/BTT-T are 1084, 18, and 17 ns, respectively. The much shortened lifetime of BDD-T and BTT-T samples indicates a fast and efficient charge transfer at the perovskite/HTM interface. Similarly, the perovskite sample covered with BTT-T shows a slightly better hole transfer than that with BDD-T. According to the theoretical and experimental results discussed earlier, BTT-T shows a more favorable dipole orientation, a deeper HOMO level, a higher hole mobility and better hole transfer properties than BDD-T, making it more suitable for HTM applications.
The photovoltaic performance of BDD-T and BTT-T was further investigated in n-i-p PSCs with a device structure of fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO)/SnO2/C60-SAM/MA0.7FA0.3PbI3/phenethylammonium iodide (PEAI)/HTM/Au. The optimal fabrication condition for BDD-T and BTT-T is spin-coating from a chlorobenzene solution with a concentration of 15 mg mL−1 at 3000 rpm for 60 s. The measured HTM film thickness was around 40 nm. With a passivation of PEAI, BTT-T-based PSCs delivered a champion PCE of 20.9% with a VOC of 1.14 V, a JSC of 23.4 mA cm−2 and a FF of 78.9% under the reverse voltage scan. The same device showed a PCE of 19.9% with a VOC of 1.12 V, a JSC of 23.2 mA cm−2 and a FF of 76.7% under a forward voltage scan. This efficiency is much higher than that of BDD-T-based PSCs with a maximum PCE of 16.3 (14.7)%, a VOC of 1.12 (1.06) V, a JSC of 23.3 (23.3) mA cm−2 and a FF of 62.8 (59.6)% under the reverse (forward) voltage scan (Fig. 4a). As far as we know, this PCE performance of BTT-T is among the best values for D–A–D type dopant-free HTMs used in n-i-p PSCs (Table S2, ESI). Fig. 4b presents the external quantum efficiency (EQE) curves with integrated current densities. The integrated current density values from EQE curves are 22.7 and 22.8 mA cm−2 for BDD-T and BTT-T-based devices, respectively, which match well with the JSCs measured under one sun illumination (AM 1.5G).
To check the device performance under continuous illumination, the stabilized power output of unencapsulated champion PSCs was tested in air for 600 s (Fig. 4c). BTT-T delivered a stable PCE output of 20.5%, while the efficiency of the BDD-T-based device was only 14.9%. The trend in steady-state output efficiencies agrees well with J–V results. The long-term stability was also measured at intervals. The unencapsulated devices were kept and tested in ambient air with a relative humidity of around 20% for 60 days. As shown in Fig. 4d, PSCs based on dopant-free HTMs showed significantly improved stabilities compared with doped spiro-OMeTAD-based PSCs. After an aging test of 60 days, both BDD-T and BTT-T devices retained over 85% of their initial PCEs. By sharp contrast, the spiro-OMeTAD device has a reduced photovoltaic response, mainly attributed to the perovskite degradation caused by hydrophilic additives and dopants. To further study the charge transport and recombination dynamics, the light intensity-dependent JSC and VOC are measured as shown in Fig. 4e and f. The fitted slopes (α) of JSC on the light intensity at a double logarithmic scale are 0.89 and 0.96 for BDD-T and BTT-T devices, respectively. The closer α value of the BTT-T device to 1 indicates a more efficient charge collection before recombination. According to the slopes of VOC against light intensity, the slopes for BDD-T and BTT-T devices are calculated to be 1.89 and 1.74 kT/e, respectively. As the trap-assisted Shockley–Read–Hall recombination dominates in a device with a slope ranging from 1 to 2 kT/e, a more suppressed trap-assisted recombination may occur in the BTT-T based device.
In summary, two novel D–A–D type dopant-free HTMs, BDD-T and BTT, have been synthesized with planar A cores. By appropriately choosing the A units, n-i-p PSCs based on dopant-free BTT-T show a high PCE of 20.9% with good long-term stabilities, which is one of the highest efficiencies for D–A–D type dopant-free HTMs. This work provides a useful method and a promising candidate for developing dopant-free HTMs, which is important for the commercialization of PSCs.
The authors acknowledge the financial support from the Jiaxing Public Welfare Research Program (No. 2020AY10011, No. 2019 AY11007), the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (No. 2021M702317) and the Zhejiang Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. LQ21B020009, No. LGJ22B040001).

There are no conflicts to declare.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Details of the synthesis and characterization of BDD-T and BTT-T. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2cc02346f
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022