 DOI: 10.1039/C9TA01111K
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 9822-9830


Kun
Yang
,

Qiaogan
Liao
,

Chang Woo
Koh
,

Jianhua
Chen
,

Mengyao
Su
,

Xin
Zhou
,

Yumin
Tang
,

Yang
Wang
,

Youming
Zhang
,

Han Young
Woo
* and 

Xugang
Guo
*

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology (SUSTech), No. 1088, Xueyuan Road, Shenzhen, Guangdong 518055, China. E-mail: guoxg@sustc.edu.cn

Department of Chemistry, Korea University, Seoul 136-713, Republic of Korea. E-mail: hywoo@korea.ac.kr

State Key Laboratory and Institute of Elemento-Organic Chemistry, Centre of Nanoscale Science and Technology, Key Laboratory of Functional Polymer Materials, College of Chemistry, Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, China

School of Materials Science and Engineering, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin 150001, China

Key Laboratory of Optoelectronic Devices and Systems of Ministry of Education and Guangdong Province, College of Optoelectronic Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, 518060, China

Received
28th January 2019
, Accepted 23rd March 2019
First published on 25th March 2019
A new indacenodithiophene-based acceptor–donor–acceptor (A–D–A) type nonfullerene acceptor material ITBTC, featuring a conjugation-extended benzo[b]thiophene-fused end group, was designed and synthesized. Compared to the well known phenyl-fused ITIC acceptor containing a 2-(3-oxo-2,3-dihydroinden-1-ylidene)malononitrile (IC) end group, incorporation of an additional electron-rich thiophene into the IC moiety decreased the electron-accepting strength of the end group and increased the intermolecular interactions of ITBTC molecules. As a result, ITBTC exhibited an elevated lowest unoccupied molecular orbital, an improved electron mobility, and a more favorable blend film morphology. Despite its slightly blue-shifted absorption, the photocurrent of ITBTC-based devices was well-maintained due to the extra absorption band in the short wavelength range, which is induced by its conjugation-extended end group. Benefitting from these characteristics, the ITBTC-based solar cells achieved an enhanced power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 10.99% with a simultaneously improved open-circuit voltage (Voc, 0.94 V) and fill factor (FF, 71.3%) and well-maintained short-circuit current density (Jsc, 16.37 mA cm−2), compared to those of the ITIC-based devices (PCE of 9.53%). These results suggest that extending the π-conjugation of end group through thiophene incorporation is an efficient approach for optimizing both the energy level alignment and intermolecular interaction of the acceptor materials while maintaining their efficient light-harvesting ability. Our study also demonstrates the great potential of the new benzo[b]thiophene-fused end group for constructing high-performance nonfullerene acceptors and provided insight into overcoming the trade-off between Jsc and Voc to realize simultaneously enhanced photovoltaic parameters.

With the rapid development of new material design strategies, materials processing, and device fabrication techniques, the past several years have witnessed unprecedented progress in organic solar cells (OSCs). The state-of-the-art power conversion efficiency (PCE) has been substantially boosted to over 14% in binary OSC devices to date, suggesting their great potential in realizing the next-generation of flexible and printable solar panels. Traditionally, due to their high electron affinity, isotropic electron transport, and large electron mobility, fullerene derivatives have dominated in OSCs as the electron accepting materials to form a bulk heterojunction (BHJ) active layer with a polymeric donor. However, fullerene based OSCs suffer from several distinctive drawbacks, such as poor optical absorption, limited molecular/electronic structure tunability, and low morphological stabilities, imposing severe limitations for PCE improvement and practical applications of OSCs. Therefore, incremental endeavors have been devoted to developing high-performance nonfullerene acceptors (NFAs) with improved physicochemical properties. In such a context, many different types of NFAs have been designed and synthesized based on various electron-deficient moieties, such as perylene diimide (PDI), naphthalene diimide (NDI), diketopyrrolopyrrole (DPP), B←N bridged bipyridine, and 2-(3-oxo-2,3-dihydroinden-1-ylidene)malononitrile (IC), which show superior photovoltaic performances that approach and even surpass their fullerene-based OSCs by a big margin.

Among the miscellaneous NFAs developed to date, the acceptor–donor–acceptor (A–D–A) type fused-ring electron acceptors (FREAs) with IC-based end groups represent the most promising alternatives to fullerene derivatives. Benefitting from their various advantageous features including broad absorption in the long wavelength region of the solar spectrum, readily tunable Frontier molecular orbital (FMO) energy levels, and significantly reduced voltage losses, a great improvement in PCEs for NFA-based OSCs has been achieved, recently. A large number of new A–D–A FREAs have been developed using the molecular engineering approach based on the seminal ITIC molecule, including extending the conjugation length, altering the ladderization pattern of the rigid aromatic core, modifying the peripheral side chains on the fused ring, and optimizing the end-capped IC groups with different electron donating/withdrawing substituents. Among them, the modification of IC-based end groups provides a straightforward and powerful approach to optimize the FREA properties due to the essential role of these strong electron-withdrawing end groups in determining their optoelectronic properties and self-assembly characteristics. For example, the electron-withdrawing ability of end groups not only affects intramolecular charge transfer within the A–D–A framework and hence the bandgap but also plays a decisive role in tuning the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energy levels of the FREA materials. More importantly, while the compact stacking between the end groups is believed to be beneficial for providing the major electron transport pathways within the active layer in the devices. The interactions between end group and the donor polymer can also enhance the exciton dissociation at the D/A interfaces. Thus, developing A–D–A FREAs with new end groups having appropriate energetics and packing properties is crucial for enhancing their photovoltaic performance.
However, in spite of the abundant options in selecting different (hetero)arenes, such as phenyl, thiophene, selenophene, pyrrole, silole, and thienothiophene, and ring fusion with up to 11 rings linearly fused in a row to alter their central cores, the tailoring freedom of the terminal IC moiety of A–D–A FREAs was still severely restricted. As summarized in Scheme S1, only a few available IC-based end groups have been reported in the literature, with most of them having been prepared by either changing the H atom on the phenyl moiety to other functional groups, such as F, Cl, methyl, and methoxy, or replacing the phenyl ring with other aromatic units, which only have a few examples reported yet, such as naphthalene and thiophene. In addition, whether one modifies the substitution group or replaces the aromatic moiety of the IC end groups, a trade-off often arises between the short-circuit current density (Jsc) and open-circuit voltage (Voc). The increased electron-withdrawing nature of the fluorinated IC decreased the bandgap of FREAs with increased light absorption, but lowered the LUMO level of the FREA, resulting in a smaller Voc. Conversely, when the phenyl-fused ICs were replaced with thiophene-fused ones, despite an elevated LUMO level and enhanced Voc was achieved, a decrease in Jsc was observed due to the blue-shifted absorption of the resulting FREAs, leading to reduced efficiencies. Recently, Cheng et al. reported the replacement of the phenyl moiety of IC unit with thieno[3,2-b]thiophene to render a new TTC end group, resulting in the FREA material BDCPDT-TTC. Accompanying the upshifted FMO energy levels and intensified absorption at shorter wavelengths, Voc and Jsc were simultaneously enhanced in the BDCPDT-TTC-based OSC devices. However, the FF of the BDCPDT-TTC based OSCs is quite small (<62%), likely due to their over-aggregated domain sizes induced by the excessively strong intermolecular S⋯S interactions between TTC end groups. Therefore, further efforts to design more suitable electron-withdrawing end groups for constructing high-performance NFAs are still greatly needed, since simultaneous enhancement of the Voc, Jsc, and FF values is essential to boost the solar cell performance.
Based on these considerations, herein we report the design and synthesis of a novel nonfullerene acceptor, ITBTC, based on a conjugation-extended benzo[b]thiophene-fused end group (BTC) by simply incorporating a thiophene ring into the IC unit (Fig. 1). The addition of an electron-rich thiophene decreased the electron-accepting strength of the end group relative to the well-studied phenyl-fused acceptor ITIC, thus affording an elevated FMO energy level, which can yield enlarged Voc in the ITBTC-based OSC devices. Benefitting from its enlarged π-conjugated end group and increased intermolecular (S⋯S) chalcogen interactions,ITBTC exhibited a reduced π–π stacking distance and better intermixing with the donor polymer, resulting in an improved and more balanced charge transport capability and promoting charge separation. Compared to that of ITIC, the conjugation-extended end group also induces an additional absorption transition and improved absorption for ITBTC at shorter wavelengths (ca. 320–570 nm), thus avoiding the Jsc reduction caused by its slightly blue-shifted absorptions. As a result, the PBDB-T:ITBTC solar cells showed an enhanced PCE of 10.99%, compared to the PCE of 9.53% of the ITIC-based control devices, with simultaneously improved Voc and FF and well-maintained Jsc. Our results show the great potential of the new BTC end group for constructing high-performance NFAs with extended end group π-conjugation and also provide insights into overcoming the trade-off between Jsc and Voc in solar cells through end group engineering of A–D–A NFAs in order to realize simultaneously enhanced photovoltaic parameters, which are critical for maximizing the PCEs of organic solar cells.

The chemical structures and synthetic procedures for the benzo[b]thiophene fused BTC end group and FREA molecule ITBTC are shown in Scheme 1. Through chlorination followed by an AlCl3-catalyzed intramolecular electrophilic acylation reaction, the starting material benzo[b]thiophene-2-carboxylic acid (compound 1) can be readily transformed to the diketo-functionalized compound 3 with a total yield of 37% in this two-step procedure, which is then treated with malononitrile to afford a new BTC end group in a 68% yield. Notably, the BTC consists of two regioisomers with similar polarity and retention time in the silica gel column, leading to an inseparable mixture for the following Knoevenagel condensation with IT-CHO to afford ITBTC in a yield of 61%. Based on the commercial starting material benzo[b]thiophene-2-carboxylic acid, the overall yield to the final acceptor material ITBTC is 16%. For better understanding the device performance of our new acceptor ITBTC and studying the structure–property correlations, the acceptor ITIC was purchased from a commercial source (Vizuchem. Inc., Shanghai, China) and used as the control. All the intermediates and the final product ITBTC were fully characterized with 1H NMR, 13C NMR, and high-resolution mass spectrometry (HR-MS) techniques. ITBTC exhibits good solubility in common organic solvents such as chloroform, chlorobenzene, and o-dichlorobenzene. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) results for ITBTC (Fig. S1) showed a thermal decomposition temperature (5% weight loss) of 397 °C, suggesting a high thermal stability of the new acceptor molecule, which should be beneficial to device fabrication and optimization over a wide temperature range.

The optical properties of the new acceptor ITBTC in solution and in film were investigated using UV-Vis absorption spectroscopy. As shown in Fig. 1c, ITBTC exhibited a strong and broad absorption in the range of 500–700 nm in chloroform with an absorption maximum at 661 nm, which is blue-shifted by 17 nm compared to that of the ITIC solution. Such hypsochromic absorption of ITBTC relative to ITIC is in good agreement with the decreased electron-withdrawing capability of the new BTC end group in comparison to that of the IC terminal group, which leads to a reduced push–pull interaction within the acceptor molecule. Both acceptors showed bathochromically-shifted absorptions in film relative than those in solution (Fig. 1d). Although a similarly hypsochromic shifted absorption was still observed, the ITBTC film exhibited a much broader and intensified absorption range than the ITIC film, with a remarkably larger full width at half maximum (FWHM) of 215 nm, compared to 132 nm for the ITIC film. In addition, due to the optical transition of BTC moiety (Fig. S2), an extra absorption band at 320–570 nm was induced for the ITBTC film, resulting in a wide optical absorption coverage from the near ultraviolet to the near infrared region (320–780 nm) that shows the advantages of enlarging the π-conjugation in the end group. Consequently, despite of its slightly blue-shifted absorption, ITBTC exhibited a much stronger light harvesting capability in the shorter wavelength range, which should be beneficial for attaining high Jscs.
The FMO energy levels of ITBTC and ITIC in film state were characterized using cyclic voltammetry (CV) with ferrocene/ferrocenium (Fc/Fc+) as the reference redox couple under the same conditions, and the ITBTC and ITIC films were drop-casted on the electrode by evaporation of their solution in chloroform (5 × 10−4 M). As shown in Fig. S3 and summarized in Table S1, the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO)/LUMO energy levels of ITBTC and ITIC were estimated based on the onset oxidation and reduction potentials to be −5.38/−3.78 and −5.48/−3.90 eV, respectively. Compared to those of ITIC, ITBTC exhibited pronouncedly elevated HOMO/LUMO energy levels due to the decreased electron-withdrawing ability of BTC after incorporation of an additional electron-rich thiophene moiety, which should assist in achieving a higher Voc in their corresponding OSC devices. Density functional theory (DFT) calculations at the level of B3LYP/6-311G(d,p) also confirmed a decreased intramolecular charge transfer characteristic within the ITBTC molecule. As shown in Fig. 2, the half segment of ITBTC showed a smaller dipole moment (6.31 Debye) compared to that (6.79 Debye) of the ITIC half segment, in good agreement with the decreased electron withdrawing nature of the BTC end group. The DFT results revealed a slightly curvier molecular backbone for the BTC-capped acceptor molecule with a dihydral angle of ∼18° between the central core and the BTC moiety (versus the angle of ∼0.1° between the central core and the IC moiety in ITIC), and an uplifted LUMO level and an enlarged bandgap were calculated for ITBTC, agreeing well with the HOMO/LUMO values and slightly blue-shifted optical absorption range as obtained from the electrochemical and UV-Vis measurements.
To investigate the photovoltaic performance of ITBTC, OSCs with a conventional device configuration of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PBDB-T:ITBTC/PDINO/Al were fabricated, where indium tin oxide (ITO), poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS), PBDB-T, and amino N-oxide perylene diimide (PDINO) served as the anode, hole transporting layer, polymer donor material, and cathode interlayer, respectively. The control devices with PBDB-T:ITIC active layers were fabricated under the same device configuration and processing conditions. Fig. 3a shows the characteristic current density–voltage (J–V) curves of two NFA based OSC devices. As summarized in Table 1, PBDB-T:ITBTC-based devices achieved a maximum PCE of 10.99% with a high Voc of 0.941 V, a Jsc of 16.37 mA cm−2, and a FF of 71.3% after systematic device optimization using different donors, additive types, and additive ratios (Fig. S4–S6, Table S2–S4). In contrast, the PBDB-T:ITIC-based control devices showed a smaller Voc of 0.897 V, a Jsc of 16.13 mA cm−2, and an FF of 65.8% after a systematic device optimization, thus yielding a near 15% lower PCE (9.53%). Please note the Voc increase from PBDB-T:ITIC-based cells to PBDB-T:ITBTC-based cells is smaller than the elevation of LUMO energy levels from ITIC to ITBTC, which reflects the fact that the Voc is not only determined by LUMO–HOMO energy offset between the acceptor and donor materials, but also affected by the charge recombination characteristics in radiative and non-radiative fashions in their blends. The improved PCE of ITBTC-based devices is mainly ascribed to the larger Voc and FF values, which should be attributed to the upshifted LUMO energy levels and increased charge carrier mobility (vide infra), likely enabled by the improved intermolecular interactions of ITBTC. Impressively, despite its slightly blue-shifted absorption, no obvious drop in the photocurrent of ITBTC-based devices was observed, which should partially be due to its enhanced optical absorption in the short wavelength ranges. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra (Fig. 3b) of the two FREA-based devices further supported the stronger light harvesting capability of ITBTC in the 350–450 nm range, which likely results from the optical absorption of the BTC unit (the absorption spectrum of BTC end group is showed in Fig. S2). In addition, despite the blue-shifted absorption of ITBTC neat film (versusITIC neat film, Fig. 1d), a slightly red-shifted EQE edge in the long wavelength range was observed for the PBDB-T:ITBTC blend (versus PBDB-T:ITIC blend) based devices, which should be attributed to the slightly red-shifted absorption of PBDB-T:ITBTC blend film when compared to that of the PBDB-T:ITIC blend film (see Fig. S7). Similar effects of such red-shift in EQE edges (compared to UV-Vis absorption spectra) have also been observed in other works, likely reflecting the packing motif changes of the acceptor molecules when blended with the polymer donor and with the treatment of processing additive. The integrated current densities of both acceptor-based devices are in good agreement with the values from the J–V curves, showing a mismatch of less than 5%. The results indicate good reliability of the measured photovoltaic parameters.
Acceptor

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)

μ
h,sclc
 (cm2 V−1 s−1)

μ
e,sclc
 (cm2 V−1 s−1)

E
loss (V)
Max. PCE (%)

a Measured from SCLC method.
b Averaged from 10 devices.


ITBTC

0.941
16.37
71.3
1.32 × 10−4
8.66 × 10−5
0.63
10.99 (10.77 ± 0.25)

ITIC

0.897
16.13
65.8
7.13 × 10−5
1.32 × 10−5
0.67
9.53 (9.11 ± 0.34)
To elucidate the reasons for the improved FF value of ITBTC-based devices, the exciton dissociation, charge collection, and recombination processes of these devices were evaluated by measuring the relationship between photocurrent density (Jph) and effective voltage (Veff), and the dependence of Jsc on light intensity (P). As can be seen from Fig. 3c, a Jph/Jsat (Jsat is the saturation current density in Fig. 3c) ratio of 0.925 was observed for the ITBTC-based OSC devices while that of ITIC-based devices was 0.920, indicating that both acceptor-based devices have efficient charge generation probabilities. For the charge recombination kinetics, the power-law exponents (α) for the ITIC- and ITBTC-based devices (Jsc ∝ Pα) extracted from the curves as shown in Fig. 3d, are 0.96 and 0.98, respectively, suggesting a lower degree of bimolecular recombination in the ITBTC-based devices and agreeing well with the observed lower energy loss of the corresponding devices (0.63 V for ITBTC-based devices versus 0.67 V for ITIC-based devices, Table 1). The charge carrier mobilities of the blend films are critical for charge collection in solar cells. Using the space charge limited current (SCLC) method, hole and electron mobilities of the FREA-based blends were also calculated. As demonstrated in Fig. S8 and Table S5, the PBDB-T:ITBTC blend film exhibits an electron mobility of 8.66 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1, which is 6.5 times higher than 1.32 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1 of the PBDB-T:ITIC based films. Meanwhile, a more balanced hole/electron mobility ratio (1.52) was observed for the ITBTC-based films when compared to that of the ITIC-based films (5.40), which should also result in an enhanced FF as observed in the ITBTC-based devices.
To probe the efficiency of charge transfer at the donor/acceptor interface, the photoluminescence (PL) spectra of both FREA molecule based BHJ films were measured. As shown in Fig. S9, the PBDB-T:ITBTC film exhibited a more efficient PL quenching with a quenching efficiency of 99% as calculated from the maximum emission wavelength 779 nm than the PBDB-T:ITIC film with a quenching efficiency of 95% at 777 nm, which should assist in achieving a higher Jsc for ITBTC-based OSC devices.
Using a combination of atomic force microscopy (AFM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) techniques, the blend film morphologies of both FREA-based blend films were investigated. As shown in Fig. 4a–d, the root-mean-square roughness of PBDB-T:ITIC and PBDB-T:ITBTC blend films is 4.75 and 3.15 nm, respectively, which likely suggests a better miscibility between the donor polymer and ITBTC due to the possible formation of extra S⋯S interactions between the thiophene-inserted BTC end group of ITBTC acceptor molecule and the thiophene moiety in the donor polymer (see the DSC curves of blend films as shown in Fig. S10). This might also lead to an improved charge transfer at the donor/acceptor interfaces in the ITBTC-based solar cells, which agrees well with the higher PL quenching efficiency (99%) of ITBTC than that (95%) of ITIC as disclosed above and should be beneficial to achieve higher Jsc and FF values in the corresponding devices. As seen from the TEM images (Fig. 3c and f), the PBDB-T:ITIC film features larger fibrillar domains, while the PBDB-T:ITBTC film exhibits a more evenly distributed phase separation with improved interpenetrating network, further verifying a better intermixing between the polymer donor PBDB-T and acceptor material ITBTC.
Finally, two-dimensional grazing incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (2D GIWAXS) measurements were carried out to further study the molecular packing and orientation of FREA-based neat and blend (with polymer PBDB-T) films (see Fig. 5). The corresponding one-dimensional linecut profiles along the in-plane (IP) and out-of-plane (OOP) directions are shown in Fig. S11. As seen from Fig. 5a and b, both ITBTC and ITIC neat films exhibited a strong (010) scattering peak in the OOP direction and the corresponding (100) peak in the IP direction, indicating a face-on dominant orientation. The (010) peaks of both ITBTC and ITIC neat films were deconvoluted into two separate peaks at qz = ∼1.5 and ∼1.7 Å−1, showing two different π–π stacking d-spacings of approximately 4.1 and 3.6 Å, respectively (Fig. S12, Table S6). The peak areas were also calculated and the resulting ratio of areas (A(at qz = ∼1.5 Å−1)/A(at qz = ∼1.7 Å−1)) was determined to be 38/62 for ITBTC and 53/47 for ITIC, respectively. This suggests that the tightly packed portion is clearly larger for ITBTC compared to ITIC, which can be ascribed to the increased intermolecular interaction resulting from its extended π-conjugation and additional S⋯S chalcogen interactions between the neighboring BTC end groups. For both blend films, a similar GIWAXS pattern was obtained with dominant face-on orientation exhibiting the (010) and (100) stacking peaks in the OOP and IP directions, respectively. However, the (100) lamellar scattering becomes more isotropic (hump-shaped) for both PBDB-T:ITBTC and PBDB-T:ITIC, suggesting mixed face-on and edge-on orientations. Interestingly, PBDB-T:ITIC shows two strong (010) scatterings in the OOP direction, where the peak at low qz (1.48 Å−1) is clearly intensified compared to the neat ITIC film, indicating a largely increased portion of loosely packed crystallites. In the contrary, PBDB-T:ITBTC shows mainly a tightly packed crystallite with the cofacial π–π stacking distance of 3.7 Å. The higher degree of face-on stacking and decreased π–π stacking distance of the ITBTC blend films should help in achieving a higher electron mobility, especially in the vertical charge transport direction, which agrees well with the mobility data measured from the SCLC method. Such morphological characteristics together with the larger charge carrier mobilities of the ITBTC blend lead to the higher FF (71.3%) versus that (65.8%) of the ITIC-based film.

In summary, a new benzo[b]thiophene-fused BTC end group with an extended conjugation length was designed and synthesized for developing an acceptor–donor–acceptor type nonfullerene n-type semiconducting material ITBTC. Compared to the well-known ITIC acceptor with a phenyl-fused end group, ITBTC exhibited a slightly blue-shifted optical absorption, upshifted LUMO energy level, improved and more balanced charge transport properties, and more favorable blend film morphology with increased face-on orientation. These changes were attributed to the decreased electron-withdrawing capability and enhanced intermolecular interactions enabled by the extended BTC end group. Moreover, a much broader absorption with an extra absorption band in the short wavelength region of 320–570 nm was present for the ITBTC molecule, leading to a well-maintained photocurrent in the OSC devices despite its blue-shifted absorption. As a result, the ITBTC-based solar cells showed an enhanced PCE of 10.99% with simultaneously improved Voc of 0.941 V and FF of 71.3% and a well-maintained Jsc of 16.37 mA cm−2 with respect to the ITIC-based control devices, which showed a PCE of 9.53% with a Voc of 0.897 V, FF of 65.8%, and Jsc of 16.13 mA cm−2. Among a very few reported examples of IC-type end groups based on the aromatic structure replacement of its phenyl ring, our work provides a new end group with extended π-conjugation and demonstrates the great potential of the BTC end group to serve as a new electron accepting unit for constructing high-performance FREA materials with increased charge carrier mobilities and simultaneously improved photovoltaic parameters in nonfullerene solar cells, which are essential for maximizing the PCEs of organic solar cells.


The authors declare no competing financial interest.


X. G. is grateful to National Science Foundation of China (NSFC, 21774055), Shenzhen Basic Research Fund (JCYJ20170817105905899), Shenzhen Peacock Plan Project (KQTD20140630110339343), J. C. acknowledges Basic Research Fund of Shenzhen City (JCYJ20170817104319061) and the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2018M631727), Y. W. acknowledges the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (No. 2018M630267) and the SUSTech Presidential Postdoctoral Fellowship. Y. Z. acknowledges the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2017M622748). H. Y. W. thanks the financial support from the NRF of Korea (2016M1A2A2940911 and 2015M1A2A2057506).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta01111k
‡ K. Yang and Q. Liao contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019