 DOI: 10.1039/C8TA04246B
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 10729-10738


Su Htike
Aung
,

Lichen
Zhao
,

Kazuteru
Nonomura
,

Than Zaw
Oo
,

Shaik M.
Zakeeruddin
,

Nick
Vlachopoulos
*,

Tamara
Sloboda
,

Sebastian
Svanström
,

Ute B.
Cappel
,

Anders
Hagfeldt
* and 

Michael
Grätzel
*

Laboratory of Photomolecular Science, Institute of Chemical Science and Engineering, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Lausanne (EPFL), EPFL-SB-ISIC-LSPM, Chemin des Alambics, Station 6, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland. E-mail: nikolaos.vlachopoulos@epfl.ch; anders.hagfeldt@epl.ch

Laboratory of Photonics and Interfaces, Institute of Chemical Science and Engineering, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Lausanne (EPFL), EPFL-SB-ISIC-LPI, Chemin des Alambics, Station 6, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland. E-mail: Michael.graetzel@epfl.ch

State Key Laboratory for Artificial Microstructure and Mesoscopic Physics, Department of Physics, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China

Physics Department, Shwebo University, Shwebo 02261, Myanmar

Materials Research Laboratory, Department of Physics, University of Mandalay, Mandalay 05032, Myanmar

Division of Applied Physical Chemistry, Department of Chemistry, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, SE-100 44 Stockholm, Sweden

Division of Molecular and Condensed Matter Physics, Department of Physics and Astronomy, Uppsala University, Box 516, SE-751 20 Uppsala, Sweden

Received
7th May 2018
, Accepted 26th March 2019
First published on 26th March 2019
The anodic electrodeposition method is investigated as an alternative technique for the preparation of a titanium oxide (TiO2) blocking underlayer (UL) for perovskite solar cells (PSCs). Extremely thin TiIV-based films are grown from aqueous acidic titanium(III) chloride in an electrochemical cell at room temperature. This precursor layer is converted to the UL (ED-UL), in a suitable state for PSC applications, by undertaking a sintering step at 450 °C for half an hour. PSCs with the composition of the light-absorbing material FA0.85MA0.10Cs0.05Pb(I0.87Br0.13)3 (FA and MA denote the formamidinium and methylammonium cations, respectively) based on the ED-UL are compared with PSCs with the UL of a standard type prepared by the spray-pyrolysis method at 450 °C from titanium diisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate) (SP-UL). We obtain power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of over 20% for mesoscopic perovskite devices employing both ED-ULs and SP-ULs. Slightly higher fill factor values are observed for ED-UL-based devices. In addition, ED-ULs prepared by the same method have also been applied in planar PSCs, resulting in a PCE exceeding 17%, which is comparable to that for similar PSCs with an SP-UL. The preparation of ED-ULs with a lower sintering temperature, 150 °C, has also been examined. The efficiency of a planar PSC incorporating this underlayer was 14%. These results point out to the possibility of applying ED-ULs in flexible planar PSCs in the future.

The continuous increase of the world's energy demand and the associated environmental pollution is continuously driving research efforts toward the development of renewable energy technologies, including photovoltaics. In this respect, there is considerable interest in the development of third-generation efficient solar cells based on inexpensive and stable thin-film organic, organometallic, or inorganic coordination light-absorbing compounds. Until recently, such cells were hampered by a sunlight-to-electricity power conversion efficiency (PCE) not exceeding 20% and therefore, were not favorable for large-scale solar energy generation. However, in the last ten years, perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have appeared as a competitor to traditional solar cells based on inorganic crystalline materials like Si, GaAs, CdSe and CuInGaSe2 (ref. 1–8) with PCE values increasing from 3% before 2010, as described in the pioneering work by Miyasaka, to above 20% at present (Grätzel, Seok, and others), with a record efficiency of 23.7% (NREL chart).

In order to achieve the aforementioned results, an essential step has been the optimization of the structural configuration of light-absorbing perovskites with the ABX3 structure, where A is an organic cation, B is a metal cation, and X is a halide anion; this structure is analogous to that of traditional all-inorganic perovskites. Earlier PSCs were based on CH3NH3PbI3. Gradually, more elaborate structures were introduced in order to increase the efficiency and stability. One of the most efficient variations of CH3NH3PbI3 leading to a PCE of above 20% in the authors' laboratory consists of partially substituting on the one hand CH3NH3+ (abbreviation MA+) with formamidinium (HC(NH)2+, abbreviation FA+) and Cs+, and on the other hand I− with Br−. Therefore, the overall structure can be written as (Cs)x(FA)y(MA)1−x−yPb[(Br)z(I)1−z]3.
Apart from the high efficiency, an additional advantage is the ease of cell manufacture, and in this respect, the overall device configuration should be considered. The n–i–p PSC configuration considered in this publication comprises: (i) a transparent conducting oxide (TCO) substrate, frequently F-doped tin oxide (FTO); (ii) a thin blocking TiO2 underlayer (UL), of thickness of 10–100 nm, deposited on the transparent conducting oxide, usually F-doped tin oxide (FTO), substrate; in some cases (iii) an additional electron-conducting mesoporous TiO2 layer as the perovskite support on the UL-coated F-doped tin oxide (FTO) conducting glass substrate; (iv) a perovskite light-absorbing layer; (v) an organic hole conductor, 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis[N,N-di(4-methoxyphenyl)amino]-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD); (vi) an evaporated gold counter electrode layer. The present publication is focused on the preparation of the TiO2 UL. TiO2 has been extensively used as the material of choice in photoelectrochemical and photocatalytic applications since the pioneering studies of Fujishima and Honda (1972) due to its advantageous chemical stability and semiconductivity. In the case of UL applications in solar cells, the latter property contributes to allowing the flow of an anodic photocurrent but restricting that of cathodic dark current. Apart from TiO2, other oxides can be used (e.g. SnO2 and ZnSnO4), but in the present article only TiO2-based ULs will be considered.
The usual method of fabricating a UL is the spray pyrolysis (SP-UL) of an organic titanium compound (e.g. Ti-isopropoxide or Ti-acetylacetonate) at high temperature according to Kavan et al. However, the large-scale application of this method may be cumbersome and cost-ineffective for some applications. For example, it requires precise temperature control of large surfaces and considerable safety precautions. Furthermore, in some cases, such as that of plastic conductive substrates, this high-temperature method may not be appropriate. Alternative methods for fabricating ULs include dip-coating, spin coating, sputtering, atomic layer deposition (ALD), chemical vapor deposition, direct current (DC) magnetron sputtering, radiofrequency (RF) sputtering, electron beam (EB) evaporation, and electrochemical deposition (ED). Considerable information about some of these ULs has been accumulated from research and development in the area of dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) with liquid electrolyte or solid hole conductors as charge-transfer media.
In this respect, it should be noted that TiO2 ULs have been used in the preparation of flexible PSCs on plastic substrates; the subject has been recently reviewed by Yang et al. Frequently used substrates are polyethylene terephthalate (PET) and polyethylene naphthalate (PEN), usually coated by a TCO layer, commonly Sn-doped indium oxide (ITO). Some examples of TiO2 ULs used in flexible devices are those generated by ED, ALD, EB evaporation, DC sputtering, and RF sputtering.
Electrochemical deposition has been extensively applied for the fabrication of large-area coatings in photovoltaic cells. The electrochemical deposition underlayer (ED-UL) fabrication method is well adapted for large-area coating with good homogeneity and is relatively easy to perform, requiring relatively simple equipment. Furthermore, the production of an ED-UL is possible at lower temperatures than several other types of ULs. As will be later explained, electrochemical deposition (ED) is usually performed at room temperature, but the required additional heating treatment after the deposition can be performed at a temperature below 200 °C. Additionally, the thickness of the UL can be regulated by properly adjusting the ED parameters, which are electrode potential, current and time, depending on the applied method, for example, ED at constant electrode potential (vs. a reference electrode, chronoamperometry), constant current (chronopotentiometry) or at zero cell potential, by short circuiting the working electrode undergoing electrodeposition with a counter electrode catalytic toward H2 evolution (internal electrolysis).
A systematic study on an ED-UL fabricated by the anodic oxidation of an acidic TiCl3 solution was published in the 1990s by Kavan et al. This UL was applied as the support for the dye-adsorbing mesoporous colloidal TiO2 layer of DSSCs. In a later electrochemical study by Kavan et al. a systematic comparison of ED-ULs, SP-ULs and ALD-ULs was presented; however a comparison of solar cells made with these ULs was not included.
The mechanism of electrochemical deposition to fabricate ULs is quite complex and not fully elucidated. However, the essential event is the oxidation of TiIII to TiIV. In aqueous solution, Ti3+ ions are in hydrolytic equilibrium with the TiO+ intermediate according to
Ti3+(aq) + H2O ⇄ TiO+ + 2H+
TiO+ is electrochemically oxidized to TiIV in polymer form, as a pre-underlayer (ED-PRE-UL):
TiO + → TiO2+ + e−
TiO2+ → TiIV-polymer
Alternative methods for generating TiO2 by ED from aqueous media, destined to solar cell applications, have been proposed, including cathodic electrodeposition from an aqueous peroxotitanate bath, precipitation of TiO2 induced by local alkalinization upon cathodic hydrogen evolution, and anodic deposition from an alkaline solution of Ti-isopropoxide and benzoquinone. The future application of these approaches to UL fabrication could be of interest for further research.
As regards the preparation of the ED-PRE-UL described in this publication, during ED the solution will be progressively acidified, so Na2CO3 will be added in order to prevent the pH from getting lower than 2.0 in the course of the reaction.
In two recent publications, it has been demonstrated that PSCs with an ED-UL exhibit a higher PCE than those with other types of ULs: DC-UL, SC-UL and SP-UL. The highest PCE reached 15% under AM1.5 simulated sunlight, with a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 19.6 mA cm−2, an open-circuit photovoltage (VOC) of 1.06 V, and a fill factor (FF) of 0.72. Furthermore, the same research group also demonstrated the use of ED-ULs in mesoscopic PSCs, based on a TiO2 scaffold of the brookite type, with a plastic conducting substrate for the photoelectrode.
An UL preparation method should be considered as an alternative to some established procedures if it is inexpensive, reproducible and amenable to large-scale production as well as flexible devices. However, before contemplating such considerations in detail, comparative performance tests should be made on PSCs based on the new UL as well as the usual ones, with otherwise the other parts of the PSC being identical.
In the present study, a method similar to that by Kavan et al. is utilized for the preparation of efficient, homogeneous and pinhole-free blocking layers. A three-electrode configuration was used, and a constant current (galvanostatic electrodeposition) was applied. The ED-UL was compared to the SP-UL for two types of PSCs. One is mesoscopic devices in which the perovskite is deposited on mesoporous TiO2, and the other is planar cells in which the perovskite is directly deposited onto the UL-coated FTO glass. The types of perovskite and hole conductor used were the triple-cation-double-anion composition and spiro-OMeTAD as previously described.

All chemicals used in this project were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich unless otherwise specified.


The 20% TiCl3 solution in HCl (Sigma-Aldrich) and other chemicals were used without further purification. The pH value of TiCl3 was adjusted with addition of solid Na2CO3. Normally, a pH value in the range 2.0–2.5 was suitable for TiIV layer deposition. By adding ∼1.0 g of Na2CO3 into 120 ml of 3 mM acidic TiCl3 (originally pH ∼0.8–0.9), the desired pH value (2.0–2.5) was obtained. For this purpose, a pH meter from Metrohm AG, model 913A was used. As a rule, an aqueous 3 mM TiCl3 solution (pH = 2.0–2.5) was used for the electrochemical deposition on transparent FTO (Nippon sheet) glass of sheet resistance 10 ohm per square.


Prior to electrodeposition the FTO glass plates were cleaned carefully, by sonication in an ultrasonic bath, with 2% aqueous surfactant solution (Hellmanex), acetone, and ethanol, for 30 minutes in each medium, finally rinsed with water and ethanol, and dried in air. Then the substrates were subjected to an UV–ozone treatment. Electrochemical experiments were carried out in a three-electrode cell configuration by means of an Autolab potentiostat, model TG. The reference electrode was Ag/AgCl/saturated KCl. A titanium foil with the surface area ∼5 × 7 cm2 was used as the counter electrode immersed directly into the electrodeposition bath. A cleaned patterned bare FTO plate of 12 cm2 area was used as the working electrode for the desired electrochemical deposition. Initially, the pH-adjusted TiCl3 electrolytic solution of 30 ml volume was deoxygenated by N2 bubbling before ED. Then the ED was performed by the constant current (galvanostatic) method. During ED the electrolyte was covered with a properly fitting cup, with a N2 flow maintained above the solution. The electrode potential vs. a reference was monitored so that it would not assume a too positive value, in which case parasitic oxygen evolution could have a deleterious effect on the quality of the electrodeposited layer. During electrolysis, the pH was periodically measured. In this respect, the two applied parameters, current density of the galvanostatic electrodeposition and deposition time, could be varied, by considering Faraday's law under the estimative assumption of 100% electrodeposition efficiency, so as to obtain a uniform layer of the desired thickness. As a rule, a constant current density of ∼20 μA cm−2 was applied for 1000 s in order to obtain a homogeneous ED-PRE-UL. Afterwards, the ED-PRE-UL was washed carefully with water in order to remove residues potentially harmful to the PSC performance.

In order to obtain the final compact form of the UL, the ED-PRE-ULs intended for standard PSC devices were sintered at 450 °C for half an hour, with a programmed heating time of 30 min from room temperature to 450 °C and cooling time of 1 h from 450 °C to room temperature. Alternatively, in order to test the effect of lower UL heating temperatures on the PSC performance, some samples were treated at 150 °C for five hours. After sintering, the UL-coated plates were utilized in PSC assembly. The UL is transparent, as indicated by the UV-VIS spectrum included in the ESI.

Photoelectron spectroscopy (PES) was carried out at the HIKE end station, KMC-1 beamline at the BESSY II synchrotron facility (Helmholtz Zentrum Berlin, Germany) on an ED-UL sample with a deposition time of 800 s and 1000 s. The results were compared to a TiO2 layer prepared by a TiCl4 treatment (Fig. S1 in ESI). The HIKE end-station provides photon energies from 2000 eV up to 12000 eV. In this experiment, a photon energy of 2100 eV was chosen by selecting the first order light from a Si (111) double crystal monochromator (Oxford Danfysik). The analysis chamber was under high vacuum conditions (∼10−8 mbar) and a Scienta R-4000 hemispherical analyser was used to measure the kinetic energies of the emitted electrons. The measurements were energy calibrated by measuring the Au 4f7/2 level of a gold foil mounted on the manipulator and setting its position to 84.0 eV binding energy. With the used photon energy, the mean free path for electrons escaping from the Ti 2p and Sn 3d core levels is about 3 nm giving a probing depth of 9 nm for these core levels.


Nippon Sheet Glass with a resistance of 10 ohm per square was cleaned by sonication in 2% Hellmanex water solution for 30 min followed by washing in acetone and ethanol, for 15 minutes in each medium. After rinsing with deionized water and ethanol, the substrates were subjected to a UV–ozone treatment for 15 min. Subsequently, in the case of the standard devices, a 30 nm TiO2 underlayer was deposited on FTO via spray pyrolysis at 450 °C from a precursor solution of 0.6 ml titanium diisopropoxide and 0.4 ml bis(acetylacetonate) in 9 ml anhydrous ethanol. After the spraying, the substrates were left at 450 °C for 45 min and left to cool down to room temperature. Alternatively, an ED-UL was deposited as already mentioned. Afterwards, a mesoporous TiO2 layer was deposited onto the UL by spin coating for 20 s at 4000 rpm with a ramp of 2000 rpm per second, using a 30 nm particle paste (Dyesol 30 NR-D) diluted in ethanol so as to produce a 150–200 nm-thick layer. After the spin coating, the substrates were dried at 100 °C for 10 min and then sintered again at 450 °C for 30 min under dry air flow. After cooling down to 150 °C, the substrates were immediately transferred into a dry air atmosphere glove box for depositing the perovskite films.

FA0.85MA0.10Cs0.05Pb(I0.87Br0.13)3 with 5 mol% excess PbI2 perovskite precursor solution containing 1.407 M Pb2+ (PbI2 and PbBr2), 0.135 M MA+ (MABr), 1.147 M FA+ (FAI), 0.0675 M Cs+ (CsI), 3.557 M I− (FAI and PbI2) and 0.540 M Br− (MABr and PbBr2) in anhydrous DMF:DMSO (v:v = 1:4) was prepared in an argon glovebox, operating at ambient temperature, and was deposited onto the TiO2 substrate by the antisolvent spin coating method. This procedure was carried out in a dry air flow in a glove box with a two-step program of 2000 rpm and 6000 rpm for 10 s and 20 s, respectively. During the second step, 200 μl of chlorobenzene was poured on the spinning substrate 5 s prior to the end of the program. The substrates were then sintered at 100 °C for 1 h in a dry-air-filled glove box. For fabrication of planar devices, perovskite layers were directly grown onto ED-ULs and SP-ULs, without any mesoporous TiO2 layer interposed between the UL and the perovskite layer. After perovskite sintering, the substrates were cooled down to room temperature and a spiro-OMeTAD (Merck) solution (70 mM in chlorobenzene) was spin-coated at 4000 rpm for 20 s. The Spiro-OMeTAD solution contained the following additives: lithium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide (LITFSI) salt and organic base 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP). The molar ratio of additives to spiro-OMeTAD was 0.5 and 3.3 for Li-TFSI and TBP, respectively.
Finally, a counter electrode gold layer of 80 nm thickness was thermally evaporated under high vacuum (<2.5 × 10−5 Pa) using a shadow mask to pattern the electrodes.

Cyclic voltammetry measurements were performed on the same potentiostat used for electrodeposition in a three-electrode cell. The electrochemical behaviour of ED-PRE-ULs and ED-ULs in the presence of 1 mM K4Fe(CN)6 in 1 M aqueous KCl before and after heating was compared to that of FTO and SP-ULs. For preliminary calibration experiments a glassy carbon disk semi-microelectrode (GC) of 0.07 cm2 was used. In all measurements, the reference electrode was Ag/AgCl/saturated KCl and the counter electrode was a graphite rod.

Before investigating the blocking effect, the background current in 1 M KCl electrolyte was measured on the GC electrode. Subsequently, the cyclic voltammogram of 1 mM K3FeCN6 was recorded in the same electrolyte. The position of the half-potential determined as the average reduction and oxidation peaks was used in order to calibrate the reference electrode on the basis of the E1/2 value of 0.226 V vs. the saturated calomel electrode (SCE) reported by Thornton et al. Then the cyclic voltammograms of a cleaned FTO working electrode were measured for comparison with those of ULs obtained by various preparation methods. These ULs included ED-PRE-ULs and ED-ULs, the latter were generated after heating at 150 and 450 °C, as well as SP-ULs.

Current density vs. voltage (J–V) characteristics were measured with a J–V setup consisting of a Keithley Model 2400 SourceMeter SMU and an Oriel 450 W xenon lamp equipped with a Schott K113 Rempax sunlight filter (Praezisions Glas & Optik GmbH) to match the emission spectrum of the lamp to the AM1.5G standard. Before each measurement, the exact light intensity was determined using a calibrated Si reference diode equipped with an infrared cutoff filter (KG-3, Schott). The devices with an active irradiation area of 0.16 cm2, delimited by a black mask, were measured at a scan rate of 0.01 V s−1 with a compliance current of 5 mA and a potential step of 5 mV applied for a time in the range of 0–0.04 s.


ED-PRE-ULs on FTO glass are prepared from an acidic 30 mM TiCl3 solution (pH 2.1–2.5). Two key parameters controlling the properties of the ED-PRE-ULs are the current density and the time of galvanostatic electrodeposition. Moreover, rigorous control of the pH values is also of key importance in the formation of a homogeneous thin ED-PRE-UL. We observed that the pH of 2.1–2.5 is the most appropriate condition for the formation of a homogeneous ED-PRE-UL, in agreement with Kavan et al. In fact, pH values of above 2.5 can cause precipitation, and the solution will not be clear with flakes and dust floating on the solution surface due to the formation of TiO2 and similar species by hydrolysis. A small amount of solid residue may be present even at a pH of below 2.5. In this case, a filtration of the solution is necessary prior to electrodeposition. On the other hand, upon ED at a pH of below 2.0, the monitored electrode potential under constant-current ED is unstable, and the resulting layers are not homogeneous. Contrarily, if the working pH ranges from 2.1 to 2.4, the electrode potential does not show large variations, in the range from −0.33 to −0.55 V vs. Ag/AgCl/sat. KCl, and the resulting layer is homogeneous.

Three electrodeposition times (tED) were used, 1000 s, 2000 s and 3600 s, respectively. A tED of 1000 s was chosen as the standard condition due to the slightly higher PCE and FF values (Table 1).
Samples
Deposition time (s)

P (mW cm−2)

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)

a Data for the cells with the best efficiency are presented here. A complete statistical analysis is available in the ESI Section.

SP-UL
—
98.4
1.114
24.1
0.78
20.9
ED-UL-1
1000
98.3
1.101
24.2
0.78
20.9
ED-UL-2
2000
98.5
1.095
24.1
0.78
20.5
ED-UL-3
3600
98.2
1.094
23.8
0.77
20.0

Overview photoelectron spectra of the TiO2 underlayers in comparison to the FTO substrate confirm the presence of thin layers of TiO2 (Fig. S1 in ESI) as core levels of both Ti and Sn are observed. No core levels related to Cl are observed for UL samples confirming that Cl from the precursor does not remain in the layer after electrodeposition and annealing. Fig. 1 shows the Ti 2p core level of the ED-UL TiO2 sample with a deposition time of 800 s. A curve fit to the Ti 2p3/2 peak with a Voigt function gives a peak position of 459.1 eV. This position and the symmetrical peak shape are in good agreement with literature spectra of Ti4+ in TiO2. Ti3+ features would be observed at approximately 1.4 eV lower binding energy than the Ti4+ peak and are not observed here. This confirms that almost all Ti is present as Ti4+ in the underlayers as expected for TiO2. Results for the ED-UL TiO2 sample with a deposition time of 1000 s were very similar (data not shown).


The morphologies of ED-UL/FTO and SP-UL/FTO were determined by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (Fig. 2) and were compared to that of bare FTO. The SP-UL seems to be more homogeneous than the ED-UL. The inhomogeneity of the ED-UL could be attributed to an attachment of unavoidable TiO2 particles during ED-PRE-UL deposition. Eliminating this deleterious effect could lead to better performance and reproducibility. As shown in the cross-sectional SEM images (Fig. 3), the thickness of the UL can be determined; the thickness of a typical ED-UL with a quality sufficient for efficient PSC photovoltaic performance, at around 10 nm, is lower than that of the SP-UL, in the 50–100 nm range. In fact, for the former it is difficult to determine the precise thickness. Cross-sectional SEM images of both a SP-UL and an ED-UL are depicted in Fig. 3, indicating a cross-section in the range of 50–100 nm for the SP-UL (left) and 10 nm for the ED-UL (right). In brief, the results of morphology characterization indicate that the preparation of a UL by electrochemical deposition is a reliable method to be considered in future PSC applications, in particular in types of PSCs in which the application of spray pyrolysis in UL preparation is to be excluded.


By assuming a faradaic efficiency of 100% for the formation of the ED-UL, the thickness d100% of a compact layer is given by the following equation based on the application of Faraday's law to the one-electron oxidation of TiIII to TiIV:
where
J is the current density, t the electrodeposition time, F the Faraday constant (9.65 × 104 C per mole of electrons), Mw is the molecular weight of TiO2, (79.866 g mol−1), ρ is the density of TiO2 (3.89 g cm−3) for anatase, the crystallographic form generated after firing at 450 °C according to Kavan et al., and εpor the porosity of the UL. For J = 12 μA cm−2, t = 1000 s, and assuming εpor = 0, a thickness of 43 nm is calculated.

If dexp is the thickness of the layer measured by electron microscopy, the Faradaic efficiency FE will be expressed as below:
From the electron microscopy measurements discussed in Section 3.4 the UL thickness is estimated as 10 nm. Therefore, the FE could be 25%. This is in agreement with the literature data stipulating a FE in the range of 20–50% for the pH of the electrodeposition bath in the pH 2–2.5 range. In this calculation, the loss of material upon electrode washing after extraction from the electrodeposition bath is neglected.

In order to compare the blocking behavior of ED-PRE-ULs and ED-ULs, cyclic voltammetry experiments were performed in a deoxygenated aqueous solution containing 1 mM K3Fe(CN)6 and 1 M KCl; the reference electrode (RE) was Ag/AgCl/saturated KCl. All electrode potentials are reported vs. the Standard Hydrogen Electrode (SHE). The voltammograms are compared with that of a clean FTO glass electrode as well as that of a SP-UL. As seen from curve B of Fig. 4, it appears that the ED-UL is not completely blocking the electrochemical activity of K3Fe(CN)6. That is to say, the large cathodic-anodic peak separation of ∼0.8 V at a scan rate of 20 mV s−1 indicates that the kinetics is electrochemically irreversible, considerably slower than in the case of a bare FTO electrode (curve A), with a peak separation of 0.2 V at the same scan rate, corresponding to quasi-reversible electrochemical kinetics. The electrochemical behavior of an SP-UL is very different. The reduction of [FeIII(CN)6]3− occurs at a substantially more negative electrode potential, with a peak potential at ∼−0.27 V/SHE as compared to ∼0.05 V/SHE for the ED-UL and ∼0.30 V/SHE for bare FTO. Upon reversal of the scan, no reoxidation peak of [FeII(CN)6]4− is observed for the SP-UL. This is a typical behavior of a compact n-type semiconductor electrode with rectifying electrochemical properties. The reduction is possible at electrode potentials corresponding to an electrode with the Fermi level approaching the conduction band edge.

In Fig. 5, the cyclic voltammograms for [FeIII (CN)6]3− reduction are compared between an ED-PRE-UL and ED-ULs heated at 150 °C and 450 °C, respectively. The measurements were performed in the potential range of −0.2 to 1.0 V/SHE. At first, a significant difference of the redox behavior of ED-PRE-ULs and ED-ULs is evident, with well-defined quasi-reversible reduction-oxidation waves from the former and electrochemically irreversible behavior for the latter.
Furthermore, the voltammogram of the ED-PRE-ULs looks different than that of the sintered ED-PRE-ULs. The electrochemical behavior of the former is attributed to the electrolyte contacting the FTO substrate through defects. Therefore, the onset of reduction current occurs for ED-PRE-ULs at a less negative potential (∼0.55 V/SHE) than for the sintered ED-UL (∼0.45 V/SHE), in which case the redox behavior is attributed to the compact TiO2 material itself.
In fact, the electrochemical behavior of the ED-PRE-UL is largely attributed to the exposed part of the FTO substrate. The sintering process on the one hand improves the TiO2 conductivity and on the other hand eliminates several of the defects responsible for electrolyte permeation. Therefore, the electrochemical activity of the sintered EL-UD is mostly attributed to the TiO2 material itself.
Moreover, the electrochemical behaviour of the underlayer depends on the electrodeposition time. Three underlayers have been examined for different electrodeposition times, followed by sintering at 450 °C (Fig. 6). The blocking behaviour for an electrodeposition time of 1000 s is slightly better than that for a time of 500 s. However, for the longer electrodeposition time of 3600 s the electrode is less blocking, as indicated by the significantly lower separation between anodic and cathodic peaks, possibly due to a defect propagating within the underlayer during the longer electrodeposition time.
To sum up, the aforementioned cyclic voltammetry experiments indicate that the ED-UL is less blocking than the SP-UL, and that the heating process improves the blocking behavior of the former. However, the ultimate criterion for accepting the one or other type of UL is the performance of PSCs based on it. In this respect, as discussed in the following, the difference between ED-ULs and SP-ULs is less pronounced.
Additional cyclic voltammetry data are discussed in the ESI, Section SI-3.

The J–V characteristics of devices were measured using a 450 W xenon lamp as the illumination source. Appropriate filters were used to simulate AM1.5 light. In the present and the following section, data related to the solar cells with the best efficiency are presented. A complete statistical analysis is included in the ESI Section. Hysteresis has been observed in all measurements; The performance data presented in this publication correspond to the forward scan. Detailed data on hysteresis are presented in the ESI, Section SI-7. The results obtained with mesoscopic PSCs based on the ED-ULs, that were fabricated with a tdep of 1000, 2000 and 3600 s, and an electrodeposition current density of 20 μA cm−2 in all cases, are presented in Table 1. For comparison, results on PSCs with SP-ULs were also included. The best performance among the ED-UL-based PSCs was obtained with the layer fabricated with a tdep of 1000 s and subsequent heating at 450 °C. Current density under short circuit (JSC), open-circuit voltage (VOC), fill factor (FF), and power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 24.2 mA cm−2, 1.101 V, 0.784, and 20.88%, respectively, are virtually identical to those obtained with the SP-UL, with JSC, VOC, FF and PCE of 24.1 mA cm−2, 1.114 V, 0.778, and 20.89%, respectively. The exact value of the irradiance P applied during the experiments, within 2% of 100 mW cm−2, is also indicated. Slightly lower PCEs were obtained with PSCs with ED-ULs fabricated with a tdep of 2000 s and 3600 s. The corresponding J–V curves are depicted in Fig. 7. Based on these results, it is important to further investigate and optimize the properties of the ED-ULs as a replacement for SP-ULs. One important parameter is the sintering temperature, as discussed in the following section.


The effect of sintering temperature on the blocking behavior was studied by applying ULs in planar devices. Planar PSCs have attracted considerable interest due to the possibility of using flexible transparent plastic TCO-coated substrates in place of the usual TCO-coated glass substrates, as previously discussed. However, several problems with the reproducibility of planar PSC cells with the TiO2 underlayer have been reported, and the hysteresis of this type of cell upon recording the current–potential curves is considerable. For this reason, replacement of TiO2 by other types of oxide underlayers, for example SnO2, has been proposed. Therefore, in the present study some preliminary tests of the use of an ED-UL sintered at a low temperature, as a replacement for the SP-UL, have been included, with the understanding that further studies regarding the optimization of the ED-UL for this type of application would be needed.

In this respect, the performance of PSCs with ED-ULs sintered at 150 °C and 450 °C was directly compared to that of PSCs with an SP-UL. We observed similar performance for the device utilizing the ED-UL heated at 450 °C with respect to that utilizing an SP-UL, with lower JSC, slightly higher VOC and virtually the same FF, resulting in the same PCE. Decreasing the ED-UL heating temperature from 450 °C to 150 °C resulted in a drastic decrease in PCE to 14.1%, mainly due to a significant decrease of the VOC by ∼0.09 V, and of the FF, from 0.66 to 0.59. The corresponding J–V curves are depicted in Fig. 8 (Table 2).
Samples
Heating temperature (°C)

P (mW cm−2)

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)

a Data for the cells with the best efficiency are presented here. A complete statistical analysis is available in the ESI Section.

SP-UL
450 °C
100.0
1.079
23.5
0.69
17.4
ED-UL
150 °C
98.8
1.034
23.0
0.59
14.1
ED-UL
450 °C
98.7
1.070
22.3
0.72
17.4

Electrochemically generated TiO2 blocking underlayers (ULs), with the precursor layer electrodeposited at room temperature followed by sintering at 450 °C, were successfully applied in mesoscopic perovskite solar cells (PSCs) achieving a solar-to-electrical energy conversion efficiency of 21%. Meanwhile, a PCE of 17% was observed for planar devices, directly comparable to that of devices employing a UL produced by the spray-pyrolysis method. We noted that electrochemically deposited ULs sintered at low temperature were also effective in planar PSCs. This makes this type of UL promising for future flexible planar device applications. This study establishes the fact that the electrochemical deposition is a feasible, simple and versatile method for preparing ULs suitable for a variety of PSCs, indicating that it should be further investigated in view of the development of PSC technology at the industrial scale.


There are no conflicts to declare.


We acknowledge financial support from the Swiss National Science Foundation, project No 200020_169695/1 entitled “dye-sensitized and perovskite solar cells”. Su Htike Aung acknowledges support from the Swiss National Science Foundation for a Swiss Government Excellence Scholarship. We thank HZB for the allocation of synchrotron radiation beamtime.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Photoelectron spectra of underlayers. UV-VIS Spectra of underlayers. Statistical data of mesoscopic solar cell performance measurements. Incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency measurements: experimental conditions. Comparison of mesoporous solar cell short-circuit photocurrents and photocurrents obtained by integration of the IPCE spectrum. Hysteresis data. Effect of electrochemical underlayer sintering time in the range of 500–1500 s on the mesoscopic cell performance. Statistical data on planar perovskite cells. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta04246b
‡ Su Htike Aung and Lichen Zhao contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019