 DOI: 10.1039/C6TA09202K
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 4527-4534


Riski Titian
Ginting
,

Mi-Kyoung
Jeon
,

Kwang-Jae
Lee
,

Won-Yong
Jin
,

Tae-Wook
Kim
* and 

Jae-Wook
Kang
*

Department of Flexible and Printable Electronics, Polymer Materials Fusion Research Center, Chonbuk National University, Jeonju 54896, Republic of Korea. E-mail: jwkang@jbnu.ac.kr

Soft Innovative Materials Research Center, Institute of Advanced Composite Materials, Korea Institute of Science and Technology, Jeollabuk-do 55324, Republic of Korea. E-mail: twkim@kist.re.kr

Received
24th October 2016
, Accepted 23rd January 2017
First published on 8th February 2017
In this report, we demonstrate that moisture/O2 in ambient air is the major issue for the photovoltaic performance degradation and severe photocurrent hysteresis of non-encapsulated planar-perovskite solar cells. Consequently, this leads to difficulty in determining the real power conversion efficiency (PCE). Upon longer storage time, the evidence of a small amount of iodine in the hole transport layer (HTL) led to hindering the charge transport from the HTL to the anode, thus resulting in the decrease of short-circuit current density and fill factor. Meanwhile, the transient chronoamperometry result suggests that the increase of hysteresis with storage time is ascribed to the changes of activation energy. It is further supported by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy depth profile analysis, which revealed that penetration of moisture/O2 caused the shifts of iodine distribution within the perovskite layer after aging time of >72 h. Remarkably, effective moisture/O2 passivation can be achieved by combination of polyimide and UV-cured polymer as a novel encapsulation process, which exhibited an impressive stabilized PCE of above 14% (retained 97% of its initial efficiency) and simultaneously maintained the hysteresis up to ∼1000 h.

Ongoing research on materials and processing in perovskite solar cell (PSC) devices has led to impressive improvements of power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) over the last few years from 3.8% (2009) to 9.7% (2012) and recently certified PCE over 20% (2016) has been achieved. The advantage of the perovskite material properties allows the development of fully solution-processed fabrication, which makes this solar technology compatible for a roll-to-roll printing process with potentially low-cost. Other than the need for higher efficiencies, the long-term stability of PSCs is essential for practical outdoor applications. In order to obtain further improvements in the stability of PSCs, a detailed understanding of the device degradation mechanisms is required. Several research groups have provided fundamental insight into different aspects affecting the aging process of PSCs. Multiple degradation factors have been identified in operating devices employing hybrid organic–inorganic methylammonium lead halide (MAPbI3), namely the influence of temperature, moisture, oxygen, electric-field, and UV-light which are detrimental to the performance of PSCs. However, a recent study showed that oxygen and light are the major factors that influence PSC degradation instead of ambient moisture. For instance, it has been reported that the presence of pinholes at the surface of 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD) and photo-degradation were found to be the main degradation causes of PSCs. Since then, several approaches have been conducted to improve PSC stability. The design of a new hydrophobic hole transport layer (HTL) shows promising stability improvement in hindering the penetration of water into the MAPbI3 layer.

Despite different material processing steps that could improve passivation toward moisture air and oxygen by the perovskite interlayer, an encapsulation technique is essential to overcome poor device stability and prevent gas release by hydroiodic acid (HI) and methylamine (CH3NH2) into the ambient atmosphere. Most previous stability studies have focused on PSCs based on TiO2 as an electron transporting layer (ETL) under accelerated testing conditions and storage time by utilizing fully encapsulated and hydrophobic passivation layer. Regardless, the stability of PSC devices based on ZnO as an ETL has been rarely investigated. It is noteworthy that ZnO is highly compatible with low-temperature fabrication of roll-to-roll flexible PSCs. In addition, the dynamic changes of hysteresis as a function of aging time and humidity have been observed recently; however, the mechanism and the reason behind are not clearly understood so far. Therefore, the degradation mechanism and hysteresis as a function of storage time (shelf life) require further complementary investigations.
In this report, we aim to investigate the shelf life stability and monitor the hysteresis changes with storage time of planar PSCs based on sol–gel ZnO as an ETL. We found that photovoltaic performance deteriorates in the absence of encapsulation as a function of storage time, which causes severe photocurrent hysteresis. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) depth profile analysis revealed that penetration of moisture/O2 from the top electrode causes shifts of ionic (defect vacancies) concentration within the MAPbI3 layer and diffusion of iodine into the HTL. The non-destructive impedance spectroscopy measurement further confirms the decrements of short circuit current density (Jsc) and fill factor (FF) upon aging, mainly due to the inhibition of charge transport from the HTL to the anode. From chronoamperometry measurement, it is suggested that hysteresis changes with storage time correlated with the dynamic changes of activation energy and charge trapping due to accumulation of iodine. Remarkably, air-stable device performance up to ∼1000 h can be achieved while simultaneously maintaining the hysteresis using novel passivation methods for moisture/O2, which consist of a polyimide tape and a UV-cured sealant with glass encapsulation.

In this study, we aim to better understand the degradation mechanism caused by moist air on partially and fully encapsulated PSC devices. Each set of eight cells was stored in the dark at ambient temperature (∼25 °C) and 35–45% relative humidity (RH). The encapsulation systems used in this work are illustrated in Fig. 1a and b, while the non-encapsulated device was fabricated as a reference and is shown in Fig. S1.Fig. 1c–e depict the representative J–V characteristics measured under illumination of 100 mW cm−2 as a function of storage time. The non-encapsulated device (fresh device: 0 h) demonstrated an open circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.022 V, Jsc of 19.02 mA cm2, FF of 59.75%, and power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 10.94% in the reverse sweep direction. After 24 h in dark ambient air, the photovoltaic performance was improved up to a PCE of 13.57%, as summarized in Fig. 2. A similar behavior was observed for partially and fully encapsulated devices after 48 and 72 h, respectively. A maximum PCE of 15.12% was achieved by the fully encapsulated device (Fig. 2d). Improvements of non-, partial, and fully encapsulated PSC devices after storage at different durations were expected due to the partial oxidation of spiro-OMeTAD by O2− species, allowing improvement of hole conductivity, and thus facilitating efficient charge transfer from the HTL to the anode.

At a certain period of storage time, the PSC device without encapsulation retained up to 55% of its initial efficiency for up to ∼100 h under similar ambient conditions. Furthermore, the partially encapsulated device showed prolonged stability, retaining up to ∼70% of its initial PCE during a storage time of ∼300 h, suggesting that Kapton® polyimide (PI) tape can be used for temporary moisture/O2 passivation. However, for the forward sweep direction, significant changes of the J–V curves (Fig. 1c and d) were clearly observed at longer storage times, and the photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Fig. S2. The s-shape curves were observed at 96 h and 264 h for non- and partially encapsulated devices, respectively, and indicate a lower FF value. Consequently, this indicates that hysteresis becomes more severe as a function of storage time. Based on a previous report, s-shape curves and reduced Voc are related to metal contact degradation of PSCs after aging. However, the Voc value did not show significant changes, implying that the degradation of the metal electrode is unlikely the major factor in this work.
To determine the reason for Jsc decrease with storage time for the partial encapsulation device, photo-induced charge extraction by linearly increasing voltage (photo-CELIV) measurement was employed as shown in Fig. S3. Based on the extraction values, the charge mobility decreases linearly by 1.2 fold from 3.20 to 2.55 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 after a storage time of ∼260 h. These findings imply that moisture/O2 ingression strongly influences the MAPbI3/HTL layer, leading to reduced charge mobility and increased extracted charge carrier transit time (from ∼50 to ∼56 μs). These results strongly suggest that moisture/O2 penetration induces charge trapping within the MAPbI3/HTL layer, which is the major factor hindering charge transport and lowering the photovoltaic performance. In contrast, the fully encapsulated PSC device maintained up to ∼97% of the initial efficiency (Fig. 2) and exhibited negligible changes of charge mobility (not shown here).

In order to understand the chemical degradation of PSCs after storage in dark ambient air, XPS depth profile analysis was performed for full device configuration of ITO/ZnO/MAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag. The atomic percentage of each element was obtained from narrow-scan XPS with an interval sputter time of 100 s and sputtering conditions similar to a previous study.Fig. 3a depicts the atomic percentage (at%) of elemental distribution as a function of sputter time for a fresh sample (without the encapsulated device), along with the schematic representation of each layer. Meanwhile, the depth profiles after storage for 72 and 240 h are shown in Fig. S4. The C 1s and N 1s element concentrations are constant at sputter times from 400 to 2000 s and can be assigned to the spiro-OMeTAD layer, where the changes of at% after 2000 s are probably caused by the underlying layer interface of MAPbI3. Detailed analysis can be found in the ESI.Fig. 3b clearly shows that the I/Pb ratio is roughly 2.0 at the peak intensities of I and Pb for the fresh sample, which is less than the theoretical stoichiometry value of 3.0 due to the incomplete conversion of iodine into the MAPbI3 film. The I/Pb ratio gradually decreases to 1.8 after aging the sample for 240 h in ambient air, while the distribution of iodine also significantly shifts, leading to an I/Pb ratio greater than 3.0 at the spiro-OMeTAD/MAPbI3 interfaces. Interestingly, the Fig. 3b inset shows negligible iodine concentration within the spiro-OMeTAD at a sputter time of 500 s for the fresh sample; however, further aging in ambient air for 240 h yields 0.7 at% iodide. A previous report observed a decreasing trend of I/Pb on the surface of the MAPbI3 film (without spiro-OMeTAD) over time due to decomposition-induced releases of HI and CH3NH2 gases to the air. Instead of being released into the air, our finding revealed that the distribution of iodine concentration within the MAPbI3 is affected, probably due to the small amount of moisture/O2 that penetrates through Ag electrodes. This leads to the accumulation of iodine near the spiro-OMeTAD/MAPbI3 interface and further facilitates the diffusion of iodine toward the spiro-OMeTAD layer.


The non-destructive measurement via impedance spectroscopy has been carried out in order to monitor the PSC degradation as a function of storage time due to the changes in interfacial electrical properties. The Nyquist plots of partially and fully encapsulated devices are shown in Fig. 3c. The two semicircular features at the first and second arc can be clearly observed; therefore, equivalent circuit analysis was employed for quantitative evaluation of the PSCs, as shown in Fig. 3c. The high-frequency region (first semicircle) is assigned to the charge-transport resistance at the interface of the HTL/Ag electrode (RHTL) and constant phase element (CPE), or a non-ideal capacitor was used to provide better fitting. The low-frequency region (second semicircle) corresponds to the interfacial recombination resistance (Rrec) at the ETL/perovskite interface, and CPEμ represents the chemical capacitance. The series resistance (Rs) of ∼10 Ω cm2 was consistent for all samples and attributed to the ITO substrate and wire resistance. The extracted Rrec (Fig. S5) demonstrates a decreasing trend with applied voltage, which is in accordance with the literature. However, Rrec exhibits negligible changes (same order of magnitude) even after aging for 240 and 960 h for partially and fully encapsulated devices, respectively. These findings are in agreement with the insignificant Voc changes observed in Fig. 1a, and it is noteworthy that extended storage time does not influence the recombination rate. Strikingly, as shown in Fig. 3d, the RHTL for the partially encapsulated device increases by two-fold after a storage time of 240 h, suggesting that the charge transfer from the HTL to the anode was notably inhibited. This implies that changes in spiro-OMeTAD electrical properties are mainly caused by accumulation and diffusion of iodine from the MAPbI3 layer towards the HTL, as observed earlier by the XPS depth profile. Consequently, this could lower the Jsc and FF of PSC devices (Fig. 1d) and cause a detrimental effect on photovoltaic performance. In contrast, the fully encapsulated device shows negligible changes in RHTL, indicating a stable spiro-OMeTAD layer.


As mentioned previously during J–V analysis, different J–V curves between forward and reverse voltage scans can be observed and indicate hysteresis. The degree of hysteresis (DoH) was calculated using eqn (S1) and the extracted values are plotted in Fig. 4a. Notably, DoH for both non- and partially encapsulated devices shows a linear increase with storage time, indicating that hysteresis worsened for both devices. Meanwhile, DoH for the fully encapsulated device was almost constant at 0.2 after 200 h of storage time. In order to further investigate the origin of hysteresis, the temperature-dependent chronoamperometry measurement was performed to investigate the activation energy (Ea), and change with storage time was monitored only for partially and fully encapsulated devices, since the rate of DoH increase was too fast for the non-encapsulated device. The transient photocurrent characteristics of the PSC poling at forward (+0.8 V) and reverse (−0.2 V) bias are shown in Fig. S6. The decay times (τ) as a function of temperature (T) for forward and reverse biases are shown in Fig. 4b (partially encapsulated device). From the linear relationship between decay time (τ) and 1/T, Ea can be estimated from the Arrhenius relationship, τ ∼ exp(−Ea/kbT), where kb represents Boltzmann's constant. Fig. 4c depicts the Ea for forward and reverse biases as 0.23 and 0.19 eV, respectively, at an initial storage time of 24 h (partially encapsulated device). Similarly, the Ea value of the fully encapsulated device is about 0.22 eV; however, only the forward bias decay time was recorded due to the difficulty in fitting the gradual rise and decay curves at reverse bias. It is important to note that this finding is in good agreement with our previous report Ea of ∼0.2 eV (calculated based on J–V dependent on temperature) for ZnO/MAPbI3 configuration. A further detailed comparison of Ea values based on theoretical and experimental data from a published report is summarized in Table S1.

Upon longer aging times, the Ea gradually decreases to 0.15 eV at forward bias (+0.8 V), while it rapidly increases to 0.40 eV at reverse bias (−0.2 V). As a result, the discrepancy of Ea between forward and reverse bias becomes larger, as shown in Fig. 4c. These findings are consistent with the increasing trend of DoH with storage time (for the partially encapsulated device). Furthermore, these values are comparable to the theoretical calculation for ionic defect vacancies, namely iodide (VI) and methylammonium (VMA) vacancy migration of ∼0.10 eV and ∼0.46 eV, respectively, and are in good agreement with the electromigration of MA+, reported as ∼0.36 eV (Table S1). Meanwhile, the interstitial defect migration was not commonly observed in inorganic perovskite oxides or halides; therefore, VI and VMA were mainly responsible for ionic migration. The observation of MA ion migration in this work could originate from the chemical decomposition byproduct of MAPbI3 into MAI due to penetration of moisture/O2 into the device. Interestingly, the Ea value of 0.22 eV for the fully encapsulated device is almost constant even up to 960 h (Fig. 4c).
In order to explain the changes of Ea with aging, we proposed a plausible degradation mechanism in this work. As previously explained in the XPS depth profile, the shift of iodine distribution upon device exposure to ambient air causes different ionic species concentrations within the perovskite layer, as illustrated in Fig. 4d. This creates two distinctive regions namely, a defect vacancy-poor regime located near the spiro-OMeTAD/MAPbI3 interface (region A), and subsequently, leaving behind the vacancy which gives rise to a defect vacancy-rich regime close to the ETL (region B). Under forward and/or reverse bias conditions, the VI and VMA could migrate to the corresponding electron/hole-selective interface, resulting in temporary n- or p-type doping, as shown in Fig. 4e (with lower hysteresis). For aging PSCs, the penetration of moisture/O2 causes the two following scenarios: (i) VI more favorably migrates from region A toward the HTL, while the VMA migration was limited, thus creating unbalanced n and p doping near the interface. Under reverse bias, the migration of VI from the interface near the HTL to region B was hindered due to the VI-poor region; (ii) this negative effect is worsened due to the interfacial charge trapping of iodine accumulation near the spiro-OMeTAD layer, as evidenced by decreased carrier mobility. These findings lead to severe hysteresis due to the s-shape J–V curves in the forward scan direction (Fig. 1c and d). According to a previous report, the combination effects of ion migration and charge trapping could cause s-shaped J–V curves, thus promoting larger hysteresis.
Based on the above findings, encapsulation can be used as an effective passivation method for moisture/O2, as well as to enhance PSC stability. However, it is suggested that introducing an interfacial layer between the perovskite and HTL may prevent the diffusion of iodine ions to the spiro-OMeTAD layer. Additionally, inserting air-stable metal oxides into the HTL or interlayer between the HTL and top electrodes may boost the device stability in ambient air and act to minimize the penetration of moisture/O2, thus prolonging the photovoltaic performance and simultaneously maintaining hysteresis.

In this work, we investigated the key mechanism that contributes to degradation of photovoltaic performance and hysteresis in the planar device configuration ITO/ZnO/MAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag. During storage in ambient air, photovoltaic performance rapidly decreases, particularly the Jsc and FF, resulting in lower PCE, while the photocurrent hysteresis becomes severe for devices without complete encapsulation. Accordingly, the increase of hysteresis gives rise to difficulty in determining the real photoconversion efficiency with aging time. Upon aging time, the decrement of Jsc and FF is mainly caused by the inhibition of charge transport from spiro-OMeTAD to the anode. Meanwhile, the increase of hysteresis with storage time is due to the changes of activation energy originated from shifts of ionic distribution within the MAPbI3 layer and charge trapping near the HTL layer which is induced by accumulation of iodine. Accordingly, this finding provides the degradation mechanism of planar PSCs which is not limited to only the ETL of the ZnO thin film, but also the TiO2 compact layer or any other n-type metal oxides with spiro-OMeTAD as HTL. Remarkably, the negative effect can be prevented with a fully encapsulated device, which demonstrates stable photovoltaic performance (retained 97% of its initial efficiency), while simultaneously maintaining hysteresis for up to ∼1000 h of storage time by efficient moisture/O2 passivation.


The sol–gel ZnO solution was prepared based on a previously reported method. Methylammonium iodide (CH3NH3I; MAI) was synthesized by mixing methylamine (27.8 ml, 40 wt% in H2O, Aldrich) and hydroiodic acid (30 ml, 57 wt% in water, Aldrich) at 0 °C for 2 h. CH3NH3I was acquired by removing the solvent at 50 °C using rotary evaporation. The powder was re-dissolved in an ethanol and diethyl ether solution several times, and then the precipitate was filtered. Subsequently, the MAI product was dried in a vacuum oven at 60 °C for 12 h. Lead iodide (99%) and spiro-OMeTAD were purchased from Aldrich and Jilin OLED Materials Co., respectively. The HTL containing 75 mg of spiro-OMeTAD, 17.5 μl of Li-TFSI (520 mg ml−1 of LiTFSI in acetonitrile), and 28.8 μl of tBP in 1 ml of chlorobenzene was prepared and stored in a dark N2 glovebox.


The patterned ITO glass substrates (∼10 Ω □−1) were cleaned sequentially with acetone, ethanol, and isopropanol for 20 min. Prior to spin-coating the ZnO layer at 5000 rpm for 30 s, the substrate was dried on a hotplate at 120 °C for 10 min and treated with ultraviolet ozone (UVO) plasma for 15 min, followed by dynamic annealing at 150 °C for 20 min under ambient air. The 400 mg ml−1 PbI2 solution in DMF was stirred for 2 h in ambient air prior to being spin-cast onto the ZnO layer at 5000 rpm for 40 s and annealing at 100 °C for 5 min. Afterward, a 200 μl droplet of MAI solution (40 mg ml−1 in IPA) was allowed to sit for 20 s prior to spinning at 5000 rpm for 30 s, followed by annealing at 80 °C for 10 min (ambient air RH < 40%) to yield the crystalline MAPbI3. The HTL layer was formed by spin-coating the spiro-OMeTAD solution on top of the perovskite film at 3000 rpm for 60 s in a N2 glovebox. Finally, 100 nm of Ag was thermally evaporated (∼10−6 Torr) with an active area of 0.096 cm2 as defined by a metal mask.


The device was encapsulated in a N2 glovebox using Kapton® polyimide tape on the completed devices (partial encapsulation). For full encapsulation, 200 μl of UV-curable sealant (NOA 63, Norland Products Inc.) was placed onto the PI tape surface, followed by a bare glass (thickness of 0.7 mm) cap with a rim of 2 mm to limit water ingress into the sides of the device. These steps are critical to effectively block water diffusion into the device. Finally, the curing process was completed by exposing the devices to UV light (LIT-2000, Nextron) for 900 s. In addition to temporary moisture/O2 passivation, the function of the PI tape is to prevent degradation of the perovskite layer caused by UV light during the curing process. The water vapor transmission rate (WVTR) of PI tape was measured using the Ca corrosion test, as shown in Fig. S7.


The J–V curves were recorded under simulated AM 1.5G illumination with an irradiance of 100 mW cm−2 (Oriel Sol 1A, Newport) and Keithley 2400 SMU as a function of storage time with a fixed voltage step size of 30 mV and delay time of 10 ms, where the slow scan rate can be referred to our previous report. The forward and reverse voltage scan directions were monitored. In order to accurately define the active area, a metal mask with an exposed area of 0.096 cm2 was used during the J–V measurements. The cross-section images of the PSC device were examined by using a field-emission scanning electron microscope Hitachi S-4800 as shown in Fig. S8. The photo-CELIV setup was similar to that in our previous report. The tdelay of ∼1 μs with an applied voltage of 0.1 V and offset voltage of 0.8 V was fixed for all devices. The XPS depth profiles (ESCALAB 250Xi, Thermo Scientific) were measured for an interval sputtering time of 100 s with a 1 keV Ar+ beam, and XPS analysis was performed with a monochromatic Al Kα X-ray beam with a spot size of 300 μm. Quantification and deconvolution were evaluated based on Shirley background subtraction using Avantage software for narrow scan spectra with % concentration accuracy of each element. The impedance spectroscopy and transient chronoamperometry measurement were carried out using an impedance analyzer (CompactStat, IVIUM Tech.). The Nyquist plot was fitted using ZView software (Scribner Associates). For chronoamperometry, the device was held at a forward bias (+0.8 V) and open circuit for 10 s in the dark, followed by white LED illumination under short circuit conditions (V = 0) for 60 s. Afterward, reverse bias (−0.2 V) was applied for 10 s in the dark and followed by white LED illumination for 60 s. The transient decay curves are shown in Fig. S6. The decay and rise of photocurrent density were fitted with a double exponential decay function according to the literature.


This work was supported by the Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning (KETEP) and the Ministry of Trade, Industry & Energy (MOTIE) of the Republic of Korea (No. 20153030012720). This study was also supported by the Institute for Information & communications Technology Promotion (IITP) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIP) (No. R7520-16-0010). R. T. G. acknowledges support of this work by Korea Research Fellowship Program through the NRF of Korea funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT, and Future Planning.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta09202k
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017