 DOI: 10.1039/D1TC02812J
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 9982-9989


Shendong
Xu
,

Zheng
Liang
,

Haiying
Zheng
,

Liying
Zhang
,

Xiaoxiao
Xu
,

Huifen
Xu
,

Liangzheng
Zhu
,

Jiajiu
Ye
,

Guozhen
Liu
* and 

Xu
Pan
*

Key Laboratory of Photovoltaic and Energy Conservation Materials, Institute of Solid State Physics, Hefei Institutes of Physical Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hefei 230031, China. E-mail: gzliu@issp.ac.cn; xpan@rntek.cas.cn

University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026, China

Institutes of Physical Science and Information Technology, Anhui University, Hefei, 230601, China

Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Condensed Matter Physics at Extreme Conditions, High Magnetic Field Laboratory, Chinese Academy of Science, Hefei 230031, Anhui, China

Received
17th June 2021
, Accepted 6th July 2021
First published on 12th July 2021
Because the heterostructure of soft perovskite possesses a weak bonding nature, the photovoltaic performance and stability of devices are limited by numerous under-coordinated ions (Pb2+ or CH3NH3+) or iodine vacancies at the TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3 interface. Herein, organic super-halide salt tetrabutylammonium borohydride (TABH) was introduced to the TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3 interface, and it impeded the movement of decomposed components from the soft CH3NH3PbI3 lattice and thus increased the trap passivation effect. As a result, there was an increase in the power conversion efficiency (PCE) from 18.2% to as high as 20.4% with suppressed hysteresis, which can be ascribed to the incorporated TABH-optimized energy level alignment and fewer iodine vacancies as well as traps. Furthermore, considering the strong chemical interactions of the Pb–BH4−t bond, the under-coordinated lead ions were stabilized by the incorporation of the TABH interlayer and were able to impede ion migration or volatilization, thereby enhancing the stability of perovskite solar cells (PSCs). More importantly, PSCs maintained 80% of their initial efficiency after storage for 1200 h in the ambient environment. This work provides a facile interface strategy that compensates for the intrinsic instability of soft perovskite's heterostructure and demonstrates the fabrication of highly efficient PSCs for further application.

Organic–inorganic metal halide perovskite materials have become a prime candidate for solar cells because of their superior power conversion efficiency (PCE), which has increased from 3.8% to 25.5% over the last decade. The device architecture of a semiconductor's heterostructure is analogous to that of a sandwich, with the perovskite active layer in the middle between the electron transport layer (ETL) and hole transport layer (HTL). Thus, ideal ETL or HTL materials possess a suitable energy level alignment and high electron or hole mobility, which are the key features that enable the achievement of highly efficient and stable perovskite solar cells (PSCs).

More importantly, the construction of defect-free and stable ETL- or HTL-perovskite heterostructures is essential for long-term application of PSCs. On the perovskite side near the interface of the heterostructure, the perovskite lattice is easily decomposed due to the relatively weak chemical bonds of assemblies, such as ionic and hydrogen bonds. As a result, a large number of uncoordinated metal and organic ions (Pb2+ or CH3NH3+) and vacancies (I−) are formed at the interface during annealing. These defects tend to form electron traps and accelerate degradation under the influence of light illumination, humidity, and heat. Especially in CH3NH3PbI3 crystal, the uncoordinated Pb2+ on the interface is sensitive to oxygen and water, leading to the formation of lead oxide and hydroxide when exposed to surrounding ambient conditions. Similarly, uncoordinated CH3NH3+ on the crystal surface prefers to bind with water molecules, resulting in degradation of the crystal surface. Furthermore, it is easy for iodide vacancies to form at the interface of the ETL-perovskite heterostructure, which will instigate interfacial charge recombination, causing photocurrent loss and hysteresis in PSCs.
Several strategies have been reported to effectively modify the ETL/CH3NH3PbI3 heterostructure. For instance, various modifiers were employed to modify the interface between TiO2 and perovskite, including bis-PCBM:DMC, graphene, ammonium salts, fullerene (C60), and a self-assembled monolayer (SAM) of fullerene derivatives as well as metal oxide. Additionally, various functional groups exhibited the ability to improve performance by interacting with TiO2 and perovskite, such as carboxyl and hydroxyl groups. However, research on how to stabilize weak TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3 heterostructure remains a challenge, and it could assist in increasing our understanding of passivation defects and ultimately improving efficiency and stability. Through the analysis of theoretical calculation and experimental studies, it was determined that the interface stability of the soft perovskite heterostructure is mainly affected by uncoordinated atoms and vacancies, which decompose from the interface and do not contribute to the formation of the long-term stable heterostructure on the surface of perovskite. Han et al. reported a solution-processing strategy to stabilize the perovskite-HTL heterostructure by forming strong chemical bonds on the soft perovskite surface, which effectively hindered the degradation process and significantly enhanced device stability. Therefore, stabilization of the perovskite heterostructure at interfaces through anchoring and passivation techniques is a feasible approach to achieve operative stability and perfect PCE.
Here, we first introduce the organic super-halide salt tetrabutylammonium borohydride (TABH) into the surface of mesoporous TiO2 to stabilize the TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3 heterostructure via the simultaneous formation of stronger chemical bonds and decreased iodide vacancy. As a result, TABH can hasten charge extraction and transport via forming surface dipoles and matching with the perovskite active layer. The iodide vacancy (anionic I−) at the TiO2-perovskite interface can be partially substituted with super-halogen BH4−, due to the similar chemical properties and ionic radius of BH4−. This behavior can decrease the trap-state density and mitigate the charge accumulation as well as charge recombination at the interface. More importantly, we enabled strong chemical interactions of Pb–BH4− by passivation of TABH. The super halogen BH4− ions in TABH are favorable for coordination or bond formation with uncoordinated Pb ions on the surface of perovskite, thus stabilizing the TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3 heterostructure and inhibiting ion migration. The short-circuit current density (Jsc) and fill factor (FF) were enhanced, and the PCE of the perovskite device was increased from 18.2% to 20.4% with suppressed hysteresis. Furthermore, the stability of ETL based on TABH-modified mesoporous TiO2 was significantly improved when compared with the bare TiO2 ETL. Constructing a stable and low-defect TiO2-perovskite heterostructure interface delivered outstanding performance and provides a facile route for interface modification strategies.

Tetrabutylammonium borohydride (TABH) was employed to modify the interface between mesoporous TiO2 and the perovskite absorber layer. A schematic representation of the post-treatment with TABH–ethanol solution on the surface of mesoporous TiO2 films is shown in Fig. 1a. The compact TiO2 and mesoporous TiO2 films were fabricated via previously reported spray pyrolysis and spin-coating methods, respectively. After the above preparation, the TABH-ethanol solution was spin-coated onto the mesoporous TiO2 surface, followed by reannealing at 100 °C for 10 minutes. Fig. 1b and c show top-view scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of untreated TiO2 and TABH-modified TiO2 samples. Compared with the untreated TiO2 film, the mesoporous TiO2 films treated with TABH–ethanol solution show similar surface morphology, which indicates that TABH did not change the mesoporous morphology of TiO2 after post-treatment.

It is well known that a mesoporous TiO2 structure is conducive to the growth of perovskite crystals, and it is mainly affected by the size of the TiO2 nanoparticles and surface roughness. In order to clarify the detailed change in the surface morphology, further characterization was conducted by atomic force microscopy (AFM) to visualize the film surface. Fig. S1 (ESI) shows the change in the surface topographic AFM images of the TiO2 and TABH-modified TiO2 samples. It is clear that the root-mean-square (RMS) roughness value is 16.5 nm for the untreated TiO2 surface, while the RMS roughness value is 18.8 nm for the TABH-modified TiO2 film, indicating that the TABH-modified film benefited from the growth of perovskite crystals.
As shown in Fig. 1d, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was performed to further verify the existence and interaction of TABH in mesoporous TiO2 films. A detectable layer of TABH was observed on the top of the mesoporous TiO2 film. The characterization results showed that characteristic peaks of N 1s and B 1s were found, and were ascribed to cation and anion moieties from TABH, located at approximately 400 eV and 150 eV, respectively, and further demonstrating the coverage of TABH on the TiO2 surface. The intensities of the C 1s and N 1s peaks for TABH-modified TiO2 were much higher than those of untreated TiO2 because of the organic components in TABH. As shown in the top left corner of Fig. 1d or Fig. S2 (ESI), it was found that the Ti 2p peaks with TABH and without TABH were shifted by approximately 1 eV, revealing strong electronic interactions between TABH and the TiO2. Then, the effects of the TiO2 layer optical transmittance before and after TABH modification were investigated. Fig. S3 (ESI) compares the optical transmission spectra of the TiO2 layer without TABH to those of TiO2 films with TABH. After TABH modification, the TiO2 layer displayed a higher average transmittance in the wavelength range of 600–800 nm, possibly due to redistribution of the light irradiation and reduced reflection, causing more photon flux into the perovskite absorber that improved the efficiency of the solar cells.
Previous research results showed that TABH forms a surface dipole to modulate the energy level of TiO2 so that its work function is matched with the perovskite active layer. To understand the evolution in work function, the work functions of untreated TiO2 and TABH-modified TiO2 were measured using Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM), and the surface potential images are shown in Fig. 1e and f. The relative potential of TABH-modified TiO2 is significantly higher than that of untreated TiO2, indicating that TABH-modified TiO2 has a lower work function. This phenomenon can be ascribed to the permanent dipole forming a point outward on the free space of the TiO2 surface, thus reducing the work function through the downward displacement of the vacuum level. In other words, when a dipole is formed on the surface of TiO2, the band edge approaches the vacuum energy level of the perovskite active layer, thus reducing the electron injection barrier. Schematics of the device structure and energy level are shown in Fig. 2a and b. With the decrease in vacuum energy level, there is an upshift in the conduction band, which reduces the energy loss in the electron transport process, and suppresses the electron transport from the TiO2 to the perovskite active layer, thus achieving higher electron extraction efficiency.
Based on the above experimental analysis and results, the TABH-modified mesoporous-TiO2 layer decreased light loss, eased energy level mismatches, and decreased the interaction with titanium oxide. Most importantly, TABH can form electronic interactions with perovskite molecules to effectively achieve defect passivation and interface stabilization. Our previous work showed that the super halogen BH4− molecule in TABH can compensate iodide vacancy and interact with lead atoms and organic cations due to the ion radius of BH4− being similar to that of iodine, and the valence of the BH4− molecule being the same as that of iodide. In this work, redundant TABH molecules were used to modify the mesoporous-TiO2 layer to interact in situ with the perovskite interface. BH4− molecules in TABH not only eliminate iodide vacancy, but they also interact with uncoordinated lead atoms to reduce interface defects and stabilize uncoordinated atoms, promoting device performance improvement and enhancing device stability. Fig. 2c illustrates the mechanism of interaction between BH4− molecules and perovskite.
To evaluate the influence of TABH on the growth process of perovskite films, we used SEM to compare the surface morphology of perovskite films before and after TABH modification. As exhibited in Fig. 2d and e, there were some obvious holes on the surface of the unmodified control film, while the modified film showed a flat and defect-free morphology. Fig. S4 and S5 (ESI) show the unmodified and modified film morphology at low magnification, respectively, and the modified film has fewer defects. TABH molecules provide heterogeneous nucleation sites for the nucleation and growth of perovskite, thus improving the crystal quality of the film. Fig. S6 (ESI) shows the X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of MAPbI3-based perovskite films with and without TABH. The films display the crystal planes of (110) and (220) clearly, for the trigonal perovskite phase. The results indicate that TABH can significantly enhance the crystallinity of perovskite, which is consistent with the results of the AFM and SEM analysis.
After investigating the influence of TABH on a mesoporous titanium oxide layer and perovskite absorber, its impact on the photovoltaic performance was determined. A device with a FTO/compact-TiO2/mesoporous-TiO2/perovskite/spiro-MeOTAD/Au structure was prepared. To establish the optimal solution concentration of TABH, the photovoltaic performance was tested using a series of different concentrations of TABH. Fig. S7 (ESI) shows the typical current density versus voltage (J–V) curves of PSCs with different concentrations of TABH under simulated AM 1.5G one sun illumination (100 mW cm−2). The champion PCE of 20.40% was achieved with 4 mg mL−1 TABH modification. The related photovoltaic parameters, including short-circuit current (Jsc), open-circuit voltage (Voc), and fill factor (FF) were improved. The device performance did not always increase with increasing concentration, but it increased at the beginning stage and then decayed. To simplify the analysis, hereinafter, all measurements and discussions are based on optimal concentration devices and control devices.
As comparatively shown in Fig. 3a and Table 1, the optimal PCE of unmodified devices (control device) with reverse and forward scan were 18.20 and 16.13%, respectively. After TABH modification, the champion devices delivered a PCE of 20.40% and 19.73% in forward and reverse scans, with obtained Jsc of 24.00 and 23.90 mA cm−2, Voc of 1.11 and 1.08 V, and FF of 76.62 and 76.48%, respectively. The hysteresis of current and voltage of the modified device was clearly suppressed. The improvement in photovoltaic performance and the weakening of the hysteresis effect can be ascribed to the improved electron extraction that resulted from interface trap state passivation of the perovskite layer The increased electron extraction efficiency is also due to the formation of a surface dipole at the interface by TABH, which reduces the electron injection barrier and thus increases the current. The higher Jsc is attributed to the modified TiO2 with a more optimal matched work function and balanced charge carriers due to the improved electron injection. Incident photon-to-current efficiencies (IPCE) and integrated photocurrent (dotted lines) for the champion cell of the modified and unmodified device are shown in Fig. 3b.
Devices

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Without TABH – reverse
21.84
1.07
77.75
18.20
Without TABH – forward
21.27
1.04
72.31
16.13
With TABH – reverse
24.00
1.11
76.62
20.4
With TABH – forward
23.90
1.08
76.48
19.73
The results show that the IPCE enhancement is focused on the long wavelength range, and is possibly responsible for the improved crystallinity and compactness of the modified films. This is consistent with the results of the SEM and XRD analyses. The enhanced Jsc of the device with TABH is associated with the integrated photocurrent due to the enlargements over a broad spectral range with TABH. The IPCE characterization demonstrated that the device with interface modification possesses stronger absorption capacity. Furthermore, the modified TiO2 film with a slightly enhanced light transmittance can trigger more photon flux into the perovskite absorber to improve the IPCE in the entire wavelength range and Jsc of the solar cells. Moreover, a negligible current–voltage hysteresis phenomenon was observed in the modified devices, which can be ascribed to eliminating the interfacial charge accumulation and reducing the trap-state density at the interface (as discussed below).
As a confirmation of the stabilized power output with TABH, time-dependent current density and PCE were measured at the maximum power point (Vmax = 0.87V for the unmodified device and Vmax = 0.91V for the modified device). As illustrated in Fig. 3d and f, a stabilized PCE of 19.6% and a photocurrent of 21.5 mA cm−2 were observed after 300 s for the modified device, which is higher than 17.1% and 19.6 mA cm−2 for the untreated device, respectively. A statistical distribution diagram of the TABH impact on photovoltaic parameters was also plotted, including PCE, Jsc, FF, and Voc, based on more than 20 solar cells, as shown in Fig. 3c. Key parameters of the modified device dramatically improved, and it possessed higher repeatability than that of the device without modification. Therefore, through the characterization of the photovoltaic performance of the devices before and after modification, it was determined that TABH can greatly enhance the performance of the devices, which can be attributed to the optimal interface state and the perovskite absorber layer with fewer defects.
To further explore the effects of TABH modification on photophysical properties, steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy was conducted in perovskite films with and without TABH modification deposited on FTO/compactTiO2/mesoporous-TiO2 substrates. Fig. 4a comparatively shows the PL spectra of perovskite films, and there is strongly quenched PL in the films with TABH modification. The PL results revealed that the TABH-modified mesoporous titanium oxide was more conducive to electron injection and lower surface charge trapping, due to more optimal matching energy levels. Thus, the interfacial charge accumulation is relieved, the hysteresis is reduced, and the current density is enhanced. The changes in the radiative recombination and carrier lifetime were further confirmed by time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL). Fig. 4b shows PL intensity decay curves fitted by the single-exponential decay equation of I(t) = I0 + A1exp(−t/τ), where τ denotes a slow decay time constant. As displayed in Table S1 (ESI), the PL lifetimes of the modified and unmodified perovskite films are 24 and 31.56 ns, respectively. The electron extraction was improved after TABH modification, and the high-quality film weakened the charge recombination rate to some extent, due to the higher open circuit voltage and negligible current–voltage hysteresis of the modified device. Additionally, in order to explore the influence of TABH on the UV-Vis absorption of perovskite film, the perovskite film was characterized before and after modification. As shown in Fig. S8 (ESI), the results indicate that the modified perovskite film possesses a stronger light absorption ability, which further proves that the modification can enhance the crystallization of perovskite effectively and then improve Jsc.
The space-charge-limited current (SCLC) technique is an effective tool used to quantitatively evaluate the defect density of perovskite films. Therefore, the fabricated electron-only device (FTO/TiO2/m-TiO2(/TABH)/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/Au) was investigated to determine the effect of TABH modification on the electron trap state in the perovskite absorber.Fig. 4c illustrates the typical dark J–V curves of the devices based on modified TiO2 and unmodified TiO2. The density of defect states can be calculated via equation nt = (2εε0VTFL)/(eL2), where e, L, ε, ε0, represent elementary charge, film thickness, dielectric constant of perovskite (ε = 32), and vacuum dielectric constant, respectively. VTFL can be obtained by fitting the dark J–V curve, which is 0.087 V (with TABH) and 0.163 V (without TABH), respectively. According to the calculation, the defect state density of the modified device was reduced from 2.01 × 1015 cm−3 to 1.06 × 1015 cm−3, which indicated that the quality of the modified film had been greatly improved.
The charge recombination process was further explored inside the device through the relationship curve between voltage and light intensity. Fig. 4d shows the slope of Vocversus light intensity, and the modified device (1.44KT/q) exhibits a lower slope than the unmodified device (1.73KT/q), indicating that the TABH modification suppressed the nonradiative recombination. Furthermore, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurement has been widely used to obtain deep insight into the dynamic behavior of PSCs. A large number of studies has shown that in a typical PSC, the high-frequency region of the impedance spectroscopy is associated with the absorber bulk recombination, while the low-frequency region is closely related to the interface charge recombination and charge accumulation.
In this work, EIS (under dark conditions) was used to study the interface or bulk charge behavior in PSCs. The impedance spectroscopy of the control and modified devices was performed at different applied voltages in the frequency range of 1 MHz to 0.1 Hz in the dark. Fig. 4e depicts the equivalent circuit model and Nyquist plots of perovskite devices under dark conditions at a bias of 0.8 V. The semicircle diameter of the impedance diagram curve of the modified device is much larger than that of the unmodified device in the low-frequency region, which indicates that there is higher interfacial recombination resistance in the modified device. Additionally, Fig. S9 (ESI) plots a set of the characteristic impedance spectroscopy results obtained from both cells at different applied potentials under dark working conditions. Fig. S10–S12 (ESI) show the details of the high-frequency region of the impedance spectroscopy.
As shown in Tables S2 and S3 (ESI), the PSCs with TABH have higher low-frequency resistance and higher high-frequency resistance at different applied potentials. This demonstrates that the recombination within the absorber bulk is also inhibited. Fig. 4f further compares the changes in the low-frequency resistance at different bias voltages before and after TABH modification. The low-frequency resistance (Fig. 4f) was clearly increased after interface modification for all the investigated applied voltages, which is extraordinarily in accordance with the above PL analysis. The EIS results confirmed that the TABH modification at the m-TiO2/perovskite interface reduced the loss of interfacial and bulk charge recombination. Consequently, the modified device exhibited a higher open-circuit voltage, which reveals the intrinsic feature for the enhancement of device performance by TABH modification.
The environmental stability of perovskite devices is one of the important factors hindering their development and application. Therefore, systematic experimental exploration of the long-term stability of the device was carried out, and included ultraviolet light stability, thermal stability, and humidity stability. Fig. 5 shows the normalized PCE variation curves of unencapsulated devices based on unmodified perovskite devices and perovskite devices with optimal TABH modification under UV illumination, 85 °C in a vacuum oven, and environmental conditions (50 ± 10% RH), respectively. As shown in Fig. 5, the stability of the device under UV light was first tested. After 10 hours of exposure to continuous UV light, the results showed that the modified device maintained approximately 60% of the initial value, while the efficiency of the unmodified control device was less than 20%, indicating that defects at the interface were significantly suppressed after the modification of TABH. Most importantly, the interaction between TABH and perovskite molecules inhibited ion migration, which in turn increased the stability of the device under ultraviolet light. The schematic diagram presented in Fig. 3c shows that the interaction of the super-halogen BH4− with organic cations and lead atoms at the surface effectively inhibited ion migration, thereby resisting the degradation of devices. As previously predicted, the thermal stability of the modified device will be significantly improved (as shown in Fig. 5) because the electronic interaction between TABH and perovskite can enhance the overall structural stability and prevent the thermal decomposition process from occurring.
The stability of devices with TABH modification was further investigated under environmental conditions (50 ± 10% RH) without encapsulation. Interestingly, when the device was continuously stored in the environment for more than 1200 hours, the PCE of the modified device was reduced by less than 20%, while the PCE of the unmodified device could only be maintained at half of the initial efficiency. This can be ascribed to TABH during the process of nucleation and crystallization of the perovskite film, which obtained more perfect crystal morphology and lower defect density, thus preventing water molecules from damaging and eroding the device. Undoubtedly, TABH modification of the mesoporous-TiO2 surface not only enhanced the photovoltaic performance of the device, but it also improved the long-term stability of the PSCs.

In summary, this study demonstrated for the first time that the introduction of an organic super-halide salt tetrabutylammonium borohydride (TABH) modification layer can effectively mitigate the electron trap-state density and charge recombination in the ETL-perovskite heterojunction, optimize energy level alignment, enhance the extraction and transport of electrons, and then eliminate the interface charge accumulation, increasing the PCE of the device from 18.2% to 20.4%. Furthermore, the devices exhibited satisfactory stability due to the enhanced heterojunction stability by the formation of electronic interactions between TABH and mesoporous-TiO2 or perovskite. There were even greater advantages because the TABH modifier is beneficial for the nucleation and crystallization of perovskite films, and enabled high-quality polycrystalline films to be obtained with fewer defects. Additionally, the ion migration at the interface and bulk was inhibited in the film, which is one of the main reasons for obtaining devices with a low hysteresis effect. Improvement of device performance and tolerability were possible due to the unique interaction of TABH with perovskite and titanium oxide, and thus, this work provides a facile method for improving device performance and tolerability. Based on this work, an excellent opportunity exists to find more molecules or ions with similar effects, opening a new window for the development of PSCs.


The perovskite devices were fabricated using a one-step method based on mesoporous architecture. Different concentrations of TABH (0, 2, 4, 8 mg mL−1) were used to modify the mesoporous-TiO2. Additional experimental details are provided in the ESI.


This manuscript was written through contributions of all authors. All authors have approved the final version of the manuscript.


The authors declare no competing financial interests.


This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant no. 11904366) and the CASHIPS Director's Fund (No. YZJJ2019QN16).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: The Supporting Information is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website. The Supporting Information contains details of materials preparation, perovskite solar cell fabrication, and characterization as well as film and device aging tests; high-resolution XPS Ti 2p spectra; transmission spectra of the unmodified TiO2 and the TABH-modified TiO2 films; J–V curves of PSCs with different concentrations of TABH modifications; fitted results of TRPL; and top-view SEM images of perovskite films. See DOI: 10.1039/d1tc02812j
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021