 DOI: 10.1039/C6TA03658A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 9958-9966


Yurong
Jiang
*,

Chen
Li
,

Hairui
Liu
,

Ruiping
Qin
 and 

Heng
Ma
*

College of Physics and Electronic Engineering, Henan Province Key Laboratory of Photovoltaic Materials, Henan Normal University, Xinxiang, 453007, China. E-mail: jiangyurong@whut.edu.cn; maheng@htu.edu.cn

Received
2nd May 2016
, Accepted 16th May 2016
First published on 20th May 2016
Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate)(PEDOT:PSS)–molybdenum oxide (MoOx) composite films are used as hole transport layers in planar perovskite solar cells (PSCs) by simply incorporating solution-processed MoOx powders into a PEDOT:PSS solution. Compared to PEDOT:PSS based PSCs, the PEDOT:PSS–MoOx based PSC exhibits an obvious improvement in conversion efficiency, open circuit voltage, and fill factor. The morphology of perovskite films indicates that the film coverage has been improved due to the introduction of MoOx nanospots into the underlayer, which are regarded as the growing sites of the crystal nucleus of the perovskites during annealing. A PEDOT:PSS–MoOx based device with a power conversion efficiency of over 15% has been achieved, suggesting that the PEDOT:PSS–MoOx film is efficient as a hole transport layer in obtaining highly efficient planar perovskite solar cells.

Since the reports on solar cells with organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite materials with high power conversion efficiency in 2012, organolead halide based perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have attracted considerable attention, owing to their simple fabrication process, low material and fabrication costs and high power conversion efficiencies (PCEs). Two types of device structures have been developed; one type of device structure has a layer of scaffold metal oxide, such as TiO2 or Al2O3 on indium tin oxide (ITO) or fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO). Usually, a high-temperature step is needed for the preparation of the scaffold metal oxide layer, and the morphology of the scaffold metal oxide layer strongly affects the photovoltaic performance of the devices. The other type of perovskite solar cell has a planar structure without the scaffold metal oxide layer. The holes and electrons generated in the perovskite layer are transported through the hole-collection and electron-collection layers, respectively, to the two electrodes. The advantages of this structure are the simplicity as well as low-temperature solution processability.

In order to improve the efficiency, most studies are focused on perovskite film processing and relevant material design. Meanwhile, interface control and crystal film growth of perovskite are regarded as the most important factors to obtain high-performance PSCs. Recently, NiOx, GeO2 doped-PEDOT:PSS and TiO2–MoO3 core–shell structures have been demonstrated as efficient hole conductors for planar PSCs with efficiencies exceeding 15%. However, outstanding conductors are still rarely developed and applied in the planar PSCs. Therefore, the implementation of improved interfacial layers is still essential to maximize the device performance.
Recently, sol–gel processed molybdenum oxide (MoOx, x < 3) has been reported as a hole-extraction layer of organic solar cells because MoOx has merits of high transparency, high work function, and high conductivity. In addition, PEDOT:PSS–MoOx mixtures have also been presented as hole transport layers (HTL) in organic solar cells. However, there is no clear study on PEDOT:PSS–MoOx as an efficient HTL in PSC devices. Therefore, based on a consideration that MoOx could ensure the better growth of high quality perovskite films and provide sufficient charge dissociation and extraction, mixed PEDOT:PSS–MoOx is expected to be a perfect hole interfacial film for PSCs.
In this work, solution-processed MoOx nanoparticles were utilized as the dopant of PEDOT:PSS hole conductors in planar PSCs. The introduction of MoOx into PEDOT:PSS significantly enhanced the performance of PSCs. It was found that doping with MoOx improved the coverage of the perovskite layer and reduced the shunting paths. These successful attempts indicate that MoOx has potential to contribute significantly toward high-performance PSCs.

Clevios PVP AI 4083 PEDOT:PSS was bought from Heraeus (Germany). CH3NH3I, PbCl2 (99.999%), and N,N-dimethyl formamide (DMF) (anhydrous, amine free; 99.9%) were purchased from Alfa-Aesar. PC61BM and Bphen were purchased from Nichem Fine Technology Co. Ltd. (Taiwan). CH3NH3I and PbCl2 were dissolved in DMF with a molar ratio of 3:1. The mixture was stirred at 60 °C overnight in a glove-box.

The synthesis of MoOx nanoparticles has been described elsewhere and the application of this material for highly efficient polymer solar cells has been reported by other groups. Molybdenum powder was purchased from Aladdin. First, 0.2 g of metal powder was dispersed in 20 ml ethanol with an ultra-sound bath. Then the solution was mixed with 0.7 ml hydrogen peroxide (30%). Ethanol was used to control the reaction rate between metal powders and hydrogen peroxide. During the reaction, ethanol will provide e− and H+ for the reduction of the metal peroxide; meanwhile H+ can be inserted into the metal oxide lattice to form metal oxide bronzes. After 20 hours of reaction, molybdenum oxide solution turned from gray to blue, which is attributed to the H+ insertion into the metal oxide lattice and then the reduction of a metal element (Mo6+) to the sub-state (Mo5+), forming hydrogen molybdenum bronzes (HxMoO3). Finally, the remaining solvent was vaporized in a dry box, after which the obtained molybdenum bronze was dissolved in commercial PEDOT:PSS solution with different mixing ratios of 0.5 mg ml−1, 1 mg ml−1, and 1.5 mg ml−1 respectively.

Doped PEDOT:PSS films were obtained by spin-coating PEDOT:PSS with the MoOx dopant on a clear ITO surface under 4500 rpm/40 s and then annealing at 140 °C for 20 min. For the perovskite layer, CH3NH3PbI3−xClx was spin coated from a dimethyl formamide (DMF) solution with CH3NH3I (synthesized in a previous study) and PbCl2 in a 3:1 molar ratio. The solution was spin-coated at 4000 rpm for 40 s in an N2 filled glovebox. The annealing of wet perovskite films was carried out by following a typical gradient increased temperature method, which can be found elsewhere. After drying at room temperature for ∼20 min, the samples were slowly heated from 50 °C to 100 °C at a ramp rate of 10 °C/10 min on a hot plate. After that, 20 mg ml−1 PC61BM in chlorobenzene was coated onto the perovskite layer at 2000 rpm for 40 s. Subsequently, the Bphen interfacial layer with 0.5 mg ml−1 in ethanol was spin-coated without additional annealing. Ag (100 nm) was additionally deposited onto the Bphen layer under vacuum at 2 × 106 Torr through a shadow mask, thus defining a device area of 7.25 mm2. The devices have a structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS–MoOx/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/PC61BM/Bphen/Ag (100 nm) (shown in Fig. 1b). Current density–voltage characteristics of PSCs under 1 sun illumination were measured under ambient conditions using a programmable Keithley 2400 source meter under AM 1.5G solar irradiation at 100 mW cm−2 (Newport, Class AAA solar simulator, 94023A-U), and the characteristics have been described elsewhere. The incident-photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) measurement was performed using a system combining a xenon lamp, a monochromator, a chopper and a lock-in amplifier together with a calibrated silicon photodetector. The distribution of MoOx in the PEODT:PSS film was investigated using a high-resolution scanning transmission electron microscope (JEM2200FS operating at 200 kV, JEOL).


We used a conventional planar heterojunction architecture of indium tin oxide (ITO)/PEDOT:PSS–MoOx (40 nm)/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx (300 nm)/PC61BM (50 nm)/Bphen (10 nm)/Ag (100 nm) (Fig. 1a) to study the influence of the MoOx dopant on the crystal-line perovskite film quality and the device performance. Solution-processed Bphen is employed as an efficient cathode modification layer that can flatten the Ag cathode interface effectively. A cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy image of the device without the Ag electrode is shown in Fig. 1b.



Fig. 2a shows the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of CH3NH3PbI3−xClx based PSCs using the PEDOT:PSS–MoOx layer as an efficient HTL under AM 1.5G conditions (100 mW cm−2). The MoOx was blended in PEDOT:PSS with varied doping ratios from 0.5 to 1.5 mg ml−1. The relevant performance parameters are also summarized in Table 1. The reference device without any MoOx exhibited a PCE of 13.9% with an open circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.92 V, short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 20.9 mA cm−2, and fill factor (FF) of 72.6%. In the case of an optimized MoOx concentration of 1 mg ml−1, the device shows a significantly enhanced PCE of 15.79.0% with a Voc of 0.97 V, Jsc of 21.6 mA cm−2 and FF of 75.4%. By further increasing the amount of MoOx, the cell parameters are decreased rapidly. From Fig. 2a it can be seen that the cell performance is strongly dependent on the amount of dopant. The performance of the PEDOT:PSS–MoOx device is much enhanced (from 13.9% to 15.7%). Analyzing the data, it can be seen that the FF and Voc values have been obviously enhanced. The shunt resistances (Rsh) of the PEDOT:PSS based cells and PEDOT:PSS–MoOx are 1241.1 and 1717.8 Ω, respectively. The smaller Rsh is due to the voids and cracks in the perovskite film resulting in direct contact between the ETL and HTL, which causes the device short circuit (discussed in the following). The contact resistances (Rs) of the PEDOT:PSS based cells and PEDOT:PSS–MoOx are 11.4 and 9.2 Ω, respectively. It is assumed that the PEDOT:PSS_MoOx interlayer induces a good interface contact resulting in the significant reduction of Rs. In addition, the J–V curves of the devices with different scanning directions are recorded in ESI Fig. S1b; no obvious hysteresis has been observed in the J–V curves of the PEDOT:PSS–MoOx based device.

MoOx concentration (mg ml−1)

V
oc


J
sc

FF (%)
PCE (%)

R
s (Ω)

R
sh (Ω)
0
0.92
20.91
72.61
13.90
15.71
1241.19
0.5
0.95
20.82
74.08
14.51
10.83
1430.13
1
0.97
21.59
75.42
15.79
9.28
1717.89
1.5
0.96
21.01
73.11
14.72
9.12
1415.35

Fig. 2b shows the external quantum efficiency (EQE) curves of the PEDOT:PSS based device and PEDOT:PSS–MoOx based device (1 mg ml−1) under AM 1.5G illumination; the Jsc calculated by integrating the EQE curve of PEDOT:PSS based device is 21.38 mA cm−2, which is very consistent with the corresponding Jsc (21.59 mA cm−2) obtained from the J–V curves. This result is in good agreement with the enhancement Jsc of the PEDOT:PSS–MoOx based device. Fig. 2c presents the UV-Vis absorption spectra of the perovskite films processed on the PEDOT:PSS–MoOx film with different ratios of the MoOx dopant. The absorption onset of the perovskite layer is at ca. 780 nm, corresponding to an optical bandgap of 1.59 eV. From Fig. 2c it can be seen that the MoOx dopant hardly affects the light absorption of devices.
To determine the variation trend of the device performance, 18 devices were measured to plot a corresponding histogram of PCEs (Fig. 2d). The PCE of the PEDOT:PSS–MoOx (1 mg ml−1) underlayer based devices concentrated in 15%, indicating a good device repeatability.

The synthesized MoOx powders are added simply into a commercial PEDOT:PSS water dispersion (Clevios PVP Al 4083) with different mixing ratios. The PEDOT:PSS–MoOx composite films are then deposited by spin-coating the mixed solution onto cleared ITO by thermal annealing at 140 °C for 20 min in air. Fig. 3a and b show the AFM surface morphology (5 μm × 5 μm) of pristine PEDOT:PSS and PEDOT:PSS–MoOx (1 mg ml−1) composite films. The RMS of the pristine PEDOT:PSS is 1.89 nm, whereas it is 2.11 nm for the PEDOT:PSS–MoOx (1 mg ml−1) composite film. The slightly increased RMS may be attributed to the nano-spots of MoOx (Fig. S2). Noticeably, when increasing the mixing ratio of MoOx, the roughness of the PEDOT:PSS–MoOx composite films is slightly increased (ESI Fig. S2), but there is no obvious change of morphology as evidenced by SEM (ESI Fig. S3). The results indicate that the MoOx nanoparticles maybe disperse uniformly into PEDOT:PSS and hardly affect the morphology of PEDOT:PSS films, which would be beneficial to subsequently form even CH3NH3PbI3−xClx films.

The UPS measurements of a pristine PEDOT:PSS film and PEDOT:PSS–MoOx composite films (1 mg ml−1) on ITO substrates are carried out and the results are shown in Fig. 3c, where the inset is the magnified region of the photoemission cutoff. The work function of the PEDOT:PSS–MoOx composite film is determined to be 5.03 eV, which is slightly higher than that of the pristine PEDOT:PSS (4.99 eV). An increased work function at the anode interface side can result in a better energy alignment between ITO and the perovskite active layer, which is beneficial to improve the Voc of solar cells. This result explains the origin of improved Voc for the PDEOT:PSS–MoOx based device.
We attribute the effective work function change to the change of the chemical structure of PEDOT:PSS by introduction of MoOx. The PSS chain is intercalated into the MoOx nanospot, modifying the chemical structure of thePEDOT:PSS conjugated polymer.
In order to investigate the chemical composition of the MoOx thin films using low-temperature solution processing, the X-ray photoelectron spectrum (XPS) of the Mo 3d core level of the MoOx film is shown in ESI Fig. S4. Fig. S4a indicates that Mo6+ and Mo5+ are found to be the major species present in the MoOx. Mo5+ species are contributed to metal-like electrical properties of MoOx, which are beneficial for the collection of photo-generated charge carriers owing to the more favorable band structure and are finally able to increase Jsc. This result is consistent with the improved Jsc of the PEDOT:PSS–MoOx based device.
In addition, the MoOx is presented as the nanoparticles and is not the continuous film on glass (ESI Fig. S4c and d), which is consistent with the SEM image in ESI Fig. S1. This is also the reason that the MoOx could not completely replace the PEDOT:PSS as the hole conductor in PSCs although the MoOx has a higher work function than PEDOT:PSS (ESI Fig. S4b). This is presumably caused by shorting associated with pinholes on the MoOx layer. However, the high work function of MoOx results in a work function enhancement of PEDOT:PSS–MoOx, which can provide sufficient charge dissociation and extraction and would result in an increase of Voc of PSCs.

The surface morphology and microstructure of perovskite play a critical role in the performance of planar PSCs. To clarify the nature of the influence of MoOx, the morphology and coverage of perovskite films are evaluated. Fig. 4 shows the scanning electron microscopy images of perovskite films incorporated with varied concentrations of MoOx. From Fig. 4a, one can see that PEDOT:PSS only based perovskite films exhibit many pinholes and voids (circled with the red line). The existing defects and bad film coverage would lead to poor charge transport and shorting.

It is therefore expected that further enhancement might be achievable if the voids and micro-cracks could be eliminated or be smaller. In the case of 1 mg ml−1 MoOx incorporation, an almost continuous perovskite film with increased grain boundaries can be observed. We can also see that the voids on the perovskite film surface become smaller and partly disappear as shown in Fig. 4c.
Notably, with further increase of the MoOx concentration in the case of 1.5 mg ml−1 MoOx incorporation as shown in Fig. 4d, the individual grain size is decreased, whereas more small voids are produced between the grains, which is not beneficial to the transport of charges. The perovskite contains many pin-holes and voids which can result in direct contact between the ETL and HTL. The direct contact is detrimental to the device performance. In a word, the optimal ratio of MoOx could improve the coverage of the perovskite film; this fact is favorable for the suppression of shunting paths in the device and benefits the electron extraction and collection, resulting in an enhanced FF and Voc; these are consistent with the J–V measurements under illumination.
The X-ray diffraction spectrometry (XRD) patterns in Fig. 4e and f confirmed the role of MoOx in the growth of perovskite crystal films. Slightly strong diffraction peaks at 14.14° and 28.43° correspond to the diffractions from (110) and (220), respectively, in crystal planes of the CH3NH3PbI3−xClx perovskite structure, which are consistent with the reported results. Noticeably, PEDOT:PSS–MoOx (1 mg ml−1) based CH3NH3PbI3−xClx shows stronger diffraction peaks from (110), indicating the better morphology, which agrees well with the SEM observations. Good film coverage means a better photovoltaic performance, which is confirmed by the J–V characteristics.
We attribute the diffraction peak enhancement of CH3NH3PbI3−xClx films to improved coverage as the voids and grain gaps become small or disappear with introduction of MoOx into PEDOT:PSS. It can be seen from the TEM image of PEDOT:PSS–MoOx in Fig. 5a that the MoOx nano-spots (NPs) distribute randomly in the PEDOT:PSS–MoOx film. We can also clearly see the lattice fringe of MoOx with the HRTEM image (Fig. 5b) obtained from the circled area in Fig. 5a, and the nano-spots are about 5 nm. We assume that these MoOx nano-spots could act as the growing sites of the crystal nucleus of CH3NH3PbI3−xClx films during annealing. A schematic diagram of seed-mediated growth dynamics by MoOx NPs for perovskite crystallization can be proposed as shown in Fig. 5c. The PEDOT:PSS–MoOx composite precursor was first spin-coated onto the ITO substrates. MoOx NPs acted as the growing sites of the crystal nucleus and perovskites onto the PEDOT:PSS–MoOx underlayer start to grow from the MoOx NPs. By the seed-mediation of MoOx particles, a good film coverage of CH3NH3PbI3−xClx films is obtained as shown in the SEM image.
The seed-mediated growth method by adopting nanoparticles has been widely used in controlling the film growth. In addition, the inexistence of other impurity phases suggests a full conversion of the starting products to the perovskite phase in all samples. It means that there is no large influence of MoOx (below 1.5 mg ml−1) on the phase purity of the CH3NH3PbI3−xClx perovskites.

Photoluminescence (PL) measurements are performed on planar perovskite films to figure out the role of MoOx in the process of photo-generated carriers efficiently. Analysis of the PL quenching behavior of these systems provides information about the rate of the charge (hole) injection into the hole transport material from the perovskite layer relative to that of recombination of photo-induced charges created. As examples, the steady-state PL spectra of PEDOT:PSS and PEDOT:PSS–MoOx based perovskite films are shown in Fig. 6a. In our devices, PEDOT:PSS or PEDOT:PSS–MoOx as a hole transport layer can extract photo-generated carriers. We observed a significant quenching effect when MoOx was incorporated into PEDOT:PSS, and the PL intensity is the weakest at 1 mg ml−1 of the doping concentration. It indicates that the PEDOT:PSS–MoOx (1 mg ml−1) film extracts holes more efficiently, which may decrease charge recombination in devices. Meanwhile, when the doping concentration increases to 1.5 mg ml−1, the PL intensity becomes strong. We attribute this enhanced PL to the carrier irradiative recombination which arises from the defects of small voids in the perovskite film. The results demonstrate that optimal doping MoOx into PEDOT:PSS can enhance extraction and transport ability of the hole transport layer.

Impedance Spectroscopy (IS) measurements can provide insights into charge transport, recombination, and accumulation of charges within the perovskite-based devices. IS measurements are carried out in the dark. Fig. 6b shows the Nyquist plots of the CH3NH3PbI3−xClx perovskites solar cells based on PEDOT:PSS and PEDOT:PSS–MoOx films. The solid curves are the fitting results with a transmission line model, as shown in the inset in Fig. 6b. The frequency range chosen for the measurement was from 1 Hz to 106 Hz with an AC amplitude of 10 mV at 0.85 V bias. It can be seen from Fig. 6b that the expected single semicircle occurs. We have conducted performance fitting and simulation of these data for an equivalent circuit shown in the inset. The resistance element Rs in the high frequency range over 1 MHz is influenced by the contact resistance between both the contacts, which are Ag/PCBM and PEDOT:PSS/ITO or PEDOT:PSS–MoOx/ITO. The values of Rs for PEDOT:PSS and PEDOT:PSS–MoOx based PSCs are 5.45 Ω and 3.24 Ω, respectively, which implies the reduction of contact resistance due to the introduction of MoOx, which is consistent with the good conductive ability of Mo5+. The variation trend is consistent with the above mentioned J–V characteristics. Rs is lower in PEDOT:PSS–MoOx based PSCs, which is associated with the good conductive ability of Mo5+. IS evaluation further verified the excellent role of PEDOT:PSS–MoOx as a hole transporting layer in planar PSCs.

In summary, we have demonstrated a solution-processed PEDOT:PSS–MoOx composite film as a hole transport layer of the planar perovskite solar cells by simply incorporating the MoOx powders into the PEDOT:PSS aqueous dispersion. The resulting cell shows the best performance with a PCE of 15.79% and FF of 75.4%. There is a remarkable improvement from 13.9% to 15.79% compared with the pristine PEDOT:PSS based device. From AFM, SEM and TEM evaluations, the formed MoOx nano-spots in PEDOT:PSS improve the coverage of perovskite films which could reduce the shunting paths and improve the electrical contacts, and we believed that MoOx NPs acted as the growing sites of the crystal nucleus of perovskites during annealing. Moreover, the UPS, PL and IS measurements demonstrate that the present MoOx increases the work function of the hole transport layer resulting in better energy alignment and carrier transport ability. All the results could explain the higher Voc, FF and PEC of the corresponding solar cells. Therefore, MoOx plays an essential role in obtaining highly efficient planar PSCs. This finding gives a hint to seek other suitable nano-particle materials for fabricating highly efficient PSCs in the future.


This work is supported by the Chinese Nature Science Foundation Committee (No. 61540016), Henan Provincial Basic and Frontier Project (No. 152300410088) and Henan normal university youth backbone teachers (No. 5101029470611).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta03658a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016