 DOI: 10.1039/C5TA08250A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1306-1311


Juyoung
Yun
,

Jaehoon
Ryu
,

Jungsup
Lee
,

Haejun
Yu
 and 

Jyongsik
Jang
*

School of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Seoul National University, 599 Gwanangno, Gwanakgu, Seoul 151-742, Korea. E-mail: jsjang@plaza.snu.ac.kr; Fax: +82 2 880 1604; Tel: +82 2 880 7069

Received
14th October 2015
, Accepted 7th December 2015
First published on 9th December 2015
Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have been developed intensively recently due to their excellent efficiency. In this study, PSCs were fabricated using a hollow structure as a scaffold layer and Al doped TiO2 (Al-TiO2) as a compact layer. The hollow structure showed effective loading of perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3Cl3−x) on the working electrode of the PSCs. In particular, using SiO2/TiO2 hollow nanoparticles (STHNPs) instead of TiO2 hollow nanoparticles (THNPs) as insulators improved the open circuit voltage, because STHNPs did not allow photogenerated electrons to transfer easily from the perovskite. Al-TiO2 compact layers synthesized using a low temperature procedure (≤150 °C) promoted electron extraction and reduced the recombination, leading to enhanced power conversion efficiency (PCE). An optimum PCE of 14.7% was achieved for PSCs based on STHNP scaffold layers with Al doping in the electron transfer layer.

Derived from dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), hybrid organic–inorganic perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have attracted attention in recent years due to their excellent efficiency. Perovskite has a direct band gap that absorbs light across the entire visible solar spectrum. In addition, its exciton binding energy is small, allowing easy division into electrons and holes. Furthermore, it has higher carrier mobility and longer charge diffusion length than dyes used in DSSCs or organic photovoltaic devices. Many studies have reported various approaches for the improvement of the power conversion efficiency (PCE), including interface engineering, solvent engineering, design of nanostructures, and introduction of a new charge transfer layer.

Typical PSCs can be divided into two classes, mesoporous PSCs and planar heterojunction PSCs. Mesoporous PSCs are composed of a fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) glass, a compact layer (a electron transport layer), a scaffold layer (a nanostructured oxide layer), a perovskite layer, a hole transport layer and an Au layer. On the other hand, planar heterojunction PSCs are fabricated without a scaffold layer. In particular, modulating the compact layer or scaffold layer improves the efficiency of PSCs. TiO2, ZnO, Al2O3, ZrO2 and SiO2 nanoparticles or nanostructures have usually been introduced into the scaffold layer. Compared to TiO2 and ZnO, Al2O3, ZrO2 and SiO2 are insulating materials that cannot transport electrons from perovskite. Hence, electron transport should occur within the perovskite itself. PSCs based on insulating materials have used CH3NH3PbI3−xClx as a light absorber and an electron transfer material, because CH3NH3PbI3−xClx has a higher charge carrier mobility and longer exciton diffusion length than CH3NH3PbI3. The effective loading of perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3−xClx) on PSCs based on insulating materials is one method for improving the efficiency of PSCs.
In addition, various nanocrystals such as TiO2, SnO2, and ZnO have been introduced into the compact layer to improve the photovoltaic parameters. Among them, TiO2 compact layer-based PSCs have the best efficiency. However, TiO2 nanocrystals have relatively poor optical and electronic properties compared to SnO2, In2O3, and ZnO. SnO2 and ZnO as compact layers have been used to improve the optical and electronic properties. Another approach for enhancing the electronic properties of the TiO2 compact layer is doping with Y or Al. However, yttrium (Y) is an expensive, rare earth element and Al doping requires high-temperature sintering. There is thus a need to identify common, inexpensive dopants that utilize a low-temperature doping procedure.
Here, we successfully used two types of hollow nanoparticles (HNPs) as a scaffold layer and doped the compact layer with Al at a low temperature (≤150 °C). The two types of HNPs with monodispersity were synthesized using two etching processes on SiO2/TiO2 core/shell nanoparticles (STCSNPs). Both HNPs possessed structural advantages facilitating the loading of perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3−xClx). In particular, SiO2/TiO2 HNPs (STHNPs) as insulating materials enhanced the open circuit voltage, leading to the improvement of the power conversion efficiency (PCE). Furthermore, Al-doping in the compact layer may improve electronic properties. PSCs based on STHNPs and Al-doping exhibited a high PCE of 14.7% due to effective loading of perovskite and enhanced electronic properties. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of the PSC application with HNPs as scaffold materials and Al-doping at a low temperature in the electron transfer layer.

SiO2/TiO2 HNPs (STHNPs) and TiO2 HNPs (THNPs) were synthesized via sonication-mediated and selective etching processes, respectively, on SiO2/TiO2 core/shell nanoparticles (STCSNPs) to create a scaffold layer in perovskite solar cells, as previously reported. Fig. S1a shows a schematic illustration of the experimental procedure for the two types of HNPs (see the Experimental section). Fig. S1b–d exhibit high resolution transmission electron microscopy (HR-TEM) images of single particles of STCSNPs, STHNPs, and THNPs, respectively. The scaffold layers were formed from two types of HNPs using spin coating, with the thickness controlled by the concentration of HNPs in a dispersed ethanol solution. Silica nanoparticles (NPs) of the same size as the HNPs were used as a control to evaluate the effect of the hollow structure. Fig. 1a shows a representative colored cross-sectional field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) image of the perovskite solar cells including a scaffold layer. A flat, compact electron collection layer with a thickness of about 50 nm was deposited by spin-coating. The thicknesses of the scaffold layer, perovskite layer and hole transfer layer were about 250 nm, 300 nm, and 200 nm, respectively, deposited by spin-coating. Fig. 1b–d show transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of uniform STHNPs, THNPs, and silica NPs with an average diameter of 100 nm. Fig. S2 shows STEM-EDS images and STHNP line-mapping, indicating that the STHNPs have a 15 nm-thick hollow structural shell composed of silica and titania. Fig. S3a shows the X-ray diffraction (XRD) spectra of the STHNPs and THNPs illustrating that STHNPs contained amorphous silica and titania, while THNPs contained a crystalline phase of TiO2 anatase. Fig. 1e–g present cross-sectional FE-SEM images of devices with scaffold layers based on STHNPs, THNPs, and silica NPs, respectively. In all devices, the perovskite infiltrates deeply into the scaffold layer. The crystallinity of perovskite films on the scaffold layer is shown in Fig. S3b.


Fig. 2a presents UV/vis spectra of the 600 nm-thick perovskite films based on silica NPs, THNPs and STHNPs to investigate the influence of the scaffold layer on the absorption of perovskite. HNP-based perovskite films absorbed better than silica NP-based films due to increased loading into the hollow inner cavity that silica NPs lack. Fig. 2b shows photoluminescence analyses of perovskite films based on STHNP, THNP, and silica NP scaffolds to investigate the electron transport in scaffold layers. Because the absorptions of both HNP-based perovskite films at 500 nm were similar, PL analysis was conducted at an excitation of 500 nm. The PL emission peak of the THNPs/perovskite films was much lower than that of the STHNPs/perovskite films, implying that photogenerated electrons from the perovskite layer were quenched by electron injection into the TiO2 anatase grain in the THNPs. The PL intensity of silica/perovskite films was lower than that of STHNPs/perovskite films due to the low intensity of the UV-vis spectra at 500 nm wavelength. The open circuit voltage of PSCs based on STHNPs and silica was higher than that of PSCs based on THNPs. Fig. 2c illustrates the flow of photogenerated electrons in scaffold layers; the generated electrons were not transported to silica NPs and STHNPs from the perovskite. The STHNPs in the scaffold layer acted similar to Al2O3, ZrO2 and SiO2 NPs; however, the THNPs contained anatase grains which were able to transport the generated electrons from the perovskite layer. Even though the STHNPs had TiO2, it was hard to transport electrons through STHNPs due to SiO2. Usually, the difference of the conduction band between anatase TiO2 and perovskite was 0.1–0.2 eV. From the XRD data and HR-TEM images of STHNPs, there was no crystalline phase of TiO2. The amorphous TiO2 (3.6 eV) had a larger band gap than the crystalline phase (3.0–3.2 eV). Furthermore, the composite of SiO2 and TiO2 could increase the band gap of TiO2. Furthermore, both Si and Ti are distributed evenly in STHNP as shown in the STEM image (Fig. S2). According to the results, the generated electrons could not be transported to the conduction band of STHNPs.

Fig. 3 shows the photovoltaic parameters used to investigate the influence of HNPs in the scaffold layer: the short circuit current Jsc, open circuit voltage Voc, fill factor FF, and power conversion efficiency (PCE). Jsc of devices containing both types of HNPs was higher than that of devices containing silica NPs due to efficient perovskite loading enabled by the HNPs' superior structural characteristics, as shown in the UV-vis absorption spectra. The Voc measurements exhibited a different tendency from that found for Jsc. Silica NPs and STHNPs acted as insulators with a large band-gap, and when they were used as a scaffold material, all electronic charges resided in perovskite. The electrons were transferred in the perovskite itself. There were fewer sub-band gap states in the perovskite layer than in the mesoporous TiO2 layer. According to the results, Voc of PSCs based on an insulating scaffold material was larger than that of PSCs based on THNPs. In addition, the FF was influenced by the coverage of perovskite and the interface resistance. No large differences in FF were observed. The THNPs have an interface resistance with TiO2 and perovskite, unlike an insulating scaffold, resulting in the lowest value of FF. The results show that, overall, PSC-based STHNPs had the highest PCE. Fig. S4 shows the J–V curves of the devices based on different scaffolds.
Al doping (2–4 mol%) in the compact layer was employed at a low sintering temperature (≤150 °C) to enhance the performance of the devices. Fig. 4a shows the XRD analyses of unmodified and Al-doped TiO2 nanocrystals used as a compact layer. Both peaks indicated the presence of the anatase phase of TiO2 and the absence of Al2O3. The difference of ionic radii (Al(III) = 0.53 nm, Ti(IV) = 0.61 nm) caused the small shift of the peak due to small distortion by Al-doping. Hence, weak doping with Al induced only a small impurity concentration, resulting in similar XRD spectra in both cases. Fig. 4b–d show X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) spectra of Al2p, Ti2p, and O1s for TiO2 and Al-TiO2 nanocrystals. The Al2p peak existed in Al-TiO2 nanocrystals but not in TiO2 nanocrystals, as shown in Fig. 4b. Fig. 4c shows that the Ti binding energy in the anatase lattice is close to 458 eV. In the case of Al-TiO2 nanocrystals, the Ti2p peak was slightly shifted to the left to a lower binding energy compared to TiO2 nanocrystals resulting from charge transfer through Al-doping. This result may suggest that the TiO2 lattice contained Al ions without the formation of different phases.Fig. 4d shows the O1s peaks of both nanocrystals, which were found to be similar. The major component of the binding energy of O1s was close to 530.0 eV, corresponding to bonding with Ti and Al. The other component, with a binding energy of 531.4 eV, may correspond to hydrated bonds or carbonate bonds from surface contamination. XRD and XPS data thus indicate that the compact layer was successfully doped with Al.
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were performed to characterize the kinetics of charge transfer due to Al-doping in the compact layer. Fig. 5 shows Nyquist plots of devices including an Al-TiO2 compact layer and a TiO2 compact layer under dark conditions. Usually, under dark conditions, a Nyquist plot shows two distinct arcs at low and higher frequencies in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). In case of PSCs, the first arc is attributed to HTM transport and extraction in the Au electrode at higher frequencies. According to the simplified transmission line model, this first arc at higher frequencies is almost indistinguishable. The second arc at low frequencies is related to recombination resistance as the main arc. A main arc, showing the recombination of the charge carriers, Rrec, was observed in the EIS spectra. The recombination resistance of the Al-TiO2 compact layer was larger than that of the TiO2 compact layer. Two Al(III) substitutions with Ti(IV) eliminated oxygen defects from the TiO2 lattice and created a favorable structure thermodynamically and electronically. Thus, electrons generated in the perovskite could be transferred easily to the Al-TiO2 compact layer. Improved electron extraction and reduced recombination were observed in the Al-TiO2 compact layer, leading to an increase in Voc and Jsc in perovskite solar cells.
PSCs were prepared using an Al-TiO2 compact layer with Al concentrations in the range of 0–0.8 mol% to investigate the effect of doping density on performance. Fig. S5 shows the J–V curves and photovoltaic parameters of PSCs including an Al-TiO2 compact layer with variable Al concentrations. The highest value of Jsc was exhibited for the sample containing 2–4 mol% of Al doping. An enhanced local conduction band was observed as the concentration of Al doping increased, followed by a reduction in charge injection, lowering the photocurrent, Jsc. Thus, increasing the Al-doping concentration above 2–4 mol% decreased Jsc and the PCE of the PSCs. Fig. 6a shows the respective J–V curves and photovoltaic parameters of PSCs based on TiO2 and Al-TiO2 compact layers. PSCs based on an Al-TiO2 compact layer exhibited an enhanced photocurrent density of Jsc = 17.8 mA cm−2 and an open circuit voltage of Voc = 1.05 V. These values were higher than those of PSCs based on a TiO2 compact layer, with a photocurrent density of Jsc = 16.4 mA cm−2 and an open circuit voltage of Voc = 1.00 V. Therefore, the Al-TiO2 compact layer improved the PCE due to enhanced electron extraction and a reduced recombination rate. Fig. 6b shows incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra of PSCs based on TiO2 and Al-TiO2 compact layers. The enhanced electron extraction and reduced recombination rate increased the quantum efficiency at overall wavelengths. The calculated Jscs from IPCE spectra were 16.3 mA cm−2 and 18.1 mA cm−2 for TiO2 and Al-TiO2 compact layers. These values are similar to the results shown in Fig. 6a. PSCs' overall efficiency was improved through the synergistic effect of an STHNP scaffold layer and an Al-doped compact layer. Fig. 6c shows the optimal J–V curve of PSCs based on STHNPs and an Al-TiO2 compact layer. The photovoltaic parameters of this device were found to be Jsc = 18.7 mA cm−2, Voc = 1.05 V, FF = 0.747, and PCE η = 14.7%, under 1.5 G irradiance. This PCE value was significantly higher than that of PSCs based on silica and a TiO2 compact layer, with a PCE of 10.7%.

In summary, two types of HNPs as a scaffold layer and an Al-TiO2 compact layer were introduced into PSCs to improve efficiency. STHNPs included amorphous phases of SiO2 and TiO2, while THNPs included a crystalline TiO2 anatase phase. Both HNPs improved perovskite loading, leading to an increased Jsc. Unlike THNPs, STHNPs acted as insulators in the scaffold layer, leading to an enhanced Voc. In addition, Al doping of the compact layer at low temperatures (≤150 °C) led to an increase in Jsc and Voc due to easy electron extraction and a reduced recombination rate. Overall, implementation of STHNP scaffold layers and Al-TiO2 compact layers led to a higher PCE of 14.7%, compared to 10.7% for PSCs based on silica NPs with a TiO2 compact layer.


Two types of 100 nm HNPs were synthesized using a sol–gel method and two separate etching processes. First, silica/titania core/shell nanoparticles (STCSNPs) were prepared according to a sol–gel method. A solution containing 79 mL of ethanol, 1.4 mL of de-ionized (DI) water, and 3.9 mL of ammonia solution was stirred for 1 h at 38 °C, followed by injection of 2.9 mL of tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS). After 10 h, the silica nanoparticles were synthesized with ca. 75 nm diameter. Then, 3.6 mL of titanium isopropoxide (TIP) was injected into a solution with 18 mL of acetonitrile and 54 mL of ethanol at 4 °C, which reacted with the silica nanoparticles. The STCSNPs were then separated using a centrifuge and washed with ethanol and DI water. The STHNPs were formed via sonication-mediated etching using an ammonia solution and STCSNPs. The THNPs were formed via calcination and NaOH etching. Following etching, the two types of HNPs were isolated by centrifugation and then washed and dried in a vacuum oven.


A 30 mL HI solution (57 wt% in water, Aldrich) was reacted with 27 mL of methylamine (40 wt% in methanol, Aldrich) in a 250 mL round flask at 0 °C for 2 h, with stirring. A rotary evaporator was used to remove the solvent and obtain the precipitate. The brown methylammonium iodide (CH3NH3I) was washed several times using diethyl ether and dried in a vacuum oven for 24 h.


The TiO2 and Al-doped TiO2 nanocrystals were synthesized via a non-hydrolytic sol–gel method. First, 0.5 mL of TiCl4 was dropped into 2 mL of ethanol while stirring, and then 10 mL of benzyl alcohol was added, resulting in yellow sol. This solution was heated at 80 °C for 8 h, leading to a white suspension. The TiO2 crystals formed were washed with diethyl ether, and then redispersed in ethanol at a concentration of 5 mg mL−1. The Al doped TiO2 nanocrystals were synthesized using a similar method to TiO2 nanocrystals. It included AlCl3 addition to 2mL of ethanol at a molar ratio to TiCl4. The rest of the procedures were the same. Titanium diisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate) (Tiacac, 75% in isopropanol, Aldrich) was then added to the solution at a concentration of 15–20 μL mL−1 to stabilize the crystals.


Patterned fluorine-doped tin dioxide (FTO) glass electrodes were washed using a sonication method with DI water, acetone, and isopropanol for 60 min, separately. The compact layer was spin-coated on FTO glass with a TiO2 or Al-doped TiO2 nanocrystal solution at 3000 rpm for 60 s, and then annealed at 150 °C for 30 min in ambient air. The thickness of the compact layer was about 50 nm. A scaffold layer with a thickness of around 250 nm was deposited using spin coating. A dimethylformamide (DMF) solution (40 wt% in a mixture of 3:1 (CH3NH3I:PbCl2)) was prepared for the perovskite layer. The perovskite solution was cast onto the substrate at 3000 rpm for 60 s, and then annealed at 100 °C for 60 min in ambient air to form perovskite films (CH3NH3PbI3−xClx). The hole transfer layer was spin-coated using a 1 mL chlorobenzene solution including 72.3 mg mL−1 of Spiro-MeOTAD, 28.8 μL of tert-butylpyridine, and 17.5 μL of 1 mL acetonitrile solution containing 520 mg lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl) imide salt at 3500 rpm for 50 s. Finally, an Au counter electrode was formed by thermal evaporation. The active area was 0.09 cm2.


TEM and FE-SEM images were obtained with a JEOL JEM-200CX and JEOL JSM6700-F. The electron energy loss spectroscopy mapping and scanning TEM/energy dispersive spectroscopy line analysis were performed using a JEOL JEM-2100F. X-ray diffraction measurements were performed using a M18XHF-SRA (Mac Science Co., Yokohama, Japan) with a Cu Kα radiation source (λ = 1.5406 Å) at 40 kV and 300 mA (12 kW). UV-vis spectra were obtained using a Lamda 35 (Perkin-Elmer). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy measurements were performed with an AXIS-Hsi. A PerkinElmer LS 45 fluorescence spectrometer was used to perform photoluminesence measurements. EIS spectra were characterized from 0.1 Hz to 250 kHz using a Zahaner Electric IM6 analyzer. Photovoltaic parameters of PSCs were obtained using a 500 W xenon lamp with a MP-160 I-V tracer (EKO Instruments, delay time 0.005 s and scan rate 1.0 V s−1). The incident photocurrent efficiency (IPCE; PV measurement. Inc., Boulder, CO) was characterized from 300 nm to 850 nm (chopper frequency 4 Hz, without bias light and 10 nm step wavelength).


This work was supported by the Global Frontier R&D Program of the Center for Multiscale Energy System funded by the National Research Foundation under the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology, Korea (2011-0031573).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Schematic illustration of the synthesis of HNPs, HR-TEM and STEM images of HNPs, XRD spectra of HNPs and perovskite, current density–voltage curves of PSCs based on different scaffolds, Al-doping concentrations, transmittance spectra, hysteresis analysis of PSCs, and conductivity of compact layers. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta08250a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016