 DOI: 10.1039/C9TC03407B
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 630-636


Pengfei
Wang
,

Xuechen
Jiao
,

Shengjie
Xu
,

Hao
Wu
,

Christopher R.
McNeill
,

Haijun
Fan
* and 

Xiaozhang
Zhu
*

Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, CAS Key Laboratory of Organic Solids, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China. E-mail: fanhai2008@iccas.ac.cn; xzzhu@iccas.ac.cn

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia

Australian Synchrotron, Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia

Received
24th June 2019
, Accepted 2nd December 2019
First published on 3rd December 2019
Two indenothiophene-based non-fullerene small molecule acceptors (NFSMAs), FTBT and FTTBT, were designed and synthesized to investigate the photovoltaic effect of fusing a thiophene into the core of NFSMAs. Compared with the none-fused FTBT, the thiophene-fused FTTBT achieves a much higher power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 9.79% with a Voc of 0.934 V, a Jsc of 16.01 mA cm−2 and an FF of 65.49%, when it was blended with PM6 polymer donor to fabricate bulk-heterojunction solar cells. Combined photophysical, electrochemical, photovoltaic property and morphology analysis indicates that the boosted device performance mainly lies in two reasons: (i) the incorporation of an electron-donating thiophene ring narrows the optical bandgap by extending π-conjugation, which contributes to a large short-circuit current; (ii) the incorporation of a single thiophene ring transforms the axisymmetrical molecular configuration into a centrosymmetrical one, which decreases the crystallinity and optimizes the packing feature in the blend. It results in a transport-favorable blending morphology and contributes to a high fill factor. The work clarifies an effective molecular design strategy for performance enhancement of organic solar cells.

Organic solar cells (OSCs) are regarded to be a promising technology for solar energy-electricity conversion due to favourable properties such as the low cost, light weight and mechanical flexibility. Electron acceptors are playing crucial roles in achieving high-performance bulk-heterojunction photovoltaic devices. Compared with conventional fullerene-based acceptors, the non-fullerene small-molecule acceptors (NFSMAs) possessing multiple advantages such as the broad and strong absorption in visible and near-infrared region, conveniently tuned energy levels and feasible synthesis, has aroused the interest of researchers. Recently, various NFSMAs have been developed based on diverse frameworks such as the indacenodithiophene (IDT), the indacenodithieno[3,2-b]thiophene (IDTT), diketopyrrolopyrrole (DPP), and the benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene (BDT) units. Promising performance of power conversion efficiency PCEs exceeding 13% have been realized, which leads a notably rapid progress in this field.

To date, numerous NFSMAs with acceptor-donor–acceptor (A–D–A) framework have been developed by modifying the “D” and “A” segments or the side-chains. The modulation enables the fine-tuning of molecular electronic properties including energy level, bandgap and molecule-packing behaviour. However, despite considerable efforts, a clear correlation between the molecular structure of photovoltaic materials and their final device performance remains unveiled, which urges more exploration. Recently, studies around the effect of molecular geometry of photovoltaic materials to the performance of their photovoltaic devices were well demonstrated, which provides new viewing angle for such correlation. Chen et al. compared the photovoltaic performance of a series of oligothiophene-based small-molecule donors with demonstrating that devices based on DRCN5T, DRCN7T and DRCN9T, which are axisymmetric, exhibited relatively higher power conversion efficiency (PCE) than DRCN4T, DRCN6T and DRCN8T, which are centrosymmetric. The effect is attributed to the dipole moment and morphology reasons. Li et al. further found that an asymmetry induced only by a certain building block could obviously affect the performance of resulted materials. In their study, polymer donor with a monomer of minor symmetry and reduced crystallinity, yielded more efficient non-fullerene OSCs. Yang et al. focused on the effect of molecular symmetry for NFSMAs and reported that devices based on NFSMAs of asymmetrical cores generally exhibit higher fill factors (FFs) compared to their symmetrical analogues. The large dipole moments within asymmetrical NFSMAs was attributed to be the key factor which induces both enhanced intermolecular interaction and antiparallel packing feature. Therefore, both lamellar packing and π–π stacking were effectively enhanced. Yan et al. indicated that the asymmetric design of NFSMAs also benefits the reduction of energy losses in OSCs, which can be attributed to the variation of molecular conformations as it induces small changes in the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) level from neutral to ion state. Sun et al. also demonstrated that by introducing asymmetric end groups into NFSMAs, obvious changes in optical absorption, bandgap and energy levels could be achieved, which were attributed to the varied electron-withdrawing ability. Despite noticeable progresses, efficient methodology regarding the fine-tuning over the performance of photovoltaic materials especially on NFSMAs via asymmetry-control has not been established, nor an efficient control method been demonstrated. Recently, we reported an axisymmetric small-molecule acceptor NFTI based on a fluorene central core, which obtains a PCE of 9.02% by blending with PBDB-T polymer donor to fabricate bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) solar cells. By replacing the fluorene to indenoindene core, we developed a centrosymmetric molecular acceptor, NITI, which delivers a PCE of 12.74%. Such promising result inspire our further explore towards developing more efficient asymmetry-control method over NFSMAs for their photovoltaic application.
Regarding performance enhancement of OSCs, π-conjugation tuning was viewed to be a feasible solution. Bäuerle et al. compared the photovoltaic property of three small molecules with different terminal units and found that increased π-conjugation by rising number of double bonds coming from the terminal units contributes to an improvement of the PCE. Chen et al. introduced a naphthyl-fused indanone unit as end groups to an A–D–A NFSMA and designed FDNCTF, which obtained a PCE of 11.2%. The improvement on PCE is attributed to the enhanced molecular interaction between donor/acceptor, enhanced light absorption and more ordered packing at solid state due to the extended end-group conjugation. Zhan et al. modified the conjugated side chains onto the molecular backbone of NFSMAs by a 2D conjugation strategy and proposed that simultaneously facilitated intramolecular conjugation and intermolecular interaction benefit both the absorption and charge transport. They also demonstrated that the π-conjugation extension of the central core building block results in similar effect. The study further indicated that there is a limit on expanding the π-conjugation within certain NFSMAs. For instance, in an indene-cored acceptor systems with same end-capping moieties while of number-differentiated fused thiophene rings, NFSMA with eight thiophenes fused would be maximal. Even though, due to the diversity of A–D–A NFSMAs, a general definition of the ideal extended conjugation length of the central building block remains unknown, which urges a better understanding to the integrated effect of end-capping moieties, linkage units and/or the branched substituents attached to the cores, and also inspires exploration towards more effective π-conjugation tuning.
In this manuscript, a simple π-conjugation tuning design was applied for obtaining efficient NFSMAs, which simultaneously realizes a fine tuning of molecular asymmetry. By introducing a single thiophene ring into an axisymmetric indenothiophene-based NFSMA, FTBT, we obtained a centrosymmetric NFSMA, FTTBT (Fig. 1). A wide-bandgap polymer donor PM6 was used to fabricate PM6:FTBT (or FTTBT) bulk-heterojunction solar cells for photovoltaic performance evaluation. The PM6:FTBT solar cell obtains a limited PCE of 3.47% with an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.963 V, a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 7.55 mA cm−2 and an FF of 47.65% while in a sharp contrast, the PM6:FTTBT device achieves an optimal PCE of 9.79% with a Voc of 0.934 V, a Jsc of 16.01 mA cm−2 and an FF of 65.49%, which nearly triples that of the former. By virtue of combined characterizations, the detailed effect of above fusing-a-thiophene design were systematically investigated.

The synthetic details of FTBT and FTTBT are shown in Scheme S1 in the ESI. To obtain FTBT, compound 1 was first synthesized through an esterification reaction of 4-chloro-3-methoxybenzoic acid (yield: 94%). Compound 2 was achieved by a Bromination reaction of compound 1 in a yield of 87%. Compound 3a was obtained from compound 2 by Stille-coupling with 2,5-bis(trimethylstannyl)thiophene (yield: 86%). The double nucleophilic addition reaction of compound 3a with freshly prepared (4-hexylphenyl)magnesium bromide produced tertiary alcohol, which was followed by an acid-mediated intramolecular cyclization reaction to afford compound 4a (yield: 30%). The demethylation of compound 4a with boron tribromide produced compound 5a in a yield of 83%. Compound 6a was obtained from compound 5a and trifluoromethanesulfonic anhydride in a yield of 98%, which further produced compound 7a through a Pd-catalyzed Sonogashira coupling reaction (yield: 76%). The intramolecular cyclization of 7a at 190 °C in use of the sodium sulfide nonahydrate sulphur source produced compound 8a in a yield of 91%. Compound 8a was then treated with n-butyl lithium in anhydrous THF at −78 °C, and quenched with dried N,N-dimethyl formamide. This reaction produces dialdehyde (9a) in a yield of 92%. Finally, the black solid FTBT was obtained by a Knoevenagel condensation reaction of 9a with 2FINCN in a yield of 60%. The synthetic route of FTTBT was similar to FTBT. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) indicated that both FTBT and FTTBT were thermally stable, which show 5% weight losses at ∼395 and 368 °C respectively (Fig. S1 in the ESI).


The ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) absorption spectra of FTBT and FTTBT were showed in Fig. 2a and Table S1 (ESI). FTBT exhibits a maximum molar extinction coefficient of 1.71 × 105 M−1 cm−1 at 678 nm wavelength in chloroform, which is lower than that of FTTBT (1.82 × 105 M−1 cm−1 at 686 nm). In film states, both FTBT and FTTBT show considerable red-shifts compared with their solution absorptions. This may be caused by the restricted internal rotation or the strong π–π interaction in solid states. Shown in Fig. S2 (ESI), the maximal absorption peaks of FTBT and FTTBT films deposited from diluted solutions are both fixed, which implies a negligible influence by restricted internal rotation. The optical bandgaps of FTBT and FTTBT were 1.59 eV and 1.54 eV respectively, calculated from the absorption edge of the films. Combined with a cyclic voltammetry method (Fig. S3, ESI), we determined the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and LUMO energy levels of FTBT and FTTBT to be −5.67/−3.95 eV and −5.57/−4.02 eV respectively. The incorporation of a single thiophene ring lifts the HOMO levels more than the LUMOs, which probably dues to the extended π-conjugation by electron-rich thiophene.


To investigate the photovoltaic properties of FTBT and FTTBT, bulk heterojunction solar cells in a conventional device structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS(poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiopene): poly(styrenesulfonate))/PM6:FTBT(or FTTBT)/PDINO/Al were fabricated, where PDINO were used as a cathodic buffer. Typical current density–voltage (J–V) curves of devices based on FTBT and FTTBT under 100 mW cm−2, AM 1.5G simulated solar illumination were shown in Fig. 3a with detailed parameters summarized in Table 1. Devices based on PM6:FTBT blend obtain an optimal PCE of 3.47% with a Voc of 0.963 V, a Jsc of 7.55 mA cm−2, an FF of 47.65%. In contrast, the devices based on PM6:FTTBT blend achieve a PCE of 9.79% with a Voc of 0.934 V, a Jsc of 16.01 mA cm−2, an FF of 65.49%. Noticeably, unlike FTBT-based devices, the devices based on FTTBT are less dependent to the delicate control such as the thermal annealing or additive-assisted processing (Table S2, ESI), which appeals to the mass production. Calculated energy losses (Eloss), defined as Eloss = Egopt − eVoc, for the two photovoltaic devices shows a ∼20 mV difference between the FTTBT-based sample (0.606 eV) and FTBT-based one (0.627 eV), which is attributed to be an important reason for their dramatic performance gap.

Blend film

V
oc (V)

J
sc
 (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)

a Shown in the parentheses are the Jsc values integrated from the EQE curves.
b Data was collected from 25 devices with the best one shown in parenthesis.
c Data obtained from 29 devices.

PM6:FTBT
0.963
7.55(7.48)
47.65
3.35 ± 0.09(3.47)
PM6:FTTBT
0.934
16.0(15.5)
65.49
9.55 ± 0.14(9.79)
The external quantum efficiency (EQE) curves of optimized devices based on FTBT and FTTBT were shown in Fig. 3b. The spectral response range of PM6:FTTBT device is broader than that of the PM6:FTBT device, which relates with the extended UV-vis absorption of FTTBT compared to FTBT. Meantime, the PM6:FTTBT device shows dramatically high monochromatic conversion efficiency than the PM6:FTBT device across the whole response range. The Jsc values of FTTBT- and FTBT-based devices were 15.53 and 7.48 mA cm−2 respectively, calculated by integrating their corresponding EQE curves, which show good consistent with that obtained by J–V measurement. These evidences point to that the incorporation of a single thiophene ring dramatically increases the light absorption with also enhancing the monochromatic response.
To investigate the exciton generation and dissociation condition for FTBT- and FTTBT-based solar cells, we plotted curves of photocurrent density (Jph) versus the effective applied voltage (Veff) for the optimized devices (Fig. 4a). Jph is defined as Jph = JL – JD, where JL is the current density under illumination and JD is the current density in the dark. Veff is defined to be Veff = Vo − Va, where Vo is the voltage when Jph is zero, and Va is the applied voltage. The normalized Jph with the saturation photocurrent density (Jph/Jsat) values were given for a direct comparison (Table S3, ESI). Under short-circuit condition, the Jph/Jsat values of FTBT- and FTTBT-based devices were 68% and 85% respectively, which indicates an improved exciton generation and dissociation by FAT. The photoluminescence (PL) measurement for the two blend films shows more effective PL quenching (94.1% vs. 92.5%, Fig. S4, ESI) in a PM6:FTTBT blend than in a PM6:FTBT blend, which also implies the effectiveness on charge transfer and exciton dissociation by the FAT design.
The recombination behaviour within PM6:FTBT and PM6:FTTBT devices were examined by plotting curves of light-intensity (Plight) versus Jsc (Fig. 4b). The relationship between Plight and Jsc can be described by a power-law equation: Jsc ∝ Pα, where the deviation of the index α from 1 manifests the level of charge recombination. The α values for FTBT and FTTBT-based devices were fitted to be 0.926 and 0.930, respectively, which suggests less bimolecular recombination in FTTBT-based devices than in the FTBT-based ones.
The charge transport properties of PM6:FTBT and PM6:FTTBT blend films were investigated by using a space-charge-limited current (SCLC) method. Two kinds of single-carrier devices with ITO/PEDOT:PSS/active layer/Au and ITO/ZnO/active layer/PDINO/Al configurations were fabricated for hole and electron mobility measurement respectively (Fig. S5 and Table S3, ESI). The PM6:FTBT blend film shows a hole mobility (uh) of 8.2 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1 and an electron mobility (ue) of 3.6 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1, while the PM6:FTTBT blend film exhibits a uh of 3.3 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1 and a ue of 1.1 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1. The results indicate that incorporating a single thiophene ring into the indenothiophene-based molecule dramatically improves the charge transporting property of molecular acceptors.
The blending morphology of PM6:FTBT and PM6:FTTBT films were investigated by atomic force microscopy (AFM). Fig. 5 shows the AFM height and phase images for the two films. The PM6:FTBT blend film exhibits a uniform surface consisting of interconnected aggregates smaller in diameter than that of the PM6:FTTBT blend film. It gives a root-mean-square surface roughness (Rq) of 1.30 nm. On the contrary, the PM6:FTTBT blend film shows a larger Rq of 1.62 nm. This suggests that the intermixing between PM6 and FTBT is better than that between PM6 and FTTBT. However, as observed in many photovoltaic systems, mixing too well of photovoltaic blends is not favourable since it tends to increase the charge recombination and thus lowers the FF of the devices. The FTBT-based solar cell may just be the case. From the phase image, we observed widespread fibrils dominating the whole surface of PM6:FTBT film, which suggests the formation of ordered PM6 nano-structure. It accounts for the relatively high uh of PM6:FTBT films. In a sharp contrast, scattered irregular aggregates of diameter ∼60 nm with clear boundaries in-between was observed in the PM6:FTTBT blend film. The aggregates in both blends are attributed to a complex containing crystallites by polymer or small molecules, which feature dramatically different packing states, as indicated by below investigation via crystallographic characterization.
To gain more insights into the nanoscale morphology of films incorporating acceptors by thiophene-fused molecular design, synchrotron-based grazing-incident wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) was conducted. Shown in Fig. 6, the PM6 pristine film shows clear (h00) and (010) peaks in the out-of-plane direction, which correspond to the lamellar and π–π stacking peak respectively. It also exhibits a (001) peak in the in-plane direction, which corresponds to the backbone stacking. These features identify the rolling-log packing of PM6 in its pristine film. In FTBT pristine film, a combined diffraction comprising out-of-plane, in-plane, and off-axis peaks with varied degrees of pole figure distribution was observed. Differently, the FTTBT pristine film exhibits weak isotropic scattering rings around 0.35 Å−1 and 1.25 Å−1, corresponding to d-spacing values of 17.94 Å and 5.02 Å, respectively. Comparatively, FTBT is more susceptible to form 3D crystallites as the simultaneous existence of diffraction peaks on three crystallographic axes indicated. Contrastingly, FTTBT only forms aggregation featuring lamellar stacking yet without preferential orientation. These results suggest that the symmetrical change induced by FAT decreases the propensity of crystallization for molecules. In their respective blends, the (h00), (001) diffraction peaks of PM6 both remain the same as that in its pristine film, which implies that the blending of PM6 with FTBT or FTTBT does not affect the lamellar packing or backbone packing of PM6. Since factors of domain size, or the connectivity of domains, also affect the formation of interpenetrated PM6 domains and thus uh, we deduce that the crystallization of PM6 may be influenced by molecule acceptors during the formation of blend films. Due to FTBT's relatively small molecule weight and strong crystalline tendency, it may act as the nucleus and affects more than FTTBT does at the early stage of PM6 crystallization, which induces the formation of a morphology with dense domains and improved connectivity. Therefore, the PM6:FTBT blend achieves a higher uh. In PM6:FTTBT blend, a much stronger (010) π–π stacking peak in out-of-plane direction was observed, which indicates a preferential face-on orientation than in the PM6:FTBT blend. It favors the formation of efficient charge-transporting channels along the vertical direction, which is attributed to the reason for the higher ue of FTTBT blend despite that the neat FTTBT is of relatively low crystallinity. The crystallinity variation in neat and blend states may also relate with the miscibility of PM6 and molecular donors. To examine this we conducted contact angle measurement. As shown in Fig. S7 (ESI), the contact angles for PM6, FTBT and FTTBT are 27.7°, 15.8° and 10.3° respectively, which suggests better miscibility between PM6 and FTBT other than FTTBT. The inferior miscibility favors the self-aggregation of FTTBT and the growth of FTTBT crystals from a blend solution, which promotes the phase separation and benefits the formation of preferential orientation of FTTBT crystals as well. The optimal orientation may also benefits the light-harvesting due to better oriented photo-absorption planes within the blends, which partially contributes to the boosted Jsc. Besides, both improved shelf-lifetime and thermal stability of PM6:FTTBT device than the PM6:FTBT one (Fig. S6, ESI) was observed, which suggests additional benefits by the FAT molecule design.

A fusing-a-thiophene design was applied in indenothiophene-based non-fullerene small molecule acceptors (NFSMAs). Its effect on photovoltaic property of indenothiophene-based NFSMAs were systematically investigated with two comparative molecules, FTBT and FTTBT, being designed and synthesized. In use of a PM6 polymer donor, non-fullerene bulk-heterojunction polymer solar cells were fabricated. The FTTBT-based solar cell obtains a much higher PCE (9.79%) than that based on FTBT (3.47%). Through a detailed comparison combining photophysical, photovoltaic, and morphological characterization, we attribute the boosted device performance to two reasons: (i) the incorporation of an electron-donating thiophene ring narrows the optical bandgap by extending π-conjugation, which contributes to a large short-circuit current; (ii) the incorporation of a single thiophene ring simultaneously alters the molecular symmetry by transforming the axisymmetric molecular configuration to a centrosymmetric one, which tunes the crystallinity and molecular packing of NFSMAs with contributing to a charge transport-favourable blending morphology and a high FF. The work clarifies an effective molecular design strategy for performance enhancement of organic solar cells.


There are no conflicts to declare.


We thank the National Basic Research Program of China (973 Program) (No. 2014CB643502), the National Key R&D Program of China (2017YFA0204700), the Strategic Priority Research Program of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (XDB12010200), and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21572234, 21661132006, 61505225) for financial support.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Cyclic voltammetry (CV) of PM6, FTBT and FTTBT. TGA, SCLC, NMR spectra of all compounds synthetically related. See DOI: 10.1039/c9tc03407b
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020