 DOI: 10.1039/C5TA03396A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 14378-14388


Dipankar
Barpuzary
,

Avishek
Banik
,

Gaurangi
Gogoi
 and 

Mohammad
Qureshi
*

Materials Science Laboratory, Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, Guwahati – 781039, Assam, India. E-mail: mq@iitg.ernet.in; Fax: +91-361-258-2349; Tel: +91-361-258-2320

Received
8th May 2015
, Accepted 29th May 2015
First published on 1st June 2015
Noble metal-free counter electrodes using a co-catalytic loading of MoS2 nanosheets onto Cu2ZnSnS4 microspheres are investigated by means of CuInS2–CdSe quantum dot (QD) co-sensitized solar cells fabricated with single crystalline ZnO nanowires. An ex situ electrophoretic deposition route is employed to deposit QDs onto ZnO nanowires that are epitaxially grown on ZnO seed layered FTO substrates. Hydrothermally grown ZnO nanowires have also established an excellent stability against the bias conditions applied to fabricate the photoanodes of the devices. The superior photovoltaic performance of CuInS2–CdSe QD co-sensitized cells is compared with that of bare CuInS2 and CdSe counterparts, using current–voltage and incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency measurements. The present study also demonstrates an enhanced performance of the devices fabricated with 1.0 wt% of MoS2 loaded Cu2ZnSnS4 based counter electrodes in contrast to bare Cu2ZnSnS4. Hydrothermal loading of MoS2 onto Cu2ZnSnS4 generates an electrically interconnected network of Cu2ZnSnS4 microspheres, leading to facile charge transport in the counter electrode of the devices. MoS2 in its nanosheet form acts as an electrical bridge that interlinks the Cu2ZnSnS4 microspheres. Additionally, a favorable band energy alignment of Cu2ZnSnS4 and MoS2 stimulates the charge transfer dynamics in the Cu2ZnSnS4–MoS2 composite. Electron transport and recombination kinetics of the devices are measured using electrochemical impedance spectroscopy.

Quantum dot-sensitized solar cells (QDSCs) have attracted significant attention due to the presence of quantum dots (QDs) ensuring fascinating advantages like size-controlled band gap tunability, enhanced light absorption, viable multiple exciton generation, feasibility to extract hot charge carriers, etc. The basic design of a QDSC—a prototype of dye-sensitized solar cell (DSC)—contains a nanostructured semiconductor oxide material sensitized with QDs that generate electrons upon photon absorption and inject them into the semiconductor, a redox couple as the electrolyte, and a counter electrode (CE). In QDSCs, a number of QDs (CdS, CdSe, CuInS2, CuInSe2, Sb2S3, CdTe, PbS) or combination of QDs have been tested to adapt an efficient solar harvesting to afford several milestones in power conversion efficiency (PCE). In addition to QDs, selection of a pertinent wide-band gap oxide material is equally credible to boost the efficiency of a solar cell. Since the discovery of DSCs, mesoscopic TiO2 films have been used as an excellent electron collector material. However, the enormously high surface area of TiO2 matrices tends to clog the mesopores upon QD loading, which hinders the free-charge injection, carrier transport, diffusion of the electrolyte, and adequate loading of QDs into the interior of oxide films in QDSCs. To avoid such glitches, one-dimensional (1D) morphology—nanorods, nanowires (NWs), nanotubes—based QD scaffolds were later on developed. The use of such 1D structures is advantageous as they possess a single or quasi-single crystalline geometry, which facilitates a unidirectional pathway for facile charge transport, an increased electron diffusion length, and reduced grain-boundary scattering. In view of this, recent advancements of ZnO based architectures have paved a way to improve the charge transportation and QD loading in QDSCs, achieving high PCEs. In essence, a superior electron mobility (ZnO ≈ 200–1000 cm2 V s−1, TiO2 ≈ 0.1–4 cm2 V s−1), band offsets similar to that of TiO2, higher crystallinity, fewer grain boundaries, and readily tunable morphologies with benchtop synthetic routes make ZnO a prime alternative to traditional TiO2. Earlier results from our group have also established the capitalization of stable morphologies of ZnO to exhibit faster charge transportability, smooth diffusion of the electrolyte, and a retarded rate of charge recombination in solar cells. Especially, epitaxially grown 1D ZnO NW based devices revealed an additional benefit of direct 1D electrical pathways promoting the transport and rapid collection of charge carriers injected from the sensitizers.

Another factor that influences the performance of a QDSC is loading of QDs onto mesoscopic oxide films. Targeting a few rudiments like high surface coverage and uniform distribution of QDs, multiple in situ or ex situ strategies are often applied to deposit QDs onto oxide films with effective anchoring. Despite they hold their own merits and demerits, the selection of a specific technique or a combination of techniques to be used to load QDs depends on the physical nature, stability, and mode of anchoring of the QDs onto the oxide surface. Notably, electrophoretic deposition (EPD)—that drives ligand-capped and charged QDs (pre-synthesized) onto oxide based electrodes under an applied bias—technically sounds to be a promising ex situ approach. This is credible to the typical advantages of EPD like a robust and uniformly distributed coverage of QDs in a short time span, effective anchoring of QDs onto the oxide surface, rapid penetration of QDs up to the interior pores of oxide films, etc. Besides, the EPD route makes sequential loading of multiple QDs possible, allowing efficient photon capturing tunability of the photoanodes to extend the spectral absorption window up to the infrared regime.
On top of the oxide scaffolds and QD absorbers, the prime constituent of a QDSC is the CE (mostly Pt). CEs account for the collection of electrons from the external circuit to electrolyte thereby triggering catalytic reduction of the redox couple. The electrolyte system is in turn responsible for the regeneration of oxidized photosensitizers. In general, iodide/triiodide (I3−/I−), sulfide/polysulfide (S2−/Sn2−), and Co2+/3+ complex based redox couple containing electrolytes are used in solar cells depending on the aptness of their redox potentials with the valence band (VB) potential of the sensitizer and work function of the CE material. In view of this, taking into account the increasing demand, high-cost, striving for high PCE, and industrialization of photovoltaic technology, the scientific quest to replace Pt with a low-cost CE material has explored a number of carbon materials, transition metal compounds (carbide, oxide, sulfide, nitride), conducting polymers or hybrids, and a class of inorganic chalcogenides due to their excellent properties such as electrical conductivity, chemical stability, and (electro)catalytic activity. Even if the photovoltaic performance of most of these Pt-free CEs is explored in DSCs employing an I3−/I− redox couple, an inevitable photodegradation of a majority of QD absorbers (if comes in direct contact with I3−/I−) jeopardizes the stability and efficiency of QDSCs. Consequently, an aqueous electrolyte, S2−/Sn2−, favoring an attenuated photocorrosion of QDs is often used in QDSCs. However, using Pt as a CE in the presence of the S2−/Sn2− couple limits the efficiency of QDSCs due to the chemisorption of S-compounds onto the Pt surface. Such a catalytic poisoning not only deteriorates the conductivity and electrocatalytic activity of the Pt CE, but also increases the charge transfer resistance at the Pt/electrolyte interface. To overcome such issues, recently CEs such as Cu2ZnSnS4 (CZTS) have been utilized wherein apart from resolving catalytic poisoning issues, the CE is more eco-friendly as well as economical due to the presence of earth-abundant elements; Cu, Sn, and Zn. Even if the intrinsic peculiarities like a direct band gap (∼1.5 eV) and a high absorption coefficient (>1 × 104 cm−1) make CZTS an excellent absorber material, its excelling role as a CE is explored less for solar cells, especially in QDSCs. It is worth noting that the modification/change in the elemental composition of CZTS based CEs has already been studied for solar cells achieving promising PCEs up to ∼5.2–7.4%. However, to the best of our knowledge, any co-catalyst loaded CZTS as a CE for solar cells has not been reported yet.
Based on the current understanding, herein we report for the first time, the utilization of a MoS2 loaded CZTS based novel CE for an efficient QDSC containing 1D ZnO NWs as a sensitizer scaffold, CuInS2 and CdSe QDs as the photosensitizers, and a S2−/Sn2− redox couple as the electrolyte. Notably, CZTS–MoS2 CE based QDSCs exhibit superior performances in contrast to bare CZTS counterparts. MoS2 in its nanosheet form acts as an electrical linker that interconnects the CZTS microspheres favoring effective charge transport in the CE of the devices. We believe that the concept of MoS2 loading onto CZTS might also allow us to get rid of the typical Mo back contact issues often encountered in CZTS based solar cells. Our present work has established a maximum PCE of ∼4.6% for QDSCs that can be accredited to several factors: (1) involvement of epitaxially grown ZnO NWs offering inherently faster transport and collection of charge carriers, (2) broad-visible range photon absorption achieved by a combination of CuInS2 (Eg ≈ 1.5 eV) and CdSe (Eg ≈ 1.7 eV) QDs, (3) efficient QD loading attained by an EPD route, and (4) effective electronic interactions between CZTS and MoS2 achieved by a hydrothermal route. In addition, favorable band alignments among different components of the photoanode and CE (Scheme 1) facilitate the charge transfer in the circuit in an efficient way.

The phase purity of the CE materials is confirmed by the powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD) patterns. From Fig. 1a, the observed lattice planes (112), (200), (220), (312), (008), and (332) for CZTS microspheres can be indexed to their formation of tetragonal kesterite crystalline phase (JCPDS Ref. #26-0575). No diffraction peaks from other crystalline forms (ZnS, Cu2SnS3) are detected. Broad diffraction peaks appearing for (002), (100), (103), and (110) lattice planes of MoS2 (Fig. 1b) signify the formation of a hexagonal phase and a nano-dimension (JCPDS Ref. #75-1539). Notably, the PXRD pattern recorded for 1.0 wt% of MoS2 loaded CZTS (CZTS–MoS2, Fig. 1c) shows the diffraction peaks mainly for CZTS, while well-distinct diffraction peaks for MoS2 remain silent. It could possibly be due to a low catalytic loading of MoS2 onto CZTS and a weaker crystalline nature of MoS2 in contrast to the CZTS host. To investigate if there is any change in the crystallite size of CZTS upon MoS2 loading, average crystallite sizes of CZTS and CZTS–MoS2 are estimated using the Debye–Scherrer relation from the (112) lattice plane of CZTS. It is observed that 1.0 wt% of co-catalytic loading of MoS2 does not alter the crystallite size of CZTS significantly (CZTS ≈ 22.9 nm, CZTS–MoS2 ≈ 23.4 nm). It is indicative of the retention of the crystallinity of CZTS even after loading of MoS2 is done under current hydrothermal conditions. Alternately, the highest intensity (002) diffraction peak for MoS2 at 2θ ≈ 14.48° defines its average crystallite size of ∼6.9 nm and an interlayer distance of ∼0.66 nm.

The crystallinity of ZnO (seed layers and 1D NWs) on F-doped tin oxide (FTO) substrates is also confirmed by PXRD. Fig. 2a shows a sharp (002) diffraction peak at 2θ ≈ 34.6° for ZnO seed layers (excluding the peaks for FTO). It confirms preferential c-axis texturing of seed layers of ZnO nanocrystals obtained by the thermal decomposition of the zinc salt. Interestingly, the PXRD pattern of ZnO NWs (Fig. 2b) grown over ZnO seed layers has also shown a similar trend, exhibiting a sharp (002) diffraction peak at 2θ ≈ 34.6°. Thus, the PXRD patterns of ZnO reveal two factors—(1) a similar type of crystal parameter for both seed layer and 1D NWs of ZnO, and (2) an epitaxial growth of single crystalline ZnO NWs over a ZnO seeded platform in the [0002] lattice orientation along the c-axis normal to the substrate. A predominant high-intensity (002) diffraction peak for ZnO can be indexed to the formation of a hexagonal wurtzite structure (JCPDS Ref. #36-1451). In addition, identical values of calculated lattice constants for 1D NWs (a = 0.3249 nm, c = 0.5208 nm) and seed layers (a = 0.3249 nm, c = 0.5208 nm) further confirm a homoepitaxial growth of ZnO NWs over ZnO seed layers. It can also be stated that the pre-alignment of the ZnO seed layer controls further orientation of ZnO NWs. Such a homoepitaxial and unidirectional growth induces lesser defects in the continuous crystal lattice of ZnO NWs, which generates 1D charge transport pathways. The presence of lesser crystal defects in ZnO NWs is confirmed by their less prominent defect-mediated emission peak (Fig. S1, ESI), originating from the weak transitions from the conduction band (CB) to deep defect levels of ZnO.
The PXRD pattern of CuInS2 QDs (Fig. 2c) shows the diffraction peaks for (112), (204/220), and (116/312) lattice planes, which can be indexed to the formation of a tetragonal crystal phase (JCPDS Ref. #85-1575). Similarly, (111), (220), and (311) lattice planes (Fig. 2d) are indexed to the formation of a zinc blende phase of cubic crystalline CdSe QDs (JCPDS Ref. #19-0191). Notably, the appearance of broad diffraction peaks for both CuInS2 and CdSe confirms their nanodimensions. Interestingly, well-resolved diffraction peaks for the QDs are also observed in the PXRD patterns of all the photoanodes (Fig. S2, ESI), which confirms a successful loading of QDs by an EPD approach. In addition, strong appearance of the (002) diffraction peak for ZnO NWs (Fig. S2) further proves the retention of single crystalline geometry and structure of ZnO NWs even after the loading of QDs is carried out under an applied external load.

Optical properties of CZTS, CZTS–MoS2, and MoS2 are endorsed from their normalized UV-vis absorption spectra (Fig. 3). UV-vis spectra of CZTS (black line) and CZTS–MoS2 (red line) exhibit their characteristic absorption features in a wide-visible range. Similarly, MoS2 (green line) shows its typical broad absorption in the range of ∼500 to 800 nm. The observed spectral features of MoS2 nanosheets can be correlated with their excitonic peaks corresponding to the direct transitions and spin–orbit splitting at the VB. To be more precise, the solid state absorption profile of MoS2 exhibits three distinct peaks: (1) first excitonic peak at ∼687 nm ascribed to a direct transition at the K point of the Brillouin zone, and (2) the second and third excitonic peaks at ∼660 nm and ∼590 nm (energy difference ∼0.22 eV) arising due to the spin–orbit splitting of the top of VB at the K point for K4 → K5 and K1 → K5 transitions, respectively. Notably, in the solid state UV-vis study, we did not observe any sharp excitonic peak for MoS2 corresponding to its direct transition originating from the deep VB to the CB. In contrast, the absorption spectrum of MoS2 recorded in 1-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (Fig. S3, ESI) reveals the appearance of slight shoulders in the wavelength ranges ∼350 to 500 nm (peak at 408 nm) and ∼580 to 690 nm, indicating the presence of direct transitions in MoS2.

To further study the band energetics of CE materials, the optical band gap (Eg) of solid film samples is estimated using Tauc's relation. The corresponding Tauc plots, where (αhν)2 is plotted against photon energy (hν), estimate Eg values for CZTS (∼1.66 eV, black line) and CZTS–MoS2 (∼1.62 eV, green line), as shown in the inset to Fig. 3. Notably, a slight reduction (∼0.04 eV) in the Eg value is apparent for CZTS upon 1.0 wt% of MoS2 loading, which could possibly be ascribed to the presence of electronic interactions between CZTS and MoS2 in CZTS–MoS2. The Tauc plot also estimates an Eg ≈ 1.59 eV for MoS2 (red line) that indicates its direct band gap due to a monolayered distribution. It is also in good agreement with the fact that the optical properties of MoS2 nanosheets can be readily tuned from indirect-to-direct band gap by introducing quantum size effects via altering the morphology from the bulk to nano-dimensions.
Normalized UV-vis absorption spectra of 1D ZnO NWs, bare CuInS2 QDs (in chloroform), bare CdSe QDs (obtained by EPD), and the photoanodes (ZnO–CIS, ZnO–CdSe, and ZnO–CIS–CdSe) are shown in Fig. 4. The absorption spectrum of 1D ZnO NWs shows a typical absorption steep at ∼384 nm, which indicates a wide band gap of ZnO (Fig. 4a). Fig. 4b shows the typical broad absorption of bare CuInS2 QDs in the visible range with an absorption onset at ∼650 nm. CuInS2 QDs also exhibit a less pronounced shoulder at ∼520 nm for their size quantized effect arising from the excitonic transitions, while the non-appearance of sharp excitonic peaks can be due to a slight inhomogeneity in their size and shape.Fig. 4c depicts a broad-visible range (∼400 to 700 nm) absorption of bare CdSe QDs with an absorption onset at ∼690 nm and excitonic peak at ∼630 nm. It is noticed that the individual intrinsic absorption edges of CuInS2 and CdSe QDs are retained in the UV-vis spectra of all the photoanodes (Fig. 4d–f). It is indicative of a sufficient loading of the QDs onto ZnO NWs. Interestingly, an enhanced molar absorptivity of the ZnO–CIS–CdSe photoanode in contrast to that of ZnO–CIS and ZnO–CdSe reflects an efficient photon absorption achieved by the co-sensitization approach.

The morphology of the CE materials (CZTS, CZTS–MoS2) is analyzed using field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM). As can be seen from Fig. 5, both CZTS and CZTS–MoS2 represent microspherical structures with the estimated average diameter of ∼200 to 250 nm. Fig. 5 also reveals a mesoporous nature of CZTS and CZTS–MoS2 microspheres along with their void-type morphologies. Such a porous surface of the CEs not only delivers sufficient active sites for catalytic reduction of electrolytes, but also facilitates the diffusion of electrolytes to the interiors of CE films. Notably, FESEM images of CZTS–MoS2 show a relatively more agglomerated feature of the microspheres in contrast to CZTS counterparts. It can be ascribed to effective adherence of CZTS to MoS2 nanosheets, readily achieved by the hydrothermal synthesis. To further elucidate the elemental composition of CE materials, energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) maps of bare CZTS and CZTS–MoS2 are recorded. As can be seen from Fig. S4 (ESI), the EDS map of CZTS indicates a homogeneous distribution of Cu, Zn, Sn, and S atoms in CZTS, while CZTS–MoS2 shows a typical elemental distribution of Cu, Zn, Sn, S, and Mo atoms.

The surface morphology of ZnO NWs (bare vs. QD loaded) is also probed using FESEM. An illustrative FESEM image of 1D ZnO NWs (Fig. 6a) indicates well-oriented vertical arrangement of the NWs. In earlier reports, we have already established the significant role of similar ZnO NWs in improving the efficiency of QDSCs and DSCs. However, in this work, unlike the previously used SILAR method, we have adapted an EPD route to deposit QDs onto ZnO NWs. Interestingly, ZnO NWs revealed an excellent stability against the bias conditions applied to deposit the QDs. It is confirmed by FESEM images of the photoanodes (Fig. 6b–d), which clearly show the retention of 1D geometry of ZnO NWs even after the loading of QDs is performed under the external bias of ∼150 mV cm−1 for CuInS2 and ∼0.60 mA cm−1 for CdSe. However, in the case of EPD, the QD loading time should be optimized to ensure sufficient adsorption of the QDs, and at the same time, to retain the void-type morphology of the photoanode for a smooth diffusion of the electrolyte in the devices. We have deposited CuInS2 QDs in a period of ∼2 to 3 min, while ∼30 min was fixed to load CdSe QDs. To investigate the effects of a longer QD loading time on the surface morphology of the photoanodes, QDs were loaded for prolonged time intervals and the surface of the photoanodes was scanned by FESEM. As can be seen from Fig. S5 (ESI), persistent loading results in an agglomerated-type accumulation of the QDs over ZnO NWs, leading to a high surface coverage of QDs. This is not credible as it induces a few limitations: (1) blocking of the voids present within ZnO NWs, (2) deteriorated loading of QDs into the inner pores of the NW network, and (3) a retarded penetration of the electrolyte to the interior parts of the photoanode.
The morphology of various components involved in the CEs and photoanodes is further characterized by transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Fig. 7a shows a representative TEM image of CZTS microspheres with an estimated average diameter of ∼200 to 250 nm. Similarly, the TEM image of MoS2 nanosheets (Fig. S6a, ESI) shows a lateral size distribution in the range of ∼3 to 10 nm for the smaller and larger fractions of MoS2 nanoplatelets. To have a better idea of the morphology, HRTEM images of hydrothermally synthesized MoS2 nanosheets are recorded as shown in Fig. 7b and S6b (ESI). A single nanosheet of MoS2 shows a thickness of around ∼8 to 10 nm with an estimated average length of ∼40 to 50 nm. In addition, an IFFT of the HRTEM image (Fig. 7c) of MoS2 nanosheets shows an interplanar d-spacing of ∼0.66 ± 0.005 nm. Fig. 7d shows an illustrative TEM image of MoS2 loaded CZTS, indicating the microspherical shape of CZTS–MoS2 with a diameter of ∼200 to 250 nm. Fig. 7e shows the HRTEM image of CZTS–MoS2 depicting the well-distinct lattice patterns of both CZTS and MoS2. The inset to Fig. 7e shows the respective selected area energy diffraction (SAED) pattern of CZTS–MoS2. Different lattice planes of CZTS and MoS2 entities are further resolved by IFFT of the HRTEM image of CZTS–MoS2 (Fig. 7f). It shows the interplanar d-spacings of CZTS and MoS2 to be ∼0.31 ± 0.004 nm and ∼0.66 ± 0.005 nm, respectively.
On the other hand, a representative TEM image of bare ZnO NWs, as shown in Fig. S6c (ESI), confirms their 1D shape with an average diameter of ∼40 to 50 nm. It is also in good agreement with our earlier reports. The crystalline nature of CuInS2 QDs is also evidenced from their well-defined lattice planes observed in the HRTEM image as shown in Fig. S6d, ESI. Moreover, the HRTEM image of CuInS2 QDs reveals an almost spherical shape with an estimated diameter of ∼3 to 4 nm. IFFT of the HRTEM image of CuInS2 further shows an interplanar d-spacing of ∼0.34 ± 0.006 nm (Fig. S6e, ESI). The SAED pattern of CuInS2 QDs is indexed to their (112), (220), and (312) lattice planes (inset to Fig. S6e, ESI). Similarly, the crystallinity of CdSe QDs is confirmed by their well-distinct lattice fringes, as observed from the HRTEM image (Fig. S6f, ESI). The HRTEM image of CdSe QDs also confirms a spherical shape of the particles, an average diameter of ∼5 to 6 nm, and an interplanar d-spacing of ∼0.35 nm. The inset to Fig. S6d (ESI) shows the corresponding SAED pattern of CdSe QDs, indexed to their (111), (220), and (311) lattice planes.
To confirm the loading of CuInS2 and CdSe QDs onto ZnO NWs, TEM analysis of a co-sensitized photoanode is carried out. A representative TEM image of a single ZnO NW loaded with CuInS2 and CdSe QDs is shown in Fig. 8a. As can be seen, a thickness of ∼15 nm is estimated for the QD layer deposited throughout the surface of ZnO NWs. The HRTEM image of a QD loaded ZnO NW (Fig. 8b) also shows the well-distinct lattice fringes of both CuInS2 and CdSe QDs. An IFFT of the HRTEM image (Fig. 8c) further estimates the interplanar d-spacings of ∼0.34 ± 0.005 nm for CuInS2 QDs and ∼0.35 ± 0.006 nm for CdSe QDs. The corresponding SAED pattern of QD loaded ZnO NW is depicted in the inset to Fig. 8c.

To gain an insight into the electronic interactions between CZTS and MoS2, steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra of bare CZTS and the CZTS–MoS2 composite are recorded at 510 nm excitation. As can be seen, Fig. 9 shows a quenching in the PL emission originating from CZTS when it is loaded with 1.0 wt% of MoS2 co-catalyst. It confirms the presence of excited-state electronic interactions between CZTS and MoS2 entities in the CZTS–MoS2 composite, leading to the deactivation of the excited state of CZTS via a non-radiative process involving the charge transfer from CZTS to MoS2. In essence, MoS2 nanosheets act as electrical linkers to interconnect the separated microspheres of CZTS, thereby generating a faster charge transport network in CZTS–MoS2 with a minimized internal charge recombination.

To understand the charge transfer processes taking place within the CE materials, VB and CB edges of CZTS and MoS2 are estimated from the absolute Mulliken electronegativity values, as explained in the ESI. The predicted values of the top of the VB and the bottom of the CB are found to be −5.1 eV and −3.4 eV for CZTS and −5.9 eV and −4.3 eV for MoS2, respectively. These empirical values are also in good agreement with the available literature reports. Such a favorable proximity of band offsets between CZTS and MoS2 induces facile charge transport from the CB of CZTS to that of MoS2 (Scheme 2).

Nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherm and Barrett–Joyner–Halenda (BJH) pore size distribution plots for CZTS (black line) and CZTS–MoS2 (red line) are shown in Fig. 10. As can be seen, the BET plots exhibit type IV isotherms and H3 hysteresis loops, indicating a typical mesoporous nature of both CZTS and CZTS–MoS2, which is favorable for efficient catalytic performance of the CEs. In addition, pore size distribution plots of CZTS and CZTS–MoS2 (inset to Fig. 10) show similar features of the isotherms with almost identical pore diameters. It specifies the retention of surface morphology of CZTS microspheres even after the loading of 1.0 wt% of MoS2. The BET surface areas of CZTS and CZTS–MoS2 are found to be ∼18.5 m2 g−1 and ∼20.0 m2 g−1, respectively, which are adequate to produce a sufficient number of active sites to accomplish efficient reduction of the electrolyte.


Photovoltaic performances of the QDSCs are evaluated against CZTS and CZTS–MoS2 based CEs with a S2−/Sn2− redox couple as the electrolyte, under the AM 1.5 G simulated solar spectrum at an intensity of 100 mW cm−2. The performance parameters such as short-circuit current density (Jsc), open circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (FF), and PCE, for all the fabricated devices, are derived from the current density–voltage (Jsc–V) plots (Fig. 11) and are summarized in Table 1. In the case of CZTS CE, the bare CuInS2 QD based QDSC resulted in a Jsc ≈ 4.72 mA cm−2, a Voc ≈ 513 mV, and a FF ≈ 35.9%, affording a PCE ≈ 0.87%, whereas the bare CdSe QD based QDSC afforded a Jsc ≈ 8.99 mA cm−2, a Voc ≈ 606 mV, and a FF ≈ 46.8%, yielding a PCE ≈ 2.55%. In contrast, the CuInS2/CdSe co-sensitized QDSC exhibited a maximum PCE of ∼4.17% with Jsc ≈ 12.78 mA cm−2, Voc ≈ 660 mV, and FF ≈ 49.4% against the CZTS CE. Notably, upon changing the CE from bare CZTS to 1.0 wt% of MoS2 loaded CZTS, the performance parameters of identical QDSCs are found to be significantly improved. As can be seen, the CuInS2/CdSe co-sensitized cell exhibited a maximum PCE of ∼4.58% with a Jsc ≈ 13.52 mA cm−2, a Voc ≈ 669 mV, and a FF ≈ 50.6% against CZTS–MoS2 CE, while CuInS2 and CdSe sensitized devices resulted in the following values: a Jsc ≈ 5.90 mA cm−2, a Voc ≈ 531 mV, and a FF ≈ 43.7%, yielding a PCE ≈ 1.36% (for CuInS2) and a Jsc ≈ 9.32 mA cm−2, a Voc ≈ 614 mV, and a FF ≈ 49.7% yielding a PCE ≈ 2.84% (for CdSe). The above results establish that both CZTS and CZTS–MoS2 act as effective CEs for QDSCs employing the S2−/Sn2− couple as an electrolyte. The superior performances of CZTS–MoS2 CE based QDSCs in contrast to bare CZTS counterparts can be ascribed to faster charge transport through CZTS readily achieved by loading MoS2. It is noteworthy that CuInS2/CdSe co-sensitized QDSCs performed better in contrast to bare CuInS2 and CdSe counterparts. This is attributed to an enhanced molar absorptivity of QDSCs employing co-sensitized photoanodes. In addition, the overall high performance of all the fabricated QDSCs can be accredited to a number of factors: (1) an adequate loading of QDs onto ZnO NWs by an EPD method, (2) a favorable band alignment among CuInS2, CdSe, and ZnO offering an efficient photoinduced charge injection from the QDs to ZnO in the photoanodes, (3) facile charge migration and transport properties of ZnO NWs generated by 1D pathways, (4) sufficient catalytic reduction of redox electrolyte due to the mesoporous nature of CE materials, and (5) an excellent charge transport property of bare as well as MoS2 loaded CZTS microsphere based CEs.

QDSC photoanode
Counter electrode

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (mV)
FF (%)
PCE (η, %)
IPCEmax (%)

τ
el (ms)

a Data reported are the results of the best performing devices out of a minimum of five devices for each configuration. The standard deviations evaluated for five devices are included.
b Electron lifetime measurements are performed only for the best performing devices.

ZnO–CIS
CZTS
4.72 ± 0.26
513 ± 13
35.9
0.87
13
—
ZnO–CIS
CZTS–MoS2
5.90 ± 0.19
531 ± 32
43.7
1.36
20
—
ZnO–CdSe
CZTS
8.99 ± 0.21
606 ± 57
46.8
2.55
50
—
ZnO–CdSe
CZTS–MoS2
9.32 ± 0.09
614 ± 41
49.7
2.84
61
—
ZnO–CIS–CdSe
CZTS
12.78 ± 0.16
660 ± 14
49.4
4.17
66
32.4
ZnO–CIS–CdSe
CZTS–MoS2
13.52 ± 0.18
669 ± 27
50.6
4.58
72
34.6
To have a better understanding of photocurrent behavior of the fabricated QDSCs, their IPCE values are recorded in a scan range of 350–800 nm (Fig. 12). It is clearly observed that all the QDSCs exhibit an efficient photosensitization in the visible range, which is directly correlated with the light absorptivity of QDs loaded onto the photoanodes. As can be seen, CuInS2 based QDSCs exhibited lower IPCE values with a maximum of ∼13% (CZTS CE) and ∼20% (CZTS–MoS2 CE), while identical devices with CdSe QDs achieved an IPCEmax of ∼50% and ∼61%, respectively. Fascinatingly, CuInS2/CdSe co-sensitized QDSCs afforded the IPCEmax of ∼66% (CZTS) and ∼72% (CZTS–MoS2). In general, IPCE values of the fabricated QDSCs can be ascribed to the efficiencies of (1) photon harvesting by QD absorbers, (2) photoinduced electron injection from the QDs to ZnO and collection at the FTO electrode, and (3) faster charge transport in the CE favoring the regeneration of electrolyte. It is therefore expected to obtain maximum IPCE values in the wavelength range where the photon absorption of QDs is maximum. UV-vis spectra (Fig. 3) of the photoanodes reveal an enhancement in light absorption in the order: ZnO–CIS < ZnO–CdSe < ZnO–CIS–CdSe. A similar trend is also observed in the case of IPCE values of the QDSCs, which indicates that the highest photocurrent generation is readily achieved by the QDSCs composed of CuInS2/CdSe co-sensitized photoanodes. This is also in good agreement with the corresponding Jsc values obtained from J–V curves (Fig. 11). Moreover, a suitable band alignment among CdSe, CuInS2, and ZnO plays a significant role in improving the photogenerated charge injection from the QDs to ZnO, leading to efficient charge transport by ZnO NWs and their collection at the FTO electrode. Additionally, the MoS2 interconnected network of CZTS facilitates the charge transport in CZTS–MoS2 based CEs in contrast to bare CZTS counterparts. As a result, CZTS–MoS2 based QDSCs exhibited superior IPCE values in contrast to the devices based on CZTS CEs. The observed IPCEmax values of all the QDSCs are summarized in Table 1.

To investigate the effects of MoS2 loading on electron transport and recombination properties of the QDSCs, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements are carried out for the best-performing devices under the dark conditions at an external bias equivalent to Voc in a frequency range of 10−1 to 105 Hz. EIS analysis of a QDSC mainly accounts for the charge transfer and recombination processes taking place at the CE/electrolyte interface in the high-frequency region (103–105 Hz), at the ZnO/QD/electrolyte interface in the mid-frequency region (10−1 to 103 Hz), and the diffusion of electrolyte in the low-frequency region (10−1 to 10−2 Hz). From Fig. 13a, it is observed that the Nyquist plots for CuInS2/CdSe co-sensitized QDSCs depict two semicircles. The first semicircle in the mid-frequency region is attributed to the charge transfer processes taking place at the ZnO/QD/electrolyte interface, while a second semicircle in the high-frequency region is ascribed to the redox reactions taking place at the CE/electrolyte interface. The co-catalytic loading of MoS2 onto CZTS lowers the internal charge recombination between the CE and redox electrolyte, thereby enhancing the Jsc values. Ideally, the Jsc value of a solar cell depends on series resistance (Rs). Interestingly, a lower series resistance (Rs) is observed for the QDSC fabricated with CZTS–MoS2 in contrast to its CZTS counterpart. In general, Rs for a QDSC can be derived from the Nyquist plot, using eqn (1) (ref. 24)

Rs = RTCO + Rct + Rd
(1)
where
RTCO is the electron transport resistance at the FTO electrode, proportional to the sheet resistance of FTO and contact resistance at the FTO/ZnO interface, Rct is the electron transfer resistance at the electrolyte/CE/FTO interface that directly depends on the carrier transport resistance at the CE surface, and Rd is the Nernst diffusion impedance within the electrolyte.

In the present work, CZTS–MoS2 exhibits more facile charge transport in the CEs in contrast to bare CZTS, due to the formation of an electrically interconnected network of CZTS microspheres upon MoS2 loading. This further retards the Rct at the electrolyte/CE/FTO interface and hence a lowering of Rs is observed in the Nyquist plot upon MoS2 loading. However, the values of Rh and Rd do not change much because of the presence of identical anodes and electrolytes in both the cells. It is noticed that the Voc of the QDSCs is marginally improved by changing the CE from CZTS to CZTS–MoS2. This could be ascribed to a lowering of the interfacial charge recombination in the devices upon the addition of MoS2 in the CEs.

Fig. 13b shows the corresponding Bode plots for CuInS2/CdSe co-sensitized QDSCs with different CEs. It is observed that the Bode plots for both the QDSCs represent two distinct peaks corresponding to the two diode interfaces of the devices. The peak observed in the mid-frequency region accounts for the electron diffusion time constant in the photoanode, which further gives the photoinduced electron lifetime (τel) at the photoanodes, using eqn (2)
(2)
where
fp is the maximum peak frequency in the mid-frequency region. The characteristic peak frequencies for the CZTS and CZTS–MoS2 based co-sensitized QDSCs are found to be located at ∼4.91 Hz and ∼4.59 Hz, respectively. The corresponding τel values for the devices are calculated and found to be ∼32.4 ms (for CZTS) and ∼34.6 ms (for CZTS–MoS2).


CZTS microspheres and MoS2 loaded CZTS microspheres have been demonstrated as novel CE materials for QDSCs constructed with ZnO NWs sensitized with QDs and a S2−/Sn2− redox couple as the electrolyte. The co-sensitization approach involving CuInS2 and CdSe QDs provided efficient photon harvesting ability of the photoanodes. The introduction of 1D ZnO NWs into the photoanodes exhibited superior charge transport properties due to their 1D charge transport pathways. In addition, ZnO NWs have shown excellent stability, in terms of structure and crystallinity, against the bias conditions applied for the electrophoretic deposition of QDs. Alternately, excelling performances of CZTS–MoS2 based QDSCs in contrast to CZTS counterparts are also established. In essence, MoS2 nanosheets play the role of electrical bridges in interconnecting the CZTS microspheres, leading to a prominent charge transfer network in the CEs. This work will be beneficial for the researchers working in the area of QDSCs involving noble metal-free CEs.


This work is supported by the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research and Department of Science and Technology (DST), India, through project no. CSIR/01(2704)/12/EMR-II and DST/TSP/2009/23. Instrumentation help from the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Guwahati and Central Instruments Facility, IIT Guwahati are acknowledged. D.B. thanks Ashim Malakar for help.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Synthesis of ZnO, QDs, and CE materials. Device fabrication. PL spectrum of ZnO. XRD pattern of photoanodes. UV-vis spectra of MoS2 in 1-methyl-2-pyrrolidone. FESEM image of photoanodes fabricated at longer loading times. TEM images of ZnO NWs, CuInS2, CdSe, and MoS2. Estimation of band offsets of MoS2 and CZTS. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta03396a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015