 DOI: 10.1039/D0SE01861A
(Paper)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2021, 5, 2028-2035


Tomokazu
Umeyama
*,

Kensho
Igarashi
,

Yasunari
Tamai
,

Tatsuho
Wada
,

Taiki
Takeyama
,

Daiki
Sasada
,

Keiichi
Ishida
,

Tomoyuki
Koganezawa
,

Shunsuke
Ohtani
,

Kazuo
Tanaka
,

Hideo
Ohkita
* and 

Hiroshi
Imahori
*

Department of Molecular Engineering, Graduate School of Engineering, Kyoto University, Nishikyo-ku, Kyoto 615-8510, Japan. E-mail: umeyama@scl.kyoto-u.ac.jp; imahori@scl.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Department of Polymer Chemistry, Graduate School of Engineering, Kyoto University, Nishikyo-ku, Kyoto 615-8510, Japan. E-mail: ohkita@photo.polym.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST), PRESTO, 4-1-8 Honcho, Kawaguchi, Saitama 332-0012, Japan

Japan Synchrotron Radiation Research Institute, 1-1-1, Kouto, Sayo-cho, Sayo-gun, Hyogo 679-5198, Japan

Institute for Integrated Cell-Material Sciences (WPI-iCeMS), Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan

Received
17th December 2020
, Accepted 22nd February 2021
First published on 10th March 2021
A comprehensive study on the relationship between the structure and the photophysical and photovoltaic properties of acceptor–donor–acceptor (A–D–A) type nonfullerene acceptors (NFAs) is of pivotal importance to obtain design guidelines for high-performance organic photovoltaics (OPVs). In this study, we synthesized a D unit, NTT, in which the central benzene core, indacenodithieno[3,2-b]thiophene (IT), is replaced by naphthalene. Notably, NTTIC, an A–D–A type NFA with NTT as the D unit, showed a longer singlet exciton lifetime in the film than the IT-based benchmark NFA, ITIC. When paired with a conjugated polymer donor, PBDB-T, the NTTIC-based OPV device exhibited a higher power conversion efficiency (PCE = 9.95%) than the ITIC-based device (9.71%). Furthermore, due to the larger domain size of NTTIC in PBDB-T:NTTIC, the exciton diffusion (ED) at the donor/acceptor interface and the charge transfer (CT) were slower (14 ps in total) than those of PBDB-T:ITIC (7 ps in total). Nevertheless, the total efficiency of the ED and CT in PBDB-T:NTTIC was similar to that in PBDB-T:ITIC (95%) owing to the longer singlet exciton lifetime of the NTTIC film. These results demonstrate the high potential of naphthalene-cored D units of A–D–A type NFAs to achieve a long singlet exciton lifetime and a resultant high PCE in NFA-based OPVs.

Organic photovoltaics (OPVs) have received considerable attention as clean energy conversion devices because of their light weight, cost effectiveness, flexibility, and suitability for roll-to-roll printing. In the past few decades, the active layer of OPV devices has usually consisted of conjugated polymers as donors and fullerene derivatives as acceptors, which typically form a bulk heterojunction (BHJ) structure. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of OPVs based on fullerene derivative acceptors has reached over 10%. However, it is difficult to further increase the PCE of fullerene-based OPVs due to their inherent limitations including arduous energy-level tunability and a low absorption profile. To enhance the photovoltaic performance of OPVs, nonfullerene acceptors (NFAs) with aromatic fused-ring structures have been extensively developed in recent years to fabricate high-efficiency OPVs. Compared to traditional fullerene acceptors, NFAs possess several advantages, such as facile synthesis and a high absorption profile. Most high-performance NFAs possess acceptor–donor–acceptor (A–D–A) type structures, in which fused multi-ring ladder structures are used as the D unit and 1,1-dicyanomethylene-3-indanone (IC) derivatives as the A unit. In 2015–2016, Zhan et al. reported pioneering A–D–A type NFAs such as IDIC and ITIC, in which an extended fused-ring indacenodithiophene (ID) or indacenodithieno[3,2-b]thiophene (IT) was used as the central D unit (Fig. 1 and S1). In the last 4–5 years, IDIC/ITIC analogues and various A–D–A type NFAs have emerged and the PCEs of NFA-based OPVs have been improved to 10–18%, which are significantly higher than those of fullerene-based OPVs.

It was reported that IDIC has a longer exciton diffusion (ED) length than typical organic semiconductors owing to a much higher exciton diffusion constant. This property was consistent with the relatively large domain sizes (20–50 nm) in the optimized BHJ structures of the blend films of IDIC and conjugated polymers. Recently, we developed a novel NFA, TACIC, in which the central benzene core of IDIC was replaced by a two-dimensionally fused heteroaromatic ring system, thienoazacoronene (Fig. S1). Owing to the unique intermolecular π–π interaction between the thienoazacoronene units, radiative and nonradiative decay processes of the singlet excitons of TACIC were remarkably suppressed in the film. This successfully led to the extension of the singlet exciton lifetime (approximately 1.6 ns) in the film compared to solution (220 ps). Because the ED length is dependent on not only the diffusion constant but also the lifetime of the exciton, the long exciton lifetime of TACIC in the film state is beneficial for efficient ED at the domain interface in the blend film of TACIC and an electron donor and subsequent charge transfer (CT) at the interface. In fact, the ED efficiency was extremely high (>98%) even in micrometer-sized large TACIC domains in the blend film with a conjugated polymer donor, PBDB-T (Fig. 1), achieving a decent PCE of the OPV device (7.10%). As such, the prolongation of the singlet exciton lifetime is highly desirable because we do not have to control the nanometer-sized bulk heterojunction structure of the electron donor and acceptor as the photoactive layer of OPV devices. Furthermore, the long singlet exciton lifetime is advantageous for the occurrence of efficient CT between the donor and acceptor with reduced energy offsets, which may achieve a high photocurrent generation efficiency with a reduced voltage loss. However, the synthesis of the thienoazacoronene unit is rather painstaking, and therefore the design concept using simple fused aromatic ring structures to actualize the long singlet exciton lifetime is highly awaited.
Naphthalene as the central core is the simplest polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon, consisting of a fused pair of benzene rings. So far, several NFAs based on naphthalene and naphthodithiophene have been explored to exhibit promising performance in OPVs with PCEs of 5–14% and 7–13.5%, respectively, in binary single-junction devices. For example, Zhan et al. utilized a D unit, IH, where the central benzene core of ID was replaced with a naphthalene core, to yield IHIC (Fig. S1) and compared the photovoltaic properties of the IHIC-based device to those of the IDIC-based reference device. When paired with a conjugated polymer donor, FTAZ (Fig. S1), the former device showed a higher PCE (9.21%) than the latter device (7.13%) probably owing to the enhanced intermolecular π–π interaction. Nevertheless, there have been no studies on the photophysical properties of naphthalene-based NFAs to investigate how benzene and naphthalene cores differ in affecting the photophysical properties as well as the photovoltaic performances.
In this study, to address the above issue, we synthesized a D unit, NTT (Fig. 1), with a naphthalene–bisthieno[3,2-b]thiophene fused structure via a five-membered ring with two bulky p-hexylphenyl groups because NTT is the naphthalene counterpart of the representative D unit, IT. An A–D–A type NFA, NTTIC (Fig. 1), with NTT as the D unit and IC as the end-capping A units was synthesized and judiciously compared with ITIC to evaluate the replacement effect of the central benzene core with naphthalene on the photophysical properties, film structures, charge carrier transport performance, and photovoltaic properties of blend films with conjugated polymers. To make the replacement effect obvious, our focus was not placed on the naphthodithiophene-cored NFA but on the naphthalene-cored one. Notably, the singlet exciton lifetime of the NTTIC film was found to be longer than that of the ITIC film, revealing that the replacement of the central benzene core of A–D–A type NFAs with the simplest fused-ring structure, naphthalene, is a promising way for the prolongation of the singlet exciton lifetime.

The synthetic details of NTTIC are presented in the ESI. The Knoevenagel condensation reaction of bis-formylated NTT (NTTCHO) was carried out with the end-capping group IC to yield NTTIC. All the reaction intermediates and NTTIC were well characterized by 1H NMR, 13C NMR, and IR spectroscopy and high-resolution mass spectrometry (Fig. S2–S4). The target material, NTTIC, exhibited excellent solubility in common organic solvents, such as chloroform, toluene, and chlorobenzene. As confirmed by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) and differential scanning calorimetry (DSC), NTTIC showed excellent thermal stability with a decomposition temperature (Td, 5 wt% loss) of 345 °C and no distinct glass transition or melting point (Fig. S5).


The ultraviolet-visible-near infrared (UV-vis-NIR) absorption spectra of NTTIC and ITIC in diluted chloroform are shown in Fig. S6a, and the corresponding data are summarized in Table S1. The spectral shapes and absorption intensities of NTTIC and ITIC are analogous, but the absorption peak of NTTIC (672 nm) is slightly blue-shifted relative to that of ITIC (678 nm) (Fig. S6b). This result is consistent with the findings of a previous report, in which the absorption of naphthalene-based IHIC is marginally blue-shifted relative to that of benzene-based IDIC. This blue-shift of NTTIC is somewhat disadvantageous when used in OPVs because the blue-shift generally reduces the solar light-harvesting ability. Additionally, when excited at the absorption maxima, both NTTIC and ITIC showed emissions in the vis-NIR regions (Fig. S6c and d). The optical transition energy of NTTIC in chloroform (1.79 eV) determined from the intersection point of normalized absorption and fluorescence spectra is slightly larger than that of ITIC (1.78 eV).

In going from solution to films, the UV-vis-NIR absorption spectrum of NTTIC revealed a broadened and red-shifted profile (Fig. 2a, S7a and Table S1). Besides, the NTTIC film exhibited a clear 0–1 absorption peak at 632 nm together with a 0–0 absorption peak located at 692 nm, while the NTTIC solution showed a 0–1 absorption as a shoulder signal at around 620 nm. In contrast, the ITIC film revealed more broadened and red-shifted absorption spectrum than the NTTIC film, and the 0–1 absorption peak was less evident than that of NTTIC (Fig. 2a, S7b and Table S1). These results indicate that the difference in the core structure, i.e., naphthalene or benzene, affects the stacking structures of NTTIC and ITIC in the films. The NTTIC film also showed red-shifted fluorescence with a peak at 745 nm compared to the NTTIC solution in chloroform with a peak at 713 nm (Fig. S6c, S7c and Table S1). The optical bandgap of the NTTIC film determined from the intersection point of the normalized absorption and photoluminescence (PL) spectra is 1.72 eV, which is larger than that of the ITIC film (1.68 eV) (Fig. S7c and d).
The energy levels of NTTIC, ITIC, and a conjugated polymer donor, PBDB-T (Fig. 1), used for the fabrication of OPV devices are illustrated in Fig. 2b. The HOMO levels of NTTIC and ITIC were determined by photoemission yield spectroscopy in air (PYSA, Fig. S8), and the LUMO levels were estimated by adding the optical bandgap to the HOMO level in the film states (Table S2). The LUMO energy level of NTTIC is elevated by 0.07 eV in comparison with that of ITIC. Since the open-circuit voltage (VOC) of OPV devices is generally proportional to the energy difference between the LUMO of the electron acceptor and the HOMO of the electron donor, the higher LUMO level of NTTIC is beneficial for attaining higher VOC in OPV devices.
Density functional theory (DFT) calculations at the B3LYP/6-31G(d) level in a chloroform polarizable continuum model (PCM) were carried out to predict the molecular geometry and frontier molecular orbital energy levels of NTTIC. As displayed in Fig. S9a–c, NTTIC adopts a highly planar backbone conformation with four 4-alkylphenyl groups in out-of-plane directions. The HOMO of NTTIC is mainly localized on the electron-rich naphthalene core and the fused thieno[3,2-b]thiophene rings. The LUMO is delocalized along the planar backbone and concentrated on the electron-withdrawing IC groups. These characteristics of NTTIC are similar to those of ITIC (Fig. S9d–f). The calculated LUMO energy level of NTTIC (−3.39 eV) is higher than that of ITIC (−3.46 eV), which is consistent with the energy levels obtained by the experiments (Table S2).

The fluorescence lifetime measurement by the time-correlated single photon counting (TCSPC) method revealed that the singlet exciton lifetime of the NTTIC film (280 ps) was prolonged compared to that of the NTTIC solution (210 ps) (Fig. S10 and Table S3). These lifetimes are consistent with the values estimated from the transient absorption spectra of the NTTIC film (270 ps) and solution in chloroform (200 ps) (Fig. S11). Meanwhile, the absolute PL quantum yield of the NTTIC film (ΦPL = 0.029), estimated by the integrated sphere method, is lower than that of the NTTIC chloroform solution (ΦPL = 0.049). These results indicate that both the radiative rate constant (kr) and the nonradiative rate constant (knr) of the NTTIC film (1.0 × 108 s−1 and 3.5 × 108 s−1, respectively) are smaller than those of the NTTIC chloroform solution (2.3 × 108 s−1 and 4.6 × 108 s−1, respectively) (Table S3). As is the case with TACIC, of which the singlet exciton lifetime in the film (1590 ps) is longer than in chloroform (220 ps) owing to the smaller kr and knr in the film (4.8 × 107 s−1 and 5.8 × 108 s−1, respectively) than in chloroform (3.0 × 108 s−1 and 4.2 × 109 s−1, respectively), the unique stacking structure of NTTIC may suppress both the decay processes in the film. Furthermore, the singlet exciton lifetime of the NTTIC film was longer than that of the ITIC film determined by the fluorescence lifetime (163 ps, Table S3). Although various naphthalene-based NFAs have been explored so far, this is the first example exemplifying a prolonged singlet exciton lifetime relative to their benzene-based equivalent.

The electron mobility (μe) of NFAs is associated with the OPV device performance because it significantly influences the charge collection efficiency. A high μe of NFAs is expected to reduce the bimolecular recombination of charge carriers, thus increasing the short-circuit current density (JSC) of the OPV device. Hence, the space charge limited current (SCLC) method was adopted to measure the μe of the NTTIC and ITIC neat films. The results revealed that the μe of NTTIC (4.6 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1) was higher than that of ITIC (2.6 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1) (Table S2). In the two-dimensional grazing-incidence X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) plot, NTTIC exhibited a lamellar (100) diffraction peak (at 0.42 Å−1) with an interlamellar distance of 15.0 Å and an obvious π–π stacking (010) diffraction peak (1.75 Å−1) in the out-of-plane direction with a d-spacing of 3.6 Å (Fig. S12). In contrast, no clear X-ray diffraction peaks were observed for ITIC (Fig. S12). Then, we attempted to make a single crystal of NTTIC using various solvents (chloroform, toluene, and o-dichlorobenzene as good solvents and hexane, octane, and methanol as poor solvents) to know the precise molecular packing structures of NTTIC in the solid states. However, the NTTIC samples suitable for the single crystal X-ray analysis have not been obtained. Nevertheless, the results of GIWAXS indicate the high crystallinity and preferential face-on packing of NTTIC. The replacement of the benzene core in ITIC with naphthalene in NTTIC ensures a well-stacked film structure, thus improving the electron transport ability, which is expected to enhance effective carrier transport and reduce carrier recombination when used as an electron acceptor. The highly crystalline nature of NTTIC may also contribute to the elongation of the singlet exciton lifetime in the film by suppressing undesirable nonradiative decay processes.

To examine the replacement effect of the central benzene core with naphthalene on the photovoltaic properties, we fabricated OPV devices based on PBDB-T as the donor and NTTIC or ITIC as the acceptor with an inverted device configuration: ITO/ZnO/PBDB-T:NFA/MoO3/Ag. PBDB-T is composed of 2-alkylthiophene-substituted benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene (BDT) and 1,3-bis(thiophen-2-yl)-5,7-bis(2-ethylhexyl)benzo-[1,2-c:4,5-c′]dithiophene-4,8-dione (BDD) units (Fig. 1). PBDB-T was used as the electron donor in this study because it is one of the most widely used donors for OPV device applications. The fabrication conditions for the photoactive layers, such as the donor:acceptor weight ratio, solvent additives, and annealing temperature, were optimized for both NTTIC- and ITIC-based devices independently. The detailed device fabrication procedures are described in the ESI.

The current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the OPVs based on PBDB-T:NTTIC and PBDB-T:ITIC with the optimal photovoltaic performance are depicted in Fig. 3a, and the corresponding photovoltaic parameters are listed in Table 1. The PCE of the PBDB-T:ITIC-based device (9.71%) is comparable to PCEs reported in the literature. The PBDB-T:NTTIC-based device shows a slightly higher PCE (9.95%) than the PBDB-T:ITIC-based device. Despite the comparable JSC (15.92 and 16.02 mA cm−2) and fill factor (FF) (0.682 and 0.685), the VOC of the PBDB-T:NTTIC-based device (0.916 V) is significantly improved compared to that of the PBDB-T:ITIC-based device (0.885 V) as a consequence of the higher-lying LUMO energy level of NTTIC (Fig. 2b). The incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) spectra of the PBDB-T:NTTIC- and PBDB-T:ITIC-based devices were recorded under the irradiation of monochromatic light at an interval of 10 nm (Fig. 3b). The spectra of both devices display high IPCE values of over 70% in the 560–690 nm region. However, the IPCE values of the PBDB-T:NTTIC-based device are slightly decreased in the range of 700–800 nm, which can be attributed to the narrower absorption of NTTIC than that of ITIC (Fig. 2a and S13).
Active layer

J
SC/mA cm−2

V
OC/V
FF
PCE/%

a Parameters of the best-performing devices are shown. In parentheses, the photovoltaic parameters were averaged from ten independent devices.

PBDB-T:NTTIC
15.92 (15.62 ± 0.22)
0.916 (0.919 ± 0.003)
0.682 (0.676 ± 0.014)
9.95 (9.70 ± 0.13)
PBDB-T:ITIC
16.02 (15.81 ± 0.19)
0.885 (0.880 ± 0.004)
0.685 (0.683 ± 0.006)
9.71 (9.50 ± 0.12)

After the photon energy absorption, ED at the domain interface of the conjugated polymer and NFA, CT, charge dissociation (CD), and charge collection (CC) at the electrodes should be caused in the photoactive layers of OPV devices for photocurrent generation. To assess the exciton dynamics in the PBDB-T:NTTIC blend film, an ultrafast spectroscopic study was conducted. Fig. 4 presents the transient absorption (TA) spectra of PBDB-T:NTTIC within the pico- to nano-second time range after photoexcitation with 700 nm light. This excitation wavelength matches the absorption band of NTTIC better than that of PBDB-T (Fig. S13) and, therefore, should preferentially lead to CT through a hole transfer process after the ED. The detailed peak assignments in the TA spectra and excitation intensity dependent TA kinetics are described in the Supporting Notes and in Fig. S14 and S15 in the ESI.

Immediately after the photoexcitation, the TA spectrum is composed of the ground state bleaching (GSB) and the absorption of the first singlet excited state (S1) of NTTIC centered at 1000 nm (Fig. 4). The S1 state of NTTIC in PBDB-T:NTTIC decays with a time constant of 14 ps (Fig. S15a), which is slower than the S1 state of ITIC in PBDB-T:ITIC (7 ps) (Fig. S16 and Table 2). The longer S1 lifetime of NTTIC than that of ITIC indicates slower ED and/or CT in PBDB-T:NTTIC than in PBDB-T:ITIC. Taking into account the similar HOMO energy levels of NTTIC and ITIC (Fig. 2), the rate constants for CT in PBDB-T:NTTIC and PBDB-T:ITIC would be comparable. Therefore, the longer S1 lifetime of NTTIC than ITIC was presumably due to the slower ED, implying the formation of relatively large NTTIC domains in PBDB-T:NTTIC. Consistently, the atomic force microscopy (AFM) image of PBDB-T:NTTIC visualized a rougher surface morphology of PBDB-T:NTTIC than that of PBDB-T:ITIC (Fig. S17).
Active layer

τ
S1/ps
PL quenching/%

η
CD


μ
e
/×10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1

μ
h
/×10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1
NFA
PBDB-T

a The blend films were excited at 710 nm.
b The blend films were excited at 520 nm.
c Measured by SCLC with the device configuration of ITO/ZnO/polymer:NFA/Al.
d Measured by SCLC with the device configuration of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/polymer:NFA/MoO3/Au.

PBDB-T:NTTIC
14
95
95
0.76
2.5
6.1
PBDB-T:ITIC
7
95
95
0.75
3.1
2.1
To estimate the total efficiency of the ED and CT, the PL quenching efficiency of the PBDB-T:NTTIC blend film in comparison with its neat films was determined (Fig. S18 and Table 2). Wavelengths of 710 and 520 nm were chosen for the preferential excitation of NTTIC and PBDB-T, respectively (Fig. S13). For the excitation of PBDB-T or NTTIC, the corresponding absorbances in the neat and blend films were adjusted to be identical, and the PL intensities of the neat and blend films were compared to determine the PL quenching efficiencies. When excited at 710 nm, the NTTIC neat film showed PL in the vis-NIR region with a peak at 745 nm. However, the PL of NTTIC in the blend film was efficiently quenched (95%, Fig. S18a), indicating that the excitons generated in the NTTIC domain diffused toward the D/A interface and caused the CT efficiently (95% in total). This result is consistent with the singlet exciton lifetimes of NTTIC, that is, the lifetime is decreased by 95% in the PBDB-T:NTTIC blend film (14 ps) compared to that of the NTTIC neat film (270–280 ps, Fig. S10 and S11).
When excited at 520 nm, the PL of PBDB-T was also efficiently quenched in the PBDB-T:NTTIC blend film (95%, Fig. S18c), suggesting efficient ED and CT (95% in total). It is important to note that in addition to the PL of PBDB-T with a peak at around 670 nm, the PBDB-T:NTTIC blend film also displayed weak PL of NTTIC with a peak at around 740 nm. This may be attributed to the unignorable excitation of NTTIC with an excitation wavelength of 520 nm (Fig. S13). Furthermore, the energy transfer from the excited PBDB-T to NTTIC would also occur because the PL spectrum of PBDB-T is overlapped well with the absorption spectrum of NTTIC (Fig. S13 and S18).
The PL quenching efficiencies of the PBDB-T:ITIC blend film relative to its neat films were also 95% with the preferential excitations of both ITIC at 710 nm and PBDB-T at 520 nm (Fig. S18b and c). These results signify that the efficiencies of ED and CD in the PBDB-T:NTTIC and PBDB-T:ITIC blend films are comparable, irrespective of the formation of relatively large domains of NTTIC in PBDB-T:NTTIC. Owing to the longer singlet exciton lifetime of NTTIC in the film state (280 ps) than that of the ITIC film (163 ps), the excitons generated in the relatively large NTTIC domains in the PBDB-T:NTTIC blend film would reach the domain interface of the conjugated polymer and NTTIC efficiently.
From the recovery profile of the TA signal at 570 nm, which was derived from the GSB of PBDB-T after 100 ps (Fig. S15b), the CD efficiency from the CT state in PBDB-T:NTTIC was estimated to be 76% (Table 2), assuming that the constant fraction at >2500 ps stems from the dissociated free charges and the decayed component at <2500 ps results from the geminate recombination before the CD. This is comparable to the CD efficiency in PBDB-T:ITIC (75%) (Fig. S16). Considering that the IPCEs up to 700 nm and the efficiencies of ED, CT, and CD are all similar in the PBDB-T:NTTIC and PBDB-T:ITIC blend films, the CC efficiencies should also be similar. Therefore, the charge transport properties, i.e., μe and hole mobility (μh), of PBDB-T:NTTIC and PBDB-T:ITIC were evaluated using the SCLC method. The results revealed that the μe of PBDB-T:NTTIC (2.5 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1) was somewhat lower than that of PBDB-T:ITIC (3.1 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1), but the μh of PBDB-T:NTTIC (6.1 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1) was higher than that of PBDB-T:ITIC (2.1 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1) (Table 2). As a result, the CC efficiency of PBDB-T:NTTIC was similar to that of PBDB-T:ITIC. It should be recalled that the NTTIC neat film showed a higher μe (4.6 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1) than the ITIC neat film (2.6 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1), which was attributable to the preferential face-on stacking alignment of NTTIC (Table S2). The GIWAXS plot of PBDB-T:NTTIC demonstrated the preservation of the face-on stacking structure with a d-spacing of 3.6 Å (qz = 1.75 Å−1) in the NTTIC domain of the PBDB-T:NTTIC blend film (Fig. S19). The larger domain growth of NTTIC revealed by the AFM measurement may result in the unfavorable formation of an electron transport pathway in PBDB-T:NTTIC and a lower μe, in spite of the intrinsically higher electron transport ability of NTTIC than ITIC. It is known that if μe and μh do not match each other in the blend film, then the carriers with lower mobility accumulate in the device. The accumulation leads to an additional electric field in the device, which blocks the extraction of the carriers, thus promoting the non geminate recombination and reducing the FF. As such, there is still a need to optimize the OPV device fabrication conditions, e.g., combined conjugated polymers and solvent additives, to prevent the reduction of μe in the blend film for a further enhancement in the performances of the NTTIC-based OPV devices.

In summary, we prepared a D unit, NTT, comprising a central naphthalene core fused with two thieno[3,2-b]thiophenes at the ortho-positions via a five-membered ring bridge with two bulky p-hexylphenyl groups. Combined with IC as the end-capping A unit, an A–D–A type NFA, NTTIC, was synthesized. NTTIC exhibited slightly blue-shifted absorption, a higher LUMO energy level, and better π–π stacking compared to the corresponding benzene-cored benchmark NFA, ITIC. More importantly, the singlet exciton lifetime of the NTTIC film (270–280 ps) was longer than that of the ITIC film (163 ps) due to the stronger intermolecular interaction in the NTTIC film. Although various naphthalene-based NFAs have been developed thus far, this is the first example corroborating the longer singlet exciton lifetime of naphthalene-based NFAs than their benzene-based counterpart. The subtle modification, i.e., the replacement of benzene with naphthalene, in the central core structure of the D unit of A–D–A type NFAs was found to significantly affect the exciton dynamics. Due to the longer singlet exciton lifetime of NTTIC than ITIC, OPV devices based on NTTIC are expected to show high ED and CT efficiencies, even in the phase-separation structure with large domain sizes. Such characteristics of the naphthalene-cored NFA are advantageous to the future commercialization of OPV devices, because one of the problems that hamper the large-scale production of high-performance OPV devices is the difficulty in the highly reproducible formation of the bicontinuous domain structures of conjugated polymers and NFAs in the photoactive layers with domain sizes smaller than the exciton diffusion length.

OPVs based on a blend film of a conjugated polymer donor, PBDB-T, and NTTIC achieved a decent PCE of 9.95% with a VOC of 0.916 V, which were higher than those of the ITIC-based control device (PCE = 9.71% and VOC = 0.885 V). Due to the larger domain size of NTTIC in the PBDB-T:NTTIC blend film, the ED and CT in PBDB-T:NTTIC were slow (14 ps in total) relative to those in PBDB-T:ITIC (7 ps). Generally, slower ED and CT lead to lower efficiencies of ED and CT because the S1 state in organic semiconductors rapidly recombine. Nevertheless, the total efficiency of the ED and CT in PBDB-T:NTTIC was similar to that in PBDB-T:ITIC (95%) owing to the sufficiently long singlet exciton lifetime of the NTTIC film. Despite the slightly blue-shifted absorption, the large domain sizes, and the ill-balanced charge mobilities of PBDB-T:NTTIC in comparison with those of PBDB-T:ITIC, the JSC of the PBDB-T:NTTIC-based device (15.92 mA cm−2) was comparable to that of the PBDB-T:ITIC-based device (16.02 mA cm−2). These results demonstrate the high potential of naphthalene-cored D units of A–D–A type NFAs to achieve a long singlet exciton lifetime and high PCE in NFA-based OPVs. To take full advantage of the naphthalene-based NFAs with a longer S1 lifetime, the combination of a conjugated polymer and a naphthalene-based NFA, of which the HOMO–HOMO offset is small, is necessary for achieving a high photocurrent generation efficiency with a reduced voltage loss. The replacement of benzene with naphthalene in the D unit is worthy of further detailed investigations.

T. U. and H. I. conceived the research, led the project, and wrote the manuscript. K. Igarashi, T. W., and D. S. performed the syntheses and characterization of materials, spectroscopic measurements, theoretical calculations, and device fabrications and evaluations. Y. T., T. T., and H. O. conducted transient absorption measurements and analyses. K. Ishida and T. K. carried out GIWAXS measurements and analyses. S. O. and K. T. performed PL quantum efficiency measurements and analyses. All the authors commented on the manuscript.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the JSPS KAKENHI (Grant Number 18H03898, 20H02567, 20H05831, and 20H05832), Shorai Foundation for Science and Technology, and Research Foundation for the Electrochemistry of Chubu. The synchrotron radiation experiments for GIWAXS measurements were performed at the BU46XU of SPring-8 with the approval of the Japan Synchrotron Radiation Research Institute (JASRI) (Proposal No. 2019A1824 and 2020A1743).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0se01861a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021