 DOI: 10.1039/D0TA03951A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 12723-12734


Yang
Yang
,

Minh Tam
Hoang
,

Disheng
Yao
,

Ngoc Duy
Pham
,

Vincent Tiing
Tiong
,

Xiaoxiang
Wang
 and 

Hongxia
Wang
*

School of Chemistry, Physics and Mechanical Engineering, Science and Engineering Faculty, Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane 4001, Australia. E-mail: hx.wang@qut.edu.au

Received
11th April 2020
, Accepted 29th May 2020
First published on 1st June 2020
A hole transport layer (HTL) plays the role of extracting hole carriers while improving interfacial contacts of perovskite/carbon in planar heterojunction perovskite solar cells using carbon based electrodes (C-PSCs). For the future application of C-PSCs, the HTL also needs to have good stability and easy processability while maintaining high device efficiency. Herein, we compare the behaviour of the most widely used HTL based on spiro-OMeTAD to the much less studied HTL based on CuSCN in planar C-PSCs. The results show that 14.7% power conversion efficiency (PCE) is obtained for CuSCN based C-PSCs with good reproducibility and negligible hysteresis behaviour. In contrast, the C-PSCs using spiro-OMeTAD show a much lower PCE (12.4%) and significant hysteresis phenomenon. We conduct systematic characterisation of the electronic and energetic properties of the C-PSCs to understand this phenomenon. We find that a more favourable energy level alignment of CuSCN with the perovskite than spiro-OMeTAD leads to a reduced charge injection barrier, which favours a more efficient hole extraction capability, inhibited carrier recombination and reduced ionic capacitance. This in turn leads to better PCE and lower hysteresis for the C-PSCs. Moreover, the CuSCN based C-PSCs also demonstrate better stability against moisture with a high PCE retention ratio of 93% under a humid environment (55–70%) for 80 days without encapsulation.

The unprecedented advancement of the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) makes this new photovoltaic (PV) technology highly promising in the future PV market to deliver cost-effective solar electricity. However, most of the state-of-the-art PSCs employ noble metals such as gold as the back contact and expensive organic semiconductor materials as the hole transport layer (HTL), which yield high performance but increase the cost and decrease the life-span of the devices. To address these issues, carbon materials, which are cheap, conductive and chemically inert and resistant to moisture, have been exploited as either a hole conductor or a current collector for PSCs. Although some HTL-free carbon based PSCs have shown good stability, the insufficient hole extractive ability of carbon materials and poor interfacial contact of perovskite/carbon cause a strong hysteretic behaviour in the J–V plot and lower conversion efficiency. In the meantime, in order to simplify the fabrication process and reduce energy consumption, PSCs with a planar structure with an ultrathin electron transport layer (ETL) that can be fabricated at low temperature have been considered as the most appropriate choice for future large scale production of PSCs. Many attempts have been made to enhance the device performance by modifying the ETL in PSCs such as by using an amorphous TiO2-coated ETL to improve the short circuit current density and efficiency of the devices due to the presence of oxygen vacancies or by incorporating edge-enriched graphene nanoribbons and TiO2 nanocrystals to prepare ETLs. Nevertheless, the impact of the HTL itself on the performance and stability of carbon based planar perovskite solar cells (C-PSCs) is not well studied yet.

As the representative of hole transport material in PSCs, organic spiro-OMeTAD (2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis-(N,N-di-4-methoxyphenylamino)-9,9′spirobifluorene) has been widely employed in PSCs to acquire high PCE when in combination with a precious metal based electrode due to its appropriate ionization potential, decent hole mobility and good film-formation capacity. Because of its success in producing high PCE of PSCs, it has been widely used as a reference material to evaluate other hole extraction materials in PSCs. However, there is a lack of detailed study of using spiro-OMeTAD in C-PSCs. Practically the efficiency of C-PSCs using spiro-OMeTAD is much lower compared to the device using a metal based back contact. The main reason is that certain organic solvents contained in carbon paste that is used to make carbon back contact electrodes are incompatible with spiro-OMeTAD, and thus they can potentially destroy the underneath HTL, and even the perovskite layer. To address this issue, Zhang et al. adopted a pressing transfer approach, in which they prepared a free-standing carbon film first which was then pressed onto a spiro-OMeTAD layer to assemble C-PSCs. Previously, we have demonstrated a method involving hot-pressing a pre-made carbon film on a spiro-OMeTAD layer to effectively address the interfacial contact problems between carbon and HTLs. In addition to spiro-OMeTAD based organic HTLs, an inorganic p-type semiconductor based on copper thiocyanate (CuSCN) with a wide band gap and high mobility has shown the potential of enhancing the PCE of C-PSCs. In regard to PSCs using noble metal electrodes, Arora et al. compared spiro-OMeTAD and CuSCN in Au based devices, which showed similar PCE for the device with the two different hole transport materials. They also found that the reaction of CuSCN with Au caused device decomposition. Nonetheless, no work reveals the underlying dynamic process of generation, separation, extraction and transfer of hole carriers at the interfaces of perovskite/HTL in C-PSCs when using different hole transport materials.
In this work, we conducted comprehensive comparison of the effect of spiro-OMeTAD and CuSCN on the photovoltaic, electronic, energetic and durable properties of planar C-PSCs. All the characterization techniques were performed with the C-PSCs that were made with an optimal thickness of both spiro-OMeTAD and CuSCN layers. We believe that this comparison is important both practically and fundamentally to reveal the underlying reasons that cause the different device performance and hysteresis behaviour. It was found that the power conversion efficiency of the C-PSCs using CuSCN as the HTL (close to 15%) was much higher with a much smaller hysteresis behaviour than that of the spiro-OMeTAD based devices. This is ascribed to the favourable energy level alignment between CuSCN and the perovskite material for hole carrier extraction and ionic capacitance suppression. Benefiting from the hydrophobicity of CuSCN, the corresponding C-PSCs also demonstrated excellent moisture resistance with more than 93% retention of the initial efficiency under humid conditions (relative humidity: 55–70%) after aging for over 80 days without encapsulation.

All materials were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and used as received without further purification unless otherwise stated. Ammonium bromide (MABr) and formamidinium iodide (FAI) were purchased from Greatcell Solar and lead iodide (PbI2, 99.9%) was provided by Youxuan Tech, China. 2,2′,7,7′-Tetrakis-(N,N-di-4-methoxyphenylamino)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD) was purchased from Borun New Material, China. The carbon ink was supplied by Guangzhou Saidi Technology Development Co. Ltd, China.


Hydrochloric acid (HCl, 35.5 wt%) and zinc powder were used to partially etch fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) glass substrates (Nippon Electric Glass, 15 Ω square−1). The etched substrates were then cleaned in an ultrasonic bath in sequence: an aqueous solution of Decon-90 detergent (5 wt%), deionized water and a mixed solution of ethanol, isopropanol and acetone with a volume ratio of 1:1:1. To completely remove organic residuals, the glass substrates were treated with UV-ozone for 30 min. A tin(II)chloride (SnCl2) solution (0.1 M in ethanol) was spin-coated onto the FTO-coated glass at 3000 rpm for 30 s. After being annealed at 185 °C for 1 h in a muffle furnace, a compact tin dioxide (SnO2) electron transport layer was obtained. A perovskite film was deposited onto the SnO2-coated substrate in a N2-filled glove box by spin-coating a triple cation perovskite precursor (CsFA0.83MA0.17PbI2.53Br0.47) in a two-step process.

Two different hole transport layers were applied in this work. With regard to spiro-OMeTAD based PSCs, a precursor was prepared firstly by dissolving spiro-OMeTAD (72.3 mg), 4-tert-butylpyridine (28.8 μl) and bis(trifluoromethane)sulfonimide lithium (Li-TFSI) solution (17.5 μl) consisting of Li-TFSI (520 mg) and acetonitrile (1 ml) in 1 ml of chlorobenzene. Then a spiro-OMeTAD layer was achieved via spin-coating the prepared precursor on top of a perovskite film at 4000 rpm for 30 s. A thin copper thiocyanate (CuSCN) layer was deposited onto the perovskite-coated substrate by a dynamic dripping method to make CuSCN based devices. Specifically, 35 μl of CuSCN precursor made by dissolving 35 mg of CuSCN in 1 ml of diethyl sulfide was drop-cast on a spinning perovskite-coated substrate at 5000 rpm for 2 s to yield a flat thin layer.
A carbon electrode of the device was made by hot-pressing a free-standing carbon film onto the hole transport layer at 80 °C at a pressure of 30 MPa for 3 min. The standalone carbon was obtained by peeling off the as-prepared carbon film, which was firstly coated onto a cleaned microscope slide by doctor-blading the commercial carbon slurry and then was immersed in ethanol to remove the residual solvent. For simplicity, the PSC with spiro-OMeTAD is named PSK/spiro/C, while the one with CuSCN is labelled PSK/CuSCN/C.

A field emission scanning electron microscope (FSEM JOEL 7001 F) was used to capture the top-view and cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the samples at an acceleration voltage of 5 kV or 10 kV. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS, HeI as the resonance line; the photoenergy is 21.22 eV) were performed using a Kratos AXIS Supra photoelectron spectrometer. UV-visible absorbance spectra were acquired by using a UV-visible spectrometer (Carry 60). Steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra of the sample were recorded with a fluorescence spectrofluorometer (Cary Eclipse). The samples were excited with a 450 W xenon lamp at a fixed wavelength of 487 nm. The PL was detected by using emission monochromators in the spectral range of 500 to 900 nm.

The photovoltaic properties of perovskite solar cells were measured under an irradiation of 100 mW cm−2 (AM1.5, 1 sun) provided by a solar simulator (Oriel Sol3A, Newport) with a 450 W xenon lamp. The active area of the devices was 0.115 cm2 that was controlled by using a black mask. The J–V plots of perovskite solar cells under different light illumination intensities were also obtained by using neutral density optical filters with a transmittance of 1%, 11%, 19%, 30% and 55%, respectively. J–V scans for the devices were performed under 1 sun illumination at a scan rate of 14 mV s−1, 50 mV s−1, 140 mV s−1, 200 mV s−1 and 300 mV s−1, respectively. The stabilized photocurrent measurement was conducted via measuring the current density of the devices at the voltage of the maximum power point under 1 sun illumination. Transient Voc and Jsc measurement during light/dark cycling was obtained by switching on and off light illumination (1 sun illumination intensity) every 100 seconds. A current response in a total of four cycles was recorded. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectrum of the solar cells was measured using a quantum efficiency system (EQE/IQE 200B, Newport) in AC mode. Impedance spectroscopy (IS) of the devices was performed via an electrochemical workstation (VSP BioLogic Science Instruments) in a frequency range from 1 MHz to 100 mHz under open-circuit conditions with different light illumination intensities. The capacitance–voltage plot of the C-PSCs was obtained by impedance spectroscopy in the dark as a function of DC voltage applied. Mott–Schottky measurements were performed at a frequency of 1.469 kHz or 10.02 kHz in the dark using the electrochemical workstation. The long-term stability of the solar cells was tested by monitoring the performance of devices stored in an ambient environment (temperature: ∼22 °C; humidity: 55–70%) without encapsulation. The hydrophobicity of the films was assessed via measuring the contact angle of a water droplet on the film surface by using a First Ten Angstroms dynamic contact angle analyser (FTA 200).


Fig. 1a exhibits the J–V plot of the champion planar C-PSCs with various HTLs under both reverse (Rev, from Voc to Jsc) and forward (FW, from Jsc to Voc) scans and the corresponding characteristic photovoltaic performance parameters of each device are shown in Table 1. A PCE of 12.4% was achieved for the spiro-OMeTAD based C-PSC (PSK/spiro/C) with a short-current density (Jsc) of 20.7 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.97 V and a fill factor (FF) of 61.8% in the reverse scan. By contrast, the CuSCN based C-PSC (PSK/CuSCN/C) generated an outstanding PCE of 14.7% for the best performing cell, as a result of the much enhanced Voc (1.01 V) and FF (70.1%). More importantly, compared to PSK/spiro/C, PSK/CuSCN/C also yielded a better PCE of 14.0% in the forward scan leading to negligible hysteresis behaviour. The hysteresis index (HI) of PSK/CuSCN/C is only 0.048 that is approximately 4 times lower than that of PSK/spiro/C (0.194). In addition, it was found that PSK/CuSCN/C with a thicker CuSCN layer (100 nm, 150 nm) showed lower performance, which is ascribed to suppressed charge carrier transport and collection in the thicker CuSCN layer (Fig. S1). Nevertheless, the C-PSCs with the CuSCN layer that has a similar film thickness to spiro-OMeTAD (150 nm) still presented much lower hysteresis than PSK/spiro/C. The statistical characteristic photovoltaic performance parameters based on 15 cells for the C-PSCs with spiro-OMeTAD or CuSCN are summarized in Fig. S2 and Table S1, which display a similar trend to the champion device of each type.

Sample
Scan direction

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
HI

a Hysteresis index: HI = (PCERev − PCEFW)/PCERev.

PSK/spiro/C
Rev
0.97
20.7
61.8
12.4
0.194
FW
0.93
20.8
51.8
10.0
PSK/CuSCN/C
Rev
1.01
20.6
70.1
14.7
0.048
FW
1.01
21.0
65.8
14.0
The external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra for the spiro-OMeTAD based C-PSC and CuSCN based C-PSC are demonstrated in Fig. 1b. It is clear that PSK/CuSCN/C exhibits higher EQE in the broad wavelength range from 350–750 nm than PSK/spiro/C. An integrated photo-current density calculated from the EQE spectrum of 19.59 mA cm−2 for PSK/CuSCN/C is very close to the Jsc value obtained from the J–V plot. In contrast, the integrated Jsc of 18.70 mA cm−2 of PSK/spiro/C is lower than its Jsc value from the J–V plot. This difference between two types of devices is attributed to the difference in shallow trap states at the interface of perovskite/HTL or HTL/carbon. Clearly, the loss of electrons generated by the much weaker monochromatic light used in the EQE test at the interface between spiro-OMeTAD and adjacent perovskite and the carbon layer becomes more serious as a consequence of the trapping process, while these defective trap states can be filled up under high illumination intensity as in the case of the J–V measurement, leading to a large mismatch between two measurements. To estimate the charge extraction properties of the perovskite film in the presence of spiro-OMeTAD or CuSCN, the steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra of the material were obtained (Fig. S3a). Compared to spiro-OMeTAD, the PL of the perovskite film is much more effectively quenched when in contact with CuSCN. It indicates that a more efficient hole extraction occurs at the interface of perovskite/CuSCN than that of perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD. This can explain the similar value of Jsc measured by using a solar simulator and by integration of the EQE plot.
We further measured the steady-state PCE of the devices by tracking the stabilized photocurrent density at the voltage of the corresponding maximum power point (MPP) in the J–V plot under 1 sun light illumination. As shown in Fig. 1c, the maximum values of photocurrent density (18.20 mA cm−2) and PCE output (14.0%) were achieved for PSK/CuSCN/C within 30 s. After this, it slightly decreases to 13.7%. This stable power output sustained for around 100 s, demonstrating an outstanding stability of PSK/CuSCN/C under continuous light soaking. In contrast, it takes quite a long time (more than 110 s) for the PSK/spiro/C device to reach a stabilized photocurrent of 17.34 mA cm−2 under a voltage bias of 630 mV, leading to a corresponding PCE of only 10.9%. The much lower MPP results further imply the existence of rich trap states in PSK/spiro/C, which is consistent with the EQE results. Table 2 lists the steady-state PCE and PV response of carbon based PSCs with different electron transport layers, HTLs and device structures (mesoporous and planar) reported in the literature. The responding time here is the time to reach the maximum photocurrent density and maintain a stable output at the voltage of MPP in the J–V curves of the corresponding devices. It is worth pointing out that the majority of reports on carbon based PSCs used a mesoporous TiO2 based electron transport layer which normally produces higher PCEs but requires high temperature annealing temperature above 400 °C. There are limited studies of C-PSCs that adopt a planar structure as in our case. Clearly, the PV response of PSK/CuSCN/C in this work is comparable to or even faster than that of some of the high performance C-PSCs. The thickness of each layer of the C-PSCs with different HTLs was assessed via the cross-sectional SEM images of the full device as exhibited in Fig. 1d and S3b. Specifically, the SnO2, perovskite, spiro-OMeTAD, CuSCN and carbon layers are approximately 30 nm, 500 nm, 150 nm, 50 nm and 45 μm thick, respectively.
Device structure
PV response
Steady-state PCE (%)
Ref.
c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/Cs0.17FA0.83PbI2.64Br0.36/C
∼35 s
10.1

23

c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/Cs0.17FA0.83PbI2.64Br0.36/PEO/C
∼10 s
13.0

23

TiO2/SnO2/CsFA0.83MA0.17PbI2.53Br0.47/CuPc/C
∼150 s
14.5

24

TiO2/CsFA0.83MA0.17PbI2.53Br0.47/CuPc/C
∼25 s
13.1

25

Ni-TiO2/CsFA0.83MA 0.17PbI2.53Br0.47/CuPc/C
∼25 s
17.1

11

SnO2/CsFA0.83MA0.17PbI2.53Br0.47/spiro-OMeTAD/C
>110 s
10.9
This work
SnO2/CsFA0.83MA0.17PbI2.53Br0.47/CuSCN/C
∼30 s
14.0
This work
The main differences in the device performance between PSK/spiro/C and the PSK/CuSCN/C are Voc and FF, both of which are strongly related to the charge recombination process in the device. The impedance spectrum (IS) of the device under open-circuit conditions with different light illumination intensities was recorded to probe the dynamic process of internal charge carrier transfer and recombination of the devices. Two arcs are found in the Nyquist plot that can be well-fitted using an equivalent circuit (Fig. 2a). The R3 and Cg of the first arc in the high frequency region stand for the charge carrier recombination resistance in bulk perovskite and dielectric properties of the perovskite material, respectively. The R1 and Cs of the second arc in the low frequency zone correlate with the properties of perovskite interfaces. In particular, the sum of R1 and R3 reveals the recombination resistance of charge carriers at interfaces, while Cs indicates interfacial charge carrier accumulation capacitance. It is found that the recombination resistance, both R3 and R1 + R3, of PSK/CuSCN/C is obviously larger than that of PSK/spiro/C at the same Voc (Fig. 2b). In our case, since the only difference between these two types of devices is the HTL material, the higher values of R3 and R1 + R3 signify less trap-related recombination. In other words, there is better charge carrier transport at the interface of the perovskite and CuSCN. This is consistent with the better device performance of PSK/CuSCN/C obtained from both the J–V measurement and the steady state measurement as well as the EQE shown above. The ideality factor of the PSCs extracted from the resistance versus voltage plot is calculated according to the following eqn (1).
(1)
An ideality factor, md, of 1.81 is obtained for PSK/spiro/C, while a smaller md value of 1.35 is acquired for PSK/CuSCN/C. The smaller md further confirms the reduced interfacial charge recombination rate and less trap-related charge recombination in the CuSCN based device.
In addition, when it comes to the analysis of capacitance, the ideality factor, mc, can also be calculated by using eqn (2) below.
(2)
As shown in Fig. 2c, the value of Cg remains almost unchanged, whereas Cs increases linearly with the increase of light illumination intensity for both types of C-PSCs. In comparison to PSK/spiro/C, the Cs of PSK/CuSCN/C is around two orders of magnitudes lower under light illumination, which means less charge carrier accumulation or less charge carrier density at the interface. This could be related to the thinner film, higher conductivity, smoother surface and better coverage of the CuSCN layer on the perovskite layer. The value of mc for PSK/CuSCN/C is 1.47, which is slightly smaller than that of PSK/spiro/C (mc = 1.54). This is consistent with the hypothesis that there is less interfacial charge accumulation capacitance for the CuSCN based C-PSC device.
The different hysteresis behaviour of the C-PSCs using CuSCN and spiro was further investigated by monitoring the photo-response of Jsc and Voc under light/dark cycles. As shown in Fig. 3, clearly, both Jsc and Voc of PSK/CuSCN/C respond much faster than those of PSK/spiro/C in the transient measurement (Fig. 3a and d). Although the Jsc for both C-PSCs has a similar light response in the first light on/off cycle (Fig. 3b), a much slower Jsc response is noted from the 2nd light on/off cycle for the spiro-OMeTAD based device. In the fourth cycle, PSK/spiro/C needs a longer time of about 40 s to reach a relatively steady-state maximum value, while PSK/CuSCN/C reaches its maximum and stable Jsc in less than 5 s (Fig. 3c). The transient Jsc behaviour is consistent with the result of MPP measurement above. Similarly, the zoomed-in plot of Voc response (Fig. 3e and f) exhibits that it takes approximately 20 s for PSK/spiro/C to acquire a relatively stabilized value. After three cycles of light on/off, this response time increases to more than 40 s. By contrast, PSK/CuSCN/C always demonstrates a fast photo-response in all the transient tests, which requires less than 10 s to produce a stable Voc. Based on the results of transient Voc and Jsc tests, we can hypothesize that, compared to the perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD interface, fewer ions and charge carriers are trapped in the deep state at the interface of perovskite/CuSCN. Therefore they can be released (detrapped) faster to reach stable Jsc and Voc. The negligible hysteresis for PSK/CuSCN/C is a direct consequence of this rapid response to Jsc and Voc. In the meantime, at the end of the illumination cycle test, PSK/CuSCN/C shows a slower voltage decay compared to PSK/spiro/C (Fig. S3c). The longer decay time of Voc in the dark indicates a longer charge carrier lifetime and lower interfacial recombination rate of the device, as a result of the lower density of trap states.
As the hysteresis in the J–V plot is dependent on the measuring conditions such as the scan rate, we obtained the J–V curves for the C-PSC devices with different HTLs at various sweep rates ranging from 14 to 300 mV s−1 under 1 sun light illumination to understand the hysteresis behaviour (Fig. 4a). It is found that PSK/spiro/C always shows a typical normal hysteresis behaviour where the PCE in the reverse scan is larger than that in the forward scan for the different scan rates. Moreover, the hysteresis index (HI) decreases slightly from 0.273 at 300 mV s−1 to 0.142 at 14 mV s−1 (Table S2). The reason for the gradually alleviated hysteresis with the decrease of the sweep rate is attributed to the reduced time required for the motion of the mobile ions following the built-in electrical field of the device. In contrast, there is always negligible hysteresis behaviour for PSK/CuSCN/C regardless of the scan rates with a very low HI value between 0.021 and 0.063, indicating excellent charge carrier extraction ability of the perovskite/CuSCN interface.
Hysteresis is caused by the imbalanced charge extraction rate at the two most critical interfaces in PSCs, namely perovskite/ETL (SnO2 in this work) and perovskite/HTL. Quite often, the transport rate of holes from perovskite to the adjacent HTL is lower than the transport of electrons from perovskite to the ETL, leaving accumulation of holes in the device. The charge accumulation is reflected by the different capacitance of the device. To confirm whether there is any difference in the density of accumulated charge between the CuSCN based C-PSCs and the spiro based C-PSCs, the capacitance of the C-PSC devices with CuSCN or spiro-OMeTAD was investigated by the analysis of impedance spectroscopy of the device (Fig. 4b and c). There are two main plateaus in the capacitance vs. frequency plot which correspond to the electrode polarization domain in the low-frequency region and the dielectric polarization domain in the high-frequency region (Fig. 4b). Generally, the PSC presents a relatively stable dielectric polarization domain as a result of dielectric relaxation of bulk perovskite, while it behaves differently in the electrode polarization domain, which is directly associated with ion accumulation at interfaces. PSK/spiro/C shows a constant ionic capacitance of around 2 μF cm−2 at 0.5 Hz regardless of the applied voltage (Fig. 4c). In contrast, the low-frequency capacitance for PSK/CuSCN/C is only 0.36 μF cm−2 at 0.5 Hz without voltage bias which increases rapidly to 3.2 μF cm−2 after 600 mV. It is noticeable that the capacitance value for PSK/spiro/C is always higher than that of PSK/CuSCN/C throughout the voltage bias range from 0 V to 600 mV, which can be attributed to more ionic accumulation induced by electrode polarization at the interface of perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD compared to perovskite/CuSCN. Interestingly, when the applied voltage bias increases to 800 mV, a negative capacitance at low frequency is visible for both types of C-PSCs (Fig. S4a and c). The onset of negative capacitance is perceived as a deep downward spike in the plots where the turning point is located at around 0.41 Hz for PSK/spiro/C and 0.32 Hz for PSK/CuSCN/C. This negative value is also shown as an inductive loop in the corresponding Nyquist plots (Fig. S4b and d), which is correlated with the charging and accumulation of ions and carriers at interfaces.
Based on the results above, it is clear that the different hysteresis and capacitance behaviour of carbon-based planar PSCs are caused by the different hole transport layers. To understand the reason for the more efficient hole extraction ability of CuSCN, we investigated the energy band alignment of both CuSCN and spiro-OMeTAD relative to the perovskite material by using ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS). The valence band maximum (VBM) of each material is determined by fitting the linear section of the high kinetic energy curve close to the Fermi edge (Fig. 5a). As is shown, CuSCN possesses a very small EVBM of 0.48 eV that is much lower than the EVBM of spiro-OMeTAD (1.15 eV). The cutoff energy is illustrated in Fig. 5b where the Ecutoff is 17.25 eV and 16.13 eV for spiro-OMeTAD and CuSCN, respectively. Combining the results from UPS and the band gap value of perovskite derived from UV-visible absorption spectra (Fig. S5), we depicted the energy band position for perovskite, spiro-OMeTAD, CuSCN and carbon (Fig. 5c). Apparently, there is a remarkable energy offset of 0.66 eV between the valence band (VB) of perovskite and the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) level of spiro-OMeTAD, whereas the VB of CuSCN is much closer to that of perovskite. The better energy level alignment of perovskite and CuSCN benefits a more effective hole extraction process, suppressing charge recombination and reducing charge/ionic accumulation, thereby reducing or eliminating hysteresis behaviour.
In order to further explain the mechanism of hysteretic variation of the C-PSCs with CuSCN and spiro-OMeTAD, a physical model showing the energy alignment at the perovskite/HTL interface for the device is developed by following the approach proposed by Bisquert et al. (Fig. 6). For simplicity of interpretation, here we consider that the VB of CuSCN matches perfectly with the adjacent perovskite. In contrast, an energy gap of ΔE = 0.45 eV exists between perovskite and spiro-OMeTAD. In the meantime, we just focus on the interface of perovskite/HTL and the effect of other interfaces is ignored since the same materials were in both devices except the hole transport material. Fig. 6a and b exhibit the energy level alignment under equilibrium conditions (0 V) in the dark for PSK/spiro/C and PSK/CuSCN/C, respectively. The depletion width for the two systems can be calculated by analysing the built-in potential (Vbi) at the perovskite and HTL contacts, which are estimated from the intercept of the x-axis and linear part of the Mott–Schottky plot of the capacitance in the high frequency zone (Fig. S6). The built-in potential for PSK/CuSCN/C is 0.97 V that is 0.05 V higher than that of PSK/spiro/C. It indicates that a larger built-in potential not only offers a greater driving force for the separation of photo-produced charge carriers but also more effectively prevents the carriers from going back from the HTL to the perovskite absorber. In the space charge region at the p–n junction, there are no free carriers. According to eqn (3) below,Nd, the doping concentration of the donor is obtained (Table 3).
(3)
where
C, A, V and q are the measured capacitance, active area of the device, the applied voltage bias and the elementary charge, respectively. The relative dielectric constant of the perovskite film, ε, is around 35 according to the literature. The vacuum permittivity, ε0, is 8.854 × F m−1. By using eqn (4), the depletion widths on the n-side and p-side for the C-PSCs are calculated.

(4)
where
Na and Nd are the doping concentration of the acceptor and donor, respectively. The value of Na is 7.13 × 1015 cm−3 for spiro-OMeTAD and 7.20 × 1017 cm−3 for CuSCN as reported previously.Table 3 lists the depletion width on both the n-side and p-side for different C-PSCs. The value of Wp (14.58 μm) for PSK/CuSCN/C is 20 times higher than that for PSK/spiro/C (Wp = 0.71 μm), which is attributed to the better hole doping density and hole mobility of CuSCN.

Sample

V
oc (V)

V
bi (V)
Slope of 1/C2vs. V (F−2 V−1)

N
d (cm−3)

W
n (nm)

W
p (μm)
PSK/spiro/C
0.96
0.92
−7.36 × 1014
2.80 × 1015
280.39
0.71
PSK/CuSCN/C
1.01
0.97
−1.71 × 1015
1.20 × 1015
24.30
14.58
When an external voltage bias (Vapp) of 1 V is applied to the C-PSCs, the Fermi level of electrons increases toward the valence band and generates an accumulation regime of ions and electrons at the bending edge, simultaneously, leading to an accumulation of holes in the HTL. The Vapp exceeds the Vbi by 0.08 V for PSK/spiro/C, whereas the Vapp is almost equal to the Vbi for PSK/CuSCN/C. Therefore, a more severe inversion of the bending is induced by the applied electrical field for PSK/spiro/C. The formed inverse bending is more beneficial for the negative ions to transfer back to the interface of perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD, leading to charge accumulation. Thanks to the different energy levels between spiro-OMeTAD and CuSCN, this accumulation occurs at a higher voltage in PSK/CuSCN/C compared to PSK/spiro/C. The charge gathering at the perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD interface is always higher than that at the perovskite/CuSCN interface when an external voltage bias is applied. Furthermore, due to the energy barrier at the interface of perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD is closer to the perovskite side, hole injection from spiro-OMeTAD into perovskite is suppressed, thereby forming a thin highly charged space charge accumulation layer on the spiro-OMeTAD side. Such accumulation leads to a capacitance “across” the interface that is larger than the one formed at the perovskite/CuSCN interface causing an anomalous hysteretic response. Overall, the different hysteresis behaviour of the C-PSCs with CuSCN and spiro-OMeTAD can be well interpreted by this physical model. Based on the simulation analysis, tuning the energy level alignment of the perovskite and HTL is of great importance to eliminate hysteresis behaviour for carbon based planar PSCs.
Additionally, the long-term stability of unencapsulated C-PSCs with CuSCN or spiro-OMeTAD based HTLs was compared through monitoring the device performance for more than 80 days in an environment with a relative humidity of 55–70%. As depicted in Fig. 7, after aging for 40 days, the PCE of PSK/spiro/C reduced to below 80% of its initial efficiency. The performance drop is mainly because of the decrease of Voc and FF as there is almost no change for Jsc. In contrast, PSK/CuSCN/C presented an impressive long-term stability, which yielded more than 93% retention of the initial PCE after aging for over 80 days. Both Voc and Jsc are quite stable for PSK/CuSCN/C, and only the FF decreases slightly during the stability test. Since the carbon electrode for the PSCs is known to be robust against water penetration, the difference in the long-term stability of the devices should be due to the HTL material itself. To verify this, we measured the surface contact angle (CA) of the films to check their vulnerability to water (Fig. S7). As can be seen, both the organic spiro-OMeTAD layer and the inorganic CuSCN layer can effectively protect the perovskite layer from moisture, because the CA of the water droplet on the perovskite film increases dramatically after the deposition of the HTL from the pristine 70.5° to 91.1° for spiro-OMeTAD and to 83.7° for CuSCN, respectively. Besides, it seems that sprio-OMeTAD is even more hydrophobic than CuSCN, which is different from the general thought of this material. However, note that the value of CA depends on two aspects, the thickness and smoothness of the film. The cross-sectional SEM images (Fig. 1d) show that the thickness of spiro-OMeTAD is 250 nm which is 5 times thicker than CuSCN (50 nm). The water droplet is struggling to penetrate into the thick spiro-OMeTAD layer in a short time (60 s in CA measurement). In addition, there are a lot of pin holes and particles on the surface of the spiro-OMeTAD layer while the CuSCN layer is smoother (Fig. S8). On the smoother layer it is easier for the water droplet to spread out leading to a lower CA value. Actually, the more rapid performance drop of the PSCs with spiro-OMeTAD is related to the reactions occurring in the film, leading to a morphological change. As seen in Fig. S8 and S9, after aging for 80 days, numerous pin-holes appeared in the spiro-OMeTAD film but there was almost no change in the CuSCN film. It is caused by partial evaporation of 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP) and aggregation of Li-TFSI, two of the components used in spiro-OMeTAD based HTLs. These holes are available for oxygen and moisture to permeate into the perovskite layer causing device degradation.

In summary, we investigated the influence of hole transport materials on the performance of C-PSCs by using spiro-OMeTAD and CuSCN as HTLs. PSK/spiro/C demonstrated a PCE of 12.4% with obvious hysteresis whereas a higher PCE of 14.7% with negligible hysteresis was obtained in PSK/CuSCN/C. Further characterization of the devices regarding recombination and energy level alignment has revealed the origin for the better device performance and smaller hysteretic behaviour for the CuSCN based C-PSCs which is due to the reduced charge injection barrier at the interface of perovskite/CuSCN compared to perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD. Furthermore, PSK/CuSCN/C also presented more robust resistance against moisture and thus over 93% performance retention was achieved for the device after being stored in a humid environment (55–70%) for over 80 days. As a result, compared with spiro-OMeTAD, the low-cost and stable CuSCN is a preferable hole extraction material for planar carbon based perovskite solar cells to fulfil industrial and commercial production.


The authors declare no competing financial interest.


The authors acknowledge the financial support to this work by the Australian Research Council Discovery Project (DP190102252) and Centre for Materials Science, Queensland University of Technology (QUT). YY acknowledges the QUT postgraduate scholarship. The data of SEM and UPS reported in this paper were obtained at the Central Analytical Research facility (CARF), QUT. Access to CARF was supported by the generous funding from the Science and Engineering faculty, QUT.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Steady-state PL spectrum, SEM images, UV-vis absorption spectrum and water contact angle images of different films. J–V curves, IS plots, statistical photovoltaic parameters, and Mott–Schottky plot for the devices. The table of photovoltaic parameters for various cells. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta03951a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020