 DOI: 10.1039/C8TA07462C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 24793-24804


Mengjie
Sun
,

Chunjun
Liang
,

Huimin
Zhang
,

Chao
Ji
,

Fulin
Sun
,

Fangtian
You
,

Xiping
Jing
 and 

Zhiqun
He
*

Key Laboratory of Luminescence and Optical Information, Ministry of Education, Institute of Optoelectronic Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing 100044, P. R. China. E-mail: zhqhe@bjtu.edu.cn

College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Peking University, Beijing 100871, P. R. China

Received
1st August 2018
, Accepted 21st November 2018
First published on 21st November 2018
In this work, organic–inorganic perovskite thin films with a mixed FA0.85MA0.15Pb(Br0.07I0.93)3 composition were prepared using a two-step sequential procedure. The preparation was manipulated by the addition of a small fraction of DMSO to the precursor of the second step. By adjusting the fraction of DMSO, the crystallisation and the PbI2 residue of the perovskite films can be finely controlled. The change in dissolution due to the addition of DMSO altered nucleation dynamics, and molecular intercalation occurred in the initial stage of the reaction, followed by a dissolution–crystallisation process of growth for the crystals. The approach used in this work can be easily controlled and has high reproducibility. The optimised perovskite solar cells prepared here displayed high performance, with the best device achieving a power conversion efficiency of 19.29% without hysteresis.

Organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite compounds have become the subject of intense research in recent years, due to their remarkable performance in photovoltaic devices and their solution-processibility at low cost. Power conversion efficiency (PCE) of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) has increased rapidly from 3.8% in 2009 to 22.7% in 2017. Two typical solution approaches are used in the preparation of perovskite films: either one-step or two-step methods. In the one-step approach, a precursor solution consisting of all the necessary ingredients is immersed into a mesoporous structure or spin-coated on top of a substrate, followed by annealing, to form a crystalline perovskite film. In the two-step method, a PbI2 film is first deposited, and a second layer of methylammonium halide (MAX) or formamidinium halide (FAX) is wet-coated on top, forming a planar structure such as MAI or FAI, and this is followed by further reactions during the annealing process.

Techniques that have been adopted to improve the performance of PSCs with a planar structure have included the engineering of compositions and the manipulation of fabrication processes. The former involves the fine-tuning of cations (i.e. MA+) or anions (i.e. I−) in the perovskite. PSCs with mixed ionic components show better performance than that of conventional MAPbI3 PSCs in term of their absorptivity, stability etc. The latter technique is usually achieved by optimisation of the fabrication conditions. Alternatively, intermediate additives, interface engineering, or surface passivation can be applied to increase the crystallinities and grain sizes, reduce grain boundaries and minimise interface recombination. This is the key to obtain pinhole-free, smooth, and large-grained perovskite films.
Solution additives are commonly used as an effective method for preparing high-efficiency perovskite cells. Polar aprotic solvents have been used, such as dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO)N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP), and hexamethyl-phosphoramide (HMPA) as well as organic amide and thioamide, such as urea and thiourea. It has been found that these additives can act as Lewis bases, donating a pair of electrons to form Lewis adducts with Pb2+, i.e., an intermediate state (a Lewis acid–base adduct) with PbI2. This has been reported as leading to high charge extraction characteristics in PSCs.
Of these, DMSO is one of the most common additives used in the fabrication of PSCs. DMSO has been added to a conventional hole-transporting layer such as PEDOT:PSS and PTAA to enhance the photocurrent and efficiency of p–i–n type PSC. In the one-step method, DMSO has been widely used as one of the main fractions in a solvent mixture of perovskite precursors, as it is excellent solvent of PbI2 and causes the formation of the PbI2–DMSO adduct.
The two-step approach is complex. DMSO is usually added to the precursor solution in the first step, so that a smooth and compact PbI2 layer can be obtained. Owing to its high boiling point and the formation of a PbI2–(DMSO)x complex with PbI2, DMSO can slow down the crystallisation of PbI2. Due to the strong PbI2/DMSO interaction and the solubility of PbI2 in DMSO, DMSO was therefore prohibited to use as solvent or additive in the second-step precursor for perovskite fabrication, to prevent the first PbI2 layer from being damaged or washing away.
However, the current investigation revealed that the addition of a small fraction of DMSO to the second-step precursor for perovskite fabrication is beneficial. It results in a significant improvement in film quality and an increase in the grain sizes of the crystalline perovskite films. We also find that this DMSO additive can fine-tune the quantity of the residual PbI2. The issue of residual PbI2 in perovskite layers has been extensively discussed. The excess PbI2 reported in early works was attributed to the decomposition of unstable perovskite layers, which related to the deterioration in performance of PSCs. The functionalities of the PbI2 residue have been the subject of debate in recent years. Excess PbI2 was found to improve the passivation of interfaces at the grain boundaries of perovskite films, leading to a decrease in recombination at the interface between electron-transporting and perovskite layers.
In this work, PSCs based on FA0.85MA0.15Pb(Br0.07I0.93)3 are fabricated using a two-step process involving spin-coating a mixture of organic salts (formamidinium iodide (FAI), methylammonium bromide (MABr) and methylammonium chloride (MACl)) onto a previously prepared PbI2 layer. We use DMSO as a solvent additive in our second-step FAI-MAX precursor. By finely tuning the fraction of DMSO in the second-step preparation precursor, we are able to precisely control the crystallisation of the perovskite layers in terms of the grain size and the quantity of PbI2 residue, in a highly reproducible process. The grain size of the crystalline perovskite film was over 900 nm, and the solar cell performance was significantly enhanced, achieving an optimised PCE of 19.29%. Physical mechanism of the device was further discussed here.

In the current investigation, perovskite films with mixed compositions of FA0.85MA0.15Pb(Br0.07I0.93)3 were prepared using a two-step process. Compositions of the perovskites prepared were determined using energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) (Fig. S1 and Table S1) and proton nuclear magnetic resonance (1H NMR) (Fig. S2) as shown in the ESI. Although MACl was also involved in the fabrication, it cannot be detected in perovskite films. The MACl component can be eliminated during annealing, as reported in previous work. This has been the focus of prior discussion and is a well-accepted result in the field. PSCs were then fabricated and their photovoltaic responses investigated. Schematic diagrams of the fabrication procedures used and the general structure of the devices are given in Fig. 1. A solution-processed nano-crystalline SnO2 is first spin-coated on top of an ITO substrate as an electron transport layer, and poly[bis(4-phenyl)(2,4,6-trimethylphenyl)amine] (PTAA) is used as a hole transport layer.


Perovskite films were prepared using a two-step sequential deposition method. In the first step of fabrication, a PbI2 precursor (see Experimental section) was spin-coated on top of the ITO/SnO2 substrate to form a good-quality PbI2 layer, in a similar way to the procedure widely used in the literature. As usual, a mixed solvent of DMF:DMSO (v/v 19/1) was used in the PbI2 precursor. A dense, smooth, crystalline PbI2 film was obtained after heating at 70 °C for 1 min.

In this work, the second step of the sequential deposition method was modified and in the second step of the procedure, a mixture of FAI-MAX precursor was deposited on top of PbI2 layer to form a mixed halide (FAI:MABr:MACl) layer. Unlike previous methods reported in the literature, however, the mixed FAI-MAX precursor contained a varying fraction of DMSO, which is normally prohibited to use either as a solvent or an additive in the second step preparation precursor. The solubility of PbI2 in DMSO is the main concern, as it may dissolve and damage the underlying PbI2 layer. The appearance of the specimens prepared after the second step is shown in Fig. 2(a). It can be seen that the film colour darkens when the DMSO fraction in the second-step precursor is raised to about 1 v/v% and then lightens again if the concentration of DMSO is further increased. When the ratio of DMSO reaches 5 v/v% or higher, the films become completely colourless. After annealing, the appearance of the films with between 0 to 3 v/v% DMSO is a uniform dark colour, shown in Fig. 2(b). The final perovskite films were obtained via diffusion by annealing the PbI2/FAI-MAX quasi-bilayer at 150 °C for 20 min. The perovskite films prepared here are similar to those reported having an excellent light absorbing layer.
The initial darkening in colour immediately after the spin-coating and before annealing, in the specimens prepared with between 0.5 and 2 v/v% DMSO in the second-step precursor, indicates an increase in the rate of the reaction. The addition of a small fraction of DMSO to the second-step FAI-MAX precursor speeds up the reaction for FAI-MAX diffusion or intercalation into the PbI2 lattice. However, if the concentration of DMSO is increased further to higher than 3 v/v%, it appears that the PbI2 layer underneath becomes damaged. The colour of the film became lighter immediately after spin coating, and could not be improved by annealing. In the extreme case of specimens prepared with a 5 v/v% or higher concentration of DMSO, the PbI2 layer appears to be washed away completely during the second-step of the process, as the films remain colourless after annealing. The colourless films were composed only FAI-MAX, since there was no more PbI2 left to react with FAI-MAX precursor layer.

The crystallisation of FA0.85MA0.15Pb(Br0.07I0.93)3 perovskite films after annealing was investigated using X-ray diffraction (XRD). The films were coated on top of ITO/SnO2 substrates, and the diffraction intensity versus 2θ profiles are shown in Fig. 3. It can clearly be seen that both perovskite and residual PbI2 crystalline phases coexist. Diffractions at 2θ = 14.0°, 19.8°, 24.4°, 28.2°, and 31.6° can be assigned to a cubic lattice in crystalline perovskite structure having Miller indices (hkl) = (100), (110), (111), (200), and (210) of perovskite via simulation using a crystal analysing software with a cubic unit cell of Pmm (221) space group, a = b = c = 6.327 Å and a cell volume of 253.3 Å3, as shown in Table S2 in ESI. The result is in agreement with those reported. It can be easily identified that the diffraction at 2θ = 12.7° (strong) and 25.5° (very weak) belong to the crystalline PbI2 according to JCPDS file 07-0235. The initial PbI2 diffraction is relatively strong in the perovskite specimen prepared using the FAI-MAX precursor without DMSO (0 v/v%) in the second step. The intense PbI2 diffraction from the perovskite films indicates a relatively high level of residual PbI2 remaining in the films; however, as the fraction of DMSO in the FAI-MAX precursor is increased, the diffractions from PbI2 are substantially reduced. The addition of DMSO to the FAI-MAX precursor is able to reduce the PbI2 residue in the final perovskite films.


The surface morphology of the perovskite films prepared in this work was investigated using scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The SEM images from the top surface of the perovskite film specimens are shown in Fig. 4. A very distinct change in the size of the crystal grains can be observed from the Fig. 4(a) through Fig. 4(e). The grain size of the perovskite films first increases to a maximum and then decreases as the DMSO ratio in the FAI-MAX precursor increases. Fig. 4(f) is a cartogram of the grain size distribution of the perovskite films. The largest average size was 933 nm, and this was found in the specimen prepared using 1 v/v% DMSO in the FAI-MAX precursor at the second step. High-quality perovskite films can be obtained under these conditions. This specimen also shown the darkest colour before annealing (see Fig. 2(a)). When a large amount of DMSO is added, uneven surface morphology is shown in specimens with 2 and 3 v/v%, and the grain sizes are also reduced (see Fig. 4(d and e)). This may be caused by varying degrees of damage to the underlying PbI2 layer, due to the use of DMSO additive in the second step preparation precursor.

The current experiments demonstrate that the perovskite grain sizes can be well controlled by tuning the DMSO fraction in the FAI-MAX precursor in the preparation for the second step. The current preparation procedures used here were also found to be highly repeatable, and were able to produce films with consistent qualities. This is vital for solar cell fabrication in order to achieve good reproducibility.

The two-step sequential deposition of perovskite films has been widely investigated in recent years. This involves the deposition of a PbI2 layer in the first step and the deposition of MAX or FAX in the second step. The follow-up conversion of the quasi-perovskite bilayer into a perovskite phase via annealing has been proposed, either through intercalation of organic halides into layered PbI2 crystal lattices or a dissolution–crystallisation process. The crystalline phase and morphology of the PbI2 layers are believed to be critical in determining the quality of the perovskite film and hence the performance of a solar cell.

Solvent engineering has been found to be an effective approach for modifying of perovskite film morphologies and enhancing the power conversion efficiency of solar cells, and Lewis acid and Lewis base solvents have been extensively studied in recent years. In particular, DMSO has been found to have a strong interaction with PbI2 and to form PbI2–(DMSO)2 complexes. Due to this strong interaction and the low crystallinity of the complexes, the use of DMSO in the PbI2 precursor at the first-step of the sequential process has been examined, either as a solvent or as an additive. The low crystallinity of PbI2–DMSO complex films favour fast molecular intercalation and the reaction of PbI2 with the organic halides. The amorphous PbI2–DMSO adduct was found to be beneficial in the reduction of the crystallisation rate, allowing researchers to tune the grain size in perovskite films. Up to now, the majority of the researches in solvent engineering has focused on the first step of the two-step sequential process, and few investigations have focused on the follow-up processes, for example, the variation of MAI solution concentrations or temperatures or the variation of solvent mixtures with isopropanol/cyclohexane, isopropanol/ethyl alcohol, or isopropanol/DMF in FAX and/or MAX precursors at the second step. The use of DMSO in the second-step precursor has rarely been discussed in the literature. Very recent investigations have explored the use of DMF, DMSO and other additives in MAI or FAI isopropanol solutions, and the functionality of DMF has been the focus of discussion. Another useful approach called the vapour-assisted surface modification process has also developed, which can dramatically modify the PbI2 surface layer due to the formation of a PbI2–DMSO intermediate on the surface and can promote the diffusion of MAI into the PbI2 framework. In an intercalation diffusion model, the interlayer spaces allow faster diffusion of guest molecules due to weak van der Waals-type interactions between the two planes. This intercalation results in the expansion of the interlayer distance.
In the present investigation, we find that the rate of reaction, the grain sizes and the PbI2 residue are all closely related to the proportion of DMSO additive used in the second-step preparation in the sequential process. For a better understanding of our experimental results, the effects of the DMSO additive used in the preparation on the formation of perovskite and crystallisation dynamics are analysed. Based on our experimental observations, we suggest that the formation of perovskite lattice may involve two stages: the molecular penetration stage and the crystal growth stage. This process is illustrated in Fig. 5.
In the first, the molecular penetration stage, the migration of FAX (or MAX) guest molecules into the layered PbI2 host network is considered to be the main course of the process upon the molecules in contact with the PbI2 surface. This process is illustrated on the left hand side of Fig. 5. The layered structure of the PbI2 compound is characterised by strong bonding within layers and weak van der Waals' bonding between the layers. Guest molecules may be intercalated into the structure and sandwiched between the layers, as illustrated in the enlarged section outlined in red in Fig. 5. Due to the strong interaction between DMSO and PbI2, the DMSO would coordinate immediately with PbI2 as soon as it is absorbed onto the PbI2 surface layer. It forms an adduct via molecular interaction, and this expands the layer spacing of the PbI2 lattice, boosting the PbI2 lattice structure to break up and assisting organic molecules to penetrate into the PbI2 lattice. This accelerates the intercalation of FAX/MAX molecules into the lattice structure of the crystalline PbI2 layer. The above processes can be described by eqn (1) and (2) as follows. The full reactions are complete after annealing.
PbI2(s) + DMSO(l) → PbI2–DMSO(s) + PbI2–(DMSO)2(s)
(1)
PbI2–DMSO(s) + PbI2–(DMSO)2(s) + FAX(s) → FAPbI2X(s) + DMSO(g) ↑
(2)
In fact, the speed-up process has already been confirmed, as seen in Fig. 2. Immediately after spin-coating the FAX/MAX layers in the second step, and before annealing, the colour of the films becomes darkened if the specimens are prepared using 0.5 and 1 v/v% DMSO additive in the FAI-MAX precursor at the second step. This colour change indicates a faster reaction than that without the DMSO additive. FAX–PbI2–DMSO or MAX–PbI2–DMSO intermediates may also be formed before annealing.
In the second, the crystal growth stage, it may be better explained using a dissolution–crystallisation model. The crystal growth processes can be controlled by tuning the density of the nuclei (or seeds) at the interface or the crystallisation conditions (such as temperature). To increase the size of the crystal grains, the number of seeds must be kept low. A slow crystal growth process is normally required in order to release the strain and stress in the bulk. If the crystal growth process is not controlled, a high density of nuclei or defects may result in a small grain size of crystallisation.
Since DMSO is a good solvent of both FAX (or MAX) and PbI2, the addition of DMSO even at a very low fraction to the second-step precursor may strongly affect the underlying PbI2 layer during the process. DMSO may interact with the PbI2 lattice at the surface layer or may dissolve the lattice, entering between the layers to form an adduct. During these processes, smaller crystals may be more energetic or unstable than larger ones due to the higher chemical potential in the chemical reaction. This chemical potential can be described by eqn (3).
(3)
where
μ is the chemical potential on the surface of a particle with radius r, μ0 is the chemical potential for a flat surface, γ is the surface energy, and V is the molar volume of the particle. DMSO will therefore have a priority to interact or dissolve more effectively with smaller crystals or defective crystals at a very low threshold level due to the favourable chemical potential. If the fraction of the DMSO additive in the second-step precursor can be kept at a low level, the dissolution process can be dynamically controlled. Small crystals with higher chemical activity are dissolved first and density of the nuclei or seeds for crystallisation is substantially reduced, making it possible for crystals to grow continuously into larger ones until they merge at the boundaries. The crystallisation processes taking place at different levels of DMSO additive in the second-step precursor are illustrated in Fig. 5.

The experiment results from this investigation may be explained by a combination of both the molecular penetration and these crystal growth processes. The penetration of various fractions of DMSO into the PbI2 films tend to interact with or dissolve the PbI2 lattice to different degrees, and the following situations are encountered:
(1) At a very low DMSO fraction, small crystals dissolve at the PbI2 surface due to their relatively high chemical potential (eqn (3)), thus reducing the density of the seeds as depicted in Fig. 5. The molecules dissolved can then be re-deposited (or re-crystallised) at the surface of the larger crystals or through an Ostwald ripening process. The reduction in density of nuclei leaves enough room for crystals to grow into larger sizes, until they merge at the boundaries. Before the critical DMSO fraction is reached, the density of the nuclei will be inversely proportional to the DMSO concentration. A slight increase in DMSO fraction causes the grain sizes to be increased due to a further reduction in density of nuclei. In our current work, the largest grain size was achieved for 1 v/v% DMSO in the second step preparation, as illustrated in Fig. 4 and 5;
(2) At a high level of DMSO additive, the PbI2 layer can be badly damaged due to the solvent combination having high solubility. In the extreme case with 5 v/v% DMSO, severe dissolution of PbI2 films was observed. The PbI2 layer was completely removed during the spin-coating process, as can be seen in Fig. 2.
(3) At an intermedium situation where the fraction of DMSO was gradually increased, a progressively strong interact of DMSO molecules with the PbI2 films occurs. The increase in solvation of PbI2 films in the second-step precursor partially dissolve the PbI2 and destroy the lattice. The crystal growth process is therefore altered completely from a seed-controlled process to a random one (see Fig. 5). The crystallisation has to re-start from nucleation. This results in uncontrolled growth of the crystals and the grain sizes are reduced to a smaller size due to more defects in their structures (Fig. 4).
The dissolution–crystallisation model explains the perovskite preparation process well in this work. The inclusion of a DMSO additive in the second-step preparation turns the perovskite crystallisation into a dynamically controlled process. There is a threshold fraction for the DMSO additive in the FAI-MAX precursor in the second step: a small, controlled fraction of DMSO allows us to tune the density of the nuclei to a suitable level where the crystalline grain size can be increased, while an excessive amount of DMSO will destroy the PbI2 layer completely, and this is detrimental to the crystal growth process. This trade-off means that careful tuning of the DMSO concentration is very important in this approach.
Since the process is dynamically controlled, it is understandable that the perovskite films prepared in this way contain residual PbI2 (Fig. 3). This is situated at the bottom of the film close to the SnO2/ITO substrate where the FAX (or MAX) molecules cannot reach easily.
The growth of large perovskite crystals has also been reported using a DMSO solvent annealing process and in other work using a DMSO additive in perovskite preparation processes, e.g. in a one-step approach or in the first step in a sequential method. The formation of PbI2–DMSO or PbI2–(DMSO)2 adducts were believed to slow down perovskite crystallisation. However, their repeatability is a concern. In the current work, the perovskite films were highly repeatable if the concentration of DMSO additive could be well controlled in the second-step precursor.
The use of DMSO additive in the FAI-MAX precursor in the second-step preparation process appears to function as a special reagent that can control the perovskite formation, which tunes the rate of reaction, the grain size, and the PbI2 residue. The increase in grain size will obviously reduce the density of the grain boundaries, which are considered the main sites for ion migration in perovskite films and cause current hysteresis in devices. Our process may potentially improve device performance, and this will be discussed in a later section.

The visible absorption spectra of the perovskite films prepared in this work were measured, and there are shown in Fig. 6(a), inset. It is noticeable that the long-wavelength absorption edges shift slightly to the red when the specimens are prepared with increasing DMSO fractions (in the FAI-MAX precursor in the second-step preparation). The optical band-gap (Eg) was analysed using Tauc plots, as shown in Fig. 6(a), where a linear relation between (αhν)2versus hν can be found. This fulfils a direct bandgap feature, which agrees with prior reports in the literature. The value of Eg was determined from the intercepts by extrapolating the linear region of the Tauc plots to the E-axis, (see Fig. 6(a)). A small change in Eg can be observed as the perovskite preparation conditions change; the measured Eg shifted from 1.565 to 1.556 eV for specimens prepared with DMSO fractions varying from 0 to 3 v/v%, respectively, in the second-step precursor. Since the perovskite films prepared in this way have the same composition, other sources must be responsible for the change in Eg. After careful comparison of the film structures analysed above, it became clear that the decline in Eg of the perovskite films was similar to the reduction in PbI2 residue in the films. Since PbI2 has a relatively wide band gap of 2.3 eV, it is reasonable to suggest that the red shift of the absorption edges and the reduction in Eg are related to the quantity of residual PbI2, in agreement with those reported.

The steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra of the perovskite films on ITO/SnO2 substrates were measured (excited at 479 nm) and these are shown in Fig. 6(b). After careful comparison, it can be seen that the emission peaks are red-shifted slightly from 796 to 800 nm as shown in Fig. 6(b) and (c); this is equivalent to a shift of about 0.01 eV in energy, and is consistent with the optical band gap changes. The peak emissions almost overlap the absorption edges, indicating a rather small Stokes shift. The photoluminescence can therefore be considered to be intrinsic, via electron–hole recombination.
It is much more interesting to see the systematic change in PL intensity, which first increases and then decreases, as the film preparation conditions are varied (Fig. 6(b)). The changes in PL intensity appear to be related to the crystallisation morphologies of the perovskite films; the PL intensity increases as the crystal grain size is increased and decreases as the grain size is reduced. The strongest PL emission occurred in the specimen prepared with 1 v/v% DMSO additive at the second step, which also has the largest grain size. The change in PL intensity coincides with the variation in the grain size of the perovskite. The reduction in PL intensity may therefore correlate with the defects at the surface or within the crystalline domains, which act as quenchers for the perovskite emission and open a non-radiative decay pathway. As the grain size is increased by controlling the preparation, the density of the interfaces is reduced and hence the effect from defects is minimised, increasing the PL emissions.
In order to understand the physical mechanism involved, the time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) spectra of perovskite films were also measured, as shown in Fig. 6(d); the films were excited at 479 nm with a semiconductor laser and monitored at 795 nm. It can be seen from Fig. 6(d) that the PL decays are closely fitted (solid lines) by a biexponential function in which the decay processes consist of a fast decay time, τ1, in the range 5–40 ns, which occupies approximately half the weight fraction of average lifetime, and a slow decay time, τ2, in the range 200–300 ns. The results are summarised in Table 1.
DMSO content

τ
1 (ns)

A
1
 (%)

τ
2 (ns)

A
2
 (%)

τ
avg
 (ns)

a 
A
i is the fraction of τi component.
b 
τ
avg is calculated from the equation .

W/O
37.80
57
194.37
43
105.13
0.5%
18.29
60
237.72
40
106.06
1%
8.21
47
310.79
53
168.58
2%
5.96
56
279.85
44
126.47
3%
5.07
61
210.35
39
85.13
It can be seen from Table 1 that the fast decay time τ1 decreased monotonically from 37.8 ns to 5.07 ns in specimens prepared with increasing DMSO fractions in the second-step precursor. It therefore appears that a quenching channel was opened up in the specimens prepared with increasing DMSO fractions.
The fundamental photophysics of perovskites is not well understood, and it remains unclear whether PL decay originates from free carrier recombination between the bands, weakly bonded exciton recombination, charge transfer, or defect trapping. The PL decay time of the perovskite films can be fitted with biexponential components. It was found that the short-time decay usually occurred at a low excitation intensity, representing the defect-trapping effect. A fast τ1 and a high fraction of the τ1 component suggest a larger relaxation rate for the defect states, and this explanation also seem to fit our experimental results well. In these experiments, both the grain size and the PbI2 residue may contribute to the changes in τ1. An increase in crystalline grain size can reduce the interface areas and hence the number of interface defect states, while a quantitative reduction of PbI2 residues can weaken the interface passivation around the perovskite grains and lead to higher-level defect trapping. In our experiments, the PbI2 residue is continuously reduced as the DMSO fraction was gradually increased in the second-step precursor (see Fig. 3). This gradually weakens the interface passivation around the perovskite grains so that more carriers are trapped by the defects and speeds up the τ1 decay process, i.e. a progressive reduction in τ1 can be observed. However, we also notice that the fraction of the τ1 component was the lowest in the specimen prepared with 1 v/v% DMSO, which coincided with the optimised condition for preparation of perovskite having the largest grain size. The perovskite specimen with the largest grain size will have the lowest density of defects, thus accounting for the lowest τ1 fraction in TRPL.
The slow decay component τ2 is found to increase first from 194.37 ns to a maximum of 310.79 ns and then decreases to 210.35 ns as the DMSO fraction in the second-step precursor is continuously increased. The slow component τ2 of the perovskite specimens are generally ascribed to free carrier recombination lifetimes. These could be obtained only when the defect traps were filled at a relatively high intensity of excitation. In current work, the variation in the τ2 component is consistent with the changes in crystal size of perovskite films under different preparation conditions (Fig. 4). The perovskite film with the largest grain size, prepared with 1 v/v% DMSO in the second-step precursor, demonstrated the longest τ2. A relatively large grain size enables a relatively long diffusion length, which can prolong the time for which carriers can travel to the interfaces, resulting in relatively long-lived photocarriers. The latter is one of the important advantages of halide perovskites for photovoltaic applications.
Overall, the average lifetime τavg of the perovskite specimens was increased and then reduced as the grain sizes were raised and lowered. The maximum average lifetime of 168.58 ns was obtained in a specimen prepared with 1 v/v% DMSO in the FAI-MAX precursor of the second step; this specimen had the largest average grain size of close to 1 μm. The use of DMSO as an additive in the second-step sequential preparation enables us to tune the photophysical properties of the perovskite films via the crystalline morphology and PbI2 residue control. This is also expected to improve the photovoltaic responses in perovskite devices as described in the next section.

In order to examine the effect of changes in perovskite morphology on device performance, perovskite solar cells based on FA0.85MA0.15Pb(Br0.07I0.93)3 were fabricated with a device configuration of ITO/SnO2/FA0.85MA0.15Pb(Br0.07I0.93)3/PTAA/Au as shown in Fig. 1. The J–V characteristics and photovoltaic parameters of these perovskite solar cells were measured under illumination of a solar simulator at standard conditions with an AM 1.5G spectrum and a light intensity of 100 mW cm−2. The results are shown in Fig. 7 and the device parameters are summarised in Table 2.

DMSO
Scan direction

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)

H-index %

a 
H-index = (PCERS − PCEFS)/PCERS.
b RS: reverse scan, from VOC to 0 V.
c FS: forward scan, from 0 V to VOC.

W/O
RS
1.03
22.66
67.97
15.87
−2.316
FS
1.03
22.65
69.63
16.24
0.5%
RS
1.05
22.88
69.17
16.60
−1.195
FS
1.05
22.87
69.98
16.81
1%
RS
1.07
22.94
74.95
18.39
−0.132
FS
1.08
23.09
74.33
18.42
2%
RS
1.05
22.76
71.19
17.04
3.533
FS
1.05
22.66
69.08
16.44
3%
RS
1.04
22.50
67.37
15.77
7.334
FS
1.05
22.45
62.21
14.61
It can be seen from the results that devices prepared with 0.5, 1 and 2 v/v% of DMSO in the second-step precursor exhibiting better performance than the control device, which did not use DMSO in the second-step precursor (Fig. 7(a)). Small increases in short-circuit current (JSC) (from 22.7 to 23.1 mA cm−2) and open-circuit voltage (VOC) (from 1.03 to 1.08 V), and a substantial enhancement in fill factor (FF) (from 67.97 to 74.95%) were obtained, leading to a marked improvement in the efficiency of the devices. Statistical graphs for the device parameters were evaluated using 20 cells for each preparation condition, and the results are presented in Fig. 8. Since each device condition was repeated for 20 cells at least, the trends shown by these experimental results are reliable.
The external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra of the devices were further evaluated as shown in Fig. 7(b), to give a better understanding of the physical mechanism of the devices. The EQE spectra have similar profiles, and show a slight increase in full spectral range for devices prepared using a small amount (0.5 to 2 v/v%) of DMSO in the second-step precursor, matching the enhancement in film absorption. The increase in EQE can be ascribed to a change in the absorption of the films. The integrated current densities calculated from the EQE spectra are also in good agreement with the JSC values obtained from the J–V curves.
The change in the VOC of the devices is rather small; it shows first an increase and then a decrease, with a maximum increase of 0.05 V in the film prepared with 1 v/v% DMSO in the second-step precursor. This complicated variation may be related to factors such as the crystallisation of the perovskite films, the residual PbI2 and hence the optical band-gap shift, and the interface conditions. Since the active film with the largest grain size corresponds to the device with the highest VOC, the increase in grain size appears to be the determining factor in the increase in VOC.
Interestingly, the FF showed a marked increase and then a decrease. The device prepared with 1 v/v% DMSO again demonstrated the best FF, and this was the perovskite film that showed the largest grain size. An increase in grain size reduces the density of the grain boundaries, minimising recombination at the interfaces, and this means that charge carrier extraction can be improved at the electrodes. A similar result has previously been reported in the literature, where perovskite films with larger grain sizes demonstrated more efficient charge collection and less interface recombination.
An astonishingly result is that the device prepared with 1 v/v% DMSO is almost hysteresis-free, as shown in Fig. 9(a); devices prepared with DMSO additive above or below this level demonstrated an increased degree of hysteresis (see Fig. S3 in ESI). In addition, inverted hysteresis (i.e. the forward scan performed better than the reverse scan) was observed for devices prepared with a DMSO additive of less than 1 v/v% in the second-step precursor, while a normal hysteresis (device performs better in the reverse scan) was obtained for devices prepared with more than 1 v/v% DMSO in the second-step precursor. The H-index is defined as representing the difference between the reverse and forward scans of the devices. The degree of hysteresis in the device efficiency can then be quantified through H-index = (PCERS − PCEFS)/PCERS, where the subscripts RS and FS represent reverse and forward scans, respectively. The degree of hysteresis in the devices examined in this work is illustrated in Fig. 9(b).
A similar “inverted” current–voltage hysteresis was reported for devices based on a mixed cation-halide perovskite (containing FAI, PbI2, MABr, and PbBr2) deposited on thin mesoporous TiO2. This was related to an energetic extraction barrier at the TiO2 interface. In the current work, we found that the type of hysteresis could be altered by the preparation conditions and could be tuned using the DMSO fraction in the second step preparation precursors. If we look at this phenomenon carefully, we found that the tuning point occurs at a preparation condition with 1 v/v% DMSO additive in the second-step precursor. Under this condition, the perovskite was optimised with the largest grain size but still showed a significant amount of PbI2 residue, and the device prepared in this way was almost hysteresis-free. This result is consistent with prior results reported in the literature, where no ion-migration signal or hysteresis can be detected in single-crystal PSCs. A further increase in the DMSO fraction in the second-step precursor caused the PbI2 residue to be significantly reduced, due to an increased level of dissolution of the original crystalline PbI2 layer during the preparation. The preparation of the perovskite film is therefore much closer to a one-step procedure. A perovskite film with good quality crystallisation and abundant PbI2 residue for passivation appears to show a relatively small, inverted hysteresis, while a perovskite film with poor crystallisation without PbI2 residue shows a relatively large, normal hysteresis. Our work reveals that the type of hysteresis is closely related to both crystallisation and the residual PbI2. Device engineering can tune the quantity of PbI2 residue to a moderate level, giving the best device performance.
This work demonstrates that the device performance is related to the preparation conditions, the crystallisation morphology, the PbI2 residue, and the photophysical properties of the perovskite films. It is clear that the optimal condition for these devices is preparation using 1 v/v% DMSO in the second-step precursor. The best device achieved values for JSC, VOC, and FF of 23.36 mA cm−2, 1.10 V and 74.93%, respectively. The PCE of this device was 19.29%, which was 19% higher than the average PCE of the control device.

A series of perovskite films with a composition of FA0.85MA0.15Pb(Br0.07I0.93)3 was fabricated via a two-step sequential process in which the second-step process was manipulated with different fractions of DMSO as an additive. It was found that DMSO additive in this approach was able to tune the crystallisation of the perovskite layers, the grain size, and the quantity of PbI2 residue. The approach improved the molecular penetration to the original PbI2 layer, which altered the density of nuclei for crystallisation and promoted the growth of the crystals to larger sizes. It appears that intercalation occurred mainly at the initial reaction stage, while dissolution–crystallisation was involved in the whole process. Our approach can be easily controlled and the film preparation is highly reproducible.

The optimised perovskite film has excellent film quality with a large crystal size which minimises the grain boundaries, and moderate PbI2 residue which maintains interface passivation. The film also demonstrated improved photoluminescence and a relatively long excitation decay time. Solar cells prepared with the optimised perovskite films displayed excellent performance with an overall improvement in all photovoltaic parameters. The best device achieved a power conversion efficiency of 19.29% without hysteresis.

PbI2 (99.99%), CH3NH3Br (MABr, 99.5%), CH3NH3Cl (MACl, 99.5%), HC(NH2)2I (FAI, 99.5%), lithium bis(trifluoromethyl-sulphonyl) imide (Li-TFSI, 99%), 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP, 96%), and poly[bis(4-phenyl)(2,4,6-trimethylphenyl)amine] (PTAA) with number average molecular weight  were purchased from Xi'an Polymer Light Technology Corp. Tin(IV) oxide colloidal dispersion (15 wt% in H2O) was purchased from Alfa Aesar. N,N-Dimethylformamide (DMF) (99.8%), N,N-dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) (99.8%), toluene (99.8%), isopropanol (99.5%), were received from Sigma-Aldrich.

SnO2 precursor: the purchased SnO2 nanoparticle colloidal dispersion (15 wt%) was diluted to a concentration of 2.67 wt% with deionized water to form a SnO2 precursor. PbI2 precursor: a PbI2 precursor (concentration 1.3 M) was prepared by dissolving PbI2 into a mixed solvent of DMF:DMSO at a volume ratio = 19:1. Precursors of methylammonium (MA) or formamidinium (FA) halides (FAI-MAX) mixtures: a series of FAI-MAX precursors were prepared by dissolving 60 mg of FAI, 6 mg of MABr, and 6 mg of MACl in 1 mL isopropanol with 0, 5, 10, 20, or 30 μL DMSO. PTAA polymer precursor: 10 mg PTAA was dissolved into 1 mL toluene consisting of 7.5 μL bis(trifluoro-methane) sulfonimide lithium salt (Li-TFSI) stock solution (175 mg Li-TFSI in 1 mL acetonitrile) and 4 μL 4-tert-butylpyridine.
Indium-Tin-Oxide (ITO) glass substrates were cleaned using detergent, deionized (DI) water, acetone, isopropanol (IPA) sequentially and treated with UVO for 10 min before use. A thin SnO2 electron transport layer was fabricated by spin coating the SnO2 precursor prepared at 4000 rpm for 30 s on top of the ITO substrates, and was annealed at 150 °C in ambient air for 10 min. The active layer was prepared as follows: a thin PbI2 layer was spin-coated on top of the SnO2 layer from the PbI2 precursor prepared at 2000 rpm for 30 s following by heating up to 70 °C for 1 min. After cooling to room temperature, a FAI:MABr:MACl layer was spin-coated on top of the PbI2 layer using one of FAI:MABr:MACl precursors prepared at 2000 rpm for 30 s. The films were then annealed at 150 °C in air and a humidity about 30–40% for 15 min to form a perovskite active layer. A thin hole-transporting layer of PTAA polymer was spin-coated using its precursor on top of the perovskite layer at 3000 rpm for 30 s. Finally, Au film (ca. 100 nm) was thermally evaporated as a counter electrode and the active areas were defined through a shadow mask. The active areas of the devices were 0.04 cm2.
Current–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the devices were measured using a source measure unit (Agilent B2902A) under an illumination of AM 1.5G solar irradiation and light intensity of 100 mW cm−2 from a solar simulator (Abet Sun 2000). The external quantum efficiencies (EQE) of the solar cells were detected with a solar cell quantum-efficiency measurement system (Zolix Solar Cell Scan 100). UV-Vis absorption spectra of the film specimen were taken with UV-Vis-NIR scanning spectrometer (Shimadzu UV-3101PC). Steady state or transient photoluminescence (PL) spectra were measured using a Horiba Nanolog FL3-2iHR fluorescence spectrometer or Horiba Delta flex ultrafast lifetime spectrofluorometer, respectively. X-ray diffraction patterns were taken using a Bruker D8 advance diffractometer. Electron microscopic images and energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) were obtained on a scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (Hitachi S4800) working at a 15 kV and a distant of ∼8 mm with 20k multiplication using a secondary electron mode.

There are no conflicts to declare.


This work is supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 11474017, 61574014 and 61874008) and Special Project of Beijing Municipal Science and Technology Commission (Grant No. Z181100004718004). Authors would like to express their thanks to the technicians of medium instrumental lab in chemistry, Peking University for their assistance in TRPL measurements.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopic image, 1H NMR spectra, X-ray diffraction analysis and J–V curves from different devices for hysteresis comparison. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta07462c
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018