 DOI: 10.1039/D1CE01707A
(Paper)
CrystEngComm, 2022, 24, 2100-2106


Song-Tao
Dong
*,

Zhuang
Fu
,

Miaocheng
Yu
,

Jia-Ling
Jiang
,

Xiaoyun
Jin
,

Yu-Hang
Guo
,

Lei
Wang
 and 

Ya-Mei
Zhang


Institute of Material Science and Engineering, Jiangsu University of Science and Technology, Zhenjiang, 212003, China. E-mail: stdong@just.edu.cn

School of Science, Jiangsu University of Science and Technology, Zhenjiang, 212003, China

Received
24th December 2021
, Accepted 9th February 2022
First published on 9th February 2022
Self-powered photoelectric devices as a new type of sensor without an external power source have a great potential advantage in the next generation of portable and wearable personal devices. The design of those devices is normally based on three kinds of strategies: a p–n junction, the Schottky junction and ferroelectric polarization. Here, a novel solution based on ion migration induced self-powered photodetectors was explored. In this work, high quality halide perovskite FAPbBr3 crystals were grown by an inverse temperature crystallization (ITC) method. An irreversible ion migration was intentionally created using a symmetrically structured Au/FAPbBr3/Au device. The resulting built-in electric field and energy band bending were proved using electrical measurements in the dark and under light. Finally, the response of the ion migration induced self-powered FAPbBr3 detector was investigated with the values of R (∼0.18 mA W−1) and EQE (∼0.055%) under light with a power density of 1 mW cm−2 and a wavelength of 397 nm. Our investigation demonstrates that ion migration, which is normally deemed a detrimental factor for device stability, can be intentionally used for self-powered photoelectric devices.

Recently, self-powered photoelectric devices as a new type of sensor without an external power source have received more and more attention. These devices have a great potential advantage in next generation portable and wearable personal devices. In nature similar to solar cells, these sensors can directly convert the absorbed light to electrical signals without external bias. The realization of “self-powered” operation originates from the electric field in the space charge region of a p–n junction, the Schottky junction, ferroelectric polarization,etc. Based on different methods, a variety of materials have been investigated for the fabrication of these devices so far, such as ZnO, halide perovskites, and perovskite oxides. For example, Makhsud I. Saidaminov and co-workers reported a self-biased Schottky photodetector Pt/CsPbBr3/Au. Properties such as an excellent ON/OFF ratio (105), external quantum efficiency (EQE) (over 6%) and responsivity (28 mA W−1 at 550 nm) were realized.

Materials and device structures are both important for constructing this kind of self-powered device. As a member of the halide perovskite family, FAPbBr3 (FA = HC(NH2)2+) has a higher tolerance factor that is nearer to 1 at room temperature due to a larger ion radius for the A-site substitution in FA+ than in MA+ in the perovskite lattice. It exhibits better chemical stability and transport properties in comparison to MAPbBr3. However, the complex composition of FAPbBr3 makes the material preparation much more difficult, especially for high quality FAPbBr3 crystals. In addition to the three common device structures mentioned above, the built-in electric field can also be formed by ion migration (cations or anions move in halide perovskites due to their weak Coulomb interaction between the ions and the crystal lattice) in halide perovskites. Ion migration can result in high ionic conductivity, large leakage currents, and I–V hysteresis behaviors in perovskite devices. Although ion migration is a disadvantageous factor for their working stability, it induces an anomalous photovoltage effect in solar cells. However, there were few studies reported for self-powered photodetectors based on the ion migration induced built-in electric field.
In this study, FAPbBr3 single crystals were grown by an inverse temperature crystallization (ITC) method. Based on the symmetrically structured Au/FAPbBr3/Au device, the irreversible ion migration was induced by applying a high voltage, which results in the aggregation of cations and anions near the electrodes and the formation of a built-in electric field. Accordingly, the photovoltage effect and the performance of the self-powered photodetectors were investigated.

Formamidine acetate (HC(NH2)2COOH) (99%), HBr (40 wt%), lead bromide (PbBr2, 99%), N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF, 99.8%), and γ-butyrolactone (GBL, >99.9%) were purchased from Aladdin Reagent Ltd., China. All these materials were used without any further purification.


HC(NH2)2AC and HBr with a molar ratio of 1:1 were mixed in a rotary evaporator. Then, the reaction temperature was kept at 50 °C for 24 hours. After washing 3 times with ethyl alcohol, the white FABr crystalline powders were obtained.


An inverse temperature crystallization (ITC) method with a homemade water tank was employed to grow FAPbBr3 single crystals. An equimolar mixture of FABr and PbBr2 was dissolved in a mixed solution of dimethylformamide (DMF) and γ-butyrolactone (GBL) (solvent volume ratio of 1:1) for 1–4 hours with magnetic stirring. The solution concentration was controlled in the range of 1.4–1.6 M. The initial solution was filtered using a 0.22 μm filter membrane. Then, the precursors were put into a glass vial and placed into a homemade water tank then grown with a heating rate of 0.3 °C h−1 from 25 °C to 55 °C. Finally, orange FAPbBr3 single crystals with an average size of about 2 × 2 × 0.5 mm3 were obtained as shown in Fig. 1(a). The crystal surface was polished using sandpaper with absolute ethyl alcohol and a polishing pad with magnesium oxide powder for 5 min, respectively. After that, 2–3 drops of absolute ethyl alcohol were added to the polishing pad and polishing was continued for about 30 s until the scratches disappear. Finally, the crystal surface was cleaned with anhydrous ethanol and then dried for later use.


The X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern of the powder crystals of FAPbBr3 was measured by using a D/Max 2500PC with Cu Kα1 in the range of 10–70° (2θ) under a tube voltage and current of 40 kV and 40 mA, respectively. High resolution XRD (HRXRD) patterns of the single crystals were obtained by employing a Bruker D8 Discover high-resolution X-ray diffractometer. The composition of the FAPbBr3 single crystals were determined by energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) in a scanning electron microscope (SEM) (FEI-Quantum) using a standard reference sample. The Au/FAPbBr3/Au MSM structure planar devices were made by thermally evaporating on the two sides of the crystal sample using a ZHD300 high vacuum resistance evaporation coating machine. The Hall test was conducted using a self-designed optoelectronic measuring system with a magnetic field of 0.5 T at room temperature. Current–voltage (I–V) and current–time (I–t) measurements were performed on the planar devices using a Keithley 6517B with an LED light (397 nm), whose spot size is about 1 mm2.


The FAPbBr3 single crystals grown by the ITC method are shown in Fig. 1(a). These orange-colored crystals exhibit good transparency and high crystalline quality. Energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) was carried out to verify the chemical components. As demonstrated in Fig. 1(b), the ratio of Br and Pb obtained in the spectrum is 3:1, confirming that the inorganic elemental content is as expected. Fig. 1(c) shows the powder XRD pattern of FAPbBr3. No reflections were detected in the powder XRD spectrum of the ground crystal other than those belonging to FAPbBr3, which confirms the purity of the FAPbBr3 phase of the crystals. On the basis of the XRD pattern, the crystal structure is assigned to the cubic perovskite structure, and the space group is assigned to Pmm (no. 221) with a unit-cell parameter of a = 5.99 Å, as demonstrated in the inset. The representative XRD rocking scan of the as-grown FAPbBr3 crystals was also measured as shown in the inset of Fig. 1(c). The full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the (001) peak is about 0.592°.

As shown in the schematic diagram in Fig. 2(a), two gold (Au) electrodes with a thickness of 70 nm and a diameter of 2 mm were volatilized on the two opposite sides of the as-grown FAPbBr3 crystals, which had a thickness of 1 mm. The initial resistivity shown in the current–voltage curves (Fig. 2(b)) and the carrier mobility evaluated by the Hall testing are 2.78 × 109 Ω cm and 96.7 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively. This reveals a p-type semiconductor with a hole concentration of 2.99 × 107 cm−3. The basic electrical parameters are better than those in the previously reported results, which reflect the good quality of our as-grown FAPbBr3 crystals. The non-reversible ion migration is expected to happen once the applied extra electric field is high enough. As shown in Fig. 2(a), a relatively high voltage of 100 V was applied to the Au/FAPbBr3/Au device with a symmetrical electrode structure and kept for a relatively long time of 5 min. The purpose of this process is to use the high voltage to overcome the barrier of the ion migration in the crystal lattice, thus moving the anions and cations in the FAPbBr3 crystal through the crystal lattice so that the anions and cations collect at the two Au electrodes. Although some anions and cations will revert back to their lattice positions, some anions and cations will remain near the electrodes. They form a negative built-in electric field, which correspondingly changes the energy band of the Au/FAPbBr3/Au device, as shown in Fig. 2(a). This can be shown by the dark current–voltage curves before and after the process in Fig. 2(b). First, the resistivity of the FAPbBr3 crystal decreased from 2.78 × 109 Ω cm to 5.91 × 108 Ω cm. This reduction is due to the increasing concentration of the point defects caused by the non-reversible ion migration. Second, the current–voltage curves have a negative net current of −1.4 nA at zero voltage and a positive open-circuit voltage of ∼0.72 V after the ion migration process, providing evidence for the negative built-in electric field. Third, a slight hysteresis behavior was observed in the current–voltage curves by scanning in the opposite directions. This indicated that there was still a weak ion migration happening in the FAPbBr3 crystal.
As we inferred above, the ion migration induced negative built-in electric field existed in the Au/FAPbBr3/Au device. Therefore, the photovoltaic effect will also be observed. Fig. 3(a) shows the photocurrent density–voltage curves from −0.1 V to 0.9 V by scanning in the opposite directions. The inset of Fig. 3(a) is the schematic diagram of the Au/FAPbBr3/Au photodetector under violet light (397 nm). Similar to the dark current–voltage curves, there also existed negative short-circuit currents (Jsc) and positive open-circuit voltages (Voc) under variable light powers. As the light power increases, the short-circuit currents and open-circuit voltages also increase. Meanwhile, the I–V hysteresis behavior is also enhanced, which is consistent with the previously reported effect of photo-enhanced ion migration. The detailed behavior of the open-circuit voltages and the short-circuit currents are summarized in Fig. 3(b) and (c). This kind of photovoltaic behavior in ion migration was similar to the previous results.
Although a low fill factor (25.1%) and poor power conversion efficiency (0.001%) were found in comparison with typical ‘sandwich’ solar cells due to a too long carrier transport length (1 mm), the Jsc and Voc values show an effective carrier separation in our single crystal under illumination. This also proves the possibility of making a self-powered photodetector. Fig. 4(a) reveals the photoresponse of the Au/FAPbBr3/Au device irradiated by blue-violet light (397 nm) with various power densities from 1 mW cm−2 to 20 mW cm−2 under zero bias. Stable negative photocurrents and dark currents were observed under several ON/OFF cycles. As shown in Fig. 4(b), the ratio of the ON–OFF currents and photocurrents increased by enhancing the incident light power densities. The maximum ratio obtained was ∼90 under the power density of 20 mW cm−2. The dependence of the photocurrent (Ipc) on the light intensity can be expressed by a power law: Ipc ∝ P0.57, where P is the power of illumination. An index of 0.57 was much lower than the ideal value of 1, indicating that high density trap states existed in the energy gap.
Here, two key parameters, photoresponsivity (R) and external quantum efficiency (EQE) of the self-powered Au/FAPbBr3/Au detector, were measured and calculated. The R and EQE values can be expressed by the following equations:
(1)
(2)
where Δ
I is the difference between the photocurrent and the dark current, P is the irradiance power density, S is the effective illuminated area, h is Planck's constant, c is the velocity of light, e is the electron charge, and λ is the wavelength of the incident light. As shown in Fig. 4(c), R and EQE decreased from ∼0.18 mA W−1 to ∼0.05 mA W−1 and ∼0.055% to ∼0.015% with the light power density increasing from 1 mW cm−2 to 20 mW cm−2. The values are smaller than those of the previously reported Schottky junction devices, such as Pt/MAPbBr3 crystal/Au (R = 1 mW cm−2) and Al/MAPbI3 crystal/Au (R = 1 mW cm−2, EQE = 0.07%), and p–n junction device Ag/MAPbBr3/MAPbIxBr3−x/Ag (R = 1–10 mW cm−2) under similar conditions. There may be several reasons for this difference. First, due to the light incident on the top of the device, the Au electrode with the thickness of 70 nm would absorb some optical photons, reducing the photon flux in the FAPbBr3 crystal. Second, the wavelength of the incident light is not optimal. As reported previously, the above-bandgap and below-bandgap excitation revealed variable impacts on the properties of the halide perovskite photodetectors. The above-bandgap photons with a smaller wavelength are more sensitive to the surface defects. The best wavelength for the optimal photoresponse is close to the band gap of FAPbBr3 (566 nm, ∼2.19 eV). Third, in comparison to the FAPbBr3 perovskite microcrystal device with a thickness of only 5 μm exhibiting sensitive and fast photodetection, our FAPbBr3 crystal is too thick by about 1 mm which will affect the ability of the electrons and holes to be transported to the electrodes, and leads to a low carrier collection efficiency. Finally, Fig. 4(d) shows the homologous detectivity (D*) of the FPB SC photodetector, computed to be 2.7 × 107 to 1.6 × 108 Jones with the increasing power, according to the equation:

(3)

High quality FAPbBr3 crystals are grown using the ITC method. The as-grown FAPbBr3 crystal is a p-type semiconductor with a resistivity of 2.78 × 109 Ω cm, a Hall mobility of 96.7 cm2 V−1 s−1, and a hole carrier concentration of 2.99 × 107 cm−3. In order to induce the built-in electric field, an external voltage of 100 V was applied for 5 min to the Au/FAPbBr3/Au device, inducing irreversible ion migration. Accordingly, this reduced the resistivity of the device to 5.91 × 108 Ω cm, due to the increasing concentration of the point defects. A negative short-circuit current (Jsc) of −1.4 nA and a positive open-circuit voltage (Voc) of ∼0.72 V were observed in the dark. The enhanced photovoltage effect was also observed under illumination with an LED with a wavelength of 397 nm and using variable optical powers from 1 mW cm−2 to 20 mW cm−2. Finally, the response of the self-powered FAPbBr3 detector was investigated. R and EQE decreased from ∼0.18 mA W−1 to ∼0.05 mA W−1 and ∼0.055% to ∼0.015% with the light power density increasing from 1 mW cm−2 to 20 mW cm−2.


Conceptualization and data curation: Zhuang Fu; methodology: Miaocheng Yu and Lei Wang; formal analysis: Jia-Ling Jiang; investigation: Xiaoyun Jin and Yu-Hang Guo; writing – original draft preparation: Song-Tao Dong; writing – review and editing: Ya-Mei Zhang. All the authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.


There are no conflicts to declare.


The authors acknowledge the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51702132), and Song-Tao Dong acknowledges the open project of the National Laboratory of Solid State Microstructures at Nanjing University.


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022