 DOI: 10.1039/C5RA05258K
(Paper)
RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 45586-45591

Sayantan Das and 
T. L. Alford*

Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry and School for Engineering of Matter, Transport and Energy Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona 85287, USA. E-mail: TA@asu.edu; Tel: +1 480 965 7471

Received
24th March 2015
, Accepted 15th May 2015
First published on 15th May 2015
Zinc-oxide and yttrium-doped ZnO films were fabricated by a sol–gel processing technique and were incorporated as an electron transport layer in inverted organic solar cells (with an active layer comprising a blend of P3HT and PC61BM). First, the annealing conditions for the pure sol–gel ZnO layers were optimized. An interesting observation was that the annealing temperature of the ZnO layer significantly influenced the overall organic solar cells performance. Annealing the ZnO film at temperatures of ∼150 °C provided the highest device performance. The physical and surface properties of these ZnO films were examined by X-ray diffraction, atomic force microscopy and UV-vis transmittance measurements. Utilizing the optimized annealing conditions, we further fabricated high-efficiency organic solar cells by doping yttrium in the zinc-oxide (YZO) electron transport layers. The efficiency of YZO based devices was improved by 30% when compared to that of the undoped zinc oxide based devices.

Until today civilized society has been almost entirely dependent upon fossil fuels for nearly every part of its existence. However, it becomes quiet unpleasant to realize that at some point fossil fuels are going to be extinct or become too expensive for an average person to use. Moreover, the uncontrolled use of fossil fuels has also increased carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions causing an increased average global temperature. This has led to the increasing demand for cheap, renewable and clean energy sources across the globe and organic solar cells (OSCs) are a promising solutions. In OSCs, a blend of regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and the fullerene derivative [6,6]-phenyl-C61 butyric acid methyl ester (PC61BM) forms a phase-separated (BHJ) nanostructure which offers a large interfacial area for efficient exciton dissociation and are also the most widely researched donor and acceptor materials. Recently, Guo et al. fabricated and characterized P3HT:PC61BM based OSCs under AM0 (stands for air mass zero) illumination for testing its potential use in space applications. These materials have the potential to be manufactured cheaply as flexible large area sheets with low-cost materials at low temperature using roll-to-roll processes. However, in order to become marketable and start to make an impact in power generation, several obstacles must first be overcome such as lower efficiencies than commercially available Si solar cells and relatively short OSC lifetimes due to degradation.

In case of OSC devices the energy level alignment at the interfaces between each layer plays a crucial role in determining the short circuit current (Jsc), open circuit voltage (Voc), and fill factor (FF). For example, in case of OSCs, the presence of non-ohmic contacts in between electrode and the organic layers may result in a lower Voc, while application of interfacial layers resulted in enhanced Voc. Furthermore, interfacial layers helps in the improvement of the charge collection efficiency and decrease in the interfacial contact resistance which leads to smaller series resistance (Rs) and larger shunt resistance (Rsh).
In the inverted structure of OSCs, a high work function metal like silver is used as a hole collecting electrode, while the n-type metal oxides such as SnO2, TiO2 and ZnO are used as the electron transport layer (ETL). Among the metal oxides, ZnO serves as an excellent ETL due to its high electron mobility, good transparency, availability, non-toxicity, and hole blocking properties. Pure ZnO has been widely used in organic/polymer based solar cells, perovskite based solar cells and dye sensitized solar cells.
Recently, in order to increase the device performance of inverted solar cells, several groups have studied the use of metal doped n-type buffer layers. Metal doping is an efficient technique to modify the optical and electrical properties of ZnO layers. Dopant atoms such as Al, Ga, In, Sn, Ta and Y have been explored as potential n-type dopants for ZnO; because, they can replace the Zn sites in the ZnO crystal and generate free electrons.
In this article, we report the effects of ZnO processing temperature on the photovoltaic properties of inverted solar cells with the structure of ITO/ZnO/P3HT:PC61BM/MoOx/Ag/Al. The best device performance is observed with the ZnO layers annealed at 150 °C despite the fact that higher temperatures leads to improvement in thin film crystallinity and electron mobility. We further investigated the use of yttrium as a doping impurity to enhance the electron transport properties in the ZnO films. The efficiency of solar cells has further been improved by using optimized concentration of yttrium ions in the ZnO (YZO) film enabling them to become excellent electron transport layers.

ZnO and yttrium doped ZnO precursor solution was prepared by dissolving 0.5 M zinc acetate dihydrate (Zn(CH3CO2)2·2H2O) in N,N-dimethylformamide (99.8%, Sigma-Aldrich) with monoethanolamine (MEA) as chelating agent (stabilizer). YCl3·6H2O in different amounts was added into the solution and the mixture solution was then stirred on a hot plate at 60 °C for about 1 h until the solution changed to a clear transparent solution. This solution was then aged for a day before further use.


All devices in this work were prepared on 40 Ω sq−1 ITO coated glass substrates. The substrates were cleaned in sequential ultrasonic baths of acetone, methanol, and isopropanol, followed by ultraviolet ozone (UVO) treatment for 10 min. The ZnO/YZO precursor solution was spin coated at 3000 rpm for 60 s onto cleaned patterned ITO substrate. The precursor solutions was then subjected to heat treatment at various temperatures for an hour (discussed later) on a hot plate in order to convert the precursor materials into ZnO/YZO. Immediately prior to the active layer (P3HT:PC61BM) deposition, ultraviolet ozone (UVO) treatment for 2 min was performed on the ZnO/YZO layers to remove organic residues that might be present on the ZnO/YZO surface. Photoactive layers were then spin-coated from P3HT:PC61BM blends dissolved in 1,2-dichlorobenzene (DCB) in 1:1 weight ratio at 600 rpm for 1 min. The photoactive layer (150 nm) was then dried at 150 °C for 15 min. In addition, after spin-coating, the photoactive layer was left inside the N2 filled glove box for 24 h to increase P3HT ordering. The device structure was completed by evaporating MoOx (10 nm)/Ag (10 nm)/Al (70 nm).


X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were recorded at room temperature using a Philips X'PertPro diffractometer equipped with a Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.54056 Å). A working voltage of 45 kV was employed with a filament current of 40 mA. Surface morphology of the ZnO layers on ITO was acquired by using atomic force microscopy (AFM). The optical transmittance of glass/ITO/ZnO and ITO/YZO thin films were measured using Ocean Optics double channel spectrometer (model DS200) in a wavelength range of 300–800 nm.


Current density–voltage (J–V) measurements were performed under simulated AM 1.5 global solar irradiation (100 mW cm−2) using a xenon-lamp solar simulator (Spectra Physics, Oriel Instruments, USA). The light source was calibrated with a standard Si photodiode reference cell (Hamamatsu Photonics, Japan) prior to measurement.


Fig. 1 demonstrates the electronic structure of the inverted solar cells. In this inverted structure, electrons are transferred from PC61BM to the ITO/ZnO cathode and holes in P3HT towards the MoOx/Ag/Al anode. Organic stabilizers like monoethanolamine (MEA) used during ZnO film formation needs to be removed before the deposition of the active layer (P3HT:PC61BM) to enhance the electronic contact between the ETL and the active layer as well as that among ZnO grains. Earlier reports suggest that a short UVO treatment can effectively remove the organic capping agents and improve electronic coupling among the ZnO grains thus improving solar cell efficiency. Nevertheless, prolonged UVO treatment reduces the number of free electrons in the conduction band by filling the oxygen atom vacancies with an adverse effect on the device performance.

Table 1 summarized the data derived from the J–V characteristics of the solar cell devices fabricated using solution processed ZnO layer annealed at different temperatures. By inspecting the device properties we were able to observe effect of annealing the ZnO layer after spin coating. The OSCs utilizing ZnO ETL annealed at 50 °C exhibited a PCE of 1.28% with a Voc of 0.59 V, a Jsc of 7.78 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 27.8%. The OSCs fabricated with ZnO layers annealed at 150 °C showed significant improvement in the PCE by ∼70% to 2.18% (Voc = 0.60 V, Jsc = 8.72 mA cm−2, and FF = 41.7%). Higher temperature annealing treatments of ZnO layer however showed continuous depreciation in cell performance, and the PCE became 1.00% for the cells with ZnO annealed at 450 °C.
ZnO anneal temperature (°C)
Voc (V)
Jsc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
Rsh (Ω cm2)
Rs (Ω cm2)
PCE (%)
50
0.59
7.78
27.8
130
39
1.28
150
0.60
8.72
41.7
510
13
2.18
300
0.60
8.76
32.9
150
28
1.73
450
0.48
6.64
31.4
92
9
1.00
In solar cell devices, Rsh and Rs are important parameters and often used to quantify the quality of the films and their interfaces. In an ideal situation, the series resistance is close to zero while the shunt resistance approaches a large value. The Rs depends on the resistivity of the different layers in the OSC and electrodes while the Rsh depends on recombination of charge carriers occurring near the different interfacial layers and at the electrode. We thus hypothesize here that the excessive heat treatment can modify the surface properties of the ZnO layer, affecting the performance of the cells. At first instance it is expected that a higher crystallinity will lead to better electron transport and reduced Rs. In fact the Rs value of the device decreases when ZnO layer is annealed from 50 °C to 150 °C and the PCE increased. However, further increasing the annealing temperature from 150 °C to 450 °C results in a drop in the Rsh, indicating higher leakage current resulted from higher surface roughness of ZnO ETLs. Table 1 suggests that only optimum thermal treatment of the ITO covered ZnO layer is beneficial for the cell performance whereas excessive annealing of the ZnO layer deteriorates the device performance.
To investigate the effect of different annealing temperature on the surface roughness of the ZnO thin films, samples annealed at 150 °C and 450 °C are investigated by AFM. Fig. 2(a) and (b) are AFM images of the single layer ZnO film on glass substrates prepared by annealing at 150 °C and 450 °C, respectively. The ZnO film annealed at 450 °C is comparatively rougher with a root-mean square (rms) roughness of 5.7 nm than the film annealed at 150 °C (rms of 2.2 nm). In organic solar cell structures the smoother surface is expected to facilitate a uniform interfacial contact between the ETLs and active layers, thus increasing the electron collection efficiency.
The structure of the ZnO was verified by spin coating the precursor solution multiple times on glass substrates followed by annealing on a hot plate for 150 °C, 300 °C and 450 °C. The structure of the ZnO films were evaluated using X-ray diffraction (XRD) method. The precursor solution was spin coated on glass substrate six times followed by annealing at different temperatures for 1 hour. Fig. 3 shows the XRD patterns of ZnO thin films on glass substrates and confirms that samples annealed at 150 °C had amorphous structures, whereas samples annealed at 300 °C and 450 °C shows a pronounced ZnO peak at 34.4° (2θ) corresponding to the (002) reflection of the hexagonal cubic wurtzite structure (JCPDS card no. 79-2205). The c-axis lattice constant of ZnO films was found to be 0.52 nm. The optical transmittance of glass/ITO/ZnO films annealed at different temperatures shows good optical transmittance in the visible region. Fig. 4 shows no significant difference in transmittance values regardless of the annealing temperature except the one annealed at 450 °C which might be due to degradation of ITO.

It has been reported previously that the resistivity of ZnO films further decreases after doping with yttrium ions; however, excessive doping leads to increase in the resistivity of the films. At low doping concentrations Y3+ ion substitutes the Zn2+ lattice sites as donors, resulting in an increased number of charged carriers, but beyond a critical limit carrier concentration saturates and resistivity starts to rise due to enhanced scattering from the dopant ions. Thus, to investigate the effects of doping in zinc oxide for the inverted OSCs, different concentrations of the n-type dopant (Y3+) was added to the zinc oxide precursor solution and spin coated on top of ITO layer, followed by annealing at 150 °C on a hot plate inside the glove box. Fig. 5 illustrates the UV-vis absorption spectra of various YZO thin films and indicates that the transmittance spectra have no significant difference regardless of the amount of yttrium added. All the ZnO/YZO films have good optical transmittance in the visible region. It might be because the YZO films are very thin and could be considered as completely transparent. Thus the introduction of various amounts of yttrium in ZnO layers has no significant effect to the UV-vis absorption spectra.

The J–V characteristics of the P3HT:PC61BM based OSCs fabricated using ETLs of ZnO and YZO are shown in Fig. 6 and the data derived from it is illustrated in Table 2. As reported earlier the OSC device with ZnO exhibits a Jsc of 8.72 mA cm−2, Voc of 0.60 V, FF of 41.7% and PCE of 2.18%. The OSC incorporating an ETL composed of 0.5 at% Y-doped ZnO exhibits an improved photovoltaic response with Jsc of 9.19 mA cm−2, Voc of 0.59 V, FF of 49.2% and thus a PCE of 2.66%. The efficiency of the inverted organic solar cell fabricated with 1.0 at% Y-doped ZnO exhibited the best photovoltaic performance among all the devices, with PCE of 2.85%, Jsc of 9.81 mA cm−2, Voc of 0.59 V and FF of 49.3%. Further increase in the yttrium concentration beyond 1 at% leads to slight depreciation of the device performance as evident from their PCE values.
ETL
Voc (V)
Jsc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
Rsh (Ω cm2)
Rs (Ω cm2)
PCE (%)
ZnO
0.60
8.72
41.7
510
13
2.18
0.5% YZO
0.59
9.19
49.2
283
7
2.66
1.0% YZO
0.59
9.81
49.3
254
6
2.85
1.5% YZO
0.60
8.98
51.5
334
9
2.77
2.0% YZO
0.60
8.99
50.3
258
6
2.71
It is observed that increasing the Y-concentration from 0 to 1.0 at% leads to improvement in the solar cell performance by ∼30%. The increase in fill factor from 41.7% to 49.3% has also been attributed to improved electron–hole mobility in the device. This significant enhancement of the PCE in YZO based devices could be attributed to the improved mobility of the YZO ETLs as compared to the ZnO ETL, thus increasing the Jsc. Moreover, the Rs value of all the YZO based devices are significantly lower than the ZnO based devices resulting in increased PCE values. These results indicate that power conversion efficiency of the ZnO based devices can be improved through Y-doping of the ZnO layer, however; it is also noted that exceeding the Y doping beyond 1.0 at% leads to the decrease in the device performance.

In this study, the performance of ZnO ETLs in ITO/ZnO/P3HT:PC61BM/MoOx/Ag/Al structures with optimized annealing conditions was reported through characterization of the surface morphology, thin film crystallinity, and optical and device properties. It was found that the proper ZnO annealing condition plays a dominant role in determining the device performance for sol–gel processed ZnO. Based on these findings, an approach to fabricate and optimize high-efficiency P3HT:PC61BM solar cells was determined by using yttrium-doped zinc oxide as the ETL. Our results in this work suggest that such a doping approach can provide a brilliant solution for the enhancement of PCE in organic solar cells, however optimum doping conditions should be maintained to observe best device performance. This study showed that by doping an optimized amount of yttrium into zinc oxide layer resulted in a 30% enhancement of PCE. This implies that interfacial engineering is a promising approach for manipulating the efficiency of organic/polymer based solar cells in low-cost roll-to-roll manufacturing.


This research was partially supported by the National Science Foundation (C. Ying, Grant no. DMR-0902277).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ra05258k
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015