 DOI: 10.1039/C8TC03928C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 11156-11161


Shiyu
Yao
,

Leijing
Liu
,

Qingsen
Zeng
,

Xiaohang
Du
,

Chan
Im
,

Yi
Liu
,

Hao
Zhang
,

Bai
Yang
,

Tian
Cui
* and 

Wenjing
Tian
*

College of Physics, Jilin University, Changchun 130012, P. R. China. E-mail: cuitian@jlu.edu.cn; Fax: +86-0431-85168448

State Key Laboratory of Supramolecular Structure and Materials, Jilin University, Changchun 130012, P. R. China. E-mail: wjtian@jlu.edu.cn

Department of Chemistry, Konkuk University, 120 Neungdong-ro, Gwangjin-gu, Seoul 05029, Korea

State Key Laboratory of Superhard Materials, Jilin University, Changchun 130012, P. R. China

Key Laboratory of Physics and Technology for Advanced Batteries, Ministry of Education, Jilin University, Changchun 130012, P. R. China

Received
7th August 2018
, Accepted 20th September 2018
First published on 20th September 2018
This work presents the influence of chloride treatment on the photovoltaic performance, microstructure, charge carrier dynamics, and surface chemical composition of aqueous-processed CdTe nanocrystal (NC)-based hybrid solar cells (HSCs). By applying CdCl2 treatment on the CdTe films through a spin-coating method, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the HSCs is largely improved from 4.49% to 6.01%. We show that the main role of chloride treatment is to promote the grain growth of the CdTe NCs, which leads to an increase in charge carrier lifetime. It is also demonstrated that CdCl2 treatment can prevent the generation of detrimental surface oxides and improve the wettability of the CdTe films.

Over the past decade, cadmium telluride (CdTe) semiconductors have been considered as the potential market-leading photovoltaic material with large absorption coefficient surpassing the traditional multicrystalline silicon. Many technologies have been developed for fabricating CdTe solar cells with laboratory efficiencies higher than 20%, such as close space sublimation, cosputtering/coevaporation, and melt growth. However, most solid deposition methods require high temperature, vacuum or gas protection, and specific equipment, which seriously cast doubt on their future applicability. Due to numerous advantages including controllable stoichiometry, high chemical yield, melting point depression, and low-cost procedure, the solution processing technology based on colloidal CdTe nanocrystals (NCs) may open a way to solve this problem. Among thousands of solvents in the list of alternatives, water is undoubtedly the most popular one because of its low cost and environmentally friendly characteristics. Up to now, the performance of aqueous-processed CdTe NC-based solar cells has been largely improved by incorporating new conjugated polymers, utilizing different device structures, and applying novel device optimization methods. A summary of the CdTe NC-based solar cells with literature reports is presented in Table S1 (ESI). However, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of aqueous-processed CdTe NC-based solar cells is still far behind traditional solid deposited CdTe solar cells.

The lag in PCE of the aqueous-processed CdTe NC solar cells encourages us to fully understand and explore the inherent difference between solid deposition and aqueous process methods. It is known that the microstructure of a CdTe film in a photovoltaic device is of fundamental importance due to its optical properties, electrical properties, and the resulting photovoltaic performance. As to the solid deposition method, the CdTe film usually consists of micrometer-sized grains with a relatively smooth surface morphology, which is beneficial for sunlight absorption and charge separation in the photovoltaic device. In contrast, the aqueous-processed CdTe NC-based solar cells are fabricated by blading or spin-coating the aqueous CdTe NCs onto the substrate. Limited by the original nanoscale size of CdTe NCs, the aqueous-processed CdTe film is always rough and full of grain boundary defects. This microstructure will lead to insufficient sunlight harvest and increased charge recombination in the photovoltaic device, which strongly suppresses the PCE of the photovoltaic devices. Therefore, how to improve the quality of the aqueous-processed CdTe film is crucial for understanding aqueous-processed CdTe NC-based solar cells with high efficiency.
Inspired by a previous report that used the CdCl2 treatment process to trigger the recrystallization, p-type doping, and grain boundary passivation of the solid deposition CdTe film, herein, we introduce the CdCl2 treatment process in the fabrication of the aqueous-processed CdTe NCs:polymer hybrid solar cells. The device performance is significantly improved from 4.49% to 6.01% when the CdCl2 treatment is applied to the CdTe layer through a spin-coating method. The mechanism for this enhancement is investigated. X-ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and atomic force microscopy (AFM) characterization techniques indicate that the CdCl2 treatment on the aqueous-processed CdTe film can promote their grain growth. The ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) spectra, external quantum efficiency (EQE) measurement, and transient absorption (TA) decay spectra reveal that the grain growth is beneficial for the charge transport and extraction, resulting in a higher photovoltaic performance. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurement shows that the CdCl2 treatment can prevent the generation of the oxides during the annealing process, facilitating the interfacial charge transport in the device. Furthermore, the CdCl2 treatment can improve the wettability of the CdTe film, providing a better film formation of the upper layer and a superior interfacial contact between adjacent layers. Since the CdCl2 treatment can significantly improve the performance of aqueous-processed CdTe NC-based hybrid solar cells, it is reasonable to believe that our work will assist commercial application of aqueous-processed CdTe NC-based solar cells in the future.


Fig. 1a shows the device architecture of the aqueous CdTe NCs based solar cells. As previously reported, the incorporation of conjugated polymers can not only improve the light harvesting ability and build-in voltage of the photovoltaic devices, but also facilitate the film formation. Hence, the conjugated polymer PFBTBr is employed as the donor material to form a bulk heterojunction with the acceptor CdTe NCs (Fig. S1, ESI). In addition, the CdTe/CdTe:PFBTBr n–i structure, where n refers to the acceptor and i refers to the blend of donor and acceptor, is utilized in the device architecture to increase the light absorption as well as the charge separation and extraction. As a result, the device is fabricated by spin-coating the TiO2 electron transport layer and the CdTe/CdTe:PFBTBr layers on the ITO cathode, followed by the vacuum evaporated MoO3 hole transport layer and the gold anode. The device performance of the CdTe:PFBTBr hybrid solar cells is investigated by measuring the current density versus voltage (J–V) curves of the devices under a simulated AM1.5 spectrum. The device exhibits a maximum PCE of 4.49%, a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 16.34 mA cm−2, an open circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.62 V, and a fill factor (FF) of 44.29%, with an average performance of 4.03% (Fig. 1d and Table 1).

CdCl2 treatment

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
w/o (ave)
0.611 ± 0.01
16.73 ± 0.59
39.45 ± 3.58
4.03 ± 0.37
w/o (peak)
0.620
16.34
44.29
4.49
With (ave)
0.645 ± 0.01
20.64 ± 0.67
41.83 ± 1.97
5.57 ± 0.31
With (peak)
0.638
20.76
45.34
6.01
In order to investigate the influence of the CdCl2 treatment on the device performance of the CdTe:PFBTBr hybrid solar cells, the CdCl2 treatment is introduced by depositing a layer of CdCl2 on top of the CdTe or CdTe:PFBTBr film. Considering that the as-prepared aqueous-processed CdTe or CdTe:PFBTBr film may be destroyed by the CdCl2 solution used during the CdCl2 treatment, the CdCl2 treatment strategies are applied in four different methods. The spin-coating method is conducted by spin-coating the saturated CdCl2 methanol solution at a rate of 700 rpm. The dropping method refers to drop a certain amount of saturated CdCl2 solution on top of the as-prepared films. As for the dipping method, the as-prepared films are dipped into the saturated CdCl2 solution for 20 s, immediately rinsed by isopropanol, and dried with N2. Then in the vapor process, the CdCl2 powder is placed on top of a glass slide alongside the as-prepared films upon annealing. Afterwards, all the above films are annealed on a 365 °C hotplate for 10 min in the glove box to complete the CdCl2 treatment. As a comparison, the untreated devices go through the same annealing process.
The CdCl2 treatment is firstly applied on the CdTe layer. Fig. 1b and Table S2 (ESI) show the J–V curves of the devices following the four different CdCl2 treatment strategies. In the case of the dropping method, the device performance is much lower than the untreated device, which is attributed to the destruction of the CdTe film by dropping the CdCl2 solution on top of it (Fig. S2, ESI). The dipping method may also cause the cracking of the CdTe film, resulting in nearly no improvement in the PCE of the devices (Fig. S2, ESI). Spin-coating and vapor methods both exhibit a higher PCE than the untreated device. Nevertheless, the vapor method is less effective due to insufficient CdCl2 supply. Consequently, the spin-coating method, which provides enough CdCl2 but avoids the damage of the CdTe films, turns to be the best CdCl2 treatment method. We also investigate the performance of the devices with the CdCl2 treatment on the CdTe:PFBTBr film (Fig. 1c and Table S3, ESI). When the CdCl2 treatment is applied on the CdTe:PFBTBr film through spin-coating, the PCE of the device significantly decreases. The FF shows an apparent drop in spite of the increase in Jsc, which implies an unbalanced charge transport in the device. Thus, we speculate that the CdCl2 treatment leads to a CdTe rich surface on the CdTe:PFBTBr film, which hinders the hole transport from the polymer donor to the hole transport layer.
Based on the above results, the most efficient single device is fabricated by CdCl2 spin-coating on the CdTe film. It reached a Jsc of 20.76 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.638 V, a FF of 45.34%, and an efficiency of 6.01%, which are among the highest photovoltaic performances of the aqueous-processed CdTe NC-based hybrid solar cells (Fig. 1d). The average performances and the corresponding statistics are summarized in Table 1 and Fig. S3 (ESI). In comparison with the untreated device, the photovoltaic factors of the CdCl2 treated device are all largely improved, especially the Jsc and Voc. Therefore, the CdCl2 treatment is a facile and efficient way to improve the photovoltaic performance of the aqueous-processed CdTe NC-based solar cells.
In the solid deposited CdTe solar cells, as Major et al. reported, the main role of the chloride treatment is to achieve a higher Voc through grain boundary passivation. The Jsc and FF can be improved simply by annealing. However, in our aqueous-processed devices, the untreated CdTe devices experienced that the same annealing process cannot reach the Jsc and FF as high as that of CdCl2 treated devices. Therefore, it is speculated that the CdCl2 treatment rather than the annealing process contributes to the Jsc and FF increases in the aqueous-processed CdTe NC-based hybrid solar cells. And the influence of CdCl2 treatment on aqueous-processed CdTe NC-based solar cells and solid-deposited CdTe solar cells is totally different.
To disclose the enhancement mechanism of CdCl2 treatment on the aqueous-processed CdTe:PFBTBr solar cells, the XRD measurement is conducted to investigate the crystallinity of the CdTe film (Fig. 1f). The XRD patterns of the CdCl2 treated and untreated CdTe films both exhibit three diffraction peaks at 23.75°, 39.4°, and 46.56°, corresponding to the (111), (220), and (311) planes of CdTe with a zinc blende structure (JCPDS card No. 19-0192). Note that the peaks in Fig. 1f between 30° and 35° are attributed to the formation of CdTeOx, TeOx or TeCl4 due to the annealing temperature higher than 350 °C. After the CdCl2 treatment, the (111) peak significantly increases, while the (311) and (220) peaks remain steady. This result indicates that the CdCl2 treatment enhanced the crystallinity of the CdTe film, facilitating the charge transport in the CdTe film. To quantify the degree of texture in the CdTe film, the standard deviations of the texture coefficients, which represent the extent of a film's orientation deviates from the powder, are calculated using the equation in the ESI. As summarized in Table S4 (ESI), the standard deviation of texture coefficients for the as-prepared CdTe film is 0.2, while it increases to 0.53 after the CdCl2 treatment since the improvement of the C111 texture coefficient. Thus, the CdCl2 treatment produces a more textured film with a (111) plane preferred orientation. The average grain sizes of the CdTe films are further calculated following the Scherrer equation. After the CdCl2 treatment, the average crystalline grain size increases from 11.7 to 20.1 nm. Kim et al. also reported an identical (111) peak increase after CdCl2 treatment under high temperature (300–375 °C). They attributed this increase to the crystal growth of the CdTe (111) plane. On the basis of previous report and our results, it can be concluded that the CdCl2 treatment on CdTe NC prepared CdTe films tends to promote grain growth rather than recrystallization compared with the solid deposited CdTe film. The appearance of this difference may come from the fact that the solid deposited CdTe film already possesses large grain sizes on the micrometer scale and tends to relax the volume strain energy through recrystallization, whereas the small-sized CdTe NC-based CdTe film prefers to minimize the overall grain boundary surface energy and grows into larger grains.
The morphologies of the CdTe films are investigated by SEM and AFM. Fig. 2a and b show the SEM images of the CdCl2 treated and untreated CdTe films. The untreated CdTe film consists of relatively small CdTe particles with an average size of 34.99 nm. After the CdCl2 treatment, the average particle size appears to be larger than 60 nm. These large-sized CdTe particles cannot be obtained through annealing even for several hours. The growth of CdTe particles is also proved by the AFM images (Fig. 2c and d). The untreated CdTe film exhibits an average particle size of 31.5 nm, while the treated CdTe film shows relatively large particles of 60.16 nm. Since the CdTe particle is composed by several CdTe NCs, the above results are in accordance with the XRD results and further indicate that the presence of CdCl2 other than the annealing process is the key point for the grain growth of the aqueous CdTe NC-based film. Moreover, from the AFM height and 3D height images, it can be seen that the CdCl2 treated CdTe film forms continuous large particles with less pores on the surface (Fig. 2e and f). Thus, the large-sized CdTe particles and their reduced pore density are likely to promote the charge carrier transport in the devices, and eventually lead to higher photovoltaic performances.
The different crystallization process and the microstructure of the CdCl2 treated CdTe NC films demonstrate a new CdCl2 treatment mechanism for the aqueous-processed CdTe NC-based solar cells. The CdCl2 treatment promotes the grain growth of the aqueous CdTe NCs. The higher crystallinity, continuous larger grains, and less surface pores may improve the electrical properties in the device, facilitating the charge transport and extraction and yielding the higher photovoltaic performance.
The UV-vis absorption spectra of the CdTe films are recorded to investigate the optical properties of the devices. As presented in Fig. 3a, the absorption onset of CdCl2 treated CdTe films is slightly red-shifted compared with that of untreated CdTe films due to the growth of the CdTe NCs. Moreover, the EQE curves are given in Fig. 1e to examine the charge carriers’ behavior in the devices. The EQE values are enhanced in the wavelength between 300 and 900 nm after the CdCl2 treatment, and the device reaches its maximum EQE value of 89.9% at 430 nm. The increased EQE indicates an enhanced charge transport and extraction in the CdCl2 treated device, which helped improve the Jsc. Moreover, Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM) is applied on the CdCl2 untreated and treated films. As shown in Fig. S4 (ESI), the surface potential of the CdCl2 treated film is about 10 mV higher than that of the untreated film. This result demonstrates that the chloride treatment can enhance the built-in potential of the device, which explains the increase of Voc.
To verify the influence of CdCl2 treatment on the charge dynamics of the CdTe film, TA measurements are conducted. As shown in Fig. 3b, the TA decay spectra are recorded upon excitation at 800 nm and probed at 740 nm to observe the lifetime of the bleaching feature of the CdTe film. Compared with the CdCl2 treated film, the untreated CdTe film exhibits an accelerated decay rate, which implies an increased lifetime of the charge carriers in the CdCl2 treated CdTe film. The increased charge carrier lifetime illustrates a decrease in the charge carrier recombination after the CdCl2 treatment, which is primarily due to the longer charge transport pathway and less grain boundary defects after the CdCl2 treatment. Therefore, the reduced charge carrier recombination correlates with the increased charge transport and extraction observed by EQE guaranting a better photovoltaic performance.
The stoichiometry of the CdTe layer's surface can influence the device performance. Thereby the surface composition of the CdCl2 untreated and treated CdTe films are investigated by XPS. The content of O decreases from 31.73% to 26.25% after the CdCl2 treatment. From the Te 3d XPS spectra (Fig. 4a), it can be seen that the untreated CdTe film shows four peaks, corresponding to CdTe and the formed oxides (TeO2 or CdTeO3). After the CdCl2 treatment, the peaks of Te–O chemical bonding significantly decrease, accompanied by the shift of the Te–Cd peaks to the lower energy side, indicating the elimination of the oxides. Since the surface ligands introduce a small amount of sulfur in the CdTe film, the S spectra are studied as well. As shown in Fig. 4b, the S 2p peak of S–O bonding disappears after the CdCl2 treatment. These results indicate that the oxides, which are usually generated during the annealing process to block the interfacial charge transport, could be efficiently eliminated by the CdCl2 treatment.
Additionally, the wettability of the CdCl2 treated and untreated CdTe films are measured. As shown in Fig. 5, the contact angle of the CdTe film decreases from 54.6° to 31.9° after the CdCl2 treatment, indicating the improvement in the wettability of the CdTe film. Since the devices are aqueous-processed, the improved wettability can facilitate the film formation of the upper layer and generate a better interfacial contact between adjacent layers.

In conclusion, this work presents the effect of CdCl2 treatment on aqueous-processed CdTe NC-based hybrid solar cells. By following the CdCl2 spin-coating treatment on the CdTe layers, the device performance is significantly improved with a PCE of 6.01%, which is among the highest PCE of the aqueous-processed CdTe NC-based hybrid solar cells. XRD, SEM, and AFM measurements reveal a grain growth rather than the recrystallization of the aqueous-processed CdTe solar cells after the CdCl2 treatment, which facilitates the formation of CdTe films with enhanced crystallinity, larger continuous grains, and fewer surface pores. As a result, the CdCl2 treated CdTe films exhibit longer charge carrier lifetimes, and less oxides on the surface. Furthermore, the wettability of the CdTe films is improved after the CdCl2 treatment, which is beneficial for the formation of upper layers and better interfacial contacts between adjacent layers. Since the CdCl2 treatment by spin-coating is facile and efficient, it is reasonable to believe that our work will assist in commercial application of aqueous-processed CdTe NC-based solar cells in the future.


Cadmium chloride hydrate (CdCl2·2.5H2O, 99%), tellurium powder (−200 mesh, 99.8+%), 2-mercaptoethylamine (MA, 98%), and sodium borohydride (NaBH4, >96%) were purchased from Sigma Aldrich. Tetrabutyl titanate (98%), sodium hydroxide (NaOH, 99%), hydrochloric acid (HCl, 36–38%) and molybdenum oxide (MoO3, >99%) were obtained from Acros. All these chemicals were used as received.


4 mL deionized water, 4 mL isopropanol and 17 μL HCl were added into a mixture of 4 mL tetrabutyl titanate and 2 mL isopropanol and mixed for 10 min. The mixed solution was then stirred for 12 h at room temperature to obtain the sol–gel TiO2 precursor.


NaHB4 was added into 6 mL deionized water in a small vial. Then the tellurium powder was added to the vial. The molar ratio of NaHB4 to tellurium is 2:1. The vial was quickly sealed with a small pinhole in the rubber stopper for the evolution of hydrogen gas. Then the vial was placed on ice. After about 6 hour later, the black tellurium powder completely disappeared, accompanied by the appearance of white crystals. Then the vial was sealed and stored in the dark at 2 °C.


Aqueous CdTe precursors were obtained by injecting 0.28 mL NaHTe solution (1 M) to a mixed solution of 70 mL N2 saturated CdCl2 (12.5 mM) and MA at a pH range of 5.7 to 5.8. The molar ratio of Cd2+/MA/HSe− is 1:1.5:0.2. Then, the CdTe NCs grow in the mixed solution after refluxing at 100 °C for 60 min. After that, the CdTe NCs were obtained by centrifuging at 6000 rpm for 5 min in the presence of isopropanol and drying in a vacuum oven at room temperature. Finally, the CdTe NCs were dissolved in deionized water to reach a desired concentration.


The ITO glasses were washed by sonicating in ethanol, acetone and isopropanol in an order. Then the ITO was treated with O2 plasma for 10 min. After that the TiO2 precursor solution was spin-coated onto the ITO with a speed of 2000 rpm and then annealed at 350 °C for 15 min to produce the anatase TiO2. The CdTe NC aqueous solution was applied onto the TiO2 layer and spin coated at 700 rpm for 40 s in the air, with an annealing process in N2 at 365 °C for 10 min. Then, the PFBTBr:CdTe NC mixture solution was spin coated at 700 rpm for 40 s by a repeated annealing process at 365 °C for 10 min in N2. The chloride treatment was applied in four different ways before the annealing process. For the spincoating or dropping methods, the CdCl2 saturated methanol solution was spincoated or dropped onto the CdTe or active layer. For the dip method, the CdTe or active layers were dipped in the saturated CdCl2 solution for 20 s, immediately rinsed in isopropanol and dried in N2 flow. For the vapour method, the CdTe or active layers were annealed with a certain amount of chloride on a clean glass slide and covered with a Petri dish. Finally, the MoO3 hole transport layer (5 nm) and the Au anode (80 nm) were vacuum evaporated on the active layer at a pressure below 10−5 Torr, with a 5 mm2 active area.


Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was conducted using an SU8020 electron microscope from HITACHI with a primary electron energy of 3 kV. X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were obtained using a PANalytical B.V. Empyrean diffractometer. Ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) absorption spectra were carried out using a Lambda 800 UV-vis spectrophotometer. Femtosecond transient absorption (TA) spectra were measured by using a pump–probe system (Libra-USP-HE, Coherent Libra; AvaSpec-1650F-USB2, AVANTES). Atomic force microscopy (AFM) and Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM) were performed by using a Bruker Dimension Icon atomic force microscope. Current density versus voltage (J–V) measurements were carried out using a SCIENCETECH 500 W solar simulator (AM1.5G, 100 mW cm−2) and a Keithley 2400 SourceMeter measurement system. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) was measured under monochromatic light from a monochromator (JobinYvon, TRIAX 320) equipped with a xenon lamp. The contact angle was measured by using the DataPhysics OCA contact angle system.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51803070), the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (Grant No. 2017M611312), the National Key Research and Development Program of China (No. 2016YFB0401701), the JLU Science and Technology Innovative Research Team (2017TD-06) and the Special Project from MOST of China.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8tc03928c
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018