 DOI: 10.1039/D0TA00522C
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 6517-6523


Li
Wan
,

Wenxiao
Zhang
,

Sheng
Fu
,

Lijun
Chen
,

Yueming
Wang
,

Zhongyuan
Xue
,

Youtian
Tao
,

Wenjun
Zhang
*,

Weijie
Song
 and 

Junfeng
Fang
*

School of Physics and Materials Science, Engineering Research Center of Nanophotonics & Advanced Instrument, Ministry of Education, East China Normal University, Shanghai 200241, China. E-mail: fangjf@nimte.ac.cn

Ningbo Institute of Materials Technology and Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Ningbo, 315201, China. E-mail: zhangwenjun@nimte.ac.cn

Key Lab for Flexible Electronics and Institute of Advanced Materials, Nanjing Tech University, Nanjing, 211816, China

Received
14th January 2020
, Accepted 14th March 2020
First published on 16th March 2020
Hole transporting materials (HTMs) play a critical role in ameliorating the performance of perovskite solar cells (PSCs). Dedicated HTMs can improve not only the hole extraction and efficiency but also the stability. Herein, PFDT-COOH and its fluorinated derivative, PFDT-2F-COOH, are introduced as dopant-free HTMs for inverted PSCs. Compared to PFDT-COOH, PFDT-2F-COOH exhibits a deeper highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) level, a higher work function on indium tin oxide electrodes, and an elevated built-in potential in the device. The PFDT-COOH device based on FA1−xMAxPbI3 mixed-cation perovskite exhibits a champion power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 20.64%, while the PFDT-2F-COOH device exhibits a champion PCE of 21.68%, which is close to the highest value (21.7%) attained in inverted single-junction PSCs. The elevated efficiency is attributed to reduction of carrier recombination and enhancement of carrier extraction via the fluorination strategy. In addition, the two devices also show excellent operational and thermal stabilities. Therefore, our work offers a feasible strategy for preparing high efficiency and stable inverted PSCs.

Organic–inorganic metal hybrid perovskite materials have become a hot topic in the photovoltaic field by virtue of their excellent photoelectric properties, including high absorption coefficient, long carrier recombination lifetime and suitable optical band edge. Due to the development of interface engineering, solvent engineering, component engineering, and the post-treatment process, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) has been improved extremely to over 25%. Among them, interface engineering has always played a pivotal part. Generally speaking, an outstanding interfacial material needs to fulfill several requirements, such as good charge selectivity to enhance the carrier collection efficiency and matched energy levels with the perovskite material to minimize the photovoltage loss in PSCs.

For PSCs, there are two kinds of devices, conventional structured devices and inverted structured devices. In conventional structured devices, TiO2 or SnO2 is usually chosen as an electron transporting material (ETM), and doped Spiro-OMeTAD (2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis-(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene) is adopted as a hole transporting material (HTM). The photocatalytic properties of TiO2 and the hygroscopic properties of doped Spiro-OMeTAD are prejudicial to the device stability. But these problems will not exist in inverted devices. Generally, for inverted devices, 6,6-phenyl C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) is adopted as the ETM and is stable under light. Remarkable advancements related to inverted PSCs have been achieved which make them a hot topic. Compared with the high efficiency of conventional devices, the efficiency of inverted devices needs to be continuously improved. In inverted PSCs, HTMs play a significant role not only in charge collection of the interface but also in the crystal growth of perovskite. So it is urgent to develop HTMs for high efficiency inverted devices.
Compared to inorganic HTMs, organic HTMs exhibit unique characteristics, such as flexibility, solution processing at low temperature, and easy regulation of electrical and structural properties. Poly(triarylamine) (PTAA) is an attractive HTM and employed in most of the high-efficiency inverted PSCs. However, because of its hydrophobic nature and low hole mobility, excess surface treatment or p-type doping is indispensable for highly efficient devices. Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) is another widely used material. However, the inherent acidity of PEDOT:PSS will affect the stability of the device, resulting in poor long-term stability. In addition, the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) level of PEDOT:PSS does not match well with that of perovskite. In fact, the improvement of the HOMO level is also one of the most urgent requirements for the design of HTMs. The high HOMO level of HTMs incite large energy offsets, which bring about an interfacial obstacle for hole extraction and this results in severe open circuit voltage (VOC) loss. In organic solar cells, the substitution of fluorine for hydrogen (fluorination) has been proved to be a feasible method to adjust the photoelectric nature of organic compounds. Actually, fluorination can improve device performance in various ways, for example, elevating VOC by reducing the HOMO level of HTMs and improving the fill factor (FF) by ameliorating the film morphology of bulk heterojunction. Considering the crucial role of fluorination in improving the photovoltaic performance, it will be a reasonable choice to introduce fluorine into the HTM of PSCs to deepen its HOMO level.
In this work, two novel copolymers PFDT-COOH and PFDT-2F-COOH were obtained by combining fluorene units with carboxyl side chains and bithiophene units and introduced as dopant-free HTMs for inverted PSCs. The different behaviors of PFDT-COOH and PFDT-2F-COOH in PSCs confirm the substantial role of the fluorinated HTM in improving the device performance. The inverted mixed-cation PSC based on PFDT-COOH exhibits a champion PCE of 20.64% with a VOC of 1.079 V, a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 24.78 mA cm−2, and a FF of 77.2%. Benefitting from the effect of fluorination, the device based on PFDT-2F-COOH exhibits an outstanding PCE of 21.68% with a VOC of 1.111 V, a JSC of 24.86 mA cm−2, and a FF of 78.5%. The efficiency is close to the highest value (21.7%) achieved in inverted single-junction PSCs to date. What's more, the PFDT-COOH and PFDT-2F-COOH-based devices both show good stabilities.

The chemical structures of PFDT-COOH and PFDT-2F-COOH are presented in Fig. 1a and the synthesis details are presented in Scheme 1 (ESI). The carboxyl pendants of PFDT-COOH and PFDT-2F-COOH are beneficial to the wettability of the perovskite precursor solution on the HTM and the attachment between perovskite and the HTM. The bithiophene units enable efficient hole transport, while the substitution of fluorine for hydrogen in PFDT-2F-COOH could induce a relatively low HOMO level of the backbone. The ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) absorption spectra of PFDT-COOH and PFDT-2F-COOH in both solution and solid states were obtained (Fig. 1b). Compared to the solution absorption spectra, the film absorption spectra are red-shifted, which is attributed to the π–π stacking. What's more, compared with PFDT-COOH, the fluorine substituted polymer PFDT-2F-COOH exhibits blue-shifted absorption spectra both in solution and as the film to some extent. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurements were carried out to study the HOMO level and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) level of the PFDT-COOH and PFDT-2F-COOH film (Fig. 1c). By employing ferrocene as the external standard (Fig. S1), the HOMO level values of PFDT-COOH and PFDT-2F-COOH are calculated from the onset oxidation potentials to be −5.22 eV and −5.32 eV, and the LUMO level values are calculated from the onset reduction potentials to be −3.04 eV and −3.02 eV, respectively. This indicates that the substitution of fluorine for hydrogen in our materials mainly has an influence on the HOMO levels, with a down-shift of 0.1 eV.

In order to further investigate the influence of the fluorination on the interfacial properties of the HTMs, ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) measurements were executed to estimate the work functions (WFs) of the HTMs on indium tin oxide (ITO). As shown in Fig. 1d, for pristine ITO glass, the WF is estimated to be 4.65 eV, which is not high enough for efficient hole collection. After PFDT-COOH was spin-coated on ITO glass, the WF value increased to 5.07 eV, promoting the hole collection in part. The elevated WF of ITO with PFDT-COOH should be mainly attributed to the interaction between the carboxylic groups of PFDT-COOH and the hydroxyl groups of ITO, which is confirmed by the X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) data (Fig. S2). The arrangement of the carboxylic groups on ITO will induce an interfacial dipole and thus improve the WF of ITO. After the deposition of PFDT-2F-COOH, the WF value even increased to 5.18 eV. Since there is no coordination between fluorine and ITO (Fig. S3), the higher WF of ITO/PFDT-2F-COOH than ITO/PFDT-COOH could be attributed to the strong bond dipole of the F–C bond in PFDT-2F-COOH. Compared with PFDT-COOH, the WF value of ITO/PFDT-2F-COOH is closer to the valence band of perovskite, which may reduce potential energy loss at the perovskite/HTL interface. The built-in potential (Vbi) could be used to estimate the potential energy loss; thus capacitance–voltage measurements were carried out to examine the interface junction properties of HTL/perovskite. In order to eliminate the influence of other factors on Vbi, ITO/HTM/perovskite/Cu devices without an ETM were adopted and the measurement curves are shown in Fig. 1e. Vbi was obtained from the x-intercept of the linear regime in the Mott–Schottky plot. The Vbi of the PFDT-2F-COOH/perovskite heterojunction is about 0.1 V higher than that of the PFDT-COOH/perovskite heterojunction (0.89 V vs. 0.79 V). The enhanced Vbi is beneficial for suppressing the back transport of holes from the HTM to the perovskite and also for the charge transport and collection. Therefore, the fluorine substituted PFDT-2F-COOH directly contributes to the enhanced built-in potential of the solar cell. The above results indicate that fluorination may play a role in enhancing the output voltage of PSCs.
XPS measurements were executed to confirm the intermolecular interactions between hole transporting layers (HTLs) and perovskite (Fig. 2a). On the one hand, we can see that the Pb 4f (Fig. 2b) and I 3d (Fig. 2c) peaks of the PFDT-COOH/perovskite and PFDT-2F-COOH/perovskite film are located at the same position. On the other hand, the Pb 4f and I 3d peaks of perovskite with the HTL both reveal a high energy shift compared to those of perovskite without the HTL. This shift to higher binding energy demonstrates the decline of electron density from the Pb atoms, which can be attributed to the strong coordination of carboxylic acid to Pb2+. Based on the XPS analysis, it can be seen that the HTLs can strongly interact with the perovskite film. Furthermore, according to previous reports, the carboxyl groups can efficiently promote crystal growth and passivate defects.
To evaluate the interfacial modification of the two HTMs for inverted perovskite solar cells, a common device architecture of ITO/HTM/perovskite/PCBM/C60/bathocuproine (BCP)/Cu (Fig. 3a) was adopted. Significantly, both PFDT-COOH and PFDT-2F-COOH were used as dopant-free HTMs. The active layer was FA1−xMAxPbI3 (FA: NH2CHNH2, MA: CH3NH3) mixed-cation perovskite, while the thickness of HTMs were optimized by adjusting their solution concentrations. The optimal concentrations of both PFDT-COOH and PFDT-2F-COOH were 0.5 mg mL−1 in methanol (Fig. S6). Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and atomic force microscopy (AFM) measurements of the HTLs on ITO demonstrate that the thin films of PFDT-COOH and PFDT-2F-COOH are smooth and fully covered (Fig. S7). The current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the optimal devices are exhibited in Fig. 3a and the detailed photovoltaic parameter values are summarized in Table 1. The optimal PFDT-COOH-based device exhibited a PCE of 20.64% with a VOC of 1.079 V, a JSC of 24.78 mA cm−2, and a FF of 77.2%, while the optimal PFDT-2F-COOH-based device exhibited a PCE of 21.68% with a VOC of 1.111 V, a JSC of 24.86 mA cm−2, and a FF of 78.5%. Compared to the PCE of the PFDT-COOH-based device, a 5% enhancement of PCE was obtained for the PFDT-2F-COOH-based device. The PCE enhancement was mainly ascribed to the elevation of VOC. Negligible hysteresis was observed for the two devices (Fig. S8) and the detailed photovoltaic parameter values are summarized in Table S1.Fig. 3b depicts the corresponding external quantum efficiency (EQE) curves and integrated JSC curves of the PFDT-COOH-based and PFDT-2F-COOH-based devices. Although a slow degradation could be suffered during the test, the EQE of the PFDT-COOH-based and PFDT-2F-COOH-based devices presents a remarkably high value >80% in the 350–750 nm region. The integrated JSC calculated from the full EQE spectrum is 23.88 and 23.92 mA cm−2 for the PFDT-COOH-based and PFDT-2F-COOH-based device, respectively, which are in accordance with the values obtained from the J–V measurement curves.
HTMs

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
PFDT-COOH
1.079 (1.068 ± 0.012)
24.78 (24.46 ± 0.38)
77.2 (75.5 ± 1.2)
20.64 (19.65 ± 0.52)
PFDT-2F-COOH
1.111 (1.088 ± 0.013)
24.86 (24.68 ± 0.36)
78.5 (76.8 ± 1.2)
21.68 (20.51 ± 0.59)
To further study the output characteristics of the device and confirm the reliability of the device performance, steady-state photocurrent output measurements at the maximum power point (0.88 V for the PFDT-COOH-based device and 0.90 V for the PFDT-2F-COOH-based device) were performed. As shown in Fig. 3c, a steady-state PCE of 20.07% and 21.05% was obtained for the PFDT-COOH-based and PFDT-2F-COOH-based devices respectively after 500 s of continuous illumination. We also confirmed the reproducibility of the corresponding devices by testing 30 randomly collected devices, and the statistical analysis of the device parameters are shown in Fig. 3d and S9. The statistical data demonstrate that the trend of the data is consistent with previous device parameter values (Table 1). On the one hand, we could see that the elevated VOC of PFDT-2F-COOH-based devices is the major cause of the improved PCE. The elevated VOC is related to the better energy level matching in the PFDT-2F-COOH-based device. The lower HOMO level of PFDT-2F-COOH leads to lower energy loss and higher VOC. On the other hand, the FF and JSC of PFDT-2F-COOH-based devices are also slightly higher than those of PFDT-COOH-based devices, which may be related to charge recombination and extraction, and this will be discussed in detail below.
The perovskite grain morphology plays a crucial role in PSC performance. Fig. S10a and S10b show the SEM images of the perovskite surfaces on different HTMs. Both highly crystalline micron-sized grains are obviously observed from the perovskites on PFDT-COOH and PFDT-2F-COOH. Also, the film is compact and pinhole-free. What's more, the flatness of the surface of the perovskite film on different HTMs has similar results. As shown in Fig. S10c and S10d, AFM images show that the root-mean-square (RMS) of perovskite on PFDT-COOH and PFDT-2F-COOH is 17.8 nm and 16.9 nm, respectively. This result is in accordance with the result of SEM, suggesting that PFDT-COOH and PFDT-2F-COOH are both good matches for the growth of high-quality perovskite crystals. The same carboxyl pendants of the HTMs should be attributed to the good crystallization of perovskite.
To analyze the carrier dynamics from perovskite to the HTL, transient photovoltage (TPV) and transient photocurrent (TPC) decay measurements were executed to study the charge recombination and transport time constants (τr and τt), respectively (Fig. 4a and b). The detailed decay lifetime are listed in Table 2. For the PFDT-COOH-based device, τr and τt are 32.9 μs and 8.1 μs respectively. For the PFDT-2F-COOH-based device, τr and τt are 51.2 μs and 5.3 μs respectively. It can be seen that the PFDT-2F-COOH-based device exhibits a longer τr and a shorter τt than the PFDT-COOH-based device. The longer τr illustrates a slower charge recombination in the PFDT-2F-COOH-based device, which can be attributed to the rapid hole extraction at the interface of the perovskite and PFDT-2F-COOH. The shorter τt demonstrates the much faster hole transport through the PFDT-2F-COOH carrier extraction layer compared with the PFDT-COOH one. In addition, electrical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were further utilized to estimate transfer resistance in the corresponding PSC devices. Fig. 4c shows the Nyquist plots of the PSCs with different HTMs measured at VOC under dark conditions. As we all know, the low-frequency component represents transfer resistance (Rtr) and the high-frequency one represents recombination resistance (Rrec). Since only the perovskite/HTL interface is different for the two devices, the differences in Rtr and Rrec are determined by the perovskite/HTL interface. Apparently, compared with the PFDT-COOH-based device, the PFDT-2F-COOH-based device shows smaller Rtr and larger Rrec. The small Rtr facilitates carrier transport and extraction, and the large Rrec effectively resists carrier recombination.
HTMs

τ
r (μs)

τ

t
 (μs)
PFDT-COOH
32.9
8.1
PFDT-2F-COOH
51.2
5.3
Steady-state photoluminescence (PL) and time-resolved PL (TRPL) can also be performed to elucidate the exciton separation of perovskite and charge transfer from perovskite to the HTM. Consequently, we obtained steady-state PL quenching spectra and TRPL decay curves of the perovskite films on PFDT-COOH and PFDT-2F-COOH. The PL excitation wavelength is 470 nm, and all samples are spin-coated on the ITO substrate. When a layer of the HTM was inserted between ITO and perovskite, the PL intensity decreased significantly (Fig. S11). Specifically, 61.7% peak intensity of PL is quenched for the perovskite on PFDT-COOH, and 65.2% peak intensity of PL is quenched for the perovskite on PFDT-2F-COOH. The results suggest that the quenching ability of PFDT-2F-COOH is better than that of PFDT-COOH, which means more efficient hole transfer from perovskite to PFDT-2F-COOH. Notably, compared to the pristine perovskite without the HTM, the perovskite on HTMs exhibited a blue shift of the PL emission peak, from 815 nm to 810 nm. These results reveal that both PFDT-COOH and PFDT-2F-COOH passivate defects at the perovskite/HTM interface. In addition, TRPL tests also depict similar results (shown in Fig. 4d). The lifetime of pristine perovskite is 283.7 ns; for the perovskite spun on PFDT-COOH, the lifetime is 144.2 ns, and when PFDT-COOH is replaced by PFDT-2F-COOH, the lifetime is shortened to 112.1 ns. The detailed TRPL lifetimes are summarized in Table S2. The PL lifetimes demonstrate that radiative recombination of perovskite on PFDT-COOH was suppressed, and the holes were extracted much faster by PFDT-2F-COOH compared with PFDT-COOH. The fruitful hole extraction and transport from perovskite to PFDT-2F-COOH are responsible for the higher FF and JSC values of PFDT-2F-COOH PSCs compared to PFDT-COOH PSCs.
Besides efficiency, stability is another critical issue in PSCs, which is interrelated with their future business applications. We measured the stabilities of the PFDT-COOH-based and PFDT-2F-COOH-based unencapsulated devices under different conditions. (FAPbI3)1−x (MAPbBr3)x was adopted as the active layer for the stability measurements. The initial PCE of the PFDT-COOH-based and PFDT-2F-COOH-based devices with (FAPbI3)1−x (MAPbBr3)x perovskite is over 20% and 21%, respectively (Fig. S12). First, we investigated the stability of long-term operation at the maximum power point (MPP) tracking under continuous illumination (100 mW cm −2, white LED). As shown in Fig. 5a, both types of devices show good continuous operational stability. After 500 h of continuous power output at the MPP tracking, both the devices maintain over 85% of their initial efficiencies. Then, we also measured their stability under full-sun AM 1.5 G continuous illumination of a xenon lamp without any UV-filter (Fig. S14). Similar to the above results, both types of devices maintained more than 95% of their initial efficiencies after 80 h continuous illumination. In addition, the device stability under thermal conditions (85 °C in a N2 atmosphere) was also investigated (Fig. 5b). Both the devices retained over 80% of their original PCE values after 720 h of heating. To sum up, both PFDT-COOH-based and PFDT-2F-COOH-based devices have a positive effect on the stability. The good stabilities of the devices are attributed to the good active layer morphology and less carrier recombination.

In summary, two low-temperature solution-processed conjugated polyelectrolytes were synthesized and introduced into inverted mixed-cations PSCs as excellent HTMs to improve their PCE. Compared to PFDT-COOH, the fluorinated derivative PFDT-2F-COOH exhibits a lower HOMO level, a higher WF on ITO, and an elevated built-in potential in the device. The champion PFDT-2F-COOH-based PSC exhibits a higher PCE of 21.68% than the PFDT-COOH-based PSC. The elevated VOC is the primary contribution to the PCE improvement. Further research indicates that the suppressed carrier recombination, hole extraction and transport from perovskite to the HTM are also response for the outstanding device performance. Meanwhile, the inverted PSCs show good operational and thermal stabilities. This work demonstrates that the substitution of fluorine for hydrogen in conjugated units can be a promising strategy to develop novel HTMs for highly efficient and stable inverted PSCs.


There are no conflicts to declare.


We are grateful for the funding from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 61974150, 21875272 and 51773213), the Zhejiang Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China (LY18E030012), the Key Research Program of Frontier Sciences (QYZDB-SSW-JSC047), Zhejiang Province Science and Technology Plan (2018C01047) and the Youth Innovation Promotion Association of the Chinese Academy of Sciences. This work was also supported by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities and National Youth Top-notch Talent Support Program.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta00522c
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020