 DOI: 10.1039/C3RA42429D
(Paper)
RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 18587-18595

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms

Xiaoliang Zhang,
Jianhua Liu*,
Songmei Li,
Xiaohong Tan,
Mei Yu and 
Juan Du

School of Materials Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China. E-mail: liujh@buaa.edu.cn

Department of Chemistry and Center for Nucleic Acids Science and Technology, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, United States

Received
16th May 2013
, Accepted 15th July 2013
First published on 17th July 2013
Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) are attracting increasing attention as a promising technology for renewable energy production, and the localized surface plasmons (LSPs) of metal nanoparticles (NPs) is being actively explored to enhance the performance of DSSCs. Herein, plasmid DNA was employed as a bioscaffold to fabricate Ag@TiO2 plasmonic nanocomposites for DSSCs. The effect of the nanocomposites on the light harvesting and the dependence of the amount of the nanocomposites in the photoanode on the performance of plasmonic DSSCs were investigated. It was found that plasmid DNA not only worked as a scaffold to drive the formation of the nanocomposites, but also acted as an effective reducing agent under the UV irradiation. Due to the nanocomposites working as “plasmonic components” in the photoanode, compared with conventional TiO2-only DSSCs, the light harvesting, corresponding photocurrent, and power conversion efficiency (PCE) were enhanced in the presence of the nanocomposites. Specially, when the amount of Ag NPs in the plasmonic photoanode was 0.8 wt%, the PCE was 1.83%, increased by ∼28.87% compared with 1.42% for the TiO2-only DSSC. Additionally, plasmonic DSSCs reduced the materials required by ∼30% for DSSC fabrication to maintain the same performance as conventional TiO2-only DSSCs.

Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) have attracted significant attention as a promising technology for renewable energy production because of their low cost, environmental friendliness, high efficiency, and relatively simple fabrication process. Intensive efforts have been made to improve the power conversion efficiency (PCE), and it is now well accepted that the high efficiency photoanode not only requires a high surface area for the light harvesting but also needs fast electron transport in the photoanode. For thick photoanodes, many more dyes molecules can be adsorbed on the photoanode to enhance the photogenerated electron production, but the diffusion of the electron in the photoanode negatively affects the electron collection and transportation to the current collector, particularly in solid state solar cells in which the recombination of electrons is very fast. To satisfy these conflicting requirements, many efforts are focused on the development of a plasmonic photoanode, which not only enhances the light harvesting and corresponding PCE, but also reduces the photoanode thickness and hence the resistance to electron transport.

A variety of technologies have so far been explored to incorporate metal NPs (such as Au, Ag) with oxide materials (such as TiO2, ZnO) forming plasmonic nanocomposites for the fabrication of the efficient solar cells. However, it remains a challenge to directly fabricate homogeneous plasmonic nanocomposites under mild conditions. The fabrication process of the plasmonic nanocomposites is sometimes under high temperature and pressure, which are disadvantages for the surface properties of photoanode and the fabrication process is not easy to control. Meanwhile, there is little experimental evidence on the effect of the amount of metal NPs on the performance of DSSCs. Though the plasmonic nanocomposites are able to enhance the light harvesting and power conversion efficiency, part of photogenerated electrons can be trapped by metal NPs as the amount of metal NPs in the photoanode is high, which negatively affects the effective charge production and collection efficiency. Therefore, it is of fundamental research and technological importance to explore high efficiency solar cells by applying the plasmonic nanocomposites, which is significant in improving the performance of thin film photoelectron conversion devices that require efficient light harvesting.
DNA has been widely investigated as a scaffold to organize nanoparticles into arrays via base pairing, or as a template to synthesize functional metallic, alloy and semiconducting nanomaterials. The DNA backbone is composed of alternating phosphate groups and sugar molecules, which exhibit negative charge and could bind various metal cations and cationic nanoparticles via electrostatic interaction. Furthermore, under the ultraviolet (UV) irradiation, the metal cations anchored on the DNA backbone can be reduced by DNA, forming metallic or semiconducting nanomaterials. In previous works, the microorganisms, such as Bacillus and Spirulina, were successfully applied as bioscaffolds for the fabrication of the functional micro/nanostructures.
Herein, plasmid DNA was employed as a scaffold to fabricate Ag@TiO2 plasmonic nanocomposites, which were incorporated into a photoanode to fabricate the high efficiency plasmonic DSSCs. The effect of the nanocomposites on the light harvesting and performance of DSSCs was investigated. We show that plasmid DNA not only worked as a scaffold, driving the formation of the nanocomposites, but also acted as an effective reducing agent in the fabrication of the nanocomposites. Due to the nanocomposites working as “plasmonic components” in the photoanode, compared with conventional TiO2-only DSSC the light harvesting, photocurrent and PCE were enhanced with presence of the nanocomposites. The mechanism of the effect of the nanocomposites on the performance of DSSCs was discussed in detail.

The Bacillus (No. 1.1100) hosts were cultured in liquid nourishment condition in a constant temperature stirred tank (90 rpm) at 37 °C. Plasmid DNA was separated from the Bacillus hosts according to the specification, sheets together with the reagent box as previously described. The concentration of the collected plasmid DNA was calculated based on the absorption values of UV-vis absorption spectra, and the concentration was ∼121 μg mL−1. The collected plasmid DNA was stored in a dark environment at −20 °C until needed for experiments.


Plasmid DNA solution (100 μL) was mixed with calculated silver nitrate solutions and the complex solution was placed in a dark environment at 4 °C for 12 h. Then, TiO2 NPs clusters with an average diameter of ∼5 nm were added into the complex solution and sonicated at 0 °C for 5 min. After sonication, the obtained complex solution was placed in a dark environment at 4 °C for 6 h. Then, the complex solution was UV irradiated (λ = 254 nm) for 40 min under an UV lamp (8 W) to form Ag@TiO2 plasmonic nanocomposites. After the UV irradiation, the plasmonic nanocomposites were collected by centrifugation and thoroughly washed with water and ethanol.


The photoanode films with a thickness of ∼3.5 μm for both conventional TiO2-only and plasmonic photoanodes were prepared on fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) glass via spin coating method. The same method was used to prepare the thin film with the thickness of ∼2 μm on quartz glass for light absorption measurement. Different amounts of the nanocomposites were incorporated into the TiO2 paste (mixture of TiO2 NPs with diameter of ∼25 nm, ethyl celluloses, and terpinol) followed by stirring and sonication. The amounts of Ag in the plasmonic photoanodes were 0, 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, and 1.0 wt%. The photoanodes and samples for light absorption measurements were annealed at 500 °C for 30 min under a nitrogen gas ambience to remove organic substances, plasmid DNA and solvent. The photoanodes and samples for light absorption measurements were immersed into cis-bis(isothiocyanato)bis(2,2′-biprydi-4,4′-dicarboxylatoruthenium(II)bis-tetrabutylammonium (N719, 0.5 mM) dyes solution and kept at room temperature for 24 h. Then, the dyed photoanodes and samples for light absorption measurements were immersed in acetonitrile for 5 min to remove non-adsorbed dyes.


The dyed photoanodes were assembled into solar cells with Pt-sputtered FTO glass as the counter electrode. The electrolyte consisted of 1-butyl-3-methyl-imidazolium iodide (0.7 M), I2 (0.03 M), guanidinium thiocyanate (0.1 M), and 4-tert-butylpyridine (0.5 M) in acetonitrile and valeronitrile (85:15 v/v). The photovoltaic characteristics were measured under a 500 W xenon arc lamp (NBeT, Solar-500) that simulated AM 1.5 solar irradiance with an intensity of 100 mW cm−2, which was adjusted using a Si reference solar cell. The exposed area was 0.16 cm2. The photocurrent density-voltage characteristic (J–V) curves were recorded using a PARSTAT 2273 Advanced Electrochemical system according to the references. The monochromatic incident photo-to-current efficiency (IPCE) values were determined using a system comprising a monochromator, a calibrated silicon photodetector and a power meter.


The light absorption measurements were recorded on a Shimadzu Uv-3600 UV-vis Spectrophotometer. The samples for transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) measurements were prepared by placing a drop of the nanocomposite solution onto a carbon film supported by a copper grid followed by slow evaporation of solvent at ambient condition. The TEM, high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) and selected area electron diffraction (SAED) were measured by using a transmission electron microscope (JSM 2100 and 2100F) at an accelerating voltage of 200 kV, and the EDX was measured with the instrument connected to the microscope during TEM measurements. Field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) images were collected using field-emission scanning electron microscopy (APPLO300 and XL30 S-FEG) with an accelerating voltage of 10 kV after sputter-coating with aurum.


So as to better understand the fabrication of Ag@TiO2 plasmonic nanocomposites based on plasmid DNA as a bioscaffold, Fig. 1 shows the schematic drawing for the fabrication processes. Plasmid DNA is a circular extrachromosomal molecule that is capable of replicating autonomously in the Bacillus hosts and can be prepared in large quantities by using molecular biological procedures (Fig. 1a). Plasmid DNA with 3980 base pairs is separated from the Bacillus hosts as previously described (Fig. S1, ESI). Due to the self-assembling and self-reproducing properties of the biological system, the plasmid DNA exhibits the same dimensions and structure, which are the main reasons to apply plasmid DNA as a scaffold to synthesize functional micro/nanomaterials. Meanwhile, this approach for the preparation of plasmid DNA is relatively easy, and large yields with significantly high efficiency can be attained with this way. The double helix rigid chain structure gives plasmid DNA more mechanical strength so that it is hard to be destroyed. Under the electrostatic interaction, the Ag(I) cations were firstly anchored on the plasmid DNA and embedded inside the double helix forming plasmid DNA–Ag(I) cations complexes (Fig. 1b). After the Ag(I) cations were anchored on the plasmid DNA, the plasmid DNA–Ag(I) cations complexes interacted with TiO2 NP clusters. In acidic solution (pH 6.0), the surfaces of the TiO2 NP clusters exhibit positive charge, which causes the TiO2 NP clusters to interact with plasmid DNA via electrostatic interaction. TiO2 NP clusters were also anchored on plasmid DNA–Ag(I) cations complexes by synchronously binding plasmid DNA with Ag(I) cations and TiO2 NPs clusters, forming stable complexes (Fig. 1b).

Under the UV irradiation (λ = 254 nm) at room temperature (Fig. 1c), photo-oxidation and degradation take place on plasmid DNA base pairs, and, concomitantly, the anchored Ag(I) cations were reduced to Ag NPs deposited on TiO2 NP clusters, forming Ag@TiO2 plasmonic nanocomposites (Fig. 1d). Briefly, the plasmid DNA base pairs underwent photo-oxidation when exposed to the UV irradiation, forming reactive radical intermediates or generating singlet oxygen, which played an active role in the reduction of the Ag(I) cations. Due to DNA having a strong absorption for the UV irradiation, plasmid DNA base pairs also acted as photosensitizers during the fabrication of the plasmonic nanocomposites. Participation in the electron transfer by plasmid DNA–Ag(I) cations complexes followed the photosensitization step operated by the plasmid DNA. Initially, the anchored Ag(I) cations were firstly reduced to metallic Ag as the nucleus on the TiO2 NP clusters. With time, the formed nucleus grew, forming bigger particles, and previously formed particles could catalyze the reduction of the remaining Ag(I) cations to metallic Ag, forming the plasmonic nanocomposites.
Compared with other methods to fabricate the plasmonic nanocomposites reported in the literature, the approach applied in this work exhibits following advantages: (1) the Ag NPs can uniformly deposit on the TiO2 NP clusters forming the plasmonic nanocomposites. The plasmid DNA are able to synchronously bind Ag(I) cations and TiO2 NP clusters via electrostatic interactions. After the UV irradiation, the Ag(I) cations are reduced to Ag NPs uniformly deposited on TiO2 NP clusters; (2) the fabrication process is taken under the mild conditions that do not need high temperature and pressure. The fabrication approach is low cost, environmentally friendly and easy to control; (3) the fabrication process does not need reductant or other additives, like low molecular weight amphiphiles that do not yield nanomaterials and bring disadvantages for DNA and TiO2 NP clusters. Under the UV irradiation, the plasmid DNA provides the dual functions of metal cation reduction and a scaffold for directing the plasmonic nanocomposite formation.
So as to better understand the role of plasmid DNA in the fabrication of the plasmonic nanocomposites, UV-vis absorption spectra were applied to investigate the fabrication process (Fig. 2). The obtained plasmid DNA has an absorption band at ∼260 nm (Fig. S1, ESI). The complexes of plasmid DNA synchronously binding Ag(I) cations and TiO2 NPs clusters were prepared such that the molar ratio of TiO2 NP clusters and Ag(I) cations to the plasmid DNA base pairs were 5 and 4, respectively. The average diameter of the TiO2 NP clusters is ∼5 nm. Comparing the complexes before and after the UV irradiation, the absorption band at ∼260 nm for the plasmid DNA undergoes a decrease after the UV irradiation (curve c and d, Fig. 2a). Under the UV irradiation, the photo-oxidation and degradation take place on plasmid DNA base pairs. The reason for the decrease of the absorption band for plasmid DNA is the decomposition of plasmid DNA base pairs and the changes in duplex structures. Though plasmid DNA is photo-oxidized under the UV irradiation, the reduction of Ag(I) cations anchored on plasmid DNA are reduced concomitantly with the degradation of plasmid DNA. After UV irradiation, a new absorption peak appears at ∼420 nm (curve d, Fig. 2a), which is attributed to the surface plasmon resonance of the Ag NPs. Therefore, the plasmon peak at ∼420 nm clearly confirms the formation of Ag NPs in the experimental conditions. In the absence of plasmid DNA, after UV irradiation at 254 nm for 40 min, no Ag NPs are formed (curves a and b, Fig. 2a), which indicates that plasmid DNA is necessary during the fabrication of the plasmonic nanocomposites.
The different complexes of plasmid DNA binding Ag(I) cations and TiO2 NPs clusters were prepared by varying the molar ratio of Ag(I) cations to the plasmid DNA base pairs. The molar ratios of Ag(I) cations to the plasmid DNA base pairs were 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 (R = 1–5) by adjusting the Ag(I) cation content, and the molar ratio of TiO2 NPs clusters to plasmid DNA base pairs was 5 for all complexes. After the UV irradiation for 40 min, the plasmon resonance peak of Ag NPs increases as the value R increases from 1 to 5 (Fig. 2b). The red shift and broadening of the plasmon peak of Ag NPs at ∼420 nm indicates more Ag NPs formation. Compared with the bare TiO2 NPs clusters (curve a, Fig. 2b), the plasmonic nanocomposites exhibit a wide light absorption covering the range of 270–600 nm. The accompanying color of the plasmonic nanocomposite solution also changes from translucent to brown (insert, Fig. 2b), which suggests more Ag NPs are formed in the solution.

The morphology of the plasmonic nanocomposites fabricated at different experimental conditions was characterized by TEM. As described in the above section, the molar ratio of TiO2 NPs clusters to plasmid DNA base pairs was 5 for all samples, and the molar ratios of Ag(I) cations to plasmid DNA base pairs were 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 (R = 1–5) for Fig. 3a–e. In the TEM images, the dark colored NPs are Ag NPs and the lighter NPs are TiO2 NP clusters. It seems that Ag NPs have almost the same dimensions and distribution in the nanocomposites. The plasmid DNA has same number of base pairs and uniform dimension. The Ag(I) cations anchor on the plasmid DNA and are reduced by plasmid DNA under the UV irradiation. Therefore, plasmid DNA controls the Ag NP formation and restricts their dimensions. Notably, as the molar ratio of Ag(I) cations to plasmid DNA base pairs increases, more Ag(I) cations anchor onto plasmid DNA and are reduced under the UV irradiation, resulting in the amount of Ag NPs in the nanocomposites increasing (Fig. 3a–e). These results are in good accordance with the UV-vis absorption spectra of the plasmonic nanocomposite solutions (Fig. 2b). Especially, when the molar ratio of Ag(I) cations to plasmid DNA base pairs is 5, the Ag NPs are uniformly distributed in the plasmonic nanocomposites (Fig. 3e). The composition of the plasmonic nanocomposites was investigated using EDX (Fig. 3e and f), which confirms that the Ag and Ti elements are detected in the nanocomposites. The Cu element comes from the carbon coated Cu grid used for TEM and EDX analysis.

High magnification TEM was applied to investigate the detailed information of the plasmonic nanocomposites fabricated when the molar ratio of Ag(I) cations to plasmid DNA base pairs is 5 (Fig. 4a). It can be seen that the nanocomposites exhibit well-defined morphology and Ag NPs are uniformly dispersed in the plasmonic nanocomposites, as the arrows indicate in the TEM image. It is worth noting that the Ag NPs are insulated by the TiO2 clusters rather than agglomerated together. The insulation of metal NPs in the plasmonic nanocomposites is important for enhancing the light absorption of the photoanode. When the metal NPs are insulated and the size is much smaller than the wavelength of the electromagnetic wave, the free electron in the metal NPs is in resonance with the electric field of electromagnetic wave, resulting in the enhancement of light absorption. Additionally, the insulated Ag NPs have a relatively high surface area to interact with TiO2 NP clusters. The surface plasmon polariton at the interface of Ag/TiO2 is an important resource for the enhancement of light absorption. FESEM was applied to characterize the morphology of the plasmonic nanocomposites, which also indicates that the Ag NPs are uniformly dispersed in the plasmonic nanocomposites (Fig. S2, ESI).
The anatase structure TiO2 NPs are used to fabricate the plasmonic nanocomposites. So as to study the crystal structure of Ag NPs in the plasmonic nanocomposites, HRTEM was also used to study a single Ag NP (Fig. 4b). The marked interplanar distance is ∼0.24 nm, which is compatible with the <111> plane of the face-centered cubic (FCC) crystal structure of Ag. SAED was also applied to investigate the structure of the nanocomposites, which also confirms that the Ag NPs have FCC crystal structure and the TiO2 NP clusters have anatase structure (insert, Fig. 4b).

To incorporate the nanocomposites into photoanode as light harvesting components, the nanocomposites were incorporated into TiO2 paste forming a “plasmonic paste”. After stirring and sonication, the “plasmonic paste” was covered onto the FTO glass via spin coating method, forming the plasmonic photoanode film. To remove the organic substance, plasmid DNA and solvent in the photoanode film, the photoanode was annealed at 500 °C for 30 min under a nitrogen gas ambience to protect Ag NPs from oxidation. FESEM was used to characterize the surface and cross-section of the photoanode (Fig. 5), which reveals that there are numerous small holes distributed in the photoanode film. These small holes originate from the removal of organic substances and plasmid DNA, and these small holes could enhance the surface area of the photoanode and facilitate dye molecules immersion and adsorption on the photoanode film.

The effect of the nanocomposites on the light absorption was investigated in both solution and film, as shown in Fig. 6. Firstly, the effect of the plasmonic nanocomposites on light absorption is compared in the solution (Fig. 6a). The amount of TiO2 NPs in the solutions is same. The LSP behavior of Ag NPs in the nanocomposites simulates the effect in the plasmonic photoanode, and the concentrations of the nanocomposites and dyes could be precisely controlled in the solution. Comparing with the solution of dye and TiO2 NP clusters (curve c, Fig. 6a), the light absorption is enhanced over the range of 350–650 nm with the presence of the nanocomposites (curve d, Fig. 6a). Compared with the absorption peak of Ag NPs at ∼420 nm in water (Fig. 2), the absorption peak shifts to ∼430 nm in ethanol due to the difference in the dielectric constant of the solvent. The TiO2-only and plasmonic nanocomposites films with a thickness of ∼2 μm were prepared on quartz glass via spin coating method, and the films were annealed at 500 °C for 30 min under a nitrogen gas ambience to remove the plasmid DNA and solvent. The amount of Ag NPs in the plasmonic nanocomposites film is 0.8 wt%. It can been seen that the plasmonic nanocomposites film has a higher light absorption compared with the TiO2-only film, and the absorption peak of Ag NPs at ∼420 nm is also clearly observed, as indicated in Fig. 6b.
To simulate the light absorption of the DSSCs, the TiO2-only and plasmonic nanocomposites films were dyed. The amount of Ag NPs in the plasmonic nanocomposites film is 0.8 wt%. Compared with the dyed TiO2-only film, there is also an increase of light absorption for the dyed plasmonic nanocomposites film (Fig. 6c). The effects of the LSP behavior of Ag NPs in the plasmonic nanocomposites film on light absorption are the following: (1) the Ag NPs in the plasmonic nanocomposites film act as scattering elements to couple and trap propagating light into film by folding the light into a thin absorber layer; (2) the Ag NPs are used as effective “antennas” for the incident light. The NPs can store the incident energy in localized plasmon mode, in which the plasmonic near-field of Ag NPs is coupled to the TiO2 NP clusters to increase its effective absorption cross-section; (3) the Ag NPs are insulated by TiO2 NP clusters such that Ag NPs have relatively high surface area. The surface plasmon polariton at the interface of Ag/TiO2 can also efficiency trap and guide light in the plasmonic nanocomposites film.

The plasmonic nanocomposites were incorporated into the TiO2 NP paste to prepare the plasmonic photoanode. The thickness of all photoanode films is ∼3.5 μm. The amount of Ag NPs in the plasmonic photoanode is 0.8 wt%. The performances of the plasmonic DSSC and conventional TiO2-only DSSC are compared in Fig. 7. Fig. 7a shows the photocurrent density–voltage characteristic curves (J–V) of the DSSCs fabricated with and without the nanocomposites. The short-circuit current density (Jsc) of the TiO2-only DSSC is 5.12 mA cm−2, while for the plasmonic DSSC it is 6.67 mA cm−2, increased by 30.27%. The open-circuit voltage (Voc) and fill factor (FF) of the TiO2-only DSSC are 0.66 V and 44.6%, while for the plasmonic DSSC they are 0.69 V and 44.9%. The open-circuit voltage and fill factor are close for the two types DSSC. The PCE (η) of the plasmonic DSSC is 1.83%, increased by 28.87% compared with 1.42% for the TiO2-only DSSC. Additionally, the required photoanode thickness of the plasmonic DSSC is thinner than the TiO2-only DSSC to achieve the same performance. For instance, it is observed that the plasmonic DSSC with ∼3.5 μm thick photoanode and the TiO2-only DSSC with ∼5 μm thick photoanode have almost same PCE of ∼1.86%, reducing the materials required by ∼30% for DSSC fabrication without affecting the performance.

The IPCE measurement was carried out in the range of 350–700 nm to investigate the spectral response for the two types of DSSCs (Fig. 6b). The IPCE is the product of the light-harvesting, electron injection efficiency, and electron collection efficiency. If the electron injection and collection efficiency of photoanode are not affected, increasing the light absorption of the photoanode will enhance the light harvesting and IPCE of the solar cells. From Fig. 7b, it can be seen that the IPCE spectrum of the plasmonic DSSC is improved over whole wavelength spectrum with the presence of the nanocomposites, indicating photocurrent generation from light harvesting by the nanocomposites. Especially, the enhancement is largely enhanced in the range of 450–600 nm. The IPCEmax of TiO2-only DSSC is around 510 nm (λmax = 510 nm). While for plasmonic DSSC, the IPCEmax is around 530 nm (λmax = 530 nm); it is red-shift by ∼20 nm compared with the TiO2-only DSSC. Rand and co-workers observed a similar red-shift in the IPCEmax relative to λmax when they incorporated Ag NPs into the solar cells. In rationalizing the similar behavior for solar cells incorporated with Au NPs, Hägglund and co-workers focused on the wavelength-dependent plasmonic enhancement of the rate of electron injection by dyes into the photoanode. The red-shift in the IPCEmax is caused by a wavelength-dependent plasmon effect. The detailed explanation likely does not include injection behavior as the yield for electron injection from dye N719 into the titanium dioxide is already close to unity. Therefore, the enhancement of IPCE is due to the enhancement of the light absorption from the plasmonic photoanode, and red-shift of the IPCEmax is caused by the plasmon effect of Ag NPs in the plasmonic photoanode.
Fig. 8 shows the effect of the amount of Ag NPs (0 to 1.0 wt%) in the plasmonic photoanode on the photocurrent density, potential and PCE. To decrease error, every measurement has four parallel samples for investigating the performance of DSSCs fabricated under the same experimental conditions. As shown in Fig. 8a, the photocurrent density increases with the increasing amount of Ag NPs in plasmonic photoanodes from 0 to 0.8 wt%. When the amount of Ag NPs is further increased, the photocurrent density decreases because Ag NPs act as recombination centers in the plasmonic photoanode. When the amount of Ag NPs in the plasmonic photoanode is high, the Ag NPs in essence create an internal short-circuit throughout the bulk of the photoanode layer. The open-circuit voltage slightly increases with the increase in the amount of Ag NPs in the plasmonic photoanode from 0 to 0.8 wt% (Fig. 8b). For the conventional mesoporous photoanode film of DSSC, the dyed cell is optically dense enough to absorb most of the incident light over the absorbing range of the dyes, which reduces the impact of the “plasmonic” enhancement. However, the enhancement of light harvesting in a thin film cell should cause an improvement in the open-circuit voltage, which is in accordance with the result of open-circuit voltage in Fig. 8b. Fig. 8c shows the effect of the amount of Ag NPs in the plasmonic DSSC on the PCE, which is in accordance with the dependence of the photocurrent on the amount of Ag NPs in plasmonic photoanode. When the amount of Ag NPs in plasmonic photoanode is 0.8 wt%, the DSSC exhibits relatively better performance. The photocurrent of the plasmonic DSSC is enhanced with the presence of plasmonic nanocomposites, indicating the light harvesting from the “plasmonic components” is directly contributing to the photocurrent generation and PCE.
Compared with other conventional TiO2-only DSSCs, the PCE is 2.7–4.3% for the photoanode with the thickness of ∼6 μm, which is higher than for the plasmonic DSSCs prepared in this work. The thickness of the plasmonic photoanode is thinner than photoanodes reported in the literatures. When the photoanode is thick, the photoanode is able to adsorb more dye molecules that could enhance the production of photogenerated electrons. However, the diffusion of photogenerated electrons between TiO2 NPs in the photoanode negatively affects the electron collection and transportation to the current collector. Due to the recombination of electrons being very fast, especially in solid state solar cells, how to optimize the production of photogenerated electron and facilitate electron collection and transportation remains a challenge. Furthermore, when the thickness of the photoanode film is too thick, the photoanode film could be difficult to closely fix on the FTO glass. Therefore, how to use a relatively thinner film photoanode to enhance the photogenerated electron production and collection is of technological importance and is a significant research topic to improve the performance of solar cells and other photovoltaic technologies.
Up to now, the precise ways by which charge is generated from light harvesting by the metal NPs is still not apparent. Though the LSP behavior of metal NPs affects the light harvesting in three ways, as described in the above part, we believe the scattering from metal NPs in the plasmonic photoanode is minimal. The localized plasmon mode and plasmon polariton at the interface of metal NPs and oxide materials are the main aspects for the enhancement of light harvesting and performance of DSSCs. Brown and co-workers studied the effect of Au NPs on the performance of liquid electrolyte-based and solid-based DSSCs, which suggested that the presence of the Au NPs in the photoanode increased the charge generation. They contributed these to the discrete energy transfer from the plasmon mode to the dyes excited state and direct near field coupling. In light of these results, further studies are under way to fully understand the detailed mechanism of metal NPs in the performance of solar cells. However, it is worth noting that although the metal NPs are able to enhance the light harvesting and performance of solar cells, the metal NPs can also negatively affect the performance of solar cells if the amount of NPs is high in the photoanode. In other words, the metal NPs can also act as recombination centers for generated electrons if the amount of metal NPs is high. Meanwhile, applying plasmonic nanocomposites for the fabrication of plasmonic photoanodes can decrease the thickness of photoanode and improve the electron collection and transportation, which could also be applied to other thin film photoelectron conversion devices that require efficient light harvesting.

In summary, we reported that plasmid DNA was applied as scaffold to fabricate Ag@TiO2 plasmonic nanocomposites under mild conditions, and the plasmonic DSSCs were fabricated by incorporating the nanocomposites into photoanode. During the fabrication of the nanocomposites, plasmid DNA not only worked as a scaffold driving the formation of the nanocomposites, but also acted as an effective reducing agent under the UV irradiation. The light harvesting, corresponding photocurrent and PCE of the plasmonic DSSCs were enhanced due to the nanocomposites working as “plasmonic components” in photoanodes. The performance of the plasmonic DSSCs depended on the amount of Ag NPs in the photoanode. When the amount of Ag NPs in the plasmonic photoanode was 0.8 wt%, the DSSC exhibited relatively better performance, in that the PCE was 1.83% increased by 28.87% compared with 1.42% for the conventional TiO2-only DSSC. Applying the plasmonic nanocomposites in fabricating the photoanode reduced the materials required for DSSC fabrication without affecting the performance. The strategy applied to enhance the performance of DSSC could be also applied for other thin film photovoltaic technologies that require efficient light harvesting.


This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51001007), Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities, and Innovation Foundation of BUAA for PhD Graduates. X. Z. acknowledges the Overseas Visiting Research Scholarship of BUAA for PhD Graduates. X. Z. is grateful to Prof. Bruce A. Armitage, Carnegie Mellon University, for helpful advice and discussions.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ra42429d
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013