 DOI: 10.1039/D2TC02312A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 11220-11231


Jitendra
Kumar
,

Omer
Vana
,

Subila Kurukkal
Balakrishnan
 and 

Eran
Edri
*

Department of Chemical Engineering, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva-8410501, Israel. E-mail: edrier@bgu.ac.il

Received
3rd June 2022
, Accepted 9th July 2022
First published on 15th July 2022
The short wavelength infrared (SWIR) region of the solar spectrum is underutilized, partly due to the limited availability of light absorbers for this region. Here, we report the synthesis of bismuth antimony selenide [(BixSb1−x)2Se3] alloys through a low-cost, low-temperature (310 °C) benign solution process. Twenty-three percent of Bi has been successfully incorporated in antimony selenide [Bi/(Bi + Sb) = 0.23], reducing the optical bandgap from 1.22 eV to 1.05 eV. A detailed study on the composition and structure of the (BixSb1−x)2Se3 deposits reveals that increasing the Bi ion content in the ink facilitated nucleation and growth in the solution, resulting in decreasing nanorods' diameter and length. The applicability of the developed method has been demonstrated by incorporating it in an FTO/ZnO/CdS/(BixSb1−x)2Se3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au solar cell structure. Developing benign solution processes for light absorbers in the SWIR region may enable low-cost tandem photovoltaics.

Stacking three photovoltaic (PV) devices with complementary light-absorbing materials with bandgaps of 1.83 eV, 1.6 eV, and 0.71 eV theoretically facilitates solar-to-electricity power conversion efficiency (PCE) of ∼50%. In parallel to advancements in coupling Si and other thin-film photovoltaic devices with “large” bandgap halide perovskite solar cells for making efficient tandem PV devices, there is a need for complementary low-cost small bandgap absorber materials for the short-wavelength infrared section, where an additional 5–6% absolute PCE points can be gained. Current triple-junction solar cells use either Ge (Eg = 0.66 eV), GaSb (Eg = 0.72 eV), or GaInAs as a small bandgap absorber material. However, the synthesis of III–V semiconductor materials is challenging and expensive, and alternatives for low-cost small bandgap materials and synthesis techniques are needed.

A potential light absorber material can be formed by alloying bismuth (Bi) in antimony selenide (Sb2Se3). The reported optical bandgap of Sb2Se3 is ∼1.18 eV, which can be narrowed by Bi-alloying. In addition, Sb2Se3 has an orthorhombic quasi-one-dimensional crystal structure (space group Pnma). The structure consists of (Sb4Se6)n ribbons, which are held together by weak van der Waals interactions along the a- and b-directions, and covalent bonding along the c-axis [Fig. 1(a)]. Due to the ribbon-like structure, grain boundaries of Sb2Se3 films containing hk1 planes are expected to be electrically benign. A similar argument can be made for surfaces of Sb2Se3 rods. However, we note that these claims are still debated. Moreover, the additional s orbitals of Sb contribute anti-bonding states at the top of the valence band maximum, which is suggested to add tolerance to deleterious effects of point defects.
Bi2Se3, on the other hand, has a rhombohedral crystal structure (space group Rm) that can be visualized as a layered structure with hexagonal unit cells. The structure consists of quintuple layers of (primarily) covalently bonded atoms stacked along the c-axis. The quintuple layers are held together by van der Waals interactions [Fig. 1(b)]. The different crystal structures of the parent phases set a limit to the mutual solubility of Sb2Se3 and Bi2Se3, however, a metastable orthorhombic stibnite structure was recently predicted for Bi2Se3, which may explain the partial solubility of Bi in Sb2Se3. Heremans et al. reported that (BixSb1−x)2Se3 has an orthorhombic crystal structure in the range 0 < x ≤ 0.48 and a rhombohedral crystal structure in 0.86 < x ≤ 1. Between 0.48 ≤ x < 0.86 a mixture of orthorhombic and rhombohedral phases is obtained. Wang et al. have synthesized (BixSb1−x)2Se3 using spark plasma sintering and reported the orthorhombic phase for 0 < x ≤ 0.5, mixed-phase for 0.5 < x ≤ 0.75 and rhombohedral phase for 0.75 < x ≤ 1. Recently, Weiss et al. have reported the formation of the orthorhombic phase for x ≤ 0.60 and rhombohedral for x > 0.60.
Antimony selenide was previously deposited using vacuum-based processes such as closed-space sublimation, thermal evaporation, and vapor-transport, along with solution processes such as hydrothermal, electrodeposition, and amine–thiol mixtures. Solution process techniques can have potential advantages over vacuum-based methods because they are low-cost, and require simpler equipment and a lower temperature. For example, deposition of Sb2Se3 using a physical process (e.g., metal evaporation and selenization) involves a temperature of 400–600 °C and a vacuum of the order of 260 − 5 × 10−2 mbar, while Sb2Se3 synthesis using a solution process requires a temperature in the range of 300–375 °C and ambient pressure. Yet, not many solvents can dissolve the precursors at sufficient concentrations.
In 1967, Vineyard et al. proposed a mechanism of sulfur dissolution in an amine–thiol mixture, where the amine deprotonates the thiol and generates a nucleophilic thiolate, which breaks the sulfur chain into soluble smaller polysulfide species. More recently, Weber et al. reported the dissolution of nine different chalcogenide semiconductors, by mixing ethanethiol in diethanolamine. It was found that a primary amine was needed for the dissolution to take place. Since then, solution mixtures of amines and thiols have been successfully used to dissolve a wide range of elements and compounds such as Sb, Cu, Zn, Sn, Ga, In, Se, S, Te, Cu2O, SnO, ZnO, Sb2Se3, Bi2Se3, and Sb2O3. However, the mechanism and the structure of the dissolved species are still investigated.
Ma et al. proposed that upon mixing Sb and Se in the amine–thiol mixture, ethylenediamine (en) deprotonates ethanedithiol (EDT) and forms a nucleophilic thiolate which reacts with the bulk selenium and dissolves it (Fig. 2, eqn (2)). The Sb, which remains mainly undissolved in the absence of Se, reacts with the Se–thiolate adduct (e.g., HSCH2CH2SSe−) to form an Sb–Se metal–organic complex, resulting in the molecular dissolution of Sb (eqn (3)).
However, the corrosiveness of the amine–thiol mixture poses a challenge for deposition on other semiconductors commonly used as selective contacts in photovoltaics. Recently, Zhao et al. reported a benign-ink formulation approach for the fabrication of CuInS2 thin film for PV application, where Cu, In, and S are dissolved in an amine–thiol mixture and followed by vacuum drying to get Cu, In, and S-complexes which were subsequently redissolved in a benign dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) solvent. Taking the clue from the study by Zhao et al., here in this study, we exploit the versatility of the amine–thiol mixture to dissolve the Sb and Se to form Sb–Se complexes and later separate the Sb–Se-complex from the corrosive thiol-amine mixture by solvent evaporation. The Sb–Se-complex was subsequently redissolved in DMSO, and Bi-salts (in different amounts) were added to get a Bi–Sb–Se-ink. Using the formulated Bi–Sb–Se-ink, Bi-alloyed Sb2Se3 [(BixSb1−x)2Se3] compounds were successfully synthesized at a relatively low temperature of 310 °C. The prepared (BixSb1−x)2Se3 compounds are optically and structurally characterized and applied as light absorbers in (BixSb1−x)2Se3 solar cells.

Fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) glass (TEC-T10) was purchased from XOP Glass, Spain. Antimony powder (100 mesh, 99.5%), acetonitrile (CH3CN, 99.8% anhydrous), 4-tertbutyl pyridine (C9H13N, 98%, tBP), lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (CF3SO2NLiSO2CF3, 99.95%, LiTFSI) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Selenium powder (100 mesh, 99.99%), thiourea [CS(NH2), 99%], bismuth nitrate pentahydrate [Bi(NO3)·5H2O, 98%], sodium sulphide hydrate (Na2S·xH2O) and cadmium sulphate (CdSO4, 99+%) and 1,2-ethanedithiol (EDT, 98%) was purchased from Alfa Aesar. Ethylenediamine (en, >99%). Chlorobenzene (C6H5Cl, 99.8%, extra dry), dimethyl sulfoxide [(CH3)2SO, 99.7%] were purchased from Acros Organics. Ammonium hydroxide (NH4OH, 25%) from Bio-Lab, Israel, 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD) was purchased from Borun New Material Technology Co., Ltd, China. All chemicals were used as received without any further purification.


Structural characterization and phase identification were made using X-ray diffraction (XRD) performed on PANalytical X'Pert powder diffractometer equipped with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.54056 Å, 40 kV, 40 mA).

The elemental composition and surface morphology imaging were done using field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM, FEI nova nano SEM450) equipped with an energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy detector (EDS, Oxford, AZtec).
Raman spectroscopy studies were performed on Horiba Jobin Yvon (LabRAM HR evolution) Raman spectrometer using a 785 nm laser and 100× objective lens. A 600 grooves per mm grating enabling ±0.8 cm−1 spectral resolution was used. The spectrometer was calibrated using a standard silicon peak at 520.5 cm−1. A typical measurement consists of 1 s of exposure and 40 accumulations. Low incident laser power was used to minimize heating.
Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) measurements were carried out on the Thermofisher Scientific Escalab system with He I excitation (21.21 eV) and pass energy of 2.0 eV.
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) imaging was performed on 200 kV, JEOL JEM 2100F equipped with EDX. The sample for TEM analysis was prepared by ultrasonication in ethanol for 10 min, followed by drop-casting on a carbon-coated TEM copper grid.
Surface photovoltage measurements on KP technology Ltd. System were performed in a non-contact kelvin probe configuration. A 700 nm light-emitting diode was used as an illumination source.
Diffused reflectance data were collected on Cary 5000 UV-Vis-NIR spectrophotometer by Agilent Technologies. Barium sulfate (BaSO4) was used as a 100% reflectance standard.
The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics were measured with an Ossila source meter. AM 1.5G (100 mW cm−2) generated by ScienceTech AAA solar simulator and calibrated using silicon reference cell (certified by Newport Corporation) was used as an illumination source. The solar cell devices were covered with an aperture area of 0.0256 cm2 during J–V measurements.

Incorporation of the Bi into Sb2Se3 using the amine–thiol mixture technique is challenging. From our own experience, we observe that the amine–thiol solution made by the dissolution of elemental Bi or Bi2O3 along with Sb and Se in the amine–thiol mixture is very unstable and results in immediate precipitation of bismuth selenide (not shown). Dissolving Bi2O3/Bi and Se (or Se and Sb) in separate solutions and mixing the solutions also results in immediate precipitation (not shown). Therefore, we developed an alternative approach where we made the Sb–Se-ink and Bi-stock solutions separately in DMSO and mixed them in different ratios just before spin-coating. This formulation was stable for 1–2 hours in ambient. Although DMSO is benign, it can easily permeate through human skin, taking dissolved species along. Therefore, care must be taken while working with DMSO. Fig. 3 summarizes the procedure adopted to formulate the Bi–Sb–Se ink. First, 3 mmol (365.3 mg) of Sb and 4.5 mmol (355.3 mg) of Se were dissolved in a mixture of amine–thiol (8 mL en and 2 mL EDT) by continuous stirring for 2 h. During the stirring, the solution was heated at 60 °C. After complete dissolution of Sb and Se, the solution was filtered into the 50 mL round bottom flask using a polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) membrane filter (200 nm pore size). Subsequently, the flask was connected to a Schlenk vacuum line with a liquid nitrogen cold trap. A vacuum was created to evaporate en and EDT from the Sb–Se solution. During the vacuum evaporation process, Sb–Se-solution temperature was maintained at 60 °C using a water bath. After removing the en-EDT solvent (vacuum in Schlenk line ∼0.3 mTorr), the precipitated Sb–Se-complex left behind in the flask was dissolved in 5 mL of DMSO and filtered using a 350 nm pore size PTFE filter. The prepared solution having Sb–Se-complex in the DMSO is denoted as Sb–Se-ink.

Separately, Bi-stock solutions were prepared by dissolving different amounts (10 to 450 mg) of Bi(NO3)3·5H2O in DMSO. 100 μL of Bi-stock solution was added to 1 mL of Sb–Se-ink to prepare the Bi–Sb–Se-ink. For example, if a Bi–Sb–Se-ink is prepared by adding 100 μL of Bi-stock solution (10 mg mL−1 concentration) to 1 mL of Sb–Se-ink, the Bi–Sb–Se-ink is denoted as 10-Bi-ink. Similarly, if a Bi–Sb–Se-ink is prepared by adding 100 μL of Bi-stock solution of 50 mg mL−1 concentration in 1 mL of Sb–Se-ink, the Bi–Sb–Sb-ink is denoted as 50-Bi-ink.


Fig. 4(a) shows the schematic representation of the procedure used to synthesize (BixSb1−x)2Se3. First, FTO glass substrates were ultra-sonicated cleaned with Alconox® soap solution, deionized water (18.2 Ω cm), acetone, and isopropyl alcohol for 30 min each, respectively, and dried with nitrogen (N2) gas.

The prepared Bi–Sb–Se-ink with different amounts of Bi-content was spin-coated on FTO substrate at 3000 rpm for 30 s, followed by low-temperature heat treatment at 100 °C for 3 min in an ambient environment. The samples made by low-temperature heat treatment are denoted as precursor samples. A typical precursor sample involved five cycles of spin-coating and low-temperature heat treatment. Finally, to get (BixSb1−x)2Se3 compound, precursor samples were annealed at 310 °C for 10 min, under N2-ambient, following the time-temperature profile shown in Fig. 4(b). The temperature ramp rate was 3 °C min−1 until 310 °C, then held at this temperature for 10 min, followed by natural cooling (∼1.5 h).

Cleaned FTO substrates were loaded into the atomic layer deposition (ALD) chamber, and a 20 nm thick ZnO layer was deposited. The ALD process was performed at the chamber base pressure of ∼200 mTorr and sample holder temperature of 120 °C. Dimethylzinc (DMZ) and deionized (DI) water were used as a precursor and Ar as a carrier gas with a flow rate of 10 sccm. A single ALD cycle consists of a 21 ms dose pulse of DMZ and 2.5 s closing of expo valve, 21 s of Ar purging followed by an 80 ms dose pulse of DI water, and 2.5 s closing the expo valve, followed by 80 s of Ar purging. Three hundred such cycles were used to get 20 nm thick ZnO.


Before CdS deposition, ZnO deposited FTO substrate was dipped in 0.1 M Na2S solution for 3 min, followed by rinsing with DI water and dried with N2. Following Na2S treatment, substrate was immersed in a bath solution containing 0.02 M CdSO4 (2 mL), 25% NH4OH (1.5 mL), 1 M CS(NH2)2 (3.4 mL) and DI water (13.1 mL) for 5 min. The bath temperature was maintained at 60 °C. After the deposition, the CdS-coated substrate was immediately rinsed with DI water and dried in N2 flow.


The spiro-OMeTAD solution was prepared by dissolving 100 mg of spiro-OMeTAD in 1 mL of chlorobenzene, to which 36 μL of tBP and 20 μL of LiTFSI (520 mg in 1 mL of acetonitrile) were added. Spiro-OMeTAD layer was deposited by spin-coating the prepared solution at 3000 rpm for 30 s. Spiro-OMeTAD coated cells with a suitable shadow mask were loaded in a thermal evaporator (Moorfield's nanoPVD) for gold deposition. During the gold evaporation, the base pressure was 1 × 10−6 mbar. 80 nm of gold was deposited with a deposition rate of 0.5–2 Å s−1.


We prepared (BixSb1−x)2Se3 samples by spin-coating a DMSO/Bi–Sb–Se ink and heating it to 310 °C under nitrogen. The composition was measured by EDS (Fig. 5), while the crystalline phase was evaluated by XRD (Fig. 6). We found that the Bi-content [x = Bi/(Bi + Sb)] in the deposits increased in a near-linear proportion to the amount of Bi dissolved in the ink, while the XRD peaks confirmed the formation of phase pure stibnite structure (JCPDS no. 015-0861). When the Bi concentration in the solution was greater than 40 mM, in the solid x was larger than 0.23, and a secondary solid phase appeared, which we identified as bismuth selenide (Bi2Se3). We do not expect such a secondary solid phase to be beneficial for a photovoltaic device, and therefore we focused on analyzing samples with x < 0.23.

In addition to Bi, Sb, and Se, the (BixSb1−x)2Se3 samples (x < 0.23) also contained non-negligible amounts of sulfur (11 at%) and ∼12 at% carbon. There are two potential sources of sulfur in the ink, one is the ethanedithiol (EDT) used to dissolve Sb2Se3 (e.g., by decomposition or impurities), and the other is from the solvent (DMSO). Webber et al. and Ma et al. also observed the incorporation of S in Sb2Se3 and Cu2−xSe compounds when the solids were prepared from an amine–thiol solution mixture, even when the solvents were purified, which suggests that ethanedithiol decomposition is the probable source of sulfur in our solids. Nonetheless, the Se to Se and S ratio in the (BixSb1−x)2Se3 sample is rather constant, [Se/(Se + S)] = 0.89 ± 0.03, regardless of Bi content in the solution or film. Moreover, a nearly stoichiometric ratio of anion to cation [(S + Se)/(Bi + Sb) ∼ 1.5] was found in all (BixSb1−x)2Se3 samples. The overall composition ratio for all (BixSb1−x)2Se3 samples is summarized in Fig. S1 (ESI). A TEM-EDS study (Fig. S2, ESI) on individual (BixSb1−x)2Se3 nanowires supports the presence of S and Bi throughout the nanowires.
The XRD patterns confirm the formation of a phase pure orthorhombic-Sb2Se3 [Fig. 6(a)–(d)]. Specifically, the peaks at 28.20, 31.16, and 32.22 degrees correspond to (211), (221), and (301) planes of the (hk1) family, while the peaks at 14.96, 16.80, and 27.35 correspond to (020), (120) and (230) planes of the (hk0) family. We found that the texture coefficient (TC) for Sb2Se3 (x = 0; Fig. S3, ESI) for the (hk0) family of planes was greater than 1, while a TC < 1 was found for the (hk1) family, which suggests that Sb2Se3 had an (hk0) preferred orientation. In a previous study, where the Sb2Se3 was deposited from a thiol–amine mixture, we have found that the deposited Sb2Se3 crystallites had a preferred (hk1) orientation perpendicular to the surface, which suggested that the Sb2Se3 rods nucleated and grew (mostly) from the surface. Here, however, we used a DMSO-based Sb–Se-ink. The Sb2Se3 nanowires synthesized from DMSO-based ink had (hk0) preferred orientation, i.e., the nanowires lay parallel to the substrate. Therefore, we suggest that majority of the nanowires nucleated in the solution and sedimented on the surface when the solvent evaporated. Moreover, we observed that the nucleation of Sb2Se3 occurred in the precursor film already at 100 °C (confirmed by the appearance of an Sb2Se3 XRD pattern already in the precursor film; see Fig. S4, ESI).
Upon increasing the Bi content in the ink, the solids' diffraction peaks corresponding to (211), (221), and (301) of the (hk1) family shifted towards lower diffraction angles, while diffraction peaks corresponding to (020), (120) and (230) of (hk0) family did no shift. The inter-planar spacing (d) of (221) planes and the corresponding full-width at half maximum (FWHM) are estimated from the XRD peak for different Bi-content and plotted in Fig. S5 (ESI). As Bi-ion (0.90 Å) is larger than the Sb-ion (0.76 Å), the increasing amount of Bi would cause an increase in the d-spacing and a shift to lower diffraction angles, as we observed. The selective shift in the diffraction peaks of the (hk1) family of planes suggests that the Bi-ions are incorporated preferentially at specific sites, as was previously found. For x > 0.23, a new peak at ∼29.5 degrees start to appear [highlighted by the red rectangular box in Fig. 6(a)], which matches with the Bi2Se3 phase, indicating the formation of Bi2Se3.

Fig. 7 shows the Raman spectra of the (BixSb1−x)2Se3 samples (785 nm laser; above bandgap for all the samples). The peaks at 80, 116, 152, and 190 cm−1 are attributed to A7g, A5g, B12g, and A2g phonon modes of Sb2Se3, respectively. The highest intensity peak at 190 cm−1 labeled as (A) was previously assigned to Sb–Se–Sb bending. We observed that with increasing Bi content, a new peak around 169 cm−1 (labeled as B) emerged and gradually shifted towards lower wavenumbers. For x = 0.23, the peak ∼169 cm−1 has about the same intensity as that of peak intensity at 190 cm−1.
For an XY compound, the zone-center optical phonon frequency can be expressed as , where αX–Y and μX–Y are the bond-stretching force constant and reduced mass (1/μX–Y = 1/μX + 1/μY), respectively. The bond-stretching force constant relates to the bond length (α = α0·d−β), where α0 and β are constants, and d is the bond length. Therefore, a longer bond length will have a smaller bond-stretching force constant which will cause a decrease in phonon frequency. Therefore, since Bi-ions have a larger mass than the Sb-ions, and the bond length of Bi–Se is longer than the Sb–Se bond length, the optical phonon frequency will shift towards a lower wavenumber upon Bi-alloying, as we observed. To sum up, based on the XRD and Raman spectroscopy results, we conclude that (BixSb1−x)2Se3 alloys were successfully formed through Bi–Sb–Se-ink.

Fig. 8 shows the FESEM micrographs of the (BixSb1−x)2Se3 samples prepared from the Bi–Sb–Se-ink. The corresponding nanowire diameters estimated from these images have been plotted in Fig. 9. It can be seen that an increase in Bi content resulted in a decrease in nanowires diameter. Specifically, the nanowires diameter decrease from ∼60 nm for x = 0 to ∼30 nm for x = 0.23. The surface morphology and nanowire diameter for the samples for which the Bi2Se3 secondary phase has been observed (x > 0.23) are shown in Fig. S6 (ESI).
In addition to the nanowires' diameter decreasing upon the addition of Bi (or nitrate ions), the length of the nanowires decreased as well. Considering the nucleation and growth of the nanowires, the appearance of smaller (overall) particles suggests that the addition of the Bi precursor to the ink increased the nucleation rate of the crystallites or suppressed their growth. Since with Bi addition, both dimensions, length, and radius are reduced, we surmise that the added Bi precursor increased the nucleation rate in the solution. Furthermore, while at low Bi content, the nanowires appear mostly parallel to the substrate, with added Bi, the nanowires appear more randomly oriented, which is in agreement with nucleation and growth in the solution followed by sedimentation on the substrate of smaller particles.

The bandgap of the deposits was evaluated from diffused reflectance UV-Vis-NIR spectra (Fig. S7, ESI) and using a Kubelka–Munk (KM) function for direct (n = ½) and indirect (n = 2) excitation. We found that the bandgap values decreased from 1.22 eV (for x = 0, n = 2) to 1.05 eV (for x = 0.23, n = 2). However, the rate of the bandgap variation with respect to Bi content, i.e., the slope of a linear correlation of the bandgap with Bi content, is faster than we have previously found (the slope is larger). In addition, the estimated bandgap of Sb2Se3 is larger than the commonly reported bandgap value of 1.18 eV. The relatively larger value of Sb2Se3 is possibly explained by the incorporation of S into the Sb2Se3 crystal lattice, which has been reported to increase the bandgap of Sb2Se3.

Filip et al. and Koc et al. reported that the valence band maximum (VBM) is dominated by Se-4p states with little contribution from Sb-5p states, while the conduction band minimum (CBM) is dominated by Sb-5p states with little contribution from Se-4p states. Recently, Don et al. reported that the VBM has an additional contribution of Sb-5s lone pair states. When the Sb ions are replaced by Bi ions [Fig. 10(b)], the additional Bi-6p states are expected to add at the top of the valence band, leading to a decrease in the optical bandgap, as we observed. However, ultra-violet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) of the (BixSb1−x)2Se3 samples shows that this may be an oversimplified picture. The UV-vis results indicate that for x = 0.08, the bandgap decreased by ∼0.08 eV. The UPS results [Fig. 10(c)–(e)] show that for a similar Ef value, the VBM value is similar for x = 0 and x = 0.08, and since the CBM is evaluated from the UV-vis, the apparent change in the optical bandgap stems from states added below the CBM. An analysis of the other (BixSb1−x)2Se3 samples reveals a similar picture. A possible explanation for this difference could be that the disorder introduced by sulfur or other impurities extends a tail of states into the gap.
Lastly, the Ef in all samples is either near the center of the bandgap or closer to the VBM than to the CBM, suggesting p-type doping. This suggestion is supported by surface photovoltage measurements showing accumulation of negative charge at the surface upon photoexcitation (see Fig. S8, ESI), as would be expected for a p-type semiconductor.

As a proof of concept, solar cell devices based on (BixSb1−x)2Se3 were made with an FTO/ZnO/CdS/(BixSb1−x)2Se3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au structure. A typical thickness of (BixSb1−x)2Se3 absorbed layer was 1015 ± 78 nm. The cross-section viewed FESEM image of a typical solar cell device is shown in Fig. 11, along with the recorded J–V curves of the best solar cell device (for x = 0.00 and 0.23; other characteristics are summarized in Table S9, ESI). A short-circuit current density (Jsc) of ∼1.00 mA cm−2 and an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 343 mV were recorded. While adding Bi narrowed the bandgap by 200 meV, measuring EQE from the devices was unsuccessful due to a poor signal-to-noise, which stems from two reasons: (1) the Jsc of the devices was relatively low (∼1.00 mA cm−2); (2) the light intensity of the excitation source (a Xenon lamp coupled to a monochromator) is too low in the red-NIR region. Nonetheless, in another report of (BixSb1−x)2Se3 photovoltaic devices (prepared by closed-spaced sublimation), the EQE onset indeed shifted to longer wavelengths.

Nevertheless, The solar cells have good Voc, but their Jsc and fill factors (FF) are relatively poor. This partially stems from the high series resistance, Rs (212.77 Ω cm2), limiting the solar cell performance, which can possibly be improved by the orientation of the crystallites with (hk1) planes perpendicular to the substrate surface. A detailed study and further optimization of different component of the solar cell is needed in the future.

A low-temperature (310 °C) benign solution approach has been developed to successfully incorporate Bi into Sb2Se3. Through Bi-alloying, a reduction in the optical bandgap to 1.05 eV has been achieved. Bi-incorporation has been observed to affect nanowire diameter. The applicability of the developed procedure has been shown by incorporating the (BixSb1−x)2Se3 (x ∼ 0.23) nanowires in a solar cell architecture. The currently developed approach has the potential to be a low-cost, inexpensive non-vacuum procedure for Bi-alloying into Sb2Se3 to achieve a small bandgap for infrared application.


Jitendra Kumar: methodology, formal analysis, investigation, validation, writing – original draft and writing – review & editing. Omer Vana: methodology, formal analysis, investigation, validation. Subila Kurukkal Balakrishnan: formal analysis. Eran Edri: conceptualization, project administration, resources, funding acquisition, supervision, writing – review & editing.


There are no conflicts to declare.


We are grateful to the Israel Science Foundation (grant no. 1428/20) and the Israel Ministry of Energy (grant no. 218-11-031) for funding this research.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2tc02312a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022