 DOI: 10.1039/D1EE00918D
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 4048-4058


Yan-Na
Lu
,

Jun-Xing
Zhong
,

Yinye
Yu
,

Xi
Chen
,

Chan-Ying
Yao
,

Chengxi
Zhang
,

Meifang
Yang
,

Wenhuai
Feng
,

Yong
Jiang
,

Ying
Tan
,

Li
Gong
,

Xingzhan
Wei
,

Yecheng
Zhou
*,

Lianzhou
Wang
* and 

Wu-Qiang
Wu
*

MOE Key Laboratory of Bioinorganic and Synthetic Chemistry, Lehn Institute of Functional Materials, School of Chemistry, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510275, P. R. China. E-mail: wuwq36@mail.sysu.edu.cn

School of Materials Science & Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510275, P. R. China. E-mail: zhouych29@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Micro-nano manufacturing and system integration center, Chongqing Institute of Green and Intelligent Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chongqing 400714, P. R. China

Nanomaterials Centre, School of Chemical Engineering and Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD 4072, Australia. E-mail: l.wang@uq.edu.au

College of Biological and Chemical Engineering, Guangxi University of Science and Technology, Liuzhou 545006, P. R. China

Instrumental Analysis Research Center, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510275, P. R. China

Received
26th March 2021
, Accepted 17th May 2021
First published on 17th May 2021
The suboptimal carrier dynamics at the perovskite/electron transport layer has largely limited the further performance enhancement of the state-of-the-art inverted p-i-n structured perovskite solar cells. Herein, we discovered that a simple surface modification of the perovskite film by a trivalent metal halide salt, InBr3, could convert the doping levels of the top surface to be more n-type, which spontaneously formed an intriguing n/n+ homojunction between the bulk (weak n type (n) component) and the surface (more n-type (n+) component) in a monolithic perovskite film. This brought about synergistic advantages of the enlarged built-in electric field for facilitated charge separation, as well as optimized electronic energy level alignment and minimized electron injection barrier at the perovskite/C60 interface, leading to both accelerated charge extraction and suppressed interfacial charge recombination. Blade-coated inverted PSCs with n/n+ homojunctions achieved a high power conversion efficiency (PCE) of up to 22.2%, narrowing the efficiency gap with their conventional n-i-p counterparts. The InBr3 surface treatment also improved the operational stability to >1000 hours under light with 93% initial efficiency retained.

In recent years, perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have emerged as one of the most attractive photovoltaic technologies. Inverted p-i-n structured PSCs are more compatible to solution processing at lower temperatures, which show greater potential to be used in fabricating flexible electronics and/or tandem photovoltaics. However, further performance enhancement of inverted PSCs is largely limited by the suboptimal carrier dynamics at the perovskite/electron transport layer (ETL) interface, which mainly dominates the charge separation, extraction and collection within the devices. Developing a simple solution process that could achieve the in situ formation of a favorable n/n+ homojunction in a monolithic perovskite film is highly desirable, which brings the synergistic advantages of an enlarged built-in electric field between the bulk and surface of the perovskite film for facilitated charge separation to respective electrodes and the optimized energy level alignment by minimizing the electron injection barrier at the perovskite/ETL interface for accelerated charge extraction and suppressed interfacial charge recombination. Regulating the interfacial carrier dynamics is beneficial to achieve notably improved efficiency and stability of inverted PSCs, which is promising to narrow their efficiency gap with conventional n-i-p structured devices.


In recent years, organic–inorganic metal halide perovskite materials have attracted tremendous attention in a variety of optoelectronic applications, especially perovskite solar cells (PSCs), owing to their fascinating optoelectronic properties, such as tunable band gaps, long carrier diffusion lengths, high absorption coefficients, ambipolar charge transport, and easy solution processability. The certified power conversion efficiency (PCE) of PSCs has been increased to 25.5%, which is on par with or even higher than that of crystalline silicon solar cells.

Compared with conventional n-i-p structured devices, inverted p-i-n structured PSCs are more compatible to solution processing at lower temperatures, which show greater potential to be used in fabricating flexible electronics and/or tandem photovoltaics. However, the reported PCEs for the state-of-the-art inverted p-i-n structured PSCs still lag behind the highest reported value for its n-i-p counterpart. Further enhancement of the device performance is largely limited by the interfacial nonradiative recombination loss induced by the presence of numerous surface defects in solution-processed polycrystalline perovskite films and/or suboptimal carrier transport and recombination dynamics at relevant interfaces. A great deal of effort has been made to passivate the surface defects for improved efficiency and stability of PSCs, yet the modulation of interfacial carrier dynamics has been rarely investigated. Currently, the best performance of an inverted PSC is based on the device structure of ITO/PTAA/perovskite/C60/BCP/Cu (respectively, indium tin oxide glass, poly[bis(4-phenyl)(2,4,6-trimethylphenyl)amine], perovskite, fullerene, bathocuproine and copper electrode), where the junction was demonstrated to form at the perovskite/C60 interface, which mainly dominates the carrier dynamics, namely, charge separation, transportation and collection.
Although the perovskite has shown amazing ambipolar charge transport properties, the photogenerated carriers are not efficiently collected by adjacent electrodes, owing to an insufficient driving force for charge separation in the bulk perovskite and/or at the perovskite/electron transport layer (ETL) interface. Constructing the p–n homojunction or heterojunction at the relevant interface has been regarded as one of the most promising strategies to facilitate charge separation and collection. Several reports have demonstrated that the p–n homojunction can be constructed via sequential stacking of perovskite layers with different compositions, which to some extent widen the built-in electric field for promoted charge separation, while simultaneously modifying the interfacial energy band alignment between the perovskite layer and other charge transport layers for boosted charge transfer and reduced charge recombination loss. However, layer-by-layer fabrication is relatively complex and the individual perovskite compositions should be carefully regulated by controlling the stoichiometric ratios of precursor ingredients. Also, the diffusion and interference of stacked perovskite compositions can cause unpredicted changes in the electronic properties of the perovskite layer from time to time. Hence, it is more promising to directly modify the surface electronic properties of the perovskite film to optimize the perovskite/ETL interface, which is expected to improve the performance of inverted p-i-n PSCs in a well-controlled manner.
In this work, we demonstrated that a simple modification of the Cs0.07FA0.70MA0.23PbI3 perovskite (CFM, cesium formamidinium methylammonium lead triiodide) surface with a trace amount (i.e. 300 ppm) of indium bromide (InBr3) enabled beneficial surface n-doping of perovskite films, which effectively enhanced charge collection at the perovskite/ETL interface. Combining experimental results with theoretical calculations, we concluded that the facilitated charge separation can be attributed to the remarkably enlarged built-in electric field induced by a self-formed n/n+ homojunction between the bulk and surface of a monolithic perovskite film. Additionally, the interfacial charge transfer was boosted by favorable downward band bending, which minimized the electron injection barrier by 0.11 eV at the surface n-doped perovskite/C60 interface. The modified, blade-coated PSCs exhibited a high PCE of 22.2%, accompanied by a high open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.18 V. This work presents a facile strategy to regulate the interfacial carrier dynamics for achieving high performance, inverted structure PSCs.

Metal ions doping has been broadly shown to alter the optoelectronic properties of perovskite films, such as band gap, conductivity, doping level, carrier concentration, etc. Beyond our previously reported reduction in surface halide deficiency that was induced by surface treatment using metal halide salts, we further explored their unique function on modifying the surface electronic properties. Considering that metal ions with more valence electrons are able to donate electrons, upshift the Fermi level and achieve n-type doping, several trivalent metal ions (Y3+, Al3+, Ga3+, In3+, and Sc3+) are potential dopants. Among them, In3+ has the closest ionic radius to Pb2+, suggesting that the substitution of Pb by In is feasible. Moreover, it was reported that In3+ ions were able to influence the crystallization process of perovskite films when introduced as dopants in the bulk. Thus, we conducted a systematic study on the properties of In3+ doped perovskite films by combining theoretical calculations and experimental design.

The doping function induced by In3+ ions incorporation was first confirmed by defect chemistry calculations (Fig. 1 and Fig. S1–S5, ESI). More calculation details and analysis are given in the ESI. Possible surface doping configurations brought about by InBr3 doping, such as substitutional In doping on the Pb site (InPb), substitutional Br doping on the I site (BrI), vacancies of Pb (VPb) and I (VI), adsorption of In (AdsIn) and Pb (AdsPb), and adsorption of I (AdsI) and Br (AdsBr), were investigated by first-principles calculations (Fig. 1a–1c). As shown in Fig. 1d, BrI showed the lowest formation energy, which agrees with the fact that a mixed halide perovskite easily forms when both Br and I are present. In this case, homovalent ions doping rarely changes the electronic properties. The second possible doping was the adsorption of Br (AdsBr) onto a surface Pb atom, concurring with Uratani's result that the halide ion easily forms on a flat surface. Both BrI and AdsBr are neutral when the Fermi level is located between the conduction and valence bands. However, substitutional In doping on the Pb site (InPb) differed. First-principles calculations show that InPb is positive when the Fermi level is in the band gap, and the positive lattice InPb defect will produce an electron that can be thermally excited at room temperature. This finding is consistent with our X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) result (see below discussion) that the replacement of divalent Pb by trivalent In will produce an extra electron, which could alter the surrounding electron cloud density. In addition to point defects like BrI and InPb, complex defects, such as replacing Pb–I by In–Br (InBrPbI), may also form. Fig. 1e indicates that the formation energies of these complex defects are low and positive. All complex defects, including InPb, are positive and the same number of electrons are produced according to the charge neutrality condition. Hence, InBr3 doping can increase the electron concentration and upshift the Fermi level, thus changing the surface of the perovskite to be n+-type. A series of work functions of intrinsic (undoped) and doped perovskite surfaces are illustrated in Fig. 1f and Table S1 (ESI). The work function difference between the upper and bottom surfaces is due to relaxation and the ferroelectricity of the perovskite. In particular, the average work function of the intrinsic perovskite is 4.79 eV (note: the work function of the top surface is 5.82 eV, while that of the bottom surface is 3.77 eV), which is identical to our experimental result. The average work function becomes 4.46 eV when InBr defects are introduced (Fig. 1f). All calculations were performed by VASP 5.4.4, and the calculation method can be found in our previous work.
In this study, when considering a balanced trade-off between material band gap and phase stability for achieving excellent optoelectronic properties, we employed an iodide-based perovskite composition with the triple cations of Cs+, FA+ and MA+. As illustrated in Fig. 2a, the perovskite films were fabricated via a blade-coating method. To alter the surface electronic properties of the perovskite film, a facile surface treatment by a heterovalent metal halide salt was applied, whereby 0.3 mg mL−1 InBr3 dissolved in isopropyl alcohol (IPA), a common antisolvent for the perovskite, was dynamically spin-coated on top of the perovskite film followed by thermal annealing (Fig. 2b). The successful incorporation of In3+ and Br− ions into the perovskite crystal lattice is evidenced by the main (210) characteristic X-ray diffraction (XRD) peak of the perovskite films with 5 mol% InBr3 addition shifting to a higher 2θ, relative to the control, owing to lattice shrinkage associated with the smaller ionic radius of In3+ and Br− (Fig. S6, ESI). The incorporated In3+ and Br− could induce lattice distortion and change the surrounding electron cloud densities, thus altering the surface electronic properties of the perovskite film. An XPS study investigated the effect of InBr3 modification on the surface composition and any possible ions interaction. The XPS result showed the presence of In3+ on the surface of the In3+-treated perovskite film (Fig. 2c). In general, the decreased electron cloud density would shift the XPS peak of the element core level to a higher binding energy. Both the Pb 4f core level and I 4d core level shifted to a higher binding energy by 0.118 eV (Fig. 2d and e), indicating that the surrounding electron cloud density had changed upon InBr3 surface treatment, which could result in surface n-type doping of perovskites. To check the reproducibility of doping densities induced by InBr3 surface modification, we randomly measured five regions on the same InBr3-treated perovskite film surface during the XPS test, which showed uniform distribution of In on the InBr3-treated perovskite film surface.
To better elucidate the influence of the In3+ surface treatment on tuning the energy levels of the perovskite films, an ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) study was conducted. The UPS data for the control and InBr3-treated CFM perovskite films are shown in Fig. S9 (ESI). Agreeing well with the calculated work function, we observed lifting of the Fermi level (EF) from −4.79 eV to −4.30 eV (i.e. closer to the conduction band) upon In3+ surface treatment, confirming that the doping levels of the perovskite film surface were converted to be n+ type. This Fermi level up-shift was also corroborated by work function calculations. The intrinsic perovskite surface has an average work function of 4.79 eV, which became 4.46 eV when an InPb defect was introduced on a 17.8 × 17.6 Å2 surface, and 4.47 eV when an InBrPbI complex defect was present as shown in Fig. 1f and Fig. S5 (ESI). The positive shift of the work function can be attributed to interfacial electronic hybridization induced by heterovalent metal ions doping. The change in carrier type and concentration on the surface in situ form an interfacial n/n+ homojunction in a single perovskite layer, resulting in enhancement of the built-in electric field and promoting charge separation at the relevant interface.
The surface n-doping also induced a favorable downward band bending at the perovskite/C60 interface, forming an “energy slide” with expedited momentum for boosted electron transport, while simultaneously creating a barrier for blocking holes. To further check the uniformity of the surface doping induced by InBr3 surface treatment, we characterized the surface potentials of the perovskite films over a large area (3 × 3 μm2) by Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM). After the InBr3 treatment, the average surface potential uniformly increased from 339 mV to 485 mV, corresponding well with the above UPS result (Fig. 3a and b). The lower surface potential is observed in the control film, suggesting that the Fermi level is closer to the valence band as compared to the InBr3-treated CFM films. For a more intuitive and quantitative comparison, we carried out linear scanning of the bases of the perovskite films. Specifically, the In3+-modified CFM film always showed higher surface potential than the control CFM film (Fig. 3c). To further prove the formation of an n/n+ homojunction between the bulk and surface in a monolithic InBr3-treated CFM perovskite film, the cross-sectional KPFM measurements are carried out under dark conditions. As a result, one can observe the sudden surface potential increment near the bulk/surface interface, which can be caused by the carrier transport and extraction at the homojunction, driven by the derived internal built-in electric field. This demonstrates the formation of an n/n+ homojunction induced by InBr3 surface modification (Fig. S8a and S8b, ESI).
To verify the ultrafast photo-excited carrier dynamics at related interfaces upon InBr3 surface modification, we performed femtosecond (fs) transient absorption (TA) spectroscopy characterization on perovskite films sandwiched between a PTAA hole transport layer (HTL) and C60 ETL (Fig. 3d). As can be seen in Fig. 3e and f, the contour plots of the TA spectra for both the control and InBr3-treated CFM films exhibit a distinct ground-state bleaching (GSB) peak at around 750 nm. The quenching rate of a GSB peak signal reflects the carrier transport efficacy from perovskite to the ETL or HTL. A more promptly faded signal was observed in the contour plot of the InBr3-treated sample, suggesting that photo-generated electrons were more efficiently extracted out from the perovskite film to the adjacent C60. At the same delay time, the GSB peak intensity of the InBr3-treated perovskite film appeared to be much weaker compared to the original GSB peak, as well as the control counterpart, results which coincide well with the contour plots of TA spectra (Fig. 3g and h). Finally, we analyzed and interpreted the decay kinetics of the GSB signals. Upon InBr3 modification, much faster decay was witnessed, i.e., 50 ps for the InBr3-treated sample versus 252 ps for the control sample (Fig. 3i and Table S3, ESI). This result verified the beneficial roles of InBr3 surface n-doping, which enlarged the built-in electric field and enabled a better energy level alignment for accelerating charge separation, extraction and collection from the perovskite to the ETL, thus greatly reducing interfacial charge recombination loss. To gain more insights into the change of electronic states, we measured the steady-state photoluminescence (PL) intensity of the ITO glass/perovskite films. The PL measurement was conducted on the same region (with mask) of the identical perovskite film before and after InBr3 treatment. After InBr3 surface treatment, the same CFM perovskite film witnessed significant PL quenching (Fig. S10, ESI), indicating that charge transfer may occur even in a single layer thin film. Considering that perovskite materials absorb strongly at short wavelengths, we anticipate that only the surface of the films (depth < 100 nm) was excited by the 532 nm laser. Hence, we deduce that the PL quenching is caused by the presence of a n/n+ homojunction with a cascaded energy band between the underlying bulk and the top surface, as induced by the InBr3 surface treatment, which causes downward band bending at the bulk/surface interface to boost charge transfer upon light excitation.
Interfacial carrier dynamics can benefit from the construction of an ingenious, bulk-surface n/n+ homojunction present in a perovskite film. For the control device, the photogenerated carriers have no preferred transport direction owing to an inferior driving force for charge separation. In this case, the chance of undesirable electron–hole recombination is high, resulting in non-radiative recombination loss, thus impairing the device performance. Based on the valence band maximum (VBM) level and the band gap of the CFM perovskite (1.51 eV), we calculated the conduction band minimum (CBM) levels of the control and InBr3-treated CFM perovskite films. The energy level diagram of the surface n-doped CFM perovskite film and related interfaces is schematically illustrated in Fig. 4a. The work function of the doped perovskite (4.30 eV, right side) is 0.49 eV lower than that of the undoped perovskite (4.79 eV, left side). At a steady state, the Fermi level of doped and undoped perovskites becomes equal, which leads to band bending. Upon surface n-doping, the self-formed n/n+ homojunction results in a reinforced built-in electric field with the direction pointing from the surface to the bulk and induced a favorable downward band bending at bulk/surface junction, which beneficially facilitates charge separation and boosts the photo-separated carriers to transport to and be collected by the PTAA and C60 contacts.
To elucidate the interfacial band bending and charge transport influenced by n/n+ homojunction, numerical simulations were performed by wxAMPS 3. Specific parameters used in numerical simulations are shown in Table S2 (ESI). Fig. 4b shows the energy levels of the solar cells with and without doping under AM 1.5G one sun illumination. For the model without InBr3 treatment, there is an energy barrier of approximately 0.11 eV for electrons in the center device migrating to the surface. This energy barrier disappeared when the surface layer was treated with InBr3. The CBM level of perovskite near the C60 layer is 0.14 eV, which is 0.03 eV lower than the CBM level (0.17 eV) in the center (z = 250 nm). Hence, an electron in the surface-modified device could achieve more efficient injection from the perovskite layer to the C60 layer. The derivative of the band level is a built-in electric field, and hence, band bending is demonstrated by a local electric field (Fig. 4c). In the case of the untreated device, the built-in electric field is very weak, which to some extent inhibits efficient charge separation and collection, resulting in serious recombination. For the surface treated device, the up-shifted Fermi level yields an electric field, the direction pointing from the C60 side to the PTAA side, forcibly promoting the efficient electron transport from the perovskite layer to the C60 layer. According to the theoretical calculations, the carrier transfer resistance within the device and/or at relevant interface is effectively reduced by more than two-fold. Fig. 4d illustrates the charge carrier densities at the PTAA/perovskite/C60 interface. For the doped model, surface n-doping enabled plenty of electrons to diffuse to the surface of the perovskite film, driven by the much stronger built-in electric field. Therefore, electron densities in the InBr3-treated perovskite film surface are remarkably higher than those in the control device. Fig. 4e compares the carrier recombination rate in different devices at an applied bias of 1.0 V. The lower recombination rate of the treated film can be explained by the photo-separated electrons near the n/n+ homojunction contact diffusing and transporting faster because of an enlarged built-in electric field, which, to a large extent, minimizes the chance of electron–hole recombination and thus suppresses the interfacial recombination loss. Therefore, the current density is significantly increased near the perovskite/C60 interface, as shown in Fig. S11 (ESI).
We fabricated PSCs with an inverted p-i-n architecture of ITO/PTAA/perovskite/C60/BCP/Cu to evaluate the effect of InBr3 surface modification on photovoltaic performances, as illustrated in Fig. 5a. We investigated the effect of the InBr3/IPA solution concentrations (0.1 mg mL−1, 0.3 mg mL−1, and 0.5 mg mL−1) on the device performance. The preliminary test indicates that the optimal condition is to use 0.3 mg mL−1 InBr3/IPA solution, which can be attributed to the appropriate doping densities (Fig. S12, ESI). The current density–voltage (J–V) curves for the best-performing PSCs based on control and InBr3-treated CFM films are displayed in Fig. 5b. The optimized PSCs with InBr3 surface modification attained a high efficiency of 22.2%, along with a Voc of 1.18 V, a short circuit current density (Jsc) of 23.5 mA cm−2 and a fill factor (FF) of 80.2%. In comparison, the control device without treatment only exhibited an efficiency of 19.2%, Voc of 1.12 V, Jsc of 22.45 mA cm−2 and FF of 76.4%. The remarkable efficiency enhancement of the InBr3-treated CFM films can be ascribed to the optimized perovskite/ETL interface, which facilitated interfacial charge extraction and collection via a beneficial, built-in electric field and interfacial carrier dynamics management. For the control device, the weak built-in electric field does not provide enough driving force to effectively separate and transport carriers. Hence, the carrier movement is more random and without the preferred direction, which increases unfavorable recombination. As compared to the control device, the J–V hysteresis in the device with InBr3 modification was nearly negligible when measured under forward and reverse scanning directions (Fig. S13 and Table S4, ESI). The eliminated photocurrent hysteresis could be attributed to the facilitated charge collection and reduced interfacial charge recombination loss. Fig. S14 (ESI) shows the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectrum of the PSCs based on the CFM and InBr3-treated CFM perovskite films. The EQE onset at 821 nm suggests an optical band gap of approximately 1.51 eV for the CFM perovskite, and the InBr3 surface modification has not changed the material band gap. Obviously, the InBr3-treated CFM-based devices displayed higher EQE than the CFM-based counterpart over the wavelength region from 400 nm to 780 nm, agreeing well with the higher Jsc in the J–V test for the device with InBr3 modification. In addition, the integrated Jsc values from the EQE spectra were 21.9 mA cm−2 and 23.3 mA cm−2 for the PSCs based on the CFM and InBr3-treated CFM perovskite films, respectively, coincided well with the value acquired from the J–V result, with <3% discrepancy. The stabilized Jsc and power output were recorded by holding the device at a maximum power point (MPP) of 0.98 V for 10 min, yielding a stabilized power output of 21.8% under AM 1.5G illumination (Fig. 5c). The histograms of all photovoltaic parameters (i.e. Jsc, Voc, FF and PCE) for PSCs based on the CFM and InBr3-treated CFM perovskite films were constructed from data collected from a batch of 30 devices for each condition (Fig. 5d and Fig. S15, ESI). The devices with the n/n+ homojunction showed consistently higher Jsc, Voc, FF and PCE than the control device, which can be attributed to the facilitated charge extraction and collection, as well as largely suppressed interfacial charge recombination benefited from the enlarged built-in electric field and optimized energy level alignment at the perovskite/ETL interface. The PSCs with the InBr3 modification consistently showed higher PCEs and better reproducibility than the control devices. Specifically, more than 93% of modified PSCs obtained PCEs above 20.5%, while only 50% of the pristine control devices had efficiencies over 18% under 1 sun illumination. This result highlights the effectiveness of heterovalent metal halide surface treatment on achieving highly reproducible, high efficiency, blade-coated PSCs with an inverted p-i-n device architecture. In addition to the high initial performance, the operational stability of devices under realistic conditions should be considered. The devices were encapsulated with epoxy and glass slides. The long-term photostability test of the encapsulated devices was conducted with constant illumination from a 300 W plasma lamp with an adjusted light intensity of 100 mW cm−2 at room temperature. The device with InBr3 modification retained 93% of its initial PCE after 1000 h, while the control device degraded to around 80% (Fig. 5e). The greater stability of the InBr3-treated CFM-based PSCs under operational conditions can be attributed to the enlarged built-in electric field and facilitated charge separation, reducing carrier accumulation at interfaces. This lessening of interfacial recombination losses is helpful for improving the stability of PSCs.

We demonstrated a simple heterovalent metal halide surface treatment strategy to alter the surface electric properties of bladed perovskite films for efficient and stable solar cells. The InBr3 treatment can achieve surface n-doping of perovskite films, which results in in situ formation of an n/n+ homojunction between the underlying bulk and the top surface within a monolithic photoactive thin-film and the reinforcement of the built-in electric field for facilitated charge separation. The InBr3-modified perovskite showed better energy alignments, with boosted charge extraction and reduced interfacial charge recombination loss at the perovskite/ETL interface, which was attributed to favorable interfacial downward band bending for facilitated electron transfer and extraction from the perovskite to C60. The optimized blade-coated PSCs with the InBr3 surface modification had an improved efficiency of up to 22.2% and significantly enhanced the operational stability. This work provides a new strategy to modulate the interfacial carrier dynamics for further improvement of the performances of perovskite-based optoelectronic devices.


Unless stated otherwise, all materials and solvents were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Lead iodide (PbI2, 99.999%) and cesium iodide (CsI) were purchased from Alfa Aesar. Formamidinium iodide (FAI) and methylammonium iodide (MAI) were purchased from Xi'an Polymer Light Technology Corp.


The ITO glass substrates (1.5 cm × 1.5 cm) were sequentially ultrasonicated in detergent, deionized water, acetone and isopropanol, and then cleaned by UV ozone plasma for 15 min. The PTAA layer (∼20 nm) and perovskite layer (∼600 nm) were fabricated successively on the ITO glass via a blade-coating method. The perovskite layers were prepared by blade coating the Cs0.07FA0.70MA0.23PbI3 perovskite ink (PbI2, FAI, MAI, and CsI), 1.2 M in DMF (N,N-dimethylformamide), at a speed of 7.5 mm s−1 on a preheated ITO/PTAA substrate, using 5–10 μL for each coating. Before use, small amounts of additives, i.e., methylammonium hypophosphite (MHP, 0.15 wt%) and l-α-phosphatidylcholine (LP, 0.05 wt%), were incorporated to achieve uniform coating of the perovskite film. For the InBr3-treated sample, the InBr3/IPA solution with a specific concentration of 0.3 mg mL−1 was coated onto the freshly prepared perovskite film at 6000 rpm for 30 s, followed by thermal annealing at 100 °C for 10 min. In the following device fabrication step, 25 nm of C60 (Xi'an Polymer Light Technology Corp), 8 nm of BCP, and 80 nm of Cu electrode were successively deposited by thermal evaporation to complete the PSC device with an active area of 8 mm2.


The XRD pattern was obtained by using a Miniflex600 X-ray diffractometer. The J–V measurements of PSCs (a voltage scanning rate of 0.1 V s−1) and the steady photocurrent under maximum power output bias (0.98 V) were recorded with a Keithley 2400 source meter under AM1.5 G one sun illumination (100 mW cm−2) produced by a solar simulator (Oriel, model no. 91192). The light intensity was calibrated with an NREL standard Si reference cell. Non-reflective shadow masks were used to define the active regions of the PSCs. EQE spectra were obtained on a Keithley 2000 multimeter using a Spectral Products DK 240 monochromator. X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy was performed with a photoelectron spectrometer (ESCALAB 250, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Kelvin Probe Force Microscopy(KPFM) was carried on a Scanning Probe Microscope (Bruker Dimension Fastscan) and the probe was composed of the silicon cantilever with a spring constant of 5 N m−1 and silicon tip coating with Pt/Ir (SCM-PIT(Bruker)). In the KPFM testing, a tapping mode was applied to obtain the surface topography and the surface potential was compensated by the bias loading at the sample. The photoluminescence (PL) was measured with an Edinburgh Instruments FLS980 PL spectrometer. Transient absorption was measured by a regeneratively amplified Ti:Sapphire laser source (Coherent Legend, 800 nm, 150 fs, 5 mJ per pulse, and 1 kHz repetition rate) and Helios (Ultrafast Systems LLC) spectrometers. A part 800 nm output pulses (75%) were doubled in frequency in the barium borate (BaB2O4) crystal to produce 400 nm pump light. The rest of the output was concentrated using the sapphire window to produce a continuous white (420–780 nm) probe light. The 400 nm pump beam was generated as part of the output pulse of the 800nm amplifier and its power is adjusted by the neutral densimeter. The pump beam was focused at the sample with a beam waist of about ∼360 mm and the power intensity was fixed at 14 μJ cm−2. With the help of a mechanical chopper, the pump repetition frequency was synchronized to 500 Hz. By using a complementary metal–oxide semiconductor sensor with a frequency of 1 khz, the probe and reference beams could be separated from the white light continuum and sent to the fiber optical-coupled multichannel spectrometer.


Y.-N. L. and J.-X. Z. writing – original draft; W.-Q. W. and L. W. writing – review and editing; W.-Q. W., Y.-N. L., and J.-X. Z. conceptualization; Y. J., C. Z., C. Y. Y. and X. C. investigation; W.-Q. W., Y.-N. L. and J.-X. Z. methodology; L. G., M.-F. Y., W. F. and Y. T. formal analysis; Y.-Y. Y., Y.-C. Z. and X.-Z. W. software; and W.-Q. W funding acquisition.


There are no conflicts to declare.


The authors acknowledge the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (22005355) and the Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation (2019A1515110770). Y. Z. and Y. Y. thank the National Super Computer Center-Guangzhou for providing computational resources. The authors thank the XPS group in the surface and structure analysis platform of the Sun Yat-sen University Instrumental Analysis & Research Center. L. Wang acknowledges the financial support from ARC through its Discovery program.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ee00918d
‡ Equally contributed to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021