 DOI: 10.1039/C2JM31878D
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 15614-15619

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Guo-Qiang
Fan
,

Qi-Qi
Zhuo
,

Jun-Jun
Zhu
,

Zai-Quan
Xu
,

Pan-Pan
Cheng
,

Yan-Qing
Li
*,

Xu-Hui
Sun
*,

Shuit-Tong
Lee
 and 

Jian-Xin
Tang
*

Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Carbon-Based Functional Materials & Devices, Institute of Functional Nano & Soft Materials (FUNSOM), Soochow University, Suzhou 215123, China. E-mail: jxtang@suda.edu.cn; yqli@suda.edu.cn; xhsun@suda.edu.cn

Center Of Super-Diamond and Advanced Films (COSDAF) and Department of Physics and Materials Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China

Received
26th March 2012
, Accepted 7th June 2012
First published on 11th June 2012
The effect of gold nanoparticle (NP)-induced surface plasmons on the performance of polymer solar cells (PSCs) is investigated by blending the solution processable Au NP-adhered graphene oxide (Au-GO) into the anodic buffer layer of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS). The incorporation of Au-GOs provides a simple method to introduce a plasmonic effect, which is helpful to avoid aggregation of Au NPs blended in PEDOT:PSS. The addition of Au-GOs increased the light absorption and exciton generation rate in the active layer, thereby enhancing the short-circuit current and power conversion efficiency of these PSCs. According to the experimental and simulated results, the improvement in device performance can be ascribed to the near-field enhancement arising from the excitation of the localized surface plasmon resonance of Au-GOs along the active layer/PEDOT:PSS interface. Our work indicates the great potential of Au-GOs for high-efficiency plasmonic-enhanced PSC applications.

Polymer solar cells (PSCs) based on polymer–fullerene bulk heterojunctions (BHJs) have been attracting tremendous attention due to their advantageous properties, such as their light weight, low cost, solution processing at low temperature, and mechanical flexibility for special substrates. Significant progress has been made in the past decades for the development of high-efficiency PSCs, and a very encouraging device performance with power conversion efficiency (PCE) over 8% has been achieved via the incorporation of new materials, morphology control, interface engineering, and device fabrication processes.

To date, the internal quantum efficiency has approached 100% by optimizing the exciton diffusion and dissociation in the donor–acceptor BHJ and charge collection at the electrode contacts. However, the photoactive layer of PSCs is usually thin for efficient electron and hole extraction due to the low carrier mobility of organic materials. The optimum thickness of the active layer is typically on the order of 100–200 nm to reduce the probability of charge recombination after the exciton dissociation. The absorption efficiency of incident light in the active layer of PSCs is inevitably limited because most photons are left unabsorbed. Therefore, one of the key issues towards realizing high external quantum efficiencies and PCE for PSCs is to enhance the photon absorption in a thin photoactive layer.
Various light-trapping techniques have been developed to enhance the light absorption within a thin layer, including the insertion of an optical spacer to spatially redistribute the light intensity, the implementation of periodic nanostructures to increase the optical path length, and the microcavity and photonic crystal effect. Recently, the localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) effect, that is the collective oscillations of the conduction electrons within the particles, provides an alternative approach for the enhancement of light absorption and thus the improved photocurrents of PSCs. The excitation of LSPRs can be achieved when the frequency of the incident light matches their resonance peak, resulting in a strong near-field around the interface between the dielectric and metallic nanoparticles (NPs). As demonstrated previously, the resonance frequency of LSPRs is strongly dependent on the size, shape, and the dielectric environment of the metallic NPs.
Compared with the approaches toward plasmonic-enhanced PSCs by nano-scale lithographic patterning technologies, the incorporation of solution processable metallic NPs into the anodic buffer layer is an attractive way to produce the plasmonic effect in PSCs and more suitable for large-area fabrication. However, apparent aggregation between metal NPs in the poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) layer was observed unless a capping layer was used. In addition, the density of metallic NPs in the buffer layer is relatively low during the spin-coating process, and it is generally difficult to control the uniform dispersion of metallic NPs in the organic layer. These potential drawbacks, therefore, limit the plasmonic effects triggered by metallic NPs. Recently, graphene and graphene oxide (GO) have attracted extensive research interest as conducting transparent electrodes in PSCs due to their uniformly high transparency, excellent electrical conductivity, and low synthesis cost. Furthermore, the solution processable GO is compatible with film formation through spin casting of the aqueous solution. Therefore, GO has the potential to be utilized as a template for metallic nanostructures to trigger a plasmonic effect in PSCs, resulting in higher efficiency.
In this study, Au NPs adhered to the GO template (referred to as Au-GO) were blended into the anodic buffer layer of PEDOT:PSS. The incorporation of the GO template is helpful to avoid aggregation of the blended Au NPs during the formation of the PEDOT:PSS layer. The optical effect of LSPRs triggered by Au NPs on the device characteristics was experimentally and theoretically exploited. The results demonstrated an observable enhancement in photocurrent and overall device efficiency without sacrificing the electrical properties. By optimizing the size of Au NPs, the PCE of devices incorporating Au-GOs is improved to 3.55% from a value of 3.27% for the reference device without Au-GOs. The enhancement is mainly ascribed to the increase of light absorption and exciton generation rate in the active layer caused by the plasmonic near-field effect.

Graphene oxide (GO) was synthesized from graphite via a modified Hummers method. The synthesis process of Au NPs with different sizes was followed by the procedure reported in the literature. The Au NPs are somewhat spherical as shown in Fig. 1. In order to get the Au-GO composite, 5 mL of 0.5 M HAuCl4 and 5 mL of 0.2 M cetyl trimethyl ammonium bromide (CTAB) were added into a vial in sequence. After stirring for 5 minutes, 0.6 mL of 0.01 M NaBH4 was blended into the solution, which was followed by the addition of 1 mL of an aqueous 1 mg mL−1 GO solution and sonicated for 5 minutes. Finally, the sample was kept at room temperature for several hours for the complete reduction of Au NPs. The Au-GOs were collected by centrifugation and washed with deionized (DI) water for removing residual CTAB.



Fig. 1(a) shows the PSC structure with Au-GO, in which the particle size of Au NPs adhered to the GO template can be controlled by the synthesis process. The indium tin oxide (ITO)-coated glass substrates with a sheet resistance of 20 Ω per sq. were cleaned in sequence by detergent, DI water, acetone, ethanol under ultrasonication for 20 min, respectively, and then dried in an oven. The prepared Au-GO solution (in DI water) was blended into the aqueous solution of PEDOT:PSS at a volume ratio of 20%. The anodic buffer layer was prepared by spin coating the composite PEDOT:PSS solution on the UV-ozone treated ITO glass substrates, and then thermally annealing at 140 °C for 20 min in air. The prepared ITO glass substrates with a PEDOT:PSS buffer layer incorporating Au-GOs were then transferred into a nitrogen-filled glove box for spin-coating the blend of poly(3-hexylthiophene):[6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (P3HT:PCBM) with a 1:0.8 weight ratio (10 mg mL−1, dissolved in dichlorobenzene) on top of the buffer layer at 700 rpm for 54 s. The wet film was subjected to solvent annealing and a thermal annealing at 110 °C for 10 min. Finally, to complete the device fabrication, the LiF(1 nm)/Al(100 nm) bilayer cathode was deposited through thermal evaporation in a high vacuum system at a base pressure of 2 × 10−6 Torr. The deposition rate and film thickness were monitored by a quartz crystal oscillator. A shadow mask was used to define the Al cathode, and the device area determined by the overlap between ITO anode and metal cathode was estimated to be 0.1 cm2. For comparison, PSCs with the pristine PEDOT:PSS layer or blended with GOs were also fabricated with identical process parameters during the same batch processing as the device incorporating Au-GOs.


The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the PSCs without any device encapsulation were examined in air at room temperature using a programmable Keithley 2612 source measure unit under illumination from a 150 W Newport 91160 solar simulator with an air mass (AM) 1.5 G filter. The illumination intensity was adjusted to be 100 mW cm−2, which was calibrated using a standard Si optical power meter. The incident photon to current conversion efficiency (IPCE) measurement was conducted with a photo-modulation spectroscopic setup (Newport monochromator). The dimension of Au NPs on GOs was measured using a high-resolution transition electron microscope (TEM) (FEI Tecnai G2 F20 S-TWIN, at 200 kV) by dipping the Au-GO solution onto the copper grid. Absorption spectra of the samples were recorded at room temperature with a Perkin Elmer Lambda 750 UV/Vis/near-IR spectrophotometer. The steady state photoluminescence (PL) spectra were recorded with a HORIBA JOBIN YVON Fluoromax-4 Fluorescence spectrometer in transmission mode under air ambient conditions. For the time-resolved PL measurements, the samples of pristine P3HT films spin-coated on PEDOT:PSS layer with and without Au-GOs were excited at 470 nm by a Micro Time 200 pulsed laser. The dynamic signal was collected at 650 nm using a time-correlated single photon counting spectrometer with the Fluorolog-3 spectrofluorometers (Horiba-FM-2015), which is synchronized to the pulse.


The near-field distribution of isolated Au NPs with various diameters in the PEDOT:PSS layer was simulated by finite difference time domain (FDTD) with a simulated area of 24 × 24 nm2 by Lumerical FDTF Solutions. The simulation process and the setting of the dielectric constants of Au NPs and PEDOT:PSS are described in the literature.



Fig. 1(a) depicts a schematic representation of the device structure incorporating Au-GOs in the PEDOT:PSS layer. The thickness of the resulting PEDOT:PSS and P3HT:PCBM layers estimated by the alpha-SE™ Spectroscopic Ellipsometer are ∼40 and 200 nm, respectively. Fig. 1(b) and (c) display the TEM images of the as-synthesized Au-GOs, demonstrating that Au NPs are highly isolated on the GO template without aggregation. According to the high-resolution TEM image in Fig. 1(d), Au NPs are spherical in shape, and show a good degree of crystallinity. In this study, the Au NPs with diameter of 6 nm were selected. In addition, no noticeable changes in film properties of the PEDOT:PSS layer, such as absorption and electrical conductivity, were found with the incorporation of Au-GOs (results are not shown here).

To illustrate the effect of Au-GOs on the device performance of PSCs, the photovoltaic characteristics were measured. Fig. 2(a) plots the dark J–V curves of PSCs with the PEDOT:PSS buffer layer incorporating GOs and Au-GOs. The reference device with a pristine PEDOT:PSS layer is also shown for comparison. It is observed that the dark current at the forward bias remains almost the same, revealing that the electrical properties were not remarkably sacrificed by the presence of GOs or Au-GOs in PEDOT:PSS.

Fig. 2(b) displays the J–V characteristics of the corresponding devices recorded under 100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5 G illumination, and the photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table 1. The reference device prepared with pristine PEDOT:PSS exhibits an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 0.63 V, a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 8.47 mA cm−2, a fill factor (FF) of 60.6%, and a resulting PCE of 3.23%. It is evident in Fig. 2(b) that the VOC remains almost unchanged after blending the GOs or Au-GOs into the PEDOT:PSS buffer layer, suggesting the unchanged nature of the electrode–organic interface. However, a considerable increase in JSC to 9.43 mA cm−2 is noticed upon the incorporation of Au-GOs, and the resulting PCE is enhanced to 3.55%. In contrast, the device only with GOs in the PEDOT:PSS layer exhibits an overall reduction in PCE due to the decrease of FF in comparison with the reference device. Therefore, the performance enhancement of PSCs with the incorporation of Au-GOs in the PEDOT:PSS layer cannot be ascribed to the conductivity changes of the PEDOT:PSS layer.
Device

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Reference
0.63
8.47
60.6
3.23
GO
0.64
8.46
51.5
2.79
Au-GO
0.63
9.43
59.7
3.55
In order to investigate the mechanism of the LSPR effect, the IPCE spectra of the corresponding devices were measured, and the results were displayed in Fig. 2(c). It is noted that the trends in the IPCE spectra are consistent with the variation of JSC in Fig. 2(b). Furthermore, the photocurrent increases notably within the wavelength ranging from 500 nm to 650 nm after blending Au-GOs into the PEDOT:PSS layer.

Fig. 3 compared the absorption spectra of Au-GOs and the IPCE changes (ΔIPCE) of PSCs incorporating Au-GOs relative to the reference device. As shown in Fig. 3, the photocurrent in the range of 500 to 650 nm increases significantly with the incorporation of Au-GOs in the PEDOT:PSS layer, which is almost coincident with the absorption spectra. It has been demonstrated that the absorption peak of metallic NPs in the PEDOT:PSS blend will redshift due to the change of the dielectric constant of PEDOT:PSS compared to the air. Therefore, it is reasonable to deduce that the wavelength range of spectral response enhancement coincides with the excitation range of Au-GOs in PEDOT:PSS, and the increase in JSC shown in Fig. 2(b) is primarily due to the enhanced light harvesting via the excitation of LSPRs of Au-GOs. However, two factors may be responsible for the LSPR-enhanced light absorption. One is related to light trapping through forward multiple and high-angle scattering, which lengthens the optical path in the active layer. For Au NPs, the total extinction cross section consists of a large absorption and small scattering cross section, and the light scattering effect only becomes a dominant role for the particle size over 100 nm. Therefore, the forward scattering effect from Au NPs can be neglected safely. The other effect is due to the enhancement of the local electromagnetic field induced by the excitation of LSPRs around Au NPs, which increases the total number of photogenerated excitons in the active layer.
To further investigate the underlying mechanism responsible for the photocurrent enhancement, the steady state and dynamic photoluminescence (PL) measurements were performed, and the corresponding results are shown in Fig. 4. For the PL measurement, the pristine P3HT films spin-coated on PEDOT:PSS buffer layers with and without Au-GOs were prepared since P3HT predominately contributes to the light absorption and exciton generation in the P3HT:PCBM active layer. At the same time, the excitation wavelength of 470 nm was selected, which matches with the resonance frequency of LSPRs induced by Au-GOs as shown in Fig. 3. As evident in the inset of Fig. 4, the steady state PL spectrum of a P3HT film on a PEDOT:PSS layer with Au-GOs exhibits a higher intensity as compared to that without Au-GOs, implying the increase of light absorption and exciton generation in P3HT upon the excitation of LSPRs. According to the hypothesis proposed in the literature, the PL intensity enhancement of P3HT can be ascribed to the matching between the resonance frequency of Au NP-induced LSPRs and the absorption band of P3HT. Consequently, the steady state PL measurement further confirms the plasmonic effect on the device characteristics as shown in Fig. 2.
As reported previously, the enhanced PL intensity might also result from the modification of excitonic states of P3HT due to the strong interactions between the plasmonic field and excitons. In order to further estimate the influence of LSPRs on the radiative decay of photogenerated excitons in P3HT due to the presence of Au-GOs, the time-resolved PL spectra of the corresponding samples at 650 nm were presented in Fig. 4. According to the method reported in the literature, the PL decay data can be well fitted using a two-exponential function with a slow and a fast decay component:
(1)
where
A1 and A2 are the amplitude of the fast and slow decay, τ1 and τ2 are the exponential constant. According to the PL decay profiles of P3HT films in Fig. 4 and the fitting parameters in Table 2, there is negligible change in the exciton lifetime (τexciton) for samples with and without Au-GOs in the PEDOT:PSS layer, implying the absence of strong coupling between the plasmonic field and excitonic state. This is inconsistent with the results reported previously that the plasmonic field can strongly affect the photoinduced charge separation or recombination processes through plasmon–exciton coupling. Therefore, it can be concluded that the increase of light absorption and exciton generation is the main reason for the enhanced PL intensity in the inset of Fig. 4, as well as for the IPCE enhancement in Fig. 3.

Device

τ
1 (ns)

A
1


τ
2 (ns)

A
2

Reference
0.38
93.03
3.04
6.97
Au-GO
0.47
92.53
3.13
7.47
To further illustrate the JSC improvement resulting from the light absorption enhancement of the active layer induced by the strong near-field, the electromagnetic field distributions of Au NPs in the PEDOT:PSS environment at resonance wavelength (λres = 650 nm) were calculated. Here, y is defined as the light incident direction, and x is the polarization direction. As shown in Fig. 5, the light intensity, |E|2, around Au NPs with a particle size of 6 nm is enhanced as high as 7-fold in comparison with the incident light, |E0|2, indicating that the light is concentrated by the Au NP-induced LSPRs. Therefore, it is expected that the light absorption around the Au NPs will be enhanced as demonstrated previously. Furthermore, the electric field (|EX| and |EY|) distributions around the Au NPs are significantly enhanced in both x and y directions by the LSPR effect of Au NPs. Considering the near-field effect exponentially decreases with increasing distance from Au-GOs to the active layer, the light absorption enhancement by the near-field enhancement of LSPRs will only occur along the active layer/PEDOT:PSS interface. Accordingly, both the experimental and theoretical results show the possibility of enhancing the light absorption in the active layer due to the near-field enhancement of Au-GO induced LSPRs.

In summary, we have demonstrated plasmonic-enhanced PSCs by incorporating solution processable Au-GOs into the PEDOT:PSS buffer layer. The utilization of the GO template is helpful to prohibit the aggregation of Au NPs and to introduce the plasmonic effect without dramatically sacrificing the electrical properties. By optimizing the size of the Au NPs, PSCs with enhanced short-circuit current and power conversion efficiency have been achieved, exhibiting better performance compared to a reference device without Au-GOs. Experimental and theoretical results showed that the device improvement was ascribed to the enhanced light absorption and exciton generation rate in the active layer as a result of LSPR-induced near-field enhancement along the active layer/PEDOT:PSS interface. The method proposed here shows a great potential of incorporating the plasmonic effect with conventional device structure toward high-efficiency PSCs.


This work was financially supported by NSFC (Grant No. 91027041, 61007020, 61107022, 61036009), 973 program (Grant no. 2010CB934500, 2011CB808404), the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (no. BK2011280, BY2009007), and a Project Funded by the Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions (PAPD).


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012