 DOI: 10.1039/C8NR00540K
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 8526-8535


Hao
Xiong
,

Fatemeh
Zabihi
,

Hongzhi
Wang
,

Qinghong
Zhang
* and 

Morteza
Eslamian
*

State Key Laboratory for Modification of Chemical Fibers and Polymer Materials, College of Materials Science and Engineering, Donghua University, Shanghai, 201620, China. E-mail: Zhangqh@dhu.edu.cn

University of Michigan-Shanghai Jiao Tong University Joint Institute, Shanghai 200240, China

State Key Laboratory for Composite Materials, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China. E-mail: Morteza.Eslamian@sjtu.edu.cn

Received
19th January 2018
, Accepted 28th March 2018
First published on 29th March 2018
Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have gained great interest, owing to a fast increase in their power conversion efficiency (PCE), within a few years. However, their wide application and scale-up are hampered due to multiple obstacles, such as chemical instability, which leads to a short lifetime, and their complicated reaction and crystallization, which requires thermal annealing. Here, we address these issues using the ultrasonic substrate vibration post treatment (SVPT) applied on the as-spun perovskite wet films, so as to achieve a uniform, microscale and stable mixed-halide and mixed-cation perovskite layer, (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15, without the need for a conventional thermal annealing step. This is achieved by the creation of fluid micromixing and in situ annealing within the solution, caused by the ultrasonic excitation of the wet film. The optoelectronic properties of the perovskite films subjected to the SVPT, including photoemission, carrier lifetime and band gap, are remarkably improved compared to the conventionally annealed films. When incorporated into a planar PSC, a maximum PCE of 18.55% was achieved, compared to 15.17% for the control device, with high reproducibility and no hysteresis, and the device retained 80% of its initial PCE, over a period of 20 days of storage under ambient conditions.

Organometal halide perovskites, with a general formulation of AMX3, are emerging molecular semiconductors employed in optoelectronic devices, such as perovskite solar cells (PSCs). In the aforementioned formula, M is a large and divalent metal cation, such as Pb2+, although lead-free formulations based on Sn2+ are under investigation, as well. The X site is occupied by a halide anion, which is traditionally I−, Cl− or a combination thereof, and the A site is filled with a monovalent cation, typically the methylammonium (MA) ion, i.e. (CH3NH3+). The optoelectronic properties of perovskites crucially change with the choice of the ions in the perovskite structure. Filling the X site with Br− or Br−/I− increases the chemical resistivity and stability, extends the range of the absorption spectrum and tunes the open circuit voltage. The ionic radius of the cation (A) must fit into a cubic closed-pack unit cell (A/X atomic radius ratio should be large enough). The cation in the A site should also provide a narrow band gap and an appropriate diffusion length, in order to yield a low radiative recombination rate.

MA-based perovskites benefit from a small band gap (1.5–1.6 eV) and a broad absorption spectrum, but suffer from the low transition temperature, hydrophilic nature and high chemical activity of MA. Alternatively, formamidinium (FA)-based perovskites contain the HC(NH2)2+ ion, which results in a lower band gap of 1.48 eV. Also, the relatively small ionic radius of FA+ (1.8 Å) compared to that of MA+ (∼2 Å) favours the formation of cubic (α-phase) unit cells; however, its crystalline structure may change to polycrystalline (γ-phase) under ambient conditions. Fully inorganic perovskite materials such as CsPbI3 have also been suggested as stable alternatives, but are expensive and inadequate for the development of flexible devices.
Following the foregoing discussion, a mixed-cation, mixed-halide perovskite, i.e. (FAPbI3)x(MAPbBr3)1−x, is an interesting alternative to the other analogues, as it retains some of the benefits of its constituents, such as a cubic unit pack, narrow band gap, and relatively stable chemical and crystalline status under a controlled condition, collectively resulting in versatility and high performance of the ensuing PSCs. However, the (FAPbI3)x segment still requires a high temperature annealing to hinder the transition to the γ-phase during the operation. Another challenge is the need to scale-up the active area, without losing the device performance due to the formation of non-uniform and defective structures and increased shunt pathways. Addressing the imperfections and instability of the perovskite thin films requires expensive and energy-consuming strategies, such as vapor and vacuum deposition or using modified solution deposition methods, assisted by co-solvent/anti-solvent and vapor treatment, followed by thermal annealing. Thermal annealing may favor the chemical conversion and crystallization, but may also lead to pinhole formation due to the shrinkage of the grains upon post-annealing. In addition, a high temperature annealing may decompose the perovskite structure. Particularly, (FAPbI3)x simply undergoes heat-induced mechanical stress. Furthermore, controlling the thermodynamic state of the system during thermal annealing is quite challenging. Due to the different heat capacities and different solubilities of the perovskite precursors in organic solvents, the rates of expansion and deposition of precursors are different. These phenomena disturb the efficient mixing and molecular interactions between the perovskite precursors and consequently reduce the rate and selectivity of chemical reactions. Therefore, because of the aforementioned drawbacks, recent studies have focused on eliminating the thermal annealing step for the fabrication of perovskites. The suggested alternative approaches, mostly based on chemical strategies, are briefly reviewed in the following.
One of the most pioneering studies on annealing-free PSCs was conducted by Su et al. They fabricated a hole transporting layer (HTL)-free device, using a MAPbI3−XClX/C60 heterojunction as the active layer. All layers were deposited by thermal evaporation, without post-annealing, and the device showed a maximum PCE of 8.37%. In a solution-based process, Chen et al. added NH4Cl to the typical solution of MAPbI3 in N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF), so as to expedite the rate of crystallization without thermal treatment. The maximum PCE of 9.32% was achieved, when an annealing-free MAPbI3/PCBM bilayer was employed in an inverted planar PSC. Yin et al. dripped ethyl acetate anti-solvent onto the MAPbI3 film during spinning, for instant crystallization without the need for post-annealing. The resulting film exhibited large and uniform grains, and the pertinent device demonstrated a PCE of 15.56%. Fang et al. used the high boiling point solvent N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) mixed with DMF or dimethylacetamide (DMAc), and achieved a large grain size and compact MAPbI3 film. A maximum PCE of 17.09% was achieved using DMAc/NMP as the co-solvent, without thermal annealing. Sun et al. added Pb(SCN)2 to FA0.7MA0.2Cs0.1Pb(I5/6Br1/6)3 (FMC), and obtained annealing-free microscale perovskite grains, with a tailored band gap and high moisture resistivity, which resulted in PCEs of 14.09% and 10.55%, on glass and flexible substrates, respectively. Zhou et al. exploited a two-step electrochemical deposition method: first Pb was electrodeposited onto the FTO-glass substrate coated by a thin layer of compact TiO2, in an isopropanol solution of PbI2 and NaI. Then, the resulting multi-layer sample was transferred into the isopropanol solution of MAI, under controlled voltage, in order to form the MAPbI3 film, at ambient temperature. When incorporated into planar PSCs, the electrodeposited perovskite thin films showed PCEs of 15.65% and 10.45%, for small and large area (2 cm2) devices, respectively. In a recent study, Ahmadian-Yazdi and Eslamian reported an annealing-free MAPbI3 perovskite film deposited on a mesoporous TiO2 film. Instead of a conventional post-annealing step, the as-spun wet perovskite film with suitable solvents was placed on an ultrasonic transducer, in a process called ultrasonic substrate vibration post-treatment (SVPT). In the SVPT process, transmission of the ultrasonic vibration energy to the wet film enhances the infiltration of the mesoporous layer by the perovskite solution, and controls the perovskite crystallization such that there is no need for additional thermal annealing, provided that a suitable solvent is used. The imposed ultrasonic vibration hydrodynamically excites the wet film, creates micromixing within the liquid film, increases the solvent evaporation rate, and overall improves the uniformity and nanostructure of the ensuing solid film. The annealing-free thin films subjected to the SVPT were incorporated into mesoporous PSCs and demonstrated a PCE of 14.01%, compared to that of 10.43% for the conventionally annealed control device. Owing to the tremendous potential of the aforementioned method, i.e. the SVPT applied on MA-based perovskites deposited on mesoporous layers, here we employed it to fabricate (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15 hybrid perovskite, but in a planar PSC, which is more desirable from a manufacturing perspective (Fig. 1). The as-spun wet perovskite films were subjected to SVPT at a vibrational frequency of 40 kHz and varying powers and time durations, and the optimum SVPT conditions were found. We will show that compared to the conventionally annealed control devices, the annealing-free SVPT devices are more reproducible, efficient, stable, and hysteresis-free.

Spiro-MeOTAD (2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9-spriobifluorene, purity ≥99.5%) was purchased from Xi'an Polymer Light Technology Corp. and fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO, 14 Ω sq−1) coated glass was supplied by Nippon Sheet Glass Co., Ltd. Other materials were purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd and used as received.


FTO-coated glass was cleaned by ultrasonication in detergent, acetone, ethanol and deionized water, and treated in an O2 plasma cleaner (DT-01, Suzhou Omega Machinery Electronic Technology Co., Ltd). A SnO2 electron transport layer (ETL) was prepared according to the standard method as follows: 22.56 mg of SnCl2·2H2O was dissolved in 10 mL of isopropyl alcohol, and the solution was stirred and refluxed for one hour at 70 °C, and then aged for 6 h to form a sol of SnO2 nanoparticles. The sol was then spun onto the FTO-coated glass, followed by a sintering process on a hotplate at 180 °C for 3 h. The perovskite solution was prepared according to the method of Jeon et al., where 507 mg of PbI2, 73.4 mg of PbBr2, 172 mg of FAI, and 22.4 mg of CH3NH3Br were dissolved in 1 mL of a mixture of dimethyl formamide and dimethyl sulfoxide (4:1, v/v ratio) and stirred at 80 °C. The perovskite solution was spun onto the SnO2/FTO substrate using the one-step method at 3000 rpm for 30 s, and 120 μL of the anti-solvent, methylbenzene, was dripped onto the wet perovskite film, during spin coating. For characterization of the perovskite layer, the thin films were spun onto the FTO-coated or bare glass. Two sets of perovskite films were fabricated: control films, which were thermally annealed (TA) at 110 °C, for 10 min and the targeted films subjected to the SVPT using an ultrasonic transducer, working at 40 kHz, in four different periods of 1, 2, 3 and 4 min, and two powers of 5 and 10 W. The ultrasonic transducer was mounted inside a steel box and actuated using a signal generator (Yuhuan Clangsonic Ultrasonic Co., Ltd, Zhejiang, China). The ultrasonic transducer generates vertical vibrations with amplitudes on the order of ∼10 nm. The temperature of the wet perovskite films was measured with an infrared thermometer. It was found that after 4 min of applying the SVPT, the temperature nearly linearly increases with the vibration time from room temperature (∼21 °C) to about 34 and 48 °C, for a SVPT power of 5 and 10 W, respectively. Also, at 5 W – 4 min, the entire solvent content (53% of the total weight of the as-spun film) evaporates. Therefore, the SVPT dries the film and has a mild in situ annealing function, as well as the microstreaming and micromixing effects on the wet film. In order to complete the device, 25 μL of spiro-MeOTAD solution was spun onto the control or targeted perovskite layers at 2000 rpm for 30 s, followed by 80 nm of Au deposited by thermal evaporation through a shadow mask, designed for an active area of 0.16 cm2.


The perovskite's crystalline structure and chemical composition were studied by X-ray diffraction (XRD) (model D/max 2550 V, Rigaku, Japan) with the Cu Kα (λ = 1.5406 Å) radiation. The perovskite's surface texture, grain size distribution and grain boundaries were studied using a field-emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM, Model S-4800, Hitachi, Japan). Steady-state and time-resolved photoluminescence (PL) spectra of the perovskite films, deposited on FTO-coated glass, were recorded using a FLS920 transient optical spectrometer (Edinburgh Instruments, UK). The PL efficiency was determined with the excitation wavelength of 266 nm and the incident light intensity of 1 W cm−2. The forward and reverse bias photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) curves and the photovoltaic (PV) parameters of the PSCs were determined with a Keithley 2400 source meter. A solar simulator (Model 96160 Newport Co., USA) equipped with a 300 W xenon lamp was used as the light source, where the light intensity was adjusted using an NREL-calibrated Si solar cell with a KG-1 filter at AM 1.5G Sun light intensity. The incident-photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra were obtained as a function of the wavelength from 300 to 800 nm, using a specialty-designed IPCE system (Newport Co., USA). The solar cells were stored and characterized without encapsulation to mimic the actual operating conditions.


The morphology and grain structure of the control and targeted (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15 perovskite thin films were examined using close-up SEM images, shown in Fig. 2(a). The average grain size of the targeted films subjected to the SVPT is remarkably larger (Fig. S1 of the ESI), and the films are more compact, i.e., with lower density of grain boundaries, compared with those of the TA film. Also, the morphology and size distribution of the thin films subjected to the SVPT change by varying the vibration time and power. Application of the SVPT at 5 W for 1–2 min results in the formation of a somewhat defective film, with an uneven grain size distribution. The grain size increases by extending the time of the SVPT (Fig. S1), and reaches a more uniform and microscale size at 3 and 4 min of the SVPT.

According to the SEM top-view images and Fig. S1, SVPT at 5 W – 3 min and 5 W – 4 min notably homogenizes the surface texture and enlarges the average grain size to ∼1–1.5 μm, nearly 4 times larger than the average grain size of the TA control sample, which is about 300 nm. In contrast, at a higher power of 10 W, the grains are large and uniform ∼400–1000 nm until 1–2 min of the SVPT, where the film is still wet, but a longer vibration time (3–4 min) reduces the average grain size, and adversely affects the morphology. It is worth noting that the grains observed in this study are remarkably larger than those observed in our previous studies, where MA-based perovskites subjected to the same SVPT were grown on a mesoporous TiO2 substrate, supposedly because the TiO2 nanopores limit the crystal growth.
The grain boundaries of the TA control sample are relatively loose and sporadically filled with tiny grains of unreacted precursors, such as PbI2, which may be melted under illumination and deteriorate the device performance. These impurities are absent in the films subjected to the SVPT, particularly in the optimum samples, i.e. those prepared at 5 W for 3 or 4 min, and at 10 W for 1 or 2 min. The mechanism of the formation of the annealing-free perovskite thin films subjected to the SVPT may be explained as follows. Lead halide perovskite molecules with a general formula of APbX3 form after the dissociation of lead halide–solvent and the configuration of the A-Pb2+ ions. This chemical interaction is traditionally boosted by thermal annealing. In contrast, when the SVPT is applied on the wet films, the shear stresses, created by acoustic microstreaming and acoustic waves, readily disrupt the lead halide–solvent bindings, and augment the evaporation flux from the liquid surface. In the meantime, the enhanced molecular motions induced by the acoustic microstreaming favors efficient micromixing and interaction among the perovskite reagents, boosting the rate and selectivity of chemical conversion. In addition, in a recent study, we revealed that the SVPT applied to the PbI2 wet film increases the rate of nucleation and assists the formation of a uniform and compact grain network. Overall, the synergy of hydrodynamic, heat transfer, and chemical effects brought about by the SVPT is beneficial for a complete perovskite reaction, controlled kinetics of crystallization, and the formation of a uniform and defect-free perovskite film. With the aforementioned explanation, the observations made in Fig. 2(a) and S1,i.e. an increase in the average grain size and uniformity of the film by extending the time of the vibration at 5 W, can be understood. In other words, at a mild vibration power of 5 W, an increase in the vibration time to a limit of ∼3–4 min boosts the aforementioned positive effects. Given that the vibration effect is dependent on both the vibration power and time, one would deduce that at a higher vibration power of 10 W, the optimum vibration time to achieve the same result would be lower than that experienced at the power of 5 W. This is consistent with the findings of Fig. 2(a) and S1, where the optimum time period for a vibration of 10 W is about ∼1–2 min. An excessive excitation by the ultrasonic vibration, either through a high vibration power or prolonged time duration could have an adverse effect on the film, by disintegrating or cracking the grains, through excessive mechanical and thermal stresses, or causing a destabilizing effect on the wet film from a hydrodynamics point of view. The cross-sectional view of the TA sample and the sample subjected to 5 W – 4 min of the SVPT, shown in Fig. 2(b), confirms an increase in the average grain size and a decrease in the density of grain boundaries, by the application of a proper SVPT.

Fig. 2(c) elucidates the effect of the application of the SVPT with varying powers and times on the XRD patterns of the (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15 films. The diffraction angles of 14°, 24.52°, 28.41° and 31.81° are respectively associated with the (110), (202), (220) and (200) planes of the tetragonal perovskite lattice. Here, these typical perovskite peaks are observed in every XRD pattern. For the samples prepared by the SVPT, the main perovskite peak slightly shifted to the left, with respect to that of the reference sample (14.08°). The local XRD patterns presented in Fig. S2, demonstrate a systematic minor left-shift by an increase of power and duration of ultrasonic vibration. Such a change in peak position, also observed in other crystalline systems subjected to the SVPT, may be linked to the increase of FA+/MA+ or Br−/I− ratios. This suggests that a well-controlled vibration can favor chemical reaction completeness, as argued before. This peak displacement may also be due to a change in the inter-plane distances, forced by ultrasonic acoustic waves. Moreover, this can be a signature of micro-strains and elongations in the (110) crystalline plane of the perovskite, created by the ultrasonic energy, during crystal growth. In other words, according to the Pauling's rules and principles of minimum energy, during crystal growth under an external field, the original [Pb3I8]2− tends to be rearranged into the [PbI6]4− octahedron. The presence of [PbI6]4− octahedra may cause a minor peak shift to the left end.
The strong peak at 14.08°, as observed in the XRD patterns of the 5 W – 3 min, 5 W – 4 min, 10 W – 1 min and 10 W – 2 min samples, is an indication of the stable tetragonal phase, and directional growth along with the c-axis. However, a weak signal of the unreacted PbI2 at 12.6°, which indicates an incomplete chemical reaction, appears in some samples such as the samples subjected to the SVPT at 5 W – 1 min, 5 W – 2 min, 5 W – 3 min and the TA (reference) sample. It is noted that the reference TA sample shows some traces of PbI2, even though it was prepared based on the optimized annealing condition, also reported in the literature. XRD patterns of the SVPT samples prepared at 10 W – 3 min and 10 W – 4 min are free of PbI2 signals, but reflect weak signals at 11.6°, indicating minor traces of the non-perovskite FAPbI3 polymorph phase, which might have originated from the phase change under irradiation, during measurement.
The perovskite thin films were used to fabricate planar PSCs, with the following architecture: FTO/compact SnO2/(FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15/spiro-MeOTAD/Au. Fig. 3(a–d) depict the average and standard deviation of the main photovoltaic (PV) parameters at varying time and power of the SVPT. The overall values were obtained from 12 cells assembled on two substrates. Fig. 3(e) and Table 1 present the J–V curves and PV parameters of the champion cells. The average PV parameters of all cells are also listed in Table S1 of the ESI.
Perovskite film

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
TA (110 °C – 10 min)
20.22
1.09
68.57
15.17
SVPT (5 W – 1 min)
19.35
1.01
56.21
10.71
SVPT (5 W – 2 min)
17.58
1.12
58.31
11.48
SVPT (5 W – 3 min)
23.44
1.09
63.64
16.28
SVPT (5 W – 4 min)
22.97
1.15
70.63
18.55
SVPT (10 W – 1 min)
23.35
1.10
66.93
17.22
SVPT (10 W – 2 min)
21.98
1.11
65.82
16.10
SVPT (10 W – 3 min)
22.13
1.10
56.67
13.77
SVPT (10 W – 4 min)
19.48
1.12
58.57
12.70
The PSC that incorporates the TA perovskite film (control device) has shown an average power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 12.96%, corresponding to the average fill factor (FF) of 60.93%, the short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 19.35 mA cm−2 and the open circuit voltage (VOC) of 1.075 V. Among the targeted SVPT devices, four samples treated at 5 W – 3 min, 5 W – 4 min, 10 W – 1 min and 10 W – 2 min have shown superior performance, with respect to the control device. It is not surprising that the PSC based on the SVPT at 5 W – 4 min demonstrates the highest average PCE of 17.23%, which corresponds to the average FF of 66.23%, JSC of 23.64 and VOC of 1.1 V. The champion cell, fabricated under this condition, demonstrates a PCE of 18.55%, with a FF of 70.63%, a JSC of 22.97 mA cm−2 and a VOC of 1.15 V. This high performance is attributed to the large and uniform grain size, low density of grain boundaries, and pinhole-free surface texture, as substantiated earlier. Also, the cells based on the perovskite films prepared with SVPT at 10 W – 2 min, 10 W – 1 min and 5 W – 3 min outperform the reference cell, by showing the average PCEs of 15.12%, 15.06%, and 13.23%, respectively. The relatively large JSC values, particularly for the sample subjected to 5 W – 4 min SVPT, as observed in Fig. 3(a) and Table 1, are attributed to the large and defect-free grains with reduced density of grain boundaries (cf.Fig. 2(a)), all of which lead to a lower density of charge-trapping sites, and therefore an enhanced JSC. It is noted that in ref. 27 and 28, an increased JSC with the application of the SVPT was found to be due to better contact between the perovskite and mesoporous TiO2 layers, and therefore lower charge-trapping sites. Hence, provided that the light absorbance and charge generation are adequate, a lower density of charge recombination sites is the main reason for increased JSC. In the present work, this has been achieved by the formation of larger and defect-free grains.
The high FF of the SVPT cells, as shown in Fig. 3(c), is attributed to several positive effects such as reduced shunt resistance, owing to the high coverage and compactness of the perovskite layers. The enhanced VOC, according to Fig. 3(b), implies low non-radiative recombination, owing to a negligible gap between the grains and good adhesion to the adjacent layers.
The PSCs subjected to SVPT at 10 W – 3 min, 10 W – 4 min, 5 W – 2 min and 5 W – 1 min, with the average PCEs of 12.16%, 11.79%, 9.97% and 8.61%, respectively, show inferior performance with respect to the TA reference cell, due to either insufficient or excessive vibration treatment. To elaborate, the SVPT at 5 W, for 1–2 min, is insufficient for the complete chemical conversion and maturation of (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15 crystals, and applying the vibration power of 10 W for a long time (3–4 min) induces excessive thermal and mechanical stresses, deteriorating the film structure and device performance. The SEM image and J–V curve of a cell treated with the SVPT at 5 W – 5 min are shown in Fig. S3, where it is observed that an excessive vibration time (5 min) adversely affects the film morphology and the device performance.

Fig. 4 provides the distribution of the PCE of 6 PSCs, assembled on a single substrate. The distribution curves reveal that the manufacturing process of the cells incorporating perovskite layers subjected to the SVPT are more repeatable, a characteristic trait which is required for meaningful scale-up of the technology. The positive effect of the SVPT on the reproducibility of polymer solar cells has been reported, as well.
The photoexcitation efficiency and recombination dynamics of the (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15 films based on the steady state and time-resolved photoluminescence spectra (PL and TRPL, respectively) are displayed in Fig. 5(a and b). The samples subjected to the SVPT at 5 W – 3 min, 5 W – 4 min, 10 W – 1 min and 10 W – 2 min show an improved PL yield, compared to the TA reference film, indicating less involvement in carrier recombination. The most efficient photoemission was achieved from the thin film subjected to the SVPT at 5 W – 4 min, as expected, given that the same sample yielded the highest PCE. We ascribe this improvement to the pinhole-free, uniform and compact structure, reduced density of grain boundaries, and consequently low density of charge-trapping and recombination sites, as substantiated by the SEM and XRD data. In the case of the TA reference film, the large density and relatively loose grain boundaries (Fig. 2(a)) cause light scattering and create excessive charge-trapping sites. The perovskite films subjected to the SVPT with an inadequate power–time combination, i.e. 5 W – 1 min and 5 W – 2 min, or overly excited by the SVPT, i.e. at 10 W – 3 min and 10 W – 4 min, show inferior photoexcitation, as evidenced from their reduced PL intensity. This may be attributed to the defective structure of such films that causes a large density of charge-trapping sites and fast non-radiative recombination. Also, Fig. 3(c) and Table 1 show that the devices incorporating these four samples represent relatively smaller FF, which can further support the morphology-dependent PL behavior of the perovskite films. Compared to the TA sample, the films subjected to the SVPT at 5 W – 1 min and 5 W – 2 min have undergone a slight blue-shift. The samples subjected to 10 W of the SVPT show no peak displacement, while the PL spectra associated with the 5 W – 3 min and 5 W – 4 min SVPT have slightly displaced toward the red-side of the spectrum. The PL shift may be due to a change in the lattice parameters as a result of the imposed ultrasonic vibration, as observed in a previous study, or due to the existence of some unreacted PbI2 and other impurities or defects, as reported by others. The TRPL profiles, shown in Fig. 5(b), reveal that the perovskite thin films subjected to the SVPT at 5 W – 4 min and 10 W – 1 min exhibit the most retarded carrier lifetimes of 51.23 ns and 44.60 ns, respectively, consistent with the device performance, discussed before. The carrier lifetime of the films made with 10 W – 2 min and 5 W – 3 min of the SVPT are, respectively, prolonged to 38.23 and 34.49 ns, slightly longer than the carrier lifetime of the reference TA film, which was determined to be 32.74 ns. The other films subjected to the SVPT at 10 W – 3 min, 5 W – 2 min, 5 W – 1 min and 10 W – 4 min showed carrier lifetimes of 30.31, 28.18, 27.56 and 25.35 ns, respectively, shorter than that of the reference sample.
The absorbance spectra of the (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15 films spun on the FTO-coated glass (Fig. 5(c)) help to gain more insight into the optoelectronic behavior of the films. The absorbance of most of the SVPT films is greater than that of the TA reference film. This may be attributed to a larger grain size of the films subjected to the SVPT. Meanwhile, the absorption edge of the films subjected to the SVPT at 5 W – 4 min and 10 W – 1 min (optimum films in terms of the PV performance demonstrated before) have slightly moved toward the UV-end, which may be ascribed to their large grain size and compact texture. The bandgap energy was calculated by applying the Kubelka–Munk (K–M) analysis to the measured diffuse absorption spectra, shown in Fig. 5(d). The relationship between the absorption coefficient (α) and the incident energy (hν) is given as (αhν)1/2 ∝ hν − Eg, where Eg is the bandgap of the material, h is the Planck's constant, ν is the frequency of the incident light, and α is the value of the absorption coefficient. The bandgap Eg of the perovskite film subjected to the SVPT at 5 W – 4 min is slightly increased from 1.56 eV (reference) to 1.58 eV. The shift in the band gap is due to a change in the lattice structure and parameters, and the ultrasonic vibration can in fact affect the lattice parameters, as observed before, and also in this study (peak shift in XRD patterns). In addition, ultrasonic vibration may affect the film composition by causing a minor increase in the ratio of FA+/MA+ or Br−/I−, or transformation of the original [Pb3I8]2− to [PbI6]4− octahedron during crystallization.

Fig. 6(a–c) compare the overlapping of the forward and reverse J–V curves, the cross-sectional view of the device and the IPCE of the champion SVPT cell and the TA reference cell. Generally, hysteresis occurs because of a different charge dynamics in reverse and forward bias, charge-trapping and defects in grain boundaries and charge accumulation at junctions, due to poor adhesion. Both devices show negligible hysteresis in their forward and reverse bias. However, the SVPT cell depicts perfectly hysteresis-free behavior, which ascertains a superior structure and electronic performance. This is linked to the uniformly distributed and large grain size of the perovskite layer and the small density of grain boundaries, which brings about a good balance between the hole and electron carrier mobility within the perovskite layer. The cross-sectional SEM images of the cells confirm proper junctions between the stacked layers, and low density of grain boundaries, particularly in the SVPT champion cell. The IPCE together with the integrated current-density behavior, shown in Fig. 6(d), provide complementary information on the enhanced PV behavior of the cell subjected to the optimum SVPT. The integrated current density demonstrated by the pristine TA and the optimum SVPT (5 W – 4 min) devices is 19.50 and 23.36 mA cm−2, respectively. The highest achieved JSC for this perovskite composition is 23.18 mA cm−2, although their perovskite film thickness (∼800 nm) is somewhat larger than that used in this study (∼600). The enhancement in JSC of our devices, which were subjected to the SVPT under appropriate conditions, is attributed to the improved film and device structure, as a result of the ultrasonic vibration treatment, i.e. the micro-scale grain size, intact structure, compact grain boundaries, and good stacking between the adjacent layers. The aforementioned traits, collectively, favor charge extraction and reduction of charge-trapping sites for non-radiative recombination, resulting in a high JSC, consistent with the PL and IPCE behaviors of these devices, compared with the pristine TA device. A thicker perovskite film subjected to the SVPT under the optimized conditions may even result in a higher JSC. It is noted that in a previous study, the application of the SVPT on MA-based perovskite solar cells resulted in a significant increase in the JSC, as well. For both the optimum SVPT (5 W – 4 min) and TA cells, the IPCE declines around 780 nm, which typically occurs in PSCs, and is consistent with the absorbance spectra. The SVPT cell preserves the maximum IPCE within the full range of wavelengths, from 300 to 800 nm, whereas the IPCE of the TA reference cell drops slightly in the range of wavelengths between 550 and 700 nm, consistent with a smaller JSC in this cell, a fact that is further corroborated by the integrated current-density data, in Fig. 6(d). The change of the IPCE, caused by alternation of the post-treatment of the perovskite layer, suggests different light harvesting, carrier generation, carrier motion and charge collection potentials, due to the different morphology and crystalline structure of the perovskite layers, as discussed earlier.
In the last step, the long-term stability of the TA reference cell and two cells fabricated with the SVPT at 5 W – 3 min and 5 W – 4 min was evaluated (Fig. 7). The SVPT cells retained above 80% of their original PCE after 20 days of storage under ambient conditions, compared to 20% for the TA reference cell. The degradation of the PSCs during the storage or operation usually occurs through the diffusion of moisture and oxygen into the perovskite and other layers, through the pinholes and defective grain boundaries. The chemical decomposition of the perovskite thin film takes place via different mechanisms: Migration of the hydrophile MA+ to the metal contact results in the hydration and decomposition of charge-insulating layers at the HTL/metal junctions. Also, the irreversible hydration of the perovskite produces some volatile materials such as HI, which escape out through the voids on the surface and cause further morphological damage. Accumulation of unbounded ions at grain boundaries is another factor that acts as a barrier to the electrical current and deteriorates the cell performance. The gaps between grain boundaries, no matter how small, allow ion migration and water and oxygen intrusion during storage. An intact and pinhole-free perovskite layer not only shields the film against water and oxygen ingression, but also blocks the migration of the volatile ions. Light-induced thermal stretching and thermal decomposition are other serious parasitic factors which frequently occur during measurements. Due to the low thermal conductivity of the perovskite materials, the thermal energy transferred from the radiation spreads out slowly, and accumulates in the form of thermal energy. This may result in local melting, chemical decomposition and mechanical stretches. Smaller perovskite grains offer a larger surface area exposed to hydration, oxidation and light-induced decomposition, i.e. small grains are more active. Also, a larger density of grain boundaries makes the film vulnerable to mechanical stretches. Thus, the large grain size, monotonic texture and compact grain boundaries are the key reasons for the prolonged lifetime of PSCs which incorporate perovskite layers subjected to the SVPT. In addition, the presence of unreacted PbI2 in the perovskite lattice may simply initiate chemical degradation. As discussed earlier, the SVPT treatment at 5 W – 4 min results in a PbI2-free perovskite thin film, although the sample made with SVPT at 5 W – 3 min shows a very small trace of PbI2, which is quite negligible compared to the PbI2 content in the TA cell. Thus, beside other discussed effects, SVPT assists the full conversion of the perovskite precursors to perovskites, leading to an improved device performance and stability. As seen in Fig. 7(a), the FF of the TA cell drops upon aging much faster than the other PV parameters. This trend reveals that the degradation rate is highly morphology-dependent. The film morphology is effectively controlled and retained with the application of the SVPT at appropriate time and power. The photographs of three samples, shown in Fig. 7(b), reveal that the color of the TA reference cell is yellowish-brown after twenty days of exposure to air. The cell that incorporates a perovskite film subjected to the 5 W – 3 min of the SVPT remained dark brown with a small yellowish-brown area at the margins, and the cell using the perovskite layer subjected to 5 W – 4 min of the SVPT (the best cell according to Table 1) has retained its dark brown appearance, at the same storage time and conditions.

In summary, this paper reports the fabrication of mixed-halide, mixed-cation (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15 perovskite thin films, using ultrasonic substrate vibration post treatment (SVPT) applied on the wet spun films, in lieu of a conventional thermal annealing. The SVPT has a mild in situ annealing effect due to the impartation of the acoustic energy to the film. SVPT also excites the wet film from a hydrodynamic point of view, creates microstreaming and micromixing within the wet film, enhances the chemical reaction and inter-diffusion of the perovskite precursors and assists the full conversion of the perovskite precursors to perovskites. As a result, we observed that the average perovskite grain size homogenously grows to a microscale size, with gap-free and compact grain boundaries. The largest grain size of 1.5 μm, achieved by the SVPT at 5 W – 4 min (for the ultrasonic transducer assembly used in this study operated at 40 kHz), demonstrated the best PCE of 18.54% with 80% of its original PCE retained, after 20 days of storage under ambient conditions. The SVPT method is low-cost, facile, and applicable to a variety of coating and printing methods, and is a promising method for the manufacturing of annealing-free perovskite solar cells in high volume.


There are no conflicts to declare.


We acknowledge the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51572046, 51503035, and 51550110229), the Program for Professor of Special Appointment (Eastern Scholar) at Shanghai Institutions of Higher Learning, the Program of Shanghai Academic Research Leader (16XD1400100), the Science and Technology Commission of Shanghai Municipality (16JC1400700), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (CUSF-DH-D-2017038), the Program of Introducing Talents of Discipline to Universities (No. 111-2-04), the major program of the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51590902), and the Innovation Program of Shanghai Municipal Education Commission (2017-01-07-00-03-E00055). The authors would also like to thank Zhang Xin for assisting with some of the characterization studies, especially the device fabrication and stability tests.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8nr00540k
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018