 DOI: 10.1039/B919723K
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 1173-1178

Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical Terms


Virendra
Chauhan
,

Ross
Hatton
*,

Paul
Sullivan
,

Tim
Jones
*,

Sang Wan
Cho
,

Louis
Piper
,

Alex
deMasi
 and 

Kevin
Smith


Department of Chemistry, University of Warwick, Coventry, UK. E-mail: t.s.jones@warwick.ac.uk; Ross.Hatton@warwick.ac.uk; Fax: +44 (0) 2476 58265; Tel: +44 (0) 2476 52865

Department of Physics, Boston University, 590 Commonwealth Avenue, Boston, MA, USA. E-mail: ksmith@bu.edu; Fax: +1 617 353 9393; Tel: +1 617 353 6117

Received
22nd September 2009
, Accepted 25th November 2009
First published on
16th December 2009

The operation of discrete heterojunction organic photovoltaic (OPV) cells employing chloro-aluminium phthalocyanine (ClAlPc) as the electron donor and C60 as the electron acceptor is reported and the characteristics are correlated with the energy level structure of the devices determined using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy. The results give new insight into the origin of the open circuit voltage (Voc) in discrete heterojunction OPVs. The measured Voc in this system is found to be determined by: (i) the frontier orbital energy offsets between the donor and acceptor materials, accounting for the likely formation of an abrupt vacuum level shift at the heterojunction interface and (ii) the degree of alignment between the hole-extracting electrode Fermi level and the highest occupied molecular orbital energy of the electron donor material. The generality of the findings is demonstrated by rationalising the Voc in OPVs employing the archetypal electron donor, copper phthalocyanine.

Organic photovoltaics (OPVs) employing both polymer and molecular semiconductors have strong potential as an economically viable path to harvest electrical energy from sunlight. The power conversion efficiency (η) of these devices is proportional to the short circuit current density (Jsc), open circuit voltage (Voc) and fill factor (FF). However, in order to optimise each of these device parameters a rigorous understanding of the underpinning science is essential. Whilst the factors affecting Jsc and FF in OPVs are beginning to be well understood, the issues that determine the magnitude of Voc remain the subject of significant debate.

To a first approximation, the maximum attainable Voc in OPVs is given by the difference in energy between the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of the electron donor material and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of the electron acceptor. Consequently, the difference in energy between these frontier molecular orbitals (MOs) on adjacent donor and acceptor molecules is generically described as the ‘effective band gap’ of the system. There is a considerable body of evidence to suggest that the degree of alignment between the Fermi level of each electrode and the relevant frontier MO in the adjacent organic semiconductor also plays a role in determining Voc. The latter is often inferred from the work function of the electrode and the ionisation potential (or electron affinity) of the adjacent organic semiconductor. However, since there are often dipoles formed at metal–organic interfaces, the assumption of a common vacuum level is rarely correct and so meaningful correlation between the degree of interfacial energy level alignment at the electrode–organic interface and Voc can only be made when both are measured directly.
By providing a tunable source of energy, synchrotron radiation provides a nearly ideal source of photons for probing the electronic structure of materials right from the core levels (binding energies in the 0.1–100 keV range) to mapping out the valence electronic states (HOMO region). It can also provide information on the material work function (Φ) and changes in the work function which occur after sequential deposition on the substrate surface. The work function is the energy required to remove an electron from the Fermi level to the vacuum level (VL) just outside the sample surface and is equal to the difference between the incident photon energy (hν) and the secondary electron cutoff energy (Ecutoff) in the UPS spectrum (Φ = hν − Ecutoff). Ecutoff therefore corresponds to the VL and so any change in Ecutoff upon deposition of an overlayer can be interpreted as a change in the energy of the VL (∆VL). Synchrotron radiation excited photoemission spectroscopy (PES) therefore provides a way for determining the relationship between the occupied levels at a heterojunction with reference to the vacuum and Fermi levels.
The majority of OPV research interest in recent years has focused on complex interpenetrating blends of donor and acceptor molecules, i.e. bulk-heterojunctions. Such blends complicate the modelling and understanding of device parameters such as Voc. In contrast, discrete planar heterojunction cells are ideal for the study of such fundamental parameters. The present study focuses on devices employing a chloro-aluminium phthalocyanine (ClAlPc)–C60 heterojunction. The motivation for the recent interest in ClAlPc as an electron donor material in OPVs derives from its broad absorption, which extends into the near infra-red region of the solar spectrum, and its relatively deep HOMO level as compared to the most commonly investigated small molecule donor materials: copper and zinc phthalocyanine (CuPc and ZnPc). Furthermore, from a more fundamental perspective ClAlPc is interesting because the electronic properties of thin films of this molecular semiconductor exhibit a strong dependence on the deposition parameters.
In this paper the performance of OPV cells based on ClAlPc–C60 heterojunctions is reported as a function of ClAlPc deposition rate and correlated with the corresponding electronic energy level diagrams. The latter are derived from detailed studies using synchrotron based X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy and X-ray absorption spectroscopy combined with contact potential measurements. This work gives new insight into the factors determining Voc in this system, the generality of which is tested by rationalising the Voc in CuPc–C60 based OPVs.

Typical J–V characteristics obtained in the dark and under illumination for devices fabricated with different ClAlPc deposition rates are shown in Fig. 1. Average device parameters are summarised in Table 1. Notably the variation of Voc in the ITO–ClAlPc–C60–BCP–Al devices is relatively large as compared to that in devices employing a CuPc donor layer, which do not show a variation in Voc with CuPc deposition rate. This is consistent with the consensus in the literature that Voc in heterojunction OPVs increases with the effective band gap, since the ionisation potential (IP) of ClAlPc (5.25–5.35 eV) is ∼0.3 eV larger than that of CuPc. The observed variability in Voc for devices employing a ClAlPc donor layer is also consistent with previous reports and reflects the sensitivity of the electronic properties of ClAlPc films to the deposition conditions. The diodic dark current characteristics combined with the observation of no significant change in film surface morphology with deposition rate—measured using atomic force microscopy (AFM—not shown here)—indicates that the variation in Voc cannot be attributed to differences in the magnitude of leakage currents in these devices.

Deposition rate/nm s−1

J
sc ± 0.2/mA cm−2

V
oc/V
FF ± 0.02

η ± 0.10 (%)

Φ
XPS/eV

Φ
KP/eV

a Taken from ref. 32.

0.05
3.16
0.55 ± 0.13
0.49
1.04
5.0
4.9
0.10
3.16
0.65 ± 0.12
0.51
1.17
—
—
0.15
3.14
0.62 ± 0.13
0.50
1.01
4.7
4.7
CuPc–C60
3.50 ± 0.3
0.46 ± 0.02
0.50
0.88
4.3
∼4.2

PES studies of the ITO–ClAlPc–C60 system were used to obtain quantitative information on the electronic energy levels of the heterojunction. Standard protocol were used for evaluating the relative positions of the HOMO and identifying shifts in the vacuum level. Values for the IP were extracted from the onset of the low binding edge of the HOMO peaks in the PES spectra, with representative spectra shown in Fig. 2 for two different ClAlPc deposition rates. The Ip and work function of the ClAlPc films (Fig. 3), and the energy level alignment at the interfaces with ITO and C60, are all a function of the deposition rate used: (i) the work function of ClAlPc films changed from 5.0 eV to 4.7 eV upon increasing the deposition rate from slow (0.05 nm s−1) to fast (0.15 nm s−1). The latter measurement was corroborated using the Kelvin probe (KP) technique (Table 1); (ii) the degree of misalignment between the ITO Fermi level and the ClAlPc HOMO increased from 0.35 eV to 0.55 eV with increasing deposition rate and (iii) the interfacial vacuum level shift at the ClAlPc–C60 heterojunction changed from −0.1 eV to +0.2 eV with increasing deposition rate. The optical band gap of ClAlPc remained essentially unchanged at ∼1.70 eV (estimated from UV electronic absorption data) which is in broad agreement with the literature. The Ip of the C60 layer was also unchanged at ∼6.3 eV which is also consistent with published work. An energy level diagram for the heterojunctions formed with the two different ClAlPc deposition rates is shown in Fig. 4.


Previous PES studies have shown that the electronic structure of ClAlPc is very sensitive to the thin film packing architecture since, in contrast to CuPc, ClAlPc is a non-planar molecule with a large permanent dipole. We have used XAS to probe the average molecular orientation in ClAlPc thin films deposited at 0.05 nm s−1 and 0.15 nm s−1. Example spectra are shown in Fig. 5, which show grazing incidence N-K-edge XAS spectra of 20 nm thick ClAlPc films deposited at the slow and fast rates. The sharp absorption features centred around 395–400 eV are assigned to transitions from the N 1s core level to π* states and the broad absorption peaks at 405–415 eV are transitions to σ* states.

The intensity I, of the π* resonance is related to the angle of the incident radiation (θ) and the average orientation of the molecular plane relative to the substrate (α) by the expression:
I(θ) = 1 + (½)(3cos2θ − 1)(3cos2α − 1)
The average tilt angle, α, extracted from the above equation for a 20 nm ClAlPc film was 42 ± 5° for a deposition rate of 0.05 nm s−1 and 38 ± 5° for a deposition rate of 0.15 nm s−1. Whilst the measured difference in the average tilt angle of the molecular plane with respect to the substrate is close to the resolution of the technique, the data are consistent with a subtle difference in the average molecular orientation. Furthermore, neither the film surface morphology—measured using AFM—nor the optical absorption spectra were found to vary significantly with deposition rate, consistent with a subtle change in film structure and previous reports by Bailey-Salzman et al.

In the simplest case the reduction in the HOMO level of the ClAlPc donor layer with deposition rate would operate to reduce the effective band gap, thereby reducing the measured Voc. In practice the situation is complicated by the presence of an abrupt interfacial vacuum level shift (∆VL) across the ClAlPc–C60 heterojunction, which for a ClAlPc layer deposited slowly is −0.1 eV. Upon increasing the deposition rate to 0.15 nm s−1 the polarity of this shift is reversed and the magnitude is increased to 0.2 eV. Vacuum level shifts at organic–organic heterojunctions are well documented and most pronounced at the interface between organic semiconductors with very different frontier MO energies—as is the case here. Notably the ∆VL in both cases correlates with the difference in work function between the two organic layers. Consequently, we assign the origin of this abrupt vacuum level shift to an interfacial dipole formed as a result of charge transfer across the heterojunction in order to equalise the Fermi levels. The existence of an induced density of interfacial states at organic heterojunctions has been postulated in a detailed study by Kahn et al. and offers a plausible explanation for the abruptness of the vacuum level shift.

The 0.3 eV vacuum level shift across the ClAlPc–C60 heterojunction with deposition rate increases the effective band gap. When combined with the decrease resulting from the change in Ip the net effect is a 0.2 eV increase in the effective band gap, which would be expected to translate into a ∼0.2 V increase in the maximum attainable Voc. The absence of a statistically significant change in Voc with deposition rate indicates that the effective band gap is not the only factor determining the Voc in these devices.
There is not yet a consensus as to the extent to which the degree of alignment between the Fermi level of the hole-extracting electrode and the HOMO of the donor material affects the Voc measured in heterojunction OPV devices. However, there is evidence that Voc is optimised when these energy levels are matched. From Fig. 4 it is clear that this is not achieved in this work and the degree of misalignment increases from 0.35 to 0.55 eV with increasing deposition rate of the ClAlPc layer. The result of this change, assuming a linear relation, would be a reduction in Voc by ∼0.2 V. The net increase in the effective band gap would therefore be offset by the energy level alignment at the electrode resulting in no overall change in Voc, as is observed to be the case (Table 1).
To test the generality of the conclusions drawn from the study of the ClAlPc–C60 system, namely that, Voc is a function of: (i) the effective band gap; (ii) interfacial vacuum level shifts at the heterojunction and (iii) the degree of alignment at the electrode–organic interface, we have applied the same spectroscopic techniques to the archetype OPV system: CuPc–C60. The electronic energy level diagram derived from these measurements is shown in Fig. 6. We note a small difference in the HOMO energy of C60 (6.2 eV) vs. 6.3 eV measured for the ClAlPc–C60 heterojunction. This difference has also been reported in the literature and can be influenced by factors such as the substrate and the nature of the adjacent material.
The first major difference in the interfacial energetics between the CuPc–C60 and ClAlPc–C60 systems is the absence of a large dipole at the ITO interface, in agreement with an earlier study of this interface by Hill and Kahn. The Ip of CuPc was measured to be 4.9 eV which is also in agreement with the literature and ∼0.3 eV smaller than that of ClAlPc, resulting in a commensurate reduction in the effective band gap. The VL shift at the CuPc–C60 interface is also somewhat larger than that at the ClAlPc–C60 heterojunction (+0.35 eV vs. −0.1 eV, +0.2 eV) which is once again in excellent agreement with the difference in work function between the organic layers comprising the heterojunction and agrees with a previous report by Molodtsova and Knupfer. Based on the size of the effective band gap, the Voc of an OPV device employing this heterojunction would be expected to be ∼1 V. In practice the Voc is ∼0.45 V which is equal to the effective band gap minus the 0.55 eV misalignment between the HOMO of CuPc and the Fermi level of the ITO electrode, entirely consistent with our proposed rational for the Voc in OPVs employing a ClAlPc–C60 heterojunction.

Indium tin oxide (ITO)-coated glass substrates were used (Psiotec, 100 nm thick ITO, Rs < 15 Ω sq−1) after cleaning by ultrasonication in acetone, detergent and iso-propanol. The substrates were then exposed to an atmosphere of UV–ozone to remove any remaining carbon residues.

The basic OPV device structure consisted of a 20 nm ClAlPc (Aldrich) donor layer, a 40 nm C60 (Nano-C Inc.) acceptor and an 8 nm bathocuproine (BCP) exciton blocking layer (Aldrich). The organic layers were grown by vacuum sublimation in a multi-source Kurt. J. Lesker Spectros organic molecular beam deposition system with a base pressure of about 5 × 10−8 mbar. All organic materials were purified by thermal gradient sublimation prior to deposition. Deposition rates were monitored using a series of quartz-crystal microbalances (QCMs) and all materials were thoroughly out-gassed prior to film deposition. Deposition rates of 0.05–0.15 nm s−1 were used for ClAlPc, 0.05 nm s−1 for C60 and 0.10 nm s−1 for BCP. The deposition rate of CuPc was fixed at 0.10 nm s−1 although the rate was initially varied and no difference in device performance was seen. Aluminium electrodes were deposited in situ by evaporation through a shadow mask to a thickness of 100 nm giving an active area of 0.16 cm2. Power conversion efficiencies were calculated under AM1.5 solar illumination at ∼100 mW cm−2 (±10 mW cm−2) using a Newport Oriel solar simulator with the intensity varied using neutral density filters and monitored with a Gentec Solo2 power meter. To ensure that the results were statistically significant at least 20 devices were grown from numerous growth runs and the representative current–voltage (J–V) characteristics were chosen to represent averaged values. The cells were sealed in an air-tight sample holder in an inert N2 atmosphere. J–V curves were measured with a Keithley 2400 sourcemeter and the data recorded using a LabView interface.


In situ X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) and photoelectron spectroscopy (PES) measurements were carried out at the soft X-ray undulator beamline X1B at the National Synchrotron Light Source (NSLS), Brookhaven National Laboratory, which is equipped with a spherical grating monochromator. XAS spectra were recorded by the sample drain current technique to obtain the total electron yield, and were normalised to current from a reference Au coated mesh. PES spectra were recorded using a Scienta 100 mm hemispherical electron analyser. The secondary electron cutoff and valence band spectra were obtained using an incident photon energy of 250 eV. The onset of photoemission was measured with a negative bias (−9 V) on the sample to exceed the work function of the electron analyser. A multilayer structure of ITO–ClAlPc–C60 was grown in situ using organic molecular beam deposition for the XAS and PES measurements. ClAlPc and C60 were thermally evaporated onto the ITO substrate in a deposition chamber maintained below 1 × 10−7 mbar. Deposition rates of 0.05 nm s−1 and 0.15 nm s−1 were used for the growth of ClAlPc, 0.10 nm s−1 for CuPc and 0.05 nm s−1 was used for C60. Thicknesses of 30 nm ClAlPc, 15 nm CuPc and 30 nm C60 were used for investigating the organic heterojunction.


Work function measurements made using PES were corroborated using the Kelvin probe method: a piezo-ceramic based vibrating capacitor technique. The counter electrode was a gold mesh oscillated at ∼200 Hz with an amplitude of ∼1 mm (Besocke Delta Phi GmbH). Measurements were performed in a glove box under an atmosphere of nitrogen. Freshly cleaved highly ordered pyrolytic graphite (Φ = 4.48 eV) was used as a reference. Three contact potential measurements were made on each sample and repeated for a number of samples grown separately. To ensure that the ClAlPc films were in thermodynamic equilibrium with the underlying conducting substrate the work function of ClAlPc films supported on different substrates was measured (namely, UV–ozone cleaned ITO glass and freshly evaporated aluminium). For a ClAlPc film thickness of 300 nm the measured work function was identical.


In summary we have correlated the performance of bilayer OPVs employing ClAlPc–C60 and CuPc–C60 photoactive heterojunctions with detailed energy level diagrams determined using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy. It is shown that whilst the offset in the frontier orbital energies between the donor and acceptor materials is important in determining Voc in these systems it is not the only factor to be considered, since the energy level alignment at the hole-extracting contact also plays an important role. Based on the evidence from this study we have highlighted the importance of understanding on a case-by-case basis interfacial energetics in these device systems.


Dr Ross A. Hatton is supported by a Royal Academy of Engineering/Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) Research Fellowship. This work was supported by the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC), UK through the SuperGen Excitonic Solar Cell Consortium. The Boston University programme is supported in part by the NSF under CHE-0807368 and by the US Air Force Office of Scientific Research under Grant No. FA9550-06-1-0157. The NSLS is supported by the US Department of Energy under Contract No. DE-AC02-98CH10886.


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010