 DOI: 10.1039/C7TA00278E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 5952-5960


Wang
Yang
,

Xiuwen
Xu
,

Liqiang
Hou
,

Xinlong
Ma
,

Fan
Yang
,

Ying
Wang
* and 

Yongfeng
Li
*

State Key Laboratory of Heavy Oil Processing, China University of Petroleum, Beijing 102249, China. E-mail: yfli@cup.edu.cn; Fax: +86-010-89739028; Tel: +86-010-89739028

State Key Laboratory of Rare Earth Resource Utilization, Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Changchun 130022, China. E-mail: ywang_2012@ciac.ac.cn

Received
9th January 2017
, Accepted 20th February 2017
First published on 21st February 2017
Exploiting highly active and stable counter electrodes (CEs) has been a persistent challenge for the practical application of dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). Herein, we present an edge-enhanced modification to fabricate nitrogen doped holey graphene (NHG) by rationally employing N2 plasma treatment at the exposed edge sites of holey graphene. The as-synthesized NHG exhibits a highly conductive and unique holey scaffold with a large surface area, along with abundant edge-induced topological defects and nitrogen dopants. Benefiting from such unique features, NHG exhibits outstanding electrocatalytic activity and high electrochemical stability for the I−/I3− redox reaction. Furthermore, density functional theory calculations are performed to further elucidate the underlying mechanism behind this encouraging performance, in particular the effect of edge-induced topological defects. The DSSCs based on NHG CEs display a power conversion efficiency of 9.07%, which is even superior to that of Pt (8.19%). These results strongly indicate possibilities for the large-scale fabrication of low-cost and metal-free NHG materials for DSSCs with an I-complex redox couple.

Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) have emerged as promising alternatives to traditional silicon-based solar cells owing to their relatively high power conversion efficiency, cost-effectiveness and environmentally benign fabrication processes. A typical DSSC has a sandwich structure with a dye-sensitized TiO2 photoanode, a redox-active electrolyte and a counter electrode (CE). Considerable efforts have been devoted to the development of photoanodes. Additionally, as another crucial component of DSSCs, the CE plays a pivotal role in regulating DSSC performance by promoting electron transfer from the external circuit back to the electrolyte and catalyzing the reduction of the redox couple which is used as a mediator to regenerate the sensitizer after electron injection. The key requirements for ideal CEs include (1) good charge-transfer properties with low sheet resistance, (2) efficient catalytic reduction activity by charge polarization of the redox couple, (3) a high surface area for better contact with the electrolyte, and (4) electrochemical stability in the corrosive electrolyte. Traditionally, platinum (Pt) is known to be the preferred catalyst for DSSCs due to its superior electrocatalytic activity. However, the high cost and risk of Pt corrosion by the redox species have significantly impeded the large-scale commercialization of DSSCs. Therefore, it is imperative to search for cost-effective, earth-abundant and anticorrosive substitute materials to reduce the overall fabrication cost without any compromise in device performances.

Enormous research efforts have therefore been directed towards the development of alternative CE materials, such as nanocarbon materials, conductive polymer materials, and inorganic materials. In particular, metal-free nanocarbon materials have been intensively investigated because of their excellent electrical conductivity, tunable catalytic activities and easy availability. Nevertheless, these pure nanocarbon materials generally suffer from large charge transfer resistance, thus leading to inferior performance, especially in the most commonly used iodide/triiodide (I−/I3−) electrolyte. In this context, heteroatom (e.g., N, B, S, etc.) doping is proposed to modulate their intrinsic properties and enhance their electrocatalytic activities for the reduction of I3−. Moreover, edge doping has been demonstrated to be a more effective strategy, as it can induce more active topological defects and dopants in the edge sites, simultaneously with less undesirable damage in the in-plane. Dai et al. first realized the edge functionalization and doping of graphene nanoribbons by using the mild plasma treatment. Although this work displays a narrow operating window and limited potential in catalysis, it reveals the significance of wisely choosing nanocarbon with a suitable structure for edge doping modification using plasma treatment.
Recently, we demonstrated that dopant-free holey graphene with enriched edge defects can deliver good I3− reduction activity, as a result of the easy diffusion of reactant ions to the active edge sites through the nanopores. However, the performance is strongly dependent on the large CE thickness, which inevitably results in bulky and opaque devices, thus impeding its practical application. Inspired by the concept of edge doping, along with the fact that the edge sites can be more easily doped or modified, it is reasonable to expect that plasma treatment of the exposed edge sites of this holey graphene can lead to an edge-enhanced modification by introducing more edge-induced topological defects and dopants. This strategy will not only provide a more advanced CE material for DSSCs, but also facilitate the unravelling of the exact effect of edge topological defects and dopants on electrocatalytic activity. Moreover, until now, neither the exact active sites in nanocarbon materials nor their specific roles during the I3− reduction have been fully understood. Therefore, new insights into the origin and role of nanocarbon active sites including the edge-induced topological defects and dopants are of great importance for a better understanding as well as the rational design of metal-free carbon-based catalysts for I3− reduction.
Herein, we scrupulously adopt the nitrogen plasma strategy for the edge-enhanced modification of 3D holey graphene (HG). In particular, nitrogen doping mostly occurs at the exposed hole edges, where the C atoms are much more chemically reactive than those in the plane, thus realizing edge-enhanced modification to fabricate nitrogen doped holey graphene (NHG) frameworks. The resultant NHG exhibits novel holey structures with a large surface area (1874 m2 g−1), facilitating the transport of reactants. Besides, the NHG affords a highly conductive network (3100 S m−1), hence ensuring a facile electron transfer pathway. Most importantly, the abundant topological defects and nitrogen dopants in the edge sites of NHG serve as active catalytic sites for efficient I3− reduction. Electrochemical measurements demonstrate a higher catalytic activity and better electrochemical stability with respect to those of Pt, and DSSCs with optimized NHG exhibit a power conversion efficiency of 9.07%, which is obviously superior to that with Pt as the CE (8.19%). Furthermore, based on this material, the origin of catalytic activity, particularly the effect of edge topological defects and nitrogen dopants, in nanocarbon catalysts for the I3− reduction reaction (IRR) is elucidated via experimental results and density functional theory (DFT) calculations, suggesting the critical importance of topological defects and chemical dopants in the activity origin of metal-free nanocarbon materials for the IRR.

3D holey graphene (HG) was first synthesized via a CVD method with MgO as the template and methane as the carbon source in a vertical quartz fluidized-bed reactor, which is similar to our previous studies. Then, NHG was prepared by irradiating the as-grown HG surfaces with N2 plasma using glow discharge plasma equipment. Specifically, the obtained HG was placed into a chamber which was made of stainless steel and had two glass windows. Under flowing N2 (170 sccm min−1) at 460 Pa, a direct current (DC) power source negative bias (485 V) was applied to the electrode. Then, in the chamber, a N2 glow discharge plasma was generated between the top flat stainless steel and bottom electrode to modify the HG. After the N2 plasma treatment for the scheduled time (15 or 40 min), the NHG materials were obtained and directly used as CEs.


The morphology and structure were characterized using field emission scanning electron microscopy (SEM; FEI Quanta200F) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM; FEI F20). The specific surface area and pore size distribution were characterized by nitrogen adsorption at 77 K using a Micromeritics ASAP 2020 instrument. The electrical conductivity was determined using a four-probe technique on a NHG disk, which was prepared by compression at 10 MPa, with a thickness of ca. 1 mm and a diameter of 13.0 mm. XPS measurements were performed with a Thermo Fisher K-Alpha spectrometer. Raman spectra were recorded with a Renishaw inVia confocal Raman microscope system using green (532 nm) laser excitation.


A homogeneous solution was prepared by dispersing the obtained NHG powder in isopropanol solution (2 mg mL−1) under ultrasonication for 30 min. Then the resultant solution was deposited directly onto a cleaned fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) glass using an e-spray technique. The obtained electrode film was immediately annealed in an Ar atmosphere at 250 °C for 30 min prior to device fabrication. For comparison, a Pt CE was prepared by drop-casting 10 mM H2PtCl6 in isopropanol onto an FTO substrate, followed by calcination at 450 °C for 30 min.


In a typical preparation procedure, a 12 μm-thick film consisting of 20 nm-sized TiO2 particles was first printed on the FTO electrode and further coated with a 2 μm-thick layer of 300 nm light-scattering TiO2 particles. Then the TiO2 electrodes were gradually heated to 450 °C (heating rate = 10 °C min−1) in air, and subsequently sintered for 30 min. Dye adsorption onto the TiO2 layer was performed for 16 h by immersing the photoanode in a 0.5 mM solution of N719 dye, prepared by mixing acetonitrile and tert-butyl alcohol in a volume ratio of 1:1. The working electrode and counter electrode were sandwiched together using a 30 μm Surlyn spacer and then sealed through hot-pressing. The active area of the DSSCs was 0.16 cm2. The electrolyte which consists of 0.05 M I2, 0.1 M LiI, 0.1 M guanidinium thiocyanate, 0.6 M 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium iodide, and 0.5 M 4-tert-butyl pyridine in acetonitrile was injected through a hole from the back side of the counter electrode via vacuum backfilling. Finally, the hole was sealed with a Surlyn film and a thin glass cover by heating.


All the electronic structure and energy calculations were performed using the spin-polarized density functional theory (DFT) using the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP). PAW potentials were used to describe ion cores and valence electron interactions. The adopted exchange–correlation functional is the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) with the Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof functional. A kinetic energy cut-off of 350 eV was used with a plane-wave basis set. The integration of the Brillouin zone was conducted using a 3 × 3 × 1 Monkhorst–Pack grid. All atoms were fully relaxed and optimized until the force was converged to 0.05 eV Å−1 and the total energy was converged to 1.0 × 10−5 eV per atom. Pyridinic nitrogen (PN), pyrrolic nitrogen (PR), quaternary nitrogen in the bulk phase (QN-B), quaternary nitrogen on the edge (QN-E), five-carbon ring (C5), seven-carbon ring (C7), five-carbon ring adjacent to seven-carbon ring (C5 + C7) and zigzag graphene nanoribbons (G) were established based on the 4 × 4 single layer zigzag graphene. For the periodical graphene slab, the periodic box of 9.86 Å × 20.0 Å × 15.0 Å was considered. The adsorption energy (Eads) of an I atom was defined as follows: Eads = Esubstrate + 1/2EI2 − Esubstrate + I, where Esubstrate + I, EI2, and Esubstrate correspond to the total energies of an I atom together with various substrates, a gas phase I2 molecule and an isolated substrate, respectively. A positive value indicates an exothermic chemisorption process.


Cyclic voltammetry was carried out using a conventional three-electrode electrochemical cell by using NHG as the working electrode, Pt foil as the counter electrode and Ag/Ag+ as the reference electrode in an acetonitrile solution containing 0.1 M LiClO4, 10 mM LiI, and 1 mM I2 at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1 using an electrochemical workstation system (CS350, CorrTest, Wuhan). EIS measurements were conducted in the dark with symmetrical dummy cells using an electrochemical workstation system at zero bias potential. The dummy cells consisted of an iodide/triiodide (I−/I3−) electrolyte which is the same as that for DSSCs and two identical electrodes with an area of 0.16 cm2, separated by a Surlyn film with 45 μm thickness. The measured frequency ranged from 0.1 to 105 Hz, and the amplitude of the alternating current was 10 mV. Tafel-polarization measurements were carried out at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 in the symmetrical dummy cells. The J–V characteristics of DSSCs were measured with a Keithley 2400 source meter (Keithley, USA) under 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2, Zolix, China). A black mask with an aperture area of 0.16 cm2 was applied on the surface of the DSSCs during irradiation to avoid the effects of diffusive light on DSSC performance. Each current–voltage curve was measured at least 10 times to eliminate experimental error as much as possible, and a compromise curve was employed. The incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra of cells were measured with a spectral resolution using a 300 W xenon lamp.


In this study, Mg(OH)2-derived MgO flakes are adopted as catalysts and mesoporous templates for the growth of HG (as shown in Fig. S1). Subsequently, the NHG is prepared by the exposure of HG surfaces to N2 plasma irradiation, as illustrated in Fig. 1a. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and transmission electron microscope (TEM) images indicate that HG exhibits a hexagonal lamellar structure with abundant interconnected pores (Fig. S2a and b). Unlike CVD-grown graphene or reduced graphene oxide (rGO), HG possesses abundant edge sites that can be directly exposed to plasma irradiation, thereby realizing edge-enhanced modification to fabricate topological defect and dopant enriched NHG. It is also observed that NHG obtained after N2 plasma treatment still maintains the hexagonal morphology, identical to that of HG (Fig. 1b and S2c). TEM images of NHG further reveal that the original layered and honeycomb-like atomic structure of graphene remains unchanged during the plasma treatment (Fig. 1d and S2b). Notably, the whole graphene layer is crinkled and folded uniformly, in which abundant nanosized holes are observed distinctly all over the plane. Importantly, the as-obtained NHG with a 3D interconnected conductive scaffold has an excellent electrical conductivity (3100 S m−1), much higher than those of chemically derived graphene, demonstrating its excellent charge-transfer ability in spite of the existence of holes. In addition to the charge transfer properties, the efficient mass transport of the I3−/I− redox couple is another crucial factor that determines the overall photovoltaic performance; particular attention is therefore paid to investigate the specific pore size distribution of NHG. As calculated, based on the Barrett–Joyner–Halenda method, NHG shows a broad distribution ranging from 2 to 9 nm (Fig. 1c). Therefore, I3− ions 3 Å in width and 6 Å in length can effectively penetrate into the defect-enriched holes and readily undergo the charge-transfer process for the regeneration of I−/I3−. Due to the abundant pores and interconnected frameworks, the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller surface area of the NHG is as high as 1874 m2 g−1 (the inset of Fig. 1c). Such a unique holey structure can facilitate easy diffusion of reactant ions to active sites through the open pores, thus forming a 3D ion diffusion mode within the electrode matrix (as illustrated in Fig. S3).

X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements have been performed to determine the composition and chemical state of the as-produced NHG. The strong C 1s peak at 284.8 eV indicates that the conjugated honeycomb lattices are mostly retained even after N2 plasma treatment (Fig. S4). No N signal is detected on the pristine HG, whereas a pronounced N 1s peak is observed for the NHG (Fig. 2a). By increasing the treatment time from 15 min (abbreviated as NHG-1) to 40 min (abbreviated as NHG-2), the atomic percentage of N increases from 1.09% to 2.85% (Table S1), which is close to that of the N-doped graphene reported previously. Moreover, the N 1s spectra are further analyzed by least-squares fitting (Fig. 2b), which include two major constituents of pyridinic N (398.5 eV) and pyrrolic N (400.2 eV). It is worth pointing out that these two types of N binding configurations more likely occur on the edges and defect sites, to some extent, implying the edge-enhanced modification in our case. For further demonstration, we employ N2 plasma to modify edgeless rGO under similar conditions to those for NHG-2. As expected, the N-doping level for N-rGO is much lower than that of NHG-2 (Fig. S5), which confirms the importance of the edge structure for facilitating N-doping. Furthermore, the Raman spectra of all three samples display two obvious peaks at around 1350 and 1580 cm−1 (Fig. 2c), which are related to the D band and G band, respectively. The G band is caused by the first-order scattering of the E2g mode of sp2 carbon atoms which is usually utilized as a signal to identify the degree of graphitization, while the D band is induced by structural defects or disorder in samples which are known as active sites for catalyzing the I−/I3− couple. Notably, due to the considerable amount of edges defects, pristine HG possesses a relatively high intensity of the D band. After being exposed to N2 plasma, the ratio of D band to G band (ID/IG) of NHG increases from 1.70 to 1.83 and 2.02 with increasing treatment time, which implies that more structural defects and nitrogen dopants are generated during N2 plasma treatment. Based on the as-validated unique holey structure with a large surface area and high electrical conductivity, coupled with the N2 plasma treatment induced edge topological defects and nitrogen dopants as electrocatalytically active sites, it is highly expected that NHG will bring about the high-efficiency reduction of I3− for high-performance DSSCs, as illustrated in Fig. 2d.
To evaluate the electrocatalytic performance of the prepared materials, they are dispersed in isopropanol and deposited on FTO substrates using the electro-spray technique (as illustrated in Fig. S6a). The thickness of the NHG layer is approximately 4.3 μm (Fig. S6b and c), which is much smaller than that of other graphene materials reported previously. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) has been performed to investigate the electrocatalytic activity of different CEs. Two typical pairs of oxidation and reduction peaks are predominantly observed in all the CV profiles (Fig. 3a). The left pair is attributed to the main function of the CE of DSSCs towards the reduction of I3−/I−, whereas the other pair at the higher potential corresponds to the redox reaction of I2/I3−. Generally, the peak current intensity (JRed-1 or JOx-1) and separation between Red-1 and Ox-1 peaks (Epp) are considered as two crucial parameters to evaluate the catalytic activities of CEs, and the large JRed-1 and small Epp values correspond to the high electrocatalytic activity. Interestingly, the NHG-1 electrode has a lower Epp of 0.30 V and a greater JRed-1 approaching 2.15 mA cm−2 with respect to HG (Epp = 0.37 V and JRed-1 = 1.85 mA cm−2), which are even better than those of Pt (Epp = 0.35 V and JRed-1 = 1.96 mA cm−2). Furthermore, NHG-2 exhibits an even higher JRed-1 of 2.43 mA cm−2 and a lower Epp of 0.26 V, suggesting that it possesses superior catalytic activity for the reduction of I3−. This is because many more nitrogen dopants and topology-induced defects have been introduced by increasing the plasma treatment time. It is also found that the peak current densities increase with increasing scan rates, and that a linear relationship exists between the peak current densities and the square root of the scan rates (Fig. S7), which indicates that cathodic and anodic reactions are diffusion limited for the transportation of iodide species toward the CE in DSSCs.
The origin of different catalytic capabilities toward the reduction of I3− is further elucidated by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and Tafel polarization measurements using the symmetric cells, in which a thin layer of electrolyte solution is sandwiched between two identical electrodes (Fig. S8). The Nyquist plots are shown in Fig. 3b, and the parameters are summarized in Table 1. The Nyquist plot intercept on the real axis represents the series resistance (Rs) of the cell. The Rs of NHG is smaller than that of Pt, revealing that NHG has excellent conductivity. For Pt CEs, the semicircle in the low frequency range is associated with the Nernst diffusion impedance (ZN), which corresponds to diffusion in the electrolyte. The other semicircle in the high-frequency range is the charge-transfer resistance (Rct), which changes inversely with the catalytic ability for the reduction of I3−. Unlike Pt CEs, graphene-based CEs exhibit an additional semicircle in the high frequency range, which is attributed to a secondary Nernst diffusion impedance (Zpore). This is because the diffusion of I−/I3− in the electrolyte is significantly affected by the pore structure. Moreover, we have measured the impedance spectra of the NHG-2 symmetric cell at various potentials, and the corresponding curves are shown in Fig. S9. The Zpore becomes more prominent with the applied bias voltage in the high frequency range, indicating that the Nernst diffusion impedance resulting from diffusion through the electrode pores is valid. As listed in Table 1, the Rct increases in the following order: NHG-2 (1.92 Ω cm2) < NHG-1 (2.80 Ω cm2) < Pt (3.19 Ω cm2) < HG (4.13 Ω cm2). Evidently, after N2 plasma treatment, both NHG-1 and NHG-2 exhibit significantly reduced Rct values compared to pristine HG. Given that all the other conditions are identical, this significantly reduced Rct can be explained by the exposure to N2 plasma, which introduces more edge-induced topological defects and nitrogen dopants. The smallest Rct for NHG-2 implies that it has eximious catalytic activity for the reduction of I3−, which agrees well with the high catalytic activity derived from the CV data. In general, the effective reduction of I3− can promote the dye regeneration at the photoanode, resulting in an improvement of photocurrent density. Meanwhile, a lower Rct decreases the overall series resistance, which will improve the fill factor of the solar cells. In addition, Fig. 3c shows the Tafel curves with various CEs. The slope of NHG-2 exhibits the largest value compared to those of other electrodes, revealing a similar trend to the Rct values from the EIS analysis. It is explained that the exchange current density (J0), derived from the slope of the Tafel polarization curve, is directly related to the charge-transfer resistance Rct by the following equation: J0 = RT/nFRct, where R is the gas constant, T is the temperature, n is the number of electrons involved in the reduction, and F is the Faraday constant.
CE

I
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF
PCE (%)

R
s (Ω cm2)

R
ct (Ω cm2)

Z
pore (Ω cm2)

E
pp (V)
Pt
16.74
0.726
0.674
8.19
6.02
3.19
—
0.35
HG
16.10
0.736
0.615
7.28
5.35
4.13
0.73
0.37
NHG-1
16.85
0.736
0.685
8.49
5.04
2.80
0.69
0.30
NHG-2
17.19
0.744
0.709
9.07
5.03
1.92
0.62
0.26
Given the encouraging electrochemical performance validated above, the photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of actual DSSCs assembled with different CEs are recorded (Fig. 3d), and the corresponding parameters are summarized in Table 1. As expected, the devices based on NHG-2 exhibit the highest power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 9.07% with the following parameters: open circuit voltage (Voc = 0.744 V), short-circuit current density (Jsc = 17.19 mA cm−2) and fill factor (FF = 0.709). For reference, the Pt-based DSSCs show a PCE of 8.19% (Voc = 0.726 V, Jsc = 16.74 mA cm−2, and FF = 0.674). Both the Jsc and FF of the NHG-2 DSSC are higher than those of the Pt-based DSSC, which is apparently attributed to the lower Rct and Rs. The trend in the IPCE plots (Fig. S10) is consistent with the corresponding Jsc values in the J–V curves. As seen in Fig. 3c and Table 1, the DSSCs with NHG-1 display somewhat lower performance (8.49%) compared to those with NHG-2. However, they still show much higher efficiency than those with pristine HG (7.28%), and even outperform the Pt-based DSSCs. Nevertheless, with further increase in the plasma treatment time to 60 min and 100 min, the performance was found to be lower than those with NHG-2 (Fig. S11), probably caused by the over-treatment of holey graphene resulting in poor electrical conductivity. For the purpose of comparison, we summarized the reported PCEs of DSSCs based on other types of N-doped nanocarbon materials (see ref. in Table S2). For straightforward comparison, we normalized the PCEs of various N-doped nanocarbons with respect to the corresponding PCEs of Pt counterparts (Fig. 4a). Remarkably, the NHG-2 prepared in this study exhibits an even higher PCE than the best result previously reported. It is also worth mentioning that the NHG can be facilely synthesized on a kilogram-scale in a fluidized-bed reactor for industrial production. Besides, it is expected that NHG can be exploited for Co-mediated DSSCs in the future with even better performance because of the higher Voc provided by the Co-complex than the I−/I3− redox couple. Accordingly, thanks to the reduced cost and improved power conversion properties, NHG materials with excellent electrocatalytic activity not only present competitive conversion efficiency to Pt CEs but also provide a facile approach for large-scale manufacturing of low-cost CEs in DSSCs.
On the basis of the aforementioned results, both edge-induced topological defects and nitrogen dopants have been considered as effective active sites to catalyze the reduction of I3−. In an effort to further elucidate this behavior, we employ Ar plasma instead of N2 plasma to modify the holey graphene (Ar-HG) under similar conditions to those for NHG-2. Our intention here is to produce structural defects without introducing nitrogen dopants on the HG. Ar-HG and NHG-2 share similar structural features (Fig. S12), but deliver different catalytic activities. The J–V and EIS curves of Ar-HG CEs have been measured, as shown in Fig. 4b and c, and detailed parameters are summarized in Table S3. Interestingly, DSSCs based on Ar-HG CEs exhibit a higher PCE (8.06%) and lower Rct (2.96 Ω cm2) compared to their HG counterparts, demonstrating the positive effect of topological defects. However, this performance is not as satisfactory as that achieved by NHG-2, which suggests the important role of nitrogen dopants. On the other hand, we prepared a nitrogen-doped graphene material (NG) by employing a hydrothermal treatment of graphene oxides as carbon precursors and urea as a nitrogen source. The N-G presents a N content of 3.60 at% but fewer in-plane holes and edges (Fig. S13). Interestingly, when an even higher N content is doped into the nanocarbon network, the Rct of NG (5.25 Ω cm2) is still much larger than that of NHG-2, yielding a much lower PCE of 6.78% (Fig. 4b and c and Table S3). This strongly indicates the importance of the hole-induced edge sites in addition to the nitrogen dopants.
In an attempt to understand the underlying catalytic mechanisms displayed by the edge topological defects and dopant enriched NHG, we have conducted DFT calculations to better elucidate our experimental observations and describe the catalytically active sites for the IRR. The IRR reactions can be generally written as follows:
I3−(sol) ↔ I2(sol) + I−(sol)
(1)
I2(sol) → 2* + 2I*
(2)
I* + e− → I−(sol)
(3)
where * indicates the free site on the CE surface and (sol) represents the acetonitrile solution. The solution reaction step
(1) typically proceeds rapidly and is in equilibrium. In contrast, steps (2) and (3) occur at the CE/electrolyte interface, that is, the dissociation of I2 into two I atoms (I*) upon adsorption on the CE surface and the removal of I* through one-electron transfer to produce solvated I−(sol) are the rate-determining steps of the overall electrocatalytic activity. It is known that the adsorption energy of an I atom (Eads) on the CE surface can serve as a good descriptor for the overall electrocatalytic activity. Specifically, the interaction threshold values of Eads should range between 0.33 and 1.20 eV, of which the former and latter ensure the I2 molecular dissociation and desorption of I− into I−(sol), respectively.

Considering that all the possible active sites are derived from the nitrogen doping and edge-induced topological defects, several models, including pyridinic nitrogen (PN), pyrrolic nitrogen (PR), quaternary nitrogen in the bulk phase (QN-B), quaternary nitrogen on the edge (QN-E), five-carbon ring (C5), seven-carbon ring (C7), and five-carbon ring adjacent to seven-carbon ring (C5 + C7), are systematically proposed and compared with the pristine graphene nanoribbon (G). The computational details can be found in the Experimental section. Fig. 5 depicts the most stable structures of the I atom on graphene substrates, as well as the values of Eads. The other investigated meta-stable structures, along with the Eads are shown in Fig. S14 and S15. It is obvious that the values of Eads on all investigated most stable substrates are all positive except for C5 + C7, suggesting an exothermic or less stable adsorption (Fig. 5). For the QN-B and QN-E as well as the C5 + C7, the Eads (0.25, 0.09, and −0.03 eV) is determined to be beyond the optimal range for the CE catalytic activity. Unexpectedly, for IRR catalysis, the N-doped moieties present a relatively large Eads compared to that of G, expect for the QN-B and QN-E configurations. Interestingly, PN and PR are the dominant nitrogen species within the NHG matrix. So this can be responsible for the high performance of NHG toward the I3− reduction. More importantly, we confirm that edge-induced topological defects including C5 and C7 can indeed act as catalytically active sites to greatly enhance the catalytic activity for the IRR, especially C7. It is notable that the most active doped site PR for the N-containing configurations is also a five-atom ring. This is the first time it has been demonstrated that topological defects like C5 and C7 can deliver an excellent activity for the IRR. These results indicate that both the topological defects and chemical dopants are expected to improve the IRR activity on the graphene-based slabs to further enhance the performances.
In addition to conversion efficiency, the electrochemical stability is another key factor for the evaluation of the DSSC performance. For such a study, freshly assembled dummy cells are first measured by EIS under ambient conditions, and then they are subjected to CV cycles followed by EIS measurements, the detailed results of which are shown in Fig. 6. Interestingly, Rs and ZN remain almost unchanged, indicating that the cycling potential hardly influences the series resistance or the mass transport in the redox electrolyte solution. The Rct of the freshly assembled Pt is 3.19 Ω cm2 in the first cycle, but it gradually increases up to 4.05 Ω cm2 in the final cycle. This can be ascribed to the poisoning of the Pt catalyst by iodine ions and further to its dissolution in the electrolyte. However, the changes of Rct for NHG-2 dummy cells are rather small after 10 cycles (from 1.92 Ω cm2 to 2.04 Ω cm2). Therefore, it is reasonable to conclude that the NHG CEs have better electrochemical stability than the Pt CEs in I−/I3− medium.

In summary, nitrogen doped holey graphene frameworks have been developed by wisely using nitrogen plasma treatment on holey graphene to realize edge-enhanced modification. Owing to a range of desirable features such as excellent conductivity, a huge surface area and abundant edge-induced topological defects and nitrogen dopants, NHG exhibits excellent electrocatalytic performances for the I3−/I− redox couple, in particular, lower charge transfer resistance at the NHG/electrolyte interface and better electrochemical stability than the Pt counterparts. Both the experimental and theoretical simulation results reveal the critical importance of topological defects and nitrogen dopants in the activity origin of metal-free nanocarbon materials for I3− reduction. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study to report and confirm that the I3− reduction reaction is based on the defect mechanism, especially topological defects (C5 and C7) and nitrogen dopants (PN and PR). Moreover, DSSCs with NHG-2 CEs display a PCE of 9.07%, which is superior to that of the control devices using Pt as the CE (8.19%), suggesting that the NHG materials are of great potential as efficient and low-cost CEs for DSSCs. This work is expected to facilitate the rational design and fabrication of advanced metal-free nanocarbon catalysts for various potential electrocatalytic applications.


We gratefully thank the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21576289, 21322609, 11274362, and 21673220), Science Foundation of China University of Petroleum, Beijing (No. C201603), Science Foundation Research Funds Provided to New Recruitments of China University of Petroleum, Beijing (2462014QZDX01), Thousand Talents Program, Jilin Province Natural Science Foundation (20150101012JC) and Special Program for Applied Research on Super Computation of the NSFC-Guangdong Joint Fund (the second phase). Part of the computational time is supported by the Performance Computing Centre of Jilin University and Changchun Normal University.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta00278e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017