 DOI: 10.1039/C6DT00900J
(Paper)
Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 7856-7865


Weidong
Zhu
,

Chunxiong
Bao
,

Yangrunqian
Wang
,

Faming
Li
,

Xiaoxin
Zhou
,

Jie
Yang
,

Bihu
Lv
,

Xiaoyong
Wang
,

Tao
Yu
* and 

Zhigang
Zou


National Laboratory of Solid State Microstructures & Eco-Materials and Renewable Energy Research Center (ERERC) at Department of Physics, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, P. R. China. E-mail: yutao@nju.edu.cn

Collaborative Innovation Center of Advanced Microstructures, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, P. R. China

Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Nano Technology, Nanjing 210093, P. R. China

Received
6th March 2016
, Accepted 24th March 2016
First published on 24th March 2016
Large organolead triiodide perovskite (OTP) grains with little intragranular defects are beneficial to minimize carrier recombination, hence boosting cell performance. However, OTP films deposited by the widely used one-step spin-coating route are usually composed of small grains, because the poor thermal stability of OTP inherently restricts the processing window (temperature, time) during the film preparation, thus limiting grain coarsening in the film. Herein, the remarkable grain coarsening via Ostwald ripening in one-step deposited OTP films has been successfully realized by a facile and effective post-synthesis high-temperature heating treatment assisted with spin-coated CH3NH3I. By systematically investigating the heating treatment parameters, a high-quality OTP film with an enlarged average grain size from ∼280 nm to 1.2 μm, greatly enhanced crystallinity, and excellent stoichiometry is achieved. Benefiting from such improved features, this modified film shows significantly reduced defect states corresponding to the decrease of recombination centers, as well as enhanced carrier transport and injection properties, which lead to the dramatically boosted efficiency from 14.54% to 16.88% for planar-heterojunction solar cells. More importantly, the improved OTP film quality provides the possibility of thickening the absorber layer of cells to realize more sufficient absorption without serious aggravation of charge recombination. By further optimizing the thickness of the coarsened OTP films, highly efficient cells with relatively excellent reproducibility and an optimal efficiency of 19.24% are achieved.

Organolead triiodide perovskite (OTP) films have been identified as promising absorbers for developing next-generation photovoltaic (PV) cells in view of their high absorption coefficient across the visible spectrum, long and balanced carrier diffusions, ambipolar charge transport, tolerance of defects, as well as the nature of low-temperature solution processability. In the past five years, the solar to electric power conversion efficiency (PCE) of PV devices based on OTP films, known as perovskite solar cells, has been boosted from 3.8% to over 20%, promising enormous potential for future applications.

One of the key prerequisites for achieving efficient and reproducible perovskite solar cells is to controllably obtain leakage-free, uniform OTP films with specific morphology and composition. Therefore, intense efforts have been dedicated to developing alternative synthetic routes for preparing high-quality OTP films. In particular, solution-chemistry routes including one-step spin-coating, sequential solution deposition, and spray deposition have already become mainstream owing to their simple operation, cost-effectiveness, and low demand in equipment. Among them, the one-step spin-coating procedure, as the simplest one, is being extensively adopted. For the typical one-step deposition, spin-coating of precursors containing CH3NH3I and PbX2 (X = I and/or Cl) in N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) solvent and then annealing yields the OTP thin layer. Two vital processes, which are the evaporation of excess solvent and crystallization of coated solid OTP, simultaneously occur during the film formation. Due to the sharply different solubility of CH3NH3I and PbX2 in DMF, film shrinkage is easily induced resulting from the simultaneous occurrence of these two steps, hence it is rather difficult to form a flat OTP film with full and uniform coverage. Numerous successful attempts have been reported for overcoming this difficulty by modifying the classical one-step spin-coating recipe, such as precursor composition designing, solvent engineering, antisolvent washing, and deposition and/or annealing condition optimization. To date, leakage-free, uniform OTP films can be readily achieved by a modified one-step spin-coating procedure, thus realizing perovskite solar cells with acceptable efficiency and reproducibility.
Even so, because the poor thermal stability of OTP inherently restricts the processing window (temperature, time) during the film preparation, the OTP films obtained via the modified one-step spin-coating procedure usually compose of small packed grains with sizes in the range of ∼100–500 nm, which inevitably contain numbers of crystal imperfections, especially as grain boundaries and intragranular defects, compared with the single crystal counterparts. Increasing theoretical and experimental evidence indicates that, similar to other PV devices such as CdTe and Cu(InGa)Se2, the original energy loss in perovskite solar cells is also mainly attributed to the non-radiative recombination of photon-generated carriers at the undesirable trap states formed by crystal imperfections in polycrystalline OTP films. And, almost each significant advance in device efficiency surely relies on the realization of high-quality OTP film composed of large grains with less crystal imperfections. For example, Huang et al. presented solvent-annealing to improve the grain size and crystallinity of OTP films, and the cell efficiency increased from 9.9% to 15.6%. More recently, they reported the synthesis of large-aspect-ratio (2.3–7.9) OTP grains on a non-wetting hole transport layer and achieved a stabilized PCE of 18.3%. By introducing an air-exposure-assisted layer-by-layer fabrication process to grow OTP films composed of large single-crystal grains with vertically oriented boundaries, Xiao et al. obtained cells yielding an average PCE of 16.3 ± 0.9%. As reported by Meng et al., the PCE of a mesoscopic cell was boosted from 13.10% to 17.40% when the average grain size of the OTP film was raised from ∼100 to 300 nm. Therefore, reduction or even elimination of the crystal imperfections in one-step deposited OTP films, thus overcoming non-radiative recombination of photon-generated carriers, is of paramount importance to further improve the cell performance.
Herein, the one-step deposited OTP film was modified via a facile and effective post-synthesis high-temperature heating treatment route assisted with spin-coated CH3NH3I. By systematically adjusting the heating treatment temperature and time, the remarkable grain coarsening of the pristine OTP film was successfully realized and a possible mechanism was preliminarily proposed based on the Ostwald ripening theory. Moreover, the grain coarsening induced the formation of a high-quality, uniform OTP film with an enlarged average grain size from ∼280 nm to 1.2 μm, greatly enhanced crystallinity, and excellent stoichiometry, hence significantly boosted the efficiency from 14.54% to 16.88% for planar-heterojunction solar cells. By further optimizing the thickness of the coarsened OTP film to be 440 nm, highly efficient cells with relatively excellent reproducibility and the best PCE of 19.24% were achieved.


Fig. 1 schematically illustrates the experimental processes for preparing pristine OTP films via a one-step spin-coating procedure and post-synthesis high-temperature heating treatment assisted with spin-coated CH3NH3I. Firstly, the OTP precursor was dipped onto the compact TiO2 layer and then was spun at 5000 rpm for 25 s. During spinning, a portion of diethyl ether was slowly dripped onto the rotating substrate to quickly extract the solvent. The film was finally annealed at 100 °C for 5 min to obtain the pristine OTP film. For the post-synthesis high-temperature heating treatment process, a CH3NH3I solution in isopropanol (IPA) (20 mg mL−1) was coated onto the pristine OTP films followed by heating to 60 °C for about 5 min to promote the downward diffusion of CH3NH3I. Finally, the films were further heated for 10 min at different high-temperatures of 110, 130, 150, and 170 °C and washed with IPA to obtain the coarsened OTP films. For simplicity, the corresponding coarsened OTP films heated at the different temperatures were labeled as R110, R130, R150, and R170, respectively. And, the OTP film without the post-synthesis high-temperature heating treatment was labeled as pristine.


Fig. 2(a) and (b) show the surficial and cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the pristine OTP film obtained via the one-step spin-coating route. It is clear that this film has a smooth and uniform surface morphology. The entire film is composed of well-crystallized polygonal OTP grains with sizes in the range of 100–500 nm and the average of ∼280 nm, expressing the predominant microstructural feature of triple junction grain boundaries. Most of the OTP grains are vertically aligned to the TiO2/FTO substrate, which is especially beneficial to the diffusion of photo-generated carriers along the out-of-plane direction in ultimate planar PV devices. In addition, the film thickness was roughly estimated to be ∼270 nm. Similarly, as conveyed in Fig. 2(c)–(f), after the post-synthesis high-temperature heating treatment, all of the OTP films also possess a flat and homogeneous surface morphology. However, most of the original polygonal OTP grains merged together leading to the remarkably increased average grain sizes of ∼510, 640, 1190, and 580 nm for samples R110, R130, R150, and R170, respectively. As is well-known, the number of grain boundaries is inversely proportional to the average grain size for polycrystalline films. So, it can be inferred that the density of grain boundaries for all the coarsened OTP films is significantly minimized. Meanwhile, the geometrical edges of the grains in samples R110 and R130 become smooth, which is not observed in samples R150 and R170 indicating the well-reserved grain shape. In a word, the post-synthesis high-temperature heating treatment assisted with spin-coated CH3NH3I can induce the grain coarsening of one-step deposited OTP films, leading to an obvious minimization of grain boundaries in the films, especially for sample R150.
The crystalline properties of pristine and coarsened OTP films were examined by X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements and the corresponding results are given in Fig. 3. As illustrated in Fig. 3(a), all the samples exhibited the major diffraction peaks of tetragonal OTP in the I4/mcm space group, which can be verified from the distinctive diffraction peaks of (110), (220), and (310) planes located at 14.14°, 28.41°, and 31.93°. By comparison, the intensities of those diffraction peaks have obvious differences between the concerned samples. Considering the same test parameters and similar film thickness, the crystallinity difference of the films may be the main explanation for such differences. So, it can be inferred that the crystallinity of samples R110 and R130 is slightly worse than that of the pristine OTP film, while the crystallinity of samples R150 and R170, on the contrary, is much better than that of the pristine OTP film. As shown in Fig. 2, all the coarsened OTP films exhibited increased grain size. Principally, the crystallinity of these films should have corresponding improvements. However, the XRD results of samples R110 and R130 are contradictory with the above inference. To gain insight into this contradiction, we monitored the enlarged XRD patterns of the prepared samples at 2θ = 28–29°, and the results are given in Fig. 3(b). It can be seen that the signal from the (004) reflection became detectable for samples R110 and R130 compared with pristine, R150 and R170 samples, which means, the [001] orientation is favored for samples R110 and R130, while the [110] orientation is favored for pristine, R150 and R170 samples. It was recently reported that the [001] orientation is related to a high degree of disorder induced by non-stoichiometric composition of the OTP film. So, we performed X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements to analyze the composition of the samples, and the results are given in Fig. S1 and Table 1. Due to part of I being sublimated easily during the XPS measurement, the determined atomic ratios of I/Pb for all the samples are less than three. Yet, the comparison of the relative change is available. As can be seen, the atomic ratios of I/Pb for samples R110 and R130 are clearly higher than that of the pristine sample, indicating a substantial excess of CH3NH3I in the R110 and R130 films. Yet, there are not any diffraction signals of additional phases of pure CH3NH3I in the films’ XRD patterns. So, it can be expected that the excess CH3NH3I was incorporated into the OTP grains as interstitial impurities, which caused the decreased crystallinity of samples R110 and R130. In addition, the atomic ratio of I/Pb for sample R170 is somewhat lower than that for the pristine OTP film, manifesting the partial decomposition of the film. This can also be verified by the additional diffraction peak of PbI2 located at 12.63° in the XRD pattern of sample R170, which, however, is not observed in sample R150. These results connote that the post-synthesis high-temperature heating treatment assisted with spin-coated CH3NH3 can modify the crystallinity of one-step deposited OTP films and greatly improved crystallinity for coarsened samples such as R150 can be realized.
Samples
Pb 4f
I 3d
I/Pb
Pristine
8.77
22.53
2.57
R110
9.72
27.70
2.85
R130
9.88
27.70
2.80
R150
7.02
19.22
2.73
R170
8.48
20.70
2.45
Once again, it should be noted that the atomic ratio of I/Pb for sample R150 remains higher than that of the pristine OTP film, as revealed in Table 1. Namely, excrescent CH3NH3I still existed as interstitial impurities in the grains of sample R150 in spite of improved crystallinity. This result indicates that there is additional room to further improve the film's crystallinity if these interstitial impurities could be removed. On that basis, we prolonged the heating treatment time from 10 to 25 min for preparing R150 samples, monitoring their morphology and crystallinity evolution. As shown in Fig. 4, all of the 150 °C coarsened OTP films possess similarly flat and uniform surface morphologies with merged grains. And, the prolonged heating treatment time has a negligible influence on the film's grain size. The only observed difference is that the surficial wrinkles on the grains increase with the heating treatment time. This wrinkled texture may be induced by the escape of excrescent interstitial CH3NH3I in OTP grains. The XRD results indicated that all of the films similarly belong to tetragonal OTP, as shown in Fig. 5(a). As expected the diffraction peaks of the (110) and (220) planes increased in sequence with heating treatment time as indicated in Fig. 5(b), from which we can see that the film crystallinity increased in sequence, along with the decrease of interstitial CH3NH3I impurities and the increase of crystalline size. It should be noted that the additional diffraction peak of PbI2 was observed when the sample was annealed for 25 min, revealing the partial decomposition of the film. The atomic ratio of I/Pb for the sample heat treated for 20 min (not shown here) approximates that of the pristine OTP film. Consequently, it can be inferred that the crystallinity of sample R150 can be further tuned by controlling the post-synthesis high-temperature heating treatment time. And, the R150 sample heat treated for 20 min possesses optimal crystallinity and excellent stoichiometry resulting from the enlarged grains with minimum intragranular defects.
Normally, the grains of compact polycrystalline thin films will be coarsened when proper thermal energy with sufficient time is furnished. The solid-state grain growth and Ostwald ripening mechanisms are proposed for various coarsening phenomena. The thermodynamic driving force for both mechanisms is the curvature difference of the grains. For the solid-state grain growth, the coarsening proceeds slowly in solid phase and typically halts when the average grain size reaches about the film thickness. Correspondingly, the process occurs rapidly in solid phase or vapor phase for Ostwald ripening. Besides, a film with a grain size significantly larger than its thickness can be achieved. So, in the present case, the grain coarsening as well as crystallinity enhancement of the OTP film after the post-synthesis high-temperature heating treatment can be attributed to Ostwald ripening because the average grain size for all of the coarsened OTP films is greater than the film thickness. Combining our above observations, we schematically illustrate the specific mechanism involved in this phenomenon based on the Ostwald ripening theory, as given in Fig. 6(a). After spin-coating of the CH3NH3I solution in IPA, a thin layer of CH3NH3I was coated onto the pristine OTP film (Fig. S2). Due to the extremely low solubility of OTP in IPA, the spin-coating deposition of CH3NH3I has negligible influence on the morphology of the pristine film. During the post-synthesis heating treatment, some of the CH3NH3I molecules diffused downward along grain boundaries leading to the uptake of CH3NH3I molecules by the raw OTP grains, thus formed the thin layer of (CH3NH3)1+xPbI3+x solid solution at their surface or interface, which was not observed in the previously reported process of CH3NH3I-vapor-assisted growth of OTP films. The formation of (CH3NH3)1+xPbI3+x not only increased the surface energy or interfacial energy of the OTP grains, especially for small grains, but also protected the OTP grains from decomposition. With the increase of heating treatment time, the (CH3NH3)1+xPbI3+x layer became thicker, and the small grains were consumed. And then, the (CH3NH3)1+xPbI3+x layer was merged by the remaining large OTP grains, leading to the formation of larger OTP grains. Finally, the interstitial CH3NH3I escaped from the merged OTP grains after the extended heating treatment, thus the coarsened OTP film with larger grains and a pure phase was obtained. To clearly present the phenomenon of grain coarsening, we prepared an OTP film with monodispersed grains using a two-step sequential solution deposition as shown in Fig. 6(b), and treated it with the same heating treatment recipe. It can be seen from Fig. 6(c) that part of the original monodispersed grains were effectively merged, which additionally supported our proposed mechanism based on the Ostwald ripening theory.
Due to the coarsened OTP film with the post-synthesis heating treatment temperature and time of 150 °C and 20 min possessing the optimal film quality, our following investigations are mainly focused on this sample (hereinafter referred to as R150-20 for simplicity). The pristine OTP film was regarded as a reference sample. Their optical property characterizations are shown in Fig. 7. As presented in Fig. 7(a), both films exhibit a panchromatic absorption of light with spectra extended over the entire visible region.
Compared with the pristine OTP film, a higher absorption in the range of 600 to 750 nm can be found for sample R150-20. The Urbach energy was calculated to be 72 and 56 meV for the pristine OTP film and sample R150-20 from their transmittance spectra, as given in Fig. S3. Urbach energy is an empirical parameter that is related to the energetic disorder in a given semiconductor resulting from disordered structures and defects. The reduced Urbach energy for sample R150-20 indicates decreased energetic disorder, which explains its enhanced absorption and further supports the increased crystallinity in sample R150-20. Additionally, a slight red-shift of absorption onset for sample R150-20 was observed. As to the steady-state photoluminescence (PL) properties of the pristine OTP film and sample R150-20 deposited on insulated glass substrates (Fig. 7(b)), the emission peaks are both located about ∼780 nm, which is consistent with the previously reported results. It is noteworthy that a slight red-shift of the emission spectrum for sample R150-20 can also be observed. The red-shifts of the PL peak as well as the absorption onset have been observed previously, and are caused mainly by the shrinkage of the optical band gap of the OTP film resulting from increased grain size. Furthermore, it can be observed that the PL intensity of sample R150-20 is stronger than that of the pristine OTP film. To gain insight into the difference, transient PL decay measurements were conducted and the carrier lifetimes (τ0) were determined to be 49 ns for the pristine OTP film and 62 ns for sample R150-20 by fitting the time-resolved PL decay spectra, as presented in Fig. 7(c). Both the increased carrier lifetime and decreased localized exciton states clearly verify the reduced density of defect states in sample R150-20. When the OTP film was interfaced with a TiO2 electron extraction layer, the PL quenching was significantly accelerated, as shown in Fig. 7(d). And, the lifetime of carriers (τe) was fitted to be 29 ns for the pristine OTP film and 13 ns for sample R150-20. The sharp shortening of carrier lifetime for sample R150-20 connotes more efficient injection of the photo-induced carriers across the OTP/TiO2 interface. In principle, the time-resolved PL decay property of carriers can be modeled with a 1D diffusion equation with the assumption that the OTP/TiO2 interface is the only quenching interface with infinite quenching rate. And, it can be derived that LD/L is inversely proportional to τe/τ0, where LD is the carrier diffusion length and L is the OTP film thickness. The τe/τ0 was calculated to be 0.59 and 0.21 for the pristine OTP film and sample R150-20. Considering the similar thickness of these two films, it can be concluded that the LD for sample R150-20 was much larger than that of the pristine OTP film, indicating better charge transport in the film. The reduced defect states as well as improved charge transport and injection properties can be mainly attributed to the decreased grain boundaries and intragranular defects in sample R150-20.
Based on the pristine OTP film and sample R150-20, planar-heterojunction PV devices were fabricated following the configuration of FTO/compact TiO2/OTP film/spiro-MeOTAD/Ag. The typical current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the corresponding cells under AM 1.5 at one sun are given in Fig. 8(a). For the cell with the pristine OTP film, the performance indexes including short circuit current density (Jsc), open circuit voltage (Voc), and fill factor (FF), were determined to be 21.69 mA cm−2, 1.09 V, and 0.615, corresponding to a PCE of 14.54%. By comparison, all of the indexes, especially Voc and FF, have significant augments for the cell with sample R150-20 and were estimated to be 22.15 mA cm−2, 1.13 V, and 0.674, corresponding to a much improved PCE of 16.88%. To gain insight into these augments, we further analyzed the J–V curves as follows. For planar-heterojunction solar cells, the J–V characteristic is usually expressed as:
(1)
where
JL is the light induced constant current density, J is the current density through external load, V is the applied voltage, J0 is the dark saturated reversed current density, Rs is the series resistance, KB is the Boltzmann constant, A is the ideality factor, e is electron charge, T is temperature, and Rsh represents the shunt resistance. For a real device, eqn (1) can be deduced as:

(2)
(3)
According to eqn (2) and (3), the J–V curves in Fig. 8(a) were rescaled and fitted, as given in Fig. 8(b) and (c). From Fig. 8(b), the Rs was estimated to be 6.8 Ω cm−2 and 3.4 Ω cm−2 for the cells with the pristine OTP film and sample R150-20, respectively. The decrease of Rs is conductive to improve the FF of solar cells. So, the cell with sample R150-20 showed increased FF. From Fig. 8(c), the J0 was determined to be 4.4 × 10−4 and 9.5 × 10−5 mA cm−2 for the cells with the pristine OTP film and sample R150-20. Based on eqn (1), when Rsh is large enough, the Voc can be expressed as:
(4)

Eqn (4) conveyed that a lower J0 corresponds to a higher Voc. So, the cell with sample R150-20 showed a significantly increased Voc. As is well-known, J0 represents the thermal emission rate of electrons from the valence band to the conduction band of the light absorber of the PV device, and is directly proportional to the recombination rate. So, the improved Voc of the cell with sample R150-20 can be correlated with the reduction in recombination loss. Moreover, from the dark J–V curves as given in Fig. 8(d), it can be observed that for the cell with sample R150-20 the dark current density is smaller than that of the cell with the pristine OTP film, and the onset potential is larger than that of the cell with the pristine OTP film revealing a stronger depleted electric field in the TiO2/OTP heterojunction. These features also indicate the charge recombination reduced in the cell with sample R150-20. The recombination resistance was further scrutinized by an impedance spectroscopy test. Fig. 8(e) presents the Nyquist plot measured at a forward bias voltage of 0.9 V under 0.2 sun. A clear semicircle can be distinguished in the intermediate frequency region for each of the cells, which is related to the charge transfer at FTO/TiO2/OTP/HTM interfaces, mainly owing to the recombination of electrons. The recombination resistances (Rct) can be obtained by fitting the Nyquist plots with a resistance-constant phase element model (R-CPE) inserted in Fig. 8(e), and are given in Fig. 8(f). As can be seen, the Rct of the cell with sample R150-20 is clearly larger than that of cell with the pristine OTP film, agreeing well with the results discussed above. Increasing evidence indicates that the non-radiative recombination of carriers in the PV device with compact polycrystalline OTP films originates from defect states formed by crystal imperfections in OTP films. As verified in Fig. 7, the defect states were remarkably decreased in sample R150-20. So, the carrier recombination in the cell with sample R150-20 was significantly suppressed. In addition, sample R150-20 also possessed enhanced carrier transport and injection properties. Therefore the corresponding cell had decreased Rs. Overall, the post-synthesis high-temperature heating treatment assisted with spin-coated CH3NH3I can induce a decrease of grain boundaries and intragranular defects in sample R150-20 along with significantly reduced defect states, improved carrier transport and injection properties, which synergistically caused the remarkably enhanced performance of the corresponding PV devices.
It should be noted that the thickness of the OTP layer is another key factor affecting the performance of planar-heterojunction solar cells. In principle, a thicker OTP layer is conductive to sufficiently absorb most of the sun light for the cell, and then generate more carriers. Yet, this simultaneously extends the diffusion path of carriers before being collected; hence the probability of carrier recombination at defect states is increased. In an ideal OTP solar cell, the OTP layer should have a thickness of around 300–600 nm. In the present case, the optimized OTP thickness is ∼270 nm for the cell with the pristine sample due to its relative high defect states. So, sample R150-20 has a similar thickness to the pristine OTP film due to the negligible influence of post-synthesis high-temperature heating treatment on the film thickness. Considering the significantly reduced defect states as well as improved carrier transport and injection properties of sample R150-20, further improvement of the cell performance can be expectable by slightly increasing the thickness of this layer. So, we fabricated the OTP solar cells employing R150-20 samples with different thicknesses of 270, 440, 520, and 690 nm, as verified in Fig. S4. The film thickness was controlled by changing the rotation speed during the deposition of the pristine OTP films. Fig. 9(a) shows the J–V curves measured under AM 1.5 simulated sunlight, and the corresponding performance indexes are summarized in Fig. 9(b) and Table S1. It can be seen that the Jsc kept increasing with the thickness of the R150-20 sample, and saturated to be ∼23.8 mA cm−2 when the film thickness exceeded 520 nm, which is comparable to the recently reported result for mesoporous devices, and still less than the theoretical maximum value of 26 mA cm−2. The Voc showed a slight decrease with the increase of R150-20 thickness, indicating inevitable carrier recombination induced by defect states in the device. Even so, the FF slightly increased for the devices when the thickness of R150-20 was 440 and 520 nm. This can be attributed to relatively larger grains in the thick OTP film compared with the thin one prepared by same recipe. Overall, the PCE of the PV cell is the product of Jsc, Voc, and FF, so the cell employing the R150-20 sample with a thickness of 440 nm gave the further enhanced and optimal PCE of 18.43%.
We fabricated 40 cells from three independent batches employing the R150-20 samples with a thickness of 440 nm. The J–V curve of the best performing device is presented in Fig. 10(a). Under simulated AM 1.5 illumination, the cell exhibited a Jsc of 23.13 mA cm−2, Voc of 1.13 V, and FF of 0.736, corresponding to a PCE of 19.24%. The J–V hysteresis was also checked. As revealed in Fig. S5, the inevitable hysteresis was observed in the cell. It should be noted that the incident photon conversion efficiency (IPCE) of the cell without a white-light bias had a very broad plateau over 80% between 410 and 650 nm as indicated in Fig. 10(b), further verifying its excellent photoelectric conversion characteristics. The Jsc value integrated from the IPCE was 21.06 mA cm−2, which is lower than that obtained from the J–V measurement and the steady-state output of Jsc (Fig. S6). This mismatch is usually observed in perovskite solar cells and is mainly related to the measurement conditions.Fig. 10(c) presents the histogram of the PCEs for all of the fabricated cells. Around 62% of them exhibited a PCE exceeding 17%, indicating relatively excellent reproducibility of our device fabrication route. In a word, the post-synthesis high-temperature heating treatment assisted with spin-coated CH3NH3I provides a simple and effective route to realize the grain coarsening of one-step deposited OTP films via Ostwald ripening, leading to the remarkably reduced crystal imperfections in the film, and hence highly efficient planar-heterojunction solar cells.

In summary, the facile post-synthesis high-temperature heating treatment assisted with spin-coated CH3NH3I can effectively realize the grain coarsening of one-step deposited OTP films via Ostwald ripening, which was companied by the formation of high-quality, uniform OTP films with significantly enlarged average grain size, greatly enhanced crystallinity, and excellent stoichiometry. The planar-heterojunction solar cell employing this coarsened film showed remarkably boosted efficiency from 14.54% to 16.88%. By further optimizing the thickness of the coarsened OTP film to 440 nm, highly efficient cells with relatively excellent reproducibility and an optimal PCE of 19.24% can be achieved. The greatly enhanced PV performance can be attributed to the significantly reduced carrier recombination, as well as improved carrier transport and injection properties in the cells as a result of improved OTP film quality. Our work disclosed an attractive optional route to further improve the performance perovskite solar cells.


Unless specifically noted, all chemicals were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich or Alfa Aesar and used as received without further purification. Spiro-MeOTAD was purchased from Shenzhen Feiming Science and Technology Co., Ltd (China). Specific details can be referred to in our previous work. FTO-coated glass substrates were pre-cleaned and a compact TiO2 layer was deposited by spin-coating 50 μL of TiO2 sol followed by air annealing at 480 °C for 60 min. Then, the pristine OTP film was deposited onto the compact TiO2 layer by a one-step spin-coating procedure in a glovebox with a relative humidity below 1 ppm. To be specific, 50 μL of OTP precursor containing 160 mg of CH3NH3I, 461 mg of PbI2, 78 mg of dimethyl sulfoxide and 600 mg of DMF was dipped onto the compact TiO2 layer and then spun at 5000 rpm for 25 s. During spinning, 0.5 mL of diethyl ether was slowly dripped on the rotating substrate within the first 6 s. The film was finally heated to 60 °C for about 2 min and followed by 100 °C for 5 min to obtain the pristine OTP film. For the post-synthesis high-temperature heating treatment, 200 μL of CH3NH3I solution in IPA (optimized to be 20 mg mL−1) was coated on the pristine OTP films at 3000 rpm for 60 s followed by heating to 60 °C for about 5 min to promote the downward diffusion of CH3NH3I. Finally, the films were further heated for 10 min at different high temperatures of 110, 130, 150, and 170 °C, and washed using IPA to obtain the coarsened OTP films.

To prepare OTP films by the two-step sequential solution deposition, 50 μL of PbI2 solution, prepared by dissolving 461 mg of PbI2 in 1 mL of DMF, was dipped on the compact TiO2 layer and then was spun at 3000 rpm for 20 s, followed by drying at 95 °C for 15 min. After that, the film was dipped into CH3NH3I solution in IPA with a concentration of 6 mg mL−1 for 120 s. Finally, the sample was annealed at 95 °C for 10 min to obtain the OTP film. The process for the post-synthesis high-temperature heating treatment of two-step solution deposited OTP films was same as for the one-step deposited one. The heating treatment temperature and time were 130 °C and 10 min.
To complete the device fabrication, 100 μL of solution containing 145 mg of spiro-MeOTAD, 58 mL of 4-tert-butylpyridine, 53 μL of li-bis-(trifluoromethanesulfonyl) imide in acetonitrile (520 mg ml−1) and 2 mL of chlorobenzene was spin-coated on the sample OTP films at 3000 rpm to form the HTM layer. After being stored in a dry air atmosphere with a relative humidity of ∼1% for 24 h, a ∼100 nm Ag layer, serving as the contact electrode (0.09 cm2), was thermally evaporated onto the HTM layer.

A Nova NanoSEM 230 SEM was used to characterize the surficial and cross-sectional morphology of the samples. The atomic ratios were estimated using XPS (PHI 5000 VersaProbe). XRD patterns of the samples were collected on a Rigaku Ultima Ш X-ray diffractometer using Cu-Kα radiation (λ = 0.154178 nm) with a scan speed of 10° min−1. The light absorption properties of the samples were characterized at room temperature using a UV-vis spectrometer coupled with an integrating sphere (Shimadzu UV-2550). PL spectra were recorded at room temperature on a fluorescence spectrophotometer with an excited wavelength of 515 nm. Transient PL decay spectra were collected using the time-correlated single-photon counting technique (Picoharp 300). The electrochemical impedance spectra of the solar cells were measured on an IM6e Electrochemical Workstation (ZAHNER, Germany) with a 10 mV amplitude perturbation and frequencies between 100 Hz and 1 MHz. The J–V measurements of the solar cells were carried out in air with a relative humidity below 30% on a Keithley 2400 source measurement unit under simulated AM 1.5 illumination (standard 100 mW cm−2) cast by an Oriel 92251A-1000 sunlight simulator calibrated by the standard reference of a Newport 91150 silicon solar cell. The data were record with a voltage sweep from 1.2 V to −0.1 V at a scan speed of 100 mV s−1, and no preconditioning protocol has been used before the characterization. The IPCE spectrum was recorded versus wavelength without light bias using an Oriel QE-PV-SI (Newport Corporation).


This work was supported primarily by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (61377051), the National Basic Research Program of China (2013CB632404), the Natural Science Foundation and Key Research Project of Jiangsu Province (BK20130053, BK20141233, BE2015090). We thank Dr Ligang Ma and Dr Weichao Zhang for their informative discussions and experimental and technical assistance.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6dt00900j
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016