 DOI: 10.1039/D1TC02734D
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 14408-14420


Shuangxi
Yuan
,

Sining
Yun
*,

Yongwei
Zhang
,

Jiaoe
Dang
,

Menglong
Sun
,

Changwei
Dang
 and 

Yingying
Deng


Functional Materials Laboratory (FML), School of Materials Science and Engineering, Xi’an University of Architecture and Technology, No. 13, Yanta Road, Xi’an, Shaanxi 710055, P. R. China. E-mail: alexsyun1974@aliyun.com; yunsining@xauat.edu.cn

Qinghai Building and Materials Research Academy Co., Ltd., the Key Lab of Plateau Building and Eco-community in Qinghai, Xining, Qinghai 810000, P. R. China

Received
13th June 2021
, Accepted 13th September 2021
First published on 15th September 2021
Constructing cost-effective and robust counter electrodes (CEs) without noble metals remains a challenge for the commercialization of current dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). In this study, we focus on the built-in zinc element into the zeolitic imidazolate framework (ZIF-8) to construct a composite of dual-phase zinc selenide (ZnSe) encapsulated by the size-reduced ZIF-derived Se/N-doped carbon (PS N-CSR) using a post-selenization procedure. Benefitting from the enhanced synergy and charge transfer between the small-sized doped carbon skeleton and well-dispersed dual-phase ZnSe active sites, the resultant PS N-CSR exhibited superior catalytic activity and durability to the triiodide reduction reaction (IRR). The devices that utilize PS N-CSR CE achieved a high power conversion efficiency of 8.48%, surpassing that of Pt (7.20%). It is expected that this work will provide an extensible pathway for designing efficient hybrid electrocatalysts with beneficial structures containing transition metal compounds based on ZIF analogs.

Since Gräztel et al. first introduced dye-sensitized nanosized colloidal TiO2 films in dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), DSSCs have attracted vast interest as promising candidates for new-generation photovoltaic devices because of their cost-effective characteristics, facile fabrication, and diversity of constituents. Compared with other types of solar cells, particularly perovskite solar cells, DSSCs seem to fade in the work condition of full light irradiation. However, DSSCs still possess special advantages of high power conversion efficiency (PCE) under diffuse light or low-intensity light conditions and less dependence on ambient temperature, making them a potential source of electricity for indoor devices.

As a vital component, the counter electrode (CE) accounts for the collection of electrons from external circuits and catalysis in the reduction of redox mediators (like the reduction of I3− to I−). Up to now, platinum (Pt)-containing materials have been widely applied as CE catalysts for the triiodide reduction reaction (IRR) in typical DSSCs. However, the rare storage and high cost of Pt limit the wide application of DSSCs. Thus, the development of CEs prepared using non-noble metal materials with improved catalytic performance is one of the crucial solutions for the commercialization of DSSCs.
Earth-abundant transition metal compounds, especially transition metal chalcogenides (TMCs), have aroused considerable interest among many types of CE materials owing to the Pt-like catalytic behavior and low cost. However, universal defects, such as the relatively low electroconductivity and electrochemical stability, hinder their further application. To deal with these problems, combining TMCs with porous carbon to build the desired composites with rational structures renders a great strategy because of the porous carbon's high specific surface area, good electron/mass transport characteristics, and excellent chemical stability. Anam et al. reported a heterostructure composite consisting of multi-walled carbon nanotubes with Bi2S3 nanorods, and the DSSC based on the composite of Bi2S3 as CE reached a satisfactory PCE of 8.24%. Ou et al. fabricated the DSSC using transparent Cu2−xSe@N-doped carbon nanosheets as CE, which achieved a PCE of 7.61% in Co-media. Despite the progress of the aforementioned strategy to build well-defined TMC/carbon hybrid CEs, relatively less attention has been given to transition metal selenides (TMSs), as compared with transition metal sulfides, even though the former may show superior electrocatalytic activity.
For the construction of TMS/carbon composites, choosing precursors to achieve highly dispersed TMSs supported on defect-rich substrates in situ with a small size is essential in exposing more active sites and combining their respective advantages. Therefore, an enhanced synergy between selenides and carbon of small size is expected to induce the relative electrochemical activity of TMSs CEs in DSSCs. Bearing this in mind, ZIF-8, which is a type of zeolitic imidazolate frameworks (ZIFs), was selected as the precursor in this work to synthesize TMS/porous carbon composites because of its rich nitrogen (N) content for building uniform N-doped porous carbon with rich defects. It has already been reported that incorporating nitrogen into carbon matrices produces asymmetrical electron spin density and charge polarization between heteroatoms and carbon. Thus, the interaction between doped carbon and active sites (like metal compounds) may be invoked, resulting in improved electrochemical properties. Recently, many efforts have been made to introduce external metal elements (i.e., Fe, Cu, Co, and Ni) into ZIF-8 to construct highly efficient electrodes, but only a few works have focused on the initial zinc (Zn) element of ZIF-8, despite the proven active sites of the Zn moieties in many electrocatalysis fields. Although a report was previously published on utilizing hybrids of ZnSe/N-doped carbon cubes derived from ZIF-7 as catalysts in iodine-mediated DSSCs, their highest PCE (8.69%) was achieved with the assistance of the expensive conductive polymers, whereas the best PCE of the device based on the single ZnSe/N-doped carbon cube hybrid CE was much poorer (7.11%). Thus, the electrocatalytic potential of the ZIF-derived ZnSe/N-doped carbon must still be exploited. In this case, multiple heteroatom-doping events and size/morphology adjustments may be good options for enhancing the electrocatalytic properties.
Herein, we propose a simple strategy by means of post-selenization (PS) to synthesize a novel composite with the beneficial structure of dual-phase ZnSe encapsulated into a size-reduced (SR) ZIF-8-derived Se/N co-doped porous carbon skeleton in situ (PS N-CSR). Because of the close interaction of the reduced-sized heteroatom-doped carbon and dual-phase ZnSe with contacted interfaces, PS N-CSR exhibited superb IRR catalytic activity and electrochemical stability. Impressively, the DSSC based on PS N-CSR as the CE presented a superior PCE of 8.48%, exceeding the device utilizing the Pt CE a lot. It is believed that this work thus sheds light on constructing beneficial structures for efficient hybrid catalysts of transition metal compounds with a boosting synergetic effect.

All chemicals used in our experiment required no further treatments after being purchased: zinc nitrate hexahydrate (Zn(NO3)2·6H2O, 99%), 2-methylimidazole (H-MeIM, 98%), acetonitrile (99%), and methanol (99%) used as the solvent were purchased from Aladdin Chemistry Co., Ltd. Selenium powders (99%), methanol (99%) for washing, and ammonia aqueous solution (NH3·H2O, ∼25 wt%) came from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd. Commercial ZnSe (99%), guanidinium thiocyanate (99%), lithium iodide (LiI, 99%), 4-tert-butyl pyridine (TBP, ≥96%), 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium iodide (99%), and iodine (I2, 99%) were bought from Macklin Biochemical Technology Co., Ltd. The deionized water used in all experiments was obtained through ion exchange and filtration.


The preparation of ZIF-8 in this work utilizes the normal procedures with a slight modification, which can be found elsewhere. Typically, the molar ratio of Zn2+ to H-MeIM was maintained at 1:4. First, Zn(NO3)2·6H2O (3.378 g) and H-MeIM (3.696 g) were dissolved into two beakers containing methanol of 35 mL and 25 mL, respectively. Following a brief sonication of the aforementioned solutions, they were mixed into one beaker and stirred continuously for 8 h. Then, the obtained white precipitate was centrifuged, followed by washing with clean methanol. Finally, it was dried at 60 °C for half a day. After that, the normal ZIF-8 product was obtained. ZIF-8SR was synthesized using a similar method, except for the addition of NH3·H2O to control the pH at 9 approximately after the solutions of Zn2+ and H-MeIM were mixed.


The reduced-sized ZIF-8 powders were roughly ground. After that, they were placed in one capped porcelain boat and moved into the tube furnace to undergo the calcination process. The furnace tube was first filled with N2, and then these powders were pyrolyzed at 900 °C under successive N2 gas protection of 2 h with a set heating rate (5 °C min−1). According to previous works, the derived carbon pyrolyzed at 900 °C is expected to possess a high surface area, improved graphitized degree and desired N-doped active sites. When the sample was cooled down naturally, the as-obtained size-reduced ZIF-8 derived nitrogen-doped carbon (N-CSR) was ground carefully with a mortar and pestle, and collected for further use. Moreover, normal ZIF-8 derived nitrogen-doped carbon (N-C) was prepared by the above procedures.


In this work, a post-selenization method was adopted to synthesize selenic CE catalysts. Briefly, N-CSR and Se powders (the mass ratio of N-CSR to Se was 1:1) were first located at the opposite side of the porcelain boat. Then, the capped porcelain boat was arranged at the center of the tube furnace. Before the post-selenization, the sealed tube furnace was prefilled with N2 fluid. The process of selenization was held at 650 °C with a set heating rate (5 °C min−1) for 3 h. After the furnace was cooled down, the sample denoted as PS N-CSR was ground and collected carefully. To investigate the effects of temperatures on post-selenization, 550 °C and 750 °C were also set as the selenizing temperatures without other changes to the post-selenization process. The corresponding products were denoted as PS N-CSR 550 and PS N-CSR 750, respectively.


The CEs composed of N-C, N-CSR, commercial ZnSe, and PS N-CSR were prepared by the same process. Briefly, sample powders of 0.1 g were added into a vial containing 2 mL isopropanol with adequate ZrO2 pearls. Then, the vial was capped well and shaken carefully before undergoing successive ball-milling for 4 h. After milling, the obtained suspension was sprayed onto a cleaned tin oxide doped with fluorine (FTO)/glass substrates (Asahi Glass, type-U, 14 Ω sq−1, Japan) using an airbrush (TD-128, Tiandi, China). After that, the FTO plates covered with carbon catalysts were placed into the tube furnace and annealed at 400 °C for half an hour under the flowing N2 gas. The resultant CEs were obtained after the furnace was cooled naturally. Additionally, the Pt CE was obtained by sintering the FTO covered with a certain amount of platinum acid chloride dissolved in isopropyl alcohol at 500 °C for 30 min in air, and the above method was repeated at least 3 times.


The preparation of TiO2 photoanodes was based on our previous procedure. Briefly, the commercial nano-sized TiO2 film with a layer thickness of 12 μm was annealed at 500 °C in air for a half-hour. When the TiO2 film was cooled down to ∼80 °C, it was moved into a solution containing N719 dye (Solaronix SA, Switzerland) within one day to acquire the dye-sensitized TiO2 photoanodes.

A DSSC with a sandwich configuration having a 0.196 cm2 active area was assembled with a sensitized TiO2 photoanode, CE, and an electrolyte containing 0.1 M guanidinium thiocyanate, 0.06 M LiI, 0.6 M 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium iodide, 0.03 M I2, and 0.5 M 4-tert-butyl pyridine dissolved in acetonitrile as the solvent. Symmetrical cells were also fabricated by assembling two identical CEs filled with the same electrolyte used for DSSCs. Such symmetrical cells were utilized for Tafel polarization and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) tests.

The crystal structure, morphological characterization, and element distribution were carried out by an X-ray diffractometer (XRD, Cu Kα, k = 1.5406 Å, D/Max 2200, MDI), field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM, ZEISS, 5–15 kV) combined with an energy-dispersive spectrometer (EDS), and a high resolution transmission electron microscope (HRTEM, Talos F200X, 200 kV) coupled with EDS, respectively. The carbonaceous structure was also explored by a Raman confocal microscope (HORIBA LabRAM Odyssey, France) with the excitation laser of 532 nm. The chemical state and composition of PS N-CSR were analyzed by an X-ray photoelectron spectroscope (XPS, Thermo ESCALAB 250XI, America) using Al Kα (1486.6 eV) radiation and the C 1s peak at 284.8 eV as the reference. The exact quantitative analyses of the Zn and Se elements were conducted by an inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometer (ICP-OES, Agilent 5110, Australia). The nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherms at 77 K were recorded on an automated gas-sorption system (Micromeritics ASAP 2460 2.01, America). The specific surface area and pore-structure of the porous carbon were obtained using the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) method and nonlocal density functional theory (NLDFT), respectively. The photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) properties of the DSSCs were characterized by a Keithley 2400 device under AM 1.5G irradiation with a simulated light source of 0.1 W per cm2 (Oriel 94023A, Newport). Before the test, the light source was corrected to the AM 1.5G solar standard by using the referenced Si solar cell.


To evaluate the IRR capability of the as-prepared CEs, cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurements were recorded through a CHI602E electrochemical workstation (Chenhua, Shanghai, China) via a three-electrodes system with the argon-purged acetonitrile solution consisting of 1 mM I2, 1 M LiClO4, and 10 mM LiI. Briefly, Pt wire, as-prepared CE, and the Ag/AgCl electrode were regarded as the counter electrode, working electrode, and reference electrode, respectively. Stability tests of the above CEs were also carried out via CV measurements with successive 50 cycles at the selected scan rate (50 mV s−1). Tafel polarization and EIS tests were processed under the symmetrical cells system measured by a CHI660E electrochemical analyzer (Chenhua, Shanghai, China). Tafel polarization plots were measured in the range of −0.8 to 0.8 V at a set scan rate (10 mV s−1). In the EIS tests, all cells were scanned by applying an alternating current amplitude of 0.01 V under a 0 V bias potential from 100 MHz to 100 kHz. Then, the recorded EIS data were analyzed by Z-view software.


As shown in Scheme 1, the synthesis of PS N-CSR was achieved using a valid protocol involving both size adjustments of ZIF precursors by introducing NH3·H2O and post-selenization technique. In the XRD patterns of the precursors (Fig. 1a), it can be seen that the characteristic peaks of the precursors of ZIF-8 and ZIF-8SR match the simulated ZIF-8 diffraction spectrum well, indicating the successful syntheses of the ZIF-8 crystals. Meanwhile, there are only two broad peaks around 26° and 43° belonging to graphitic carbon for the XRD spectra of N-C and N-CSR (Fig. 1b). The absence of the XRD peaks of Zn for the ZIF-derived carbon was also reported in previous work. This phenomenon may be due to the relatively low content of the residual Zn element and the high dispersion of the Zn species in the forms of the coordinated ZnNX structure. Moreover, the obvious characteristic peaks of ZnSe with cubic and hexagonal phases (PDF card No. 88-2345 and No. 80-0008) are observed in Fig. 1b for PS N-CSR, pointing to the successful synthesis of ZnSe encapsulated into the ZIF-derived carbon skeleton.

The carbonaceous structure of PS N-CSR was analyzed by Raman spectrum in detail. In Fig. 1c, the first-order defect-induced D band (∼1350 cm−1) and graphite-like G band (∼1580 cm−1) were detected with a peak-intensity ratio (ID/IG) of 1.08, indicating the defect-rich structure of ZIF-derived carbon sekeleton. A broadened peak (2D band) located at 2700 cm−1 revealed the presence of turbostratic stacked graphene-layers in PS N-CSR. Moreover, the morphologies of ZIF-8 precursors and the corresponding derivatives were characterized by FESEM. Compared with the rhombic dodecahedral ZIF-8 crystal, most of the ZIF-8SR polyhedrons achieve a much smaller grain size below 200 nm (Fig. 2a and b), which usually leads to the trend of accumulation for ZIF-8SR due to their high surface energy. It should be noted that the addition of a certain amount of NH3·H2O to the mixed methanol solution of Zn(NO3)2 and H–MeIM could lead to a rapid crystallization and growth of ZIF-8. Consequently, vast interlinked microcrystals may form instantly.
After undergoing the pyrolysis and post-selenization treatment, ZIF-8SR was transformed to N-CSR and PS N-CSR in turn with the inherited morphology. Additionally, N-C was prepared for comparison via the same pyrolysis methods. As shown in Fig. 2c and d, most of the N-CSR polyhedrons still possess a much smaller grain size than N-C, indicating its larger surface area, which is proved by the following BET surface area analyses. A larger surface area may render more exposed nitrogen-doped active sites and enhanced electrochemical catalytic performance. Thus, N-CSR was chosen as the intermediator to construct PS N-CSR. From Fig. 2e, no obvious big particles of ZnSe crystals are found. Meanwhile, the obtained PS N-CSR also retains the morphology and size distribution of N-CSR. The SEM-EDS mapping graphs (Fig. 2f and Fig. S1a, ESI) and SEM-EDS spectrum (Fig. S1b and c, ESI) of PS N-CSR verify that the Zn, Se, N, and C elements are evenly distributed in the ZIF-derived carbon.
In the TEM and magnified TEM images of PS N-CSR (Fig. 3a and b), the rough polyhedron feature with tiny ZnSe grains embedded in a porous carbon framework are further clarified. Some unexpected big polyhedrons with the size around 500 nm may be due to the inhomogeneous dispersion of NH3·H2O during the synthesis of ZIF-8. In the HRTEM image of Fig. 3c, the lattice spacings (d) of 0.33 nm and 0.28 nm are attributed to the (111) and (200) facets of cubic ZnSe. Meanwhile, lattice fringes with d of 0.17 nm and 0.24 nm are assigned to the (200) and (102) planes of hexagonal ZnSe. The adjacent dual phased ZnSe is expected to expose more active sites at the interface. The facet information is proved by the fast Fourier transform (FFT) in Fig. 3d, and extra facets including the (311) and (400) planes of cubic ZnSe and (100) plane of hexagonal ZnSe are also revealed. Inverse fast Fourier transform (IFFT) images of the individual facet are also given in Fig. 3e. Moreover, elemental mapping of the selected area (area 1) and TEM-EDS spectrum (Fig. 3f–h and Fig. 4a) was performed to give insight into the elemental composition in separated carbonaceous polyhedrons, which matched well with the SEM-EDS spectrum in Fig. S1c (ESI).
The XPS technique was also adopted to analyze the details of the composition and chemical state near the surface of PS-N-CSR. From the survey spectrum (Fig. 4b), obvious orbit and Auger peaks undoubtedly confirm the presence of Zn, Se, N, and C species in PS N-CSR. Meanwhile, in Table S1 (ESI), the consistency of the contents analyzed from the EDS spectrum and XPS survey spectrum may further indicate that the obtained ZnSe has a uniform dispersion into the whole carbon framework because of the different detection depths of the above techniques. To further accurately quantify the Zn and Se elements in PS N-CSR, ICP-OES was conducted. From Table S2 (ESI), the contents of the Zn and Se elements in PS N-CSR are 11.20 wt% and 7.33 wt%, respectively. Additionally, the approximation of the Zn content in PS N-CSR and N-CSR indicates that residual Zn in N-CSR could survive and transform into ZnSe crystals following post-selenization.
In the deconvolution of the C 1s signal (Fig. 4c), fitted peaks located at 288.19 eV, 284.65 eV, 285.56 eV, and 286.67 eV should be assigned to the chemical bonding of CO, C–Se/C–C, C–N, and CSe/C–O, respectively. Meanwhile, the N 1s spectrum (Fig. 4d) is divided into four portions corresponding to the predominant pyridinic N (398.56 eV), pyrrolic N (400.65 eV), and graphitic N (402.46 eV) accompanied with NOx (403.38 eV), respectively. According to previous works, pyridinic N and graphitic N may be more active to catalyze IRR, as compared with pyrrolic N. Thus, PS N-CSR was expected to have great catalytic ability to the IRR because of the predominant species of pyridinic N (Table S3, ESI). In fine scans of Zn 2p (Fig. 4e), only the signal of the characteristic spin–orbit splitting of Zn2+ with a separation of 23 eV is observed, whose Zn 2p3/2 is located at 1021.75 eV, indicating the complete transformation of the Zn species towards ZnSe. Moreover, compared with the referenced bulk ZnSe in earlier reports, a slight negative movement of Zn 2p3/2 (−0.15 eV) is observed. This may suggest the existence of an interaction (charge transfer) between ZnSe and the surrounding heteroatom-doped carbons, which could induce the improved electrocatalytic activity of PS N-CSR due to an increase of the ZnSe electron density.
The selenium doping and the existence of ZnSe in PS N-CSR were also confirmed by the high-resolution spectrum of Se 3d (Fig. 4f). The three separate doublets of Se2− (53.64/54.43 eV), C–Se/CSe (55.75/56.35 eV), and SeOx (58.37/58.97 eV) correspond to the bonding of ZnSe, the introduction of Se species into a carbon framework, and surface oxidation of ZnSe in turn. Combining the XPS results of the C, N, and Se spectra, N and Se are doped into a carbon framework of PS N-CSR. Based on the above characterizations, it could be concluded that the dual-phase ZnSe and heteroatom doping (Se, N) are successfully introduced into the reduced-sized ZIF-8 derived carbon framework for PS N-CSR.
The surface areas and porosity structures of PS N-CSR were assessed by the N2 absorption–desorption isotherm. In Fig. 5a–c, all ZIF-derived porous carbon display the type I isotherms with a steep rise around the region of P/P0 = 1, verifying the microporous characteristic with a small amount of larger mesopores and macropores. As shown in Fig. 5d, N-CSR possesses a calculated BET surface area of 706.96 m2 g−1, which is higher than that of N-C (660.58 m2 g−1).
Although the BET surface area of PS N-CSR decreased to 614.02 m2 g−1 after post-selenization, it is still higher than the previously reported ZIF-derived selenide/carbon hybrids with the surface areas around 100–200 m2 g−1. Moreover, the porosity distributions calculated from the NL-DFT method shown in the insets of Fig. 5a–c and Fig. S2 (ESI) reveal the hierarchical pore structure in these ZIF-derived carbon catalysts. In detail, besides the main micropores, the co-existence of mesopores and macropores at 15–60 nm is much more obvious in PS N-CSR than other ZIF-derived carbon. Benefitting from these advantages, PS N-CSR with sufficient active sites is expected to possess great mass transfer ability during electrocatalysis.

Prior to fabricating the DSSCs using N-C, N-CSR, and PS N-CSR as CEs in turn, the IRR catalytic performance of the above samples was first examined by systematic electrochemical tests, including CV, EIS, and Tafel polarization techniques. For comparison, commercial ZnSe was used as the CE catalyst to elucidate the synergetic catalytic effect between the ZnSe crystals and heteroatom-doped carbon substrate. As shown in Fig. 6a, only one pair of peaks related to the redox between I− and I3− (Eqn 1) is observed in the relative negative potential region, whereas another pair located at a more positive potential area represents the redox of I3− and I2 (Eqn 2).

I3− + 2e− ↔ 3I−
(1)
3I2 + 2e− ↔ 2I3−
(2)
It should be noted that for carbon materials, the pair of redox peaks of I3− /I2 at high-potential regions is sometimes not obvious. The current density (Ip) of the highest reduction peaks at low potential and the smallest peak-to-peak separation (Epp) belonging to PS N-CSR both indicate its excellent IRR catalytic capability among all CEs (Table 1). Additionally, although Pt exhibits great catalytic activity to the IRR, its CV curves usually present a lower current density of the reduction peak for the IRR. This may be ascribed to diffusion control rather than intrinsic catalytic activity in determining the IRR during CV measurement, which deviated from the real work condition of CE in cells.
Samples

E
pp (V)

I
p (mA cm−2)

R
tm (Ω cm2)

R
ct (Ω cm2)

R
s (Ω cm2)

J
0
 (mA cm−2)

J
lim (mA cm−2)

a The J0 calculated from the eqn (3).

PS N-CSR
0.46
−2.34
—
1.28
7.58
10.04
30.20
N-CSR
0.57
−2.27
3.58
1.22
6.36
2.68
17.78
N-C
0.60
−2.17
—
5.1
10.66
2.52
18.62
Pt
0.53
−0.96
—
2.47
5.47
5.20
32.36
ZnSe
0.70
−1.62
—
3.23
13.78
3.98
2.01
To reveal more details of the electrode reaction approaching the real situation of CEs in DSSCs, Tafel polarization and EIS measurements were conducted using the configuration of symmetrical cells. From Fig. 6b, the Nyquist spectra of bulk ZnSe, Pt, N-C, and PS N-CSR exhibit the shapes with two semicircles, which could be fitted using a typical Randles-type equivalent circuit (Fig. S3a, ESI). The relevant fitted parameters were collected in Table 1. The Ohmic series resistance (Rs) was calculated from the intersection between the first semicircle with high frequency and the real axis, corresponding to a sum of the sheet resistance and contact resistance of the CE catalyst and FTO substrate. The first left semicircle within the high-frequency region reflects the charge transfer resistance (Rct), which correlates inversely with the electrocatalytic activity in parallel with the constant phase element (CPE). Moreover, the right arc of the low frequency could be regarded as the Nernst diffusion impedance (Zw) related to the diffusion resistance of the reactant during the IRR process. Exceptionally, three arcs appear in the spectrum of N-CSR. Thus, as shown in Fig. S3b (ESI), a different equivalent circuit was utilized for fitting. The first semicircle at the highest frequencies could be considered as the transmission resistance (Rtm) with the CPE, which accounted for the adsorption of the I3−/I− species on the basal planes of graphitic carbon. The aforementioned adsorption is helpful to the charge transmission from the graphitic basal planes to the active sites in the IRR, as proved by the relative DFT calculation. Thus, in the spectrum of N-CSR, the following second semicircle in the middle-frequency range is regarded as the Rct coupled with the CPE, while the last arc (right side) is assigned to Zw. Such different EIS spectra between N-CSR and N-C may derive from the fact that N-CSR possesses a much smaller particle size than the counterpart (N-C), leading to a larger surface area and sufficient exposure of nitrogen-doped graphitic basal planes. When N-CSR was transformed to PS N-CSR, the predominant active sites for iodine adsorption were changed from the N-doped species to well-dispersed dual-phase ZnSe grains supported by the carbon framework. As a result, the first small circles correlated with Rtm may become unobvious or absent in the EIS spectrum of PS N-CSR.
As shown in Table 1, to evaluate the electrocatalytic activity of different catalysts more rationally, the sum of the Rct and Rtm (4.8 Ω cm2) was calculated to reflect the effective charge-transfer resistance (Rect) to N-CSR. In this case, PS N-CSR demonstrated the most powerful catalytic activity to the IRR due to its Rct minimum (1.28 Ω cm2) among all types of catalysts. Furthermore, from the Tafel polarization curves (Fig. 6c), the highest exchanged current density (J0) obtained by extrapolation further proves the excellent catalytic activity of PS N-CSR. Moreover, the high limiting diffusion current density (Jlim) of PS N-CSR approaching Pt most closely indicates its well mass transfer capability, while the Jlim of ZnSe is the lowest (Table 1). The values of the Jlim for these CE catalysts match the trend of the Zw well, as presented in their EIS plots.
Encouraged by the excellent IRR catalytic property of the PS N-CSR CE, the characteristic J–V performance tests were conducted for the DSSCs assembled with different types of CEs at the irradiation of 1 sun. In Fig. 6d, the DSSC utilizing the PS N-CSR CE presents the highest PCE of 8.48%, and its relevant parameters of open-circuit voltage (Voc), photoelectric short-circuit current density (Jsc), and fill factor (FF) are 0.77 V, 17.00 mA cm−2, and 0.65, respectively. By contrast, the commercial ZnSe CE assembled solar cell exhibits a much poorer PCE of 5.34% with a much lower FF of 0.47. As compared with the DSSCs based on other types of CEs (Pt, ZnSe, N-C, and N-CSR) in Table 2, the best photovoltaic performance of DSSC utilizing the PS N-CSR CE originated from the highest FF and Jsc, while the Voc values are similar in these solar cells. These results demonstrate the superior synergetic catalytic effect of the dual-phase ZnSe embedded in the N, Se-doped carbon matrix consistent with the above results of Rct. It is also notable that the photovoltaic performance of the DSSC utilizing the PS N-CSR CE is prominent, as compared with the recently reported nonprecious metal-based CE catalysts-assembled DSSCs (Table S4, ESI).
CEs

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF
PCE (%)
PS N-CSR
17.00
0.77
0.65
8.48
N-CSR
13.38
0.81
0.62
6.75
N-C
14.16
0.75
0.58
6.17
Pt
14.76
0.76
0.64
7.20
ZnSe
15.91
0.72
0.47
5.34
Moreover, based on eqn 3, the J0 could be calculated to further testify catalytic activity of the aforementioned CE catalysts:
J0 = RT/nFRct
(3)
where
n, F, T, and R represent the electron transfer number, Faraday constant, room temperature (298 K), and gas constant, respectively. For a good DSSC based on the CE catalyst with high catalytic activity, the calculated J0 to the symmetric cell should be comparable with the Jsc of the practical solar cell of the same CE as far as possible. From Tables 1 and 2, it should be noted that among all CE catalysts, only the PS N-CSR CE achieves a calculated J0 (10.04 mA cm−2) that more closely approaches the Jsc of its assembled DSSC, which further suggests its more powerful catalytic property to the IRR, causing the enhanced dye regeneration at the photoanode.

The effect of the post-selenization temperature on the IRR catalytic properties was investigated in this work. For further comparison, 550 °C and 750 °C were adopted as the post-selenization temperatures to synthesize the selenic CE catalysts, which were denoted as PS N-CSR 550 and PS N-CSR 750, respectively. As shown in Fig. S4a and Table S5 (ESI), the PS N-CSR-assembled solar cell exhibits superior PCE (8.48%) with a higher JSC, as compared with the devices based on PS N-CSR 550 (7.23%) and PS N-CSR 750 (7.72%). The optimized photovoltaic performances are also consistent with the improved electrocatalytic properties of PS N-CSR at moderate selenization temperature (650 °C), which were confirmed in relative Tafel polarization and EIS tests (Fig. S4b and c and Table S5, ESI). These results may be ascribed to the more obvious two-phase composition of ZnSe in PS N-CSR, as compared with PS N-CSR 550 and PS N-CSR 750, as presented in their XRD patterns of Fig. S5 (ESI), which could provide more active reactive interfaces. It can be concluded that 650 °C is the most suitable temperature for the selenization of N-CSR to construct an efficient selenide hybrid catalyst.
Apart from the requirement of great catalytic activity for a practical CE used in DSSCs, good electrochemical stability is also necessary. In this case, successive CV tests of 50 cycles were applied to evaluate the electrocatalytic stability of the aforementioned CE catalysts. It could be seen that in Fig. 7, both CE catalysts of PS N-CSR and N-CSR exhibit little activity loss, as indicated by the negligible decrease in the peak current density with the reduction of I3−. By contrast, Pt CE suffers an obvious decline of the reduction peak current density. Accordingly, our CE catalysts (PS N-CSR and N-CSR) present a much more satisfactory electrocatalytic stability, rendering them promising alternatives to Pt.
On the basis of the aforementioned electrochemical analyses and photovoltaic performance tests, PS N-CSR stood out from all types of CE catalysts with superior catalytic properties towards IRR. The excellent catalytic activity of PS N-CSR could be ascribed to its beneficial composite structure, which produced enhanced synergetic effects in terms of the following. First, the charge transfer from the heteroatom (Se, N) co-doped carbon matrix to the active dual-phase ZnSe with increased electron density motivated the catalytic activity of the composites. Here, a deeper understanding of the IRR catalytic mechanism of PS N-CSR based on the density functional theory must be addressed in our future work. Second, the adjacent dua-phase ZnSe crystals also provided a greater number of exposed active sites for enhanced synergetic catalysis. In addition, a heteroatom (Se, N) co-doped carbon matrix within the reduced-sized ZIF-8 derived porous carbon not only inhibited the aggregation of the grains of ZnSe, but also ensured fast electron and mass transport to ZnSe compounds, thereby facilitating the interfacial electrode reaction of the triiodide reduction. Finally, the protective effect of the covered porous carbon layers around the dual-phase ZnSe suppressed the erosion of the electrolytes, which accounted for the enhanced electrochemical stability of PS N-CSR.

In this work, PS N-CSR was prepared by a feasible strategy combining the size control of ZIF precursors and post-selenization at an optimized temperature as a highly efficient composite catalyst for the IRR. Its excellent triiodide reduction ability could be attributed to the boosting synergetic effects and interaction between the heteroatom-doped porous carbon framework and well-dispersed dual-phase ZnSe with adjacent interface. These enhanced synergetic effects could induce superior catalytic behavior of ZnSe and facilitate electron and mass transport towards the active sites of contacted dual-phase ZnSe during the process of the IRR. The solar cells assembled with the PS N-CSR CE achieved a champion PCE of 8.48%, considerably surpassing that of Pt (7.20%). In addition, PS N-CSR demonstrated its better catalytic stability for the IRR, as compared with Pt. Further improvement of DSSCs should focus on the match and cooperation among Pt-free CEs, photoanodes, dyes and electrolytes, and should not be limited to the iodine species. This work should increase interest in exploiting the application of novel TMC composites with beneficial structures constructed by ZIF analogs in wider energy conversion and storage fields.


There are no conflicts to declare.


Financial support from NSFC (51672208), National Key R&D Program of China (2018YFB1502902), Key Program for International S&T Cooperation Projects of Shaanxi Province (2019KWZ-03, 2019JZ-20), Sci-Tech R&D Program of Shaanxi Province (2015JM5183), and Open foundation Project of Key Laboratory of Plateau Green Building and Ecological Community of Qinghai Province (KLKF-2019-002) is greatly acknowledged. We also would like to thank Editage (www.editage.cn) for English language editing.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1tc02734d
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021