 DOI: 10.1039/C2JM34918C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 23022-23029

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Hong Goo
Jeon
,

Chan Youn
Cho
,

Jung Chul
Shin
 and 

Byoungchoo
Park
*

Department of Electrophysics, Kwangwoon University, Seoul 139-701, Korea. E-mail: bcpark@kw.ac.kr; Fax: +82 2943 3208; Tel: +82 2940 5237

Received
25th July 2012
, Accepted 16th September 2012
First published on 19th September 2012
We herein report on the photovoltaic (PV) effect of inverted polymer solar cells (PSCs) that consist of a bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) PV layer and a sol–gel-derived zinc oxide (ZnO) electron-selective layer, produced by a simple pre-metered horizontal-dipping (H-dipping) process. For the BHJ PV layers that consisted of poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and [6,6]-phenyl C61 butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) (P3HT:PCBM) with an indium-tin-oxide (ITO) cathode and an Ag anode, it was shown that the use of the H-dipping process in the fabrication of inverted PSCs resulted in a reliable and reproducible device performance; furthermore, an inverted P3HT:PCBM PSC fabricated by H-dip-coating had a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 2.93%, which within the deviations seen was slightly higher than that of a reference device (2.75%) fabricated by conventional spin-coating. This device performance may be attributed to the homogeneous formation of functional ZnO and PV layers on the ITO cathode. Moreover, the H-dipping process was also applied to fabricate PV cells on a large-area substrate (50 × 50 mm2), which also showed that the fabrication of large-area inverted PSCs is relatively straightforward. The use of this pre-metered coating process in the fabrication of ZnO layers could be of considerable benefit in the future development of all-solution- and/or large-area inverted PSCs.

Recent advances in polymer solar cell (PSC) technology have made use of composites of conjugated polymers and fullerenes; such devices have been of interest as potential sources of renewable energy ever since the photo-induced transfer of electrons from a conjugated polymer donor to a fullerene acceptor was first reported. The major advantages of this sort of PSC technology lie in its potential to provide devices that are environmentally safe, mechanically flexible, and lightweight, as well as in the low costs of the large-area and high-speed solution coating and printing processes used in fabrication, such as the roll-to-roll (R2R) technique. Of particular relevance in the efficient generation of photocurrents in polymer composite photovoltaic (PV) layers in PSCs is the bulk heterojunction (BHJ) structure, which is composed of bicontinuous interpenetrating networks of separated polymer and fullerene phases within the PV layer itself. The application of certain advances in the structure and processes of the BHJ has made it possible to achieve efficient PSCs with a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 3–5% under AM 1.5 (AM = air mass) illumination; such devices have been demonstrated using PV layers of poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and phenyl C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM). However, such normal-structure BHJ PSCs can suffer degradation, because they generally consist of a metallic cathode with a low work function, e.g., aluminium or calcium, which reacts easily with water or oxygen in air, reducing the stability of the fabricated PSC devices. It is therefore generally recognized that PSC devices need to be more stable and efficient for a range of practical applications. The use of a more stable material than Al in the cathode of a PSC could increase the lifetime of a typical device. There has recently been a heightened interest in the use of inverted-structure PSCs, in which the charge-collecting nature of the electrodes is reversed, i.e., a modified ITO is used as the cathode and a metal with a high work function is used as the anode. The inverted configuration provides long-term stability and flexibility to the design and fabrication of advanced PSCs. To produce an efficient inverted PSC, a number of materials have been suggested for the electron-collecting interlayer, such as tin oxide (SnO2), cesium carbonate (Cs2CO3), titanium oxide (TiOx), and zinc oxide (ZnO), with the aim of modifying the interface between the PV active layer and the ITO cathode in order to match the work function of the ITO cathode with the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) level of the acceptor. Among the possible materials for the electron-collecting interlayer, one of the most stable and efficient so far suggested is ZnO, due to its high electron mobility and high transparency in the visible wavelength range. Using a ZnO electron-selective interlayer on the ITO cathode, efficient inverted PSCs have been developed with a high work function metal anode such as Ag. These have the inverted structure [ITO cathode/ZnO electron selective layer/P3HT:PCBM PV layer/hole selective layer/Ag anode], and PCEs of up to 3% have been reported for such devices. More recently, using a ZnO electron-selective layer and a molybdenum trioxide (MoO3) hole-selective layer, a high PCE of 5–6% has also been reported for an inverted PSC with a blend of the low band-gap polymer poly[N-9′-hepta-decanyl-2,7-carbazole-alt-5,5-(4′,7′-di-2-thienyl-2′,1′,3′-benzothiadiazole)] and the phenyl C71-butyric acid methyl ester, thereby demonstrating one of the best performances to date for an inverted PSC.

Despite the foregoing achievements, relatively little progress has so far been made in high-throughput processing, in terms of the design of a reliable and simple fabrication process that ensures the formation of flat, uniform layers of the inverted PSCs over large areas, which is particularly important for achieving an efficient and reliable device performance. In the fabrication of inverted PSCs, thin functional layers, especially for the electron-selective ZnO interlayer, can be prepared using chemical vapor deposition (CVD) or a wet solution-coating process. Although the inverted PSCs manufactured using a ZnO layer prepared using a vacuum-deposition process have a good performance record, the vacuum-deposition process itself is rather complex and expensive. The application of the CVD-prepared ZnO layer has therefore been rather limited, and relatively little progress has been made in the development of low-cost processable electron-collecting layers, restricting their application across the range of possible devices. Meanwhile, solution-coating processes are also of interest for preparing ZnO layers, because these techniques make a simple production technique that uses a non-vacuum process possible. Spin-coating techniques have generally hitherto been the most popular method of producing sol–gel-derived ZnO layers or ZnO nanoparticle layers. For example, ZnO electron-selective interlayers were formed by spin-coating sol–gel precursors in inverted PSCs, yielding PCEs of about 3%. However, although the spin-coating method is simple and convenient, it has several serious disadvantages, including the high stress caused by the spinning motion, the poor uniformity at the edges of coated areas, and the large amounts of wasted solution. These factors make spin-coating unsuited for the homogeneous coating of large areas. Alternative methods suggested for depositing the solution are blade-coating, slot-die coating, screen printing, ink-jet printing, and so on. Using such techniques, ZnO layers may be formed on substrates in a controlled fashion. However, in view of the continued difficulty of controlling the uniformity of the large-area ZnO interlayers using conventional coating methods, further research on techniques for solution deposition is required to achieve the simpler and more reliable fabrication of large-area ZnO electron-collecting layers. It is hoped that the results of such research will lead to rapid, large-area fabrication combined with all-solution-processing with R2R, which could potentially be used for future mass production. We therefore herein focus our research on a simple and reliable solution-based preparation of the thin functional layers, in particular the ZnO electron-collecting interlayer and the PV layer on the ITO cathode, both of which are of key importance for the further development of all-solution-inverted PSCs or large-area inverted PSCs. The aim of the study described herein was therefore to investigate methods of solution deposition in ambient atmospheres without the use of a vacuum process, with the ultimate goal of achieving a simple and reliable all-solution coating process for all the functional layers of inverted PSCs, in order to develop technologies of high-throughput processing for inverted PSCs.
In order to develop such all-solution-processing, it should be remembered that different layer-forming methods and operating parameters are optimal for different functional layers in inverted PSCs. It is therefore necessary to investigate and test various coating and/or printing materials and methods in order to find the best one for each functional layer. Unlike the various methods suggested for forming PV layers, however, the electron-collecting layers of the inorganic ZnO semiconductor have mainly been fabricated using a spin-coating method, and therefore the fabrication and characterization of ZnO layers have not been studied widely, apart from a very few trials using the R2R process, as mentioned above.
We herein report on the fabrication of efficient and large-area inverted BHJ PSCs, which we achieved via the fabrication of a sol–gel processable ZnO electron-collecting interlayer, together with an active PV layer, via a pre-metered coating process, namely the horizontal-dip (H-dip) coating method. The aim was to assess the particular suitability of this method for processing both the ZnO and PV layers. We herein demonstrate for the first time that pre-metered H-dip coating produced quite homogeneous and uniform electron-collecting layers of inorganic ZnO semiconductor as well as of organic PV layers. As a result, we show that the introduction of H-dip-coated ZnO and PV layers into inverted PSCs improves the PV performance of inverted P3HT:PCBM PSCs. Thanks to this, the ZnO and PV layers produced using this pre-metered coating process could now be used in the fabrication of efficient, large-area, reproducible, and high-performance solution-processed inverted PSCs.

P3HT (1-Material), PCBM (Nanostructured Carbon Inc.), and MoO3 (Sigma-Aldrich) were used as received from the manufacturers. The inverted PSCs on glass substrates were fabricated using a sandwich-like configuration, with an ITO (80 nm, 30 ohm per square) cathode and an Ag anode, and built according to the following procedure. ITO coated glass substrates were cleaned by ultrasonic treatment in acetone and isopropyl alcohol and successive UV-ozone treatment for 5 min. For the fabrication of an electron-selective ZnO layer, a sol–gel derived ZnO precursor was H-dip-coated on the cleaned ITO coated glass substrates. The details of the preparation of the ZnO precursor are similar to those described in earlier experiments. Zinc acetate-2-hydrate [Zn(CH3COO)2·2H2O] was used as the source of zinc. 2-Methoxyethanol (CH3OCH2CH2OH) and ethanolamine were used as the solvent and stabilizer, respectively. The concentration of zinc acetate-2-hydrate was 5 wt%, and the precursor solution was mixed thoroughly for 2 hours at 60 °C using a magnetic stirrer. An extremely small volume of the precursor solution (ca. 10 μl) per unit coating area (10 × 10 mm2) was fed into the gap between the cylindrical barrier (SUS steel, R = 6.35 mm) and the ITO glass substrate using a syringe pump (Pump Systems Inc. NE-1000). The height of the gap h0 was adjusted vertically using two micrometers, one at each end of the cylindrical barrier, and the carrying speed U was controlled using a computer-controlled translation stage (SGSP26-200, Sigma Koki Co., Ltd). After a meniscus of the precursor solution was formed uniformly on the substrate, the substrate was moved horizontally, so that the barrier caused the meniscus of the solution to spread evenly on the moving ITO substrate. The transporting speed U was 1.5 cm s−1. It took 2 seconds to prepare a complete ZnO precursor film on the ITO substrate with an area of 1.8 × 2.0 cm2. The H-dip-coated ZnO precursor layer was then dried using a heating plate at 300 °C for 10 min to evaporate the solvent and remove organic residuals. After that, the precursor film was inserted in a furnace and annealed in an ambient atmosphere at a temperature of 450 °C for 60 min to crystallize the ZnO thin film (thickness: ca. 90 nm). Next, a thin Cs2CO3 electron-collecting buffer layer (thickness: ca. 5 nm) was also H-dip-coated on top of the ZnO layer and fabricated using a solution of Cs2CO3 dissolved in water (0.2 wt%). Next, in order to prepare the active PV layer, a solution of P3HT (1.20 wt%) and PCBM (0.88 wt%), dissolved in 1,2-dichlorobenzene at 40 °C for 24 hours, was also H-dip-coated on top of the Cs2CO3 buffer layer and annealed at 120 °C for 3 min. The coated P3HT:PCBM PV layer had a thickness of about 220 nm. A ca. 20 nm thick MoO3 layer was also formed on top of the P3HT:PCBM PV layer by thermal deposition (0.05 nm s−1) at a base pressure below 2.7 × 10−4 Pa in order to fabricate the hole-selective buffer layer. Finally, a pure Ag (ca. 100 nm thick) anode layer was then formed on the MoO3 interlayer under the same vacuum conditions, with the resulting active area of the fabricated device being 3 × 3 mm2. Following the fabrication of the inverted P3HT:PCBM PSCs, the devices were annealed at 150 °C for 10 min to induce the crystallization of the PV layer (i.e., post-thermal annealing). Thus, the device structure of the sample PSC was [ITO cathode/H-dip-coated ZnO/H-dip-coated Cs2CO3/H-dip-coated P3HT:PCBM/MoO3/Ag anode] (sample cell, H/H). For comparative purposes, we also fabricated three reference PSCs using the conventional spin-coating process for each of the (ZnO/Cs2CO3) layers and/or the P3HT:PCBM active layer, i.e., [ITO cathode/H-dip-coated ZnO/H-dip-coated Cs2CO3/Spin-coated P3HT:PCBM/MoO3/Ag anode] (H/S), [ITO cathode/Spin-coated ZnO/Spin-coated Cs2CO3/H-dip-coated P3HT:PCBM/MoO3/Ag anode] (S/H), and [ITO cathode/Spin-coated ZnO/Spin-coated Cs2CO3/Spin-coated P3HT:PCBM/MoO3/Ag anode] (S/S). It should be noted that, apart from the differences in the solution-coating processes as described, all the comparative reference PSCs were fabricated using exactly the same structures and layer thicknesses as those used for the sample cell (H/H).


The optical properties of the solution-coated layers were investigated using a Cary 1E (Varian) UV–vis spectrometer. Topographic images of the surfaces of the layers studied were obtained using scanning atomic force microscopy (AFM, Nanosurf easyscan2 FlexAFM, Nanosurf AG Switzerland Inc.). A contact mode was used, with a cantilever (CONTR-10 point probe-silicon, Nanoworld, Inc.). In order to assess the quality of the fabricated ZnO layer, we studied the nanostructures of the layers using X-ray diffraction (XRD-Rigaku D/max 2200, λ = 1.54 Å). The work functions of the ITO electrodes coated with ZnO layers were also determined using a Kelvin probe (Scanning Kelvin Probe 5050, KP Technology). The performance of the inverted PSCs was measured under an illumination intensity of 100 mW cm−2, generated using an AM 1.5 G light source (Newport, 96000 Solar Simulator). The photocurrent-versus-voltage characteristics were measured using a source meter (Keithley 2400), and calibrated using a reference cell (Bunkoh-keiki, BS-520). The incident photon-to-current collection efficiency (IPCE) spectra were measured using an IPCE measurement system (Titan Electro-optics Co., QE-IPCE 3000). Prior to each measurement, all cells were stored in an inert gas environment and all measurements were made under environmental conditions.


It is well known that the thickness of a film fabricated using the pre-metered coating process increases with the capillary number (Ca), where Ca = (μU/σ). Here, μ and σ represent the viscosity and surface tension of the coating solution, respectively, and U is the coating speed. Schematic illustrations of the pre-metered H-dipping process are shown in Fig. 1(a). The thickness of the H-dip-coated film can be described by the associated drag-out problem proposed by Landau and Levich, in which the (wet) thickness (h) of the film obtained may be described using the well known relationship

h = 1.34(μU/σ)2/3Rd; nRd = (x2d/2R + 2h0) − h,
(1)
where
Rd and R represent the radii of the associated downstream meniscus and cylindrical coating barrier, respectively. The value of n is 2 for a contact angle of 0° at the interface between the solution and the coating barrier. It is noteworthy that the thickness h of the H-dip-coated layer is predetermined by eqn (1), in contrast to common metered methods, e.g., doctor blade, knife, or wire-bar coatings, which produce film thicknesses of the order of magnitude of the gap size, irrespective of the carrying speed of the substrate.

In the present study, we first investigated the dependence of the thickness of the H-dip-coated ZnO films on the transport speed U and the gap height h0 (see Fig. 1(b)). For an h0 of 0.7 mm, the thickness of the H-dip-coated ZnO film increased continuously from ca. 20 nm to ca. 90 nm with increasing U in the observed region. Furthermore, when h0 was increased to 0.8 mm, the thickness of the H-dip-coated ZnO film also further increased with U. These results agreed well with the theoretical values predicted by eqn (1) (solid lines in Fig. 1(b)). Thus, it is clear that the H-dip-coating method allows the precise control of the film thickness and the uniformity of the ZnO layers by using only the coating speed and gap distance as controlling parameters, compared with the spin-coating method which is purely empirical, as described in ref. 6 and 7. In the H-dip-coating process, it is also possible to fabricate functional films even when very little material is available, since there is essentially no loss of coating solution, unlike in the spin-coating method. Moreover, it is notable that whereas spin-coating is not R2R compatible, the H-dipping method is easily transferable to a R2R-coating environment.

Next, we obtained AFM topographic images of the surfaces of the ZnO layers. Fig. 2(a) shows AFM images of a 5 × 2.5 μm2 scanned area of the ZnO layers. The surface of the spin-coated ZnO film is fairly smooth with a root mean square (rms) roughness of 0.5–1.6 nm. Compared with the surface of the spin-coated ZnO layer, it is clear that a similar surface with an almost identical surface roughness (a rms roughness of 0.5–1.2 nm) was formed on the H-dip-coated ZnO layer; these values are comparable to those of the H-dip-coated photovoltaic and electroluminescent layers reported previously. It is therefore clear that the surface morphology of the H-dip-coated ZnO layer is almost identical to that of the spin-coated ZnO layer, which indicates that a small amount of ZnO solution may be used to form a large-area film using the H-dip-coating method without any affect on the surface morphologies and film thickness variations of the ZnO layer on the ITO substrate.

The optical transmission spectra of the ZnO films (thickness: ca. 90 nm) grown on glass substrates are shown in Fig. 2(b). In the visible range (400–700 nm), the H-dip-coated ZnO film on the glass substrate shows a high transmittance of ca. 87%, comparable to that (ca. 89%) of the spin-coated film on the glass substrate. In comparison, while the average value of transmittance for a bare glass substrate in the visible range is about 91%, the transmission spectrum for the ITO layer (thickness ∼80 nm) on a glass substrate shows a relatively low transmission minimum (ca. 80%) at about 500 nm, caused by the thin-film interference effect due to the greater difference in the refractive index between the glass (ca. 1.50 at 550 nm) and the ITO (ca. 1.92 at 550 nm) than between the glass and the ZnO (ca. 1.60 at 550 nm). Moreover, given the fundamental optical absorption edge of ZnO films, it is possible to estimate the value of the band gap for the H-dip-coated ZnO layer to be 3.33 eV, which is almost the same as that (3.36 eV) of the spin-coated ZnO film. Therefore, the optical properties of the H-dip-coated ZnO film were almost identical to those of the conventional spin-coated ZnO film.

Fig. 2(c) shows the XRD patterns of the fabricated films, which help in the visualization of the nanostructures of the H-dip-coated and spin-coated ZnO films. By comparing the XRD spectra, it was found that the H-dip-coated ZnO film produced strong and sharp diffraction peaks that were similar to the XRD signals produced by the spin-coated film. For the H-dip-coated ZnO film, the (0 0 1) and (0 0 2) planes could be identified from the observed sharp peaks at 2θ values of 30.3° and 34.3°, respectively, indicating the growth of ZnO crystallites along different directions. Strong preferential growth may be inferred along the (0 0 2) plane, showing that the ZnO films were mainly oriented along the c-axis. The crystallite size (d) of the ZnO films was also estimated using the Scherrer formula (d = 0.94λ/(βcos θ)), where λ is the wavelength of the X-ray (λ = 1.54 Å), β is the full width at half maximum of the (0 0 2) peak, and 2θ is about 34.4°. Using this relationship, it was possible to estimate the average grain size of the ZnO crystallites to be about 20 nm. By comparing these peaks with data obtained from the literature, it may be seen that the H-dip-coated ZnO film had a similar polycrystalline structure to the spin-coated films. The small peak observed at the 2θ value of 21.3° originated from the substrate (SiO2/Si).
Next, in order to investigate the electrical properties of the ZnO interlayers fabricated on the ITO electrodes, we measured the changes in the work functions induced by the ZnO films using a Kelvin probe. Compared with the work function (5.13 eV) of the bare ITOs, the average work function of the ITOs coated with the H-dip-coated ZnO layers was decreased to 4.54 ± 0.01 eV, which is the same as that of the ITOs coated with the spin-coated ZnO interlayers. This result indicates that if ZnO layers are fabricated using H-dipping, the ITO work function can be tuned to approach the LUMO level of the PCBM acceptor in the PV layer, which will not only increase the built-in potential, but will also improve the extraction of charged carriers from the PV layers. It may therefore be expected that in the fabrication of efficient inverted PSC devices, H-dip-coated ZnO layers that have a reduced work function, together with the ability to form homogeneous and transparent layers, may be used in place of conventional spin-coated ZnO layers.

In Fig. 3, the schematic structure of the inverted PSC studied, i.e., [ITO cathode/ZnO electron-selective interlayer/Cs2CO3 electron-collecting buffer layer/P3HT:PCBM BHJ PV layer/MoO3 hole-selective interlayer/Ag anode], is shown together with the chemical structures of the active materials used. For the BHJ PV layer, a composite film of P3HT and PCBM was used. The ZnO/Cs2CO3 bilayer structure served as the electron-collecting interlayer, while the MoO3/Ag structure was used as the hole-collecting layer and anode.

The optical characteristics of the P3HT:PCBM PV layers (ca. 220 nm) produced by the solution-coating processes were observed by UV–vis absorption spectroscopy. Fig. 3(b) shows the optical absorption spectra of the H-dip- and spin-coated P3HT:PCBM PV layers after thermal annealing at 150 °C for 10 min. The annealed BHJ PV layer made by H-dipping shows an absorption spectrum with a single broad absorption peak centered at approximately 500 nm. The absorption in the visible region may be attributed mainly to the P3HT polymer, because PCBM shows strong absorption in the UV region. The crystalline ordering of P3HT after thermal annealing may be confirmed by the pronounced vibronic absorption peaks (ca. 600 nm). This absorption spectrum is rather similar to that of the PV layer fabricated by spin coating. This result confirms that the H-dip-coated PV layer of P3HT:PCBM has optical absorption characteristics that are almost identical to those of the spin-coated PV layer.

The focus of the present study is on H-dip-coated ZnO and PV layers, and the influence of these on the performance of inverted PSCs. In order to investigate the effects of using the H-dip-coated ZnO layer as an ITO modifier together with the H-dip-coated PV layer for the sample cell (H/H), we next tested the inverted PSCs by measuring the current density-versus-voltage (J–V) characteristics. Fig. 4 shows the measured J–V characteristics of the four inverted PSCs (H/H, S/H, H/S, and S/S) prepared using H-dip- and spin-coating processes. It is clear from the figure that in the dark, the sample devices fabricated using H-dipping (H/H) showed almost the same characteristics as those of the other comparative devices of H/S, S/H, and S/S, and all devices exhibited a good rectification ratio; good coverage of the ZnO and PV layers was therefore apparent. In order to check the PV cell performance of the sample cell (H/H), we considered the J–V curves under an illumination of AM 1.5 G, 100 mW cm−2 (Fig. 4(b)). For the reference PSC of S/S, we recorded an open-circuit voltage VOC of 0.63 V, a short-circuit current density JSC of 9.52 mA cm−2, and a fill factor FF of 46.2%, corresponding to a PCE of 2.75%, which is comparable to the results of previous studies of inverted PSCs reported elsewhere. This device performance is almost the same as those of the other comparative devices H/S and S/H. In contrast, for the sample device (H/H) fabricated using H-dip-coating, an improved PCE of 2.93% was achieved with a VOC of 0.63 V, together with higher values of JSC and FF of 9.81 mA cm−2 and 47.7%, respectively. These improved values of JSC and FF of the sample PSC (H/H) imply that the series resistance (RS) and/or the shunt resistance (RSH) of the device may have been improved. In order to estimate RS and RSH, we deduced their average values from the analysis of the J–V curves by determining the slopes of the forward and reverse bias, where the J–V curves become linear for the inverted PSCs studied; these are summarized together with the device performances of the PSCs in Table 1. As shown in Table 1, the average RS of 14.88 Ω cm2 for the sample PSCs (H/H) is nearly identical to those of the other PSCs, or slightly lower within the deviations seen (e.g., S/S has an average RS of 18.28 Ω cm2). This value of RS, together with the JSC of the sample PSC (H/H), indicates that the photo-generated electrons in the H-dip-coated BHJ PV layer can efficiently be transported through the H-dip-coated ZnO layers and into the ITO cathode. It is also clear from Table 1 that the average RSH of 2.71 kΩ cm2 for the sample PSCs (H/H) is nearly identical to or slightly higher (within the deviations seen) than those of the other comparative cells (e.g., the average RSH of 2.58 kΩ cm2 for S/S). This value of RSH, together with the FF of the sample PSC (H/H), may be ascribed to the reduced hole–electron recombination loss at the interface between the ZnO interlayer and the BHJ PV layer, due to the efficient hole-blocking properties of the ZnO interlayer fabricated by H-dip-coating. Thus it is evident that H-dip-coated active layers of ZnO and PV provide an efficient PV cell performance. Although the details of the underlying mechanism are not yet clear, we attribute this improvement largely to the formation of sufficiently homogeneous functional layers of ZnO and PV, which fill any pin-holes and overcome other shorting effects, resulting in an increased shunt resistance and therefore a greater overall efficiency.

ZnO/PV processes
Symbol

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)

FF (%)
PCE (%)

R
S (Ω cm2)

R
SH (kΩ cm2)

a Average values were obtained from at least five devices.

Spin-coating/Spin-coating

S/S
0.63 ± 0.01
9.52 ± 0.45
46.19 ± 1.68
2.75 ± 0.08
18.28 ± 2.43
2.58 ± 0.42
H-dipping/Spin-coating

H/S
0.63 ± 0.01
9.45 ± 0.55
46.13 ± 0.88
2.73 ± 0.16
17.08 ± 1.73
2.46 ± 0.47
Spin-coating/H-dipping

S/H
0.63 ± 0.01
9.53 ± 0.46
46.67 ± 3.08
2.78 ± 0.10
18.48 ± 3.23
2.53 ± 0.33
H-dipping/H-dipping

H/H
0.63 ± 0.01
9.81 ± 0.40
47.74 ± 2.24
2.93 ± 0.13
14.88 ± 2.54
2.71 ± 0.26
We next assessed the PV performance of the inverted PSCs by measuring the IPCE spectra. The IPCE spectra of the four PSC devices are shown in Fig. 4(c). Each cell shows the well known IPCE spectral shape of its P3HT:PCBM PV layer, and all the spectra are in good agreement with the absorption spectral shape of the PV layer (Fig. 3(b)), indicating that the photocurrents are generated mainly by dissociated excitons produced by absorbed photons in P3HT. The crystalline ordering of P3HT after thermal annealing can be confirmed by the pronounced vibronic absorption peaks (ca. 600 nm). However, as shown in Fig. 3(b), although there is no appreciable difference between the absorption spectra of the P3HT:PCBM PV layers, it is the H/H device that has the highest IPCE over the entire spectrum, with a maximum of ca. 69% at 495 nm, which corresponds to the highest JSC of all the devices, as shown in Fig. 4(b).
Based on the foregoing results, it is possible to arrange the following PSCs in the order of decreasing device performance: H/H > S/H > S/S ≥ H/S, which clearly reflects the fact that the PSCs with the H-dip-coated PV films (H/H and S/H) performed better than those with the spin-coated PV films (S/S and H/S). Moreover, it is also clear that the H-dip-coated ZnO film had a better device performance than the spin-coated ZnO film for the PSCs with the H-dip-coated PV films (H/H and S/H), although the two devices S/S and H/S are almost identical in terms of their relatively poor device performances. The sample cell (H/H) may therefore be seen as a potential structure for use in the fabrication of inverted PSCs using the solution-coating process.
In order to assess the merits of the simple fabrication of the inverted PSCs produced using the H-dip-coated layers, we fabricated a PSC module using a serial connection of inverted P3HT:PCBM PSCs that contained H-dip-coated ZnO and P3HT:PCBM PV layers (H/H) on large-area glass substrates. The photograph in Fig. 5 shows an operating PSC module consisting of 6 inverted PSCs on large-area glass substrates (50 × 50 mm2), connected in series. The active area of each PSC shown in the figure is 4 × 35 mm2. The PSC module generated electricity (ca. 3.0 V) from ambient illumination, and thus clearly demonstrated that H-dip-coated ZnO and PV layers can be used in the fabrication of homogeneous, efficient and large-area inverted PSCs that only require simple pre-metered fabrication. In addition, it is also worth noting that the H-dipping method, which belongs to coating technology, produces a continuous layer along the length of the substrate, in contrast to printing technologies that allow for two-dimensional patterning in the lateral plane. Thus, the H-dip-coating is zero-dimensional in the sense that no pattern is created as it is simply an even coat on the substrate. Therefore, in the mass production of inverted PSCs using the H-dip-coating process, an innovative patterning method such as laser scribing may be introduced in order to achieve large geometric filling factors with reduced leakage-currents.
It is important to state that many other coating methods exist, such as differentially pumped slot die coating, in which the film thickness may be controlled in the range of ∼0–800 nm by adjusting the coating speed and ink flow rate. It is therefore also noted that, by applying the concept used in the differentially pumped slot die coating method to the H-dip-coating method or vice versa, it would be possible to develop a combined coating method for all-solution-processing in the mass production of PSCs.
All the foregoing results clearly indicate that H-dip-coated processable ZnO and PV layers show considerable promise for the fabrication of efficient and large-area inverted PSCs using high-throughput manufacturing, which would make the rapid processing of low-cost organic PV systems possible.

In conclusion, a simple pre-metered H-dip coating process was investigated as a promising means of solution-coating for efficient, reliable, and large-area inverted PSCs. It was demonstrated that uniform coatings of electron-selective ZnO and PV layers with well-defined optical and electrical properties can be achieved using H-dip coating by controlling the meniscus of the solutions applied. It was also shown that the efficiencies of the inverted PSCs made using H-dipping were nearly identical to or slightly higher (within the deviations seen) than those of conventional spin-coated devices: using a P3HT:PCBM PV layer, we obtained a PCE of 2.93%. These results demonstrate that the pre-metered H-dipping process for depositing ZnO and PV solutions on substrates provides a solid foundation for improving the fabrication of efficient and large-area inverted PSCs; furthermore, the use of this novel process may in future be extended to conventional mass-produced slot-die and slit-die coatings.


This work was supported by the Basic Science Research Program through a National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (MEST) (2010-0029416), and by Kwangwoon University (2012).


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012