 DOI: 10.1039/C8TA00590G
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 9257-9263


Konstantin
Glaser
,

Patrick
Beu
,

Daniel
Bahro
,

Christian
Sprau
,

Andreas
Pütz
 and 

Alexander
Colsmann
*

Light Technology Institute, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), Engesserstrasse 13, 76131 Karlsruhe, Germany. E-mail: alexander.colsmann@kit.edu

Material Research Center for Energy Systems, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), Strasse am Forum 7, 76131 Karlsruhe, Germany

Received
18th January 2018
, Accepted 6th April 2018
First published on 10th April 2018
Due to the complex optical field, the optimization of layer thicknesses in organic tandem solar cells is a very time-consuming task which is commonly approached in an iterative sample-by-sample fabrication routine or by preliminary optical simulations. In this work, a facile and comprehensive experimental approach to determine optimized absorber layer thicknesses is presented. Both absorber layers are deposited with orthogonal thickness gradients. The spatially resolved mapping of the device's photocurrent produces more than 200 data points and allows the identification of the optimum layer thickness combination. This two-dimensional optimization process is benchmarked against sample-by-sample and one-dimensional sample optimization. All layers of the tandem solar cells were doctor bladed, eventually enabling the fabrication of a solar module with a photoactive area of 24 cm2 comprising four monolithically connected solar cells, excelling with a power conversion efficiency of 5.2%.

Tandem architectures are one of the most promising concepts to enhance the power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of organic solar cells, recently yielding 13%. Commonly, two principal device architectures are distinguished: on the one hand, hetero-tandem solar cells employ spectrally complementary absorbers to extend the spectral exploitation of the solar spectrum and to more efficiently harvest the energy of short-wavelength photons. On the other hand, homo-tandem solar cells comprise twice the same absorber to compensate absorber layer thickness limitations in single-junction devices originating from moderate charge carrier mobilities. Tandem architectures can also be implemented to reduce the photocurrent in large-area solar modules where resistive losses become more important than in small lab-scale devices.

The best performance of tandem solar cells is achieved when the two serially connected subcells produce about matching photocurrents. However, the detrimental effect of non-matched currents may be mitigated to some extent: the stronger subcell may apply a field to the weaker subcell, assisting with charge carrier extraction.
Further progress towards competitive PCEs will require the design and synthesis of new light-absorbing organic semiconductors with better match to the specific requirements of tandem solar cells. Whenever new absorber materials are developed, the often employed sample-by-sample layer stack optimization towards best tandem solar cell performance is a very time and material consuming effort. Due to the large number of layers and interfaces, the optical field inside a tandem solar cell is much more intricate than in a single-junction solar cell. Hence, even small changes in the individual layer thicknesses can change the absorption profile in the absorber layers, the generation of charge carriers and therefore the performance of the whole device. Consequently, the iterative sample-by-sample optimization of the individual layer thicknesses within the stack may not produce the optimum configuration. To reduce the experimental efforts, numerical simulations are often used and afterwards experimentally verified by measuring the individual external quantum efficiencies (EQE) of both subcells. Although simulations can reduce the number of tandem solar cells to be fabricated in the lab, this approach only shifts the experimental efforts to the determination of the optical and electrical material constants which often require comprehensive material and thin-film analyses.
This tandem solar cell particularity calls for fast ways to collect and analyse performance data in order to enable comprehensive device optimization within a reasonable time frame. In an earlier report, we employed doctor blading to deposit wedge-shaped absorber layers from solution, i.e. absorber layers with linearly increasing thicknesses. Sandwiched between two electrodes, this sample configuration allowed to measure the short-circuit current density (Jsc) versus the local absorber layer thickness within just one solar cell.
In this work, we use two wedge-shaped absorber layers with orthogonal gradients to simultaneously optimize their thicknesses, thereby experimentally covering an unprecedented large parameter space. We exemplify the optimization procedure on a homo-tandem solar cell comprising a blend of poly[[4,8-bis[(2-ethylhexyl)oxy]benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl][3-fluoro-2-[(2-ethylhexyl)carbonyl]thieno[3,4-b]thiophenediyl]] and [6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PTB7:PC71BM) for light harvesting (Fig. 1). The optimized layer thicknesses are benchmarked against small-scale reference devices and transferred to a highly efficient solar module with an active area of 24 cm2.

According to the various sample requirements throughout our study, we employed four different substrate sizes and layouts (Fig. 2).


Reference tandem solar cells with only one combination of constant absorber layer thicknesses were fabricated on glass substrates (16 × 16 mm2), each carrying four indium tin oxide bottom electrodes (ITO, R□ = 13 Ω □−1, 125 nm), that were cleaned by ultra-sonication in acetone and 2-propanol (10 min each). All layers were applied on an automated doctor blading system in nitrogen atmosphere (ZAA 2300, Zehntner Testing Instruments). Doctor blading was facilitated by using arrays of four joined 16 × 16 mm2 samples. Zinc oxide nanoparticles (ZnO, N-10, Avantama AG, diluted to 1 wt% in 2-propanol) were applied as electron extraction layer and doctor bladed onto the substrate (Universal Applicator, ZUA 2000, Zehntner Testing Instruments, velocity 18 mm s−1, gap height 150 μm, platen temperature 35 °C, volume 100 μL). Afterwards, the substrates were annealed on a hotplate (80 °C, 10 min) to form a 35 nm thick layer. PTB7 and PC71BM (99%, Solenne BV) were mixed at a ratio of 2:3 (wt/wt) and dissolved in the non-halogenated solvent combination o-xylene/p-anisaldehyde (Sigma Aldrich Co. LLC., 3 vol%). We optimized the concentration of the co-solvent p-anisaldehyde specifically for thin-film deposition by doctor blading prior to this study. To produce different layer thicknesses, the initial velocity of the blade was set between 9 and 18 mm s−1. To deposit absorber layers of uniform thickness, the applicator was slightly accelerated to compensate for the decreasing amount of solution during coating (Universal Applicator, 150 μm, 68 °C, 32 μL).

The recombination zone between the two absorbers comprised poly(3,4-ethylene dioxythiophene):poly(4-styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) and ZnO, the former also acting as a solvent barrier to protect the bottom (front) subcell from dissolution when depositing the top (rear) subcell. To enhance the adhesion of the PEDOT:PSS solvent barrier, a 2-propanol-based PEDOT:PSS (Clevios F CPP105D, Heraeus Deutschland GmbH, diluted in a volume ratio of 1:4 with 2-propanol) was deposited on top of the front absorber layer (Universal Applicator, 20 mm s−1, 400 μm, 68 °C, 39 μL) and annealed on a hotplate (68 °C, 10 min) to yield a layer thickness of 15 nm. The solvent barrier was processed from modified PEDOT:PSS: PEDOT:PSS (Clevios HTL Solar, Heraeus Deutschland GmbH) was diluted with a poly(sodium-4-styrenesulfonate) solution (SPS, Sigma Aldrich Co. LLC., 100 g L−1 in deionized water) and deionized water (25:1:26 v/v/v). The formulation was doctor bladed (Universal Applicator, 4 mm s−1, 150 μm, 68 °C, 65 μL) and annealed on a hotplate (68 °C, 10 min) to produce a 75 nm thick PEDOT:PSS layer.
The ZnO and PTB7:PC71BM layers of the top subcell were processed as described above.
Finally, the MoO3/Ag (10 nm/100 nm) back contact was evaporated in high vacuum (10−7 mbar) through an aligned shadow mask. The overlap of both electrodes defined the photoactive area of the tandem solar cells.

Initially, we optimized both absorber layer thicknesses sequentially. First, we mimicked the rear subcell of the tandem device with a single-junction proxy. Therefore, we fabricated single-junction solar cells following the recipe for the rear subcell as described above, but replaced the plain absorber layer with a wedge-shaped absorber layer and used the larger type B substrates (L × W = 37.5 × 24 mm2) that carried two electrode stripes. The solvent volumes were adapted proportional to the substrate width: ZnO in 2-propanol 50 μL, PEDOT:PSS CPP105D 65 μL, SPS-modified PEDOT:PSS 100 μL. The wedge-shaped absorber layers were doctor bladed in the direction of the longer substrate dimension with a cylindrical coating bar (gap height 400 μm) instead of the Universal Applicator as previously described by Nickel et al. For a fast drying of the film, the platen temperature was set to 75 °C. The coating bar propagated with an exponential deceleration (47 to 2 mm s−1) over the substrate position x, yielding a constant layer thickness gradient (x = 0 to 40 mm). In a second experiment, we fabricated tandem solar cells according to the process described above, but incorporated a wedge-shaped front absorber layer and an optimized planar rear absorber layer (65 μL, x = 0 to 40 mm).


The solar cells were fabricated as described above onto squared glass substrates (40 × 40 mm2) and incorporated two orthogonal wedge-shaped absorber layers and only one large electrode. Solvent volumes: ZnO in 2-propanol 100 μL, PEDOT:PSS CPP105D 120 μL, SPS-modified PEDOT:PSS 200 μL. The front absorber layer was deposited from 130 μL of solution (x = 0 to 35 mm). Then the substrate was rotated by 90° to obtain orthogonal layer thickness gradients, before the rear absorber layer was deposited (130 μL, x = 0 to 40 mm).


The solar cells were fabricated onto 64 × 64 mm2 glass samples using the recipe described above for the fabrication of reference solar cells. Solvent volumes: ZnO in 2-propanol 130 μL, PEDOT:PSS CPP105D 160 μL, SPS-modified PEDOT:PSS 260 μL. To establish the monolithic interconnection between the solar cells of a module, the layers were scratched using a metal template.


The electrical properties of all tandem solar cells were recorded under AM 1.5 standard illumination from a solar simulator (300 W, M-91160, Newport Corporation) using a source measurement unit (Keithley 238, Keithley Instruments Corporation). The intensity of the solar simulator was adjusted with a calibrated filtered silicon solar cell (Reference Cell 91150-KG5, Newport Corporation). The edges of the substrates were covered by a mask to prevent adulteration of the measurement results by light-incoupling into the glass substrate. The PCE, Jsc, open-circuit voltage (Voc) and fill factor (FF) were calculated from the current density–voltage (J–V) curve.

The thickness-dependent photocurrents along the wedge-shaped absorber layers of type B and C devices were determined by spatially resolved photocurrent measurements under the solar simulator producing photocurrent maps of the solar cells. Therefore, a shadow mask with a 1.1 mm wide slit was introduced into the light-path during the measurement of type B tandem solar cells (Fig. 3a), whereas a circular mask with a pinhole-diameter of 1 mm was employed to measure the type C tandem solar cells. The devices were moved underneath the respective shadow mask on an automated XY-stage (M443 with LTA-HS actuator and ESP301 motion controller, Newport Corporation, Fig. 3a). Photocurrent data were collected every 0.5 mm (type B) or every 1.0 mm (type C), including a 4.0 mm sample overscan.
Layer thicknesses were measured with a confocal microscope (S neox, Sensofar). Scratching the tandem devices with a dispensing needle partly laid open the different layers: the recombination zone was peeled off from the front absorber layer, and the rear absorber layer from the recombination zone, respectively, providing access to both absorber layers, the ZnO layers, the recombination zone and their thicknesses (Fig. 3b). Layer thicknesses were determined every 1.25 mm along the wedges. Intermediate data points were interpolated.
Photocurrent and thickness maps were overlaid manually, using the starting point of the thickness measurement and the onset of the photocurrent. In a final step, the measurement data of 6 samples was averaged.

Organic tandem solar cells are optimized in a multi-dimensional parameter space. Every layer thickness and every interface requires careful design to maximize the photocurrent output of the tandem device. Out of the seven functional layers (other than the electrodes), we exemplify the layer thickness optimization on the two absorber layers which often have the most significant impact on the tandem solar cell performance. Yet, we note that other layer thicknesses can also affect the performance. In this stack, ZnO and PEDOT:PSS act as optical spacers and hence affect the distribution of the optical field within the tandem solar cells. Here, the optical spacers were chosen as thin as practically possible, thereby optimizing the device for least electric losses and least parasitic absorption.


Commonly, organic tandem solar cells are optimized sample-by-sample, that is, a set of tandem solar cells with distinct layer thicknesses is fabricated for maximum photocurrent. At the outset of our study, we fabricated such a set of devices with two planar absorbers in small scale devices (type A, photoactive area of 0.1 cm2). We implemented eight absorber layer thickness combinations to cover the anticipated relevant parameter space. The corresponding performance parameters are summarized in Table 1. The maximum photocurrent density Jsc obtained is 7.6 mA cm−2 for a thickness combination of 62 nm and 105 nm. It remains unclear though if this Jsc meets the global Jsc maximum since only eight distinct layer thickness combinations could be tested within a reasonable time frame.

Device
Thicknesses front/rear (nm)

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (mV)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Ref. 1
62/105
7.6 ± 0.2
1490 ± 10
66 ± 1
7.4 ± 0.2
Ref. 2
62/117
7.4 ± 0.1
1491 ± 7
64 ± 1
7.1 ± 0.2
Ref. 3
78/105
7.1 ± 0.1
1490 ± 6
65 ± 1
6.9 ± 0.2
Ref. 4
78/117
7.1 ± 0.1
1484 ± 11
64 ± 2
6.8 ± 0.2
Ref. 5
78/133
7.2 ± 0.1
1484 ± 5
63 ± 1
6.7 ± 0.1
Ref. 6
94/105
6.3 ± 0.1
1489 ± 5
66 ± 1
6.2 ± 0.1
Ref. 7
94/117
6.5 ± 0.1
1490 ± 6
65 ± 1
6.3 ± 0.1
Ref. 8
94/133
6.3 ± 0.3
1476 ± 19
63 ± 4
5.9 ± 0.3
For reference, we also fabricated optimized PTB7:PC71BM single-junction solar cells (absorber layer thickness: 95 nm) with a PCE of 6.4% (Jsc = 14.5 mA cm−2, Voc = 740 mV, FF = 60%, deviations from other literature reports may originate from batch-to-batch variations of the polymer).

The huge experimental effort on the optimization of layer thicknesses calls for more comprehensive screening methods that require less effort and, ideally, produce more data. Therefore, we implemented wedge-shaped layers into the tandem solar cells and measured the photocurrent spatially resolved. In a first approach, we separated the layer thickness optimization of the rear absorber from the layer thickness optimization of the front absorber. The ZnO/PTB7:PC71BM/MoO3/Ag architecture of the rear subcell resembles very much the layer sequence of a single-junction solar cell. We therefore expected an optical field in the rear subcell that is qualitatively similar to the optical field in a single-junction reference device. Accordingly, we first examined the dependence of the photocurrent density on the absorber layer thickness (50–110 nm) within a single-junction solar cell. In order to gain a better resolution on photocurrents and layer thicknesses and hence to collect more distinct data points, a larger photoactive area was needed which is why we used sample type B for this experiment with the thickness gradient being oriented along the long sample axis. The spatially resolved photocurrent versus the local absorber layer thickness is depicted in Fig. 4a. Below 85 nm, the photocurrent density increases towards thicker layers. At 90 ± 5 nm it reaches its maximum. Towards thicker absorber layers, the photocurrent remains about constant although the absorption increases. This modulation of the photocurrent density is well known and is the result of interference effects within the device.

Accepting 90 nm as the optimum absorber layer thickness in the single-junction solar cell, we proceeded with the fabrication of tandem solar cells with a 90 nm thick planar rear absorber and a wedge-shaped front absorber, the latter having a layer thickness gradient from 45 nm to 90 nm. Fig. 4b depicts the photocurrent densities of the tandem solar cell versus the front absorber layer thicknesses. A distinct photocurrent density maximum is visible at a front absorber layer thickness of 55 ± 5 nm. Since both subcells inside the tandem stack were connected in series via the recombination zone, a maximum current density indicates a (close to) equal photocurrent density in both subcells. For front absorber thicknesses below 50 nm, the front subcell did not generate enough photocurrent to match the photocurrent of the rear subcell. For front absorber thicknesses above 55 nm, an insufficient number of photons passed through the front absorber and the photocurrent generation in the rear subcell was too weak to match the photocurrent of the front cell.
Through this sequential experimental optimization of the tandem solar cell, we found an optimum absorber thickness combination of 55 nm (front absorber) and 90 nm (rear absorber). Notably, only little experimental effort was required to screen many layer thicknesses of both the front and the rear absorber layers. Once established, this two-step procedure allows to screen layer thicknesses in tandem devices much more efficiently than the common sample-by-sample screening. Yet, it still remains unclear whether the global Jsc maximum was found as this one-dimensional optimization of the layer thicknesses only varies the absorber layer thickness of one subcell while keeping the other constant.

The sequential optimization of both absorber layers relies on the simplification that the optical fields within both subcells are independent. However, back-reflections at interfaces and attenuation effects can account for a certain optical cross-talk between both subcells. To gain a more comprehensive picture of the tandem solar cell's photocurrent as a function of the two absorber layer thicknesses, we implemented an advanced screening method: using type C solar cells (sample size: 40 × 40 mm2), both absorber layers of the tandem solar cell were implemented wedge-shaped in order to simultaneously optimize the thicknesses of both absorber layers and hence to measure more layer thickness combinations on the same sample. After deposition of the first absorber layer and the recombination zone, the substrate was rotated by 90°. Hence, the thickness gradients of the two wedges were oriented orthogonally. Recording the spatially resolved photocurrent densities produces a matrix in which the rows contain photocurrent data for constant front and variable rear absorber thicknesses. The columns contain photocurrent data for variable front and constant rear absorber thicknesses, respectively.

The photocurrent matrix of a representative PTB7:PC71BM homo-tandem solar cell is depicted in Fig. 5 (center). With 16 rows and 14 columns, the matrix represents photocurrent densities of 224 different thickness combinations of the front and rear absorber layer, all measured on a single device. The colour code reflects the Jsc magnitude. The global maximum of the Jsc was found at 7.4 mA cm−2 and corresponds to a bottom layer thickness of 119 nm and a rear layer thickness of 62 nm. We note that the Jsc magnitude is slightly lower in the two-dimensional photocurrent maps than in the sample-by-sample approach due to its larger substrate of 40 × 40 mm2 which is more prone to ohmic losses. The shape of the line of maximum currents has the same shape as the curved isolines that are known from numerical optical device simulations. Commonly, this isoline is the set of layer thickness combinations where both absorber layers absorb equal amounts of photons. Here, the experimental isoline is the set of layer thickness combinations where both subcells generate equal photocurrent densities, and hence where the tandem device delivers the maximum photocurrent output. Here, the advantages of the experimental layer thickness optimization versus simulations become visible. The experiments intrinsically take into account possible different internal quantum efficiencies (IQEs) of both subcells and also layer thickness dependent IQEs, both of which are not taken into account in most optical simulations. Furthermore, the experimental isoline is broadened compared to numerical results, since a tandem solar cell's photocurrent is dominated, but not strictly limited by its weaker subcell: a slight mismatch between both subcells can be compensated by the attuning electrical field of the stronger subcell.
The superiority of the simultaneous optimization of both absorber layers becomes apparent in Fig. 5 where we compare the Jsc data of all three optimization procedures. From left to right, Fig. 5 depicts the Jsc obtained from the one-dimensional wedges, the two-dimensional wedges and the reference devices. Although the sample-by-sample optimization (right graph) provides a hint on the best absorber layer combination, it does not guarantee to find the globally best device configuration. Similarly, the sequential absorber layer thickness optimization using one-dimensional wedges (left graph) only allows to find a local Jsc maximum, and this optimum is shifted versus the optimum configuration found in the two-dimensional wedges. This difference indicates that the optical interplay of both subcells is much stronger and that the optimization of the rear subcell by using a single-junction proxy produces only moderate results. Only the simultaneous optimization of both absorber layers provides a comprehensive picture of the subcells' interdependencies and fabrication tolerances.
The combinatorial screening of absorber layer thicknesses within one device does not only save time but also material which may well be an asset when only little amounts of new absorber materials are available. To produce the 224 data points, only 2.5 times the solution volume of an individual tandem solar cell (i.e. one layer combination that produces one data point) was used, while the process time was maintained. The time needed for the characterisation of the layer thicknesses was about equal. The photocurrent measurements were extended noticeably, but performed fully automated.
We note that the two-dimensional photocurrent map is also very forgiving on local measurement errors, e.g., due to defects or local layer thickness fluctuations. The comprehensive picture provided by the surrounding pixels allows for a good coordination of data, whereas ambiguities in the sample-by-sample screening results are difficult to resolve due to the limited data available.

The device architecture and processing that were investigated in this work, are well suited to produce homogenous films on large area as required for the fabrication of solar modules. Therefore, we fabricated a squared 24 cm2 tandem solar module with photoactive PTB7:PC71BM layers (69 nm and 102 nm). To avoid excessive resistive losses, we divided the module into four monolithically connected solar cells with a stripe width of 12 mm. Each solar cell interconnection required 2 mm of space in between the individual solar cells, resulting in a geometric fill factor GFF = 84% (i.e. the ratio of photoactive area and the total module area). The module's Voc = 5.64 V equals about four times the Voc of individual tandem solar cells. The solar module's J–V curve is depicted in Fig. 6, exhibiting a Jsc = 1.7 mA cm−2 (current per total photoactive area of the module) and an average Jsc of the four individual solar cell stripes of 6.8 mA cm−2. Together with a fill factor FF = 55%, the tandem solar module produces a PCE = 5.2% (photoactive area) which is among the highest PCEs for all-solution processed tandem solar modules to date.


We have demonstrated that wedge-shaped absorber layers can be incorporated into organic tandem solar cells to optimize the layer thicknesses and hence the photocurrents of tandem solar cells. Spatially resolved measurements on such devices allow the rapid collection of data and the correlation of layer thickness combinations with local photocurrents. The two-dimensional approach of incorporating two wedge-shaped absorber layers is superior over a sequential one-dimensional layer thickness optimization of both subcells since it allows for a simultaneous optimization of both absorber layers. The necessity of the two-dimensional screening stems from the complicated optical field inside the tandem solar cells. Changing one absorber layer thickness also affects the absorption in the other subcell. With one layer thickness fixed, the one-dimensional approach does not necessarily produce the global optimum absorber layer thickness combination. Not only does this technique produce many more data points and hence allows to identify the global photocurrent maximum, it is also far more facile than optimizing a tandem solar cell sample-by-sample. Besides exhibiting equal conditions by having all layer thickness combinations on one substrate, the spatial characterization of wedge-shaped absorber layers saves time and material, the latter being particularly important when new materials are synthesized. This screening method reaches its limits if the absorber layers show a strongly layer thickness dependent FF, for example due to layer thickness dependent recombination rates. In our example, the FF and the Voc are stable for various layer thicknesses and layer thickness combinations (Table 1).

While we exemplified the concept of two-dimensional layer thickness gradients on the absorber layers, it can well be transferred to any other layers in the tandem solar cell. Likewise, the wedge-shaped photoactive layers could be fabricated by other techniques that allow to control the layer thickness during deposition, such as slot-die coating or ink-jet printing.

The authors declare no conflicts of interest.


This work was funded by the Federal Ministry for Education and Research (BMBF) under contract no. 03EK3504 (project TAURUS). We thank Avantama AG for supplying ZnO nanoparticles. The authors thank Joshua Fragoso, Adrian Mertens, Jan Mescher and Felix Nickel for frequent and fruitful discussions.


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018