 DOI: 10.1039/C3TA13523C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 1502-1508


Jiangwei
Feng
,

Yang
Hong
,

Jing
Zhang
*,

Peiqing
Wang
,

Ziyang
Hu
,

Qin
Wang
,

Liyuan
Han
 and 

Yuejin
Zhu
*

Department of Physics, Ningbo University, Ningbo 315211, Zhejiang, China. E-mail: zhangjing@nbu.edu.cn; zhuyuejin@nbu.edu.cn; Fax: +86 574 87600744; Tel: +86 574 87600770

Photovoltaic Materials Unit, National Institute for Materials Science, Tsukuba, Japan

Received
4th September 2013
, Accepted 7th November 2013
First published on 8th November 2013
Core–shell TiO2 microspheres were synthesised by a one step solvothermal method in ethanol solvent. The single anatase TiO2 core–shell structure exhibited high reflectance and large surface area due to its special structure. When applied in the dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs), this micro-spherical core–shell structure effectively enhanced light harvesting and led to the increase of the photocurrent of the DSCs. As a result, 29% improvement in conversion efficiency of DSCs was achieved after introducing the core–shell TiO2 scattering layer. A comparative experiment between the core–shell structure and a solid structure further confirmed that the core–shell structure is more beneficial for light scattering and photovoltaic performance. The excellent properties of the microspherical core–shell TiO2 make it a promising candidate as a scattering material for DSCs.

Owing to their excellent performance and low cost, dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) have attracted significant attention since 1991. To date, the maximum power conversion efficiency of DSCs has reached 12% for cells that incorporate a cobalt (II/III) based redox electrolyte in conjunction with zinc porphyrin dye as the sensitizer. To attain higher efficiency DSCs, many studies have been performed, which mainly include research into the improvement of short-circuit current (Jsc), open-circuit voltage (Voc) and the fill factor (FF). Of particular interest is to improve the light harvesting of DSCs, thus increasing the Jsc. Apart from novel sensitizers and new inorganic quantum dots, applying optical scatterers in photoanodes is also an effective method to do this. Presently the most commonly used dyes, such as ruthenium dyes, show much reduced light absorption in the wavelength region of 600–800 nm. Moreover, the nanosized TiO2 particles in the working electrode show very weak scattering (Rayleigh scattering, largely) of visible light, resulting in a significant portion of the light falling on DSCs being transmitted through the TiO2 film without interacting with the sensitizer. Scattering layers of various structures, including scattering centers and upper scattering layers, have been effectively employed to enhance light harvesting, thus improving the efficiency of the solar cell. So far, various micro/nanostructures of TiO2 have been studied, such as solid spheres, hollow spheres, multi hollow spheres, microplates, nest-shaped and spindle-like,etc.

Among the various morphologies, spherical structures attract more attention due to their superior performance in DSCs. Spherical TiO2, which consists of nanocrystallites, provides not only a large specific surface area but also porosity. This contributes to a larger amount of absorbed dye and better flow for the liquid electrolyte, promoting higher short-circuit current. Huang et al. introduced submicrometer-sized (830 nm) mesoporous TiO2 beads as a scattering layer and achieved a higher efficiency (8.84%) than that with a scattering layer of 400 nm particles (7.87%). Sauvage et al. investigated mesoporous TiO2 beads sensitized by C101 and acquired an efficiency of more than 10%. Dadgostar et al. prepared hierarchical sub-micrometer TiO2 hollow spheres (300–700 nm) and achieved an efficiency of 8.3%. Wu et al. introduced hollow shell-in-shell TiO2 spheres into the scattering layer and got a high efficiency of 9.1%. Jiang et al. introduced a multi-hollow spherical TiO2 structure and achieved a high efficiency (8.25%). Above all, the microsphere, serving as the scattering layer, is designed to be able to provide both large surface area and good light scattering.
Because of their similarly excellent performance as mesoporous spheres, the core–shell structure is an alternative candidate for the scattering layers. Furthermore it can reflect more light in the inner solid core, so as to make full use of the light. Li et al. prepared various morphological TiO2 spheres, such as solid spheres, core–shell spheres and hollow spheres via the control of reaction time. Of all the structures, core–shell spheres exhibited the best performance in photocatalytic activity, which is due to the greater light harvesting by the structure. The core–shell structure exhibits excellent performance in photocatalysis, so it is assumed that it could be used as the scattering layer of a photoanode, instead of conventional materials.
In this paper, we report core–shell microspherical TiO2 (C–S-T) as a novel scattering layer for high-efficiency dye-sensitized solar cells. To our knowledge, this is the first demonstration of such a novel core–shell material exhibiting a larger amount of absorbed dye as well as good light scattering properties. We adopted a solid spherical TiO2 (S-T) scattering layer on the top of the nanocrystalline photoanode, and nanocrystalline TiO2 (T) as control experiments. The results show that the bi-layer T + C–S-T photoanode provides both greater adsorption of dye molecules and more efficient light scattering at the same time, compared with T + S-T and T photoanodes, and achieves the best performance.

All chemical reagents were used as received without further purification. The nanocrystalline TiO2 and solid sphere TiO2 (Fig. S1) were synthesised according to the literature. The typical approach for the preparation of core–shell structured TiO2 was as follows: 0.6 ml titanium(III) chloride was added to 30 ml ethanol, after which the solution was stirred for 5 min. 2.4 ml acetic acid was then added to the above solution to form a coordination compound. When the colour turned transparent, 0.6 g urea and 0.6 g PEG (Mw 20000) were added and allowed to react for 30 min under stirring. Finally, the solution was transferred into a Teflon-lined autoclave and the solution was kept at 150 °C for 12 h in an oven. After reacting, the products were separated by centrifugation, washed with excess ethanol and then dried in a vacuum at 80 °C.


0.9 g of the prepared core–shell TiO2, mixed with 0.1 g nanocrystalline TiO2, was dispersed into 5 ml ethanol by sonication for 3 min. Then 1.5 g terpineol and 0.25 g 10 wt% ethyl cellulose ethanol solution were added to the above solution. The solvent was evaporated at 45 °C to obtain a viscous paste. The solid sphere TiO2 paste was prepared by the same method. The nanocrystalline TiO2 paste was prepared according to the literature. The prepared nanocrystalline TiO2 paste was deposited on fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) glass by a doctor blade method, kept in a clean box for 3 min, and dried for 6 min at 125 °C. The procedure was repeated to get a thickness of nearly 12 μm. After drying the film at 125 °C, the prepared microspherical core–shell TiO2 layer and solid TiO2 layer were deposited by a doctor blade method, resulting in a layer thickness of 4 μm on the 8 μm nanocrystalline TiO2 layer. The electrode was gradually heated under an airflow at 325 °C for 5 min, at 375 °C for 5 min, and at 450 °C for 15 min, and finally at 500 °C for 15 min. The prepared TiO2 electrode was immersed into a 0.5 mM N719 dye solution (acetonitrile and tert-butyl alcohol with a volume ratio of 1:1). The electrolyte was a solution of 0.6 M 1-butyl-3-methyl-immidazolium iodide (BMII), 0.03 M I2, 0.10 M guanidinium thiocyanate and 0.5 M 4-tert-butylpyridine solution of acetonitrile and valeronitrile (volume ratio, 85:15). The dye-covered TiO2 electrode and Pt-counter electrode were assembled in a sandwich type cell to take the measurements.


The morphologies of TiO2 were characterised by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, SU-70, Japan) and transmission electronic microscopy (TEM, JEOL2100HR, Japan). A KLA-Tencor Alpha-Step (IQ3, USA) was used to measure the thickness of the films. The crystallinity of TiO2 was determined using X-ray diffraction analysis (XRD, D8 Advance, Bruker AXS, Germany) measured with Cu Kα radiation (γ = 0.154 nm) at 50 kV and 40 mA over the 2θ range of 20° to 80°. The photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) curve measurements were conducted with an AM 1.5 solar simulator equipped with a 1000 W xenon light source and an AM 1.5G type filter (Newport, 81904, USA). The light intensity of the solar simulator was adjusted by using a standard Si cell. J–V curves were obtained by applying an external bias to the cell, and measurements were recorded with a Keithley model 2400 digital source meter. The incident photocurrent conversion efficiency (IPCE) was recorded on a Newport 2936-c power meter under the irradiation of a 300 W xenon light source with an Oriel Cornerstone 260 1/4 monochromator in DC mode. A reference scan with the Si detector was taken prior to the sample measurement, to allow the background to be subtracted. Diffuse reflection and transmittance spectra of the resulting photoanodes were collected on a Cary 5000 UV-Vis-NIR spectrophotometer with an integrating sphere. The concentration of desorbed dye in solution was calculated from UV-Vis absorbance measurements obtained with a Cary 5000 UV-Vis spectrophotometer. Electrical impedance spectra (EIS) were measured using an electrochemical workstation (Zennium, Germany) at an open-circuit potential under illumination of AM 1.5 simulated sunlight, with a frequency ranging from 10−1 to 106 Hz.



Fig. 1 shows the typical SEM and TEM micrographs of the as-prepared core–shell TiO2. Fig. 1(a) shows the SEM image at low magnification; it can be seen that the monodisperse microsphere has a diameter of around 2.5 μm, and a core inside the shell can be clearly seen from the high magnification image in Fig. 1(b). From the cross-section of a cracked microsphere (Fig. 1(c)), it can be seen that the thickness of the outer shell is approximately 100 nm. The detailed microspherical C–S-T was further investigated by TEM (Fig. 1(d)). The gradual contrast of the TEM image from the edge to the center of the sphere indicates that the entire sphere is indeed a core–shell structure, and the diameter of the solid core is about 2.0 μm.

From our experimental results, the probable mechanism for the formation of core–shell TiO2 can be explained on the basis of previous studies. The schematic diagram for the preparation of the core–shell TiO2 sphere is shown in Fig. 2. PEG (Mw 20000) serves as a structure-directing template, as it can easily self-assemble to form spherical micelles under its critical micelle concentration to form a soft template. Acetic acid is usually used as an efficient reagent to synthesize TiO2via reaction with alkoxide monomers to form the precursor TiCl3−n(CH3COO)n (1 ≥ n ≥ 3). The abundant oxygen atoms of PEG (Mw 20000) can interact with the hydrogen atoms of the urea and TiCl3−n(CH3COO)n by hydrogen bonding, thus forming the monodisperse crystalline grain precursor. According to the Ostwald ripening mechanism, crystalline particles will grow into crystalline nuclei, which aggregate isotropically to form spherical grains in ethanol solution, and further to microspherical crystallites. During the growth, the smaller, the less crystalline particles will be dissolved gradually, while the larger, more crystalline particle will grow bigger. Firstly, the outer nanocrystals will grow due to the temperature gradient from the outside to the inside, and the rich crystalline grains inside and outside. Simultaneously, the urea decomposes into CO2 and NH3 during the reaction, and the abundant decomposed CO2 gas will form a temporary barrier layer owing to the well connected shell, preventing dissolution of the inner TiO2 crystalline particles temporarily. Eventually the core can grow gradually to form a solid sphere. As the crystal grows, the core–shell TiO2 microsphere was formed at last.
The XRD patterns of C–S-T and S-T were measured, as shown in Fig. 3. All peaks match the diffraction pattern of anatase TiO2 (tetragonal, JCPDS no. 21-1272) and indicate that both posses highly crystallized anatase structures without any impurity phase. The intense and sharp diffraction peaks also indicate that the obtained TiO2 microspheres are highly crystalline.
The characteristics of the core–shell TiO2 were further investigated by N2 adsorption–desorption analysis. A typical result is shown in Fig. 4. Fig. 4 exhibits a type IV isotherm with a type H3 hysteresis for the core–shell TiO2. The specific surface area is determined to 273 m2 g−1 based on the BET model. The specific surface areas of the nanocrystalline TiO2 and solid sphere TiO2 are 94 m2 g−1 and 156 m2 g−1 (Table S1), respectively. The pore size distribution for core–shell TiO2 is depicted in the inset of Fig. 4. Evidently, the size of the most of the pores is concentrated at 5.6 nm, as estimated using the Barret–Joyner–Halenda (BJH) method, indicating the better connectivity of the nanocrystalline structure of core–shell TiO2. A high specific area is desirable for greater dye absorption, and the average pore size of 5.6 nm is adequate for penetration of the electrolyte ions in and out of the core–shell TiO2 when used as a scattering layer in DSCs.
The resulting N719 sensitized solar cells were characterized by measuring their current–voltage behaviour using a black metal mask with an aperture of 0.16 cm2 under standard AM 1.5 simulated sunlight. The typical current density versus voltage curves of the three samples are shown in Fig. 5, and detailed parameters of the cells are summarized in Table 1. The cell T attains a short-circuit current density of 15.1 mA cm−2 and an energy conversion efficiency of 6.36%, whereas cell T + S-T achieves a short-circuit current density of 17.2 mA cm−2 and a conversion efficiency of 7.88%, indicating a 23% increase in conversion efficiency compared to cell T without the scattering layer. Conspicuously, for the DSCs with C–S-T as the scattering over layer, cell T + C–S-T demonstrates the highest Jsc (18.6 mA cm−2) among the three different kinds of cells, while the voltage and fill factor are similar to those of the T and T + S-T cells. As a result, the η increases to the highest value of 8.22%, corresponding to a 29% increase compared to cell T.
Photoanode

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (mV)
FF (%)

η (%)
Absorbed dye (× 10−7 mol cm−2)

a To measure the absorbed N719 amount on the TiO2 surface, the dye was desorbed with a 0.1 M NaOH solution (the ratio volume for water and ethanol is 50:50). The dimension of the TiO2 electrode was 1 cm2.
b Margin of error for the experiment is plus or minus 5%.

T
15.1
649
0.65
6.36
2.41
T + C–S-T
18.6
664
0.65
8.22
5.04
T + S-T
17.2
654
0.69
7.88
4.62
The total photocurrent is proportional to the cell’s incident photo flux (I0), the light harvesting efficiency (ΦLH), the charge separation efficiency (ΦCS), and the collection efficiency (ΦCOL):
Jsc = I0ΦLHΦCOL
As shown in Table 1, two parameters that change markedly, Jsc and the amount of dye absorbed, can be clearly seen, which suggests that the increased photocurrent mainly stems from the light harvesting efficiency (ΦLH) as a result of the increased amount of dye absorbed. The cell T + C–S-T has the largest amount of dye absorption, which is more than two times higher than that of cell T, which is in accordance with the porosity and larger surface area of C–S-T. Therefore the larger amount of absorbed dye contributed to the higher light harvesting efficiency (ΦLH), thus achieving a higher photocurrent. These results imply that T + C–S-T exhibited better photovoltaic performance with more dye loading.
Besides the dye adsorption ability, the light scattering ability also contributes to the ΦLH of the photoanode. The light-scattering effect can be evaluated by measuring the transmittance and the diffuse reflection spectra of the films. From the transmittance spectra for the three samples shown in Fig. 6(a), the film T has almost 75% transmittance over the long wavelength region (500–800 nm), however the bi-layer T + C–S-T and T + S-T samples rapidly decline to around 20%, due to the scattering performance and long light pathway. Fig. 6(b) and (c) show the UV-vis reflectance spectra of the T + C–S-T and T + S-T films without and with dye loading, respectively. Both T + C–S-T and T + S-T films have a maximum or minimum at around 550 nm in the spectrum. Before the dye sensitization, both T + C–S-T and T + S-T films have higher reflectivity in the wavelength range 400–800 nm. The reflectivity of the nanocrystalline film decreases rapidly above 400 nm, while the microsphere-decorated films maintain quite high reflectivity over the long wavelength region, which is due to the better light scattering ability to the wavelength of visible light. Moreover, the reflectivity of the T + C–S-T film is higher than that of the T + S-T film, which can be ascribed to its special core–shell structure and its superior light scattering ability, as illustrated in Fig. 7(a) and (d). Light inside the shell can be reflected by the inner core many times, and the reflectance is more favourable for the adsorption of more light by the dye. After dye absorption, all reflectance curves decreased drastically at around 550 nm, which is mainly attributed to light absorption by the dye molecules. T + C–S-T and T films decrease drastically, which can be attributed to the larger quantity of dye absorbed. After the light is absorbed by dye molecule, the T + C–S-T film retains a substantially lower reflectance than the dye absorbed T and T + S-T films, which shows the outstanding structure of C–S-T. The data further supports the schematic of C–S-T and proves that the superior scattering property also contributed to the higher light harvesting efficiency, thereby increasing the photocurrent. These results indicate that the superior scattering properties of the T + C–S-T cell are favourable for the improvement of performance of DSCs.

Fig. 8(a) shows the incident photon to current efficiency (IPCE) spectra for the three cells. The quantum efficiencies of the cells sensitized by N719 dye reach a maximum at 550 nm. The cell T + C–S-T and cell T + S-T possess higher IPCE values over the whole spectral range (300–800 nm) than cell T. The cell T + C–S-T is slightly higher than cell T + S-T over the whole spectral range investigated, which is in agreement with previous efficiency data. When the IPCE maximum of three cells is normalized to 100%, the normalized IPCE spectra (Fig. 8(b)) can be obtained. This provides more evidence of the superior structural characteristics of the bi-layer structure of C–S-T and S-T. An enhancement in light conversion efficiency from 650 nm to 750 nm can be observed, which can be attributed to the superior light scattering properties of the microspheres, especially for the cell T + C–S-T, with its special core–shell structure. From the overlap of the three samples in the short wavelength region (350–650 nm) in Fig. 8(b), we can deduce that the enhancement of the IPCE for the microsphere-containing cells may be due to the amount of dye absorbed, which is in agreement with our previous argument. In conclusion, the core–shell TiO2 adopted in the scattering layer has two functions: one is a larger surface area to absorb more dye, and the other one is the stronger lighter scattering property, which boost the light harvesting efficiencies and further heighten the Jsc, which efficiently improves the performance of the DSCs.
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was further used to investigate charge transport and recombination in the DSCs. EIS data were compared for three samples: cell T, cell T + C–S-T and cell T + S-T. Fig. 9(a) shows the Nyquist plots for three samples. In general, two hemispheres are observed from the Nyquist plots. The first hemisphere in the high-frequency region represents the resistance at the counter electrode (Rc) for the reduction reaction of I3− ions in electrolytes using a Pt counter electrode. The second hemisphere in the low-frequency region represents the charge transfer impedance (Rct) at the interfaces among the electrolytes, dyes, and TiO2. Similar Rc values are obtained: 1.3 Ω, 1.7 Ω and1.4 Ω for cell T, cell T + C–S-T and cell T + S-T, respectively. However, the Rct values showed large differences: 29.5 Ω, 20.1 Ω and 23.2 Ω for T, T + C–S-T and T + S-T, respectively. The small Rct is favourable for the transport of electrons, which is favourable for the improvement of photovoltaic performance. Fig. 9(b) shows the Bode plots for three photoelectrodes. The electron lifetime (τe) in the DSCs can be calculated from the following equitation:
where
fmax is the maximum frequency in the intermediate frequency regime. The decrease in fmax for cell T, cell T + C–S-T and cell T + S-T corresponds to a longer electron lifetime, implying a lower charge recombination rate. Voc depends logarithmically on the kinetic constant of the back-reaction of the injected electrons with triiodide and the incident photo flux. Under the same light intensity, a longer electron lifetime results in a decrease in the back reaction, which slightly increases the Voc, in accordance with the previous results. The improvement may be attributed to the better connection of the nanocrystalline core–shell TiO2, which favours electron transport without capture by the I3− and dye molecules in the excited state. Among the investigated samples, the cell T + C–S-T exhibits a lower charge transport resistance and higher electron lifetime, which contribute to the superior photovoltaic performance of the cell T + C–S-T.


In summary, we have synthesized a novel core–shell TiO2 microsphere with uniform size by a one step solvothermal reaction using the soft templates of HAC and PEG (Mw 20000). The as-prepared products exhibit powerful scattering and dye loading properties. The core–shell TiO2 scattering layer can dramatically improve the photovoltaic performance of DSCs. A maximum conversion efficiency of 8.22% has been achieved by bi-layer DSCs containing a core–shell TiO2 scattering layer, showing a 29% increase over that of DSCs with single-layer nanocrystalline TiO2, and a 4% improvement over the cell with a solid TiO2 sphere bi-layer structured photoanode.


This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (contact grant number: 11174163, 11374168 and 51302137), the K. C. Wong Magna Fund, Ningbo University and the Qiangjiang Talented Person Project of Zhengjiang (No. QJD1302008).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: SEM image of solid microsphere TiO2 and the parameters for T, C–S-T and S-T. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ta13523c
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014