 DOI: 10.1039/C9TC04264D
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 12717-12724


Wei
Cao
,

Kaifeng
Lin
*,

Junzhuo
Li
,

Lele
Qiu
,

Yayu
Dong
,

Jiaqi
Wang
,

Debin
Xia
,

Ruiqing
Fan
 and 

Yulin
Yang
*

MIIT Key Laboratory of Critical Materials Technology for New Energy Conversion and Storage, School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin 150001, P. R. China. E-mail: linkaifeng@hit.edu.cn; ylyang@hit.edu.cn

Received
4th August 2019
, Accepted 20th September 2019
First published on 21st September 2019
Until now, the organic and inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells have developed rapidly and obtained spectacular photovoltaic performance. However, the intrinsic trap states of solution-processed perovskite are still the critical issue hindering its development. Herein, the iodine-doped graphite carbon nitride (g-CNI) was introduced into the triple cation perovskite film in order to increase its crystallinity and passivate the trap states. The characterization results indicate that the doped iodine in g-CNI can interact with under-coordinated Pb ions at the grain boundaries and the surface of perovskite materials and the trap states can be effectively passivated. The reduction of trap state density inhibits the recombination of charge carriers, and facilitates the extraction and transport of charge carriers, which was characterized by photoluminescence measurements, open-circuit voltage decay and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy. Consequently, the devices of the perovskite with g-CNI achieved a champion PCE of 18.28%, which is higher than that of the control devices (16.57%). This work develops a simple and efficient strategy to passivate the trap states of perovskite films using a type of readily available polymer with a 2D π electron structure.

In recent years, organic and inorganic hybrid perovskite materials have attracted more and more attention owing to their competitive merits, for example, high carrier mobility, adjustable optical band gap, a high absorption coefficient and ease of fabrication. Since the scientific researchers keep optimizing the materials, interfaces, and fabrication engineering of perovskite solar cells (PSCs), the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of PSCs has increased from 3.8% in 2009 to over 24% now. PSCs have developed rapidly in recent years, however, trap states in the perovskite films are still hindering the development of PSCs. The trap states are usually caused by low thermal stability of the perovskite, which could lead to the formation of vacancies and Pb–I antisite traps. Meanwhile, under-coordinated Pb ions are widely considered to be the main cause of trap states at the grain boundaries and surface of perovskite materials. Trap states can act as non-radiative recombination centers inducing charge recombination, which could hinder carrier transport and degrade device performance, therefore a number of strategies have been developed to passivate trap states. The Lewis bases were gradually developed to optimize perovskite films, due to the strong interactions between the lone pair electrons of Lewis bases as additives and under-coordinated Pb ions. For instance, BDT, a semiconducting molecule with Lewis base functional groups, can effectively passivate the trap states by forming Lewis adducts. The large aliphatic or aromatic alkylammonium was also found to play a positive role in passivating the trap states in perovskite, such as benzylamine and trimethylammonium chloride, which was achieved by anchoring the molecules to the Pb–I framework via coordinating with Pb ions or forming hydrogen bonds with iodide ions. Thus, the trap state density is reduced, carrier lifetime is enhanced and the quality of perovskite films is improved. In addition to polycrystalline perovskite films, extensive research in reducing trap density for single crystal perovskite has also been conducted. Recently, PEAI, an organic halide salt, was reported to passivate the trap states by filling the iodine vacancy on the surface and grains boundaries of perovskite films, thus improving the overall performance of the devices. In addition, a steady stream of multifunctional materials are being developed to passivate trap states and improve the performance of PSCs. However, numerous materials used to passivate trap states in perovskite films are usually unfriendly to the environment and prepared under complicated preparation conditions that limit the commercial application of these materials. Therefore, it is of interest to design and synthesize a simple and effective material to passivate the trap states and improve the overall performance of PSCs.

Graphite carbon nitride (g-CN) is a two-dimensional (2D) environmentally-friendly π electron structure conjugated polymer material. Due to its facile synthesis, low cost, excellent thermal stability and chemical stability, g-CN exhibits a variety of photocatalytic applications, such as in the oxygen and hydrogen evolution reactions. Recently, g-CN and exfoliated g-CN were introduced into the MAPbI3 (CH3NH3PbI3) perovskite films as an additive, which improved the performance of perovskite films by controlling the crystallization rates of MAPbI3, improving the conductivity of the perovskite films, self-recognizing MAPbI3 grain boundaries and loading themselves on perovskite through hydrogen bonding, confirming the 2D g-CN as favorable to obtain high quality perovskite films at the optimal concentrations. In addition, the thiazole-modified carbon nitride nanosheet was used as the interface modifier by enhancing the carrier collection to improve the performance of the inverted MAPbI3 PSCs, indicating that the g-CN nanosheet can also be used as a good interface modifier. However, the low thermal stability and light-induced trap states of MAPbI3 perovskite limit the improvement of PSCs. A mixture of triple cation perovskite containing inorganic cesium, methylammonium (MA), and formamidinium (FA) was used, which possesses better thermal stability and less impure phase than that of the MAPbI3 perovskite. The addition of Cs cation with a smaller radius could stabilize the crystal structure and improve optoelectronic properties of the perovskite. However, the conductivity of the perovskite films and the trap states at the grain boundaries and surface of perovskite materials still need to be further optimized.
In this work, we prepared organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells with cesium-containing triple cation perovskite films modified by iodine-doped graphite carbon nitride (g-CNI). The results show that the quality of perovskite films is improved with a larger grain size and enhanced crystallinity. Due to passivating the trap states, reducing charge recombination and promoting the extraction and transport of charge carriers, high photovoltaic performance parameters were achieved with the g-CNI modification. The possible mechanism of reducing trap state density was revealed to explain the improvement. Typically, a champion power conversion efficiency of 18.28% (average 17.26%) was achieved with a short circuit current density (Jsc) of 22.97 mA cm−2, an open circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.07 V, and a fill factor (FF) of 0.74. Notably, in terms of the enhancement of crystallinity and the reduction of trap state density, g-CNI plays a better role than conventional g-CN, because iodine in g-CNI interacts with under-coordinated Pb ions at the grain boundaries and the surface of perovskite materials to obtain a higher quality of perovskite films.

The iodine-doped graphite carbon nitride (g-CNI) and graphite carbon nitride (g-CN) are synthesized by heating precursor materials in a tube furnace respectively. (Detailed synthesis process is in the Experimental section.) The Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopy and powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) were applied to investigate the chemical structures of the g-CNI and g-CN samples. The FT-IR spectra of g-CN and g-CNI (Fig. 1a) show similar absorption bonds, at about 799 cm−1, 1224–1625 cm−1, and 3000–3500 cm−1, ascribed to the breathing vibration of the triazine units, stretching vibration of the C–N heterocycle, and the vibrations of the terminal amino and hydroxyl groups. No iodine-related bonds were observed, because of the low iodine content. In order to further investigate the effects of iodine addition on the chemical structures, XRD was used to characterize the samples (Fig. 1b). The XRD patterns exhibited similar diffraction peaks, and no new peaks appeared. The (100) diffraction peak at 12.97° is attributed to the interplanar packing of heptazine units, and the (002) high-angle diffraction peak at 27.56° is due to the π–π interlayer stacking. The results indicate that a similar crystal structure and a well-developed graphitic layer were formed. The X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) of g-CNI was performed for further studying the composition and chemical environment (Fig. 1 and Fig. S1, ESI). The spectrum of the g-CNI sample presents C 1s peaks at 284.6 eV, 286.1 eV, and 288.1 eV, and N 1s peaks at 398.8 eV, 399.8 eV, and 400.6 eV, which are consistent with the results of the literature. In addition, the peaks of I 3d appear at 619.3 eV and 631.0 eV, which are respectively classified as I 3d5/2 and I 3d3/2 states. At the same time, the signal of I 3d5/2 can be divided into 619.0 eV (C–I bond) and 619.9 eV (C–I+–C bond), which correspond to the C–I bond peak of 285.2 eV (C 1s spectrum in Fig. 1c). This suggests that the C–I covalent bond is formed by the iodine substituting lattice nitrogen atoms. The results indicate that g-CNI was successfully synthesized. Fig. S2 (ESI) displays the top-view scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and the transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images, which reveal that the flat and layered structure is formed. Meanwhile, the optical properties are also measured. In comparison with g-CN, the absorption spectrum of g-CNI shows a stronger absorption intensity, and a lower bandgap (2.54 eV) indicating that the intrinsic backbone structure of g-CN was not changed by the doping of iodine (Fig. S2c, ESI). The PL intensity of g-CNI shows a significant reduction compared with g-CN, which suggests a lower recombination rate (Fig. S2d, ESI). Clearly, by introducing iodine into the carbon nitride, a flat and layered structure and enhanced photophysical properties are obtained, which are beneficial to improving the performance of perovskite films.

As designed, the modified perovskite films were fabricated via spin-coating the perovskite precursor solution with or without g-CNI, which was pre-dispersed in N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF). In order to explore the differences in the surface morphology of the perovskite films with or without g-CNI, and for comparison, we also prepared the perovskite with g-CN (defined as control, with g-CNI, and with g-CN, respectively). Therefore, top-view scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was used to study the morphologies of the perovskite films (Fig. 2a, b and Fig. S3, ESI). Clearly, flat and no pinhole perovskite films were formed on the substrates. The control and the perovskite with g-CN (Fig. S3, ESI) possess almost the same grain size, but in contrast, the perovskite with g-CNI has a slightly larger grain size. In the XRD patterns of the control and the perovskite with g-CNI (Fig. 2c), the lattice diffraction peaks of the perovskite with g-CNI are almost identical to those of the control in shape and position, suggesting that g-CNI is not embedded in the lattice but on the perovskite surface or at the grain boundary. The increase in the diffraction peak intensity is due to the better crystallinity of the perovskite modified by g-CNI, consistent with the result of the larger grain size of perovskite with g-CNI. According to previous research, the conductivity of the perovskite films was improved by the addition of g-CN. As a result, the iodine-doped carbon nitride could effectively improve the quality of perovskite films. The perovskite with g-CN shows the same phenomenon as the perovskite with g-CNI (Fig. S4, ESI). As shown in the UV-vis absorption spectra of the perovskite films (Fig. 2d), the peak of the perovskite with g-CNI is slightly higher than that of the control, indicating that g-CNI has a positive effect on the light absorption of the perovskite. XPS was performed to evaluate the composition change of perovskite films and the possible interactions between g-CNI and the perovskite (Fig. 2e and f). The I 3d signal of the perovskite with g-CNI is obviously higher than that of the control. This phenomenon is strong evidence for the incorporation of g-CNI in the perovskite. The peaks of Pb 4f appearing at 142.97 eV and 138.09 eV in the spectrum of the perovskite with g-CNI, which are respectively classified as Pb 4f7/2 and Pb 4f5/2 states, exhibit an obvious shift toward a lower value compared with the control (Pb 4f7/2 143.05 eV and Pb 4f5/2 138.19 eV). This phenomenon indicates that iodine in g-CNI coordinates with the under-coordinated Pb ions to fill the halide vacancies, but on the contrary, the peaks of perovskite with g-CN show no significant change (Fig. 2f and Fig. S5, ESI). The decrease of under-coordinated Pb ions is beneficial to passivate trap states, thus reducing the trap state density and suppressing charge recombination.
To further evaluate the effects of g-CNI addition on the dynamics of charge recombination, steady-state photoluminescence (PL) and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) were measured (Fig. 3). The peaks of all samples were located at the same wavelength without an apparent shift, indicating that all the perovskite films maintain the same composition and crystal phase. Meanwhile, the PL intensity of the perovskite with g-CNI shows a significant enhancement (Fig. 3a). It has been widely reported that under-coordinated Pb ions would cause trap states in the perovskite, which can induce charge recombination and reduce the performance of cells. The perovskite with g-CNI presents an obvious enhancement in steady-state PL intensity, which provides evidence that g-CNI acts to remarkably passivate trap states, suppress the non-radiative carrier recombination and reduce charge recombination. The TRPL spectra (Fig. 3b) were fitted with a biexponential decay equation of I(t) = I0 + A1exp(−t/τ1) + A2exp(−t/τ2), where τ1 and τ2 represent fast and slow decay time constants. According to previous reports, τ1 and τ2 are related to the radiative recombination from bulk perovskite and trap-assisted nonradiative recombination (surface trap near grain boundaries), respectively. Compared with the control (τ1 = 0.67 ns, τ2 = 5.08 ns), the perovskite with g-CNI shows a much longer lifetime in both τ1 (0.70 ns) and τ2 (6.98 ns), which indicates that the nonradiative recombination induced by the trap states is significantly reduced (the fitted results are list in Table S1, ESI in detail). Therefore, the perovskite with g-CNI possesses a lower trap state density and is expected to achieve a larger current and higher voltage. In addition, after the samples were covered with hole transport materials (HTMs), the PL quenching of perovskite with g-CNI is stronger than the control (Fig. 3c), confirming a better carrier extraction and more efficient electron–hole separation at the interfaces of g-CNI modified perovskite and HTM. In short, g-CNI can effectively passivate the trap states at the grain boundaries and the surface of perovskite films, promote the separation and extraction of charge carriers and reduce charge recombination.
The dark current–voltage characteristics of electron-only devices were then studied to further evaluate the effects of g-CNI on passivating the trap states of perovskite. The electron-only devices were fabricated with the structure of FTO/TiO2/perovskite/PCBM/Au (Fig. 3d). The electron trap state density within different type perovskite films was measured using a space charge limited current (SCLC) method. As the voltage increases, the dark current–voltage curve can be divided into an ohmic contact region (I ∝ Vn = 1), a trap-filled limit current (TFL, I ∝ Vn > 3), and a space-charge-limited current (SCLC, I ∝ Vn = 2). The trap state density Ntrap of the perovskite films can be determined by using the equation:
where
VTFL is the trap-filled limit voltage (marked in Fig. 3d), which is determined by the trap density, and e, L, ε, and ε0 are the elementary charge, the thickness of the perovskite films, the relative dielectric constant, and vacuum permittivity, respectively. The trap state density of the control and with g-CNI is 1.43 × 1016 cm−3 and 1.07 × 1016 cm−3, respectively, which correspond to the VTFL values of the control and with g-CNI samples of 0.854 V and 0.643 V. The decrease of trap state density stems from the reduced generation of non-radiative recombination centers due to the interaction between iodine in g-CNI and under-coordinated Pb ions at the grain boundaries and the surface of perovskite films. Therefore, it is more beneficial to the separation and transport of charge carriers, which would effectively improve the photovoltaic performance of the devices.

To further characterize performance of the devices, we fabricated devices with the structure of FTO/TiO2/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Au, and the cross-sectional SEM image of PSCs with g-CNI and a schematic diagram of the device structure are shown in Fig. 4a. It can be observed that the device with g-CNI shows a uniform and dense perovskite layer with a thickness of about 460 nm. The doping ratio of g-CNI was also optimized using the device performance as the indicator and the device with the incorporation of 0.6 wt% was found to exhibit the best performance (Fig. S6 and Table S2, ESI). The statistical photovoltaic parameters of 15 devices demonstrate the repeatability and the reliability of the performance enhancement by the g-CNI modification (Fig. 4b–e). Interestingly, the average Jsc of PSCs based on the perovskite with g-CNI generates a significant growth, which is consistent with the enhanced crystallization and light absorption intensity. At the same time, the Voc also shows a lot of improvement, which is attributed to the g-CNI interaction with under-coordinated Pb ions in the perovskite to reduce trap state density, inhibit charge carrier recombination, and promote charge separation and extraction.

Fig. 5a presents the J–V curves of the champion devices with different perovskite (control, with g-CN, with g-CNI) with the addition amount of 0.6 wt%. Meanwhile, the champion and average photovoltaic parameters are listed in Table 1. The devices based on perovskite with g-CNI achieved a champion (average) PCE of 18.28% (17.26%), including a Jsc of 22.97 (22.38) mA cm−2, a Voc of 1.07 (1.07) V, and a fill factor (FF) of 0.74 (0.72), which is higher than the others. On the basis of the characterization results, the higher photovoltaic parameters are attributed to better crystallinity, more efficient passivation of trap states, more effective carrier separation and extraction, and less charge recombination. The incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) and corresponding integrated Jsc of the control and the perovskite with g-CNI and g-CN devices were also obtained (Fig. 5b and Fig. S7, ESI). The device with g-CNI showed a higher IPCE value than the control due to the decrease of trap state density and the integrated Jsc values are very close to that obtained from the J–V curves. Open-circuit voltage decay (OCVD) can effectively reflect the recombination of charge carriers. It can be observed that the recombination rate of carriers decreases, which further provides evidence for the interaction between g-CNI and perovskite materials (Fig. 5c and Fig. S8, ESI). In addition, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was carried out for studying charge carrier transfer and recombination within the devices (Fig. 5d and Fig. S9, ESI). The Nyquist plots were measured at a frequency ranging from 0.1 Hz to 105 Hz without bias voltage under simulated AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2 solar irradiation, and the equivalent circuit model fitting the Nyquist plots is presented in Fig. S10 (ESI). Consistent with previous studies, the Nyquist plots show two semicircles at low frequency and high frequency respectively. The semicircle in the higher frequency range represents the charge transport resistance (Rtr), and the other semicircle in the lower frequency range reflects the recombination resistance (Rrec). It can be found that the device based on the perovskite with g-CNI possesses a much higher Rrec (3545 Ω) and lower Rtr (322.7 Ω) than the control, which indicates that the perovskite with g-CNI is beneficial for transporting charge carriers and reducing charge recombination. Detailed resistance parameters are summarized in Table S3 (ESI).
Device type

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF
PCE (%)
Control
Average
21.54
1.05
0.71
16.00
Champion
21.97
1.05
0.72
16.57
With g-CN
Average
21.91
1.06
0.71
16.54
Champion
22.63
1.06
0.73
17.53
With g-CNI
Average
22.38
1.07
0.72
17.26
Champion
22.97
1.07
0.74
18.28
As shown in Fig. 6, the possible mechanism for the trap state passivation is illustrated. The under-coordinated ions at the grain boundaries and the surface of perovskite materials are the main cause of the trap states, which may induce the formation of non-radiative recombination centers, cause charge recombination and hinder the performance improvement of solar cells. Significantly, the iodine in g-CNI can fill the vacancies and interact with under-coordinated Pb ions, thus passivating the trap states generated by under-coordinated Pb ions in the perovskite layers. Due to the decrease of trap state density, the extraction and transport of charge carriers are significantly improved (proved by PL and TRPL), and at the same time, the charge recombination is effectively inhibited (testified by OCVD and EIS). Also, the trap state density of all samples was calculated from the dark J–V characteristics of the electron-only devices, confirming that the trap states are effectively passivated by g-CNI.

In summary, we have demonstrated that introducing 2D iodine-doped graphite carbon nitride into the triple cation perovskite films could efficiently improve the photovoltaic performance of the PSCs, which is attributed to the iodine in g-CNI coordinating with the under-coordinated Pb ions at the grain boundaries and surface of perovskite films. The perovskite films with better crystallinity were successfully obtained, and simultaneously the trap state density was tremendously reduced. Characterization results clearly indicate that the passivated trap states in the perovskite films benefit the extraction and transport of charge carriers from perovskite films to hole transport layers and inhibit the recombination of charge carriers. At the optimal concentration, the g-CNI modified PSCs achieved a champion PCE of 18.28% compared with that of the control (16.57%). This work proposes a simple and effective strategy to optimize perovskite films with enhanced crystallinity and reduced trap states to improve the performance of PSCs.


All the materials and solvents were used as received without further purification. Most of the materials and solvents used for preparing the perovskite precursor solution were purchased from Xi’an polymer light Technology Corp and Sigma-Aldrich. Spiro-OMeTAD was purchased from Toronto Research Chemicals.


Graphitic carbon nitride (g-CN) was synthesized according to the previous research literature. In a tube furnace, dicyandiamide (4.2 g) was heated from room temperature to 550 °C with the heating rate of 5 °C min−1 under a nitrogen atmosphere, and then held for one hour. By carefully grinding, the as-prepared solid powder was collected, which is defined as g-CN.


Iodine doped graphitic carbon nitride (g-CNI) was synthesized according to the previous research literature. The g-CNI was synthesized by directly mixing dicyandiamide (4.2 g) with ammonium iodide (0.35 g) in 40 mL of deionized water, then heating at 60 °C to remove water. Under a nitrogen atmosphere, the obtained solid was calcined at 550 °C for 1 h with the heating rate of 5 °C min−1 to get the final sample. It was denoted as g-CNI.


The fluorine-doped tin oxide coated glass (14 Ω sq−1, NSG) substrates, before preparing the devices, were firstly etched by zinc power and 4 M HCl, then ultrasonic washed for 30 min with deionized water, acetone and ethanol respectively followed by treating with UV ozone for 15 min. The compact TiO2 (c-TiO2) was obtained by mixing 175 μL of titanium isopropoxide and 17.5 μL of 4 M HCl in 2.5 mL of isopropanol. Then, the solution was spin-coated on the substrates at 3000 rpm for 30 s and annealed at 500 °C for 30 min. The preparation of the perovskite precursor solution and the spin coating process are based on the previous research literature. In a nitrogen-filled glovebox, the perovskite precursor solution was prepared by dissolving FAI (1 M), MABr (0.2 M), PbBr2 (0.2 M) and PbI2 (1.1 M) in anhydrous DMF:DMSO 4:1 (v/v). Then, 10 vol% CsI was dropped into the clarified solution to obtain the triple cation composition. The perovskite films were spin coated at 1000 rpm for 10 s, then 6000 rpm for 20 s. In the end, 200 μL of chlorobenzene was quickly dropped on the substrates in the last 5 s of step two, then annealed at 100 °C for 1 h. When the substrates dropped to room temperature, the Spiro-OMeTAD solution obtained by dissolving 72.3 mg of Spiro-OMeTAD in 1 mL of chlorobenzene and mixing with 17.5 μL of bis(trifluoromethane)sulfonimide lithium salt (Li-TFSI) solution (520 mg mL−1 in acetonitrile) and 28.8 μL of 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP) was deposited at 4000 rpm for 20 s. Finally, 80–100 nm gold was evaporated on the top of the substrates.


The Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopy was performed by using a PerkinElmer Spectrum 100 FT-IR spectrometer. UV-vis absorption spectra were measured on a PerkinElmer 750 spectrophotometer in the 250–800 nm wavelength range. Photoluminescence (PL) and time resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) spectra were recorded using an Edinburgh FLS 920 fluorescence spectrometer with an Edinburgh Xe900 450 W xenon arc lamp for an exciting light source.

Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images were obtained by using the Rili SU 8000HSD Series Hitachi New Generation Cold Field Emission SEM.
The powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were obtained by using a Shimadzu XRD-6000 instrument (Copper Kα).
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was performed by using an ESCALAB-250 spectrometer (Thermo, America) diffraction instrument. The binding energy of C 1s at 284.8 eV was used as an energy reference.

The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics were recorded on a Gamry interface 1000E with an Oriel 300 W solar simulator under ambient conditions at the light intensity of AM 1.5G 100 mW cm−2. The scan rate was 100 mv s−1. The devices were masked by an aperture shade to determine a 0.06 cm2 active area. The incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) measurements were carried out with a Newport IPCE measurement system. The electrochemical workstation (Gamry interface 1000E) provides the open-circuit voltage decay (OCVD) curves. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was also performed by using an electrochemical workstation (Gamry interface 1000E) with the frequency range from 0.1 Hz to 105 Hz under illumination and without bias voltage.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 21873025, 21571042 and 51603055), the Natural Science Foundation of Heilongjiang Province (Grant No. QC2017055), the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (Grant No. 2016M601424 and 2017T100236), and the Postdoctoral Foundation of Heilongjiang Province (Grant No. LBH-Z16059).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9tc04264d
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019