 DOI: 10.1039/D2EE03708D
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2023, 16, 565-573


Guanhua
Ren
,

Zhiguo
Zhang
,

Yanyu
Deng
,

Zhuowei
Li
,

Chunyu
Liu
*,

Mingkui
Wang
* and 

Wenbin
Guo
*

State Key Laboratory of Integrated Optoelectronics, College of Electronic Science and Engineering, Jilin University, 2699 Qianjin Street, Changchun 130012, People's Republic of China. E-mail: chunyu_liu@jlu.edu.cn; guowb@jlu.edu.cn

Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 1037 Luoyu Road, Wuhan 430074, Hubei, P. R. China. E-mail: mingkui.wang@mail.hust.edu.cn

Received
17th November 2022
, Accepted 19th December 2022
First published on 19th December 2022
Surface passivation with organic iodides has become a necessary strategy for realizing high-performance perovskite solar cells (PSCs). However, stability degradation of PSCs is always triggered by the migration of iodine interstitial (Ii) defects on the perovskite surface after such treatment. Here, we found that even if the surface treatment is not annealed, it induces the formation of Ii and leads to the subsequent migration behavior. We emphasized the importance of cation selection for organic iodides, and revealed that a strong interaction between cations and perovskite surfaces can suppress the Ii migration through increasing the migration energy barrier. Detailed investigation of four classical phenylalkylammonium iodides demonstrates that the alkyl chain length of cations has an effect on the suppression of Ii migration. Owing to effective defect passivation on the perovskite surface and successful Ii migration inhibition, the phenylpropylammonium iodide-treated PSCs achieve enhanced efficiency and stability simultaneously, obtaining a champion efficiency of 24.20% and retaining about 92% of their initial efficiency after 240 h of continuous illumination during operational stability testing.

Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have emerged as one of the most promising candidates in the photovoltaic field, thanks in large part to defect passivation on the perovskite surface with organic iodides. However, it is demonstrated here that such treatment without annealing induces the formation of iodine interstitial (Ii) defects whose migration severely degrades the device stability. We propose a cation selection strategy to achieve strong perovskite surface passivation and interaction to suppress the Ii migration while obtaining high efficiency. We find that the cations of organic iodides with different structures possess the ability to suppress the Ii migration, which can be attributed to the steric arrangement on the perovskite surface and dipole moment. Ultimately, the phenylpropylammonium iodide-treated PSCs achieve the topmost efficiency of 24.20%, and retain about 92% of its initial efficiency after 240 h of continuous illumination during operational stability testing. This work provides key guidance for the selection and design of passivation materials for perovskite devices with high efficiency and stability.


The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) has made an impressive breakthrough during the past decade, recently reaching a certified record of 25.7%. This high efficiency benefits from an effective defect passivation strategy, especially surface defect passivation, since the perovskite surface is the place where the defects are predominantly distributed. To date, organic iodides have been widely used in surface passivation for high-performance PSCs. In such a strategy, long alkyl chain or large bulk cations can passivate acceptor-like defects by intermolecular interaction, while iodide anions (I−) are able to compensate for iodide vacancy (VI) defects. However, iodine interstitial (Ii) defects have to be considered due to the presence of excessive I− ions and the annealing process required during surface treatment, which seriously impairs the device stability. For some organic iodides, the annealing process contributes to the formation of low-dimensional phases to passivate the surface defects. For other widely used organic iodides, such as phenethylammonium iodide (PEAI) and hexaneammonium iodide (HAI), the annealing process can weaken the defect passivation effect, which makes the treatment without annealing also universal in current research. In the absence of annealing, whether the formation of Ii defects and damage to stability caused by them can be avoided has not been revealed.

Ii defects possess low formation energy and migration activation energy (Ea). Therefore, even if Ii as a shallow defect does not induce non-radiative recombination to affect the initial device efficiency, it can easily migrate to damage the device stability. In most cases, iodide migration is responsible for a range of notorious problems such as hysteresis and phase segregation. In particular, during device operation, movement of iodide to the charge transport layers and metal electrodes will cause irreversible performance degradation. Although the anion I− can be replaced with others, the results showed that this strategy inevitably leads to a decrease in the efficiency. Currently, passivation of organic iodides still dominates in fabrication of ultra-high-performance PSCs, motivating the exploration of versatile cation candidates while retaining I−. Previous works focused more on defect passivation, phase stability, and humidity stability, while additional iodide-source-induced migration received less attention. Thus, suppressing Ii migration during organic iodide passivation remains an important challenge for achieving highly efficient and stable PSCs.
In this work, we revealed that surface treatment with organic iodides even without an annealing process also induces the formation of Ii defects, and predictable Ii migration will inevitably lead to the stability degradation of PSCs. We also found that the strong surface interaction provided by cations of organic iodides can suppress Ii migration by increasing the energy barrier due to blocking of the migration path, which stems from a more stable steric arrangement on the perovskite surface and a higher dipole moment. Herein, the popular phenylalkylammonium (PA) iodide derivatives that do not require annealing during defect passivation are investigated in detail, and it is proved that the interaction capacity is determined from the alkyl chain length. Ultimately, the device achieves a high efficiency of 24.20% with the surface treatment of phenylpropylammonium iodide (PPAI). More importantly, the operational stability of PSCs is greatly improved, with retention of over 90% of initial PCE after maximum power point (MPP) tracking for 240 h under continuous simulated 1sun illumination. Our findings help overcome the shortcomings of surface passivation with organic iodides, and provide key guidance for the selection of passivators for high-performance PSCs.

As mentioned above that the formation energy of Ii is low, so we reasonably suspect that the treatment of organic iodides without annealing also induces the formation of Ii and deteriorates the stability of PSCs. To verify this hypothesis, I2 in isopropanol (IPA) was used as a post-treatment solution to rule out the effect of cations. In the solution, I− and I2 eventually established an equilibrium with I3−, and the concentration was chosen to be an equivalent concentration of atomic iodine. Fig. S1 (ESI) shows the cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the whole device, in which the FA1−xMAxPbI3 perovskite layers were treated with I2 in IPA at different concentrations at room temperature. The current density–voltage (J–V) curves of champion devices were measured and are shown in Fig. 1(a)–(c), and the photovoltaic parameters of open-circuit voltage (Voc), short-circuit current density (Jsc), fill factor (FF), PCE and hysteresis index (HI) of 8 devices are displayed in Table S1 and Fig. S2 (ESI). The HI is used to quantify device hysteresis, which is calculated using the equation HI = (PCEreverse–PCEforward)/PCEreverse. The values of PCE for these devices slightly decrease while the calculated HI shows an increasing trend with increasing I2 concentration (Fig. 1(d)). Fig. 1(e) and Fig. S3 (ESI) illustrate that the PCE tends to stabilize slowly with increasing concentration. These results confirm that Ii defects can generate at room temperature when additional I− is introduced on the surface of perovskite films. Positron annihilation spectrometry (PAS) is an effective tool to prove the existence of Ii defects, which can selectively detect negatively charged, neutral vacancies and interstitial defects in materials. Positrons (e+), as the antiparticle of electrons (e−), are incident on the perovskite surface and annihilate with electrons from the free lattice sites or get trapped in negatively charged or neutral vacancies or interstitial defects to emit two γ photons: e+ + e− → γ1 + γ2. The specific γ1 is selected as the starting signal and γ2 is selected as the termination signal. The time between the two signals is the lifetime, and its variation allows qualitative analysis of the type and number of defects. The positron lifetime spectra are shown in Fig. 1(f) and they were analyzed using PATFIT software to obtain the derived lifetime parameters (Table S2, ESI). All samples have three lifetime components τ1, τ2 and τ3, in which τ1 can be ascribed to positron annihilation with electrons from the free lattice sites, τ2 comes from positrons trapped in negatively charged or neutral vacancies or interstitial defects, and τ3 is attributed to positron annihilation in the defect clusters and grain boundaries. For the case of surface treatment with IPA solution of I2 only, the increase in τ2 indicates the formation of Ii defects. Furthermore, Ii defects are not conducive to the perovskite stability in I2 vapor. We thus stored the control and treated perovskite films in I2 vapor and recorded the evolution of film morphology (Fig. S4, ESI). The accelerated degradation of perovskites in the case of 20 mM and 30 mM concentrations could be ascribed to the presence of Ii defects. Therefore, even if organic iodides without annealing are employed to improve the device efficiency, the effect of generated Ii on long-term stability still needs to be focused.

Then we fabricated the PSCs treated with PA iodides, where the PA cations had different alkyl chain lengths (the number of alkyl groups varies from 1 to 4), including phenylmethylammonium iodide (PMAI), phenethylammonium iodide (PEAI), phenylpropylammonium iodide (PPAI), and phenylbutanammonium iodide (PBAI). The corresponding device and molecular structures are shown in Fig. 2(a). As shown in Fig. 2(b), the treatment with PA iodides significantly improves the device efficiency, which are the optimal results obtained by varying the concentrations. The control device provides a PCE of 21.54%. With 12 mM PPAI, the device delivers the topmost PCE of 24.20% with a Voc of 1.171 V, a Jsc of 25.12 mA cm−2, and an FF of 82.28%. The integrated Jsc from incident photon–electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra shown in Fig. 2(c) is consistent with J–V results (the mismatch factor is less than 5%). Fig. 2(d) gives the stabilized PCEs, indicating that the devices possess good light stability. The enhancement in PCE is mainly attributed to defect passivation, while the efficiency decrease of the PBAI-treated device may be due to the loss of charge extraction capability. It should be noted that none of these organic iodides require annealing because the annealing process reduces the device efficiency, as shown in Fig. S5 and Table S3 (ESI). The annealing process on one hand facilitates the formation of low-dimensional perovskites which weakens the defect passivation effect, while on the other hand it may promote ion migration to impair the device stability. We increased the concentration of PA iodides to assess how organic cations with different chain lengths suppress Ii migration. The champion PCEs for the four types of devices at different concentrations are concluded in Fig. S6 (ESI) and Table 1. When the concentration increases above 12 mM, the efficiency of all devices decreases due to the hindered charge transport. Likewise, 8 devices for each case were prepared for statistical purpose. As shown in Fig. S7 and Table S4 (ESI), the parameters measured using the reverse scan are higher than those obtained from the forward scan, and the difference becomes more pronounced with increasing concentration. We notice that the increase in this difference slows down with longer chain length. More intuitively, Fig. 2(e) gives the HI of these devices and Fig. S8 (ESI) plots the correlation between the mean of the HI and the concentration as a special case. The increase in hysteresis is gradually mitigated from PMAI- to PBAI-treated devices. The stabilized PCEs in Fig. S9 (ESI) show that although the PCE takes a long time to reach a stable value for all devices at high concentrations, the stabilization time is shortened for the case of longer PA cations. Therefore, it can be reasonably speculated that the longer alkyl chain is more effective in suppressing the Ii migration.
Device
Concentration
Scanning direction

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
HI (%)
PMAI
12 mM
Reverse
1.159
24.76
79.61
22.85
2.71
Forward
1.149
24.75
78.17
22.23
20 mM
Reverse
1.151
24.63
78.25
22.18
3.97
Forward
1.132
24.50
76.81
21.30
30 mM
Reverse
1.138
24.37
76.47
21.21
5.00
Forward
1.119
24.33
74.02
20.15
PEAI
12 mM
Reverse
1.166
25.00
81.28
23.69
2.32
Forward
1.157
24.97
80.10
23.14
20 mM
Reverse
1.160
24.89
80.70
23.30
2.88
Forward
1.148
24.82
79.43
22.63
30 mM
Reverse
1.150
24.59
78.83
22.29
3.95
Forward
1.133
24.52
77.06
21.41
PPAI
12 mM
Reverse
1.171
25.12
82.28
24.20
1.28
Forward
1.167
25.12
81.50
23.89
20 mM
Reverse
1.161
25.04
81.32
23.64
1.65
Forward
1.153
25.04
80.54
23.25
30 mM
Reverse
1.154
24.84
79.50
22.79
2.41
Forward
1.146
24.78
78.33
22.24
PBAI
12 mM
Reverse
1.174
24.88
81.25
23.73
1.47
Forward
1.168
24.87
80.49
23.38
20 mM
Reverse
1.171
24.80
80.77
23.46
1.58
Forward
1.164
24.79
80.02
23.09
30 mM
Reverse
1.162
24.54
78.66
22.43
2.10
Forward
1.155
24.52
77.54
21.96
Density functional theory (DFT) calculation was carried out to gain insight into the mechanism of Ii migration suppression (see details in the ESI). Fig. 3(a) illustrates the optimal steric arrangement of four PA cations on the perovskite surface. The FAPbI3 perovskite was selected here because the MA content in FA1−xMAxPbI3 is quite low. The benzene rings of PPA+ and PBA+ cations are stacked almost perpendicular to the perovskite plane. A small angular deviation for PEA+ cations is observed, which increases for the PMA+ cation. The orientation deviation from the vertical direction may disrupt the regular stacking and reduce the electronic delocalization. In addition, it can be observed that the insertion depth of these four cations into the perovskite surface is in the order of PBA+ ≈ PPA+ > PEA+ > PMA+. A shallow insertion depth means that the PA cation, especially the PMA+ cation, is hindered for insertion into the Pb–I framework, which weakens its interaction with Pb and I ions. It can be explained that the structural rigidity and steric hindrance of the benzene ring in cations affect the terminal NH3+ group, which can be released by increasing the length of the middle alkyl chain. The short chain length (PMA+ and PEA+) thus weakens the binding of PA cations to the perovskite surface. The dipole moments (μ), as one of the indicators for interactions, of these four cations were calculated and are illustrated in Fig. 3(b). The cation with the longest chain length in PBA+ shows the highest μ (∼16.65 D). We speculate that the intensity of interaction of these four PA cations with the perovskite surface follows the order of PBA+ > PPA+ > PEA+ > PMA+. This conclusion was confirmed with X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurement. As shown in Fig. 3(c), the binding energies corresponding to the I 3d and Pb 4f peaks gradually shift to higher values from PMAI-treated to PBAI-treated films, suggesting the gradually enhanced interaction between I and Pb ions on the perovskite surface and in PA cations. We further calculated the energy required for Ii migration in the case of four cations. The Ii migration path was constructed by moving an Ii defect from the internal interstitial sites to away from the perovskite surface. As displayed in Fig. 3(d), the migration process of an Ii defect can be divided into two steps. In the first step, an iodide ion on the perovskite surface dissociates, leaving a VI; in the second step, an Ii defect migrates to the position of VI. The corresponding energy values are concluded in Fig. 3(e). For step 1, an increased value was observed, meaning that the Ii migration becomes more difficult as the chain length grows. For step 2, the estimated negative values indicate that Ii tends to fill the VI defect. And this procedure becomes easier for the cations with longer chain length due to the stronger interaction, that is, an increase in the energy barrier of step 1 is essential to suppress the migration of Ii. Therefore, the PA cations with longer chain length have more stable steric alignment and higher dipole moments, and thereby interact with the perovskite surface more strongly to stabilize the lattice to suppress the Ii migration more effectively. Additionally, the calculations also imply that the formation energy of VI is increased (step 1), which is beneficial to hinder the migration of dissociated I− on the surface.
As is known, the fundamental reason for ion migration is the ultralow Ea. Consequently, we employed thermal admittance spectroscopy (TAS) to measure the low-frequency capacitance signature of devices at different temperatures to estimate the Ea of the ionic conductivity of perovskite layers. The device structure was chosen as ITO/PTAA/perovskite/with or without PA iodides/C60/BCP/Ag. Fig. S10 (ESI) shows the TAS spectra of five devices measured at 263 K, 270 K, 285 K and 300 K, respectively. The corresponding plots of −ωdC/dω as a function of ω are shown in Fig. 4(a)–(c) and Fig. S11 (ESI). The sample at each temperature has a corresponding characteristic transition peak. The Ea values are obtained by fitting the corresponding plots with the Arrhenius equation, as given in Fig. 4(d). The control film provides an Ea of 0.415 eV, while the perovskite films treated with PA iodides show higher Ea values of 0.564, 0.625, 0.710 and 0.730 eV. The increased Ea demonstrates that the migration energy barrier in the perovskite film is increased due to the surface passivation, and PPAI and PBAI are more effective in increasing energy barrier among these four passivators. Although the migration of I− and FA+ cannot be distinguished here, it is generally accepted that the migration of the former is the easiest. Furthermore, we used XPS to explore the relative atomic ratios of I and Ag elements on the electrode surface of the aged devices, since iodide can migrate through the spiro-OMeTAD layer and Ag electrode to the Ag surface. The aged devices were obtained by heating the freshly prepared devices at 100 °C for 12 h and then storing them under dark conditions with 30–40% RH at room temperature for 7 days. All types of devices were subjected to the same aging treatment. Fig. S12a (ESI) shows the XPS survey spectra demonstrating the existence of Ag and I elements. Relative atomic ratios were obtained from high-resolution XPS of Ag 3d and I 3d (Fig. S12b–f, ESI) and the detailed data are listed in Table S5 (ESI). The relative ratio of I and Ag elements shows a decreasing trend from control to PBAI-treated devices, as shown in Fig. 4(e) and (f). Combined with Ea estimation, the migration of Ii and dissociated I− is suppressed with the surface passivation of PA iodides, in which the PA cations with longer alkyl chain length have a better suppression effect.
Since the crystal structure, crystallinity, surface morphology, grain size and light absorption of the perovskite films had no obvious change after the surface passivation (Fig. S13–S15, ESI), we attributed the efficiency enhancement to the variation of the alkyl chain length, which resulted in different levels of defect passivation and charge extraction capacity. We further calculated the binding energies (Eb) of the four ammonium cations with acceptor-like defects on the perovskite surface. As shown in Fig. S16 (ESI), both the FAI or PbI2 terminated (001) perovskite surfaces are considered and the cations interact with FA vacancies (VFA), Pb vacancies (VPb) and the defects arising from I substitution at Pb sites (IPb) through ionic bonding and hydrogen bonding. The Eb values are summarized in Fig. 5(a). The PBA+ cation has the strongest binding with acceptor-like defects, which could be due to the high cationic dipole moment. The steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra in Fig. 5(b) exhibits a consistent increase in peak intensity as the films change from PMAI to PBAI, implying the reduced defects and suppressed nonradiative recombination. This conclusion is supported by evaluating the trap density (Nt) using the space charge limit current (SCLC) method. Both hole-only devices and electron-only devices demonstrate that the Nt of the perovskite film decreases with the four PA iodides (Fig. 5(c), Fig. S17 and Table S6, ESI). Similar conclusions can be obtained from the trap density of states (tDOS) and dark J–V characteristics of the devices (Fig. 5(d) and (e)).
Based on the above analysis, it can be found that the defect passivation ability of PBA+ to perovskite surface defects is the strongest, while the highest PCE was observed in PPAI-treated devices. Thus, we carried out electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) to understand this phenomenon. The Nyquist plots and its equivalent circuit are exhibited in Fig. 5(f). The values of Rtr and Rrec are reflected from the radius of the two semicircles. From the control device to the PPAI-treated device, the Rtr value decreases and the Rrec value increases. However, the PBAI-treated device owns a larger Rtr value and a smaller Rrec value than the PPAI-treated device, although the difference is small (Fig. S18a, ESI). In addition, the negative work function change increases with ammonium chain length, resulting in the accumulation of charges at the interface (Fig. S18b, ESI). Therefore, increasing alkyl chain length is more effective in defect passivation, but accordingly, the charge extraction is hindered leading to a decrease in the device efficiency.
The stability is crucial to the commercialization of PSCs; we thus assessed the long-term operational stability of encapsulated devices at MPP under continuous AM 1.5G illumination in air (room temperature, RH = 40 ± 5%). The devices were encapsulated by the classic glass-to-glass encapsulation method. First, the moderately long wires were fixed to the device electrodes using a conductive silver paste to facilitate subsequent measurement. Then, the ITO back side of the device was bonded to a clean glass sheet using ultraviolet (UV) epoxy. Finally, the cover glass sheet was placed on top of the device, and the device was sealed around with UV epoxy. The time for UV light exposure is short (∼60 s) during the encapsulation process, so the damage to the device is negligible. As shown in Fig. 5(g), the control device only retains about 70% of initial PCE after 128 h. In contrast, the stability of PA-iodides-treated devices significantly improves. After 240 h, the PMAI, PEAI, PPAI and PBAI-treated devices retain about 80%, 88%, 92%, and 92% of their initial PCEs, respectively. This is mainly attributed to the different degrees of suppression of iodide migration. Then the photothermal stability was investigated under continuous illumination at 85 °C in a N2 atmosphere. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns evolution of different perovskite films as a function of time are exhibited in Fig. S19 (ESI). The control and PMAI-treated films completely degrade to PbI2 within 180 h. At the device level shown in Fig. S20 (ESI), the efficiency of the control and PMAI-treated PSCs entirely failed within 180 h. The other three PSCs still retained 5.47%, 10.04% and 14.67% of their initial efficiencies after 240 h. Although the devices degradation under such extreme conditions are rapid, the trends are consistent with operational stability test. Finally, the humidity stability of unencapsulated devices was evaluated under dark conditions with about 85% RH at room temperature. Photographs of the perovskite films with different storage times are shown in Fig. S21 (ESI). For the devices, the control device completely loses its PCE within 192 h, while the four PA-iodide-treated devices maintain 45.49%, 53.98%, 60.99% and 64.02% of the initial PCEs, respectively (Fig. S22, ESI). The improvement of humidity stability can be ascribed to defect passivation and enhanced hydrophobicity that originates from long alkyl chains. To conclude, the longer the alkyl chain length in PA cations, the more stable the device is under various conditions, so it is critical to find a balance between device stability and efficiency.

In summary, we proved the formation of Ii defects on the perovskite surface and observed the corresponding migration after the treatment of organic iodides without annealing. Combining theoretical calculations and experimental characterization, we further demonstrated that organic iodides with an appropriate cation can provide strong interaction with the perovskite surface that originates from a stable steric alignment and a high dipole moment, thereby increasing the energy barrier for Ii migration. The popular PA iodides with different alkyl chain lengths, PMAI, PEAI, PPAI and PBAI, were employed and the suppression effect of Ii migration with PA cations enhanced when the chain length increased. Meanwhile, these four PA cations exhibit a gradually increasing defect passivation capability. However, the champion PCE is obtained in the PPAI-treated device rather than the PBAI-treated device due to a decrease in the charge extraction capability. More importantly, the operational, photothermal, and humidity stability of the PPAI-treated PSCs are significantly improved. This work reveals the negative effects of surface passivation with organic iodides and proposes an effective structure selection strategy to achieve highly efficient and stable PSCs.


W. B. G., C. Y. L. and M. K. W. supervised this research project and revised the manuscript. G. H. R. and Z. G. Z. contributed equally to this work. G. H. R. completed the experiments, performed the data analysis, and wrote the manuscript. Z. G. Z. completed the theoretical calculations and analysis. Y. Y. D. helped in conducting the characterization and data analysis. Z. W. L. helped in preparing the samples for characterization. All authors participated in the discussion about the experimental details.


There are no conflicts to declare.


The authors are grateful to the National Natural Science Foundation of China (62175084 and 62005093) and the Industrial Technology Research and Development Project of Jilin Province (2020C026-5) for the support for this work.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ee03708d
‡ Guanhua Ren and Zhiguo Zhang contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023