 DOI: 10.1039/C4DT02904F
(Paper)
Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 3967-3973


Zonghao
Liu
,

Meng
Zhang
,

Xiaobao
Xu
,

Lingling
Bu
,

Wenjun
Zhang
,

Wenhui
Li
,

Zhixin
Zhao
*,

Mingkui
Wang
*,

Yi-Bing
Cheng
 and 

Hongshan
He
*

Michael Grätzel Center for Mesoscopic Solar Cells, Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, School of Optical and Electronic Information, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430074, PR China. E-mail: zhixin-zhao@hust.edu.cn; mingkui.wang@mail.hust.edu.cn

Department of Chemistry, Eastern Illinois University, Charleston, Illinois 61920, USA. E-mail: hhe@eiu.edu

Department of Materials Engineering, Monash University, Melbourne, Victoria 3800, Australia

Received
22nd September 2014
, Accepted 5th November 2014
First published on 5th November 2014
Replacement of the ZrO2 insulator layer in the state-of-the-art TiO2/ZrO2/carbon structure by mesoscopic p-type NiO particles led to 39% increase of energy conversion efficiency of hole-conductor-free organometallic perovskite heterojunction solar cells with carbon counter electrodes. In these cells, the light absorber, CH3NH3PbI3, formed instantly inside the pores of the entire TiO2/NiO/carbon layer upon sequential deposition of PbI2 and CH3NH3I. Photoluminescence, impedance spectroscopy and transient photovoltage decay measurements have revealed that introduction of NiO extended the electron lifetime and augmented the hole extraction of the counter electrode. As a result, the photocurrent and open-circuit voltage both increased, resulting in a cell with impressive energy conversion efficiency of 11.4% under AM1.5G conditions.

Organometal trihalide perovskite solar cells have shown promise as an efficient technology in utilization of solar energy. In the past three years, perovskite-based mesoscopic or thin-film heterojunction solar cells have achieved power conversion efficiencies (PCE) as high as 17.9%. However, stability, environmental friendliness as well fabrication cost, must be taken into account in order to make this type of device a viable solution for the conversion of solar energy to electricity. Theoretical studies show that the unique electronic structure and optical properties of perovskite materials contribute largely to their remarkable photovoltaic performance. Several exploratory investigation also indicates that Sn may be an alternative to Pb, which is toxic and is the dominant source of perovskite salt. Recent studies further reveal the potential of mixed halogen perovskite, modified TiO2 with Sb2S3, TiO2-free oxide nanostructures, carbon nanotube/polymer composites, and layered hybrid perovskite for improving the stability of perovskite solar cells. The use of expensive organic hole-conductor materials as charge selective layers and a metal film (Au or Ag etc.) as a counter electrode processed under vacuum evaporation techniques are also a potential hurdle for large-scale production and practical applications because of the high cost and complicated manufacturing process. It is therefore desirable to develop perovskite solar cells using low-cost materials with simple manufacturing process.

p-Type inorganic materials such as CuI, CuSCN and NiO have been employed in perovskite solar cells. The simple synthetic methods, low-cost, and suitable energy levels make these materials appealing in cost-effective perovskite solar cells. However, the poor stability of CuI and CuSCN has been a concern due to their easy degradation. NiO is an intrinsic nonstoichiometric p-type semiconductor with a wide bandgap, good thermal and chemical stability. NiO has been employed as photocathode material in p-type dye-sensitized solar cells, p–n tandem dye sensitized solar cells, and a hole collector in organic bulk heterojunction solar cells. Recently, NiO has been used in perovskite heterojunction solar cells with efficiency, in which, NiO acts as an electron blocking material because of its higher conduction band compared to CH3NH3PbI3 (−1.8 eV vs. −3.93 eV). Photo-induced absorption spectra and photoluminescence measurements also show that NiO can act as a hole conductor. Nevertheless, these devices employ expensive PCBM as the electron selective electrode, which could be problematic for practical application and need to be addressed.
Low-cost carbon black/graphite materials have been used as a counter electrode in dye-sensitized solar cells and have showed good performance. Ku et al. reported HTM-free perovskite solar cells with a carbon black/graphite counter electrode, and PCE of 6.64% is achieved. The performance of HTM-free solar cells is further improved when highly ordered mesoporous carbon or TiO2 nanosheets are employed. Recently, Han et al. used 5-ammoniumvaleric acid iodide modified CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite as an absorber in HTM-free solar cell. The resulting device shows PCE of 12.8% with promising stability. These results demonstrate the potential of Earth-abundant carbon materials for cost-effective perovskite heterojunction solar cells. In this HTM-free solar cell, ZrO2 was used as an insulator to separate the TiO2 layer and the carbon layer. The perovskite CH3NH3PbI3 transports holes to the counter electrode. Since the diffusion length of CH3NH3PbI3 is ∼100 nm, it is much smaller than the thickness of the ZrO2 layer (1–2 μm). This will restrain further improvement of device performance of HTM-free perovskite solar cells.
This study communicates a strategy to address the aforementioned issues. We have fabricated perovskite heterojunction solar cell using p-type mesoscopic NiO as an interfacial layer and carbon black/graphite as the counter electrode. In these cells, the mesoscopic pores are filled with CH3NH3PbI3 by the sequential deposition process. The mesoscopic NiO layer acted as a hole conductor or an electron blocking layer to suppress charge recombination and facilitate the hole extraction. This type of solar cell using inorganic materials (coded as TiO2/NiO(CH3NH3PbI3)/carbon) can be fabricated under atmospheric environment, showing a promising PCE of 11.4% under standard test conditions. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report on efficient perovskite heterojunction solar cells using all inorganic p-type and n-type mesoscopic materials fabricated with screen printing technology.

The devices were fabricated by screen-printing mesoscopic TiO2 layer, NiO interfacial layer, and carbon/graphite materials layer-by-layer on compact TiO2 coated FTO glass, followed by sequential deposition of PbI2 and CH3NH3I. A schematic representation of the cell structure is shown in Fig. 1. In this configuration, the cell has a compact TiO2 layer as a hole blocking layer between the FTO and the mesoscopic TiO2 layer, a carbon layer as the counter electrode on the top of NiO layer. Upon absorbing light, CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite generates exciton, which efficiently separates into electrons and holes because of a low exciton binding energy (being ∼0.05 eV). The photo-generated electron injects into the conduction band (CB, −4.0 eV) of the TiO2 and the hole injects into the valence band (VB, −5.2 eV) of the mesoscopic NiO layer. This will be different from the reported TiO2/ZrO2/(CH3NH3PbI3)/carbon device structure, in which the ZrO2 layer acted as an insulating separator between the TiO2 and the carbon layer with no charge injection due to the mismatch of energy levels between CH3NH3PbI3 and the ZrO2.


Fig. 2 shows a cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the fabricated device. Three active layers were observed. On the top of the FTO is a TiO2 layer with a thickness of ∼450 nm. Over it is a NiO layer with good contact with the TiO2 layer. The NiO layer exhibits a mesoscopic structure with a total thickness ∼1 μm. The carbon/graphite covers the NiO layer with quite large pores. The large flakes of graphite are embedded inside carbon materials. The perovskite CH3NH3PbI3 is formed inside of the entire triple layers with uniform distribution as confirmed by the energy dispersive X-ray (EDAX) spectra as shown in Fig. S1.
The photocurrent–voltage curve of the champion cell with a TiO2/NiO(CH3NH3PbI3)/carbon structure is shown in Fig. 3a. The device exhibited PCE of 11.4% with a JSC of 18.2 mA cm−2, a VOC of 890 mV, and a FF of 0.71. As a comparison, a cell with a TiO2/ZrO2(CH3NH3PbI3)/carbon device was also fabricated and tested under the same conditions. Its photocurrent–voltage curve is also shown in Fig. 3a. The results show a significant increase in VOC, JSC and FF when ZrO2 was replaced by NiO. Fig. 3b shows the incident photon to electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) of the two devices. Compared to the TiO2/ZrO2(CH3NH3PbI3)/carbon device, replacement of ZrO2 by NiO resulted in a cell with higher IPCE values in the range of 400–800 nm. The calculated photocurrent from the IPCE spectrum gives a current density of 17.7 mA cm−2 for a NiO device and 15.9 mA cm−2 for a ZrO2 device, respectively. These data are in agreement with the measured photocurrent densities. Since TiO2/ZrO2(CH3NH3PbI3) and TiO2/NiO(CH3NH3PbI3) films exhibited almost identical absorption spectra in the range of 400–800 nm as shown in Fig. S2, the TiO2/NiO(CH3NH3PbI3)/carbon device clearly possess higher charge separation or charge collection efficiency than the device with ZrO2. The performance distribution of all the devices is described in Fig. S3 and S4. The stability of TiO2/NiO(CH3NH3PbI3)/carbon devices was investigated in the dark. Fig. S5 shows the evolution of device photovoltaic parameters, which were prolonged in the dark at ambient temperature (Table 1).
Device

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (mV)
FF

η (%)

a Average device performance parameters were calculated with a standard deviation from 24 TiO2/NiO(CH3NH3PbI3)/carbon devices.
b Average device performance parameters were calculated with a standard deviation from 24 TiO2/ZrO2(CH3NH3PbI3)/carbon devices. The complete devices performance distribution of all devices is described in Fig. S3 and S4.†

TiO2/NiO/C
Champion
18.2
890
0.71
11.4
Average
15.4
871
0.70
9.4
TiO2/ZrO2/C
Champion
16.4
818
0.60
8.2
Average
13.3
824
0.60
6.6
As shown in Fig. 4, a fast photoluminescence (PL) quenching process was observed for the TiO2(CH3NH3PbI3) and NiO(CH3NH3PbI3) films. The obtained lifetimes (τe) of the photo-generated carriers (quoted as the time taken to reach 1/e of the initial intensity) were 5.3 and 2.3 ns for NiO(CH3NH3PbI3) and TiO2(CH3NH3PbI3) films, respectively. Both were significantly lower than that of ZrO2(CH3NH3PbI3) film (24 ns). This result confirmed fast interfacial charge transfer processes that occurred after the films were excited. For the TiO2(CH3NH3PbI3) film, this process involved the electron injection from the CB of CH3NH3PbI3 to the CB of TiO2 because of its lower energy level. For the NiO(CH3NH3PbI3) film, the situation may become complicated. This is because the CB of NiO is significantly higher (−1.8 eV vs. −3.93 eV), but its VB energy level is quite close to that of CH3NH3PbI3. Therefore NiO might mainly behave as a hole conductor. Therefore, the PL quenching may come from the hole injection from VB of CH3NH3PbI3 to the VB of NiO. Concurrently, the TiO2 below the NiO blocks the flow of holes at the TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3 interface between the two materials due to the large VB energy level difference (−3.93 eV vs. −7.2 eV). This is consistent with Malinkiewicz's report on organic charge-transport layer-based perovskite solar cells using polyTPD and PCBM as an electron and a hole blocking layer, respectively.
Measurements of photovoltage and short circuit current of devices under different light intensities indicated different interfacial charge recombination processes. It was found that the JSC exhibited a linear response to light intensities, whereas VOC displayed a linear response to the logarithm of incident photo flux as shown in Fig. S6. The slope of the photovoltage versus the logarithm of incident photo flux for a solar cell with an ideal photodiode behaviour is expected to be 59 mV per decade at 300 K. However, the slopes for the TiO2/NiO(CH3NH3PbI3)/carbon device and the TiO2/ZrO2(CH3NH3PbI3)/carbon device were found to be −173 mV per decade and −240 mV per decade, respectively. This result indicates that the loss of photogenerated electron in the TiO2/ZrO2(CH3NH3PbI3)/carbon device is faster than that of the TiO2/NiO(CH3NH3PbI3)/carbon device. This further indicates different interfacial charge recombination processes between these two devices, which are responsible for their photovoltage.
Electronic impedance (IS) measurement showed a large charge recombination resistance at the photoactive layer interfaces in the TiO2/NiO(CH3NH3PbI3)/carbon device. In dark IS measurement, with the applied bias from the working electrode of the IS system, the injected electrons from the FTO contact transport through mesoporous TiO2, diffuse within the CH3NH3PbI3, and eventually reach the carbon counter electrode. The Nyquist plots of the TiO2/NiO(CH3NH3PbI3)/carbon device and the TiO2/ZrO2(CH3NH3PbI3)/carbon device showed two main features: (i) the arc at the high frequency region assigned to the charge transfer process at the carbon counter electrode interface as this process is very fast; and (ii) the arc at the low frequency region is assigned to the charge recombination process at the photoactive interface as this process is slow.Fig. 5a presents the recombination resistance (Rrec) from impedance measurements in devices as a function of the bias. The Nyquist plots are shown in Fig. S7. The TiO2/NiO(CH3NH3PbI3)/carbon device displayed larger Rrec than that of the TiO2/ZrO2(CH3NH3PbI3)/carbon device, indicating that charge recombination is slower in the former. Fig. 5b presents the resistance (RCE) for the charge transfer process related to the counter electrode as a function of dark current. It was found that the TiO2/NiO(CH3NH3PbI3)/carbon device exhibited lower RCE than that of the TiO2/ZrO2(CH3NH3PbI3)/carbon device at a given current. This result indicates that the charge transfer process at the counter electrode is much efficient when NiO was used. In the case of a device with ZrO2, CH3NH3PbI3 acts as the hole transporting material and participates in the hole extraction to the counter electrode. However, in the case of a device with NiO, the hole transporting properties of the NiO layer could benefit the hole extraction and collection efficiency. Therefore, the TiO2/NiO(CH3NH3PbI3)/carbon device presented a higher fill factor.
The use of NiO increased the electron lifetime of the resulting devices. Fig. 6 presents the electron lifetime as a function of the incident light intensity from transient photovoltage decay measurements. It was observed that the electron lifetime of the TiO2/NiO(CH3NH3PbI3)/carbon device was longer than that of the TiO2/ZrO2(CH3NH3PbI3)/carbon device. This may be attributed to the dual function of NiO as a hole conductor and its electron blocking properties. Therefore, the remarkable improvement of device performance for the TiO2/NiO(CH3NH3PbI3)/carbon device can be attributed to the NiO layer. In the TiO2/ZrO2(CH3NH3PbI3)/carbon device, the photo-generated electron can be fast injected to the CB of TiO2, as evidenced by a quick quenching of the photoluminescence emission for perovskite/TiO2 in Fig. 4. The injected electron transports through the TiO2 mesoporous network to the external circuit. Meanwhile, the photo-generated hole transports through the perovskite to the counter electrode due to the ambipolar charge transport properties of perovskite. However, in TiO2/NiO(CH3NH3PbI3)/carbon devices the situation could be different. With electron injection and transporting in TiO2, the photo-generated hole can be fast injected to the VB of NiO and diffuse in this layer (see Fig. 2), which directly connects to the counter electrode. Nevertheless, the CH3NH3PbI3 heterojunction using the mesoporous NiO interfacial layer was demonstrated to efficiently convert photon into electricity. More studies are required to be carried out in the near future for a more precise knowledge about the specific device.

In summary, we have demonstrated an efficient perovskite heterojunction solar cell using p-type mesoscopic NiO as an interfacial layer. This type of solar cell using all inorganic p-type and n-type materials can be fabricated under atmospheric environment, presenting a promising power conversion efficiency of 11.4%. The open-circuit voltage, short-circuit current and fill factor of the TiO2/NiO(CH3NH3PbI3)/carbon device were significantly improved compared to the counterpart devices using the mesoscopic ZrO2 layer as a separator, which was attributed to the enlarged electron lifetime and the augmented interfacial charge transfer process on the carbon counter electrode because of the dual functions as an electron blocker and a hole conductor. This offers a viable pathway to develop efficient low-cost solar cells with attractive properties for scale up and practical applications.


FTO conducting glass was etched with sander to form two detached electrode patterns before being ultrasonically cleaned with detergent solution, deionized water and ethanol successively. A compact TiO2 layer was deposited on the cleaned FTO glass by spray pyrolysis deposition with di-isopropoxytitanium bis(acetyl acetonate) solution at 450 °C. The films were sintered at 500 °C for 30 min and then cooled to room temperature. A 450 nm mesoporous TiO2 (DSL. 18NR-T, 20 nm, Dyesol, Australia, diluted at 1/3.5 mass ratio of paste/terpineol) layer, a 1 μm NiO hole-conductor layer (NiO paste was used according to our previous report on p-type dye-sensitized solar cells) and an 8 μm carbon black/graphite layer (black/graphite mass ratio 1/4, prepared according to the literature) were subsequently prepared by screen printing onto the FTO conducting glass layer by layer, which were sintered at 500 °C, 500 °C and 400 °C for 30 min, respectively. After that, the resulted films were infiltrated with PbI2 by dropping a PbI2 solution in DMF (462 mg ml−1) that was kept at 70 °C. After drying, the films were dipped into 2-propanol for 1–2 s before being dipped into a solution of CH3NH3I in 2-propanol (10 mg ml−1) for 10 min and then rinsed with 2-propanol and the films changed colour from light yellow to black during the dipping process, indicating the formation of the perovskite CH3NH3PbI3. After drying, the fabrication of the device was completed.


The device structure was prepared through substituting the NiO hole-conductor layer with a 1 μm ZrO2 spacer layer according to the procedure described above for the fabrication of the TiO2/NiO(CH3NH3PbI3)/carbon device.


A xenon light source solar simulator (450 W, Oriel, model 9119) with AM 1.5G filter (Oriel, model 91192) was used to give an irradiance of 100 mW cm−2 at the surface of the solar cells. The current–voltage characteristics of the devices under these conditions were obtained by applying external potential bias to the devices and measuring the generated photocurrent with a Keithley model 2400 digital source meter (Keithley, USA). A similar data acquisition system was used to control the incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) measurement. A white light bias (1% sunlight intensity) was applied onto the devices during the IPCE measurements with AC model (10 Hz). The devices (∼0.6 cm2) were tested using a metal mask to prevent the scattering light.


Time-resolved fluorescence decay measurements were performed on a FLSP920 spectrometer (Edinburgh Instruments, Inc.). A picosecond pulsed light-emitting diode centered (443 nm) with a frequency of 10 MHz was used. The NiO, TiO2 and ZrO2 nanoparticles were screen-printed on quartz substrates to form 0.8 μm thick films. After sintered at 500 °C for 30 min, the resulted films were infiltrated with PbI2 by spin coating (6500 rpm for 60 s) a PbI2 solution in DMF (462 mg ml−1) that was kept at 70 °C. After drying, the films were dipped into 2-propanol for 1–2 s before being dipped into a solution of CH3NH3I in 2-propanol (10 mg ml−1) for 60 s and then rinsed with 2-propanol. It is worth noting that the films changed colour from light yellow to black during the dipping process, indicating the formation of the perovskite CH3NH3PbI3.


Electronic impedance spectroscopy (IS) was carried out on ZAHNER ENNIUM Electrochemical Workstations in the frequency range 100 mHz to 2 MHz with 10 mV AC amplitude in the dark. The electron lifetime was determined by transient photovoltage decay measurements. For the photovoltage transient decay measurement, an array of diodes was used to produce a white light bias and blue-light diodes controlled by a fast solid-state switch, which was used to generate a pulse (0.05 s square pulse-width, 100 ns rise and fall time). The voltage dynamics were recorded on a PC-interfaced Keithley 2602A source meter with a 100 μs response time. The perturbation light source was set to a suitably low level for the voltage-decay kinetics to be monoexponential. By varying the intensity of the white-light bias, the recombination rate constant and the electron diffusion rate constant could be estimated over a range of applied biases, which were used to evaluate the electron lifetime of the devices.


This work was partially supported by the National Basic Research Program of China (973 program 2011CBA00703), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (grant no. HUST: 2014TS016) (ZZ), NSFC (21103057), the CME with the Program of New Century Excellent Talents in University (NCET-10-0416) (WM), and Council on Faculty Research, and the President's Fund for Research and Creative Activity, Eastern Illinois University (HH).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: EDAX spectra of the TiO2/NiO(CH3NH3PbI3)/carbon device, absorbance of the TiO2/NiO(CH3NH3PbI3) films and TiO2/ZrO2(CH3NH3PbI3) films, the complete device performance distribution of all devices, photocurrent and photovoltage response of devices under different light intensities, Nyquist plots of devices obtained in the dark. See DOI: 10.1039/c4dt02904f
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015