 DOI: 10.1039/C5CP03762J
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 26111-26120


Ankur
Solanki
,

Bo
Wu
,

Teddy
Salim
,

Yeng Ming
Lam
 and 

Tze Chien
Sum
*

Division of Physics and Applied Physics, School of Physical and Mathematical Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, 21 Nanyang Link, 637371, Singapore

Singapore-Berkeley Research Initiative for Sustainable Energy (SinBeRISE), 1 Create Way, Singapore 138602, Singapore

School of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, 50 Nanyang Avenue, 639798, Singapore

Energy Research Institute @ NTU (ERI@N), 1 CleanTech Loop, #06-04 CleanTech One, 637141, Singapore

Received
30th June 2015
, Accepted 7th September 2015
First published on 8th September 2015
The addition of a small amount of high boiling point solvent in organic donor/acceptor blends to control their morphology is a viable approach to enhance the power conversion efficiency of bulk heterojunction (BHJ) organic solar cells. Herein, through transient absorption spectroscopy (TAS) correlated with physical characterizations and device studies, we investigate the effects of a family of thiol-based additives (i.e., 1,5-pentanedithiol (PDT), 1,6-hexanedithiol (HDT) and 1,8-octanedithiol (ODT)) in P3HT:PCBM blend films in a bid to establish a morphology-function-charge dynamics relationship with their photovoltaic performances. The performance of solar cell devices (ηHDT = 2.8%, ηODT = 2.8%, ηPDT = 1.7%) is related to the additive-induced phase separation and the degree of ordering of P3HT. TAS uncovers a more efficient initial exciton and polaron generation in the additive-treated blend samples compared to the non-additive treated control sample. HDT and ODT-added blends exhibit decay dynamics and performances similar to those of the thermally annealed samples. However, the PDT-added blend exhibits a strong trap-assisted recombination in the subsequent nanosecond-microsecond timescales. We attribute this to the loss of charge carriers in the larger isolated P3HT domains due to the lack of percolation paths to the electrode. Our findings illustrate that understanding the complex interplay of the crystalline order, intermixed phases and percolation pathways is key to optimizing the performance of thermal-annealing free, additive-treated organic solar cells.

Conjugated polymers are commonly used for bulk heterojunction (BHJ) organic solar cells (OSCs) due to their ease of processing, high optical absorption coefficient and compatibility with flexible substrates. Among the several donor–acceptor systems, blends of regioregular poly[3-hexylthiophene] (P3HT) and phenyl-C60-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) are one of the most commonly studied polymer blend systems in recent years. Key to achieving high efficiencies in these BHJ solar cells is through optimizing the morphology in the blend films, which is essential for: (i) optimal absorption of photons; (ii) efficient dissociation of photo-generated excitons into spatially separated charge carriers; and (iii) effective charge transport to the electrodes. In this regard, many methods have been employed to optimize the nano-morphology of P3HT:PCBM films, which include thermal annealing, solvent thermal annealing, ordered templates, self-assembly with marginal solvents, drying in the presence of the electric field,etc. Although all these techniques can enhance the performance of solar cells, not all are compatible for the post-processing of large-scale roll-to-roll applications. In fact, some techniques have been found to be ineffective for certain donor:acceptor (DA) systems (e.g., PCPDTBT:PCBM, PCDTBT:PCBM, PTB7:PCBM etc.). Therefore, for high volume and cost-effective production, a low-temperature solution-processable approach that is compatible with mechanically flexible substrates must be developed.

Recently, two approaches have been developed for thermal annealing-free BHJ organic solar cell devices. In the first method, Zhang et al. reported a mixed solvent approach where two solvents of different boiling points were added to the APFO-3:PCBM system. Although aggregation of the polymers occurred in the thin film, the devices still yielded low PCE. Significant improvements in PCE were reported with the other method employing PCDTBT and PTB7-based organic solar cell devices following the addition of a small volume fraction of alkanedithiols. Bazan et al. used a similar method with the P3HT:PCBM system where toluene was the host solvent. They found an improved hole mobility by two orders of magnitude as a result of the structural expansion parallel to the substrate. This work introduced the adaptability of the nano-scale self-assemblies through the control of the crystallization kinetics. The effects of the solvent additive on the phase behaviour of the P3HT:PCBM blend system was further investigated which included studies on the influence of solubility and boiling point of the additives on the nanoscale phase separation. Alkanedithiols with an analogous chemical structure but different boiling points and solubility were incorporated with the host solvent 1,2-dichlorobenzene (o-DCB). They found that PCE improvement not only had a linear dependence on the boiling point, but also depended on the miscibility of these additives with the acceptor molecules. An in-depth study of the morphology obtained in these systems revealed that the optimized phase separation of P3HT and PCBM in the blend film gives rise to an improvement in the photoconductivity of the free charge carriers and hence the improved PCE.
Although it is now apparent that mixing a suitable additive to the P3HT:PCBM blend system typically yields devices with higher PCEs, systematic photophysical studies on the effects of different additives on the morphology and charge dynamics of BHJ devices are still lacking. To achieve even higher PCEs through optimizing the morphology of additive-added P3HT:PCBM-based solar cell devices, it is necessary to gain a basic understanding of the structure–property relationships between local phase morphology and the charge generation/excited-state charge dynamics in these systems and correlate them with the performance of the solar cell devices. The investigation of the charge generation and recombination dynamics along with the origins of performance improvements in pristine (i.e., without any thermal treatment or processing additive) (NA) and additive-added P3HT:PCBM devices are the main foci of this paper. Our emphasis here is on low-temperature solution-processing. Nevertheless, thermally annealed devices were also presented for completeness, but strictly it would not be fair to use them as the control or reference.
Herein, we present a detailed study on the morphology and charge carrier dynamics in the blend films (i.e., NA and thiol-based additive-added P3HT:PCBM blends) by ultrafast spectroscopy. Transient absorption studies covering the broad temporal regimes (100 fs–5 μs) for charge generation, recombination and extraction were performed and the findings were correlated with physical properties and electrical characterizations. Our findings reveal that the addition of 1,6-hexanedithiol (HDT) or 1,8-octanedithiol (ODT) yielded a Langevin-type free charge carrier bimolecular recombination compared to a trap-assisted recombination in an additive-free non-annealed (NA) P3HT:PCBM blend. This is attributed to the formation of optimally sized crystalline domains and effective percolation of the donor acceptor phases. However, any further enlargement of the polymer domains disrupts the percolation pathways, as in the case of 1,5-pentanedithiol (PDT) blend films. This is detrimental to the solar cell device performance where trap-assisted recombination prevails. A careful balance of the crystalline order, intermixed phases (i.e., comprising of disordered/ordered P3HT and PCBM) and percolation pathways is essential for the optimal performance of additive-added devices.

To fabricate the organic solar cell devices, P3HT and PCBM were mixed together in 1,2-dichlorobenzene (o-DCB, host solvent) with a weight ratio of 10:8 (P3HT, PCBM and o-DCB were purchased from Rieke Metals, Inc., Nano-C and Sigma Aldrich, respectively). The concentration of P3HT used was 10 mg mL−1. The blend solution was kept for stirring overnight at 50 °C in a N2 glove box. 2% of each additive by volume was mixed to the blend solution and further stirred for two hours to promote a homogeneous mixing before spin coating.

The additives selected for this study were all purchased from Sigma Aldrich: 1,5-pentanedithiol (PDT), 1,6-hexanedithiol (HDT) and 1,8-octanedithiol (ODT) (Fig. 1 inset). Additives PDT, HDT and ODT have boiling points (Tb) of 216 °C, 242 °C, and 272 °C respectively, higher than that of o-DCB (Tb = 180 °C). The indium-tin oxide (ITO)-coated glass substrates (15 Ω sq−1, Xin Yan Technology Company) were cleaned in an ultrasonic bath sequentially by using deionized water and a mixture of acetone, ethanol and isopropyl alcohol in equal proportion by volume. A thin hole transporting layer of PEDOT:PSS (Clevios HTL Solar SCA388P VP Al 4083) was spin-coated onto the plasma-treated substrates giving a film thickness of 30 ± 5 nm. The PEDOT:PSS-coated substrates were then heated on a hotplate at 120 °C for 10 min and transferred into a N2 glove box. The active blend solutions of P3HT:PCBM were then filtered and coated at a spin speed of 700 rpm for 120 seconds to get a 100 ± 5 nm thick blend film. This longer period of spin-coating helped to evaporate most of the host solvent leaving behind the additive to interact with P3HT and PCBM. The colour change of the additive-added blend films within 10 s after the commencement of spin coating shows that polymer crystallization as well as phase separation began at the initial stages of film formation. Finally, a cathode contact of 100 nm thick aluminium was deposited on the blend film by thermal evaporation through a shadow mask with an active area of 0.07 cm2. No other treatment was performed for additive-added and non-additive-added set of devices. For completeness, a post-evaporation thermal annealing at 140 °C for 20 min was performed on another corresponding set of the additive-free devices. For UV-Vis absorption spectroscopy and transient absorption measurements, blend films were coated on glass substrates.
The current density–voltage (J–V) measurements of the OSC devices under 100 mW cm−2 intensity of simulated AM 1.5G illumination were performed using Keithley SMU 2400. Incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) of devices was measured using a Merlin radiometer (Newport) with a monochromator-calibrated wavelength control. A Shimadzu UV-2510PC spectrophotometer was employed to measure the UV-Vis absorption spectra of these samples.

Transient absorption measurements were performed with a commercial integrated Helios™ and EOS™ transient absorption spectrometer (Ultrafast Systems). The details of the ultrafast spectroscopy setups used to probe the carrier dynamics in the different blend films from femtoseconds to microseconds are given in the ESI.



Fig. 1 shows the linear absorption spectra of P3HT:PCBM blend films prepared without any additive and thermal treatment (NA), only thermally treated (TA) and those treated with 2 vol% of 1,5-pentanedithiol (PDT), 1,6-hexanedithiol (HDT) and 1,8-octanedithiol (ODT) as processing additives (see the Fig. S1 in ESI for the normalized absorption spectra). The absorption profiles show that the additive-treated P3HT:PCBM blend films have improved photo-absorption over the NA film over the entire visible spectral range. From Fig. 1, it can be observed that PDT-added blend film possesses the highest absorption amongst the additive-treated blend films. The positions of the main absorption peak at ∼510 nm and the vibronic shoulders at ∼555 nm and 600 nm are very similar for these blend films. The absorption peaks between 500 nm to 650 nm can be attributed to various features described by the H-aggregate model. The vibronic peaks at 555 nm and 600 nm correspond to the inter-chain interaction of P3HT molecules while the 510 nm peak represents the π–π* transition in P3HT. According to F. C. Spano et al., P3HT crystallinity is highly sensitive to the interchain interaction represented by the vibronic shoulder at 600 nm and thus the photoabsorption. The prominency of these peaks in the normalized absorption spectra are often attributed to the highly ordered P3HT chains in the P3HT:PCBM blends (Fig. S1, ESI). This indicates that the addition of PDT in the blend resulted in the highest improvement of crystallinity of the film. While it can indeed be surmised that the pi–pi* transition (510 nm) in the TA film gives the highest peak absorption, the additive-added blend films are more organized as a result of the stronger interchain interactions. The total amount of absorbed photon is further calculated by integrating the absorption spectrum of these blend films by overlapping the solar spectrum and it is found that more photons are absorbed in the additive-added blend compared to the non-additive added films (ηA-NA = 1.58 × 1022, ηA-TA = 2.06 × 1024, ηA-HDT = 2.18 × 1024, ηA-ODT = 2.24 × 1024, ηA-PDT = 1.73 × 1025). This clearly shows that the addition of the additives improves the organization of P3HT, thereby enhancing the photoabsorption (highest in PDT-added film) compared to the NA and conventional TA blend film.

XRD measurements were also performed on these blend films. The area covered by the (100) peak at 2θ = 5.4° also reveals the highest crystallinity of the PDT-added blend film, at least 30% more than the other additive-added blend films (see Fig. S2 in ESI for XRD pattern). The initial portion of the absorption spectrum at around 460 nm is mainly contributed by the amorphous P3HT existing in the blend film. From the absorbance of the crystalline and amorphous regions, the degree of crystallinity, χC, can be estimated using the following relation:
χC = (ε460/ε600)A600/{(ε460/ε600)A600 + A460}
where
A460 and A600 are the absorption intensities at 460 nm (amorphous) and 600 nm (crystalline) respectively and ε460/ε600 represents the extinction coefficient ratio between the amorphous and crystalline P3HT. The ratio of the extinction coefficients for each blend film was calculated by assuming the negligible absorption by PCBM at these wavelengths. The degree of P3HT crystallinity was found to be the lowest (∼31%) for the NA sample while it was calculated to be higher (∼50%) for the other additive-added blend films. Generally, in the presence of the high boiling point solvent (additive), the polymer chains start aggregating to minimize the interactions between the polymer and the poor solvent. The aggregation of the polymer also depends on the interaction time (i.e., evaporation time which is in turn dependent on the boiling point of the additive). The improved crystallization of P3HT and ordering with these additives can be explained as follows: during the spin-coating of the blend, the lower boiling point of the host solvent (o-DCB) evaporates faster than the additives and leaves behind an increased volume ratio of o-DCB to poor soluble additives. As a consequence, P3HT molecules start agglomerating to minimize the internal energy of the system and promote grain formation. The existence of the grains in these additive-added blend films is also confirmed by the topography phase scans of these blend films by atomic force microscopy given in Fig. 2. (See Fig. S3 in ESI for TA blend).

The morphology of the additive-added P3HT:PCBM blend films is significantly different from the control and shows a phase separation with improved crystallinity. The control sample shows a finely mixed blend with poor phase separation (having the smallest phase difference ΔΦ = 4.91°) while the presence of the additives promotes the phase separation with ΔΦ = 66.83° (HDT), 67.42° (ODT) and 88.43° (PDT). This segregation increases the P3HT aggregate size in agreement with the XRD results. As discussed earlier, polymer aggregation commences at an early stage of film formation where longer time is required to evaporate the higher boiling point additive (ODT) as compared to the lower boiling point additive (PDT). In the case of PDT-added blend film, there is another factor that promotes P3HT polymer aggregation and that is its poorer interaction with P3HT compared to HDT and ODT. Consequently, larger sized P3HT polymer aggregates with extreme phase separation are formed through the stronger P3HT–PDT interaction. This will be discussed in the next section. All three additives – PDT, HDT and ODT with higher boiling points compared to o-DCB and will result in slower evaporation, thus yielding relatively higher phase separation compared to without additives. The roughness of these blend films are also obtained as 3.52 nm (NA), 6.04 nm (HDT), 7.37 nm (ODT), and 11.63 nm (PDT), showing an increasing trend with increasing phase separation in additive processed blends. The highest value of surface roughness in the PDT-added blend is consistent with the largest aggregation and hence poor morphology of the active layer. Such aggregation in the blend will no doubt improve the photo-absorption but at the cost of exciton dissociation efficiency (due to a decrease in DA interfaces) and charge extraction (due to poorer phase intermixing percolation pathways). Therefore, there is a fine balance between aggregation, phase mixing and separation needed for improved device performance.

For a binary blend, the solubility of both the polymer and fullerene derivatives in any solvent plays a crucial role in the adaptation and distribution of these molecules in the solution and eventually in the blend film. Both P3HT and PCBM are completely soluble in o-DCB even though PCBM has higher solubility. A comparison of the solubility parameters can provide a good indication of the degree of the intermolecular interactions, which can be estimated from the solubility parameters (δ) of the blend components. The solubility parameters of PDT, HDT, ODT, P3HT and PCBM are reported to be 19.7, 19.2, 18.6, 9.1 and 7.8 J1/2 cm3/2 respectively. The difference in the solubility parameter (Δδ) between two molecules can be correlated with the degree of molecular interaction: a minimum difference in the solubility parameter (Δδ ≈ 0) often results in good miscibility (strong “good” interaction), while a larger Δδ indicates poor miscibility (strong “bad” interaction). Although ODT, compared to other additives, shows the smallest Δδ with respect to P3HT (ΔδODT-P3HT = 9.5), its higher boiling point means that ODT will take a longer time to evaporate, thus providing more time to interact with P3HT. Although ΔδHDT-P3HT is comparable, HDT's relatively lower boiling point will encourage a moderate interaction that yields a lower amount of aggregation. Lastly, PDT possesses the largest solubility parameter difference with respect to P3HT (ΔδPDT-P3HT = 10.6). This suggests a poor interaction with P3HT. Despite having the lowest boiling point, more extensive aggregation is obtained. Through a judicious choice of both Δδ and the boiling point of the additive, it is possible to adjust the extent of phase separation in an additive-treated blend.

The analysis of the absorption spectra, XRD patterns and AFM scans of all the blend films shows that the addition of solvent additives into the blends has indeed increased the amount of ordered P3HT regions in the blend. A comparison across the different additive-added blends shows that HDT induces the least change in the absorption properties due to the least improvement in crystallinity in the blend film. On the other hand, the maximum solubility parameter difference between P3HT and PDT leads to the poor interaction in PDT-added blend film which results in highest crystallinity and hence the maximum light absorption. However, the exciton harveting in these films may not be desirable because the excitons generated beyond their diffusion lengths will annihilate before reaching the DA interface. Next, organic solar cell devices fabricated with these alkanedithiol-processed P3HT:PCBM active layers were then characterized to correlate with these physical measurements.

OSCs were fabricated and current density–voltage (J–V) measurements were carried out for NA, TA and additive-added devices, both in the dark and under illumination. The dark current-voltage characteristics (Fig. 3) can be divided into two regions. The first region is below the open circuit voltage of these devices, i.e., between 0–0.5 V. The second region is beyond 0.5 V where dark currents are no longer in the injection region and approach towards the space charge limited region. Here, the first region is more interesting for us because light characteristics are mainly correlated to this region. The NA solar cell device shows the lowest dark current in both regions. This is because of poor charge carrier mobility and charge collection due to the lack of phase separation. In the lower voltage range (around 0.2–0.5 V), the PDT-added device shows a higher forward and reverse dark currents than other devices which indicates the presence of shunt paths for the charge carriers due to the poor organization of polymers in these devices. Dark currents in the TA and additive-added solar devices are comparable at 1.0 V, which implies similar carrier mobilities in these blends. It also shows that the addition of thiols as processing additives in the P3HT:PCBM blend might have reduced the series resistance and hence enhanced the dark current in the devices.



Fig. 4 displays the current–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the NA, TA and additive-added P3HT:PCBM solar cell devices under the intensity of 100 mW cm−2 of AM 1.5G illumination and the device performance is summarized in Table 1. Both NA and TA solar cell devices are also included for comparison. Because of the low short-circuit current (Jsc), open circuit voltage (Voc) and fill factor (FF), NA devices have the lowest PCE of 1%. The TA devices showed the best performance while the PDT device gave the worst performance among all the additive-added devices. Note that the device structure used in our study is glass/ITO/PEDOT/P3HT:PCBM/Al, where there is no electron transporting layer (ETL) such as LiF or Ca. The absence of the ETL in all our devices would result in reduced device performances compared to the state-of-the-art in the field. In our work, comparisons and correlations were made between all devices/films that do not have the ETL present. Hence, the absence of the ETL should not affect our findings on the structural–functional relationship between the additive-induced changes in morphologies with the device performance.

Device/parameters
PCE (%)

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF

R
s (Ω cm−2)

R
sh (Ω cm−2)
NA
1.0 ± 0.3
7.0 ± 0.5
0.48 ± 0.02
0.38 ± 0.02
23 ± 5
129 ± 38
TA
3.1 ± 0.2
10.4 ± 0.2
0.53 ± 0.01
0.57 ± 0.02
10 ± 2
512 ± 53
HDT
2.8 ± 0.3
8.8 ± 0.3
0.55 ± 0.02
0.58 ± 0.02
11 ± 1
833 ± 85
ODT
2.8 ± 0.1
10.2 ± 0.4
0.48 ± 0.02
0.58 ± 0.02
9 ± 1
833 ± 47
PDT
1.7 ± 0.3
8.2 ± 0.2
0.43 ± 0.02
0.50 ± 0.02
14 ± 2
277 ± 23
The short-circuit current density in solar cell devices depends mainly on the absorption of light, dissociation and recombination of the photogenerated charges inside the blend, and charge collection at the external electrodes. The higher current density in the TA device can be correlated to the higher absorption in the blend film (Fig. 1), and improved charge carrier mobilities as compared to NA devices, which is already reported. Among the additive-treated devices, treatment with HDT and ODT gave similar performances with PCEs of ∼2.8%. The higher performance of the HDT-added device results from an optimum mixing of the materials in the presence of the HDT among all the additives. The devices prepared with the ODT additive shows comparable current density to the TA device but is higher than those of the NA and HDT-added devices. This is very likely to be the result of better exciton generation and polaron formation than those in the HDT blend in optimized blend morphology.
In BHJ solar cells, open-circuit voltage can be estimated by calculating the energy offset between donor's highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and acceptor's lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) level. In spite of this difference, Voc is also affected by the higher recombination current in the device with poor film morphology. The Voc of PDT-added solar cell devices is only 0.43 V, the lowest among all devices, which could be due to its higher dark current near Voc attributed to the higher charge recombination. According to the Double-Junction Model, the poor phase-segregated PDT-added device shows a higher recombination current through the shunt paths between two electrodes and hence lowers the photogenerated current, even though the blend has the highest photo-absorption. Fig. 5 displays the incident photon-to-current (IPCE) spectra measured for all these devices. Consistent with the trend observed for the current density, TA and ODT-added blend device show the highest IPCE, while the NA device had the lowest IPCE, in the range of 350–650 nm. Both TA and ODT-processed devices exhibit a maximum IPCE of around 50–60% in the wavelength range of 450–650 nm. Amongst the additive-treated devices, the PDT-processed device shows the lowest IPCE, consistent with the measured short circuit density. This indicates a higher charge recombination and a more inefficient charge collection at the electrodes in the PDT-treated device. These spectra show that the presence of additives induces a more favourable ordering in the blend than NA devices, which leads to improvement in the photocurrent.
In summary, from both physical property measurements and electrical characterizations, the optimized morphology of the blend in HDT, ODT-processed solar cell devices is the main source of the performance improvement while unfavourable phase separation between P3HT and PCBM due to the poor intermixing induced by PDT deteriorates Jsc, Voc, and FF of the device. To gain deeper insights into the influence of the additives on the charge dynamics of P3HT:PCBM blend films, we turn to transient absorption spectroscopy (TAS).

TAS measurements were carried out on NA, TA and additive-added P3HT:PCBM blend films (100 ± 5 nm thick) to probe the effects of the additives on the dynamics of charge generation and recombination in these films. Fig. 6 shows the differential transmission (DT) spectra spanning 520–1600 nm at four different delay times following the photoexcitation of the NA and additive-added films (see Fig. S4 in the ESI for the TAS profile of TA). As 500 nm was used as the pump, the excitation is exclusive to P3HT because PCBM is optically transparent at this wavelength. The vibronic peaks corresponding to 0–0 (∼610 nm) and 0–1 (∼560 nm) absorption transitions are referred to as the ground state bleaching (GSB) peaks. GSB signals are related to the populated states in the photoexcited films, and represents the relative populations of the residual excited species at different times following photoexcitation. From Fig. 6, it is evident that the photo-bleaching signal for 0–0 and 0–1 transition is stronger for the additive-added films compared to the NA film. This increase in the photo-bleaching signal stems from the improved crystallinity and higher absorption in the additive-added blend films, resulting in a larger population of photogenerated excitons and polarons.


Fig. 7 shows the normalized decay dynamics of the 0–0 GSB peak for the various blend films (see Fig. S5 in the ESI for the TA film). The initial GSB decay dynamics (<10 ps) in the additive-added blend films are comparable, indicating an equivalent amount of intermixed phases (i.e., disordered/ordered P3HT and PCBM domains) in the additive-added blend films. In contrast, the GSB decay in the NA blend is faster, consistent with a poorer mixing of the phase and smaller domains that resulted in more recombination. Among the additive-added blends, the GSB signal in the HDT and ODT-added blend films drops to nearly 40% of its initial value within the first 100 ps and remains nearly constant until 1 ns. This correlates well with the improved crystallinity of these additive-added blends compared to the NA blend, where a larger population of free carriers can persist longer in the suitably sized P3HT aggregates. Consequently, this allows their charge carriers to be extracted before recombination, yielding a higher photocurrent than from the NA blend (Fig. 5). However, the PDT-blend film decays at a much faster rate and decays continually over the measured time window to a few microseconds. Despite the fact that PDT-blend films possess the highest absorption (Fig. 1) and crystallinity (Fig. S2, ESI), the larger domain size (Fig. 2d) in these blends is far from ideal for efficient charge extraction. As the carriers are transported to the electrodes, carrier recombination with trapped charges in the PDT-blend films will result in a lower photocurrent (Fig. 5).
The negative ΔT/T signal from 630 nm to 1600 nm, also known as photo-induced absorption (PIA), arises from the absorption of excited species (e.g., polarons, excitons, charge transfer excitons, etc.). In the NA blend film, the transient absorption signal at ∼700 nm, which is related to the population of delocalized polarons in P3HT aggregates, increases from ∼1–10 ps and remains fairly constant thereafter (see Fig. S6 in ESI). In contrast, for the HDT-added blend, the signal rise is faster and more pronounced, lasting up to ∼100 ps before stabilizing. This indicates a more efficient and effective excitonic dissociation into spatially separated charges in this film. This behaviour is likely to be limited by the exciton diffusion to the interface and the subsequent charge transfer from P3HT to PCBM – consistent with the larger domain size of the additive-treated blends. Such a diffusion-limited delay process has also been reported for some small molecule solar cells as well.
To discern the contributions of the respective quasi-particle populations to the spectral features, we also performed a singular value decomposition (SVD) and global fitting analysis for the transient absorption spectra between 900–1600 nm (Fig. S7, ESI). The broad peak at early times centred around 1230 nm is attributed to the singlet exciton population in the P3HT domains. The two different populations of singlet excitons from the amorphous or intermixed phase and from the crystalline domains can be clearly distinguished (see Fig. S7 and ESI for more details). The decay of singlet excitons present in the intermixed phase was found to be slightly slower in the TA and additive-treated blends as compared to the NA control. This lifetime increase is likely due to the increased crystallinity. After the fast decay of the singlet exciton population (within tens of ps), another broad peak centred at ∼1000 nm emerges that is long lived beyond the measuring time window. This latter peak is ascribed to the localized polarons in the disordered phase of P3HT.

Next, decay measurements as a function of excitation pump fluence (from 35–140 μJ cm−2) over the ns–μs timescale in all these blend films were also performed to gain a clearer understanding of the relaxation dynamics of the polarons beyond 5 ns and to elucidate the loss mechanism. Here, we focused on the 710–740 nm spectral range where the polarons are generated in crystalline P3HT domains in the blend films as a function of pump fluence dependence. Fig. 8 shows the normalized decay transients of the delocalized polaron states in the NA and additive-added P3HT:PCBM blend films for different excitation pump fluences (see Fig. S8 in the ESI for TA blend film). For the NA blend film, the rate of decay of the polarons is independent of the excitation pump fluence. This shows that their polarons are immobile and strongly bound. These polarons are trapped at the interfacial traps where they undergo the Shockley–Read–Hall (SRH)-type trap-assisted recombination involving a free and opposite charge that is subsequently trapped by the same trap state. Such intensity-independent trap-assisted recombination was previously observed in pristine pDTS(FBTTh2)2:PDI-based solar cell devices. On the other hand, intensity-dependent polaron recombination dynamics is evident in HDT and ODT–added P3HT:PCBM blend films (Fig. 8b and c) including the TA blend film (Fig. S8, ESI). Such recombination behaviour is characteristic of a Langevin-type bimolecular recombination of free charges that is charge carrier concentration-dependent. After exciton dissociation at the DA interface, efficient carrier collection is also essential for a high efficiency solar cell. The IPCE values are representative of the carrier transport in the interpenetrating network of the respective blends. Good charge carrier transporting pathways are formed in the ODT-added blend, which yields an IPCE > 55% (Fig. 5) and hence the highest current density for these devices. On the other hand, the lower current density and the IPCE value in the HDT-processed device can be attributed to the lower photoabsorption instead because of their similar decay dynamics to that of the ODT-added blend (Fig. 7) – indicating comparable charge transport properties. This clearly shows that the HDT and ODT additives have a similar effect on the charge dynamics of blends as that of thermal annealing – i.e., improving the crystallinity and percolation of the blend films which helps to reduce interfacial traps and increase the delocalization of charges in the system.

However, it is a different scenario in the PDT-added blend film (Fig. 8d), which exhibits intensity-independent recombination dynamics similar to that of the NA blend film (Fig. 8a). From the XRD and AFM measurements, we deduce that the presence of the PDT additive resulted in an extreme case of aggregation and phase separation that forms large crystalline yet isolated polymer domains with insufficient percolation with the PCBM phase. As a result, the photogenerated polarons are spatially trapped in these isolated larger domains, unable to reach the percolation network and therefore annihilate through trap-assisted recombination (Fig. 9).
Photoluminescence (PL) data (Fig. S9, ESI) also show that the PDT-added blend gives the highest PL intensity. This is consistent with the larger P3HT domains observed in the morphology study and poorer phase separation hindering the charge separation in the PDT-added blend, resulting in more radiative recombination. Despite possessing the highest photo-absorption and crystallinity among these blend films, the higher trap-assisted charge carrier recombination in the PDT-added blends caused by poor interpenetrating network is severely limiting its device performance – as evident from their lowest IPCE (<40%), fill factor (50%) and open circuit voltage (0.43 V). The deleterious effects of such disproportionate phase separation on solar cell performance was also previously reported for excessive ODT-added P3HT:PCBM and DIO-added PBDTTT-C:PC71BM blend film.

In retrospect, a comprehensive charge dynamics study of thiol-added P3HT:PCBM blend films by ultrafast spectroscopy is performed to clearly elucidate the effects of thiols on the structure–property relationship between local phase morphology and charge generation/recombination dynamics in these BHJ solar cells. The incorporation of additives does improve the crystallinity of the blends, but it is still unclear if the boiling points of solvent additives have any direct correlation with the degree of crystallinity. Our findings concur with those of other groups that the same solvent additive interacts differently with each donor/acceptor material via their distinct intermolecular interactions, which has a profound influence on their blend morphologies. Unlike previous studies that had focused on various solvent additives rather than on a specific family of additives, our systematic study focused on the family of alkanedithiols. We establish that a careful choice of the boiling point of the additive and the solubility parameter is essential to allow for optimal intermolecular interactions and sufficient time for aggregation. This is the key to achieving the desired phase segregation with an ideal aggregate size. With HDT and ODT incorporation, device performance of the thermal-free processed P3HT:PCBM solar cell improves to 2.8% as compared to the 1.0% non-annealed (NA) P3HT:PCBM solar cell. Transient spectroscopy reveals the Langevin-type free carrier bimolecular recombination due to the excess free charge carrier formation in the former as compared to the trap-assisted recombination of the latter. However, for the PDT-blends, an inferior device performance of 1.7% is attributed to the excessive enlargement of the polymer domains that resulted in poorer intermixing and percolation of the donor–acceptor networks. Consequently, a trap-dominated recombination prevails as the charges cannot be effectively transported to the electrodes. Although exciton generation is enhanced with the improved optical absorption with a better crystallinity, the device performance is still strongly dependent on the extraction of the charge carriers which is in turn influenced by the final blend morphology, domain aggregation and percolation pathways.


Financial support from NTU Start-up grant M4080514 and SPMS collaborative Research Award M4080536; the Ministry of Education AcRF Tier 2 grants MOE2013-T2-1-081 and MOE2014-T2-1-044. B. W. and T.C.S also acknowledge the funding support from the Singapore National Research Foundation (NRF) through the Singapore-Berkeley Research Initiative for Sustainable Energy (SinBeRISE) CREATE Programme. L.Y.M. acknowledges the funding support from Danish Council for Strategic Research (M4061232) and MOE Tier 1 funding (RF99/14).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: The experimental details of the transient spectroscopy setups, transient absorption spectra and charge dynamics of thermally annealed P3HT:PCBM, along with XRD data, TAS global fitting and PL spectra for all blend films are described. See DOI: 10.1039/c5cp03762j
‡ Division of Physics and Applied Physics, School of Physical and Mathematical Sciences, SPMS-PAP-03-05, Nanyang Technological University, 21 Nanyang Link, 637371, Singapore. E-mail: E-mail: tzechien@ntu.edu.sg; Tel: +6563162971.
This journal is © the Owner Societies 2015