 DOI: 10.1039/C4NR04958F
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 14297-14304


Chang
Liu
,

Xiaowen
Hu
,

Chengmei
Zhong
,

Mingjun
Huang
,

Kai
Wang
,

Zhan
Zhang
,

Xiong
Gong
*,

Yong
Cao
 and 

Alan J.
Heeger


College of Polymer Science and Polymer Engineering, University of Akron, Akron, OH 44325, USA. E-mail: xgong@uakron.edu; Fax: +(330) 972-4983

Center for Polymers and Organic Solids, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA 931006, USA

State Key Laboratory of Luminescent Materials and Devices, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, 510640 P. R. China

Received
29th August 2014
, Accepted 20th September 2014
First published on 22nd September 2014
In this study, we report the investigation of the influence of binary processing additives, 1,8-octanedithiol (ODT) and 1-chloronaphthalene (CN) on the performance of polymer solar cells (PSCs). It was found that the power conversion efficiency (PCE) can be enhanced to 8.55% from the PSCs processed with binary processing additives as compared with ∼6.50% from the PSCs processed with either ODT or CN processing additives. With binary processing additives, the crystallinity of the electron donor polymer, poly[[4,8-bis[(2-ethylhexyl)oxy]benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl][3-fluoro-2-[(2 ethylhexyl)carbonyl]thieno[3,4-b]thiophenediyl]], was elevated, which in turn facilitated charge transport within the bulk heterojunction (BHJ) layer, resulting in a high short-circuit current and large fill factor. By photophysical studies, we further found that the high PCE is majorly attributed to the minimized nongeminate recombination by controlling the kinetic film morphologies of the BHJ composite by binary solvent processing additives.

Bulk heterojunction (BHJ) polymer solar cells (PSCs) have attracted great scientific and industrial interest due to their advantages of flexibility, large scale production potential, and low-cost grid power generation by solution-processing. In the past few years, great achievements have been made in enhancing the efficiency of PSCs; over 10% and 12% power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) have been reported from single junction PSCs and tandem PSCs. However, these values are still not comparable to those from inorganic-based solar cells. Many effective strategies on the performance improvement of PSCs have been implemented, such as improving the BHJ thin film morphology, altering the device geometry, and modifying interfaces between different layers. Among them, one of the most critical factors is the thin film morphology of the BHJ interpenetrating networks. In the BHJ composite, phase separated domains not only provide the interfaces for charge separation of photogenerated excitons, but also serve as the percolation pathways for separated charge carriers to be transported to the respective electrodes. Thus, the nanoscale thin film morphology is a crucial factor affecting both geminate and nongeminate recombinations within the BHJ composite active layer. It was found that nanoscale thin film morphology can be controlled by a variety of processing methods such as different thin film processing conditions, solvent and thermal annealing, self-assembled monolayer modification, and addition of solvent processing additives. Among them, the addition of solvent processing additives was one of the simplest but the most effective methods since the addition of solvent processing additives can affect the size of fullerene domains by improving their solubility in most common organic solvents, such as chloroform (CF) and chlorobenzene (CB), over that of the polymers. Moreover, the extended drying time for removing the additional solvent processing additives allows the donor polymer to be self-organized, which makes the thin film morphology of the BHJ composite favorable for exciton dissociation, resulting in enhanced PCEs of PSCs. By this methodology, a PCE of 7.4% was achieved with PSCs fabricated from poly[[4,8-bis[(2-ethylhexyl)oxy]benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl][3-fluoro-2-[(2 ethylhexyl)carbonyl]thieno[3,4-b]thiophenediyl]] (PTB7) blended with [6,6]-phenyl C71 butyric acid methyl-ester (PC71BM) from CB solution with 3% of 1,8-diiodoctane (DIO). However, the PCE could be further enhanced if the geminate and/or nongeminate recombinations, which limit the efficiency of PSCs, are minimized by further optimizing the thin film morphology of the BHJ composite layer.

Herein, we report a PCE of 8.55% from PSCs which is fabricated from the PTB7: PC71BM BHJ composite processed from dichlorobenzene (o-DCB) solution with binary solvent processing additives, 1,8-octanedithiol (ODT) and 1-chloronaphthalene (CN). We further found that the crystallinity of PTB7 was elevated, which in turn facilitated charge transport within the BHJ layer, resulting in a high short-circuit current and large fill factor. By photophysical studies, we further found that high PCE is mostly attributed to the minimized nongeminate recombination by controlling the kinetic film morphologies of PTB7:PC71BM with binary solvent processing additives.
In order to investigate the influence of solvent additives on the performance of PSCs, four types of PSCs based on PTB7:PC71BM (1:1.5 weight ratio) were fabricated and characterized. These four types of PSCs are pristine PSCs: PSCs processed from o-DCB solution; CN-PSCs: PSCs processed from o-DCB solution with 3% (by volume) CN; ODT-PSCs: PSCs processed from o-DCB solution with 3% (by volume) ODT; and (CN + ODT)-PSCs: PSCs processed from o-DCB solution with binary solvent processing additives, CN and ODT. Fig. 1a displays the current density–voltage characteristics (J–V) of these four PSCs under an AM1.5G calibrated solar simulator with the light intensity of 100 mW cm−1. Table 1 summarizes the device performance of the four types of PSCs. All PSCs possess the same open circuit voltage (VOC) of 0.75 V, with different short circuit current densities (JSC) and fill factors (FF), consequently yielding different PCEs. The pristine PSCs exhibit a JSC of 12.24 mA cm−2, FF of 61% and PCE of 5.59%. The CN-PSCs exhibit a JSC of 14.10 mA cm−2, a FF of 62% and a PCE of 6.50%. The ODT-PSCs show a JSC of 14.26 mA cm−2, a FF of 64% and a PCE of 6.83%. The PCEs of (CN + ODT)-PSCs are decreased and then increased along with the change of the ratio of CN to ODT. A significantly enhanced JSC of 16.42 mA cm−2 and FF of 70% and consequently high PCE of 8.55% were observed from (CN + ODT)-PSCs when the ratio of CN to ODT was 3:3 by volume. Since most PSCs fabricated from low-band gap polymers blended with PCBM possess low FFs, an FF as high as 70% can be regarded as a fairly high value for PSCs fabricated from low-band gap polymers.
Solvent processing additive (vol%)

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)

a Average PCE.
b The best PCE.

No
0.75
12.24
61
5.59 (5.72)
CN: (3%)
0.75
13.80
62
6.42 (6.60)
ODT: (3%)
0.75
14.26
64
6.83 (6.93)
CN:ODT: 1:1
0.75
12.75
61
5.84 (6.02)
CN:ODT: 1:3
0.75
13.65
62
6.35 (6.43)
CN:ODT: 3:1
0.75
14.09
65
6.87 (6.96)
CN:ODT: 3:3
0.75
16.42
70
8.55 (8.63)
CN:ODT: 3:5
0.75
14.86
62
6.90 (6.97)
CN:ODT: 5:3
0.75
15.36
66
7.60 (7.74)
CN:ODT: 5:5
0.75
14.69
64
7.05 (7.19)
The external quantum efficiencies (EQE) of PSCs were further carried out to characterize these four types of PSCs. As shown in Fig. 1b, (CN + ODT)-PSCs exhibit a higher responsivity ranging from 400 nm to 720 nm. The JSC estimated from the integrated EQE spectrum is 16.2 mA cm−2. In contrast, the other three PSCs display relatively lower responsivities. The estimated JSC values are 13.8 mA cm−2, 13.2 mA cm−2, and 11.8 mA cm−2 for CN-PSCs, ODT-PSCs and pristine PSCs, respectively. All these estimated JSC values are in good agreement with the JSC values from the J–V characterization shown in Fig. 1a.
In order to understand the underlying device performance, atomic force microscopy (AFM) was carried out to investigate thin film morphologies of the BHJ composite. As shown in Fig. 2, thin film morphologies of BHJ active layers were significantly influenced by the PTB7:PC71BM BHJ composite layer processed from o-DCB solution with and without solvent processing additives. The pristine PTB7:PC71BM thin film processed from o-DCB solution (represented as the pristine-BHJ layer) exhibits a fairly smooth surface with a root mean square roughness (RMS) of 0.8 nm. The PTB7:PC71BM thin films processed from o-DCB solution with either 3% CN or 3% ODT (represented as the CN-BHJ layer or the ODT-BHJ layer) exhibit a RMS of 1.5 nm and a RMS of 1.6 nm, respectively. The PTB7:PC71BM thin film processed from o-DCB solution with both 3% CN and 3% ODT (represented as the (CN + ODT)-BHJ layer) exhibits a RMS of 3.2 nm. The relatively rougher surface suggests a better ordering of PTB7 chains in the BHJ thin film and thus a higher crystallinity of PTB7. To confirm this assumption, wide angle X-ray diffraction (WAXD) was carried out to inspect the macromolecular accumulation. The WAXD patterns of these four types of thin films are presented in Fig. 3. There is no significant change of long-term crystal and short-term π–π distance from PTB7:PC71BM thin films. However, the dramatic disparity of crystallinity in the region between 17° and 21° was observed. This difference indicates that the ordering of PTB7 side chains was drastically tuned by the solvent processing additives. The pristine-BHJ layer shows only one broad peak with the full-width at half maximum (FWHM) of ∼3.5°; however, the FWHM becomes much narrower (∼3°) for the CN-BHJ layer. This indicates that the crystallinity was increased, which facilitates the ordering of PTB7 side chains. Further improvement in crystal arrangement was observed from the ODT-BHJ layer, showing a much sharper peak with an additional shoulder. Moreover, several sharper peaks were displayed in the WXRD spectrum of the (CN + ODT)-BHJ layer, indicating that more ordered polymer structures were formed. All these results are in good agreement with observations from AFM images.
In order to further understand the phase separation, transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was carried out to investigate the images of PTB7:PC71BM thin films. As shown in Fig. 4, large PC71BM grains are evident in the pristine-BHJ layer. These large PC71BM grains could hinder the exciton migration to the D/A interface, thereby limiting the charge separation in the BHJ composite. In the CN-BHJ layer, inter-diffusion between PTB7 and PC71BM is clearly presented and the channels for charge carrier transportation are formed. Grain boundary size is further reduced in the ODT-BHJ layer, showing much diminished PC71BM aggregates. Finally, thin film morphology shows optimized phase separation and better miscibility between PTB7 and PC71BM, and preferable interpenetrating networks are formed in the (CN + ODT)-BHJ layer.
The above characterization of thin film morphologies allows us to conclude that enhanced crystallinity of polymers and reduced grain boundaries within the BHJ composite can be induced by additional binary solvent processing additives, resulting in high JSC and large FF.
In order to further understand the underlying physics of the high performance of PSCs, the recombination mechanisms in these PSCs need to be investigated. The J–V characteristics of the (CN + ODT)-PSCs under different illumination intensities are shown in Fig. 5a. The total current density (Jtotal) can be expressed as a combination of photocurrent density (Jph) and dark current density (Jdark), in which Jph is described by the following equation: Jph = qLG(I)PC(I, V), where q is the elementary charge, L is the thickness of the active layer, G(I) is the generation rate of bound electron–hole pairs per unit volume, and PC(I, V) is the charge collection probability. Under sufficiently large reverse bias, where the internal field was considered to be large enough to sweep out all the charge carriers to the respective electrodes, PC (I, V) = 1. From J–V curves in Fig. 5a, it can be assumed that Jph is saturated at −0.5 V. Fig. 5b shows a set of normalized photocurrent data under different illumination intensities, which reveals the information regarding PC (I, V) under different applied voltages. It was found that the PC (I, V) remains almost the same and the PC (I, V) is independent of the light intensities from −0.5 V to 0.65 V, the latter voltage being near the voltage for the maximum power point (MPP). Therefore, the efficiency loss in the (CN + ODT)-PSCs was dominated by geminate recombination in the range from the short circuit to MPP. In contrast, the PC (I, V) strongly depends on the light intensity from the voltage near the MPP to VOC. Moreover, the most conspicuous variations are observed at VOC, where there is no current extraction and all photogenerated charge carriers are recombined. Therefore, the efficiency loss is dominated by nongeminate recombination in this region, and the recombination rate strongly depends on the internal field.
The normalized photocurrent densities under different illumination intensities for CN-PSCs, ODT-PSCs and pristine-PSCs are shown in ESI. All these PSCs exhibit remarkable distinctions in the large internal field regime. Strong dependencies of PC (I, V) on the light intensities were observed, indicating a much larger amount of non-geminate recombination than that of (CN + ODT)-PSCs in the regime from the short circuit to MPP.
The recombination kinetics can be illustrated by the investigation of variations of JSC and VOC as the function of the light intensity. Fig. 6a represents the steady-state light-intensity dependence of JSC and VOC for all PSCs. The (CN + ODT)-PSCs exhibits a near-linear dependence of JSC on light intensity. The coefficient of α = 0.98 corresponding to the power law fit JSC∝Iα (where I is the light intensity) is observed. However, either ODT-PSCs or CN-PSCs show slight non-linear dependence of JSC on light intensity. The α values of 0.95 and 0.94 are observed with these two PSCs, respectively. The α is 0.88, which is the smallest value observed from pristine-PSCs. In principle, the observance of α = 1 indicates that all the charge carriers have been removed prior to recombination. Deviation from α = 1 is attributed to nongeminate recombination and space charge effects. In order to further verify the recombination mechanisms, we characterize the charge carrier mobilities of the BHJ composite. The J–V characteristics of hole-only and electron-only devices are exhibited in ESI. The charge carrier mobilities were estimated based on the space-charge limited current (SCLC) model and summarized in Table S1. A balanced hole and electron mobility observed with BHJ composites indicates that the space charge effects are not responsible for the decreasing of α; thus, a nongeminate recombination can be assumed as the only limitation in PSCs.
It is worth noting that a high PC (∼95%) observed in the region ranging from the short circuit to near MPP indicates that 95% of charge carriers are removed prior to the recombination. Therefore, the recombination plays a minor role in this region. However, under open-circuit conditions, where the current is zero and all photogenerated carriers are recombined within the cell, the recombination mechanisms can be explored in detail. In BHJ PSCs, VOC is described as
(1)
where
EFullereneLUMO is the LUMO energy level of fullerene derivatives; EPolymerLUMO is the HOMO energy level of donor polymers; Δ is the energy shift originating from disorder within the solution cast and phase separation; k is the Boltzmann constant; T is the temperature in kelvin; e is the electron charge; and the ne and nh are the electron and hole densities in the fullerene and polymer domains at the open circuit, respectively; NC is the density of conduction states at the band edge of the polymer and fullerene. When the nongeminate recombination is the only loss mechanism in PSCs, nenh = (n2OC) = G/γ, where G is the generation rate of the bound electron–hole pair and γ is the Langevin recombination constant. Since G is related to the light intensity (I), eqn (1) can be transformed to . In contrast, when geminate recombination is the dominating loss mechanism in PSCs, ne and nh would be proportional to the light intensity (I); therefore, the slope of δVOCversus ln(I) increased to .Fig. 6b shows that VOC varies logarithmically with the light intensity. The PSCs processed with binary solvent processing additives exhibit a slope of 1.08 kBT/e (∼0.027), indicating that the nongeminate recombination dominates the loss mechanism. In other words, a trap-free transport or eliminated geminate recombination takes place within PSCs. In contrast, the other three PSCs show a stronger dependence of VOC on the light intensity, displaying slopes of 1.25 kBT/e, 1.31 kBT/e and 1.42 kBT/e, for ODT-PSCs, CN-PSCs and pristine PSCs, respectively. These large slopes demonstrate that both geminate and nongeminate recombinations are responsible for the loss mechanism in PSCs.

We further studied how exactly the solvent processing additives affect the recombination dynamics of the PTB7:PC71BM BHJ layer by ultrafast transient absorption (TA) spectroscopy measurements. The TA spectra of the PTB7:PC71BM active layers prepared with different solvent processing additives are shown in Fig. 7a. The pristine PTB7 spectrum is also shown in Fig. 7a as the reference. All the spectra are normalized by the photobleach peak at around 680 nm. After comparing with the TA spectrum of pristine PTB7, it is clear that the photoinduced absorption (PIA) features in BHJ thin films between 800 nm and 900 nm are predominantly those of charge carrier absorption. This spectral assignment is also consistent with the previous TA study on the PTB7:PC71BM system. We can thus extract the recombination dynamics of charge carriers from this spectral region.
The PIA dynamics at 850 nm were chosen to study the decay process of charge carriers in the picosecond to nanosecond region. This is the optimal wavelength because at 850 nm the TA spectrum of pristine PTB7 crosses zero as the contribution of stimulated emission and exciton absorption cancel out each other, as seen in Fig. 7a. The normalized PIA versus the time are shown in Fig. 7b. The PIA signals in Fig. 7b reach maximum at around 10 ps for all four BHJ thin films, which corresponds to the time when excitons diffuse to the D/A interface and complete charge separation. The PIA dynamics after 10 ps starts to decay and the whole decay process can be well fitted to the nongeminate recombination model. The fitted curves were calculated by the equation
(2)
where Δ
A is the normalized PIA intensity and γ is the nongeminate decay constant. It should be noted that the exact relationship between the ΔA and the charge carrier density inside the BHJ layer is not known; therefore, the γ obtained from the fitting is only proportional to the real nongeminate decay constant (Langevin recombination rate constant). Though the absolute values of γ in this fitting have no physical meaning, the relative values between different samples can still provide information about how different additives affect charge recombination in the BHJ layer. The γ values are 1.0 × 10–3 ps−1, 1.2 × 10−3 ps−1, 1.2 × 10−3 ps−1 and 2.4 × 10−4 ps−1 for the pristine-BHJ layer, CN-BHJ layer, ODT-BHJ layer and (CN + ODT)-BHJ layer, respectively. The (CN + ODT)-BHJ layer has significantly smaller γ compared with the other three samples, thus it is clear that the binary additive treatment effectively reduced nongeminate recombination in the BHJ layer and resulted in the best PSC device performance. On the other hand, the CN-BHJ layer or ODT-BJ layer has basically the same γ that of the pristine-BHJ layer (the difference is within the fitting error), indicating no difference in the recombination dynamics. However, the steady state light intensity versus VOC measurement as described above showed a significant difference in the recombination rates. As the time window of the ultrafast TA experiment only extends to ∼2 ns, it is very likely that the recombination dynamics of these BHJ layers would only show a significant difference at longer timescales (microseconds to milliseconds) compared with the pristine-BHJ layer, which explains why the difference is not obvious in ultrafast TA measurements but prevails in the steady-state measurements.

The effects of the solvent processing additives on the internal series resistance (RS) of the PSCs were further investigated using AC impedance spectroscopy (IS). The detailed electrical properties of BHJ and interfaces, which cannot be observed by direct current measurements, can be monitored by IS. The RS of the PSCs is composed of the sheet resistance (RSH) of the electrodes and the charge-transport resistance (RCT) at the BHJ/electrode interfaces or inside the BHJ active layer. Since all PSCs have the same device structure, only the BHJ composite layer is processed under different conditions. Thus the RSH inside all these cells can be assumed to be the same, but RS can give us the information about RCT which is affected by solvent additives. The IS results of all PSCs are shown in Fig. 8. The semicircles in the Nyquist plot indicate that homogeneous transport pathways were formed in these PSCs. The pristine PSCs show a RS of 22 Ω; however, the CN-PSCs and the ODT-PSCs possess much diminished RS of 13 Ω and 11 Ω, respectively. The lowest RS of 5 Ω is observed from (ODT + CN)-PSCs, which suggests that the thin film morphology of the BHJ composite was much improved through reduced phase separation and enhanced crystallization of PTB7 via the assistance of binary solvent processing additives. These results are consistent with the previous observation shown in Fig. 2, 3 and 4.
In summary, a significant enhanced efficiency was observed with PTB7:PC71BM based PSCs fabricated from o-DCB solution with binary additives (ODT and CN). PCEs were increased from 5.60% to 8.55%. The enhanced PCE was originated from ameliorated thin film morphology of the active layer. With binary additives, the crystallinity of PTB7 was demonstrated to be elevated, which in turn facilitates charge transport within the BHJ layer. Moreover, the phase separation size was testified to be reduced, forming a more homogeneous film. Through the optimization of film morphology, the recombination loss mechanisms in PSCs were proved to be drastically lowered with the elimination of geminate recombination and decreae of the nongeminate recombination to the lowest level. This effect is confirmed by ultrafast transient absorption spectroscopy and impedance spectroscopy studies.

The authors thank the Natural Science Foundation (NSF) for financial support (ECCS-1351785). The authors at the South China University of Technology acknowledge NSFC (51329301). X. W. Hu and C. M. Zhong thank the China Scholarship Council for the Joint Ph.D. program.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c4nr04958f
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014