 DOI: 10.1039/D2TA07729A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 24199-24207


Rasmus
Nielsen
*,

Tomas H.
Youngman
,

Hadeel
Moustafa
,

Sergiu
Levcenco
,

Hannes
Hempel
,

Andrea
Crovetto
,

Thomas
Olsen
,

Ole
Hansen
,

Ib
Chorkendorff
,

Thomas
Unold
 and 

Peter C. K.
Vesborg


SurfCat, DTU Physics, Technical University of Denmark, DK-2800 Kgs Lyngby, Denmark. E-mail: raniel@dtu.dk

CAMD, DTU Physics, Technical University of Denmark, DK-2800 Kgs Lyngby, Denmark

Department of Structure and Dynamics of Energy Materials, Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin für Materialien und Energie GmbH, Berlin, Germany

DTU Nanolab, National Center for Nano Fabrication and Characterization, Technical University of Denmark, DK-2800, Kgs Lyngby, Denmark

Received
3rd October 2022
, Accepted 1st November 2022
First published on 2nd November 2022
Research on selenium solar cells is regaining momentum due to the exciting prospect of integrating a single-element, wide-bandgap (≈1.95 eV) photoabsorber in tandem with a lower bandgap photovoltaic device. Low temperature processing of selenium makes it a potentially inexpensive candidate for a top cell absorber that can easily be integrated with existing photovoltaic technology. However, single-junction selenium devices still exhibit a significant voltage deficit when compared to the Shockley–Queisser limit, despite recent efficiency improvements through device engineering. This calls for more detailed characterization of the selenium material properties linked to photovoltaic performance. In this work, we first fabricate large-area selenium solar cells with a record open-circuit voltage of 0.99 V and a pseudo fill factor of 80%. Then, we characterize the mobility-lifetime product, built-in voltage and low-temperature radiative recombination in these state-of-the-art devices. We attribute most of the Voc-deficit to non-radiative recombination in the selenium absorber. Thus, improving the bulk optoelectronic quality of selenium appears to be a more urgent need than the optimization of its device structure.

In the search of wide bandgap photoabsorbers that are process compatible for fabrication on lower bandgap photoabsorbers, the elemental p-type semiconductor selenium is experiencing renewed interest. With a reported direct bandgap between 1.8 and 2.0 eV in its trigonal phase and a range of processing temperatures below its melting point of 220 °C, it is an attractive candidate for a top cell in monolithic tandem photovoltaic devices. A power conversion efficiency of 5.0% for a single-junction selenium cell was achieved in the 1980's. This record remained unchanged for more than 30 years, until Todorov et al. achieved a promising power conversion efficiency of 6.5% and an open-circuit voltage of 969 mV in 2017 by completely redesigning the device architecture. Following these recent improvements, it is important to determine the next priority for future work on selenium solar cells. Specifically, should we keep focusing on device optimization or should we shift our attention to the optoelectronic quality of selenium itself?

In this work, we fabricate selenium solar cells featuring the revised device architecture from Todorov et al. and achieve an open-circuit voltage of Voc = 0.99 V. Even though this is the highest Voc ever reported on a selenium device, it is still more than 600 mV below the Shockley–Queisser limit for a material with a bandgap of Eg ≈ 1.95 eV. To assess the origin of this Voc-deficit, we first characterize the bulk material properties of the selenium layer that are known to strongly influence photovoltaic performance. Many of these properties (e.g., doping concentration, lifetime, mobility, built-in voltage, photoluminescence quantum yield) have rarely been reported for selenium thin-films. Other properties (e.g., effective masses and the nature of the bandgap) are revisited on the basis of first-principles calculations.
Using time-resolved terahertz spectroscopy and capacitance–voltage profiling we determine the diffusion length and the depletion region width, from which the optimal thickness of selenium reported in recent work follows quite naturally. We also find that the photoluminescence quantum yield of selenium is too low to be measured at room temperature, and use cryogenic photoluminescence spectroscopy to study radiative recombination. Our results indicate that improving the bulk material properties of selenium is probably necessary to further advance the performance of selenium solar cells.

The photovoltaic performance of our champion selenium solar cell is presented in Fig. 1, along with a cross sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of a device processed in parallel. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) under 1 sun illumination is 5.2%, with open-circuit voltage of Voc = 991 mV, a fill factor of FF = 52.4%, and a short-circuit current density of Jsc = 10.0 mA cm−2. A pseudo current–voltage (J–V) curve is reconstructed from a Suns-Voc measurement to eliminate the effects of series resistance and achieve a better fit of the non-ideal diode equation. From this, the diode ideality factor is determined to be n = 1.89, which indicates that recombination predominantly occurs in the depletion region of the solar cell. The Suns-Voc measurement yields a pseudo device efficiency of pPCE = 7.98% and pseudo fill factor of pFF = 80.4%. The low actual FF in our device is comparable to reports from other groups, and the significant difference between the FF and the pFF implies that the FF loss is a result of series resistance and bias-dependent collection. The open-circuit voltage of Voc = 991 mV is the highest value reported on a selenium solar cell. This serves as an ideal starting point for characterizing the bulk material properties of selenium in state-of-the-art films. The goal is to investigate the origin of the efficiency losses in selenium photovoltaics. We will also discuss other properties linked to photovoltaic performance that are more easily accessible by first-principles calculations.


The effective density of states and carrier effective masses are important quantities for optical absorption, carrier transport, and the modelling and interpretation of defect levels in the bandgap of a semiconductor. Commonly, the effective masses are obtained from band structure calculations by fitting the band edge dispersion with a parabola, and the effective density of states are then calculated from this result.Fig. 2A shows the electronic band structure of trigonal selenium calculated from the PBE and HSE06 functionals, as well as the PBE total density of states. Due to significant non-parabolicity in the valence band edge, we determine the effective density of states by explicit band integration. First, we determine the carrier densities explicitly from a Brillouin zone integral of the band energies. Then, we determine the effective density of states NV in the valence band using p = NV × exp(−(EF − EVBM)/kBT), and equivalently the effective density of states NC in the conduction band using n = NC × exp(−(ECBM − EF)/kBT). At T = 300 K we get
NV = 1.64 × 1020 cm−3, NC = 8.7 × 1018 cm−3
and from the effective density of states and the optical bandgap, the intrinsic carrier concentration
ni at T = 300 K becomes
The calculated effective density of states NV and NC correspond to the density-of-states carrier effective masses
as calculated by inverting the conventional parabolic band expression
 These results are compared to two simpler methods based on parabolic fits. We first consider the geometric average of band curvatures in different directions weighted by their Brillouin zone degeneracy, which results in  and  Then we consider the case of fitting the density of states over an energy range of 25 meV, which results in  and  in better agreement with the results from the Brillouin zone integral. These two approximations are shown together with the total density of states in Fig. 2B and C.

The effective masses relevant for transport properties (e.g. carrier mobility and conductivity) of selenium are not equivalent to the density-of-states effective masses. As a result of the trigonal symmetry of the selenium crystal, the electrical conductivity is anisotropic and therefore the inverse conductivity effective mass is a second rank tensor for both bands (see ESI). Evaluation of the tensor elements based on band curvatures and symmetry results in mv⊥ = 0.68 × m0 and mv∥ = 0.21 × m0 for the valence band, and mc⊥ = 0.39 × m0 and mc∥ = 0.18 × m0 for the conduction band. Here, the indices ⊥ and ∥ refer to the crystal directions perpendicular and parallel to the helical chains, respectively. This suggests that orienting the selenium chains parallel to the charge carrier transport direction could lead to an improvement in the device conductivity and thus the photovoltaic performance. Preliminary studies on directional growth of poly-Se thin-films and implications on device performance has been carried out by Hadar et al.
In contradiction to most experimental reports, the fundamental bandgap of selenium is predicted to be indirect by density functional theory, both with a semilocal (PBE) and a hybrid (HSE06) exchange–correlation functional. With the PBE functional, the fundamental bandgap is 0.96 eV (indirect), and the lowest direct bandgap is 1.01 eV. With the HSE06 functional, the fundamental bandgap is 1.70 eV (indirect), and the lowest direct bandgap is 1.79 eV. The small energy difference between the indirect and the lowest direct transition may explain why most authors report a direct bandgap using optical spectroscopy techniques. Due to the weakness of indirect transitions, it may be difficult to distinguish indirect absorption from a direct absorption tail over a spectral region narrower than 100 meV. Unless indirect transitions are unusually intense, the energy difference between the two bandgaps is likely to translate almost completely into a Voc-deficit in a film that is only a few hundreds nm thick. That is because the effective threshold for carrier generation is the direct bandgap, but non-radiative recombination may occur from carriers located at the indirect band edges. Finally, we note that the conduction band minimum (CBM) exhibits a slight Rashba splitting, which yields two degenerate minima in close vicinity to the H symmetry point. The valence band has two nearly degenerate minima located close to the L point and close to the K–H path (see Fig. 2A).

The absorption coefficient and the optical bandgap of selenium thin-films are characterized routinely using UV-visible spectrophotometry. However, we observe a large tail in the absorption spectrum when only the direct components of transmission and reflection are measured as shown in Fig. 3A. To account for the two diffuse components, additional UV-vis measurements are carried out using a spectrophotometer equipped with an integrating sphere. The absorption coefficient derived from the reflection-corrected total transmission Tcorr = Ttot/(1 − Rtot) shows that most of the apparent subgap absorption from UV-vis without an integrating sphere and spectroscopic ellipsometry is likely an artefact of light scattering. An optical bandgap of Eg = 1.95 eV is extrapolated from a Tauc plot for direct bandgap materials in the inset of Fig. 3A. This value closely matches the photovoltaic bandgap derived from the inflection point of the EQE-spectrum in Fig. 1B, as well as the bandgap reported by Todorov et al. Nonetheless, the optical bandgap of poly-Se thin-films is often reported to be slightly lower, and the significant EQE below the bandgap could be an indication of a substantial carrier collection from bandtails. As mentioned in the section above, the fundamental bandgap might only apparently be direct, as an indirect bandgap less than 100 meV below the main absorption onset would be very difficult to detect by transmission and reflection spectroscopy.


Impedance spectroscopy is used to determine the net doping density of poly-Se via the capacitance of the space charge region. Impedance spectra are recorded at different DC voltages and fitted to a Randles circuit (an RC-element in series with a single resistor). The global sample response is quantified over the full frequency range and the capacitive contributions are shown in a Mott–Schottky plot in Fig. 3B, fitted with a linear function. The intercept of the linear fit with the x-axis yields the built-in voltage Vbi = 1.3 V of the pn-heterojunction, which in this case comprise TiO2/Te/poly-Se. The doping concentration may be calculated from the slope of the linear fit, but this requires knowledge of the static dielectric response of poly-Se. The real part of the dielectric function of poly-Se retrieved from spectroscopic ellipsometry (ESI Fig. S4) is observed to converge at lower frequencies towards ε1(λ → ∞) ≈ 7.8. As this value resembles previously reported values of εr for selenium determined from oscillator fitting of IR-spectra at room temperature, the static dielectric response of poly-Se is approximated to be εr ≈ 7.8 in this work. Using this result, the net doping concentration in poly-Se is calculated to be NA = 1.3 × 1016 cm−3, and the small deviation of data from the linear fit indicates a fairly uniform doping density throughout the poly-Se layer. From the net doping concentration and the effective density of states in the valence band, the Fermi level position in our poly-Se thin-films is calculated to be EF − EVBM = kBTln(NV/NA) = 0.24 eV above the valence band edge. This result, combined with the conduction band offset ΔECB = −0.5 eV between TiO2 and poly-Se as reported by Todorov et al., is used to calculate a built-in potential of Vbi ≈ 1.2 V, in good agreement with the extrapolated value.


The transient response in time-resolved terahertz spectroscopy (TRTS) is used to determine the effective charge carrier lifetime τeff in poly-Se. Often, such an analysis is performed using time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL), but the photoluminescence quantum yield in selenium turns out to be very low at room temperature. Furthermore, TRTS offers a time resolution of ∼150 fs, revealing a rapid initial decay of the sheet photoconductivity as shown in Fig. 3C. The transient is fitted using a biexponential function to retrieve two characteristic lifetimes related to the different charge carrier mechanisms. The initial decay with τ1 ≈ 7 ps indicates a trapping of the photo-excited carriers into more localized states, resulting in a decrease in the average mobility and consequently the photoconductivity. This process is followed by a much slower decay with τ2 ≈ 2 ns, likely related to charge carrier recombination resulting in a decreasing concentration of photo-excited carriers. This lifetime is quite low when compared to high-efficiency thin-film photoabsorbers such as CIGS, CdTe, and GaAs, where carrier lifetimes in the hundreds of nanoseconds have been achieved with similar doping concentrations, but comparable to that of other emerging inorganic PV materials, including CZTS.


The sum of the electron and hole mobility in poly-Se is also derived using TRTS. By measuring the pump-induced changes in the oscillating electric field of the THz probe, we derive a mobility that defines the photo-induced AC-current as a function of the terahertz frequencies present in the pulse. The observed AC-mobility is relatively independent of frequency in the range of 0.5–2.5 THz, which indicates short scattering times (τscat ∼ 10−15 s) and allows to extrapolate the mobility sum to a DC-value of μe+h ≈ 5 cm2 V−1 s−1 as shown in Fig. 3D. This value refers to the mobility of the trap states reached after the initial fast relaxation, as discussed in the previous section. This mobility is quite low in comparison to e.g. CIGS, CdTe and GaAs, where carrier mobilities in the hundreds of cm2 V−1 s−1 have been reported. Nevertheless, it is likely that the mobility of Se films can be improved if the trap states reached after a few ps can be suppressed. This is an important area of future research. As the derivation of the mobility sum using TRTS is based on the acceleration of charge carriers on the nm-scale, and the poly-Se thin-films comprise μm-sized crystals, the result is considered an intra-grain mobility. This contrasts the more commonly used Hall effect measurements, where the mobility may be negatively affected by the lateral transport across grain boundaries. The intra-grain mobility is more relevant in the context of photovoltaic devices, as the crystal grains extend throughout the device in the carrier transport direction (Fig. 1C).


Photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy of the poly-Se thin-films synthesized in this work is carried out at cryogenic temperatures as the photoluminescence quantum yield is too low to be measured at room temperature. As an irreversible attenuation of the PL signal is observed under focused light (ESI Fig. S7), the excitation laser is scanned across the unexposed areas of the sample surface. The resulting temperature-dependent PL-spectra are shown in Fig. 4, where two radiative emission bands centered at around 1.67 eV and 1.79 eV are observed at T < 55 K. Most of the PL studies of selenium have been carried out on single crystals, where narrow excitonic lines with phonon replicas are observed at T < 10 K in the region of the predicted indirect bandgap. Zetsche et al. reported that excitonic transitions were observable even at T = 20 K. However, we do not observe any excitonic or phonon-related features in our thin-film sample at T = 16 K. The main exciton feature in the previous publications was centered at around 1.85 eV. Thus, we conclude that both PL bands observed in our thin-film sample must be related to transitions involving a defect level or a band tail.

The PL results of our poly-Se thin-films mostly resemble those of melt-grown selenium crystals reported by Queisser et al. In particular, Queisser et al. observed PL bands at 1.65 eV and 1.78 eV, respectively, and reported an irreversible decrease of PL quantum efficiency under focused light as well. They attributed the PL band at 1.65 eV to surface defects and, intriguingly, note that the 1.78 eV band is only observed for crystals deformed by about 5% by compression perpendicular to the helical chains. However, such strain is not observed in our thin-films judged by the relative shifts of the peak positions from grazing incidence X-ray diffraction (ESI Fig. S6). Finally, by analyzing the temperature quenching of the 1.79 eV PL band, an activation energy of 9 meV is estimated, supporting the hypothesis that the 1.79 eV PL band is not caused by band-to-band transitions across the indirect bandgap as it was seen for single crystals by Kuhler et al.
The bulk material properties of the poly-Se thin-films synthesized in this work are summarized in Table 1. The electron affinity was determined in our previous work using ultraviolet photoemission spectroscopy combined with optical transmission measurements on identically prepared poly-Se thin-films.
Parameter
Poly-Se
Optical bandgap (eV)
1.95
Electron affinity (eV)
3.9
Static dielectric constant
7.8
CB effective DOS (cm−3)
8.70 × 1018
VB effective DOS (cm−3)
1.64 × 1020
Net doping density (cm−3)
1.3 × 1016 (p-type)
Carrier mobility sum (cm2 V−1 s−1)
5
DOS eff. mass of electrons 
0.49
DOS eff. mass of holes 
3.50
Conductivity mass of electrons 
0.39 (⊥), 0.18 (∥)
Conductivity mass of holes 
0.68 (⊥), 0.21 (∥)
Carrier lifetime (ns)
2

The diffusion length may be calculated directly from the mobility-lifetime product, which is closely related to the collection probability of photogenerated carriers in regions where carriers move predominantly by diffusion. To calculate the minority carrier diffusion length, one should distinguish between minority and majority carrier lifetimes and mobilities. Therefore, the following result should be considered an upper estimate to the minority carrier diffusion length of the thin-films synthesized in this work, as the calculation is based on the mobility sum and the effective carrier lifetime from TRTS.

(1)
Complementary to the diffusion length, the depletion region width W indicates the width of the region where carrier are collected by drift as a function of applied DC voltage V.
(2)
Operating the selenium solar cell at the maximum power point VMPP = 661 mV, the depletion region width equates to WMPP = 211 nm. Adding the diffusion length to the depletion region width, any additional thickness of the poly-Se layer beyond WMPP + Ldiff ≈ 400 nm would not contribute to carrier collection. This result supports recent findings of an optimal poly-Se photoabsorber thickness between 300 and 500 nm.
The current–voltage relationship of a forward-biased non-ideal pn-junction may be modelled using the two-diode equation. In this model, the relation between the ideal diffusion current and the depletion region recombination current is empirically represented by the aforementioned ideality factor n. An ideality factor of n = 2 implies that the recombination in the depletion region is dominant, whereas n = 1 indicates that the dominant recombination mechanism occurs in the quasi-neutral region (i.e. outside the depletion region). The previously determined diode ideality factor of n = 1.89 from Suns-Voc measurements is thus indicative of a device dominated by recombination in the depletion region. The open-circuit voltage may also be calculated using the two-diode equation by introducing a term describing the photogenerated current density Jph = Jsc = 10.0 mA cm−2.
(3)
When compared to the Shockley–Queisser limit Voc,SQ = 1.65 V, this result indicates that an open-circuit voltage deficit of more than 450 mV is expected as a result of the bulk properties of poly-Se. This demonstrates that improving the bulk properties of selenium is more important than continued efforts in optimizing the device architecture. The two-diode model should however be used with caution; even though it is important to minimize the depletion recombination, it is not desirable to minimize the depletion region width W, as this directly compromises the collection probability and thus Jph at very short lifetimes.
To synthesize selenium thin-films of higher optoelectronic quality, the most detrimental defects responsible for the trapping and non-radiative recombination of charge carriers must first be identified. This entails an investigation of both naturally-occurring intrinsic defects (vacancies and self-interstitials) and relevant extrinsic defects (e.g. tellurium and oxygen). However, the definitive identification of point defects is challenging owing to their dilute concentrations, which are often beyond the resolution of most standard characterization techniques. A synergy of theory and experiment is therefore necessary to explain the origin of the spectroscopic features we report in this work. With a more detailed understanding of the defect physics in selenium, strategies for continued improvements to the device performance may be adopted. In the case of impurities being the key culprit, the photoabsorbing material must be further purified, whereas in the case of intrinsic defects being the main limiting factor, the synthesis process must be changed to obtain a more desirable reaction pathway and chemical environment. Examples include epitaxial growth and non-equilibrium growth where the chemical potential of the constituent elements (in this case selenium, tellurium, and the atmosphere in which it is crystallized) and/or the Fermi-distribution of the electrons (which may be manipulated using light) is altered. Alternatively, the intentional introduction of benign extrinsic impurities may be used as an additional lever to shift the chemical potential of the electrons and hence the formation energy of the most detrimental defects. The latter strategy has been implemented in the case of defect engineering for kesterite solar cells.

In summary, we have fabricated selenium solar cells with a record open-circuit voltage of Voc = 0.99 V, a highly encouraging pseudo fill factor of pFF = 80%, and one of the largest device areas A = 0.30 cm2 reported in the literature. Through detailed characterization, the photo-generated carriers in selenium are observed to decay very rapidly into more localized states, from where the large majority of carriers then recombine non-radiatively as indicated by a very weak photoluminescence signal. We estimate an open-circuit voltage loss of 450 mV due to recombination in the depletion region, and a loss of 200 mV due to a less-than optimal device structure. Thus, the bulk properties of selenium account for the greater fraction of the Voc-deficit. In addition to non-radiative recombination losses, DFT calculations predict that the fundamental bandgap of selenium is indirect, and the energy difference between the lowest direct and indirect transition is thus expected to translate directly into a Voc-deficit due to incomplete light absorption. Finally, we predict an optimal absorber thickness of ≈400 nm from the calculated diffusion length and depletion region width, which is in agreement with recent findings, and we provide a list of selenium material properties that can be used for device simulations.

To realize a greater performance potential of selenium solar cells, the optoelectronic quality of selenium thin-films should be improved. This calls for an investigation of the origin of the detrimental non-radiative recombination centers, including both naturally-occurring intrinsic defects (vacancies and self-interstitials) and potential extrinsic defects due to impurities e.g. tellurium. A more detailed knowledge of the defect physics of selenium would enable researchers to devise strategies for performance improvement through defect engineering. In the case of extrinsic defects, efforts must be made to further purify the photoabsorber material, whereas in the case intrinsic defects the synthesis process must be altered. Some possibilities could be epitaxial or non-equilibrium growth conditions, or even the intentional introduction of benign impurities that could suppress formation of the most detrimental defects.

The electronic structure was calculated using the GPAW electronic software package, using the Projector Augmented Wave (PAW) formalism and a plane wave basis. The calculations were performed with the PBE and the HSE06 (ref. 47) functionals with a plane wave energy cutoff of 800 eV and spin–orbit coupling was included non-self-consistently. The Brillouin zone was sampled on a 60 × 60 × 60 k-point mesh in the case of PBE and 13 × 13 × 11 for the HSE06 calculations. The PBE band structure was then calculated on a 400 point path along high symmetry lines of the Brillouin zone and the HSE06 band structure was calculated by interpolating the difference to the PBE bands between the points lying on the 13 × 13 × 11 grid.


Amorphous selenium (99.999+%, metals basis) and tellurium (99.9999%, metals basis) shots were purchased from Alfa Aesar. FTO-coated glass substrates (∼7 Ω sq−1) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Zn0.85Mg0.15O (99.95+%), Mo (99.98%), and Au (99.99%) sputtering targets were purchased from AJA International.


Selenium thin-film solar cells are fabricated in a superstrate configuration using physical vapor deposition techniques. First, SnO2:F (FTO) coated soda lime glass substrates are cut and sequentially cleaned in an ultrasonic bath with Milli-Q water, acetone and isopropanol. The clean substrates are dried using an N2-gun and brought into a magnetron sputtering system with a base pressure of Pbase ∼ 10−8 mbar. Initial experiments utilized a dense ∼35 nm TiO2 electron transport layer (ETL) deposited using reactive (Ar/O2 = 30/0.3 sccm) DC sputtering of metallic titanium, with the substrates heated to 400 °C. This layer served for the initial device characterization using capacitance–voltage (CV) profiling. TiO2 was later replaced with a ∼65 nm layer of ZnMgO deposited using reactive (Ar/O2 = 30/0.3 sccm) RF sputtering of a ceramic target, and no substrate heating. The deposition pressure during all sputtering processes is kept constant at 5 mTorr, and the sample stage is rotated to achieve a more uniform film. The samples are subsequently transferred to a custom-built thermal evaporator with a base pressure of Pbase ∼ 10−8 mbar, where a thin (∼1 nm) layer of tellurium (Te) is deposited at a rate of ≈0.25 Å s−1. The thin layer of Te has previously been demonstrated to improve adhesion and uniformity of selenium during the crystallization process. Without breaking vacuum, ∼300 nm of selenium is deposited on top of tellurium at a rate of ≈4 Å s−1. The samples are then brought into a home-built aluminium oven and annealed at ≈190 °C in air for 4 min. This heat treatment efficiently crystallizes the as-deposited amorphous selenium into a polycrystalline film of trigonal selenium (poly-Se). The devices are completed by depositing ∼15 nm of MoOx using reactive (Ar/O2 = 30/5 sccm) DC sputtering of metallic molybdenum, followed by ∼30 nm of Au deposited using DC sputtering. The final device structure consists of glass/SnO2:F/ETL (ZnMgO or TiO2)/Te/poly-Se/MoOx/Au where the active cell area is 0.30 cm2. In parallel with the device fabrication, poly-Se thin-films are synthesized on quartz substrates to better facilitate the characterization of the material properties of a single layer. The fabrication procedure has been discussed in detail in a previous publication.



J–V characteristics of the solar cells are measured using a Keithley 2561A source meter with four-terminal sensing setup. The AM1.5 G illumination is provided from a Newport solar simulator equipped with a 1000 W Xe arc lamp with appropriate optical filters. The intensity in the plane of the device under test is calibrated using a reference solar cell from Orion. No mask aperture is used during the acquisition. As the active area is arguably the largest source of error in estimating the efficiency of a solar cell, the Jsc is calibrated using the AM1.5 G-equivalent current density calculated by integrating the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectrum. This minimizes the effects of internal reflection from areas outside the device under test, as well as spectral mismatch from the solar simulator, both of which are known to be common issues when characterizing wide bandgap superstrate solar cells. External quantum efficiency (EQE) measurements are recorded using the QEXL from PV Measurements calibrated using a silicon photodiode. Suns-Voc measurements are carried out using the WCT-120 from Sinton Instruments.


Charge carriers were photogenerated in the sample by laser pulses with a wavelength of 400 nm, a pulse width of 150 fs, a repetition rate of 150 kHz, and a photon flux per pulse of 1013 cm−2. These carriers absorb terahertz pulses that were generated by optical rectification of 800 nm femtosecond laser pulses in a ZnTe crystal. The photoinduced change in the transmitted terahertz pulse dT/T was recorded by electrooptical sampling and can be analyzed for the photoinduced sheet conductivity Δσs by the so-called thin-film approximation. The transient photoconductivity was obtained by sampling the terahertz at its maximum and scanning the delay between terahertz pulse and pump pulse with an optical delay line. The mobility spectrum was obtained by keeping the terahertz–pump delay at 500 ps (after the initial trapping process) and sampling the whole terahertz pulse by shifting it with a second delay line. Both dT and T are Fourier transformed and the thin-film approximation yields a conductivity spectrum which is converted by the know photoinduced sheet carriers concentration Δns into the sum of electron and hole mobility μΣ = Δσs/eΔns. More details are given in ref. 53.


The sample was cooled down to temperatures around 16 K in a closed-cycle cryogenic He cryostat. The excitation source of the photoluminescence measurement was a 532 nm wavelength Nd:YAG laser and a set of neutral density filters is used to adjust its excitation intensity. A typical excitation level of about 37 suns or 3.7 W cm−2 is used in these PL measurements. The collected PL signal is dispersed with a 0.5 m focal length grating monochromator and analyzed with a CCD camera.


All scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images are obtained using the Supra 40 VP SEM from Zeiss. The UV-vis transmission and reflection spectra are measured at room temperature using a double-beam Cary 7000 spectrophotometer, where the transmitted and reflected light is collected over a ∼2π sr solid angle using an integrating sphere with incidence angles close to normal. The absorption coefficient is derived from the reflection-corrected transmission data Tcorr = T/(1 − R) and the thickness d of the film, using Beer's law. Variable angle spectroscopic ellipsometry measurements are carried out using a J. A. Woollam M-200 rotating compensator ellipsometer. In all optical models, the imaginary part (ε2) of the unknown dielectric function is determined using least-square fitting of a B-spline model with ten nodes per eV in the region near the bandgap to better capture the absorption onset, and five nodes per eV elsewhere. Kramers–Kronig integration was performed to determine the real part (ε1) of the dielectric function. The refractive index n, the extinction coefficient κ and the absorption coefficient α are derived using standard optical relations. Impedance spectroscopy is carried out using a HP 4284 LCR meter operated in resistance–reactance mode at room temperature in the dark. The measurements were performed from 0.1 kHz to 1 MHz with DC biases ranging from −0.8 to 0.4 V. The full impedance spectra are fitted to a standard Randles circuit using Elchemea Analytical to determine the effective capacitance of the space charge region at different DC voltages.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the Villum Foundation V-SUSTAIN grant (9455) to the Villum Center for the Science of Sustainable Fuels and Chemicals, and the Independent Research Fund Denmark (DFF) grant 0217-00333B. The authors would like to thank Adrian Alejo Santamaría Lancia for the great contributions to the J–V measurement system.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Additional figures. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ta07729a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022