 DOI: 10.1039/C6TA10715J
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 6515-6521


Yu
Cheng
,

Cong
Chen
,

Xu
Chen
,

Junjie
Jin
,

Hao
Li
,

Hongwei
Song
* and 

Qilin
Dai
*

State Key Laboratory on Integrated Optoelectronics, College of Electronic Science and Engineering, Jilin University, 2699 Qianjin Street, Changchun, 130012, People's Republic of China. E-mail: songhw@jlu.edu.cn

Department of Physics, Atmospheric Sciences and Geoscience, Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi 39217, USA. E-mail: qilin.dai@jsums.edu

Received
13th December 2016
, Accepted 5th March 2017
First published on 6th March 2017
Currently, perovskite solar cells (PSCs) are attracting extensive interest due to their potential for overcoming the energy crisis. However, increasing the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of PSCs to realize outdoor applications is still one of the crucial issues in PSC research. In this study, metallic nanostructures including Au, Ag and Au–Ag nanoalloy with different sizes and morphology were synthesized via a chemical solution method and embedded into an electron collecting TiO2 layer in PSCs based on the physical deposition method, which allows control over the incorporation of the metallic-nanostructures. The best improvement in the PCE was obtained using the Au–Ag nanoalloy, exhibiting an efficiency of 14.8%, which increases 17.5% compared to the bare PSCs. We believe that the increased device performance originates from increased light harvesting due to the increased optical path length caused by the light scattering of the metallic nanostructures. This strategy demonstrates a novel way to enhance the performance of photovoltaic devices.

Organometallic halide perovskite materials, typically CH3NH3PbX3 (X = Cl, I or Br), show wide and strong absorption, high mobility and extremely long and balanced electron–hole diffusion lengths, which ensure them as a new generation light absorbers for solar cells. The PCE of PSCs has been boosted from 3.81% to 22% in recent years. Such rapid PCE improvement was achieved through the fabrication of a dense, uniform perovskite layer with a variety of treatments, including structural engineering and interface engineering. The interlayers between the perovskite layer and the electrodes (hole transport layer or electron transport layer) have been optimized with the aim of increasing the charge carrier mobility in the devices or reducing the energy barrier at the interface. Even though perovskite absorbers can use visible light efficiently in well-operating devices, an improved efficiency can be still obtained by enhancing the light harvesting properties.

To date, the utilization of metallic nanostructures has been found to be a fascinating solution to improve the light absorption in solar cells (localized surface plasmon resonance) via the LSPR effect, typically, acting as scattering centers. Several researchers have employed metallic nanostructures in other types of solar cells, such as thin-film solar cells dye-sensitized solar cells and organic solar cells, which lead to an increased device performance that may be conducive to circumvent the 1 sun Shockley–Queisser limit. Recently, metallic nanostructures have also been employed to improve the PCE of PSCs. For instance, Snaith et al. reported an 11.4% improvement in the performance of PSCs by incorporating Au@SiO2 core–shell metal–dielectric nanostructures into the mesoporous layer, leading the PCE to increase from 8.5% to 9.5%. Park et al. reported a 0.6% PCE improvement by introducing Au nanostructures into the hole transport layer of PSCs, from 12.66% to 12.74%. A 10% PCE improvement was obtained when silver nanoparticles were introduced into the hole transport layer of PSCs. The abovementioned results were attributed either to reduced exciton binding energy or to improved electrical properties due to the incorporation of the metallic nanocrystals in TiO2. Therefore, very limited success was achieved using metallic nanostructures in PSCs. In addition, the reported methods always involve a high temperature annealing process, which is unavoidable for TiO2 crystallinity, which may lead to damage occurring in the metallic nanostructures. This may be another possible reason for the limited success. Metallic nanostructures including their morphology, size and nanoalloys can also influence the LSPR effect, and there is no report on the influence of the morphology, size and nanoalloy compounds in metallic nanostructures on the device performance of PSCs to date. Therefore, it is very critical to systemically study the effects of metallic nanostructures on PSC performance, which may facilitate the development of PSCs towards outdoor applications.
Herein, we developed a new device structure to enhance the PCE of PSCs using a radio frequency magnetron sputtering (RFMS) technique to embed the metallic nanostructures into the TiO2 compact layer. In this structure, high temperature treatment in the preparation of TiO2/metallic nanostructures nanocomposites was avoided and metallic nanostructures retained their original size and morphology. The influence of the metallic nanostructures including size, morphology, and nanoalloy nanostructure on PSC device performance was systematically investigated. The PCE was improved from 12.6% to 14.8% when 40 nm Au–Ag nanoalloy was used in the PSCs, which is the highest improvement reported to date when referring to the literature. We attribute the increased device performance to the enhanced light absorption of the perovskite material due to the increased optical path length in the devices caused by the multiple light scattering resulting from the metallic nanostructures.

(1) Ag nanospheres: first, a mixture of 25 mL of ethylene glycol (EG) and 3.3 g of polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) was kept stirring for 2 h and then the temperature was increased to 120 °C. Next, 0.25 g of AgNO3 was added to the resulting solution under N2 protection, and the solution was stirred for 1 h. Finally, the Ag nanospheres were obtained by washing with ethanol and acetone. The size of the Ag nanospheres can be controlled by the amount of AgNO3 added.

(2) Au–Ag nanoalloy: first, 9 mL of deionized (DI) water, 15 mg of PVP and 1 mL of a solution of the synthesized Ag nanospheres in part 1 were mixed and kept at 100 °C for 2 min under reflux conditions. Then, 2 mL of chloroauric acid (0.05 mmol L−1) was added to the abovementioned solution at a rate of 30 mL h−1. After 20 min, NaCl was added to the resulting solution. Finally, excess PVP and NaCl were removed by washing with water. The size of nanoalloys can be controlled by the size of Ag nanospheres used.
(3) Au nanospheres: a solution of 2.2 mM sodium citrate in 150 mL of DI water was heated at reflux in a 250 mL three-necked flask for 15 min under vigorous stirring. After boiling was observed, 1 mL of a HAuCl4 solution (25 mM) was added and the reaction was cooled to 90 °C. Then, 1 mL of sodium citrate solution (60 mM) and 1 mL of HAuCl4 solution (25 mM) were sequentially added to the reaction mixture. By repeating this process, the desired sizes could be obtained.
(4) Ag nanocubes: 50 mL of EG was placed in a 250 mL round-bottom flask and the temperature was kept at 150 °C under magnetic stirring. Then, 0.6 mL of NaHS (3 mM in EG) was added. After 2 min, 5 mL of HCl (3 mM in EG) was added to the reaction mixture, followed by the addition of 12.5 mL of PVP (20 mg mL−1 in EG, MW ≈ 55000). After another 2 min, 4 mL of CH3COOAg (282 mM in EG) was added to the reaction mixture. The reaction progress was monitored by UV-vis absorption spectroscopy to control the size.
(5) Au nanorods: Au nanorods were prepared according to the seed-mediated growth method reported by EI-Sayed et al., which could be divided into two steps. The first step is the seed-mediated growth. The seed solution was synthesized via the reduction of HAuCl4 (2.5 mL, 1 mM) with NaBH4 (0.6 mL, 0.01 M) after ultrasonication in the presence of CTAB (7.5 mL, 0.1 M). The preparation of the seed solution required 2 h. In the second step, 66 mL of 0.1 M cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) was mixed with 60 mL of 1 mM HAuCl4 solution in a flask and the flask was placed into an oven for 30 min to dissolve, and then 1.2 mL of a silver nitrate aqueous solution (10 mM) and 1.1 mL hydrochloric acid (2 M) were added into the flask. After gently mixing the solution, the seed solution was finally added into the mixture quickly to obtain the Au nanorods. The Au naorods were then aged for 5 h. Subsequently, the excess CTAB molecules were removed by centrifuging twice at 12000 rpm for 15 min and then redispersed in 2 mL of DI water.

Initially, the FTO on glass was removed for anode contact by etching the FTO with 30% HCl and zinc powder. The substrates were then cleaned with DI water, acetone, and methanol. TiO2 was deposited using the RFMS technique before and after spin coating of the metallic nanostructures to realize the nanostructures embedded in TiO2. The method of RFMS and details of the device fabrication are described in our previous publication.


UV-vis spectra were acquired on a Shimadzu UV-2400 spectrophotometer. TEM images of the nanostructures were obtained using 80 keV TEM (JEOL 1010, Japan). Non-masked devices were tested under a class A solar simulator (ABET Sun 2000) under AM 1.5 and 100 m cm−2 illumination conditions calibrated with a reference silicon cell (RERA Solutions RR-1002) using a Keithley 2400 as the source-meter under ambient conditions for the (current density–voltage) J–V curve measurements with 60 points from +1.5 V to −1.5 V. IPCE was recorded using SolarCellScan100 apparatus. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was performed on a model CHI630E electrochemical analyzer (ChenHua Instruments Co. Ltd., Shanghai, China) in the frequency range of 0.1–105 Hz, and the applied bias voltage was set at 0.8 V. The local roughness of the thin films was characterized using atomic force microscopy (AFM; 5500, Agilent, Santa Clara, CA) operated in contact mode.


In metallic nanostructures based PSCs, it is essential to avoid direct contact between metallic nanostructures and the perovskite because it leads to charge recombination and exciton quenching loss at the surface of the metallic nanostructures. Herein, we use RFMS to deposit a compact TiO2 layer before and after spin coating of the metallic nanostructures, leading to the nanostructures being embedded into the compact layer (Fig. 1a). This structure enables the metallic nanostructures to be totally embedded into TiO2 and avoids direct contact with the perovskite material. A device schematic for the FTO/TiO2 (embedded metallic nanostructures)/perovskite/HTM/Au material is shown in Fig. 1b. The direction of light scattering from the metallic nanostructures is in all directions. However, light will be scattered into the dielectric with lager permittivity priority when the metallic nanostructures are placed close to the interface of the two dielectrics. The metallic nanostructures can adjust the direction of incident light by scattering to increase the optical path length. Moreover, light scattering at an angle beyond the critical angle will remain trapped in the cell. In addition, the light reflected from the back contact will couple with the nanostructures again by the same scattering mechanism. As a result, the incident light will be scattered several times into the perovskite film to increase the effective optical path length.

The scatter cross-section at the LSPR wavelength can be influenced by morphology, size and concentration of the nanostructures. Therefore, it is essential to choose appropriate nanostructures in the application of PSCs to optimize the device performance. We successfully synthetized Au nanorods, Au nanospheres, Ag nanocubes, Ag nanospheres and Au–Ag nanoalloy. The diameter and length of the Au nanorods were about 18 nm and 55 nm, respectively. The sizes of the Au nanospheres, Ag nanocubes, Ag nanospheres and Au–Ag nanoalloy were about 40 nm in diameter (Fig. 2a–e). The alloyed structure was confirmed by the energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) mapping images shown in Fig. S1. It can be observed from Fig. S1 that the nanoalloys have a nanoshell structure. Fig. 2f shows the absorption spectra of the different metallic nanostructures.
The absorption peaks observed at ∼410 nm, ∼450 nm and ∼520 nm originate from the Ag nanospheres, Ag nanocubes and Au nanospheres, respectively. Two resonance absorption peaks were observed for the metallic rod nanostructures, which originate from the plasmon oscillations along the nanorod short axis and long axis, respectively. In other words, it was affected by the length-to-width ratio. The two absorption peaks from the Au nanorods were attributed to transverse plasmon and longitudinal plasmon absorption, respectively. The Au nanorods exhibit a transverse LSPR peak around 516 nm and a longitudinal localized LSPR resonant peak at about 663 nm. All of these features are consistent with the literature results, indicating the good quality of the synthesized nanostructures. The Au–Ag nanoalloy shows a much broader plasmonic peak, centered at ∼663 nm. The absorption range is related to the light wavelength range that can be scattered back and forth in the devices. In other words, more light will be scattered when the Au–Ag nanoalloy is used for light scattering in the PSC devices.
To investigate the effects of the different metallic nanostructures on the device performance, PSCs with and without metallic nanostructures are fabricated for a comparison study (Fig. 3a). The open circuit voltage (Voc) values look identical for all the J–V curves except the device using Au nanorods. A similar phenomenon was also observed for the short circuit current (Jsc) values in the devices based on the Ag nanospheres, Au nanospheres and Ag nanocubes. The performance of the devices based on the Au nanorods decreases when compared to those of the devices based on the other metallic nanostructures, which can be explained by the overlong Au nanorods (55 nm) in the TiO2 film with a thickness of 70 nm. The devices using Au–Ag nanoalloy presents the best device performance (Fig. 3a). The effect of the metallic nanostructures on the charge transfer process was investigated using an EIS study, and the typical Nyquist plots of the devices comprising the metallic nanostructures are shown in Fig. 3b. The equivalent circuit shown in the inset was utilized to fit the spectra. The recombination resistance (Rrec) and series resistance (Ris) were obtained by fitting and are listed in Fig. 3c together with all the photovoltaic parameters, including the Jsc, fill factor (FF), Voc and PCE. It can be observed that the Rrec for the device with Au nanorods was about 812.6 Ω, the largest Rrec in all of the devices, which was attributed to the increased interface roughness due to the overlong length of the Au nanorods in the TiO2 film (Fig. S2). The Rrec values obtained for the devices based on the Ag nanospheres, Au nanospheres, Ag nanocubes and Au–Ag nanoalloy are similar to each other, about 470 Ω, which is lower than that of bare PSC device (∼600 Ω). The PSCs based on the Au–Ag nanoalloy shows the best device performance, which can be explained by enhanced light scattering due to broad absorption of the nanoalloy, leading to effective light scattering of all the light from 400 nm to 800 nm (Fig. 2f).
From Fig. 3c, it can be seen that both the Jsc and FF values contribute to the variation of the PCE. As mentioned previously, the FF value has a close relationship with the resistance of the devices. Therefore, the minor changes in FF are mainly due to the similar resistance of the devices caused by the metallic nanostructures. The increased Jsc can be attributed to enhanced light absorption due to light scattering caused by the metallic nanostructures. The absorption spectra of the perovskite layer based on the different TiO2/nanostructure/TiO2 substrates are shown in Fig. S3. The trend in the absorption of the perovskite layer based on the different substrates is consistant with the increased Jsc values shown in Fig. 3 with an exception for the nanorods. The absorption based on TiO2/Au nanorod/TiO2 have the second best absorption in Fig. S3, but the device performance was not good. This can be explained by the large contact surface resistance caused by increased interface roughness due to the overlong Au nanorods. Detailed information can be found in the discussion of Fig. 3b and S2.
To study the influence of the size-dependent metallic nanostructures on the PSC device performance, we fabricated devices based on the Au–Ag nanoalloy with different sizes and concentrations. The TEM images of the Au–Ag nanoalloy with different sizes are shown in Fig. S4. The Jsc values increase with an increase in the nanostructure size and approach a maximum of 21.52 mA cm−2 when the size is 40 nm, and then decrease with further increases in the nanostructure size (Fig. 4a). The Voc and FF values do not change significantly as a function of size. (Fig. S5) Therefore, the optimum size of the nanoalloy is determined to be 40 nm, which leads to the PCE increasing from 12.6% to 14.5% (Fig. 4a), a relative increment of 15%.
It is reported that the extinction of large sized nanoparticles is dominated by scattering and the absorption of small nanoparticles is stronger than scattering. The absorption term is proportional to r3, while the scattering term is proportional to r6, where r is the radius of the nanoparticles. According to the literature results, the reabsorption effect can be neglected when compared to the scattering effect for this type of metallic nanostructure.Fig. 4c and d show the ratio of reflection and absorption, which demonstrates that the major effect is light scattering. The optimal thickness of the TiO2 compact layer was about 70 nm (Fig. S6). The larger size of the nanostructures will induce a rough surface (Fig. S2) and increase the device resistance (Fig. 4b). This can be confirmed by the lower PCE and larger Rrec value (594.8 Ω) when the 50 nm nanoalloy is used in the PSCs. When the size of the nanoalloy is smaller than 40 nm, the Rrec value is determined to be ∼450 Ω, indicating that the resistance is similar to each other.
To investigate the nanoalloy concentration effect on the device performance, 10 wt%, 20 wt% and 40 wt% of the nanoalloy in the TiO2 were utilized to be incorporated in the PSC devices. An average PCE of 13.96%, 14.7% and 13.7% was obtained for the devices with 10 wt% 20 wt% and 40 wt% Au–Ag nanoalloy, respectively (Fig. 4e). The absorbance of the film (TiO2/nanoalloy/TiO2/perovskite) was higher than that of the films without the nanoalloy from 400 nm to 750 nm (Fig. 4f). It can be observed that the Jsc value of the device with 40 wt% nanoalloy was lower than that of the 20 wt% device (Fig. 4e), although the absorbance of the 40 wt% concentration was higher than that of the 20 wt% device. Previously, it has been proven that the forward scattering portion of the LSPR was predominant and mainly trapped in the photovoltaic active layer because of its higher refractive index when compared to the TiO2 layer.
According to the abovementioned results, the optimized device performance can be obtained using 20 wt%, 40 nm nanoalloy. The thickness of the TiO2 compact layer with the nanoalloy is about 80 nm (Fig. S6). Therefore, the thickness of the metallic nanostructures is about 10 nm for the nanoalloy-based devices since the thickness of TiO2 is 70 nm. 40 devices with and without the Au–Ag nanoalloy were fabricated and studied. The average PCE increases from 12.6% to 14.8% (Fig. 5a). Fig. 5b shows the IPCE spectra of the optimized devices using the Au–Ag nanoalloy compared with the bare device. The entire IPCE spectra from 400 nm to 800 nm increased for the Au–Ag nanoalloy-based device when compared to the bare device and the absorption peak from the Au–Ag nanoalloy was absent indicating the light scattering caused by the nanoalloy was responsible for the improved device performance. We studied the hysteresis effect of the PSCs used in this work as shown in Fig. S7. It can be observed that the incorporation of the metallic nanostructures does not affect the hysteresis effect. To investigate the stabilized power output at the maximum power output of the devices with and without the Au–Ag alloy, the Jsc values of the devices are tested as a function of time when their maximum power output values were applied (0.73 V for the Au–Ag alloy based device and 0.67 V for the bare device), as shown in Fig. S8. The Jsc and PCE values were 19.5 mA cm−2 and 14.23%, respectively for the nanoalloy-based device and 17.8 mA cm−2 and 11.92% for the bare device. Therefore, the results indicate the maximum power output values are close to that observed for the forward scan mode.

In summary, metallic nanostructures including Ag, Au and Au–Ag nanoalloy with different sizes and morphology were synthesized and incorporated in PSC devices to study the effect of the metallic nanostructures on the PSC device performance. The Au–Ag nanoalloy-based PSCs show the most improved performance when compared to the other devices, which can be attributed to the enhanced light scattering caused by the broad light extinction of the nanoalloy. The optimized device shows a PCE of 14.8%, which is an enhancement of about 17.5% when compared to the bare device. The developed strategy paves the way to fabricate high efficiency PSCs.


This study was supported by the Major State Basic Research Development Program of China (973 Program) (No. 2014CB643506), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 61674067, 11504131, 11374127 and 81201738), the Graduate Innovation Fund of Jilin University (No. 2016193) and the Jilin Province Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 20150520090JH).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta10715j
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017