 DOI: 10.1039/D1TA06514A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 23019-23027


Jianguo
Sun
,

Xuliang
Zhang
,

Xufeng
Ling
,

Yingguo
Yang
,

Yao
Wang
,

Junjun
Guo
,

Shengzhong (Frank)
Liu
,

Jianyu
Yuan
* and 

Wanli
Ma
*

Institute of Functional Nano & Soft Materials (FUNSOM), Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Carbon-Based Functional Materials & Devices, Soochow University, 199 Ren-Ai Road, Suzhou Industrial Park, Suzhou, Jiangsu 215123, P. R. China. E-mail: jyyuan@suda.edu.cn; wlma@suda.edu.cn

Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility, Shanghai Institute of Applied Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 201204, P. R. China

Shaanxi Normal University, Key Laboratory of Applied Surface and Colloid Chemistry, MOE, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Xi'an, CN 710062, P. R. China

Received
2nd August 2021
, Accepted 22nd September 2021
First published on 22nd September 2021
Organic–inorganic hybrid lead halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) attracted tremendous interest due to their excellent photovoltaic performance, but they still suffer from the poor long-term stability. Here, a penetrated 2D/3D heterojunction strategy is developed to stabilize the crystal structure at both the surface as well as grain boundaries and suppress non-radiative recombination. The organic halide with a large cation, namely dimethylammonium iodide (DMAI), was reported to achieve such a penetrated 2D/3D heterojunction through a simple post-treatment approach. Under this circumstance, the efficiency of Cs0.05FA0.85MA0.10Pb(I0.90Br0.10)3 PSCs was improved from 19.83% to ∼22% due to the significantly increased open-circuit voltage (Voc). In addition, we demonstrated the versatility of such a strategy in Cs0.05FA0.85MA0.10Pb(I0.97Br0.03)3 PSCs, leading to a champion efficiency approaching 23%. More importantly, the penetrated 2D/3D heterojunction can effectively protect the underlying 3D perovskite from moisture invasion. After ageing in air for 1000 hours, the device based on the 2D/3D heterojunction retained 80% of its initial efficiency, while the control device only maintained 57%.

Organic–inorganic hybrid lead halide perovskites (LHPs) with a general chemical composition of APbX3 (A = organic or inorganic cation, X = Cl−, Br−, I− or mixed) are of great potential for photovoltaic (PV) application due to their high light absorption coefficient, low exciton binding energy, long charge-carrier diffusion length, etc. During the past decade, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) has been rapidly increased to 25.5% (ref. 5) due to the numerous efforts in the development of high-quality film preparation, passivation methodology and device architecture engineering, situating them at the forefront of next-generation solar cells. However, these ionic LHP materials are extremely sensitive to light, heat, and moisture, resulting in an unstable crystal structure. Moreover, unfavourable defects formed at either the surface or grain boundaries (GBs) of the polycrystalline perovskite film significantly restrict carrier transport and crystal stability, which further deteriorates the device performance. Therefore, defect passivation such as perovskite surface passivation, perovskite precursor passivation and transporting layer passivation is urgent and critical to both efficiency and stability of PSCs.

Excess lead iodide (PbI2) has been commonly used in the perovskite precursor for the state-of-the-art PSCs to improve the crystallinity of the perovskite film and passivate trap states. However, this unreacted PbI2 has been proven to have a detrimental effect on the long-term stability of devices. To address this critical issue, the surface dimensionality modulation constituted of the two-dimensional (2D) perovskite and three-dimensional (3D) perovskite has been reported as a promising strategy for achieving the highly enhanced stability of 2D perovskites as well as maintaining the strong photon harvesting ability of 3D perovskites. For example, isobutylammonium (IBA) was employed as an efficient organic spacer to form 2D perovskites on FAPbI3, resulting in a PCE over 22% with a greatly improved photovoltage. Moreover, an ultra-high open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.31 V in PSCs was realized by spin-coating n-butyl ammonium bromide on the surface of a wide-bandgap perovskite, exceeding 90% of its theoretical value due to the passivation function of 2D perovskites. Although the 2D/3D strategy has been proven to effectively reduce the trap states and improve the PV performance, there are two main remaining challenges. One is that the current selection of organic spacers is largely limited to primary ammonium and relevant derivatives. The other is the poor understanding of their inherent working mechanism for passivating and stabilizing the perovskite polycrystalline film. Along this line, constructing the 2D/3D heterojunction using novel functional organic spacers together with an explicit profile of their distribution could provide a new platform for designing more efficient and stable PSCs.
Quite recently, an organic ammonium salt, dimethylammonium iodide (DMAI) has been reported to catalyze the crystallization of the CsPbI3 polycrystalline film. In addition, it has been introduced into the A-site of the perovskite crystal structure to form a chemical composition of DMAxA1−xPbX3. Inspired by these reports, hereby, we developed a penetrated 2D/3D hybrid heterojunction structure via post-treating the as-prepared 3D perovskite film with DMAI. Through the advanced characterization techniques including time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (ToF-SIMS), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), grazing incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS), and conducting atomic force microscopy (C-AFM), we first revealed that the post-treatment process involves the heating-induced migration and permeation of DMA+ along the GBs of the 3D perovskite film, concomitantly generating 2D perovskites at both the surface and GBs, eventually forming a penetrated 2D/3D hybrid heterojunction structure. As a result, the penetrated 2D/3D perovskites exhibit fewer defects, improved carrier extraction and boosted PCE from 19.83% to 21.90% together with improved ambient stability. More importantly, a higher PCE of 22.61% has been further obtained in Cs0.05FA0.85MA0.10Pb(I0.97Br0.03)3 PSCs, indicating excellent universality of this penetrated 2D/3D hybrid heterojunction strategy.

As illustrated in Fig. 1a, the 3D perovskite film with a composition of Cs0.05FA0.85MA0.10Pb(I0.90Br0.10)3 was prepared through a previously reported method. Subsequently, the DMAI solution in isopropanol (IPA) was spin-coated onto the as-prepared 3D perovskite film surface, followed by annealing at 100 °C for 5 min. ToF-SIMS was introduced to probe the film composition as a function of depth as well as the distribution of DMA+ in the 3D perovskite film. As shown in Fig. 1b, we chose to monitor PbI+, In+ and DMA+, which not only have excellent sensitivity to ToF-SIMS in high resolution mode but can also determine the interface of each layer. We can find that PbI+ is evenly distributed in the entire film, which indicates a uniform vertical distribution of the 3D perovskite film. Meanwhile, the results indicate the high accumulation (∼10 nm) of DMA+ on the top of 3D perovskites and it gradually penetrated into the bulk film. From the 3D ToF-SIMS mapping, it is clear that DMA+ can be observed in the entire 3D perovskite film and the penetration could be possibly through the GBs. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was then conducted to detect the change of chemical bonding before and after treating with DMAI. The intensity of the C–N binding energy is increased for the DMAI-treated film, again confirming the existence of DMA+ (Fig. S1, ESI). In addition, the peak of CN stemming from FA+ is shifted toward high binding energy in the N 1s spectrum (Fig. S2). The characteristic peaks of both Pb 4f (Fig. 1c) and I 3d (Fig. 1d) display a significant shift over 0.5 eV to the low energy region relative to the control film. However, the peak position of the core level spectra of Cs 3d and Br 3d shows a negligible shift (Fig. S3). All these results suggest that the chemical environment has greatly changed on the control perovskite surface.

In order to gain insight into the change of the film morphology and crystal structures, top-view scanning electron microscopy (SEM), atomic force microscopy (AFM) and grazing incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) were further employed to characterize the perovskite films before and after DMAI post-treatment. As shown in Fig. 2a, a compact and pinhole-free morphology along with a bright PbI2 component is observed in the control film. For the DMAI-treated film, we find that excess PbI2 gradually disappeared as the concentration of DMAI increased, suggesting the chemical reaction between ammonium salts and excess PbI2. These observations were also confirmed by the AFM characterization studies, as shown in Fig. 2b. The control 3D perovskite film exhibits a rougher surface with a root-mean-square (RMS) roughness of 27.0 nm, and it gradually decreases to 18.1 nm after DMAI post-treatment, which could be attributed to the elimination of excess PbI2. To further investigate the crystal structure of the capping layer, 2D-GIWAXS measurements were performed. As shown in Fig. 2c, the pristine 3D perovskite film exhibits diffraction patterns at q = 1.0 Å, 1.4 Å, 1.7 Å, 2.0 Å, and 2.3 Å, corresponding to the (110), (112), (202), (220), and (310) crystal planes of a typical perovskite structure, respectively. In addition, a strong diffraction peak at q = 0.9 Å is attributed to PbI2. When the perovskite film was further treated with DMAI, we observe the disappearance of the PbI2 peak and the appearance of new diffraction peaks at small q areas (Fig. S4), which is attributed to the formation of low dimensional perovskite structures. As shown in Fig. S5, blue-shifted absorption is observed in the DMAI treated film, and a new absorption peak appears at ∼525 nm when the perovskite film was treated with a higher concentration of DMAI. In order to probe this new peak, we explore the absorption properties of 2D DMA2FAn−1PbnI3n+1 perovskite films with different n values, with the corresponding absorption spectra shown in Fig. S6. Based on these absorption spectra and aforementioned results, we can conclude the successful formation of 2D perovskites through the post-treatment method.
To explore the effects of the penetrated 2D/3D structure on the charge dynamics of perovskites, we further performed steady-state photoluminescence (PL) and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) measurements on the perovskite films deposited on the quartz substrates, as shown in Fig. 3a and b, respectively. The 2D/3D perovskite film exhibits significantly enhanced PL intensity compared to the control 3D perovskite film, attributed to the reduced non-radiative recombination. Meanwhile, we also calculated the decay lifetime (Table S1) of charge carriers from the TRPL measurements. The 2D/3D perovskite film exhibits a longer PL lifetime (347.4 ns) than the control one (232.1 ns), suggesting a higher quality film with suppressed trap-assisted non-radiative recombination. In comparison with the conventional PL spectroscopy, 2D PL mapping imaging allows us to assess the uniformity of the perovskite film (Fig. 3c and d). Increased intensity and more uniform intensity distribution were found in the 2D/3D perovskite sample relative to the neat 3D perovskite film, which may result from the elimination of defects at both the surface and GBs. All these results confirmed that 2D perovskites formed by DMAI modification can effectively passivate the 3D perovskites, leading to better polycrystalline perovskite films with fewer trap states. Space charge limited current (SCLC) measurements were then performed to intuitively investigate the change of trap states for the perovskite film before and after DMAI treatment. The electron and hole trap densities in the control perovskite film are calculated to be 5.53 × 1015 cm−3 and 9.61 × 1015 cm−3, respectively. After depositing the 2D perovskite, the electron and hole trap densities are decreased to be 3.58 × 1015 cm−3 and 6.83 × 1015 cm−3, respectively (Fig. S7). The reduced trap density could decrease non-radiative recombination and facilitate the transport and extraction of charges at the interface. To probe the local electrical properties of the film at the microscopic scale, C-AFM measurement was further introduced. Fig. 3e shows the line profiles derived from the current mapping (Fig. S8) and a relatively low current signal was observed for the control film, suggesting a lower conductivity in the control film. In contrast, the total current signal is greatly increased in the 2D/3D perovskite film, implying improved conductivity correlating with the reduced trap density and increased carrier lifetime. Notably, the current measured at the GB regions of the 2D/3D perovskite film was higher than that of the control film, suggesting efficient charge transfer between the 2D perovskite and 3D perovskite at GBs. These results indicate the formation of a type-II 2D/3D heterojunction structure. To confirm this, ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) (Fig. S9) was employed to determine the energy levels of perovskites. As shown in Fig. 3f, the pristine 3D perovskite shows a valence band maximum (VBM) of −5.56 eV, and the conduction band minimum (CBM) can be calculated to be −3.98 eV through the optical bandgap obtained from the Tauc plots (Fig. S10). The VBM of the DMAI-treated perovskite film was upshifted to −5.39 eV. Thus, the 2D/3D heterojunction forms a type-II energy level alignment, which is desired for efficient charge transfer and reduced carrier recombination loss at the interface.
Based on these above results, we depicted a schematic diagram to illustrate the penetrated 2D/3D formation in the 3D perovskite film. As shown in Fig. 4, the as-cast 3D perovskite film exhibits excess PbI2 and plenty of defects, mostly locating on the film surface and GBs. These PbI2 and defects would cause severe non-radiative recombination in the film and are detrimental to the performance and long-term stability of PSCs. After depositing DMAI on top of the 3D perovskite film, DMA+ predominantly distributes near the film surface, as well as penetrates into the bulk film mostly through GBs after thermal annealing, simultaneously passivating both the surface and interior defects. Moreover, DMA+ would react with the 3D perovskite and convert it into the 2D perovskite, forming a penetrated 2D/3D hybrid heterojunction at both the surface and GBs to enhance charge transfer and suppress trap-assisted non-radiative recombination.
Finally, to understand the effect of the penetrated 2D/3D heterojunction on PV performance, we fabricated PSCs with a planar structure of glass/FTO/TiO2/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/MoO3/Ag, as shown in Fig. 5a. Each layer of the device can be clearly identified from the cross-sectional SEM image. The optimization of DMAI post treatment is shown in Tables S2–S4.Fig. 5b shows the current density versus voltage (J–V) curves of the optimal 3D and 2D/3D PSCs. The control 3D device shows a PCE of 19.83% with a short-circuit current (Jsc) of 23.82 mA cm−2, a Voc of 1.09, and a fill factor (FF) of 0.76, while the 2D/3D perovskite device delivers a significantly improved PCE up to 21.90% with an increased Jsc of 24.20 mA cm−2, a Voc of 1.16, and an FF of 0.78. In addition, the J–V hysteresis which equals (Preverse − Pforward)/Preverse was also mitigated in 2D/3D devices, implying that ion migration and interface defects have been effectively suppressed (Table S5). As shown in Fig. S11, 16 devices for each condition were fabricated to confirm the reliability of device performance. The integrated Jsc derived from the external quantum efficiencies (EQEs) obtained values of 23.2 and 23.5 mA cm−2 for the control 3D and 2D/3D perovskite devices, respectively, confirming the values derived from the J–V curves (Fig. S12). To confirm the PCE measured from the J–V curves, the stabilized power output (SPO) characterization was further performed to track the operational stability. Fig. 5c shows that the 2D/3D perovskite device presents a PCE of 21.56% at a bias of 0.95 V over 500 s of tracking, while the control device demonstrates a PCE of 19.61% biased at 0.91 V (Fig. S13), which are both comparable to the results from the J–V curves. It is noteworthy that the improved PCE was mainly due to the significantly enhanced Voc, resulting in a Voc deficit of 0.405 eV for the champion device, as shown in Fig. S14. The penetrated 2D/3D hybrid heterojunction can facilitate the hole transfer and reduce charge recombination at the interface accounting for the improvement of Voc. To show the universality of the DMAI post-treatment method, we further performed it in Cs0.05FA0.85MA0.10Pb(I0.97Br0.03)3 PSCs, as shown in the champion J–V curve in Fig. 5d. It delivers a PCE of 22.61% with a Jsc of 25.43 mA cm−2, a Voc of 1.14, an FF of 0.78, and the inset shows an integrated Jsc of 24.23 mA cm−2. To gain insights into the recombination mechanism of charge carriers in the PSCs, the light intensity-dependent Voc and Jsc were obtained. The 3D and 2D/3D PSCs exhibited α values of 1.02 and 0.99 (Fig. S15), respectively, suggesting negligible bimolecular recombination in both devices. In contrast, for the Voc measurement results shown in Fig. 5e, the slope of the 2D/3D perovskite device (1.52kT/q) is much lower than that of the 3D perovskite devices (1.96kT/q), indicating reduced trap-assisted charge recombination. Transient photovoltage (TPV) measurement is correlated to the carrier recombination rates under the open-circuit conditions in the complete device. The photovoltage decay lifetime obtained from the TPV curves was prolonged from 1.67 to 1.91ms for the devices based on 2D/3D perovskites, suggesting that the carrier recombination occurring at the interface has been substantially suppressed (Fig. S16). Charge recombination dynamic is also examined by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) performed under open-circuit voltage in a dark environment. The Nyquist plots of PSCs are shown in Fig. 5f and the inset picture shows the adopted equivalent circuit model. Rs and Rrec represent the series resistance and recombination resistance, respectively. The parameters of the equivalent circuit are listed in Table S6, where the 2D/3D perovskite device exhibits a reduced Rs of 22.31 Ω and increased Rrec of 352.70 Ω compared to that of the 3D perovskite device. All these results demonstrate improved charge transport and less charge recombination in the 2D/3D perovskite device, which is beneficial for improving Voc and FF.
As the 2D/3D perovskite is deemed to be more stable than the pristine 3D perovskite, we finally investigated the ambient stability of the PSCs. Both devices were stored and tested under ambient conditions (relative humidity: ∼30%, room temperature) without encapsulation. We conducted these aging tests over the course of 1000 hours at regular intervals and the results are shown in Fig. 5g. The devices based on 2D/3D perovskites maintain 80% of their initial PCE after aging for 1000 hours, significantly enhanced relative to the control 3D PSCs (57% of its initial efficiency). The improved ambient stability could be ascribed to the coverage of the hydrophobic 2D perovskite on the 3D perovskite film. As confirmed by the images in Fig. S17, the 2D/3D hybrid structures can efficiently prevent moisture from infiltrating into the underlying 3D perovskite, resulting in a relatively stable phase due to slower degradation of the perovskites.

In summary, we reported for the first time a penetrated 2D/3D hybrid heterojunction strategy to fabricate high-performance PSCs. The secondary ammonium cation, namely DMA+, was adopted to achieve such a penetrated 2D/3D heterojunction through a simple post-treatment approach. The as-formed low dimensional perovskite capping layer is beneficial for reducing the trap states of the 3D perovskite, thus increasing the carrier lifetime. More importantly, we experimentally proved that DMA+ penetrated into the 3D bulk perovskite through combined ToF-SIMS, XPS and C-AFM characterization studies, enabling the passivation of the interior defects. Subsequently, the efficiency of PSCs was improved from 19.83% to 21.90% due to the significantly increased Voc, and the ambient stability was also improved due to the protection of the underlying 3D perovskite from moisture invasion. Finally, we demonstrate the versatility of such a strategy in Cs0.05FA0.85MA0.10Pb(I0.97Br0.03)3 PSCs, obtaining a champion efficiency of 22.61%.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China (No. 2019YFE0108600 and 2016YFA0202402), National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 52073198, 51803144 and 61911530158), Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (No. BK20211598), Science and Technology Program of Jiangsu Province (No. BZ2020011), Science and Technology Program of Suzhou (No. SYG202037), and “111” project, Collaborative Innovation Center of Suzhou Nano Science and Technology, Soochow University.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ta06514a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021