 DOI: 10.1039/D1EE01519B
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 5074-5083


Ruihan
Yuan
,

Bing
Cai
,

Yinhua
Lv
*,

Xiang
Gao
,

Jinwen
Gu
,

Zhenghui
Fan
,

Xinhang
Liu
,

Chi
Yang
,

Mingzhen
Liu
* and 

Wen-Hua
Zhang
*

Sichuan Research Center of New Materials, Institute of Chemical Materials, China Academy of Engineering Physics, 596 Yinhe Road, Shuangliu, Chengdu 610200, China. E-mail: qiehahah@163.com; whzhang@caep.cn

Center for High Pressure Science & Technology Advanced Research, 10 Xibeiwang East Road, Haidian District, Beijing 100094, P. R. China

School of Materials and Energy, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 611731, P. R. China. E-mail: mingzhen.liu@uestc.edu.cn

Institute for Advanced Study, Chengdu University, 2025 Chengluo Avenue, Chengdu, 610106, China

Received
19th May 2021
, Accepted 16th July 2021
First published on 17th July 2021
Planar perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have attracted extensive research attention owing to their simple architecture and manufacturing process. Improving the charge extraction ability of electron transport materials (ETMs) is imperative to enhance their power conversion efficiencies (PCEs). Herein, we report low-temperature solution-processed SnO2 nanocrystals (SnO2 NCs) enveloped by amorphous NbOx (SnO2/NbOx) as efficient ETMs for planar PSCs, achieving an impressive PCE of 24.01% with negligible hysteresis, which is significantly superior to that of PSCs made from commercial SnO2 (with PCEs up to 21.96%) and self-developed SnO2 NCs (with PCEs up to 23.01%). The NbOx layer can simultaneously passivate defects at the ETMs/perovskite interface, promote charge extraction from perovskites, and improve the crystallinity of perovskite films. The unencapsulated PSC retains over 85% of its initial efficiency after 1000 h of light soaking (one sun), showing remarkable device stability. Furthermore, the low-temperature processed SnO2/NbOx ETMs are compatible with flexible substrates and present a maximum PCE of 20.00%. This work offers a facile approach to low-temperature processed ETMs with boosted carrier extraction ability, affording excellent device efficiency and stability for planar PSCs.

Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have attracted tremendous attention in the field of photovoltaics due to the merits of high efficiency, low-cost processing, fantastic optoelectronic properties, and unlimited application potential. As a key building block in planar PSCs to yield decent power conversion efficiencies (PCEs), tin oxide (SnO2) holds great promise. However, the unknown synthesis details of the widely used commercial SnO2 colloids impede the fundamental optimization of ETM properties for high-efficiency PSCs. Herein, we explored a facile solution approach to fabricate excellent ETMs at low temperatures (≤150 °C). Our strategy can be easily processed to envelop highly crystallized SnO2 nanocrystals (NCs) with an amorphous but highly conductive NbOx external layer to form SnO2/NbOx NCs. Compared to the SnO2 ETM, the SnO2/NbOx ETM exhibited enhanced conductivity, boosted electron mobility, reduced surface defects, and improved energy levels with the perovskite layer. An impressive PCE of 24.01% with suppressed J–V hysteresis was delivered for the SnO2/NbOx based PSCs, significantly higher than that of the devices made from commercial SnO2 and pristine SnO2 NCs. This work offers a simple but effective choice to fabricate high-efficiency PSCs, which is compatible with the roll-to-roll manufacturing of flexible solar cells.


Organic–inorganic metal halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have garnered much attention from both academic and photovoltaic industrial communities owing to their impressive intrinsic properties and low fabrication cost. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) has skyrocketed from 3.8% to 25.5% over the past decade. In addition to their superior optoelectronic characteristics, such as tunable bandgap, small exciton binding energy, high absorption coefficient, and long photocarrier diffusion length, it is equally critical to optimize the perovskite film quality, device configuration, charge transport layers, and interface engineering, to obtain high-performance PSCs.

Research interest in planar PSCs is growing because of their simple architecture and low-temperature fabrication process. However, the most widely employed TiO2 electron transport materials (ETMs) in planar PSCs usually suffer from low electron mobility and strong photocatalytic activity, which are detrimental to achieving highly efficient and stable planar PSCs. In contrast, SnO2 ETMs exhibit higher electron mobility and considerably lower photocatalytic activity than TiO2 ETMs. Therefore, they are regarded as excellent ETMs for high-performance planar PSCs. Fang et al. first introduced SnO2 as ETMs for planar PSCs at low temperatures and obtained a decent PCE. Since then, a variety of preparation methods, such as sol–gel synthesis, atomic layer deposition, chemical bath deposition, and spin-coating, have been developed to fabricate compact SnO2 ETMs for planar PSCs. However, SnO2 films prepared by these methods are generally amorphous or have low crystallinity, resulting in a relatively inferior electron mobility and conductivity. SnO2 nanoparticles with high crystallinity can effectively overcome this dilemma. Additionally, some physical methods, e.g., pulsed laser irradiation in liquid, were reported to be useful for preparing high-quality metal oxide nanoparticles for use in PSCs with decent cell performance. Among them, the commercially available SnO2 colloids have been probably the most extensively employed SnO2 ETMs in planar PSCs to date. You et al. reported high-efficiency planar-structured HC(NH2)2PbI3-based PSCs using such commercial SnO2, and achieved a record efficiency of 23.32% by further surface modification of the perovskite film. Notably, the performance of planar PSCs solely composed of commercial SnO2 ETMs is unsatisfactory, and the hysteresis is severe in many devices, which is related to the poor charge extraction of SnO2 ETMs due to poor conductivity, large density of surface traps, and an unmatched energy level with the perovskite film. To address this, much efforts have been dedicated to modifying the important optoelectrical properties of commercial SnO2 ETMs. Additive engineering is a widely adopted strategy for regulating their charge transport properties. For example, both organic compounds, including ethylene diamine tetraacetic acid (EDTA), and heparin potassium, and inorganic compounds, such as ammonium chloride (NH4Cl), potassium chloride (KCl), and red-carbon quantum dots, have been introduced into commercial SnO2 aqueous dispersions to modify their electron mobility of the resultant ETMs, leading to depressed charge accumulation at the ETMs/perovskite interface. Interface modification also improves the efficiency of commercial SnO2 based PSCs. Some cost-effective inorganics, such as ammonium fluoride (NH4F), rubidium fluoride (RbF), and ammonium chloride (NH4Cl), were deposited onto commercial SnO2 films to reduce their surface defects and nonradiative recombination, resulting in significant improvements in both efficiency (from 18.71% to 21.38% and from 20.39% to 21.27%) and stability of the resultant devices. However, the unknown synthesis details of commercial SnO2 colloids impede the fundamental optimization of the ETM properties for high-efficiency PSCs.
Herein, a low-temperature, facile solution method was developed to synthesize NbOx-enveloped SnO2 nanocrystals (NCs) as superior ETMs for high-efficiency and stable planar PSCs. Highly crystallized SnO2 NCs were first prepared by the alcoholysis reaction of SnCl4·5H2O in an ethylene glycol (EG) solution; then a calculated amount of SnO2 NC–ethanol solution was added into a dilute NbCl5 aqueous solution to introduce an amorphous NbOx layer around the SnO2 NCs (that is, SnO2/NbOx NCs). The SnO2/NbOx ETMs exhibited better conductivity, higher mobility, and a lower surface defect density, as compared to the pristine SnO2 ETMs. Owing to the boosted charge extraction and improved energy level alignment with the perovskite film, a device with the SnO2/NbOx ETMs yielded a PCE of up to 24.01% with negligible hysteresis, and the low-temperature processed SnO2/NbOx ETMs were extended to flexible PSCs, showing a champion PCE of 20.00%, both of which are among the highest values for planar PSCs to date. Moreover, the planar PSCs with SnO2/NbOx ETMs exhibit excellent light soaking and thermal stability. This work provides a facile approach to fabricate excellent ETMs with enhanced carrier extraction for highly efficient PSCs and offers a simple and efficient route that is compatible with the roll-to-roll manufacturing of solar cells on flexible substrates.

As shown in Scheme 1, facile, low-temperature, and solution-processed highly crystallized SnO2 NCs were first developed by the alcoholysis of SnCl4·5H2O in an EG solution with glacial acetic acid (HAc) and ammonium hydroxide as the pH regulator and reaction accelerator, respectively. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern of SnO2 NC powders obtained after annealing at 100 °C (Fig. 1a) shows a series of diffraction peaks with an apparently broadened width, which can be assigned to those of tetragonal rutile SnO2. These results indicate that SnO2 NCs are very small in size. The transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image in Fig. S1 (ESI) demonstrates the uniform SnO2 NC morphology with an average diameter of ∼3 nm. The high crystallinity of the SnO2 NCs is confirmed using the high-resolution TEM image (HRTEM, Fig. 1b). The outer d spacing is measured to be 0.336 nm, corresponding to the interplanar spacing of the (110) plane of rutile SnO2. Notably, the highly dispersed and transparent SnO2 NC solution is stable up to one year in a refrigerator (Fig. S2 and S3, ESI).

The XRD pattern of NbCl5 processed SnO2 NCs (Fig. 1c and Fig. S4, ESI) displays diffraction peaks solely belonging to rutile SnO2, with no Nb2O5 peaks being observed. Moreover, no shift in XRD pattern is detectable after the enveloping reaction. These results indicate that doping of Nb into both SnO2 NCs and the individual Nb2O5 crystallites did not occur in the NbCl5 solution treatment process. The TEM image in Fig. S5 (ESI) shows that SnO2 NCs seem to be coated with cloud-like amorphous matter after the modification process, implying the formation of “Enveloped” SnO2 NCs. To make it clear, the HRTEM for “Enveloped” SnO2 NCs was meticulously conducted. Fig. 1d shows that the morphology of inner SnO2 NCs is not affected by the enveloping process, while an amorphous layer can be distinctly observed around the SnO2 NC surface, which is in contrast with the smooth and distinct particle edge for the pristine SnO2 NCs (Fig. 1b). Scanning transmission electronic microscopy (STEM) and energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) mapping in high-angle annular dark field (HAADF) mode were then performed to precisely identify the location of amorphous layers in “Enveloped” SnO2 NCs, as shown in Fig. 1e and f. The EDX spectrum in Fig. S6 (ESI) reveals the presence of Sn, Nb, O, and Cl elements in the “Enveloped” SnO2 NCs. The elemental maps in Fig. 1f clearly disclose the homogeneous distribution of elements Sn, O, and Nb across the entire range, and the distribution of Nb element is well consistent with that of Sn element, which in turn demonstrates that SnO2 NCs obtained in the first alcoholysis process should be covered by a layer of NbOx. In addition, Cl element is sparsely dispersed across the whole range for this sample, suggestive of very low content of Cl elements in the “Enveloped” SnO2 NCs. The presence of –Cl groups in the ETMs is highly favourable for the interface passivation of PSCs to achieve excellent optoelectrical properties. In short, we can reach a conclusion that the SnO2 NCs were enveloped by an amorphous NbOx layer with Cl termination when treated in NbCl5 solution in this study (designated as SnO2/NbOx hereafter).
To deeply explore the surface chemical states, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis was performed. As shown in Fig. S7 (ESI), two new signals emerge at the binding energy range from 200 to 215 eV for the SnO2/NbOx NCs. The high-resolution XPS spectra in Fig. 2a display the peaks with binding energies of 210.2 and 207.5 eV, which are respectively assigned to Nb 3d3/2 and Nb 3d5/2, further disclosing the presence of Nb elements in the SnO2/NbOx NCs. The characteristic peaks of Sn 3d5/2 and Sn 3d3/2 give a spin orbit coupling of 8.4 eV for both samples (Fig. 2b), consistent with the tetravalent oxidation state of Sn in rutile SnO2. The Sn 3d orbitals in the SnO2/NbOx NCs slightly shift ∼0.1 eV toward a higher binding energy range as compared to the pristine SnO2 NCs, suggesting a strong chemical interaction between the SnO2 and NbOx layer. The O 1s XPS spectra for both samples clearly show two peaks, as depicted in Fig. 2c and d. The signal at 530.3 eV originates from coordinated oxygen (Sn–O–Sn) in SnO2, and the signal at 532.2 eV can be ascribed to the hydroxyl group (Sn–OH) on the SnO2 surface. The intensity ratio of Sn–OH to Sn–O–Sn signals is reduced significantly after the treatment in the NbCl5 solution, demonstrating the formation of Sn–O–Nb bonds. An XPS quantitative analysis (Table S1, ESI) discloses that the atomic ratio between Nb and Sn is ∼0.87. Additionally, Fig. S8 (ESI) compares the Cl 2p XPS spectra of the commercial SnO2, the self-developed SnO2 and SnO2/NbOx NCs. Two distinct Cl 2p orbital peaks are observed for both prepared samples, indicating the presence of chloride in the SnO2 and SnO2/NbOx NCs, which is consistent with EDX results and considerably differed from the commercial SnO2. Indeed, the Cl content increases after the NbCl5 treatment. Combining with the results of XRD, EDX, and TEM, it can be inferred that the SnO2/NbOx NCs should have a structure with a highly crystallized SnO2 inner core surrounded by an amorphous NbOx external layer decorated with Cl ligands.
To obtain compact ETMs for PSCs in this study, the self-developed SnO2 and SnO2/NbOx NCs were deposited onto indium tin oxide (ITO) substrates by spin-coating the corresponding colloidal solutions. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and atomic force microscopy (AFM) were used to investigate the surface morphology and roughness of the ETM films, respectively. Fig. S9 (ESI) shows that both films exhibit highly similar morphology without pinholes observable on either the pristine SnO2 or the SnO2/NbOx NC film. The root-mean-square (RMS) roughness of the SnO2 and SnO2/NbOx NC films is 2.43 (Fig. S10a, ESI) and 1.98 nm (Fig. S10b, ESI), respectively. The smoother morphology of the SnO2/NbOx NC films favours the growth of high-quality perovskite films.
Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) measurements were then performed to identify the energy band structure of the two ETM films in the present study, and the results are displayed in Fig. S11 and S12 (ESI). The Fermi level (EFermi) values are obtained with the high binding energy cut-off edge, which are 4.22 and 4.16 eV for the SnO2 and SnO2/NbOx NCs, respectively. Combining with the optical bandgaps derived from Fig. S13 (ESI), the energy band structures of SnO2 and SnO2/NbOx NCs are acquired, as shown in Fig. 3a. The conduction band minimum value (ECBM) of the SnO2/NbOx NC film is expected to facilitate electron injection and transport due to the reduced energy barrier between the ETMs and perovskite, as compared to that of the SnO2 NC film. In the case of the deeper valence band maximum of the SnO2/NbOx NC film, holes can also be effectively blocked. Furthermore, it should be noted that the (ECBM − EFermi) decreases remarkably after the NbOx layer enveloping process, suggestive of an enhanced electron density in the SnO2/NbOx NC film.
For excellent ETMs for PSCs, efficient charge transport properties, such as high electron density and mobility, are essential for obtaining a superior PV performance. The Mott–Schottky analysis (M–S) was carried out to investigate the electron density changes. Fig. 3b shows that both curves have positive slopes, disclosing n-type semiconductor properties for both samples. The carrier density (Nd) can be deduced from eqn (1) and (2) by fitting the linear parts in M–S curves:
(1)
(2)
where
C is the interfacial capacitance, ε0 is the dielectric constant of vacuum (8.85 × 10−12 F m−1), ε is the relative dielectric constant of rutile SnO2 (9),A is the area of the interface or electrode, e is the elementary charge of an electron (1.6 × 10−19 C), V is the applied voltage (V), kB is Boltzmann's constant, T is the absolute temperature (K), and Nd is the carrier density. Vfb is deduced from the intersection of the fitting linear parts in the M–S plots. The SnO2/NbOx NC film exhibits a less negative Vfb value of −1.62 V than the SnO2 NC film (−1.64 V), suggesting that a lower energy barrier and better charge extraction occur at the ETM/perovskite interface in PSCs, in well agreement with the UPS results. Evidently, as summarized in Table S2 (ESI), the SnO2/NbOx NC film presents a higher Nd (1.40 × 1022 cm−3) than the SnO2 NC film (9.6 × 1021 cm−3), highly favouring the enhancement in the conductivity of the corresponding ETMs.

The space-charge-limited current (SCLC) method was then employed to measure the electron mobility of the SnO2 and SnO2/NbOx NC films in electron-only devices. Fig. 3c and d show that three distinct regions can be distinguished, namely, n = 1 region with an ohmic contact, n = 2 region with a Child's law, and n > 3 region with a trap-filled limit. The carrier mobility (μe) of the ETM films can be obtained from the n = 2 region by using the Mott–Gureney law (Fig. 3e). The SnO2/NbOx NC film offers a higher μe (2.27 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1) than the SnO2 NC film (1.80 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1). Furthermore, the direct conductivity (σ) was measured and calculated from current–voltage (I–V) characteristic curves in Fig. 3f, according to eqn (3):
(3)
where
A is the area (0.09 cm2) of the devices and L is the thickness (35 nm) of the films. Table S2 (ESI) lists the obtained parameters. The conductivity of the SnO2/NbOx NC film (1.23 × 10−2 mS cm−1) is higher than that of the SnO2 NC film (1.03 × 10−2 mS cm−1), which might be attributed to the excellent conductivity for the amorphous NbOx, and this matches well with the higher electron mobility and density in the SnO2/NbOx NC film in this study. Additionally, the electron trap density (Nt) near the CBM can be deduced from eqn (4):

(4)
where
VTFL is the trap-filled voltage (the intersection of the n = 1 region and n > 3 region in Fig. 3c and d), and L is the thickness of the ETM film. The VTFL values of the SnO2 and SnO2/NbOx NC-based devices are 0.68 and 0.51 V, respectively. The calculated Nt value of the SnO2/NbOx NC film (5.6 × 1017 cm−3) is lower than that of the SnO2 NC film (7.5 × 1017 cm−3), indicating that the envelopment of the SnO2 NCs with the NbOx amorphous layer can effectively passivate the surface traps of the SnO2 NCs. The improved conductivity, mobility, and the reduced surface trap density of the SnO2/NbOx NC film indicate the fastened charge transport and suppressed carrier accumulation at the interface in a device, implying the superior performance of SnO2/NbOx NC-based PSCs.

PSC devices with a configuration of ITO/ETMs/FA1−xMAxPbI3−yCly/2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis[N,N-di(4-methoxyphenyl)amino]-9,9′-spirobifluorene (Spiro-OMeTAD)/Au were then fabricated, where the perovskite films were prepared using a two-step spin-coating technique. It is well known that the perovskite film quality, including the grain size, crystallinity, and surface roughness, is critical for highly efficient PSCs. XRD was conducted to investigate the effect of the ETMs on the crystallization of the perovskite. Both perovskite films show the characteristic diffractions of the cubic perovskite phase, accompanied by a diffraction peak at 12.6°, which is assigned to PbI2 (Fig. 4a). A small amount of excess PbI2 has been reported to be favourable for the device performance by passivating the surface or grain boundary defects of the perovskite films, while it may be harmful for long-term stability when too much PbI2 residuals, especially under constant light soaking. The diffraction intensity ratio between the perovskite phase and the PbI2 for the SnO2/NbOx ETM-based sample is lower than that for the SnO2 ETMs, suggesting that the formation of PbI2 can be tuned by the selection of ETMs to a certain degree. The full width at half maximum (FWHM, Fig. S14, ESI) of the (001) plane in the XRD patterns shows that the perovskite formed on the SnO2/NbOx ETMs exhibits a relatively small FWMH value (0.135°) than that on the SnO2 ETMs (0.140°), confirming that larger crystallites are formed for perovskite films on SnO2/NbOx ETMs. The increased intensity of the UV-Vis spectra (Fig. S15, ESI) further confirms the improved film quality of the SnO2/NbOx ETM directed perovskite in comparison with that of the SnO2 ETM directed one. Fig. 4b and c give the cross-sectional SEM images of the complete PSC devices. Larger grains are visible across the entire perovskite film on the SnO2/NbOx ETMs in the vertical direction, aiding carrier transport, which can effectively hinder the recombination at grain boundaries and improve the stability of PSCs. Fig. S16a and b (ESI) present the morphologies of the perovskite films deposited on the SnO2 and SnO2/NbOx NC films, respectively. Both perovskite films exhibit a compact and uniform morphology with an average grain size exceeding 1 μm. Fig. S16c and d (ESI) show that the perovskite film formed on the SnO2/NbOx ETMs exhibits an RMS of 11.4 nm while it is 16.1 nm for the film on the SnO2 ETMs, which is consistent with the SEM images showing that SnO2/NbOx ETMs favour the growth of smoother perovskite films compared to the SnO2 ETMs. It is thus concluded that the SnO2/NbOx ETMs are more favourable than SnO2 ETMs for the formation of high-quality perovskite films.
To gain insight into the reason of improved quality of the perovskite films on the SnO2/NbOx ETMs, the contact angle test was conducted to probe the wettability of ETMs for PbI2-precursor solution (DMF/DMSO, 9:1, v/v). The contact angle of the PbI2 solution on the commercial SnO2 film was also measured (Fig. S17, ESI) with a value of 11.2°. In a stark contrast, once the PbI2 precursor solution was added dropwise onto the self-developed SnO2 or SnO2/NbOx films, it spreads out very quickly, demonstrating good wettability of the PbI2 solution on both ETM substrates. Since the solution spreads out too fast to capture the results in a static imaging mode, we recorded movies to catch the hydrophilic information. Notably, the PbI2 solution spreads out faster upon dropwise addition onto the SnO2/NbOx film (Movie S1, ESI) than that onto the SnO2 NC film (Movie S2, ESI), which indicates that the SnO2/NbOx NC films afford a more wettable surface for PbI2 solution than SnO2 NC films. A better wettability of the SnO2/NbOx ETMs than that of SnO2 ETMs suggests a reduced nucleation barrier and a higher nucleation density, leading to the better quality of perovskite films.
The effect of the enveloping process on the device performance was carefully surveyed. In the present study, the thickness of the NbOx layer was regulated by varying the enveloping periods, and the corresponding current density–voltage (J–V) curves are displayed in Fig. S18 (ESI). A shorter treatment time (e.g., 30 min) would lead to incomplete coating of SnO2 NCs by the NbOx amorphous layer, which has a limited positive effect on the carrier transport ability of ETMs and the PCE for the resultant devices, while an excessive enveloping time (e.g., 60 min) would result in a thick layer of the NbOx shell, indicating the enlarged series resistance and in turn posing a negative impact on the PV performance. Thus, there exists a balanced enveloping time to prepare SnO2/NbOx composites for achieving excellent PSC performance, and it is 40 min in this case. Fig. 4d and e show the J–V curves of the champion PSCs obtained with the SnO2 and SnO2/NbOx ETMs measured in both the reverse and forward directions, respectively. For comparison, a device (Fig. S19a, ESI) based on a commercial SnO2 ETM was also fabricated under otherwise identical conditions, and the corresponding J–V curves are depicted in Fig. S19b (ESI). The best-performing device based on the self-developed SnO2 NCs shows a PCE of 23.01% with a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 24.79 mA cm−2, a fill factor (FF) of 80.09%, and an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 1.16 V under the reverse scan, which is superior to the cell with commercial SnO2 (21.96%). Remarkably, the PCE is further promoted to as high as 24.01% (VOC = 1.18 V, JSC = 24.95 mA cm−2, and FF = 81.58%) for the SnO2/NbOx ETM-based device, which is among the most efficient planar PSCs to date (Fig. S20 and Table S3, ESI). Notably, all of the main PV parameters for the cell with the SnO2/NbOx ETMs are superior to the cell with SnO2 ETMs. The excellent PV characteristics of the SnO2/NbOx ETM-based PSCs can be mainly attributed to the increased electron mobility and conductivity, matched band structure, reduced trap density at the ETM/perovskite interface, and the improved perovskite quality in this system. It is notable that the hysteresis index [HI, defined by (PCEReverse − PCEForward)/PCEReverse] decreases from 0.083 for the SnO2 ETM-based device to 0.042 for SnO2/NbOx ETM-based device in the present study, and this is attributed to the decreased trap density and improved carrier transport of the SnO2/NbOx ETMs, resulting in reduced charge accumulation at the ETM/perovskite interface.
External quantum efficiency (EQE, Fig. 4f) spectra were acquired in the air ambient by Enlitech QE-R3011 testing system to evaluate the JSC of PSCs. The integrated current densities of the PSCs based on SnO2 and SnO2/NbOx ETMs are 24.06 and 24.29 mA cm−2, respectively, agreeing with the corresponding JSC obtained from the J–V curves. To assess the operational status of PSCs with different ETMs, steady-state output at the maximum power point (MPP) was measured. Fig. 4g shows that more than 99% of the maximum PCE is maintained for both devices, demonstrating the high stability of the planar PSCs in this study. A faster photo-response is observed for the SnO2/NbOx ETM-based device than that of the SnO2 ETM-based one, in agreement with the reduced hysteresis for the former one. The steady-state output for the SnO2/NbOx ETM-based PSC achieves a PCE of 23.5% with a steady-state output photocurrent density of 23.5 mA cm−2, which are higher than those of the SnO2 ETM-based PSCs (22.5% and 23.4 mA cm−2, respectively). Fig. 4h shows the statistical distribution of the PCEs for the PSCs (50 individual cells for each) with the SnO2 and SnO2/NbOx ETMs, exhibiting excellent reproducibility. The PSCs with SnO2/NbOx ETMs show higher PCE values and a narrower PCE distribution than the cells with the pristine SnO2 ETMs. The prominent enhancement in VOC should be associated with the reduction in the energy barrier and the improvement in the band alignment at the ETM/perovskite interface for the SnO2/NbOx ETM-based devices, while the increase in FF and JSC could be attributed to the enhanced carrier extraction and transport ability of the SnO2/NbOx ETMs.
An exceptional advantage of our SnO2/NbOx ETMs is that they can be processed at low temperatures, e.g., ≤150 °C, which is very suitable for flexible PSCs. Hence, flexible cells with a configuration of polyethylene naphthalate (PEN)/ITO/ETMs/FA1−xMAxPbI3−yCly/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au were further assembled. A preliminary study shows that the best flexible PSCs with SnO2 and SnO2/NbOx ETMs achieve PCEs of 19.05% and 20.00%, respectively, as measured by reverse scanning (Fig. 4i). The 20.00% efficiency is again among the highest reported for flexible PSCs in the literature. The systematic optimization of flexible PSCs using the SnO2/NbOx ETMs is under way. These results further highlight the outstanding properties of the SnO2/NbOx as ETMs in PSCs.
To probe the charge carrier dynamics in PSCs based on the present two current ETMs, steady photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy was carried out. As shown in Fig. 5a, both the SnO2 and SnO2/NbOx ETMs can effectively extract electrons from the perovskite layer above, while a more distinct quenching in PL intensity is observed for the cell with SnO2/NbOx ETMs, indicating a more efficient charge extraction for this system. Additionally, the PL peak shifts to a shorter wavelength for perovskite films deposited onto SnO2/NbOx ETMs, demonstrating the better quality and fewer defects in perovskite films on them. Time-resolved PL (TRPL) spectroscopy (Fig. 5b) provides more information about the charge dynamic process, which is fitted with a bi-exponential decay function (Table S4, ESI). The τ1 decreases from 95.5 ns for the SnO2 ETM-based perovskite film to 65.8 ns for the SnO2/NbOx ETM-based film, with the proportion of τ1 increasing from 34% to 50%, indicating a more effective electron transfer from the perovskite to SnO2/NbOx ETMs. The τ2 values are 332.5 and 363.7 ns for the SnO2 ETM- and SnO2/NbOx ETM-based perovskite films, respectively, showing the improved crystal quality of the perovskite film formed atop SnO2/NbOx ETMs. These results are in line with the aforementioned M–S and SCLC analyses, and further demonstrate the enhanced electron extraction and transport properties of the SnO2/NbOx ETMs, which are responsible for the superior PV performance.
Intensity-modulated photocurrent spectroscopy (IMPS; Fig. 5c) and intensity-modulated photovoltage spectroscopy (IMVS; Fig. 5d) were performed under irradiation with a 590 nm light-emitting diode (LED) to gain insight into the charge-transport mechanism within the devices. The Nyquist plots of both the IMPS and IMVS exhibit a typical semicircle in the complex plane. The carrier collection times and recombination times were derived from the equations of τc = 1/(2πfc) and τr = 1/(2πfr), respectively, where fc and fr are the characteristic frequencies at the minimum of the imaginary component in the IMPS and IMVS, respectively. The calculated τc for the SnO2/NbOx ETM-based PSCs is 1.6 μs, which is shorter than 1.9 μs for the cell with SnO2 ETMs. That is to say that the SnO2/NbOx ETM-based devices show faster charge transport than SnO2 ETM-based devices because of the higher conductivity and mobility in the SnO2/NbOx ETMs and the better-matched energy level alignment at the SnO2/NbOx ETM/perovskite interface. Similarly, the τr values for the SnO2 and SnO2/NbOx ETM-based devices were estimated to be 6.5 and 17.8 μs, respectively. The suppressed recombination for the cell with SnO2/NbOx ETMs contributes to the increase in VOC, which matches well with the TRPL results. The charge transport and recombination times for both devices as a function of incident light intensity were also compared (Fig. S21 and S22, ESI). A shorter charge transport and a longer recombination time are observed for the cell with the SnO2/NbOx ETMs under the full range of light intensities, which could well explain the enhancement in the PCE. Moreover, the charge collection efficiency (ηcc) can be obtained by ηcc = 1 − (τc/τr). An ηcc value of 0.91 is obtained for the SnO2/NbOx ETM-based device, which is significantly superior to that of the SnO2 ETM-based PSC (0.71). Integrated with faster charge transport, longer recombination time, and a higher charge collection efficiency, it is reasonable to conclude that SnO2/NbOx NCs are excellent ETMs for PSCs to achieve superior PV performance.
To further understand the charge recombination mechanism, we carried out JSC and VOCversus light intensity measurements. The power law dependences of JSC upon light intensity with a slope approaching 1 are observed for both devices (Fig. S23, ESI), implying a negligible bimolecular recombination in the devices.Fig. 5e shows that VOC proportionally decreases with a decrease in light intensity. Since the deviation of the slope from unity kBT/q reflects the trap-assisted nonradiative recombination in the device, the lower value for the cell with SnO2/NbOx ETMs (1.27kBT/q) is indicative of a reduced charge recombination process, as compared to the cell with SnO2 ETMs (1.67kBT/q). Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was employed to quantitatively analyse the transfer and recombination resistances in the fabricated cells. Fig. S24 (ESI) displays the Nyquist plots measured at different bias voltages from 0 to 0.6 V. Two semicircles are clearly observed over the entire voltage range, where the semicircle in the high-frequency region is closely related to the charge transfer resistance (Rtrans) and the semicircle in the low-frequency region is related to the recombination resistance (Rrec). Under the same experimental conditions, a lower Rtrans (Fig. S25a, ESI) and a higher Rrec (Fig. S25b, ESI) are observed for the SnO2/NbOx ETM-based device, as compared to the device with the SnO2 ETMs. To make it clear, the Nyquist plots of both devices at 0.6 V are shown in Fig. 5f, and the fitting parameters are summarized in Table S5 (ESI). Compared to the PSC with the SnO2 ETMs (Rtrans = 1.77 × 105 Ω and Rrec = 1.30 × 106 Ω), the device with the SnO2/NbOx ETMs exhibit a reduced Rtrans of 1.54 × 105 Ω and an increased Rrec of 2.22 × 106 Ω. The smaller Rtrans is favourable for charge extraction and transfer, and the larger Rrec effectively impedes charge recombination, which is consistent with the IMPS and IMVS results.
Stability is a critical issue in assessing the application potential of the PSCs. The stability of unencapsulated devices with SnO2 and SnO2/NbOx ETMs was comparatively studied. Fig. 6a and Fig. S26 (ESI) show the normalized photovoltaic parameters of the devices measured as a function of storage time. It is notable that the PSCs with the SnO2 and SnO2/NbOx ETMs exhibit a prominent stability. Specifically, over 95% of their initial PCEs are maintained after more than 2000 h of storage under an inert atmosphere. The thermal stability was also estimated by using poly[bis(4-phenyl)(2,4,6-trimethylphenyl)-amine] (PTAA) to replace Spiro-OMeTAD because of the superiority of PTAA to Spiro-OMeTAD in the thermal stability. The unsealed PSCs were aged at 85 °C in the dark glovebox filled with nitrogen, and both cells exhibit very similar trends in efficiency decay (Fig. 6b and Fig. S27, ESI). Specifically, the cell with the SnO2 ETMs retains 84% of its initial efficiency, and the cell with the SnO2/NbOx ETMs presents a slightly higher value of 86%. Both devices were also tested under continuous irradiation at one-sun (1.5 AM, Fig. 6c and Fig. S28, ESI). The device with SnO2/NbOx ETMs maintains over 84% of its initial efficiency within 1000 h, while it is 82% for PSCs with the SnO2 ETMs. The slightly improved stability (including both thermal aging and light soaking) for the cell with the SnO2/NbOx ETMs may be caused by the decreased surface trap density of the ETMs and the improved crystalline quality of the perovskite films. The high similarity in the trends of the stability variation can be attributed to the fact that, as inorganic oxides, both the self-developed SnO2 NCs and SnO2/NbOx NCs exhibit high thermal stability, have similar surface ligands (e.g., –Cl), and show low photocatalytic activity.

This study presents an effective enveloping strategy to boost the electron extraction of self-developed SnO2 NCs via formation of an amorphous NbOx external layer. Owing to the enhanced conductivity and electron mobility, improved energy level alignment, and suppressed trap density in the SnO2/NbOx ETMs, a PCE as high as 24.01% is achieved for the SnO2/NbOx ETM-based device with negligible hysteresis and remarkable stability, which is among the most efficient planar PSCs. Moreover, considering the low-temperature processability of the SnO2/NbOx films, flexible PSCs with an efficiency of 20.00% are obtained, showing strong potential for low-cost and wearable solar applications. We believe that this work highlights the importance of ETM design and demonstrates the advantages of SnO2/NbOx ETMs for fabricating stable, efficient, reproducible, and flexible planar PSCs.


The authors declare no competing interest.


The authors are grateful for the support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 21773218), the National Key Research and Development Program of China (Grant No. 2017YFA0207400), the Key Research and Development Projects of Sichuan province (Grant No. 2017GZ0052), the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (Grant No. 2019M653485), and Anshan Hifichem Co. Ltd.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ee01519b
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021