 DOI: 10.1039/D3CP01454A
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2023, 25, 15263-15270


Zhihai
Liu
,

Lei
Wang
,

Xiaoyin
Xie
* and 

Ping
Chen
*

School of Physics and Electronic Information, Yantai University, Yantai 264005, China. E-mail: chenping@ytu.edu.cn

School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing Technology and Business University, Beijing, 100048, China

School of Chemistry and Chemical Technology, Hubei Polytechnic University, Huangshi 435003, China. E-mail: xyxie@hbpu.edu.cn

Received
30th March 2023
, Accepted 9th May 2023
First published on 10th May 2023
In this study, we improved the performance of ternary organic solar cells (OSCs) using metal oxides (p-type NiOx and n-type SnO2) as the charge-transport layers (CTLs). The use of NiOx and SnO2 can facilitate charge transportation and suppress charge recombination in PM6:IDIC:Y6-based ternary OSCs, which is beneficial for boosting their performance. As a result, the OSCs with CTLs of NiOx and SnO2 exhibited an improved power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 16.2% (on average), which is higher than that (15.1%) of the control OSCs using poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulfonate) and LiF as the CTLs. The stability of the OSCs was simultaneously improved with the PCE degradation significantly suppressed upon using NiOx and SnO2. After 10 days of storage and measurement under ambient conditions, the PCE degradation was dramatically decreased from 49.7% to 20.3%, which was induced by the high intrinsic stability of NiOx and SnO2. The best OSC using the CTLs of NiOx and SnO2 showed a champion PCE of 16.6%, with a stable power output and negligible hysteresis.

During the past few decades, organic solar cells (OSCs) have been intensively investigated owing to their high efficiency, excellent flexibility and convenient processability. Within several years of rapid development, power conversion efficiency (PCE) values of over 18% have been achieved for single-junction OSCs, indicating their great potential for commercialization. However, the environmental stability of OSCs needs to be further improved to satisfy the requirements of future production. OSCs usually have a standard layer-by-layer structure with the functional layers deposited via solution processes, such as direct spin coating and layer-by-layer deposition. The photo-active layers usually consist of donor and acceptor materials, which are sandwiched by charge-transport (or buffer) layers. Although binary bulk-heterojunction blends are widely used, the drawbacks of binary systems, such as insufficient light absorption, weak crystallization and low charge mobility, have limited the performance improvement of OSCs. To solve this problem, the strategy of ternary OSCs has been developed by adding a third component, with a similar structure to the donor or acceptor materials, into the blends. This additional component can enhance the performance of OSCs by broadening the light absorption range, tuning the energy alignment and/or improving the morphology of the active layers. As a result, PCEs of over 15% have been reported for ternary OSCs based on active bulk-heterojunction layers that contain one donor/two acceptors or two donors/one acceptor.

Charge-transport layers (CTLs) also play very important roles in determining the performance of OSCs because they significantly influence the processes of charge dissociation and collection. In a standard structure, poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) is widely used as the hole transport layer (HTL), which lies between the anode and active layers of OSCs. On the cathode side, some wide band-gap materials (e.g., LiF, BCP, PFN, PDINO etc.) are frequently used as the buffer layers, which can tune the work function of the metal electrodes and enhance the electron transport of the OSCs. However, PEDOT:PSS can be easily dissolved in water, and exhibits high hygroscopicity in air. Moreover, the acid properties of PEDOT:PSS can gradually etch the indium-tin oxide or fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) electrodes and decompose the active layers, which is a serious restriction on the stability of OSCs. To solve this problem, some inorganic p-type semiconductors with suitable energy bands have been developed as the HTLs for OSCs. For example, metal oxides (MoO3, NiOx, V2O5, WO3, etc.) have been reported as good candidates for hole transportation in OSCs, and showed a higher intrinsic stability than PEDOT:PSS. Compared with the PEDOT:PSS-based devices, OSCs using these inorganic HTLs showed similar or higher PCEs with improved stability. In the case of electron transport layers (ETLs), several n-type metal oxides (ZnO, TiO2, SnO2, etc.) have been reported as buffers between the cathodes and active layers, which can improve the transportation of electrons in OSCs. Recently, the conducting polymer poly[(2,6-(4,8-bis(5-(2-ethylhexyl-3-fluoro)thiophen-2-yl)-benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene))-alt-(5,5-(1′,3′-di-2-thienyl-5′,7′-bis(2-ethylhexyl)benzo[1′,2′-c:4′,5′-c′]dithiophene-4,8-dione)] (PM6) and non-fullerene acceptors, such as 2,2′-((2Z,2′Z)-((12,13-bis(2-ethylhexyl)-3,9-diundecyl-12,13-dihydro-[1,2,5]thiadiazolo[3,4-e]thieno[2′′,3′′:4′,5′]thieno[2′,3′:4,5]pyrrolo[3,2-g]thieno[2′,3′:4,5]thieno[3,2-b]indole-2,10-diyl)bis(methanylylidene))bis(5,6-difluoro-3-oxo-2,3-dihydro-1H-indene-2,1-diylidene))dimalononitrile (Y6) and indacenodithiophene (IDIC), have been developed and used as the donor and acceptor materials for fabricating ternary OSCs, which achieved high PCEs of 13.8–17.7%. However, in these studies, all the ternary OSCs were fabricated using PEDOT:PSS as the HTL, which may play a negative role in the stability performance of the devices. As a result, the interface engineering of ternary OSCs needs to be investigated to further enhance the device PCE and stability.
In this work, we simultaneously improved the PCE and stability of PM6:IDIC:Y6-based ternary OSCs using solution-processed NiOx and SnO2 as the HTL and ETL, respectively. Compared with the use of PEDOT:PSS and LiF, using NiOx and SnO2 can facilitate charge transport and suppress charge recombination in OSCs, which are beneficial for improving the solar performance. Consequently, the open-circuit voltage (Voc), short-circuit current density (Jsc) and fill factor (FF) of the OSCs were improved at the same time. With these inorganic CTLs, the OSCs showed an average PCE of 16.2%, which is higher than that (15.1%) of the control devices that use PEDOT:PSS and LiF. Due to the excellent intrinsic stability of NiOx and SnO2, the long-term stability of the OSCs was also enhanced with a significantly reduced PCE degradation. Following storage for 10 days under ambient conditions, the PCE degradation was suppressed from 49.7% to 20.3%. Using NiOx and SnO2 as the CTLs, the best device exhibited the highest PCE of 16.6%, and showed a stable power output and negligible hysteresis. Our research demonstrates the superior effect of CTL engineering, which significantly improved the performance of ternary OSCs.

PM6 and IDIC were purchased from 1-Materials, Inc. (Canada). Y6 and PEDOT:PSS (Clevios P VP AI 4083) were purchased from Solarmer Materials Inc. (China) and the Heraeus Group (Germany), respectively. The SnO2 colloidal dispersion (3–4 nm) was purchased from Alfa Aesar (USA). Patterned FTO glass substrates were purchased from Advanced Election Technology Co., Ltd (China). Ni(Ac)2·4H2O and all the solvents were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (USA). As shown in Fig. 1(a), the ternary OSCs were fabricated with a structure of FTO/NiOx/PM6:IDIC:Y6/SnO2/Ag. The NiOx precursor was prepared by dissolving 0.1 mmol Ni(Ac)2·4H2O and 6 μL ethanolamine in 1 mL 2-methoxyethanol, which was stirred at 70 °C for 12 h. The active blend solution was prepared by dissolving PM6, IDIC and Y6 (1:0.2:1 by weight) in chloroform (using the solvent additive of 1-chloronaphthalene, 0.7% by volume) with a total concentration of 18 mg mL−1. The SnO2 precursor was made by diluting the colloidal dispersion to 2.0% (by volume) with 2-propanol. First, the NiOx precursor was spin coated onto the FTO glass substrates at 4000 rpm, followed by thermal annealing at 400 °C for 1 h in air. For the control devices, the PEDOT:PSS solution was spin coated onto the substrates at 4500 rpm, followed by thermal annealing at 150 °C for 10 min. Then the PM6:IDIC:Y6 blend layers were formed by spin coating the active solution onto the NiOx underlayers at 2000 rpm for 45 s in a N2 filled glove box. After that, the SnO2 precursor was spin-coated onto the active layer at 3000, 4000 or 5000 rpm for 30 s, followed by thermal annealing at 100 °C for 15 min. Finally, the Ag (∼80 nm) electrodes were thermally evaporated onto the active layers under a vacuum of 10−4 Pa. The effective working area of the OSCs was 0.04 cm2, which was determined from the vertical overlap of the anode and cathode.


Cross-sectional images of the OSCs and the surface morphology of the films were acquired using an SU8020 scanning electron microscope (SEM; Hitachi, Japan), which was operated at an acceleration voltage of 8 kV. The surface morphology of the active layers was measured using an atomic force microscope (AFM; Veeco, USA) in tapping mode. The electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) spectra of the OSCs were obtained under 1 Sun illumination with a bias of 1 V and an amplitude of 5 mV using an electrochemical work station (Bio-Logic, France). Ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) absorption and transmission spectra were obtained using a spectrometer (PerkinElmer Lambda 750, USA). The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the films were measured using an X-ray diffractometer (Panalytical, Netherlands). The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the OSCs were measured under an irradiation intensity of 100 mW cm−2 (AM1.5). The incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) spectra of the OSCs were measured using a solar cell IPCE measurement system (Solar Cell Scan 100, Zolix, China).



Fig. 1(b) shows a cross-sectional SEM image of the OSC using NiOx and SnO2 as the CTLs, which indicates a dense layer-by-layer structure. From the SEM image, the thickness of the active layer is approximately 120 nm, which is typical for PM6-based OSCs with a high performance. By contrast, the thickness of the NiOx and SnO2 layers is about 18 and 15 nm, respectively. Fig. 1(c) shows a schematic of the energy levels of all the functional layers involved in the OSCs, which indicates a gradient energy alignment for charge transportation. Compared with PEDOT:PSS, NiOx has a deeper valence band (VB) of −5.3 eV, which is very close to the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO; −5.5 eV) level of PM6. The deep VB and high conduction band (CB) levels are beneficial for hole extraction and electron blocking from the active layers. On the cathode side, the CB level of SnO2 is −4.3 eV, which lies just between the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO; −5.5 eV) level of PM6 and the work function (−4.3 eV) of the Ag electrode. The band structure of SnO2 indicates a free electron transporting barrier and a strong hole blocking property at the interface. We used IDIC as the third component, which showed suitable energy levels and an appropriate absorption. Fig. 1(d) shows the UV-vis absorption spectra of bare PM6, IDIC and Y6 films, which indicate a broad absorption range of 400–900 nm for the ternary blend. Such a wide absorption range is beneficial for increasing the current density of OSCs. The molecular structures of PM6, IDIC and Y6 are shown in Fig. 1(e), indicating a similar π-conjugated structure for the IDIC and Y6 molecules.

The quality of the prepared NiOx and SnO2 films was characterized by the measuring their SEM images and XRD patterns. As shown in Fig. 2(a) and (b), the SEM images showed a uniform morphology with a full surface coverage for both the NiOx and SnO2 films. From these SEM images, dense NiOx and SnO2 grains can be observed on the surfaces without any clear pinholes. Such a morphology is beneficial for forming an ohmic contact between the active layer and electrodes without a large contact resistance. The XRD patterns for the prepared NiOx and SnO2 films are shown in Fig. 2(c) and (d), respectively, in which clear characteristic peaks can be observed. The XRD patterns indicate well crystalized NiOx and SnO2 in the films, which is beneficial for reducing the number of defect traps and enhancing the charge transport. The SEM and XRD results demonstrate the high quality of the NiOx and SnO2 films, which were prepared via solution processes. The morphology of the active layer (PM6:IDIC:Y6) is shown in Fig. 3(a), in which nanoscale grains can be observed. From the AFM image, the diameters of the grains are about 10–25 nm, indicating the good crystallization and phase separation of the bulk-heterojunction film. Grains of such sizes are beneficial for exciton diffusion and charge separation, which are very important for the performance of the OSCs. As shown in Fig. 3(b), after the deposition of SnO2, the surface morphology becomes much smoother, and the root-mean-squared roughness decreased from 3.8 to 2.3 nm. From the AFM image, the active layer can be fully covered and well protected by the SnO2 film, without being exposed to air.

Fig. 4(a) presents the J–V characteristics for the ternary OSCs using conventional PEDOT:PSS/LiF (control) and the newly developed NiOx/SnO2 as the CTLs, with the device parameters summarized in Table 1. The control PEDOT:PSS/LiF-based OSCs showed an average PCE of 15.1%, with a Voc of 0.86 V, a Jsc of 24.3 mA cm−2 and an FF of 72.1%. The best control OSC showed a PCE of 15.5%, which is a standard level for PM6-based OSCs. The OSCs using NiOx and SnO2 showed an improved average PCE of 16.2%, with Voc, Jsc and FF simultaneously improved to 0.88 V, 25.2 mA cm−2 and 73.2%, respectively. A highest PCE of 16.6% was achieved from this group, which is an excellent value for PM6-based ternary OSCs. As shown in Fig. S1 and Table S1 (ESI), spin-coating of the SnO2 solution at 4000 rpm is the optimal condition, which results in the best performance of the OSCs. The AFM image in Fig. S2 (ESI) confirmed that the optimal thickness of the SnO2 layer was about 15 nm. The PCE variations with standard deviations for the OSCs using the different CTLs are shown in Fig. S3 (ESI), indicating a clear difference in the PCE ranges. Fig. 4(b) shows the IPCE spectra of the OSCs using PEDOT:PSS/LiF and NiOx/SnO2 as the CTLs, from which the integrated Jsc can be obtained. The calculated Jsc values from the IPCE spectra are 24.0 and 24.8 mA cm−2 for the PEDOT:PSS/LiF- and NiOx/SnO2-based OSCs, respectively. The difference between the measured and calculated Jsc is only 1.2–1.7%, indicating the accurate measurement of the J–V characteristics. The forward- and reverse-scanning J–V characteristics for the best performing OSC using NiOx and SnO2 are shown in Fig. 4(c). Under reverse scanning, the Voc and FF of the OSC became slightly larger, at 0.89 V and 73.8%, respectively, which resulted in a slightly higher PCE of 16.8%. As shown in Table S2 (ESI), the 16.6–16.8% PCEs are similar to those (16.52–16.86%) for OSCs using the PM6:IDIC:Y6 active layers reported in previous studies. Even compared with other PM6-based ternary OSCs, our devices showed a comparable or medium PCE level among these values (see Table S2, ESI). The PCE difference under the forward and reverse scans is only 1.2%, indicating a small hysteresis degree of the OSC. The hysteresis might be induced from the defects formed by impurities and/or vacancies, which could trap the generated charges. Some techniques of reducing or passivating defects may suppress this hysteresis. Fig. 4(d) shows the steady state power output for the best performing sample, which exports a stable Jsc and PCE for 300 s. The Jsc stabilized in the range of 21.5–21.8 mA cm−2, resulting in a stable PCE output of 16.1–16.3%.
Device configuration

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
Average PCE (%)
Best PCE (%)
PEDOT:PSS/LiF
0.86 ± 0.01
24.3 ± 0.3
72.1 ± 1.3
15.1 ± 0.3
15.5
NiOx/SnO2
0.88 ± 0.01
25.2 ± 0.3
73.2 ± 1.2
16.2 ± 0.3
16.6
To identify the mechanism for PCE improvement, we measured the EIS spectra, dark J–V characteristics and light-intensity dependence of Jsc for the OSCs using PEDOT:PSS/LiF and NiOx/SnO2 as the CTLs. The charge-transport process of the OSCs can be reflected from the EIS measurements. As shown in Fig. 5(a), the EIS spectra can be divided into high- and low-frequency ranges, which lie on the left and right parts of the semicircles, respectively. The high-frequency range reveals the series resistance (Rs), and the low-frequency range indicates the charge-transfer resistance (Rct) of the OSCs. Usually, for OSCs, Rs is mainly contributed from the contact resistance of different layers, and Rct is closely related to the charge-transport resistance at the interfaces of functional layers (i.e., active layer/CTL and CTL/electrode). The Rs and Rct values can be obtained by fitting the EIS spectra using the equivalent circuit shown in the inset to Fig. 5(a), which contains parameters Rs, Rct and the capacitance (C). After fitting to the semicircles, the Rct of the OSCs using NiOx/SnO2 is 402.3 Ω, which is lower than that (525.6 Ω) of the PEDOT:PSS/LiF-based devices. This presents a reduced charge-transport resistance and enhanced charge transportation when using NiOx/SnO2 as the CTLs. As indicated from previous studies, NiOx and SnO2 have high intrinsic carrier mobility values and their energy band structures are beneficial for hole and electron transportation from the active layer to the electrodes, which leads to a decrease in the Rct of the OSCs. Moreover, the Rs of NiOx/SnO2-based OSCs is 22.5 Ω, which is also lower than that (28.7 Ω) of the PEDOT:PSS/LiF-based control group. The reduced Rs can be explained from the decreased contact resistance between the functional layers. As shown in Fig. 3, coating with SnO2 significantly reduces the surface roughness of the active layers, which could decrease the contact resistance at the interfaces. The leakage current of the OSCs can be evaluated from the position of J under reverse bias on the left part of the dark J–V characteristics. As shown in Fig. 5(b), the OSCs using NiOx/SnO2 showed a lower J than the control devices using PEDOT:PSS/LiF, indicating a suppressed leakage current in the OSCs. As a result, we think that using NiOx/SnO2 can suppress charge recombination in the OSCs. To clarify this point, we measured the dependence of Jsc on the light intensity from 0.1 to 1 Sun for the OSCs using different CTLs. As shown in Fig. 5(c), the fitting slope of the NiOx/SnO2-based OSCs is 0.99, which is higher than that (0.94) of the PEDOT:PSS/LiF-based control devices. Usually, decreasing the bimolecular charge recombination leads to a higher slope of the light-intensity dependence, which occurs at the interfaces. From the energy level alignment, the high CB of NiOx and the deep VB of SnO2 can efficiently block electrons and holes, which leads to a suppression of charge recombination in the OSCs. The analysis of suppressed charge recombination here is in good agreement with the results of dark J–V measurement. In summary, the improved Jsc and FF of the devices can be explained from the enhanced charge transport and suppressed charge recombination, which are induced from the high intrinsic carrier mobility and suitable energy bands of NiOx and SnO2. From Fig. S4 (ESI), PEDOT:PSS has a work function of −5.1 eV, which is higher than the VB band of NiOx. The deeper VB level of NiOx can also induce a larger Voc, which is consistent with the J–V performance in Fig. 4. As a result, using metal oxides, the PCE of the OSCs was improved due to the simultaneously enhanced Jsc, Voc and FF.
In addition, we compared the stability performance of the ternary OSCs using PEDOT:PSS/LiF and NiOx/SnO2 as the CTLs. We stored and measured the unencapsulated samples in air at a relative humidity of about 30% and a temperature of 25 °C. The samples were measured separately 10 times over a duration of 10 days. When not being tested, the samples were stored under dark conditions. As shown in Fig. 5(d), the control OSCs using PEDOT:PSS/LiF showed a low PCE of 7.6% after a test period of 10 days, corresponding to a large PCE degradation of 49.7% (initial PCE = 15.1%). For the OSCs using NiOx and SnO2, the remaining PCE was 12.9% after 10 days, leading to a lower PCE degradation of 20.3%. Compared with the control group, the remaining PCE ratio is much higher, indicating the significantly improved long-term stability of the OSCs using NiOx/SnO2 as the CTLs. This suppressed PCE degradation can be explained from the intrinsic high stability of NiOx and SnO2. Compared with PEDOT:PSS, NiOx is more hydrophobic (see Fig. S5, ESI), which can resist the transfer of moisture from the air into the devices. The FTO electrodes can also be protected by NiOx, which will not be corroded by the PEDOT:PSS. Moreover, the active layers were fully covered with the SnO2 film (see Fig. 3), which can protect the donor and acceptors effectively. By contrast, a thin LiF layer (about 0.6 nm) was used for the control devices, which cannot fully cover the active layers. As a result, water- and O2-related damage of the active layers can be effectively avoided for the unencapsulated NiOx/SnO2-based OSCs. The 20.3% PCE degradation for OSCs using metal oxides may be induced via the gradual penetration of water and O2 from the sides of the devices, which may react with the donor and acceptor materials and decompose the phase-separated morphology. Our results indicate that the OSCs using NiOx and SnO2 exhibited a simultaneously enhanced PCE and long-term stability.

In conclusion, we investigated the use of solution-processed NiOx and SnO2 as the HTL and ETL, respectively, for improving the performance of ternary PM6:IDIC:Y6-based OSCs. Compared with conventional buffers of PEDOT:PSS and LiF, NiOx and SnO2 exhibited more suitable band structures, which can efficiently transport charges from the active layer to the electrodes. As a result, the OSCs using NiOx and SnO2 showed an average PCE of 16.2%, which is higher than that (15.1%) of control PEDOT:PSS/LiF-based devices. The Voc, Jsc and FF device parameters of the OSCs were improved simultaneously. The SEM and XRD results demonstrate the high quality of the prepared NiOx and SnO2 films. EIS, dark current density and light-intensity dependence measurements indicate the enhanced charge transport and suppressed charge recombination for the OSCs using NiOx and SnO2, which explained well the PCE improvement. Moreover, the long-term stability of the OSCs was significantly improved upon using NiOx and SnO2, which can effectively protect the FTO electrodes and active layers. Over a storage period of 10 days, the PCE degradation was conspicuously suppressed from 49.7% to 20.3% without encapsulation. The best sample using NiOx and SnO2 exhibited the highest PCE of 16.6% with a stable power output and negligible hysteresis. The results of this research demonstrate the superior effect of inorganic CTLs for simultaneously improving the PCE and stability of ternary OSCs.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the Developing Plan for College Youth Innovative Group of 2022 (funded by the National Natural Science Foundation of China, No. 11874318) and Hubei Polytechnic University Talent Introduction Foundation (No. 51871067).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Additional figures and table. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d3cp01454a
This journal is © the Owner Societies 2023