 DOI: 10.1039/C9SE00632J
(Paper)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2019, 3, 3448-3454


Jin
Yan
,

Nan
Li
,

Yuqian
Ai
,

Zenggui
Wang
,

Weichuang
Yang
,

Min
Zhao
,

Chunhui
Shou
,

Baojie
Yan
,

Jiang
Sheng
* and 

Jichun
Ye
*

Ningbo Institute of Materials Technology and Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Ningbo 315201, People's Republic of China. E-mail: shengjiang@nimte.ac.cn

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, People's Republic of China

Zhejiang Energy Group R&D, Hangzhou, Zhejiang Province 310003, People's Republic of China

Received
11th August 2019
, Accepted 21st September 2019
First published on 25th September 2019
Recently, perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have drawn a lot of attention due to their booming power conversion efficiency (PCE). However, the photovoltaic performance of PSCs is usually limited by the quality of the perovskite film. Here, trace polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) is introduced into the perovskite precursor solution as an additive for the crystalline defect passivation. The PVP with carbonyl delays the transition of the perovskite from the δ-phase to α-phase, which slows down the crystallization process. Thus, the crystallization rate of the α-phase perovskite can be controlled by forming coordination and a better film quality is achieved. As a result, we achieve a champion PCE of 19.63%, which is much higher than the 17.47% of the reference PSC. This study shows the mechanism of the material quality improvement by the additive during the perovskite film formation, where three processes are proposed to describe the film crystallization. We prove that the addition of PVP is an effective approach to improve the quality of the perovskite film, providing a valuable guidance for the development of high efficiency PSCs.

In the past few years, organic–inorganic halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have become a promising alternative as a competitive technology in the photovoltaic (PV) community due to the unique properties of perovskite materials, such as a high absorption coefficient, long carrier lifetime, and low exciton binding energy, which lead to a record power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 24.2%. This type of PSC relies on the perovskite layer for light absorption to generate free charge carriers, and then the electron transporting layer (ETL) and the hole transporting layer (HTL) to extract the electrons and holes, respectively, to the corresponding electrodes. Taking no account of the ETL and HTL, the perovskite film properties, including crystalline quality, band alignment, carrier mobility and so on, play a crucially important role in obtaining high efficiency PSCs. A high-quality perovskite film has to suppress the carrier recombination losses in both the bulk and surfaces. In other words, in a poor perovskite film, the defect-assisted non-radiative recombination derived through pinholes and crystal defects (such as boundaries and dislocations) results in current leakage and degrades the photovoltaic performance of PSCs, especially in terms of the open-circuit voltage (Voc) and short-circuit current density (Jsc). For example, it has been confirmed by many researchers that the Voc of a PSC is influenced by defect-assisted non-radiative recombination in the bulk and on the surface of the perovskite layer. Therefore, it is necessary to further improve the perovskite film quality to improve the efficiency of PSCs. The approaches by improving the uniformity of the perovskite film, controlling the perovskite film morphology, and reducing the defect states inside the crystal or at the boundaries of the perovskite film have been successfully demonstrated. In addition to the above, auxiliary additives have also been widely explored, showing a positive effect on film formation because of the controllable polar groups via the crystallization rate of the perovskite. Moreover, a wide range of material selectivity combined with a simple fabrication process flow holds a plethora of screening opportunities for choosing the suitable auxiliary additives, which demonstrates their high potential for application in the industrialized large-scale PSC production. Apart from the improvement of PCE, stability of the PSC devices is also largely enhanced with the assistance of suitable additives.

The essence of adding additives into perovskite films is to improve the intermolecular force by polarity regulation of the molecule, which can be realized through the addition of polar groups with a strong electron donating ability, such as O-donors, S-donors, and N-donors. The lone pair electron of polar groups coordinates with the 6d empty orbital on Pb2+, which realizes the real-time control of the concentration of Pb2+, improving the formation of the perovskite film. In 2014, inspired by the polymer induced nucleation, Grätzel and co-workers dissolved polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) as an additive in an anti-solvent to improve the crystal growth of a perovskite, which has a denser surface and a lower defect density than the control samples. Using this improved perovskite material they achieved a PCE of 21% for PMMA-PSCs. In addition, the solvent additive is also applied to the perovskite precursor for film modulation, and the mechanism of this process is well illustrated. Seok et al. reported that using DMSO as a ligand, the morphology of the perovskite film was well regulated by forming a stable and uniform MAI–PbI2–DMSO intermediate complex. In this process of perovskite film fabrication, DMF and DMSO solvents with strong polar groups could be evaporated rapidly during annealing, owing to the reduced defects in the growth process of perovskite crystals. Besides the use of a solvent additive for morphology control, this polar engineering could also be tuned by the addition of various additives to the precursor or stripping agent. Li et al. reported that 1,3,4-thiadiazolidine-2-thione (TDZT) and 1,3,4-thiadiazolidine-2,5-dithione (TDZDT) introduced into the perovskite precursor could modulate the growth of perovskite (MAPbI3) crystals and enlarge the grain size. Pure polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) is also applied to the perovskite precursor as an additive, which has a high level of molecular planarity and strong intermolecular interactions. The structure of PVP contains CO groups, and it can control the perovskite crystallization process and passivate the defects. Furthermore, it is easy to obtain for the wide use in large-scale PSC industrialization. Fakharuddin et al. explored the perovskite precursor with the PVP additive, which remarkably reduces the non-radiative recombination, and then this PVP–PSC had an average PCE of 17.5%, as well as a shelf-life stability over 100 days. Hao and co-workers also modified the perovskite with PVP in flexible devices and presented an improved stability and flexibility. Although these studies on PVP have paid more attention to the improvement of the device performance, the mechanisms of film quality improvement are not mentioned in detail.
Here, we propose a simple approach by adding trace additive PVP to the precursor solution of a perovskite to improve the perovskite film quality and cell performance. The action mechanism of the PVP additive in the crystallization process of the perovskite is clarified by Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) and X-ray diffraction (XRD) spectroscopy measurements. The carbonyl groups in the PVP structure coordinate with the electron-deficient lead near the grain boundaries (GBs), reducing the density of defect states of the perovskite and promoting the photovoltaic performance of the PSC. These effects result in smooth perovskite films with a low defect density. As a result, the Voc of the PSC with the trace additive PVP is greatly enhanced from an average value of 1.13 V to 1.17 V, and correspondingly, the PSC also shows a relatively high PCE of 19.63%.

ITO/glass substrates were purchased from Yichang South Glass Corp. The SnO2 colloid precursor was purchased from Alfa Aesar. Polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP; Mn = 40000) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Methylammonium iodide (MAI; 99.5%), formamidinium iodide (FAI; 99.5%), and 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis[N,N-di(4-methoxyphenyl)amino]-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD; 99.5%) were purchased from Xi'an Polymer Light Technology Corp. Unless otherwise stated, all chemicals were purchased from Aladdin.

The perovskite precursor solution was prepared as following: 1.15 mmol of PbI2, 0.20 mmol of PbBr2, 0.20 mmol of MABr and 1.09 mmol of FAI were mixed in a DMF (0.66 ml) and DMSO (0.34 ml) composite solvent. It was stirred at 60 °C for 12 hours before use, and PVP was dissolved in the perovskite precursor solution with concentrations of 6 μmol ml−1, 12 μmol ml−1, 18 μmol ml−1 and 24 μmol ml−1, labeled Γ-0.25, Γ-0.5, Γ-0.75 and Γ-1, respectively. Spiro-OMeTAD/chlorobenzene (72.3 mg ml−1) solution was employed with the addition of 35 μl of Li-TFSI/acetonitrile solution (260 mg ml−1) and 29 μl of t-BP.

The ITO/glass substrates were ultrasonically cleaned with detergent, acetone, isopropanol, and deionized water, successively. Then they were dried with nitrogen blow and put in an ultraviolet ozone cleaner for 15 min. 50 μl of SnO2 colloid (7.5 wt%) was dropped on an ITO substrate and spin-coated for 30 s in air at 5000 rpm, then annealed at 180 °C for 30 min. The perovskite layer was deposited on the ETL by an anti-solvent method and the operation was carried out in a nitrogen glove box. In detail, the perovskite precursor solution was spin-coated on ITO/SnO2 at 5000 rpm for 30 s. During spin coating, 220 μl of chlorobenzene was dropped quickly before the end of spin coating, and then the substrate was annealed at 140 °C for 10 min. After cooling down to room temperature, spiro-MeOTAD was spin-coated at 5000 rpm on the perovskite layer for 30 s to form a HTL. Finally, a silver electrode with a thickness of 80 nm was deposited by using a thermal evaporator.


The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of PSCs were recorded under a solar simulator (Oriel, Sol3A) with a Xe-arc lamp under AM 1.5 illumination (100 mW cm−2). The active illumination area was controlled to 0.1 cm2 using a stainless steel mask during the testing. The morphologies of perovskite surfaces were captured using a field-emission scanning electron microscope (SEM, Hitachi, S4800). The crystal structure of the perovskite was measured by X-ray diffraction (D8 ADVANCE DAVINCI) measurements. The data were collected in the 2θ range of 10–80° at room temperature. The dark J–V curves of devices were obtained using a semiconductor characterization system (Keithley 4200-SCS). The steady state photoluminescence (PL) was characterized using a fluorescence spectrometer (HORIBA, FL3-111) with an excitation wavelength of 440 nm and a monitoring wavelength of 770 nm. The light absorptions of samples were characterized using ultraviolet-visible-near-infrared spectroscopy (UV/vis-NIR, PerkinElmer, Lambda 950) within the wavelength range of 500–900 nm. The charge recombination measurement of the PSCs was carried out with electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS, Solartron Analytical, 1470E). The FTIR samples were prepared by spinning the precursor solution on a clean glass substrate, and the films that were annealed for 10 minutes would be scraped off the substrate and then mixed with pre-dried KBr powder. The FTIR spectra were recorded in transmittance mode using an IR spectrometer instrument (Thermo, Nicolet 6700).


To gain insight into the effect of PVP on the performance of the perovskite active layer, the optimized perovskite film (Fig. S1) with a PVP concentration of Γ-0.5 was employed for the characterization and discussion. As shown in Fig. 1a, when the samples were annealed at 140 °C for 10 minutes, the solvents (DMF and DMSO) disappeared and we considered that the appearance of the carbonyl peak indicated the existence of PVP in the perovskite film. And the carbonyl in PVP works as an intermediate complex at perovskite grain boundaries, which can be confirmed by the FTIR spectra in Fig. 1b. For the pure PVP sample (blue line), the stretching vibration peak of carbonyl appears at 1658 cm−1, which shifts to 1635 cm−1 after coordination with Pb2+ for the Γ-0.5 sample (red line). The peak of CN existing in FAI is more obvious than the stretching vibration peak of carbonyl, which is due to the much lower dose of PVP. From the perspective of polarity, the carbon–oxygen double bond is very strong in most cases, but it is weakened in the Γ-0.5 sample when the Pb2+ coordinates with the lone pair of electrons on the oxygen. Besides, the stretching vibration frequency is lowered and the peak position shifts toward the lower wavelength, suggesting a stable and uniform MA/FAX–PbX2–PVP intermediate complex and ligand as well as an enhanced solubility of PbX2 in the precursor solution. Moreover, in the presence of PVP, the inconsistent crystallization rate between MA/FAX and PbX2 in the annealing process can be avoided.

The X-ray diffraction (XRD) spectra used to investigate the action mechanism of the PVP additive in the crystallization process of (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15 are shown in Fig. 2. And the corresponding schematic images of these processes are shown on the right of Fig. 2. All the samples used here are annealed for 10 minutes. In order to eliminate the effect of the film thickness, we provide the cross-sectional SEM views of two samples Γ-0 and Γ-0.5, as shown in Fig. S2. At the low temperature (i.e., 25 °C), the diffraction peak of the α-phase (perovskite) (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15 for Γ-0.5 can be observed, but it is absent for Γ-0. It means that PVP contributes to the crystallization of (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15 at low temperature, which can be confirmed by the SEM images in Fig. 3b. The diffraction peaks of the δ-phase (non-perovskite) (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15, PbIxBr2−x and PbI2–DMSO can be seen for the two samples (i.e., Γ-0 and Γ-0.5), but the Γ-0.5 one shows higher peaks for δ-phase (non-perovskite) (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15 and PbI2–DMSO, and a lower peak for PbIxBr2−x. This phenomenon indicates that PVP can promote PbIxBr2−x to further react with FA/MAX. Therefore, the formation of δ-phase (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15 can accelerate the dissolution of PbIxBr2−x, and this process can provide enough time for phase conversion. When annealing at 60 °C, the diffraction peaks of PbIxBr2−x disappear for the two samples, while the α-phase (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15 of the two samples is strengthened due to the suppression of the δ-phase. This phenomenon can be verified from the SEM images in Fig. 3b, which indicate that rarely there are PbI2 particles on the surfaces of the perovskite films. It's not difficult to find that the diffraction peaks of α-phase (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15 are further enlarged as the annealing temperature increases to 100 °C. Besides, the hybrid diffraction peaks of PbI2–DMSO disappear and the pure PbI2 peaks appear. Moreover, δ-phase (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15 still exists for the Γ-0.5 sample, but it nearly disappeared for the Γ-0 sample. The delayed crystal phase transformation process is believed to provide enough time for the ions migrating to the suitable crystalline sites, which can effectively reduce the defect density and improve the quality of the crystals. With the annealing temperature increasing to 140 °C, the precipitation of PbI2 is obviously suppressed with the participation of PVP, compared with the sample Γ-0 (without PVP). This proves that the introduction of PVP can significantly improve the thermal stability of (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15. Here, through XRD characterization, we further understand the process of perovskite film formation. For the whole devices with different annealing temperatures, it is proved from experiments that devices annealed at 140 °C exhibit the highest PCE, as shown in Fig. S3.
In order to further prove the abovementioned mechanisms, the SEM images of the corresponding samples are shown in Fig. 3. For both Γ-0 and Γ-0.5, the phenomenon is similar with the increase of annealing temperature. It can be seen from the figure that a large amount of PbIxBr2−x gel (the dark blades in the insets) can be observed at 25 °C. The components have been confirmed using an energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS) as shown in Fig. S4. When the annealing temperature increases to 60 °C, the perovskite film quality is improved obviously with the uniform distribution of crystals on the surface, but the films are still poor in terms of compactness. With the annealing temperature rising to 100 °C and 140 °C, PbI2 (white plates) on the surface gradually increases until a large amount of precipitation occurs for the two samples. However, compared with Fig. 3a, there are still many differences which resulted from the effect of PVP. The amount of PbIxBr2−x (gel) on the surface is significantly reduced at 25 °C and 140 °C (Fig. 3b), and the morphology of the crystals with PVP is different from those without PVP at 25 °C. For the crystals with PVP, the structure has very sharp edges and corners. Combined with the results of XRD, we consider that this structure probably is δ-phase (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15 (Fig. S5b).
These phenomena all are consistent with those shown in XRD (Fig. 2), proving the role of PVP in the film formation process. Through the implementation of FTIR, XRD and SEM measurements, we have reviewed the dynamic conversion processes of perovskite films with the additional PVP additive. The three main transitions during the entire process are shown in eqn (1)–(3).
PbI2 + MABr + PbBr2 + FAI → δ-phase (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15
(1)
δ-Phase (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15 → α-phase (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15
(2)
α-Phase (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15 → PbI2 + MABr + PbBr2 + FAI
(3)
The intermediate complex MA/FAX–PbIxBr2−x–PVP can improve the stability of δ-phase (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15, which further slows down the phase transition in process (2). Besides, the crystallization rate of α-phase (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15 is also lowered, leading to reduced defect density during the crystal growth, as shown in Fig. 4. It illustrates the transitions across process (1) and (2) in detail. During the annealing process, MA/FAX and PbX2 change into δ-phase (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15 first. This intermediate δ-phase becomes very stable because of the ligand of PVP, and the conversion into α-phase (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15 is slower than that without PVP. This process further improves the crystallization quality of the α-phase perovskite, by which films with fewer traps are formed.
To further illustrate the influence of PVP on the formation of perovskite films, the contact angles of different precursor solutions dropped on the same substrate are shown in Fig. 5a and b, exhibiting the contact angles of 26° and 19° for Γ-0 and Γ-0.5, respectively. Since the carbonyl of PVP has strong polarity, the wettability of the precursor solution increases to some extent compared with the Γ-0 sample. During the annealing process, the solvent evaporates while the additive is left, so the concentrated precursor solution is well spread on the substrate due to the action of the carbonyl. As a result, a better wetting ability of the precursor solution can finally result in a uniform, dense, and pinhole-free crystalline thin film. The optical properties of the perovskite film during the process morphology control are also investigated as shown in Fig. 5c. The UV-visible absorption spectra of the films indicate that the light absorbance of the Γ-0.5 sample is higher than that of the Γ-0 sample in the wavelength range from 500 nm to 800 nm, especially from 500 nm to 600 nm. By analyzing the process of film formation, the enhancement of the absorption coefficient is the result of the improvement of film quality, which is shown as fewer pinholes and better crystallization. Fig. 5d shows the plots of lnα vs. hν, which are used to characterize the density of trap states during the film formation. In the lower energy range, where α varies exponentially with the photon energy, it is assumed that the spectral dependence of the absorption edge follows the Urbach formula:
α = α0exp[(hv − E1)/E0]
(4)
where
α0 is the Urbach absorption at the edge (E1), and E0 is the Urbach energy width which is considered as a function of the structural disorder. Thus, the slope is a constant under the ideal conditions, and then it will deviate from this constant under the real conditions for the existence of trap states. Therefore, a smaller deviation indicates that the structural disorder is less, reflecting a reduction of trap states in the perovskite crystal. The slope is 10.83 for Γ-0, whose deviation is higher than that of Γ-0.5 (i.e. 12.78). The reduction of the deviation shows that the introduction of PVP significantly reduces the density of deep traps during the perovskite film crystallization.


The PCEs of the PSCs fabricated with the different PVP concentrations (CPVP, labeled PSC Γ-0, PSC Γ-0.25, PSC Γ-0.5, PSC Γ-0.75 and PSC Γ-1) are summarized in Fig. S3. Upon increasing the PVP concentration in the perovskite precursor solution, the PCE first increases and then decreases, yielding the maximum value at CPVP = 12 μmol ml−1 (i.e. PSC Γ-0.5). In addition, the PCEs of PSCs with Γ-0.5 annealed at different temperatures are shown in Fig. S4, which suggests that the optimized temperature is 140 °C. Thus, we fix the annealing temperature at 140 °C in the following section. The photovoltaic metrics of PSCs fabricated with different concentrations of PVP (i.e. PSC Γ-0, PSC Γ-0.5 and PSC Γ-1) are summarized in Fig. 6. With the increase of CPVP from 0 to 12 μmol ml−1, the average Voc of the PSCs rises from 1.13 V to 1.17 V as shown in Fig. 6a, the fill factor (FF) increases from 0.73 to 0.76 as shown in Fig. 6c, and the PCE increases from 17.47% to an average of 19.10% as shown in Fig. 6d. The general increase of Voc benefits from the polar action of the carbonyl groups in PVP existing at the GBs which coordinate with the Pb2+.

The introduction of PVP can effectively reduce the number of conductive channels and largely increase the parallel resistance, which results in the promotion of FF. However, excessive PVP causes a decrease in electrical conductivity and it leads to charge accumulation at the interface of PVP–perovskite crystals, resulting in a drop in Jsc as shown in Fig. 6b. Fig. 6e gives the J–V curves of the champion PSCs with Γ-0.5 and Γ-0, which show a clear difference in the photovoltaic performance. Compared to the reference PSC Γ-0, both Voc (1.18 V) and FF (75.93%) of the PSC Γ-0.5 show a large enhancement, by which the maximum PCE is improved to 19.63%. In order to confirm that the PSCs have stable PCEs, the output current densities of the cells with Γ-0 and Γ-0.5 at the maximum power points (0.86 V and 0.95 V, respectively) under AM 1.5 illumination are monitored as shown in Fig. 6f. Obviously, the current density and the corresponding PCE of the Γ-0.5 sample suddenly increase when the light source is turned on, and then stabilize at 20.04 mA cm−2 and 19.02%, respectively. By contrast, the current density and PCE of the Γ-0 sample drop faster than those of the Γ-0.5 sample in 130 s. This highly stabilized PCE proves that the devices fabricated with additional PVP have more stable output performance.

As a typical diode device, the value of ideality factor n reflects the defect-state density in the PSC, which can be calculated from the differentiation of the Shockley diode equation. The corresponding n values of devices prepared with and without PVP are presented in Fig. 7a. It can be found that the actual n values are 1.81 and 1.69 for the devices PSC Γ-0 and PSC Γ-0.5, respectively, indicating that the existence of PVP effectively suppresses the carrier recombination process at the GBs. Thus, with the addition of PVP, the film defects are reduced. The enhancement of Voc improves the PCE, which benefits from the improvement of the film quality of the perovskite layer. There is a direct correlation between the dark current and Voc, which can be further confirmed according to the Shockley equation:

Voc = nkT(ln(Jph/Js) + 1)/q
(5)
where
Jph is the photo-current density, Js, q, k, and T, the reverse saturation current density, absolute value of electron charge, Boltzmann constant, and absolute temperature, respectively. Meanwhile, it's easy to create more conductive channels in the perovskite layer during the annealing process, which is reflected as an increase in reverse saturation current. As shown in Fig. 7b, the PSCs with Γ-0.5 have lower Js values than the PSCs with Γ-0, which results in a higher Voc. The reverse saturated current density can be calculated as shown in Fig. S7, and through the plots of dV/dJ vs. 1/J and the linear fitting curves, it's easy to obtain the series resistance in the dark, as illustrated in Fig. S7(a). Fig. S7(b) gives the plots of logJ vs. (V − JRs) and the reverse saturated current density is also derived from the linear fitting results, which is 3.16 × 10−8 and 1.58 × 10−8 for Γ-0 and Γ-0.5, respectively.

Further investigation based on steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy is performed to examine the role of the PVP additive in the formation of the perovskite films. On a glass substrate, the intensity signals of PL are directly related to the quality of the perovskite films. The steady-state PL spectra are shown in Fig. 7c, where the PL intensity is obviously increased with the addition of PVP. The reason is that a large number of dangling bonds that exist at the GBs are eliminated by the carbonyl. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) also provides important information on carrier recombination. The EIS spectra of different devices (PSC Γ-0 and PSC Γ-0.5) with the equivalent circuit are presented in Fig. 7d, and meanwhile the fitting results are listed in Table 1. The arc at the high-frequency range that mainly indicates the charge transfer ability can be represented by the parameter Rtr, the values of which are 7666 Ω and 7876 Ω for the PSCs based on Γ-0 and Γ-0.5, respectively. The increase of Rtr causes the reduction of Jsc for the device PSC Γ-0.5 compared with the PSC Γ-0. The arc at the low-frequency range mainly indicates the recombination resistance (Rre) at the interface, the values of which are 8931 Ω and 16486 Ω for the PSCs based on Γ-0 and Γ-0.5, respectively. It's easy to find that the charge recombination in the active layer is decreased. Compared with PSC Γ-0, the Rtr of PSC Γ-0.5 shows a slight increase, but its Rre enhances dramatically. The dose of PVP shows a positive correlation with the values of Rre, indicating that PVP plays a good role in surface passivation.
Samples

R
s (Ω)

R
tr (Ω)

R
re (Ω)
Γ-0
27.42
7666
8931
Γ-0.5
46.25
7876
16486

In summary, we investigated the effect of the polarity of an additive on the film formation and photovoltaic performance of PSCs, and provide an effective method for the passivation of the perovskite layer, whose defect density is significantly reduced and the recombination is suppressed. As a result, the perovskite films with lower grain boundary density are grown, exhibiting fewer non-radiative recombination centers. The PCE of the champion PSC increases to 19.63% with a Voc of 1.18 V. These results provide an effective strategy for fabricating high quality perovskite layers with fewer defects. However, additives with different polarities may have different influences on the PCEs of PSCs. Regarding the regulation of the morphology of the perovskite by additive polarity, we will conduct a series of comparisons to systematically explain the effect of passivation afterwards.


The authors declare no competing financial interest.


The support for this work by the Zhejiang Energy Group (Project No. znkj-2018-118), National Key Research and Development of China (Grant No. 2018YFB1500103, 2016YFB0700202, 2018YFB0704100), National Natural Science Foundation of China (61574145, 61874177, 51502315, 61704176), Zhejiang Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. LR16F040002), Major Project and Key S&T Program of Ningbo (2016B10004), and Key Lab of Photovoltaic and Energy Conservation Materials, Chinese Academy of Sciences is gratefully acknowledged by the authors.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9se00632j
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019