 DOI: 10.1039/C5NR08849F
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 5024-5036


Swapnil B.
Ambade
,

Rohan B.
Ambade
,

Seung Hun
Eom
,

Myung-Jin
Baek
,

Sushil S.
Bagde
,

Rajaram S.
Mane
 and 

Soo-Hyoung
Lee
*

School of Semiconductor and Chemical Engineering, Chonbuk National University, 664-14, 1-ga Deokjin-dong, Deokjin-gu, Jeonju, Jeonbuk 561-756, Republic of Korea. E-mail: shlee66@jbnu.ac.kr

Department of Chemistry, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), Ulsan, 689-798, Republic of Korea

Centre for Nanomaterials & Energy Devices, School of Physical Sciences, SRTM, University, 431606, Nanded, India

Received
13th December 2015
, Accepted 19th January 2016
First published on 20th January 2016
In an unprecedented attempt, we present an interesting approach of coupling solution processed ZnO planar nanorods (NRs) by an organic small molecule (SM) with a strong electron withdrawing cyano moiety and the carboxylic group as binding sites by a facile co-functionalization approach. Direct functionalization by SMs (SM-ZnO NRs) leads to higher aggregation owing to the weaker solubility of SMs in solutions of ZnO NRs dispersed in chlorobenzene (CB). A prior addition of organic 2-(2-methoxyethoxy)acetic acid (MEA) over ZnO NRs not only inhibits aggregation of SMs over ZnO NRs, but also provides enough sites for the SM to strongly couple with the ZnO NRs to yield transparent SM-MEA-ZnO NRs hybrids that exhibited excellent capability as electron transporting layers (ETLs) in inverted organic solar cells (iOSCs) of P3HT:PC60BM bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) photoactive layers. A strongly coupled SM-MEA-ZnO NR hybrid reduces the series resistance by enhancing the interfacial area and tunes the energy level alignment at the interface between the (indium-doped tin oxide, ITO) cathode and BHJ photoactive layers. A significant enhancement in power conversion efficiency (PCE) was achieved for iOSCs comprising ETLs of SM-MEA-ZnO NRs (3.64%) advancing from 0.9% for pristine ZnO NRs, while the iOSCs of aggregated SM-ZnO NRs ETL exhibited a much lower PCE of 2.6%, thus demonstrating the potential of the co-functionalization approach. The superiority of the co-functionalized SM-MEA-ZnO NRs ETL is also evident from the highest PCE of 7.38% obtained for the iOSCs comprising BHJ of PTB7-Th:PC60BM compared with extremely poor 0.05% for non-functionalized ZnO NRs.

The trend of developing semiconductor nanowires (NWs)/nanorods (NRs) is very promising as it allows effective charge transport through direct pathways along with high electron mobility and offers fewer defects, in view of the single crystalline phase, leading to less energy loss resulting from the electron trapping during electron transport. These fascinating features are of particular importance for inverted organic solar cells (iOSCs) with bulk heterojunction (BHJ) structure. The one-dimensional (1D) inorganic nanostructures can be utilized to reduce the recombination of photogenerated electrons with holes of photoactive polymer, considering that the distance for the electrons to transport from the sites where they generate to the collecting electrode (indium-doped tin oxide, ITO) in iOSCs is relatively far. For the iOSCs, the nanostructured inorganic network must possess high transparency, excellent charge mobility, and a long lifetime. Perfect crystallinity with minimal surface and bulk defects are desired, and the grain boundaries connecting individual nanostructures should be controlled to be as low as possible. Contrary to the use of porous metal oxides in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), the exciton dissociation and charge separation in iOSCs is effectively favored by the optimal morphology and the homogeneity of an ETL.

ZnO is considered as a promising inorganic semiconducting metal oxide in photovoltaics due to its high electron mobility (beneficial for reducing the electrical resistance), electron affinity and ability to form anisotropic structures such as NWs and NRs. A variety of solution processing techniques have been used to fabricate ZnO nanostructures for photovoltaic devices. Conventionally, vertical NRs are obtained by immersing ZnO nanoparticle-seeded substrates into the reaction container for a stipulated time to achieve the vertical growth of NRs with a desired aspect ratio. However, this technique has suffered from poor device performance or requires high annealing temperature processes (>400 °C). Moreover, vertically aligned NRs that are perpendicular to the substrate possess several defect states and limit the light harvesting efficiency when used in photovoltaic devices. Additionally, the physical nature of the films obtained by the conventional seeding method is opaque as well as non-uniform. For iOSCs, since the photons should reach the photoactive layer from the side of ITO through the ETL, the transparency of the ETL is a primary requirement to achieve high device efficiency. Simultaneously, an ideal transparent ETL must also possess a low resistance with ease of processing and efficient charge collection. However, transparency is always compromised at the cost of high conductivity. Thus, the ability to develop transparent and seedless one-dimensional (1D) nanomaterials such as NRs/NWs is a crucial requirement for manufacturing solution processed optoelectronic devices on a large area. From the perspective of wettability, the surface of ZnO NRs possess high free energy making them hydrophilic. This leads to incompatibility between n-type inorganic (hydrophilic ZnO) and p-type organic layers (hydrophobic polymer), causing non-ideal interfacial contact, which eventually results in undesired charge recombination and backflow of charge carriers. For control over surface energy and to overcome interfacial charge recombination, inserting an organic small molecule (SM) as an interfacial modifier (IM) at the inorganic–organic interface has been the most preferred approach. However, regarding device geometry, the incorporation of an IM adds a layer and increases the thickness of the device, clearly meaning additional interfaces. Moreover, the inserted IM tends to block some quantum of light. The increased thickness eventually means a subsequent increase in the distance for charges to travel from the photoactive layer to the ITO electrode. Another approach to increasing compatibility between inorganic and organic layers is to functionalize the surface of inorganic semiconducting metal oxides using organic components. Lee et al. demonstrated the use of organic additives of poly-(vinylpyrrolidone) (PVP) and diethanolamine (DEA) for the processing of ZnO nanoparticle (NP) hybrid nanocomposites by microwave heating to tune the work function of the ZnO ETL.
As an important functionalization constraint, reaction conditions that can ensure suitable attachment of organic molecules to inorganics can be far more restrictive than expected, owing to their different functionalities and solvent orthogonality. Although efforts have been made in using SMs for functionalization of inorganics, nevertheless, an approach to use multicomponent modification with the aim of multi-functionalization is very much atypical. Multifunctional inorganic–organic hybrid nanostructures may open up new research vistas since integral components within a designed composite can create synergetic effects in hybrid optoelectronics. For example, in iOSCs, it is challenging to synthesize solution processed 1D nanostructures that are transparent, possess high electrical conductivity and can be spin-coated.
Herein, we report an interesting, unprecedented strategy of multifunctionalizing ZnO NRs by coupling with a SM-based IM using a simple solution processing route. The incumbent challenge of inorganic–organic hybridization was overcome by stabilizing ZnO NRs using an optimum amount of 2-(2-methoxyethoxy)acetic acid (MEA) and then attaching the SM to the MEA-ZnO NRs to achieve co-functionalized SM-MEA-ZnO NRs. The SM used for functionalization was reported as an IM in previous works (designated as WL-4) including ours (designated as IM2). A detailed synthesis procedure of the SM is presented in our previous work. Geometrically, the SM is composed of a thiophene-benzothiadiazole-thiophene (TH-BT-TH) unit along with an electron withdrawing cyanoacrylic acid group, ensuring good conjugation across the entire molecule. The carboxylic acid functionality allows the SM to attach suitably to the surface of the ZnO NRs. The incorporation of electron-withdrawing benzothiadiazole between the thiophene units causes electron density to spread across the entire molecule. The density functional theory (DFT) calculations reveal that the SM has a higher intrinsic dipole moment (μ) owing to the D–A–D structure. We developed a two-step co-functionalization method for obtaining transparent, stable suspensions of SM functionalized ZnO NRs (SM-MEA-ZnO NRs), as depicted in Scheme 1. Scheme 1a is representative of direct functionalization of the SM on ZnO NRs while Scheme 1b represents co-functionalization of SM-MEA-ZnO NRs. To demonstrate the potential applications of these co-functionalized hybrid ZnO NRs, iOSCs were fabricated using a simple solution method. It was revealed that the resulting hybrid arising from SM/MEA functionalized ZnO NRs greatly enhances electron withdrawing vis-a-vis electron transporting synergetically. Moreover, other functionalities like enhanced transparency, improved wetability with organic materials and superior electrical characteristics have been achieved.

The ETLs of seedless, planar ZnO NRs were synthesized solvothermally according to procedures reported in our previous work. Briefly, hydrolysis and condensation of premixed alkali solution of zinc in the ratio of Zn2+:OH− = 1:23 was carried out in a pressurized solvothermal Teflon-lined autoclave for 4 h to obtain NRs with the necessary aspect ratio. The obtained NRs were highly opaque as well as aggregated. Direct functionalization of ZnO NRs using MEA and the SM was carried out by suspending the NRs in 1.5–1.8% chlorobenzene (CB). Before suspending in CB, the NRs were cleaned sequentially with ethanol to remove any reaction impurities. The addition of MEA and SM in respective vials was continued until opaque ZnO NRs turned into clear, transparent solutions. These solutions were stirred and spun on cleaned ITOs to perform as ETLs of iOSCs. While highly transparent solutions were obtained for MEA-functionalized ZnO NRs, the addition of SMs to ZnO NRs instead enhanced the aggregation, and no transparency was obtained. To obtain co-functionalized ZnO NRs, controlled addition of SM (∼16% v/v) to MEA-ZnO NRs was carried out. On adding SMs to MEA-ZnO NRs, the solution turned light orange although it was highly clear and transparent. It is noteworthy that two ETLs viz directly functionalized MEA-ZnO NRs and co-functionalized SM-MEA ZnO NRs, were extremely stable for months. They not only remained transparent but also performed quite consistently as ETLs.


The surface morphologies of the hybrid ZnO ETL were obtained using field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM, Hitachis-4700), energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) attached to the FESEM, transmission electron microscopy (TEM), selected area electron diffraction (SAED) and high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) using a JOEL JEM-2010 microscope operated at an acceleration voltage of 200 kV. The optical transmittance and UV-vis absorption spectra were recorded using a Shimadzu UV-2550 spectrophotometeron glass substrates. Photoluminescence (PL) spectra of the films were obtained using a Jasco FP-6500 spectrophotometer. Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectra were measured using a Shimadzu FT-IR-8700 using a standard KBr method. The FT-IR spectrum was collected after 32 scans at a resolution of 2 cm−1 from 4000 to 450 cm−1. The crystalline structures were analyzed using X-ray diffraction (XRD) and a PANalytical X-pert diffractometer operating at 30 kV and 20 mA with a CuKα radiation λ = 1.5405 Å) collected in the 2θ (twice the Bragg angle) range of 10–80° at a scan speed of 10 min−1 using a step size of 0.04°. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements were performed using a Kratos Analytical Probe (A Shimadzu Group) system equipped with a monochromatic (Al) X-ray source (1486.6 eV). XPS measurements were also carried out with a twin anode and a charge neutralizer, to test the electronic binding energy of the samples. Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) measurements were carried out using an AXIS-ULTRA DLD spectrometer (Kratos Analytical Ltd) using He(I) (21.2 eV) as a monochromatic light source. Topographic and conductive atomic force microscopy (C-AFM) images were simultaneously measured in contact mode using a Digital Instruments’ multimode atomic force microscope controlled by a Nanoscope IIIa scanning probe microscope 20 controller in tapping (to gain topographic insight) as well as contact modes. Current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics were measured under AM 1.5 G solar irradiation (Newport) with reference to a standard Si cell calibrated at an intensity of 100 mW cm−2 using a Keithley 2400 Source meter in the dark. External quantum efficiency (EQE) was measured under monochromatic illumination (Polaronix K3100 spectrometer). All electrochemical analyses including electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and photovoltage decay measurements were carried out using a COMPACTSTATe: 40 IVIUM Technologies Impedance analyzer in a frequency range of 0.01 Hz to 1.5 MHz. The obtained EIS data were fitted with Scribner Associates Z-VIEW software v3.1 using the appropriate equivalent circuits.


Inverted organic solar cells were fabricated using the following architectures: ITO/ZnONRs/P3HT:PC60BM or PTB7-Th:PC60BM/MoO3/Ag. ITO glass substrates were cleaned sequentially in ultrasonic baths of acetone and isopropanol, then further dried. The ETLs of planar ZnO NRs were spin coated onto the ITO glass at 1000 rpm for 40 s, annealed at 200 °C for 10 min and transferred into an N2 filled glove box. The BHJ photoactive layers of P3HT:PC60BM (1:1 ratio) or PTB7-Th:PC60BM (1:1.5 ratio) from 1,2-dichlorobenzene (ODCB) or chlorobenzene solution were filtered through a 0.45 μm poly(tetrafluoroethylene) filter in all devices and were spin-casted at 500 rpm for 40 s. The active layer was then dried in covered glass petri dishes for 12 h in the glove box to control the film growth rate. Finally on the top of the active layer, a 15 nm MoO3, and 100 nm Ag as an anode were thermally evaporated sequentially at a pressure of 1 × 10−6 Torr with a shadow mask. The active cell area was 0.36 cm2.


SMs are extensively used as IMs aiding in ultrafast charge transfer. An apparent challenge to couple them with inorganics originates from their strong tendency to aggregate, as a result of strong non-covalent interactions between the conjugated cores of SMs. Moreover, the organically synthesized SMs are intrinsically hydrophobic. In contrast, inorganics like ZnO possess higher surface energy which makes it challenging to integrate with materials that have a low surface energy such as SMs or polymers, causing serious interfacial problems. The incorporation of hydroxyls by functionalization with MEA provides effective blockades for SMs to aggregate on ZnO and to inhibit intermolecular or intramolecular π–π stacking. The degree of functionalization can best be tuned by the concentration of MEA. It is noted that a higher degree of functionalization can induce higher anchoring of SMs; however, excess MEA may be detrimental as it can have an adverse effect on device performance. Thus, an optimal degree of functionalization can achieve nanohybrids with superior functionalities to fulfill the requirements of a variety of hybrid optoelectronic devices like OSCs.


The optical changes in ZnO NRs were investigated using UV-vis absorption spectroscopy (Fig. 1a). The absorption edge of the non-functionalized ZnO NRs (ZnO NRs) is at 361 nm. Direct functionalization of ZnO NRs with SMs (SM-ZnO NRs) exhibited absorbance at 362 nm, which corresponds to near-UV emissions of ZnO and another absorbance in the high wavelength region of 550 nm. A blue shift in wavelength of ∼19 nm in comparison to ZnO NRs was observed for the band-edge transition of MEA-ZnO, attributed to excess carriers donated by MEA to ZnO. The absorption maximum (λmax) of SM dissolved in tetrahydrofuran (THF) corresponding to π–π* transitions and charge transfer (CT) excitation of SMs is observed at 471 nm and 371 nm (weaker absorption band), respectively. The UV-vis absorption spectrum of the SM-MEA-ZnO sample exhibits three absorbances, namely at 475 nm, a shoulder at a lower wavelength of 381 nm and the UV emission peak of ZnO at 358 nm. These spectral changes clearly point to the close packing of the SM compound into H-aggregates at the NR surface, resulting in enhanced electronic states in the bandgap of ZnO NRs. It is noteworthy that the absorbances corresponding to π–π* transitions of the SM show red shift on anchoring with hydroxylated ZnO NRs highlighting effective protonation in the co-functionalized SM-MEA-ZnO NRs. This result contradicts the previous findings of Wang et al., who reported possible deprotonation on using the same SM as an IM with TiO2 (designated WL-4). Moreover, the co-functionalization of hydroxylated ZnO NRs by the SM induces the efficient harvesting of solar light over a wider range of wavelengths.


The thin films of functionalized and non-functionalized ZnO NRs were characterized using XRD (Fig. 1b). The intense (100), (002) and (101) Bragg peaks of ZnO are in agreement with the typical wurtzite crystal of ZnO with Zn2+ and O2− terminated polar surfaces along the c-axis (hexagonal phase, space group P63mc, JCPDS no. 36-1451). No other peaks related to impurities were detected, indicating the purity of all the samples. However, the (100) and (101) diffraction peaks disappeared, and only the (002) diffraction peak was detected in the films of SM-ZnO and MEA-ZnO, indicating preferred grain growth along the (002) plane. The preferential growth may be attributed to the difference in surface energies and growth rate for different faces of ZnO nanocrystals. The increased density of hydroxyls on introducing MEA modifies the surface energies in such a way that directs the growth preferentially towards the (002) direction. The sharp diffraction peaks, in all ZnO NR films (Fig. 1b), indicate good crystallinity. The sharpness of the (002) diffraction peak, however, is comparatively lower for SM-ZnO NRs film indicating a lower crystallinity, which is very obvious since the wrapping of the intrinsically amorphous SM would result in relatively low crystalline ZnO. The peak positions of the SM-ZnO, MEA-ZnO and SM-MEA-ZnO NRs did not match those of pristine ZnO NRs, indicating that the strains induced by the organics were good enough to change the lattice constants of the ZnO NRs. The calculated parameters are presented in Table S1. XRD observations were further corroborated by morphological studies carried out using FESEM and TEM.


The FESEM and TEM digital image gallery is presented in Fig. 2. The FESEM images clearly reveal that surface functionalization induces a change in the morphology though the basic shape remains to be NR-like. A TEM image of pristine ZnO NRs (Fig. 2e) reveals that the NRs have a high aspect ratio with a typical length of 60–70 nm and a diameter of 15–20 nm. The TEM image (Fig. 2i) reflects the tubular rod type geometry of the pristine ZnO NRs synthesized solvothermally.

In a single functionalization environment containing direct molecular interaction by SMs, ZnO NRs tend to aggregate heavily with an enhancement in the length of the NR (Fig. 2c, g and k). While in another case of single-functionalization by capping with MEA, it is particularly striking that there was no significant change in the parent nanorod morphology. Also, no aggregation was observed (Fig. 2b and f). This could well be attributed to higher miscibility of MEA in ZnO NRs that are dispersed in CB solution. In sharp contrast, the solubility of the SMs is extremely poor in CB dispersed ZnO NRs leading to aggregation. Higher aggregation also implies that the relative supersaturation degree attained in the reaction mixtures was weakened. On the other hand, in a co-functionalization system comprising the SM incorporated to MEA hydroxylated ZnO NRs, the majority of ZnO NRs pile up with closed packed planes forming a densely stacked network (Fig. 2d), although it is noteworthy to point out that such a dense network in no way corresponds to any aggregation (Fig. 2d and h). Because of the interparticle attractive forces induced by dual interaction (co-functionalization) with MEA and then SMs, the NRs showed a natural tendency to organize spontaneously into ordered stacks. A representative TEM image obtained for a single co-functionalized SM-MEA-ZnO NR clearly reveals uniform SM coverage on the surface of the ZnO NR, as evidenced by the smooth organic-molecular sheath over ZnO (the region marked yellow), as shown in Fig. 2l. The thickness of the SM over ZnO is estimated to be ∼3–5 nm. However, for SM-ZnO NRs (direct functionalization) the edges of ZnO appear rougher and possibly developed as a consequence of the high degree of SM aggregation (Fig. 2k). From the TEM analysis, we postulate that the SM planar backbone forms a π–π interaction with subsequent neighboring molecules along the plane of the ZnO NRs, while the end-functional carboxylic groups of the SM act as strong coupling anchors to combine with the hydroxylated ZnO NRs.
The superlattice and crystal structure of the individual NR was probed using HRTEM analysis. Control over the dimension and surface passivation/functionalization of the individual NRs results in the precise tailoring of superlattice fringe widths. Sharp electron diffraction (ED) spots (Fig. 2m–p) demonstrate the lateral perfection of the superlattice on a nanometer scale. It is noteworthy that the sharpness of the ED spots increases with co-functionalization indicating an enhancement in the crystalline feature of the SM-MEA-ZnO NRs. The ED spots of the SM-ZnO NR sample (Fig. 2o) have the least amount of sharpness which is attributed to the high degree of aggregates of amorphous SM on ZnO NRs.
We also measured the water contact angles (WCA) on the ETLs (inset of Fig. 2a–d) and found that co-functionalized ZnO NRs were more hydrophobic than pristine ZnO NRs. Hydrophobicity increased with organic functionalization of the ZnO NRs and was recorded to be 45, 53 & 65° for MEA-ZnO, SM-ZnO and SM-MEA-ZnO NRs, respectively. Considering that the WCAs of MEA and SM are in the range of 40–70°, we, thus believe that the ZnO was sufficiently covered by organic groups on respective functionalization. The difference in the WCAs of all ETLs indicates that the morphologies and D/A interfacial area in the active layers on top of the different ZnO layers should be different.

Experimental data from the FT-IR studies carried out on all samples under a similar set of conditions point to variation in the functionalization of the ZnO NRs in all cases. As presented in Fig. 3, the broad absorption band at around 3400 cm−1 (ref. 40) for all three functionalized samples is attributed to the strong hydrogen bonding offered by functional groups coupled on the surface of the ZnO, while the C–H stretching band is observed at ∼2900 cm−1. A sharp and intense carbonyl band for the CO group is slightly shifted to lower frequencies (∼1675 cm−1) than expected, possibly as a consequence of conjugation with ZnO. A medium intensity C–O stretching vibration for acid (MEA) appears near 1270 cm−1. A broad band of low intensity, attributed to the hydrogen bonded O–H out-of-plane bending vibration, appears at around 930 cm−1. The strong band below 500 cm−1 is assigned to the Zn–O stretching vibration of ZnO.

In this work, ZnO NRs were functionalized sequentially by two functional groups (hydroxyl (–OH) from MEA & carboxyl (–COOH) from SM). In the course of co-functionalization, at the outermost edges of the ZnO NRs, it is very likely for two effects to occur. During the first step of functionalization using MEA, Zn2+ ions of ZnO would react with the hydroxyl functional groups of MEA to result in a local Zn–O–C bonding. In the second step, when SM is introduced to the MEA-functionalized ZnO NRs, the carboxylates of the SM would ensure the SMs couple with the already MEA-functionalized ZnO NRs. It is noteworthy that under this approach the hydroxylates appearing from MEA functionalization would aid in improving the solubility of the SMs in the solution of MEA-functionalized ZnO NRs. Direct functionalization of ZnO NRs using SMs immediately leads to aggregation in the absence of enough hydroxylates.
The FT-IR absorbance spectra of the SM-ZnO NR and SM-MEA ZnO NR samples show the well resolved band at 2348 cm−1, corresponding to a nitrile (CN) symmetric stretching frequency. It is clear from both spectra that the nitrile absorbance band in SM-MEA-ZnO NRs is relatively larger than that observed in SM-ZnO NRs. This could be attributed to the difference in the coupling of the SMs to ZnO NRs. Moreover, the band position in both samples remains unchanged, clearly meaning that nitriles do not interact with any other components, either from ZnO or hydroxylates induced by MEA functionalization. However, the IR bands in SM-MEA-ZnO NRs show a noticeable change in their band position at the sites of hydroxyls or carboxyls in comparison to those in SM-ZnO NRs. A ∼50 cm−1 red-shift of OH stretching vibrations for SM-MEA ZnO NRs clearly indicates stronger H-bonding between hydroxylated ZnO NRs (as induced by MEA) and carboxylic functional groups of SM. Stronger H-bonding is also indicative of the fact that the probability of SM to couple or cover ZnO NRs via prior MEA functionalization is extremely higher which would ultimately reduce any possibility of aggregation.

XPS spectra were measured to confirm co-functionalization of ZnO NRs. The binding energies of the Zn 2p3/2 and Zn 2p1/2 peaks for pristine ZnO NRs were in agreement with the reported values. From the strong chemical shifts in Zn binding energies (Fig. 4a), it is well appreciated that the core level electrons in ZnO NRs are moved to lower energies, indicating that ZnO is functionalized by organic species. With co-functionalization, the shift in binding energies is as high as ∼3 eV, suggesting that organic functional groups exert additional force to pull electrons to a lower energy. A negative shift in binding energy implies that more Zn atoms are bound to O atoms.

The O 1s core level spectra, fitted with Gaussian–Lorentz distribution are presented in Fig. 4B. The O 1s core level spectrum for ZnO NRs is deconvoluted into three sub-peaks at 530.39, 531.01 and 532.97 eV. The peak with low binding energy (P1) arising at 530.39 eV corresponds to O2− ions surrounding Zn atoms of normal wurtzite structure of ZnO single crystal. The middle peak (P2) at 531.01 eV is attributed to O2− ions in the oxygen vacancies on the ZnO nanostructure.
The third peak (P3) positioned at a higher binding energy (532.97 eV) is attributed to hydroxyls arising either during synthesis or induced after hydroxylation. The presence of an intense lattice oxygen peak in the SM-MEA-ZnO NR sample indicates that the co-functionalized films are stable without any impurity or cluster formation in comparison to that observed in the films of ZnO NRs (Fig. 4Ba). Comparing the intensities of P2 from the XPS spectra of MEA-ZnO NRs (Fig. 4Bb), SM-ZnO NRs (Fig. 4Bc) and SM-MEA-ZnO NRs (Fig. 4Bd), it is apparent that the suppression of oxygen vacancy defects in the co-functionalized material (SM-MEA-ZnO NRs) is maximum. Additionally, S 2p peaks were observed in the spectrum of SM-ZnO and SM-MEA-ZnO NRs, demonstrating that the SMs are effectively connected to the ZnO NRs. The binding energies of the measured XPS spectra are summarized Table 1.
ETLs
Zn 2p3/2 (eV)
Zn 2p1/2 (eV)
ZnO
1023.38
1046.45
MEA-ZnO
1022.57
1045.65
SM-ZnO
1020.60
1043.86
SM-MEA-ZnO
1020.42
1043.43

The crystal quality of the ZnO NRs was monitored using Raman analysis as shown in Fig. 5. The corresponding Raman maps are presented in Fig. S1. Raman spectra of all ZnO NR samples exhibited only longitudinal optical (LO) phonon and its overtones. The LO mode ∼570 cm−1 corresponding to A1 symmetry (1LO) is observed for all NR samples (Table 2), in accordance with previous observations. The significant rise of the intensity of the LO modes compared to the E2 modes is attributed to the phenomena of interactions of the short ranged non-polar E2 modes via the deformational potential, while the long ranged polar LO modes are subjected to the incoming resonance effects with intermediate states due to Frohlich interaction. Overtone modes up to a higher order (2LO) observed in every sample confirms the excellent crystalline quality of the NRs. It is observed that the ratio of intensity of high order overtone modes to first order mode (I2LO/I1LO) increases with co-functionalization, clearly suggesting the enhancement of the electron–phonon coupling strength for SM-MEA-ZnO NRs. The increased ratio is suggestive of reduced defects and improved crystal quality for SM-MEA-ZnO.

ETLs
1LO (cm−1)
2LO (cm−1)
Δ1LO (cm−1)
Δ2LO (cm−1)
ZnO
563
1090
0
0
MEA-ZnO
574.6
1086
11.6
−4
SM-ZnO
610
1093
47
3
SM-MEA-ZnO
577.61
1099.4
14.6
9.4
The pristine ZnO NR sample exhibited weak Raman signals, which was enhanced by many orders on co-functionalization. The Raman intensity of ZnO is influenced by the intensity of the local electric field formed, as the enhanced scattering intensity of active phonons is a result of interaction between the formed local electric field and optical phonons in ZnO. Thus, it is inferred that the electric field in SM-MEA-ZnO NRs was enhanced by many orders. Moreover, the SM-MEA-ZnO NRs sample exhibited additional vibrations at higher orders (Fig. 5B), further proving the generation of a high electric field in SM-MEA-ZnO NRs.

The existence of nanoscale conductivity in the ETLs was confirmed using conducting atomic force microscopy (C-AFM) imaging carried out by applying a bias voltage of 2 V. No obvious change was detected in the C-AFM image of ZnO NRs (Fig. 6a) while moderate conductive regions were observed for MEA-ZnO NRs (Fig. 6b). Massive bright spots corresponding to local conductive regions appear in SM-MEA-ZnO NRs (Fig. 6d), clearly indicating increased conductivity in SM-MEA-ZnO NRs. This is suggestive of strong coupling of the SM to ZnO via the median of MEA. The structure of the SMs may be envisioned as a series of conjugated lengths with delocalized molecular structures that are held in close proximity by the virtue of the SM backbone. Under perfect coupling of the SMs to ZnO NRs (through carboxylic end groups) via MEA, MEA plays an important role in avoiding inter as-well-as intramolecular overlap, thereby properly maintaining the structure of the SM that is linked to the ZnO NR. The energy migration in such a well-maintained co-functionalized system is certain to be facile as it allows unperturbed transfer of charges. In the absence of MEA, the SMs strongly aggregate on the surface of the ZnO NRs. It is possible that aggregation might lead to a distorted chain structure and would disastrously affect the electronic states leading to low conductive regions in SM-ZnO NRs (Fig. 6c).


The energy level alignment plays an important role in advancing device structure in optoelectronic devices like iOSCs. The energetics of ZnO NRs, MEA-ZnO NRs, SM-ZnO NRs and SM-MEA-ZnO NRs were evaluated using ultraviolet photoemission spectroscopy (UPS) and summarized in the energy diagram in Scheme 2a. Fig. 7(A) and (B) show the UPS spectra measured for the ETLs. Fig. 7B represents the photoemission onset (Eonset), from which the vacuum level can be deduced while Fig. 7A is representative of the density of states near the valence band edge (Ecutoff). All the spectra clearly point out that all ETLs possess a band edge around 3–3.5 eV below the Fermi level and a conduction band edge very close to the Fermi level, a characteristic feature of n-type conductivity. The electron transport in n-type materials is known to be more favorable via the conduction band, and thus it is important to evaluate the position of the conduction band minimum (CBM), which is eventually obtained by subtracting Eg (obtained from UV absorption edge) from the value of the valence band maximum (VBM). The VBM energy levels are calculated from the UPS data using eqn (1).

VBM = kv − (Ecutoff − Eonset)
(1)
The calculated VBM and CBM values are presented in Scheme 2b and Table 3. As shown in Scheme 2b, the CBM of SM-MEA-ZnO NRs (−3.89 eV) is upshifted by almost 0.59 eV in comparison to that of ZnO NRs (−4.48 eV), which is very close to the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of PC60BM. The reduced electronic distance should facilitate effective electron transport to the cathode. Thus, iOSCs of SM-MEA-ZnO NR ETLs are expected to have a large open circuit voltage (Voc) and short circuit current density (Jsc). The decreased work-function of SM-MEA-ZnO NRs is ascribed to stronger and efficient bonding of SMs to ZnO NRs as MEA plays a pivotal role in avoiding intermolecular aggregation of SMs on ZnO NRs. While the work function of SM-MEA-ZnO NRs was decreased, the work-function of SM-ZnO NRs was increased considerably.
ETLs
Donor

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
ff (%)
Avg. PCE (%)

R
s (Ω cm2)

R
sh (Ω cm2)
Enhancement in rectification ratio with respect to ZnO
ZnO
P3HT
5.96
0.4
40
0.95
33.0
132
0
PTB7-Th
1.25
0.18
23.62
0.05
MEA-ZnO
P3HT
9.32
0.6
56
3.13
9.3
920
936
PTB7-Th
12.06
0.80
60.93
5.86
SM-ZnO
P3HT
8.85
0.55
53
2.61
12.8
628
265
PTB7-Th
5.86
0.76
36.60
1.63
SM-MEA-ZnO
P3HT
10.29
0.62
58
3.64
3.2
1098
8758
PTB7-Th
14.03
0.80
65.57
7.38
It is known that carbon concentration plays a significant role in modulating the work function. Zhang et al. have shown that with decreasing carbon concentration, the work function decreases gradually. From the XPS analysis presented in Table 1, it is evident that the concentration of carbon in SM-MEA-ZnO NR samples is comparatively lower than that in the SM-ZnO NRs sample. A higher carbon concentration corresponds to the fact that removal of electrons from strong C–C covalent bonds to the vacuum region gets more complex, resulting in a higher work function as in the case of the SM-ZnO NR sample.

We then fabricated iOSCs by spin-coating ETLs on ITO with the device structure ITO/ETLs/P3HT:PC60BM/MoO3/Ag. The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristic curves measured under simulated 100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5G illumination are presented in Fig. 8a and tabulated in Table 3. J–V results show that use of SM-MEA-ZnO NRs as an ETL gives strikingly enhanced performance relative to iOSCs comprising non-functionalized ZnO NRs as an ETL, as the PCE increases from 0.95 to 3.64% owing to a dramatic increase in all three photovoltaic parameters. Voc, Jsc and fill factor (FF) improved from 0.4 V, 5.96 mA cm−2 & 40% to 0.62 V, 10.29 mA cm−2 & 58%, respectively for iOSCs comprising SM-MEA-ZnO NRs as an ETL. Also, the iOSCs fabricated with photoactive BHJ comprising of high efficiency donor polymer PTB7-Th and PC60BM using SM-MEA-ZnO NRs ETL resulted in a maximum PCE of 7.38% (Fig. 8c and Table 3), which was significantly higher than the 0.05% achieved for non-functionalized ZnO NRs. The enhancement in PCE for SM-MEA-ZnO NRs ETL compared to non-functionalized ZnO NRs is a result of enhancements of ∼1122% in Jsc (from 1.25 to 14.03 mA.cm−2), ∼444% in Voc (from 0.18 to 0.80), and ∼277% in FF (from 23.62 to 65.57). Besides SM-MEA-ZnO NRs, the iOSCs of the other two ETLs (MEA-ZnO NRs, SM-ZnO NRs) also exhibited an enhancement in PCE. It is, however, important to note that the PCE of devices fabricated using ETLs of direct functionalization (SM-ZnO NRs) is drastically reduced. This is attributed to notorious aggregations caused by SMs on ZnO NRs. The improvement in PCE for SM-MEA-ZnO NRs can be systematically explained by in-depth analysis of each photovoltaic parameter for a P3HT:PC60BM system.

The enhancement in Jsc is firstly attributed to enhanced light absorption in the SM-MEA-ZnO NR ETL. UV-vis absorption spectroscopy (Fig. 1a) revealed that light harvesting for SM-MEA-ZnO NRs is over a much wider range, clearly meaning a greater number of photons participate in the process of photovoltaic power generation. Additionally, SM-MEA-ZnO NRs are highly transparent in comparison to opaque ZnO NRs as well as aggregated SM-ZnO NRs, thus allowing the maximum amount of light to reach the photoactive BHJ. Secondly, the SM-MEA-ZnO NR surface has greater hydrophobicity compared to other ETLs, which should obviously improve the interface between the ETL and photoactive layer. Thirdly, the Hall measurement and C-AFM analysis revealed that the conductivity of the co-functionalized material (SM-MEA-ZnO NRs) was significantly promoted, owing to an increase in carrier concentration. The enhancement in conductivity is ascribed to the addition of new electronic states due to strong coupling of SMs to MEA hydroxylated ZnO NRs. Increased conductivity obviously means more active sites for electrons to flow towards the cathode.

EQE measurements for the P3HT:PC60BM BHJ iOSCs with SM-MEA-ZnO NRs as the ETL show an overall enhancement in the entire absorption range (Fig. 8d), indicating that the increase in Jsc results from more-efficient electron collection by the co-functionalized ETL. The maximum EQE obtained for the SM-MEA-ZnO NR device is 62%, in sharp contrast to 19, 50 & 25% for iOSCs of ZnO NRs, MEA-ZnO NRs and SM-ZnO NRs, which indicates efficient photon-to-electron conversion. For the iOSCs of PTB7-Th:PCBM BHJ, the EQE (Fig. 8e) further extends to a wavelength of 700 nm. It is worth noting that the integrated EQE values are in good agreement with the measured Jsc values.


To assess the difference in charge transfer in all the ETLs, we investigated the photoluminescence (PL) quenching efficiency of P3HT/PTB7-Th donors, and ZnO NRs used as an acceptor.Fig. 8f presents the room temperature PL spectra recorded for P3HT polymer coated onto various ZnO NRs acceptors. ZnO NRs film showed strong PL intensity, which indicates poor exciton dissociation. The PL intensity was found to be decreased for the modified ZnO NRs films. For the SM-MEA-ZnO NRs film, the PL intensity was quenched dramatically. The order of quenching was in the order of SM-MEA-ZnO NRs, MEA-ZnO NRs, and SM-ZnO NRs with respect to ZnO NRs, proving the superiority of SM-MEA-ZnO NRs. A systematically coupled SM (in the case of SM-MEA-ZnO NRs) comprising a strong electron withdrawing moiety like cyano ensures electrons to be pulled more efficiently from the photoactive layer to ZnO NRs and transport further to ITO cathode.

However, a more complex scenario can be imagined in the case of direct functionalization of SM to ZnO NRs (SM-ZnO NRs) where SM aggregates rapidly over ZnO NRs. Under such circumstances, the charge delocalization would be hampered due to excess π–π stacking and higher roughness. Moreover, it is also fair to believe that aggregation might even lead to disordering of the SMs, which certainly would be a serious obstacle for effective electronic movement. Thus, higher Jsc for iOSCs of SM-MEA-ZnO NRs is also attributed to excellent dissociation behavior in case of SM-MEA-ZnO NRs ETL.
The enhancement in FF is explained by the dark J–V characteristic curves presented in Fig. 8b. The dark J–V curves reflect that iOSCs of SM-MEA-ZnO NRs have superior rectifying diode characteristics. From Table 3, it is observed that the enhancement in rectification ratio with respect to ZnO NRs was respectively, 936, 265 & 8758 times higher for iOSCs of MEA-ZnO NRs, SM-ZnO NRs, and SM-MEA-ZnO NRs, thus justifying the occurrence of FF in all the iOSCs. It is found that the enhancement in FF is in inverse and direct proportion to the series (Rs) and shunt resistances (Rsh) of each device.
To investigate the nanoscale morphology of ETLs, atomic force microscopy (AFM) was carried out. AFM topographic images presented in Fig. S3 reveal good surface coverage for all the functionalized ETLs compared to non-functionalized ZnO NRs. The root mean square (RMS) roughness values for ZnO, MEA-ZnO, SM-ZnO, and SM-MEA-ZnO NRs are 7.6 nm, 3.24 nm, 4.98 nm, and 3.1 nm, respectively. For SM-ZnO NRs (Fig. S3c), although the uniformity increased compared to non-functionalized ZnO NRs (Fig. S3a), it is clear that large aggregates still exist. This is due to the limited miscibility of the SMs in the ZnO NRs. However, with the co-functionalization (SM-MEA-ZnO NRs), morphology becomes much smoother (Fig. S3d) and aggregation is controlled substantially. This is ascribed to suitable interactions between MEA and ZnO NRs. From the photovoltaic performance presented in Table 3, it is seen that Rs decreased significantly for iOSCs of SM-MEA-ZnO NRs, which eventually increased Jsc and FF. This is attributed to uniform, smoother morphology with decreased RMS for co-functionalized ETL (SM-MEA-ZnO NRs) that resulted in greater intimate contact between the ETL and the photoactive layer. While a rough morphology with increased RMS will lead to decreased device performance, as observed in Table 3.
The interaction between an ETL and the photoactive BHJ is also important from the perspective of determining the BHJ morphology. The WCA measured on the photoactive layer (P3HT:PCBM) spin-coated on ETLs (Fig. S2) is suggestive of the difference in spin coating conditions for the photoactive layer on different ETLs. The increased hydrophobic nature of photoactive BHJ layer on SM-MEA-ZnO NRs (Fig. S2d) indicates greater vertical phase separation in the BHJ photoactive blend. This could be ascribed to a strong charge-transfer interaction between PCBM (accumulating at the bottom or near ETL) and the surface dipoles formed by the hybrid ETL. Thus, the modified ETLs can affect the subsequent film morphology and the density of active sites for charge collection. This correlates well with the photovoltaic performance exhibited by the iOSCs of co-functionalized ETLs.
Since the Voc of the BHJ solar cell is usually determined by the difference in LUMO of the acceptor and highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of the donor, as well as the work function difference between the anode and the cathode, the increase in Voc can be attributed to the reduced work-function for SM-MEA-ZnO NRs (3.89 eV vs. 4.48 eV for ZnO).
The reduced work function of SM-MEA-ZnO NRs increases the work-function difference between the anode and the cathode, increasing the Voc to 0.62 V. One of the major benefits of SMs to couple with ZnO through carboxylate bonding is the presence of a dipole moment that points away from ZnO, leading to improved ohmic contact. The upshifted workfunction of the cathode thus facilitates electron transfer to the cathode through improved ohmic contact. Considering the fact that all photovoltaic parameters are enhanced in iOSCs of SM-MEA-ZnO NRs, we infer that SM-MEA-ZnO NRs not only serve a role of surface modifier but also act as an efficient electron extractor along with ZnO.

The difference in the charge transport at the interface between the photoactive layer and ITO cathode was evaluated using an impedance spectroscopy carried out on iOSCs comprising all four ZnO NRs as ETLs. Fig. 9a shows Nyquist plots for the iOSCs at zero bias under 1 Sun illumination.

The Nyquist plots show two distinct semicircles in the frequency regions 105–103 and 102–101 Hz. The left semicircle in the high frequency range arises from the ETLs, while that in the low frequency range (right) corresponds to photoactive layers of P3HT/PTB7-Th:PCBM. The impedance spectra were fitted to a 2-RC circuit model which contains one resistor and two RC circuits (sub-circuit with a resistor R and a capacitor C in parallel) in series as shown in the inset of Fig. 9a. The Rs represents the ohmic resistance including the electrodes and bulk resistance in the active layer. It is clear from the Nyquist plot that the recombination of charges at the interface between the ETL and the photoactive layer is dramatically reduced for iOSCs of SM-MEA-ZnO NRs, indicating efficient charge transfer in comparison to other devices. While the active layer conditions and device geometry are similar, the different diameters obviously correspond to the difference in contact resistance of underlying electron collector (i.e. ETLs) in iOSCs. The trend in Nyquist plots is consistent with the observations of J–V. We find these observations to be reasonable, since the hydrophobic nature of SM-MEA-ZnO NRs in comparison to hydrophilic ZnO NRs improves the intimate contact with the photoactive layer, thus reducing the charge transfer resistance. This is reasonable since the iOSCs of SM-MEA-ZnO NRs exhibited lowest Rs.

Another factor influencing the performance of iOSCs is electron lifetime. We measured the electron lifetime by the open-circuit voltage-decay (OCVD) technique by fitting the photovoltage decay plot obtained from open-circuit voltage decay measurement and applying equation developed by Bisquert et al. The electron lifetime is given by τn = −(KT/e)(dVoc/dt)−1, where KT is the thermal energy, e is the positive elementary charge, K is the Boltzmann constant and dVoc/dt is the first-order time derivation of the Voc. The plot of electron lifetime, τn (in a log representation), as a function of Voc presented in Fig. 9b, reveals that τn of the SM-MEA-ZnO NRs was longer than other ETLs, suggesting more efficient electron transfer, consistent with EIS analysis. Thus, enhanced electron lifetime for the iOSCs of SM-MEA-ZnO NRs accounts for a higher PCE than that of ZnO NRs.


In conclusion, we have presented a novel approach for coupling a small molecule (SM) to ZnO NRs by co-functionalizing with MEA to combine the advantages of ZnO NRs and organic SMs, typically to increase the interfacial area by modifying the surface wettability of hydrophilic ZnO NRs to moderately hydrophobic and to smartly modulate the light absorption management over a wide solar spectrum. These co-functionalized SM-MEA-ZnO NRs are used as an ETL for iOSCs that exhibited extremely enhanced electron extraction as well as transport capabilities by the virtue of increased transparency, reduced work function and promotion of electron conductivity at the interface and bulk. The iOSCs of SM-MEA-ZnO NRs using P3HT:PC60BM as a photoactive layer exhibited the highest PCE of 3.64% compared to 0.9% for iOSCs of ZnO NRs ETL. The iOSCs based on directly functionalized SM-ZnO NRs as an ETL exhibited a comparatively lower PCE of 2.61% owing to increased leakage current and higher work-function majorly as a result of randomly oriented and aggregated SM on ZnO NRs. For the iOSCs with a photoactive layer of PTB7-Th:PC60BM, the highest PCE of 7.38% was achieved for the co-functionalized ETL of SM-MEA-ZnO NRs compared to that with only 0.05% exhibited by iOSCs comprising ETLs of ZnO NRs. The PCE of 7.38% is one of the best for the unprecedented co-functionalized ZnO NRs based inorganic–organic hybrid ETL.


This research was supported by the Pioneer Research Centre Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT & Future Planning (NRF-2013M3C1A3065528).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Fig. S1–S3 and Table S1. See DOI: 10.1039/c5nr08849f
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016