 DOI: 10.1039/C9TC03111A
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 9455-9459


Zihao
Dong
,

Xinxing
Yin
,

Amjad
Ali
,

Jie
Zhou
,

Sandip Singh
Bista
,

Cong
Chen
,

Yanfa
Yan
* and 

Weihua
Tang
*

School of Chemical Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing 210094, P. R. China. E-mail: whtang@njust.edu.cn

Department of Physics and Astronomy and Wright Center for Photovoltaics Innovation and Commercialization, The University of Toledo, Toledo, OH 43606, USA. E-mail: yanfa.yan@utoledo.edu

Received
10th June 2019
, Accepted 16th July 2019
First published on 16th July 2019
Dopant-free hole transporting materials (HTMs) have been in the limelight in the quest for stable perovskite solar cells (PVSCs). Herein, we report a novel dopant-free HTM featuring a dithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]pyrrole core flanked with two-fold triphenylamine arm substituted thiophene bridges. This star-shaped molecule shows a suitable ionization potential (5.13 eV), good thermal stability (high glass-transition temperature of 120.3 °C) and a high hole mobility (6.50 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1). The molecule is more hydrophobic than reference spiro-OMeTAD in a film. By capping our dopant-free HTM on the perovskite layer, the fabricated n-i-p device can achieve a maximum power conversion efficiency of 19.42%, which is comparable to the device based on doped spiro-OMeTAD (19.59%). This star-shaped dithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]pyrrole based molecule is thus a promising candidate HTM for upscaling the commercial manufacture of PVSCs.

The hole transporting material (HTM) is a critical component in perovskite solar cells (PVSCs), responsible for efficient hole extraction and transport that enables high power conversion efficiencies (PCEs). In the past few years, the state-of-the-art PVSCs have achieved encouraging PCEs (ca. ∼24%) by employing organic HTMs. However, the short lifetime of PVSCs still remains a great challenge for their practical applications. The usage of doped HTMs is partially attributed to the device stability, since hygroscopic dopants would lead to accelerated chemical degradation of the perovskite layer. The thermal stability of the HTM films is also affected by the dopants. For instance, the glass-transition temperature (Tg) of spiro-MeOTAD was found to decrease to ∼50 °C when doped with tert-butylpyridine, which was unfavorable for retaining the film morphology during long-term use. Therefore, the development of dopant-free and high-efficiency organic HTMs is urgently needed.

There are two commonly used strategies to develop organic HTMs for PVSCs. On one hand, the arylamine unit is one common building block for organic HTMs. The conjugation between p-orbitals of nitrogen and π-orbitals of the aromatic ring endows arylamine with an excellent hole transporting ability. The key property of HTMs (e.g. energy levels and thermal stability) is the selective placement of arylamine units toward the linkers. Chiykowski et al. revealed that triphenylamine (TPA) units located on the fluorene and xanthene moiety governed the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) level and Tg value of spiro[fluorene-9,9′-xanthene]-cored HTMs, respectively. Liu et al. investigated the effect of TPA arm number on the HOMO levels and the film quality for benzene-cored HTMs. Ge et al. developed a two-dimensional molecule based on a pyrene core linking four TPA arms via a thiophene bridge, which revealed that a phenyl-thiophene unit containing Pb⋯S interaction was beneficial for perovskite trap passivation. On the other hand, spiro-OMeTAD as the benchmark HTM suffers from low hole mobility that makes it strongly rely on the dopants. The orthogonal configuration leads to high steric hindrance, hindering the hole hopping between the intramolecular arylamine units. As a contrast, planar conjugated linkers show extended conjugation and enhanced π–π stacking effect, which is beneficial for hole transport across the films. As such, a variety of dopant-free HTMs with excellent hole-transporting ability have been developed by bridging the conjugated cores with arylamine units. The efficiencies for PVSCs adopting undoped small molecule HTMs are still low, with ∼19% PCE enabled by the usage of only a few small molecule HTMs. It is thus necessary to design and tailor the structure of core-arylamine HTMs.
Thiophene-fused molecules are a class of fascinating organic semiconductors with high charge transport properties. In this regard, dithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]pyrrol (DTP) is a simple thiophene-fused unit with strong electron-donating properties, which has been explored in our group to tailor the electronic structure of organic semiconductors. Nevertheless, the exploration of DTP-derived dopant-free HTMs is still rare. In this work, we report a novel star-shaped HTM by linking DTP with four-fold TPA arms through a flanking thiophene bridge (denoted as DTPC8-ThDTPA, Fig. 1). The designed HTM shows the desired HOMO level of −4.85 eV and ionization potential of 5.13 eV. Additionally, DTPC8-ThDTPA shows a better hydrophobic nature than spiro-OMeTAD. Together with higher hole mobility (6.50 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1) than spiro-OMeTAD (5.43 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1), DTPC8-ThDTPA is of great potential to be used as a dopant-free HTM. In the n-i-p structured PVSCs (MA0.7FA0.3PbI2.85Br0.15), the best device exhibits a PCE of 19.42%, which is comparable to that of the best-performing devices using fully doped spiro-OMeTAD (19.59%), representing one of the highest PCEs among the dopant-free small molecule HTMs in the literature.
DTPC8-ThDTPA was readily synthesized via Stille coupling reaction between distannylated DTP cores and TPA arms (Fig. 1a). The detailed synthetic procedure is provided in the ESI. The structure characterization of this molecular HTM is shown in Fig. S1–S7 (ESI). We carried out density functional theory (DFT) calculations to have a better understanding of the geometrical and electronic structure of DTPC8-ThDTPA. As revealed in Fig. 1b, the thiophene bridge shows small dihedral angels (<20°) with the DTP core, resulting in a nearly planar conjugated configuration. The TPA arms have larger dihedral angels (40°–50°) with the thiophene bridge, leading to a star-shaped structure for the overall molecule in an optimized structure state. The EHOMO/ELUMO values of DTPC8-ThDTPA are calculated to be −4.22/−1.53 eV (Fig. S8, ESI), both are deeper than those of benchmark spiro-OMeTAD (−4.18/−0.59 eV). We find that the HOMOs are delocalized throughout the DTP core, thiophene bridge and TPA arm at the 2-position. It is noteworthy that the HOMOs are also delocalized on the partial TPA moiety at the 3-position. In contrast, the TPA arm substituted at the 3-position of the DTP core does not contribute to the HOMOs. This suggests that the thiophene bridge not only extends the conjugation structure but also allows more TPA arms to participate in hole-transport. Electrostatic potential (ESP) analysis demonstrates a high electron density area for the DTP core and thiophene-spacer (Fig. 2a), serving as the coordination sites with uncoordinated Pd2+ cations in perovskite. The side TPA arms and alkyl chains present electron-deficient properties.
The ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) absorption spectra of DTPC8-ThDTPA in dilute chloroform solution and solid film are shown in Fig. 2b, where two energy absorption bands are observed at 303 and 458 nm. Among them, the absorption at ∼300 nm is attributed to the n–π* transition of multi-TPA arms. The absorption band in the film is red-shifted by 25 nm as determined from the absorption onset, indicating the presence of some molecular self-organization. Taking into account the film absorption edge at 548 nm, the corresponding optical band gap (Eoptg) is estimated to be 2.26 eV. Fig. S12 and S13 (ESI) show the PL emission spectrum of perovskite and DTPAC8-ThDTPA. DTPAC8-ThDTPA shows a maximum emission peak at 403 nm. The HOMO energy level of DTPC8-ThDTPA was evaluated using the cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurement in CH2Cl2 solutions versus the Ag/AgCl reference electrode (Fig. S11, ESI). It can be clearly observed that both the CV curves show three reversible oxidation peaks for DTPC8-ThDTPA and spiro-OMeTAD. DTPC8-ThDTPA was found to share a similar HOMO energy level as spiro-OMeTAD (−4.85 eV). With HOMO and Eoptg values at hand, the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energy level of DTPC8-ThDTPA is calculated as −2.59 eV.
Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UV-PES) measurement was further carried out, which is considered as a reliable method to reveal the in situ HOMO value. The ionization potential of our HTM is found to be 5.13 eV (Fig. 2c). This value is much higher than that of spiro-OMeTAD (4.94 eV), indicating a possible more matched band alignment on the perovskite/HTM interfaces. Thermal stability is another key parameter for the organic films in PVSCs. A decomposition temperature of 444 °C (corresponding to 5% weight loss, Fig. 2d) is observed from the thermogravimetric analysis, suggesting good thermal stability for DTPC8-ThDTPA. Meanwhile, a differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) curve shows an amorphous nature for our HTM, along with a high glass-transition temperature of 120.3 °C. The amorphous feature with high thermal stability is beneficial for the formation of stable and uniform organic films. A higher water contact angle was observed for DTPC8-ThDTPA (88.9°) than spiro-OMeTAD (73.7°), indicating a more hydrophobic nature and thus better protection from moisture when using our new HTMs (Fig. 2f and g).
With these data in hand, we then examined the performance of DTPC8-ThDTPA in n-i-p structured PVSCs. We used the perovskite of MA0.7FA0.3PbI2.85Br0.15 as the light-absorbing material. The device architecture and cross-sectional SEM image are shown in Fig. 3a and b (more detailed device information can be found in the ESI). We adopted an ultra-thin PMMA layer to help to passivate the surface defects of the perovskite layer, which has been proven to be efficient to improve the open-circuit voltage (VOC) of PVSCs.
The current–voltage (J–V) curves for PVSCs under AM 1.5G irradiation of 100 mW cm−2 are depicted in Fig. 3c and Fig. S9 (ESI), and the corresponding photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table 1 and Table S1 (ESI). It can be seen that the DTPC8-ThDTPA based PVSCs with or without dopants can all obtain excellent PCEs. Obviously, the dopant-free spiro-OMeTAD based PVSCs just obtained a low PCE (12.83%). The best device based on DTPC8-ThDTPA delivers a VOC of 1.139 V, a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 23.02 mA cm−2 and a fill factor (FF) of 0.741, yielding a decent PCE of 19.42% at the reverse scan. To the best of our knowledge, this value is among the best photovoltaic performances for PVSCs with dopant-free molecular HTMs (Table S2, ESI). A small hysteresis with a PCE of 18.12% was observed for the forward scan (VOC = 1.108 V, JSC = 23.03 mA cm−2, FF = 0.710). It is noteworthy that this photovoltaic performance is comparable to the doped spiro-OMeTAD device (Table 1 and detailed device information in ESI). The device employing spiro-OMeTAD as an HTM exhibits a PCE of 19.59% and 18.04% under the reverse and forward scans, respectively. Fig. 3d shows the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra under 1 sun illumination. The integrated JSC value of DTPC8-ThDTPA and spiro-OMeTAD is calculated to be 22.57 and 22.12 mA cm−2, respectively, which agrees well with the JSC values obtained from the J–V curves. The increased JSC value of DTPC8-ThDTPA can be attributed to a higher EQE in the absorption region of 480–750 nm. Then, we use maximum power point tracking to evaluate the stability under 1 sun illumination. The results of two HTM-based devices are depicted in Fig. 3e and Fig. S10 (ESI). The steady-state PCE of the best-performing PVSC device is found to be 18.6% for DTPC8-ThDTPA, which is one of the highest values among the reported dopant-free molecular HTMs. The steady-state PCE of the best-performing PVSC device is found to be 18.2% for spiro-OMeTAD. Based on the histograms of 20 individual cells, a good reproducibility is observed for the DTPC8-ThDTPA based PVSCs (Fig. 3f). The average PCE value for DTPC8-ThDTPA is calculated to be 18.80% at the reverse scan.
HTMs
Scan direction

V
OC [V]

J
SC [mA cm−2]
FF
PCE [%]
DTPC8-ThDTPA
Forward
1.108
23.03
0.710
18.12
Reverse
1.139
23.02
0.741
19.42
Spiro-OMeTAD with dopants
Forward
1.106
22.44
0.727
18.04
Reverse
1.130
22.46
0.772
19.59
In order to study the influence of HTMs on the photovoltaic performance of perovskites, we used atomic force microscopy (AFM) images to evaluate the film-forming capability on the perovskite layer (Fig. 4a–c). Both DTPC8-ThDTPA and spiro-OMeTAD can form smooth and uniform films on the perovskite layer with low surface fluctuation. The root-mean-square roughness (RMS) for DTPC8-ThDTPA (RMS = 7.98 nm) is much lower than that of the pristine perovskite surface (RMS = 15.1 nm). The effect of HTMs on the excited-state properties of perovskite was further investigated by steady-state photoluminescence (PL) and time-resolved PL measurements. As shown in Fig. 4d, a broad emission peak centred at 773 nm is observed for the pristine perovskite film. After capping with the dopant-free DTPC8-ThDTPA film, the PL intensity was quenched by 85%, indicating that stronger Pb⋯S interaction based on the thiophene-rich structure leads to an efficient hole extraction from the perovskite layers. As a comparison, only 69.50% of PL was quenched by the spiro-OMeTAD film. According to the previous report, the more efficient the quenching of the photogenerated charges the faster the interface charge separation, contributing to a better JSC and FF in the PSCs with the HTM capping in perovskite. The time-resolved PL results show the fastest hole collection for perovskite/DTPC8-ThDTPA, with an average decay time of 11 ns (Fig. 4e). While for the interface of perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD, the average decay time is found to be 18 ns. This accounts for the greatly reduced probability of exciton recombination and enhanced JSC. The hole transport ability across the thin films (thickness ∼ 100 nm) of our HTMs was also explored using the space-charge-limited-current (SCLC) method. Fitting the J–V curve (Fig. S12, ESI) of the hole-only devices (ITO/PEDOT:PSS/HTM/MoO3/Ag), the hole mobility for DTPC8-ThDTPA is determined to be 6.50 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1, which is slightly higher than that of spiro-OMeTAD (5.43 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1). We further compared the inner hole reorganization energy (λh) using theoretical calculations. DTPC8-ThDTPA shows a lower λh of 133 meV than spiro-OMeTAD (λh = 148 meV), indicating the fast hole hopping for this molecular HTM. Therefore, our as-developed DTP-based molecule can serve as an efficient dopant-free HTM with impressive photovoltaic performance. To study the recombination mechanism of the PVSCs, we evaluated the dependence of JSC and VOC characteristics on the light intensity from 1 to 100 mW cm−2. The JSC is found to vary linearly with the light intensity (Fig. 4f), revealing that almost all carriers at the interface are swept out before recombination under short-circuit conditions. Fig. 4g demonstrates that VOC changes logarithmically with light intensity. The slope for the DTPC8-ThDTPA device is 1.60 kT e−1, suggesting that both monomolecular and bimolecular recombination processes are involved in our case.

In conclusion, we have successfully developed a star-shaped molecular HTM with a DTP core and four-fold triphenylamine arms. With the presence of a thiophene bridge, the electronic and geometrical structure of the overall molecule was modulated. The as-synthesized molecule shows a higher Tg, better hydrophobicity, deeper ionization potential and higher hole mobility when compared to doped spiro-OMeTAD. The dopant-free HTM enables the highest PCE of 19.42% for the best-performing n-i-p structured PVSCs. This new dopant-free HTM can be regarded as an appealing alternative for pushing forward the commercial PVSCs.


There are no conflicts to declare.


We gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51573077, 51861145401) and the Priority Academic Program Development (PAPD) of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Materials synthesis and characterization, device fabrication, SCLC mobility, and summary of high-efficiency dopant-free PVSCs in the literature. See DOI: 10.1039/c9tc03111a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019