 DOI: 10.1039/C5TA04061B
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 17721-17727


Hytham
Elbohy
,

Alex
Aboagye
,

Sudhan
Sigdel
,

Qi
Wang
,

M. Hassan
Sayyad
,

Lifeng
Zhang
* and 

Qiquan
Qiao
*

Department of Electrical Engineering, Center for Advanced Photovoltaics, South Dakota State University, Brookings, South Dakota 57007, USA. E-mail: qiquan.qiao@sdstate.edu; Fax: +1 605 688 4401; Tel: +1 605 688 6965

Joint School of Nanoscience and Nanoengineering, North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina 27401, USA. E-mail: lzhang@ncat.edu; Fax: +1 336 500 0115; Tel: +1 336 285 2875

Faculty of Engineering Sciences, Ghulam Ishaq Khan Institute of Engineering Sciences and Technology, Topi, District Swabi, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa 23640, Pakistan

Department of Physics, Faculty of Science, Damietta University, Damietta, Egypt

Received
5th June 2015
, Accepted 20th July 2015
First published on 24th July 2015
Graphene-embedded carbon nanofibers (GCNFs) were developed as a new counter electrode nanomaterial for high efficiency dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs). GCNFs were produced by electrospinning polyacrylonitrile (PAN) with graphene nanoplatelets followed by stabilization and carbonization. GCNFs decorated with surface-attached platinum nanoneedles (GCNFs-PtNNs) were subsequently prepared by a redox reaction and then deposited onto fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) glass to make a counter electrode for DSCs. Graphene inside the carbon nanofibers and Pt nanoneedles on the surface demonstrated a synergistic effect to improve the DSC performance. Compared to DSCs with conventional planar Pt counter electrodes, the DSCs with GCNFs-PtNNs significantly improved the energy conversion efficiency from ∼8.63% to ∼9.70% using a mask under AM1.5 illumination. This is the highest conversion efficiency so far with a carbon nanofiber based counter electrode.

Due to their low cost and easy fabrication process, dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) have attracted extensive attention since their invention by Grätzel in 1991 as a potential alternative to silicon solar cells. A typical DSC consists of three components: (1) dye attached photoanode, which is usually a porous film of sintered TiO2 nanoparticles that are deposited on fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) glass; (2) counter electrode (CE), which is generally a platinum (Pt)-coated FTO substrate; and (3) redox electrolyte, e.g., I−/I3−, which connects both photoanode and CE. When DSCs are illuminated by sunlight, photoelectrons are produced from dye molecules and then injected into TiO2 nanoparticles followed by transporting them to the CE through an external circuit. Finally, the electrolyte regains electrons from the CE and reduces dye molecules back to the normal state. Existing DSCs generally use Pt as the CE because Pt possesses excellent catalytic activity for I3− reduction. Nonetheless Pt can be corroded by the electrolyte with time. In the meantime, the high cost and scarcity of Pt makes it a less desirable candidate for use in industries. Numerous efforts have been made to seek a low-cost replacement for Pt at the performance level comparable to Pt.

Carbon based materials including graphite, graphene, carbon black, carbon nanotubes, and carbon nanofibers have been investigated as an alternative to Pt because of their strong catalytic effect, high electrical conductivity, and corrosion resistance. Compared to conventional planar Pt CEs, electrospun carbon nanofibers alone have limitations such as relatively low conductivity leading to high series resistance. Our previous research revealed that the series resistance can be reduced and DSC performance has been significantly improved by depositing/growing Pt nanoparticles onto the carbon nanofiber surface. Graphene is a 2D carbon nanomaterial composed of monolayered or multilayered graphitic nanosheets. Its exceptional electrical conductivity and large surface area can benefit both charge transport and charge transfer in DSCs.
In this work, a new carbon nanomaterial graphene-embedded carbon nanofibers with surface attached Pt nanoneedles (GCNFs-PtNNs) for the CE of DSCs was developed by integrating graphene into carbon nanofibers through electrospinning followed by growing platinum nanoneedles on the nanofiber surface through a redox reaction. Graphene in the carbon nanofibers and Pt nanoneedles on the carbon nanofiber surface demonstrated a synergistic effect on the performance of DSCs. The CE of GCNFs-PtNNs exhibited more efficient electro-catalytic activity than the conventional Pt CE. Compared to DSCs with conventional planar Pt counter electrodes, the DSCs with GCNFs-PtNNs significantly improved the energy conversion efficiency from ∼8.63% to ∼9.70% using a mask under AM1.5 illumination.

Polyacrylonitrile (PAN), N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF), chloroplatinic acid (H2PtCl6), formic acid (HCOOH), TiCl4 liquid (≥99.0%), and titanium diisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate) (75 wt% in 2-propanol) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Corporation (St. Louis, MO). Graphene nanoplatelet particles (C-750) were purchased from XG Sciences, Inc. (Lansing, MI). Fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) substrates were ordered from Hartford Glasses. Nanocrystalline TiO2 (Ti-nanoxide HT/SP), scattering TiO2 (Ti-nanoxide R/SP), and N719 dye (Ruthenizer 535-bisTBA) were purchased from Solaronix. All materials were used as received except that TiCl4 was diluted in deionized water (DI) to prepare a 40 mM aqueous solution.


FTO substrates were cleaned with detergent, deionized (DI) water, acetone, and 2-propanol in an ultrasonic bath for 10 min each. The cleaned FTO was first immersed in 40 mM TiCl4 aqueous solution at 70 °C for 30 min, then cleaned with DI water and ethanol, and dried under nitrogen. A compact layer of TiO2 was deposited onto the treated FTO glass surface by spin-coating 75 wt% titanium diisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate) in 2-propanol solution followed by two-step annealing: (1) 125 °C for 15 min; (2) 475 °C for 30 min. Subsequently a 12 μm thick transparent nanocystalline TiO2 layer (Solaronix Ti-nanoxide HT/SP) was doctor-bladed on top of the compact TiO2 layer and annealed following the same procedure as above. A scattering layer of TiO2 (Solaronix Ti-Nanooxide R/SP) with a thickness of 4 μm was further deposited on top of the layer of nanocrystalline TiO2 and annealed one more time under the same conditions. This was followed by another round of TiCl4 treatment and subsequent annealing as described above. The photoanode was cooled down to 80 °C and then immersed in 0.3 mM of Ruthenizer 535-bisTBA (N719) dye solution in acetonitrile/t-butanol (1:1 by volume) for 24 h at room temperature to attach dye. The final photoanode was rinsed in acetonitrile to remove any excess dye molecules and dried in nitrogen flow.


3 g polyacrylonitrile (PAN) was first dissolved in 17 g DMF to make a 15 wt% solution. 0.3 g graphene nanoplatelet particles were sonicated in DMF and then added to the PAN solution to achieve a PAN: graphene mass ratio of 10:1 in solution. The solution was stirred for 24 h at 80 °C before electrospinning. Electrospinning was performed at 20 kV at a flow rate of 1.1 ml h−1 and a PAN nanofibrous mat with embedded graphene nanoplatelets was collected on a drum collector. The obtained nanofibrous mat was stabilized in air at 280 °C and carbonized in an inert atmosphere at 1200 °C to produce the graphene-embedded carbon nanofiber (GCNF) mat following the procedure as described in previous publication. To grow Pt nanoneedles on the surface of GCNFs, the nanofibrous mat was sonicated first and then immersed in a solution composed of 400 ml 4 mM H2PtCl6 (Pt precursor) and 40 ml of HCOOH (reducing agent) for 48 h at room temperature to ensure complete Pt precursor reduction. The product of GCNFs-PtNNs was washed several times afterwards in deionized water and dried at room temperature.

Both GCNFs and GCNFs-PtNNs were used to prepare CEs for DSCs. 0.01 g crushed powder of GCNFs and GCNFs-PtNNs was respectively weighed and dissolved in 5 ml ethanol. The mixture of each sample was stirred for 1 h and then spray-coated onto the surface of a piece of cleaned FTO glass. Different spray-coating time was attempted to obtain different carbon electrode thicknesses (5 μm, 10 μm, 15 μm and 20 μm, respectively). The obtained CEs were then thermally treated at 60 °C for 6 h. The conventional Pt CE was prepared by spin coating of Pt precursor solution (0.02 M H2PtCl6·6H2O) in anhydrous ethanol onto cleaned FTO substrates and annealed at 400 °C for 15 min, which served as the control sample.

The morphology and structure of the GCNF and GCNFs-PtNN nanofibrous mat were examined by a Carl Zeiss Auriga-BU FIB field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM) and a Carl Zeiss Libra 120 plus transmission electron microscope (TEM).

Both photoanode and CE were assembled together using a thermoplastic sealant. The iodide/triiodide electrolyte was then injected into DSCs and further sealed to prevent any leakage. A series of dummy cells were constructed by assembling two identical CE electrodes and used for electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements. EIS was conducted using an Ametek VERSASTAT3-200 Potentiostat with a frequency analysis module (FDA). The AC signal of amplitude 10 mV in the frequency range of 0.1 to 105 Hz at 0.8 V (∼Voc) DC bias voltage under dark conditions was used.
Cyclic voltammogram (CV) measurements were performed using a Pt wire as the counter electrode, an Ag/AgCl as the reference electrode, and the respective DSC CEs for testing as the working electrode in an acetonitrile solution containing 10 mM LiI and 0.5 mM I2 using 0.1 M tetra-n-butylammonium tetrafluoroborate as the supporting electrolyte at a potential scan rate of 50 mV s−1.
Current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of DSCs were tested under AM 1.5 illumination at a light intensity of 100 mW cm−2. In this measurement, a Xenon 40 lamp (Newport 67005) with an AM 1.5 filter was used as the light source. In the J–V measurement, a mask with an area of 0.132 cm2 was used and verified by SEM imaging. In the incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) measurement, a xenon lamp was connected to a Newport monochromator. Two lenses were used to focus monochromatic light onto the active area of DSCs. The light output was modulated from 380 nm to 800 nm and the IPCE data were verified through a NREL calibrated solar cell reference.

The graphene used in this research showed a “particle-platelet” morphology. Upon sonication, graphene nanoparticles with diameters up to 200 nm were observed (Fig. 1-A1). A closer look of an individual graphene particle showed that these graphene nanoparticles were composed of stacks of thin and small dimension graphene sheets with dimensions up to a few tens of nanometers (Fig. 1-A2). Sonication not only broke down graphene nanoparticle agglomerates but also released some thin graphene sheets from individual graphene particles. The original mass ratio of PAN to graphene was 10:1 in as-spun PAN/graphene precursor nanofibers. After stabilization and carbonization, graphene counted ∼20% of mass of carbon in final GCNFs due to ∼50% carbon yield of PAN. In other words, the prepared GCNFs contained approximately 16.7 wt% graphene. Both graphene nanoparticles and thin sheets were observed in GCNFs (Fig. 1-B1 and B2). It can be seen that graphene stays like nanobeads in the nanofibers.

Through a redox reaction between H2PtCl6 and HCOOH, Pt nanoneedles grew on the GCNF surface and covered GCNFs' surface. Fig. 1-C1 and C2 show SEM and TEM images of GCNFs-PtNNs. Individual needles (Fig. 1-C2) had a diameter of 5–10 nm and a length up to 100 nm. High atomic number Pt blocked almost all electrons from a TEM electron beam and made the GCNFs-PtNN fiber totally dark under TEM. The Pt loading of GCNFs-PtNNs is defined as the percentage of weight with respect to the original mass of GCNFs. The loading of PtNNs was high, i.e. ∼500% of the weight of GCNFs in this work.

Fig. 2 shows (a) a top view SEM image of GCNFs-PtNNs and (b) energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) mapping image of GCNFs-PtNNs as the counter electrode. This SEM image has a scale bar of 10 μm, which is much larger than the SEM images in Fig. 1. The EDS mapping image shows Pt (red regions) with nanofiber structures, supporting that Pt nanoneedles are attached onto the surface of the GCNFs.

Fig. 3 shows the J–V curves of the GCNFs-PtNN counter electrode at different thicknesses of 5 μm, 10 μm, 15 μm and 20 μm, respectively. Different spray-coating time was used to get these different counter electrode thicknesses. Results were calculated and are illustrated in Table 1. From the plots, it is clear that the overall performance was reduced by increasing the thickness of the counter electrode. This decrease in performance is due to the reduction of both FF and Jsc, while Voc values remain almost unchanged at different thicknesses. The lower FF might be caused by the larger series resistance as the counter electrode gets thicker.
Thicknesses of GCNFs-PtNNs

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF (%)

η (%)
5 μm
18.70 ± 0.10
0.78 ± 0.007
67
9.77 ± 0.14
10 μm
18.41 ± 0.12
0.78 ± 0.005
63
9.05 ± 0.12
15 μm
17.83 ± 0.18
0.78 ± 0.005
60
8.34 ± 0.14
20 μm
17.1 ± 0.10
0.78 ± 0.005
57
7.63 ± 0.09
The electrical resistance of the counter electrode increases as it gets thicker, which can be seen in the following equation: R = ρl/A, where ρ is the electrical resistivity, l is the thickness of the counter electrode, A is the cross-sectional area of the counter electrode, and R is electrical resistance. As the thickness l increases, R gets larger. This can increase the overall DSSC series resistance and lead to lower overall performance. The lower Jsc might be from the higher charge transport loss when passing through a thicker counter electrode film. As the counter electrode increased from 5 μm, 10 μm and 15 μm to 20 μm, the overall DSSC series resistance increased from 6.9 Ω cm−2, 9.9 Ω cm−2 and 10.6 Ω cm−2 to 11.9 Ω cm−2. The series resistance of DSSCs can be obtained from experimental J–V curves by calculating the linear slope of the curve at high voltage (0.6–0.8 V). Since only the counter electrode thickness increases while the other components of the DSSCs are the same, the change of overall series resistance will be mainly contributed by counter electrode resistance.

Fig. 4a and b show current density versus voltage (J–V) curves of DSCs with CEs made by conventional Pt, GCNFs, and GCNFs-PtNNs with and without the mask, respectively, under the AM 1.5 solar simulator illumination at a light intensity of ∼100 mW cm−2. The thicknesses of GCNFs and GCNFs-PtNNs are both at 5 μm. In order to more accurately measure the efficiency of DSCs, the illuminated cell area was masked to confine light irradiance and prevent any error that comes from side illumination. The performance of these DSCs with and without the mask is summarized in Table 2. All the DSCs with different CEs exhibited a similar open circuit voltage (Voc) at ∼0.77–0.79 V, while the fill factor (FF) and short circuit current density (Jsc) showed notable changes. The DSCs with the GCNF CE showed a Jsc of ∼14.70 mA cm−2 without the mask and ∼14.52 mA cm−2 with the mask, a FF of 64% for both with and without the mask, a power conversion efficiency (η) of ∼7.24% without the mask and ∼7.15% with the mask.
CEs

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF (%)

η (%)
Without the mask
Pt
17.44 ± 0.15
0.79 ± 0.006
63
8.68 ± 0.14
GCNFs
14.70 ± 0.2
0.77 ± 0.004
64
7.24 ± 0.13
GCNFs-PtNNs
18.70 ± 0.1
0.78 ± 0.007
67
9.77 ± 0.14
With the mask
Pt
17.20 ± 0.1
0.79 ± 0.006
63
8.63 ± 0.05
GCNFs
14.52 ± 0.1
0.77 ± 0.004
64
7.15 ± 0.08
GCNFs-PtNNs
18.57 ± 0.1
0.78 ± 0.007
67
9.70 ± 0.14
By employing the GCNF-PtNN CE, the η of the DSCs increased significantly to ∼9.77% without the mask and ∼9.70% with the mask. The Jsc increased to ∼18.70 mA cm−2 without the mask and ∼18.57 mA cm−2 with the mask. The FF increased to 67% for both without and with the mask. For comparison, the η of a reference DSC made with a conventional Pt CE was ∼8.68% without the mask and ∼8.63% with the mask along with a Jsc of ∼17.44 mA cm−2 without the mask and 17.20 mA cm−2 with the mask, a FF of 63% for both without and with the mask.
Although the presence of graphene in carbon nanofibers enabled a higher η in DSCs compared to those with pure nanofiber CEs, GCNF CEs based DSCs still had a lower performance than that of the conventional Pt CE based DSC. As observed with the GCNFs-PtNN CE, both FF and Jsc values of the DSCs were significantly higher than those of the devices with conventional Pt CEs. DSCs with GCNFs-PtNNs significantly improved the energy conversion efficiency from ∼8.63% for conventional Pt to ∼9.70% for GCNFs-PtNNs using a mask under AM1.5 illumination. This is the highest conversion efficiency so far with a carbon nanofiber based counter electrode.
Furthermore incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) was measured as a function of wavelength for DSCs made with conventional Pt, GCNFs, and GCNFs-PtNNs CEs, respectively (Fig. 5). The maximum value of IPCE for GCNF based DSCs was found to be ∼77% and this value was significantly improved to ∼88% for GCNFs-PtNN based DSCs while the maximum IPCE value of conventional Pt based DSCs was found to be ∼84%. To validate our J–V measurements, we estimated Jsc of the tested DSCs by integrating the IPCE value using the equation below.
(1)
where
ηIPCE (λ) and Nph (λ) are the IPCE and photon flux density at wavelength λ, respectively.

Using eqn (1), the integration of the measured IPCE spectral response with the AM 1.5 solar spectrum (100 mW cm−2) resulted in an estimated Jsc of 17.52 mA cm−2 for conventional Pt based DSCs, 15.2 mA cm−2 for GCNFs based DSCs, and 18.56 mA cm−2 for GCNFs-PtNN based DSCs. These values were very close to the corresponding values from J–V analysis and further confirmed measurements of power conversion efficiency.
To better understand performance of the GCNFs-PtNN CE in DSCs, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements of dummy cells were performed. The dummy cells were fabricated by sealing two identical counter electrodes symmetrically together with I−/I3− injected in between. Nyquist plots of the dummy cells were fitted with an equivalent circuit as shown in the Fig. 6 inset. The equivalent circuit comprises charge transfer resistance (RCT) at the interface of the electrode and the electrolyte, series resistance (RS), constant phase element (CPE), and Warburg impedance (ZW). The CPE represents capacitance of the electrode and its impedance is ZCPE = (jω)−β/Q, where j is an imaginary unit; Q is a CPE constant; β (0 < β < 1) represents the roughness of the electrode; ω represents the angular frequency. Both Q and β are frequency independent. ZW represents the charge diffusion resistance inside the electrolyte. EIS parameters of all dummy cells are summarized in Table 3.
Electrodes

R
S (Ω cm2)

R
CT (Ω cm2)

Q (F Sβ−1 cm−2)

β

Pt
3.27
1.3
6.7 × 10−5
0.97
GCNFs
3.63
0.49
1.3 × 10−4
0.88
GCNFs-PtNNs
3.16
0.12
4.4 × 10−3
0.85
In a Nyquist plot, the left side high frequency semicircle was caused by a charge transfer process at the interface between the electrode and electrolyte while the right side low frequency arc was from the Warburg impedance of the I−/I3− redox couple. The RCT values of both GCNF and GCNFs-PtNN electrodes, which were calculated from the left side high frequency semicircle of the Nyquist plot, were much smaller than those of conventional Pt electrodes. The RCT of the GCNF electrode was approximately half of that of conventional Pt electrodes, while the RCT of the GCNFs-PtNN electrode was merely 0.12 Ω cm2, approximately 10% of that (1.3 Ω cm2) of conventional Pt electrodes. Smaller RCT indicates smaller charge transfer resistance at the interface between the CE and electrolyte in DSCs. In the case of the GCNF CE, the distribution of highly conductive graphene nanoparticles as well as thin graphene sheets throughout carbon nanofibers facilitated charge transfer and therefore reduced RCT. Compared to conventional Pt CEs, surface attached Pt nanoneedles on GCNFs can result in a much higher specific surface area and corresponding much larger number of catalytic sites for I3− reduction at the interface between the CE and electrotype in DSCs and lead to higher electro-catalytic activity and thus lower charge transfer resistance. Moreover the surface attached Pt nanoneedles also reduced RS of the dummy cell compared to conventional Pt, which would also contribute to a lower overall series resistance in the DSC and thus a higher FF of the DSC. The CPE constant Q in Table 3 gives the capacitance information at the interface between the electrode and electrolyte. The fitted results from the Nyquist plot showed that β of the electrode decreased from conventional Pt electrodes to the GCNF electrode to the GCNFs-PtNN electrode. A smaller β value suggested higher porosity of the electrode. In the meantime, Q also increased from conventional Pt electrodes to the GCNF electrode to the GCNFs-PtNN electrode, indicating the highest surface area of the GCNFs-PtNN electrode. The consistent Q and β values give the facts that integrating graphene and decorating with Pt nanoneedles increased the counter electrode porosity and specific surface area for I3− reduction and thus confirmed higher electro-catalytic activity of the GCNFs-PtNN CE in DSCs.
In cyclic voltammetry (C-V) curves of Pt, GCNF, and GCNFs-PtNN counter electrodes, two pairs of oxidation and reduction peaks were observed for all electrodes (Fig. 7). The oxidation–reduction peak pairs on the left are attributed to the reduction reaction of triiodide ions I3− (I3− + 2e− = 3I−) and thus are directly related to catalytic capability and performance of the corresponding CE in DSCs. The largest oxidation–reduction current density of the GCNFs-PtNN electrode among the three electrodes indicated the fastest reduction of I3− in the corresponding DSC, which is followed by Pt electrodes. The GCNF electrode showed the slowest reduction of I3−. The oxidation–reduction peak pairs on the right result from the redox reaction of 3I2 + 2e− = 2I3−, which had almost no effect on DSC performance. From the measured cyclic voltammetry, it is clear that the peak-to-peak separation for GCNFs-PtNNs is smaller than that of the Pt counter electrode and this is because that the GCNFs-PtNN counter electrode exhibits higher electro-catalytic activity than the Pt counter electrode.
Overall the GCNF-PtNN composite is an innovative and effective nanomaterial for the CE of DSCs. In comparison with performance of the DSCs made with the GCNF and GCNF-PtNN CEs, the integration of graphene in carbon nanofibers and growth of Pt nanoneedles on the carbon nanofiber surface have synergistic effects on the DSC performance. The higher power conversion efficiency took place due to following facts from GCNFs-PtNNs: (1) distribution of highly conductive graphene in carbon nanofibers facilitated charge transfer; (2) presence of graphene nanoplatelets in PAN precursor nanofibers resulted in voids/pores formation in final GCNFs during the volume-shrinking carbonization process and thus increased the specific surface area of GCNFs; (3) surface-attached Pt nanoneedles further increased the specific surface area of nanofibers and enormous active sites for faster I3− reduction, i.e. higher electro-catalytic activity; and (4) surface-attached Pt nanoneedles also reduced overall series resistance in DSCs and led to a higher FF.

In summary, a novel counter electrode nanomaterial for high efficiency dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) was developed by integrating graphene nanoplatelets into electrospun carbon nanofibers and subsequently growing Pt nanoneedles onto the carbon nanofiber surface through a redox reaction. Synergistic effects of graphene integration and Pt nanoneedle decoration on DSC performance were observed. Compared to conventional Pt counter electrodes (CE), the GCNFs-PtNN CE exhibited much higher electro-catalytic performance due to its larger interfacial surface area, faster I3− reduction rate, lower charge transfer resistance (RCT), and lower series resistance (RS) for electron transport. The short circuit current density (Jsc) and fill factor (FF) of the DSCs made with the GCNFs-PtNN CE were significantly higher than those of counterpart DSCs made with conventional Pt CEs.


This study was partially supported by the US–Pakistan Joint Science and Technology through National Academy of Science, and Egyptian government fellowship (Egyptian Missions sector, 2012) for Mr Elbohy. The authors would also thank the Joint School of Nanoscience and Nanoengineering and the State of North Carolina for financial support.


† These authors contributed equally.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015