 DOI: 10.1039/C8EE00995C
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2188-2197


Minsu
Jung
,

Tae Joo
Shin
,

Jangwon
Seo
,

Gwisu
Kim
 and 

Sang Il
Seok
*

School of Energy and Chemical Engineering, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), Ulsan 44919, South Korea. E-mail: seoksi@unist.ac.kr

UNIST Central Research Facilities (UCRF), Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), Ulsan 44919, South Korea

Division of Advanced Materials, Korea Research Institute of Chemical Technology (KRICT), Deajeon 34114, South Korea

Received
5th April 2018
, Accepted 24th May 2018
First published on 24th May 2018
Methylammonium lead iodide perovskites have limited practical applications due to a lack of stability under operating conditions. Environmental stability under heating has not yet been achieved, although recent studies modifying perovskites with long organic cations have reported the progress of stabilisation under humid conditions. In this work, we report the structural evolution of long alkylammonium-modified MAPbI3 and its functions for highly efficient and stable solar cells. As an encapsulating agent, octylammonium (OA) cation produced individual MAPbI3 grains in full armour without the formation of layered structures in contrast to butylammonium (BA) and phenethylammonium (PEA) cations. Our OA-armoured MAPbI3 achieved a stabilised power conversion efficiency of 20.1% without a deterioration of charge transport properties due to highly preferential orientation suppressing non-radiative recombination. The structural features also led to a much improved thermal stability at 85 °C in ambient atmosphere retaining 80% of the initial efficiency after 760 h without any encapsulation, as well as water tolerance. This work addresses widespread concerns associated with the photovoltaic efficiency and stability of MAPbI3 by exploring the inter-relationship between structural features and their functions in surfactant-modified perovskites.

Inorganic–organic hybrid perovskite solar cells have been making significant advances in solar-driven power generation, compared to other thin film photovoltaics. Despite this dramatic progress, perovskite solar cells suffer from intrinsic instability due to the hygroscopicity and volatility of methylammonium cations. Much effort has been focused on the addition of long organic cations with a hydrophobic nature to prevent humidity-induced degradation but without great attention to the crystalline structural features. We address the structural evolution of perovskites by controlling the formation of two-dimensional (2D) layered structures at grain boundaries (GBs), even with the introduction of long organic cations. Surfactant-armoured MAPbI3 perovskites without layered structures have a boosted efficiency of over 20% and superior long-term thermal stability as well as humidity stability. Our research will provide considerable advances in optoelectronic properties and long-term stability under heat and humidity for next-generation perovskite-based energy technologies.


Inorganic–organic hybrid perovskites have shown a rapid advance in photovoltaic applications, achieving a certified efficiency of over 22% which is comparable to commercialised solar cell technology. Despite their significantly improved efficiency, methylammonium lead iodide (MAPbI3, MA = CH3NH3) perovskites have been suffering from environmental instability in response to light, heat, moisture and oxygen. Severe degradation of MAPbI3 perovskite solar cells under a humid environment has been reported due to the hygroscopic nature of MA cations and weak Pb–I interactions. Under oxygen and moisture, harsh heat stress accelerates MAPbI3 degradation due to the volatility of MA cations. The stability of MAPbI3 perovskites also deteriorates under light illumination due to the formation of deep traps and the reduction of iodide by photogenerated electrons. Moreover, MAPbI3 degradation has been suggested to be initiated at grain boundaries (GBs) and surface defects when exposed to moisture or oxygen.In order to surmount their intrinsic instability, recent attempts have been focused on the chemical modification of perovskites by introducing long organic cations. Two-dimensional (2D) layered perovskites based on long alkylammonium halide molecules with hydrophobic characteristics have been utilised in the hope of providing a high resistance to moisture compared to three-dimensional (3D) perovskites. The 2D perovskites with layered structures have been able to achieve an enhanced humidity stability, but only at the expense of their photovoltaic performance due to their low absorption coefficient and inferior charge transport properties. Subsequently, an attempt has been made to trade off moisture endurance against photovoltaic efficiency by forming 2D/3D mixed perovskites. Previous reported studies have mostly focused on achieving high efficiency and humidity stability of the 2D/3D mixed perovskites. However, the structural features of the long organic cation-mixed perovskites have been neglected, with the assumption that they exist as periodically separated 2D/3D mixed structures. Regarding this concern, recent work has proposed that butylammonium (BA) is present at the GBs of 3D perovskites, shaping the 2D layered structures as evidenced by grazing-incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS). While an array of research exists on this topic, neither the structural evolution dependence on the length of the alkyl chains, including longer alkyl chains compared to the BA and phenethylammonium (PEA) cations which are mostly used in 2D or 2D/3D mixed perovskites, nor the corresponding functions in high photovoltaic performances, which surpass 20%, and device stability against thermal stress as well as water and solar light, have been studied comprehensively.

In this work, we introduce octylammonium (OA) iodide into MAPbI3 to investigate the structural features of long alkylammonium cation-mixed perovskites compared to unmodified, BA- and PEA-modified analogues. Furthermore, we correlate the structural characteristics pertaining to the alkylammonium materials with their functions which are critical for highly efficient and stable solar cells. In sharp contrast to BA- and PEA-modified MAPbI3 which have 2D layered structures, our OA-modified perovskites, which were naturally believed to form layered structures, did not form layered structures but formed encapsulated individual 3D perovskite crystal domains. The OA-armoured MAPbI3, without the formation of layered structures, achieved a balance of two desirable but incompatible features; shielding individual grains from outside stimuli and maintaining charge transport properties across the grains. These simultaneous achievements could originate from the induction of a highly preferential orientation suppressing non-radiative recombination in perovskite layers upon the addition of a small amount of OA, as evidenced by GIWAXS and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) spectroscopy, respectively. We also discovered that the thermal degradation of MAPbI3 by heat or electron beam is initiated at the GBs. However, OA-modified MAPbI3 degradation was suppressed under identical conditions which is attributed to the armouring effect of the less volatile OA-shielded grains with strong attractive interactions. Our study on the structural features and their roles helps to address the inherent instability of MAPbI3 perovskites, balancing the photovoltaic efficiency and device stability.

MAPbI3 perovskites in this work were used to investigate the structural features upon the introduction of BA, PEA or OA cationic surfactants and their functions, correlating to the photovoltaic performance and the device stability. Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) was carried out to probe the existence of OA introduced into the MAPbI3 perovskites. As shown in Fig. S1 in the ESI, discernible peaks are found at 2858 cm−1 and 2927 cm−1 for –CH2 symmetric and asymmetric vibrational modes, and 2958 cm−1 for –CH3 symmetric vibrational modes with the rise of peak intensities caused by an increase in the OA content. The characteristic observation in the FTIR spectra suggests a clear confirmation of the OA presence in MAPbI3. The structural phase transition behaviour in the OA-modified perovskites was also evaluated using differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) (Fig. S2 in the ESI). The DSC curves show that for all of the OA-modified perovskites, the phase transition temperatures from a tetragonal to a cubic structure were found at 58.8 °C and 56.6 °C in heating and cooling processes, respectively, which are similar to those of the 0% OA counterpart. The thermal analytical results suggest that the addition of OA cations did not influence the crystal phase transition of the perovskites. Considering that OA cations are too long to incorporate into the bulk perovskite lattice, they could be present within the GBs. To further elucidate the location of the OA cations in the perovskite layer, scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM), combined with energy dispersive X-ray analysis (EDX), was utilised with focused ion beam (FIB) milling for TEM sample preparation. Fig. S3a–c in the ESI demonstrate high-angle annular dark-field (HAADF)-STEM images of the cross section, where perovskite films with various amounts of OA were deposited on mp-TiO2/bl-TiO2/FTO. The GBs in the perovskite layer are discernible and their widths appear to be wide with 9.5% OA content. The EDX line scan profiles in Fig. S3d–f in the ESI show the spatial distribution of lead, iodide and carbon at the GBs of Fig. S3a–c in the ESI, indicating the width of the GBs. It has been reported that low energy FIB with little ion beam current and acceleration voltage should be used to minimise beam-induced damage of the sample. The beam-induced damage appears in the shape of a void in the FIB-prepared samples which could be confused with GBs, causing GBs to show decreased carbon, lead and iodide profiles. Compositional profiles in Fig. S3d–f in the ESI, with an increased carbon and a decreased Pb/I content, indicate intact GBs which bridge the relationship between the distribution of octylammonium ions and the increased OA content in the perovskite layer, excluding an artificial effect of the sample damage by FIB. Moreover, a bright-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) cross-sectional image as shown in Fig. S4 in the ESI indicates that the grain boundary has amorphous characteristics. The visual evidence on the broadening of the GBs’ width in the STEM and EDX analytical findings suggests a strong indication of an OA presence at the GBs.

X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis was also carried out to identify a distinction between the perovskite films with an OA content of 0–9.5%. Full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the XRD peak at 2θ = 14.3° corresponding to a (110) plane (Fig. 1a) and the ratio of intensities of the (110) and (310) peaks for all of the samples are plotted in Fig. S5 in the ESI. At a low OA content, the FWHM was observed to be 0.15° for 3.3 and 4.9%, which is narrower than that for the 0% OA film (0.17°). Beyond an OA content of 4.9%, the FWHM widens to 0.21° for 9.5%. The broadening of the FWHM in a high OA regime indicates a reduction in the crystalline size of the perovskites, suggesting that introducing a large amount of OA suppresses the crystal growth by attaching the perovskites through its alkyl chains. The growth constraint in long organic cation-modified perovskites has also been reported by others. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images in the inset of Fig. 1a show a variation in grain size. The grain size of the perovskite films with a high OA content (9.5%) reduced dramatically when compared to the perovskite films with a 0 and 3.3% OA content. In addition to a variation in the grain size, the XRD peak intensities of the perovskite films with an OA content of 3.3 and 4.9% were observed to be 3.9 and 2.7 times higher than that for the 0% OA film as exhibited in Fig. S5 in the ESI. The high level of the peak intensity is not attributed to the presence of thicker perovskite films compared to the 0% OA film as their thicknesses are almost identical (approximately 300 nm) as exhibited by Fig. S6 in the ESI. The rise in the XRD peak intensity could originate from an increase in preferred orientation along the (110) plane of the OA-modified perovskite films.
In order to gain an in-depth understanding of the structural evolution of the OA-mixed perovskite films, grazing incidence wide angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) measurements were conducted at beamline 6D at Pohang Accelerator Laboratory (PAL), South Korea. The 2D GIWAXS patterns for the perovskite films with an OA content of 0–9.5% exhibit scattering rings at q = 1 Å−1 (Fig. 1b), which are assigned to the (110) plane of the perovskite structures (Fig. 1a). After close inspection of the degree of the (110) crystal orientation, 0% OA films show a uniform intensity distribution along the azimuthal angle at q = 1 Å−1, indicating little preference of the crystal orientation. The observation is consistent with others who have reported a random crystal orientation of perovskites. OA-modified perovskite films exhibit distinct features to their 0% OA counterpart. For instance, for a low OA content of 3.3%, an intense scattering intensity was found at the azimuthal angle of 90°, suggesting that the crystal planes are highly oriented parallel to the substrate, which is responsible for the improved charge transport property. On the other hand, at high OA concentrations, the peak intensity becomes less pronounced due to both a dramatically reduced crystallinity and there being little preferred orientation.
In addition to XRD and GIWAXS, UV-visible absorption spectroscopy and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) spectroscopy with time-correlated single photon counting (TSCPC) were undertaken to assess the light absorption capability and to examine the charge carrier dynamics of the OA-mixed perovskite films, respectively. The bandgap energy of the OA-modified MAPbI3 did not change significantly, as shown in Fig. S7 in the ESI, albeit with a very slight blue shift upon an increase in the OA content. In Fig. 1c and Table S1 in the ESI, the 3.3% OA film shows a much longer charge recombination lifetime of 157 ns compared to that of 37 ns for the 0% OA film. The lifetimes appear to shorten to 70 ns with increasing OA content up to 9.5%. On the basis of the spectroscopic characterisation, prolonged carrier recombination lifetimes of low OA perovskite films suggest a significant drop in non-radiative recombination due to the highly preferential orientation of perovskites as summarised in Fig. S5 in the ESI. However, with increasing OA content, the PL lifetimes were gradually shortened due to the lower crystallinity and low orientation of the perovskites. Taking into account our experimental findings, we suggest the structural evolution of unmodified and BA-, PEA- and OA-mixed perovskites as illustrated in Fig. 2. It has already been reported that BA cations are present at GBs forming layered perovskite structures as probed by GIWAXS analysis, which is different from our findings in OA-modified MAPbI3. We also found that adding BA cations to MAPbI3 induces the formation of layered structures as evidenced by XRD (Fig. 2f). Moreover, the presence of layered structures was found even upon the addition of PEA cations with similar lengths to BA cations (Fig. 2e). Interestingly, longer OA cations, which are naturally believed to form layered structures, did not form layered structures, only encapsulated individual 3D perovskite crystal domains with a highly preferential orientation (Fig. 2d). In order to probe the presence of probable non-perovskite structures with the introduction of octylammonium iodide, the XRD pattern for 3.3% OA-modified MAPbI3 was magnified from Fig. 1(a) as shown in Fig. S8 in the ESI. With the XRD results for OAI and MAI raw materials as controls, the magnified XRD peaks for the OA-modified MAPbI3 have been assigned to MAPbI3 crystals, suggesting the absence of non-perovskite structures such as crystalline lead iodide, methylammonium iodide and octylammonium iodide, as well as 2D perovskite structures. The integration of our experimental findings with associated literature suggests that the structural evolution of the perovskites is strongly dependent on the length of the surfactants’ alkyl chain even among the long organic cations. In contrast to MAPbI3 which has a random crystal orientation, a close crystal domain arrangement in OA-mixed perovskite films could originate from strong attractive interactions via van der Waals forces between the long alkyl chains of the OA cations, hydrogen bonds between the ammonium entities of the OA cations and the iodide in the inorganic framework, and the attachment of alkyl chains to the perovskite surface. Recent progress has also proposed that the robust interactions in perovskites, such as van der Waals interaction, hydrogen bonds, and adsorption could improve the stability of the perovskites.

In order to study a strong overlap between the structural features of OA-modified perovskites and their functions in photovoltaic performance, we fabricated perovskite solar cells with a configuration of FTO/bl-TiO2/mp-TiO2/perovskite/PTAA/Au. Fig. 3a shows a cross-sectional SEM image confirming the device structure with an approximately 300 nm thick perovskite layer based on 3.3% OA. 30 individual devices with an increasing OA content of 0–9.5% were assessed on their photovoltaic performance by reverse scanning under simulated one sun AM 1.5G illumination at 100 mW cm−2. In Fig. 3b, PCE histograms with statistical distribution indicate that compared to the average efficiency of 0% OA perovskite devices (17.4%), the introduction of a low OA content (3.3%) improved the photovoltaic efficiency (19.3%). Taking into account the material properties as evidenced by the aforementioned characterisations, a noticeable enhancement in the photovoltaic performance could be attributed both to the highly preferential orientation perpendicular to the substrate and a significant decline in non-radiative recombination in the perovskite layer. However, beyond the OA fraction (3.3%), the perovskite devices exhibit a drop in the average efficiency to 16.7% for 9.5% OA content, due to lower crystallinity and low preferential orientation of the perovskite structures. All photovoltaic metrics extracted from the J–V curves for the best devices with 0–9.5% OA content are summarised in Table 1. Fig. 3c compares the J–V characteristics of the best performing devices with 0 and 3.3% OA. The addition of a small amount of OA (3.3%) induces a concurrent increase in the short-circuit current density (JSC), the open-circuit voltage (VOC), and the fill factor (FF) achieving a maximum efficiency of 20.6% when compared to the control device (18.4%). To begin with, the remarkably enhanced PCE is primarily ascribed to an increase in VOC from 1.06 V to 1.11 V and FF from 79.0% to 81.5%. The significant increase in VOC particularly, and FF, could originate from a drop in non-radiative charge carrier recombination by highly preferential orientation in the perovskite layer, as evidenced by the experimental findings combining XRD (Fig. 1a) and GIWAXS (Fig. 1b) with TRPL decay profiles (Fig. 1c). Moreover, an enhanced JSC value from 21.8 mA cm−2 to 22.6 mA cm−2 contributes further to the improved photovoltaic performance. The observed change in the JSC value for the 3.3% OA film could be ascribed to better charge transport properties as a consequence of the highly preferential orientation of the perovskite crystallites compared to the 0% OA film which has a random crystal orientation. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) for the corresponding perovskite devices is illustrated in Fig. 3d. The integrated current density from the EQE spectrum is calculated to be 21.7 mA cm−2, which is approximately a 4.0% difference from the short-circuit current density (22.6 mA cm−2) measured from the J–V curves in Fig. 3c. The OA-mixed device also exhibits a significantly reduced J–V hysteresis with a hysteresis index of 0.093 compared to the control device (0.259) as shown in Fig. S9 in the ESI, albeit with some hysteresis. The intrinsic J–V hysteresis of the MAPbI3-based perovskite solar cells has been suggested to originate from the charge accumulation caused by inefficient charge transport within the perovskite film. To assess the photovoltaic efficiency independently of hysteresis behaviour during reverse and forward scanning, the current at a constant voltage of 0.92 V corresponding to around the maximum power point in the J–V curves was measured, as displayed in Fig. 3e. A stabilised PCE was determined to be 20.1% for the best performing 3.3% OA-mixed perovskite device.

OA content (mol%)

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
0
1.06
21.8
79.0
18.4
3.3
1.11
22.6
81.5
20.6
4.9
1.09
22.4
79.1
19.5
9.5
1.07
22.0
75.2
17.8

From a practical perspective, the environmental stability of the perovskite devices remains a challenging issue, even though we achieve a much improved photovoltaic efficiency. The device stability against heat was assessed at 85 °C in an oven in ambient atmosphere without any encapsulation. As displayed in Fig. 4a, the normalised efficiency of 0% OA perovskite solar cells was found to decline to approximately 40% of the initial value after 432 h. However, OA-modified perovskite solar cells exhibit a superior thermal stability retaining 87% of their initial efficiency following an identical period of time. More interestingly, their normalised efficiencies are shown to be over 80% of the initial value even after 768 h of stability testing. Long-term stability of MAPbI3-based perovskite solar cells surpassing an efficiency of 20% under harsh heat conditions of 85 °C in air without any encapsulation has not been reported to date. The thermal stability of 3.3% BA- and PEA-mixed perovskite solar cells was further evaluated to compare with the corresponding OA perovskite devices (Fig. S10a in the ESI). The OA-modified perovskite device sustains the highest thermal stability during 700 h. Unlike MAPbI3 which has been reported to suffer from thermal instability at a high temperature of 85 °C, the superior thermal resistance of OA-mixed perovskite solar cells could be ascribed to OA-armoured individual grains with strong attractive interactions due to van der Waals forces between the long alkyl chains of the OA cations, hydrogen bonds between ammonium entities of the OA cations and inorganic framework, and the attachment of alkyl chains to the perovskite surface as previously explained. A further justification is the much lower volatility of OA. To reinforce the explanation for the enhanced resistance against heat, the thermal behaviour of 0% OA, 3.3% BA-, PEA- and OA-modified perovskites was assessed using thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) in air from room temperature to 500 °C with a ramping rate of 10 °C min−1 (Fig. S11 in the ESI). Compared to a weight loss of 57% for 0% OA perovskites at about 370 °C, BA- and PEA-modified perovskites exhibit 61% and 65%, respectively. However, the OA-modified perovskites’ weight reduced gradually to 80% at an identical temperature. A comparison of the TGA curves provides additional verification of the thermally stable feature of OA perovskites. The influence of the OA content on the thermal stability of the device was also evaluated as shown in Fig. S10b in the ESI. Upon an increase in the OA content, the thermal stability was found to gradually decrease, possibly due to the lower crystallinity and low preferential orientation. In order to further investigate the relationship between OA-armoured perovskite structures and their thermal stability, we examined the perovskite layer prior to and following thermal stability testing via SEM images to probe the initial progression of thermal degradation. The 0% OA film shows cracks at the GBs after 4 days of testing (Fig. 4e), while OA-armoured perovskite films remained unchanged under identical conditions (Fig. 4d). To confirm the importance of the armouring effect on the thermal stability, we also monitored the degradation progression of the corresponding films under thermal stress by in situ electron beam (EB) irradiation during the SEM analysis. Compared to the 0% OA film which showed a thermal degradation at the GBs following 60 s of EB exposure (Fig. 4g), the OA-armoured film did not show significant degradation at the GBs under identical conditions (Fig. 4f). The comparative observations suggest that thermal degradation of the perovskite by heat or electron beam is initiated at the GBs and the OA cations present in the GBs could function as a protective covering against thermal stress. In order to verify whether OA-assisted growths provide stable MAPbI3 crystals over the entire temperature range of solar cell operation, OA-armoured MAPbI3 perovskites deposited on a mp-TiO2/bl-TiO2/FTO substrate were exposed at room temperature and under 25% relative humidity for 66 days. Fig. S12 in the ESI shows that the XRD pattern of exposed OA-armoured MAPbI3 indicates no significant distinction compared to that prior to exposure, albeit with a small trace of lead iodide at 12.6°. The results suggest that the introduction of OA into the perovskites induces thermally stable MAPbI3 crystals ranging from room temperature to 85 °C.

In addition to the great heat resistance of OA-armoured perovskite devices, we found an additional armouring effect on the humidity stability at 25 °C under 65% relative humidity (RH) without any encapsulation. As displayed in Fig. 4b, 3.3% OA-modified perovskite devices show over 90% retention of their initial value during testing for 430 h compared to a control showing severe degradation for an identical period of time. The much improved stability against humidity could be considered as a consequence of hydrophobic OA-armoured grains. To further verify the importance of the armoured structures on the stability, the photostability of the devices without any encapsulation was also assessed under full solar illumination (AM 1.5G) without a UV blocking filter or any encapsulation at 25 °C in a nitrogen atmosphere. The normalised PCEs with testing times are exhibited in Fig. 4c where the control devices (0% OA) appear to show a dramatic drop in efficiency, down to 20% of their initial value within only 3 h. Interestingly, introducing a low OA content (3.3%) imparts superior stability against solar light, including UV, to the corresponding perovskite devices which retain 70% of their original efficiency even after 75 h under identical testing conditions. The photostability results show that UV light-induced degradation originates primarily from the mesoporous TiO2–perovskite interface. In contrast to volatile MA ions at the interface which are more prone to evaporating under simulated sunlight, less volatile OA ions present at the mesoporous TiO2–perovskite interface could act as an interlayer preventing UV light-induced degradation. Our claim is further reinforced by others. For instance, light-induced degradation has been reported to be due to electron extraction by TiO2 from I− followed by I2 reduction releasing HI, and the formation of deep traps by the reaction of photogenerated holes in TiO2 with adsorbed oxygen at the interface between TiO2 and MAPbI3. An additional rationale behind the improved photostability is the presence of OA-armoured individual grains which prevent photo-induced degradation. We further evaluated the device stability to understand the impact of OA content on the photo-stable nature. Fig. S13 in the ESI shows that the normalised efficiencies of OA-mixed perovskite solar cells decline with increasing OA content possibly due to the lower crystallinity and low preferential orientation, which is a similar trend to that of thermal stability (Fig. S10b in the ESI).
Despite remarkable achievements in photovoltaic performance and device stability against heat, humidity or solar light, a study on the materials chemistry pertaining to the length of the alkyl chain (i.e. dodecylammonium and hexadecylammonium), the number of organic groups (i.e. primary, secondary, tertiary or quaternary), and the presence of aromatic rings in the organic cations is essential to further improve photovoltaic performance and device stability.

In summary, we have demonstrated surfactant-armoured MAPbI3 perovskites achieving a significantly improved photovoltaic performance and device stability when exposed to heat, humidity or solar light, including UV. The introduction of OA surfactants induces the formation of encapsulated grains in perovskite films through strong attractive interactions. A clear distinction in OA-modified perovskite films is the absence of layered perovskite structures compared to other long organic cations such as BA and PEA which exhibit the presence of two-dimensional structures at the GBs. The structural features associated with the OA-modified perovskite grains stimulate a high degree of preferential orientation, exhibiting a noticeable drop in the non-radiative recombination of charge carriers. In addition to an improved photovoltaic performance, OA-armoured grains in MAPbI3 perovskites are responsible for the stability of the device when exposed to heat, humidity or solar light. The findings in this work provide great potential for armouring individual grains with cationic surfactants without a loss of charge transport properties for highly efficient and stable optoelectronic devices such as solar cells and light emitting diodes.


Octylammonium iodide was synthesised by adding dropwise 57% aqueous hydriodic acid (30 mL, 227 mmol) into a mixture of octylamine (37.6 mL, 227 mmol) and 5 mL of ethanol in an ice bath with vigorous stirring. After the addition of HI, the solution was stirred for another 2 hours. The solvent was then removed under vacuum using a rotary evaporator and the precipitate was dissolved in ethanol and recrystallised in diethyl ether. The OAI white flakes obtained by the recrystallisation process were then dried at 60 °C under vacuum overnight. Methylammonium iodide (MAI), butylammonium iodide (BAI), and phenethylammonium iodide (PEAI) were also synthesised under identical conditions as described above. To synthesise the OA-mixed MAPbI3 powder, stoichiometric amounts of OAI, MAI, and PbI2 were dissolved in 2-methoxyethanol under stirring at 100 °C for 30 minutes. The precipitates were collected using toluene by suction filtration and dried under vacuum overnight. Unmodified MAPbI3, BA- and PEA-modified MAPbI3 powders were also synthesised under identical conditions as described above.


Fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO)-coated glass (Pilkington, TEC8) as a substrate was cleaned in an ultrasonic bath using detergents, acetone and ethanol for 30 min, respectively. A titanium diisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate) precursor solution diluted in ethanol with a ratio of 1:10 by volume was sprayed onto the FTO substrate at 450 °C to coat the TiO2 hole blocking layer (bl-TiO2). A mesoporous TiO2 layer (mp-TiO2) was deposited onto the bl-TiO2/FTO substrate by spin-coating TiO2 paste with an average particle size of 50 nm at 1500 rpm for 50 s. The substrate was then annealed at 500 °C in air for 1 h. The synthesised perovskites were dissolved in N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) and dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO), with a DMF to DMSO volume ratio of 4:1, with stirring at 60 °C for 1 h. Afterwards, the perovskite solution filtered with a PTFE syringe filter (0.2 μm) was deposited onto the mp-TiO2 substrate by two consecutive spin-coating steps at 1000 rpm for 15 s followed by 5000 rpm for 20 s with a ramping rate of 300 rpm s−1 and 1300 rpm s−1, respectively. 1 mL toluene was dropped onto the spinning substrate 10 s after starting the second spin-coating stage. The perovskite-deposited substrate was then heat-treated on a hot plate at 100 °C for 10 min. For deposition of the organic hole transporting material, poly(bis(4-phenyl)(2,4,6-trimethylphenyl)amine) (PTAA) solution (10 mg in 1 mL of toluene) was mixed with 7.5 μL of lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (Li-TFSI) solution in acetonitrile (170 mg mL−1), 7.5 μL of 4-tert-butylpyridine (tBP). The hole-conducting material was spin-coated at 3000 rpm for 30 s on the perovskite/mp-TiO2/bl-TiO2/FTO. Finally, a gold layer was deposited onto the HTL using a thermal evaporator.


The morphology of the perovskite films was measured using a scanning electron microscope (Tescan Mira 3 LMU FEG) operating at 5 kV. Scanning transmission electron microscopy (JEOL, JEM-2100F) combined with energy dispersive X-ray analysis was utilised with an accelerating voltage of 200 kV. TEM samples were prepared using a focused ion beam system (FEI, Helios NanolLab 450). The crystal structure was analysed using an X-ray diffractometer (Rigaku SmartLab). Grazing incidence wide angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) measurements were conducted at beamline 6D at Pohang Accelerator Laboratory (PAL), South Korea. An incident angle of 0.3° was used and a sample–detector distance was approximately 246.4 mm. The structural phase transition behaviour in the perovskite powders was evaluated using a differential scanning calorimeter (DSC, TA Instruments Q200) from 30 °C to 120 °C with a ramping rate of 5 °C min−1 in nitrogen with a flow rate of 50 mL min−1. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) for perovskite powders was carried out from 30 °C to 500 °C with a heating rate of 10 °C min−1 in air using a TA Instruments Q500 machine. Infrared spectra were recorded using a FT-IR spectrometer (Varian 670-IR). The optical properties of the perovskite films were measured using a UV-vis spectrophotometer (Shimadzu UV-2600). Time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) measurements were performed using a fluorescence spectrometer (Edinburgh Instruments, FL920). The TRPL decay profiles were recorded at individual PL emission maxima for all of the samples excited by a wavelength of 470 nm with a maximum average power of 5 mW. The PL emission decay curves were fitted using the following equation:

Y = A1exp(−t/τ1) + A2exp(−t/τ2)
(1)
where
Y is the time-dependent emission intensity, A1 and A2 are the relative amplitudes and τ1 and τ2 are the fit PL decay times. Eqn (1) demonstrates that the charge carrier dynamics are described by a combination of non-radiative recombination at the defect sites and the radiative recombination in bulk perovskite films, which is assigned to τ1 and τ2 as the fast and slow components, respectively.

The J–V characteristics of the devices were measured using a Keithley 2420 Source Meter under illumination by a solar simulator (Newport, Oriel Sol3A Class AAA) with an AM 1.5 filter and an irradiation intensity of 100 mW cm−2. The active area of the devices is 0.096 cm2. The J–V scans were carried out at 10 mV steps with a delay time of 100 ms in the reverse (VOC → VOC) and forward (VO → VOC) directions. External quantum efficiency (EQE) was measured using an IQE 200B system (ORIEL Instruments) under 100 W xenon lamp irradiation. The light intensity was calibrated by a silicon reference detector. The stabilised power conversion efficiencies of the devices were evaluated by tracking the photocurrent at a constant voltage of approximately the maximum power point in the J–V curves under simulated one sun irradiation with a light intensity of 100 mW cm−2.

The perovskite solar cells without encapsulation were stored in an oven at 85 °C under average 10% RH in the dark and in an ambient atmosphere to test the thermal stability. For photostability measurement, the devices without encapsulation were placed in a customised nitrogen-filled chamber at room temperature. During the testing, continuous simulated sunlight without a UV blocking filter illuminated the devices via a solar simulator (Newport, Oriel Sol3A Class AAA) with an AM 1.5 filter and an irradiation intensity of 100 mW cm−2. The humidity stability of the perovskite devices without encapsulation was performed at room temperature in the dark and under 65% relative humidity.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the Global Frontier R&D Program for Multiscale Energy System (NRF-2011-0031565), the Climate Change Program (NRF-2015M1A2A2056542) through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT & Future Planning (MSIP), a Brand Project (1.180043.01) through UNIST, and a Regional Development Project (1.180030.01) through Ulsan City. M. Jung acknowledges a NRF Research Fellowship funded by the Ministry of Education (NRF-2016R1A6A3A11930303). M. Jung would like to thank Dr S. J. Lee for providing synthesised octylammonium iodide in the initial stage of the project. The authors would also like to thank Prof. J. H. Noh for discussion during the project.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ee00995c
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018