 DOI: 10.1039/D0TA10649F
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 2857-2863


Shanshan
Chen
,

Junfeng
Ye
,

Qianguang
Yang
,

Jiyeon
Oh
,

Dingqin
Hu
,

Ke
Yang
,

George Omololu
Odunmbaku
,

Feng
Li
,

Qingqing
Yu
,

Zhipeng
Kan
,

Zeyun
Xiao
,

Changduk
Yang
,

Shirong
Lu
* and 

Kuan
Sun
*

Key Laboratory of Low-grade Energy Utilization Technologies and Systems, CQU-NUS Renewable Energy Materials & Devices Joint Laboratory, School of Energy & Power Engineering, Chongqing University, Chongqing 400044, P. R. China. E-mail: kuan.sun@cqu.edu.cn

Organic Semiconductor Research Center, Chongqing Institute of Green and Intelligent Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chongqing 400714, P. R. China. E-mail: lushirong@cigit.ac.cn

Department of Energy Engineering, School of Energy and Chemical Engineering, Perovtronics Research Center, Low Dimensional Carbon Materials Center, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), 50 UNIST-gil, Ulju-gun, Ulsan 44919, South Korea

School of Energy and Chemical Engineering, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), Ulsan 44919, South Korea

Received
1st November 2020
, Accepted 14th December 2020
First published on 15th December 2020
Morphology control remains a major challenge for all-small-molecule organic solar cells (ASM OSCs), mainly reflecting in the elusive trade-off between the molecular ordering and phase separation of the active layer. In this study, a novel volatile solid additive IC-FI, namely dihalogenated 1,1-dicyanomethylene-3-indanone, whose chemical structure is analogous to the end-group moiety of the representative non-fullerene acceptor, has been prepared and applied in BTR-Cl:N3-based ASM OSCs. The intrinsic structural feature of IC-IF enables the self-assembly of N3 along with the enhanced intermixing between BTR-Cl and N3 in the subsequent thermal annealing process. This offers nano-scale phase separation with a predominant face-on oriented molecular packing in the blend film, thereby boosting the effective charge transport and extraction process in the device. Consequently, a superior power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 14.43% with an outstanding fill factor (FF) of 73.53% was achieved in the IC-FI processed device. These results indicate that the use of the volatile solid additive is a simple and practical strategy for the optimization of the small-molecule bulk-heterojunction morphology toward highly efficient ASM OSCs.

Solution-processed organic solar cells (OSCs) are regarded as some of the promising solar technologies owing to their low cost, light weight, mechanical flexibility, and capability to be fabricated via a roll-to-roll printing process. In particular, all-small-molecule (ASM) OSCs possess unique advantages in terms of definite chemical structures, easy purification, and negligible batch-to-batch variations, which have attracted wide attention from both academics and industries. To realize high-performance ASM OSCs, considerable efforts have been devoted to modulating the bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) morphology of active layers. The major challenge of ASM OSCs is to enhance the molecular ordering for efficient charge transport while maintaining nanoscale phase separation with interpenetrating networks due to the high crystallinity of each component in the blend. Various strategies such as solvent vapor annealing (SVA), thermal annealing (TA), and use of high-boiling-point solvent additives have been extensively investigated in fullerene-based blend systems to optimize the morphological kinetics, which plays a critical role in boosting the photovoltaic performance of a given blend. Due to the advances in donor–acceptor–donor (A–D–A)-type non-fullerene acceptors, a significant breakthrough in power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) over 14% has been recently reached in ASM OSCs. Different from spherical fullerene derivatives, the A–D–A-type acceptors possess a planar conjugated skeleton with various bulky side chains, resulting in an anisotropic molecular orientation in the solid state. The morphology processing techniques empirically inherited from fullerene-based systems might not be sufficient to realize the maximized efficiency in non-fullerene ASM OSCs. Considering the distinct molecular packing behavior of non-fullerene acceptors, a series of volatile aromatic solid additives have been successfully designed and applied in non-fullerene polymer solar cells (NF-PSCs). These additives show appropriate miscibility with the donor/acceptor components and serve as a bridge to enhance the intermolecular interaction between two adjacent molecules. As the aromatic solid additive volatilized from the active layer, the ordered molecular arrangement via self-assembly was greatly enhanced in the BHJ blend, offering higher PCEs and better device reproducibility and stability than for the devices processed with widely used solvent additives, such as 1,8-diiodooctane (DIO) and 1-chloronaphthalene (1-CN). Despite the growing interest in developing volatile solid additives for the morphology optimization of polymer-based devices, there has been no report exploring the effect and mechanism of volatile solid additives in all-small-molecule systems.

Herein, we have synthesized a new volatile solid additive IC-FI (dihalogenated 1,1-dicyanomethylene-3-indanone) with the chemical structure analogous to the end-group moiety of the representative non-fullerene acceptor, and applied it in BTR-Cl:N3-based ASM OSCs (Fig. 1). The effects of IC-FI as a processing volatile solid additive on the optical response, morphology, and photovoltaic characteristics of the BTR-Cl:N3 platform have been investigated systematically. Compared to the control film without the IC-FI additive treatment, a well-distributed microstructure with a predominant face-on oriented molecular packing was achieved after the volatilization of IC-FI, contributing to significantly enhanced charge transport properties with less recombination loss. This allows achieving a superior PCE of 14.43% with an outstanding fill factor (FF) of 73.53% in the IC-FI processed device. The present work demonstrates that the use of a volatile solid additive is a feasible strategy for small-molecule BHJ morphology regulation toward highly efficient ASM OSCs.

The molecular structures of BTR-Cl (small molecule donor), N3 (small molecule acceptor), and IC-FI (volatile solid additive) are shown in Fig. 1. The IC-FI can be easily synthesized through a two-step process with low-cost compounds and it exhibited sufficient solubility in commonly used organic solvents. Fig. S1a presents the IC-FI thin film absorption spectra before and after thermal annealing at 120 °C. The absence of absorption peaks in the ultraviolet-to-visible region verifies the complete volatilization of IC-FI at a given temperature. In addition, the effect of IC-FI additive treatment on the optical properties of both BTR-Cl/TA and N3/TA thin films was examined. As shown in Fig. S1b and c, compared to the reference films without the IC-FI additive, both BTR-Cl + IC-FI/TA and N3 + IC-FI/TA films present a red-shifted absorption profile with an obviously higher absorption coefficient. The absorbance spectra of the blend film with IC-FI additive treatment compared to those of the control blend film were mainly modified in the 600–1000 nm region, with a slightly red-shifted profile and enhanced absorption coefficient possibly due to the improved molecular aggregation (Fig. S1d). Therefore, these results indicate that IC-FI can be utilized as a volatile solid additive in the BTR-Cl:N3 blend system to regulate the BHJ microstructure and possibly influence the photovoltaic performance of the device.

To evaluate the effect of IC-FI treatment on the device performance, conventional ASM OSCs were fabricated with a device configuration of indium tin oxide (ITO)/poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly (styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS)/active layer/phen-NaDPO/Ag (Fig. 2a). Device optimization was carried out by carefully screening the amount of IC-FI additive, annealing temperature and duration (Tables S2–S4). Fig. 2b displays the representative current density versus voltage (J–V) curves of the optimal devices with and without the IC-FI additive under an AM1.5G solar simulator at 100 mW cm2; the relevant photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table 1. The control devices without the IC-FI additive exhibit a maximum PCE of 13.36% with an open circuit voltage (VOC) of 0.85 V, a short circuit current (JSC) of 24.16 mA cm−2, and an FF of 64.72%. The use of the 36 wt% IC-FI volatile solid additive relative to the weight of the N3 acceptor in a device provides a significantly enhanced FF value of 73.53%, together with a comparable JSC of 24.06 mA cm−2 and VOC of 0.82 V, yielding a greater PCE of 14.43% than that of the control device. It is worth noting that the achieved FF and PCE outputs are among the superior values reported for ASM OSCs to date, which demonstrates the use of volatile solid additives as an alternative and promising approach towards highly efficient ASM OSCs (Fig. 2d). Fig. 2c shows the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra and the corresponding integrated JSC values of both devices, which agree well with the JSC values obtained from J–V characteristics (within 5% mismatch). Compared to the control device, the IC-FI-processed device exhibits a red-shifted photo-response in the range of 820–1000 nm, which partially correlates with the absorption feature of the active layer in this region and can compensate for the declined EQE in the short wavelength response corresponding to the exciton dissociation of the BTR-Cl component.
Devices

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)

J
SC
 (mA cm−2)

μ
h (cm2 V−1 s−1)

μ
e (cm2 V−1 s−1)

a The average values are obtained from 12 devices with standard deviation.
b The short-circuit current densities integrated from the EQE spectra.

Control
0.85
24.16
64.7
13.36 (13.23 ± 0.12)
23.79
1.61 × 10−4
7.05 × 10−4
With IC-FI
0.82
24.06
73.5
14.43 (14.29 ± 0.14)
23.78
7.89 × 10−4
2.32 × 10−3

To gain insight into the effect of IC-FI treatment on the molecular packing and orientation in thin films, grazing incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) measurements were carried out. As shown in Fig. 3, the neat BTR-Cl film exhibits well-defined (h00) lamellar diffractions in the out-of-plane (qz) direction and (010) π–π stacking diffraction in the in-plane (qxy) direction, suggesting a preferential edge-on orientation with long-range ordered lamellar packing. However, the neat N3 film exhibits a predominant face-on orientation with a strong (010) π–π stacking diffraction in the qz direction. Upon blending the BTR-Cl and N3 under the control device conditions, a bimodal π–π stacking pattern in both edge-on and face-on orientations forms. The distinct edge-on (h00) lamellar diffractions and (010) π–π stacking diffraction at qxy = 1.73 Å−1 are the characteristics of BTR-Cl, indicating that the crystalline packing of BTR-Cl is nearly retained in the blend. Yet, the diffractions (qxy = 0.32 Å−1, qz = 1.70 Å−1) originating from N3 are not as distinguishable as those observed in the neat film, indicating that the crystallinity of N3 is substantially weakened in the blend. Using Scherrer's equation, the edge- and face-on oriented π-stacking crystallite coherence lengths (CCL010) in the control film are 3.68 and 2.81 nm, respectively. For the blend film processed with the IC-FI volatile additive, a strong (010) diffraction at qz = 1.72 Å−1 (CCL010 = 4.19 nm) appears, together with the emergence of a sharp (001) diffraction at qxy = 0.28 Å−1 (CCL001 = 10.91 nm), suggesting that both the π-face-on and backbone ordering of the N3 component in the blend are remarkably promoted. Considering the similar chemical structure of IC-FI and the N3 end-group, the IC-FI could serve as a bridge to enhance the π–π interaction of end-groups between adjacent N3 molecules and thus favor tighter self-assembly of N3 in BHJ upon IC-FI volatilization. This predominant face-on geometry with compact π–π stacking is known to help facilitate the vertical charge transport and ultimately improve the FF and PCE in devices. Besides, the estimated edge-on CCL010 originating from BTR-Cl crystallites in the blend is reduced from 3.63 nm (control film) to 3.20 nm (IC-FI-processed film). This suggests a slightly reduced crystallinity of BTR-Cl when treated with IC-FI in the blend film, which might account for the reduced EQE in the range of 300–600 nm.

The trade-off between the crystallinity of BTR-Cl and N3 can result in various phase separation morphologies within the film. As shown in Fig. 4, the control film exhibits isolated granule-like aggregates with a root-mean-square roughness (Rq) value of 1.60 nm; the large grain boundaries can act as a barrier to efficient charge transport, explaining the low FF output in the control device. When processed with the IC-FI volatile additive, the surface of the blend film becomes fairly smoother with a decreased Rq value of 1.16 nm. The finer phase separation with an interpenetrating network indicates improved intermixing of BTR-Cl and N3 in the blend. To further explore the effect of IC-FI on the bulk morphology of the blend films, high-angle angular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) was conducted. As shown in Fig. S5a, smaller aggregates were distributed more uniformly in the IC-FI-processed blend film. Radially averaged two-dimensional discrete Fourier transform is used to investigate the quasi-periodic structures that are proportional to the mean domain size in the blend. Estimated using the peak position of the Fourier transform, the mean domain sizes are 86 nm and 67 nm for the control and IC-FI-processed blend film, respectively (Fig. S5b). The result agrees well with the corresponding surface morphology obtained in the AFM measurement, implying a smaller degree of phase separation in the blend with IC-FI treatment. Thus, one can speculate that the use of the IC-FI volatile additive can regulate not only the molecular orientation and order range, but also the degree of phase separation within the blend. Therefore, a well-distributed microstructure with a preferential π-face-on oriented molecular packing might be one of the key factors for achieving highly efficient ASM OSCs.

To directly evaluate the vertical charge carrier mobility of both blend films, space charge limited current (SCLC) measurement was conducted (Fig. 5a and b). For the control blend film, the electron mobility (μe) and hole mobility (μh) are 7.05 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 1.61 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively, with a μe/μh ratio of 4.9. After processing with the IC-FI volatile additive, the μe and μh values increased to 2.32 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 7.89 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively, with a reduced μe/μh ratio of 3.2. The higher and more balanced charge carrier mobilities can be ascribed to optimal percolation pathways with enhanced π-face-on ordering in the blend, responsible for the improved FF value in the device.

Furthermore, we carried out the incident light intensity (P) dependent J–V characterization to investigate the effect of the IC-FI volatile additive on the charge recombination dynamics in the device. The relationship between JSC and P can be quantitatively interpreted using a power-law function (JSC ∝ Pα), in which the α parameter is close to unity when the bimolecular recombination is negligible. The estimated α value is 0.99 for both devices, implying a minor bimolecular recombination loss (Fig. 5c). Besides, the Shockley–Read–Hall recombination loss can be derived from the dependence of VOC on P (Fig. 5d). The slope of the semi-logarithmic plot gives kT/q, where k is the Boltzmann's constant, T is the temperature in K, and q is the elementary charge. The fitted slopes are 1.53 kT/q and 1.25 kT/q for the control and IC-FI-processed devices, respectively, implying that the trap-assisted recombination loss is partially suppressed when using the IC-FI additive in the blend. Moreover, the carrier lifetime and charge extraction time were determined from the transient photovoltage (TPV) and transient photocurrent (TPC) measurements, respectively. As shown in Fig. 5e and f, the extracted carrier lifetime under dark conditions increases from 55.90 μs (control device) to 63.40 μs (IC-FI-processed device), while the charge extraction time decreases from 0.35 μs (control device) to 0.29 μs (IC-FI-processed device). In addition, the extracted carrier lifetimes under one sun operation conditions are 1.07 to 1.31 μs for the control and IC-FI-processed devices, respectively (Fig. S6). The longer carrier lifetime and shorter charge extraction time generally correlate with a slower recombination rate, which agrees well with the reduced recombination loss above. Further investigation on the working mechanism was conducted to obtain the plots of photocurrent density (Jph) versus effective voltage (Veff) for both devices (Fig. S7). Here, Jph is defined as Jph = JL − JD, where JL and JD are the photocurrent densities under illumination and dark conditions, respectively; Veff is given by Veff = V0 − Va, where V0 is the compensation voltage at Jph = 0 and Va is the applied voltage bias. The Jph could reach the saturation value (Jsat) at high Veff (over 1.0 V) in both devices, where all the photogenerated excitons are dissociated into free charge carriers and collected at electrodes. Under short-circuit conditions, the estimated Jph/Jsat values are 96.3% and 98.8% for the control and IC-FI-processed devices, respectively, indicating the slightly improved exciton dissociation probability in the device with IC-FI treatment. At maximum power output, the IC-FI-processed device exhibits a significantly enhanced Jph/Jsat value (86.1%) compared to the control device (76.8%), indicating more efficient charge extraction and collection processes in the device with IC-FI treatment. These results suggest that the application of the IC-FI volatile additive simultaneously elevates charge carrier mobility and suppresses charge recombination, which contributes to the overall photovoltaic performance of ASM OSCs.

In summary, we have developed a novel volatile solid IC-FI derived from the end-group moiety structure of the N3 acceptor and applied it as a processing additive to the BTR-Cl:N3-based ASM OSCs. The intrinsic structural feature of the IC-IF additive enables the molecular rearrangement of N3 together with the enhanced intermixing between BTR-Cl and N3 in the subsequent thermal annealing process. As the IC-FI additive volatilizes from the active layer, a well-distributed microstructure with a significantly enhanced π-face-on oriented packing in the blend was observed, contributing to a more effective charge transport and extraction process. This feature played a vital role in realizing an impressive PCE of 14.43% along with a significantly enhanced FF of 73.53% in the device. These results highlight that the utilization of the IC-based volatile solid additive is a simple yet effective approach for the modulation of molecular packing and nanophase blending in small-molecule BHJ and demonstrate a promising prospect for the application and development of high-performance ASM OSCs.


PEDOT:PSS aqueous solution (Clevios PVP Al 4083) was purchased from Heraeus and used directly. N3 was purchased from Shenzhen Yirou Photonics Technology Co. Ltd. Chloroform and isopropyl alcohol (IPA) were purchased from J&K Scientific Ltd., and all purchased chemicals and solvents were not further treated before using.


Thionyl chloride (7.1375 g, 60 mmol) was added to a solution of 3-fluoro-4-iodobenzoic acid (7.9803 g, 30 mmol) in 50 mL of CHCl3 (30 mL) under the protection of nitrogen. Subsequently, DMF (0.5 mL) was added to initiate the reaction. The reaction was stirred at 65 °C for 1 hour, then the excess thionyl chloride was removed under reduced pressure, and 3-fluoro-4-iodobenzoyl chloride was used for the next step without further purification. The mixture of malonyl dichloride (8.4568 g, 60 mmol) and AlCl3 (5.9999 g, 45 mmol) in dry dichloromethane (50 mL) solution was flushed with nitrogen for ten minutes, then 3-fluoro-4-iodobenzoyl chloride was added. After being refluxed at 65 °C overnight, the mixture was poured into 2 M oxalic acid aqueous solution. Then, the pH of the solution was tuned to around 7 by using NaHCO3 aqueous solution. The crude product extracted from dichloromethane was purified using silica gel, and 6.6693 g of the target product was obtained as a yellow solid. 1H NMR (400 MHz, chloroform-d): δ 8.44 (d, J = 5.3 Hz, 1H), 7.55 (d, J = 6.2 Hz, 1H), 3.26 (s, 2H). FT-MS (calcd for [C9H4FIO2] [M + Na]+: calc. m/z 312.91322) found: 312.91369.


Sodium acetate (1.0503 g, 15 mmol) was added to a solution of malononitrile (1.3213 g, 20 mmol) and IN-FI (2.9003 g, 10 mmol) in 50 mL of ethanol. The mixture was stirred for 1 h at room temperature. Then 50 mL of water was added to the mixture, which was then acidified to pH 1–2 by using HCl (2 M). The solid was filtered and purified by column chromatography, and the target IC-FI was obtained as a yellow solid (2.4159 g, yield 71.46%). 1H NMR (400 MHz, chloroform-d): δ 9.08 (d, 0.3H), 8.42 (d, 0.7H), 8.24 (d, 0.7H), 7.56 (d, 0.3H), 3.75 (d, 2H). FT-MS (calcd for [C9H4FIO2] [M + H]+: calc. m/z 360.92445) found: 360.92466.


The device structure used in this paper is ITO/PEDOT:PSS/active layer/phen-NaDPO/Ag. Indium tin oxide (ITO) needs ultrasonic cleaning before using. ITO was cleaned with detergent, deionized water, acetone, and isopropanol in turn for 15 minutes. After cleaning, the ITO was dried with nitrogen gas and then treated with UV-ozone for 15 minutes to produce hydrophilic surface groups. PEDOT:PSS was spin-coated on the ITO at 4000 rpm for 20 s, and then the coated ITO was annealed at 120 °C for 10 minutes. Then, the PEDOT:PSS covered ITO was transferred to a nitrogen-filled glovebox for further operation. Phen-NaDPO was dissolved in isopropanol at a concentration of 0.5 mg mL−1. The D/A ratio of BTR-Cl to N3 is 1.4:1, and the concentration is 20 mg mL−1. For devices without additives, chloroform solution materials are used as the solvent directly. For the IC-FI-processed devices, the IC-FI precursor solution was prepared in chloroform with various concentrations (0.5–5 mg mL−1). And then, the photoactive materials (BTR-Cl and N3) were added and dissolved in the IC-FI precursor solution. It is worth noting that the weight concentration of the BTR-Cl:N3 mixture was 20 mg mL−1, and the BTR-Cl:N3 ratio was kept at 1.4:1. The blend solution was stirred at 30 °C for 2 hours. Afterwards, the blend solution was spin-coated onto PEDOT:PSS/ITO/glass substrates at 2500 rpm for 30 s. Thermal annealing post-treatment was utilized at various temperatures and durations to optimize the morphology of the active layer. Afterwards, phen-NaDPO is spin-coated on the active layer at 2000 rpm for 20 s. Finally, these devices are transferred to a thermal evaporation chamber with a pressure of less than 1 × 10−6 Torr for vapor deposition, and 100 nm thick silver is deposited. The current density–voltage (J–V) curves of OSCs were measured in air using a Keithley 2400 source meter and an AAA grade solar simulator (Sirius-SS150A-D, Zolix Ltd.) along with AM 1.5 G spectra whose intensity was corrected using a certified standard silicon solar cell (certificate no.: GXtc2017-1280, NIM) at 1000 W m−2. The J–V curves were measured in the forward direction under both light and dark conditions, and series and shunt resistances were recorded under dark conditions at a bias of 1.5 and 0 V, respectively. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) measurement was carried out with a certified incident photon to electron conversion (IPCE) instrument (QE-R) from Enli Technology Co., Ltd. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) was carried out on a METTLER TOLEDO TGA/DSC 1 thermogravimetric analyzer with a thermal balance under the protection of nitrogen at a heating rate of 10 °C min−1. Transient photocurrent (TPC) measurements were carried out under short-circuit conditions to explore the time-dependent extraction of photogenerated charge carriers. The intensity of light was 230 μW cm−2 and the wavelength of light was 520 nm. The light pulse duration was 10 ns. The devices were kept in the dark between pulses to avoid any influence of pulse frequency on the current responses. Transient photovoltage (TPV) was measured under both dark and one sun conditions to explore the corresponding photovoltage decay. And the adopted bias photovoltage was set under open-circuit conditions. The subsequent voltage decay was then recorded using a digital oscilloscope to directly monitor non-geminate charge carrier recombination. The normalized curves were used to extract the carrier lifetimes. The photovoltage decay kinetics of all devices follow a mono-exponential decay: δV = Aexp(−t/τ), where t is the time and τ is the charge carrier lifetime. Note that the carrier lifetime is independent of A, the pre-factor value.


Atomic force microscopy (AFM) images were acquired using a Bruker Dimension EDGE in tapping mode. High-angle angular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF STEM) measurement was conducted with a Talos F200S electron microscope. UV-Vis absorption spectra were determined using a PerkinElmer Lambda 365 spectrophotometer. The GIWAXS characterization was performed at the PLS-II 6A U-SAXS beamline of the Pohang Accelerator Laboratory in Korea. Samples were prepared under the same device conditions on Si substrates. The X-rays from an in-vacuum undulator (IVU) were monochromatic (wavelength λ = 1.10994 Å), obtained using a double crystal monochromator, and focused both horizontally and vertically (450 (H) × 60 (V) μm2 in FWHM @ the sample position) using K–B type mirrors. The grazing incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering sample stage was equipped with a 7-axis motorized stage for the fine alignment of the sample, and the incidence angle of the X-ray was varied from 0.08° to 0.15° for different depths in the film. The GIWAXS patterns were recorded with a 2D CCD detector (Rayonix SX165) and an X-ray irradiation time of up to 100 s, dependent on the saturation level of the detector. Diffraction angles were calibrated using a sucrose standard (monoclinic, P21, a = 10.8631 Å, b = 8.7044 Å, c = 7.7624 Å, and β = 102.938°) and the sample-to-detector distance was ∼220 mm.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (62074022, 62074149), Natural Science Foundation of Chongqing (cstc2018jszx-cyzdX0137), Chongqing Science Foundation for Distinguished Young Scholars (cstc2020jcyj-jq0112), “Artificial Intelligence” Key Project of Chongqing (cstc2017rgzn-zdyf0120), Venture & Innovation Support Program for Chongqing Overseas Returnees (cx2019107), Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (2020CDJQY-A055) and the Youth Talent Support Program of Chongqing (CQYC2020058091).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta10649f
‡ S. Chen, J. Ye, and Q. Yang contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021