 DOI: 10.1039/C5TA04695E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 18483-18491


Qin
Hu
,

Yi
Liu
,

Yu
Li
,

Lei
Ying
,

Tanghao
Liu
,

Fei
Huang
*,

Shufeng
Wang
,

Wei
Huang
,

Rui
Zhu
* and 

Qihuang
Gong


State Key Laboratory for Artificial Microstructure and Mesoscopic Physics, School of Physics, Peking University, Beijing, 100871, China. E-mail: iamzhurui@pku.edu.cn; Fax: +86 010 62756567; Tel: +86 010 62750853

Collaborative Innovation Center of Quantum Matter, Beijing, 100871, China

Institute of Polymer Optoelectronic Materials and Devices, State Key Laboratory of Luminescent Materials and Devices, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, 510640, China. E-mail: msfhuang@scut.edu.cn

Institute of Advanced Materials, Nanjing Tech University, Nanjing, 211816, China

Received
25th June 2015
, Accepted 3rd August 2015
First published on 4th August 2015
A cross-linkable conjugated polymer, poly[9,9-bis(6′-(N,N-diethylamino)propyl)-fluorene-alt-9,9-bis-(3-ethyl(oxetane-3-ethyloxy)-hexyl)-fluorene] (PFN-OX), was investigated as the n-type interface layer for highly efficient and low-temperature processed planar heterojunction perovskite solar cells. Hybrid composite films consisting of PFN-OX and ZnO nanoparticles were utilized as electron selective layers, and a remarkable power conversion efficiency over 16% was achieved. The cross-linkable PFN-OX provided a robust hybrid composite electron selective layer, which is solvent-resistant during the device fabrication process and results in efficient electron extraction and hole blocking. Meanwhile, time-resolved photoluminescence quenching measurements indicated that the charge separation and collection processes were improved for devices based on PFN-OX:ZnO, in comparison with devices using pure PFN-OX or ZnO. The device stability and the hysteresis effect were also discussed. Moreover, this study introduces the cross-linking concept in perovskite solar cells, which will potentially be an effective strategy for obtaining high performance perovskite solar cells.

Highly efficient and cost effective photovoltaic technologies are attracting increasing attention from both academic and industrial fields. Some candidates, such as dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), organic solar cells, and inorganic thin film solar cells have been extensively studied over the past decade. During the recent five years, a novel photovoltaic technology, perovskite solar cells (PSSCs), has emerged as a top contender for high performance and low-cost photovoltaic devices. Compared with other candidates, PSSCs have shown great potential and superiority due to the inexpensive perovskite material, simple fabrication methods and the sky-rocketing power conversion efficiency (PCE) from 3.8% to around 20% within only 5 years. Most recently, a certified PCE up to 20.1% for PSSCs was reported with great effort from the Korea Research Institute of Chemical Technology (KRICT).

The advances in PSSCs are originally attributed to organometal halide perovskite photovoltaic materials, which consist of organic and inorganic hybrid components and possess a perovskite-type crystalline structure. Due to their unique electronic and optical properties, these hybrid organometal halide perovskites have been intensively studied in thin-film transistors, light-emitting diodes and other photoelectric devices during the past decades. The application of organometal halide perovskites in photovoltaic devices initially evolved from the DSSC technology. In 2009, hybrid perovskites were first used as solar light absorbers in liquid-electrolyte based DSSCs, resulting in a modest PCE of 3.8%. Further enhancement was later achieved by introducing perovskite light absorbers into mesoporous solid-state DSSCs, leading to PCEs of ∼10% in 2012. Research studies also indicated that hybrid perovskites possess optimal bandgaps, high absorption coefficients, small exciton binding energy, high mobilities of carriers and long exciton diffusion length. These advances have ensured superior photovoltaic performance for hybrid perovskite solar cells.
In addition to mesoporous PSSCs, planar heterojunction PSSCs have also been developed, which have the advantage of a low-temperature process and is suitable for flexible substrates. Planar heterojunction PSSC devices possess a layered architecture, which consists of multiple functional films sandwiched between the anode and cathode. These functional films include electron selective contacts (ESCs), perovskite absorber layers, and hole selective contacts (HSCs). In order to achieve high device performance, various approaches have been conducted. For example, morphology control of perovskite films and the optimization of hole-conducting materials have been extensively studied to optimize the device performance. Moreover, intensive effort has also been made for interface engineering at electron selective contacts. This provides an effective strategy to enhance electron collection, leading to improved device performance. The most commonly used ESC for planar heterojunction PSSCs is based on titanium oxide (TiOx) materials. Several other materials, including TiO2/graphene nanocomposites, ZnO nanoparticles and ultrathin graphene quantum dots, were reported as low-temperature processed ESCs and considerable device efficiencies of over 15% were achieved. Moreover, the surface modification strategy has also been demonstrated to achieve n-type contact between the active layer and the electrode. By modifying the surface energy of the ITO substrate with Cs2CO3, a device efficiency exceeding 15% was achieved. Most recently, a hybrid n-type contact consisting of doped TiO2 and a polyelectrolyte was introduced into PSSCs and a high PCE approaching 20% was achieved.
In this study, a hybrid n-type interface modification based on a cross-linkable conjugated polymer (CP) is demonstrated in perovskite solar cells. CPs have been reported as effective n-type interface layers in organic electronic devices and perovskite solar cells. It is believed that the CP layer could form dipoles at the organic/metal interface and facilitate efficient electron transport. For example, amino-functionalized polyfluorene, poly[9,9-bis(6′-(N,N-dimethylamino)hexyl)-fluorene] (PFN, Fig. 1a), has been used in organic light emitting devices (OLEDs) and polymer solar cells (PSCs). Impressive results were often achieved with the contribution of the PFN-based interface. However, considering their solubility in polar solvents, CPs may not be compatible in regular PSSCs. For example, perovskite materials are often deposited onto an n-type interface layer from its solution in polar solvents, such as N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) or dimethylsulphoxide (DMSO). These solvents could re-dissolve the PFN layer. The deposition of a hole-conducting layer also involves organic halogenated solvents, which may damage the PFN interface layer. Thus, a cross-linkable conjugated polymer (PFN-OX, Fig. 1a), which shows better solvent resistance, has been chosen to form a hybrid n-type interface layer with metal nanoparticles. With this hybrid composite as the electron-selective layer, a remarkable efficiency above 16% could be achieved.

Conjugated polymers (CPs) have been widely used to improve the interface contact in organic photovoltaics (OPVs) and OLEDs. A typical example is the alcohol/water soluble polyfluorene derivative, PFN, which contains alkylamine groups in the side chain (Fig. 1a). It was reported that the work function of indium-tin-oxide (ITO) could be modified by the amino groups in PFN, which greatly enhanced the electron extraction in OPVs and electron injection in OLEDs. Recently, PFN was also utilized in inverted planar heterojunction perovskite solar cells to form efficient ohmic contact between the electrode and active layer. However, PFN has unfavorable solvent resistance to some polar solvents or organic halogenated solvents, such as DMF and CB, which is undesirable during the device fabrication of regular planar heterojunction PSSCs. In contrast, PFN-OX, as shown in Fig. 1a, could be insoluble after being thermally cross-linked, giving a robust CP layer. Meanwhile, as the oxetane groups are chemically bonded on the end of the side chains, the band structure and the energy level of the PFN-OX main chain could not be changed after being cross-linked.

The solvent resistance capability of PFN and cross-linked PFN-OX was compared based on UV-vis absorption shown in Fig. 1b. Both the PFN and PFN-OX films were washed with pure chlorobenzene (CB), which is the typical solvent for hole-conducting materials in PSSCs. Besides, CB can wash away PFN more easily compared with other polar solvents. Thickness variation of the washed films could be monitored basing on the UV-vis absorption intensity. As shown in Fig. 1b, before solvent washing, the PFN-OX film has a similar absorption intensity to that of PFN. After being washed with CB, the absorption intensity of PFN decreased by ∼70%, indicating the loss of ∼70% PFN. In contrast, no obvious absorption changes were observed for the cross-linked PFN-OX film after CB washing. This result confirms the robustness of the cross-linked PFN-OX.
PFN and PFN-OX were then incorporated into regular planar heterojunction perovskite solar cells with the structure of ITO/ESC/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au (as shown in Fig. 2a). In addition, ZnO nanoparticles were also utilized together with the conjugated polymers to form the hybrid electron-selective layer in this study. The deposition of CH3NH3PbI3 films on different ESCs followed the regular two-step sequential-deposition method. However, it should be mentioned that no annealing process was performed after the deposition of CH3NH3PbI3 films. This will avoid the possible reactions between the perovskite layer and ZnO materials.

Table 1 summarizes the device performances with different ESCs measured under simulated AM 1.5G 100 mW cm−2 illumination. The mean values and standard deviations of the characterization parameters are from 7 to 15 solar cells for different types of devices. For the typical device with pristine ITO, poor performance was obtained. The device performance became better as long as the ESCs were inserted. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the device with pure PFN-OX was 11.1%, while only 10.2% for pure PFN. For the device using pure sol–gel-processed ZnO nanoparticles as ESCs, a PCE of 13.7% was achieved. For the device using the PFN:ZnO hybrid electron selective composites, a PCE of 12.8% was attained, which was a little lower than that based on pristine ZnO. By contrast, the device based on the PFN-OX:ZnO composite exhibited a remarkable PCE of 15.5%, with an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.02 V, a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 20.2 mA cm−2 and a fill factor (FF) of 0.75. The high PCE is mainly ascribed to the improved FF in the PFN-OX:ZnO-based device, which is often influenced by the series resistance (Rs) and the shunt resistance (Rsh). Compared with the device based on PFN-OX, the device with PFN-OX:ZnO showed decreased Rs from 6.9 Ω cm2 to 4.0 Ω cm2 and increased Rsh from 1909.6 Ω cm2 to 3355.4 Ω cm2, resulting in the improved FF from 0.68 to 0.75. These results suggested that a favourable ohmic contact between the electrode and perovskites could be achieved with the hybrid ESCs. In summary, the device based on the PFN-OX:ZnO hybrid n-type contacts attained the best photovoltaic performance.

According to previous reports, the thickness of the CP layer is critical to the device performance. On one hand, the CP layer should have enough thickness to ensure effective electron selection and transportation. On the other hand, the thicker CP layer could introduce a larger series resistance and result in a lower FF. In order to explore the optimum thickness conditions for the hybrid n-type contact, the thickness of PFN-OX and ZnO in the hybrid composite was optimized. PFN-OX solutions with varied concentrations from 0.25 mg mL−1 to 2.0 mg mL−1 were spin-coated on ITO substrates for the device fabrication. Fig. 2c exhibits the representative device performance. (The mean values and standard deviations are shown in Table S1). With increased thickness of PFN-OX, the Voc showed little change, while the Jsc and FF could reach their best at a concentration of 0.5 mg mL−1. A Voc of 1.02 V, Jsc of 21.1 mA cm−2 and FF of 0.70 were achieved with this optimized PFN-OX thickness, resulting in the PCE of 15.1%. For the optimization of the ZnO layer in the hybrid composite, results indicated that one layer of ZnO nanoparticles (10–13 nm) on the PFN-OX layer showed the best performance. Further coatings of ZnO nanoparticles did not give better device performance, although the ZnO film could be more compact. In order to ensure the reproducibility of the device fabrication, 50 devices were prepared based on PFN-OX:ZnO. The statistics of device performance characteristics are shown in Fig. S1. The champion PCE of 16.2% was achieved, with a Voc of 1.03 V, Jsc of 20.7 mA cm−2, and FF of 0.76, as shown in Fig. 2d. The incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectrum was also obtained for this device (inset of Fig. 2d). The Jsc calculated from the IPCE spectrum is 18.9 mA cm−2, which agrees with the Jsc measured from J–V characterization under standard AM 1.5G illumination.


Interface engineering between the electrode and light-harvesting perovskite layer is important to achieve high device performance. The introduction of suitable interfacial materials, the optimization of the interface barrier and the formation of ohmic contact with minimum resistance and high charge selectivity should be considered to realize an ideal interface. Recent progress also demonstrated the importance of interface engineering in PSSCs with the mesoscopic structure or the planar heterojunction structure. According to the above device optimization, interface engineering based on PFN-OX:ZnO hybrid n-type contact could provide the best performance for PSSCs. To understand the interface engineering of this hybrid composite contact, surface work function, surface morphology and interface interaction of the hybrid composite were investigated.

First, it is well known that the amino groups in the functional polyfluorene could generate interface dipoles and lower the work function of ITO. The dipoles at the interface could increase the built-in potential and result in a higher Voc. This was approved in the devices based on PFN or PFN-OX in comparison to the device based on pristine ITO (Table 1). For PFN-OX, UPS results (Fig. 3a) indicated that the surface work function of ITO was 0.9 eV closer to the vacuum level after PFN-OX modification. This is consistent with previous reports. The work function of PFN-OX:ZnO was 4.2 eV, which was almost the same as that of pure ZnO. Fig. 3b shows the energy level diagram of the device based on UPS analysis. The work function of ITO was 4.4 eV. The hybrid composite film of PFN-OX:ZnO exhibited a work function of 4.2 eV, while the conduction band minimum (CBM) of CH3NH3PbI3 was reported to be 3.9 eV. It is obvious that favourable energy level alignment could be achieved between PFN-OX:ZnO and CH3NH3PbI3. This will lead to efficient carrier extraction and transportation without excessive interface recombination or quasi-Fermi level splitting in the light-harvesting CH3NH3PbI3 layer.
Electron-selective contacts

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)

R
s (Ω cm2)

R
sh (Ω cm2)
Pristine ITO
0.88 (0.87 ± 0.06)
14.9 (14.2 ± 1.4)
0.49 (0.45 ± 0.04)
6.4 (5.6 ± 0.8)
17.2 (21.8 ± 3.2)
195.1 (236.0 ± 39.7)
PFN
0.92 (0.93 ± 0.03)
19.1 (19.3 ± 0.8)
0.58 (0.57 ± 0.02)
10.2 (9.9 ± 1.0)
9.1 (9.8 ± 1.7)
647.2 (807.6 ± 82.9)
PFN-OX
0.94 (0.94 ± 0.04)
18.7 (18.6 ± 0.9)
0.63 (0.62 ± 0.03)
11.1 (10.8 ± 0.7)
6.9 (6.3 ± 1.6)
1909.6 (1803.1 ± 142.3)
ZnO
1.01 (0.99 ± 0.05)
19.9 (20.1 ± 0.5)
0.68 (0.67 ± 0.03)
13.7 (12.8 ± 0.8)
4.3 (4.8 ± 1.2)
2266.2 (2401.3 ± 201.9)
PFN:ZnO
1.00 (0.99 ± 0.02)
20.0 (19.8 ± 0.5)
0.64 (0.64 ± 0.02)
12.8 (12.5 ± 0.6)
6.4 (7.2 ± 0.9)
716.0 (1105.6 ± 63.4)
PFN-OX:ZnO
1.02 (1.01 ± 0.02)
20.2 (20.1 ± 0.8)
0.75 (0.73 ± 0.01)
15.5 (14.6 ± 0.9)
4.0 (5.1 ± 1.3)
3355.4 (3011.8 ± 215.2)
In addition to the matched surface work functions, the formation of ohmic contact with minimum resistance should also be considered for an ideal interface. As aforementioned, the device based on the hybrid PFN-OX:ZnO interface showed an increased Rsh and deceased Rs, indicating that the hybrid PFN-OX:ZnO contacts could provide an effective ohmic contact and facilitate electron extraction from the perovskite absorber to ITO. Comparing the devices based on PFN:ZnO and PFN-OX:ZnO, the device performance in Table 1 indicated that the PFN-OX:ZnO composite film may form a better ohmic contact at the interface than PFN:ZnO. This could be understood based on the morphology analysis. Fig. 7 shows some top-view SEM images. In Fig. 7a, a few pin-holes can be observed in the perovskite film formed on the PFN-OX:ZnO film; meanwhile, the SEM of the PFN-OX:ZnO hybrid layer (Fig. 7b) also indicates that ZnO nanoparticles did not form a compact film. These pin-holes could provide the penetration channel for DMF in perovskite solution and CB in spiro-OMeTAD solution. Thus, the electron selective layer could be corroded by DMF and CB solvents if the layer was not robust enough. Compared with PFN, PFN-OX could be thermally cross-linked, resulting in robust polymer networks. This will prevent the polar solvents from damaging the PFN-OX:ZnO hybrid interface layer. As a result, the PFN-OX:ZnO could provide a better and robust interface contact, leading to a higher PCE.
The interfacial interaction was further investigated by the time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) quenching study. TRPL quenching has been successfully used to determine excitons' lifetime, diffusion rate and diffusion length. It is also helpful to explore the exciton quenching at the interface between ESCs and the perovskite light absorbing layer. In this work, TRPL quenching was performed to compare the different ESCs including PFN-OX, ZnO and hybrid PFN-OX:ZnO. The thickness of the CH3NH3PbI3 film was about 330 nm. The samples were excited at 517 nm by a two-stage optical parametric amplifier, and the TRPL decays were acquired at the peak emission wavelength of 770 nm. The observed PL decays were fitted with two exponential decay curves to yield the lifetime of excitons or carriers according to the one-dimensional diffusion model (the longer lifetime was used).Fig. 4 shows the TRPL quenching results. The PL decay of the neat CH3NH3PbI3 film on a glass substrate exhibited a lifetime of 8.9 ns, which was consistent with the reported results. When the CH3NH3PbI3 film formed a contact with PFN-OX or ZnO, the carrier lifetime both reduced to 5.7 ns, respectively. This indicates that PFN-OX and ZnO could provide a similar charge-carrier transfer process at the interface. Moreover, the lifetime of CH3NH3PbI3 further dropped to 4.6 ns for the hybrid PFN-OX:ZnO contacts. The shorter lifetime based on PFN-OX:ZnO reveals that PFN-OX:ZnO provided faster charge transfer from perovskite to ITO in comparison to pure PFN-OX or ZnO. In other words, the charge separation and collection processes could be more efficient based on the hybrid PFN-OX:ZnO contacts. This may also be ascribed to the appropriate energy level alignment between PFN-OX:ZnO and CH3NH3PbI3 without excessive interface recombination, as well as the ohmic contact to facilitate electron extraction from the perovskite absorber to ITO. These PL quenching results were consistent with the device performance listed in Table 1.
Based on the above characterization and discussions, the advances of the hybrid PFN-OX:ZnO contacts can be summarized with its superior electrical and chemical properties. These include appropriate energy level alignment, ohmic contact, and efficient electron extraction.

Recently, researchers are paying more and more attention on the hysteresis effect of perovskite solar cells, which manifests the differences in current–voltage (I–V) curves performed in different scanning directions in current–voltage measurements. The hysteresis effect is a common phenomenon observed in thin film solar cells, such as CdTe, GIGS and amorphous silicon. Hysteresis effects typically originated from the capacitive character of devices. Several dynamic models based on P–N junctions and capacitances have been built to understand the inside mechanism. In fact, none of the reported models could be universally verified to elaborate the hysteresis effect in all types of solar cells. The existence of defect states, ion migration and deep trapping of the charger carrier accumulation have also been proposed to understand the hysteresis effect in thin film solar cells.

In PSSCs, the hysteresis effect has been detected both in the mesoscopic and the planar heterojunction device structures. Those conclusions obtained in thin film solar cells have been speculated for the hysteretic behaviour in PSCCs. However, the hysteresis effect in PSSCs seems to be more complicated due to the organic–inorganic hybrid crystal structure of the perovskites. In addition to the existence of defects states, ion migration and deep trapping of the charger carrier accumulation discussed in thin film solar cells, several other mechanisms have also been proposed. For example, the ferroelectricity, the polarization effects originating from the lattice distortion and the orientation of MA+-dipoles, the changes of the contact conductivity and the significant halide ion mobility have been studied to understand the hysteresis effect in perovskite solar cells. To date, the exact conclusions for the origin of hysteresis effects have not been established yet, although the hysteresis could be almost eliminated through tuning the material morphology, optimizing the interface in the mesoscopic structure, or utilizing inverted device architectures.
For regular planar heterojunction PSSCs, so far, there has been no convincing example showing the complete elimination of hysteresis. According to some recent reports, n-type interface engineering seems not to provide an effective solution for the hysteresis effect. In the present effort, the hysteresis effect was also observed for the device based on hybrid PFN-OX:ZnO n-type contact. Fig. 5 shows the hysteresis characterization in a representative PFN-OX:ZnO-based device measured on the reverse scan (from forward bias to short circuit) or forward scan (from short circuit to forward bias). For the reverse scan, the Jsc, Voc, and FF values are 20.7 mA cm−2, 1.00 V, and 0.69, respectively, yielding a PCE of 14.3%. For the forward scan the characterization was 20.9 mA cm−2, 0.90 V, and 0.54, with a PCE of 10.2%.

Preliminary long-term stability investigation for perovskite solar cells based on PFN-OX:ZnO was carried out under ambient conditions (temperature ∼20 °C, humidity ∼10%). Fig. 6 shows the stability results for the unencapsulated devices stored in air for 600 h. During the initial 100 h after the device fabrication, the Voc was very stable, and the Jsc decreased while the FF increased, resulting in little change in PCE. Then, the PCE showed a clear decrease after storing for 240 h and this was ascribed to the simultaneous decrease in Jsc and Voc. For the next 300 h, the efficiency decreased slowly. Compared with the initial performance, the device showed ∼15% decrease in PCE after being stored under the ambient conditions without encapsulation for 600 h.

The hybrid PFN-OX:ZnO based perovskite solar cells have a similar thermal stability to the ZnO-based devices. The thermal instability of ZnO-based perovskite solar cells has been reported by both our previous work and other research studies.Fig. 7c–f show the decomposition process of CH3NH3PbI3 depositing on the ZnO interface. After heating at 100 °C for 1 h, the dark brown CH3NH3PbI3 film transforms to a bright yellow film. Besides, the morphologies of the yellow-coloured byproducts (Fig. 7g) are very different from the yellow PbI2 precursor (Fig. 7e). The annealed ITO/ZnO/CH3NH3PbI3 substrate was subsequently washed with DMF. Fig. 7h reveals that the pristine ZnO nanoparticles were washed off, indicating the possible Lewis acid–base chemical reaction between the perovskite and ZnO nanoparticles at high temperature. The proposed mechanism for the perovskite bleaching is illustrated in Fig. S2. CH3NH3PbI3 may first degrade to volatile CH3NH2, inorganic PbI2 and (ionic salt) HI following the reaction shown in Fig. S2a. The acid–base chemical reaction between ZnO and HI (strong acid) or CH3NH3I could easily produce H2O, which is believed to be one of the most critical reasons for CH3NH3PbI3 decomposition. The possible degradation pathways of perovskites in the presence of water and ZnO are shown in Fig. S2c based on the reported literature.

In summary, highly efficient and low-temperature processed planar heterojunction perovskite solar cells, based on the cross-linked conjugated polymer, PFN-OX, were demonstrated. The cross-linked PFN-OX could provide a robust electron selective layer which possesses superiority in electron extraction and hole-blocking. Hybrid composite films consisting of PFN-OX and ZnO nanoparticles were utilized as the electron selective layer, and a remarkable power conversion efficiency over 16% was achieved. The hybrid composite of PFN-OX:ZnO could not only achieve the appropriate energy level alignment between the perovskite material and ITO electrode, but also form optimized ohmic contact with minimum resistance and high charge selectivity. Moreover, the charge separation and collection processes were improved for the devices based on PFN-OX:ZnO in comparison with the devices using pure PFN-OX or ZnO from the TRPL results. This study introduces the cross-linking concept in perovskite solar cells, which will potentially be an effective strategy to achieve high performance perovskite solar cells.


CH3NH3I was synthesized from CH3NH2 and HI based on the literature procedures. ZnO nanoparticles were synthesized from zinc acetate dehydrate and potassium hydroxide according to the reported literature. PFN was prepared according to the published procedure and PFN-OX was synthesized according to polymerization reactions carried out by palladium(0)-catalyzed Suzuki cross-coupling reactions as the reported methods. The molecular weight (Mn) of PFN and PFN-OX was 25.1 kDa and 29.5 kDa, respectively. The polydispersity (PDI) of PFN and PFN-OX was 2.8 and 2.9. The Mn and PDI were estimated by gel permeation chromatography (GPC) with tetrahydrofuran (THF) as the eluent and linear polystyrene as the standard. Besides, all liquid reagents, such as DMF, 2-propanol (IPA) and chlorobenzene (CB), were purchased from commercial sources (Acros) and used as received. PbI2 was purchased from Sigma Aldrich, and spiro-OMeTAD from SunaTech.


The devices were fabricated on pre-patterned ITO glass substrates that were cleaned with diluted detergent, deionized water, acetone, and IPA successively. Then, PFN-OX or PFN in a solution of methanol:acetic acid (100:1 v/v) was spin-coated (2000 rpm for 25 s) onto the substrates. The PFN-OX was cross-linked after heating the substrates at 120 °C under fluorescence lamp illumination (no UV lamps required) for 20 min in air. The concentration of PFN was 0.5 mg mL−1. The concentration of PFN-OX varied according to different requirements. After that, the ZnO layer was formed by spin-coating at 2500 rpm for 20 s and heated at 120 °C for 3 min. All the procedures above were prepared in an ambient environment of temperature ∼20 °C and humidity ∼20%. The solution of PbI2 in DMF with a concentration of 461 mg mL−1 was spin-coated at 2500 rpm for 15 s and dried at 75 °C for 10 min in a N2 glovebox. The samples were then dipped in a CH3NH3I solution (10 mg mL−1 in 2-propanol) for 30 s without further annealing. The spiro-OMeTAD-based hole-transporting layer (80 mg of spiro-OMeTAD, 17.5 μL of lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)-imide (Li-TFSI) solution (520 mg of Li-TFSI in 1 mL of acetonitrile) and 28.5 μL of 4-tert-butylpyridine all dissolved in 1 mL of CB) was subsequently deposited onto the prepared substrate at 2000 rpm for 30 s in the N2 glovebox. Finally, the gold electrode (80 nm) was deposited as the back contact through thermal evaporation.


The devices (active area: 0.09 cm2) were illuminated under 100 mW cm−2 by using a 150 W Class AAA solar simulator (XES-40S1, SAN-EI) with an AM 1.5G filter. The light intensity of 100 mW cm−2 was determined by using a standard monocrystal silicon photodiode calibrated by the Newport TAC-PV lab. The current–voltage curves were measured using a Keithley 2400 source-measure unit. The IPCE spectra were measured in air using a lock-in amplifier coupled with a monochromator (Crowntech, Qtest Station 2000). The light intensity from the monochromator was calibrated by using a standard single-crystal Si photovoltaic cell. All the measurements were performed under ambient conditions at room temperature on the devices without encapsulation (temperature ∼20 °C, humidity ∼20%).

The ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) spectrum was recorded with an Agilent 8453 spectrophotometer. Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) was observed with an Imaging Photoelectron Spectrometer (Axis Ultra, Kratos Analytical Ltd). Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images were collected by using an FEI Nova_NanoSEM 430 field-emission SEM. The time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) decay spectra were recorded using a streak camera system (HAMAMATSU C10910) with 1 ps temporal resolution. All the samples were excited at 517 nm by using a two-stage optical parametric amplifier (OperA Solo, Coherent) configured with an amplified Ti:sapphire laser system (Legend, Coherent) with a repetition rate of 1 kHz and a pulse duration of 35 fs. All the photoluminescence spectra were measured under ambient conditions.

This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (61377025, 91433203, and 11121091) and the 973 Program of China (2015CB932203 and 2014CB643501). The authors thank Prof. Xinqiang Wang for the calibration of the solar simulator, Prof. Lixin Xiao for IPCE measurements. R.Z. is grateful to Prof. Yang Yang at UCLA for providing guidance in solar energy research.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta04695e
‡ These authors contributed equally.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015