 DOI: 10.1039/C9TA05048E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 18898-18905


Wenxiao
Zhang
,

Li
Wan
,

Xiaodong
Li
,

Yulei
Wu
,

Sheng
Fu
 and 

Junfeng
Fang
*

Ningbo Institute of Materials Technology and Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Ningbo 315201, China. E-mail: fangjf@nimte.ac.cn

Centre of Materials Science and Optoelectronics Engineering, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China

School of Physics and Materials Science, Ministry of Education Nanophotonics & Advanced Instrument Engineering Research Center, East China Normal University, Shanghai 200062, China

Received
14th May 2019
, Accepted 12th July 2019
First published on 12th July 2019
Spiro-OMeTAD is a commonly used hole transport material (HTM) in regular device structures. However, a complex and uncontrollable oxygen doping process is necessary. To avoid the drawbacks of dopants, a polyelectrolyte (P3CT-BN) is introduced as a dopant-free HTM. The CO group on P3CT-BN could interact with bare Pb at the perovskite surface, which facilitates hole transfer at the perovskite/HTL interface. The P3CT-BN layer could reduce interfacial recombination and exhibits outstanding film-forming properties. Thus the efficiency of the best device is improved from 18.26% to 19.05% when replacing Spiro-OMeTAD with P3CT-BN. Moreover, devices based on P3CT-BN exhibit outstanding stability, retaining 80% of their original performance after storage in the atmosphere (30–40% relative humidity) for 1800 h without encapsulation. These results indicate that P3CT-BN can be an effective HTM to realize high efficiency and stable PSCs.

Organometal halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) with the ABX3 structure (A = methylamine or formamidinium, B = lead (Pb), X = Cl, Br, and I) have attracted increasing attention due to their high power conversion efficiency. The remarkable performance of perovskite solar cells benefits from their superior optical and electrical properties including a high dielectric constant, long diffusion length (∼1000 nm), high absorption coefficient (104 to 105 cm−1), and high charge carrier mobility (1–101 cm2 V−1 s−1). Much progress has been made through composition engineering, dopant strategies, interlayer material designing and interface modification in the past few years.

In most device constructions, the perovskite absorber layer is usually sandwiched within the electron transporting layer (ETL) and hole transporting layer (HTL). Charge transfer at the interface (perovskite/ETL or HTL interface) and transportation in the ETL or HTL play an essential role in fabricating a high efficiency device. Consequently, these charge transport materials should possess matched energy levels, high charge mobility and low trap density to prove effective charge transportation and avoid carrier recombination at the interface. In the n–i–p structured planar devices, the usually employed ETLs include TiO2, SnO2, ZnO and fullerene derivatives. Due to the low electron mobility of TiO2 and the instability of ZnO, the SnO2 ETL has become an outstanding planar ETL and plenty of work focusing on the modification of SnO2 has sprung up. Considering the hole transport materials in normal structures, 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′-spirobifuorene (Spiro-OMeTAD), poly(triarylamine) (PTAA) and poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl) (P3HT) are the major ones. However, all these intrinsic materials possess relatively low conductivity, and need to be doped by additives such as lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (Li-TFSI), cobalt complexes, and tris(2-(1H-pyrazol-1-yl)-4-tert-butylpyridine)-cobalt(III) tris(bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide) (FK209) or 2,3,5,6-tetrafluoro-7,7,8,8-tetracyanoquinodimethane (F4-TCNQ) to improve their hole conductivity. Nevertheless, Li-TFSI additives are hygroscopic and tBP tends to volatilize due to its low boiling point which are both detrimental to device stability. What's more, the doping process of Spiro-OMeTAD with Li-TFSI requires oxygen and the concentration of oxidized Spiro-OMeTAD in the HTMs is uncontrollable. This oxidation reaction process reduces device stability and reproducibility substantially, as well as complicating the device fabrication procedure. To avoid the trade-off between stability and photovoltaic performance, alternative dopants and dopant-free small molecules or conjugated polymers were designed and synthesized in recent years. Xu et al. designed and synthesized a HTM molecule called DTB with bithiophene functional units interacting with the perovskite to promote the hole extraction ability and to passivate the interfacial traps. The mesoporous configuration PSCs with DTB HTLs showed a high PCE of 19.81% with a high short-circuit current density (Jsc) up to 25.50 mA cm−2. Zhan et al. introduced a p-type organic semiconductor (BDTS-2DPP) between perovskite/Spiro-OMeTAD with electron-rich sulfur (S) atoms as Lewis bases passivating the under-coordinated Pb in CH3NH3PbI3 (Cl) which improved the device efficiency from 16.9% to 18.2%. Recently, Seo and Noh et al. achieved a certified power conversion efficiency of 22.7 percent with a hysteresis of ±0.51 percent using P3HT as a hole-transport material without any dopants. They inserted an ultrathin wide-band gap halide on the light-absorbing perovskite to reduce recombination at the perovskite/P3HT interface through promoting the self-assembly of P3HT.
Poly[3-(4-carboxylatebutyl)thiophene] (P3CT) could be used as a potential HTL in n–i–p structured devices due to its excellent transport ability. However, it was insoluble in non-polar solvents such as chlorobenzene and toluene which limited its application in regular PSCs as a dopant-free HTL. Therefore, a dopant-free P3CT-BN HTL was synthesized through reacting P3CT with butylamine (Fig. S1). Thus, we successfully dissolved P3CT into 2,2,2-trifluoroethanol solvent which could not dissolve the perovskite under-layer during the spinning process. In addition to the matching HOMO level, the polyelectrolyte molecular could modify perovskite facial traps and decrease interfacial recombination which reduces energy loss during hole transport. The hole extraction ability and the P3CT-BN film quality both surpassed those of traditionally used Spiro-OMeTAD. Benefitting from these properties, a planar device with the structure indium-doped tin oxide (ITO)/SnO2/CPTA/MAPbI3/P3CT-BN/Au delivered a high PCE of 19.05%, while the corresponding device based on Li-salt and tBP doped Spiro-OMeTAD as the HTL exhibited a lower efficiency of 18.26%. More importantly, non-encapsulated devices based on a P3CT-BN HTL showed improved ambient stability retaining 80% of their original efficiency after storage under ambient conditions (30–40% relative humidity) for 1800 h. These results prove the promising application of polyelectrolytes as dopant-free HTMs in regular PSCs.

The regular device configuration and the chemical structure of P3CT-BN are shown in Fig. 1a. After reacting with butylamine, P3CT could dissolve in 2,2,2-trifluoroethanol and form an orange P3CT-BN solution (inset in Fig. 1b) which indicated the low aggregation degree of the polymer chains. As shown in the UV-vis absorption spectra (Abs) in Fig. 1b, the solution absorption peak red shifted by 49 nm from 486 to 535 nm when cast into the film due to slightly strong intermolecular π–π stacking in the film. And the photo-luminescence (PL) spectra showed that the maximum emission locates at 614 nm which was in accordance with the film absorption edge. Fig. 1c shows the energy level of all the functional layers in our planar perovskite device. The HOMO level and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) level of the P3CT-BN HTL were determined by both cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurements and Ultraviolet Photoelectron Spectroscopy (UPS) (Fig. S3). Its HOMO level (−5.22 eV) was close to the valence band energy (VB) of MAPbI3 (−5.4 eV) which could decrease energy loss during hole transfer at the perovskite/P3CT-BN interface. And the LUMO level (−2.95 eV) was much higher than the conduction band energy (CB) of MAPbI3 (−3.9 eV) and thus electron transfer at this interface was forbidden. Consequently, the lifted frontier orbital levels relative to those of the perovskite suggested that P3CT-BN can serve as an effective HTM to extract holes from the perovskite layer and simultaneously block electrons from reaching the Au electrode. The CO group in P3CT-BN could interact with the exposed Pb atom at the perovskite surface. PbI2 and P3CT both could dissolve in DMF solvent, respectively, while precipitation occurred immediately after mixing these two solutions together (Fig. S2a–c). The Pb 4f and I 3d XPS signals shifted toward higher core-level binding energies after dispersion of PbI2 into P3CT solution, indicating the presence of additional negative charge around the Pb and I atoms (Fig. S2d and e). The Pb atom accepted a lone pair of electrons via coordinate bonding with the carboxylic acid groups in P3CT. The shifting of the I atom was caused by the reduction in the internal electron-withdrawing ability of the Pb atom. Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) (Fig. S2d) further verified the coordination between CO and perovskite in which the stretching vibration of CO (νCO) weakened after being coated on the perovskite surface. The XRD peak of PbI2 at 12.8° nearly disappeared after dispersion of PbI2 into P3CT solution, indicating that a spontaneous crystalline-to-amorphous phase transformation of PbI2 occurred due to the facile intercalation of P3CT into the PbI2 lattice through a strong chelation effect (Fig. S2g). The hole-transporting ability of P3CT-BN shown in Fig. 1d was determined by the space-charge-limited-current (SCLC) method from a hole-only device with the structure of ITO/HTM/Au (Fig. 1c). The hole mobility of P3CT-BN was calculated to be 1.90 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1 which was higher than that of the dopant-free Spiro-OMeTAD (1.27 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1, Fig. S4). Although the hole mobility of P3CT-BN was moderate, the P3CT-BN film could be reduced to nearly 30 nm to ensure effective hole transport benefitting from its excellent film quality mentioned below. The impact of P3CT-BN thickness and statistical photovoltaic parameters are shown in the ESI (Fig. S5 and Table S1).

To validate the effectiveness of P3CT-BN as a promising HTM, planar devices with about 25 nm CPTA modified SnO2 as the ETL, 400 nm MAPbI3 as the photoabsorber, 30 nm P3CT-BN or 80 nm Spiro-OMeTAD as the HTL, and 80 nm thermally evaporated Au as the back contact were fabricated, as illustrated in the cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image in the inset of Fig. 2b. The current–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the champion solar cells based on P3CT-BN, pristine Spiro-OMeTAD and Li-TFSI and tBP doped Spiro-OMeTAD HTLs are presented in Fig. 2a. The corresponding photovoltaic parameters including open-circuit voltage (Voc), Jsc, fill factor (FF) and PCE are listed in Table 1. The champion PSCs based on P3CT-BN exhibited a Voc of 1.103 V, a short-circuit Jsc of 23.08 mA cm−2, and a FF of 74.8%, leading to a PCE of 19.05%, while the Spiro-OMeTAD based control device showed a PCE of 18.26% with a Voc of 1.068 V, a Jsc of 22.62 mA cm−2, and a FF of 75.55%. The device based on pristine Spiro-OMeTAD delivered a quite low photovoltaic efficiency of 10.04% due to its low hole mobility and unmatched HOMO level (Fig. S3f). Moreover, due to the structure similarity between P3CT-BN and the widely used P3HT HTL, devices based on the P3HT HTL were also fabricated and the J–V characteristics and parameters are shown in the ESI (Fig. S6a). The highest PCE of P3HT based devices was 16.06% with a low Voc of 1.05 V and a low Jsc of 20.81 mA cm−2. The inferior performance was due to its HOMO value (−4.96 eV) as shown in the CV results (Fig. S6b) and also the short charge lifetime at the perovskite/P3HT interface, which exacerbated the non-radiative recombination during hole transfer and transportation. To avoid the over-measurement errors of the above P3CT-BN based PCE induced by hysteresis problems, the steady-state performance was measured with the maximal steady-state power set at 0.89 V. A stabilized Jsc of 20.47 mA cm−2 at 0.89 V showed nearly no decline up to 300 s. This revealed that the device worked properly under actual working conditions. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) curve showed high quantum conversion efficiency throughout the whole wavelength range with an integrated Jsc of 21.9 mA cm−2 calculated from the full EQE spectrum, which was highly consistent with the Jsc value obtained from J–V measurements. We also confirmed the high uniformity of the P3CT-BN film and the reproducibility of the corresponding device performance as shown in Fig. 2d. The reproducible efficiency of the 30 randomly collected devices indicated that a 30 nm P3CT-BN could cover the perovskite layer compactly and avoid contact between the active layer and electrode. The detailed parameters of these 30 devices are shown in the ESI (Fig. S7).
Cells

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
P3CT-BN
1.103
23.08
74.8
19.05
Spiro
1.068
22.62
75.55
18.26
Dopant-free spiro
0.969
20.27
52.9
10.40
To understand the interfacial properties of devices based on different HTLs, steady-state photoluminescence (PL) and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) measurements were carried out as shown in Fig. 3a. It is noted that the PL intensity of MAPbI3/P3CT-BN bilayers was 7.2 fold weaker than that of the pristine perovskite while the PL intensity of MAPbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD bilayers was about 6.45 fold weaker than that of the pristine perovskite. The much lower PL intensity of MAPbI3/P3CT-BN indicated the much more efficient charge transfer properties at the perovskite/HTM interface. The charge dynamics of the perovskite layer with and without a HTL was investigated through TRPL as shown in Fig. 3b. The PL decay curves of the pristine perovskite and perovskite/HTL bilayer were fitted with single-exponential and two-exponential models, respectively. The signal was collected at 770 nm, where the perovskite PL peaks. For the glass/perovskite sample, the PL decay time was 56.5 ns indicating the long exciton diffusion length and low density of defects in the perovskite thin film. In the two-exponential model, the PL lifetime was considered as the summation of fast- and slow-decay components that gave a short lifetime τ1 and a long lifetime τ2, respectively. Generally, the fast decay component (τ1) originates from the quenching of charge via trap states or interfacial charge transfer, and the slow decay component (τ2) is attributed to the bimolecular recombination via light emission. The fast decay components (τ1) were shortened to 6.9 ns and 12.5 ns when P3CT-BN and Spiro-OMeTAD HTLs were coated on the perovskite, respectively. The shortened PL lifetime indicated the better hole extraction ability of the P3CT-BN HTL than that of Spiro-OMeTAD. In order to further understand the interface charge transport of P3CT-BN based perovskite solar cells, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) characterization was conducted. EIS was measured in the dark at a reverse potential of 0.8 V at frequencies ranging from 1.0 Hz to 1.0 MHz and the oscillation potential amplitudes are 10 mV. The Nyquist plots of the two devices based on a P3CT-BN or Spiro-OMeTAD HTL are shown in Fig. 3c, with the inset depicting the corresponding fitted curves using an equivalent circuit based on a transmission line model. The Rs is the series resistance whose value is the intercept on the Z' axis, stemming from the ITO substrate and the ETL/perovskite/HTL interfaces. The value of the recombination resistance Rrec equals the diameter of the semicircle. When two HTLs were applied in the same device architecture, the Nyquist plot differences were mainly from HTLs and the HTL/perovskite interface. Consequently, the higher Rrec and lower Rs of P3CT-BN based devices indicated the improved charge transfer and suppressed recombination at the perovskite/P3CT-BN interface. These results further proved the interfacial passivation function of P3CT-BN and interpreted the origin of its improved Voc and Jsc. To further prove the decreased trap state density, we fabricated hole-only devices (ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3/P3CT-BN or Spiro-OMeTAD/Au) to characterize the space-charge limited current (SCLC) for different bias voltages (Fig. 3d). The trap-filled limit voltage (VTFL) of the perovskite films covered with P3CT-BN and Spiro-OMeTAD is 0.66 and 0.78 V, respectively. The trap-state density can be determined from the VTFL using the equation:
where
q is the elementary charge of the electron, L is the perovskite film thickness, and ε and ε0 are the relative dielectric constant and the vacuum permittivity. Therefore, the trap-state density of the P3CT-BN and Spiro based perovskites is 9.03 × 1015 cm−3 and 1.04 × 1016 cm−3, respectively, indicating that traps on the perovskite surface were passivated by P3CT-BN.

In addition to efficiency optimization, stability has become a tough and hot issue of PSCs. As mentioned above, although Spiro-OMeTAD serves as the HTM in most high efficiency perovskite devices, the indispensable dopants limit their further improvement in stability. Moreover, the mobility of the Li-salt and evaporation of low boiling point tBP result in formation of pinholes in the HTL. These pinholes cause the direct contact of the perovskite layer and the metal electrode which also accelerates device degradation. To examine the film quality of HTLs, atomic force microscopy (AFM) images and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the perovskite film, perovskite/P3CT film and perovskite/doped Spiro-OMeTAD film are obtained and presented in Fig. 4. The flat and compact MAPbI3 film deposited on the ITO/SnO2/CPTA substrate is shown in Fig. 4a–c. After coating P3CT-BN on the perovskite layer, the film roughness decreased from 7.24 nm to 7.19 nm. The surface morphology shown in Fig. 4d–f illustrated the uniformity and density of the P3CT-BN film. However there existed many pin-holes in the doped Spiro-OMeTAD film as shown in Fig. 4g and h. Consequently, only a 30 nm P3CT-BN film could fully isolate Au and the perovskite layer which decreased interfacial recombination and slowed down device degradation effectively.
On the other hand, deliquescent and hygroscopic Li-TFSI attracts water molecules and accelerates degradation of both the HTL and perovskite layer. In order to investigate the improved hydrophobic properties of the dopant-free P3CT-BN film, we determined the static contact angles (α) of a deionized water droplet on the surface of the bare perovskite, perovskite/Spiro-OMeTAD, and perovskite/P3CT-BN as shown in Fig. 5. The rather small α of pure perovskite films indicated that water molecules could infiltrate into the perovskite layer easily. As for the Spiro-OMeTAD film doped with Li-TFSI and tBP, the contact angle just slightly increased to 74.77°, illustrating that it could not effectively prevent moisture penetration. Remarkably, the samples with P3CT-BN displayed a larger contact angle of 85.46°, apparently acting as a hydrophobic protector on the perovskite film. This result showed the potential of P3CT-BN to be a moisture-proof HTL and to promote stability of PSCs. The protective function of the conjugated polymer (P3CT-BN) layer in the degradation of perovskite had been verified by comparing X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns and the color variation of different films exposed to ambient conditions with 50–70% relative humidity at room temperature. As shown in Fig. 5, the as-prepared perovskite film coated with and without a HTL all showed no peak of PbI2. Along with the degradation of the perovskite film, the Spiro-OMeTAD covering the perovskite film decomposed with the appearance of the (001) peak of PbI2 at 12.6° after storage for 15 days, much faster than the pristine MAPbI3 thin film in which the PbI2 peak appears after storage for 40 days. Strikingly, we did not track the PbI2 peak but a peak at 10.5° was observed for the P3CT-BN coated perovskite film even after 60 days. The peak at 10.5° indicated the formation of a monohydrate, CH3NH3PbI3·H2O phase as the following reaction:
4(CH3NH3)PbI3 + 4H2O ⇔ 4[CH3NH3PbI3·H2O] ⇔ (CH3NH3)4PbI6·2H2O + 3PbI2 + H2O
(1)
(2)
The above reactions indicated that the decomposition of MAPbI3 into HI, PbI2, and CH3NH2 could only happen in the presence of excess or liquid water (not only in the form of crystal water) which could dissolve the methylammonium ions. It was obvious that the P3CT-BN film protected the perovskite layer well and the MAPbI3 degraded slightly compared with other samples. For the devices' stability test, the performance evolution of the best-performing PSC devices without encapsulation stored under dark conditions at room temperature with a relative humidity of 30–40% was tracked. The devices were periodically evaluated to obtain the PCE values in order to study the stability. The long-term ambient device performance evolution of the devices based on Spiro-OMeTAD and P3CT-BN is displayed in Fig. 6. The P3CT-BN based PSC retains 80% of its initial PCE when stored for 1800 h, indicating its excellent long-time stability. By contrast, the PSCs based on Spiro-OMeTAD broke down thoroughly. This fast decay may be attributed to the hydroscopic Li ions absorbing moisture in air and the damage caused by tBP to MAPbI3 which both accelerated the degradation of the perovskite. Based on these results, the application of dopant-free polymer P3CT-BN as the HTM not only remarkably enhanced the photovoltaic performance of PSCs but also improved their air stability.

In conclusion, a polyelectrolyte P3CT-BN was used as an ultrathin dopant-free HTL in planar regular structured PSCs to improve the device performance and stability. The results demonstrate that the CO group on the P3CT-BN molecule could coordinate with the uncoordinated Pb atom at the perovskite surface. This passivation function could facilitate hole transfer and reduce recombination loss at the perovskite/P3CT-BN interface. As a consequence, the MAPbI3 devices based on the P3CT-BN HTL outperformed the Spiro-OMeTAD based one with efficiency increasing from 18.26% to 19.05%. More importantly, the P3CT-BN HTL could improve the device stability dramatically. Devices with the P3CT-BN HTL retained 80% of their initial PCE when stored in air with a 30–40% relative humidity for 1800 h, while Spiro-OMeTAD based devices broke down thoroughly within 1500 h. These results indicated that P3CT-BN can act as an effective dopant-free HTM in regular PSCs to further improve their PCE and stability.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant no. 51773213), China Postdoctoral Science Foundation funded project (2017M610380), Key Research Program of Frontier Sciences (Grant No. QYZDB-SSW-JSC047) and Zhejiang Province Science and Technology Plan (grant no. 2018C01047). This work was also supported by the National Youth Top-Notch Talent Program of China.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta05048e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019