 DOI: 10.1039/C7CP04053A
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 25016-25024


Dian
Wang
*,

Kah H.
Chan
,

Naveen Kumar
Elumalai
*,

Md. Arafat
Mahmud
,

Mushfika B.
Upama
,

Ashraf
Uddin
 and 

Supriya
Pillai


School of Photovoltaic and Renewable Energy Engineering, University of New South Wales, 2052 Sydney, Australia. E-mail: dian.wang@student.unsw.edu.au; n.elumalai@unsw.edu.au

Received
16th June 2017
, Accepted 28th August 2017
First published on 29th August 2017
In this work, we have demonstrated the incorporation of metal (Ag NPs) and dielectric nanoparticles (SiO2 NPs) into the hole transporting layers of inverted PSCs using facile deposition methods. Interfacial engineering in PSCs is accomplished by incorporating 50 nm Ag NPs or SiO2 NPs within the PEDOT:PSS interlayer. Dielectric SiO2 NPs were used for comparison purposes as a control sample to isolate morphological impacts without plasmonic effects. The photovoltaic performance of the devices significantly improved due to increased charge selectivity and enhanced charge collection properties across the interface (HTL). The recombination resistance of the SiO2 NP incorporated HTL based PSCs was 193% higher than that of the conventional devices. In-depth analysis using impedance measurements revealed that devices containing Ag or SiO2 NPs have low electrode polarization and consequently lower charge accumulation at the interface. Lower electrode polarization in the modified devices was also found to improve the charge carrier selectivity, which eventually led to enhanced fill factor and lower parasitic resistances. Interfacial engineering via NPs yielded improvements in the electrical characteristics of non-optical origin, which not only enhanced device performance, but also reduced the hysteresis effects to much lower than in the conventional inverted PSCs based on a pristine PEDOT:PSS interlayer.

Improved understanding of various aspects in perovskite solar cells (PSCs) has recently enabled the achievement of over 22% power conversion efficiency. Developments in the interfacial layers, film deposition techniques and hysteresis studies continue to inform progress in more efficient photovoltaic devices. Further improvements in device performance can potentially be obtained via the use of plasmonic nanostructures. Multiple reports have demonstrated the viability of plasmonic perovskite solar cells, especially in improving photocurrent generation. Zhang et al. employed gold–silica core–shell nanoparticles (NPs) in meso-superstructured organometal halide PSCs and found an increase in the external quantum efficiency (EQE) across a broad range of wavelengths despite no notable increase in light absorption. Reduced exciton binding energy was thought to be responsible for the EQE increase. A recent paper by Saliba et al. incorporated silver Ag–TiO2 NPs into an Al2O3 mesostructure using a low temperature process. It was postulated that an enhancement in photon recycling within the active layer was responsible for improved photocurrent generation. Interactions between exciton dipoles and core–shell NPs enhanced the radiative decay of excitons, which enabled the re-absorption of emitted radiation. In another report, a perovskite device was fabricated using TiO2 nanofibers with embedded Au NPs. Devices with these embedded Au NPs displayed significantly improved EQE due to near-field enhancement and light scattering, as well as plasmon enhanced transfer of hot electrons. While numerous reports attribute improved device performance to increased photocurrent, the application of plasmonic nanostructures is known to improve the electrical characteristics of PSCs. This type of improvement is also common after application of plasmonic nanostructures in organic solar cells. Long et al. found an increase in hole mobility with a hole transport layer (HTL) which allowed the conformal deposition of gold electrodes. An increase in fill factor (FF) was observed in devices with this modified HTL. Other reports on PSCs with metal or plasmonic nanoparticles have also shown an improvement in the FF. More recently, perovskite devices incorporated with other types of nanoparticles have also shown improvements in device performance characteristics. A solution-processed neutral PEDOT:PSS–GeO2 composite film resulted in significantly increased power conversion efficiency, by improving the crystallinity and uniformity of perovskite films via seed-mediation of GeO2 particles. Another report successfully demonstrated improved perovskite film crystallinity and device stability by doping PEDOT:PSS with TiO2/MoO3 core/shell NPs.

In this work, the optical and electrical effects of integrating 50 nm Ag NPs or SiO2 NPs into the PEDOT:PSS HTL of PSCs were investigated. SiO2 NPs were used as a control sample to understand the effects of light scattering and to isolate morphological impacts. The incorporation of these NPs influenced the electronic characteristics of the devices (translated into increases in FF), rather than the expected improvement in light harvesting properties (increase in JSC). In order to provide further insights into the mechanism behind the improvements in FF, we employed impedance spectroscopy to analyze the electronic properties of the devices. Recent findings have shown that the capacitive responses of perovskite solar cells play a crucial role in understanding the nature of charge distribution and kinetics of charging processes, as well as hysteresis in PSCs. Such changes in the electronic topography within the device influence the electrode polarization and thereby influence the photovoltaic parameters of the PSCs under operating conditions. In this work, similar studies were carried out to correlate changes in charge carrier transport and associated recombination processes to the capacitive response of devices, as well as modelled results from the impedance spectra. We thus propose a unique interpretation of improvements observed in PSCs with integrated nanoparticles, in terms of changes in interfacial and bulk conditions, which are non-optical in nature.

The photoactive materials comprising PbI2 (99.999% purity) and CH3NH3I were purchased from Lumtec and Dyesol respectively. Chlorobenzene and DMF were obtained from Sigma, while PC70BM was acquired from 1-material. Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)–poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS, Al 4083) was purchased from Ossila. Spherical Ag NPs at a concentration of 4.73 mg mL−1 (silver basis) and a particle concentration of 5.2 × 1012 particles mL−1 were obtained from nanoComposix. The Ag NPs have Ag core diameters of approximately 50 nm, are dispersed in DI water and have surface polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) groups. Spherical SiO2 NPs with a concentration of 10.4 mg mL−1 (silica basis) and a particle concentration of 9.1 × 1013 particles mL−1 were also obtained from nanoComposix. The SiO2 NPs also have silica core diameters of approximately 50 nm, are dispersed in DI water and have surface silanol groups. These were all used as received. Patterned indium tin oxide (ITO) glass substrates measuring 12 × 12 mm were obtained from Lumtec. Reference photovoltaic devices were fabricated in the inverted structure of “ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/Ag”.


ITO glass substrates were cleaned by ultrasonication for 10 minutes in 2% Hallmanex detergent, DI water, acetone and isopropanol. The PEDOT:PSS solution was first filtered through a 0.45 μm PVDF filter and ultrasonicated for 1 minute. Ag or SiO2 NPs from stock solution were first diluted in DI water before blending into the PEDOT:PSS solution to reach the desired concentration. The resulting blend was ultrasonicated for 1 minute. The optimized concentration (for highest efficiency) of Ag or SiO2 NPs in the PEDOT:PSS blend was 1011 Ag or SiO2 particles mL−1 with a water content of 5%. In both types of devices, PEDOT:PSS hole transport layers (or blends with Ag NPs) were formed via spin coating on ITO coated glass at 4000 rpm for 30 s, resulting in approximately 20 nm thick layers. After spin-coating, the films were immediately transferred onto a hotplate for annealing at 120 °C for 15 minutes. The CH3NH3PbI3 device was fabricated via a gas-assist method on top of the PEDOT:PSS film. CH3NH3PbI3 DMF solution was prepared from lead iodide (PbI2) and CH3NH3I (MAI) at a precursor concentration of 1 M. This solution was pipetted onto the substrate and spin-coated at 2500 rpm. A dry N2 gas stream was blown over the film for 9 seconds after spin-coating had begun. The films were then annealed at 100 °C for 10 minutes. Next, the PC70BM electron transport layer was prepared by dissolving PC70BM in chlorobenzene at 20 mg mL−1 and subsequently spin-coated at 3000 rpm to form a 40 nm thick film. Device fabrication was completed by thermal evaporation of a 100 nm silver electrode at a background pressure of 10−5 mbar. For all devices, a cell area of 0.13 cm2 was defined during thermal evaporation via a shadow mask. Devices were stored in a N2 purged glovebox after fabrication.


Light absorption of the full device was measured using a Perkin Elmer UV-vis spectrometer (Lambda 1050). The absorption profile includes absorption from the ITO layer as well as other layers which may not contribute to the photocurrent generated. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) was determined using a QEX10 spectral response system (PV measurements, Inc.). The thicknesses of various materials used were estimated using a KLA Tencor D-600 Stylus Profiler with sub-Angstrom resolution. Current density–voltage (J–V) measurements were obtained from an IV5 solar cell I–V testing system (PV measurements, Inc.) using a Keithley 2400 source meter and illumination at 100 mW cm−2 by an AM 1.5G solar simulator (Oriel model 94023A). Series and shunt resistances were estimated from the slope of the J–V curve at the open circuit voltage and short circuit current. For hysteresis studies, the J–V characteristics were measured at low scan rates of 0.01 V s−1. Atomic force microscope (AFM) images were taken using a Bruker dimension icon SPM. Images of the surface topology were captured via Carl Zeiss AURIGA Cross Beam scanning electron microscopy (SEM). X-ray diffraction (XRD) results were obtained with CuKα radiation and by step-scanning at a step size of 0.02°. Impedance spectroscopy was performed via an Autolab PGSTAT-30 equipped with a frequency analyzer module in the frequency range of 1–106 Hz. The AC amplitude was set to 20 mV (rms) to maintain the linearity of the response. The impedance was recorded at 0.9 V forward bias under light and dark conditions in a N2 purged glove box. The lamp used to measure impedance under light conditions was calibrated to resemble the power output of the light source of the I–V testing system. The flat-band potential was estimated from Mott–Schottky curves at 10 kHz frequency. Nova software was used to model impedance spectra. J–V, EQE and absorption measurements were performed in air within 2 days of fabrication to minimize the effects of device degradation.


Devices with 50 nm Ag NPs incorporated into the PEDOT:PSS layer achieved a power conversion efficiency of 13.7%, which is 3.2% higher compared to the reference PSCs (devices with standard PEDOT:PSS HTL) as detailed in Table 1. This higher efficiency is due predominantly to an improved FF, which is the result of lower series resistance (Rseries) and higher shunt resistance (RSH). For devices integrated with Ag NPs (“Ag NPs” device), the Rseries reduced from 5.2 Ω cm2 of the reference to 3.5 Ω cm2. In addition, the shunt resistance increased significantly from 843 to 1320 Ω cm2, which represents a 56% improvement in the RSH. Similar improvements were also observed for devices with 50 nm SiO2 NPs incorporated into the PEDOT:PSS HTL (“SiO2 NPs” device). In SiO2 NP devices, an improved efficiency of 14.0% was again the result of improved FF. Compared to reference devices, Rseries reduced by 20%, while RSH increased by 64%. The open circuit voltage (VOC) was not altered significantly after incorporation of Ag NPs or SiO2 NPs into the PEDOT:PSS layer. There was also no change in the short circuit current density (JSC) of about 21 mA cm−2, which was obtained for the reference device, Ag NP device and SiO2 NP device. Fig. 1(a) shows the J–V curves for representative devices for each category. A schematic diagram for the Ag NP and SiO2 NP devices, showing the various layers and positioning of NPs, is provided in Fig. 1(b). Fig. S1 (ESI) contains box plots showing the distribution of results for device performance characteristics.

Device

V
OC (mV)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)

η (%)

R
series (Ω cm2)

R
SH (Ω cm2)
Reference
894 ± 1
20.8 ± 0.1
71.6 ± 0.7
13.3 ± 0.1
5.15
843
Ag NPs
890 ± 3
20.9 ± 0.3
73.7 ± 0.6
13.7 ± 0.1
3.47
1320
SiO2 NPs
908 ± 1
21.0 ± 0.3
73.5 ± 0.6
14.0 ± 0.2
4.14
1380
The morphology of the PEDOT:PSS/perovskite interface was also investigated by AFM analysis. Fig. 2 shows the AFM images of PEDOT:PSS films for the reference device and that for the films of PEDOT:PSS blended with Ag or SiO2 NPs. The reference PEDOT:PSS film is relatively smooth, with root mean square (RMS) roughness values of approximately 1.53 nm. In contrast, the films of PEDOT:PSS with Ag and SiO2 NPs are slightly rougher, with RMS roughness values of 1.72 nm and 1.65 nm respectively. A rougher morphology could suggest an increased interfacial contact area (between the PEDOT:PSS and perovskite layer), which results in shorter routes for hole transport to the anode. In organic solar cells, this reduced distance between carriers and the electrode has been known to minimize the dependence on the asymmetry of electrode work functions for charge collection and thus lead to improved FF. Particles of approximately 50 nm size in Fig. 2 indicate the presence of Ag and SiO2 NPs. More detailed SEM images showing these NPs can be found in Fig. 3(a–c). It is inferred from the images and the performance characteristics of the devices that the Ag or SiO2 NPs did not protrude from the PEDOT:PSS film in such a way that could negatively impact the electrical performance of the PSCs by forming shunt pathways. Furthermore, there were no obvious differences in the surface morphology of the perovskite film after incorporation of either Ag or SiO2 NPs as shown in Fig. 3(d–f). Hence, the improved performance of the Ag NP and SiO2 NP devices cannot be attributed to changes in morphology. Fig. 4 shows the XRD patterns for perovskite films in the 3 device configurations used in this study. The presence of (110), (202), (220), (310), (224) and (314) characteristic diffraction peaks is ascribed to the tetragonal perovskite structure. Importantly, the relative normalized peak intensities and full-width-at-half-maximum are broadly similar among all devices. Furthermore, the crystallite size, microstrain and dislocation density of all perovskite films obtained from XRD spectral fitting (in Table S1, ESI) were approximately comparable. The mathematical relations for calculating microstrain, dislocation density (Williamson and Smallman's equation) and crystallite dimension (Debye–Scherrer equation) have been described previously. Thus, it is inferred that perovskite crystallinity is comparable across devices in this study. The origin of the improved device performance presented here differs from previous studies where NPs acted as the nucleation sites for the perovskite film.
As shown in Fig. 5(b), the absorption spectra for reference, Ag NP and SiO2 NP devices are essentially similar, but with a small increase in light absorption noticeable in the wavelength range of 400–550 nm for Ag NP and SiO2 NP devices. Interestingly, there was also a corresponding increase in the EQE for this same wavelength region. This small increase in the EQE, as evident in Fig. 5(a), could explain the minor increase in JSC in Table 1. Previous attempts at incorporating Au NPs into PEDOT:PSS buffer layers in organic solar cells also yielded no significant change in light absorption due to the localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) distributing laterally across the PEDOT:PSS layer. Hence, it is inferred that optical enhancement provided by the plasmonic Ag NPs did not play a major role in improving the overall device efficiency, particularly since devices with SiO2 NPs also experienced a similar improvement.
Impedance spectroscopy was utilized to study the internal electrical characteristics of devices. In general, the Nyquist plots are a combination of semicircles in the complex plane, where the high frequency arc is associated with carrier transport in the HTL while the lower frequency arc is related to recombination at each interface of the perovskite layer. The semicircle related to recombination is more prominently observed in our study, but has also been reported previously in other studies.Fig. 7 and 8 show the impedance spectra of the reference, Ag NP and SiO2 NP devices. To fit the impedance spectra, an equivalent circuit, as depicted in Fig. 6, which had been described extensively was used. Briefly, RS is associated with contact resistances, while RHTL and RREC are the resistance of the HTL and recombination resistance respectively. CBULK refers to the chemical or bulk capacitance, which is associated with charges due to photogenerated electrons and holes in the perovskite layer. CHTL is the geometric or interfacial capacitance, which quantifies the charge storage in contacts. In planar PSCs, it is postulated that CHTL dominates over CBULK. Impedance spectra were obtained for all devices under light and dark conditions. The modelled results from fitting with the equivalent circuit are presented in Tables 2 and 3. Under dark conditions, RS for the Ag NP and SiO2 NP devices shows a reduction of 38% and 42% respectively. In addition, RREC was substantially increased for these two types of devices and thus signifies lower recombination rates. Suppressed charge recombination can lead to better RSH due to better contact selectivity and charge collection. The reduced capacitances (CHTL and CBULK) further suggest reduced charge accumulation in the bulk and contacts, which could indicate more efficient charge extraction in the Ag NP and SiO2 NP devices. These modelled results concur with the reduced Rseries and improved RSH in Table 1. Moreover, the same trend is noticeable even for the modelled results from impedance spectroscopy under light conditions. For planar PSCs, the fast transport of carriers through the perovskite film and the associated time constant may be beyond the capabilities of impedance spectroscopy to measure. However, the recombination lifetime (τREC) for charge at contacts can be found as the product of RREC and CHTL. From the fitted results for dark conditions, τREC improved from 3.6 μs for the reference device to 6.2 μs for Ag NP devices and 8.6 μs for SiO2 NP devices. The longer lifetime translates to improved carrier extraction at the electrodes and less recombination, and thus increased FF and VOC. Similar improvements in τREC were observed for fitted results under light conditions, although the increase in lifetime was more moderate. The flat-band potential, which can be determined from a Mott–Schottky plot under dark conditions, is useful for interpreting changes in device performance. Typically, the x-axis intercept of the extrapolated linear section of a Mott–Schottky curve indicates the flat-band potential of a device. The calculated flat-band potentials for the reference, Ag NP and SiO2 NP devices are 0.83 V, 0.95 V and 0.93 V respectively. It has been suggested previously that band bending increases with larger net built-in electric field and driving potential, which can lead to improved photovoltaic device performance. The improved performance is related to enhanced charge separation and extraction, which is derived from the larger driving force provided by the superior built-in electric field. Hence, it is postulated that the improved FF for the Ag NP and SiO2 NP devices can be attributed to improved charge separation and extraction.
Reference
Ag NPs
SiO2 NPs

R
S (Ω)
14
8.4
7.8

R
HTL (Ω)
9
24
25

R
REC (Ω)
43
94
126

C
HTL (nF)
84
67
68

C
BULK (nF)
18
17
14

τ
REC (μs)
3.6
6.2
8.6
Reference
Ag NPs
SiO2 NPs

R
S (Ω)
16
11
12

R
HTL (Ω)
1.9
3.3
3.5

R
REC (Ω)
17
26
29

C
HTL (nF)
233
158
154

C
BULK (nF)
26
20
19

τ
REC (μs)
4.0
4.1
4.4
Recent work has shown that two capacitance steps exist in frequency-dependent capacitance measurements. The intermediate frequency capacitance step is due to dipole polarization or chemical capacitance in the perovskite layer, while the low frequency capacitance step originates from electrode polarization. Trapping of electronic carriers or ionic charges can result in charge accumulation at the contact interfaces, which may alter the local electric field. Consequently, electrode polarization (excess interfacial capacitance) can lead to thin space charge regions forming near contacts. For normal structured PSCs, capacitance due to electrode polarization is in the range of 10−5 to 10−6 F cm−2. However, inverted structured PSCs exhibit capacitances 1 order of magnitude lower, which is in line with Fig. 9. For reference PSCs, the capacitance decreased from 1.9 × 10−5 F cm−2 at low frequency to 9.1 × 10−8 F cm−2 at the high frequency (>1 kHz) plateau. In contrast, the decrease in capacitance was less dramatic for the Ag NP and SiO2 NP devices, which exhibited low frequency capacitances of 2.0 × 10−6 F cm−2 and 4.1 × 10−7 F cm−2, respectively, before the high frequency plateau. The capacitances for the Ag NP and SiO2 NP devices also reached the high frequency plateau (∼500 Hz) slightly faster compared to the reference devices. The lower interfacial capacitance (or reduced electrode polarization) is attributed to enhanced charge extraction at the interface and hence, lower accumulation of charge near contacts. These effects are due to a redistribution of the localized electric field in the vicinity of the HTL/perovskite interface, and possibly elimination of alternate current paths for the photogenerated current under light conditions. Consequently, the change in capacitive behavior near the electrode may lead to the significant increase in RSH for the Ag NP and SiO2 NP devices as seen in Table 1. Moreover, the reduced electrode polarization for the Ag NP and SiO2 NP devices also suggests efficient charge separation and extraction, which corroborates the earlier results indicating higher flat-band potential for both Ag NPs and SiO2 NPs. Excess interfacial capacitance can partly be associated with electronic traps within the perovskite film, which are expected to originate from iodine ion migration or defects due to iodine interstitials within the CH3NH3PbI3 film. Hence, the reduced electrode polarization observed in Fig. 9 for both the Ag and SiO2 NP devices could also imply less trap states at the HTL interface. The reduction of chemical interactions between iodide ions and chemically reactive sites in the HTL or contacts is known to improve charge selectivity at the contacts. These results also point to reduced probability of recombination, which is evidenced by the improved τREC for Ag and SiO2 NP devices.
The interpreted changes in electrode polarization that led to enhanced FF in the Ag NP or SiO2 NP devices could help mitigate ion accumulation at the interfaces and thus have the potential to reduce the hysteresis phenomenon. While there exist many approaches in reporting hysteresis in the literature, one way to quantify the hysteresis effect is via the use of an adimensional hysteric index. A hysteric index of zero implies a hysteresis-free device, while a hysteric index of one corresponds to a device where the hysteresis is as large as the photocurrent. At a scan rate of 0.1 V s−1, the hysteric index was found to be 0.015, 0.009 and 0.013 for the reference, Ag NP and SiO2 NP devices respectively. The hysteretic behavior essentially disappears at a lower scan rate of 0.01 V s−1 for the reference, Ag NP and SiO2 NP devices as observed in a previous report. In general, the devices in this study are relatively hysteresis-free owing to the inverted device structure employed. However, the lower hysteric indices for the Ag NP and SiO2 NP devices are indicative of reduced hysteresis phenomenon compared to reference devices. The J–V characteristics of all devices at different (forward and reverse) voltage scan rates are illustrated in Fig. 10(a and b). Previous work in the literature has established the connection between electrode polarization and hysteresis phenomena. Since the hysteresis effect has a capacitive origin, low interfacial capacitance at the interface or reduced electrode polarization could explain the lower hysteresis observed for the Ag NP and SiO2 NP devices. The change in capacitive behaviour observed in this study might partly explain the improved FF of other plasmonic PSCs. PVP doping in perovskite has been known to increase the thermal stability of devices, which prevents perovskite decomposition into PbI2 and MAI due to interactions between the carbonyl group on PVP and MAI. Interestingly, similar increases in RSH and VOC, as was observed in our study, were also reported. Hence, it is speculated that interactions between the PVP surface groups on the Ag NPs and the perovskite layer could play a role in enhancing the FF. However, more work is required to understand the mechanism of improvement and the role of silanol surface groups (on SiO2 NPs) in modulating interfacial capacitance.
In summary, the superior electrical properties of the Ag NP and SiO2 NP devices are expected to stem from their larger flat-band potential and low electrode polarization. The higher flat-band potential provides the driving force for increased band bending, which results in better carrier separation, extraction and ultimately collection at the electrodes. In addition, the low electrode polarization indicates enhanced charge collection properties and a reduced hysteresis phenomenon. It can also be inferred from the lower interfacial capacitance that there is a lower incidence of recombination and hence, higher recombination resistance. A schematic diagram illustrating the mechanism for improved performance is shown in Fig. 11. More work is underway to investigate the change in interfacial properties and carrier dynamics responsible for the improvement in electrical characteristics. While the preliminary results suggest that nanoparticle inclusion may lead to a reduced hysteresis phenomenon, the mechanism for this reduction is still unclear and thus warrants further investigation. Finally, further studies are warranted to examine the effects of the NP size and concentration on the electrical characteristics of PSCs.

Plasmonic Ag NPs and SiO2 dielectric NPs were incorporated into the PEDOT:PSS layer of CH3NH3PbI3-based perovskite solar cells. Optical enhancement via plasmonics was not observed for either the Ag NP or SiO2 NP devices. Both devices exhibited improved shunt resistance and lowered series resistance compared to the reference device, which is attributed to improved charge selectivity at the interface. Additional electronic characterization revealed higher recombination resistance and longer recombination lifetime in the Ag and SiO2 NP devices, which indicate less recombination at the HTL/perovskite interface. It was also shown through capacitive measurements that the decreases in both the bulk and interfacial capacitance are attributed to enhanced charge extraction from the perovskite layer, and also reduced formation of space charge regions (electrode polarization) at the electrode. Furthermore, it can be inferred from the reduced electrode polarization that more efficient charge separation and extraction is occurring, which is supported by the larger flat band potential for the Ag NP and SiO2 NP devices. In this preliminary work, lower hysteresis was observed for the Ag NP and SiO2 NP devices, which is likely also due to the lower electrode polarization. Furthermore, the higher recombination resistance and longer recombination lifetime in the Ag and SiO2 NP devices indicate less recombination at the HTL/perovskite interface. Consequently, improved electrical characteristics led to the observed high FF and enhanced efficiency of the Ag and SiO2 NP devices. The substantive benefits to the electrical characteristics at the interface should be viewed as complementary to developments in new perovskite materials and device structures, which would further enhance device performance.


There are no conflicts of interest to declare.


The authors would like to thank the Australian Centre for Advanced Photovoltaics, SPREE staff and technicians for their kind support. We are also grateful towards members in the OPV group for their feedback, helpful discussions and support whilst completing this work. We acknowledge the funding support from Future Solar Technologies.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7cp04053a
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © the Owner Societies 2017