 DOI: 10.1039/C7EE00332C
(Communication)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1134-1141


Bofei
Liu
,

Lisha
Bai
,

Tiantian
Li
,

Changchun
Wei
,

Baozhang
Li
,

Qian
Huang
,

Dekun
Zhang
,

Guangcai
Wang
,

Ying
Zhao
 and 

Xiaodan
Zhang
*

Institute of Photoelectronic Thin Film Devices and Technology of Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, P. R. China. E-mail: xdzhang@nankai.edu.cn; Fax: +86-22-23499304; Tel: +86-22-23499304

Key Laboratory of Photoelectronic Thin Film Devices and Technology of Tianjin, Tianjin 300071, P. R. China

Key Laboratory of Photoelectronic Thin Film Devices and Technology of Ministry of Education, Tianjin 300071, P. R. China

Collaborative Innovation Center of Chemical Science and Engineering (Tianjin), Tianjin 300072, China

Received
4th February 2017
, Accepted 24th March 2017
First published on 24th March 2017
Conversion of clean and renewable solar energy into electricity with photovoltaic (PV) devices, based on earth-abundant silicon elements to meet increasing global energy demands and environmental sustainability, has motivated various potential industrial and domestic applications. In addition to large-scale electricity production of market-dominant crystalline silicon PVs, the unique properties of silicon-based thin-film solar-cells (TFSCs) make them very attractive as affordable clean and safe energy devices. Herein, with large-scale and mature plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD) process that can efficiently fabricate high-performing a-SiC:H, a-SiGe:H, a-Si:H, and μc-Si:H single- and various multi-junction TFSCs, we report a highly-efficient and flexibly tunable monolithic quadruple-junction silicon TFSC with a high photovoltage above 3.0 V and power conversion efficiency of 15.03% (NREL measured 14.58%). Our proposed high-voltage silicon TFSCs, with excellent performance, can further enrich the toolbox for functional photoelectrical devices and inspire possible future applications as highly promising power supply sources in charging electronics, splitting and disinfecting water, powering household electronic devices, solar to CO2 reduction, and other possible applications.

Rapidly increasing energy demands in daily lives and widely popular smart household electronics drive the urgent need for clean, renewable, and secure alternatives for traditional pollution-carrying power supply sources. Photovoltaic technologies, particularly silicon-based thin-film photovoltaic device harvesting and converting sustainable and clean solar energy into electricity, provide an eco-friendly potential solution. To drive the electronics and functional photoelectrical devices working in operating area, a sufficient voltage that is generally supplied by the source needs to be satisfied. Herein, we describe a highly efficient and flexibly tunable quadruple-junction silicon-based thin-film solar cell fabricated with a scalable and well-established plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD) process; This solar cell can provide a remarkably high open-circuit voltage above 3.0 V and enable several potential applications to power wearable, portable, and controllable household electronics and integration with various functional devices requiring sufficient operating voltages.


Continuous concerns on the growing global energy demand and environmental sustainability have aroused a great research interest in developing clean and renewable energy. Inexhaustible green solar energy, which is widely distributed on the earth, should be effectively harvested to combat the excessive use of finite, reserved fossil fuels and worsening environmental pollution, global warming, and ecological destruction. The necessity of cheap and clean electrical supplies from the abundant solar energy to people's daily lives has thus stirred a huge development of photovoltaic (PV) devices based on silicon, the second most abundant (27%) element on the earth, at the commercial, laboratory, and research scale. High performance crystalline silicon PVs, for instance, have accounted for the dominant market position in large-scale electricity production and industrialization among various other PV technologies, such as kesterite, organic, and perovskite solar cells.

The advantageous features of silicon-based, thin film solar cells (TFSCs), compared to their crystalline silicon counterparts, are high-photovoltages, sensitivity to weak light or non-direct sunlight, and high-temperature adaptability; these advantages make them one of the most attractive PV candidates for meeting the growing need for affordable clean and safe energy. In the past decades, extensive studies on single-junction (1J) amorphous silicon (a-Si:H) TFSCs, were based on advanced material engineering to maximize their open-circuit voltages (Voc), defined by the band gaps of a-Si absorbers and fundamental thermodynamic loss, and to approach the theoretical performance limits. The highest Voc, about 1.0 V with a power conversion efficiency (PCE) above 10% practically achieved for a-Si:H TFSCs, has facilitated their preliminary applications in handheld electronics and mature integration in roof-mounted PVs and large-scale power generation. Silicon TFSCs that incorporate more junctions in one cell, known as multi-junction cells, further open up attractive pathways to more potential integrations in industrial usages, household and functional devices due to their inherent superiorities, such as weaker thermalization loss of photon energy, better light spectral utilization, higher photovoltages, enhanced efficiency potential, and long-term stability. Double- (2J) and triple-junction (3J) silicon TFSCs, comprising amorphous and microcrystalline silicon (μc-Si:H) and their related alloys (silicon germanium, oxide, and carbon etc.), have demonstrated high efficiencies and can offer higher photovoltages than 1.0 V and better PCEs than their 1J counterparts. 3J TFSCs with Vocs above 2.0 V, for instance, are appropriate for solar water-splitting units requiring a practical voltage above 1.8 V, thus allowing a high flexibility in choosing non-precious catalyst materials and constituting low-cost and unassisted monolithic solar water-splitting devices. Quadruple-junction (4J) silicon TFSCs, which were theoretically proven to potentially achieve a higher efficiency limit of 56% due to weaker thermalization loss of photon energy, offer new opportunities as potential candidates to enrich the toolbox in various applications.
However, the performance development of 4J TFSCs has been hindered by the presence of serious restrictions from both material engineering and device design. Multiple sub-cell combinations with graded absorber band gaps in TFSCs require absorber materials with precisely tuned thicknesses for reasonable optical splitting between component cells, which conversely increases the process difficulty in high performance sub-cells. The optically and electrically low-loss connections between sub-cells, which are more than 2J and 3J counterparts in number, also further complicate the practical realization of high performance, quadruple-junction silicon solar cells. In this study, which aimed at providing process guidelines and technical routes in developing high performance 4J TFSCs that enable a much wider diversity of functional devices in environmental applications, we report a highly efficient silicon-based quadruple-junction TFSC (a-SiC:H/a-Si:H/a-SiGe:H/μc-Si:H) with a remarkably high open-circuit voltage above 3.0 V and a PCE of 15.03% (NREL measured 14.58%). The entire fabrication process of the devices was carried out with a technically-mature and large-scale silicon plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD) process; the process was not only energy-efficient, but also suitable for flexible substrates that can be potentially applied in wearable and portable electronics. The band-gaps and responsive spectral ranges of a-SiC:H, a-Si:H, a-SiGe:H, and μc-Si:H component cells can also be flexibly tuned, thereby meeting the particular requirements in various application environments.

All the solar cells were fabricated on a transparent and high scattering AZO front contact supported by 0.7 mm-thick glasses (Corning Eagle XG). AZO front contacts were grown in a high-vacuum sputtering system (KJLC Lab-18, base pressure below 1 × 10−5 Pa) by a pulsed direct current (PDC) magnetron sputtering process using a sintered ceramic ZnO target with 1 wt% Al2O3 (target-substrate distance: 190 mm, working power density: 3.3 W cm−2, working pressure: 1.0 mTorr, and substrate temperature: 325 °C). The glass substrates were ultrasonically cleaned in detergent and deionized water and finally dried with nitrogen gas. The AZO substrates were then chemically wet etched in 0.5% diluted HCl solution for about 20 s to prepare a textured surface morphology with a high scattering performance before solar cell fabrication. All the active layers in a-SiC:H, a-Si:H, and a-SiGe:H cells were fabricated using radio-frequency PECVD with a mixture of source gases of silane (SiH4) and hydrogen (H2) for intrinsic a-Si:H, SiH4 and methane (CH4) for a-SiC:H, and SiH4 and germane (GeH4) for a-SiGe:H. The μc-Si:H active layers were grown using a very high frequency PECVD process. Finally, a mask-defined ZnO (BZO)/Ag/Al back contact was fabricated by a metal organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) process for the BZO and thermal evaporation for the Ag/Al metal stack to finish the entire fabrication process. The exposed BZO was also fully wet-etched in 1% HCl solution to insulate the cells.


Atomic force microscopy (AFM) measurements were carried out with an SPA 400 AFM (SII Nanotechnology, Inc., Tokyo, Japan) to characterize the surface morphology of the front TCO and extract the inclination angle distribution of the AZOs.


The cross-sectional images of the 1J, 2J, 3J, and 4J TFSCs and top-view image of AZO front contacts were extracted with a SUPRA 55VP scanning electronic microscope (Carl ZEISS AG, Jena, Germany) using a 10 kV acceleration voltage.


The illuminated current density–voltage characteristics of all the solar cell samples were carried out with a preset shadow mask, to ensure the illuminated active areas, and measured under 1 Sun conditions [AM 1.5, 25 °C, and 100 mW cm−2] provided by a Wacom WXs-156s-L2 dual-beam solar simulator (Class AAA), which accurately simulates the AM 1.5 spectrum by superposing the two adequately calibrated filtered light sources with different spectral ranges. The illumination intensity was calibrated to 100 mW cm−2 using a certified single-crystalline silicon solar cell before real characterizations. We also calibrated the simulated solar spectrum from the solar simulator in the entire wavelength range (400–1100 nm) to match the real AM 1.5G spectrum for acquiring an accurate device performance.


The solar cell simulations were performed with a commercial inorganic device simulator called the one-dimensional (1D) simulation package Advanced Semiconductor Analysis (ASA, Delft University of Technology).


Our strategy employed 4J TFSCs comprising a-SiC:H top, a-Si:H second, a-SiGe:H third, and μc-Si:H bottom component cells serving as the optical splitters and harvesters, as illustrated schematically in Fig. 1a, aiming at reasonably splitting the incident spectrum. The a-SiC:H, a-Si:H, and a-SiGe:H components and their 1J counterparts in this study were fabricated by a large-scale and mature radio-frequency (13.56 MHz) RF-PECVD and the μc-Si:H was fabricated by a very-high-frequency (70 MHz) PECVD. More detailed processing conditions of cells can be found in our previous study. The colored cross-sectional SEM image and corresponding photographs of one experimentally fabricated 4J TFSC are respectively displayed in Fig. 1b and c for clarity. It should be noted that despite the 4J TFSC exhibited here that have a mask-defined active area of 0.25 cm2 (5 mm × 5 mm), our 4J TFSCs, depending on the size of masks for the boron doped ZnO (BZO)/Ag/Al rear electrode fabrication, are scalable and may inspire more integrations in electronics as power supply sources. Even though the upscaling of solar cells may encounter additional challenges in maintaining device performance, a reasonable device design of large-scale TFSCs can effectively overcome these issues.

It is well established that an achievable Voc and PCE for a PV device can be seriously restrained by means of a non-radiative exciton recombination and optical absorption in bulk and at interfaces or surfaces of component layers and thus, device and material engineering become more critical particularly in 4J TFSCs due to their complex device architecture. To roughly demonstrate the respective contributions on the overall performance by the optimized components of 4J TFSCs in our study, AM 1.5 illuminated J–V characteristics of corresponding 1J cells deposited with identical processing conditions are shown in Fig. 1d. Various experimental strategies were considered in our study to boost the overall open-circuit voltages and PCEs of 4J TFSCs. Wider-gap and thin a-SiC:H absorbers (band-gap Eg = 2.0 eV, thickness D = 100 nm), in comparison to traditional a-Si:H top absorbers, can efficiently suppress the thermalization losses of carriers excited by high-energy photons and potentially offer higher photovoltages on account of their wider band-gaps. In addition, p-type nanocrystalline silicon carbon (p-nc-SiC:H) layers were adopted to avoid the unwanted potential losses at the TCO/p interface, thus giving rise to a remarkable Voc of 0.992 V and PCE of 4.69% for the p–i–n type a-SiC:H cell.
To achieve a better spectral splitting in the incident AM 1.5 spectrum and resulting current-matching, the a-Si:H middle absorber with a thickness of 350 nm was fabricated with a high-hydrogen dilution (90%) and a low substrate temperature (180 °C) condition to acquire a narrow band-gap Eg of 1.7 eV. Even so, a high Voc of 0.969 V achieved explicitly demonstrates a sufficiently suppressed recombination in a-Si:H bulk.
Benefiting from the excellent band-gap tunability in the 0.9–1.75 eV range, easily extendable absorption limit, and strong light-absorption capabilities, a-SiGe:H third component cells with an average band-gap of 1.48 eV (D = 160 nm) were chosen to further extend the responsive spectral range to a cut-off wavelength of about 900 nm. Low-defective intrinsic a-Si:H buffers were inserted into p/i and i/n interfaces to suppress the interfacial recombination, compensate for the band-gap mismatching, and mitigate the well-known electric-field screening effect, and thus boost the achievable open-circuit voltages of the a-SiGe:H component cell. On account of the serious recombination enhancement induced by the germanium alloying and the resulted Voc losses, a linear graded germanium profile, corresponding to a continuous band-gap grading from 1.41 eV (p side) to 1.62 eV (n side), was employed to accelerate the hole transport in the absorber while keeping sufficient long-wavelength response, thereby achieving an excellent Voc value of 0.784 V. It is worth noting that the Vocs of 4J TFSCs can thus be flexibly tuned in a wide range by modulating the average germanium content in the a-SiGe:H third cell to fulfill the particular requirements of various electronics, as demonstrated in Fig. S1 (ESI).
Finally, μc-Si:H bottom component cells (thickness D = 3.0 μm), which play a critical role in extending the responsive spectral range to 1100 nm, were optimized to further enhance the Vocs of the resulting 4J TFSCs with a myriad of strategies, including hydrogen dilution profiling in μc-Si:H absorbers, intrinsic hydrogenated amorphous silicon oxide (a-SiOx:H) p/i and a-Si:H i/n buffers, and p and n-type nanocrystalline SiOx:H supporting layers. Tuning the crystalline fraction of μc-Si:H absorbers can efficiently give rise to various μc-Si:H component cells with balanced open-circuit-voltages and current outputs, thus allowing the special ability of tuning photovoltages of 4J TFSCs in small steps (see Fig. S2 for more details, ESI).
Photoelectrical simulations in the four types of component cells were also carried out to demonstrate their great performance potential and guided our further device design, as shown in AM 1.5 illuminated J–V curves presented in Fig. 1e. The excellent performance parameters for the simulated cells indicated that we still have a huge improvement space in optimizing the 1J component cells and confirmed the effectiveness of our 1J cell architectures from the device engineering point of view.
It is worth emphasizing that 4J TFSCs were fabricated on our home-developed high-transparent and conductive AZO substrates, which were carefully sputtered and then chemically wet-etched in 0.5% diluted hydrochloric acid (HCl) solution to form crater-like surface morphologies with a typical lateral correlation length of 830 nm and roughness of 140 nm (see the atomic force microscope image, extracted and fitted autocorrelation curves in Fig. S3, ESI), as shown in the top-view SEM image in Fig. 1f. Apart from the excellent scattering capacities of AZOs to sufficiently scatter the incident light into the component cells of 4J TFSCs from the optical point of view, such AZO substrates with an aspect ratio of about 0.17 can unequivocally suppress the defective cracks and resultant shunt currents in 4J TFSCs, thus easing the detrimental impacts on Vocs of 4J TFSCs. The inclination angle distribution of the AZO substrate in Fig. S4 (ESI) demonstrates that the typical inclination angles of the substrate are below 30°, clearly demonstrating its electrical flatness. Low pressure chemical vapor deposition (LPCVD) deposited BZOs (chemically etched away after the deposition of the stacked Ag/Al patterns), followed by thermally evaporated Ag/Al double-layer back contacts with a mask-defined small area of 0.25 cm2, were finally fabricated on the μc-Si:H bottom cells to reflect the forward-propagating light waves back to be repeatedly absorbed in 4J TFSCs.
The achievable Voc of a 4J TFSC could be estimated by summing the Vocs of individual component cells under one Sun, thus predicting a Voc of 3.24 V according to the 1J J–V curves in Fig. 1d. Herein, we should note that the inevitable Voc reduction arising from the preceding components, serving as optical filters, and losses on tunnel recombination junctions (denoted as TRJs for simplicity hereafter) between sub-cells constitute a practically achievable Voc that may be much less than the predicted one when physically combining the sub-cells. However, decoupling the TRJ effects on the overall Voc merely with J–V curves of 4J TFSCs alone cannot be straightforwardly performed. To circumvent this issue, our strategy of achieving the highest possible Voc for 4J TFSCs with little losses was processed by fabricating and comparing the illuminated J–V characteristics of co-deposited a-SiC:H 1J, a-SiC:H/a-Si:H 2J, a-SiC:H/a-Si:H/a-SiGe:H 3J, and the resulting a-SiC:H/a-Si:H/a-SiGe:H/μc-Si:H 4J TFSCs, as schematically demonstrated in Fig. 2a. The cross-sectional SEM images of cells are also shown (see Fig. S5 for more details, ESI). It is noted that to simulate the component cells in the 4J TFSC, 1J, 2J, and 3J TFSCs were completed with only Al metal contacts to substitute the stack of BZO/Ag/Al back-reflector in the 4J TFSC. For simplicity, we also denoted the top/second, second/third, and third/bottom TRJs in 4J TFSC as TRJts, TRJst, and TRJtb.
The first remarkable fact is that, despite the inevitable optical-filtered and TRJs induced photovoltage losses, a considerably high Voc of 3.11 V, accompanied with a suitable fill factor (FF) and short-circuit current density (Jsc) values of 63.61% and 6.9 mA cm−2, could be observed for one small 4J TFSC. To the best of our knowledge, no prior study reported on silicon-based TFSCs could achieve such a high Voc value above 3.0 V while maintaining a sufficient device performance. It should be noted that the achieved photovoltage for our 4J TFSC as such, which provides sufficient energy to extract photo-generated carriers, is well in line with the special requirements on operating voltages for various functional devices, such as ones for solar water splitting and chemical fuel generating. Even though serial interconnections between various sub-cells can also provide a feasible route that allows developing such a high-voltage power source, our presented fabrication strategy in high-voltage PVs enabled the flexibility of tuning the generated photovoltage of 4J TFSCs in a monolithic and more controllable manner, as noted in Fig. S1 and S2 (ESI); this is a unique ability that is profoundly appealing for functional devices that requires precise controls on device parameters. The potentially higher performance, relative to the serial ones, is also another primary merit for our 4J TFSC due to the inevitable power losses thermally on serial conductive wires and optically on additional transparent conductive layers. Fig. 2c also presents the simulated band diagrams of the illuminated 4J TFSC at the open circuit point, which estimate the possibility of an achieved built-in voltage Vi of 3.34 V determined by the difference between the hole quasi-Fermi energy level (−1.67 eV) in an a-SiC top and electron quasi-Fermi energy level (1.67 eV) in μc-Si bottom cells by physically combining 1J sub-cells with various band-gaps. The performance advantages for 4J TFSCs arise from the aforementioned device engineering in component cells and the low-loss TRJ design in the 4J TFSC. The development of such low-loss TRJs has been addressed in detail in our previous study, and the corresponding band diagram for our TRJ design is displayed in the inset plot of Fig. 2c. Double-layer n-μc-Si:H/p-μc-Si:H TRJ, as an interconnecting layer in our design, exhibited high electron and hole mobilities in comparison to their amorphous counterparts to improve the rapid recombination of the extracted photogenerated carriers from adjacent sub-cells, narrower band gaps and higher defects to enhance the non-local carrier recombination, and great process compatibility in comparison to other non-silicon TRJ layers. Fig. 2d statistically summarizes the achievable Vocs of the TFSCs and corresponding voltage losses on three TRJs. The performances of four samples in the same run are roughly identical with each other, suggesting the great process uniformity of the high photovoltage TFSCs. The voltage losses on three TRJs were respectively estimated with the AM 1.5 illuminated J–V characteristics of the TFSC and its following 1J cells (see Fig. 1c). From the experimental point of view, the value of TRJtb, for instance, can be roughly predicted to be 63 mV (2.678 V plus 0.495 V and then minus 3.11 V). Consequently, the voltage losses on three TRJs were respectively predicted to be 34 mV, 33 mV, and 63 mV, comparable to the previously reported average values in silicon based 2J TFSCs (20–40 mV) with one stand-alone TRJ, clearly demonstrating the good working charge exchange among component cells in the 4J TFSC. It is worth mentioning that the losses estimated here also simultaneously take into account the optical-filtered photovoltage losses, thereby representing a gradual uptrend at three TRJs. Considering the well-designed 1J component cells and developed low-loss TRJs, we also conducted the photoelectrical integrated simulation of 1J, 2J, 3J, and 4J TFSCs to estimate their Voc and performance potentials, as seen from the AM 1.5 illuminated J–V characteristics exhibited in Fig. 2e. An extremely high Voc of 3.33 V and PCE of 20.16% (Jsc = 7.83 mA cm−2 and FF = 77.3%) can be predicted for our 4J TFSC architecture, fully suggesting the great performance potential for our proposed 4J TFSCs. More studies will also be carried out in the near future to optimize the device performance of 4J TFSCs.

J–V measurements of the 4J TFSC under various simulated-AM 1.5 intensities (0.1–1 Suns) were also carried out to evaluate their applicability in sub-optimal solar conditions of the as-prepared device, as observed from the open-circuit-voltages summarized in Fig. 2f. The Vocs under weakened light intensities were nearly identical with 1 Sun Voc, clearly demonstrating the extensive applicability of the fabricated 4J TFSCs to flexibly meet various working environment demands for the functional devices.
Finally, the monolithic 4J TFSC, with an open-circuit-voltage over 3.0 V, was further optimized to deliver higher power output. We tuned the effective light absorption in various sub-cells, according to the hydrogen content in a-Si:H, germanium concentration and bandgap grading in a-SiGe:H, crystalline fraction in μc-Si:H and corresponding absorber thicknesses, to carefully tune the individual current densities in sub-cells. Even though current matching can maximize the effective current output in stacked TFSCs, current mismatching can also effectively improve the fill factor of 4J-TFSCs by changing the current-limiting sub-cells to ones with the highest FFs, which is also the primary performance drawback in the 4J-TFSC, as shown in Fig. 2b. The illuminated J–V characteristics of the highest-performing device are displayed in Fig. 3a and b. An initial efficiency of 15.03% (FF = 73.81%, and Jsc = 6.74 mA cm−2) was achieved while keeping a high open-circuit voltage of 3.02 V. Fig. S6 (ESI) also provides the measured results for our 4J TFSCs without encapsulation after being fabricated half a year ago by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL, USA) with a measured PCE of 14.58%. We also compared our experimentally delivered and theoretically evaluated Voc and PCE device parameters with reported quadruple-junction TFSCs with various architectures, including a-Si:H/a-SiGe:H/μc-Si:H/μc-Si:H, a-Si:H/a-Si:H/μc-Si:H/μc-Si:H, a-SiOx:H/a-Si:H/μc-Si:H/μc-Si:H, a-SiC:H/a-Si:H/a-SiGe:H/μc-Si:H, and a-SiOx:H/a-Si:H/a-SiGe:H/μc-SiGe:H(simulation) 4J TFSCs, to illustrate the excellent performance potential of our 4J TFSCs. It is clear that our 4J TFSC devices can provide much higher Voc and power output in comparison to other sub-cell combinations, from both the experimental and the theoretical points of view. In addition, we should note that the previously reported 4J TFSCs in pioneering studies have illustrated their excellent advantage of long-term light stability in comparison to their 2J and 3J counterparts, which also make our 4J-TFSCs a suitable choice for long-term stable functional electronic applications.

We demonstrated a highly efficient silicon 4J TFSC with an extremely high photovoltage above 3.0 V and efficiency of 15.03% (NREL measured 14.58%). Individually reducing the electrical losses in component cells and interconnecting them with low-cost TRJs successfully suppressed the voltage losses in the 4J TFSC, giving rise to a Voc of 3.11 V, which is the highest reported to date for any 4J TFSCs. The unique high photovoltage above 3.0 V and outstanding performance for 4J TFSC should be helpful for functional optoelectronic devices and can enable several potential applications for powering wearable, portable, and controllable household electronics.


X. Z. conceived the study. B. L., L. B., T. L. B. L., Q. H. carried out the experiments. B. L., L. B., X. Z. wrote the manuscript. X. Z., Y. Z. supervised the project. All authors discussed the results and implications and commented on the manuscript at all stages.


The authors declare no competing financial interests.


The authors gratefully acknowledge the English revision by Baojie Yan who worked at United Solar in USA. The authors also gratefully acknowledge support from the International Cooperation Projects of the Ministry of Science and Technology (2014DFE60170), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 61474065, 61674084), the Tianjin Research Key Program of Application Foundation and Advanced Technology (15JCZDJC31300), the Key Project in the Science & Technology Pillar Program of Jiangsu Province (BE2014147-3), and Specialized Research Fund for the PhD Program of Higher Education (20120031110039).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ee00332c
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017