 DOI: 10.1039/C6TC04743B
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 1106-1112


Jong Hwa
Lee
,

Kang Min
Kim
,

Woongsik
Jang
,

Sunyong
Ahn
,

Young Yun
Kim
,

O. Ok
Park
* and 

Dong Hwan
Wang
*

Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering (BK21+ graduate Program), Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, 291 Daehak-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 305-701, Republic of Korea. E-mail: oopark@kaist.ac.kr

School of Integrative Engineering, Chung-Ang University, 84 Heukseok-ro, Dongjak-gu, Seoul 156-756, Republic of Korea. E-mail: king0401@cau.ac.kr

Received
2nd November 2016
, Accepted 8th January 2017
First published on 9th January 2017
Stamping transfer process for fabricating organic electronics has recently been demonstrated to improve device performance because it allows the control of morphology, patterning, and transfer of various materials. However, it still has issues related to reproducibility because complex solvent conditions, that is, several active layers consisting of solvent additives or mixtures used for improving morphology, unfavorably affect the film transfer. To transfer uniform thin films, poly({4,8-bis[(2-ethylhexyl)oxy]benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl}{3-fluoro-2-[(2-ethylhexyl)carbonyl]thieno[3,4-b]thiophenediyl}):[6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PTB7:PC71BM)-based organic photovoltaic cells were fabricated in this study by utilizing the optimized surface energy of the hydrophilic 2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate–polyurethane acrylate stamp. Upon application of vacuum treatment based on dry transfer, a bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) layer with the solvent additive, 1,8-diiodooctane, was completely transferred onto a poly-(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) layer without any change in its domain distribution and composition. Consequently, BHJ devices fabricated by stamping transfer showed power conversion efficiency comparable to those of devices fabricated by spin-coating. We also observed significant improvement in long-term stability of the PTB7:PC71BM-based photovoltaic cells fabricated by stamping transfer under dry conditions.

Innovative photovoltaic technologies aimed at reducing the consumption of conventional fossil fuels and at compensating for the gradual increase in global energy demands have attracted immense interest. Organic photovoltaic cells have inherent advantages such as cost-effectiveness of the solution process, excellent mechanical flexibility, and large-area fabrication. Previous studies have reported significant advancements in organic photovoltaic devices with a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of greater than 10%, which can be commercialized. Numerous recent studies have reported the importance of the stamping transfer process in solving issues related to solvent intermixing in existing solution processes such as spin-coating. The stamping transfer process improves device performance, as well as imparts stability by allowing the control of morphology, patterning, and transfer of various active materials. It has been considered as an alternative process to industrial applications because of its low-cost, simple, flexible, and repeatable process, which is suitable for large-area fabrication.

Previously, our group utilized stamping transfer using a polyurethane acrylate (PUA) stamp with a tunable surface energy. PUA has inherent chemical stability against swelling in organic solvents and does not require additional chemical treatment. Carlson et al. reported that the energy release rate (G) between individual materials is the main factor that determines the feasibility of stamping transfer. This finding signifies that the adhesion force between the polymer stamp and transfer material is directly related to material transfer. Choi et al. synthesized surface-energy-tunable PUA by changing the releasing agent or prepolymer from hydrophobic to hydrophilic with respect to the PUA stamp.
A previous work has revealed that the active layer in organic photovoltaic cells fabricated by stamping transfer consists of a crystalline polymer of poly(3-hexylthiophene) and 6,6-phenyl-C61 butyric acid methyl ester. Such cells, however, exhibit low PCE (approximately 4%).
In the present study, we used poly({4,8-bis[(2-ethylhexyl)oxy]benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl}{3-fluoro-2-[(2-ethylhexyl)carbonyl]thieno[3,4-b]thiophenediyl}):[6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PTB7:PC71BM), to improve the PCE (greater than 7%). Upon subjecting to typical reported stamping transfer process in air, the bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) layer composed of PTB7:PC71BM was not completely transferred onto the poly-(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) layer due to the co-solvent, 1,8-diiodooctane (DIO). In general, for organic solar cells based on a polymer donor and a fullerene acceptor including PTB7:PC70BM, high PCEs have been achieved by using high boiling point solvent additive such as DIO. However, due to the high boiling point of DIO, the entire active layer solution decreased in volatility and the excess solvent disrupted the uniform transfer of the active layer; hence, vacuum treatment was applied to obtain the wetting condition of the BHJ layer for stamping transfer. In the present study, we fabricated PTB7:PC71BM-based organic photovoltaic cells by stamping transfer, utilizing the optimized surface energy of the PUA stamp. By applying the vacuum conditions, we were able to completely transfer the BHJ layer onto the PEDOT:PSS layer. As a result, the dry transferred PTB7:PC71BM-based photovoltaic cells exhibited comparable PCE and substantially enhanced long-term stability as compared with those of cells prepared by spin coating.

PUA films were synthesized using aliphatic urethane diacrylate oligomer (Ebecryl® 9270, SK Cytec), 2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate (HEMA, Aldrich) and 1-hydroxycyclohexyl phenyl ketone (HCPK, Aldrich). PTB7 (1-material Inc. OS0007), PC71BM (EM Index), 1,8-diiodooctane (Sigma-Aldrich), Titanium(IV) isopropoxide (TTIP, Sigma-Aldrich) and PEDOT:PSS (P VP AI 4083, Clevious) were employed to fabricate organic photovoltaic devices. In the present work, HEMA–PUA films were fabricated by adapting the previously reported methods with some modifications. A solution comprising of 19 g of urethane diacrylate oligomer, 19 g of HEMA, and 2 g of HCPK was stirred vigorously at room temperature. Subsequently, the mixture was poured on a silicon wafer and spread by covering with a polycarbonate (PC) film. Then, the sandwiched UV-curable resin was rubbed with a roller and cured by exposure to ultraviolet (UV) light for 3 min. The PUA/PC film was detached from the silicon wafer.


The indium tin oxide (ITO) patterned glass substrate was cleaned in acetone and isopropyl alcohol (IPA) under sonication for 10 min, respectively. Subsequently, the substrates were exposed to oxygen plasma treatment for 5 min. Then, the PEDOT:PSS (AI 4083) solution diluted in IPA (1:1 volume ratio) was spin coated on the substrate at 4000 rpm for 30 s and annealed on a hot plate at 150 °C for 20 min. The BHJ solution (25 mg ml−1) was prepared by mixing PTB7 and PC71BM (1:1.5 weight ratio) in chlorobenzene (CB) with 3 vol% DIO as co-solvent at 60 °C overnight. The BHJ solution was spin coated on the HEMA-PUA stamp. Before transferring, the BHJ layer on the PUA/PC stamp was treated by a vacuum pump in a desiccator for 5 min. Subsequently, the BHJ layer was stamped onto the PEDOT:PSS/ITO substrate and manually rubbed with cotton swabs to render the BHJ layer suitable for adhesion to the continuously heated substrate on a hotplate at 90 °C. After detaching the PUA/PC stamp, the BHJ layer was completely transferred onto the PEDOT:PSS/ITO substrate. In the case of reference, the BHJ solution was spin coated on the PEDOT:PSS/ITO substrate at 1000 rpm for 60 s in a glove box. Afterwards, the TiOx interlayer (10 mM of TTIP precursor diluted in isopropyl alcohol) was introduced on the active layer by spin coating at 5000 rpm for 40 s. Finally, the Al cathode was deposited by thermal evaporation. The active area was fixed as 0.09 cm2. Fig. 1(c) shows the sequential schematic diagram to fabricate the PTB7/PC71BM based photovoltaic cell following stamping transfer.

The current density–voltage (J–V) curves were measured by a solar simulator (Peccell, PEC-L01) with the Keithley 2400 under the illumination of 1 Sun (100 mW cm−2 Air Mass 1.5G). The light intensity was calibrated with a Si reference cell (PECSI01, Bunkou Keiki Co., Ltd). The external quantum efficiency (EQE) was measured using a power source (150 W Xe lamp) with PEC-S20 (Peccell Technologies, Inc.). For measurement of impedance of the devices, an impedance analyzer (WonAtech, Zive SP1) was used. UV-Vis spectrophotometry (Cary 100, Vetiran) was used to obtain absorption spectra. Impedance measurement was done through electrochemical impedance spectroscopic (EIS) measurement using an impedance analyzer (WonATech, Zive SP1) under 1 Sun condition. To investigate long-term stability, the PCE of all PTB7-based photovoltaic cells was measured in every two days for a month. All the cells were kept in air at room temperature without any encapsulation. Passage of light was blocked during the storage step. The surface morphology was measured by atomic force microscopy (AFM) (Veeco, U.S.A.; non-contact tapping mode, D3100). To confirm the composition of PTB7/PC71BM bulk hetero junction layer, multi purpose X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, Thermo VG Scientific) was implemented. The crystallinity of active layer was obtained using thin-film X-ray diffractometer (XRD, RIGAKU).


Fig. 1 shows a schematic of the device architecture along with a band-gap energy diagram and the entire fabrication of the PTB7:PC71BM-based photovoltaic cell. The photovoltaic cells fabricated herein exhibit an ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PTB7:PC71BM/TiOx/Al structure (Fig. 1(a)); their respective energy levels are shown in Fig. 1(b). The electrons and holes generated from the exciton in the PTB7:PC71BM BHJ layer are transported into TiOx and PEDOT:PSS, which serve as the electron- and hole-transporting layers, respectively. Fig. 1(c) depicts the entire fabrication process for the PTB7:PC71BM-based photovoltaic cell via stamping transfer. In the present study, we synthesized a hydrophilic PUA stamp, using a HEMA additive to transfer the hydrophobic active layer. The energy release rate (G) value, which determines whether the layer is transferable, is related to the difference in surface energy between the active layer and PUA stamp. When we transferred the active layer onto the PEDOT:PSS layer, the hydrophilic surface of the HEMA–PUA stamp not only decreased the attraction between the HEMA–PUA stamp and active layer, but it also aided the complete transfer of the active layer to the target substrate. Before the transfer of the active layer film from the PUA stamp to the PEDOT:PSS layer, vacuum treatment was conducted to create suitable wetting conditions for stamping transfer. Subsequently at 90 °C, the BHJ layer was stamped onto the PEDOT:PSS/ITO substrate and manually swabbed with a cotton tip to increase adhesion. As the PUA/PC stamp was detached, the BHJ layer was completely transferred onto the PEDOT:PSS/ITO substrate. To optimize the transfer condition, we investigated the feasibility of transfer for variation of vacuum time and hot-plate-heating temperatures (Fig. S1, ESI).

To determine the effect of vacuum treatment on the stamping transfer of the PTB7:PC71BM BHJ layer, the active-layer films on the PUA stamp were transferred onto PEDOT:PSS surfaces with and without vacuum treatment. Fig. 2 presents a schematic of the effect of vacuum treatment and an optical image of the transferred active layer on the PEDOT:PSS surfaces. The active layer was completely transferred under vacuum treatment, while the active layer was not uniformly transferred onto the PEDOT:PSS/ITO substrate without vacuum treatment, probably because use of DIO as a cosolvent improved the morphology and efficiency of the BHJ. DIO, which has a boiling point higher than CB, led to a decrease in the volatility of the entire active-layer solution, resulting in excess solvent on the PUA stamp. Consequently, this excess solvent which disrupted the uniform transfer of the active layer, which occurs by sudden evaporation upon heat application during stamping transfer and interrupted adhesion between active layer and PEDOT:PSS. With vacuum treatment, the active layer was cleanly and reproducibly transferred onto the PEDOT:PSS/ITO substrate, because the amount of the entire solvent decreased until conditions were suitable for stamping transfer under vacuum treatment. Although, mild annealing can be considered as alternating process to vacuum, thermal stress is generally known to cause a rapid degradation of the devices using PTB7:PC70BM BHJs. While the thermal stability of PTB7:PC70BM blends is not yet studied in details, PTB7-based solar cells show significant losses in their performances even at moderate annealing temperature below 100 °C.
The morphologies of the spin-coated and transferred active layers may be compared in Fig. 3. Using AFM analysis, we investigated the surface morphology of the active layer fabricated by the two processes (Fig. 3(a) and (b) and Fig. S2, ESI). Upon vacuum treatment, the morphology of the transferred active layer exhibited a surface smoother than that of the active layer prepared by spin coating because of the reduction of the RMS value from 1.700 nm to 1.018 nm. In addition, the donor–acceptor interpenetrating structure exhibited nanoscale domain separation. These AFM results indicate that the surface morphology of the active layer, which consists of nanoscale dispersed PTB7 and PC71BM domains affected by the additive solvent, DIO (Fig. 3(c) and (d)), remained after vacuum-treatment-based dry transfer.
XRD patterns for layers obtained with stamping transfer and spin coating (Fig. 4(a)) show similar peak intensities, indicating retention of the crystallinity of the active layer during dry transfer. The high-resolution XPS survey scan of the PTB7/PC71BM active layer (Fig. 4(b)) reveals several distinct peaks for C 1s (284 eV), S 2p (164 eV), F 1s (690 eV), and O 1s (532 eV). XPS peaks with binding energies of 162 eV to 166 eV are due to sulfur atoms in the PTB7 polymer (Fig. 4(c)). Atomic percentages of sulfur from the active layer surface obtained with spin coating and stamping transfer at the surface were 2.25% and 2.37%, respectively. Hence, the overall atomic percentages of sulfur in the transferred and spin-coated active layers were similar (Fig. 4(d)). These results indicate that the HEMA–PUA surface property does not affect the change in domain distribution and composition of the PTB7:PC71BM BHJ layer during stamping transfer.

Fig. 5 shows the photovoltaic properties of the PTB7:PC71BM-based devices fabricated by spin coating (denoted as “spin-coated cell”) and by stamping transfer (denoted as “transferred cell”) with a TiOx interlayer. J–V curves for these devices (Fig. 5(a)) indicate that the spin-coated cell has an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.75 V, a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 14.53 mA cm−2, a fill factor (FF) of 66.37%, and overall power conversion efficiency (η) of 7.29%. The transferred cell exhibited a Voc of 0.76 V, a Jsc of 14.74 mA cm−2, an FF of 63.33%, and an η of 7.11%. Table 1 summarizes the average photovoltaic properties of the spin-coated and transferred cells, including standard errors. All of these parameters correspond to the average data for 10 cells for each case under illumination of 1 Sun (100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5G). The transferred cells exhibited PCE comparable to that of cells prepared by spin coating; the efficiency slightly decreased, however, because of the decrease in the average FF (66.37% → 63.33%), whereas the average Jsc values of the transferred cells (14.53–14.74 mA cm−2) were similar. EQE results and absorption spectra (Fig. 5(b) and Fig. S3, ESI) confirm that the incident photocurrent conversion efficiency of the transferred cell is similar to that of the spin-coated cell. The slight increase in Jsc may be attributed to enhanced electron injection or transfer efficiency due to the TiOx interlayer, which was used as an electron-transporting layer and a hole-blocking layer. The effect of the TiOx interlayer in the transferred system was much stronger than that of the spin-coated system because stamping transfer produced the smooth surface of the active layer which allows the TiOx interlayer to be coated with more uniform thickness. Logarithmic curves of the dark-current density (Fig. 5(c)) indicate that the shunt resistance for the transferred cells, which is related to FF, is lower than that of the spin-coated cell, while the series resistances are similar. The decreased shunt resistances of the transferred cell are related to the tendency of FF, which is decreased possibly because manual stamping decreased the uniformity of interfacial contacts between the PEDOT:PSS and active layer, compare to spin coating.
PTB7:PC71BM BHJ

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)

R
s (Ω cm)

R
sh (Ω cm)
Spin coating
0.75 ± 0.002
14.53 ± 0.10
66.37 ± 0.43
7.29 ± 0.05
6.71
893
Stamping transfer
0.76 ± 0.001
14.74 ± 0.14
63.27 ± 0.52
7.11 ± 0.03
8.16
756
Impedance spectra were obtained under AM 1.5G illumination during the application of Voc (Fig. 6(a)). The first arc at high frequency is related to the charge transfer or charge transport and series resistance, while the second arc at low frequency is associated with the recombination resistance and electron transport kinetics. Nyquist plots of the impedance response suggest that the transferred cell exhibits much lower recombination resistance, thus resulting in a rapid recombination reaction and a short electron lifetime. This observation may also be apparent from the lower FF of the transferred cell relative that of the spin-coated cell. To compare the long-term stabilities of the spin-coated and transferred cells, their photovoltaic properties as a function of storage time were measured. The normalized average photovoltaic properties of 10 cells for each type of cells, which were stored in air at room temperature without any encapsulation, were recorded (Fig. 6(b) and Fig. S4, ESI). The obtained data indicate that the long-term operation of the transferred cells markedly improved as compared with that of spin-coated cells, the efficiencies of which rapidly decreased with time.
Moreover, the introduced TiOx interlayer could protect the active layer against degradation in air and could provide excellent air stability, since it functions as an oxygen scavenger and a barrier between the active layer and Al cathode. Previously, our group has reported the formation of a uniform interlayer and coverage of the smooth surface of the active layer by stamping transfer. From the 3-dimensional AFM images and RMS values of each layer (Fig. S2, ESI), we hypothesized the entire sequence of inner structures of the PTB7:PC71BM-based photovoltaic device fabricated by spin coating and stamping transfer (Fig. 7(a)). The expected interface morphology of the inner layers is in good agreement with the cross-sectional scanning electron microscope images (Fig. 7(b) and (c)). The spin-coated active layer in Fig. 7(b) exhibited a surface morphology rougher than that of the transferred cell shown in Fig. 7(c). Even after introduction of the TiOx interlayer, the spin-coated cells degraded more rapidly than did the transferred cells because the thin TiOx interlayer in spin-coated cells with low coverage of the rough active layer could not prevent the intrusion of oxygen between the active layer and Al cathode. In contrast, the TiOx interlayer for the transferred cells, which has more uniform thickness, could protect the active layer from degradation. Because of the dry transfer, the stability of transferred cell was greater than that of the spin-coated cell.

We fabricated a PTB7:PC71BM-based organic photovoltaic cell by transferring a BHJ layer via stamping transfer. This photovoltaic cell exhibited enhanced long-term stability and similar cell performance as compared with those of the spin-coated cells. Notably, the active layer under optimized wetting conditions was completely transferred from the hydrophilic HEMA–PUA stamp onto the PEDOT:PSS layer upon vacuum treatment. Even after addition of the solvent additive (or cosolvent system) DIO, the active layer was completely transferred onto the substrate without changes in the domain distribution and composition. As a result, the PTB7:PC71BM-based photovoltaic cells fabricated by stamping transfer (7.11%) exhibited a PCE comparable to those of cells fabricated by spin coating (7.29%). The enhancement of stability afforded by stamping transfer is due to the uniform coat of TiOx interlayer on the smooth surface of the active layer, which can maximally prevent oxygen diffusion from the effective coverage area in the devices. Thus, the dry thin film transferred via vacuum-based stamping may be a good alternative to spin-coating process.


This research was supported by the Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF), funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT & Future Planning (2014R1A1A1002419). This research was also supported by the Climate Change Research Hub of KAIST (grant no. N11160015). The authors appreciate Sung Cik Mun for the assistance with synthesis of HEMA-PUA.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6tc04743b
‡ J. H. Lee, and K. M. Kim contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017