 DOI: 10.1039/C0CC04841K
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 3120-3122

Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical Terms


Kazuhiro
Manseki
*,

Wirat
Jarernboon
,

You
Youhai
,

Ke-Jian
Jiang
,

Kazuharu
Suzuki
,

Naruhiko
Masaki
,

Yukyeong
Kim
,

Jiangbin
Xia
 and 

Shozo
Yanagida
*

Center for Advanced Science and Innovation, Osaka University, Yamadaoka 2-1, Suita, Osaka, Japan. E-mail: kmanseki@gifu-u.ac.jp; s.yanagida@casi.osaka-u.ac.jp; Fax: +81 6-6879-4132; Tel: +81 6-6879-4132

Received
7th November 2010
, Accepted 6th January 2011
First published on 24th January 2011
A PEDOT-based dye-sensitized solar cell (DSC) is successfully improved by coupling photoelectrochemically deposited PEDOT layer with an Ag paste-paint on the cathode. With a 9.3 μm thick mesoscopic nanocrystalline TiO2 film, a maximum cell performance of 3.2% with relatively high Voc of around 780 mV is achieved.

Since the report in 1991 by Grätzel et al., dye-sensitized solar cells (DSC) have been recognized as a next generation photovoltaic that could bring cost-effectiveness into practical outdoor and indoor use applications. DSC devices built from mesoscopic nanocrystalline TiO2 electrodes have demonstrated remarkable efficiencies up to around 12% for miniature cells when iodine–iodide is used as the redox couple in the electrolyte solution. Although the fluid iodine–iodide redox systems can infiltrate inside the TiO2 mesoscopic pore and facilitate charge transport and diffusivity of charges, giving rise to such a respectable cell performance, iodine–iodide redox electrolytes have the following disadvantages to be addressed; (i) corrosion of metal grids because of its oxidizing nature especially in the presence of moisture, (ii) photocurrent loss due to visible light absorption (λ = 430 nm) of the electrolytes, (iii) significant loss in short circuit current density and slight loss in open circuit voltage, particularly in highly viscous electrolytes such as ionic liquids. There is currently an intensive research on ‘solid-state dye-sensitized solar cells’ introducing hole conducting materials (HTM), coupling with the recent progress of organic thin-film photovoltaics and organic light-emitting diodes (OLED). The example of HTM includes 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenyl-amine)-9,9′-spiro-bifluorene, (spiro-OMeTAD), poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT), poly(3-hexyl-thiophene) (P3HT) and other semiconductors as highlighted in some recent review papers.

We have recently studied a solid-state DSC containing a ruthenium complex dye with a 2-thiophen-2-yl-vinyl-conjugated bipyridyl ligand, HRS-1, which was designed to promote self-organization at dye interfaces with polythiophenes such as PEDOT and hydrophobic P3HT through ethylenedioxythiophene (EDOT) and hexylthiophene groups, contributing to an effective charge accessibility at the interfaces. In our previous work, a maximum power conversion efficiency of 2.6% has been obtained for the solid-state DSC, where interfaces of HRS-1/photoelectrodeposited PEDOT/sputtered Au are infiltrated with ionic liquids.
One of the important strategies for the performance improvement of solid-state DSC should be hetero-interface engineering of a nanostructured anode/dye/hole conductor/cathode. We herein report that efficient PEDOT-based DSC with a mesoscopic nanocrystalline TiO2 film can be fabricated by introduction of an Ag metal paste on top of the PEDOT layer. Surprisingly, a respectable light-to-electricity conversion efficiency of 3.2% is obtained. The cathode interface of the PEDOT-based DSC is compared by evaluation of I–V curves, incident photon-to-electricity conversion efficiency (IPCE), and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy.
The solid-state device structure of DSC is illustrated in Fig. 1, where the cell has hetero-interfaces of FTO/compact-TiO2/nanocrystalline TiO2/HRS-1/photoelectrochemically deposited PEDOT/Ag paste-painted cathode. We used three types of counter electrode materials, i.e., Ag paste, PEDOT electropolymerized on FTO, and carbon paste to compare the performance of each PEDOT-based DSC. Experimental procedure of photoelectropolymerization and simple electropolymerization of 2,2′-bis(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (bis-EDOT), fabrication method of DSC and their assessment are summarized in ESI.

I–V curves and cell parameters are shown in Fig. 2 and Table 1. The Ag paste cell shows the highest conversion efficiency of 3.2% with short circuit photocurrent (Jsc), open circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (FF) of 5.69 ± 0.37 mA cm−2, 0.781 ± 0.012 V, 0.72 ± 0.03, respectively. This is a striking result because our previous cell with the same Ru complex sensitizer was evaluated using the cell employing vacuum deposited Au cathode. On the other hand, the carbon paste DSC exhibited a poor performance with low Voc. This is mainly due to lower electrical conductivity (Ag paste: 1.88 ± 0.75 × 105 S m−2, carbon paste: 6.69 ± 1.10 × 102 S m−2). Another explanation is that intrinsic Ag metal affinity toward sulfur atoms is conceivable to make a high charge diffusivity in PEDOT, leading to a more suitable charge transfer process when compared to the case for carbon cathode. I–V curves also demonstrate that the reduced dark current, i.e., the lowest electron leakage current for Ag paste cell gave rise to the highest open circuit voltage. In order to gain direct insight into the charge transfer process at the new hetero-interface of the solid-state DSC device associating with the relatively high Voc of around 780 mV, we measured electrochemical impedance spectra for Ag and carbon paste cells under an illumination condition as shown in Fig. 3. Fitting of those Nyquist plots by applying the same equivalent circuit showed larger radius of semicircles for the Ag paste cell. The result reveals that electrical contact between PEDOT and Ag is reliable, and at the same time charge transfer in TiO2/dye/PEDOT occurs more efficiently for the Ag paste cell. In other words, the recombination process for the Ag paste cell is slower than that of carbon paste cell, which is consistent with the higher Voc. This can be explained as due to suppression of electron leakage at the interfaces of the device HRS-1 dye/PEDOT/Ag-paste, where the PEDOT-vacant space could be infiltrated by Ag metal paste. As shown in Fig. 3, the semicircles corresponding to PEDOT/Ag interface and TiO2/dye/PEDOT overlap each other for the Ag paste cell possibly because of the quick charge transport at the Ag counter electrode in the high-frequency region. In other words, the resistance at the Ag cathode decreased. This is consistent with the improved fill factor as can be seen from the larger slope at Voc in I–V curve data and the small internal resistance for the Ag paste DSC shown in the result of impedance spectroscopy in Fig. 3.
Cathode

J
sc/mA cm−2

V
oc/mV

FF


η (%)
Ag paste
5.69 ± 0.37
781 ± 0.012
0.72 ± 0.03
3.19 ± 0.02
Carbon paste
4.90 ± 0.38
456 ± 0.010
0.52 ± 0.02
1.17 ± 0.13
PEDOT/FTO
5.30 ± 0.66
460 ± 0.020
0.63 ± 0.02
1.54 ± 0.30

Fig. 3 also indicates that when internal resistances between the Ag paste and C paste DSC are compared, the former gives the decreased internal resistance. Ag paste may also favorably affect the sheet resistance of FTO.

I–V data are also consistent with IPCE spectra as depicted in Fig. 4. The highest value of Jsc for Ag metal paste showed a maximum peak at around λ = 390 nm and 530 nm corresponding to a ππ* transition and a MLCT band, respectively. As we explained above, charge transfer process in TiO2/dye/PEDOT dramatically changes depending on cathode materials used. The more effective charge transfer at the interface for Ag paste cell compared to the case for C paste is in agreement with the higher IPCE for Ag paste cell, although the impedance measurement for PEDOT/FTO cell was unsuccessful in this work.

Fig. 5 shows dependence of cell parameters on the porous TiO2 film thickness. Voc and FF were estimated to be 0.78 V and 0.72 V when TiO2 thickness is 9.3 ± 0.3 μm, whereas Voc and FF did not show any significant change by TiO2 film thickness. The important point is that Jsc and η increase with an increase of the TiO2 film thickness. The highest efficiency was achieved by TiO2 electrode with 9.3 μm thickness. Note that PEDOT-based-DSCs with Au sputtered cathode previously reported by our group and Liu et al. demonstrated rather poor conversion efficiency at thicker TiO2 electrodes such as ∼10 μm in contrast to the present results. This means that the Ag paint cathode must contribute to electron diffusivity and accessibility of the photoelectropolymerized PEDOT in the porous TiO2 electrodes. For our Ag paste cell, electron diffusivity of PEDOT does not appear to limit the charge collection even for the relatively thick devices. The Ag metal might be infiltrated into the PEDOT layer to an appreciable extent.
We also studied stability of the Ag-paste PEDOT-based DSC cells. Parameters are obtained by measurements of the sample keeping at a given period of time under dark as depicted in Fig. 6. Even though the cell is fabricated without sealing materials, parameters appear to stay constant at least 550 h at room temperature. The stability is probably attributed to the formation of effective dye/PEDOT/Ag interfaces as described above, resulting in an efficient charge transport between TiO2 electrode and silver cathode through the interface. In addition, as demonstrated by the report ionic liquids can improve device stability due to the effective invasion of water and oxygen molecules from air.
Iodine/iodide free dye-sensitized solar cells, consisting of FTO anode/compact-TiO2/nc-TiO2/Ru dye/PEDOT/Ag-painted cathode were developed by photo-electrochemical deposition of PEDOT layer combined with an Ag paste paint cathode. A respectable cell performance of 3.2% was obtained by the cell with a relatively thick TiO2 film (∼10 μm). Non-vacuum fabrication carried out in this work has significant potential to the cost-effectiveness of iodine-free DSC. Further optimization by applying the knowledge of the recent research trend of DSC such as morphology design of nanostructured TiO2 electrodes will pave a new way to develop more efficient solid-state DSC opening up new perspectives for near future industrialization.
This work was partially supported by the New Energy and Industrial Technology Development Organization (NEDO) under the Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry of Japan, and Grant-in-aid for Scientific and Research (20750150).
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c0cc04841k
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011