 DOI: 10.1039/C7NJ00954B
(Paper)
New J. Chem., 2017, 41, 5808-5817


Sutripto
Majumder
 and 

Babasaheb R.
Sankapal
*

Nanomaterials and Device Laboratory, Department of Physics, Visvesvaraya National Institute of Technology, South Ambazari Road, Nagpur, MS 440010, India. E-mail: brsankapal@gmail.com; brsankapal@phy.vnit.ac.in; Fax: +91 (712) 2223230; Tel: +91 (712) 2801170

Received
22nd March 2017
, Accepted 23rd May 2017
First published on 24th May 2017
Hierarchical one-dimensional CdS nanowires (NWs)/CdSe core–shell heterostructure have been synthesized through a simple wet chemical approach. The formation of CdS NWs/CdSe core–shell has been confirmed by structural, morphological and optical analysis. Fascinatingly, an optimum number of CdSe nanoparticles loaded over CdS NWs boosts the device efficiency five times than a bare CdS NW structure. The effect of increasing the CdSe SILAR cycles over CdS induces red shift in the absorption wavelength along with quenching, which leads to the negative shift of the conduction band, and hence, increases the electron lifetime, as analyzed by photoluminescence, external quantum efficiency and Mott–Schottky studies. Interestingly, a discrepancy has been found in the device performance with an increase in the SILAR cycles beyond the optimum condition. The reason behind this fact has been investigated through different comprehensive photoelectrochemical characterization and discussed herein.

The growth of complex nanostructured photovoltaic devices with persuasive efficiency using the low cost modus operandi is a promising alternative for widespread uses of solar energy. One-dimensional (1D) semiconductor nanostructures have been extensively studied due to their optoelectronic approaches. Fundamentally, a 1D nanostructure is advantageous for photovoltaic applications as they not only provide a direct pathway for charge transport in the radial direction but also exhibit higher optical absorption cross-sections than thin films due to high surface area and more light scattering and trapping abilities. Till date, many metal oxides have been explored such as TiO2, ZnO and SnO2 to be used as core materials. Rather, CdS nanowires (NWs) possess fewer grain boundaries, which direct less electron recombinations during the diffusion process, and hence, result in the fast transport of excited charge carriers. This is advantageous for solar cell applications. In spite of having a good electron transfer rate, CdS (intrinsic bandgap: 2.42 eV) can only absorb the wavelength <512 nm, which limits the further improvement of photovoltaic properties. Many approaches have been proposed and executed throughout the world to overcome the limitations of recombination processes in 1D nanostructures and to extend the photoresponse to the NIR region. A realistic approach to maximize the absorption of the incident photons in NW structures is to couple another light-absorbing component that has a relatively lower bandgap than that of CdS such as CdSe, PbS, PbSe, SnS, Sb2S3, Bi2S3 and Sb2Se3 in order to achieve a good spectral match from the visible to NIR regions. In order to get significant performance from solar cells, it will be feasible to switch towards the core–shell 1D nanostructure where the interfacial properties between the core and the shell (p–n junction) plays a vital role in the energy band alignment and carrier separation by relaxing the carrier diffusion length. Among all these, CdSe is the best direct bandgap sensitizing semiconductor with a high absorption coefficient near the band edge, which allows for constructing a typical shell structure over the core material as a sensitizer in solar cell applications. In this regard, Wang et al. fabricated CdSe through the chemical bath deposition (CBD) method over hydrothermally grown CdS. The CdS/CdSe structure acts as an efficient hydrogen production material than bare CdS nanostructure due to the fermi-level energy-band alignment. Pan et al. have reported the growth of CdS/CdSe over a TiO2 structure with bifunctional linker mercaptopropionic acid (MPA) molecules to form highly efficient inverted quantum-dot-sensitized solar cells.

The present investigation focuses on the synthesis of interconnected CdS as a core NW through a simple CBD method and the consecutive anchoring of CdSe nanoparticles as a shell over CdS through the successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR) method. To the best of our knowledge, limited literature is available about the linker-free, low-cost and efficient growth of CdS/CdSe as a 1D core–shell NW structure for solar cell applications. The core–shell structure has been confirmed by structural, morphological and optical studies. Electrochemical studies have been performed in the polysulfide electrolyte to obtain power conversion efficiency that has been correlated to quantum efficiency and capacitance measurements.

All the chemicals were of the analytical grade and used as received. Fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) coated glass was used as the substrate (Sigma-Aldrich; thickness: 2 mm; sheet resistance: 15 Ω □−1). The electrode with the structure FTO/CdS flat/CdS NWs/CdSe shell has been obtained by step-by-step growth via CBD and ion exchange followed by SILAR.


A CdS flat layer was grown on the FTO-coated glass substrate as per our previous report. In brief, well-cleaned FTO was immersed into an aqueous bath containing equimolar (1 mM) solutions of cadmium chloride (CdCl2, Merck) monohydrate and thiourea (CH4N2S, Merck). For slow and uniform growth, aqueous ammonia was used to complex CdCl2 in the bath with the resultant pH (∼11). After 30 min of deposition, a pale-yellow-colored uniform thin film of CdS flat appeared over the FTO substrate.


In order to coat CdS NWs over CdS flat, Cd(OH)2 NWs thin film was grown at room temperature (27 °C) by CBD method as per literature. Briefly, an aqueous bath containing CdCl2 was complexed with aqueous ammonia at room temperature (27 °C) with the resultant pH (∼11) in which the substrate with CdS flat was placed. After 9 h, a white-colored film of Cd(OH)2 was evident over the CdS flat layer. These Cd(OH)2 NWs coated substrate was dipped in aqueous 0.02 M sodium sulfide flakes (Na2S) solution for 50 min where the hydroxyl ion of Cd(OH)2 gets replaced by sulfide ion due to the negative free energy of formation. Finally, the resulting film was rinsed in double distilled water (DDW) and air-annealed at 250 °C for 1 h, thereby yielding final film for further use.


CdSe nanoparticles as a shell have been anchored over CdS NWs by using SILAR. For this, aqueous cadmium acetate (Cd(CH3COO)2) was used as the cationic source. For the anionic source, the formation of sodium hydrogen selenide (NaHSe) aqueous solution was prepared by reducing 0.37 g of selenium with 0.27 g of sodium borohydride (NaBH4) in 50 ml of DDW. The growth kinetics of the CdSe film formation through the SILAR method was based on the ion-by-ion deposition on the porous CdS NW structure, which can be depicted as follows:

(i) Dissociation of Cd(CH3COO)2 as
Cd(CH3COO)2 → Cd2+ + 2CH3COO−
(ii) Release of Se2− ions as
Se + 2BH4− → Se2− + H2 + BH3
(iii) Formation of CdSe as a shell
Cd2+ + Se2− → CdSe
The SILAR method involves the immersion of CdS NW film in 0.1 M Cd(CH3COO)2 solution for 20 s, rinsing in DDW for 10 s and immersion in NaHSe solution for 30 s, and finally, rinsing in DDW for 10 s. This process of immersion and rinsing can be considered as one SILAR cycle. Such cycles were repeated for 4, 8, 12 and 16 times in order to optimize and acquire good coverage of CdSe over the CdS NWs. The feasibility of the formation of CdSe over CdS was visible through the change in color from yellow to reddish brown and then to complete brown, which happens due to an increase in the number of SILAR cycles. Finally, the as-prepared samples were rinsed in DDW followed by annealing at 200 °C to improve the crystallinity and electronic properties.

X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis was performed by using Bruker D8 Advance diffractometer with CuKα radiations (λ = 1.5406 Å) in the 2θ range from 20 to 80°. The surface morphology was recorded by using field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) (SUPRA-40, Zeiss Merlin, Germany) operated at 20 kV. A high-resolution transmission electron microscope (HR-TEM) (JEM-2100, JEOL, Japan) operated at 200 kV was used to comprehensively investigate the core–shell structure. The energy dispersive X-ray spectrometer (EDS) was used to identify the chemical species. Surface profiler (Dektak 150) has been used to measure the thickness. The Raman spectra were obtained on Raman spectrometers (Renishaw MR-2000) excited by a laser (λ ∼ 532 nm). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was performed using the Multilab 2000 photoelectron spectrometer (Thermo VG Scientific) with monochromatic AlKα radiation of 600 W at 1486.6 eV and the electron take-off angle was 90°. The UV-visible absorbance spectra of the samples were recorded using a UV-visible spectrophotometer (UV3600, Shimadzu, Japan). Photoluminescence (PL) was measured by using a Nanometrics RPM 2000 (Nanometrics) equipped with a 405 nm diode laser and 420 nm long-pass filter. Surface area was measured by the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) method using Micrometrics ASAP-2010. The current–voltage characteristics were measured by Keithley 2611B coupled with a Sciencetech solar simulator (model: SS150W-AAA) with an exposed area of 0.2 cm2 regulated by a mask that was operated under dark and illumination under standard conditions of 100 mW cm−2 and AM 1.5G. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) was measured by using a Bentham-TM 300 unit in the wavelength range of 300–800 nm. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and capacitance studies were conducted by the PARSTAT 4000 (Princeton Applied Research, USA) in the frequency range from 10−2 to 104 Hz with a 10 mV AC signal.



Fig. 1 shows the XRD patterns of FTO-coated glass substrate as the reference, CdS NW layered on FTO and CdS NWs as the core encapsulated with CdSe at different SILAR cycles (4, 8, 12 and 16) followed by annealing at 200 °C. The FTO peaks are highlighted by ‘*’. The peaks (100), (002), (101), (102), (110), (103), (200) and (202) were indexed to the CdS NW core for the hexagonal phase, whereas (111) for the cubic phase appears to be merged with (002). The cubic and hexagonal phases of CdS were confirmed by the JCPDS card no. 80-0019 and 41-1049, respectively.

With increasing SILAR cycles, the formation of the CdSe shell structure was found to be prominent. The peaks of CdSe were highlighted by ‘#’. The existence of the hexagonal CdSe phase was confirmed due to the emergence of (100), (002), (102) and (110) planes (JCPDS card no. 08-0459). The average crystallite size was calculated from the XRD patterns by the well-known Debye–Scherer's formula as 16 nm for core CdS NWs and 23, 34, 46 and 108 nm with the CdSe shell for 4, 8, 12 and 16 SILAR cycles, respectively. Interestingly, the abrupt increase in the crystallite size for 16 cycles, of CdSe might be due to the agglomeration of the nanoparticles to form large nanochunks, which leads to the overgrowth of CdSe above the CdS NWs.
HR-TEM image of 12 SILAR cycles deposited CdSe over CdS NWs formed a uniform core–shell structure, as shown in Fig. 2(a) with a scale bar of 50 nm. From Fig. 2(b), the SAED pattern of CdS NWs/CdSe core–shell structure shows the presence of both CdS and CdSe phases with the inner ring representing the (002)H/(111)C planes of CdS core, whereas the outer ring exhibits the presence of (110) plane of the CdSe shell structure. Fig. 2(c) shows a clear HRTEM image of the interface of the CdS NWs/CdSe where the evidence of the (110) plane of CdSe at the edge of the CdS NW structure with (002)H/(111)C plane of CdS in the body of CdS NW as a core has been observed. Fig. 2(d) shows the higher magnified image that clearly reveals the crystallographic structure with interplanar spacings of 0.35, 0.33, 0.31 and 0.20 nm corresponding to (100)H, (002)H/(111)C, (101)H and (110)H lattice planes, respectively, exhibiting the hexagonal and cubic structure of CdS NWs. The ‘d’ spacing of 0.25 and 0.21 nm indicates the (102) and (110) planes of hexagonal CdSe, confirming the anchoring of CdSe as a shell over the CdS NW structure as the core. The justifications of the elements were qualitatively identified by their characteristic wavelengths in the elemental analysis, as shown in Fig. 2(e). Apart from the presence of C, O and Cu which appeared due to surface contamination and the usage of a copper grid, there is presence of Cd, S and Se confirming the incorporation of CdS and CdSe materials.

For flat CdS, good coverage with nano-cauliflower like structures appeared due to the aggregation of nanoparticles to form secondary nucleation centers via the ion-by-ion mechanism, as shown in Fig. S1 (ESI). These act as the nucleation centers for the growth of highly porous CdS NW structures. Fig. 3 shows the FE-SEM images of bare CdS NWs and CdS NWs/CdSe core–shell thin film for different SILAR cycles. The inset in Fig. 3(a) shows the uniform distribution of CdS NW film. Fig. 3(b), (c), (d) and (e) show the anchoring of CdSe nanoparticles over the outer surface of CdS NWs, yielding a core–shell structure for the 4, 8, 12 and 16 SILAR cycles of CdSe, respectively. On increasing the SILAR cycles to 12, a uniform coverage of CdSe over the CdS NW has been achieved without sabotaging the NW structure. However, at 16 cycles, the overgrowth of CdSe nanoparticles can be prominently seen on the CdS NWs due to the formation of nucleation centers from the pre-adsorbed CdSe layer, which results in the increase in the thickness of the films, and finally, may fill the pores in between the CdS NWs. The surface area estimation has been performed through BET for which the films were gently scratched from FTO to get a powder. Prior to analysis, all the powdery samples were degassed at 100 °C at 10−5 Torr overnight. The entity surface area was measured by the quantity of the absorbed and deabsorbed gas from the surface of the scratched sample with respect to the change in the thermal conductivity of the mixture of nitrogen and helium gas. The obtained actual surface areas of the as-deposited and annealed samples are listed in Table 1. The effect of CdSe loading through the nanonetwork CdS can be seen prominently through the decrease in the values of the surface area with respect to an increase in the number of SILAR cycles, which agrees well with the observations made from the surface morphologies.

Sl. no.
Labels
Structural and optical parameters
PV parameters
Surface area (m2 g−1)

D
avg (nm)

E
g (eV)

V
oc (mV)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)

η (%)

R
s (Ω)

R
sh (kΩ)
1
CdS
16
2.42
230
1.28
30.88
0.091
97
0.92
85.11
2
CdS/CdSe 4 cy
23
2.02
274
2.24
31.08
0.190
68
1.33
76.09
3
CdS/CdSe 8 cy
34
1.86
303
3.34
31.50
0.318
44
2.22
67.84
4
CdS/CdSe 12 cy
46
1.74
327
4.34
32.01
0.454
37
2.67
58.33
5
CdS/CdSe 16 cy
108
1.65
256
2.51
31.20
0.201
63
1.49
51.28


Fig. 4(a) shows the Raman spectra of the CdS NWs/CdSe core–shell structure for different SILAR cycles of CdSe. Inset shows the spectra of bare CdS NW structure as the reference where peaks at 302, 600 and 905 cm−1 are attributed to the first, second and third-order longitudinal optical (LO) phonon modes of CdS, respectively. The shift of the 1LO peak (3 cm−1) shows the phonon confinement for CdS NWs as compared with that of the bulk counterpart. The Raman spectra of the CdS NWs/CdSe shows the emergence of 1LO and 2LO at 201 and 415 cm−1, respectively, which acts as the fundamental vibration mode of CdSe over CdS NWs. The peak corresponding to 1LO was found to be fairly dominant for both bare CdS NWs and CdS NWs/CdSe structures. Furthermore, the peak intensity of 1LO for CdSe was found to be more pronounced with respect to an increase in the CdSe SILAR cycles along with the red shift in the 1LO as compared to the bulk around 210 cm−1, which also confirms the phonon confinement of the CdSe nanoparticles sheath. Therefore, SILAR cycles followed by annealing decreases the intensity of the 2LO and 3LO peaks of CdS NWs; this disappeared at 16 cycles.


XPS is used for investigating the information about the chemical states of the nanostructured thin film.Fig. 4(b) shows the XPS spectra of CdS NWs/CdSe 12 cycles core–shell sample post annealed at 200 °C, where the spectra depicts the inclusion of Cd, S and Se along with C1s and O1s. The slow scan XPS spectra for the CdS NWs/CdSe core–shell is shown in Fig. 4(c), where the 3d peaks of Cd appeared at the binding energy (B.E.) values of 405.19 and 411.93 eV attributable to the chemical state of Cd2+ with spin orbit separation of 6.74 eV. This indicates the typical divalent source of Cd from CdS, confirming the non-formation of CdO. Furthermore, Fig. 4(d) shows the Se2− species with the featured B.E. values of 54.28 and 55.37 eV for 3d5/2 and 3d3/2, respectively, which is akin to that observed in CdSe, as reported by Meng et al. No existence of the peak at 59 eV has been observed, confirming the non-formation of SeO2, whereas Fig. 4(e) shows the high-resolution spectrum for S at the B.E. values of 160.60 and 161.60 eV corresponding to 2p3/2 and 2p1/2, respectively. Thus, from the XPS analysis, it can be concluded that the CdS NWs/CdSe comprise Cd, S and Se with no formation of oxides. Moreover, the presence of O1s and C1s shows surface contamination, which usually appears in chemically deposited thin films due to open atmosphere deposition.


The optical absorption spectra of CdS NWs/CdSe with different CdSe SILAR cycles were investigated, as shown in Fig. 5(a). On increasing the number of CdSe SILAR cycles, the absorbance intensity increases gradually along with the red shift at the absorption edge. The inset shows the photograph of the samples where the change in the color can be visualized as the function of SILAR cycles. The energy bandgaps of the CdS NWs/CdSe core–shell system with different SILAR cycles have been estimated through the Tauc's relation. Since CdS and CdSe have direct bandgaps, the plot of (αhν)2versus hν has been plotted. The extrapolation of the straight line from (αhν)2 = 0 gives the value of the bandgap, as shown in Fig. S2 (ESI). The optical bandgaps were estimated as 2.42, 2.02, 1.86, 1.74 and 1.65 eV for bare CdS NWs and CdS NWs/CdSe at 4, 8, 12 and 16 SILAR cycles of CdSe, respectively.


PL studies can be used to identify the quenching process between the core and shell structure due to the charge transfer process that can be correlated to the amount of shell over the core. The PL studies have been performed under the excitation wavelength of 405 nm. The PL spectrum of bare CdS NWs is shown in the inset of Fig. 5(b), which displays a dominant peak at ∼512 nm (∼2.42 eV) showing band-edge emission, whereas the broadband emission was centered at 700 nm due to the defect emission.Fig. 5(b) shows the PL spectrum of the CdS NWs/CdSe core–shell structure where the peak of around 510 nm yields band-edge emission along with appearance of the strong emission of the CdSe shell around 650 nm due to the saturation of high-density excitons from the CdS core. It is fairly evident that the PL intensity decreases from 4 cycles to 16 cycles; the quenching process is manifested due to an increase in the charge transfer process. The appearance of red shift can be justified because of the shifting of the PL peaks towards the higher wavelength region (from 675 to 700 nm), which demonstrates the enhancement in the particle size of the sheath materials with respect to an increase in the number of immersions, which is in good agreement with structural and optical studies.



Fig. 6(a) shows the schematic of CdS NWs/CdSe that have been used as a photoanode with the device structure of FTO/CdS flat/CdS NWs/CdSe/polysulfide/platinum. The current density–voltage (J–V) measurements were carried out with an active area of 0.2 cm2. A sandwich-type cell was prepared by using a film as a photoanode and a platinum-coated conducting glass electrode as the counter electrode, NWs/CdSe. The polysulfide electrolyte was composed of 1 M of NaOH, Na2S and S powder with a mixture of H2O–MeOH (3:7, v/v) injected via capillary action. Fig. 6(b) displays the J–V characteristics of bare CdS NWs as the reference and CdS NWs/CdSe photoelectrodes. A high dark current was shown for the CdS NWs/CdSe 12 cycles due to the decrease in the excess charge recombination centers, which results in low charge transfer resistance; a similar trend was shown by Hui et al. A complete variation of the photovoltaic parameters such as short-circuit current density (Jsc), open-circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (FF), series resistance (Rs) and shunt resistance (Rsh) are listed in Table 1. On illumination, the J–V characteristics curve of bare CdS NWs shifted towards the fourth quadrant overlaying small values of both Jsc and Voc resulting in lower values of efficiency [Fig. 6(b) and Table 1]. However, both Jsc and Voc were found to increase quickly with increasing SILAR cycles of CdSe from 4 to 12 and reach the maximum value of 4.34 mA cm−2 and 327 mV, respectively, at 12 cycles, yielding the highest efficiency (η) of 0.45%. With increasing CdSe SILAR cycles, a larger amount of CdSe nanoparticles get attached, which increases the crystallite size over the CdS NW framework and generates more photo-excited electrons, thereby increasing Jsc along with decreasing Rs and increasing Rsh. Overall, this increases the FF through the reduction of charge carrier recombination, which, in turn increases the efficiency. Further, on increasing the CdSe cycles to 16, Jsc decreases. Therefore, the correlation between Jsc, crystallite size and optical red shift breaks due to the over-coverage of CdSe nanoparticles on CdS NWs. The reason may be well understood due to the following facts. (i) As CdS is in the form of interconnected NWs, the growth of CdSe results in big nanochunks in between the CdS NW structures, hindering the complete penetration of liquid electrolyte through the voids of CdSe covered CdS NWs as a result of which the photogenerated holes cannot effectively transfer by being captured through S2− ions in the solution (as shown in the figure). This directly decreases Voc and Rsh and increases Rs; therefore, FF decreases, and hence, deteriorates the device performance. (ii) Due to the overgrowth of CdSe on the CdS NWs, the thickness of CdSe increases, which acts as an obstacle to pass light at the interface into the depth of the electrode. This decreases the excessive electron density, resulting in lower Voc and increased Rs. Along with Voc, Jsc also decreases, which is due to the greater electrode thickness than light penetration depth. Hence, it can be seen that this increases more recombination centers where electron loss takes place.


The effect of CdSe SILAR cycles over CdS NW photoanode in PEC solar cells was assessed by EQE measurements. Fig. 6(c) shows the clear variation of the EQE with respect to SILAR cycles. Due to the increase in the absorption of CdSe with increasing number of cycles, the photocurrent density increases till 12 cycles. Beyond this, EQE decreases to 13%. As the SILAR cycles increase, the thickness of the photoanode increases, which augments the recombination centers within the cell. This sabotages the charge transfer process, which influences Jsc, and hence, affects the EQE of the cell; this is in good agreement with the J–V results. The current densities have been estimated by integrating the overlap of the EQE spectrum with AM 1.5G, yielding values of 8.33 mA cm−2 for bare CdS NWs and 9.25, 11.65, 12.76 and 10.67 mA cm−2 for 4, 8, 12 and 16 CdSe cycles over CdS NWs, respectively. The difference in Jsc obtained from EQE than the J–V analysis can be attributed to the nonlinear response of the device.


Mott–Schottky analysis is commonly used to determine both charge carrier densities and the flat-band potential at the semiconductor–liquid contact as crucial parameters.Fig. 6(d) shows the Mott–Schottky plot obtained in the dark condition in which the depletion layer capacitance is expressed by the following relation:

(1)
where
ε0 is the vacuum permittivity (8.85 × 10−12 C2 N m−2), q is the elemental charge (1.602 × 10−19 C), Nd is the donor density, kBT/q is a temperature-dependent term and Vfb is the flat-band potential that determines the difference between the redox potential in the electrolyte and the quasi-Fermi level.Vfb can be determined by extrapolating the linear portion of the plot of 1/C2 to the voltage as the Y-axis. The obtained values of Vfb were −1, −1.05, −1.2 and −1.10 V for 4, 8, 12 and 16 CdSe cycles, respectively, whereas Vfb of CdS NWs is found to be −0.51 V, as shown in Fig. S3 (ESI). The displacement of the flat-band position reflects the influence of the CdSe nanoparticles as the shell materials over CdS NWs. From Fig. 6(d) and Table 2, it is noteworthy that Vfb were negatively shifted as the CdSe amount increases up to 12 cycles, which supports the enhancement in Voc, whereas for 16 cycles, the trend of Vfb becomes opposite, which again leads to decreasing Voc.

Sl. no.
Label

V
fb (V)

R
1 (Ω)

Q
2 (μF)

R
2 (Ω)

τ
e (ms)

K
eff (s−1)
1
CdS NWs
−0.51
43.45
321
469.3
15.9
62.89
2
CdS NWs /CdSe 4 cy
−1.00
37.91
605
421.5
25.2
39.68
3
CdS NWs /CdSe 8 cy
−1.05
36.5
1466
181.2
50.3
19.84
4
CdS NWs /CdSe 12 cy
−1.20
28.55
4848
101.9
79.6
12.56
5
CdS NWs /CdSe 16 cy
−1.10
39.11
833
301.8
31.7
31.46

In order to evaluate the resistance distributions and charge recombination processes, EIS measurements were conducted within the frequency range of 10−2 to 104 Hz. Fig. 7(a) shows the Nyquist plots of the EIS spectra in the dark under the reverse bias voltage of 0.33 V for bare CdS NWs and CdS NWs/CdSe photoanodes at different CdSe SILAR cycles. The CdS NWs/CdSe core–shell structure acts as a leakage capacitor. The smaller and larger semicircles in the Nyquist plots are attributed to the charge transfer at the counter electrode/electrolyte interface and the CdS NWs/CdSe/electrolyte interface, respectively. Fundamentally, ‘R’ is the intercept on the non-real axis at the highest frequency of the Nyquist plot, the semicircle at the high-frequency range can be ascribed to the charge transfer resistance at the electrolyte/platinum electrode interface ‘R1’, whereas the semicircle in the intermediate-frequency range can be ascribed to the accumulation or transport of the injected charge carriers across the CdS NWs/CdSe/electrolyte interfaces and shown by ‘R2’. A similar trend of the Nyquist plot has been shown by Yuan et al. for a CdS NWs/CdSe system over ZnO through SILAR. All of these parameters were analyzed by the Z-view software using an equivalent circuit and shown in the inset of Fig. 7(a) containing non-ideal frequency-dependent capacitance, termed as constant phase elements ‘Q1’ and ‘Q2’. Practically, the hemispherical arc in the high and low frequency regions signifies the charge transfer process, whereas the diameter represents the charge transfer resistances. From Table 2, it is observed that the value of R1 estimated from the high-frequency region decreases as the number of SILAR cycles of CdSe over CdS NWs increases to 12 beyond which R1 increases, thereby reducing the cell performance. R2 is the dominating factor since it directly influences the cell efficiency. As we move from bare CdS NWs to the SILAR-coated CdS NWs/CdSe core–shell structure, R2 reaches its least value, whereas Q2 acquires its highest value due to the enhanced crystalline nature of the film. This indicates a lower recombination rate at the interface of the photoelectrode and electrolyte. Comparatively, the least value of R2 for the CdS NWs/CdSe 12 cycles electrode shows enhanced electron transfer and greater conversion efficiency, which also depends upon the crystalline nature of the film. These results are in line with the structural studies. The low value of R2 for the CdS NWs/CdSe 12 cycles photoelectrode also demonstrates the high diffusion velocity of the redox couple. Interestingly, a significant increase in the value of R2 (301.8 Ω) for CdS NWs/CdSe 16 cycles electrode has been observed due to the emergence of the irregular deposition of CdSe, which leads to the disappearance of the pores among sensitizers and the nanonetwork. This also prevents the contact between the electrolyte and high-surface-area sensitizers, which is in good agreement with the J–V studies.


Fig. 7(b) shows the Bode phase plot of the impedance spectra of the bare CdS NWs and CdS NWs/CdSe with different CdSe SILAR cycles followed by annealing. The electron lifetime (τe) for different photoelectrodes can be evaluated from the peak at the minimum phase angle, obtained from the following relationship: , where the value of fpeak is shown in the Bode plots. From the figure, it can be inferred that there is a drastic shift of the value of the peak position as we move from bare CdS NWs to CdS NWs/CdSe 12 cycles photoanode. The τe value increases from bare CdS NWs to 12 cycles SILAR-coated CdSe over CdS NWs. The higher τe value for CdS NWs/CdSe 12 cycles suggests that the electrons have a longer lifetime, which directly enhances the electron transport due to the lower back reaction of electrons with the polysulfide electrolyte. Therefore, the mobility of electrons becomes higher and can travel longer distances with very few traps. In other words, the longer lifetime also results in higher Jsc; this increases the cell efficiency. Interestingly, τe is found to decrease for CdS NWs/CdSe 16 cycles due to the larger crystallite size of CdSe that creates large nanochunks in the porous structure of CdS, which obstructs electrolyte permeation. In order to get a clear idea regarding the recombination rate, the effective rate of recombination [Keff = 1/τe] has been evaluated. From Table 2, it is clear that as the loading of the CdSe nanoparticles increases over the CdS NWs, Keff decreases due to the decrease in the probability of trap density caused by the enhancement in the crystallinity of the film. Interestingly, in spite of the good crystallinity achieved for the 16 cycles CdS NWs/CdSe, Keff increases sharply. This is due to the fact that the extra deposition of CdSe creates an obstacle by reducing the contact of CdS NWs with the electrolyte, which further increases the density of the trap charges, and hence, increases the charge recombination between the injected charge carriers and oxidized species (Sn2−) of the electrolyte. As a result of this, Voc reduces, and hence, FF decreases, which is well supported by the photovoltaic output parameters.

A facile chemical route, namely, SILAR, has been employed to anchor CdSe nanoparticles over CBD-grown CdS NWs to form a core–shell structure. Heterostructure formed by 12 optimized cycles of CdSe over CdS NWs followed by annealing at 200 °C yields a 5-fold increment in the power conversion efficiency (0.45%) with respect to bare CdS NWs (0.09%). Increasing the SILAR cycles to achieve an optimum core–shell heterostructure yields the highest power conversion efficiency and has been confirmed by the following facts. Increase in the crystallite size and decrease in the optical bandgap value has been observed, which, in turn, increases the effect of quenching. This leads to a negative shift in the flat band, which shifted the conduction band; this resulted in an increase in Voc, EQE and Jsc, and lastly, an enhancement in the charge transport with a reduction in the recombination rate. Interestingly, on further increasing the SILAR cycles by extra deposition creates over-coverage of CdSe, which reduces the contact of the CdS NW structure with the electrolyte, and hence, increases the recombination rate. This reduces the flat-band potential and charge transport, and hence, decreases Voc and Jsc, which, as a whole, diminishes the device efficiency.


BRS is thankful to Director, VNIT for ULR grant (2013–14). SM is thankful to the Director VNIT for the Institute Scholarship and ESCA lab IIT Bombay for XPS facility.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7nj00954b
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2017