 DOI: 10.1039/C1EE02276H
(Perspective)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5919-5940

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Sebastiano
Cataldo
,

Patrizio
Salice
,

Enzo
Menna
* and 

Bruno
Pignataro
*

Dipartimento di Chimica “S. Cannizzaro”, Università di Palermo, Viale delle Scienze, Ed. 17, 90100, Palermo, Italy. E-mail: bruno.pignataro@unipa.it; Fax: +39 091 590015; Tel: +39 091 6 59846

Dipartimento di Scienze Chimiche, Università di Padova, via Marzolo, 1, 35131, Padova, Italy. E-mail: enzo.menna@unipd.it; Fax: +39 049 8275792; Tel: +39 049 8275660

Received
3rd August 2011
, Accepted 25th October 2011
First published on 21st November 2011
The use of carbon nanotubes in photovoltaics is still challenging due to different issues connected to their synthesis, purification, functionalization, processing and device integration. From this perspective at first we review on selected contributions dealing with the above issues; then we focus on the advantages and limitations of carbon nanotubes for the development of organic solar cells.
Sebastiano Cataldo
Sebastiano Cataldo is a postdoctoral researcher at the Department of Chemistry of the University of Palermo. He received a Master's Degree in Chemistry in 2003 and a PhD in Chemical Sciences in 2007 from the University of Catania. His research activity is set on the edge between surface science and nanotechnology. His main interests are studying the organization of materials (biological and organic) at surfaces and the engineering of thin films architectures down to the nano-scale for potential applications in the field of plastic electronics including organic solar cells.
Patrizio Salice
Patrizio Salice is a postdoctoral scientist at the Department of Chemical Sciences of the University of Padova. He defended his PhD thesis on the synthesis and characterization of photoactive theranostic nanoclinics under the supervision of Professor Giorgio A. Pagani at the University of Milano-Bicocca in 2009. During his PhD studies he also joined Professor Peter R. Ogilby's group at the University of Aarhus. His research interests are in the design and chemical manipulation of organic functional nanomaterials.
Enzo Menna
Enzo Menna received his PhD in Chemical Sciences in 1999. He is an Associate Professor of Organic Chemistry at the University of Padova, Department of Chemical Sciences. His current research activity is mainly focused on the synthesis of organic materials and nanomaterials with potential application in fields such as energy conversion and photonics. He is particularly involved in the synthesis of π-conjugated molecular structures and in the organic functionalization of carbon nanotubes, both at the outside (exohedral, covalent and non-covalent) and at the inside (encapsulation).
Bruno Pignataro
Bruno Pignataro, born in Bologna in 1972, is a Professor of Physical Chemistry at the University of Palermo. He received a degree in chemistry in 1995 and a PhD in materials science in 2000 at the University of Catania. His group research interests focus on the assembly of biological, organic and hybrid (organic/inorganic) materials at surfaces and on the development of electronic devices (transistors, photovoltaic cells, sensors/biosensors), including those related to plastic electronics.

Organic solar cells achieved a lot of attention due to their potential efficiency/cost ratio competitiveness with respect to inorganic solar cells. Many materials and processing methods are actually under investigation in order to improve efficiency and reduce cost. Carbon nanostructures are very interesting and here we emphasize the versatility of carbon nanotubes, especially in combination with suitable electron donors. The recent progress in the separation of semiconducting single wall carbon nanotubes and the new derivatization techniques open interesting perspectives in this context. Applications may include both a niche market including low-power and short-term devices and a larger market including low-power, longer-term and portable devices.


Since their discovery,carbon nanotubes (CNTs) have attracted considerable attention because of their outstanding properties and versatility. Indeed, promising nanostructured organic or hybrid (organic/inorganic) materials based on CNTs are expected to underpin, in a medium-long term, a variety of high-prospect applications including organic and plastic electronics.

Nowadays, different groups are working worldwide to improve the optical and electrical properties of thin films for the next generation of solar/photovoltaic cells. Indeed, an exciting challenge is to enhance the generation of free charges from excitons, at the donor (D)/acceptor (A) interface, and their percolation through the material to the respective electrodes. In this respect, the most significant advance for the organic photovoltaic (OPV) technology based on a planar D/A heterojunction is the introduction of the bulk heterojunction (BHJ) approach.
The nanoscale structure of the organic film is a fundamental property. In particular, the probability that an exciton reaches the D/A interface and dissociates is high if the length scale of the network features is consistent with the exciton diffusion length (10–30 nm). Furthermore, for an efficient photocurrent collection each material must provide a continuous path for the transport of separated charges to the contacts, since isolated domains can give recombination.
The progress of thin film BHJ cells during the last few years has been spectacular: from a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 0.04% reported in 1995, efficiencies of 2.5% in 2000, 3.0% in 2003, around 5% in 2007, more than 6% in 2009 and 7.4% in 2010 have been achieved. More recently, by using proprietary materials, Konarka and Solarmer Inc. declared 8.3% and 8.41% respectively.
In considering PCE, one has to take into account several parameters which directly impact the short circuit current density (JSC), the open circuit voltage (VOC) and the fill factor (FF). In particular, VOC is a measure of the cell potential and typically scales with the energy gap between the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of A and the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of D. Thus, it is clear that the appropriate material design and screening of the D–A materials combination is fundamental to optimize VOC. On the other side, JSC represents the maximum current density that could be produced by the cell and it mainly depends on the band gap and on the absorption coefficient of D as well as on the charge extraction. Finally, FF denotes the fraction of power the cell can output with respect to the ideal maximum power defined by the product VOCJSC. An important point for improving this last factor is the D–A charge carrier mobility balance along with the BHJ morphology. Ultimately PCE = VOCJSCFF/Pin.
Advancing PCE to values larger than 10% requires a strategic combination of the energy levels of all the components (donor, acceptor and electrode materials) as well as a fine control of all interfaces. Actually, an accurate band engineering taking into account suitable band gaps of both materials and a fine HOMO–LUMO line-up between them is crucial. Indeed, this leads to reaching an enhanced overlap between the photoactive material absorption and the solar spectrum and to reducing the energy loss resulting from the exciton dissociation. Even more challenging, the control of the heterojunction architecture may take advantage of recent insights on the preparation and characterization of nanostructured thin films to improve performances.
A noteworthy example which led to the highest efficiency published to date is the preparation of BHJs of thieno[3,4-b]thienyl- and benzodithienyl-based polymers (PTBs) with fullerene phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM). Here, the complementary absorption of the low band gap (about 1.6 eV) conjugated polymers in the highest photon flux region of the solar spectrum (ca. 700 nm) and of PC71BM in the near-UV region results in a panchromatic-wide absorption material.
In addition, the low-lying HOMO of PTBs with a good electron acceptor as PC71BM results in high VOC values. Finally, the high solubilities of the donor polymer and of the acceptor prevent phase segregation allowing efficient exciton dissociation at the widespread D/A interfaces with transfer times of 100 fs.
While the flourishing field of low band-gap polymers has constantly proposed as novel donor materials for OPV applications, among all organic molecules experimented as acceptors,fullerene derivatives are difficult to replace. Among the other acceptor materials proposed (also including small molecules based on Vinazene, polyboranes,etc.) nanostructured allotropic forms of carbon such as graphene and CNTs stand out.
CNTs, in particular, are one-dimensional nanostructures (i.e., their aspect ratio spans from 103 up to 106) characterized by a ballistic charge transport along their axis. Unlike fullerenes and graphene, the band-gap of CNTs can be tuned over a wide range by employing different radii and chiralities, hence allowing for a precise band engineering. Furthermore, thanks to the high surface area (about 1600 m2 g−1) and the electron-accepting properties, CNTs nicely fit the need of a wide conductive network and offer a tremendous opportunity for exciton dissociation. For these reasons, CNTs are expected to find a prominent position in electro- and photo-active nanocomposites in association with semi-conducting polymers.
Herein, we focus on the properties of CNT-based materials for the preparation and processing of OPV devices. Then we discuss the main drawbacks to overcome and the perspectives CNT-based OPV cells may offer in the field.

It is well known that the properties of carbon nanotubes are intimately related to their structure. Thus, also in the light of developing solar cell devices, one important aspect is the possibility to tune their optical and electronic properties within a wide range of band-gaps from metallic to semiconductive. This ability is not held by other nanoscopic forms of carbon like fullerenes.

Indeed, computational investigations have shown how the electronic properties of SWNTs strongly depend on the chiral angle offering both metallic and semiconducting behaviour in dependence of the nanotube indices (n,m). In particular, all SWNTs with chiral indices such that n − m = 3j (with j = 0) are metallic (m-SWNTs); those with n − m = 3j (with j ≠ 0) are very small-gap semiconductors (also referred as “semi-metallic”; Egap < kT) whereas when n − m = 3j ± 1, they are large-gap (ca. 1 eV for a 0.7 nm of diameter) semiconductive SWNTs (s-SWNTs) (see Fig. 1). Commonly, nanotubes with n = m are called “armchair” whereas those with chiral indices (n,0) are called “zig-zag”. The 1D structure of SWNTs gives rise to an electronic structure with a peculiar shape in the density of state (DOS) diagram characterised by the so-called van Hove singularities (Fig. 1). These are mirror-like spikes straddling the Fermi level (referred to as zero) in the DOS diagram. The optical spectra of CNTs are strictly related to van Hove singularities showing electronic transitions between these specular spikes as shown in Fig. 2a and b. A tight binding model study resulted in the so-called “Kataura plot” which relates the (n,m) structure and the diameter of SWNTs with the optical transition energies between the van Hove singularities (Eii). As observed in Fig. 3, higher Eii values correspond to smaller tubes. For s-CNTs, Egap ∝ 1/R ≈ 0.6 eV d−1 (nm) while for the semi-metallic ones the band-gap varies with diameter as 1/R2.
Different chiral structures give different photoluminescence emission (PLE) spectra as well. For instance, in Fig. 2c peaks into the oval arise from photon absorption by a s-SWNTs sample at energy E22 that gives fluorescence emission at E11. Obviously, E11 and E22 are different for the diverse (n,m) nanotube structure, the m-SWNTs not giving any signal since they are not endowed with a band-gap (Fig. 2b).
Similarly, vibrational features in Raman spectroscopy (Fig. 4) are closely related to the CNT structure. In particular, it is well known that the resonance frequency of Radial Breathing Modes (RBM; ωRBM ≈ 100 ÷ 300 cm−1; Fig. 4a and b) has a linear relation with the tube diameters, following the simple rule ωRBM ∝ 1/d, and does not depend on the (n,m) indices. Besides, the line shape of the G-bands (around 1500–1600 cm−1) is indicative of the semiconductive or metallic behaviour as shown in Fig. 4c for a (17,3) s-SWNT and a (19,1) m-SWNT respectively.
By matching Raman and PLE data, Bachilo et al. succeeded in assigning to every peak of a PLE plot (Fig. 4c) a couple of indices (n,m) making bulk SWNTs diameter chiral characterization very easy and rapid. These researchers settled also a worth and useful empirical method that allows for a precise calculation of the Eii transition energy for each (n,m) s-SWNT.
As to applications, it is important to consider some relevant properties of CNTs in thin films. In particular, the thickness may significantly affect their transmittance. While CNT films with thicknesses between 10 and 100 nm show high transmittance in the visible spectrum due to the spare structure of the network, in thicker films transmittance decreases. However, CNT films are very transparent in the far-infrared up to 22 μm (Fig. 5a) that is much more than other widely used materials (see Fig. 5b for a comparison). This makes them interesting for IR-imaging, organic solar cells and/or IR solar cells and as effective transparent anodes with high work functions (see Section 6.2). In this respect, by comparing the reflectance of the widely used plastic polyethylene terephthalate (PET)-supported ITO electrode with that of the PET/CNT electrode, it was shown (Fig. 5c) that, thanks to the optimal polymer/nanotube film index matching, contrary to ITO, CNTs do not worsen the PET reflectance.
As to the electrical properties of CNT thin films, unlike m-SWNTs, s-SWNTs show a strict dependence on the temperature since the thermal excitation promotes carriers to the conduction band. On the other side, multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWNTs) exhibit metallic or semiconducting properties depending on their outermost shell.
These systems differ from the SWNTs by the coupling between the multiple walls as for CNT bundles. The length of the tubes is another important factor as CNTs shorter than 500 nm show a minimum resistance of about 6–7 kΩ that increases with a ratio up to 6 kΩ μm−1, as shown in Fig. 6. Also, Gomez-Herrero et al. found that the resistance depends on the bias voltage and on the nanotube defect density, but still the junction resistance between tubes may dominate the overall resistance of CNT thin films. Since carriers in their electronic band structure are weakly bound to phonons, SWNTs showed a “ballistic” charge transport along with carrier mobilities up to 100000 cm2Vs−1. Accordingly, nanotubes show outstanding charge transport properties such as high conductivity along their main axis (1000÷200000 S cm−1) which is further enhanced by their extremely high aspect ratio (up to 106) and high current carrying capacity (1000 times higher than a copper wire).
The CNTs behaviour can be also drastically altered by defects which are often present inside their structure as pentagons, heptagons, vacancies and/or dopants. Moreover, because of the oxidative doping in air, semiconducting CNTs generally show p-type behaviour that however may change in relation with the nature of the material they contact. Thus, introducing defects came as an interesting and effective method to manage the electronic properties of CNTs in order to develop new powerful devices and potential applications in organic electronics. Even small defects in the backbone of CNTs make them susceptible to small environmental effects. For example, chemical defects on the walls and on the edges of CNTs (e.g., dangling bonds, sp3carbon sites, isomerisms) are scattering sites which limit the current mobilities. Moreover, electron acceptors (e.g., buckyballs, metal oxides) and electron donors (e.g., metal catalyst residues) adsorbed on the walls, and even encapsulated inside carbon nanotubes, act as dopants in their electronic band structure and consequently alter the electrical characteristics of the final material.
Contact resistance is a further fundamental issue since contact metals have a wide range of work functions, Fermi levels, and interfacial tensions. Typically, CNT work functions lie around 5 eV, that is about 0.1–0.2 higher than that of pyrolitic graphite because of hybrid σ–π valence states induced by the tube curvature. In this respect, particularly interesting are the properties of ultra-small diameter nanotubes (about 0.4 nm) showing superconductivity. Some authors found that for m-CNTs, the work function does not depend on chirality and increases only marginally with the diameter. Conversely, for s-CNTs it rapidly decreases with the tube diameter as shown in Fig. 7a. Work function and contact resistance may be tuned by annealing or chemical doping, for instance by intercalating metallic ions inside the tubes as in Fig. 7b.
Usefully, higher work functions may facilitate charge extraction.

If it is true that the aforementioned properties make CNTs promising functional materials, the carbon material obtained from the synthesis could not be processed as it is due to the presence of undesired species that would alter the final performance in an unpredictable way. Indeed, each step of the photogeneration and transport of free carrier in carbon-based nanocomposites is largely affected by the presence of (a) non-carbon impurities (mainly metal catalysts such as nickel and cobalt nanoparticles), (b) carbon impurities (e.g., amorphous carbon, buckyballs, graphitic structures) and (c) unsought carbon nanotubes (e.g., metallic CNTs when a semiconducting material is required by the application). Herein, we will consider the four steps involved in the energy conversion process (i.e., light absorption, exciton diffusion, exciton separation and collection of free carriers) and how the purification and separation of CNTs have a beneficial role in overcoming the actual limitations.

The primary step is the absorption of a photon by either the donor or the acceptor in the photoactive layer. In this regard, not only the scarce chemical reactivity of CNTs ensures prolonged photostability, but also CNTs act as physical quenchers of oxidizing species, thus enhancing the photostability of codispersed P3HT. Even more interestingly, the seminal work by Kataura et al. describes in detail the resolution of HiPCO nanotubes in metallic and in 13 different chiralities of semiconducting SWNTs. Their method is based on the hierarchical interaction between carbon nanotubes and sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and between the SDS and an allyl dextran-based size-exclusion gel column. The dispersion of SWNTs in aqueous SDS results in the selective interaction between the surfactant and the semiconducting tubes, whose strength depends on the electronic properties of the tubes, and hence on their chiralities. The retention times of the SDS-coated SWNTs are determined by the interaction between the surfactant molecules and the dextran gel. While the need to remove the surfactant and the low concentration involved in this purification process are still open issues, the resolution of the different chromatic components of SWNT mixtures permits the building of OPV devices with adjustable photoabsorption profiles.
In the second step of the photoconversion process, the exciton generated after photoabsorption migrates to the interface between donor and acceptor. Again, CNT-based photoactive materials benefit from dielectric constants, electron-lattice interaction and delocalization of electronic states in between the low performing organic materials and their inorganic counterpart. Moreover, a crucial help to overcome the exciton diffusion bottleneck comes from the design of nanomorphologies which combine long-range order and high active surface area to maximize the fractions of excitons reaching the D/A interface. To this aim, the dispersion of CNTs down to individual tubes and strategies to prevent reaggregation are needed. Indeed, in a wide range of systematic investigations, surface tension and van der Waals interactions of surfactants are engineered to separate insoluble metal residues and large bundles of CNTs from individually dispersed and small bundles of nanotubes in the supernatant. While the excess surfactant may alter the device performances if not removed, the design of functional surfactants with either electronic or optical properties compatible with the intended application gets rid of their removal. Aside the early examples of conjugated molecules in solar applications (e.g., porphyrins,phthalocyanines, and oligothienyls), Nicholas' group is proposing the employment of the conjugated polymers already used in OPV devices (i.e., regioregular P3HT, polyindenofluorene) to disperse CNTs in individual nanohybrids (Fig. 16). Indeed, highly soluble supramolecular aggregates in which different polymers are wrapped around the CNTs are obtained by sonication and ultracentrifugation cycles in different solvents. Detailed spectroscopic studies in solution showed an intense red-shift for the SWNT transition energies due to the formation of a type II heterojunction at the P3HT/SWNT interface where the charge separation occurs. Clue of this third step in the photogeneration process is the quenching of the photoluminescence of conjugated polymers (e.g., P3HT and poly(paraphenelene vinylene)s) when intimately bound to carbon nanotubes. Specifically, time-correlated single-photon counting showed that the photoluminescence (PL) decay of P3HT is shortened from 1.7 ps to 0.43 ps when 1% of SWNTs individually wrapped with P3HT are added to P3HT in a blend. While PL decays may not necessarily be associated with the splitting of the exciton in free carriers, ultrafast transient absorption measurements of the P3HT delocalized polaron are direct evidence of charge separation. The results obtained from Nicholas' group show that the lifetime of the photogenerated polarons depends strongly on the morphology of the nanocomposite which should provide not only a uniform ordered interface between the polymer (D) and the SWNTs (A), but also percolation pathways for both electrons, provided by CNTs, and holes, provided by the conjugated polymer. From this picture emerged that just a few selected types of CNTs may be suitable for efficient charge separation at D/A interfaces. Following the reports of Blackburn et al. and Arnold et al., the use of small-diameter semiconducting SWNTs is of paramount importance in extending the lifetime of the free charges photogenerated. Indeed, metallic SWNTs act as recombination sites either by electron transfer from the LUMO of the conductive polymers to empty states in the conduction band of m-SWNTs or by electron transfer from the valence band of m-SWNTs to the HOMO of P3HT. Time-resolved microwave conductivity on a blend of P3HT and enriched s-SWNTs, obtained by centrifuging raw SWNTs dispersed in SDS and sodium cholate (SC) in a iodixanol density gradient at 207000 g, showed that the removal of m-SWNTs improves the lifetime of free carriers up to three-magnitude, although care should be taken in the removal of metallic impurities. Indeed, the introduction of oxidative sites through treatment of CNTs with a mixture of sulfuric acid and hydrogen peroxide hinders the photogeneration of free carriers at the D/A interface. Not surprisingly, density gradient ultracentrifugation (DGU) is traditionally employed to separate CNTs according to their aggregation degree (larger aggregates are collected at the bottom of the centrifuge tube, while individual carbon nanotubes at the top), length and diameter.

Capillary or 
gel electrophoresis
 is a good alternative to DGU being based on the different mobilities of macromolecules on a substrate under the influence of an electric field. Since mobility depends on the mass/electric charge ratio, on the molecular weight of the analytes and on their interaction with the substrate, monodimensional structures such as CNTs can be separated according to their predominant dimension (i.e., length) and to their aggregation degree, while removing at the same time the non-carbonaceous impurities. Moreover, when the substrate is subjected to an alternate current, instead of a fixed voltage, dielectrophoresis takes place that makes it possible to separate semiconducting from metallic CNTs based on their different dielectric function (i.e., polarizability).
CNTs play a dramatic role in the final step of the photoconversion process: charge transport. The one-dimensional conjugated structure of CNTs results in electron mobility as high as 10000 cm2 V−1 s−1 for SWNT, exceeding those of any other organic semiconductor at room temperature. Nevertheless, like any other semiconductor, the presence of impurities affects heavily the overall carrier merits, and indeed many efforts are dedicated to understanding and controlling the doping of CNTs as recently reviewed. CNTs in OPV devices do not affect only electron mobility, but they also induce a beneficial effect on hole transport. Indeed, SWNTs purified from amorphous carbon and metallic impurities by oxidative treatment with nitric acid induce a “crystallinity enhancement” of P3HT. The highly ordered supramolecular organization of P3HT ensures higher hole mobility via interchain transport, in particular if coupled to nanosheets of pure P3HT adjacent to the P3HT/SWNT interface. Moreover, a skillful design of the nanomorphology such that the ratio between the electron and hole mobilities is larger than a factor of 100 should improve the exciton dissociation probability.
Despite these few outstanding results, further developments are required to produce materials with predictable behavior for advanced applications such as OPV and electronics. Moreover, the possibility to tune finely, and in a wide range, the band gap of a semiconducting material by selecting the appropriate nanotube diameter and helicity is tempting enough to drive much effort in developing different purification approaches, as outlined by comprehensive literature surveys.
In light of remarkable recent progress, the obtainment of a monodisperse population of nanotubes with univocal optoelectronic properties appears much more accessible.
Indeed, the ability to address specifically the different purification stages and to combine them in a continuous multi-step process may result in the development of a purification tool compatible with different synthetic methodologies and batches. Such technology has to be:
• Scalable, economically accessible and environmentally sustainable. Concerns for the consumption of energy and resources required by the fabrication of CNT-based devices should encourage great efforts in the technological improvement of synthesis and purification yields.
• Nondestructive. Some purification approaches are particularly aggressive toward the sp2carbon structure of nanotubes and hence against the electronic properties. A careful choice among the possibilities offered by carbon chemistry could focus on mild methods based on non-covalent or reversible bonding (i.e., the 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition of azomethine ylides)
• Iterable. An ideal purification process entails auxiliary techniques that allow its effectiveness to be monitered providing a feedback in an iterative procedure. The implementation of continuous flow processes to support such an approach is an option to be considered.
These statements have justified a rush for the best performing purification technique since the inception of carbon nanotubes as active components in optoelectronic devices. While some of the most successful attempts for each stage of the purification process have already been adopted for OPV applications (DGU, solubilization by surfactant and polymers, oxidative treatment), other underexploited significant achievements in this field will be addressed shortly.

Controlled 
growth
is a synthetic procedure which affords a cleaner carbonaceous material facilitating subsequent purification steps. Since quality and properties of CNT products are heavily influenced by the synthetic method, it is then fundamental to point out the set of parameters which control the growth of CNTs. Progress has been made on a lab scale, highlighting the crucial role of catalysts,noble gas carriers and redox active species, but there is still much work to do with processes to be up-scaled from the gram to the multi-kilos scale in the most optimistic view. Since approaches based on the selective growth of CNTs do not provide monodisperse samples, additional purification stages are required.
Interesting approaches are based on selective exohedral functionalizations. The interaction of CNTs with proper reactive species leads to the preferential formation of adducts with a specific population of nanotubes (i.e., nanotubes with specific properties). The nature of the interaction determines which population of tubes is interested by the functionalization. For example, the dependence of the density of state at the Fermi level on both the diameter and the length of carbon nanotubes ultimately leads to a different reactivity toward suitable reactants. Among these, diazonium salts,carbenes,nitronium ions,hydrogen peroxide, and azomethine ylides have been considered as the means to enrich a particular population of CNTs. Higher solubilities are often reached by the classic oxidation of the CNT walls with either nitric acid or sulphonitric mixture followed by etching with hydrogen peroxide, conversion of carboxylic groups into acyl chlorides and reaction with nucleophiles (e.g., amino-polyethylene glycol (PEG)).
A different chemical approach, the selective degradation, is based on the annihilation of the properties of undesired electronically active carbon materials through oxidation with oxygen, fluorine and hydrogen peroxide. Somehow analogous to this strategy, the selective exfoliation of the outer walls of MWNTs has been induced by applying electric currents with densities exceeding 109 A cm−2 and it is referred to as electrical breakdown.
To summarize, all the techniques presented have to face two main issues: the raw carbon nanotubes are strongly contaminated by many different species and the amount of CNTs processed by each technique is not yet enough for large-scale applications. Therefore it is desirable to combine different technologies in a single multi-step purification process (i.e., partially controlled growth with engineered nanocatalysts, selective and reversible chemical functionalization, ultrapurification with physical methods) and to introduce industrially relevant aspects (e.g., continuous processes, low cost and nonflammable solvents, scalability, …) to fully exploit the advantages brought by CNTs to the photogeneration and transport of carriers in the active layer of OPV devices (Fig. 8).

Chemical modification is a key step for the implementation of the appealing properties of CNTs within real world materials and devices. Functionalized CNTs were introduced in a bulk heterojunction solar cell in 2006 for the first time: encouraged by the first attempts to use CNTs in solar cell applications either as hole-collecting electrode or blended into the conductive polymer, Miller et al. functionalized MWNTs through the classic oxidation and esterification route.

Different goals can be pursued through the functionalization of CNTs: the most relevant are the improvement of processability and the tailoring of specific properties for the envisioned application. The strong tendency of CNTs to form bundles and tight aggregates hampers their effective dispersion in solvents and other media. The attachment of proper residues to the walls of the nanotubes can bring solubility and induce the disentanglement of aggregates, thus helping also mixing within polymer matrices. Moreover a solubilizing functionalization can help with removing impurities trapped inside CNT bundles. On the other hand, chemical modification of CNTs can tune their native features or provide new ones. Functionalization with antenna systems absorbing in the range of frequencies of the solar spectrum, for example, can improve light absorption in the range of the solar spectrum, thus optimizing the material for the development of non-conventional photovoltaics.
Three main strategies (summarized in Fig. 9) can be followed for the chemical modification of CNTs: covalent linking to the nanotube structure, encapsulation inside the inner cavity, and supramolecular (non-covalent) binding to the outer wall.

Covalent functionalization is based on the intrinsic reactivity of the curved sp2carbon network and on the possible presence of different kinds of defects. The degree of aggregation of the tubes is a crucial point too, since it determines the exposure of the structure to the reagents. The pristine CNT sp2 structure exhibits a chemical behavior comparable to fullerenes and, in general, more reactive than the similar structure of graphene due to the curvature-induced strain. Among the most common reactions for the functionalization of CNTs (mostly belonging to the families of cycloadditions and radical, nucleophilic or electrophilic additions),1,3-dipolar cycloaddition of azomethine ylides provides a convenient mean to get soluble and functional CNT derivatives (scheme in Fig. 10a). The resulting pyrrolidine ring can carry a wide range of functional groups and allows the simultaneous attachment of different moieties. A number of photophysical and electrochemical investigations have unveiled the behavior of CNT-pyrrolidine derivatives bearing photo-electroactive functional groups such as porphyrins and phthalocyanines or ferrocene.Aryl diazonium derivatives (either pre-formed as diazonium salts or generated in situ through a solvent free reaction, as in Fig. 10b) are also a valuable family of reactive species for the functionalization of CNTs, for example with porphyrin derivatives or alkyne moieties as active sites for a subsequent grafting through click chemistry.
In particular, the preferential addition to metallic tubes offers the attractive possibility of some enrichment based on the electronic properties.
During the last few years, an efficient, and in some cases selective, functionalization have been proposed, based on the alkylation/arylation of SWNT(n-) carbanions, obtained viaBirch reduction or by a nucleophilic addition of organometallic species. A very recent modification of the sequence extends the use of the reaction to carbonyl and even carboxylic moieties.
Defects in the CNT structure can be deliberately created, as reactive sites for the subsequent functionalization, through an assortment of oxidation reactions. Typical defects are carboxylic groups that can be used to graft molecules through the formation of amide (Fig. 10c) or ester bonds. Carboxylate groups themselves, together with sulfonated groups from oxidations in sulphonitric mixture, provide solubility in water and polar solvents, thus allowing also dispersion within bulk heterojunction materials. Proper chain structures can effectively help to disentangle CNTs in order to achieve solubility and to improve the dispersion in polymer matrices. In some cases, disentanglement was so effective that phonon dynamics could be clearly observed in real-time through femtosecond-resolved pump-probe experiments. This kind of functionalization provides efficient disaggregation of CNT bundles and is particularly attractive for BHJ applications. Indeed it is expected to maximize π–π stacking interactions between the nanotube wall and the conjugate polymer. As discussed in Section 6, such interactions improve both the interface charge separation and the crystallinity of the polymer phase, that in turn enhance exciton diffusion. On the other hand, photophysical investigations showed that the density of defects introduced by chemical modification can be kept low enough to preserve most of the pristine CNT electronic features by carefully tuning the reaction conditions. As an alternative approach, the immobilization of radical polymerization initiators, such as 2-bromopropionate groups, to carboxylate sites on CNTs can be used for the subsequent growth of polymers (e.g., polystirene) to obtain soluble and disentangled derivatives. Carboxylic functionalization, in particular, has been successfully employed to link CNTs with photoactive structures, such as thiophene derivatives, tetrathiafulvalenes, antenna-like porphyrins and phthalocyanines or metallic and semiconducting nanoparticles, such as silver,gold and CdS mediated by thiol bearing spacers. However, the resulting materials are usually poorly soluble in common organic solvents. A very simple approach to overcome such limitations is the simultaneous attachment of poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) chains and aromatic fluorophores, that provide solubility and the desired photophysical properties respectively.
In particular, while PEG does not directly affect optical absorption and emission, it has been shown that the choice of the organic fluorophore allows modulation of electron transfer from the chromophore to the nanotube.
Still a covalent approach, though much different, is the substitutional doping of CNTs based on the replacement of C atoms with boron (B-CNTs) or nitrogen (N-CNTs). Organic solar cells could gain noticeable enhancement of performances from this kind of derivatives, since it has been recently proven that N- or B-CNTs dispersed in fullerene-based BHJs selectively enhance electron or hole transport, respectively.
Effective solubilization of CNTs with non-covalent functionalization is easily achieved by means of molecular amphiphilic surfactants or through wrapping with polymers such as polysaccharides and DNA. Particularly interesting is the wrapping with π-conjugated structures, that can provide hybrid materials with relevant optical and electronic properties in view of possible photoconversion applications. A closely related example to possible OPV applications is given by the non-covalent wrapping of SWNTs with the water soluble electron donor copolymer of thiophene and 7-(thien-3-ylsulfanyl)heptanoic acid (PSCOOH).Polymers can also be grown in situ through electrochemical polymerization.
Noncovalent interactions with π-conjugated structures like pyrene (Fig. 11), tetrathiafulvalenes, or naphthalene derivatives can lead to soluble adducts. In particular, antennas such as phthalocyanine-pyrene conjugates or porphirins are known to form CNT adducts through π-stacking, giving rise to electron/energy transfer processes that could lead to photoconversion applications.
The encapsulation of molecules inside the inner space of CNTs was initially achieved through diffusion of vapor phase C60fullerene, affording the so-called “peapod” derivatives. The subsequent development of milder processes disclosed the possibility to encapsulate thermally less stable fullerene derivatives and different organic molecules (Fig. 12). Peapod derivatives are particularly attractive when the preservation of native CNTs electronic or charge transport behavior is desired, while featuring new properties due to the encapsulated molecules.
Guest structures are confined inside a one-dimensional space, subjected to a tight alignment and forced to assume anisotropic dynamics. These conditions, along with possible shielding effects and, especially, interactions with the host nanotube, make endohedral derivatives powerful candidates for the development of novel materials with unprecedented properties. On the other hand, since the CNT structure is retained, nano-peapods are also insoluble.
A possible mitigation of such a drawback and, in general, new interesting achievements, are expected to rise from the concurrent or sequential combination of different functionalization strategies, such as encapsulation and polymer wrapping or polymer grafting and non-covalent interactions with photoactive molecules like porphyrin systems. The combination of CNTs with inorganic nanoparticles seems also a promising playground for the design of novel functional architectures.
The intrinsic insolubility of CNTs limits the productivity of any functionalization strategy, due to the prolonged reaction times, the large solvent volumes and the challenging work-up and isolation procedures. Efforts in particular should be devoted to devise and develop synthetic and processing methods allowing to scale up the production of CNT-based materials for OPV applications. Possible strategies could exploit unconventional processes such as microwave heating or continuous flow synthesis that have been proven to boost reaction rates and provide a simple scalable and green approach.

In order to exploit the advantages of CNT properties, the achievement of stable dispersions has to be accompanied by the development of methods able to easily control the structure of large area films with precise density and possibly orientation and order.

One of the most classical approaches is the spin-coating deposition, which is integrable to the fabrication process of fully organic devices, and from an industrial point of view, one of the most desirable techniques for large area thin film deposition. It consists of dispensing CNT solutions onto a substrate that rotates with a controlled angular velocity and for a determined time. Spin-coating processing allows deposition over a variety of substrates, with a wide range of surface coverages, both nude CNTs and polymer-CNT composites. Several papers showed the possibility to align nanotubes on the surface and control their density.
As an unconventional variation of spin-coating, Meitl et al. developed a method called “Controlled Flocculation”. Accordingly, a nanotubes suspension and an appropriate solvent are simultaneously and continuously delivered on a spinning substrate and, as far as the suspension mixes with the solvent, CNTs precipitate aligning in a film growing with the desired thickness in a single step.
Yu et al. conceived a different interesting method, called Blown Bubble Deposition, based on the blown film extrusion process which allows manufacture of plastic nanocomposite films in large quantity, with width exceeding 1 m at rates of the order of 500 kg h−1. In particular, this process involves the expansion of a polymer/nanotube dispersion, stabilized by the covalent functionalization of CNTs with octadecylamine (see Section 4) through a circular die to form a bubble at controlled pressure and expansion rate, where stable vertical expansion is achieved using an external/vertical mechanical force (Fig. 13a). The balloon is then collapsed onto the substrate just to transfer a continuous flat film on its surface. This results in the formation of films with uniform thickness (200–500 nm) and high degree of lateral order with parallelly aligned CNTs over the centimetre scale.
Interestingly, here CNTs are located in a restricted thickness (quasi 2D layer of tens of nanometres). This is in contrast with other methods like drop or spin-casting where CNTs are usually distributed over the whole film thickness. Although very well oriented, the density of CNTs into the film remains quite low but still useful for applications in fields like that of displays and nanoelectronic transistors or arrays for chemical sensing.
As another attractive technique for the fabrication of polymer-CNT nanocomposites, the Electrophoretic Deposition (EPD) is achieved via the coagulation of charged systems (particles, polymers, composites) in a stable suspension toward an electrode under the action of an electric field as depicted in Fig. 13b. As an example, Casagrande et al. achieved the separation of large nanotube bundles into individual functionalized CNTs through the polymer wrapping strategy (see Section 4). The use of polymer bearing tertiary amine moieties, protonated in water under acidic conditions, provided to the nanocomposite not only solubility, but also the charges allowing for the migration towards the cathode. The cathode neighbours are characterized by an increased pH (reduction of water and formation of hydroxide ions) and thereby the composite particles are locally neutralized giving an insoluble and highly uniform deposit with programmable (polymer concentration, deposition time, voltage) thickness up to 10 μm. It is worth noting that a great portion of SWNTs vertically aligned at the substrate surface is observed.
Vichchulada et al. proposed the so-called Laminar Flow Deposition (LFD), sketched in Fig. 13c. By this method, the surface of a substrate is loaded with a CNT dispersion. A high purity laminar nitrogen flow is used to force the anisotropic drying along with the formation of aligned CNT arrays. LFD avoids the formation of CNT bundles and allows for the construction of layer by layer (LBL) architectures with arbitrary density and designed layers relative orientation on a number of substrates.

Langmuir–Blodgett (LB), in Fig. 13d, is one of the most elegant methods to deposit CNT monolayers or multilayered organic thin films. In the LB technique, CNTs wrapped by a hydrophobic surfactant (see Sections 3 and 4 for some examples) lay on the free surface of a subphase compound (usually water) forming a film. This floating film is transferred on a substrate that is withdrawn vertically across the subphase-air interface. To obtain high quality SWNT LB films, solutions of stably suspended nanotubes are critical. An optimal combination of the organic solvent with a polymeric surfactant matrix was established by Li and Giancane which succeeded in depositing parallel CNTs perpendicular to the substrate withdrawal direction. Furthermore, a quasi-LB method was developed to prepare randomly oriented surfactant-free CNTs. Accordingly, a pure nanotube suspension is initially filtered through an alumina membrane. Then, the CNT layer is removed from the filter and floated on an aqueous subphase to be transferred on the substrate in a LB-like style.
More recently a big deal has been devoted to the employment of printing for the precise patterning of CNTs.Inkjet printing technology derives directly from the graphic arts and newspaper industry and has been scaled for the production in the field of large area flexible electronics. The process (see Fig. 13e) essentially consists in the ejection of a fixed amount of “ink” from a nozzle through the pressure of a piezoelectric actuator within the ink chamber. Inkjet printing permits easy micrometric patterning of surfaces without any material waste and in principle may result in a strong cost reduction and low environmental impact. The formulation of the “ink”, i.e., the CNTs suspension to be printed, is a key requirement. Tailoring of electrical properties has been demonstrated by Okimoto et al. which succeeded in achieving metallic or semimetallic films, by simply modulating the density of the CNT surface coverage.
Different techniques are also widely used for the development of solid-supported CNT networks due to their simplicity, solution processability, applicability to flexible substrates and large area scalability.
Among those the Air Brushing consists in producing a stream of nebulized small droplets of a surfactant-stabilized CNT ink by using an air brushing pistol. This last directs the stream onto a substrate which is maintained at a relatively high temperature to facilitate solvent evaporation and film drying. This process results in CNT networks without much uniformity in thickness and surface density, thus producing films with heterogeneous properties.
A natural development of this technique has been the Ultrasonic Spraying deposition (see Fig. 13f) in which the brushing gun is implemented with an ultrasonicating nozzle. Ultrasonic nozzles produce picolitre droplets and permit precise amounts of CNTs to be reproducibly and uniformly dispensed over arbitrarily large areas. The thickness can be easily tuned via layer-by-layer deposition.
Since the presence of polymeric stabilizers may reduce the tube-tube conductivity, a polymer matrix-free deposition method is desirable. A dry single-step deposition technique based on aerosol methods has been refined by Zavodchikova et al. who deposit CNT films straight after their production in an aerosol synthesis reactor. The process is possible thanks to the spontaneous charging occurrence of CNT bundles at the exit of the aerosol reactor. The as-grown nanotubes are dragged out of the reactor by a carrier gas and then driven by an electric field inside an electrostatic precipitator to be collected over a biased substrate at room temperature. The density can be controlled by adjusting the electric field power and the collection time.
In order to obtain self-supported films of CNTs in a polymer matrix, mechanical stretching is a very simple method. It consists of mixing a dispersion of nanotubes with a solution of polymer (e.g., polycarbonate, polyethylene) and then heating the mixture to evaporate the solvent. Still hot, the composite obtained is mechanically stretched until the film reaches numerous times its initial length. The stretching operation can be repeated several times to enhance the degree of alignment and to improve the CNT/polymer interface. The result is a self-supporting nano-composite film with good electrical and mechanical properties.
To overcome the drawbacks of techniques like spin-coating, spin casting or airbrushing in terms of efficiency of production and quality of the CNT film, Wu et al. proposed the vacuum filtration method (Fig. 14a). According to this technique, a stable surfactant–CNTs suspension is vacuum-filtered through a soluble membrane. The resulting sample is then washed to eliminate the surfactant. The supported membrane can be detached as a free-standing film or moved on both rigid and flexible substrates by a technique called Transfer Printing.After that, the soluble membrane is dissolved leaving a network of nanotubes on the substrate. Thanks to their rigidity and great persistence length, homogeneously dispersed CNTs tend to give highly packed and interpenetrated networks on the membrane. Furthermore, this method makes the film thickness readily controllable by the CNT load and the solution volume and allows easy accomplishment of large area deposition.
Equally scalable in a large area but more suitable for a continuous high-rate production is the solid-state process settled by Zhang et al. which prepared self-standing nanotube films by drawing them from MWNT forests (Fig. 14b). By using a simple adhesive tape, they pasted the sidewall of the forest and manually drew highly aligned CNT sheets up to metres long and 5 cm wide. The film thickness is on the micrometre scale and varies proportionally with the height of the forest. These films can also be densified in tens of nanometres thick sheets and fixed on a substrate. Since the ease of drawing CNT forests increases with their height, this method is very useful in aligning very long nanotubes.
A well-known method in the coating industry that allows for a continuous and controlled large scale fabrication of SWNT networks is the draw-down rod-coating (Fig. 14c). This method makes use of the so-called wire-wound Mayer rod: a tool composed of a metallic bar coiled tightly by stainless steel wire. A suspesion of SWNTs is cast on a substrate, then the rod is rolled over the substrate to push-off the liquid. The thickness of the film is determined by the SWNTs concentration as well as by the open space between the wire coils and the surface; the greater the section of the wound-wire, the thicker the film. This technique can be used to deposit uniform and randomly oriented SWNT networks on a variety of substrates both flexible and rigid, like PET and glass.
Finally, integration of CNTs in thin solid films can be assisted by external electromagnetic fields, as depicted in Fig. 14d. It has been shown that both electric and magnetic fields can align nanotubes within a polymer matrix along the direction of the force lines. The fact that CNTs have a high and anisotropic magnetic susceptibility has been exploited by Steinert and Dean who simply cast a nanotube–polymer suspension on a substrate and insert it inside a magnet until the complete evaporation of the solvent. By exploiting the CNT anisotropic polarizability, Valentini et al. applied an electric field to a nanotube-polymer composite film, perpendicularly to the substrate, above the film glass transition temperature.
They obtained a vertically aligned CNT composite film that interestingly showed an increase in vertical conductivity of several orders of magnitude, due to the formation of charge percolating pathways.
With the same method but employing an alternate electric field, Radbeh et al. reported on the alignment of nanotubes induced by agitation that seems to generate around the nanotubes a sort of free space improving their orientation.

The employment of CNTs in organic photovoltaics has been proposed according to different strategies and purposes. These include the direct integration of CNTs inside a BHJ photoactive film, the synthesis of CNT-polymer nanocomposites, the use of CNT thin films as a hole extraction layer or the construction of transparent flexible hole collecting electrodes.


Nowadays the most performing OPV cells are based on fullerenes as A and on the concept of BHJ. Nevertheless, the efficiency of this kind of device is limited by both the small charge mobility, due to the hopping transport mechanism, and the clustering of fullerenes.

The dominant incentive for the integration of CNTs in a BHJ is to substitute the more expensive, less conductive and less air-stable fullerenes and to combine the physico-chemical properties of conductive polymers with the unique charge transport characteristics of CNTs. This gives the possibility to obtain an efficient percolation network with highly efficient exciton dissociation in polymeric BHJs with the polymer acting as D and the CNT as A.
Moreover, recent theoretical studies show that s-SWNTs and regioregular poly-3(hexylthiophene) (rrP3HT) give rise to a staggered heterojunction with a type II band line-up (see the energy level diagram in Fig. 15) where the HOMO and LUMO of the D are higher than those of the A. This band-offset may lead to full exciton dissociation at the interface, with a charge transfer from the polymer to the nanotubes. This kind of band offset is crucial allowing for free charge generation and may represent an effective scheme to apply during the materials screening with the view to maximize the interfacial charge separation and ultimately solar cell PCE, including the CNT based ones. This is supported by time-resolved microwave conductivity studies demonstrating that photoexcitation of P3HT results in long-lived carriers. This is due to the efficient spatial separation at the donor–acceptor interface and the nanotubes readily moving away the electrons, thus avoiding recombination. In contrast, no charge transfer to the polymer is observed after nanotube photoexcitation, and charge carriers are short-lived due to their confinement inside the tube along with the electron acceptor character of SWNTs.
Another advantage is that SWNTs induce organisation in numerous conjugated polymers thereby affecting their optical properties. It has been reported that CNTs may behave like a nano-substrate for rrP3HT. Thanks to the non-covalent π–π stacking interaction between the polymer backbone and the nanotube wall, rrP3HT forms crystalline monolayers that wrap-up the nanotube yielding highly ordered rrP3HT:SWNT nano-hybrids (see the drawing in Fig. 16) as confirmed by electron diffraction studies. These studies also show that P3HT crystallinity increases with the SWNT amount, and this could explain the improvement of exciton diffusion as well as of charge mobility in polythiophene:SWNT composites. Besides, femtosecond spectroscopy studies demonstrate that the photo-excitation of the P3HT shell produces an ultrafast electron transfer to the wrapped SWNT on the timescale of 400 fs. Charge separation efficiency similar to that of well optimized P3HT:fullerene heterojunctions may be achieved with only 1% SWNT content indicating these nano-hybrids as promising materials in CNT based OPV.
Optimizing the polymer:CNTs blend while discarding non-bonded nanotubes and polymer molecules could be a winning strategy to improve the interface charge separation and mobility of polymer:CNTs BHJs.
As stated in Section 4, the formation of nano-hybrids through polymer wrapping is also helpful for the effective solubilization of nanotubes. Furthermore, the electron injection from the polymer shifts up the nanotube Fermi level (Fig. 17), the reduced work function having been proposed to explain the typical high VOC of OPV cells of P3HT/SWNT composites.

The most common method to integrate CNTs (both SWNTs and MWNTs) within photoactive BHJs consists in dispersing nanotubes in a solution of the electron D polymer to be then spin-coated on a substrate (glass, plastic, etc.). The substrate is generally covered by a transparent electrode consisting of 60–100 nm of conductive ITO covered by a layer of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS). This last layer assists the selective hole injection into the ITO electrode and smoothes the ITO surface minimizing fissure formation in the active film along with possible shorts and current leakages.

Polythiophenes like rrP3HT or poly 3-octyl-thiophene (P3OT) are usually employed as D components due to their ability to form semicrystalline films when cast onto the substrate. Indeed, the thiophene rings assemble via π–π stacking and generate alternating layers containing the polymer backbone or the alkyl side chains. Through these layers, polymers have high hole mobilities up to 0.1 cm2 V−1·s−1 and a conjugation length of 20–25 monomers.
The deposition is generally followed by thermal annealing above the polymer glass transition temperature (Tg ≈ 100–120 °C). This allows for optimal separation of the BHJ components and aligns the polymer chains improving charge transfer, transport and collection with significantly enhanced PCE.
Following this strategy, Kymakis et al. prepared a BHJ solar cell employing P3OT:SWNT (1% wt) as D:A couple to deposit a 100 nm thick photoactive film. After thermal annealing PCE was doubled to 0.22% with Jsc = 0.5 mA·cm−2, Voc = 0.75 V and FF = 60% for a 0.25 cm2cell. To date, the most efficient CNT-based BHJ solar cell was obtained by Lanzi et al. These authors employed new thiophene derivatives bearing a ω-methoxy-functionalized hexamethylene side chain as D, blended with SWNTs (3% wt) as A. This new class of polythiophenes is more soluble and resistant to atmospheric oxygen and leads to solar cells with PCE = 0.53% along with Jsc, Voc and FF of 1.93 mA·cm−2, 0.48 V and 42%, respectively. This suggests that the design of new D materials with optimized properties (chemical stability, extended light absorption, …) is of fundamental importance in order to gain the best photovoltaic performances.
In another study, Dissanayake and Zhong obtained a surprising external quantum efficiency exceeding 90% for a millimetre scale P3HT/SWNTs device. Instead of BHJs, they used a bilayer heterojunction, depositing on a quartz substrate horizontally aligned arrays of SWNTs (m- and/or s-ones) and directly contacting each of them at the extremes by metal electrodes (Al or Pd). Then, P3HT was deposited onto nanotubes and top-contacted by an ITO layer. They found that SWNTs behave like hole- instead of electron-acceptors. This is probably due to the heavy p-doping of P3HT. Hole transfer from the polymer to the nanotube is independent from the work function of electrodes and is uniquely regulated by the P3HT/SWNT energy levels line-up. Most importantly, they demonstrate that both m- and s-SWNTs act as efficient D components, leading to a fast carrier extraction. This would eliminate expensive separation and purification processes.
Despite these promising results, such as the high open circuit voltage and the extended near-infrared light harvesting, the power conversion efficiency of CNT based OPV cells is still low, i.e. about one order of magnitude smaller than the fullerene based devices. To get an idea, compare for example the performances listed above for the highest efficient CNT-based devices with those of a polytiophene:fullerene optimized solar cell (JSC = 14.5 mA·cm−2, VOC = 0.78 V; FF = 70% and PCE = 7.4%).

The limiting factors for CNTs are several, including the incomplete exciton dissociation especially for the low amounts of CNTs at the percolative threshold. On the other hand, increasing the CNTs percentage in the polymer matrix to settle this problem increases shunts and recombination pathways due to their random distribution and high aspect ratio.

Nevertheless, the poor rectification behaviour and the low efficiency could be also due to the extreme heterogeneity of CNTs, although uniformity can be improved (under certain limits) through different strategies, as discussed in Section 3. Indeed, as-produced nanotubes are typically a mixture of m- and s-CNTs, and such an electronic diversity may affect the device efficiency. For example, the presence of an appreciable amount of m-CNTs as well as metallic CNT ropes/bundles induces electron-hole recombination involving their continuous “mid-gap” electronic states. In this case, a quenching effect arises from the electrons decay from the donor LUMO to the metallic empty mid-gap states and/or from the Fermi level of m-CNTs to the donor HOMO. Another detrimental effect of m-CNTs arises from possible charge transfers at the ground state. By computational studies on the electrostatic potential distribution at the P3HT/SWNTs interface of a BHJ (see Fig. 18), a strong potential fall on the donor polymer hampering the electron transfer to the metallic nanotube has been shown. In addition, even if a small amount of electrons is transferred to the nanotube, the built-in potential of the heterojunction would be too small to give charge migration. At variance, s-SWNTs result in a slight potential drop at their surface along with an optimal type-II band-offset. Unfortunately, due to the interfacial dipoles induced by the charge transfer, the polymer would interact preferentially with m-SWNTs leading to a number of photovoltaic-inefficient interfaces. Thus, different authors indicate s-SWNTs as the only desirable ones for OPV and 3-times long-lived charge carriers for the photocurrent generation have been demonstrated by eliminating m-CNTs. Surprisingly, a small lower limit for electron mobility in nanotubes of only 0.057 cm2 V−1 s−1 has been estimated. Researchers suggest that electron mobility may be limited by electronic and morphological perturbation. By exciting SWNTs they also reported no charge transfer to the polymer along with the formation of short-lived charge carriers confined within the nanotubes.
Another interesting limiting factor is reported by Schuettfort et al. By studying a BHJ system composed of rrP3HT:SWNT nano-hybrids, they revealed an efficient energy transfer from the donor polymer to the SWNTs thus limiting the ability of this interface to separate excitons in free charge carriers. Nevertheless, exciton separation across this interface could be possible. Indeed, it has been revealed that energy transfer rates decrease with the diameter of the tubes. This agrees with the observed formation of a type II heterojunction between small diameter s-SWNTs and rrP3HT (Fig. 19), which allows for exciton separation.
In contrast, Maligaspe et al. showed better performances for larger tube diameters (lower band-gap). These researchers compared charge separation rates and quantum yields for Zn-Porphyrin/SWNT nano-hybrids prepared by tubes with two different band gaps. It was demonstrated that charge separation and efficiency of (7,6)-SWNT, which have the lowest band gap, were slightly higher compared to a (6,9)-SWNT nano-hybrid. Researchers ascribe the faster charge transfer rate to the higher electron affinity which characterizes semiconductors with small gaps hence with lower conductive energy bands.
These results suggest that a key strategy for the maximization of free charge carriers generation and PCE could be the precise separation of only s-SWNTs and a balanced trade-off between the diameter and band gap.

While providing an optimal solution for a large increase of interfacial area, BHJs are not similarly effective in charge mobility. Besides the scarce mobility afforded by organic semiconductors, BHJs present a lack of percolative charge pathways. In this respect, CNTs are used in photoactive films not only as electron acceptors but also as pipelines which support carriers’ migration at the electrodes, thus improving charge extraction. For example, CNTs have been functionalized with C60 and C70fullerenes and/or implemented into P3HT-PCBM devices to mitigate shortcomings such as the low carrier mobility of fullerene and the coulombic recombination of the electron-hole pair after exciton dissociation. In this latter example, P3HT wraps the SWNTs (as illustrated in Fig. 16), improving holes extraction by the nanotube. Possible short circuits resulting from the contact between the hole-transporting SWNT and the electron transporting PCBM should be prevented by the shielding action of the wrapping polymer. Although this strategy of application is promising, only minor improvements in PCE were observed. While some authors pointed out an efficient charge transfer, the low efficiency of this last system might be ascribed to a lifetime increase hindering the electron transfer from photoexcited P3HT to the PCBM.

As already mentioned in Section 4, another interesting study on the enhancement of charge mobility of OPV cells reports the use of MWNTs doped with Boron (B-CNTs) or Nitrogen (N-CNTs) integrated into a P3HT:PCBM BHJ. B and N atoms bring respectively one electron less and one electron more than C. This excess/dearth of electrons shifts the work functions of the MWNTs close to the LUMO level of PCBM for the B-CNTs and to the HOMO level of P3HT for the B-CNTs. Accordingly, N- and B-CNTs behave respectively like electron- and hole-only transporting materials. Doped MWNTs work like a channel between organic molecules. Indeed, they give improved charge mobility when integrated inside a BHJ device making the slow hopping charge transport more effective. In particular, the implementation of B-CNTs into a P3HT:PCBM device gives comparable electron and hole mobility of about 10−7 m2 V−1·s−1, which is strongly desirable for high performance photovoltaic devices. Moreover, both an improved JSC from 9 to 11.5 mA cm−2 and PCE from 3% to 4.1% were recorded. Furthermore, it was found that B- and N-doping also improve the nanotubes dispersion because of the local polarities induced on the nanotube surface.
Conversely, Rahman et al. obtained among the best EQE (9.9%) for a device made by poly[(vinylbenzyl)-trimethylammonium chloride] (PVBTAn+) wrapped SWNTs and Zn-porphyrins. Likewise, oxidised MWNTs (o-MWNTs) integrated in a poly[2-(3-thienyl)-ethoxy-4-butylsulfonate] (PTEBS, a water soluble polythiophene):C60 bilayer heterojunction led to an increase of 20% for the FF and to a corresponding enhancement of PCE. The authors ascribe the enhanced performances to the reduced series resistance (see in the I–V curve of Fig. 20 the increased slope at the x-axis interception) due to the charge percolative paths provided by the tubes along with the optimal alignment of the o-MWNTs Fermi level and the PTEBS HOMO.

In addition to photoactive material, CNTs may be used also as Hole Extraction Layers (HELs) or transparent electrodes. Indeed, the huge intrinsic charge mobility of an individual CNT, the high optical transparency over a wide range of frequencies (see Fig. 5b) and the amenability to solution processing are tempting enough to design electrically conductive, flexible, transparent and low-cost networks. Moreover, the CNT work function suitability (4.7–5.2 eV) has been exploited to replace either ITO transparent electrodes or PEDOT:PSS HELs in OPV and other optoelectronic devices (e.g., displays, touch screens, OLED). In this respect, indium is a toxic and expensive rare metal (up to 1000 $ kg−1) and ITO is scarcely compatible with flexible polymeric substrates because of its brittleness and high temperature deposition (600 °C). On the other hand, the widely employed PEDOT:PSS HEL may alter the photoactive layer through the corrosion of the usually underneath ITO surface. Conversely, CNTs are easily accessible, thermally and chemically stable and can be conveniently deposited through low cost solution processing techniques.

Unfortunately, despite very high expectations the sheet resistances (Rs) of a CNT network are much higher than the desired values for a ballistic conductor, albeit it can be improved by increasing the layer thickness at the expense of its transparency. Consequently, best performances for transparent conductive CNT networks need a precise trade-off between Rs and transparency. The overall series resistance of a CNT-based electrode is determined by chemical composition, density and alignment of nanotubes. In this regard, the seminal work by Staderman et al. and Nirmalraj et al. pointed out that electrical transport in CNT thin films is determined by the number and nature of nanotube junctions. A comprehensive analysis of Rs for a high number of transparent (T > 90%) nanostructured films indicated that the conductivity increases with the film thickness, following a percolation-like behaviour. Under this regime, chemical treatments aimed at improving the interconnectivity of CNT bundles have been proven to have a dramatic role in decreasing Rs. Postfunctionalization of CNT films by oxidation with nitric acid and thionyl chloride (o-CNTs) has a dual effect: a slight increase of the intrinsic conductivity of semiconducting tubes due to p-doping and a three-fold reduction of the junction resistance. It has been shown that P3HT:PCBM solar cells with either o-CNTs (both SW and MW) or PEDOT:PSS HLEs afforded similar performances exhibiting the possibility to replace the ubiquitous PEDOT. Furthermore, different studies show spray deposited transparent electrodes of o-CNTs (T = 70 to 90%) with low Rs (57 to 130 Ω sq−1) with remarkable conductivity up to 7700 S cm−1 (ITO is 4400 S cm−1), which led to OPV cells having similar PCE with respect to analogous ITO based devices. Interestingly, Feng et al. demonstrated that an acid treatment produces both a tenfold decrease in Rs and a 1.5 fold increase in transparency. This is strategic to build up a transparency/resistance trade-off for PCE optimization. Even better, Barnes et al. prepared OPV devices by spray deposited o-SWNTs electrodes giving lower Rs, higher JSC and increased PCE from 3.5 to 4.1% with respect to ITO-based devices.
Doping can be further tuned by deposition of a layer of PEDOT:PSS on top of the CNT film followed by thermal annealing. SWNTs and PEDOT:PSS HLEs were sequentially deposited on ITO at different strategic positions (see Fig. 21a) within a P3HT:PCBM cell by Chaudhary et al. They obtained a significant improvement in PCE from 4 to 4.9% (Fig. 21b) when SWNTs were used as HEL in configuration 2 and 3 (Fig. 21a). Furthermore, the co-deposition of PEDOT:PSS and MWNTs gave a minor increase in PCE, from 2.1 to 2.4%. Likewise, the use of a 3D hybrid anode of MWNTs/PEDOT:PSS on ITO has been shown to give a PCE improvement from 1.3 to 1.7% along with a 2-fold increase of Jsc.
The importance of the film morphology and cell architecture has been shown by vertically aligned nanotubes being more electrically and thermally conductive than randomly dispersed ones.
Another important point in the optimization of electrodes and HELs is the use of electronically monodisperse CNTs. Recently, Tyler et al. used SWNTs sorted viaDGU as transparent anode material in OPVs and showed that a composition in m-SWNTs ≥70% affords a PCE 50-fold higher than monodisperse s-SWNT thin films. This is also in agreement with metallic-semiconductive CNTs junction resistances notably higher than the metallic-metallic ones. This result points out the necessity to use highly enriched metallic CNTs as electrodes with very low Rs. Sorting techniques like those discussed in Section 3 should be properly developed in order to provide the chiral separation of nanotubes with quasi-monodisperse diameters. The resulting narrow distribution of band gaps with a characteristic optical absorption would afford conductive and variously coloured CNT networks.
Finally, CNTs offer the possibility for mechanical flexibility. In particular, after a bending up to 1 mm of the curvature radius, a CNT-based device had a performance drop of 20–25% that was completely restored by a simple thermal treatment. This, together with an extended lifetime with respect to ITO, makes CNTs well-suited for large scale fabrication employing low-cost roll-to-roll solution processes thus fitting the field of flexible electronics (including flexible displays like OLED, touch screens, rollable e-paper for the expanding market of e-readers, electrochromic, elecrophoretic, electrowetting, liquid crystal displays) and in particular OPV.

These outstanding contributions on each specific stage, such as synthesis, functionalization, purification, processing and device preparation, are a strong indication that science and technology provide a strong opportunity for the integration of CNT-based organic thin films in the next generation of OPV cells. Still, current research should be aimed to understand the structure–property relationships beginning from the molecular structure, through the microdomain organization, to the final device architecture. This multidisciplinary approach should start by developing refined theoretical models able to correlate the electronic properties and the morphology of CNTs with the merits of OPV devices. In this regard, simple and reliable computational models able to correlate chirality, diameter, and length of CNTs with current and voltage characteristics of a photoactive nanocomposite are an important feedback for the optimization of PCE.

Given these considerations, the growth of CNTs should require smaller amounts of metal catalysts while improving the control on chirality and length of the tubes. In the subsequent steps, industrially relevant aspects (i.e., continuous processes, use of low cost and nonflammable solvents, scalability, etc.) should be integrated in a multi-step purification procedure able to afford CNTs with the desired parameters. Actually, this aspect is faced through the design of chemical and physical methods showing preferential affinity for CNTs with specific chirality, thus enabling the separation of semiconducting and metallic tubes. Nevertheless, increasing efforts should be addressed to fill the gap between the small quantities required by academic researchers and the large amount of continuously processed CNTs needed for practical applications. In this respect, chemical modifications by means of covalent or non-covalent functionalizations have been extensively employed for the purification and separation of CNTs. Moreover, chemical post-processing is an attractive solution to tune the physical properties of the CNTs either by tuning the band-gap by p- and n-doping or by exploiting the interaction with photoactive dyes complementary to the prominent UV and IR absorption of CNTs. Even more interestingly, chemical processing is the gateway between the electronic characteristics of the individual nanotubes and their interaction with photoelectroactive matrices at a macroscopic scale. Covalent modification and supramolecular interactions offer the required solubility, stability, and versatility to engineer the electronic communication at the D/A interfaces and ultimately to improve the PCE of BHJ OPV cells through a controlled processing. Indeed, conveniently functionalized CNTs can be processed using lower boiling point solvents, thus allowing for low-cost mass-production, either by ink-jet printing or by different coating techniques from solution.
With this perspective, the employment of structurally versatile CNTs would have a major impact on OPV technology particularly thanks to the scaling-up of a variety of deposition and patterning methods available today.
Once these constrains are solved, future applications would first involve a niche market including low-power and short-term devices and then a larger market including low-power, longer-term and portable devices. Indeed, applications could include self-powered devices for both indoor and outdoor uses in fields like “portable energy” for electronic devices (e.g., cell phones, smart phones, portable audio/video players, sensors, digital cameras and camcorders), building integrated photovoltaics and rooftops (e.g., commercial buildings, industrial plants, government, academic institutions), residential photovoltaics (grid-tied and off-grid homes) and automotive (e.g., car standby power supply, starting, lighting, and ignition car battery sustaining systems).

The authors acknowledge Italian MIUR (grants FIRB-Futuro in Ricerca-RBFR08DUX6, FIRB-RBAP11C58Y, PRIN-20085M27SS) and University of Padova through HELIOS (grant STPD08RCX5) for financial support.


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012