 DOI: 10.1039/C5NR01275A
(Communication)
Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 8304-8308


L. Z.
Hao
*,

W.
Gao
,

Y. J.
Liu
,

Z. D.
Han
,

Q. Z.
Xue
,

W. Y.
Guo
,

J.
Zhu
 and 

Y. R.
Li


College of Science, China University of Petroleum, Qingdao, Shandong 266580, People's Republic of China. E-mail: haolanzhong@upc.edu.cn

State Key Laboratory of Electronic Thin Films and Integrated Devices, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 610054, People's Republic of China. E-mail: yrli@upc.edu.cn

Received
25th February 2015
, Accepted 9th April 2015
First published on 13th April 2015
A solar cell based on the n-MoS2/i-SiO2/p-Si heterojunction is fabricated. The device exhibits a high power-conversion efficiency of 4.5% due to the incorporation of a nano-scale SiO2 buffer into the MoS2/Si interface. The present device architectures are envisaged as potentially valuable candidates for high-performance photovoltaic devices.

In recent years, two dimensional layered materials, such as molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) and graphene, have manifested a lot of intriguing properties and spurred intense scientific interests. Due to the strong absorption of sunlight, MoS2 has attracted much interest in developing high-performance solar cells. It has been reported that MoS2 exhibits one order of magnitude higher sunlight absorption than the most commonly used solar absorbers of Si and GaAs. Intrinsic MoS2 belongs to n-type semiconductors and its band gap is 1.2–1.9 eV. Based on the configuration of Schottky or p–n junctions, several kinds of MoS2-based high-speed photodetectors and new-type solar cells were constructed. Shanmugam et al. achieved a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 1.8% in Au/MoS2 junctions. Furthermore, Wi et al. utilized the plasma-induced p-doping approach to form p–n junctions in MoS2 layers. The devices showed good photovoltaic properties with a large short-circuit photocurrent density of 20.9 mA cm−2 and a high PCE of 2.8%. Presently, Si is dominating the commercial photovoltaic market due to its high abundance and mature processing technology. In order to develop practically applicable solar cells, it is of great value to realize the integration of MoS2 on Si. By stacking a MoS2 monolayer on Si to enhance light absorption, Tsai et al. realized the increase of the PCE from 4.64% to 5.23% in Al/Si solar cells. It can be expected that the MoS2/Si heterojunctions would become one of the good candidates to develop high-performance solar cells. MoS2 has a layered crystal structure, where the atoms in layers are hexagonally packed, while crystal Si belongs to a diamond-like structure. The large difference of the lattice structure between them would result in large quantities of lattice defects at the interface when MoS2 films were deposited straight on the Si surface. In addition, inherent reactivity and serious element diffusion at the interface are unavoidable during the integration. These interfacial characteristics can degrade largely the performance of the solar cells. Thus, it is necessary to conduct interface modification before making viable functional devices on Si. Previous studies have shown that employing suitable buffers at the interface, such as ZnO, Al2O3, and MoO3, is one of the effective ways to implement interface modification in junction-type solar cells. The buffer can balance carrier injection and reduce the leakage current. Especially in the case of band edge modifications, a large open circuit voltage can be achieved through built-in barrier enhancement when the buffers with a large band gap are incorporated. Apart from the MoS2 and Si themselves, a suitable buffer would be important to obtain high-performance MoS2/Si solar cells. However, the related studies are absent.

In this work, MoS2 bulk-like thin films were deposited on SiO2 buffered p-type Si substrates and MoS2/SiO2/Si n–i–p junction solar cells were fabricated. SiO2 was chosen as a buffer for three reasons. Firstly, formation of SiO2 layers at high temperatures under an oxidizing atmosphere can form an SiO2/Si interface with low interface state density (<1 × 1010 cm−2 eV). Secondly, SiO2/Si is usually used as the substrate to obtain large-scale uniform MoS2 monolayers. Finally, SiO2 as an insulating buffer can decrease the carrier recombination near the interface and improve the photovoltaic properties of the devices. Our results demonstrated that the performance of the device was enhanced significantly due to the insertion of the nano-scale SiO2 buffer into the MoS2/Si interface. According to the results, the mechanisms for the enhanced photovoltaic properties were discussed in terms of the energy-band structure near the interface.
MoS2 bulk-like thin films were deposited on (100)-oriented Si substrates using the dc magnetron sputtering technique. The precursor materials for the films were MoS2 powders. The MoS2 powders (purity, 99.9%) were cold-pressed into a disk under the pressure of 20.0 MPa. The as-fabricated disk (Φ 60.0 mm × 4.5 mm) was used as the target during sputtering. The Si substrates (size, 10 mm × 10 mm) used in this work are p-type semiconductors with the resistivity of 1.2–1.8 Ω cm. Before the deposition, the substrates were ultrasonically cleaned in sequence with alcohol, acetone, and de-ionized water. Then, the substrates were immersed into a HF solution (∼5.0%) for 60 s to remove the natural oxide layer from the Si surface. After that, the substrates were annealed at 600 °C under the oxygen pressure of 20 Pa for 3 min to form a SiO2 buffer layer on the Si surface. The thickness of the SiO2 layer is about 3–5 nm calculated from the capacitance–voltage (C–V) curve of the SiO2/Si heterojunction. Subsequently, ∼40 nm-thick MoS2 thin films were deposited. During the deposition, the working pressure of argon gas and the deposition temperature were 0.3 Pa and 380.0 °C, respectively. Finally, the top ∼30 nm-thick Pd electrode was fabricated on the MoS2 film using the dc magnetron sputtering technique. The whole top surface of the film was covered with an electrode layer. The back ∼200 nm-thickness indium (In) electrode was fabricated on the whole backside of the Si substrate using thermal evaporation. The thickness of the MoS2 films and electrode layers were calibrated using a scanning electron microscope (SEM). Comparatively, MoS2 films were also deposited straight on the Si surface to form n–p junctions as reference devices.

Fig. 1a shows the Raman spectrum of the MoS2 film on SiO2/Si. From the figure, we can see that the film exhibits two characteristic MoS2 Raman peaks, the E12g mode at ∼373 cm−1 and A1g mode at ∼407 cm−1. The E12g mode corresponds to the sulfur and molybdenum atoms oscillating in antiphase parallel to the crystal plane, as shown in Fig. 1b, and the A1g mode corresponds to the sulfur atoms oscillating in antiphase out-of-plane, as shown in Fig. 1c. Our Raman results are consistent with other reported results about MoS2 bulk-like films. The separation between Raman peaks of the film, Δ = 34 cm−1, is much larger than those for the reported monolayer and several-layer MoS2. As shown in the figure, the peak intensity of E12g is higher than the A1g peak. This is similar to the results from previous reports, and indicative of high structural quality in the as-deposited MoS2 film.

Fig. 2a shows the schematic illustration of the electrical measurement of the Pd/MoS2/SiO2/Si/In solar cell. Forward voltages are defined as positive voltages applied on the In electrode. Pure MoS2 belongs to n-type semiconductors. Thus, the n–p and n–i–p junctions were formed when the films were deposited on p-Si and SiO2 buffered Si, respectively. Fig. 2b shows the dark current density versus voltage (J–V) curves of the devices with/without a SiO2 buffer. Both the devices exhibit obvious rectifying behaviour. In our experiments, the contacts of Pd/MoS2 and In/Si are almost ohmic. Thus, the asymmetric characteristics of the J–V curves originate mainly from MoS2/Si and MoS2/SiO2/Si contacts, respectively. A turn-on voltage (Von) of 0.19 V for the MoS2/Si n–p junction, at which the current starts to increase rapidly, can be obtained. From the figure, we can see that the Von increases to 0.33 V for the MoS2/SiO2/Si n–i–p junction. Fig. 2c shows the replot of the J–V curves in the forward voltage range using semi-logarithmic mode. For the n–p junction, three distinctly different linear regions with different ideality factors (n) can be observed. This demonstrates that the conduction of the n–p junction is dominated by the diffusion current (n = 1.0), recombination current (n = 2.0), and trap-assisted recombination current (n = 9.0) in different forward voltage ranges, respectively. This is similar to the reported results about other p–n junctions. When the SiO2 buffer is incorporated, the currents are suppressed largely and the transporting mechanisms are changed in the high voltage range, as shown in the figure. Fig. 2d shows the replot of the dark J–V curve of the n–i–p junction using the Fowler–Nordheim (F–N) tunnelling mechanism. The tunnelling current density is described as
J = AV2exp(−B/V),
(1)
where
A and B are constants. As shown in the figure, the dependence of log(JV−2) on V−1 is almost linear when the voltage is larger than Von (0.33 V). This implies that the carriers in the n–i–p junction can pass the SiO2 layer by F–N tunnelling.


Fig. 3 shows the photovoltaic characteristics of the devices without and with a SiO2 buffer under 15.0 mW cm−2 light illumination. The MoS2/Si n–p junction shows an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 0.15 V and a short-circuit current (JSC) of 4.3 mA cm−2. It has a fill factor (FF) of 0.39, resulting in a PCE of merely 1.4%. When the SiO2 buffer is introduced, the photovoltaic performance is enhanced significantly, as shown in the figure. For the Pd/MoS2/SiO2/Si/In cell, VOC increases to 0.3 V, an enhancement of 2 times. Simultaneously, JSC and FF of the device increase to 5.5 mA cm−2 and 0.42, respectively. The overall PCE reaches 4.5%, up to a 3-fold increase compared to the reference device. This PCE is the highest value among all the reported MoS2-based solar cells. Thus, the insertion of the SiO2 buffer at the MoS2/Si interface plays a crucial role in improving the light-to-current conversion efficiency for the solar cells.
According to the measured C–V curve in the reverse voltage range, the C−3versus voltage curve for the n–p junction and the C−2versus voltage curve for the n–i–p junction are shown in Fig. 4a. In a semiconductor junction, the capacitance can be expressed as
C ∝ (V + Vbi)−1/m,
(2)
where
C is the capacitance, V is the reverse voltage, and Vbi is the built-in electrical field. m is a constant, m = 2 for an abrupt junction and m = 3 for a graded junction. The linear dependence demonstrates that the MoS2/Si n–p junction is graded, while the MoS2/SiO2/Si n–i–p junction is abrupt. According to the intercept on the voltage axis, Vbi can be determined. As shown in the figure, the Vbi is enhanced due to the introduction of the SiO2 buffer. According to the extracted results, the Vbi of the n–i–p junction is about 0.65 V, which is larger than 0.41 V of the n–p junction. Fig. 4b shows the transmission spectrum of the ∼40 nm-thick MoS2 film deposited on a glass (a-SiO2) substrate under the same growth conditions as that on Si. From the figure, we can see that the film has high transmittance (>50%) in the visible light range. It can be deduced that only a part of incident light is absorbed by the MoS2 film when the junction is under the light illumination and others can reach the Si substrate. Thus, photo-induced carriers can be generated in both the film and Si substrate. As shown in the inset, (αhν)2 is plotted as a function of photon energy hν, wherein h is the Planck constant and ν is the photon frequency. α is the absorption coefficient, calculated using αd = ln(1/T), d and T are the thickness and transmittance of the film, respectively. The band gap (Eg) of the film can be determined by the intercept of the line on the hν axis, Eg = 1.42 eV. The energy-band value for the film is a little larger than the MoS2 bulk (∼1.2 eV) and much smaller than the monolayer (∼1.9 eV).

The observed enhanced photovoltaic characteristics can be explained by considering the modulation of the SiO2 buffer on the energy-band alignment near the MoS2/Si interface. Fig. 5a shows the energy band diagram of the MoS2/Si n–p junction. By the Hall effect measurements, the MoS2 film is proved to be a quasi-intrinsic semiconductor with a very small Hall coefficient (∼0). Due to the quasi-intrinsic semiconductor nature, the Fermi energy level of the MoS2 film (EF1) is close to (but above) the middle of the energy band gap. As shown in Fig. 4b, the energy-band gap of the MoS2 film (Eg1) is 1.42 eV. For single-crystal p-Si, the Fermi energy level [EF2 = 5.0 eV] and the energy band gap [Eg2 = 1.12 eV] are taken to construct the band structure and the difference (EF2 − EV2) between the Fermi energy level and the top of the valence band is about 0.2 eV. When the MoS2 film is deposited straight on the surface of p-type Si, a MoS2/Si n–p junction is fabricated and the built-in field is formed near the MoS2/Si interface. The built-in field points from the film to the substrate and it can be expressed as Vbi = (EF2 − EF1)/e. According to the Vbi of 0.41 V obtained from Fig. 4a, the Fermi energy level of the MoS2 film (EF1) can be determined, about 4.59 eV. This value is in accord with the reported results. Under light illumination, the incident photons can be absorbed by both the MoS2 film and Si, as demonstrated in Fig. 4b, and the electron–hole (e–h) pairs are generated on both the sides of the junction. The built-in field facilitates the separation of photo-generated e–h pairs, transporting separated electrons from Si to MoS2 and holes towards Si. The processes of photo-excitation and carrier transport in the junction are illustrated in Fig. 5a. Therefore, photovoltaic characteristics are exhibited. In junction-type solar cells, the VOC is closely related to the built-in field. The relatively small value of the Vbi in the n–p junction results in a small VOC of only 0.15 V and a low PCE of 1.4%. When the buffer is inserted into the MoS2/Si interface, the SiO2 layer instead of the Si surface forms a contact with the MoS2 film. As an insulator, SiO2 has a larger work function of about 5.4 eV than Si. The larger work function led to a larger Vbi of 0.65 V, as shown in Fig. 4a. The increase of Vbi further enhanced the separation of photo-generated e–h pairs in the junction and a larger VOC of 0.3 V was obtained. In addition, the photo-generated carriers in the n–i–p junction can pass the SiO2 layer with the F–N tunnelling mechanism because the Vbi of 0.65 V is larger than the Von, as shown in Fig. 5b. This results in a large JSC of 5.5 mA cm−2. Both the large VOC and JSC promise a high PCE of 4.5% in the n–i–p junction. Based on the above analysis, definitely, the SiO2 buffer plays a crucial role in obtaining an enhanced performance. A certain thickness of the SiO2 layer was necessary to have good passivation of the Si surface. The optimized SiO2 thickness is several nanometers according to other reported results. This is in accord with our studies. However, if the SiO2 layer is too thick, it can decrease the effectiveness of the carrier tunnelling due to the scattering and trapping of the carriers in the SiO2 layer. At the same time, the SiO2 layer offers a high potential barrier preventing the carriers from the diffusion and the shift moving to two ends. Thus, the electrical performance of the fabricated solar cells would be degraded. In our experiments, the photovoltaic characteristics disappeared completely when the thickness of the SiO2 layer was larger than ∼10.0 nm.
In summary, the MoS2 bulk-like thin films were deposited on SiO2 buffered p-type Si substrates and MoS2/SiO2/Si n–i–p junctions were formed. Our results demonstrated that the photovoltaic performance of the device was enhanced significantly due to the incorporation of the SiO2 buffer. The VOC and JSC increased to 0.3 V and 5.5 mA cm−2, respectively. A PCE of 4.5% was achieved, which was the highest value among all the reported MoS2-based solar cells. Besides the expected improvement of the interfacial structures by the passivation, the SiO2 buffer can effectively enhance the built-in field and further promote the separation of photo-generated e–h pairs in the junction. All these should be responsible for the enhanced photovoltaic performance. Our work supplies an effective route for the integration of MoS2 films with Si-based electronics to develop high-performance solar cells.

The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (14CX05038A) and the National Science Foundation of China (grant no. 51102284 and 51372030).


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015