 DOI: 10.1039/C6CP05999F
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 30254-30260


Dae-Kue
Hwang
* and 

Shi-Joon
Sung


Convergence Research Center for Solar Energy, Daegu Gyeongbuk Institute of Science and Technology, Daegu 42988, Korea. E-mail: dkhwang@dgist.ac.kr

Received
31st August 2016
, Accepted 21st September 2016
First published on 21st September 2016
To meet the nanofabrication requirements, such as control of structure and scalability, we investigated an electrospray-based method to manufacture scattering layers (SLs) for dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). TiO2 spherical and disk-shaped particles with a large surface area, high crystallinity, uniform nanostructure and good light scattering properties were fabricated via a simple electrospray method. We showed how the morphology and structure of the resulting films can be controlled by varying the droplet evaporation rates before impact on the substrate. Thus, by tuning the process conditions, high-quality TiO2 spheres and disks were obtained. Then, these mesoporous TiO2 particles were used as the SLs in photoelectrodes, which resulted in enhanced power conversion efficiency (PCE). Compared with conventional SLs (8.45%), DSSCs based on spherical and disk-shaped particle SLs yield higher PCEs of 9.0% and 9.53%, respectively. This is because the generated TiO2 spheres and disks provide a large surface area and exhibit excellent light scattering capabilities, allowing a low total internal resistance and a long electron lifetime.

Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) have attracted tremendous attention as promising candidates for next-generation solar cells due to their low cost, facile fabrication, and high power conversion efficiency (PCE). By harvesting photons, dye molecules absorbed on a titania (TiO2) photoelectrode surface generate free electrons that are injected into and diffuse through the titania network, while the charged dye molecules are regenerated by a redox couple (typically iodide/triiodide) in electrolyte solution. The iodide is reduced at a platinum electrode by the electrons that have traveled through the external circuit. It is obvious that many factors can affect the performance of DSSCs; however, the structural and physical properties of the titania electrode are among the most important. Compared with using only nanocrystalline (nc)-TiO2 particle films, it has been demonstrated that the photocurrent density can be improved by mixing submicron-sized particles with nc-TiO2 in mono- and/or bilayer structures composed of a light-scattering layer (SL) and a nanocrystalline semitransparent TiO2 layer. The confinement of incident light by the light-scattering particles causes more photons to be harvested. Since the particle size, surface area, and position of the scattering particles play important roles in light scattering and dye uptake of the photoelectrode, a suitable combination of nanoparticles and scattering particles is essential to improve the cell performance. Recently, mesoporous TiO2 particles have been synthesized for DSSCs in micron/submicron particle geometries with hierarchical structures, such as titania aggregates, beads, spheres, and inverse opal structures. These porous structures are composed of primary nanocrystallites that cluster together to form larger secondary particles, thereby functioning as light scatterers without sacrificing the internal surface area needed for effective dye uptake in DSSCs. These films were applied as photoelectrode films directly or as the SLs and showed improved cell performance.

Here, we report an innovative SL for DSSC photoanodes made of electrosprayed nc-TiO2. Compared with traditional SLs, the present electrosprayed spherical and disk-shaped particle SLs have several advantages. Firstly, the electrosprayed TiO2 SL particles are composed of nanocrystallites with diameters of approximately ∼15–20 nm, and thus, they do not sacrifice dye-loading capacity of the photoanode. Secondly, the diameter of the electrosprayed TiO2 SL particles is submicron-sized, resulting in much higher diffuse reflection properties, thereby effectively improving the light harvesting characteristics of the device. Thirdly, the morphology of the SL can be easily engineered and fine-tuned by changing the operating parameters of the electrospraying process.

Nanocrystalline (nc)-TiO2 (Degussa P-25, particle size ∼15–20 nm) was first dispersed in ethanol at 10 wt% using a Kotobuki UAM-015 Ultra Apex mill. The 10 wt% nc-TiO2 dispersion was loaded into a plastic syringe, which was connected to a Bertan 205B high-voltage power supply. The dispersed nc-TiO2 particles were electrosprayed directly onto nc-TiO2 films on conducting fluoridated tin oxide (FTO) substrates. The process temperature and humidity were controlled using a heater and humidifier, respectively. An electric field of 15 kV was applied between the metal orifice and the conducting substrates, which were separated by a distance of 10 cm. The feed rate was controlled by a syringe pump at 25–30 μL min−1. In order to form a uniform thickness over a large area, the nozzle and the substrate were placed on a motion-control system with a microprocessor.


The optical properties of the as-prepared SL particles were measured using a UV/VIS/NIR Spectrometer (Perkin Elmer LAMBDA 1050) in the wavelength range of 185–3300 nm. The surface and cross-sectional morphologies of the TiO2 particles were analyzed using field-emission transmission electron microscopy (FE-TEM; Hitachi, HF-3300) and field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM; Hitachi, S-4800). The structural properties of the TiO2 particles were analyzed by X-ray diffraction (XRD; PANalytical, X'pert PRO-MPD with Cu Kα irradiation) in the θ–2θ mode.


After the electrospray process, each as-prepared TiO2-coated FTO photoelectrode was placed between two planar steel plates for mechanical pressing with a Teflon film, to protect the delamination of TiO2 photoelectrodes. On the basis of a previous study, it is clear that a properly optimized mechanical hot-pressing process can indeed improve the adhesion between the TiO2 photoelectrode and the substrate, thus improving the interface performance of TiO2 photoelectrodes in DSSCs. The typical pressure applied to fabricate efficient solar cells was 12 MPa at 120 °C for 10 min. The photoelectrodes coated with TiO2 spheres, disks, and nc-TiO2 were sintered in a box furnace in air at 500 °C for 30 min. For post-treatment, the TiO2 films were soaked in a 0.05 M TiCl4 aqueous solution for 20 min at 80 °C, rinsed with water, and then sintered again at 450 °C for 30 min. After cooling to 80 °C, the TiO2 photoelectrodes were immersed in a purified 3 × 10−4 M cis-diisothiocyanato-bis(2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylato)ruthenium(II)bis(tetrabutylammonium) solution (N719, Solaronix) for 15 h at room temperature (25 °C). For the counter electrode, FTO plates were drilled by a micro-drill, washed with a 0.1 M HCl solution in ethanol, and subsequently cleaned in an ultrasonic bath with water and ethanol for 15 min. A solution of 5 mM H2PtCl6 in isopropyl alcohol was drop-cast onto the washed FTO plates and then sintered at 400 °C for 20 min in air. The dye-adsorbed TiO2 photoelectrodes were rinsed with ethanol and dried under nitrogen flow. The dye-adsorbed TiO2 photoelectrodes were then assembled and sealed with the Pt counter electrodes using thermal adhesive films (Surlyn, Dupont 1702, 25 μm thick) as spacers to produce sandwich-type cells. The liquid electrolyte consisted of 0.7 M 1-propyl-3-methylimidazolium iodide (PMII), 0.03 M iodine (I2), 0.1 M guanidinium thiocyanate (GSCN), and 0.5 M 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP) in a mixture of acetonitrile (ACN) and valeronitrile (VN) (85/15 v/v). The electrolyte solution was introduced through the holes drilled in the counter electrode. Finally, the holes were sealed with a hot-melt film and a cover glass.


The photovoltaic measurements of the DSSCs employed an AM1.5G solar simulator between the sample and a 450 W xenon lamp. The intensity of the simulated light was calibrated by a silicon reference solar cell equipped with a KG5 filter for approximating AM1.5 global solar radiation. The photovoltaic characteristics of the DSSCs were obtained by applying an external potential bias to the cells and measuring the generated photocurrent using a Keithley Model 2400 source meter. The incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) was measured as a function of the wavelength from 350 nm to 800 nm using a specially designed IPCE system for DSSCs (PV measurement, Inc.). A 75 W xenon lamp was used as the light source to generate a monochromatic beam. Calibration was performed using a NIST calibrated silicon photodiode as the standard. IPCE values were collected at a low chopping speed of 5 Hz. The electrical impedance spectra (EIS) were measured using an impedance analyzer (Solartron 1260) at open-circuit potential under AM1.5G full-Sun illumination (100 mW cm−2), with a frequency range of ∼0.1–105 Hz. The obtained spectra were fitted using the ZView software (v3.2c, Scribner Associates, Inc.).


To realize SL-coupled DSSCs (SL DSSC) with enhanced photocurrent over a large spectral region, we have fabricated a fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO)/nc-TiO2/SL double layer that can be illuminated from the anode side. Fig. 1 schematically illustrates the procedure for preparing FTO/nc-TiO2/SL electrodes for DSSCs. To obtain the FTO/nc-TiO2 structure for a conventional DSSC and the double-layered structure shown in Fig. 1(a)–(c), nc-TiO2 paste is applied to the FTO-glass slide using a doctor blade and subsequently heat treated. Cellophane tape is used to control the film thickness. After that, to produce the final FTO/nc-TiO2/SL structure, a conventional SL is pasted onto the nc-TiO2 by a doctor blade, whereas sphere-shaped and disk-shaped SLs are prepared using elecrospraying processes (Fig. 1(d)–(f)). The generated surface morphology of conventional, spherical and disk-shaped SLs is shown in Fig. 1(g)–(i).

Several process parameters of the electrospraying procedure can be adjusted to tune the particle morphology of the SLs presented herein. Specifically, process temperature and humidity are controlled using a heater and humidifier unit, respectively; Table 1 shows the corresponding values used to produce specific particle morphologies in this experiment. After the electrospray process, each as-prepared FTO/nc-TiO2/SL electrode was placed between two planar steel plates for mechanical pressing and subsequently subjected to heat treatment.
Morphology
Solution
Temperature (°C)
Humidity (%)
Sphere SL
10 wt% nc-TiO2 (P-25) in ethanol
25
20
Disk SL
10 wt% nc-TiO2 (P-25) in ethanol
25
40
A toroid morphology of the produced particles can be considered to arise from an initial deformation of the droplet, which changes the initial spherical shape to a disk form. This is possible due to the loss of structural stability of the droplet in a two-phase flow field because of the additional macro- and microhydrodynamic effects during the drying process. The structural stability of the droplets can be explained by Bond's number, β, the ratio of the inertial force to the surface tension effects. The Bond number is given by
(1)
where Δ
ρ is the difference in densities of the droplet and the surrounding fluid, a is the acceleration (change in gas velocity with time), dd is the droplet size, and σ the interfacial tension/surface force. The droplet is nearly spherical at values β → 0 and becomes flat when the value of β increases. Thus, spherical particles are typically generated by electrospraying and can be fabricated from the nc-TiO2 dispersion. The dispersion shows the maximum structural stability when it is in spherical form, which is the fundamental reason for the production of this shape. When the humidity is low, the solvent evaporation rate is high, and the nanoparticles can re-homogenize as the droplet shrinks, promoting the formation of less porous particles. The low porosity corresponds to high mechanical strength inside the particle; therefore, it does not experience shrinkage or collapse, and a spherical morphology is realized (Fig. 2, R1).

The value of β can be set experimentally by varying the process humidity. Consequently, the destabilization of the initial shape of a droplet could be achieved by increasing the droplet size. Under conditions of high humidity of ∼40% obtained using a humidifier, the droplet radius is increased by the decreased solvent evaporation rate, and the destabilization of the initial droplet shape occurs. Values of β > 1 are attained from eqn (1), and the disk form is obtained (Fig. 2, R2). Detailed formulas for the calculation of shapes are available in previous literature. The selection and adjustment of the initial physicochemical properties of the droplet are known as the Bond-number correlation. Changes in the hydrodynamics, structural stability, and droplet behavior transform a droplet from spherical to disk-shape (Fig. 2, R1 and R2).

Fig. 3(a) and (b) are transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images showing the morphology of the electrosprayed TiO2 particles. The electrosprayed disk-shaped and spherical TiO2 particles are composed of ∼15–20 nm commercial P-25 (Degussa) nanoparticles used in the precursor dispersion. Furthermore, Fig. 3(c) shows the X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns for the conventional, spherical, and disk-shaped TiO2 SL particles, which indicate that all three possess highly crystalline anatase structures without any impurity phases (ICSD 156838). It should be noted that the peaks observed at 26°, 33°, and 51° are attributed to the FTO substrate (ICSD 039176). The crystallite sizes of spherical and disk-shaped TiO2 SL particles, as determined from the anatase (101) peak using the Scherrer equation, were 15.2 and 16.4 nm, respectively, comparable to the particle sizes obtained from the TEM images.
Dye desorption experiments are carried out using nc-TiO2/SL films coated with the N719 dye prepared from a 0.3 mM ethanolic solution. For each sample, the dye was desorbed from the nc-TiO2/SL electrodes by treatment with a certain volume of 0.1 M NaOH (aq). The absorbance of the resulting solution was then quantified with a UV-vis spectrophotometer by calculating the number of molecules from the obtained UV-vis absorption spectra of desorbed sensitizers using the extinction coefficient of the N719 sensitizer. Accordingly, the total amounts of adsorbed dye on the 8 μm nc-TiO2/4 μm conventional SL, 6 μm nc-TiO2/6 μm spherical SL, and 6 μm nc-TiO2/5 μm disk-shaped SL were 4.51 × 10−7 mol cm−2, 4.48 × 10−7 mol cm−2, and 4.45 × 10−7 mol cm−2, respectively. These results show that the spherical and disk-shaped SLs function as SLs without sacrificing the internal surface area needed for effective dye uptake. Furthermore, it is confirmed that the enhancement of photocurrent is not attributed to the different amounts of adsorbed dye in these samples. A SL DSSC consisting of 6 μm nc-TiO2/6 μm spherical SL, or 6 μm nc-TiO2/5 μm disk-shaped SL has the same calculated amount of adsorbed dye as an approximately 8 μm nc-TiO2 underlayer and 4 μm conventional SL, which was therefore used as a reference.
The photovoltaic properties of the SL DSSCs assembled using each of the conventional, spherical, and disk-shaped SLs are summarized in Fig. 4(a) and Table 2. We measured the J–V characteristics using the shading mask method of Ito et al. that has been used to limit photocurrent overestimation arising from light-guiding effects that occur as the light passes through the conduction glass electrode. It can be seen that the SL DSSC with the conventional SL shows a short circuit current (Jsc) of 15.3 mA cm−2, an open circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.778 mV, and a fill factor of 71%, resulting in a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 8.45%. The SL DSSC with spherical SL particles shows an enhanced Jsc of 16 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.781 mV, and a fill factor of 72%, resulting in an increased PCE of 9.0%. Moreover, the SL DSSC with disk-shaped SL particles exhibits a more significantly enhanced Jsc of 17 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.801 mV, and a fill factor of 70%, resulting in an increased PCE of 9.53%. Thus, the SL DSSC utilizing the disk-shaped SL provides the best performance, with an active area of 0.25 cm2, as shown in Table 2. In particular, the Jsc is 6% and 11% greater than those of the SL DSSCs obtained using the spherical and conventional SL, respectively. It is worth noting that the fill factor values are almost identical among the three SL types.
Morphology

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Disk SL
0.801
17
70
9.53
Sphere SL
0.781
16
72
9.0
Conventional SL
0.778
15.3
71
8.45
Increased light-scattering ability of TiO2 photoelectrodes is necessary to improve the light-harvesting efficiency, and thus, the incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) of the resulting DSSC. The amount of diffusely scattered light after irradiation by a beam on the electrode film can be quantified by diffuse reflectance spectroscopy. For comparison, the diffuse reflectance spectra of the SL using conventional, spherical, and disk-shaped particles are measured and presented in Fig. 4(b). From this figure, it is obvious that the disk-shaped photoelectrode has a higher diffuse reflectance capacity than those of the spherical and conventional SL in the wavelength range between 400 and 800 nm, indicating the superior light-scattering properties of the disk-shaped film. In order to compare the photovoltaic performances of the three SL types, the IPCE spectra of the SL DSSC using these materials were collected. These IPCE spectra are measured as a function of wavelength from 400 nm to 800 nm using a specially designed IPCE system for DSSCs. The IPCE characteristics of the SL DSSCs are shown in Fig. 4(c). As shown in Fig. 4(c), the SL prepared using disk-shaped particles possesses higher IPCE values over a wide spectral range (from 400 to 800 nm) than the SLs containing similar amounts of the adsorbed dye using either spherical or conventional particles. The higher IPCE values of the disk-shaped SL are ascribed to the enhanced light-scattering capacity of the SL, which promotes light harvesting of the sensitizing dye in this region. This is in good agreement with the Jsc and reflectance results mentioned above. In order to investigate the electron transport properties in the SL DSSCs, electrical impedance spectra (EIS) measurements are used. Fig. 4(d) shows the Nyquist plots of the EIS results of the three different SL devices, measured under 1.5 AM simulated solar conditions. Generally, the conventional three semicircles observed in the Nyquist plot indicate the internal resistances of the devices. The series resistance (R0) of the cells is estimated from the intercept on the real axis with the highest frequency. The first arc in the high-frequency range indicates the electrochemical reaction resistance or the redox couple at the Pt counter electrode (R1). The second arc in the intermediate-frequency range represents the charge recombination resistance at the interface between the TiO2 photoelectrode and the electrolyte (R2). The third arc is caused by the Warburg diffusion of the redox species (WS). CPE1 and CPE2 are the constant-phase elements of the capacitance, corresponding to R1 and R2, respectively. Thus, Fig. 4(d) illustrates the origin of the differences in the electric properties between the devices using disk-shaped, spherical, and conventional SLs. As shown in Table 3, the disk-shaped SL has a smaller R2 resistance and larger CPE2 capacitance than those of the spherical and conventional SLs.
Morphology

R
0 (Ω)

R
1 (Ω)
CPE1 (mF)

R
2 (Ω)
CPE2 (mF)

W
S (Ω)

τ (ms)
Disk SL
8.23
5.71
1.02
11.52
1.35
3.93
15.5
Sphere SL
8.19
5.19
0.94
13.73
0.61
3.16
8.4
Conventional SL
8.42
5.11
0.95
14.83
0.31
6.62
4.6

R
2 is denoted as Rk (charge-transfer resistance related to the recombination of electrons in TiO2) from the Bisquert equation:
(2)
where
kB, T, q, A, ns, k, and L denote the Boltzmann constant, absolute temperature, charge of protons, electrode area, electron density at the steady state in the conduction band, rate constant of recombination, and thickness of TiO2, respectively. The decrease in Rk with various SLs can be likely attributed to the following reasons: the number of injected electrons increases with improved light-harvesting efficiency by the SL, resulting in an increase in ns. This eventually leads to a decrease in Rk, as it is inversely proportional to ns (eqn (2)). This results in a decrease in its total internal resistance and an increase in its efficiency. The electron diffusion length becomes longer as the electron lifetime increases. The electron lifetime (τ) can be calculated as follows:

τn = R22CPE2
(3)
The calculated lifetimes τn of the disk-shaped, spherical, and conventional SLs are 15.5, 8.4, and 4.6 ms, respectively. Under illumination, the relation between Voc and recombination lifetime can be described as:
(4)
where
R is the molar gas constant, T is the temperature, F is the Faraday constant, β is the reaction order for I3− and electrons, A is the electrode area, I is the incident photon flux, n0 is the concentration of electronic states in the conduction band, k1 is the reaction constant for the back-reaction of injected electrons with triiodide, and k2 is the reaction constant for the recombination of electrons with oxidized dye (D+). Assuming that recombination with oxidized dye molecules is negligible, Voc is logarithmically dependent on k1 under the conditions used in this study, because both the concentration of triiodide in the electrolyte and incident photon flux were constant. Furthermore, assuming Voc is proportional to ln(1/τn), DSSCs with longer lifetimes have higher Voc values. In particular, the long lifetime (15.5 ms) of the disk-shaped SL photoelectrode provides a higher Voc of 0.801 V, compared to those of the spherical SL (0.781 V) and conventional SL (0.778 V), respectively. The increased lifetime in the disk-shaped SL photoelectrode is directly related to the reduced possibility of multiple trapping, as well as the inhibition of recombination in the TiO2/electrolyte interface, because the disk-shaped SL photoelectrode is relatively thin and has a large porous structure compared to other structures. This would directly imply that both the dye and the iodide can easily penetrate completely into the TiO2 photoelectrodes, and due to a reduction of grain boundaries, the charge recombination decreased.


In summary, hierarchically structured spherical and disk-shaped particles were successfully formed via the electrospray process in this study. Comparisons between a theoretical mechanism and experimental results were shown to illustrate how particles of various morphologies were formed. Electrosprayed TiO2 spherical and disk-shaped particles can be applied as effective SLs in DSSCs to improve the performance of the device. Comparing with the conventional SL, the electrosprayed spherical and disk-shaped SLs consisted of numerous nanocrystallites (∼15–20 nm size) packed on the particles. This provides the SL with an added advantage of high dye-loading capacity. The disk-shaped SL has a higher diffuse reflectance capacity than those of the spherical and conventional SLs in the wavelength range between 400 and 800 nm, indicating the superior light-scattering properties of the disk-shaped SL. Thus, our unique configuration with spherical and disk-shaped SLs can improve the light harvesting efficiency of the device without compromising the dye loading abilities. High efficiencies of 9.53% and 9.0% can be achieved with the disk-shaped and spherical SLs, respectively, which are 13% and 6.5% greater than that of a device with the conventional monodispersed 400 nm SL particles having only 8.45% efficiency. We aim to further benefit from the electrospraying ability to control the deposition parameters, systematically report a variety of film structures, and study their effect on the DSSC performance. The primary focus of this work is to track the relative changes in the DSSC performance. Although we need more effort to achieve the high absolute efficiencies, the flexibility of the technique makes it applicable to more advanced materials used in high-efficiency cells, such as state-of-the-art chemical sensitizers, redox couples, or solid-state hole conductors.


This work was supported by the DGIST R&D Program of the Ministry of Science, ICT and Future Planning of Korea (16-EN-03) and a grant from the Fundamental R&D program for Core Technology of Materials (10050966) funded by the Ministry of Knowledge Economy.


This journal is © the Owner Societies 2016