 DOI: 10.1039/C8TA00948A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 12370-12379


Ting
Qiu
,

Yanqiang
Hu
,

Fan
Bai
,

Xiaoliang
Miao
 and 

Shufang
Zhang
*

College of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing 210094, China. E-mail: zhangshufang@njust.edu.cn

Received
29th January 2018
, Accepted 5th June 2018
First published on 6th June 2018
Organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites have attracted enormous attention due to their remarkable properties for high-efficiency solar cells in recent years. However, controlling the morphology of perovskite films is still a challenge using a solution synthesis method. Perovskite films with incomplete coverage are inevitable and this significantly limits the device photoelectric performance and long-term stability. In this work, we have combined gamma-aminobutyric acid iodide (GABAI) and CH3NH3I (MAI) as a mixed amine source in a precursor solution to fabricate a mixed-cation perovskite (GABA)xMA1−xPbI3. As a result, high quality (GABA)xMA1−xPbI3 crystals were synthesized and showed better pore-filling and more complete contact with the TiO2 scaffold, enhancing the power conversion efficiency from 15.08 to 18.31% with respect to the controlled MAPbI3 solar cells. Importantly, the devices that contained GABA+ also showed much higher stability when compared to the reference MAPbI3 devices. This new chemical modification design, using bifunctional mixed cations in organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites, provides an efficient approach for improving both the performance and stability simultaneously.

Organic–inorganic metal halide perovskites have attracted enormous attention in the photovoltaic community for their use as light harvesters due to their outstanding optical properties such as high absorption coefficient, high carrier mobility and tunable band-gap, as well as low-cost solution processing. In recent years, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of solar cells based on these organic–inorganic metal halide perovskites has increased from 3.8% to more than 22%. Of the various organic–inorganic lead halide perovskites, methylammonium lead iodide (MAPbI3) is the most commonly used photoactive material for fabricating high-efficiency perovskite solar cells (PSCs). Several solution methods, such as the one-step spin-coating method and two-step sequential method, have been employed to prepare MAPbI3 thin films. In particular, the one-step deposition technique is most frequently used to fabricate perovskite films owing to the low-cost and easy operation. However, this technique is susceptible to uncontrollable film morphologies with large morphological variations and incomplete filling of the mesoporous oxide scaffold, which will suppress sufficient light harvesting and accelerate carrier recombination, thus further deteriorating the cell performance and long-term stability. Therefore, developing a high-quality perovskite film with full surface coverage, large grain size and less grain boundaries using this procedure is essential to improve the PCE and stability of PSCs.

Incomplete surface coverage can occur due to two main reasons: bad adhesion on the substrate and the weak bond between crystals. Hence, surface modification on TiO2 and crosslinking between individual perovskites are two effective methods to improve the crystal and film quality, resulting in an improved device performance. Usually, the former can be accomplished by introducing organic compounds containing special functional groups as interfacial linkers. For example, several research groups have shown that smooth and highly crystalline perovskite films could be prepared via pretreatment of the TiO2 surface using amphipathic molecules such as glycine, 3-aminopropanoic acid and 4-aminobenzoic acid. This method can help to exactly control the formation of perovskite crystals in the porous oxide and reduce voids in the films. However, the intrinsic affinity of MAPbI3 for moisture remains to be solved since MAPbI3 would degrade under ambient conditions and eventually transform into PbI2 due to the weak bonding energies, resulting in the loss of CH3NH3I. In this regard, Grätzel et al. introduced bifunctional ammonium cations, alkylphosphonic acid ω-ammonium cations (4-ABPA), as crosslinking agents between neighbouring perovskite grains. As a result, they demonstrated that 4-ABPA, acting as a crosslinking agent, could enhance the device efficiency and stability simultaneously due to the hydrogen-bonding interactions between the perovskite grains and –PO(OH)2 groups. Many other additives have also been incorporated into perovskite films via “cross-link” or chelation effects between the perovskite grains and functional groups. In these typical additives, functional groups such as carboxyl groups (–COOH), hydroxyl groups (–OH), and ammonium groups (–NH2), linked by flexible carbon chains, usually interact with the Pb2+ cations or I− ions of perovskites via the formation of hydrogen bonds, which can effectively suppress the migration of ions in the perovskite film and further reduce hysteresis and improve the stability of PSCs.
However, the way in which these additives can simultaneously modify the TiO2 surface contact and form cross-links between perovskite crystals has rarely been reported. Based on this consideration, we firstly employed gamma-aminobutyric acid iodide (GABAI) as the mixed amine source in the precursor solution to fabricate the perovskite film via a simple one-step spin-coating method. As a typical bifunctional group, GABA+ contains both –COOH and NH3+ groups at different terminals of the molecule. The carboxylic group is easily chemically bonded to TiO2, and the amino group acts as a growth site of the crystal of the MAPbI3 perovskite and favours large crystal formation. On the other hand, –COOH has been reported to form hydrogen bonds with the I− ions from the PbI6 octahedra, which can enhance the connection between adjacent perovskites. This enables GABA+ to be potentially used as a hybrid cation to improve the contact with TiO2 and the link between the perovskite crystals at the same time. On the premise of maintaining a 1:1 molar ratio of organic ammonium cations and PbI2, we have developed a series of mixed-cation perovskite materials with the formula (GABA)xMA1−xPbI3 (x = 0.025, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, and 0.5) by controlling the ratio of GABAI to MAI in the precursor solution and we have further explored their photoelectric properties in PSCs as light-absorbing materials for the first time. For a clear expression, we used the proportion of GABAI in the mixed precursor solution to roughly describe the mixed-cation perovskite. It should be noted that the real proportion of GABA+ in (GABA)xMA1−xPbI3 was actually lower than these values because part of GABA+ was anchored in the TiO2/perovskite interface. As a reference, conventional MAPbI3 was prepared using the same process. By adjusting the incorporation ratio of GABA+ to an optimal value, uniform perovskite films with large crystals, full surface coverage, and an ultrasmooth surface were conveniently fabricated. The highly crystalline quality of the perovskite was found to simultaneously enhance the PCE and the durability of PSCs. When compared to the control device, the PCE of the devices fabricated with GABA+ were obviously improved from 15.08% to 18.31%. The champion device based on (GABA)0.1MA0.9PbI3 demonstrated a high PCE of 18.31% with an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.10 V, a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 22.09 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 0.75 with good reproducibility. In addition, the high performance devices fabricated with GABA+ could retain over 72% of the initial PCE after 30 days when kept under ambient conditions (average relative humidity (RH) = 45% and 25 °C) without any encapsulation, thus showing superior stability when compared to the reference MAPbI3-based devices.

Methylammonium iodide (MAI, 99.9%), lead iodide (PbI2, 99.9%), gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA, 99.9%), hydroiodic acid (HI, 57%), toluene (anhydrous, 99.8%), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO, anhydrous, 99.8%) and N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF, anhydrous, 99.8%) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Gamma-aminobutyric acid iodide (GABAI) was synthesized from the reaction of gamma-aminobutyric acid powder and hydroiodic acid. First, hydroiodic acid and gamma-aminobutyric acid were added together, with a mole ratio of 1:1, into a round-bottomed flask and stirred in an ice bath for 2 h. Afterwards, the remaining liquid was evaporated using a rotavapor at 50 °C. The precipitate was washed three times with diethyl ether and dried in a vacuum drying oven, and then GABAI was obtained. All of the materials were used as received without further purification unless otherwise specified.


A 1 M MAPbI3 perovskite precursor solution was prepared by dissolving MAI and PbI2 powder in a 1 mL DMSO and DMF mixed solvent (3:7 in volume ratio) and stirring for over 24 h at 70 °C. 1 M (GABA)xMA1−xPbI3 (x = 0.025, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, and 0.5) precursor solutions were prepared in the same manner except with different molar ratios of GABAI and MAI in the precursor solution (GABAI/MAI/PbI2 = x/1 − x/1, mole ratio). Specifically, to obtain such stoichiometric solutions, the molar ratio of GABAI in the mixture was controlled at 2.5 mol%, 5 mol%, 10 mol%, 20 mol% and 50 mol%.


Firstly, a fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) conducting glass substrate (sheet resistance < 7 ohm per square) was ultrasonically cleaned using detergent, deionized water and acetone for 20 min, sequentially, and it was then treated with a UV/O3 cleaner for 30 min. A compact layer of TiO2 was deposited on the cleaned substrate by spin-coating 0.15 M titanium diisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate) at 3500 rpm. After repeating the process twice, the sample was sintered at 500 °C for 30 min. A porous TiO2 film was deposited on the compact TiO2 blocking layer by spin-coating of the TiO2 paste diluted in terpinol at 4000 rpm for 30 s, followed by annealing at 500 °C for 2 h. The MAPbI3 and (GABA)xMA1−xPbI3 absorber layers were obtained via a reported anti-solvent method. The spin-coating procedure was performed at 1000 rpm for 10 s, then at 5000 rpm for 30 s. At 21 s before the last spin-coating step, 0.5 mL toluene, used as an anti-solvent, was pipetted onto the substrate. Then, the sample was annealed at 100 °C for 30 min to induce solvent evaporation and perovskite absorption layer formation. The hole transporter, spiro-OMeTAD, was dissolved in chlorobenzene and LiTFSI and tert-butylpyridine (TBP) was used as the additive (0.167 g spiro-OMeTAD, 0.0298 g TBP, 0.0103 g in 1.00 mL chlorobenzene), and then the solution was deposited by spin-coating at 5500 rpm for 30 s. Finally, a 100 nm thick Au electrode was deposited on top of the device by thermal evaporation under ca. 1 × 10−6 torr vacuum conditions, through a shadow mask.


The surface and cross morphologies and elemental compositions of the prepared (GABA)xMA1−xPbI3 films were observed using field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM; Quanta 250FEG). The roughness and surface microstructure were characterized using atomic force microscopy (AFM; Brook Multimode 8). Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectra were recorded using a Bruker Vertex 80v Fourier transform infrared spectrometer. Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy was performed using an AVANCE III instrument with a frequency of 500 MHz, and deuterated DMSO was used as the solvent. X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were recorded using a Bruker D8 diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.5406 Å). UV-vis spectra were recorded using perovskite infiltrated mesoscopic TiO2 films supported by FTO glass and a UV-vis-NIR spectrophotometer (UV-3600, Shimadzu). The photoluminescence (PL) spectra of the films were obtained at room temperature using a steady-state lifetime spectrofluorometer (Varian Cary Eclipse). The time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) decay of the perovskite films was measured using a Horiba Fluorolog-3 Time Correlated Single Photon Counting (TCSPC) system with an excitation wavelength at 768 nm. Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) was performed using a PHI5000VERSA PROBE II instrument. The current–voltage characteristic curves of the fabricated PSCs were measured under standard AM 1.5 sunlight (100 mW cm−2, WXS-90L2, Wacom). The effective area of the cell was defined as 1.0 cm2 using a non-reflective metal mask.



Fig. 1a shows a proposed schematic diagram of the self-assembled (GABA)xMA1−xPbI3 perovskite films and their anchor on the TiO2 surface. We propose that GABA+, as a typical bifunctional ammonium species, can partially replace MA+ at the periphery of the octahedral structure and can self-assemble into a perovskite structure via the formation of hydrogen bonds between the terminal carboxylic functional groups and the I− ions from the PbI6 octahedra. The possible connective mechanism with TiO2 may be that the carboxylate oxygen atoms on the GABA+ molecule react with the metal cations of TiO2 to form carboxylate–metal bonds, which is very similar to the mechanism that occurs in widely used dyes, with –COOH acting as an anchoring group in dye-sensitized solar cells. The NH3+ groups of GABA+ are exposed to the perovskite solution and hence they are expected to be nucleation sites. By incorporating a small amount of GABA+ into the precursor solution, the color of the (GABA)x(MA)1−xPbI3 films changes and gradually becomes darker when the concentration of GABA+ increases to 10 mol%, however, when continuously increasing its content, the film turns brown and eventually becomes yellowish if only a pure GABAI precursor solution is added, which is not suitable for the absorbance layer in PSCs (Fig. 1b). The Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) transmission spectra of GABAI, MAPbI3, (GABA)0.1MA0.9PbI3 and GABAI + MAPbI3 (a mixture of the two compounds) were recorded to determine the existence of GABA+ in the perovskite film, as shown in Fig. 1c. Strong peaks were observed at 1637 cm−1, which can be ascribed to CO stretching, while the peaks at 1473 cm−1 and 1117 cm−1 represent C–O stretching, and correspond to the –COOH group of the molecules, as reported previously. A closer inspection of the CO vibration band was carried out, as shown in Fig. 1d. The CO vibration band of GABA+ in (GABA)0.1MA0.9PbI3 was shifted to 1637 from 1631 cm−1 in GABAI, which was attributed to coordinate effects between the oxygen lone pairs of the –COOH group and the Pb ions of the perovskite, however, after just mixing the two compounds of GABAI and MAPbI3, no shift could be observed in the CO vibration band, which means that there was no interaction between Pb and –COOH. To confirm the formation of hydrogen bonds, as shown in Fig. 1a, a 1H NMR measurement was performed, as shown in Fig. S1. From looking at the spectrum of the GABAI sample, the resonance signal that appears at δ = 12.97 ppm was attributed to the carboxylic group. A chemical shift of Δδ = −1.22 ppm could be observed in the (GABA)0.1MA0.9PbI3 solution and this can be explained by the formation of a hydrogen bond between the carboxylic group and iodide ion. The resonance signal of –NH3+ in GABAI (peak at δ = 8.42 ppm) was shifted by Δδ = −0.87 ppm after it was incorporated into the (GABA)0.1MA0.9PbI3 solution, which could also be attributed to the influence of hydrogen bonds between NH3+ and the iodide ion. We used the analogous perovskite, CsPbI3, as a reference to further verify our analysis of the chemical shifts. Similar chemical shifts were also present in the GABA–CsPbI3 sample, which provided solid evidence for the presence of hydrogen bonding between the hydroxyl group (and NH3+) in GABAI and the iodide ion in the PbI64− octahedra. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of neat MAPbI3 and (GABA)xMA1−xPbI3 were recorded to evaluate the effect of GABA+ on perovskite crystallinity (Fig. 1e). Clear diffraction peaks at ∼14.11, ∼28.40 and ∼31.85° for all of the perovskite films could be indexed to the (110), (220), and (310) diffraction peaks of the perovskite grains, respectively. When the concentration of GABA+ was increased from 0 mol% to 10 mol%, the absolute intensities of the (110) and (220) peaks became significantly sharper and enhanced when compared to pristine MAPbI3, reaching the strongest intensity at 10 mol%, which indicates that a small and suitable proportion of GABA+ will be conducive to the improvement of perovskite crystallinity in the films. The full widths at half maximum (FWHMs) of the (110) plane for the films with GABA+ concentrations ranging from 0 to 50 mol% were 0.138, 0.128, 0.125, 0.118, 0.129 and 0.139 nm−1, respectively (Fig. S2). The lowest FWHM value was found for the 10 mol% GABA+ perovskite film, which suggests that it has the best crystallinity. Specifically, the presence of only two peaks at 2θ = 14.02° and 28.23° for the 10 mol% GABA+-based sample indicates preferential crystal growth of the (110) and (220) faces, leading to better performance. However, when continuously increasing the GABA+ doping concentration and exceeding the optimal value of 10 mol%, a newly emerged (100) plane was found at 11.6°, along with a weakened value for the (110) peak, indicating excessive GABA+ guided complex preferential crystallization. Furthermore, a close inspection of the (110) planes in the XRD patterns of the (GABA)xMA1−xPbI3 films showed a slight shift toward lower angles when the GABA+ concentration was increased to 10 mol% (Fig. 1f), which could be correlated with a significant increase in the lattice parameters due to incorporation of the larger GABA+ cation. When the GABA+ content surpassed 10 mol%, the (110) peaks no longer shifted and the intensity of the diffraction peaks decreased. We speculate that the substitution reaction was saturated and the excessive addition of GABA+ will only affect the preferred orientation of crystallization.

To further investigate the crystallization of the perovskite films with and without GABA+, top view SEM images of the (GABA)xMA1−xPbI3 and MAPbI3 films were obtained, as shown in Fig. 2a–f. In the controlled MAPbI3 films, incomplete coverage was inevitably found with some visible pinholes. After incorporating 2.5 mol% GABA+ into the precursor solution, the pinholes disappeared and the resulting film showed full surface coverage over the entire substrate. The films gradually became smoother with larger grains sizes when the amount of GABA+ incorporated was gradually increased to the optimum value of 10 mol%. However, when we further increased the amount of GABA+, the perovskite film became coarser and non-uniform due to the non-compact arrangement of the crystal grains. This was well consistent with the XRD analysis above. The improvement in perovskite crystallinity and the higher loading of the perovskite on the mesopores of the oxide scaffold in the presence of GABA cations probably resulted from the anchoring of GABA+ to the surface of the mesoporous TiO2 film, thus affecting perovskite crystal nucleation and growth. In the adsorbed state, the terminal –NH3+ groups of GABA+ are exposed to the perovskite solution and hence serve as nucleation sites. GABA cations could serve as a template to regulate the formation of perovskite crystals in the mesoporous oxide host and induce preferential growth. The morphologies of the perovskite thin films based on MAPbI3 and the optimum (GABA)0.1MA0.9PbI3 were further studied using AFM. We observed dramatic changes in the morphologies and surface coverage of these films after incorporation of GABA+, as shown in Fig. 3a and b. The (GABA)0.1MA0.9PbI3 film exhibited a very smooth surface with a small root mean square (RMS) roughness value of 12.4 nm. In contrast, the controlled MAPbI3 film showed a high RMS of 32.8 nm. These morphology characterizations, obtained using SEM and AFM, show that the perovskite thin films can become smoother and more uniform due to the partial substitution of MA+ with GABA+. This suggests homogenous nucleation of the perovskites on the TiO2 surface, probably due to the modification of the TiO2 substrate. These improvements in the morphology and crystallization will be beneficial for effective charge transport, thus achieving a higher photovoltaic performance.

In order to evaluate the crystalline quality-related optoelectronic properties of the perovskite films after incorporation of GABA+ into the perovskite structure, we obtained absorption spectra and PL measurements of the GABA-based (GABA)xMA1−xPbI3 perovskite films, using the MAPbI3 film as a reference. As shown in Fig. 3c, when compared to the controlled MAPbI3 film, the absorbance of the (GABA)xMA1−xPbI3 films gradually increased along almost the entire visible-light region when the concentration of GABA+ was increased from 2.5 mol% to 10 mol%, which probably originates from the contribution of improved surface morphologies and the more uniform crystal formation of the perovskites. With a further increase in the concentration of GABA+, the absorbance significantly decreased, resulting from the decrease in the crystal quality, which was consistent with the variation in the trend of the morphology from the SEM results. These microstructural changes that control the photophysical properties could be further confirmed from the PL spectra, as shown in Fig. S3. We observed that the PL intensity of the GABA-incorporated films (from 2.5 mol% to 20 mol%) was higher than that of the controlled MAPbI3 perovskite film, suggesting a reduction in the number of trapping sites in the (GABA)xMA1−xPbI3 (x ≤ 0.2) perovskite films. To verify the conductive variation induced by GABA+ doping, we measured the electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) of the controlled MAPbI3 and the (GABA)xMA1−xPbI3 films by coating a thin layer of Au as the top electrode, as shown in Fig. 3d. Nyquist plots of these films exhibited distinct semicircles, and the semicircles fitted well with the inserted equivalent circuit model. The sheet resistance of R1 (Rsh) and the charge transport resistance of R2 (Rct) are summarized in Table S1. The Rsh values of all of these films were close to each other, demonstrating that the testing of these films were conducted under the same conditions. As expected, the Rct of the (GABA)xMA1−xPbI3 films gradually decreased to 0.712 kΩ with the increase in the GABA+ concentration to 10 mol%, in comparison to that of the controlled MAPbI3 film (1.762 kΩ). Thus, the obvious decrease in Rct for the (GABA)0.1MA0.9PbI3 films indicated that the presence of GABA+ enhanced the conductivity by modifying the contact with the TiO2 electron transport layer. In addition, the relatively high resistances in the high GABA+ content films, such as the (GABA)0.2MA0.8PbI3 and (GABA)0.5MA0.5PbI3 films, were possibly caused by the large area grain boundary and the poor morphology of the perovskite layers.

In addition, we investigated the TRPL decay of the MAPbI3 and (GABA)0.1MA0.9PbI3 perovskite films on bare glass substrates (Fig. S4a). We observed a significant increase in the PL lifetime (141 ns) of the (GABA)0.1MA0.9PbI3 film when compared to the controlled MAPbI3 film (45 ns), which was consistent with a significant reduction in non-radiative recombination in the film. To investigate the charge transfer ability of the perovskite light absorber to the TiO2 electron transfer layer after adding GABA+, we also carried out TRPL decay measurements with a configuration of glass/TiO2/perovskite. As shown in Fig. S4b, we obtained an average PL decay time of 3 ns for glass/TiO2/(GABA)0.1MA0.9PbI3 and 10 ns for glass/TiO2/MAPbI3. When compared with the MAPbI3 perovskite, the GABA-based perovskite led to a significantly reduced PL decay time, implying that electrons separated from the photo-generated excitons within the perovskite layer were efficiently extracted from the perovskite to TiO2. The results of the TRPL decay measurements confirm the improved charge transfer ability to extract and transport charge from the perovskite layer to TiO2 after adding GABA, suggesting that GABA+ served as a surface modifier for the TiO2 thin film.

To evaluate the photovoltaic performance of the devices based on the (GABA)x(MA)1−xPbI3 films with various concentrations of GABA+, regular architecture perovskite solar cells of FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Au based on these GABA-doped perovskite films were investigated. Fig. 4a and b show the cross-sectional SEM images of PSCs based on the perovskite films without and with 10 mol% GABA+. The current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the devices are shown in Fig. S5 and the corresponding photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table 1. Owing to the incomplete coverage and inefficient light harvesting, the device of MAPbI3 exhibited a relatively poorer performance with a Jsc value of 20.89 mA cm−2, an Voc value of 1.08 V, a FF of 66.84%, and a PCE of 15.08%. The performance of the PSCs gradually improved with increasing GABA+ concentration from 2.5 to 10 mol%. As expected, the J–V characteristics of the champion device with the (GABA)0.1MA0.9PbI3 film achieved a high PCE of 18.31%, a Jsc of 22.09 mA cm−2, an Voc of 1.10 V, and a FF of 75.35% (Fig. 4c). The largely enhanced photovoltaic performance not only came from the smoother and denser morphology of (GABA)0.1MA0.9PbI3, which helped to sustain electron–hole separation and block the primary recombination pathway from TiO2 to the hole-transporting material (HTM), but also from a more intimate contact of the perovskite with TiO2 and a down-shifted TiO2 work function, as evidenced from the UPS measurement. As shown in Fig. S6, the work function of bare TiO2 was ≈4.03 eV, and when it was soaked with GABA+, the work function of GABA–TiO2 shifted to ≈4.13 eV. The positively shifted TiO2 allowed a larger driving force in the TiO2 film for interfacial electron injection from the Fermi level of the perovskite, thus facilitating charge transport. However, the PSCs with 20 and 50 mol% GABA+ severely deteriorated due to the decrease in the morphology and absorption performance arising from excessive doping. In addition, the effects of the GABA cation on the energy levels of the perovskite were investigated. As shown in Fig. S7a, the band gaps (Eg) of MAPbI3 and the (GABA)0.1MA0.9PbI3 films were calculated to be 1.55 and 1.54 eV, respectively. Fig. S7b shows the UPS spectra for MAPbI3 and (GABA)0.1MA0.9PbI3 deposited on the TiO2 film, where the energy was calibrated with respect to the He(I) photon energy (21.21 eV). The valence band energy (EVB) of (GABA)0.1MA0.9PbI3 was estimated to be −5.47 eV below vacuum level, which was very slightly upshifted when compared to the MAPbI3 film (−5.46 eV). The schematic band alignments were sketched, as shown in Fig. S7c and d. After incorporating 10 mol% GABA+ into the perovskite, the band position was better aligned for charge separation.

Perovskite

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
MAPbI3
1.08
20.89
66.84
15.08
(GABA)0.025MA0.975PbI3
1.09
21.59
68.41
16.10
(GABA)0.05MA0.95PbI3
1.10
21.84
70.89
17.03
(GABA)0.1MA0.9PbI3
1.10
22.09
75.35
18.31
(GABA)0.2MA0.8PbI3
1.06
20.24
69.49
14.91
(GABA)0.5MA0.5PbI3
1.01
19.84
65.03
12.44
The J–V hysteresis of the best-performing devices employing (GABA)0.1MA0.9PbI3 and MAPbI3, carried out at different scan rates to exclude the effect of scanning rate, are shown in Fig. S8 and the relevant parameters are summarized in Table S2. There was a commonly significant hysteresis phenomenon in the MAPbI3 PSC regardless of the scanning rate, however, with the incorporation of GABA+, the hysteresis phenomenon was greatly reduced. As demonstrated from the SEM and XRD results, the (GABA)0.1MA0.9PbI3 perovskite layer possessed good crystallization, lower defect density and smaller GBs, which could accelerate the charge carrier mobility and extraction in the active layer. This guaranteed that the film would respond quickly when the voltage was changed, resulting in suppressed hysteresis. In addition, the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra of the devices and the integrated Jsc are shown in Fig. 4d. The (GABA)0.1MA0.9PbI3 perovskite solar cell exhibited a higher EQE than the controlled MAPbI3 over the wavelength range corresponding to its absorbance, and a current density of 22.05 mA cm−2 was obtained by integrating the overlap of the EQE spectrum with the AM 1.5 G solar photon flux, which was in excellent agreement with the photocurrent density measured from the J–V curves. Furthermore, when compared to the controlled MAPbI3 solar cell, which had a stabilized efficiency of only 14.68% (Fig. 4e), the (GABA)0.1MA0.9PbI3 solar cell required only 10 s to reach a stable efficiency value of 18.08%, which is very close to the J–V scan efficiency. The reproducibility was investigated using statistic 50 devices for each type of PSC, as shown in the statistical histogram of Fig. 4f. The (GABA)0.1MA0.9PbI3 PSCs showed a more concentrated distribution in the high-efficiency segment, which demonstrates the excellent reproducibility after doping with GABA+. The average PCE of the (GABA)0.1MA0.9PbI3 PSCs was 16.6%, which is much higher than that of the corresponding MAPbI3 device (13.4%). In addition, the statistical distributions of the photovoltaic parameters such as Voc, Jsc, FF and PCE for each batch of the 50 devices based on the controlled MAPbI3 and a series of (GABA)xMA1−xPbI3 films are shown in Fig. S9. The much higher average PCE value of the (GABA)0.1MA0.9PbI3 PSCs was mainly due to the significant increase in Jsc and FF, and a slight increase in Voc.

To study the long-term stability of the (GABA)0.1MA0.9PbI3 film when compared to the MAPbI3 film, we tested the water wetting behaviour of the controlled MAPbI3 and (GABA)0.1MA0.9PbI3 films by means of contact-angle testing. As shown in Fig. 5a, when compared to the controlled MAPbI3 film with a water contact angle of 68.3°, the (GABA)0.1MA0.9PbI3 film showed a very large water contact angle of 114.5°, and maintained a larger contact angle (83.8°) after ten minutes. The obvious difference in contact angle might be attributed to the smoother surface of the (GABA)0.1MA0.9PbI3 film with improved uniformity and increased hydrophobicity. In addition, we believe that surface modification of the perovskite grains by a GABA+ containing long chain molecule impaired the access of water to the perovskite and prevented the perovskite from degrading to PbI2.

Notoriously, due to its ionic character, MAPbI3 is sensitive to moisture and unsealed perovskite cells degrade rapidly in a humid environment, and defect-formed regions and grain boundaries in MAPbI3 films are easily attacked by corrosive moisture or oxygen, promoting disintegration of the perovskite film.Fig. 5b and c show photographs of these two kinds of films over time when kept in a constant temperature–humidity chamber at 25 °C with 60% RH. In the case of the controlled MAPbI3 film, we found that the pristine perovskite was severely corroded by moisture since the color gradually changed to yellow, suggesting that the perovskite was converted to PbI2, while no obvious change in color of the (GABA)0.1MA0.9PbI3 film was observed. The XRD patterns of these films, kept for 30 days, confirmed that the (GABA)0.1MA0.9PbI3 film was much more stable than the MAPbI3 film, as seen in Fig. S10a and b. For the controlled MAPbI3 film, the (001) plane corresponding to the characteristic peak of PbI2 appeared after the sample was kept for 3 days in ambient air and the intensity increased significantly when the time was prolonged to 10 days. Moreover, the intensity of the (110) and (220) crystal planes for these perovskite films obviously decreased with time. In contrast, there was no obvious change in the (GABA)0.1MA0.9PbI3 film even after 30 days. Correspondingly, the absorption spectra of these two kinds of films during the 30 days were measured (Fig. 5d and e). The absorption spectra of the (GABA)0.1MA0.9PbI3 film did not obviously change even after 30 days. While, the absorption spectra of the MAPbI3 film suggests that MAPbI3 gradually decreased and was degraded completely after 10 days. These results further support the conclusion that the (GABA)0.1MA0.9PbI3 film is much more stable against moisture than the MAPbI3 film. We also tested the stability under ambient conditions at 45% relative humidity with complete devices without encapsulation. Four key photovoltaic parameters of the (GABA)0.1MA0.9PbI3 and MAPbI3 solar cells as a function of time were evaluated for 30 days, as shown in Fig. S11. The PCE of the GABA-based device maintained over 72% of its initial value for 30 days, while the PCEs of the MAPbI3 devices were reduced to 5% during the same period of time. The much stronger resistance to degradation over a long time of (GABA)0.1MA0.9PbI3 when compared to pure MAPbI3 was mainly due to the remarkable crystal morphology and the strong interactions between the carboxyl group in GABA+ with the PbI6 octahedra in the perovskite structure.

In this work, we introduced a typical bifunctional cation, GABA+, into the MAPbI3 perovskite lattice with a mixture of MAI and GABAI in the precursor solution via a simple one-step solution process. The optimal molar ratio of GABA cations in (GABA)xMA1−xPbI3 was determined to be 10 mol%, and thus the as-prepared (GABA)0.1MA0.9PbI3 showed great improvements in the film morphology and crystallinity due to surface modification of the TiO2 mesoporous network and crosslinking of adjacent perovskite crystals. The high crystalline quality of (GABA)0.1MA0.9PbI3 was found to simultaneously enhance the PCE and moisture stability of the PSCs when compared to the pristine MAPbI3 perovskite. In particular, a high PCE of 18.31% with less hysteresis was achieved in the solar cell that contained (GABA)0.1MA0.9PbI3 as the absorption layer, which was 21.4% higher than the controlled MA-based PSCs. Furthermore, the device based on the high-quality (GABA)0.1MA0.9PbI3 film also showed long-term stability in ambient air (retaining over 72% of the initial PCE after 30 days). The introduction of such a molecularly engineered GABA cation as a surface-modifying and crosslinking agent offers a new and effective tool towards the engineering of metal halide perovskites for large-scale applications. Further utilization of our strategy to the upgraded perovskite compositions with mixed bifunctional cations may obtain even higher PCEs and stabilities.


There are no conflicts to declare.


We acknowledge financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21403112), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities, No. 3091501333, a Project Funded by the Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions (PAPD) and the Postgraduate Research & Practice Innovation Program of Jiangsu Province. The SEM and AFM experiments were performed at the Materials Characterization Facility of Nanjing University of Science and Technology.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta00948a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018