 DOI: 10.1039/C7NR00784A
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 4700-4706


S.
Cacovich
*,

L.
Ciná
,

F.
Matteocci
,

G.
Divitini
,

P. A.
Midgley
,

A.
Di Carlo
 and 

C.
Ducati


Department of Materials Science & Metallurgy, University of Cambridge, 27 Charles Babbage road, CB3 0FS, Cambridge, UK. E-mail: sc862@cam.ac.uk

C.H.O.S.E. (Centre for Hybrid and Organic Solar Energy), Department of Electronic Engineering, University of Rome “Tor Vergata”, via del Politecnico 1, Rome 00133, Italy

Cicci Research srl, via Giordania 227, 58100 Grosseto, Italy

Received
2nd February 2017
, Accepted 13th March 2017
First published on 21st March 2017
Operational stability is the main issue hindering the commercialisation of perovskite solar cells. Here, a long term light soaking test was performed on large area hybrid halide perovskite solar cells to investigate the morphological and chemical changes associated with the degradation of photovoltaic performance occurring within the devices. Using Scanning Transmission Electron Microscopy (STEM) in conjunction with EDX analysis on device cross sections, we observe the formation of gold clusters in the perovskite active layer as well as in the TiO2 mesoporous layer, and a severe degradation of the perovskite due to iodine migration into the hole transporter. All these phenomena are associated with a drastic drop of all the photovoltaic parameters. The use of advanced electron microscopy techniques and data processing provides new insights on the degradation pathways, directly correlating the nanoscale structure and chemistry to the macroscopic properties of hybrid perovskite devices.

Over the last few years, organic–inorganic perovskite based solar cells have attracted strong interest due to their excellent photovoltaic properties, resulting in an unprecedented rise in power conversion efficiency. One of the fundamental challenges the community is facing today concerns the stability of the cells. Intrinsic and extrinsic degradation processes underlying the drop in device performance have been widely investigated using macroscopic characterization tools, and several studies reported humidity, temperature and light exposure as responsible factors. In particular, two recently published papers highlight the presence of elemental migration within a perovskite thin film and in a state-of-the-art complete solar cell due to light exposure. De Quillettes et al. investigated the changes in the local PL (photoluminescence) intensity and PL lifetime in a methylammonium lead iodide thin film after 1 hour of light soaking. The redistribution of the iodine content, studied via ToF-SIMS, was correlated to a local improvement in the optical properties. Elemental migration under light exposure was reported by Domanski et al. in a combined thermal and light soaking test over 15 hours, showing evidence of gold migration into the mesoporous and compact perovskite layer using a ToF-SIMS approach. In order to establish a direct connection between illumination and irreversible degradation of photovoltaic performance it is essential to investigate how the morphology and chemical composition of the nanostructured active layers are affected by light soaking under electrical bias. Imaging and analytical tools with high spatial resolution are necessary in order to measure changes that happen at nanometer scale.


In this work we report a study of the effect of light soaking on large area hybrid perovskite solar cells, using Scanning Transmission Electron Microscopy in conjunction with Energy Dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (STEM-EDX), and characterizing, at the nanoscale, the chemical changes that occur within devices illuminated for 200 hours under dynamical bias. The large area solar cells (1.05 cm2) are fabricated using solvent engineering, in an established architecture: fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) coated glass/compact TiO2/mesoporous TiO2/perovskite/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au. In order to improve holes transport, FK209 – a cobalt based compound – was employed as Spiro-OMeTAD dopant. The devices were sealed according to a previously published method, to protect the cells from contamination and moisture, thus preventing cell degradation due to extrinsic factors. In this work we investigated the behavior of an “early fail” device, to evaluate the phenomena leading to cell breakdown. This accelerated degradation may be linked to the local distribution of structural defects present in the device, and in particular to incomplete perovskite infiltration within the mesoporous TiO2 scaffold.

We compared an as-produced device aged in dark, in open circuit configuration, with an identical device that was exposed to a light soaking stability test for 200 hours, under 1 sun of illumination, at room temperature and dynamically biased at Maximum Power Point (MPP). A white light LED source was chosen in order to avoid possible degradation due to UV and IR radiation, limiting the optical excitation to the visible spectrum. The main photovoltaic parameters were recorded every 20 minutes with an I–V scan. The overall trends are reported in Fig. 1a. The stability test induced a dramatic fall of the short circuit current (JSC) during the first 50 hours, together with a linear reduction of the open circuit voltage (VOC). This results in an obvious drop of the fill factor (FF) and the Power Conversion Efficiency (PCE), which decreased from the initial value of 15.89% to 0.37% after 100 hours of light exposure, showing a strong correlation with the trend of the JSC. Interestingly, JSC and RS show a change in their slope at about 45 hours. At this time the cell reached a 90% of drop in efficiency and we hypothesize the activation of a new degradation phenomenon which increases the relative loss of resistance.
The effect of the light soaking stability test over the main physical processes of the device was investigated with a set of steady state and transient measurements before and after the test, as shown in Fig. 1. The J–V curves measured under 1 sun and in dark are shown in Fig. 1b and c. The increase in dark current up to four decades in the low voltage range (0 to 0.5 V) where trap-assisted phenomena are generally more evident, suggest that light soaking has induced defect states in the effective band gap of the device.
The ability of the perovskite layer to inject charges into the mesoporous TiO2 layer was measured using Transient Photo-Voltage analysis (TPV). In particular, the open circuit voltage rise test involves monitoring the photovoltage when the device is taken from a dark steady state, to light source and monitoring the subsequent rise in photovoltage. The concentration of the photo-injected electrons in the TiO2 primarily determines the photovoltage transient profile. In this scenario, the free charge recombination processes within perovskite layer and HTM reduces the build-up of electrons and, hence, the consequent dynamic response of VOC. As reported in Fig. 1d, after the stress the device shows an extremely slow VOC rise profile that can be associated to degradation in the perovskite layer and its capability to inject charges into the TiO2 layer. Differently, the TPV decay test (Fig. 1e) was performed in order to investigate the interfacial charge-recombination dynamic and its modification after the stress test. Temporal trends were fitted with a tri-exponential decay function (dashed line). The temporal profiles show an evident decrease in the decay time that is around 3 orders of magnitude lower after the light soaking test. This results strongly confirm the activation of new recombination paths from TiO2 to perovskite and HTM layers.
Complementary information regarding the recombination phenomena are extracted from the light intensity (Pinc) dependence of the VOC and JSC. Fig. 1f shows semi-logarithmic plots of the VOCversus light intensity for the PSC before and after the light-soaking. In particular, the fresh device shows the same slope (149 mV dec−1) over 3 decades of irradiation level. Interestingly, the aging process introduces a suppression of the photovoltage in the low level of irradiation (<10 mW cm−2). As demonstrated by Gouda et al., at these irradiation levels the increase of VOC is limited by the TiO2 and the accumulation of the photo-injected electrons, similar to the dye sensitized technology. This is a clear indication of the severe photo-induced degradation of the mesoporous layer. Under intermediate and high light intensity (around 10 to 100 mW cm−2), the aged device shows a three-fold increase in the VOC slope (475 mV dec−1), further, it has been demonstrated that in this operative region the photovoltage trend is mainly related to the Fermi level in the perovskite. In particular, the higher VOC slope suggests the activation of trap states inside the perovskite layer that can explain the loss in the voltage decay time (Fig. 1e). Similarly, the light intensity dependence of the JSC is reported Fig. 1g. A power law fit of the curves shows that the power index (γ) is almost unity (0.97) before the stress while it reduces to 0.88 after the light-soaking. This indicates the appearance of bimolecular recombination processes induced by the light stress that degrades the charge collection capability. Therefore, the synergetic effects of the TiO2 degradation and trap state formation inside the perovskite layer combined with the bimolecular recombination evidence lead to a premature loss in performance.
The large, irreversible effects evident in the electrical characterization suggest a structural degradation of the perovskite active layer with a rise of unwanted recombination phenomena that prevent charge collection on the outer circuit. Nanoscale changes in the devices were investigated via STEM. Lamellae of fresh and stressed large area cells were prepared using a focused ion beam (FIB) approach, according to the procedure described by Langford et al. After preparation, each cross sectional specimen was immediately transferred to a FEI Tecnai Osiris TEM/STEM operating at 200 kV. The HAADF (high angular annular dark field) STEM images of Fig. 2 show a comparison of the two cells. When the thickness of the specimen is constant as in our cross sections, the intensity of HAADF STEM images is approximately proportional to the square of the atomic number, therefore allowing a qualitative interpretation of average composition. Perovskite infiltration in the mesoporous titania scaffold layer appears incomplete and inhomogeneous in both cells, with voids of the order of 200 nm in diameter. This was not observed in small area devices and hence it is likely due to the up-scaling of the synthesis process and characteristic to the central region of the large area devices. Cross sectional images of the devices in central and peripheral areas, where the structure appears more homogeneous, support this hypothesis (Fig. S1). The incomplete perovskite infiltration in the mesoporous scaffold might be one of the factors affecting the overall stability of the devices. It is indeed easy to suppose that the larger the number of defects in the infiltrated layer, the less uniform the charge carrier transport across the cell, and the less homogeneous the electric field across the device. These processes may have cumulative effects on the photovoltaic performance of the cells, and lead each one to failure over time. The fresh cell shows a well formed continuous perovskite layer, with an average thickness of 145 ± 42 nm. We clearly observe the formation of clusters containing heavy elements in both the perovskite and the mesoporous layer after 200 h of light soaking. In the stressed device the perovskite layer appears degraded, in particular at the Spiro-OMeTAD/perovskite interface, where we also notice the presence of heavy element aggregates of the diameter of tens of nanometers. The average thickness in this case decreases to a value of 108 ± 27 nm and the perovskite layer appears discontinuous but smoother where still present. The chemical and physical degradation at the active layer/hole transport layer and hole transport layer/cathode interfaces has been reported as one of the first causes for the reduction of the cells performance. Additionally, to prove the validity of the sealing procedure we report HAADF STEM images of the hole transport layer (HTL) in Fig. S2. The HTL is still continuous and no air infiltration occurred.
To further investigate the nature of the gaps along the mesoporous layer as well as the chemical composition of the heavy inclusions in the stressed device we performed EDX analysis with nanometric resolution. EDX data were then treated within Hyperspy, an open source multivariate statistical analysis tool-kit, in order to increase the signal to noise ratio and obtain more detailed and quantitative EDX maps. Multivariate analysis algorithms typically deconstruct the initial dataset and generate a set of components. A model of the raw data is then built employing only the components containing physical information and discarding the noise-dominated ones. The application of this method plays a key role in the analysis of data acquired with limited electron doses, representing a crucial characterization tool in the analysis of beam sensitive materials such as halide perovskites. Fig. 3 shows quantitative elemental EDX maps of the representative elements in the fresh device. We note that the amount of cobalt added as Spiro-OMeTAD dopant (less than 0.1 at%), is below the detection limit of this technique. The large voids in the fresh cell appear to be filled with carbon, which might derive from different sources – the methylammonium cation in the halide perovskite, the Spiro-OMeTAD hole transporter, or can be deposited with the electron beam during TEM analysis and sample preparation. STEM/EDX is not sensitive enough to discriminate between the carbon deriving from these possible sources.
Relative amounts of Au, C, I, O, Pb, Sn and Ti are determined and integrated over the width of the section of the stressed cell, i.e. along the vertical axis in Fig. 4a (see Fig. S3 for quantitative elemental EDX maps). Gold migration was recently observed by Domansky et al. using ToF-SIMS on cells exposed to light soaking at 70 °C for 15 h. To distinguish between the effects of the two factors – light and temperature – we performed the light soaking keeping the PSC at room temperature. We find that gold migration is induced by the light-soaking stress. The driving force for this process lies in the electric field across the device which results from the dynamical bias applied under MPP operation. The flow of charge carriers (electrons, holes and other ions) may also influence Au migration. The effect of temperature is just to accelerate the kinetics of the migration. This is confirmed by our previous investigation where in situ measurement at different temperatures did not show gold migration. Using STEM EDX we identified the presence of gold within both the perovskite active layer and the mesoporous layer, and determined the morphology of these defects within the cell. The gold EDX map in Fig. 4b clearly shows that the dense clusters observed in the STEM images are gold aggregates. We speculate that these clusters agglomerate preferentially in specific regions, where defects or voids in the perovskite layer were initially present. This may be due to local variations of the electric field, and may be further amplified by plasmonic effects in the small Au particles. The formation of such gold clusters might be influenced by redeposition phenomena occurring during FIB sample preparation. However we believe that is not the case, since the same preparation technique was employed on the fresh cell, as well as our previous investigation on large area devices, without evidence of gold diffusion and agglomeration.
The use of denoising algorithms such as Non-negative Matrix Factorisation (NMF) allowed us to investigate in detail the migration of atomic species through the Spiro-OMeTAD layer, in particular gold (Fig. 4c) and iodine (Fig. 4d). Under light soaking, gold appears to diffuse through the HTL and aggregate at the interface with the perovskite active layer, while iodine migrates from the perovskite layer towards the gold electrode. Iodine then accumulates at the interface HTL/gold. The driving force for the migration of elemental species is a combination of applied electric field and light exposure. In particular we suggest that gold migrates through the HTL, driven by the local inhomogeneities of the electric field, and gets pinned at specific regions, which correspond to defects in both the perovskite layer and the mesoporous titania scaffold, where the Au clusters can grow through Ostwald ripening. A similar light induced gold cluster growth mechanism has been described by Liu et al. in the context of semiconductors for nano-catalysts. Plasmonic effects under illumination could also affect the growth. We identify gold elemental migration as one of the causes leading to the loss in performance of the cell upon light soaking. This unwanted gold diffusion might induce a degradation of the electronic properties of both the hole transport layer and the active perovskite layer. It is interesting to note that the controlled introduction of gold nanoparticles within solar cells has been widely investigated in the context of plasmonic photovoltaic devices. Plasmonic nanoparticles have been included in the HTL, in the perovskite layer as well as in the mesoporous layer obtaining an enhancement in terms of absorption and photocurrent generation of the device. Nevertheless, the presence of gold nanoparticles has several drawbacks that need to be considered, such as the introduction of parasitic absorption, the possibility that gold aggregates act as carrier recombination centers and the risk of shorting out parts of the cell. Additionally, an uncontrolled nucleation and growth of gold nanoparticles does not allow to reach a good compromise between an increase in the spectral absorption and a potential degradation.
Finally, we investigate the changes in the perovskite active layer composition. Fig. 5 compares the relative proportions of iodine and lead in the perovskite layer for the fresh and stressed cells. In the fresh sample the ratio is close to the stoichiometric value of 3, whereas we observe a reduction down to 2.75 in the stressed cell. This is a further confirmation of the perovskite degradation due to iodine migration, causing a reduced photocurrent generation. Similarly, Jeangros et al. proved iodine migration as one of the main biased induced degradation mechanism through in situ TEM measurements. Moreover the ratio between the average atomic percentage of iodine and lead in a bigger area including the perovskite layer and the HTL, is approximately 3 in both cases. This results suggest that iodine migrates through the HTL without evaporating. Our results are also in line with the structural modification reported by Leijtens et al. after applying an electric field on a CH3NH3PbI3 thin film. The electric field created under working condition has induced the migration of iodine ions within the HTL.

The effects of a long term light soaking test under electrical bias on a large area perovskite solar cell have been investigated at the nanoscale, showing a direct link between the reduction of the photovoltaic parameters and the chemical and structural degradation of the cell. In particular we observe the formation of gold precipitates at the interface between Spiro-OMeTAD and perovskite and of bigger clusters within the perovskite active layer and the mesoporous layer. The permeation of gold inside the mesoporous TiO2 layer could result in a large increase of recombination paths for the photo-injected electrons and, hence, a decrease in the charge collection efficiency, as observed in the trends of the photovoltaics parameters in the long term test. Additionally, the obvious decrease of the short circuit current JSC and the rise of the recombination processes, highlighted by both steady state and transient measurements, can be directly related to a morphological and chemical degradation of the perovskite layer due to the loss of iodine upon migration. All these phenomena lead to a decrease in photovoltaic parameters, as they affect charge generation and transport within the device.

The proven diffusion of Au and I induced by the light-soaking stress calls for a new stabilization strategies of PSC. Firstly, it is necessary to reduce this diffusion by employing alternative hole transport materials (HTM), for example by using inorganic HTMs, replacing gold or working on interlayers. At the same time more stable perovskite formulations should be investigated, such as the multi-cation materials that have been recently proposed.

Fluorine-doped Tin Oxide (FTO)-coated glasses (Pilkington, 8 ohms per square, 2.5 cm × 2.5 cm) were etched with infrared Nd:YVO4 laser beam. The substrates were cleaned in an ultrasonic bath, using detergent with de-ionized water, acetone and isopropanol (10 minutes for each step). A 50 nm-thick patterned blocking TiO2 layer (BL-TiO2) layer was deposited onto the patterned FTO using spray pyrolysis in according with a previously reported procedure. TiO2 paste (18 NR-T paste, Dyesol) diluted with ethanol (1:6 w/w) was deposited over the BL-TiO2 surface by spin coating (2000 rpm for 20 s) and sintered at 450 °C for 30 min in order to obtain the meso-porous structure. The TiO2-coated substrate was transferred in a glove-box to deposit the perovskite layer. A solution 1.1 M of PbI2 powder (Sigma Aldrich) and 1.1 M of CH3NH3I (Dyesol) was dissolved in DMSO and stirred at RT overnight. 110 μl of the aforementioned solution were spin coated on the TiO2 substrate at 1000 rpm for 10 s and 5000 rpm 30 s. Toluene was poured on the device 10 s prior the end of the second ramp. The toluene volume was 200 μl. Full perovskite conversion was obtained after annealing at 100 °C for 40 min. A doped Spiro-OMeTAD (2,20,7,70-tetrakis-(N,N-dip-methoxyphenylamine) 9,9′-spirobifluorene) solution (60 mM, Lumtec) in chlorobenzene was spun at 2000 rpm 20 s. The molar ratio the cobalt additive (FK102)/Spiro-OMeTAD was 0.03. Finally, the samples were introduced into a high vacuum chamber (10−6 mbar) to thermally evaporate Au back contacts (nominal thickness 80 nm) with an active area of 1.05 cm2.


Kapton adhesive sheets were attached on the active area. The light-curable glue was deposited and cured under Xenon lamp (1000 W cm−2 illumination condition) for 20 seconds. UV curable glue (Threebond) was deposited on the edges between the device and the protective glass with drying in air under UV lamp for 1 minute. The active area was masked during the UV curing.


Electro-optical measurements – dark I–V, transient photovoltage (TPV), stability at the MPP, and illumination intensity dependence of the VOC and JSC – are performed with a modular testing platform (Arkeo-Cicci research s.r.l.) composed of a white LED array (4200 Kelvin) tunable up to 200 mW cm−2 of optical power density and a high speed source-meter unit. A spring contact-based sample holder is used to improve the repeatability of the experiments. The TPV tests are performed in a high perturbation configuration where the entire VOC rise/decay after switching the light intensity from dark (1 sun) to 1 sun (dark).

The prolonged sun irradiation test is performed by using a high power white LED (Bridgelux-50C10K0@5000 Kelvin), providing simulated 1 sun illumination (100 mW cm−2) calibrated through the mismatch factor with a certified reference Si cell (RERA Solutions RR-1002). The MPP is tracked with a Perturb&Observe algorithm with a refresh time of 1 s. The I–V scan is carried out under LED illumination every 20 min.

A FEI Helios Dual beam FIB/FEGSEM was employed to prepare lamellae for STEM imaging and analysis. EDX data were acquired using a FEI Tecnai Osiris TEM equipped with a high brightness Schottky X-FEG gun and a Super-EDX system composed by four silicon drift detectors, each approximately 30 mm2 in area and arranged symmetrically around the optical axis to achieve a collection solid angle of 0.9 sr. Spectrum images were acquired with an acceleration voltage of 200 kV, a probe current of 0.7 nA, a spatial sampling of 10 nm per pixel and 100 ms per pixel dwell time. Data were acquired in a single scan wih TIA and analysed with Hyperspy. For EDX quantification we employed Cliff–Lorimer method, using the following lines: Au Lα, C Kα, Ga Lα, I Lα, O Kα, Pb Lα, Pt Lα, Sn Lα, Ti Kα. The I/Pb relative k-factor was calibrated from a PbI2 lamella prepared using the same procedure and parameters of the devices under analysis.


S. C., G. D., P. A. M. and C. D. thank Dr Francisco de la Peña and Dr Pierre Burdet for helpful discussions about multivariate analysis. S. C., G. D. and C. D. acknowledge funding from ERC under grant number 259619 76 PHOTO EM. G. D., P. A. M. and C. D. acknowledge financial support from the EU under grant number 77 312483 ESTEEM2. L. C., F. M., and A. D. C. acknowledge funding from EU FP7 CHEETAH” (no. 609788), the European Union's Horizon 2020 Framework Program for Research and Innovation under Grant agreement no. 653296 (CHEOPS).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7nr00784a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017