 DOI: 10.1039/D2NJ00822J
(Paper)
New J. Chem., 2022, 46, 9841-9850


JingYan
Liu
,

Xiong
He
,

Xin
Li
* and 

Ying
Li
*

MIIT Key Laboratory of Critical Materials Technology for New Energy Conversion and Storage, School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, State Key Lab of Urban Water Resource and Environment, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin 150090, China. E-mail: lixin@hit.edu.cn; Tel: +86-0451-86282153

Materials Science and Engineering Research Center, Guangxi University of Science and Technology, Liuzhou 545000, China

School of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Tiangong University, China. E-mail: ly@tiangong.edu.cn

Received
17th February 2022
, Accepted 18th April 2022
First published on 19th April 2022
In terms of high electron mobility and good stability, the SnO2 based electron transport layer (ETL) is favored by uncountable researchers. However, how to reduce the surface defects and improve the crystalline quality of the SnO2 ETL during low-temperature preparation is still a great challenge. Here, we develop a brief solvothermal synthesis method to prepare a SnO2 ETL with high quality at a low temperature, in which a mixed solution of ethanol and water is chosen as the solvent to enhance the crystallinity of SnO2. Notably, the preparation of the SnO2 ETL only requires annealing at 85 °C, which efficiently promotes process simplification and cost savings. Based on the fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO)/SnO2/perovskite/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au structure, the champion device has a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of up to 19.21% with low hysteresis. The unencapsulated device can maintain more than 93% of its original efficiency after 1440 h in an atmospheric environment, and its initial efficiency is only reduced by about 9% after heating at 85 °C for 24 h, showing good long-term stability and good thermal stability. Importantly, the assembly and testing of the devices are done in an atmospheric environment, which provides a new route to the preparation of high-performance SnO2-based perovskite solar cells (PSCs) in the air.

Organic–inorganic lead halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have attracted the attention of the world due to their simple process, low production cost, and extremely high photoelectric conversion efficiency. To date, PSCs have achieved an ultra-high power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 25.7%. The reason for their rapid development is that perovskite materials have excellent light absorption properties, high charge mobility, and controllable band gap. In these high-efficiency PSCs, the electron transport layer (ETL) is significant because of its dual role of transporting electrons and blocking holes. Therefore, the correct choice of the ETL is particularly important for assembling high-efficiency PSCs.

TiO2 is the most widely used ETL material, but it usually requires high-temperature annealing during the preparation process, which inevitably increases the cost and is incompatible with roll-to-roll processing and flexible devices. High-efficiency TiO2-based PSCs generally require a mesoporous TiO2 layer to be assembled, which is not conducive to process simplification. SnO2 has the advantages of a higher electron mobility, a wider band gap and well-matched band alignment with the perovskite, and is an excellent substitute for TiO2. In addition, TiO2 has a stronger UV-related photocatalytic effect compared to SnO2. The photocatalytic reaction is one of the main reasons for the degradation of the perovskite. Therefore, SnO2 has better stability.
Many researchers have worked on new strategies for low-temperature preparation, surface passivation and interfacial engineering of SnO2-based PSCs. MK Nazeeruddin et al. used low-temperature atomic layer deposition (ALD) to prepare the SnO2 ETL, which has an excellent electron extraction and hole blocking capability. The efficiency of the devices assembled based on the ALD SnO2 ETL reached 20%. However, the ALD process is expensive, which limits its large-scale application. Fuzhi Huang et al. prepared the SnO2 ETL by chemical bath deposition (CBD), and the devices have an efficiency of 20.56% and can be applied in flexible devices. Nonetheless, the CBD process is complex, which is certainly not conducive to industrial production. Currently, the solution process is the most widely used method for depositing the SnO2 ETL. Yaoguang Rong et al. introduced potassium heparin to regulate the alignment of SnO2 nanocrystals and induced the vertical growth of the perovskite. The PCE of the prepared devices reached 23.03%, and the open-circuit voltage (VOC) was enhanced to 1.162 V. However, there are still some pressing issues with the SnO2 ETL. SnO2 films have body defects and surface defects caused by oxygen vacancies, which can become recombination centers for carriers and greatly affect the VOC and fill factor (FF) of the devices. For most devices, it is difficult to reduce the concentration of surface defects and surface roughness in the SnO2 ETL during the low-temperature treatment. Baomin Xu et al. successfully prepared a high-performance SnO2 ETL by combining hydrothermal treatment and spin coating processes at a lower temperature. The efficiency of the assembled flexible devices reached 18.1%. Yueli Liu et al. introduced a double-layer SnO2 electron transport layer, which can be processed at 70 °C. The champion device assembled in a glove box can reach a PCE of 21.75% and exhibit excellent stability. Yue Jiang et al. prepared SnO2 quantum dots using a super-rapid and additive-free microwave-assisted reaction process, and the PCE of the assembled devices was as high as 20.24%. Yiqiang Zhan et al. prepared the SnO2 ETL using a vacuum-assisted annealing method. The annealing temperature of the ETL was only 100 °C and the champion devices could achieve a PCE of 20.14%. Yue Jiang et al. synthesized a high-quality SnO2 ETL by an in situ low-temperature solvent-assisted process, and the efficiency of the devices assembled using this ETL reached 20.52%. These reports provide us a new idea: whether high-quality SnO2 nanocrystals can be prepared by a hydrothermal or solvothermal reaction and used as the ETL at a lower annealing temperature. Therefore, we tried to prepare SnO2 nanocrystals by a HClO4-assisted hydrothermal method and used them as the ETL, and the efficiency of the assembled inverted perovskite solar cells could reach 16.36%. However, further improvement of the crystalline quality of SnO2 is still needed. According to reports, a suitable solvent in the hydrothermal or solvothermal process plays a crucial role in the crystallization of SnO2. This is attributed to the fact that the polarity of the solvent will have a significant effect on the crystallization rate of the crystals, thus affecting the morphology and quality of the crystals. Therefore, selection of suitable solvents for application in hydrothermal/solvothermal reactions is still a challenge. On the other hand, high-efficiency SnO2-based PSCs are always assembled in a glove box, which is certainly not conducive to the large-scale industrial production of PSCs.
Here, a variety of solutions with different polarities were selected to be used as solvents for hydrothermal or solvothermal reactions for the preparation of SnO2 nanocrystals, and the prepared products were investigated. It was found that the best performance of SnO2 nanocrystals was obtained by applying ethanol with 15 vol% water as the solvent for the solvothermal reaction. The annealing temperature of this SnO2 ETL is only 85 °C, and the efficiency of the assembled SnO2-based PSC under atmospheric conditions is as high as 19.21%. The results of space charge-limited current (SCLC) and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) demonstrate that the prepared SnO2 ETL has a high electron transport capability and a low defect density. In addition, the long-term stability and thermal stability of the devices also have been significantly improved.

To obtain high-quality crystals, it is particularly important to select a suitable solvent for the hydrothermal/solvothermal process. The polarity of the solution plays a key role in the growth mechanism and final morphology of SnO2 crystals. Therefore, we chose pure water, ethanol containing a small amount of water, isopropanol containing a small amount of water, butanol containing a small amount of water and isobutanol solution containing a small amount of water as hydrothermal/solvothermal solvents for the preparation of SnO2 nanocrystals. The purpose of adding a small amount of water is to increase the rate of hydrolysis. The optical photographs of the prepared solutions are shown in Fig. 1(a). According to reports, when the solution polarity decreases, the dissolving rate of hydrolyzed tin ions also decreases. When the solution polarity is too low, the extremely small size of the formed SnO2 crystals is unstable and tends to agglomerate. The growth mechanism of SnO2 can be explained by the Ostwald maturation theory: when the supersaturation level of the metal ion solution is low and the concentration is much lower than the concentration around the small grains, the small grains begin to dissolve and the large particles rely on the small particles for growth. Therefore, the particle size of SnO2 nanocrystals prepared using isopropanol with a small amount of water, butanol with a small amount of water, and isobutanol with a small amount of water is relatively large, which makes it difficult to form a homogeneous SnO2 precursor solution. Herein, they were discarded and will not be described in this paper. In order to further investigate the optimal solvent ratios, ethanol solutions with 5 vol%, 10 vol%, 15 vol%, 20 vol%, and 25 vol% water were selected as the solvents for the solvothermal reactions to prepare SnO2 nanocrystals. These products were investigated by Raman spectroscopy. The Raman tests were also performed on the products prepared using pure water as the solvent. As shown in Fig. S1 (ESI), the SnO2 nanocrystals prepared using ethanol solution with 15 vol% water, ethanol solution with 20 vol% water and pure water as solvents have no Raman response signals at 327 cm−1. According to reports, the Raman peak located at 327 cm−1 is associated with the agglomeration of nanocrystals and the formation of surface defects. Therefore, SnO2 nanocrystals prepared using ethanol solution containing 15 vol%, ethanol solution containing 20 vol% and pure water as solvents are more uniformly dispersed and have fewer defects, which is more favorable for the preparation of a high-quality ETL. In order to further investigate the morphology of the ETL films, the transmission of the ETLs was tested using UV-visible spectroscopy. As shown in Fig. S2 (ESI), the SnO2 ETLs prepared using ethanol solution containing 15 vol% water and pure water as solvents showed higher transmission. In summary, we finally chose the SnO2 nanocrystals prepared using ethanol solution containing 15 vol% water and pure water as the solvents for further investigation. For ease of understanding, the SnO2 nanocrystals prepared using ethanol solution containing 15 vol% water and pure water are named E-SnO2 and W-SnO2, respectively.

The XRD pattern (Fig. 1(b)) shows that the positions of all the diffraction peaks of E-SnO2 and W-SnO2 match well with those of tetragonal rutile SnO2. In addition, the intensity of diffraction peaks in E-SnO2 is stronger than that of W-SnO2, which means that using ethanol–water as the solvent in the solvothermal process can improve the crystallinity of SnO2 nanocrystals. The improved crystallinity of SnO2 nanocrystals results from the fact that the polarity of the ethanol solution containing 15 vol% water is more suitable for the growth of SnO2 crystals than that of pure water. The polarity of the ethanol solution containing 15 vol% water is lower than that of the pure water solution, thus slowing down the hydrolysis of Sn ionic precursors and suppressing the nucleation of SnO2 crystals. Ultimately, the SnO2 crystal nucleus can grow better and the growth direction tends to be towards the rutile phase of SnO2 with a stable structure. TEM characterization was conducted to investigate the crystal structure and morphology of the SnO2 nanocrystals. The results are shown in Fig. 1(c and d), and the corresponding electron diffraction patterns are shown in the insets. The grain size of E-SnO2 is about 3–4 nm, and that of W-SnO2 is 2–3 nm. This conclusion corresponds to the broadening of the XRD peak width. In addition, a lattice fringe of about 0.33 nm indexed to the (110) crystal plane can be observed in both samples, which means that the prepared SnO2 nanocrystals are rutile SnO2.
For investigating the electronic state of the SnO2 nanocrystals, the E-SnO2 film and W-SnO2 film were characterized by XPS (Fig. 2). In Fig. 2(a), the peak at 486.9 eV is attributed to Sn 3d5/2, and the peak at 495.3 eV is attributed to Sn 3d3/2. The Sn 3d5/2 peak and Sn 3d3/2 peak show only one symmetric component, indicating that only the Sn4+ valence state exists in the sample. In Fig. 2(b), the peak at 530.7 eV belongs to the Sn–O bond, and the peak at 532.1 eV belongs to the O-H bond and oxygen vacancies. Compared with W-SnO2, the peak area of E-SnO2 located at 532.1 eV is significantly smaller, which indicates that the oxygen vacancy defect of E-SnO2 is greatly reduced. These oxygen vacancies may form recombination centers for carriers and increase the occurrence of non-radiative recombination, leading to a decrease in the FF of the devices. The hydroxyl oxygen on the surface of SnO2 provides bonding sites for organic solvents, which leads to residual organic solvents and affects the extraction and transport of photogenerated electrons.
To further explore the surface morphology of the SnO2 ETL and perovskite layer, SEM and AFM tests were used. As shown in Fig. 3(a), the E-SnO2 film has a denser surface without pinholes. However, there are many pinholes in the W-SnO2 film (Fig. 3(b)), which may become the recombination centers of carriers. The root-mean-square roughness (Rq) of the E-SnO2 film is only about 8.09 nm (Fig. 3(c)), compared with about 10.92 nm for the W-SnO2 film (Fig. 3(d)), which provides favorable conditions for the growth of the perovskite. As shown in Fig. 3(e and f), the perovskite layer deposited on the E-SnO2 film is smoother and denser. In Fig. 3(g and h), the Rq of the perovskite layer deposited on the E-SnO2 film is about 16.28 nm, which is smaller than the Rq of the perovskite layer deposited on the W-SnO2 film (≈19.54 nm). The reduction in interfacial roughness will lead to a better contact between the perovskite layer and the hole-transport layer (HTL), which is beneficial for reducing the interfacial resistance of the device. The size distribution of the perovskite deposited on E-SnO2 ranged from 0.8 to 2 μm, while the size distribution of the perovskite deposited on W-SnO2 ranged from 0.3 to 1 μm. Compared with the perovskite layer deposited on the W-SnO2 film, the average particle size of the perovskite layer deposited on the E-SnO2 film increases and the number of grain boundaries decreases significantly. Photogenerated carriers are prone to non-radiative recombination at the grain boundaries in perovskite films. Larger grains facilitate electron transfer, and the reduction in the number of grain boundaries facilitates the reduction of energy loss due to photogenerated carrier recombination at grain boundaries, resulting in high-quality perovskite films.
To calculate the valence band level (EVB) and conduction band level (ECB) of SnO2 layers, we performed UPS and UV-vis analysis (Fig. S3, ESI) and plotted the energy level diagrams of SnO2 layers and perovskite layers. As shown in Fig. 4(a), compared to W-SnO2, the ECB value of E-SnO2 has changed from −4.35 eV to −4.20 eV, showing good band alignment. The reduction of the energy level difference between ETL and perovskite means that the energy barrier of carriers in the transport process is reduced. It will facilitate efficient carrier transport from the perovskite layer to the ETL. Obviously, good energy band alignment will facilitate the extraction and transfer of charges and ultimately reduces the recombination of charges at the interface. In addition to the energy level arrangement, conductivity has an important influence on charge transport. In order to determine the conductivity of E-SnO2 films and W-SnO2 films, we assembled devices with FTO/SnO2 (E-SnO2 or W-SnO2)/Au structure. As shown in Fig. 4(b), the conductivity of E-SnO2 and W-SnO2 is 7.43 × 10−5 S cm−1 and 5.15 × 10−5 S cm−1, respectively. The increase in conductivity is mainly due to the higher crystallinity of E-SnO2, which is beneficial to the transport of charges. This will improve the short-circuit current density (JSC) of the device.
Devices with FTO/SnO2(E-SnO2 or W-SnO2)/perovskite structure were constructed for PL and TRPL to further explore the interface carrier transport characteristics between the perovskite and the ETL. As the PL spectrum shows (Fig. 4(c)), E-SnO2 has higher PL quenching efficiency than W-SnO2, which means electrons can be transferred more efficiently from the perovskite layer to the ETL layer. To investigate the effect of SnO2 ETL on carrier dissociation and recombination, the TRPL was performed. The attenuation time (τ1 and τ2) of E-SnO2/perovskite and W-SnO2/perovskite film is calculated by attenuation fitting, and the average decay time (τave) is calculated by eqn (S.1) (ESI). As shown in Fig. 4(d) and Table 1, the τave value of the perovskite deposited on E-SnO2 is 23.42 ns, and the value of the perovskite deposited on W-SnO2 is 106.16 ns, which indicates a significant shortening of the electron transfer time from perovskite layer to the E-SnO2 ETL. This implies a higher extraction efficiency from perovskite to ETL due to better-matched band alignment and fewer interfacial defects. The reduced decay time will also help to reduce the charge accumulation and recombination between the perovskite and ETL interfaces. Combined with the results of UPS, conductivity, PL, and TRPL tests, E-SnO2 has a suitable energy level match with perovskite, higher electrons extraction, and transport efficiency, and effectively suppresses the non-radiative recombination of carriers. All these lay the foundation for the construction of efficient PSCs.
Sample

A
1 (%)

τ
1 (ns)

A
2 (%)

τ
2 (ns)

τ
ave (ns)
E-SnO2/perovskite
30.69
8.94
69.30
25.66
23.42
W-SnO2/perovskite
56.68
12.28
43.31
118.87
106.16
To determine the influence of E-SnO2 and W-SnO2 on device performance, we have assembled PSCs based on E-SnO2 and W-SnO2 in the atmosphere, and their structure is FTO/SnO2(E-SnO2 or W-SnO2)/perovskite/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au (Fig. 5(a)). The cross-sectional SEM image of the PSC based on E-SnO2 is shown in Fig. 5(b). It can be seen from the image that every interface is tightly connected, which will facilitate carrier transport. The J–V curves of E-SnO2 and W-SnO2-based PSCs are shown in Fig. 5(c and d); the photovoltaic parameters of the champion PSCs based on E-SnO2 and W-SnO2 are listed in Table 2. The hysteresis index (HI) was calculated by eqn (S.2) (ESI). As expected, the champion device based on E-SnO2 yields an excellent PCE of 19.21%, with a JSC of 21.70 mA cm−2, a VOC of 1.11 V, and an FF of 79.75%, and HI of 0.050. The W-SnO2-based device shows a reduced performance with a JSC of 21.56 mA cm−2, a VOC of 1.08 V, and a FF of 73.78%, exhibiting a PCE of 17.18% and HI of 0.104. The device performance is enhanced mainly due to the increase in VOC and FF. It is attributed to the fact that E-SnO2/perovskite layers have fewer interface defects, and the energy level of E-SnO2 is more matched with that of the perovskite layer, which reduces the occurrence of non-radiative recombination. In the EQE measurement, the integrated JSC values for the E-SnO2-PSC and W-SnO2-PSC are 20.18 mA cm−2 and 19.58 mA cm−2 (Fig. 5(e)), respectively, which agree with the J–V results. We measured the steady-state photocurrent output of the E-SnO2-PSC at the maximum power point, as shown in Fig. 5(f). The steady-state photocurrent of the E-SnO2-based device is 21.10 mA cm−2, and the stabilized PCE is 18.36%, which shows excellent working stability. To explore the reproducibility of the devices, Fig. 6(a) shows the efficiency histograms of 40 E-SnO2-PSCs and W-SnO2-PSCs counted from the same batch. Compared with W-SnO2-PSCs, the E-SnO2-PSCs showed better performance with a smaller distribution ranging from 17.0% to 19.5%, indicating a better reproducibility.
Type
PCE [%]

J
SC [mA cm−2]

V
OC [V]
FF [%]
HI
E-SnO2-PSC (reverse and forward)
19.21/18.25
21.70/21.71
1.11/1.09
79.75/77.12
0.050
W-SnO2-PSC (reverse and forward)
17.18/15.39
21.56/21.53
1.08/1.05
73.78/68.08
0.104
The SCLC method using single-carrier devices allows the calculation of trap density in perovskite films. For this purpose, we measured the dark current–voltage (I–V) of a purely electronic device (FTO/SnO2(E-SnO2 or W-SnO2)/perovskite/PCBM/Au), as shown in Fig. 6(b). According to the calculation (see eqn (S.3), ESI, for details of the steps), the defect state density of the E-SnO2-based device is 3.21 × 1015 cm−3, which is much smaller than that of the W-SnO2-based device (7.06 × 1015 cm−3). This indicates that, compared with W-SnO2, E-SnO2 can significantly reduce the trap-state density of perovskite films and improve the quality of perovskite films, thus effectively reducing the device hysteresis and improving the VOC and FF of the device. On this basis, we have further revealed the properties of electron transport and recombination through EIS. Nyquist plots were derived by measuring the E-SnO2-PSC and W-SnO2-PSC in the dark (Fig. 6(c)), and the equivalent circuits of the corresponding devices are shown in the inset. The corresponding fitted parameters are shown in Table S1 (ESI). Compared to the W-SnO2-PSC, the E-SnO2-PSC has a lower series resistance (Rs) and a higher recombination resistance (Rrec). According to previous reports, the decrease of Rs is conducive to carrier transport, and the increase of Rrec will inhibit the carrier recombination. The lower Rs of the E-SnO2-PSC indicates the higher electron extraction efficiency of the E-SnO2-PSC. A higher Rrec of the E-SnO2-PSC means that the energy loss consumed by non-radiative recombination is smaller. This leads to an increase in the VOC of the devices, and the improved efficiency of the devices supports this conclusion. In summary, the E-SnO2 ETL has both high electron transport properties and can effectively suppress carrier recombination, the combined effect of which leads to improved device performance. In addition, to further explore the charge recombination process, we performed open-circuit photovoltage decay (OCVD) tests. As shown in Fig. S4 (ESI), the E-SnO2-PSC has a higher initial VOC of 1.10 V, while the initial VOC of the W-SnO2-PSC is only 1.07 V. The decay trend of the E-SnO2-PSC is significantly mitigated relative to the dramatic increase in the decay behavior of the W-SnO2-PSC. According to reports, the enhanced initial VOC and slowed decay trend indicate that E-SnO2-PSCs have longer carrier lifetimes and lower carrier recombination rates, implying a significant reduction in defect density.
Due to the fragility of the perovskite in the atmospheric environment, improving the stability of PSCs is one of the urgent problems. Most studies have focused on improving the quality of the perovskite layers; however, ETLs can also have a great impact on the stability of the PSCs. Therefore, we tested the unencapsulated devices periodically in the atmospheric environment (average temperature of 25 °C and average humidity of 40%), and the test results are shown in Fig. 6(d). As expected, the E-SnO2-PSC maintained an efficiency of 93% after 1440 h, while the PCE of the W-SnO2-PSC was only 84%. Besides water, oxygen and UV light, thermal effects are also important factors for the instability of the perovskite. Moreover, it is impossible to improve the thermal stability of the device through encapsulation. In order to investigate the thermal stability of the device, we subjected the device to continuous heating at 85 °C under atmospheric conditions (average humidity of 40%). As shown in Fig. 6(e), after 24 h of heating, the E-SnO2-PSC can maintain 91% of its initial efficiency. By contrast, the W-SnO2-PSC only maintains 72% of its initial PCE. The main reason for the improvement of device stability is the higher electron transport ability of the E-SnO2 ETL, which reduces the charge accumulation at the ETL/perovskite interface. The TRPL and EIS results also support this conclusion. In addition, the grain size of the perovskite deposited on E-SnO2 increases, and the number of grain boundaries of the perovskite deposited on E-SnO2 decreases. Fewer grain boundaries will facilitate the hindrance of water and oxygen attack on the perovskite, which also contributes to the device stability.

In summary, we investigated the effect of using pure water and ethanol solution containing 15 vol% water as solvents on the crystalline quality of SnO2 in the solvothermal process. The results show that the prepared E-SnO2 ETL has better performance. The E-SnO2 ETL has better crystallinity, a flat and smooth surface without pinholes, and a higher electrical conductivity, and its energy band is better matched with that of the perovskite. In addition, it has a high charge transfer efficiency and effectively suppresses the formation of interfacial defects, resulting in a substantial improvement in device performance. The PCE of the E-SnO2-PSC assembled under atmospheric conditions is as high as 19.21%. Most importantly, the annealing temperature of the E-SnO2 ETL is only 85 °C, thus reducing process requirements. Furthermore, the long-term stability and thermal stability of the devices have been significantly improved. Our work provides a new idea to realize efficient and stable PSCs with simple processes in the atmosphere.


Perchloric acid (HClO4, 70%) was obtained from HuShi. Carbamide (CO(NH2)2) was obtained from Tianjin Tianli Chemical Reagent Corp. Tin(iv) chloride pentahydrate (SnCl4·5H2O) was purchased from Macklin. N,N-Dimethyl-formamide (DMF), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and chlorobenzene were obtained from Youxuan Trade. Other anhydrous solvents were purchased from Alfa Aesar. Purchased perovskite and HTL of materials from Xián Polymer Light Technology Corp. All reagents were used as received without any further purification.


According to previous reports and the procedure of our study, SnO2 nanocrystals treated with HClO4 were prepared. First, 0.1 g SnCl4·5H2O and 1.0 g CO(NH2)2 were mixed, then the mixture was added into 40.0 mL of the solvent, and finally 1.5 mL HClO4 was added into the mixed solution with mild stirring. To configure solvents with different polarities, pure water, ethanol with a small amount of water, isopropanol with a small amount of water, butanol with a small amount of water and isobutanol with a small amount of water were chosen as the solvents for the hydrothermal/solvothermal reaction. The five kinds of mixed solutions were transferred to five 50.0 mL Teflon-lined stainless steel autoclaves and left to react at 90 °C for 24 h, respectively. The products were collected by centrifugation at a speed of 5000 rpm. To remove the entire precursor solution, the SnO2 nanocrystals were washed 3 times with deionized water and ethanol, respectively. The SnO2 nanocrystals were dispersed into the corresponding solutions and ultrasonicated for 30 min to form a solution of about 20 mg mL−1 SnO2 nanocrystals. Finally, these SnO2 nanocrystal solutions were filtered using a 0.45 mm polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) filter.

In order to further investigate the optimal solvent ratio to find the most suitable solvent, ethanol solutions with 5 vol%, 10 vol%, 15 vol%, 20 vol%, and 25 vol% water were chosen as the solvents for the solvothermal reaction. The other steps were the same as above.

To obtain a clean glass/FTO surface, it was washed with soapy water, deionized water, isopropanol, acetone and ethanol and then UV-ozone-treated. The SnO2 nanocrystal precursor solutions were spin-coated 2 times on glass/FTO at 3000 rpm for 30 s and then heated at 85 °C for 1.5 h. The substrate was treated with UV-ozone for 8 minutes, and then the perovskite layer was spin-coated. To prepare the FA0.7MA0.3PbI3 precursor solution, 484.0 mg PbI2, 47.8 mg MAI and 120.4 mg FAI were added into 1 mL of the DMF–DMSO solvent (4:1 volume ratio). The mixed solution was stirred for 30 min. The perovskite precursor solution was spin-coated onto the FTO/SnO2 substrate at 1000 rpm for 5 s and 4000 rpm for 40 s. The anti-solvent was ethyl acetate (300 μL), which was dropped on the substrate at 15 s of the spin-coating procedure. Then, the substrates were thermally annealed in the air at 85 °C for 10 min and at 130 °C for 20 min. The HTL precursor solution was composed of 76.0 mg of 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N′-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (Spiro-OMeTAD), 28.5 μL of 4-tert-butylpyridine, 17.5 μL of Li-TFSI (520 mg mL−1 in acetonitrile) and 1.0 mL of chlorobenzene. The HTL precursor solution was spin-coated at 3000 rpm for 30 s. Finally, an Au electrode of about 50 nm thickness was deposited on the substrate in an evaporator. The active area of PSCs is 0.09 cm2. All processes of fabrication, storage, and measurement of the devices were carried out under atmospheric conditions.


To obtain the morphology and lattice spacing of the SnO2 nanocrystals, transmission electron microscopy (TEM, JEOL, JEM-2100) was used. X-Ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were carried out using a PANalytical Empyrean X-ray diffractometer (CuKα radiation, λ = 1.5405 Å). The morphology and cross-sectional structures of the samples were observed using a transmission electron microscope (TEM, JEOL, JEM-2100), a cold field emission scanning electron microscope (SEM, Hitachi, SU8000) and an atomic force scanning probe microscope (AFM, Bruker, Dimension Icon). X-Ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) with a monochromatic radiation source (Al-Kα, 1486.6 eV) was used to detect binding energy values. Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) with a HeI (21.22 eV) emission line was used to measure the valence band and Fermi level. Both XPS and UPS were measured using a PerkinElmer PHI 5400 ESCA system. The ultraviolet-visible (UV-visible) absorption spectra of different films were measured using a UV-visible spectrometer (TU1901, Beijing Purkinje General Instrument Co., Ltd). Steady-state photo-luminescence (PL) and TRPL spectra were recorded on a V2.7 fluorescence spectrometer (HORIBA). Under AM 1.5 G sunlight irradiation (100 mW cm−2), the measurement of photocurrent density–photovoltage (J–V) curves, conductivity tests and electron trap density tests of the devices were conducted using a class ABB solar simulator (model: 94021A, Newport) and an electrochemical workstation (VersaSTAT 3, Ametek). A QTest Station 500D solar cell quantum efficiency measurement system (CROWNTECH) was used to measure the incident photon–electron conversion efficiency (IPCE). A VersaSTAT 3 electrochemical workstation (Ametek, USA) was used to obtain the electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS). The measurement processes of all devices were carried out under atmospheric conditions and the devices were not encapsulated.


The authors declare no competing financial interest.


We are grateful for the financial support for this research from the Natural Science Foundation of Heilongjiang Province of China (LH2021E054).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2nj00822j
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2022