 DOI: 10.1039/D1SE01687C
(Paper)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2022, 6, 1121-1130


Man Qi
Wang
,

Xiaobo
Zhang
,

Shaoxin
Yan
,

Nabonswende Aida
Nadege Ouedraogo
,

Yongzhe
Zhang
,

Hui
Yan
 and 

Chang Bao
Han
*

The Key Laboratory of Advanced Functional Materials, Ministry of Education of China, Faculty of Materials and Manufacturing, Beijing University of Technology, Beijing 100124, People's Republic of China. E-mail: cbhan@bjut.edu.cn

Received
22nd October 2021
, Accepted 10th January 2022
First published on 10th January 2022
Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have received tremendous attention because of their advantages of low fabrication cost and rising power conversion efficiency (PCE). However, the poor crystalline quality of perovskite materials leads to nonradiative recombination, which hinders the fabrication of high-performance PSCs. Herein, a new method is provided to improve the crystalline quality of perovskite films by applying an external electric field (EEF) during the two-step deposition process. High-quality films were obtained by regulating ion (MA+ and FA+) migration behavior in lead iodide (PbI2) with an ∼MV m−1 electric field. The results show that the trap density can yield an ∼22.63% drop to 2.82 × 1015 cm−3 after the EEF-assisted process. Meanwhile, the solar cell has shown a nearly 5% improvement of PCE to 19.76% and an ∼86.7% mitigation of the hysteresis index to 3.49%, compared with the pristine one. The results can be ascribed to the ion (MA+ and FA+) migration to PbI2 under the EEF, thereby forming a film with few defects at surfaces and between grain boundaries, which will effectively reduce the photo-generated electron–hole nonradiative recombination in PSCs. This work provides a new physical approach to fabricate high-quality perovskite materials for enhancing the performance of photovoltaic devices.

Organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite materials are widely used in solar cells due to their outstanding optoelectronic properties, such as high carrier mobility, long carrier diffusion length, ideal bandgap energy, and low exciton binding energy. Over the past decade, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) has been quickly improved from 3.8% (ref. 6) to 25.5%. However, nonradiative recombination losses limit the further improvement of PCE, making it fail to achieve Shockley–Queisser limit efficiency. In general, trap-assisted recombination at the interface or grain boundary (containing dangling bonds, vacancies, interstitials, or impurities) of perovskite causes severe photo-generated electron–hole recombination and open-circuit voltage loss. Theoretical calculation shows that I−, Pb2+ and MA+ point defects are easily formed by the vacancies and interstitial atoms due to the low formation energies. Besides, some deep level defects could be formed by shallow level defects according to first-principles calculations. For instance, the deep defect level VI1− is derived from the Pb–Pb bonding state accompanied by the iodine vacancy defect (VI) changing from VI0 to VI1−. Meanwhile, deep level defects (larger than 0.026 eV) act as the key nonradiative recombination center of charge carriers, leading to a high electron–hole recombination rate in PSCs. In addition, the vacancy-assisted migration of I− ions has a lower activation energy of 0.58 eV compared with Pb2+ (2.31 eV) and MA+ (0.84 eV), which may cause I− defect migration under an external bias. The ion migration and loss of the photo-generated charges are considered to explain hysteresis in the J–V scan process, while the existence of hysteresis will affect the authenticity of PCE in solar cells. Therefore, the enhancement of perovskite solar cell efficiency can be achieved by improving the quality of perovskite films.

At present, perovskite films are prepared by the solution method, vapor-assisted deposition method, or blade-coating method. The solution process is the most popular method due to its advantages of simplicity, low cost, and ease of mass production. Nevertheless, massive defects inside and among the grains are often formed during the solution-processed preparation of perovskite films. To resolve that, different techniques have been utilized, ranging from controlling the growth process of perovskite films to using additives, or adjusting the compositions of perovskite materials. In the crystal growth process, Li et al. indicated that the grain size can be increased to ∼2.25 μm by changing the annealing environment, and the grain boundaries or defects were reduced significantly. Recently, an external electric field-assisted annealing treatment was confirmed to be an efficient strategy to control the ion polarization orientation in perovskite films during a one-step solution method, and the results showed that it can increase the crystallinity of the films and enhance the device performance. However, for fabricating a perovskite film by an external electric field assisted annealing treatment in a one-step process, the anions and cations in the perovskite precursor solution are regulated synchronously to migrate reversely towards the two surfaces of the film under an external electric field, resulting in uneven crystallization of perovskite. Inspired by this, the application of an external electric field in the two-step solution process to control the migration of organic cations in the precursor solution is expected to obtain a perovskite film with excellent crystallinity.
In this work, the crystallinity of perovskite films is improved by regulating the migration behavior of the organic cations (MA+ and FA+) into lead iodide via using an external electric field in the two-step solution method. It revealed that the perovskite crystal grains in the film show dense and linear arrangements perpendicular to the transport layer by adjusting the external electric field direction and time. The corresponding planar PSC has the highest efficiency of 19.76% by using an external electric field of 1.85 MV m−1 (down direction), and correlated with the lowest hysteresis index of 3.49%. This work provides a facile and precise method for further enhancing the PCE of PSCs by improving the perovskite crystallinity quality.

As shown in Fig. 1a, an EEF has been applied on the spin-coated samples (organic salt solution on a PbI2 film) in air before thermal annealing. Meanwhile, pristine samples (without the EEF) have been fabricated by the same two-step deposition method. The perovskite solar cell has a planar structure of ITO/SnO2/(FAPbI3)1−x(MAPbI3-yCly)x/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au (Fig. 1b). It is apparent from Fig. 1c that different morphologies of perovskite films were obtained on glass substrates with or without the EEF at different times. Compared with Ref-0 h, films prepared by the EEF method show a compact and fully covered morphology. In addition, when the standing time before annealing is 1.0 h (without the EEF), the ions in organic salt solution may migrate in all directions due to the concentration difference, so no pinhole is observed on the surface of the perovskite film, compared with the Ref-0 h sample. Based on previous reports, a large crystalline grain size could positively impact the device photovoltaic performance, but a large gap between grain boundaries may lead to charge leakage between the ETL and HTL, resulting in a decline of device performance. However, the surface of the perovskite film with a good coverage has been reported to reduce the shunt pathways between the ETL and HTL, and to enhance the contact between the perovskite layer and carrier transport layers. Consequently, the perovskite film fabricated by the EEF method as a light absorption layer has a compact grain morphology and low charge leakage, which is conducive to obtaining high performance solar cells.

The crystal structure of the (FAPbI3)1−x(MAPbI3−yCly)x perovskite films with different EEF times (from 0 to 2.0 h) is examined by XRD analysis, and the results are exhibited in Fig. 2a. It is noted that the perovskite films with and without the EEF nearly have the same peaks, which is the perovskite phase of 2θ of 13.6° (110), 27.8° (220), and 31.2° (310), while the small peak at 12.3° belongs to the PbI2 phase. Additionally, enlarged XRD patterns present some shifts for these peaks (Fig. 2b). For instance, the shift of the position of the (110) peak from 13.60° [sample 1, (Ref-0 h)], 13.62° [sample 8, (Ref-1.0 h)] to 13.72° [sample 2, EEF (up)-1.0 h] and 13.78° [sample 6, EEF (down)-1.0 h] indicates a smaller parallel atomic plan spacing in the EEF samples. Based on Bragg's law (, where λ is the specific X-ray wavelength), the corresponding parallel atomic plan spacing (d) is 6.506 Å (Ref-0 h), 6.496 Å (Ref-1.0 h), 6.449 Å [EEF (up)-1.0 h], and 6.421 Å [EEF (down)-1.0 h], respectively. For a specific plane, the right shift of the peak position indicates that closer and more compact perovskite crystals have been obtained. This phenomenon implies that the crystallization of perovskite can be improved by applying an EEF. However, when the EEF time increased to 2.0 h, there is no obvious peak position shift compared with the pristine perovskite. Since the mobility of [PbI6]4− is much lower than that of organic cations (MA+ and FA+), the motion of organic cations will more likely play the main role in this process. This peak shift phenomenon may be explained by the fact that the organic cations in precursor solution move to different positions around the octahedral anions in PbI2 at different EEF times, thereby changing the interplanar spacing of the perovskite.
Studies have shown that the quality of perovskite films usually determines their optical properties. Therefore, a light absorption test was performed on the perovskite films prepared under different EEFs, as shown in Fig. 2c. It can be found that the absorption edge of the perovskite films has a slight blue shift after the EEF is applied, but the optical band gap is ∼1.55 eV. Compared with the corresponding reference sample (Ref-0 h), the absorbance of perovskite films in the visible light wavelength range has an increase of 11% for EEF (down)-1.0 h, a decrease of 7% for Ref-1.0 h and a decrease of 8% for EEF (up)-1.0 h, which is attributed to the better crystalline quality and full coverage of the perovskite film under the EEF (down direction), as shown in Fig. 1c above.

Steady-state PL spectra and dark J–V characteristic curves have been recorded to survey the charge separation and collection at the interfaces and perovskite layer. Fig. 2d shows the PL spectra of spin-coated perovskite films on glass to evaluate the charge recombination behavior. The PL intensity of the perovskite film for EEF (down)-1.0 h is the highest compared with the reference sample (Ref-0 h and Ref 1 h) and EEF (up)-1.0 h sample. The higher PL intensity indicates weaker defect recombination and smaller trap density in perovskite films, as can be supported by trap density space-charge-limited current (SCLC) measurements. Therefore, dark J–V measurements were used to investigate the charge recombination and carrier transport behavior, through the electron-only device structure of ITO/SnO2/perovskite/PCBM/Au. As shown in Fig. 2e, according to the J–V characteristics, the log–log plots of SCLC characteristic curves were obtained to evaluate the trap density (ntraps) of perovskite films, and ntraps can be calculated using formula (1).

(1)
where
ε0 is the vacuum dielectric constant (8.8542 × 10−14 F cm−1), e is the electric charge (1.602 × 10−19 C), εr is the relative dielectric constant of the perovskite film, and L is the thickness of the perovskite layer (∼750 nm, Fig. 5).VTFL is the starting voltage of the trap-filled limit acquired from the dark J–V curve. As a result, the VTFL of perovskite films based on the different preparation processes of EEF (down)-1.0 h, Ref-0 h, EEF (up)-1.0 h and Ref-1.0 h is 0.41 V, 0.53 V, 0.56 V and 0.57 V, respectively. The electron trap density was calculated using eqn (1) to be 2.820 × 1015 cm−3 for EEF (down)-1.0 h and 3.645 × 1015 cm−3 for Ref-0 h, which yields a ∼22.63% decrease of trap-state density, as shown in Fig. 2f. Such a phenomenon indicates that the carrier extraction and transport ability of the perovskite film at EEF (down)-1.0 h are better than those of the pristine one (Ref-0 h). However, the electron trap density was 3.92 × 1015 cm−3 for Ref-1.0 h and 3.65 × 1015 cm−3 for Ref-0 h, which yields a ∼7% increase. This may be because more perpendicular grain boundaries in the perovskite film will hinder charge transport due to the inhomogeneity of ion diffusion. Thus, it concludes that the EEF PSC presents less carrier recombination at interfaces and grain boundaries compared to the pristine one, which is beneficial to improve the device efficiency.


The photovoltaic properties of the PSCs assembled with perovskite films prepared under different EEFs were studied via fabricating planar solar cells with the structure of ITO/SnO2/perovskite/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au. The J–V curves of the corresponding devices are displayed in Fig. 3a, and the performance parameters of PSCs including open-circuit voltage (VOC), short-circuit current density (JSC), fill factor (FF), and PCE are illustrated in Fig. 3b. For the pristine device (Ref-0 h), the PCE was 18.80% with a VOC of 1.02 V, FF of 75.80%, and JSC of 24.67 mA cm−2. In all devices, the PSC assembled with the perovskite film of EEF-1.0 h has a champion efficiency of 19.76%, and VOC of 1.06 V, FF of 76.97%, and JSC of 24.52 mA cm−2. It seems that the sample for EEF (down)-1.0 h is a watershed, as shown in Fig. 3b. When the EEF (down) time changed from 0 to 1.0 h, most of the performances have a significant increase. After 2.0 h, the PCE of the PSC has a drastic decrease, indicating the best PCE at EEF (down)-1.0 h.

This enhanced VOC is attributed to the gradual increase of the built-in electric field induced by the EEF, which leads to the generation and collection of high electron density at the ETL and perovskite layer interface, and high hole density at the HTL and perovskite layer interface. Therefore, we deduce that the increase of the photovoltaic parameters is related to the perovskite film with high crystallization and the suppressed non-radiative recombination by the EEF (down). And, the decrease of photovoltaic parameters for EEF (up) samples might be the result of MA+ and FA+ ions migrating to the perovskite up surface and evaporating into air under the regulation of the EEF, thus forming more point defects. Finally, high trap density is formed in EEF (up) films and hinders the charge transport and thereby reduces the PSC efficiency. To verify the JSC value obtained by the J–V test, the corresponding EQE of the optimized solar cell devices (EEF (down)-1.0 h) over a wavelength range from 300 to 850 nm is shown in Fig. 3c. The EQE value exceeds 90%, and the integrated photocurrent density is 23.72 mA cm−2 within 3% deviation, compared to the JSC measured by the J–V test.
In addition, the difference of electrical performance parameters obtained during the J–V forward scan and reverse scan tests will affect the authenticity of the evaluation of PCE. At the same time, it is difficult to characterize and reproduce PSCs in a repeatable manner. The gap between the forward and reverse J–V curves can show the severity degree of hysteresis, which can be quantitatively described by the hysteresis index (HI).
(2)
A more positive number means more serious hysteresis and vice versa. Therefore, HI was calculated using eqn (2) to be 3.49% for the EEF (down)-1.0 h sample and 26.22% for the Ref-0 h sample, as shown in Fig. 4a. It is obvious that the lowest HI corresponds to EEF (down)-1.0 h, which also correlates with the highest PCE. Fig. 4b compares statistical HI of 8 PSC cells. This key parameter has shown much narrower distributions than the control samples, indicating a quite satisfactory reproducibility and controllability of the EEF method.

The two-step sequential deposition of perovskite films involves the deposition of a PbI2 layer in the first step and the deposition of an organic salt in the second step. Taking a MAPbI3 perovskite film as an example, the MA+ ions are infiltrated and migrated into a PbI2 film and react with [PbI6]4− to form perovskite grains. Next, the quasi-perovskite phase will be transformed into the perovskite phase after the annealing process. Thus, the cation diffusion in organic salt solution and the reaction process with PbI2 are considered to be the key to determine the quality of perovskite grains and films.

The cross-sectional SEM images of the films with and without an EEF (about 750 nm) are shown in Fig. 5. Compared with other samples, the EEF (down) sample clearly shows an ideal columnar character for the crystal grains from bottom to top. For the pristine sample, it can be distinctly observed that the excess PbI2 grains were distributed at the ITO/perovskite interface. For the EEF (up) sample, the excess PbI2 and the pin holes were distributed at the ITO/perovskite interface. To explain those observed trends in the (FAPbI3)1−x(MAPbI3−yCly)x perovskite layers, it is necessary to understand the EEF tunning mechanism. In the perovskite cubic structure of ABX3, atoms at site A fill the void of [BX6] because the electrostatic strength between B–X ions  is greater than that between A–X ions . Thus, MA+ and FA+ free cations in organic salt solution diffuse into the PbI2 layer due to the centrifugal forces and concentration difference after the spin-coating process. Then, free cations react with [PbI6]4− octahedra and enter the center of [PbI6]4− octahedra to form perovskite crystal cells. During the next annealing process, the crystal cells in the PbI2 layer will combine to form crystal nuclei due to the volatilization of solvent, and then gradually grow into perovskite grains with the consumption of solution.
In the EEF-free process (Fig. 5a), FA+ and MA+ cations randomly migrate in all directions after entering the PbI2 layer, resulting in the absence of cations in the lower concentration region, and the supersaturation of cations at the upper PbI2 layer. Then, the inhomogeneous distribution of organic cations makes the octahedral anions in the bottom PbI2 layer unable to completely react with the cations to obtain uniform perovskite grains. Furthermore, some supersaturated cations in the upper PbI2 layer are heated to gas and volatilized into air during the annealing process. Finally, the inhomogeneous distribution of the cations in the PbI2 layer and the cation-free region forms deep holes (enrichment defect area) and excess PbI2, respectively. Grain boundaries, pinholes, and excess PbI2 will hinder charge transport, leading to non-radiative recombination or accumulation of carriers.
When the EEF (down) is applied (Fig. 5c), MA+ and FA+ ions from organic salt precursor solution migrate downward and perpendicular into the PbI2 layer along the direction of the electric field line, and finally, organic cations are distributed throughout the PbI2 layer. Then, allowing the volatilization of solvent, the organic cations and octahedral anions in perovskite solution will fully react with each other. After annealing, a perovskite film with compact columnar grains (without pin holes and excess PbI2) was formed. It indicates that the EEF promotes the directional migration of organic cations during the formation process of perovskite, leading to a complete reaction between MAI (or FAI or MACl) and PbI2 and thus improving the crystalline quality of the film.
Similarly, when an EEF (up) is utilized (Fig. 5b), MA+ and FA+ ions migrate upward and perpendicular into the PbI2 layer, making cations gather in the upper PbI2 layer. After annealing, PbI2 grains and pinholes were formed between the ITO and perovskite layer, which would hinder the transport of carriers from the perovskite absorption layer to the ETL layer and reduce the PCE of devices.
To sum up, the migration behavior of ions can be regulated by applying an EEF during the process of preparing perovskite films via the two-step solution method, forming a pinhole-free high-quality film. As shown in Fig. 6a, the perovskite films with compact columnar arranged grains have an excellent ability to transport carriers, improving the PCE and mitigating hysteresis of PSCs. An interfacial potential barrier may be formed at the interface between the ETL and perovskite layer due to high trap density in PSCs assembled with perovskite films prepared without an EEF (Fig. 6b). According to carrier generation and transport theory, when the carriers were transported to the electrodes via the built-in electric field, the electrons may be blocked by the interfacial potential barrier.

ITO substrates were purchased from GULUO GLASS Technology co. Ltd. The tin oxide (SnO2) colloid precursor was purchased from Alfa Aesar (15%). The organic salts, composed of formamidinium iodide (FAI, >99.5%), methylammonium iodide (MAI, >99.5%), and methylammonium chloride (MACl, >99.5%), together with Spiro-OMeTAD (>99.5%) and PbI2 (>99.99%) were also purchased from Xi'an Polymer Light Technology Corp. All chemicals were directly used without further treatment.


ITO substrates were ultrasonicated for 15 min with detergent, deionized water, anhydrous alcohol, acetone, and anhydrous alcohol, respectively, and then treated with ultraviolet radiation for 10 min. The SnO2 electron transport layer (ETL) was obtained through spin-coating on cleaned ITO substrates at 4000 rpm for 30 s, followed by heat treatment at 150 °C for 30 min in ambient air. The concentration of SnO2 nanoparticles is 2.67%. After the ETL was deposited, the (FAPbI3)1−x(MAPbI3−yCly)x perovskite active layer was prepared on top by a two-step method. Firstly, PbI2 precursor solution was obtained by dissolving 671.5 mg PbI2 in 950 μL DMF and 50 μL DMSO. After that, the PbI2 solution was spin-coated on ITO/SnO2 at 1500 rpm for 30 s and then annealed at 70 °C for 2 min in a glove box. Secondly, the organic salt solution containing FAI:MAI:MACl (54 mg:36 mg:9 mg) in 1 mL IPA was spin-coated on PbI2 layers at 2000 rpm for 30 s. Then, an external electric field (EEF) of 1.85 × 106 V m−1 uniformly acted on the films in air (RH = 40%) by applying a voltage of 1.3 kV via a high voltage equipment. Finally, the film was annealed for 15 min at 150 °C in air with 40% humidity.

As a hole-transport layer (HTL), Spiro-OMeTAD solution was deposed at 3000 rpm for 30 s, which contains 72.3 mg Spiro-OMeTAD in 1 mL of chlorobenzene, 35 μL of a lithium-bis(tri-fluoromethanesulfonyl) imide (Li-TFSI) solution (260 mg Li-TFSI/1 mL acetonitrile), and 30 μL of 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP). Finally, about 70 nm of Au back electrode was deposited by thermal evaporation. The difference of EEF-assisted conditions for sample 1, sample 2, sample 3, sample 4, sample 5, sample 6, sample 7, and sample 8 is EEF (up)-2.0 h, EEF (up)-1.0 h, EEF (up)-0.5 h, Reference (Ref)-0 h, EEF (down)-0.5 h, EEF (down)-1.0 h, EEF (down)-2.0 h, and Ref-1.0 h, respectively. The “Ref-0 h” sample is the abbreviation of the film annealed after spin-coating immediately. The “Ref-1.0 h” sample is the abbreviation of the film annealed after standing in air for 1.0 h (without applying an EEF). The “EEF (up)-1.0 h” sample is the abbreviation of the film annealed after applying an EEF (up direction) for 1.0 h. The “EEF (down)-1.0 h” sample is the abbreviation of the film annealed after applying an EEF (down direction) for 1.0 h.

Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was performed using a Hitachi SU8010 to examine the morphology of the perovskite films. The XRD patterns were recorded on a Bruker D8 Advance X-ray diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.5418 Å) as the X-ray source. The data were collected with an accelerating voltage of 40 kV, an electrical current of 40 mA, and a step size of 0.1°. The ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) linear absorption spectra were recorded using a Persee TU-1810 spectrophotometer. Steady-state photoluminescence (PL) was carried out using a femtosecond laser system at a wavelength 532 nm with 35 fs pulses and a repetition operating rate of 1 kHz. Under AM 1.5 G illumination (100 mW cm−2), a Keithley 2400 Source Meter was utilized to measure the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of PSC devices and to record the dark J–V curves of perovskite films. The effective area of the cell was defined to be 0.04 cm2 using a non-reflective metal mask. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectrum was recorded using an EQE measurement system (SCS10X150-DSSC), where the monochromatic beam was supplied by a 150 W Xenon lamp (OSRAM).


In summary, an external electric field (EEF)-assisted two spin-coating technique is explored to improve the crystalline quality of perovskite films. The crystallization quality of perovskite films was changed by applying an EEF to regulate the migration behavior of organic cations (MA+ and FA+) in PbI2. The results show that a compact perovskite film with columnar grains was prepared under an EEF (down) of 1.85 MV m−1, while a perovskite film with horizontal grain boundaries and excess PbI2 and pin holes was obtained under the EEF (up or without). As a result, the ntraps is reduced from 3.645 × 1015 cm−3 to 2.820 × 1015 cm−3, which yields a ∼22.63% decrease after applying a down EEF. Meanwhile, a champion power conversion efficiency of 19.76% is achieved for EEF (down) PSCs with a VOC of 1.06 V, JSC of 24.52 mA cm−2, FF of 76.97%, and hysteresis index of 3.49%. Overall, this work develops a common and effective approach to further improve the perovskite film quality and enhance the photovoltaic performance of PSCs.


Man Qi Wang: conceptualization, software, data curation, and writing-original draft. Xiaobo Zhang: conceptualization and resources. Shaoxin Yan: conceptualization. Nabonswende Aida Nadege Ouedraogo: resources. Hui Yan: resources. Yongzhe Zhang: resources. Chang Bao Han: resources, conceptualization, writing-review & editing, and funding acquisition.


The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest.


This work was supported by the Key Laboratory of Advanced Functional Materials, Ministry of Education of China, Beijing University of Technology. The authors gratefully acknowledge the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC, 52070006), National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC, 62034001), and Beijing Nova Program of Science and Technology (Z191100001119116).


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022