 DOI: 10.1039/D2TA05128A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 22145-22154


Yi
Zhang
,

Zida
Zheng
,

Xiudong
Cao
,

Gangwei
Gu
,

Zhixing
Gan
*,

Rui
Huang
*,

Yanqing
Guo
,

Dejian
Hou
 and 

Xiaowei
Zhang
*

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Ningbo University, Ningbo 315211, P. R. China. E-mail: zhangxiaowei@nbu.edu.cn

Center for Future Optoelectronic Functional Materials, School of Computer and Electronic Information/School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing Normal University, Nanjing 210023, P. R. China. E-mail: zxgan@njnu.edu.cn

National Laboratory of Solid State Microstructures, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, P. R. China

School of Materials Science and Engineering, Hanshan Normal University, Chaozhou 521041, P. R. China. E-mail: rhuang@hstc.edu.cn

Received
27th June 2022
, Accepted 27th September 2022
First published on 27th September 2022
Luminescent solar concentrators (LSCs) are receiving increasing attention as photovoltaic (PV) modules to replace glass for seamless integration into the urban architectural landscape. Glass facades exhibiting different transparencies are highly demanded, however, LSCs with similar features of frosted glass are rarely reported. In this work, we developed eco-friendly multifunctional frosted LSCs (FLSCs) by incorporating the Si5.9Al0.1O0.1N7.9:Eu2+ phosphor with photoluminescence quantum yield (PLQY) up to 93% and the SrAl2O4:Eu2+, Dy3+ phosphor with bright persistent luminescence into a thiol–ene polymer. A record-high external quantum efficiency (ηext) of 29.8% is demonstrated for a 5 cm × 5 cm FLSC with the corresponding power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 1.37% and optical efficiency (ηopt) of 3.4% by attaching Si PV cells along the FLSC. The FLSC is proven to be an excellent substitute for commercial frosted glass thanks to its similar aesthetic quality. In addition to PV modules, FLSCs also act as zero-energy nightscape lighting devices due to the persistent luminescence. FLSCs exhibit favorable photostability during 150 h of 1 Sun illumination. Therefore, this work develops a new type of multifunctional and stable FLSC, which can not only replace frosted glass in multiple scenarios, but also play important roles in photovoltaic and lighting applications.

Research interests are constantly focused on newly emerging optoelectronic devices using solar technologies to answer the burgeoning demand for renewable energy. Among these optoelectronic devices, LSCs exhibit unique potential to collect direct sunlight and indirect sunlight for efficient solar-to-electricity conversion. Typically, LSCs consist of an optical waveguide embedded with luminescent fluorophores, such as organic fluorophores and quantum dots (QDs). LSCs harvest incident sunlight and re-emit at a longer wavelength. The emitted light is transferred to edge-mounted PV cells through waveguided photoluminescence and total internal reflection. Crucially for building-integrated photovoltaic (BIPV) applications, LSCs can be produced with unrivaled design freedom in terms of shape, transparency and color, which makes them a compelling choice for converting glass facades of urban buildings into transparent or semitransparent distributed energy generation units.

Glass facades of buildings are composed of glasses with different transparencies, such as transparent glass, semitransparent glass and frosted glass. A great deal of research on efficient LSCs is currently concentrated on transparent and semitransparent LSCs based on QDs. For example, Meinardi et al. investigated a flexible Si QD-based LSC utilizing indirect-bandgap colloidal nanostructures to reduce reabsorption and scattering in a polymerized matrix. The Si QD-based LSC had a PCE of 2.85% with an optical quantum efficiency of 30%. Further, a high transmittance of 70% for visible light made the Si QD-based LSC serve as a transparent glass in BIPV applications. Similarly, a tandem LSC consisting of CuInSe2 QDs as the bottom layer and Mn2+ doped CdxZn1−xS based QDs as the top layer was developed by Wu et al. An optical quantum efficiency of 6.4% corresponding to an optical transparency of 83% enables this tandem LSC to replace transparent glass. Huang et al. presented LSCs fabricated with Si QDs embedded in an off-stoichiometric thiol–ene polymer in a triplex glass configuration. A promising optical power efficiency of 7.9% was achieved for an optimized LSC with a transmittance of 62% at 500 nm, which endows this LSC with aesthetic quality comparable to semitransparent glass. Transparent and semitransparent LSCs are being extensively studied since a higher transparency means fewer scattering and reabsorption losses in the waveguide. In other words, there is a tradeoff between efficiency and aesthetic quality. Although the transparency of LSCs can be decreased by increasing the QD concentration to achieve the frosting effect, higher QD concentrations would heighten the reabsorption in the waveguide and result in poor efficiency. Therefore, it is a tough challenge to obtain frosted LSCs with high efficiency.
Another method to achieve the frosting effect in LSCs maintaining high aesthetic quality is to enhance light scattering in LSCs. For example, Li et al. introduced subwavelength sanding treatment to boost LSCs with scattering gain and achieve a frosting effect. In this work, in order to enhance light scattering and achieve a high optical efficiency, phosphors were developed as luminescent fluorophores in LSCs. Owing to the micro-scale particle sizes of phosphors, a large absorption cross-section of phosphors ensures high optical conversion for LSCs while enhancing light scattering. Other excellent features of phosphors such as high PLQY and larger Stokes shifts also guarantee high optical conversion hedging against scattering losses. The superior long-term photostability of phosphors to solar irradiation can meet the demand of practical applications. Moreover, specially designed phosphors with persistent luminescence can store light energy during the day and emit it at night. If persistent luminescence could be inherited in LSCs, it not only coincides with green building design, which advocates efficiently using energy, water, and other resources, but also boosts BIPV applications of LSCs in the architecture. Herein, we developed a series of eco-friendly phosphor-based FLSCs free from reabsorption. The optimized FLSC exhibits an ηext of 29.8% corresponding to a high absorption of 78.3%. The optical properties were analyzed based on experiments and Monte Carlo ray-tracing simulation. The optimized FLSC displays an ηopt of 3.4% and a PCE of 1.37% under AM 1.5G with PV cells. Meanwhile, the optimized FLSC can rival the aesthetic quality of commercial frosted glass. In addition, these multifunctional FLSCs also act as nightscape lighting devices and show good photostability with minimal degradation over 150 h of 1 Sun illumination.

As shown in Fig. 1a, the X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns confirm the pure monoclinic crystal phase and unambiguous hexagonal crystal phase corresponding to the SrAl2O4:Eu2+, Dy3+ (SAO) phosphor and Si5.9Al0.1O0.1N7.9:Eu2+ (SAON) phosphor, respectively. The substitution of a small amount of Sr atoms by Eu2+ or Dy3+ in the crystal lattice does not have a detectable influence on the XRD spectra, indicating that the crystal structure is unaltered at such low doping concentrations. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements further confirm the low doping concentrations of Eu2+, Dy3+ and Eu2+ in SAO and SAON, respectively (Tables S1 and S2). Fig. 1b and c show scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the SAO phosphor and SAON phosphor. The SAO phosphor has several irregular polygonal particles with sizes between 3 and 14 μm. The SAON phosphor consisted of rod-like crystals with lengths between 8 and 23 μm, and diameters of 3.5–5.2 μm. The composition distributions of the elements in both SAO (Sr, Al and O) and SAON (Sr, Al, O and N) are uniform (Fig. S1 and S2).

Photoluminescence (PL) and photoluminescence excitation (PLE) spectra of the SAO, SAON and the mixture of SAO and SAON phosphors are shown in Fig. 1d–f. The SAO phosphor shows a characteristic Eu2+ based broad emission band at around 520 nm, which is ascribed to the 5d → 4f transitions. The excitation band ranging from 250 to 500 nm originates from 4f → 5d transitions of Eu2+ ions, and the PLQY of the SAO phosphor in the solid state is about 30% (Fig. S3a). The SAON phosphor also shows a broad emission band attributed to 5d → 4f transitions of Eu3+ ions at around 540 nm. Two broadbands centered at 340 and 405 nm and several shoulders are observed in the PLE spectrum of the SAON phosphor. The fine structure in the excitation spectrum is due to the crystal field splitting of the 5d level of the Eu2+ ions. The SAON phosphor in the solid state exhibits an extremely high PLQY of 93% (Fig. S3b). Given that the emission and excitation range of SAO strongly resemble those of SAON, the mixture of SAO and SAON may cause little photon energy transfer between each other. This can be further confirmed by PL and PLE spectra of the mixture of SAO and SAON (weight ratio of 1:1), which are almost invariable compared to those of SAON, and the mixture retains a relatively high PLQY of 81% (Fig. S3c). The UV-visible diffuse reflectance spectra of SAO, SAON and mixture phosphors (Fig. S4) are transformed to pseudoabsorbance using the Kubelk–Munk (KM) function α = (1 − R)2/2R, where α is the optical absorption coefficient and R is the reflectance. As plotted in Fig. 1d–f, SAO and SAON phosphors exhibit large Stokes shifts of 1.37 eV and 0.77 eV, respectively. Such a large Stokes shift is key to the realization of large-area LSCs with suppressed reabsorption losses. Very intriguingly, the SAO phosphor exhibits a persistent luminescence lasting for more than 7 h (Fig. 1g). The SAO phosphor displays an emission band at around 520 nm after the removal of light excitation. Intense persistent luminescence occurs through the direct recombination of the conduction electrons released from the traps of Dy3+ with the luminescent centers of Eu3+. Schematic diagrams are constructed to explain photoluminescence and persistent luminescence processes in the SAO and SAON phosphors (Fig. S5).

A series of FLSCs were fabricated by integrating the mixtures of SAO and SAON uniformly into thiol–ene polymers (details in the methods section). We named DS1, DS2, DS3 and DS4 for FLSCs with loading amounts of 3.2 g L−1, 4.8 g L−1, 6.4 g L−1 and 11.2 g L−1, respectively. The typical size of the FLSCs is 5 × 5 × 0.5 cm3, which is sufficient to allow reabsorption losses and scattering losses to assert themselves to enable a reliable evaluation of performance. As shown in Fig. 2a, there is no significant variation in the PL spectral shapes between the mixed phosphors and FLSCs. Only a subtle emission peak shift at approximately 4 nm was detected, which is ascribed to the different refractive indices between the thiol–ene polymer and air. It is worth noting that the FLSCs displayed a strong waveguiding effect as indicated by bright green emission emerging from the edge under weak UV irradiation. Fig. 2b shows DS4 as an example.

To quantify the optical efficiency of FLSCs and obtain detailed insights into the optical loss mechanisms, the edge-emission efficiency (ηedge) and the total PLQY of FLSCs were measured using an integrating-sphere equipped spectrometer (Fig. S6). The ηedge is defined as follows:
where
Iedge is the integral intensity of the edge PL band, and Itotal is the integral intensity of the total PL band, as shown in Fig. S7. The quantification method for the PLQY of FLSCs is the same as that for the phosphors (Fig. S8). Fig. 2c shows the decline of ηedge with increasing phosphor concentrations, while the PLQY exhibits a totally reverse trend to ηedge with increasing phosphor concentrations. ηedge is affected by the random propagation direction of photons during each scattering event, which leads to additional losses via emission into the escape cone. Given the large particle sizes of the phosphors, photon scattering probability would increase in lockstep with phosphor concentrations, resulting in the reduction of ηedge. The increasing scattering probability was further proven by the simulated value of ηedge obtained via Monte Carlo ray-tracing calculations, which is in good agreement with the observed results (Fig. S9–S11). With the assistance of Monte Carlo ray-tracing simulation, we found that incident photons are more likely to be absorbed by phosphors than polymers, and emission photons are less likely to be absorbed by polymers following nonradiative recombination with increasing phosphor concentration. These two factors finally contribute to the increased PLQY. The internal quantum efficiency (ηint), ηint = ηedge × PLQY of the FLSCs, keeps pace with the phosphor concentrations and increases from 33.1% to 38.2% (Fig. 2c). Thanks to the large absorption cross-section of the phosphors, FLSCs exhibit a pretty high absorptance (ηabs) even for the DS1 with the lowest phosphor concentration (Fig. 2d). With increasing phosphor concentrations, ηabs substantially improves and reaches a maximum at 78.3% for DS4. To eliminate the interference of scattering during measuring ηabs, we used an integrating sphere to directly measure the ηabs of FLSCs (Fig. S12). The external quantum efficiencies (ηext = ηabs × ηint) for DS1 and DS4 are 15.5% and 29.8%, respectively (Fig. 2d).

Emission spectra harvested at one of the FLSC edges were excited at 405 nm with the pump spot positioned at different distances (d) from the edge. As shown in Fig. 2e, a progressive reduction in the emission intensity with increasing d indicates that energy losses occur as a result of reabsorption or scattering in the FLSC. It's well accepted that reduction owing to reabsorption is accompanied by a variation in the emission spectral shape, but the normalized emission spectrum remains unchanged with increasing d (inset of Fig. 2e). Thus, we infer that the energy losses are mainly due to scattering by the phosphors within the FLSC, leading to the photon escape through the top surface and bottom surface. Another manifestation of scattering losses is that the FLSC with higher phosphor concentration shows a sharper reduction in the d dependent emission intensity (Fig. 2f). The increase in phosphor concentrations increases the scattering probability, which enables a higher proportion of photons to escape from the top surface and bottom surface. Moreover, the Monte Carlo ray-tracing simulated trend regarding the reabsorption-free condition perfectly matches with the experimental data, demonstrating that the loss caused by reabsorption is negligible (Fig. 2f and S9–S11).
The conversion efficiency of FLSCs with a size comparable to frosted glass used in architecture buildings will determine whether these FLSCs are qualified to function as frosted glass in BIPV applications. Due to the limited conditions in the laboratory, constructing such a large FLSC is problematic. Monte Carlo ray-tracing simulated optical performance metrics such as PLQY, ηedge, ηint and ηext of FLSCs reported in Fig. 2c and d are in very good agreement with the experimentally observed values. This enables us to use the Monte Carlo ray-tracing simulation based on experimental parameters of FLSCs (phosphor concentrations, absorption, PL spectra and PLQY of phosphors) to estimate the key optical performances of large FLSCs. The calculated optical performance metrics (PLQY, ηedge and ηext) of the FLSCs with larger areas (from 25 to 100 cm2) are shown in Fig. 3a–c. The ηabs was found to be a constant at a certain phosphor concentration with increasing FLSC area. The simulated trend indicates that expanding the FLSC area leads to a reduction in the PLQY, meanwhile the FLSC with lower phosphor concentrations causes a sharper reduction in the PLQY with an expanding FLSC area (Fig. 3a). PLQY losses are attributed to the emission photons absorbed by the polymer following non-radiative recombination with longer waveguides. With expansion of the FLSC area, ηedge also suffers losses due to more emission photons in the escape cone by particle scattering (Fig. 3b). As shown in Fig. 3c, although expanding the FLSC area results in losses of both PLQY and ηedge, the FLSC with the largest area (100 cm2) and the highest concentration (11.2 g L−1) still preserves the optimized ηext of 19.5%, which is a 4-fold increase in area and only a 34% decrease in ηext compared to that of the DS4 (area of 25 cm2).


Fig. 4a shows the current density versus voltage (J–V) characteristics of the series of FLSCs measured under AM 1.5G illumination. The overall PCE of the FLSC system is defined as follows:
where
Jsc is the short-circuit current density, Voc is the open circuit voltage, FF is the fill factor of PV cells, and P0 is the irradiation intensity. Significantly, JSC here is divided by the area of the top surface rather than the area of the edge-mounted Si PV cell, just as with any other PV system (details in the methods section). The photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table 1. DS1 with the lowest concentration shows a Jsc of 2.14 ± 0.05 mA cm−2. As the phosphor concentration increases, the JSC further increases with a modest increase in Voc and FF, resulting in an enhancement of the corresponding PCE. The optimized FLSC, DS4 with the highest concentration, reaches a PCE of 1.37 ± 0.03%. It is instructive to compare the performance of our devices with current research about LSCs based on QDs and NCs reported in the literature. ηopt is the photoelectrical parameter frequently used to compare the performance of LSCs, which is defined as follows:
where
Isc-LSC and Isc are the short-circuit currents from the Si PV cell mounted on the edge of the LSC and the same PV cell under AM 1.5G illumination, and G is the geometric factor (G = Atop/Aedge, Atop is the area of the top surface, and Aedge is the surface area of the edges mounted on a solar cell). The G factor in the present work is 10, and the series of ηopt is listed in Table 1. DS4 shares the same level of ηopt as LSCs based on QDs and NCs with a high PLQY, and the ηopt of DS4 is higher than those of CsPbI3 NCs and CuInSeS/ZnS QDs based LSCs, while lower than that of the PbS/CdS QD-based LSC with the same G factor (G = 10) (Fig. 4b and Table S3).

Samples

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF
PCE

η
opt

DS1
2.14 ± 0.05
0.47 ± 0.01
58 ± 1%
0.59 ± 0.03%
1.57 ± 0.01%
DS2
2.58 ± 0.05
0.48 ± 0.01
58 ± 1%
0.72 ± 0.03%
1.91 ± 0.01%
DS3
3.20 ± 0.06
0.49 ± 0.01
60 ± 1%
0.94 ± 0.03%
2.35 ± 0.02%
DS4
4.51 ± 0.07
0.52 ± 0.01
59 ± 1%
1.37 ± 0.03%
3.38 ± 0.02%

As PV modules to replace frosted glass in buildings, figures of merit for the aesthetic quality of FLSCs, such as average visible transmission (AVT), correlated color temperature (CCT), CIE chromaticity coordinates, and color rendering index (CRI) of transmitted sunlight should be close to those of frosted glass. AVT can be achieved in transmittance (T(λ)) spectra. As shown in Fig. 5a and Table 2, the T(λ) spectra of each FLSC fluctuate slightly over the entire visible range, and the AVT of FLSCs increases with increasing phosphor concentrations. Interestingly, the almost coincident T(λ) spectra of DS4 and commercial frosted glass mean that DS4 has similar photo-permeability of sunlight to commercial frosted glass. CCT, CIE1931 chromaticity coordinates and CRI were obtained by measuring transmitted light from a solar simulator (AM 1.5G) using a spectroradiometer, as shown in Fig. 5b and Table 2. The variation in phosphor concentrations has little influence on the CIE1931 chromaticity coordinates (Fig. 5c) and CRI, and only casts down the CCT from 5233 K to 5004 K, which is a tiny variation in the CCT scale. The hazy and semitransparent appearance of DS4 looks little different from that of commercial frosted glass under sunlight, except for a slight green float (Fig. 5d). The visible haze of DS4 is 74%, which is comparable to that of frosted glass (72%), as shown in Fig S13. Significantly, a series of aesthetic qualities of DS4 close to that of commercial frosted glass confirms the potential of DS4 to replace commercial frosted glass in buildings.

Samples
CCT (K)
CIE1931
CRI
AVT (%)

x


y

DS1
5233
0.34
0.35
98
35.8
DS2
5189
0.34
0.35
99
26.9
DS3
5139
0.34
0.35
99
18.1
DS4
5004
0.35
0.35
97
5.6
Frosted glass
5152
0.34
0.35
98
5.5

In addition to sunlight collectors for solar-to-electricity conversion, this series of multifunctional FLSCs also act as nightscape lighting devices. As shown in Fig. 5e, DS4 exhibited bright green persistent luminescence in a darkroom after exposure to external natural sunlight for 5 min. According to the International Maritime Organization, persistent luminescence devices suitable for night-vision application should provide luminance at least 20 mcd m−2 at 10 min and greater than 2.8 mcd m−2 at 60 min after the removal of all external excitation sources.Fig. 5f shows the persistent luminescence decay curve after exposure to sunlight for 5 min and persistent luminescence spectra recorded at 10 min and 60 min after the stoppage of irradiation. The luminance of DS4 reaches 23.3 mcd m−2 at 10 min and 4.7 mcd m−2 at 60 min, demonstrating that DS4 is a qualified device used in nightscape lighting applications.

The bathroom window is usually expected to provide enough natural light while obstructing the view from the outside, which is a very typical application scenario of the frosted glass. In order to verify the potential of FLSCs to replace frosted glass, we fabricate a miniature bathroom by using the commercial frosted glass (Fig. 5g) and the FLSC (Fig. 5h) as the window. Four serial Si PV strips (5 × 0.5 cm2) were mounted on four edges of the FLSC and connected to LED devices. Apart from as a preferable substitute of frosted glass, the FLSC mounted with PV strips can power LED devices to light up the bathroom in daylight (Fig. 5h). Moreover, after ceasing all light irradiation, the miniature bathroom was lit by bright green persistent luminescence from the FLSC (Fig. 5i).

Since the lifetime of the LSC is very crucial for real-world deployment, the stabilities of our FLSCs were tested by indoor experiments at a temperature of 28 °C and a humidity of 35%. DS4 was irradiated with a xenon lamp for 150 h (Fig. S15). The irradiation intensity on the DS4 surface was calibrated to 1 Sun with the NREL-calibrated Si reference cell. The J–V characteristics of DS4 were measured under AM 1.5G illumination every 50 h (Fig. 6a). DS4 shows excellent photostability with evidence of PCE slightly decreasing from 1.46% to 1.34% and the ηopt decreasing from 3.38% to 3.13% after 150 h of 1 Sun illumination (Fig. 6b). In order to make the lifetime testing close to realistic applications, the stabilities of our FLSCs have also been tested by outdoor experiments under various weather conditions (for example, sunny, cloudy, overcast and rainy days, see results in Fig S16).


Chemical reagents SrCO3 (3.5 N), Al2O3 (4 N), Eu2O3 (4 N), Dy2O3 (4 N), EuN (3 N), Si (3 N) and Si3N4 (β-phase, 3 N) were purchased from Aladdin. The monomers pentaerythritol tetrakis(3-mercaptopropionate) (thiol) and triallyl triazine trione (allyl) were purchased from Aldrich.


The SrAl2O4:Eu2+, Dy3+ phosphor was synthesized via high-temperature solid-state sintering. 57.38 wt% SrCO3, 40.44 wt% Al2O3, 0.7 wt% Eu2O3 and 1.48 wt% Dy2O3 were mixed and ground adequately in an agate mortar to form homogeneous powder for prefiring. After the mixture was calcined at 1300 °C for 3 hours under a 95% N2 + 5% H2 atmosphere, the material was ground again to fine powder, and the SrAl2O4:Eu2+, Dy3+ phosphor was obtained.

Eu3Si2 was obtained by calcining the mixture of EuN and excess Si (molar ratio of Eu:Si = 1) at 1150 °C for 4 hours in a N2 atmosphere. 97.43 wt% Si3N4, 1.4 wt% Al2O3, and 1.17 wt% Eu3Si2 were mixed and ground adequately in an agate mortar to form homogeneous powder for prefiring. After the mixture was calcined at 1950 °C for 8 h in a 0.9 Mpa N2 atmosphere, the material was ground again to fine powder, and the Si5.9Al0.1O0.1N7.9: Eu2+ phosphor was obtained.

The photo-initiator (Irgacure-184) and phosphors were added to the precursor with the thiol and allyl monomers. The weight ratio of Irgacure-184:thiol:allyl is 0.01:1:0.8. After vigorous stirring and the vacuum treatment process, the mixture was transferred into a glass mold with a dimension of 5 × 5 × 0.5 cm3 and irradiated by UV illumination for 5 min (UV lamp spectrum is shown in S17). The radiance of UV illumination on the surface of the polymer was 5.2 W m−2. Finally, the glass mold was detached carefully, and the FLSC was obtained.


The phase structure of the prepared phosphors was determined using a BRUKER D8 ADVANCE type X-ray diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation, and the operating conditions were 40 kV and 30 mA. XPS was performed using a Thermo ESCALAB 250XI system. The morphology and elemental composition were characterized using a SEM FEI Quanta 400. The PL spectra, PLE spectra, persistent luminescence spectra and persistent luminescence decay curves were measured using a fluorescence spectrophotometer (Edinburgh Instrument Ltd, FLS1000). The PLQY of the phosphors was measured using the integrated sphere internally installed in the FLS1000 instrument.


PL spectra were measured on a FLS1000 instrument. The ηedge and ηPL,LSC were measured using an integrating sphere fiber-coupled with the FLS1000 instrument. The excitation distance dependent emission spectra were recorded by coupling the output edge of the FLSC to an integrating sphere, using a 405 nm laser as an excitation source, and recording the emission intensity with double-gratings (1200 gr mm−1, 500 nm blaze) in the emission monochromator with a CCD camera. (T(λ)) of the FLSC was measured using a double-beam Shimadzu UV-3600 spectrophotometer in the transmission mode. CCT, CIE1931 chromaticity coordinates and CRI were obtained by measuring the transmitted light of the FLSC from a solar simulator (AM 1.5G) using a Photo Research PR-655 SpectraScan spectroradiometer. Digital photographs were captured using a camera phone (Galaxy S21 Ultra 5G, Samsung).


For J–V measurements, the Si PV strip (5 × 0.5 cm2) was mounted on one waveguide edge of the FLSC with an air gap, and the remaining three edges were covered with black tapes to block the light and internal reflection of light (details in Fig. S18 and S19). A matte black background was placed on the back of the FLSC to eliminate illumination from the environment or reflection. An opaque mask with a well-defined area value was closely placed in front of the FLSC to block any direct illumination. The overall J–V was corrected by multiplying the current density by 4.


Theoretical analysis of the efficiency of the LSC was performed using a Monte Carlo ray-tracing method based on python software, in which the propagation of a photon within the LSC was modelled as the propagation of a geometrical ray subject to refraction/reflection at the air–LSC interfaces according to Fresnel laws. The stochastic nature of the simulations is reflected in the fact that the ray is not split upon reaching an interface but is instead transmitted or reflected, with probabilities proportional to the respective energy fluxes given by the Fresnel laws (note S6).


In summary, a series of novel FLSCs were fabricated by embedding phosphors with high PLQY into a thiol–ene polymer. The large absorption cross-section of the phosphors and no reabsorption in the waveguide endow the FLSC with a high ηext of 29.8%, despite scattering losses resulting from phosphor particles in the polymer. With the assistance of Monte Carlo ray-tracing simulations, a large area FLSC (100 cm2) is found to maintain a high ηext of 19.5%. The FLSC attached to Si PV cells exhibits a PCE of 1.37% and ηopt of 3.4% corresponding to the CRI of 97. Moreover, the FLSC can act as a zero-energy nightscape lighting device. After 60 days of outdoor testing, the FLSC was verified to have favorable photostability under various weather conditions. This work demonstrates the potential of multifunctional FLSCs as both deployed power-generating devices and persistent luminescence devices to replace commercial frosted glass in multiple applications with high photovoltaic performance, comparable aesthetic quality to frosted glass, excellent nightscape lighting properties and long-term photostability.


Y. Zhang, Z. Gan and X. Zhang conceived the idea and initiated the research. X. Zhang supervised the project. Y. Zhang and Z. Zheng designed the experiments. Y. Zhang, Z. Zheng, D. Hou and X. Cao performed the experiments and collected the data. Y. Zhang, Z. Zheng, G. Gu, R. Huang and Y. Guo analyzed the data and discussed the results. Y. Zhang, R. Huang and Z. Gan cowrote the manuscript, and Y. Zhang, Z. Gan and X. Zhang revised and commented on it.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) (61974078 and 12104117), the Natural Science Foundation of Zhejiang Province (LY21F040002), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Provincial Universities of Zhejiang (SJLY2021012), the Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation (2020A1515010432), the Project of Educational Commission of Guangdong Province (2019KTSCX096), the Natural Science Foundation of Ningbo City (2021J059), and the Key Research and Development Program of Jiangsu Province (BE2021082).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ta05128a
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022