 DOI: 10.1039/D3TA01496G
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2023, 11, 11607-11636


Yuling
Zhang
,

Ruyue
Wang
 and 

Zhan'ao
Tan
*

Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Soft Matter Science and Engineering, Beijing University of Chemical Technology, Beijing 100029, China. E-mail: tanzhanao@mail.buct.edu.cn

Received
11th March 2023
, Accepted 3rd May 2023
First published on 4th May 2023
The success of introducing diverse organic cations in three-dimensional (3D) organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites to form two-dimensional (2D) or quasi-2D perovskites, including Ruddlesden–Popper (R–P), Dion–Jacobson (D–J), and alternating cations in the interlayer (ACI) structures, highlights the research progress for 2D perovskite-based optoelectronic materials and devices. However, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 2D perovskite solar cells (PerSCs) still needs to catch up to their 3D counterparts at present. In this review, we focus on the crystallographic characteristics and crystal growth of 2D perovskites from the perspectives of fabrication methods, solvent engineering, and component engineering. For 2D PerSCs, three critical factors of carrier transport, energy level alignment (ELA), and light management are summarized to further enhance the photovoltaic performance. Furthermore, the exact balance between stability and efficiency needs to be reconsidered. The structural stability, phase stability, and environmental stability are discussed for all-inorganic, tin-based, and 2D/3D PerSCs. Finally, several new insights are proposed to further optimize the photovoltaic properties of 2D PerSCs.
Yuling Zhang
Yuling Zhang received his Master's degree in the College of Chemical Engineering from China University of Petroleum (East China) in 2020. Currently, he is studying at the Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Soft Matter Science and Engineering at Beijing University of Chemical Technology. His current research areas focus on perovskite solar cells.
Ruyue Wang
Ruyue Wang received her Bachelor's degree in the School of Material Chemistry from Henan University of Science and Technology in 2019. Currently, she is studying at the Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Soft Matter Science and Engineering at Beijing University of Chemical Technology. Her current research areas focus on perovskite solar cells.
Zhan'ao Tan
Zhan'ao Tan has been a Professor at the Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Soft Matter Science and Engineering, Beijing University of Chemical Technology since 2018. Previously, he worked at the Beijing Key Laboratory of Novel Thin Film Solar Cells, North China Electric Power University from 2009 to 2018. He currently leads the Group of Organic Optoelectronic Materials and Devices. He received his Ph.D. degree in Physical Chemistry in 2007 from the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences. He then went to Pennsylvania State University, USA, as a postdoctoral fellow working on semiconductor quantum dots-based light-emitting diodes and photovoltaics from 2007 to 2009. His present research interests include polymer solar cells, semiconductor nanocrystal-based optoelectronics, organic-inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells and flow batteries.

In the last fifteen years, perovskite solar cells (PerSCs) have attracted much research attention as a form of third-generation photovoltaic technology, benefiting from the rapidly improved light absorption intensity, long carrier lifetime, long exciton separation length, tunable composition, and versatile film fabrication methods. The value of the power conversion efficiency (PCE) has increased rapidly from 3.8% (ref. 1) to a certified value of 25.7% (ref. 2) for the n–i–p structure and certified value of 25.37% (ref. 3) for the p–i–n structure PerSCs. Compared with commercial solar cells like Si and CIGS solar cells, the stability of the PerSCs is the biggest obstacle that needs to be resolved for large-scale commercialization.

Typically, the three-dimensional (3D) perovskite crystal structure follows the ABX3 chemical structure, where A is FA+, MA+, or Cs+, B is Pb2+ or Sn2+, and X− is a halogen ion. The inferior environmental stability of the 3D perovskite may derive from the hydrophilic properties of A-site cations, and the poor structural and phase stabilities are relative to the relatively low formation energy. Moreover, the small-sized cations may aggravate the octahedral distortion and degradation of perovskite films. An effective strategy to resolve the instability problem is to introduce bulky organic cations, which can not only increase the formation energy of perovskite films to inhibit ion migration, but also improve environmental stability. The bulky organic cations commonly tend to stack in an orderly way along the specific orientation, and the organic layer can cut the 3D crystal structure into a 2D or 2D/3D mixed phase. According to the different stacking modes of organic cations, such as monovalent cation (BA+, PEA+), bivalent cations (PDA2+), and unique GA+, the commonly reported 2D perovskite structures are categorized into three types, including the Ruddlesden–Popper (R–P), Dion–Jacobson (D–J), and alternating cations in the interlayer (ACI) structures. The chemical structural formula is , A′′An−1BnX3n+1, and (GA)2An−1BnX3n+1, respectively, and the value of <n> represents the layer number of the [BX6]4− octahedral.
However, the insulating organic layer may block the carrier transmission routine in the perovskite films. Fortunately, the adjustment of three different crystal orientations, including parallel, perpendicular to the film-forming substrate, or randomly stacking mode, can be controlled via solvent engineering, component engineering, and processing engineering. The stacking mode that is perpendicular to the substrate interface is the ideal crystal orientation to improve the properties of the carrier transport and operation stability. In addition, the carrier transport and energy level alignment have a great relationship with the quality of the crystal growth films. Therefore, it is important to precisely regulate the crystal growth of the 2D perovskite films to balance the stability and PCE.
In this review, we focus on the crystal growth, carrier transport, energy level alignment of the 2D perovskites and summarize the recent research progress on different types of 2D perovskite solar cells, including all-inorganic PerSCs, tin-based PerSCs, and 2D/3D PerSCs. The balance between the stability and high PCE value is also a significant problem that needs to be resolved in 2D PerSCs. Light management is a potential efficient method to resolve the problem. We also summarize the stability of the 2D perovskite films and the huge potential application in photovoltaics areas. Finally, the challenges and outlooks on the further development of two-dimensional perovskites are proposed.

Generally, in an ABX3 structured 3D perovskite, the six adjacent X-position atoms conform the unique octahedral structure, and the B-position metal ions are wrapped at the center of the octahedron structure, forming a [BX6]4− octahedron structure (Fig. 1a). The [BX6]4− octahedrons link each other via corner-sharing way, and the A-position cations are located at the center of the eight adjacent [BX6]4− octahedrons. Theoretically, the lasting stability of the perovskite device has a good relationship with the octahedron structural stability, and the tolerance factor (τ) was introduced by Goldschmidt to quantitatively characterize the performance. The formula is as follows, and the theoretical τ value of the stable perovskite should be 0.8–1.0.

(1)
Here,
RA, RB, and RX refer to the ionic radii of the A-position cations, B-position metal ions, and X-position atoms, respectively.

However, it is difficult to determine the tolerance factors for the organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite, the bond lengths of the organic cations in the 2D/quasi-2D perovskite are various due to the existence of a hydrogen-bonding interaction between [PbI6]4− and organic cations. Kieslich proposed the concept of effective radii for different organic ions (RAeff), as shown in Fig. 1b. The tolerance factor of the hybrid Pb iodides was calculated according to formula (3), and the ion radius of the organic cations was modified by formula (2). For example, the calculated tolerance factor of PAPbI3 is 0.98.
RAeff = Rmass + Rion
(2)
(3)
Here,
α denotes the modified tolerance factor, and Rmass denotes the largest length between the center of mass of the molecule and the atoms, ignoring the existence of hydron atoms. Rion represents the ion radius of the atoms. RXeff and hXeff denote the effective radius and effective height in the model, respectively.

Instead of the full corner-sharing connection in the 3D perovskite, [PbX6]4− octahedra can also connect in the form of edge-sharing or face-sharing, namely as 3D perovskitoids. As shown in Fig. 1c, the rigid building unit [B2X10]6− was connected by edge-sharing, and formed 3D networks by the corner-sharing of the adjacent [B2X10]6− units. The voids of type I and type II are large enough to accommodate diammonium cations, which exhibit similar band structure and dynamic lattice characteristics to those of the 3D perovskites.
When the amine part of the organic cations is inserted into the position of the small-sized MA+, FA+, or Cs+, the over-sized long organic tail part (linear, cyclic or aromatic type) will destroy the regularly repeated [BX6]4− octahedrons. The connection force between the adjacent [BX6]4− octahedrons changes into an intermolecular force instead of the chemical bond, and the three different stacking modes of the organic cations will form different crystal orientations. As shown in Fig. 2a, the three different crystal structures can be defined in the formula of  (<100> orientation), A2′AmBmX3m+1 (<110> orientation), and A2′Aq−1BqX3q+3 (<111> orientation) (where n/m/q = 1, 2, 3, …, A′ represents the organic cations). Unlike the rarely reported <110> and <111> directions in the literature, the <100> direction can form the common 2D perovskites, including R–P, D–J, and ACI structures. For example, in the formula of , the <n> value refers to the layer number of the inorganic part, which can distinguish the type of low-dimensional perovskites. When <n> = 1, it denotes the ideal 2D perovskite; when <n> = 2–5, the quasi-2D perovskites can be formed; and when <n> = +∞, it belongs to a classic 3D perovskite structure.
For the 2D perovskite (Fig. 2b), the R–P, D–J type perovskites are more common structures than the ACI type perovskite, the chemical formulae are  (R–P type) and A′′An−1BnX3n+1 (D–J type), where A′ represents the large monovalent organic cations, like phenethylammonium (PEA+), propylammonium (PA+), and others, and A′′ represents the divalent organic spacer cations, like ethylenediamine (EDA2+), propylenediamine (PDA2+), and others. In the structure of the R–P type perovskite, the inorganic perovskite layer is connected via monovalent organic cations, and the tail of the organic cations can be stacked in van der Waals forces. Thus, ordered hydrophobic layers can be formed via connecting the adjacent inorganic array, which is beneficial to improving the 2D perovskite environmental stability. For the D–J type structure, the connection between the adjacent inorganic layer is divalent organic cations. The divalent organic cations can not only construct an organic layer, but also shorten the distance of the organic layer, which contributes to the efficient carrier transport.
Guanidinium (GuA+) is a unique organic cation that is used to construct the ACI structure in 2D perovskite. GuA+ can stack in an orderly manner like MA+ and FA+ between inorganic layers, and the formula of the ACI type is (GuA)2An−1BnX3n+1. Different from the high electrical dipole moment of MA+ and FA+, the GuA+ cation possesses a zero electrical moment, and can possibly reduce the location effect of carriers. For the pure GuA+-based 2D perovskite, GuA2PbI4 can be arranged along the special <110> direction, which is a characteristic of ACI type perovskites.

The quantum well (QW) can be formed in the 2D perovskite structure due to the insertion of organic cations into the 3D perovskite structure. The inserted organic layer can work as a “barrier”, and the inorganic layer can work as a “well” (Fig. 3a). The QW width and barrier thickness can be tuned by selecting various organic cations, which is significant for the efficient charge carrier transportation and lasting stability in photovoltaic devices. For the R–P  and D–J (A′′An−1BnX3n+1) type perovskite, the QW width can be tuned via adjusting the <n> value from 1 to +∞, and the thickness of the barrier can be adjusted by introducing versatile organic cations, such as PEA+, PA+, and others.

Due to the unique QW structure, the dielectric constant of the organic layer is smaller than that of the inorganic layer, which contributes to the quantum confinement effect in the two-dimensional perovskite (Fig. 3b). That means that the carrier transport routine is trapped in the inorganic perovskite part, and the disordered accumulation of the organic layer may impede efficient carrier transport. Thus, the reasonable crystallization orientation is particularly important for the carrier transport under a large built-in electric field in the 2D perovskite. The common viewpoint is that the organic layer can be arranged in an orderly way via intermolecular force and remain perpendicular to the substrates, and the inorganic layer can stack along the organic layer, which builds an efficient transporting route for photovoltaic and light-emitting devices. Compared with the 2D perovskite, 3D perovskites demonstrate poor stability, including humidity stability and the environmental stability due to the lower formation energy (Fig. 3c). For example, in the case of the PEA2MAn−1PbnI3n+1 perovskite obtained by changing the relative ratios of PbI2, MAI and PEAI, the formation energy increased gradually when the value of <n> decreased from +∞ to 1. The density functional theory calculation (DFT) shows that the 2D perovskite exhibits better stability than the 3D perovskite in high humidity condition (Fig. 3d).
The distribution of QW is also a critical element that influences the crystal growth and efficient carrier transportation property in the 2D perovskite. The non-uniformly distributed QW cannot be ignored in the perovskite films, and it is useful for the researchers to regulate the distribution of QW perpendicularly instead of in parallel along the substrate. In addition, the distribution of QW between the bottom and surface is also uneven. The QW distribution in the 2D/3D perovskite interface or mixed 2D/3D perovskite films needs to be further studied.

To select suitable organic cations to obtain a stable 2D perovskite, two points need to be considered, and the commonly used organic cations are summarized in Fig. 4. Firstly, from the perspective of the molecular structure, several factors need to be considered, including the charge, shape, solubility, and heteroatom substitution (Fig. 5a). Except for the pyrrole ring, the protonated nitrogen in amino amine or arylamine molecules has been used to count the charge of organic cations, which can be confirmed via the methods of infrared (IR) spectroscopy and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR). For organic cations, the primary ammonium cations with a long organic tail are the most suitable for 2D perovskites, which can ensure the efficient penetration to the site of [PbI6]4− and hydrogen bonding interaction between adjacent organic cations (van der Waals in R–P and D–J type organic molecules). The organic tail part can be classified into linear, branched, and cyclic, which greatly influence the steric hindrance. The introduction of a heteroatom in the tail, including sulfur (S), fluorine (F), and oxygen (O), can not only affect steric hindrance, but also can adjust the stacking orientation in 2D perovskites.

Secondly, it is necessary to analyze the relationship between versatile organic cations and [BX6]4− structures. Because of the octahedral arrangement in the crystal structures, the interlayer distance, and the interaction between organic cations and [BX6]4− also have a great influence on the perovskite film properties, including optical properties, carrier transport and energy level alignment. For the R–P type perovskite, the thickness of the barrier is related to the organic cations, which limit the carrier transport via forming the unique quantum well structure. The conjugated organic tail can enhance the orderly accumulation of the barrier layer, which may increase the carrier mobility with low dielectric constant. Another possible solution for improving the photovoltaic performance of the R–P perovskite is introducing heteroatoms in the chain or aromatic ring, especially fluorine-substituted organic cations (such as 4FPEA+, F5PEA+ (ref. 69)). The substituted position of the heteroatoms in organic cations may also induce the geometrical variation, which can even adjust the width of QW in the 2D/3D heterostructures.
For the D–J type perovskite, optimizing the conjugated degree of the organic part and the introduction of substituted-heteroatoms are also important strategies to design novel D–J type organic cations. In addition, the octahedral tilt in the form of in-plane or out-of-plane ordering contributes to the dynamic instability of the lattice in the 3D organic-inorganic hybrid perovskite crystal structure, which has a direct influence on the carrier transport and exciton-phonon coupling. It was found that when n = 1 to 4 in the 2D R–P perovskite, the [PbX6]4− octahedron tends to twist following the out-of-plane surface orientation, which can even enhance the inversion asymmetry at the perovskite surface (Fig. 5b). The weaker hydrogen between the organic cations and [BX6]4− structures may contribute to the bonding state of organic cations near the valence band maximum (VBM) of the [BX6]4− planes, which may be beneficial to overcome the energy barrier and improve hole transport. The weaker hydrogen bonding can be relieved via forming an out-of-plane hole transport path with the metastable D–J type perovskite structure, such as the asymmetric N,N-dimethyl-1,3-propane diammonium unit (DMePDA2+)-based 2D PerSCs, and the initial PCE value decreases by only 10% for 1000 h under the extreme test condition (>85% relative humidity, 85 °C). Thus, the optimization of the octahedron tilt in the D–J 2D perovskites maybe also be an important strategy to improve the perovskite performances and obtain higher efficiency.

Crystal growth is the basis to optimize the perovskite film and the whole perovskite solar cells. For the 2D perovskite film, the random quantum well structure with different <n> values in the perovskite film may limit the carrier transport. Thus, the ordered crystal growth can be adjusted by adopting several strategies, such as designing versatile organic cations, fabrication methods, solvent engineering, and component engineering. The specific crystal orientation that is perpendicular to the substrate can be helpful to ensure more efficient carrier transport and reduce the carrier recombination loss with fully increased photovoltaic parameters, including open circuit voltage (VOC), fill factor (FF), and short circuit current (JSC), thus contributing to higher power conversation efficiency (PCE). The strategies to optimize the perovskite film will be discussed in detail in Part 3.

For the whole 2D perovskite devices, the crystal growth of the perovskite has a great influence on the energy level alignment between the perovskite layer and transporting layer. The details will be discussed in Part 4.2. In addition, the light management can be adjusted to accelerate the potential commercialization for perovskite solar cells with lasting operation stability.

The film fabrication methods have a great influence on the perovskite crystal growth, films morphology, carrier transport, and even device performance. The commonly used fabrication methods in the 3D perovskite can also be used in the 2D perovskite, such as spin-casting, blade-coating, and vacuum evaporation methods. However, the crystal nucleation and growth process need to be controlled effectively via optimizing different process conditions in 2D perovskites.


“Hot-casting” method means that the conductive substrate was pre-heated before spin-coating the perovskite precursor solution, and the method was firstly proposed to fabricate the 2D BA2MA3Pb4I13 perovskite film. As shown in GIWAXS images (Fig. 6a), the film (obtained by room-temperature-casting) illustrates the obvious uninterrupted ring, which means there is a disordered crystal orientation. However, for the hot-casting film, the GIWAXS image shows several independent bright spots, which means there is an ordered crystal orientation. The Bragg data confirmed that the major 2D perovskite grows along the <101> plane that is perpendicular to the FTO/PEDOT:PSS substrate, and the excellent crystallinity and uniformity of the film facilitate efficient carrier transport. After that, the hot-coating method has been widely used in fabricating R–P and D–J type reduced-dimensional perovskites.

Different from the spin-casting method, the unique hot-casting method that induced perovskite film orientation can be explained using the low-dimensional quantum well model.Fig. 6b exhibits the nucleation and growth model of PEA2MAn−1PbnI3n+1 using the hot-casting method. There is more solvent (DMSO), dissolved solute (organic cations-DMSO, MAI-DMSO, and PbI2-DMSO complex), and other intermediate complexes in the precursor solution. Once the precursor solution is close to the preheated substrate, the closest side of the droplets will change the intermediate instantly and consume most of the organic cations. Thus, the furthest gas–liquid interface has a lower concentration of organic cations, and different <n> value distributions can be formed. The value of <n> will tend to increase from the bottom to the top of the films. Thus, the formed unique structure can be called a quantum well. In addition, the film orientation tends to have a different state to the substrate, e.g., parallel to the substrate (n = 2–3) or perpendicular to the substrate (n > 5). As shown in Fig. 6c, the rapid nonisothermal (NIT) crystallization strategy was used to control the crystal growth of the D–J type PDMA-based perovskite via the use of an intense near-infrared lamp.
The D–J type 2D perovskite was formed using 1,4-phenylenedimethanammonium (PDMA) as organic spacer cations. The results show that the homogeneous nucleation occurs at the air-liquid interface, there is a hydrogen bonding interaction between PDMA layer and inorganic layer, and the π–π interactions in the phenyl-based ammonium can assist the self-assembled PDMA-based cations. The low-dimensional epitaxial growth mode will accelerate film growth with a high crystallization and specific crystal orientation.
Furthermore, the substrate temperature of the films has a great influence on the crystallization process using the method of hot-casting method. Rapid cooling of the substrate may lead to premature termination of the crystallization and limit the perovskite grain growth. By systematically comparing the crystallization procedure of PEA2MA2Pb3I10 using the methods of hot-casting or post-coating methods, it is discovered that the conjunction of the two methods can overcome the drawbacks of using a single method in fabricating the 2D perovskite films.
Although the hot-casting method is an efficient method to induce the ideal crystal growth orientation in the 2D perovskite films, the accurate control of the pre-heating substrate is an obstacle for device repeatability and large area preparation. Moreover, the high substrate temperature may be harmful to the fabrication of 2D Sn-based perovskites in virtue of the existence of unstable Sn2+. The preheated substrate may not only worsen the wettability of the substrate, but also cause stress variation in the 2D perovskite films.
By optimizing the process condition of the 2D perovskite, the post-annealing method has been used as an effective crystallization method to fabricate the 2D perovskite in conjunction with the hot-casting methods. For example, the 2D BA2MA3Pb4I13 PerSCs was fabricated in conjunction with the two methods. Without using the slow post-annealing method, a staggered arrangement can be formed, accompanied by a more abrupt and non-uniform phase near the bottom and top portions of the films. The unwanted quantum well energy barriers may induce a charge recombination, which obviously hinders the photovoltaic properties. In contrast, the slow post-annealing process can form well energy gradients along the vertical direction of the substrate, which can not only restrain the quantum well effect, but also promote carrier extraction and transport. Yang et al. developed a new growth model of the dimensionally graded perovskite formation (DGPF), and BABr was used to form graded distribution 2D/3D perovskite films via inducing the ion-exchange between the 2D and 3D phases. The emerging BABr-based 2D perovskite phase can not only passivate the grain boundaries, but also reduces the defects of the 3D perovskite layer.

Compared with the hot-casting method, the substrates using the spin-coating method do not require being preheated before the assembly of the 2D perovskite films. The spin-coating process can be summarized as follows to illustrate the growth process. Firstly, the excessive precursor solution was removed, and the residual solvent started to evaporate continuously at the same time, leading to the increase of precursor concentration. Secondly, the films started to nucleate and crystallize, which is a decisive stage for the final film quality and morphology. If the nucleation and crystallization process are too fast, the surface of the film will become rough and develop many defects, such as lead vacancies (VPb), iodine vacancy (VI), methylamine (VMA) vacancy, formamidine vacancy (VFA), lead-iodine transposition defect (PbI) and others. These fatal defects will severely limit the photovoltaic performance of the devices. Conversely, if the nucleation and evaporation process are too slow, it can also contribute to heterogeneous nucleation and inferior film morphology. Due to the few nucleation sites, the antisolvents such as chlorobenzene (CB), ethyl acetate (EA), diethyl ether, toluene, and others were introduced to increase the homogeneous nucleation sites via eliminating residual solvents and forming a supersaturation solution.

To balance the rate of nucleation, crystallization process and control the QW distribution effectively in the 2D perovskite, versatile organic cations, the solvent engineering, additive engineering, interface optimizing and others can assist the growth of high-efficient 2D perovskites. However, the modified spin-coating method can only be suitable to fabricate small-size perovskite devices in the laboratory. The procedure may waste much solution and raw materials. In addition, the wetting properties of the substrate interface may cause inhomogeneous crystal growth and more defects. Thus, there needs to be more effort devoted to optimizing the specific substrate and specific perovskite precursor solution.

Although it is unnecessary to consider the effect of an uneven centrifugal force that is vital in the spin-coating or hot-casting procedure, when the thickness at the location of the center or edge is different, the situation will even be aggravated due to the amplification effect. Compared with the small-size devices using hot-casting method or spin-coating method in the laboratory, the biggest advantage of the blade-coating method is the huge potential in the large-scale device for commercialization. The crystallization processes using the blade-coating method have a great influence on the blading temperature and blading speed, which is the key to forming a uniform large-scale perovskite film. The blade-coating method has the most potential for fabricating large-size devices from the laboratory to commercialization.

The hot air flow of the blade will affect the crystal growth and grain size due to different precursor concentrations (Fig. 6d). A temple growth method was proposed by Wang et al. to effectively control the growth direction of BA2MAn−1PbnI3n+1 along the out-of-plane direction. The dense R–P type perovskite BA2MAn−1PbnI3n+1 layer (the average <n> = 4) was obtained by selecting NH4Cl as an additive to form a more ordered crystal orientation. Since the formation of voids for the p–i–n devices have a great relationship with the entrapped nonvolatile DMSO, it is necessary to control the molar ratio of DMSO to Pb in the precursor solution to obtain a more uniform morphology.

As noted above, the distribution of the <n> value from the bottom to the top of the low-dimensional perovskite film tends to be inhomogeneous. The self-assembled film forming method may contribute to an unequal growth rate arising from the large-scale n-value nanoplates in the precursor solution, and the uneven distribution of the organic cations (such as BA+, PEA+) may aggravate the disordered crystal growth during the process of thermal annealing. To control the <n> value and ordered growth orientation, vacuum methods were used to solve this problem.

The vacuum method is another potential commercial method for large-scale fabrication. The condition of the evaporation chamber, such as pressure, atmosphere, and temperature need to be effectively controlled to study the crystallization process. The evaporation rate can be controlled to boost the high-quality 2D films at optimal conditions. As shown in Fig. 6e, Zhang et al. proposed the strategy of vacuum poling methods to enforce nucleation during crystallization and form uniform distributed <n> value nanoplates to prevent the rapid growth of the grain size. Transient absorption (TA) results show that the obtained quasi-2D PEA2MAn−1PbnI3n+1 nanoplates with larger-n-value demonstrated faster charge transfer. However, the harsh conditions, such as the need for ultra-high vacuum degree, high precision instruments may limit the large-scale production.

The function of solvents can serve as a media to dissolve the organic or inorganic components for obtaining the homogeneous precursor solution, which may also affect the crystal growth quality of the 2D perovskite films. The commonly used solvents in the 3D perovskite, such as N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), γ-butyrolactone (GBL) and N-methyl pyrrolidone (NMP), are also applicable to grow the 2D perovskite (Fig. 7a and b). The selected common solvents have different physical and chemical properties, such as polarities, viscosities, boiling point, and coordinating strength, which have a great influence on the nucleation and crystal growth of the 2D perovskite.

The crystallization orientation can be tuned via mixing the different solvents (DMF, DMSO) with different ratios, then the 2D perovskite films can be fabricated. For example, by controlling the solvent effect on the crystallization dynamics, the crystallization orientation of the 2D BA2MA3Pb4I13 film can be changed into perpendicular to the substrate when the ratio of DMF: DMSO is 1:1 or 1:3. However, for the single solvent DMF or DMSO, the solvent evaporating is too fast and forms a random film growth orientation due to the homogeneous nuclei (Fig. 7c and d).
The intermediate formation can be influenced by the coordinating ability between the selected solvent and Pb2+ in the precursor solution. The parameter Gutmann donor number (DN), instead of solvent dielectric constant, was used to characterize the metastable stage. If the value of DN was high between Pb2+ and solvent, the strong coordination interaction can form a stable intermediate phase, such as PbI2-DMSO, PbI2-DMF, which can slow down the crystallization process and extend the crystallization time to obtain a larger size of perovskite grains. In contrast, the low value of DN means that Pb2+ can be easily released form the solvent to form a [PbI6]4− octahedral structure, and accelerate the crystallization process. Thus, the nucleation of the 2D perovskite can be optimized by selecting different solvents with distinctive coordination capability. This is the reason that the different ratios of DMF and DMSO, instead of a single solvent, were commonly used to obtain high-quality films in 2D PerSCs, such as CsFA and CsMAFA-based 2D PerSCs.
For the fabrication of the 2D/3D perovskite, the important parameters, such as dielectric constant (εr) and Gutmann number (DN) can serve as an important qualitative basis to control the coordination ability even though different precursor ions and solvent are selected. If the value of solvent εr > 30, and 5 < DN < 18 kcal mol−1, the selected solvent can dissolve the 2D perovskite and have no impact on the 3D perovskite layer. In addition, the pure phase 2D perovskite can stack on the 3D perovskite films to obtain a controllable thickness without dissolving the 3D perovskite layer.

The effective optimization of the precursor ionic composition, or the introduction of additives can obviously improve the crystal growth of the low-dimensional perovskite and ensure an efficient carrier transport. Versatile organic cations, alcohol reagents, and additives were added into the perovskite precursor solution to serve as the A′-site components, 2D layer or passivated layer during the crystal growth of the perovskite films.


From the perspective of the Goldschmidt tolerance, the perfect perovskite structure can be formed via adjusting the precursor ion composition to ease the structure distortions in the crystal lattice.

The optimization of the precursor ionic composition, including the A-site cations, B-site metal ions and X-site halogen anions, is an effective tactic to adjust the optical-electronic properties. However, for the 2D perovskite, the existence of a quantum well structure will limit the crystal orientation to the specific direction that is perpendicular to the substrates, which are closely bound with the carrier transport and device performance.
For the R–P type 2D perovskite, the weak interaction and interspace between the inorganic layers limit the charge transfer and induce phase separation under continuous light illumination, and the different dielectric constant between the organic and inorganic species induce exciton recombination. The symmetric guanidium cation (GA+) was added into the R–P type (BA)2MA2Pb3I10 perovskite, and form new low-dimensional (BA, GA)2MA2Pb3I10 films. GIWAXS showed some Debye–Scherrer rings at q values of 0.5, 1.0, 1.7, and 2.0 A−1, which indicated a random orientation with a polycrystalline film state. However, the discrete Bragg spots disappeared, and bright spots of the (BA0.85 Ga0.15)2MA2Pb3I10 films indicated the ordered orientation along the (111), (202), and (311) planes (Fig. 8a).
In the D–J perovskite, the tightly packed divalent organic cations can increase the structure integrity and form a more stable structure by forming a hydrogen bond between the organic cation and the perovskite slabs. The MA-free low-dimensional perovskite (PDA)FAn−1PbnI3n+1 was fabricated using propane-1,3-diammonium as a spacer cation. FACl can hasten the crystal growth during the process of thermal annealing. As shown in Fig. 8b, the unstable δ-phase FAPbI3 can be easily transformed into an α-phase FAPbI3 at high temperature. The Cl-containing intermediates can form a low-dimensional (PDA)FA3Pb4 perovskite via anion exchange, and the extra FACl can be removed by evaporation at the same time. PDA2+ can attach to the [PbI6]4− slabs due to the hydrogen bonding interaction, which can regulate the crystal orientation of the perovskites, and a higher intensity [011] crystal orientation can be obtained. The flexible monovalent cations can ease the lattice distortions and decrease the defect sites. Cheng et al. fabricated the (PDA)(FA)3Pb4I13 low-dimensional perovskites, and replaced the PDA component with monovalent PA cations. Subsequently, new (PDA1−x/2PAx)(FA)3Pb4I13 (x = 0, 0.2, 0.4) were formed. The optimized (PDA0.9PA0.2)(FA)3Pb4I13 film shows obvious microscopic morphology and vertical crystal orientation. The B-site metal cations, such as tin (Sn), barium (Ba), strontium (Sr), and germanium (Ge) have potential to partially replace lead (Pb) in perovskite. A Pb–Ba mixed reduced dimensional perovskite PEAxMA0.4−xFA0.6Pb0.9Ba0.1IyCl3−y, serving as an absorber layer, was investigated.

The introduction of additives, such as MACl NH4Cl, and NH4SCN is a useful method to improve the crystal growth orientation and enlarge the grain size of the low-dimensional perovskite.

MACl is the most commonly used additives in 2D perovskite to induce the ordered distribution of the <n> value in the layered perovskite, which determines the efficient carrier transport property. The growth direction from the bottom to the top of the substrates needs to be controlled for obtaining the ordered and homogeneous phase distribution of the 2D perovskites.
Upon using MACl as an additive, the <n> value of the 2D perovskite film is inclined to be small, and the increasing <n> value can be achieved when the film is perpendicular to the substrate orientation. NH4Cl can serve as an additive to attain a better 2D perovskite phase with perpendicular crystallization orientation and efficient carrier transport. The Lewis base Cl− in NH4Cl can interact with the Lewis acid (Pb2+, or Sn2+), which can form a more stable intermediate phase. Apart from the function of adjusting the growth orientation, the NH4Cl additive can also change the film morphology with suitable size. The formed intermediate phase can slow down the speed of crystallization, with few pinholes being noticed in the perovskite films, and the grain size becomes larger.
In addition, Kim et al. found that the pseudo-halogen anion SCN− can be used as efficient additives to improve the grain growth in the wide-band gap perovskite. Extra 2 mol% Pb(SCN)2 in the 3D perovskite is beneficial to the growth of the 3D perovskite (Fig. 8c and d). The anion engineering of the 2D perovskite needs to be further studied owing to the merits of the unique electrical and carrier transport performances.

Owing to the unique structure of the 2D perovskite, many approaches to enhance the PCE of 2D PerSCs have been proposed, and the strategies of enhancing the carrier transport of the 2D perovskite, optimizing the energy level alignment at the interfaces, and adjusting the light distribution have proven to be effective methods for PCE enhancement, and the device performance of D–J, R–P, ACI, and 2D/3D PerSCs are summarized in Table 1.

Type
Perovskite
Device structure

V
OC [V]
FF [%]

J
SC [mA cm−2]
PCE [%]
Stability
Ref.

a MPP: maximum power point tracking under continuous light irradiation. RH: ambient condition; * refers to the encapsulated devices.

R–P
PEA2MA2Pb3I10
FTO/TiO2/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
1.18
60
6.72
4.73
—

207

BA2MA2Pb3I10
FTO/TiO2/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
0.93
46
9.42
4.02
—

54

PEA2MA59Pb60I181
FTO/TiO2/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
1.09
73.70
19.12
15.36
55% RH at 100 °C for 36 h

43

BA2MA3Pb4I13
FTO/PEDOT:PSS/perovskite/PCBM/Al
1.01
74.13
16.76
12.51
65% RH for 2250 h*

56

BA2(Cs0.02MA0.64FA0.34)4Pb5I16
FTO/TiO2/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
1.13
69
18.23
14.23
15–20% RH at 80 °C for 600 h

53

BA2MA3Pb4I13
FTO/TiO2/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
1.08
63.47
19.95
13.68
30% RH for 1416 h; 80 °C for 16 h

103

BA2MA2Pb3I10
ITO/NiOx/perovskite/PCBM: ICBA/BCP/Ag
1.23
72.17
13.61
12.07
40% RH at 30 °C for 15 days

143

PA2MA4Pb5I16
FTO/TiO2/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
1.11
49.53
18.89
10.41
50% RH at 25 °C for 500 h

90

(PEA0.8AA0.2)2MA4Pb5I16
ITO/PTAA/perovskite/C60/BCP/Ag
1.23
76.88
19.10
18.03
85% RH for 1080 h, N2, 50 °C for 1080 h at MPP

35

TEA2MA2Pb3I10
ITO/Cu:NiOx/perovskite/PCBM/BCP/Ag
1.23
75.3
15.85
14.68
40–65% RH for 500 h

62

TMA2FA4Pb5I16
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/perovskite/PCBM/BCP/Ag
1.07
75.8
23.39
19.06
30% RH for 552 h

59

BA2MA3Sn4I13
FTO/TiO2/perovskite/PTAA/Au
0.23
45.7
24.1
2.53
Maintain 90% of the initial PCE for 1 month

89

PEA2SnI4
FTO/NiOx/perovskite/PCBM/BCP/Ag
0.61
70.1
22.0
9.41
N2 for 600 h

118

D–J
(TTDMA)(MA)3Pb4I13
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/perovskite/PCBM/BCP/Ag
1.03
81.64
21.85
18.82
30% RH for 740 h

82

(PDMA)MA4Pb5I16
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/perovskite/PCBM/BCP/Ag
1.11
84.32
19.08
17.86
N2 for 2000 h, or 65 °C for 280 h

36

(DPP-2 T)0.5 MA3Pb4I13
ITO/SnO2/perovskite/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au
1.15
74.6
21.7
18.6
40–60% RH, N2 for 1000 h

113

(PDA)MA3Pb4I13
ITO/PTAA/perovskite/C60/BCP/Ag
1.25
78.86
18.73
18.41
N2, 85 °C over 3000 h

11

(PXD)MA2Pb3I10
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/perovskite/PCBM/BCP/Cu
1.07
73.25
19.93
15.6
60–80% RH for 130 days

102

(3AMPY)MA3Pb4I13
FTO/PEDOT:PSS/perovskite/C60/BCP/Ag
1.08
59.58
14.34
9.20
—

81

ACI
(GA)MA3Pb3I10
FTO/TiO2/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
1.15
67.8
18.8
14.56
30–40% RH at 25 °C for 240 days

39

(GA)MA3Pb3I10
FTO/TiO2/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
1.14
72.67
22.26
18.48
55% RH at 60 °C for 200 h at MPP

38

GA2MA4Pb5I16
ITO/SnO2/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag
1.17
75
21.9
19.3
10% RH for 3000 h

49

2D/3D
(AVA)2PbI4/MAPbI3
FTO/TiO2/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
1.03
75.5
18.84
14.6
N2, at 45 °C for 300 h at MPP

130

CsPbI3·0.025EDAPbI4
FTO/TiO2/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag
1.15
71
14.53
11.86
Dry box for 1 month

208

MAPbI3/C60-BPAMI2
FTO/NiOx/perovskite/PCBM/BCP/Ag
1.09
78.53
23.61
20.21
40% RH at 25 °C for 2300 h

83

(NPMA)2PbI4
ITO/SnO2/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/MoO3/Ag
1.18
81.36
25.30
24.37
N2, at 25 °C for 1500 h at MPP

71

Cs0.05FA0.85MA0.10Pb(I0.97Br0.03)3-EDOEAI2
ITO/SnO2/perovskite/Spiro-OMeTAD/Ag
1.15
76.66
25.88
22.68
50% RH at 25 °C for 1600 h

80

FA0.97MA0.03PbI2.91Br0.09/DMePDAI2
FTO/SnO2/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
1.16
84.3
25.25
25.25
N2, at 40 °C for 1000 h at MPP

77

Cs0.05(FA0.92MA0.08)0.95Pb(I0.92Br0.08)3-OAmI
ITO/PTAA/perovskite/C60/BCP/Cu
1.17
81.6
24.1
23.0
85 °C for 1020 h

57

MAPbI3/BA2MAnPbn+1I3n+4
ITO/TiO2/perovskite/Au
1.08
72.5
20.76
16.13
65% RH for 50 days

55


The PCE of the 2D PerSC is decided by the high quality of the perovskite thin films. Due to the existence of the unique QW structure in the 2D perovskite, the insulated organic layer hinders the separation and transfer of carriers, which causes a low PCE value. However, the vertical crystal orientation of the inorganic layer can ensure efficient carrier transfer in the 2D perovskite. Thus, the formation mechanism of the crystal orientation and crystallization process need to be understood, which is helpful to achieve a more efficient carrier transfer and reduce the side effects of the barrier.

In 2D perovskite structures, the inorganic layer with a bipolar carrier transport like the 3D perovskite structures is linked via the corner-sharing of the [BX6]4− octahedra, which is an important channel for photogenerated carrier transport. Inside the single QW structure of the 2D perovskites, carriers can transport along the octahedrons linking direction or pass through the organic layer by way of the tunneling effect. However, it is different to transport in the adjacent QWs, which originates from the intrinsic insulation character of the hydrophobic layer.
For the aliphatic or single-ring organic cations, such as propylammonium (PA), 2-thiophene-2-ethylamine (ThEA), and phenethylammonium (PEA), the 2D perovskite layer presents weak light-absorbing properties. The effective strategy that can enhance the carrier transport of the accumulative organic layer is to use highly conjugated organic cations to extend the pi-electron delocalization among the conjugated backbone. Xu et al. used multiple-ring organic cations, 1-naphthalenemethylammonium (NpMA) and 9-anthracene methylammonium (AnMA) to fabricate 2D (NpMA)2MA3Pb4I13 and (AnMA)2MA3Pb4I13 films by the hot-casting procedure. The (NpMA)2PbI4 processed perovskite film demonstrated evidently enlarged grain size-reduced grain boundary defects and improved carrier transport lifetime. Overall, a high PCE of 24.37% was achieved for the best performing small area device.

For 2D PerSCs as demonstrated in Fig. 9a–c, there are three critical interfaces, inducing perovskite/HTL interface, perovskite/ETL interface, and 2D/3D perovskite interface for mixed dimensional perovskite, which determine the energy loss at these interfaces during charge transport. Therefore, the energy level alignment (ELA) at these interfaces should be carefully tuned to minimize the energy losses. Ultraviolet photoemission spectroscopy (UPS) and inverse photoemission spectroscopy (IPS) are powerful methods to measure the energy level shift at the perovskite/transporting layer interface in different kinds of device structures, including mesoporous structure, n–i–p, and p–i–n structures. The two methods can be used to learn the interface dipole, and whether the energy level matches to ensure efficient carrier transport in the fabricated devices (Fig. 9). The work function (WF) of the interface can be obtained by dealing with the UPS results of the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and ionization potential (IE). Furthermore, the information of the grain boundaries, the internal potential distribution, and energy band diagram can be obtained by kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM). KPFM can measure the local contact potential difference (CPD) between the probe and the test sample surface that can be directly connected with the WF. The ELA in 2D PerSCs can also be learned from combination of UPS and KPFM, which is helpful to optimize the interfaces at the 2D/3D perovskite layer, perovskite/transporting layer, and perovskite/electrode.


Organic cations have been widely used as a 2D perovskite passivation layer to adjust the surface energy level of the 3D perovskite for obtaining 2D/3D mixed dimensional perovskites, which can increase the open circuit voltage (VOC) and the fill factor (FF) of PerSCs by reason of the effective passivation of defects via adjusting the interaction between the organic cation and [PbI6]4−. For example, cyclohexylethylammonium iodide (CEAI) served as a 2D CEAI2PbI4 cap on the 3D perovskite, and PerSCs exhibited a PCE of 23.57% with an FF of 82.6%. As shown in Fig. 10a and b, for the CEAI-treated film, WF decreased by 0.42 eV and the bandgap increased from 1.74 eV to 2.55 eV. The formed 2D cap not only improved the photovoltaic properties, but also retained the long-term stability for 600 h under 40 ± 20% humidity. Similarly, the low-concentration BABr spin-coated on the 3D perovskite films via post-annealing can also form a 2D/3D perovskite, which can reduce the interface recombination and increase the VOC for PerSCs. Similar results were observed in PerSCs using the graded perovskite formation method (DGPF).

For the 2D perovskite film that serves as an absorber layer, the relationship between the <n> value and ELA in the films is still unclear, which may arise from the uneven distribution of the <n> value during the process of crystal growth. Thus, it is difficult for the researchers to assemble the high-pure phase 2D perovskite to directly monitor the ELA variation. Although the mixed phase 2D/3D perovskite structure can form a heterostructure, the nature of the heterostructure is still under debate. The type I and type II configurations are illustrated in Fig. 10c and d. Zhong et al. combined the techniques of UPS and IPES to study the ELA of 2D BA2MAn−1PbnI3n+1 (n = 1–5). The results show that the WF and VBM of the BA2MA2Pb3I10 film are 3.85 eV and 1.68 eV, and the ionization energy (IE) and electron affinity (EA) are 5.53 eV and 3.40 eV, respectively (Fig. 10e). The IE and EA values with different <n> values are summarized in Fig. 10f, and show that the 2D BA2MAn−1PbnI3n+1 (n = 1–5) has type-I configuration.
The dual functional passivators strategy is also used to eliminate the grain boundaries defects (GBs) and surface defects in the perovskite. For example, phenethylammonium chloride (PEACl) was commonly used as an additive in the precursor solution and surface treatment simultaneously. The heterogeneous 2D R–P perovskite (PEA)2(CsyFA1−y)n−1Pbn(I1−xClx)3n+1 was formed at the surface and grain boundaries with n = 1–2, which can effectively inhibit the non-radiative recombination, increase the electron mobility, and reduce the electron/hole trap density, as confirmed by time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) spectra for samples with grain boundary passivation (GBP), surface passivator (SP), and GBP&SP. The champion device illustrated 22.7% of PCE with 1.162 V of VOC and 83.2% of FF in the MA-free inverted device.
By introducing bulky thiophene-based cations, 2-thiophenemethylammonium halide (2-TMAI, 2-TMABr, 2TMACl), a p–n junction with 2D perovskite layer was formed on top of the 3D perovskite film. The unique p–n junction can significantly reduce the interfacial recombination by decreasing the electron density, and a high VOC of 1.15 V was obtained, which is close to the potential internal quasi-Fermi level splitting of the perovskite layer. The photovoltaic performances can also be improved via tailoring the terminal groups on the perovskite surface and modifying the surface chemical environmental. By introducing the bifunctional molecule piperazinium iodide (PI) to react with the distinctive surface-terminating atoms on the perovskite layer, the charge recombination was significantly suppressed, and high performance 2D PerSCs with VOC of 1.17 V and PCE of 23.37% (with 22.75% certified) was demonstrated.

Apart from the ELA variation of the precursor components, the substrates of the device have a great effect on the energy levels of the perovskite, which originates from different EF of the substrates, i.e., the n-type substrate interface (SnO2, TiO2) with spiro-OMeTAD as HTL, and the p-type substrate interface (PEDOT:PSS, PTAA, NiOx, SAM) with C60, PCBM or ICBA as ETL, and the ELA of common substrate and corresponding HTL or ETL materials are summarized in Fig. 11. The ELA between the transporting layer and perovskite interfaces has a close relationship with the charge recombination at the interfaces and efficient carrier transport, which greatly influences the device properties. Thus, it is important to learn the ELA variation at different perovskite interfaces to obtain high efficiency 2D PerSCs.


For the n–i–p type perovskite, the n-type semiconducting oxides, such as TiO2, SnO2 are the commonly used ETLs with the merits of well-matched ELA with the perovskite layer, excellent conductivity, feasible assembly, and high transmittance. The PCE of the SnO2-based perovskite have exceeded 25% (ref. 147) via adopting different SnO2 deposition methods, such as the sol–gel method, chemical bath deposition method, vapor deposition method, and doping engineering. These methods offer a cornerstone to further improve the interface properties of the SnO2-based 2D PerSCs. The optimization ELA of the SnO2/perovskite interface is the key issue for high-efficiency and stable 2D PerSCs, and it is esoteric to adjust the relative content of Sn2+ and Sn4+, vacancies defects of oxygen and hydroxyl groups, and different derivatives (e.g., SnO, Sn2O3, Sn(OH)2). The direct method is to learn the CB and VB offset between SnO2 and perovskite layer (Fig. 12a). A D–A–D type organic cation, namely as dithienyl diketopyrrolopyrrole (DPP-2T), fabricated the 2D (DPP-2T)0.5MAn−1PbnI3n+1 perovskite, and showed that the energy levels were aligned well with SnO2 and spiro-OMeTAD without a transfer barrier, and the energy level variation change was smaller than that of the traditional 2D perovskites.

In either the n–i–p or p–i–n perovskite (Fig. 11), a lower CB offset at the perovskite/ETL interface can ensure better charge collection, and a higher VB offset at the perovskite/ETL interface with suitable bandgap can block hole transport and interfacial recombination. A lower WF of ETL than that of the perovskite layer can ensure a better interfacial band offset for collecting electrons (Fig. 9d and e). Thus, the effective strategy is to change the <n> value of the perovskite layer to match the energy level of the ETL substrate by adjusting the CB and VB values. The low-dimensional MA-free perovskites (PDA)FAn−1PbnI3n+1 (n = 2–4) were fabricated with FACl as an additive on the SnO2 substrate. UPS results show that the VB value of (PDA)FAn−1PbnI3n+1 is −5.93 eV, −5.78 eV, −5.77 eV when the <n> value is 2, 3, 4, respectively, and the corresponding CB value is −4.02 eV, −3.97 eV, −3.99 eV. Compared with the CB value of −4.31 eV of SnO2, the (PDA)FA3Pb4I13 (n = 4) film with 13.8% PCE has the closest matching ELA to the SnO2 and perovskite layer.

Titanium oxide (TiO2) is also one of the most efficient and widely utilized n-type ETL materials in PerSCs. The TiO2-based device can be classified into a planar structure and mesoporous structure (mp-TiO2). Similar to SnO2 ETLs, TiO2 possesses intrinsic advantages, such as transparency, electronic characteristics, and low cost with facial fabrication methods. However, the low conductivity and electron mobility limit the operative electron collection and transport, and the oxygen defects and metal vacancies at the surface and grain boundaries may increase the recombination rate of the photogenerated carriers.

TiO2 are usually fabricated in the form of a two-layer structure with a mesoporous TiO2 film (mp-TiO2, thickness = 100–200 nm), and a compact TiO2 (cp-TiO2) underlayer on an FTO substrate. The mp-TiO2 can provide a larger contact area between TiO2 and the perovskite layer, which can be helpful to improve the charge collection efficiency. The two-layer TiO2 structure was used to fabricate the 2D, 3D, and 2D/3D heterojunctions. Deep-level transient spectroscopy (DLTS) spectra show that the dominant defect of E1 (350 K), E2 (410 K) and E3 (440 K) can be ascribed to the IPb, IMA, and intrinsic defects from Br (Fig. 12b). The carrier concentration is on the order of 4.1 × 1016, 9.1 × 1017, and 1.3 × 1018 cm−3, in contrast to their defect density on the order of 10−17, 10−15, 10−15 cm−3 for 2D, 3D and 2D/3D, respectively. The device parameters show that the 2D perovskite possesses the lowest PCE because it has the poorest carrier density, even though the defect concentration is the smallest. Furthermore, the 3D perovskite possesses higher PCE owing to the larger carrier concentration, even though the defect density is higher than that of the 2D perovskite. However, the 2D/3D perovskite displays the highest PCE by reason of the largest carrier concentration (Fig. 12c and d). Using TiO2 as an electron-transporting layer, PEA2MAn−1PbnI3n+1 was fabricated with different <n> values from 1 to ∞. The formation energy decreased gradually accompanied with the increasing <n> value, which is in accordance with the stability in the high humidity atmosphere.

Compared with P3HT and PTAA, 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenyl)-amine-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD) is the most widely used hole-transporting material in n–i–p perovskite when using SnO2 or TiO2 as ETL, and was firstly used in 2012 with an efficiency of 9.7%. 4-Tert-butylpyridine (tBP) and bis(trifluiromethane)sulfonimide lithium salt (LiTFSI) are efficient additives that can obviously improve the hole-transporting properties of the perovskite devices by improve the solubility and film morphology.

The ELA of spiro-OMeTAD can match well with the light absorbing layer (Fig. 11). The LUMO of spiro-OMeTAD is located above the conduction band minimum of the perovskites by more than 2 eV, which can ensure a better electron-blocking property. Moreover, the HOMO of spiro-OMeTAD is situated higher than the valence band maximum of the versatile perovskites with an offset. The spiro-OMeTAD interface can be continuously oxidized for 10–24 h to optimize the conductivity and WF. However, the residual LiTFSI and tBP may have a negative effect on the stability of the perovskite device, which needs to be resolved by a doping strategy, such as the stable spiro-OMeTAD2+(TFSI−)2.

Compared with the n–i–p structure, the p–i–n structure has several merits: (1) the perovskite layer can be fabricated under a low-temperature condition; (2) the hysteresis of the device is negligible; (3) the thickness of HTMs of the p–i–n device is thinner than that of the n–i–p configuration, which means a lower cost for large-scale application. For the p–i–n perovskite, the inorganic semiconducting (e.g., NiOx) and organic HTL (e.g., PTAA, PEDOT:PSS, and SAM) have been widely used in 2D PerSCs, and the corresponding ETL, including C60, PCBM, ICBA have been used. The effective ELA of the p-type substrate for the perovskite/HTL interfaces such as the perovskite/NiOx interface, perovskite/PTAA interface, perovskite/PEDOT:PSS interface, and perovskite/SAM interface, has a significant influence on the device properties.


Compared with organic HTMs, the inorganic HTMs, such as CuSCN, Cu2O, NiOx, and others have better hole transporting properties, lasting stability, and lower cost. The p-type semiconductor, NiOx exhibits a band gap change from 3.6 to 4.0 eV. The ELA between NiOx and the perovskite interface can be adjusted by changing the content of O2− and Ni2+ to obtain matchable carrier mobility and WF.

The surface of pristine NiOx is known to be complex with a high resistance of about 108 Ω, which is detrimental to the properties of the perovskite/NiOx interface, such as conductivity, carrier recombination and hole extraction. The ionic doping strategy is an efficient method to optimize the nickel vacancies (VNi) with increasing conductivity. In addition, interface optimization between NiOx and the perovskite layer can reduce the lattice mismatch. For example, the CsBr buffer layer was used as an interface layer to cut down the interface defects and upgrade the ELA with excellent environmental stability. The different substrates NiOx and PTAA were optimized to serve as the 2D passivation layer at the buried surface by comparing different organic cations, such as BA, EA, DMA, and GuA. The results show that EA and DMA cannot form a 2D phase at the substrate interface, and GuA can form the GuA2PbI4 phase at the NiOx substrate with lower non-radiative recombination and higher VOC.

Poly[bis(4-phenyl)(2,4,5-trimethylphenyl)amine] (PTAA) was firstly used as a HTM in PerSCs in 2013 with a PCE of up to 12%, and has a huge prospective utilization in flexible, large-scale, and tandem devices. PTAA has been widely used as HTMs owing to the matchable HOMO energy level (−5.2 eV) with the VBM of the perovskite layer, which is beneficial to enhance the value of VOC and FF of the photovoltaic device. The hole mobility of PTAA is 4 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1. The hole-transporting property outstrips that of the undoped spiro-OMeTAD (2 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1) and P3HT (4 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1). However, the strongly hydrophobic long triphenylamine backbone and highly disordered packing mode may contribute to the poor π–π interactions and nonwetting problem of the perovskite precursor solution. Thus, the modification of the perovskite/PTAA interface has been concentrated on the strategy of doping methods, wetting on PTAA, and adopting multi-layer HTL to obtain better ELA between HTL and the perovskite layer with lower surface defect density in the p–i–n device.


The classic conductive material, poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) can be regarded as a good HTM because of its facile solution processibility, uniform morphology on the ITO substrate, and a low-temperature annealing process. However, the hygroscopic and acidic nature have raised the researchers' concern that it is necessary to discover novel HTL to replace or dope PEDOT:PSS. So far, few research groups have successfully used PEDOT:PSS as HTL in the inverted perovskite, whose band gap is from 1.5–1.8 eV to obtain a PCE of over 24%, and it is universal to use PEDOT:PSS instead of PTAA and NiOx to fabricate Sn-based or Sn/Pb-mixed PerSCs.

For the undoped PEDOT:PSS films, the electrical conductivity is inferior to 1.0 S cm−1, and the electrical conductivity can be increased to 4000 S cm−1via doping strategy. The WF of the PEDOT:PSS layers can be adjusted from 4.8 to 5.4 eV, which is applicable to versatile perovskite layers to ensure effective charge transfer for the perovskite device. The modified PEDOT:PSS films can also be applicable to flexible and intrinsically stretchable devices. Recently, a novel alcohol-soluble PEDOT:F was synthesized with the merits of good wetting performance and low acidity, which may have huge potential for the stability of the PerSCs.

For the inverted PerSCs, the hydrophobicity of PTAA and high hygroscopicity of PEDOT:PSS limit the further development of the two kinds of HTL materials, although the doping or modification can slightly improve the situation. The novel carbazole-based SAM can avoid the drawbacks of PTAA and PEDOT:PSS, and the phosphonic acid can anchor onto the ITO or FTO substrate and form self-assembled monolayers via simple fabrication. The strategy of surface functionalization using self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) has a long history in the area of surface chemistry. SAM-based field-effect transistors and SAM-based organic photovoltaics were also investigated, and the SAM was firstly used in PerSCs as an electrode modifications layer, and firstly used as a hole-transporting layer in 2018. The certified PCE of the p–i–n type PerSCs using carbazole-based SAM as HTL is over 25% and keeps up with the efficiency of formal devices. The SAM molecules can bind to the transparent conductive oxide, e.g., indium tin oxide (ITO), fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO), or other substrates, to improve the perovskite crystallization and carrier transport. Levine et al. used the five carbazole-based SAM (1 nm) as a model to analysis the charge carrier dynamics between the perovskite and SAM-modified ITO interface via the test technique of steady-state and transient surface photovoltage (SPV). The SAM molecule with different CnH2n chain lengths (n = 2, 4, and 6) and halogen or methoxy-substituted carbazole head has an obvious effect on the dipole moments and tunneling length for charge transport. The novel SPV technique can monitor the variation of the surface potential and distinguish the direction of charge separation. When the SPV signal is positive, it means the separation direction is from the holes to the perovskite's surface, and vice versa (Fig. 13a–c). Compared with the work function of the untreated ITO substrate (4.65 eV), the more obvious change of 2PACz (5.09 eV) and Me-4PACz (5.20 eV) can originate from the stronger dipole.


Fullerenes (C60) are the most widely used organic semiconductors in inverted PerSCs on account of the intrinsic outstanding electron-acceptor feature and electron mobility. C60 was firstly used in a MAPbI3 inverted device in 2013. MAPbI3/C60 served as a donor/acceptor heterojunction, and the obtained efficiency of the devices was only 3.0%. The C60 films were prepared by thermal evaporation under ultra-high vacuum, and have the merits of thermal stability and controlled film thickness. C60 can suppress hysteresis and contribute to electron-extraction from the perovskite films. This is because a small amount of C60 can penetrate down to the grain boundaries and passivate the surface of the perovskite layers. The reported thickness of C60 is from 20 to 30 nm, which can ensure full coverage and the formation of an efficient interface to extract electrons in inverted perovskite cells. Once the thickness of the C60 layer is lower than 20 nm or higher than 30 nm, the PCE of the perovskite device has been observed to significantly decrease in most reported literature studies (Fig. 13e).


Compared with C60 prepared by evaporation method, PCBM is a solution-processable efficient ETL. The interface of perovskite/PCBM has been studied to adjust the ELA to accelerate the carrier transport and obtain high-efficiency devices in 3D perovskites. However, there are very few reports regarding the ELA of the 2D perovskite between the <n> value and perovskite/PCBM interface in the perovskite layer. J. M. Yang et al. theoretically investigated the energetics at the (PEA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1/PCBM interface with the <n> values changing from 1 to +∞ by the one-step coating method using different relative concentrations of PEAI and MAI in the precursor solution, and investigated the UPS spectra of PCBM films with various thicknesses (from 1 nm to 15 nm) on the surface of (PEA)2Pb1I4. Upon coating of 15 nm PCBM, the film can fully cover the perovskite surface and could provide a saturated energy level shift. The secondary electron cutoff energy shifted towards the lower binding energy region, and no additional shift was noticed when the thickness of PCBM was lower than 15 nm. When the <n> values varied from 1 to ∞, the ionization potential (IP) of the 2D perovskite films changed between 5.56 and 5.73 eV, and WF changed from 4.05 to 5.00 eV. The results show that the n-type surface can be formed for n = 3, 5 perovskites, p-type surface when n = 1, 40, and ∞, and the n-type surface of the 2D layer is helpful to inhibit charge recombination at the perovskite/ETL interface.


Indene-C60 bisadduct (ICBA) was firstly synthesized and widely used as an acceptor in organic solar cells in 2010. The LUMO value is −3.74 eV, which is higher by 0.17 eV than that of PCBM. Due to the merits of the higher LUMO, ICBA was used in perovskites to obtain the higher VOC in the single junction or tandem devices. This can not only optimize the interfacial contact and reduce the nonradiative recombination losses, but also obtains negligible hysteresis and higher VOC. Jiang et al. studied the interface of the 2D perovskite/ICBA and 2D perovskite/PCBM interface. The component of the precursor solution was PEAxFA1−xSnI3 (x = 0 or 0.15), and PEDOT:PSS was used as a substrate to control the nucleation and orientation of the perovskite. The final device structure was ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PEAxFA1−xSnI3/ICBA or PCBM/BCP/Ag. The targeted efficiency was 12.4% (VOC = 0.94 V, FF = 75%, JSC = 17.4 mA cm−2), which is superior to that of the PCBM-based control samples (PCE = 7.7%, VOC = 0.60 V, FF = 74%, JSC = 17.1 mA cm−2). To clarify the much-enhanced voltage and performance using ICBA, scanning kelvin probe microscopy (SKPM) was used to determine the interfacial energy level alignment of the perovskite/ETL interface. The results show that the Fermi level of ICBA is 80 meV lower than that of PCBM. Due to the existence of ion migration, iodide can be involved in the remote doping of ETL and act as a donor to provide electrons. The lower Fermi level of ICBA can suppress the electron injection from iodide, and reduce the aggregation of electron on the interface of perovskite/ICBA. Time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) decay measurements illustrate a bi-exponential decay (τ1, τ2), and the decay time of the low-dimensional perovskite layer with ICBA and PCBM are (1.1 ns, 12.1 ns) and (0.25 ns, 2.2 ns) for ICBA and PCBM, respectively. The interface of the 2D perovskite/ICBA shows a slower carrier recombination, which has also been confirmed by the obvious electroluminescence peak.

The mixing or doping of ICBA and PCBA is also an efficient way to match the energy and reduced trap states in 2D perovskites. Chen et al. used the mixture of ICBA and PCBA at the weight ratio of 1:1 as the ETL in the 2D BA2MA2Pb3I10 device. The strategy boosted the PCE of the ITO/NiOx/BA2MA2Pb3I10/ETL/BCP/Ag device from 11.01% (VOC = 1.21 V, FF = 70.24%, Jsc = 12.95 mA cm−2) to 12.07% (Voc = 1.23 V, FF = 72.17%, Jsc = 13.61 mA cm−2). The improvement of PCE can be ascribed to the optimized interface of the 2D perovskite/ETL, the reduction of the interfacial charged recombination, and a reduced energy loss at the perovskite/ETL interface.

The above noted effective methods to control the crystal growth, carrier transport, and ELA of 2D perovskite have accelerated the efficiency of quasi-2D PerSCs by over 22%. To further improve the efficiency and approach the theoretical limit of 2D PerSCs, light management can be an effective strategy for the multilayered photovoltaic devices. It is necessary to synergistically optimize the whole device structure to ensure reasonable light distribution from the perspectives of the substrate, transporting layer, active layer, and electrode (Fig. 14). Four main approaches have been used to manage the light distribution, such as introducing the anti-reflection coating (ARC) between the air and glass substrate interface, designing a vertical optical cavity to reduce the ratio of reflectance/transmittance, using the plasmonic or high refractive index nanostructures in the different layers of the photovoltaic cell, and adjusting the texture of the internal interfaces in the device. Although few references have been reported on the light management in 2D perovskites due to the relatively low efficiency at present, we are convinced that the light management strategy will pave the way for the high-efficiency and stable 2D PerSCs. In this part, we give a brief introduction on the light management, which may have an effective reference significance for the further study of 2D PerSCs.

For a planar glass substrate in the PerSCs, the incident light will lose about 4% due to the reflection between the air and glass interface. The loss value may be even up to 30% when considering all incident angles. Thus, ensuring effective light absorption (320–850 nm) is equally vital to increase the PCE value. Once the ARC was used in the devices, the main increase of the photovoltaic parameters is the JSC, and the VOC and FF remain unchanged. For example, Choi fabricated a sticker-type ultra-thin (20 μm) perfluoropolyether AR film (SUPA) with a refractive index of 1.34 and light transition efficiency of 98.3% (Fig. 15a), and the JSC of the SUPA-used PerSCs reached 26.63 mA cm−2, which increased by 3.82% compared with the control device.
Because the perovskite morphology can be determined by the surface characteristics of the different types of substrates, the back electrode can also serve as a light-trapping layer in PerSCs. For example, Wei used the bioinspired moth-eye nanostructures to the back electrode, adopting soft imprinting methods. The results of SEM and XRD show that a uniform film can be formed on the ITO/PEDOT:PSS surface with (110), (220)-oriented crystallinity, and the roughness of PCBM is lower than 20 nm. However, when the grating structure is controlled to about 500 nm with a 60 nm groove depth, the moth-eye nanostructure shows a quasi-random subwavelength state with a similar groove depth (Fig. 15b–d). Considering the wavelength-dependent refractive indices (n) and extinction coefficients (k), the normalized cross-section field intensity distribution for the transverse electric polarized incident light at the wavelength of 780 nm was simulated. The results show that the EQE increase at 780 nm can be ascribed to the unique moth-eye nanostructures, which causes the polarization-independent self-enhanced absorption in the active layer (Fig. 15e–g). In addition, dielectric layer/metal/dielectric layer (D/M/D) electrodes, microcavity-embedded electrodes, and dielectric mirrors are used in semi-transparent and tandem PerSCs.

For the commercial application of PerSCs, the lasting stability is the most important problem that needs to be resolved. Compared with the 3D perovskite, the 2D perovskite exhibits better inherent stability under different environmental conditions via the selection of various organic cations, which can form a natural quantum well structure. The unique barrier and well can increase the hydrophobicity, improve the formation energy of perovskite, and effectively suppress the ion immigration. In this part, the stability will concentrate on the structural stability, phase stability and environmental stability of the 2D perovskites and 2D/3D perovskites. The stability data in different kinds of low-dimensional PerSCs are also summarized in Table 1.


In the organic-inorganic hybrid 3D perovskites, the structural instabilities originate from the octahedral tilt in the crystal structures, which show a stiff rotation of the inorganic octahedral frameworks in the form of an in-phase or out-of-phase way (Fig. 5b). The hydrogen bonding interactions between the small organic A-site cations (MA+, FA+) and [PbX6]4− have a great influence on the octahedral tilt. For the 2D perovskite, the using of large organic cations may upgrade the strain-balancing and strain accumulation. DFT was used to learn the mechanical strain of the lattice-mismatched interfaces in the 2D RP type perovskite, and the results show that the lattice strain has a great relationship with the octahedral tilt of the PbX6 octahedra. Shao et al. used 2D BA2MAn−1PbnI3n+1 (n is from 1 to 4) as research model, and directly observed the octahedral tilts on the surface of 2D perovskites via scanning tunneling microscopy (STM). DFT and STM show that the I–I distance may directly affect the out-of-plane surface octahedral tilt instead of the in-plane octahedral tilt (Fig. 16a). The octahedral tilt in D–J or ACI type perovskites also needs to be further studied.

Compared with the R–P and ACI type perovskite, the common thought is that the crystal structure of the D–J type perovskite can be more stable. Li et al. used amylammonium (AA) to fabricate the R–P phase AA2MA4Pb5I16 (n = 5) as a light absorber layer, and butylammonium iodide (BAI) and 1,4-butanediamine dihydroiodide (BDAI2) were used as the R–P or D–J heterojunction layer to passivate the defect and reduce the non-radiative recombination. The structural stability was examined via monitoring the variation of the XRD spectra in the air with 60% humidity at 20 °C (Fig. 16b). The peak intensity of the control and BAI-modified films at 14.8° (<111> plane) was obviously reduced with aging time, which indicated the decrease of crystallinity. The new peak at 12.3° can be ascribed to the decomposed PbI2 of the AA2MA4Pb5I16 film after 600 h. However, the BDAI2-modified film can be stable for an extended time without decomposition-related XRD peaks. The fabricated devices also exhibit superior stability without PCE loss under thermal aging (60 °C) in moist air (RH of 60%) for 800 h.

The introduction of various large organic cations can not only upgrade the structural stability in low-dimensional perovskites, but also improves the phase stability. The stable intermediate phase has a great influence on the crystal dynamics of the perovskite films, which can enhance the repeatability of the device fabrication. Especially, the intermediate phase of the all-inorganic perovskites or tin-based perovskite needs to be further studied for high-efficiency and stable PerSCs. The effective phase control may accelerate the development of perovskite-based tandem solar cells.

For all inorganic perovskite structures, Cs+ is the only inorganic cation that can form the CsPbX3 (X = I, Br, Cl) structure due to it having just the right tolerance factor. Different from the phase-stable CsPbBr3 or CsPbCl3 perovskite, the black phase (α-phase) of the CsPbI3 perovskite may rapidly change into a non-perovskite phase (δ-phase) owing to the thermodynamic instability at room temperature. Thus, it is a hot topic on how to retain the α-phase of CsPbI3, and organic cations have an influence on the phase stability of PerSCs. Zhang et al. developed a low-temperature fabrication method using CsI and PbI2·xHI (x > 1.3) as precursor components, which change the annealing temperature from 350 °C to 100–150 °C (Fig. 16c). The new phase of PbI2·xHI is different from the reported HPbI3, and have no difference with the PbI2 phase. The improvement of efficiency and stability can be related to the coexistence of EDA2+ and Cs+ cations in the CsPbI3·xEDAPbI4 structure. By comparison, the phase stability of the CsPbI3·0.025EDAPbI4 is a <110> layered structure, and CsPbI3·0.025BDAPbI4 is <100> layered 2D perovskites. The unique <110> layered structure is beneficial to stabilize the α-phase of CsPbI3 (retains the α-phase for 150 h at 100 °C). The champion perovskite device can be stable at room temperature for several months with no significant decrease with a PCE of 11.8%.
The introduction of different organic cations in the CsPbX3 perovskites can also enhance the formation energy, control phase transition, and improve the stability of devices. The phenylethylammonium (PEA) unit was utilized to stabilize the black cubic phase of the iodide-based inorganic perovskite, and fabricated the quasi-2D PEA2Csn−1PbnI3n+1 perovskite films. The <n> values were adjusted via changing the molar ratio of PEA+ and Cs+. The absorption spectra illustrated that the bandgap tends to decrease when the <n> value changes from a small to large value, and the photoluminescence (PL) spectra was red-shifted at the same time. The dielectric quantum confinement effects can be ignored when the <n> value is larger than 5. The champion PCE of 12.4% with a 1.07 V of VOC, 0.70 of FF was obtained when the <n> value was 60.
As we known, the B-site Pb2+ in the ABX3 perovskite is not environmentally friendly and is harmful to humans, which limits its application scenarios. Thus, the substitution of Pb2+ using other B-site elements has attracted much attention, such as Sn2+, Sr2+, Ba2+, Ca2+, Ag+, and Bi3+. At present, the Sn-based perovskite has a huge potential to substitute Pb2+ due to the similar ion radius. n-Propylammonium iodide (PAI) was dissolved in the mixture of chloroform (CF) and DMSO solution (the volume ratio is 100:1) as an antisolvent to fabricate the FASnI3 film, which cannot form 2D perovskite structures. DMSO can offer a liquid phase environment, and PAI can aggregate around the nucleus site and induce the crystal growth of FASnI3 along the <100> plane. A certified PCE of 11.2% was obtained with reduced defect density. However, the easy oxidization of Sn2+ to Sn4+ needs to be resolved. Various reducing additives, such as 4-hydrazinobenzoic acid and formamidine sulfonic acid, are introduced into the active layer, which can guarantee the long-term stability of tin-based or tin-lead-based perovskites.
In addition, single crystal redissolution strategy may be an efficient method to improve the perovskite phase stability (Fig. 16d). For the 2D/3D mixed perovskite, the introduction of a single crystal, such as PEA2PbI4, into the precursor solution can form pure-phase FAPbI3 perovskite films. The 2D perovskite phase can be formed at GB, which can prevent the invasion of moisture and improve the charge separation in the 3D perovskite films. Xiong et al. used (PYA)2PbCl4 and (PYA)2PbI4 (PYA = propargylammonium) to form a phase-pure perovskite structure with type-I and type-II band alignment, respectively. The pure phase (PYA)2PbCl4 can suppress ion migration in the bulk and passivate the multiple traps at the grain boundaries. The (PYA)2PbCl4-modified devices show obviously lasting stability and retain over 95% of their incipient efficiency at the maximum power point (MPP) under one sun illumination.

For the 2D perovskites, it is believed that the hydrophobicity nature of the organic cations, such as the buck aliphatic cations (BA+, BDA2+, OA+), and the bulk aromatic alkylammonium cations (PEA+, TEA+, 3AMPY2+), can prevent the penetration of water into the inorganic layers and destroy the corner-sharing [BX6]4− octahedral structure. Yu et al. simultaneously introduced PEA+ and 1,4-butanediamonium BDA2+ into the processor solution to obtain BDA0.8(PEA2)0.2MA4Pb5X16 films. In the polycrystalline films, PEA+ scatter on the perovskite surface and BDA2+ mostly aggregate at the crystal grains. PEA+ and BDA2+ can induce crystallization and vertical orientation of the perovskites, which improves the exciton binding energy and quantum well distribution (Fig. 17a). The fabricated inverted device can maintain 95% of the initial efficiency (17.2%) for 500 h in ambient air under 40 ± 5% relative humidity. The different size hydrophobic organic cations can stack up perpendicular or parallel along the substrate, and the perpendicular stacking method can effectively prevent water or oxygen infiltration into the inorganic perovskite layer. Smith, et al. fabricated PEA2MAn−1PbnI3n+1 films, and found that the low-dimensional PEA2MA2Pb3I10 was stable when it was exposed to an ambient humidity condition of 52% for 40 days.

The bifunctional organic spacer cations also possess excellent moisture and illumination stability by the introduction of heteroatoms or functional groups, such as –COOH, -Br, –F, –CN, and –SH. A steric phenyltrimethylammonium (PTA) cation was used in MAPbI3 perovskites with 21.16% of PCE. The formed 2D PTAMAPbI4 layer can lock MA+ and passivate the surface of the 3D perovskite, which is beneficial to increase the photostability, and the PCE retained less than 10% reduction for 500 h. Liu et al. use pentafluorophenylethylammonium (FEA+) to form the 2D (FEA)2PbI4 perovskite layer, which was used to form the 2D/3D perovskite structure. The terminal ammonium group can interact with the [PbI6]4− layer via hydrogen bonding, and the electronegative nature of the perfluorinated part can enhance the hydrophobicity and accelerate the hole extraction ability between the CB of the perovskite film and the LUMO of spiro-OMeTAD. The optimized perovskite cell can retain 90% of the initial efficiency for 1000 h at the relative humidity of 40% under one sun irradiation.
The lead leakage of the perovskite solar cells is hazardous to the natural environment and human health. Different from the strategy that uses novel polymer materials, such as cation-exchange resins, ionogels, and metal–organic-framework, to reduce the lead leakage via chemical absorption method, Wei et al. used 2,2′-dithiobis(ethylamine) cations (DOE2+) to form a D–J type 2D/3D perovskite (Fig. 17b), which can reduce the surface defect and suppress ion migration. The strong chemical interaction between the mercaptan functional group of DOE2+ and [PbI6]4− can relieve the structural collapse, which obviously reduces the content of the free Pb2+ in the perovskite films from 66.5 ppm to 13.7 ppm under simulated rainwater conditions. The target device can operate stably over 1100 h and keep 95% of the initial PCE. Apart from forming the 2D perovskite layer on the 3D perovskite, the introduction of a 1D layer can also improve the stability of the 3D perovskite (Fig. 17c).
The relationship between the <n> value variation of organic cations and stability also needs to be further studied. Zhang et al. adopted a high-throughput robotic (HT-Robot) strategy to systematically investigate the relationship between the organic cations and the 2D perovskite stability. Five representative organic cations with various <n> values, including propylammonium (PA+), phenylmethylamine (PMA+), isobutylammonium (i-BA+), n-butylammonium (n-BA+), and phenethylammonium (PEA+), were used to elucidate the universal stability trend (Fig. 17d). By changing the <n> value in solution, the optical properties of the 2D perovskites can be adjusted. The relative spectral degradation (RSD) model was used to quantify the stability via calculating the ratio of the final absorption intensity and the initial absorption intensity. The results show that the i-BA2MAn−1PbnI3n+1 film stability can be improved when the <n> value changes from 1 to 5, then becomes worse when the <n> value is over 5. A similar tendency can be obtained from the other organic cations (Fig. 17e). The results show that the organic cations in the 2D perovskite not can only serve as a barrier layer to improve the device stability, but also reduces the defect density in the films.
The <n> value in the 2D PerSCs can also be tuned via setting different annealing temperatures from 25 °C (2D-RT) to 100 °C (2D-TA). The films of 2D-TA tend to form a n = 1 phase, and the higher-dimensionality 2D perovskite layer can be obtained at room temperature (2D-RT). GIWAXS results illustrate diffraction qz peaks at 0.2 A−1 to 0.5 A−1, which correspond to <001> and <002> planes. The <n> value of the 2D-TA films mainly consisted of the n = 1 phase (the obvious peak at qz = 0.35 A−1). However, the 2D-RT films illustrated the diffraction peaks of n = 1, n = 2, and a lower qz means a larger content of the n = 2 phase. The strong intensity of the z-direction of the 2D-RT films indicates a regular lateral growth on the 3D perovskite layers. By tailing the <n> value of the 2D OLAPbI3 layers on the surface of the 3D perovskite, the damp-heat test was successfully passed under the condition of 85 °C and 85% relative humidity, and the champion inverted devices showed a 24.3% PCE and retained >95% of the initial PCE lasting for 1200 h.
However, unlike the perovskite/HTL interface in a formal device structure, the passivation strategy using a 2D organic spacer cation (such as PEA+, TEA+) is not fully applicable to the perovskite/ETL surface in an inverted device, which is a huge obstacle to improve the PCE and operation stability. In recent months, controlling the dimensionality <n> of the 2D PerSCs has shown huge potential in enabling efficient passivation through forming the 2D-perovskite layer, such as 3-fluoro-phenethylammonium (3F-PEAI) and oleylammonium-iodide molecules (OLAI). The balance between the <n> value and stability needs to be further studied in the 2D perovskites.

Compared with the 3D perovskite, the PCEs of 2D PerSCs still lag behind due to the existence of the insulated quantum well structure using various organic cations. The balance between the efficiency and stability needs to be further addressed. In this section, we conclude the key factors that need to be resolved from the perspective of the crystal structure, crystal growth, carrier transport, ELA, and light management in the 2D PerSCs (Fig. 18).


For the 2D perovskite, the adjustable organic molecule structure makes it possible to achieve the R–P, D–J and ACI perovskite, which can be applied in n–i–p and p–i–n structured PerSCs. Researchers have devoted much effort and attention to selecting and designing suitable organic cations for synthesizing organic molecules and optimizing the device performance. Obviously, most of these explorations are based on empirical results, which may waste a lot of human and material resources. Fortunately, the machine learning may be an effective method to select promising organic cations for highly efficient and stable 2D PerSCs, which avoids the trial-and-error process. Moreover, the anions are limited in I−, Br− and Cl− for the 2D perovskite at present. The pseudo-halogen (SCN−) may be a helpful choice to fabricate the 2D perovskite.


For the 2D perovskite, the organic cation layer serves as a “barrier”, and the inorganic layer works as a “well”. Unlike the free carrier transport in the inorganic well, the barrier layer blocks the carrier transport, which is detrimental to the properties of the 2D PerSCs. Thus, it is necessary to control the QW distribution or <n> value distribution, and the carrier transport in the QW structure needs to be further studied. Furthermore, the relationship between the [PbX6]4− octahedral structure and organic cations should be further understood to control the crystal orientation. Since [PbX6]4− is the basis structure in the perovskites, the octahedral tilt may occur in the form of in-plane or out-of-plane ordering due to the rigid rotation between the adjacent [PbX6]4− octahedral structures in the 3D perovskite, which is influenced by various factors, such as the fabrication method, precursor additives, kinds of organic cations, and substrates of the devices.


The effective control of the ELA between the transporting layer and perovskite layer is beneficial to further improve the carrier extraction at the interface and reduce defect loss in 2D PerSCs. The comprehensive understanding of the carrier transport mechanism at the interface can give a guideline to improving the properties of the 2D PerSCs and designing novel device structures. For the 2D/3D perovskite, the relationship between the <n> value and carrier transport are unclear due to the existence of a quantum structure and needs to be further studied. The specific interfaces, such as the perovskite/ETL and perovskite/HTL are mainly measured via the UPS and IPES methods, which are sensitive to the surface contamination. The bend bending and the interface dipole can be observed in most interfaces. Especially, the novel carbazole-based SAM and their derivatives have a huge potential in the development of the 2D perovskite due to the matchable energy level.


Typically, the 2D perovskite exhibits a larger bandgap than its 3D counterpart, so the JSC is always limited by the light harvesting for 2D PerSCs. It is an effective strategy to further improve the PCE of 2D PerSCs by managing the light distribution within the 2D perovskite absorption layer for enhancing light absorption. Therefore, it is necessary to synergistically optimize the whole device structure to ensure efficient light harvesting from the perspectives of the substrate, transporting layer, active layer, and electrode. The commonly used light managing methods, such as anti-reflection coating, vertical optical cavity, plasmonic or high refractive index functional layers, and texture internal interfaces, may have a huge potential not only in 2D PerSCs, but also in tandem solar cells.


Stability is a detrimental challenge for lasting operation and potential commercial application. Compared with the 3D perovskite, the higher formation of the 2D perovskite means a more stable crystal structure with good structure stability, phase stability, and environmental stability. The higher PCE is related to a more efficient carrier extraction and transport with matchable energy level alignment between the perovskite layer and transporting layer for the pure-2D perovskite, quasi-2D, or 2D/3D perovskite films. Thus, it is necessary to coordinate and optimize the whole devices to balance the stability and PCE, including the perovskite layer, transporting layer, electrode, packaging equipment, operation condition, and others. The prospect for commercialization is very close.


Y. L. Zhang completed the whole manuscript. R. Y. Wang helped match the figures of the manuscript. Z. A. Tan offered the guideline of the manuscript, and revised the original version of the manuscript.


All authors have no conflict of interest to the manuscript.


This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51873007, 21835006, 51961165102 and 52003022).


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023