 DOI: 10.1039/C6TA03284B
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 10130-10134


Yong
Li
,

Kunyuan
Lu
,

Xufeng
Ling
,

Jianyu
Yuan
,

Guozhen
Shi
,

Guanqun
Ding
,

Jianxia
Sun
,

Shaohua
Shi
,

Xiu
Gong
 and 

Wanli
Ma
*

Institute of Functional Nano and Soft Materials (FUNSOM), Soochow University, 199 Ren-Ai Road, Suzhou Industrial Park, Suzhou, 215123, China. E-mail: wlma@suda.edu.cn

Received
20th April 2016
, Accepted 3rd June 2016
First published on 6th June 2016
In this contribution, we disclose the fabrication and characterization of efficient planar-heterojunction perovskite solar cells using novel amino-based fulleropyrrolidine (C60–N) as the electron transporting material (ETM). Compared to the widely spread [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM), we found that C60–N can both efficiently reduce the work function of the metal cathode and passivate the trap states of the perovskite surface, further resulting in improved carrier transport, photovoltaic performance and stability. Devices using C60–N as the ETM exhibit a high power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 16.6%, significantly higher than the 12.3% of PCBM based ones. In addition, we found that C60–N can also significantly enhance the film PL lifetime and decrease the surface roughness. These findings provide insight into the selection and design of new ETMs with desirable properties.

It has been six years since Tom Miyasaka and his collaborators first introduced the organic–inorganic halide perovskites as light harvesting materials in hybrid solar cells. Due to the excellent properties of the perovskite materials (typically CH3NH3PbI3 and CH3NH3PbI3−xClx) and the versatility in fabrication techniques, organometallic halide perovskite solar cells have gained huge attention from all over the world and the power conversion efficiency has increased rapidly in the last three years. Until date, the highest power conversion efficiency of over 20% has been reported and confirmed, leapfrogging every other solution-processed solar cell technology. Over the past several years, a lot of efforts on perovskite solar cells has been focused on planar and mesoporous device structures employing an n-type TiO2 ETM layer and devices based on these architectures have achieved high PCEs. However, mesoporous structures require a high temperature (>450 °C) sintering process for the TiO2 scaffold, which will increase the fabrication cost and is incompatible with flexible substrates. Meanwhile, the planar structures based on TiO2 (regular structure) usually suffer from a large degree of J–V hysteresis. Thus in order to avoid such issues, other device structures have been explored, such as “inverted” planar device structure, using p-type and n-type materials as the bottom and top charge transport layers, respectively. In 2013, Jeng et al. successfully fabricated inverted planar-heterojunction perovskite solar cells by depositing a thin layer of an “acceptor” material, [6,6]-phenyl C61-butyricacidmethylester (PCBM), on top of a perovskite layer, creating a donor–acceptor contact interface for charge extraction. They deemed that perovskite can act as both a light harvester and hole conductor. Then, Snaith's group employed a bi-layer of PCBM and compact TiOx as the n-type charge collection layer and achieved a power conversion efficiency of around 10% on glass substrates and over 6% on flexible substrates. By further device optimization, Malinkiewicz et al. and Seok's group reported high PCEs of 12% and 14.1% for inverted planar-heterojunction devices, respectively. Last year, Nie et al. developed a solution-based hot-casting technique and achieved continuous, pinhole-free thin films with millimeter-scale crystalline grains which led to solar cells with efficiency approaching 18%. And very recently, a remarkable PCE as high as 19.4% was reported by Huang's group. These series of studies show that the inverted planar-heterojunction perovskite solar cells can also acquire comparable power conversion efficiencies with the mesoporous or regular planar perovskite solar cells. More importantly, due to the simple architecture, low solution-processing temperature, easy fabrication process, compatibility with flexible substrates, and negligible hysteresis, it may become the most promising structure for the future commercialization of perovskite solar cells.

Despite the significant progress of inverted planar heterojunction perovskite solar cells, the mostly used ETM material in these devices is still PCBM, as widely used in organic solar cells. To the best of our knowledge, only very few other materials have been used to replace PCBM as the ETM in inverted planar-heterojunction perovskite solar cells. Jeng et al. tried using fullerene (C60) and indene-C60 bisadduct (ICBA) as the ETMs but the device performances are both lower than those of devices based on PCBM. In our previous work, we introduced for the first time an n-type polymer such as N2200, PNVT-8, and PNDI2OD-TT as the ETM in inverted planar-heterojunction perovskite solar cells. And we obtained a PCE approaching 9%, which is comparable with that of PCBM based devices. More recently, Sun et al. reported an amino-functionalized conjugated polymer PFN-2TNDI as an efficient ETM for replacing PCBM, with the PCE improved from 12.9% to 16.7%. Loi et al. used n-type polymers P(NDI2OD-T2) and P(NDI2DT-T2) as the ETMs, resulting in a PCE of 10.8% and improved ambient stability.
In this work, we demonstrated a new kind of amino-based fulleropyrrolidine (C60–N) as an efficient ETM in inverted planar-heterojunction CH3NH3PbI3−xClx perovskite solar cells. C60–N was reported to reduce the electrode work function, especially when used as an interlayer in perovskite solar cells previously. We used it as an ETM in our perovskite solar cells and it showed more functions and enhanced effects. First, it can reduce the work function of metal electrodes to facilitate charge extraction as previously reported. Additionally, it can also efficiently passivate the perovskite crystal surface to reduce the trap states and decrease charge recombination. Benefiting from the dual functions of this new ETM, a dramatically improved power conversion efficiency of 16.6% was obtained under sunlight of AM 1.5 with 100 mW cm−2 intensity, which is 35% higher than the PCE of control devices.
The inverted planar-heterojunction perovskite solar cells were fabricated with the device structure shown in Fig. 1a, where PEDOT:PSS is used as the hole transport layer, the organic–inorganic CH3NH3PbI3−xClx perovskite as the light harvester and PCBM or C60–N as the electron transport layer. The cross-sectional SEM image of the planar perovskite device is depicted in Fig. 1b, which clearly shows each of the corresponding layers. The thicknesses of the PEDOT:PSS film, perovskite layer, ETM film, and Al electrode are measured to be 35, 300, 45, and 100 nm, respectively. Fig. 1c and d show the chemical structures of the fullerene derivatives and their energy level alignment with the perovskite and electrodes. The energy level of C60–N is very close to that of PCBM. And both ETM materials can effectively extract electrons and block holes generated in the perovskite film. The XRD patterns of the perovskite are shown in Fig. S1 (ESI), indicating the absence of impurities. The scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the CH3NH3PbI3−xClx perovskite surface is shown in Fig. S2, demonstrating good film quality. The photovoltaic devices were fabricated inside a glove box. Six independent devices were made for each condition to ensure the data reproducibility. Fig. 2a presents the current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the optimized perovskite solar cells using PCBM and C60–N as the ETMs. The solar cells with PCBM exhibit a PCE of 12.3% with a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 17.29 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.98 V and a fill factor (FF) of 72.7%. The devices obtained by replacing PCBM with C60–N yield a PCE of 16.6% with a Jsc of 21.24 mA cm−2, a Voc of 1.02 V and a FF of 76.4%. The detailed parameters are listed in Table 1, with all devices measured under sunlight of AM 1.5 at 100 mW cm−2. It is worth noting that the photovoltaic parameters for the forward and reverse J–V scans are very close (Fig. 2b). The minimum hysteresis indicates the superior properties of the C60–N as the ETM. The Jsc of the devices using PCBM and C60–N is within 5% error compared to the Jsc calculated from external quantum efficiency (EQE) curves which show a Jsc of 16.8 and 20.4 mA cm−2 for PCBM and C60–N based devices, respectively (see Fig. 2c). According to Table 1, all device parameters are significantly improved after replacing PCBM with C60–N. First, on the basis of the energy level that is measured in the previous paper, the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) levels of C60–N (HOMO: −5.7 eV and LUMO: −3.9 eV) match quite well with the valence band (VB) and conduction band (CB) of the perovskite (VB: −5.4 eV and CB: −3.9 eV). Thus both ETMs can effectively extract electrons without an energy barrier. However, the amino-functionalized C60–N can dramatically decrease the work function (WF) of the Al electrode by 0.8 eV, as measured by ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) and shown in Fig. S3. The great change of the metal WF can be attributed to the large dipole value at the Al/C60–N interface, likely resulting from the electron transfer from the nitrogen lone pair of the tertiary amines to the metal substrate. Devices using a bare Al cathode without an interface modification suffer from the high work function value of Al and the resultant weak built-in electrostatic potential difference, while C60–N can reduce the work function of the Al cathode and tailor the interface between C60–N and the Al cathode to maximize Voc and minimize contact resistance. Thus, as a result of the improved Al/C60–N interface, the devices fabricated with C60–N outperform those with PCBM as the ETM, owing to the higher Voc (0.98 to 1.02 V) and FF (72.7 to 76.4%) values, as shown in Table 1. Meanwhile, we noticed that the Jsc is also significantly increased after the use of C60–N. One possible reason is the improved device absorption after using C60–N, as evidenced by the UV-vis absorbance (Fig. S4). However, since the ETM layer is quite thin (45 nm), we do not consider the absorption difference as the major reason for the improved current.
ETM

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
Fill factor
PCE (%)

R (series) (Ω)

R (shunt) (Ω)
C60–N
1.02
21.24
0.764
16.6
15
7532
PCBM
0.98
17.29
0.727
12.3
36
6082
In order to clarify the origin of current improvement, we further investigated the C60–N/perovskite interface by using a solvent to wash off the C60–N layer and then spin coat PCBM on top of it again. Surprisingly, we found that the device performances can also be significantly improved compared to the devices using PCBM as the electron transport layer (Table S1). We thus suspected that there were C60–N molecules remaining at the interface, interacting with the perovskite surface atoms and resulting in excellent passivation. As reported, due to the loss of halogen elements at the surface of the perovskite, vacancy sites can result in a net positive charge residing on the Pb atoms, both on the crystal surface and at the grain boundaries. These under-coordinated Pb atoms were found to be trap sites for photo-generated electrons, which increased the level of recombination in the devices. In a previous report, the perovskite surface was treated with the Lewis bases thiophene and pyridine, which can donate electron density to the Pb and form a coordinate or dative covalent bond, thus effectively neutralizing the excess positive charge in the crystal. In the present case, since the nitrogen atom in the alkylamine side chain of C60–N is also an electron rich functional group, it may have a similar passivation effect by donating lone pair electrons to the Pb atom and form a coordinate or dative-covalent bond with the perovskite surface (see TOC figure).
In order to validate our hypothesis and verify the passivation effect of C60–N, we first studied the photoluminescence properties of the CH3NH3PbI3−xClx film with PCBM or C60–N deposited on the top. Fig. 3a shows the result of the steady-state PL of both perovskite films which were processed under the same conditions. The enhanced PL of the C60–N covered perovskite film indicates that the non-radiative decay is significantly suppressed through the use of C60–N as the ETM. Furthermore, time-resolved PL (TRPL) shown in Fig. 3b clearly shows that the PL lifetime of the C60–N passivated film is significantly improved compared to that of PCBM. The perovskite film covered with PCBM exhibits a lifetime of approximately 34 ns, whereas replacing PCBM with C60–N as the ETM increases the lifetime to 321 ns, almost showing an enhancement of nearly an order of magnitude. The PL lifetime can be mainly affected by the non-radiative decay and carrier quenching between the perovskite film and ETM. Since PCBM and C60–N are both fullerene derivatives, they would show a similar impact on the PL lifetime. Therefore, the significant change in the PL lifetime should be mainly caused by the suppressed non-radiative decay as a result of C60–N passivation. Combining the PL and the TRPL measurements, we can conclude that the non-radiative recombination channels based on C60–N are greatly inhibited and therefore, the number of defects or trap states on the perovskite crystal surface was decreased by employing C60–N as the ETM.
To obtain more direct evidence of passivation, we further investigated the chemical properties of the perovskite's surface after spin coating a thin PCBM and C60–N layer by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). The results show that the binding energy of Pb valence electrons in 4f7/2 and 4f5/2 was shifted for the perovskite covered with C60–N, while no binding-energy shift can be observed for that covered with PCBM (Fig. 3c). These XPS spectra directly demonstrate the chemical interaction between C60–N and the under-coordinated Pb atoms on the film surface, resulting in the electronic passivation of the perovskite surface. In contrast, PCBM acts only as the electron extraction layer without chemical interactions with the perovskite film. And the results are also consistent with the substantially increased current density of the devices because of the greatly reduced trap states and carrier recombination at the interface. Moreover, the device dark J–V characteristics were measured and are shown in Fig. 3d. The C60–N based devices exhibit a higher rectification ratio and lower leakage current under reverse bias than the PCBM based ones. The improved diode characteristics can be attributed to the lower series resistance and higher shunt resistance of C60–N based devices (Table 1).
Atomic force microscopy (AFM) was employed to study the surface morphology with different ETMs on the perovskite films, as shown in Fig. 4. We can observe that the calculated root-mean-square (RMS) roughness values based on PCBM and C60–N are both decreased compared to that of the pristine perovskite sample. Nevertheless, the roughness based on C60–N (RMS = 9.2 nm) is much smaller than that based on PCBM (RMS = 22.0 nm) or pristine perovskite (RMS = 33.4 nm). The 3D surface plot images shown in Fig. 4d–f can clearly show the decrease of the surface roughness of the C60–N covered film. This surface topography indicates that C60–N has better coverage on the top of the perovskite film, resulting in a larger parallel resistance and lower serial resistance, as evidenced by the improved diode characteristics (Fig. 4d).
Based on the PL, XPS, J–V and AFM results, we can summarize that due to the excellent properties of the C60–N material such as trap passivation, work-function modification, and excellent surface coverage, an improved device performance can be achieved. Comparing the molecular structure of C60–N with that of PCBM, the major difference is the three amino functional groups on the side chains. The different effects of the two fullerene derivatives on the device performance and morphology can be attributed to these tertiary amines, which can generate a passivation effect by donating the lone pair electrons to the Pb atom on the perovskite surface. Very recently, Sun et al. also reported that a conjugated polymer with similar amino-functionalized side-chains can passivate the surface of the perovskite material, showing results consistent with ours. And we also investigated the device stabilities of PCBM and C60–N based perovskite solar cells under ambient conditions (around 40% humidity); the results in Fig. 5 suggest that the stability of C60–N based perovskite solar cells outperforms that of the PCBM based devices, which might be due to the better surface coverage and protection of the perovskite film with C60–N. Note that in our work, the excellent electron accepting and transporting properties of the fullerene molecule are also very important. According to our experiment results, other amino-based materials have a less pronounced effect on improving the performance of perovskite solar cells.

In short, we have studied the use of the C60–N as the ETM in inverted planar-heterojunction CH3NH3PbI3−xClx perovskite solar cells. This new ETM demonstrated significantly improved properties than conventional PCBM. C60–N can donate the nitrogen lone pair electrons in its amino groups to the under-coordinated Pb atoms on the perovskite surface, resulting in excellent passivation. In addition, it can also effectively reduce the work function of Al electrodes, leading to an efficient electron extraction. Moreover, the interface between the perovskite film and cathode can be improved by the better coverage of C60–N, compared with PCBM. The superior properties of C60–N result in a significant enhancement of device PCE from 12.3% to 16.6% and an improved device stability under ambient conditions. We believe that this work may provide insight into the selection and design of new ETMs with desirable properties in perovskite solar cells.


This work was supported the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 61176054 and 61222401). We also acknowledge the Collaborative Innovation Center of Suzhou Nano Science and Technology and the Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions (PAPD).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta03284b
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016