 DOI: 10.1039/C7TA08078F
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 24621-24625


Jian-Jun
Wang
,

Mehmet Zafer
Akgul
,

Yu
Bi
,

Sotirios
Christodoulou
 and 

Gerasimos
Konstantatos
*

ICFO-Institut de Ciencies Fotoniques, The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, 08860 Castelldefels, Barcelona, Spain. E-mail: gerasimos.konstantatos@icfo.es

ICREA-Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats, Passeig Lluís Companys 23, 08010 Barcelona, Spain

Received
13th September 2017
, Accepted 10th November 2017
First published on 11th November 2017
A new facile colloidal synthesis of CuBiS2 (CBS) nanocrystals with monodispersed size and good quality has been developed. The CBS nanocrystal films were deposited by solid-state ligand exchange and their field effect transistor and photoconductive characteristics were characterized. The prototype solar cell has presented a decent performance. The suitable bandgap and highly appealing photoresponsivity demonstrate the as-synthesized CBS nanocrystals as an alternative to existing Cd- and Pb-containing nanocrystals for optoelectronic and photovoltaic devices.

Colloidal synthesis of semiconductor nanocrystals represents an impressive route to obtain high yield products at low temperature, where a relatively facile synthesis can be modified to tune the structural and physical properties of the resultant nanocrystals from size, morphology, phase, and composition to absorption, emission and conductivity. The surface chemistry of the as-synthesized nanoparticles allows us to further engineer the optical and electrical properties. These nanocrystals can be readily dispersed in polar or/and non-polar solvents and allow an easy process to prepare solid films for a variety of architectures such as monolayers on porous scaffolds, flat thick films and hybrid bulk heterojunctions with other materials like polymers. The advances at this level of control have resulted in their exploitation for various applications such as electronics, solar energy conversion, light detection, and thermoelectrics. For instance, highly efficient light-emitting diodes have been fabricated using quantum dots. Solar cells from these nanoparticles, generally Pb-based quantum dots have achieved remarkable power conversion efficiencies of 12%.

The presence of toxic elements (Pb and Cd) however can limit their large-scale and widespread deployment. While avoiding scarce and toxic metals, ternary (I–II–VI2) or quaternary (I2–II–IV–VI4) nanocrystals are increasingly attracting investigation due to their compositionally tunable band gap and high absorption coefficients using only earth abundant elements. A number of copper chalcogenide based nanocrystals have driven a great deal of interest because of their importance in thin film photovoltaics such as Cu2ZnSnS4, CuInxGa1−xS2, CuInSe2, CuInS2, and Cu2SnSe3. Recently, the ternary compounds of Cu–Bi–S have seen theoretical and experimental interest due to their tunable band-gap (1.4–2.6 eV), high absorption coefficient (105 cm−1), and moderate hole mobilities, as well as containing all earth-abundant elements for photovoltaics. They have been used as sensitizers in photoelectrochemical and sensitized solar cells with a decent performance reported. However, as an alternative absorber material for thin film solar cells, the colloidal CBS nanocrystals have not been reported so far due to the complicated chemistry and the variation in composition and phase. Herein, we present a low-temperature colloidal synthesis of CBS nanocrystals and demonstrate their potential application as a light absorber for photodetectors and solar cells for the first time.
In a typical synthesis, Cu(I) acetate (0.2 mmol) and Bi(III) acetate (1 mmol) were weighed inside a glovebox and loaded into a 100 ml sealed flask. To this was added 8 ml oleic acid and the flask was connected to a Schlenk line outside the glovebox. The mixture was degassed for 60 min at 60 °C under vacuum to form a clear solution. Then the flask environment was switched to that of argon. 1.0 mmol TMS (210 μl) in ODE was injected resulting in an immediate color change from light blue to brown, and finally black. The reaction was kept at that temperature for another 60 min and the flask was quickly immersed in an ice bath to cool down. Subsequently, 30 ml of acetone was added to quench the reaction. The mixture was centrifuged at 3500 rpm for 5 min and further purified by successive dispersion/precipitation in toluene/acetone. Finally, the obtained nanocrystals were dispersed in non-polar solvents (toluene and hexane) for further characterization.
The structure and morphology of the product were characterized by transmission electron microscopy. As shown in Fig. 1a, the as-synthesized nanocrystals are pseudo-spherical nanoparticles with an average diameter of ∼4 nm and a size dispersion of 24%. The polycrystalline selected-area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern with rings in Fig. 1a can be indexed to (111)/(310), and (002)/(431) of the orthorhombic phase of CBS. The lattice fringes with a spacing of 0.35 nm corresponding to (111) were clearly observed, indicating good crystallinity.
The compositional homogeneity across the samples is further confirmed by employing X-ray diffraction (XRD) and Raman spectroscopy. A resultant XRD pattern in Fig. 1c shows two broadened reflections, which can be indexed to the orthorhombic phase resembling the orthorhombic phase of Bi2S3 with some shift to a larger angle due to the introduction of Cu atoms with a smaller radius. These two peaks at 2θ values of 26° and 49° correspond to the (111)/(310) and (002)/(431) planes of the orthorhombic phase, consistent with the observation of SAED. The widening and deviation of peak positions are due to the small size and strain along with composition deviation from the stoichiometry. The two major Raman peaks at 265 cm−1 and 439 cm−1 are well consistent with that of bulk emplectite CuBiS2 (RRUFF ID: R070307). The broadening of the Raman peak for nanocrystals has been observed due to the phonon confinement within the nanocrystal. It is noteworthy that there is no additional peak corresponding to binary compounds such as Cu2S and Bi2S3, confirming the pure single phase of the obtained CBS nanocrystals.
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy was used to investigate the chemical states of elements in CBS nanocrystals. In order to improve the conductivity, the sample was treated with ethane dithiol (EDT) to exchange the long chain ligand of oleic acid. As shown in Fig. S1, most of the original oleic acid has been removed. An overview spectrum of the synthesized nanocrystals confirmed the presence of Cu, Bi, S, O, and C (Fig. S2). High-resolution spectra of Cu 2p, Bi 4f and S 2s were measured to identify the oxidation states of the constituent elements (Fig. 2). The binding energies of Cu 2p3/2 and 2p1/2 were located at 932.2 and 952.0 eV with a peak splitting of 19.8 eV, respectively, which are well consistent with the reported values of Cu+. The absence of strong shake-up satellite peaks suggests that there is no Cu2+ species in the sample. The Bi 4f core-level spectrum is more complicated due to the overlapping with S 2p and Bi 5s. The Bi 4f core-level spectrum can be deconvoluted into two doublet peaks. The major contribution with doublet peaks at 158.1 eV and 163.5 eV is attributed to Bi–S bonds inside nanocrystals, which is in agreement with reported values. The other small doublet peaks at slightly higher energy can be ascribed to Bi–S species with some degree of oxidation. This is due to the Bi atoms located on the surface of the CBS nanocrystals, which are bonded to sulphur and oxygen, either through the oleate residues or oxidation of the surface. Similar two doublet peaks are observed from EDT-treated Bi2S3 nanocrystals due to their orthorhombic layer crystal structure, which can partially contribute to the observed two doublet peaks of CBS nanocrystals. The S 2s spectrum can be fitted with two components. The major peak at 225.5 eV is from Bi–S bonds as reported, while the peak at higher energy (226.2 eV) is ascribed to C–S bonds from EDT bonding on the surface of nanocrystals. The quantitative analysis by XPS indicates that the composition of the as-synthesized nanocrystals is 35.6/7.64/56.7 of Bi/Cu/S, which is Cu-deficient further confirmed by energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (Table S1). The cation ratio is consistent with the ratio of precursors used for the reaction. Increasing the amount of Cu precursor will lead to the formation of Cu2S as a secondary phase (Fig. S3).
The optical properties were investigated by UV-vis-NIR absorption spectroscopy (Fig. 2d). The as-synthesized nanocrystals show significant absorption in the UV-visible spectral region. The optical band-gap was estimated by plotting the relation of (αhv)2versus hv (where α is absorbance, h is Planck's constant, and v is frequency). The result demonstrates an effective optical band-gap of ∼1.24 eV, which is somewhat smaller than previously reported due to the off-stoichiometric nature of the nanocrystals.
In order to assess the optoelectronic properties of the as-prepared CBS nanocrystals for photovoltaics, field-effect transistor devices were fabricated. The nanocrystals dispersed in toluene were spin-coated on a silicon wafer covered with SiO2, and gold was deposited as source–drain electrodes. To improve the conductivity of nanocrystal films, the long ligand of oleic acid bonding on the surface, which separates and stabilizes nanocrystals in solution, was exchanged with EDT for XPS measurements. This process leads to an average thickness of ∼12 nm per layer. The transfer curves (Fig. S4) of CBS nanocrystal FET devices indicate that the films show p-type conductivity, which is expected for Cu-based chalcogenide compounds and agrees with recent studies on CBS.
The same devices were measured under laser illumination of 635 nm of various intensities. The measured photocurrent initially increases with increasing light intensity and then saturation onsets at higher intensities, akin to trap-state sensitized photoconductive detectors whose trap states progressively saturate with increasing light intensity. As a result the responsivity drops and saturates at higher optical power density as observed in Fig. 3b.
It has been observed that the atomic halide ligands can further reduce the electron density from Bi atoms and hence lead to better passivation of nanocrystals, so we used (1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium iodide) EMII to exchange the oleic acid on the surface. The removal of the original oleate ligands was confirmed by FTIR analysis, shown in Fig. S1. The device fabricated with EMII-treated films generated ∼5 times larger photocurrent under the same conditions and therefore higher responsivity. Fig. 3c shows the measured responsivity as a function of the applied bias for devices illuminated using a 635 nm laser. The incident optical power on each device was 124 pW. The responsivity increases with applied bias, due to the reduction of the transit time of charge carriers. The enhancement of photocurrent and responsivity upon iodide treatment suggests that surface passivation of the nanocrystals is playing an important role and surface engineering will allow for further improvement of the performance of the corresponding optoelectronic devices. The transient photocurrent of the devices at 30 V has been measured and is illustrated in Fig. 3d. The devices demonstrated fast photoresponse with an increasing time of less than 4 ms, limited by the measurement system resolution, while the fall process consists of two exponential decay components. This is confirmed by fitting the photocurrent decay curve with a two-order exponential formula. Such behavior has been previously attributed, in colloidal quantum dot photodetectors, to the presence of trap states of various energy levels, with the shallower ones contributing to the faster decay components and the deeper ones to the slower decay components.
Finally, prototype solar cells based on the synthesized CBS nanocrystals are fabricated to evaluate their potential as a light absorber for solar energy conversion. The schematic of the device is shown in Fig. 4a as FTO/TiO2/CBS/P3HT/Au with TiO2 and P3HT as hole and electron blocking layers. The CBS layer was deposited by the aforementioned procedure (layer-by-layer) with a thickness of ∼35 nm. The EQE spectrum and I–V curves of the champion cell are presented in Fig. 4b and c. Under 100 mW cm−2 simulated AM 1.5G irradiation, the devices without additional doping produced very low short-circuit current (Jsc <1 mA cm−2), as summarized in Table S2. This is likely due to the low mobility and large trap state density of minority carriers. To address this issue, we doped the CBS layer by spin-coating InCl3 solution on top which has been demonstrated previously as an effective dopant in Cu2ZnSnS2 and CuInSxSe2−x devices. Upon In doping, the best performing solar cell yielded significantly improved performance with a power conversion efficiency of 0.68%, a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 7.32 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.22 V, and a fill factor (FF) of 42%, as shown in Fig. 4b. The corresponding EQE spectrum is shown in Fig. 4c, representing the contribution from the CBS nanocrystals in carrier photogeneration. Compared with the EQE spectra of PbS and CZTSSe solar cells, this low EQE value can be related to several factors such as large interfacial recombination at the CBS-TiO2 interface, as well as poor carrier mobility and therefore low charge collection efficiency. It is also noteworthy that while EMII treated devices outperformed EDT treated devices when tested as photodetectors the reverse is observed in the case of solar cells. This is related to the different nature of the two device architectures, the former being a majority carrier device while the performance of the latter is determined by minority carriers. Additional important roles may play the effect of energy band tuning upon passivation with different ligands due to surface dipole effects as previously reported for PbS QD solar cells. Iodide passivation is known to lead to deeper energy bands and therefore may lead to the formation of strong barriers in injecting electrons from the CBS to the titania electrode.
The above hypothesis and preliminary results of this study however point to further optimization and studies needed to understand the effect of surface chemistry and ligand passivation of CBS NCs upon their electronic properties and the resultant power conversion efficiency in solar cells.

In conclusion, a solution-based method for the synthesis of colloidal CuBiS2 NCs with monodispersed size, high quality and an optical band-gap of 1.24 eV was developed. XRD, Raman, TEM, EDS, and XPS measurements confirmed that the nanocrystals were pure single phase of CuBiS2. Photodetectors based on the nanocrystal films made by solid-state ligand exchange were fabricated and reported. The prototype solar cell has presented a promising performance (PCE of 0.68%, Jsc of 7.32 mA cm−2, Voc of 0.22 V, and FF of 42%). The suitable bandgap and high responsivity of the as-constructed devices make the as-synthesized CuBiS2 nanocrystals an appealing alternative to Cd- and Pb-containing materials for optoelectronic and photovoltaic devices.


The authors declare no competing financial interest.


We acknowledge financial support from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant agreement No 725165), the Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness (MINECO) and the “Fondo Europeo de Desarrollo Regional” (FEDER) through grant MAT2014-56210-R. This work was also supported by AGAUR under the SGR grant (2014SGR1548). We also acknowledge financial support from Fundacio Privada Cellex, the CERCA Programme and the Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness, through the “Severo Ochoa” Programme for Centres of Excellence in R&D (SEV-2015-0522). Christodoulou S. acknowledges support from the Marie Curie Standard European Fellowships (“NAROBAND”, H2020-MSCA-IF-2016-750600).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta08078f
‡ Present address: State Key Laboratory of Crystal materials, Shandong University, Jinan 250100, P. R. China.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017