 DOI: 10.1039/C4PY00934G
(Paper)
Polym. Chem., 2015, 6, 721-731


Fei
Li
,

Kevin G.
Yager
,

Noel M.
Dawson
,

Ying-Bing
Jiang
,

Kevin J.
Malloy
 and 

Yang
Qin
*

Department of Chemistry & Chemical Biology, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM 87131, USA. E-mail: yangqin@unm.edu

Center for Functional Nanomaterials, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, NY 11973, USA

Center for High Technology Materials, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM 87131, USA

TEM Laboratory, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM 87131, USA

Received
7th July 2014
, Accepted 10th October 2014
First published on 10th October 2014
We describe a facile strategy of precisely nano-structuring conjugated polymer (CP)/fullerene composites for organic photovoltaics (OPVs). By building in strong complementary hydrogen bonding interactions between CP nanofibers (NFs) and fullerene derivatives, well-defined and stable supramolecular polymer/fullerene composite NFs are obtained. Specifically, a conjugated block copolymer having poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) backbone selectively functionalized with polar isoorotic acid moieties, P3HT-b-P3IOAT, and a diaminopyridine tethered fullerene derivative, PCBP, are used as the building blocks. Self-assembly of P3HT-b-P3IOAT in mixed solvents leads to core–shell micelle-like NFs having IOA groups preferentially located on the periphery of the P3HT NF core, onto which PCBP molecules are subsequently attached non-covalently. Formation of such complex structures are studied in detail and confirmed by NMR spectroscopy, absorption spectroscopy, transmission electron microscopy, atomic force microscopy, and X-ray scattering measurements. Application of these composite NFs in OPV devices is investigated and evaluated, which shows close correlations between device performance and morphology controllability.

Organic electronic devices employing conjugated polymers (CPs) have received significant research attention in recent years due to their intriguing properties including light weight, flexibility and low-cost production. Performances of these devices, such as charge mobility in organic field-effect transistors (OFETs) and power conversion efficiency (PCE) in organic photovoltaics (OPVs), are strongly dependent on the morphologies and structures of constituting CPs on the nanometer scale. Specifically in OPVs, CPs are typically blended with fullerene derivatives and the resulting so-called bulk heterojunction (BHJ) morphologies play a decisive role for device performance. It is important for such binary blends to form interpenetrating networks having domain sizes comparable to the exciton diffusion lengths in these materials, as well as high crystallinity within each domain to sustain satisfactory conductivity. In order to fulfill these structural and morphological requirements, BHJs are commonly optimized thermally and/or via solvent treatment through trial and error approaches that are, however, hardly predictable and highly system dependent. Furthermore, BHJs are intrinsically in a thermodynamically meta-stable state and spontaneous macro-phase separation over time will eventually lead to device deterioration. Thus, to construct CP/fullerene nano-structures having device-favorable domain sizes and stability in controlled manners represents a challenge in this field.

Self-assembly of electron donor and electron acceptor containing block copolymers (BCPs) is an intriguing strategy in order to achieve stable and controllable BHJ morphologies on the nanometer scale. Most existing examples involve covalent attachment of fullerene derivatives onto one block of conjugated BCPs selectively. However, difficulty of separating unreacted fullerenes, and relatively low fullerene loading percentages due to limited solubility, make these approaches less appealing. A clever alternative methodology is to attach fullerene acceptors non-covalently. Fullerene loading percentages can thus be easily adjusted, and solubility of the resulting complexes can be enhanced due to the reversible nature of these non-covalent interactions. Several recent reports have described complexation between fullerene derivatives and polythiophene based diblock and random copolymers through single-point hydrogen bonding and π–π interactions. These interactions are however relatively weak. Among well-studied systems, complementary hydrogen bonding represents one of the strongest and most directional non-covalent interactions. We have recently reported the synthesis of a conjugated BCP based on regio-regular poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) backbone selectively functionalized with isoorotic acid (IOA) moieties (P3HT-b-P3IOAT, Scheme 1) and a diaminopyridine tethered fullerene derivative (PCBP, Scheme 1). Self-assembly of P3HT-b-P3IOAT complexed with PCBP through strong complementary hydrogen bonding interactions led to tunable and stable BHJ morphologies exhibiting rarely observed nano-structure controllability.
Another commonly applied method of nano-structuring CPs is through the formation of nanofibers (NFs), which has been exclusively based on poly(3-alkylthiophene)s (P3ATs). Induced by strong inter-molecular π–π interactions, well-defined P3AT NFs up to microns in length can be obtained under proper conditions. Typical widths of such NFs are 10–20 nm, optimal for exciton dissociation. Compared with well-dissolved solutions and disordered thin films, P3AT NFs have unique device favorable properties including high crystallinity, J-type aggregation and superior charge mobilities. Indeed, P3AT NFs have been incorporated into OPV devices that showed comparable or better PCEs than corresponding conventional BHJ cells. Additionally, NFs formed from conjugated BCPs containing P3AT segments have recently attracted great attention due to their ability to self-assemble into stable and more complex nanostructures. However, most examples of NF OPV devices are fabricated by blending CP NFs with fullerene derivatives, between which there is no strong or specific interactions, offering little control on the spatial arrangement of these two components in solutions as well as in thin films.
Herein, we report a novel strategy of nano-structuring CP/fullerene composites through cooperation of orthogonal non-covalent interactions. Self-assembly of P3HT-b-P3IOAT in mixed solvents led to well-defined micelle-like NFs having IOA groups located preferentially at the periphery, driven by solubility difference of the two blocks and crystallization of the P3HT block. Non-covalent attachment of PCBP through “three-point” complementary hydrogen bonding interactions resulted in core–shell type composite NFs. The formation mechanisms, as well as thin film properties of these supramolecular nano-structures, were studied in detail by nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy, absorption spectroscopy, transmission electron microscopy (TEM), optical microscopy, atomic force microscopy (AFM) and X-ray scattering techniques. Their application in OPVs was implemented and corresponding effects on device PCE and stability were evaluated.

All reagents and solvents were used as received from Sigma-Aldrich or Alfa Aesar unless otherwise noted. Synthesis of P3HT-b-P3IOAT and PCBP was described previously. Size exclusion chromatography (SEC) analyses were performed in chloroform with 0.5% (vol/vol) triethylamine (1 mL min−1) using a Waters Breeze system equipped with a 2707 autosampler, a 1515 isocratic HPLC pump and a 2414 refractive index detector. Two styragel columns (Polymer Laboratories; 5 μm Mix-C), which were kept in a column heater at 35 °C, were used for separation. The columns were calibrated with polystyrene standards (Varian). Ultraviolet-Visible (UV-Vis) absorption spectra were recorded on a Shimadzu UV-2401 PC spectrometer over a wavelength range of 240–800 nm. Fluorescence emission spectra were obtained on a Varian Cary Eclipse fluorimeter. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) measurements were performed on an Asylum MFP3D AFM instrument operated under tapping mode. Images were obtained directly from corresponding OPV devices. Optical Micrographs were taken on a Carl Zesis Axio Imager 2 microscope at a 400× magnification. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images were taken on a JEOL 2010 high resolution TEM operated at 200 kV. Samples were prepared by drop-casting corresponding blend solutions onto carbon coated copper grids (200 mesh, SPI Supplies) atop a filter paper and dried under vacuum. Wide-angle and small-angle X-ray scattering experiments were performed at the X9 undulator-based beamline at the National Synchrotron Light Source (NSLS). An incident X-ray beam of energy 13.5 keV (wavelength = 0.0918 nm) was collimated using a two-slit system, and focused to a beam 50 μm tall by 100 μm wide at the sample position using a KB mirror system. Grazing-incidence experiments were performed over a range of incidence angles, both below and above the film-vacuum critical angle. Two-dimensional scattering images were measured in the small-angle (GISAXS) using a charged-coupled device (CCD) detectors positioned at 5.330 m from the sample. Data in the wide-angle (GIWAXS) were recorded using a CCD detector 263 mm from the sample. Data conversion to q-space was accomplished using Silver Behenate powder as a standard. The orientation distribution of the crystalline P3HT-b-P3IOAT was assessed using previously-established methods. Briefly, the intensity along the polymer (100) lamellar peak (q ∼ 0.39 Å−1) was integrated as a function of the angle (χ) with respect to the qz axis. The full peak width was integrated, with the background at each χ subtracted by measuring the intensity just outside the peak region. The χ scale was corrected to account for the intersection of the Ewald with reciprocal space. To convert from scattering intensity to a measure of amount of material, we need to account for the finite intersection of the Ewald sphere with the three-dimensional reciprocal space. Since the films studied here are in-plane powders (symmetry about the qz axis), we adjust the scattering intensity by sin(χ). We decompose the corrected curve's integrated intensity into three groups, in order to estimate the relative amounts of isotropic, edge-on, and face-on material. Isotropically ordered polymer produces a ring of uniform intensity in the original scattering data (and thus a curve that goes as sin(χ) in the corrected data). The intensity above this baseline is divided into edge-on (χ < 45°) and face-on (χ > 45°), where ‘edge-on’ refers to polymer with the lamellar stacking oriented roughly vertically (and thus the (100) peak appears near the qz axis), and ‘face-on’ refers to polymer with the thiophene ring roughly parallel with the substrate plane (and thus the (100) peak appears near the qr axis). Although the use of a cutoff at 45° in principle includes material oriented with a substantial skew (with respect to qz or qr), in practice we observed essentially bimodal populations (after removal of the isotropic component) peaked near the qz or qr axis.


In a dry vial was added 5 mg polymer and 0.5 mL anhydrous chlorobenzene. The solution was heated with stirring at 100 °C for 1 h inside a nitrogen glovebox and then stirred at room temperature (r.t.) for 1 h. Acetone of predetermined volume was then added dropwise via a micro-syringe. The solution was then kept stirring at room temperature for predetermined periods of time before analysis. For pre-formed polymer/PCBP composite NF blends: the polymer NF solution was transferred to another vial containing 2 mg PCBP powder and the solution was kept stirring at r.t. for 12 h before analysis and device fabrication. For in situ formed polymer/PCBP composite NF blends: identical procedure to that for pure polymer NF formation except an additional 2 mg PCBP was added at the beginning of sample preparation.


A conventional structure of ITO/MoO3/active layer/Al was adopted for the OPV devices studied. Devices were fabricated according to the following procedures. ITO-coated glass substrates (China Shenzhen Southern Glass Display. Ltd, 8 Ω □−1) were cleaned by ultrasonication sequentially in detergent, DI water, acetone and isopropyl alcohol, each for 15 min. These ITO-coated glass substrates were further treated by UV-ozone (PSD Series, Novascan) for 45 min before being transferred to a nitrogen glovebox (Innovative Technology, model PL-He-4GB-1800, O2 < 0.1 ppm, H2O < 0.1 ppm) for MoO3 deposition. MoO3 (10 nm) was deposited using an Angstrom Engineering Åmod system equipped with four thermal resistive deposition sources at a base vacuum level <7 × 10−8 Torr. Polymer/PCBM blend solutions were spun cast on top of the MoO3 layer at 400 rpm for 30 s to give a thin film thickness of ca. 100 nm as measured by profilometry. Al (100 nm) was thermally evaporated through patterned shadow masks. The solar cell active area is 3.14 mm2. Current–voltage (I–V) characteristics were measured by a Keithley 2400 source-measuring unit under simulated AM 1.5 G irradiation (100 mW cm−2) generated by a Xe arc-lamp based Newport 67005 150 W solar simulator equipped with an AM 1.5 G filter. The light intensity was calibrated by a Newport thermopile detector (model 818P-010-12) equipped with a Newport 1916-C Optical Power Meter.


The detailed synthesis and characterization of P3HT-b-P3IOAT and PCBP have been described previously. From size exclusion chromatography (SEC), the number average molecular weight (Mn) of P3HT-b-P3IOAT is ca. 27.2 kDa and the block length ratio between the unfunctionalized and IOA functionalized segments is ca. 6/1. The relatively long homo-P3HT block was designed to ensure sufficient driving force for crystallization induced NF formation. The IOA functional group concentration along the BCP backbone was estimated by 1H NMR spectroscopy to be ca. 7%. We have shown that each PCBP molecule forms strong, one-on-one complex with only one IOA moiety in P3HT-b-P3IOAT, corresponding to a polymer/fullerene weight ratio of ca. 10/4 upon complete complexation of all IOA moieties on the polymer. However, BHJ blends consisting P3HT-b-P3IOAT/PCBP (10/4, wt/wt) gave non-satisfactory OPV performance due to insufficient amount of fullerenes for efficient charge separation and electron conduction. On the other hand, BHJ devices employing 10/8 by weight P3HT-b-P3IOAT/PCBP blends showed similar PCEs and superior stability when compared with control devices using P3HT and phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM, 10/8, wt/wt) BHJ blends under respectively optimized conditions. Thus, the P3HT-b-P3IOAT and PCBP weight ratios of 10/4 and 10/8 were chosen throughout the current NF studies.

Formation of P3HT-b-P3IOAT NFs was first studied by UV-Vis absorption measurements as shown in Fig. S1 of the ESI. Commonly applied “whisker” methods, i.e. slow crystallization of P3ATs in a single marginal solvent, require relatively low concentrations of the polymer, which makes device fabrication from such dilute solutions difficult. We thus undertook the “mixed solvents” approach by adding acetone, a non-solvent for P3HT but a good solvent for IOA moieties, into chlorobenzene solutions of the BCP. The initial concentration of P3HT-b-P3IOAT was set to 10 mg mL−1, a concentration commonly applied in conventional P3HT/PCBM BHJ devices. Different amounts of acetone were then added into a set of such solutions and aged at room temperature for 14 hours before dilution for absorption measurements. As shown in Fig. S1, with increasing amount of acetone, the absorption profiles red shift and the vibronic features at 514, 522 and 603 nm became more pronounced, indicating the formation of more ordered aggregates. Beyond an acetone–chlorobenzene volume ratio of 1/5, polymer precipitation was visually detectable despite the continuingly enhancing vibronic features in the absorption spectra. Such precipitation could potentially complicate the following self-assembly studies and significantly affect film formation during OPV device fabrication. Thus, the acetone–chlorobenzene mixed solvents at a 1/5 volume ratio were chosen for NF formation throughout the current study.
Since acetone is a good solvent for IOA groups, we expect the IOA functionalized block in P3HT-b-P3IOAT remains relatively more solubilized and stays outside of the NFs formed from the more crystalline P3HT block, resulting in core–shell micelle-like nano-structures. Possibilities of forming such structures were first studied by 1H NMR spectroscopy, since the relative changes in intensity of certain proton signals can be conveniently used to differentiate well-solvated and aggregated species. For instance in a core–shell type micelle formed from an amphiphilic BCP, the relative intensities of proton signals from the core to those of the more solubilized shell would appear smaller than the actual molar ratios due to the slower nuclear spin relaxation rates within the rigid core. Accordingly, P3HT-b-P3IOAT was dissolved in mixed (5/1, vol/vol) chlorobenzene-d5 and acetone-d6 solvents at room temperature and 1H NMR spectra were taken at predetermined time intervals under identical experimental conditions. Fig. 1 shows the NMR spectra upon dissolution and aged for 16 and 24 h; corresponding integration values of selected protons are also included. Intensities of the deuterated solvent peaks were used as internal standards for integration. Notably, from integration at time 0 h, the IOA functional group concentration was calculated to be ca. 11% that is slightly larger than the 7% value obtained from NMR spectra of well-dissolved polymer solutions, indicating aggregation to certain degree upon dissolution in the mixed solvents. The relative signal intensities of protons from the polymer backbone, i.e. Ha and Hb, decreased significantly with time, confirming aggregates formation via close packing of the backbone. On the other hand, the relative signal intensities of IOA protons, i.e. Hc, Hd and He, remained more or less constant, indicating good solvation of the IOA groups throughout the time window of the experiment. These observations strongly suggest the formation of proposed micelle-type nano-structures having P3HT NF core and IOA functionalized shell.
Nano-structures generated from P3HT-b-P3IOAT and corresponding PCBP complexes were directly visualized by TEM and the results are summarized in Fig. 2. Uniform NFs having lengths up to several microns are obtained from P3HT-b-P3IOAT in the mixed solvents as seen in Fig. 2A. These NFs have a narrow distribution of fiber widths with an average of ca. 15.9 nm, slightly larger than that reported previously for NFs formed from high molecular weight P3HT homopolymers. This can be reasonably explained by the presence of more solubilized IOA functionalized block forming extended shell outside of the compact NF core, consistent with the NMR studies. Indeed, addition of 40 wt% PCBP into the solution containing pre-formed P3HT-b-P3IOAT NFs led to significant changes in fiber appearances as shown in Fig. 2B. The original long NFs are broken into shorter ones having a seemingly broader length distribution. The fiber width distribution also broadens and the average width increases to ca. 22.2 nm. Since previously reported examples have shown little changes in P3HT NF appearances before and after the addition of PCBM molecules, our observation can only be explained by strong attachment of PCBP molecules onto the NF periphery. Based on our core–shell model, the P3HT-b-P3IOAT NFs have more solubilized IOA moieties on the NF periphery, which are available for PCBP complexation. Upon addition of PCBP, the strong complementary hydrogen bonding interactions immobilize these fullerene molecules at the IOA sites, leading to a volume expansion of the IOA containing polymer block and thus increased overall fiber widths. Upon incorporation of these relatively large fullerene molecules, steric repulsion along the NF long axis within the shell might become large enough at certain points to break long fibers into shorter ones. Consistently, when 80 wt% PCBP was added to the pre-formed P3HT-b-P3IOAT NF solution as shown in Fig. 2D, even shorter NFs were obtained and the average fiber width increased to ca. 27.6 nm. The presence of more fullerene molecules likely led to more PCBP attachment onto those IOA groups that were less accessible when only 40 wt% PCBP was added. Interactions, including hydrogen bonding and π–π attraction among PCBP molecules themselves, may also contribute to more fullerene attachment. These observations confirmed our proposed core–shell micellar-type NF structures from P3HT-b-P3IOAT. To the best of our knowledge, these NFs, when complexed with PCBP, represent the first examples of well-defined composite NFs having polymer-rich core and fullerene rich shell, induced by complementary hydrogen bonding interactions in solution.
Similarly, composite NFs can be obtained in situ by adding acetone into well-dissolved mixture solutions containing P3HT-b-P3IOAT and PCBP at 10/4 and 10/8 weight ratios. As shown in Fig. 2C and 2E, the in situ formed composite NFs closely resemble those pre-formed ones at respective weight ratios, except for slightly larger fiber widths. This indicates similar NF formation mechanisms and comparable composite nano-structures by both methods. The respective larger widths observed for in situ formed composite NFs are likely due to more PCBP attachment onto P3HT-b-P3IOAT initially in pure chlorobenzene solutions since no aggregates are expected to be present before acetone addition.
UV-Vis absorption spectra of the composite NF solutions are included in Fig. S2. Similar absorption profiles are observed for pure P3HT-b-P3IOAT NFs and composite NFs containing PCBP at 10/4 and 10/8 weight ratios under both pre-formed and in situ formed conditions. This indicates that attachment of PCBP molecules did not significantly change the packing structures of P3HT chains within the NF cores. Interestingly, more pronounced vibronic features are observed in absorption profiles of composite NFs, especially in those employing 40 wt% PCBP, indicating enhanced crystallinity of the NFs upon fullerene attachment. Presumably, for the pure BCP NFs, interactions among the free IOA moieties intra- and inter-molecularly can potentially disrupt the close packing of P3HT chains. Upon complexation with PCBP, such interactions are weakened, leading to better packing of polymer chains within the NF cores. In the case of 10/8 composite NFs, there are more fullerene molecules attached onto the NFs as evidenced by TEM. Steric hindrance may become large enough to interfere with P3HT close packing, leading to seemingly less crystallinity within these NFs as shown in Fig. S2.

OPV devices were fabricated from both pre-formed and in situ formed P3HT-b-P3IOAT/PCBP composite NF solutions with polymer to fullerene weight ratios at 10/4 and 10/8. Conventional structures: ITO glass/MoO3 (10 nm)/active layer (100 nm)/Al (100 nm) were applied for all devices. Thermally evaporated MoO3 was used as the anode interfacial layer instead of the commonly applied PEDOT:PSS in order to avoid disruption of desired hydrogen bonding interactions by the highly acidic nature of PEDOT:PSS. All devices were optimized by thermal annealing at 150 °C for 15 min. Accelerated aging tests were performed by thermal annealing the devices at 110 °C for up to 112 h and tested at pre-determined time intervals. Performances of as-cast and optimized devices are summarized in Table 1 and aging results in Fig. 3. Current density–voltage (I–V) curves for all devices under different conditions are included in Fig. S3.


P3HT-b-P3IOAT/PCBP NFs
PCE (%)

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF
(as-cast/optimized)
(as-cast/optimized)
(as-cast/optimized)
(as-cast/optimized)

a Spin-cast from respective solutions (10 mg mL−1 polymer concentration) at 400 rpm for 30 s and thermally annealed at 150 °C for 15 min. All values are reported as average of five individual cells.
b Power conversion efficiency under simulated 100 mW cm−2 white light irradiation.
c Short circuit current.
d Open circuit voltage.
e Fill factor.


10/4 (wt/wt)

Pre-formed

0.78 ± 0.11/2.34 ± 0.19
3.36 ± 0.44/8.71 ± 0.70
0.50 ± 0.01/0.55 ± 0.01
0.46 ± 0.01/0.49 ± 0.01

In situ formed

0.63 ± 0.08/2.27 ± 0.14
2.90 ± 0.32/8.85 ± 0.62
0.47 ± 0.02/0.53 ± 0.01
0.46 ± 0.02/0.48 ± 0.01

10/8 (wt/wt)

Pre-formed

1.15 ± 0.17/2.08 ± 0.08
4.58 ± 0.41/6.99 ± 0.17
0.54 ± 0.01/0.58 ± 0.01
0.46 ± 0.03/0.51 ± 0.01

In situ formed

0.58 ± 0.06/2.25 ± 0.14
3.05 ± 0.17/7.65 ± 0.55
0.50 ± 0.01/0.56 ± 0.01
0.37 ± 0.02/0.52 ± 0.01
As shown in Table 1, as-cast devices from all NF formation conditions gave relatively low PCEs, suffering mostly from low short circuit current (JSC) values. Upon thermal optimization, performances of all devices were significantly improved to over 2% PCEs. The 10/4 composite NF devices slightly out-performed corresponding 10/8 devices under both pre-formed and in situ formed conditions. Despite the relatively low fullerene contents, these 10/4 composite NF devices have comparable PCEs with BHJ devices using P3HT-b-P3IOAT and PCBP at a 10/8 weight ratio and are much better than BHJ devices using these two materials at a 10/4 weight ratio. The improvement of device performance originates mostly from enhanced JSC, which is likely due to CP domain confinement through NF formation into sizes more favorable for exciton diffusion and dissociation, as well as better nano-structures resulted from such cooperative non-covalent interactions.
Although the composite NF devices at both polymer/fullerene weight ratios showed similar optimized performances, thermal stability is however greatly different. As shown in Fig. 3A, more than 60% PCEs are retained for both pre-formed and in situ formed composite NF devices at 10/4 weight ratio after thermal annealing at 110 °C for 112 h, the later being slightly better. On the contrary, the 10/8 composite NF devices lost photovoltaic performance almost entirely within the first 40 h of aging tests. The open circuit voltage (VOC) in all devices is relatively stable (Fig. 3C) and the observed stability differences are directly caused by significantly steeper decline in both JSC (Fig. 3B) and fill factor (FF, Fig. 3D) values in the 10/8 composite NF devices. Such trend is also confirmed by the appearance of progressively worsening S-shaped kinks around VOC regions in I–V curves of the 10/8 devices during the aging tests, which is apparently absent in I–V curves of the 10/4 composite NF devices (Fig. S3).

The relatively stable VOC values for all devices throughout aging tests indicate only small changes in energetics at the organic/organic and organic/electrode interfaces. The significant decreases in JSC and FFs that are most responsible for device degradation are thus likely caused by morphology instability. Optical microscopy was first utilized to probe possible phase separation on a macroscopic level. Optical images (400× magnification) of all composite NF devices under as-cast, optimized and final aged conditions are shown in Fig. 4. The darker areas in these optical images are commonly recognized as fullerene aggregates/crystallites.

Clear trends can be observed in Fig. 4, which is consistent with device stability results and proposed NF formation mechanism. Significantly larger and more densely packed PCBP crystallites are present in the 10/8 devices than in the 10/4 devices, even in the as-cast films. Such differences are easily understood since only 40 wt% PCBP is needed to fully complex all the IOA moieties on P3HT-b-P3IOAT. In the case of 10/8 devices, at least half of the PCBP molecules are not bound to the polymer and can freely aggregate through hydrogen bonding interactions among the diaminopyridine groups, leading to large-scale crystallization. Such macroscopic phase separation likely accounts for the much worse stability observed in the 10/8 NF devices. On the other hand, smaller and less densely packed PCBP crystallites are observed in the 10/4 composite NF devices. Since in these films, most fullerene molecules are expectedly attached tightly to the BCP through complementary hydrogen bonding interactions, leading to macro-phase separation to a lesser extent and thus enhanced morphology and device stability. Noticeably, there are very few fullerene crystallites in the in situ formed composite NF (10/4) devices even after prolonged aging (Fig. 4I), indicating fewer free PCBP molecules in these films. This observation is consistent with the TEM measurements, in which the in situ formed composite NFs are thicker than corresponding pre-formed ones due to more efficient attachment of PCBP molecules onto P3HT-b-P3IOAT. As a result, the devices employing in situ formed composite NFs are consistently more stable than those using pre-formed composite NFs.
Atomic force microscopy (AFM) was applied to study thin film morphologies of the NF devices on the nanometer scale. Fig. 5 compiles the phase images of composite NF devices under different fabrication conditions and corresponding height images are included in Fig. S4. Thin films containing pure P3HT-b-P3IOAT NFs showed very similar topography and morphological features under as-cast, optimized and aged conditions, as seen in Fig. 5A–5C, respectively. Unlike most literature reported AFM images of P3HT homopolymer NF films, in which straight and uniform NFs are clearly present, only curved and irregular fibril-like structures are observed in P3HT-b-P3IOAT NF films. Such differences can likely be explained by interactions among IOA moieties. In solutions, the IOA groups are well solvated by acetone, by which P3HT-b-P3IOAT NFs are well-dispersed and directly visualizable by TEM. In thin films, where solvents are absent, inter- and intra-NF hydrogen bonding interactions among IOA moieties can become strong enough to distort NFs as well as inter-connect adjacent NFs and make the boundaries between them less discernible by AFM. For the composite NF films, much rougher surfaces are observed, especially for the 10/8 devices. Large aggregated species are observed for these films and clear differences can be seen in films before and after thermal treatment. These results further confirm that performance deterioration in these 10/8 composite NF devices is indeed caused by morphology instability. On the other hand, similar morphologies are observed for both pre-formed and in situ formed 10/4 composite NF devices (Fig. 5D–5F and 5J–5L) before and after thermal treatment. Again, these observations are consistent with the enhanced stability in these devices. Very interestingly, brighter (more crystalline) and darker (less crystalline) regions in these films seem to be patterned periodically with somewhat long-range order, having repeating distances of ca. 30–40 nm. Such ordering in morphology is possibly mediated by self-assembly of P3HT-b-P3IOAT complexed with PCBP, which is studied in more detail using X-ray scattering technique as discussed below.
In order to gain a deeper insight into the effectiveness of our composite NF strategy on morphology controllability, we performed both grazing-incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) and grazing-incidence small-angle X-ray scattering (GISAXS) measurements on these P3HT-b-P3IOAT/PCBP composite NF thin films. The results are summarized in Fig. 6, 7 and Table 2.
Conditions
GIWAXS (as cast/optimized/aged)
GISAXS (as cast/optimized/aged)
Face-on (%)
Edge-on (%)
Isotropic (%)

d-Spacing (nm)
Grain size (nm)

a Thin films were deposited using identical conditions as that applied in OPV device fabrication. Optimized: 150 °C, 15 min; aged: 110 °C, 112 h.
b Grazing-incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering. Percentages of different polymer orientations are estimated by integration the intensity along the (100) scattering rings.
c Grazing-incidence small-angle X-ray scattering. Grain size estimated from the peak width (Scherrer analysis), after accounting for instrumental resolution. “–” indicates not observed.


P3HT-b-P3IOAT NFs
8/5/4
67/81/68
25/14/27
—
—
Pre-formed P3HT-b-P3IOAT NFs/PCBP
10/4 (wt/wt)
11/7/4
48/59/42
44/34/54
38/38/37
187/193/207
10/8 (wt/wt)
11/6/6
51/49/53
38/46/41
39/—/—
200/—/—

In situ formed P3HT-b-P3IOAT/PCBP NFs
10/4 (wt/wt)
11/5/7
56/57/49
33/38/43
38/38/38
207/187/206
10/8 (wt/wt)
12/8/10
48/58/55
40/34/35
40/39/—
179/172/—
GIWAXS enables probing of the molecular-scale packing of the components, and is particularly sensitive to the efficient organization of P3HT (or P3HT-b-P3IOAT) in two orthogonal directions: the π–π stacking of the aromatic thiophene rings, and the lamellar stacking that results from the disordered alkyl side-chains. We note that the third orthogonal direction (along the polymer backbone) does not give rise to a well-defined GIWAXS peak. The intensity along the scattering rings can also be used to quantify the orientation distribution of the material, and thus the fractions of materials oriented in different directions. As shown in Fig. 6, strong scattering peaks are observed in all films, indicating high crystallinity in the composite NF devices. Unsurprisingly, annealing improves order for all the materials studied, with higher-order peaks becoming more intense and better defined. Interestingly, there is some suggestion that the P3HT-b-P3IOAT/PCBP composite NFs cause the PCBP phase to crystallize, as evidenced by the appearance of textured scattering rings at the distance corresponding to fullerene packing (q ∼ 1.4 Å−1). This was only observed for aged samples of composite NFs, which is also more pronounced in the 10/8 devices, presumably due to the large-scale fullerene crystallization as observed in optical microscopy and AFM measurements.
One intriguing phenomenon is the enhanced “face-on” polymer packing orientation relative to the substrate in these composite NF devices. P3HT samples have been shown to adopt predominantly “edge-on” orientation, wherein the side-chains interact with the substrate interface, giving rise to the out-of-plane lamellar peaks, and corresponding in-plane π–π peaks. This should be contrasted with the “face-on” orientation, which has the aromatic rings stacked along the film normal instead, and which is expected to give rise to higher out-of-plane hole mobility and thus more suitable for OPV operations.
As summarized in Fig. 6 and Table 2, the composite NF films all exhibited decreased “edge-on” orientation and enhanced “face-on” packing. For example in the optimized films, 81% of the pure P3HT-b-P3IOAT NFs take on the “edge-on” orientation while the fraction of “edge-on” orientation decreases to below 60% in all composite NF films accompanied by increased “face-on” and uniformly distributed (isotropic) materials. This reorientation of material can be seen as a bimodal distribution of scattering intensity along the P3HT-b-P3IOAT lamellar scattering rings. It is possible that the polymer only NFs are efficiently oriented by the substrate-wetting preference of the P3HT alkyl side-chains. The strong interactions between P3HT-b-P3IOAT and PCBP modify this substrate interaction, and allow the composite NFs to achieve greater orientational freedom about their long axis. Furthermore, orientation of the composite NFs are fairly stable against thermal annealing since only small changes in relative fractions can be observed among as-cast, optimized and aged films.
The GISAXS data probes nanoscale order and confirms the AFM observations previously described. All the NF samples exhibit a broad undulation of scattering intensity along the vertical direction (Fig. 7), whose spacing (0.035 Å−1) is consistent with the form-factor for the cylindrical cross-section of the NFs (ca. 18 nm diameter). This observation indicates that integrity of these NFs remains in thin films even after prolonged annealing, although they are not clearly observed in AFM images. Absent in thin films containing only P3HT-b-P3IOAT NFs under all three conditions (Fig. 7A–7C), a distinct in-plane GISAXS peak is observed in all as-cast composite NF films, which suggests a well-defined nanoscale ordering of the two heterojunction materials. The observed GISAXS peaks are presumably caused by preferred packing distance for P3HT-b-P3IOAT NFs due to strongly-associated PCBP molecules segregating between them. Such effects are absent in P3HT-b-P3IOAT alone NF films, wherein the heterojunctions are not well structured and thus no scattering peaks could be observed. Specifically, well-defined spacings of ca. 40 nm with a corresponding grain-size of ca. 200 nm (measured from the peak width through Scherrer analysis after accounting for instrumental resolution) exist in all these as-cast samples, which correlate well with AFM images. Such long-range ordering in morphology seems to be robust against annealing in the 10/4 composite NF films since neither the domain sizes nor the correlation lengths are significantly changed even after prolonged aging tests (Table 2). On the other hand, such ordering disappeared very quickly upon thermal treatment in optimized and aged films containing 10/8 P3HT-b-P3IOAT/PCBP composite NFs, which is consistent with the macro-phase separation and fast performance degradation in these devices as discussed previously. These results suggest that it is possible to form well-defined and highly stable polymer/fullerene nano-morphologies through the interplay of several orthogonal non-covalent interactions including NF formation, BCP self-assembly, strong complementary hydrogen bonding as well as fullerene aggregation. The balance among these interactions needs to be carefully designed and fine-tuned to achieve the desired morphology. Imbalance from even one of these parameters, e.g. excess fullerene molecules capable of self-complementary hydrogen bonding, can lead to detrimental effects on morphology controllability and stability.

In summary, we have developed a modular approach for achieving stable and controllable nano-morphology toward more efficient and thermally robust OPV devices. By building in strong non-covalent interactions between one segment of a conjugated block copolymer and fullerene derivatives, well-defined composite NFs are obtained through self-assembly in solution. Such supramolecular nanostructures lead to more device favorable polymer orientation, enhanced morphology stability and rarely observed long-range nano-structuring of the heterojunction. Our strategy opens up new possibilities in supramolecular chemistry and adds a promising tool for precision morphology engineering that can potentially lead to better performing OPVs, when extended to more efficient materials systems such as low bandgap conjugated polymers.


The authors would like to acknowledge University of New Mexico for financial support for this research. Y. Qin acknowledges NSF grant no. IIA-1301346 for financial support. K. Yager is supported by the Center for Functional Nanomaterials, which is funded by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Basic Energy Sciences under contract no. DE-AC02-98CH10886.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Synthetic details, UV-Vis absorption spectra of NFs formed in mixed solvents having various compositions and composite NFs under different blending conditions; I–V curves of composite NF OPV devices under as-cast, optimized and different aging conditions; AFM height images of composite NF thin films. See DOI: 10.1039/c4py00934g
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015