 DOI: 10.1039/C7TA10306A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 2273-2278


Lin
Hu
,

Yun
Liu
,

Lin
Mao
,

Sixing
Xiong
,

Lulu
Sun
,

Nan
Zhao
,

Fei
Qin
,

Youyu
Jiang
 and 

Yinhua
Zhou
*

Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, School of Optical and Electronic Information, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China. E-mail: yh_zhou@hust.edu.cn

Research Institute of Huazhong University of Science and Technology in Shenzhen, Shenzhen 518057, China

Received
23rd November 2017
, Accepted 5th January 2018
First published on 8th January 2018
The development of non-fullerene acceptors keeps pushing forward the efficiency record of organic solar cells and resulting in new solar cell physics and chemistry to research. ITIC-based materials are an important type of non-fullerene acceptors. Herein, we report a new finding that the ITIC acceptor can react with the widely used low work-function interfacial layer polyethylenimine (PEI or PEIE) in non-fullerene organic solar cells. The amine interfacial material reacts as a nucleophile with the CO moiety of the ITIC, that destroys the original electronic structure and the intramolecular charge transfer of the ITIC molecules. Inverted non-fullerene solar cells with a PBDB-T:ITIC active layer deposited on PEI or PEIE display much lower PCE values compared with those of reference cells with the active layers deposited on ZnO electron-collecting interlayers. This chemical reaction between the ITIC acceptor and PEI or PEIE becomes more severe under thermal annealing and further deteriorates the solar cell performance. This original finding pays important attention to the design and development of the interfaces required for efficient non-fullerene organic solar cells.

Bulk heterojunction organic solar cells (OSCs) have attracted considerable attention due to their potential for realizing low-temperature low-cost manufacturing on lightweight flexible substrates. In a typical bulk heterojunction OSC device, the active layer is composed of two materials that work as electron donor and acceptor, respectively. Over the past few decades, fullerene derivatives, such as [6,6]-phenyl-C61/C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC61BM/PC71BM) and indene-C60 bis adduct (ICBA), have been regarded as the most classical electron acceptors for OSCs owing to their advantages of large electron affinity and high electron mobility. Power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of over 11% have been achieved after tremendous efforts in the development of electron-donor materials and device optimization for single-junction fullerenes-based devices.

Recently, the emergence of efficient non-fullerene acceptors has significantly triggered the research of new electron acceptors for organic solar cells. The development of new non-fullerene acceptors pushes the efficiency record forward due to their broad light absorption spectra and low energy loss between the donor and acceptor. 3,9-Bis(2-methylene-(3-(1,1-dicyanomethylene)-indanone))-5,5,11,11-tetrakis(4-hexylphenyl)-dithieno[2,3-d:2′,3′-d′]-s-indaceno[1,2-b:5,6-b′]dithiophene (ITIC)-based materials are an important type of non-fullerene acceptor. They exhibit a PCE of 6.8%, comparable with that of fullerene-based OSCs. Up to now, state-of-the-art non-fullerene-based devices have yielded record PCEs of 13.1% in single-junction and 13.8% in tandem OSCs.
To efficiently extract the charge carriers from the non-fullerene containing active layers, appropriate interfaces have to be well designed in order to achieve a high performance of the OSCs. Previously, many interface materials have been developed to produce low work function interfaces for fullerene-containing organic solar cells. One representative is inorganic n-type metal oxides, such as titanium oxide (TiOx) or zinc oxide (ZnO). The n-type inorganic metal oxides were often used owing to their merits of excellent charge mobility and electron selectivity. Another type of widely used low work function interface includes organic molecules and polymers, such as polyethylenimine (PEI), ethoxylated polyethylenimine (PEIE) and poly[(9,9-bis(3′-(N,N-dimethylamino)propyl)-2,7-fluorene)-alt-2,7-(9,9-dioctylfluorene)] (PFN). The polymer interfacial layers are low-cost and easy to process via low temperature coating. The amine groups contained in the polymers produce a low work function via partial charge transfer that leads to effective surface dipoles. The effective n-doping of the fullerene acceptor by the PEI or PEIE polymer, that increases the charge carrier density and shifts the energy level, is also beneficial for efficient electron collection to the electrode.
Herein, we report the finding that PEI or PEIE can react with the ITIC non-fullerene acceptor. The ITIC molecule is constructed with a configuration of acceptor–donor–acceptor (A–D–A) that is different from the fullerene acceptors. The central block is indacenodithieno[3,2-b]thiophene (IDTT) and it is end-capped by two 2-(3-oxo-2,3-dihydroinden-1-ylidene)malononitrile (INCN) groups. The central IDTT block has strong electron-donating properties, and the INCN end groups possess strong electron-withdrawing properties. This push–pull structure of ITIC induces effective intramolecular charge transfer and extends the light absorption spectrum, endowing the acceptor with outstanding photovoltaic properties. However, when ITIC molecules make contact with PEI or PEIE, there is nucleophilic attack from amine groups in the polymer on the carbonyl groups in INCN. This nucleophilic reaction destroys the original intramolecular charge transfer in ITIC (from IDTT to INCN). Moreover, the reaction at the interface results in poor low electron collection and therefore, the solar cells deliver inferior PCEs compared with those of reference cells with a ZnO interlayer.

The finding that ITIC reacts with PEI and PEIE was made by fabricating the solar cells: glass/ITO/ZnO or PEI or PEIE/PBDB-T:ITIC/MoO3/Ag, where PBDB-T denotes the poly[(2,6-(4,8-bis(5-(2-ethylhexyl)thiophen-2-yl)-benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene))-alt-(5,5-(1′,3′-di-2-thienyl-5′,7′-bis(2-ethylhexyl)benzo[1′,2′-c:4′,5′-c′]dithiophene-4,8-dione))] (PBDB-T) donor and the ITIC acceptor that are mixed as the photoactive layer. ZnO, PEI and PEIE are used to produce low work-function interfaces for electron collection. The device structure is shown in Fig. 1(a). Current density–voltage (J–V) characteristic curves of the OSC devices with different electron-collecting electrodes are shown in Fig. 1(b). For the reference devices with the ZnO layer, a PCE of 9.71% was obtained with an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 0.88 V, a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 17.36 mA cm−2 and a fill factor (FF) of 64% (Table 1). When PEI or PEIE was incorporated as the electron-collecting electrodes, the PCEs of the devices decreased to 7.06% and 7.11%, respectively. The VOC values of the cells are comparable for these cells with ZnO or PEI (or PEIE). The decrease in the device performance can be mainly attributed to the reduced JSC and FF values, especially the FF values of cells with PEI and PEIE, which have fallen to 48% and 53%, respectively. An S-shape can be seen in the J–V characteristics of the cells with a PEI interface. This is surprising in view of the work functions, since those of PEI or PEIE are sufficiently low enough for efficient electron collection, and have been widely applied in fullerene-based solar cells.

Annealing treatment
Interface layers

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)

a The averaged photovoltaic parameters of each device are obtained from 10 devices, and the ± refers to the standard deviation. The values in parentheses denote the maximum PCE values.

Without annealing
ZnO
0.88 ± 0.01 (0.88)
17.01 ± 0.25 (17.36)
0.62 ± 0.01 (0.64)
9.28 ± 0.45 (9.71)
PEI
0.87 ± 0.02 (0.88)
16.11 ± 0.34 (16.60)
0.45 ± 0.02 (0.48)
6.38 ± 0.54 (7.06)
PEIE
0.86 ± 0.01 (0.86)
15.21 ± 0.31 (15.67)
0.50 ± 0.02 (0.53)
6.54 ± 0.43 (7.11)
Annealing at 160 °C for 10 min
ZnO
0.85 ± 0.02 (0.86)
17.18 ± 0.35 (17.44)
0.67 ± 0.02 (0.69)
9.80 ± 0.41 (10.37)
PEI
0.56 ± 0.02 (0.58)
11.85 ± 0.44 (12.11)
0.35 ± 0.02 (0.37)
2.32 ± 0.21 (2.57)
PEIE
0.56 ± 0.02 (0.57)
14.01 ± 0.43 (14.28)
0.39 ± 0.02 (0.41)
2.91 ± 0.32 (3.34)
Furthermore, thermal annealing treatment (at 160 °C for 10 min) was applied to the PBDB-T:ITIC active layers deposited on ITO/ZnO, ITO/PEI, and ITO/PEIE, respectively. For ITO/ZnO/PBDB-T:ITIC-based cells, the devices deliver an increased performance with a PCE of 10.37% (with VOC = 0.86 V, JSC = 17.44 mA cm−2 and FF = 69%) after the thermal annealing, as shown in Fig. 1(c) and Table 1. The thermal annealing slightly increases the device performance, which is consistent with a previous report. However, for ITO/PEI/PBDB-T:ITIC and ITO/PEIE/PBDB-T:ITIC-based cells, the VOC, JSC and FF values all decrease significantly, resulting in poor performances of 2.57% and 3.34%, respectively (Table 1). Since the top electrodes (hole-collecting electrodes) and interfaces for all three types of solar cell are the same (PBDB-T:ITIC/MoO3/Ag), the poor performance of the solar cells with PEI (or PEIE) must arise from the bottom electron-collecting electrode and interface (ITO/PEI (or PEIE)/PBDB-T:ITIC). The thermal annealing further deteriorates the electron collection at the bottom electrode and interface. The EQE spectra of the devices with and without thermal annealing are shown in Fig. 1(d). The EQE spectra of all the devices cover a similar spectral region from 300 to 800 nm. The devices with PEI and PEIE show lower values than those with ZnO. The thermal annealing further reduces the EQE values for the devices with PEI and PEIE. The current integrated from the EQE is consistent to the JSC values obtained from the J–V characteristics.
In order to investigate the reaction between the underlying PEI or PEIE and the upper active layer, we exposed the donor PBDB-T and acceptor ITIC films to the amine vapor produced from PEI or PEIE (hereafter referred to as “amine vapor”), respectively. The vapor contains volatile ethyleneimine dimers and trimers as reported by Fabiano et al. As shown in Fig. 2(a) and S1(a), the UV-vis-NIR absorption spectra of the PBDB-T films exposed to amine vapor produced by PEI or PEIE for different amounts of time are identical. While exposing the ITIC films to the amine vapor results in a significant change to the UV-vis-NIR absorption spectra of the films. Fig. 2(b) and S1(b) show the ITIC films exposure to amine vapor produced by PEI and PEIE for different amounts of time. The pristine ITIC films exhibit strong absorptions in the region of 500–800 nm with a peak at around 700 nm, which are assigned to a high-energy π–π* transition and an intramolecular charge transfer from IDTT to INCN moieties. After exposing the ITIC films to the amine vapor, the main absorption band (500–800 nm) disappears gradually, along with the formation of a new absorption band that is centered at around 440 nm. Considering the IDTT and INCN monomer with UV-vis-NIR absorption spectra in the near ultraviolet region, shown in Fig. S2(a) and (b), the change in the absorption spectra after PEI or PEIE exposure can be attributed to a restriction of the intramolecular charge transfer from the central IDTT core to the terminal INCN moieties.
To further verify this phenomenon, we directly mixed the ITIC solution and PEI together. The picture of the ITIC with various concentrations of PEI is shown in Fig. 2(d). The UV-vis-NIR absorption spectra of the mixed solution in chlorobenzene are shown in Fig. 2(c). A similar absorption evolution for the ITIC solution is observed to that of ITIC film exposed to amine vapor produced by PEI or PEIE for different amounts of time. Absorption in the long wavelength band (500–750 nm) disappears and a new absorption band in the short wavelength (380–480 nm) region appears when the ratio of PEI increases in the mixed solution. This confirms the reaction between PEI and ITIC.
A schematic diagram of the reaction between PEI or PEIE and the ITIC acceptor are shown in Fig. 3(a). The reaction between the amine polymer modifiers (PEI or PEIE) and the active layer destroys the non-fullerene acceptor (ITIC), leading to a decreased power conversion efficiency of the solar cells. The thermal annealing promotes the interaction between the PEI (or PEIE) and the ITIC, which further deteriorates the solar cell performance. Because of the acceptor–donor–acceptor (A–D–A) configuration of the non-fullerene electron acceptor, that is different to that of a fullerene acceptor, the electron-withdrawing/acceptor moieties are helpful in creating an intramolecular charge transfer for extending the long-wavelength absorption of the ITIC. But, in the meantime, the electron-withdrawing/acceptor moieties could also be attacked by strong electron-donating PEI (or PEIE) surface modifiers acting as nucleophiles. The original A–D–A configuration with intramolecular charge transfer was therefore disrupted. Ultimately, the ITIC is “poisoned” by the amine-containing interfacial layer in non-fullerene solar cells.
To verify the chemical reaction between the PEI (or PEIE) and the ITIC acceptor, electron spin resonance (ESR) was also performed. Fig. 3(b) and S3(a) show the ESR spectra of pristine ITIC films and corresponding films treated with amine vapor. The PEI or PEIE treated ITIC films reveal a strong paramagnetic signal with a g value of 1.918, while no appreciable radical signal is observed in the pristine ITIC film. In addition, there is no radical signal in the PEI or PEIE treated PBDB-T films, as well as the pristine PBDB-T film, as shown in Fig. S3(b). The different ESR experiments indicate that the radical species are formed through chemical reaction of the amines and the ITIC, rather than any interaction involving the donor polymer, although the mechanism of the radical-forming reaction is unclear. Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopic measurements were carried out to further explore the interaction between PEI (or PEIE) and ITIC. Fig. 3(c) shows the FT-IR spectra of PEI treated ITIC and pristine ITIC. The pure ITIC exhibits bands at 2222 cm−1 and 1706 cm−1, which correspond to the CN and CO groups, respectively. After being treated with PEI, the band corresponding to the CO groups disappears and the band corresponding to the CN groups moves to a lower wavenumber, which indicates that a charge chemical reaction occurs between the electrophilic INCN moieties inside ITIC and the nucleophilic Lewis base PEI. Furthermore, to identify which moiety of the ITIC reacts with PEI or PEIE, we also used PEI and PEIE to treat the INCN and IDTT units respectively, and measured their FT-IR spectra. The FT-IR spectra of the PEI treated INCN monomer show a similar behavior to that of ITIC. The FT-IR spectra of PEIE treated ITIC and INCN also show a similar behavior (Fig. S4). This shows that the reaction happens between the amines and the INCN moiety of ITIC.
In order to further elucidate the chemical reaction between the ITIC molecules and amines, we separated and purified the products via chromatography and recorded their 1H NMR spectra. Since the polymer amines are too complicated to test by NMR, we used methylamine as the model compound and mixed the ITIC in anhydrous tetrahydrofuran. Two products were separated, purified and collected via column chromatography on silica gel using petroleum ether/ethyl acetate. From the 1H NMR spectra, as shown in Fig. S5, the emerging singlet at ca. d = 9.9 ppm for the NH proton and ca. d = 3.2 ppm for the methyl group in the NH indicate that ITIC reacts with methylamine through a nucleophilic addition. Moreover, the reaction continues through Schiff base condensation chemistry to show the disappearance of a singlet at ca. d = 9.9 ppm, shown in Fig. S5. In addition, the FT-IR spectra of the two products were also recorded (Fig. S6). IR bands at 1706 cm−1 (CO) are not observed for the two separated products. The results indicate there is no CHO generated in the separated products and therefore excludes the possibility of the occurrence of a retro-Knoevenagel reaction. The outline of the synthetic routes is shown in Fig. 4. This is also consistent with a previous report in the literature that electron-rich amines, acting as nucleophiles, attack the carbonyl groups in the INCN end groups. Hence, the results from 1H NMR also confirm the disappearance of CO groups, which is in agreement with what is observed in the FT-IR spectra in Fig. 3(c). Therefore, PEI (or PEIE) acts as a nucleophile with the CO moiety of ITIC, breaking the original chemical and electronic structure of ITIC and resulting in the poor performance of the non-fullerene solar cells.

In this work, we report the finding that the recently emerged and efficient non-fullerene acceptor ITIC can react with the amine-containing interfacial materials, polyethylenimine (PEI) or PEIE. PEI (or PEIE) can act as a nucleophile with the CO moiety of ITIC, breaking the original intramolecular charge transfer in ITIC which significantly changes the optical absorption behavior of the ITIC acceptor. The reaction destroys the original expectation that efficient electron collection would occur at the interface of the solar cells. Therefore, while the reference device with the ZnO electron-collecting layer shows a power conversion efficiency of about 9.7%, with thermal annealing slightly increasing the efficiency to 10.3% (PBDB-T:ITIC as the active layer), the solar cells with PEI or PEIE interfacial layers deliver an inferior PCE of about 7.1% which is further reduced to about 2.2% after thermal annealing. The opposite trend in the efficiency as a function of the thermal annealing, compared to the reference cells, is due to the fact that the thermal annealing further pushes the reaction forward between the PEI (or PEIE) and the ITIC acceptor. This finding of the reaction between the ITIC non-fullerene acceptor and the interfacial layer provides important information for the community on selecting appropriate combinations of interfaces and active layer materials in order to form efficient and reliable non-fullerene organic solar cells.


There are no conflicts to declare.


The work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 21474035, 51773072), the Recruitment Program of Global Youth Experts, the HUST Key Innovation Team for Interdisciplinary Promotion (Grant No. 2016JCTD111), the Science and Technology Program of Shenzhen (JCYJ20160429182443609), and the Postdoctoral Science Foundation of China (2016M602289).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta10306a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018