 DOI: 10.1039/D1TC00886B
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 6217-6224


Jing
Ren
,

Shurong
Wang
,

Jianxing
Xia
,

Chengbo
Li
,

Lisha
Xie
,

Hongcai
He
,

Xiaobin
Niu
,

Qiang
Zhao
* and 

Feng
Hao
*

School of Materials and Energy, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 611731, China. E-mail: zqphys@uestc.edu.cn; haofeng@uestc.edu.cn

State Key Laboratory of Electronic Thin Films and Integrated Devices, School of Electronic Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 611731, China

Received
24th February 2021
, Accepted 18th April 2021
First published on 19th April 2021
Defects, inevitably produced in solution-processed halide perovskite films, can act as charge carrier recombination centers to induce severe energy loss in perovskite solar cells (PSCs). Suppressing these trap states has been regarded as one of the effective strategies to improve the photovoltaic performance and stability of PSCs. Herein, a small molecule of 3-picolinic acid, a commodity chemical with a carboxyl group (–COOH) better known by its common name niacin, which can be chemically anchored to methylammonium lead iodide (MAPbI3) through the coordination effect, is introduced to passivate the defects and control the perovskite crystal growth. Highly crystalline perovskite films with a large grain size are obtained. The passivation within the perovskite via the interaction of –COOH in niacin with Pb2+ is verified by Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, as well as density functional theory calculations. Consequently, the device with niacin achieved a power conversion efficiency close to 20%, along with much more enhanced air and ultraviolet illumination stability, compared to the control device.

Organic–inorganic hybrid halide perovskites have come into prominence as excellent new absorbers for solar cells due to their low exciton binding energy, long charge carrier diffusion length, wide absorption range, tunable bandgap and energy level. During the past several years, along with the persistent optimization of perovskite compositions and device structures, the power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of halide perovskite solar cells (PCSs) have rocketed from 3.8% in 2009 to a certified value of 25.5%, approaching the efficiency record of crystalline silicon solar cells and other inorganic semiconductor solar cells. In general, the traditional low temperature solution-processing and fast crystallization method are widely used in the deposition of perovskite films, since the solution process is low-cost, convenient and can be readily upscaled. However, the solution-processed perovskite films are polycrystalline in nature and inevitably introduce a large amount of defects into the surface and grain boundaries of perovskite films. It is well known that the defects are vulnerable to trap-assisted recombination, thereby resulting in severe energy loss in PSCs. Meanwhile, moisture and oxygen will infiltrate into the perovskite from the defective sites to jeopardize the device stability in ambient environment. Therefore, it is imperative to passivate these defects for achieving high-performance PSCs.

To date, tremendous efforts have been devoted to reducing the defects in PSCs. For instance, Sargent et al. introduced phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PC61BM) into the perovskite layer to facilitate the trap passivation and minimize the photocurrent hysteresis. Fang et al. applied a cross-linkable organic small molecule of trimethylolpropane triacrylate to chemically bind to grain boundaries and in situ cross-link to a robust continuous network polymer after thermal treatment, thereby achieving a 590-fold improvement in the operational stability. By using an Eu3+–Eu2+ ion pair as the “redox shuttle”, Zhou et al. successfully suppressed the defects of Pb0 and I0 in perovskite films. You et al. employed phenethylammonium iodide (PEAI) to passivate the surface of a perovskite film. Li et al. passivated the bulk defect by a thiadiazole derivative and obtained a PCE of 19.04%. Hao et al. added thiazole into the perovskite precursor to improve the crystallinity and morphology, yielding a fill factor (FF) of 82%. Recent studies have shown that the incorporation of carboxyl group (–COOH) derivatives can reduce the defect density and decrease the charge carrier recombination in perovskite layers. Han et al. utilized the carboxyl group in an organic dye (AQ310) to coordinate with lead ions which effectively passivated the defects in the perovskite films. Li et al. reported that the carboxyl groups on both sides of 2,5-di(thiophen-2-yl)terephthalic acid can effectively coordinate with unsaturated or undercoordinated Pb2+ to passivate the defects in perovskite films. Meanwhile, Yang et al. reported that caffeine could coordinate with Pb2+ to slow down the perovskite crystal growth and induce a preferred orientation in the perovskite film, and greatly improved the PCEs and thermal stability of PSCs. In addition, Fang et al. reported that the carboxyl pendants of PFDT-COOH and PFDT-2F-COOH could not only improve the wettability of the perovskite precursor solution on the HTM, but also effectively coordinate with Pb2+ to promote crystal growth and passivate defects, yielding a PCE of 21.68% for inverted PSCs. Marks et al. introduced a traditional anchoring group (2-cyanoacrylic acid) into MPA-BT to induce interfacial modification of the ITO electrode and efficient defect passivation toward the perovskite layer.
Herein, we introduce a small molecule of 3-picolinic acid (niacin) into the perovskite precursor. Through the interaction of the carboxyl groups in niacin with Pb2+, niacin could interact strongly with Pb2+ ions to suppress the defects in the perovskite film and control the crystal growth process. The passivation within the perovskite layer was verified by Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analyses, and supported by density functional theory (DFT) calculations. The passivation of trap states would reduce the charge carrier recombination and enhance the open-circuit voltage (Voc) of the PSC devices. As a result, niacin-incorporated PSCs yield a competitive PCE of 19.52%, which is 12% higher than that of the control device. Most strikingly, the unencapsulated PSCs with niacin exhibit significantly improved stability under different operating conditions.


Fig. 1a shows the 3D molecular structure of niacin, featuring a carboxyl group on the pyridine. The interaction between niacin and the perovskite was first probed by Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR, Fig. 1b). The stretching vibration of CO in niacin was observed at 1717 cm−1. In contrast, the CO vibration was shifted to a lower wavenumber (1709 cm−1) for the PbI2 and niacin complex, indicating the interaction between niacin and PbI2. To further verify the interaction between –COOH and Pb2+, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was performed on the perovskite films with and without niacin. As shown in Fig. 1c, for the perovskite film with niacin, the binding energies of two main peaks corresponding to Pb 4f7/2 (137.8 eV) and Pb 4f5/2 (142.7 eV) were shifted to lower ionization potentials, which further verified the formation of covalent bonds between Pb2+ and –COOH. Therefore, this strong interaction of –COOH in niacin with Pb2+ ions is expected to increase the activation energy of nucleation, which will further retard the perovskite crystal growth and improve the crystallinity of perovskite films.


Fig. 2a and c demonstrate the top-view scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of perovskite films with and without niacin, respectively. It is worth noting that the perovskite film with niacin presented a larger grain size than that without niacin. The corresponding grain size distributions are summarized in Fig. 2b and d. It is clear that the perovskite film with niacin showed an average grain size of 273.98 nm, which is significantly larger than that of the control film (191.11 nm). This suggests that the introduction of niacin could control the perovskite crystal growth, resulting in a high-quality perovskite film with uniform and larger grains. The cross-sectional SEM image of the perovskite film with niacin is shown in Fig. S1a (ESI) with an average film thickness of 500 nm. The crystalline behaviors of perovskite films were further examined by X-ray diffraction (XRD) (Fig. 2e). The Bragg peaks at 14.08°, 28.48°, 31.98°, and 40.48° can be indexed to the (110), (220), (310), and (224) planes of the MAPbI3 crystal, respectively. The stronger diffraction peak intensities of the niacin-incorporated perovskite film at (110) and (220) indicated that the crystallization quality was enhanced, which was mainly ascribed to the interaction with Pb2+ ions. This interaction in the precursor could form a coordinative intermediate to modulate the crystal growth.Fig. 2f shows the UV-vis absorption spectra of perovskite films. It can be easily observed that the light absorption intensity of the niacin-incorporated perovskite film was enhanced in the whole visible spectral range owing to the improved crystallinity and slightly larger grain size of the perovskite film with niacin.
In order to assess the carrier recombination kinetics and defect density of the perovskite films, steady-state photoluminescence (PL) and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) decay measurements were carried out. As shown in Fig. 3a, the PL intensity of the niacin-incorporated perovskite film was higher than that of the control film. Simultaneously, the peak position was blue-shifted from 770 to 766 nm in the perovskite film with niacin, indicating reduced nonradiative recombination from the passivation trap states via the Lewis acid–base reaction between the –COOH groups and Pb2+. In addition, as shown in Fig. 3b, the corresponding TRPL spectra of these perovskites were fitted by a bi-exponential equation:
(1)
where
A1 and A2 are the decay amplitudes, τi is the decay time constant, and B is a constant for the baseline offset. Generally, τ1 is the fast decay lifetime, generally attributed to the nonradiative recombination at the interface. On the other hand, the slow decay lifetime (τ2) is attributed to bi-molecular recombination in the bulk film. With the incorporation of niacin, the perovskite film presented an obvious enhancement of PL decay time from 42.4 ns to 66.8 ns (τ2), which indicated that the perovskite film with niacin has a prolonged carrier lifetime. The defect density was further measured by using the space charge limited current (SCLC) method. The corresponding current–voltage (J–V) curves under dark conditions for the electron-only devices with a structure of FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/MAPbI3/PC61BM/Ag are shown in Fig. 3c. In the low voltage range, the current density is proportional to voltage, which reflected an ohmic contact. The current density then sharply rises with increasing bias, which corresponds to a trap-filled limit (TFL). The defect density (Nt) can be calculated using the following formula:

(2)
where
e is the elementary charge, ε and ε0 are the dielectric constants of MAPbI3 and vacuum permittivity, respectively, L is the thickness of the perovskite film, and VTFL is determined from the J–V curve. The Nt values were calculated to be 1.01 × 1016 cm−3 and 0.85 × 1016 cm−3 for the control perovskite film and the film with niacin, respectively.

Meanwhile, the mechanism of defect passivation was investigated through density functional theory (DFT) calculations. A typical under-coordinated Pb2+ defect on the MAI termination of (001) perovskite surfaces is produced (Fig. S2a, ESI). Fig. S2b (ESI) presents the optimized geometry and charge density difference of the perovskite surface with the adsorption of niacin, where the yellow and blue electron clouds indicate charge accumulation and depletion, respectively. As for the charge density differences of niacin on the (110) oriented MAPbI3 surface, the –COOH group was mainly responsible for the electron loss, while the peripheral lead atoms mainly capture electrons. Consequently, the electron clouds at the interface demonstrated charge redistribution and a strong interaction between MAPbI3 and the –COOH group, which were consistent with the results of FTIR and XPS. This interaction may fill halogen anion vacancies, which always trap the free electron, thus resulting in suppressed carrier recombination. To probe the influence of niacin on the trap states, the corresponding adsorption configuration was selected to study the density of states (DOS) of perovskites. The DOS values of the perovskite with and without niacin are plotted in Fig. 3d. It can be seen that the Pb 6p and I 5p orbitals in both perovskite slabs with or without passivation contribute to the majority of the conduction band (CB) and valence band (VB), respectively. However, there are new gap states within the defective perovskite slab, which are mainly contributed by the p orbitals of the Pb-dimer and serve as a deep trap attribute to the occupied surface excess electron. Once niacin was introduced into the perovskite layer, these deep traps near the CB disappeared due to the donation of electrons from the absorbed niacin molecule, resulting in a shift of the trap states.
The PSC devices were fabricated with a typical mesoporous architecture, as shown in Fig. S1b (ESI). The photovoltaic performance was evaluated under AM 1.5G illumination with an intensity of 100 mW cm−2. The corresponding J–V curves of the champion devices with and without niacin are shown in Fig. 4a and Fig. S3 (ESI), and the corresponding parameters are summarized in Table 1. The niacin-incorporated devices exhibited a PCE of 19.52% with a short-circuit current (Jsc) of 23.19 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.11 V, and a fill factor (FF) of 75.83%. In contrast, the control device showed a PCE of 17.43%, along with a Voc of 1.06 V, a Jsc of 22.48 mA cm−2, and a FF of 73.18%. Impressively, the Jsc, Voc and FF are systematically improved in the device with niacin, which is associated with the decreased charge recombination and defect passivation. Moreover, the J–V hysteresis behavior in different scan directions was also compared. The hysteresis index  of the niacin-incorporated devices decreased from 9.93% to 5.94% (Fig. 4a and Table S1, ESI). To further verify the performance reproducibility, 25 independent devices were fabricated and the statistical distribution is displayed in Fig. 4b and Fig. S4, S5 (ESI). Meanwhile, to ensure the accuracy of the J–V measurements, incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra were measured, as shown in Fig. 4c. The device with niacin exhibited a wide plateau of over 90% between 450 and 750 nm, yielding an integrated current density of 21.8 mA cm−2, which was in good agreement with the Jsc value from J–V measurements. Simultaneously, the steady-state photocurrents and efficiencies at the maximum power point voltage (Vmpp) were also examined. We tracked the light output at 0.89 V for the niacin-incorporated device and the pristine device at 0.83 V. As shown in Fig. 4d, the device with niacin yielded a steady PCE of 19.25% with a stable photocurrent density of 21.62 mA cm−2, which were very close to those obtained from the reverse scanning. To gain further insight into the performance enhancement, the charge recombination and transport time constants in both control and niacin-incorporated devices were characterized by transient photovoltage decay (TPV) and transient photocurrent decay (TPC) measurements under open- and short-circuit conditions, respectively. As shown in Fig. 4e, the device with niacin exhibited a substantially longer charge recombination lifetime of 32.8 μs than the control device (9.6 μs), suggesting that charge recombination is greatly inhibited in the niacin-incorporated device. This higher value of the charge recombination constant is consistent with the higher Voc of the corresponding devices. Furthermore, the increase in Voc can be understood from the flat band potential (Vbi) obtained from the Mott–Schottky plot. The measurements were performed at 100 kHz with a scan from 0 to −1.2 V. Basically, the Vbi can be deduced from the equation:
(3)
where
N is the carrier density, A is the active area, ε is the static permittivity, ε0 is the permittivity of free space, and q is the elementary charge. The Vbi can be calculated using the intersection of the linear regime with the x-axis of the Mott–Schottky plot, as shown in Fig. 4f and Table S2 (ESI). The carrier density of the device with niacin was calculated to be 6.14 × 1016 cm−3, which was higher than that of the control sample (5.20 × 1016 cm−3). Simultaneously, as shown in Fig. S6 (ESI), the charge transfer lifetime (τt) of the PSC device with niacin decreased from 2.5 to 1.4 μs, confirming the efficient charge transfer in the niacin-incorporated device.

Niacin concentration (mg mL−1)

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)

a Numbers in parentheses demonstrate the champion device parameters.

0
22.52 ± 0.69
1.05 ± 0.02
71.88 ± 1.79
17.05 ± 0.51
(22.48)
(1.06)
(73.18)
(17.43)
1
22.81 ± 0.63
1.07 ± 0.02
74.12 ± 1.65
18.04 ± 0.41
(22.87)
(1.09)
(74.01)
(18.45)
2
23.15 ± 0.55
1.10 ± 0.02
75.31 ± 1.62
19.01 ± 0.51
(23.19)
(1.11)
(75.83)
(19.52)
3
22.49 ± 0.53
1.09 ± 0.02
73.28 ± 1.57
17.82 ± 0.44
(22.95)
(1.09)
(72.99)
(18.26)
Stability is still the greatest challenge for the commercialization of PSCs. As shown in Fig. 5a, continuous UV light illumination stability was tested under UV light illumination (52 mW cm−2) for 100 min at room temperature (25 °C) and 50 ± 10 RH%. The device with niacin showed excellent UV stability, preserving more than 75% of its original PCE after 100 minutes of illumination, while the control device dropped to half of its original PCE. Meanwhile, the XRD patterns of these perovskite films were investigated, as shown in Fig. S7 (ESI). Before UV light soaking, the as-fabricated perovskite films showed tetragonal MAPbI3 characteristic diffraction peaks, in the absence of any additional peaks. After 100 min of UV light illumination, both perovskite films exhibited a new PbI2 peak at 12.3°, which can be indexed to the PbI2 phase. However, the diffraction peak intensity of PbI2 in the control film is stronger, indicating that the MAPbI3 film experienced much more severe degradation under UV light soaking. The degraded perovskite will inevitably weaken the light absorbance and simultaneously impede the photo-generated electron transport. Fig. S8 (ESI) shows the corresponding absorption curves of the perovskite film with and without niacin. After 100 minutes of UV illumination, the absorption intensity of the MAPbI3 perovskite film degraded dramatically, while the MAPbI3 film with niacin exhibited only a slight light absorption loss. These results strongly suggest that niacin can effectively improve the UV light durability of niacin-based PSCs. Moreover, enhanced stability can also be observed for the niacin-based device when stored in air with a relative humidity of 50% ± 10% for 480 h (Fig. 5b). Simultaneously, we conducted a continuous thermal stress stability test at 85 °C in ambient air atmosphere with a relative humidity of 60% ± 10% for 120 h. Compared to the control devices, the devices with niacin also showed superior stability at high temperature, as shown in Fig. S9 (ESI). Therefore, the improved crystallinity and reduced trap states of the perovskite film with niacin are responsible for the improved UV, humidity and thermal stability.

In summary, we employed niacin, a small molecule with a carboxyl group (–COOH), for the deposition of a high-quality MAPbI3 film. The –COOH group on niacin can be chemically bound with Pb2+ ions, which can not only effectively passivate the defects in the perovskite film but also control the perovskite crystal growth and improve the water-resisting and UV light-resisting abilities of the perovskite film. The DFT calculations reveal a reduction of the deep traps near the conduction band, primarily due to the donation of electrons from absorbed niacin and equilibrated surface charge. As a result, a PCE of 19.52% was achieved for the niacin-incorporated PSC device. More importantly, the device with niacin showed excellent UV illumination and humidity stability.


The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest.


This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC; 51702038), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (Grant No. ZYGX2019J024), the Sichuan Science and Technology Foundation (2020YFG0061 and 2020YJ0015) and the Recruitment Program for Young Professionals.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1tc00886b
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021