 DOI: 10.1039/C1CP21020C
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 14590-14597

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Yushuai
Shi
,

Yinghui
Wang
,

Min
Zhang
* and 

Xiandui
Dong
*

Engineering Laboratory for Modern Analytical Techniques, State Key Laboratory of Electroanalytical Chemistry, Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Science, Changchun 130022, China. E-mail: dxd@ciac.jl.cn

State Key Laboratory of Polymer Physics and Chemistry, Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Changchun 130022, China. E-mail: min.zhang@ciac.jl.cn

Graduate School, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100039, China

Received
2nd April 2011
, Accepted 2nd June 2011
First published on 18th July 2011
We investigate the dependence of the photovoltaic performance of dye-sensitized solar cells on the cations with different charge densities, such as lithium (Li+), sodium (Na+), potassium (K+), and dimethylimidazolium (DMI+). The efficiencies of light harvesting, electron injection and charge collection were evaluated to clarify the influence of cation selection on photocurrent generation. It is found that the short-circuit photocurrents of DSCs gradually diminish with decreasing cation charge densities, partially owing to reduced electron injection rates which are intimately related to the reaction Gibbs free energies. Further experiments indicate that the upward movement of conduction band edge results in decreased reaction Gibbs free energy of electron injection from Li+ to DMI+. At an irradiation of 100 mW cm−2AM1.5 sunlight, the open-circuit photovoltage and the fill factor of a typical dye-sensitized solar cell increase in the order of Li+ < Na+ < K+ < DMI+. Analyses of impedance data reveal that the increase of cell photovoltage mainly correlates with the upward shift of the conduction band edge induced by the adsorption of low-charge-density cations on the surface of titania nanocrystals. A J–V model was proposed to understand the improvement of the fill factor. It is found that the increase of the fill factor stems from the decrease of recombination current density under the equilibrium state in the dark by fitting the J–V data with the model.

During the past decades, a lot of research has been carried out in the field of dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) inspired by their high energy-conversion efficiency and the potential of low production cost. Besides the design and synthesis of excellent dyes on material engineering, another approach to achieve excellent performance of DSCs is to acquire proper semiconductor/dye/electrolyte interfaces on interface engineering, even though it is difficult to reveal the phenomena and understand the complexity of such interface, which is easily modulated by the electrolyte compositions. Until now, it was found that the ions in electrolytes could impose influence on several aspects of DSCs. For example, through downward shifting of the conduction band edge of the titania film, the lithium cations increase the injection yield and 1,2-dimethyl-3-propylimidazolium (DMPIm+) and Li+ decrease the open-circuit voltage. Furthermore, the ambipolar diffusion coefficients and the rate of dye cations reduction are either affected by the concentration or the species of cations. Therefore, to design the semiconductor/dye/electrolyte interfaces for highly efficient solar cells, it is important to elucidate and understand the influence of the cations in the electrolyte on the cell performance.

In this work, based on excluding the complexity of solar cells, through selecting simple electrolytes, Li+, Na+, K+, DMI+ in acetonitrile and ethylene carbonate solvent for these cations have typical charge density characteristics, and NaRu(4-carboxylic acid-4′-carboxylate-2,2′-bipyridine) (4,4′-bis(5-(hexylthio) thiophen-2-yl)-2,2′-bipyridine) (NCS)2, coded C106 as a model photosensitizer. From its weak interaction with cations, assisting with clues from experiments including photocurrent action spectra, steady photocurrent–voltage characteristics, electrochemical and impedance measurements, transient emission measurement and integrating with basic model analysis, we expect to elucidate a more clear relationship between the cations and the cell performance.


Acetonitrile (AN), ethylene carbonate (EC), and tert-butyl alcohol were distilled before use. Lithium iodide (LiI), potassium iodide (NaI), potassium iodide (KI), lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (LiTFSI), 3α,7α-dihydroxy-5β-cholic acid (cheno) and iodine were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and used without further purification. 1,3-Dimethylimidazolium iodide (DMII) and dimethylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (DMITFSI) were prepared according to literature procedures. The synthesis of C106 sensitizer was described in our previous paper.


An 11-μm-thick, screen-printed film of interconnected 22-nm-sized TiO2 particles on the FTO (TEC 15 Ω/□, Libbey-Owens-Ford Industries, 2.2 mm thick) conducting glass was used as the photoanode. The film thickness was measured by a bench-top Ambios XP-1 stylus profilometer. The detailed preparation procedures of TiO2 nanocrystals paste for screen-printing and nanostructured TiO2 film were reported in a previous paper. A cycloidal TiO2 electrode (∼0.28 cm2) was stained by immersing it into a dye solution containing C106 sensitizer (300 μM) and cheno (1 mM) in a mixture of acetonitrile and tert-butyl alcohol (volume ratio: 1/1) overnight. After washing with acetonitrile and drying in air flow, the dye-coated titania electrode was assembled with a thermally platinized FTO electrode. The electrodes were separated by a 30-μm-thick Bynel (DuPont) hot-melt gasket and sealed up by heating. The internal space was filled with a liquid electrolyte using a vacuum back-filling system. The electrolyte-injecting hole on the counter electrode made with a sand-blasting drill, was sealed with a Bynel sheet and a thin glass cover by heating. Four kinds of electrolytes were used, E1: 0.3 M LiI and 30 mM iodine in AN/EC (volume ratio: 6/4); E2: 0.3 M NaI and 30 mM iodine in AN/EC (volume ratio: 6/4); E3: 0.3 M KI and 30 mM iodine in AN/EC (volume ratio: 6/4); E4: 0.3 M DMII and 30 mM iodine in AN/EC (volume ratio: 6/4).


A Keithley 2400 source meter and a Zolix Omni-λ300 monochromator equipped with a 500 W xenon lamp were used for photocurrent action spectrum measurements, with a wavelength sampling interval of 10 nm and a current sampling time of 2 s under full computer control. Monochromatic incident photon-to-collected electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) was defined by IPCE(λ) = hcJsc/qϕλ, where h is the Planck constant, c is the light speed in vacuum, q is the electronic charge, λ is the wavelength, Jsc is the short-circuit photocurrent density, and ϕ is the incident radiative flux. A Hamamatsu S1337-1010BQ silicon diode used for IPCE measurements was calibrated at the National Institute of Metrology, China. A model LS1000-4S-AM1.5G-1000W solar simulator (Solar Light Company, USA) in combination with a metal mesh was employed to give an irradiance of 100 mW cm−2. The light intensity was tested with a PMA2144 pyranometer and a calibrated PMA 2100 dose control system. Current–voltage (J–V) characteristics were obtained by applying a bias potential to a testing cell and measuring the photocurrent with a Keithley 2400 source meter under full computer control. The measurements were fully automated using Labview 8.0. A metal mask with an aperture area of 0.158 cm2 was covered on a testing cell during all measurements. An antireflection film (λ < 380 nm, ARKTOP, ASAHI Glass) is adhered to the DSC photoanode during IPCE and J–V measurements. The short-circuit photocurrent densities measured under this solar simulator were well consistent with the integral of IPCEs with the AM1.5G spectrum (ASTM G173-03), within a 5% error.



Electronic absorption spectra were recorded on a UNICO spectrometer. A CHI660C electrochemical workstation was used for square-wave voltammetric measurements in combination with a three-electrode electrochemical cell equipped with a platinum gauze as counter electrode and a Ag/AgCl (sat. KCl) as auxiliary electrode. The C106-coated titania on fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) was used as working electrode. The redox potentials reported in this paper were calibrated with ferrocene as internal reference (−5.14 V versus vacuum).


The time-correlated single photon counting (TCSPC) technique was performed on a LifeSpec-II fluorescence spectrometer equipped with an EPL635 laser diode. The detection wavelength is chosen at the maximum of the emission spectra. During our detection, the number of channels used is 2048 and the time scale of the channel is about 97 ps. In order to compare the amplitude of photoluminescence of the dye in Al2O3 and TiO2 film, we fix the collection time each time to capture the emission photon of the dye in Al2O3 and TiO2 film. In our TCSPC, the full width at half-maximum of the instrument response function is ∼200 ps.


Electrical impedance experiments were carried out under illumination of a red LED with an IM6ex electrochemical workstation, with a frequency range from 50 mHz to 100 kHz and a potential modulation of 10 mV. A bias potential was applied to near the open-circuit voltage at each irradiation intensity. The obtained impedance spectra were fitted with the Z-view software (v2.80, Scribner Associates Inc.).


To evaluate the influence of Li+, Na+, K+, and DMI+ in electrolytes as typical cations on the performance of DSCs, J–V characteristics (Fig. 1) were first measured and detailed photovoltaic parameters were summarized in Table 1. The short-circuit photocurrent density (Jsc) gently decreased with the decrease of the corresponding positive charge density of cations from E1 to E4, being 17.57 to 16.23 mA cm−2. However, the decrease of the charge density had a favorable impact on the open-circuit voltage (Voc), featuring an almost 160 mV enhancement from Li+ to DMI+. The fill factors (FF) also increased as the charge density decreased. It is worth noting that upon employment of the electrolyte based on the imidazolium cation, the corresponding cell presented the highest overall power conversion efficiency (η), primarily benefiting from the highest open-circuit photovoltage and the fill factor, which collectively overwhelmed the adverse effect of a lowest photocurrent on the photoelectric conversion efficiency.

Electrolyte

V
oc/V

J
sc/mA cm−2

FF


η (%)
E1
0.564
17.57
0.632
6.26
E2
0.610
17.08
0.664
6.92
E3
0.647
16.81
0.686
7.46

E4

0.725
16.23
0.723
8.52

Generally, the short-circuit photocurrent density at irradiation of a certain light intensity is mainly determined by the incident photon-to-collected electron conversion efficiency (IPCE(λ)) of DSCs, which is dependent on the cations of Li+, Na+, K+, DMI+ in electrolytes E1–E4. Fig. 2A showed the photocurrent action spectra (IPCE(λ)) of the cells, from which short-circuit current densities can be calculated using

(1)
where
λ1 and λ2 are the onset and offset wavelength of light absorption, respectively, q is the electron charge, I0 is the incidence light intensity. The calculated results for the same cell sample were consistent with the Jsc measured at an irradiation of AM1.5G full sunlight. So, it was reasonable to explore the influence of cations on Jsc with IPCE(λ). The IPCE of a cell is determined by three efficiencies, which are wavelength-dependent light harvest efficiency (ηlh(λ)), charge collection efficiency (ηcoll(λ)) and wavelength-independent net charge separation (Φcs) efficiency. If the differences of IPCE are only from the net charge separation changes, the normalized IPCEs of the cells with E1–E4 should be the same over the whole spectra response range. As shown in Fig. 2B, the difference among normalized IPCEs in the red region indicates that the absorption and/or charge collection are affected by the cations. The light absorption spectra of the cells (Fig. 3A) showed that light absorption reduced with the charge density decreasing, which was consistent with the tendency of the IPCE in the longwave area. As seen in Fig. 3B, the data of the normalized IPCEs to a light absorption percentage of the cell in E1–E4 show that there is no significant difference among them, indicating that the charge collection efficiency of the cell is independent of cations in electrolyte. In comparison with the data at 550 to 600 nm wave area (Fig. 2A and 3A) of cells in E1–E4, these cells present almost the same light harvest efficiency, but different IPCE heights. So it can be deduced preliminary that only the charge separation efficiency is the main cause of IPCE height differences.

The net charge separation could be divided into electron injection processes and interfacial charge competition processes. With the time-correlated single photon counting (TCSPC) technique, we scrutinized the yield of electron injection at the dye/titania/electrolyte interfaces, through the rate constant of the electron injection and non-injection decay kinetics. Similar to the emission kinetics measurement on TiO2 film, we detected the non-injection decay kinetics of C106 anchored on Al2O3 film, indicating the photoluminescence deactivation of excited-state dye molecules, which acts as a reference due to lack of a suitable energy offset in favour of charge transfer at the dye/Al2O3 interface. As shown in Fig. 4, in comparison with the transient emission kinetics of the C106 in Al2O3 film immersed in E1–E4 electrolyte, those in TiO2 film suggest that fast electron injection processes occur, act as a main deactivation channel for the excited-state dye molecules and are fitted with a stretched exponential function (I(t) ∝ I0 exp[−(t/τ)α]), which offer an average lifetime 〈τ〉 of traces (〈τ〉 = (τ/α)Γ(1/α), Γ(x) is the Grumman function). The injection and non-injection rate constants were obtained from the reciprocal of the average lifetime of transient emission traces shown in Fig. 4, and listed in Table 2. Apparently, the cations in E1–E4, almost don't influence the non-injection deactivation rate, but accelerate the electron injection rate constants. Finally, the electron injection efficiencies of cells with E1–E4 are 99.6, 99.0, 97.9, and 91.3%.
Electrolyte

k
rel/s−1

k
inj/s−1

η
inj/%

ΔG0/eV

a Derived from the difference between the excited redox potential and the conduction band position in E1–E4.

E1
4.10 × 107
1.11 × 1010
99.6
−0.430
E2
3.71 × 107
4.00 × 109
99.0
−0.383
E3
3.71 × 107
1.75 × 109
97.9
−0.329

E4

4.15 × 107
4.72 × 108
91.3
−0.245
The relation between the injection rate constant and the cations in electrolytes was explored further. First the ground state redox potential and the optical energy gap (E0–0) of the dye C106 were measured by square-wave voltammograms and the steady light absorption and emission spectra (shown in Fig. S1 and S2) to acquire the excited-state redox potential of the dye C106. Apparently, the E0–0 is almost independent of the cation charge density in the electrolyte, which is to the contrary of the evident interaction of cations on metal-free chromophore C218, examined in our previous work. Second, Ec − EF,Redox could be derived (list in Table 3) with the aid of EIS experiments at open circuit conditions, by fitting the electron transport resistanve (Rt) vs EF,n − EF,Redox (Fig. 5A) with equation.
(2)
wherein
R0 denotes the electron transport resistance in the conduction band and is considered to be an invariable constant for all cells provided that they all have the same geometrical dimensions; kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the absolute temperature, Ec is the conduction band edge, EF,n is the qual-Fermi energy level of TiO2 and EF,Redox is the Fermi energy level of electrolyte. The practical fitting slope (about −15.7 V−1) in Fig. 5A is larger than the theoretical counterpart (−17 V−1). This discrepancy may be caused by the upward movement of the TiO2 conduction band edge as the bias voltage is scanned negatively. Considering the cells with E1–E4 electrolytes all had the same composition (I−/I3−) with Femi energy levels (about −4.86 eV versus vacuum), the TiO2 conduction band edge can be obtained, and the difference of Ec − EF,redox comes from the movement of TiO2 conduction band edge induced by the cations. Finally, Gibbs free energies of the electron injection process were attained from the difference of the excited redox potential of the dye C106 and TiO2 conduction band edge, (Table 2) which, consistent with the injection rate constants (kinj), follow the order from Li+ to DMI+.

Electrolyte

E
c − EF,Redox/eV

β


k
0/cm−3(1−β) s−1

J
s_EIS/A cm−2
E1
0.713
0.75
7.1 × 105
4.7 × 10−10
E2
0.760
0.73
1.4 × 106
1.9 × 10−10
E3
0.814
0.73
2.8 × 106
7.0 × 10−11

E4

0.898
0.69
9.5 × 106
1.4 × 10−11
It is reasonable to conclude that, along with Li+ to DMI+, the efficiency of light-harvesting, charge collection, and interfacial charge competition exhibit no evident change, the injection rate constant decreases mainly owing to the upward shift of the conduction band edge evoked by cations from Li+ to DMI+, but the performance parameters of the cell related with injection, regeneration, collection, like Jsc, were gently decreased.

Another key parameter concerning the photovoltaic performance of a DSC, the open-circuit photovoltage (Voc), increased in the order of Li+ < Na+ < K+ < DMI+ (Table 1). It is known that the open-circuit photovoltage is defined as the energy difference between EF,n and EF,Redox:

qVoc = EF,n − EF,Redox
(3)
On the other hand, according to the Fermi–Dirac distribution, the electron density (
nc) in the titania conduction band displays an exponential dependence on the energy offset of EF,n − EF,Redox

(4)
where
neq is the equilibrium concentration of free titania electrons in the dark. Combining eqn (3) and (4) leads to

(5)
Apparently,
Voc can also be dictated as the ratio of nc to neq. A higher cell photovoltage may stem from a higher free electron density in an illuminated cell and/or a lower equilibrium electron density in the dark. Thereby, the effect of the cation selection on nc and neq should be inspected to explore the relative Voc variations of cells with electrolytes E1–E4. Under the open-circuit conditions, the rate of photocurrent generation is balanced by the nonlinear charge recombination at the titania/electrolyte interface:

Uinj = Un = k0(nβc − nβeq) ≈ k0nβc
(6)
where
Uinj and Un are the rates of photocurrent generation and charge recombination, respectively, k0 is the recombination rate constant and β is the recombination reaction order of the titania electrons. By noting that the Uinj level is primarily decided by the intensity of solar irradiation, the nc could be estimated from eqn (6) provided that k0 and β are numerically available. On the basis of the preceding discussion on the electrolyte-dependent titania conduction band edges, the kinetics parameters (k0 and β, Table 3) depicting the interfacial charge recombination were obtained by fitting the charge recombination resistance (Rr) as a function of EF,n − EF,Redox (Fig. 5B) in terms of the following equation

(7)
wherein
A = 0.2826 cm2 is the active cell area, d = 11 μm is the film thickness and Nc = 1021 cm−3 is the accessible density of states in the titania conduction band. On the basis of this analysis, we found that the free electron density nc did not noticeably vary among these four electrolyte systems, owing to a compromised effect of the decreasing β and increasing k0 from Li+ to DMI+, as shown in Table 3. It is thus derived that the Voc improvements from E1 to E4 were not prominently related to the dissimilar nc levels in difference cells, but decisively due to the electrolyte-correlated neq which is defined as

(8)
With the as-presented energy differences of
Ec − EF,redox, the equilibrium free electron density neq in the dark could be calculated. It is found that cations with a higher charge density evoke a relatively smaller Ec − EF,Redox, which furthermore leads to gradually diminishing neq values in the order of Li+ > Na+ > K+ > DMI+. In view of the fact that neq exclusively depends on the conduction band edge given that a change of electroinactive cations in electrolytes does not change the EF,Redox value, we conclusively attribute the low-charge-density-cation-correlated higher cell photovoltage to the remarkably upward shift of titania conduction band edge, which has overwhelmed the adverse effect of an accelerated interfacial charge recombination on Voc, as indicated by the increasing reaction rate constants of cells with E1−E4 (Table 3).

To understand the electrolyte influence on the cell photovoltage from a quantitative point of view, we combine eqn (5), (6) and (8) to attain the following equation:
(9)
Obviously, in this expression the open-circuit photovoltage of a DSC can be denoted as the sum of three subdivisions of
VI, VII and VIII, which represent the contributions of conduction band edge displacement, dissimilarity in charge recombination kinetics and change of photocurrent generation, respectively. Note that UIinj and UIIinj are the rates of photocurrent generation (evaluated with Jsc, and are equivalent to the charge recombination rate under open circuit conditions) of a DSC and the reference cell (here, the Li+ based cell). According to the calculation results shown in Table 4, the VIII items impose only some negligible influence on the Voc variations. Moreover, it is noticed that with comparable open-circuit recombination rates of E1−E4 cells, i.e., Uinj or Jsc, the electrolyte-dependent charge recombination kinetics, or the VII term, also has little effect on Voc. Remarkably, the VI term related to the conduction band edge shift consecutively increases along with the electrolyte alteration from E1 to E4, making itself a determinant of the Voc variations. Note that the open–circuit photovoltages (Voc_EIS) derived from analysis of impedance data possess the same sequence feature as those from J–V experiments. However, the Voc_EIS values are larger than Voc obtained from J–V measurements for about 30–38 mV (almost the same for the three kind of inorganic cations) and 53 mV (for DMI+, an organic cation), which is likely caused by the fact that impedance experiments were carried out at different light intensities.

Electrolyte

V
I/V

V
II/V

V
III(Uinjvs. Uinj_LiI)/V

V
oc_EIS(VI + VII + VIII)/V

V
oc_JV/V

a The differences of Voc_EIS and Voc_JV were shown inside brackets.

E1
−0.521
1.117
0.0
0.596 (32 mV)
0.564
E2
−0.474
1.123
−0.001
0.648 (38 mV)
0.610
E3
−0.420
1.099
−0.002
0.677 (30 mV)
0.647

E4

−0.336
1.117
−0.003
0.778 (53 mV)
0.725

To investigate the influence of the cation on the fill factor, a more complex analysis is needed since FF which is the composite feature of the cell comes from open-circuit voltage, short-circuit current, and the voltage and current for maximal power output at certain irradiation derived from its J–V relation. The relation of the bias voltage (V) imposed on the cell and the Fermi-energy level of TiO2 is

qV = EF,n − EF,Redox
(10)
Combining
eqns (4), (6), (10) and Jr = qdUn, we obtained

(11)
Here,
Jr is the recombination current density, d is the film thickness, and Js is the recombination current density under the equilibrium state in the dark.

(12)
Assuming the light harvest and charge separation efficiencies are independent of the bias voltage,
 and introducing Jph describing the photocurrent, Rs describing the electrolyte resistant and contact resistant, Rp describing the current leakage at the FTO/electrolyte contact, then the J–V formula can be obtained, which has a similar form to the Shockley equivalent circuit

(13)
Obviously, it is hard to for a math formula to describe the fill factor.
Eqn (13) is analyzed and the effect of Rs, Rp, Jph, β, k0, and Ec − EF,Redox on J–V feature is shown in Fig. 6 and 7. The values range of these parameters are determined for maximum general usage and used by a lot of references. In the general parameters’ range, the increase of Rs doesn't influence the open-circuit voltage and the short-circuit current density, but brings the maximal power point to the low bias voltage, resulting in a lower fill factor, shown in Fig. 6A; The J–V curves are not affected by Rp because the normal cells have sufficiently big Rp, then the item V/Rp is too small to have a visible effect on J–V curves (Fig. 6B); the short-circuit current density linearly increases as Jph increases. Fig. 6C shows that the different increase laws of short-circuit current and open-circuit voltage lead to several J–V curves of the degenerative square. This case is usually observed during the J–V testing under different light intensities; in Fig. 7A, assuming Jph is independent of Ec − EF,Redox (this case does not usually exist in a real experiment), the open-circuit voltage linearly increases with the Ec − EF,Redox increasing, so the shape of the J–V curve turns to be square with the increase of Ec − EF,Redox; the increase of k0 and β results in the J–V curve of the degenerative square, shown in Fig. 7B and C. The shape of the J–V curve is controlled by the open-circuit voltage, Voc linearly decreases with the increase of k0 semilogarithmically, but approximately linearly decreases with the increase of β.

According to the analysis of these J–V features, the relations of the fill factor with Rs, Rp, Jph, β, k0, and Ec − EF,Redox are derived and shown in Fig. 8 and 9. It was observed that the fill factor depends a lot on Rs and Ec − EF,Redox, depends little on Rp, and depends moderately on Jph, β, and k0. The cell with an approximate square J–V curve shape usually has the relatively good fill factor. Under the same Jph, the square J–V curve has the high open-circuit voltage, so the good fill factor and high open-circuit be usually observed simultaneously in a cell, as shown in Table 1.
In order to understand the cation effect of the fill factor, the J–V curves of cells with E1–E4 were explained by eqn (13) with β derived from EIS. The detailed fitted parameters were collected in Table 5. The similar β, Rs, Rp, and Jph for these cells implied that the fill factor was affected mainly by Js-JV, and the Js-JV was bigger than Js-EIS by about 2 times. This maybe had the same reason as the difference of Voc_JV and Voc_EIS. And the Js-EIS and Js-JV had the same decrease tendency as the cation charge density decreased. In summary, considering the similar β, Js is controlled by k0 and Ec − EF,Redox, and k0 has the little reverse effect on the fill factor as in Fig. 7B, so the increase of the fill factor mainly stemmed from the negative shift of the conduction band from E1 to E4.
Electrolyte

R
s/Ω cm2

R
p/Ω cm2

J
ph/mA cm−2

J
s_JV/A cm−2
E1
4.8
8.4 × 1013
17.0
1.4 × 10−9
E2
4.0
9.3 × 1013
16.9
6.0 × 10−10
E3
4.0
9.2 × 1013
16.7
2.0 × 10−10

E4

3.3
8.2 × 1014
16.3
6.3 × 10−11

To summarize, on the basis of four electrolytes containing cations with gradually decreasing charge densities, i.e., Li+, Na+, K+, DMI+, we have scrutinized the influence of electrolyte cations on the photovoltaic performance of dye-sensitized solar cells. Transient emission measurements indicate that the cation alteration from Li+ to DMI+ noticeably decreases the rate of interfacial electron injection which diplays an apparent Gibbs free energy dependence, leading to a diminished carrier injection yield. On the other hand, the utilization of cations featuring a relatively lower charge density has prompted an improved cell photovoltage, and this is primarily related to an electrolyte cation-correlated negative shift of the titania conduction band edge. Moreover, on the basis of some theoritical simulation of the current–voltage characteristics, it is found that the use of low-charge-density cations generally reduces the equilibrium recombination current of a cell in the dark, contributing to a higher fill factor. Our investigation highlights the significance of understaning the multi-channel charge transfer dynamics at the complicated titania/dye/electrolyte interface to the device engineering of efficient dye-sensitized solar cells.


The National Key Scientific Program (No. 2007CB936700, No. 2011CBA00700) has supported this work. We are grateful to DuPont Packaging and Industrial Polymers for supplying the Bynel film.


† Electronic supporting information available: Voltammetric, absorptions and emission spectroscopic data.
This journal is © the Owner Societies 2011