 DOI: 10.1039/C7TC05711C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 2483-2494


Narendra
Pai
,

Jianfeng
Lu
,

Dimuthu C.
Senevirathna
,

Anthony S. R.
Chesman
,

Thomas
Gengenbach
,

Manjunath
Chatti
,

Udo
Bach
,

Philip C.
Andrews
,

Leone
Spiccia
,

Yi-Bing
Cheng
* and 

Alexandr N.
Simonov
*

School of Chemistry, Monash University, Melbourne, Victoria 3800, Australia. E-mail: alexandr.simonov@monash.edu

Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation Manufacturing, Clayton, Victoria 3168, Australia

ARC Centre of Excellence for Electromaterials Science, Monash University, Melbourne, Victoria 3800, Australia

ARC Centre of Excellence in Exciton Science and Department of Chemical Engineering, Monash University, Melbourne, Victoria 3800, Australia

The Melbourne Centre for Nanofabrication, Clayton, Victoria 3168, Australia

ARC Centre of Excellence in Exciton Science and Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Monash University, Melbourne, Victoria 3800, Australia

State Key Laboratory of Advanced Technology for Materials Synthesis and Processing, Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan 430070, China

Received
13th December 2017
, Accepted 28th January 2018
First published on 29th January 2018
Spray pyrolysis of bismuth(III) tris(4-methylbenzodithioate) toluene solutions containing either silver(I) acetate and 1-octanethiol, or copper(I) acetate and 1,2-ethanedithiol is introduced as a low-temperature solution-based method to produce sub-100 nm thick coatings of α cubic rock salt AgBiS2 or orthorhombic Cu3BiS3, respectively. The structure, morphology and optoelectronic properties of the materials thus obtained have been comprehensively characterised using conventional techniques. Extensive optimisation of the deposition conditions has been undertaken to achieve the formation of uniform, 60–70 nm thick films of densely packed AgBiS2 and Cu3BiS3 crystallites with a typical size of 10–20 nm. Planar photovoltaic devices based on spray-deposited AgBiS2 as a light harvester, ZnO as an electron transporting layer, and spiro-OMeTAD as a hole transporting material produce short-circuit current densities as high as 18.1 ± 0.6 mA cm−2 under 1 sun AM 1.5 G irradiation. The devices are stable without encapsulation under ambient conditions for at least 1 month.

Chalcogenides have come to the forefront of the science of functional materials as a class of versatile compounds with tunable and often unique thermoelectric, (photo)(electro)catalytic and optoelectronic properties. Different types of chalcogenides have carved niches in a range of applications that include nonlinear optics, light emitting in vivo bioimaging, energy storage, electrocatalysis and photovoltaics. Till now, binary metal chalcogenides containing either noxious lead and cadmium, or scarce elements like tellurium and indium have dominated research in the aforementioned areas, eventuating in commercialisation in the most successful cases. However, increasingly strict environmental regulations and the urge towards the development of cheaper and safer materials have promoted a continuously enhancing interest in ternary chalcogenides based on non-toxic and earth-abundant elements. From this perspective, bismuth-based systems are particularly attractive as solution-processable materials with a range of useful physical and chemical properties.

Among the non-toxic ternary chalcogenides currently considered for applications in photovoltaics, silver bismuth disulphide (AgBiS2) stands out as a promising photoconductive material with intrinsic stoichiometric stability. It has already been applied in solar cells both as a counter electrode and as a light-absorber. In the latter case, a comparatively high absorption coefficient (105 to 103 cm−1 within the 400–1100 nm wavelength range) of the stable α cubic rock salt AgBiS2 phase (formed at ca. 473 K) enables promising photovoltaic performance as recently reported by Bernechea et al. for very thin layers of this chalcogenide sandwiched between electron- and hole-conducting materials. Another prospective ternary bismuth chalcogenide for optoelectronic applications is Cu3BiS3, which exhibits an orthorhombic crystal structure, p-type conductivity, and an impressive absorption coefficient of approximately 105 cm−1 in the visible region.
Vacuum fusing and flux techniques were the most commonly applied methods to synthesise AgBiS2 until Chen et al. established polyol and microwave-assisted routes as significantly less resource intensive procedures to obtain silver-bismuth disulphide rods and dendrites. Later, Thongtem et al. demonstrated the synthesis of AgBiS2 nanostructured “flowers” via low-temperature solvothermal and cyclic microwave techniques. Most recently, Bernechea et al. introduced a hot-injection method to produce ligand-stabilised cubic phase AgBiS2 particles that are only several nanometres in size. Importantly, the above synthetic protocols eliminate the requirement to use metallic silver and bismuth along with sulphur powder as the starting materials, which is a critical advantage over high-temperature flux methods. Instead, solution-processable precursors like bismuth and silver nitrates or acetates, thiourea, thiosemicarbazide,L-cysteine, hexamethyldisilathiane or Na2S can be employed. Cu3BiS3 in a variety of morphologies can be synthesised via a range of physical and chemical techniques, such as sputtering, thermal evaporation, spray pyrolysis, spin coating and chemical bath deposition. In a recent report from some of us, bismuth(III) aryldithioates were introduced as a new type of precursor for both bismuth and sulphur that can be combined with soluble AgI or CuI salts to produce AgBiS2 and Cu3BiS3 nanoparticles, respectively, upon mild microwave treatment.
The above reports have significantly broadened the possibilities to prepare small particles of silver and copper bismuth sulphides. However, less success has been achieved hitherto in the fabrication of thin homogeneous AgBiS2 and Cu3BiS3 films, as needed for optoelectronic applications. Indeed, given that no intrinsic photogenerated charge-separation mechanism exists in ternary bismuth-based sulphides and the charge diffusion lengths are comparatively short, a planar configuration for optoelectronic devices, and in particular photovoltaic devices with a very thin light-absorber layer, is seen as the most advantageous architecture. Reported strategies to deposit AgBiS2 as a film are predominantly based either on direct thermal evaporation of the compound, or a sonochemical approach, or casting layers of pre-formed AgBiS2 particles. The high-temperature evaporation and similar gas-to-particle deposition methods have obvious technological disadvantages, which include the use of sophisticated instrumentation, comparatively low productivity, and overall high cost. With the particle pre-forming/deposition approach, the formation of homogeneous and pin-hole-free layers where small crystallites are densely packed and interconnected is typically hard to achieve. Overall, the fabrication of uniform, stable and thin AgBiS2 layers under mild conditions is yet challenging, and the development of an easy-to-scale, highly reproducible and low-cost method is needed to facilitate integration of this chalcogenide material into optoelectronic devices.
One robust and rapid deposition technique that has not been previously applied to the synthesis of AgBiS2 is spray pyrolysis. Considering the simplicity of the apparatus and its high productivity, this versatile method is technologically attractive for the production of thin films with facile control over the thickness. Importantly, the procedure does not require the use of a vacuum or very high temperatures at any stage. Cu3BiS3 has been successfully deposited as 250–300 nm thick films onto glassvia spray pyrolysis of solutions containing BiCl3, CuCl2 and thiourea. However, the uniformity and morphological homogeneity of the resulting coatings would require significant improvements if integration into optoelectronic devices is pursued. Besides, thinner films could not be obtained by using the reported method.
The present work reports on the spray pyrolysis deposition of ternary AgBiS2 semiconductor films with controllable, sub-100-nm thickness using dual-source bismuth 4-methylbenzodithioate and silver acetate as precursors. The deposition conditions have been optimised to enhance the photovoltaic effect for the fabricated films when integrated into planar configuration solar cells, and a comprehensive physical characterisation of the produced materials and photovoltaic devices has been undertaken. The possibility to deposit Cu3BiS3 thin films following the same strategy is also demonstrated.

All chemicals were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and used as received from suppliers without any further purification unless otherwise stated. 2,2′,7,7′-Tetrakis (N,N-di-p-methoxy phenylamino)-9,9-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD) was obtained from Luminescence Technology Corp. PTB7 (poly[(4,8-bis-(2-ethylhexyloxy)-benzo(1,2-b:4,5-b′)dithiophene)-2,6-diyl-alt-(4-(2-ethylhexyl)-3-fluorothieno[3,4-b]thiophene-2-carboxylate-2-6-diyl)]) was purchased from 1-Material. P3HT (poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl)) was purchased from Rieke Metals. [Co(bpyPY4)](OTf)2.66 (cobalt(II,III) 6,6′-bis(1,1-di(pyridin-2-yl)ethyl)-2,2′-bipyridine triflate) was synthesised as reported in ref. 40. Bismuth tris(4-methylbenzodithioate) [Bi(4-MBDT)3] was synthesised via a sonochemical reaction of bismite (Bi2O3) with 4-methylbenzodithioic acid (4-MBDT) in toluene followed by filtration and recrystallisation in hot toluene as reported previously. The composition and structure were confirmed by elemental analysis, mass-spectrometry and 1H- and 13C-NMR spectroscopy (Fig. S1, ESI).


Glass sheets (10 cm × 10 cm) coated with indium tin oxide (ITO) with a sheet resistance of ca. 15 Ω sq−1 were purchased from Lumtec and used as substrates for thin film deposition. The ITO substrates were cleaned by ultrasonication in a 2% Helmanex surfactant aqueous solution, acetone and isopropanol (15 min in each medium), dried under N2 flow, and plasma treated at 1000 mTorr for 15 min (Harrick Plasma cleaner). Laser patterned substrates were then cut into smaller pieces of the dimensions 2.5 cm × 2.5 cm and a ZnO layer was deposited by spin-coating (3000 rpm; 30 s) 30 μL of the precursor solution (1 g of zinc acetate dehydrate and 284 μL of ethanolamine in 10 mL of methoxyethanol) and subsequent heating at 200 °C for 30 min in air. Two spin-coating/annealing cycles were applied to achieve a ZnO thickness of ca. 45 nm.


The precursor solution for AgBiS2 was prepared as follows: bismuth(III) tris(4-methylbenzodithioate) (23.1 mg) was dissolved in 8 mL of toluene at 50 °C; silver acetate (5.3 mg) and 1-octanethiol (0.55 mL) were then added to the solution under vigorous stirring, which was continued for one hour at 50 °C. The precursor solution for Cu3BiS3 was prepared by adding 11.8 mg of copper(I) acetate with 0.34 mL of 1,2-ethanedithiol to a bismuth(III) tris(4-methylbenzodithioate) toluene solution (the same concentration as for AgBiS2 precursor). The thus prepared solutions were then immediately employed for spray pyrolysis onto 2.5 cm × 2.5 cm ZnO|ITO substrates using a spray nozzle (Glass Keller, Falcon sprayer with borosilicate glass 19/26 15 mL capacity glass tube) connected to compressed air (18 × 105 Pa). The substrates were maintained at a defined temperature (100–250 °C) provided by a Harry Gestigkeit GmbH titanium hotplate during deposition and for an additional 30 min after spraying was complete. The optimised spray conditions were as follows: 4 mM bismuth and 4 mM silver precursor concentrations with 40 mM 1-octanethiol or 4 mM bismuth and 12 mM copper precursor concentrations with 50 mM 1,2-ethanedithiol (excess thiols were necessary to compensate for sulphur loss during thermal deposition), sprayed solution volume – 7 mL, nozzle to substrate distance – 12 cm, intermittent cycles with 0.5 s continuous spraying and 20 seconds wait time. The number of deposition cycles was varied as discussed in the text below. All of the above procedures were carried out in air, though inside a fume hood to provide fast removal of gaseous products and solvent vapors. The films were allowed to cool to ambient temperature (24 ± 2 °C) naturally.


2.5 cm × 2.5 cm AgBiS2|ZnO|ITO and Cu3BiS3|ZnO|ITO samples were transferred into a N2-filled glovebox and modified with a hole-transporting material (HTM) layer (spiro-OMeTAD, PTB7, P3HT, [Co(bpyPY4)](OTf)2.66, CuSCN or CuI), a back-contact (Ag) and a mask to complete a photovoltaic device. Spiro-OMeTAD was deposited by spin-coating (3000 rpm, 30 s) 25 μL of the chlorobenzene solution containing 60 mM HTM, 32 mM lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (LiTFSI), 200 mM tert-butylpyridine (tBP) and 1.8 mM bis(2,6-di(1H-pyrazol-1-yl)pyridine) cobalt(II) di[bis(trifluoromethane) sulfonimide] (FK269). Dichlorobenzene solutions of PTB7 (5 mg mL−1) and P3HT (20 mg mL−1) were spin-coated at 2000 rpm for 30 s. In some cases, MoO3 (nominal thickness 5 nm) was thermally evaporated onto the above HTM layers. CuSCN and CuI layers were obtained by spin-coating (2000 rpm, 30 s) 1 mL of their diethyl sulphide solutions (30 mg of CuSCN; 20 mg of CuI) followed by heating at 60 °C for 10 min. [Co(bpyPY4)](OTf)2.66 deposition solution was prepared by mixing solutions of [CoIII(bpyPY4)](OTf)3 (26.7 mg in 1 mL nitromethane) and [CoII(bpyPY4)](OTf)2 (24.6 mg in 1 mL nitromethane) in a 2:1 ratio (120:60 μL) with 1.1 μL of LiTFSI (520 mg mL−1) and 2.5 μL of tBP; 40 μL of this solution was spin-coated at 2500 rpm for 40 s. On top of the HTM layer, a 120 nm-thick silver back contact was evaporated (DDong DD-GCMO3CR; initial vacuum level 8 × 10−6 Torr). A photomask was finally applied to produce solar cells with an active area of 0.16 or 1.00 cm2.


X-ray diffraction patterns were obtained using a D2 Advance BRUKER diffractometer with a Cu-Kα radiation (λ = 1.5406 Å) source operating at 30 kV and 15 mA at a scan rate of 0.5° min−1. Spray-deposited AgBiS2 and Cu3BiS3 films of 100 nm thickness were used for the analysis.

X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis was performed with an AXIS Nova spectrometer (Kratos Analytical Inc.) at about 1 × 10−8 mbar with a monochromatic Al-Kα X-ray source operating at a power of 180 W (15 kV × 12 mA) and a hemispherical analyser in fixed analyser transmission mode. High resolution spectra were recorded at a pass energy of 40 eV with an overall spectral resolution of better than 0.9 eV. The accuracy associated with quantitative analysis in XPS is generally considered to be 10–15%. 100 nm thick films of AgBiS2 spray-coated onto 2 cm × 2 cm ITO substrates were used for XPS analysis.
Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectra were recorded with an Agilent Technologies Cary 630 spectrometer. Bismuth(III) tris(4-methylbenzodithioate) crystals and silver dodecylthiolate were dissolved in toluene and then dried on a rotary evaporator to produce a “precursor” sample. AgBiS2 was deposited by spray-pyrolysis onto glass substrates and scratched for analysis.
Differential scanning calorimetry and thermogravimetric analysis were carried out for the dried AgBiS2 samples in 70 μL alumina pans within the 25–800 °C temperature range (heating rate 4 °C min−1) in a dinitrogen atmosphere using the Mettler Toledo TGA/DSC 1 Star System.
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) in secondary and backscattered electron detection modes was undertaken with an FEI Nova NanoSEM 450 microscope at a voltage of 5 kV and spot size of 2.5. The AgBiS2 and Cu3BiS3 films deposited on ITO were immobilised on a specimen stub using double sided carbon tape. All samples were coated with a ca. 1 nm layer of iridium to minimise charging effects. Local energy dispersive X-ray elemental analysis was provided by a Bruker Quantax 400 X-ray detector.
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) analysis was undertaken on an FEI Tecnai T20 microscope operating at an accelerating voltage of 200 kV. Samples were prepared by drop-casting a dispersion of AgBiS2 in ethanol on a holey carbon 300 mesh Cu grid.
UV-Vis-NIR spectra of spray-deposited AgBiS2 and Cu3BiS3 films were recorded in transmission and reflectance modes using a PerkinElmer Lambda 1050 spectrophotometer equipped with an integrating sphere. A bare glass substrate was used to obtain background spectra. The absorption coefficient, α(λ), of the films was derived from the equation:
where
t is film thickness, and T(λ) and R(λ) are background-corrected transmittance and reflectance, respectively.

Photoelectron Spectroscopy in Air (PESA) measurements were undertaken using a Riken Kekei AC-2 spectrometer in a power intensity range from 20 to 50 nW. 100 nm thick films of AgBiS2 or Cu3BiS3 spray coated onto 2 cm × 2 cm glass substrates were used for analysis.
Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) analysis was performed using an AXIS Ultra DLD spectrometer (Kratos Analytical Inc.) at about 1 × 10−8 mbar with a He discharge lamp producing He I UV radiation (incident photon energy: 21.22 eV), a hemispherical analyser operating in fixed analyser transmission mode and a standard aperture (analysis area: 0.3 mm × 0.7 mm). Samples were biased at −9 V to facilitate measuring the secondary electron cut-off. Spectra were recorded at a pass energy of 5 eV with a spectral resolution of better than 100 meV. Samples were prepared by spray depositing an appropriate precursor solution onto ITO substrates.
Photovoltaic characterisation was performed using a Keithley 2400 Source Meter under irradiation provided by an Oriel solar simulator fitted with a filtered 1000 W xenon lamp to replicate the AM 1.5 G spectrum. Unless otherwise stated, the light intensity was 100 mW cm−2 (1 sun) as calibrated using a silicon reference cell having a KG3 glass filter (PV Measurements, Inc.) with a black non-reflective metal mask to confine the area exposed to light to 0.16 cm2. A Keithley 2400 Source Meter and a 300 W xenon lamp equipped with an Oriel Corner-stone 260 monochromator was used to record incident photon to current conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra. A calibrated silicon cell (Peccell Technologies) was used to quantify the monochromatic photon flux.

The reaction of 4-methyldithiobenzenoic acid (4-MBDT) with bismuth oxide in toluene produces bismuth tris(4-methylbenzodithioate) [Bi(4-MBDT)3], which is red in colour (Fig. 1a) and highly crystalline, as reported by some of us elsewhere. Outcomes of the NMR and FTIR analyses of this material (Fig. S1 and S2, ESI) were also in keeping with previous publications. Addition of silver acetate and 1-octanethiol to [Bi(4-MBDT)3] dissolved in hot toluene forms a black homogeneous solution of AgBiLy2, where Ly denotes a mixed alkyl-arylthiolate ligand. Spray deposition followed by annealing in air at 125 ≤ T ≤ 200 °C of the thus prepared AgBiLy2 toluene solution yields highly-dispersed AgBiS2 particles (Fig. 1a and Fig. S3, ESI). This strategy allows for the formation of uniform silver bismuth disulphide films with easily controlled thickness (Fig. 1b). The composition of the sprayed precursor solution and instrumental spray parameters (see experimental for details) were optimised to provide the highest quality of the AgBiS2 films in terms of homogeneity and photovoltaic properties (vide infra), and were kept unchanged for all materials described further in the text. As will also be demonstrated below, replacing silver(I) acetate with copper(I) acetate and 1-octanethiol with 1,2-ethanedithiol in the precursor solution enables the deposition of thin homogeneous Cu3BiS3 films.


The fast and quantitative conversion of the AgBiLy2 precursor to AgBiS2 under the employed spray conditions (Fig. 1b and experimental) was confirmed by X-ray diffraction (Fig. 2a) and FTIR spectroscopy (Fig. S2, ESI). XRD patterns of the films deposited within the temperature interval 125 ≤ T ≤ 200 °C were consistent with the α cubic AgBiS2 phase (JCPDS Card File No. 01-089-2045). No indications of the presence of Ag2S, Bi2S3 or other undesired phases were identified by XRD (the broad halo within the 2θ range 12–36° in the diffractograms shown in Fig. 2a is due to the ITO support). Equally importantly, attenuated total reflection FTIR analysis confirmed the essentially complete removal of the methylbenzodithioate ligand and octanethiol (Fig. S2, ESI). Differential scanning calorimetry and thermogravimetric analysis undertaken under dinitrogen atmosphere for spray-deposited AgBiS2 showed a relatively low mass loss of 1.5% and an associated increase in heat flow within the temperature range 300–600 °C, which was tentatively attributed to the removal of residues of the organic compounds (Fig. S4, ESI). It was also found that decomposition of AgBiS2 under an inert atmosphere commences at approximately 700 °C. TEM analysis of the freshly spray-deposited AgBiS2 material that was scratched from the support surface revealed that the films are composed of interconnected nanoparticles that are close to spherical in shape (Fig. S3, ESI). Such morphology is most probably provided by the capping effect of octanethiol on the thiophilic bismuth-based surface, which suppresses the growth of the particles. When synthesis was undertaken at 150 °C, an average linear particle size of 12 ± 5 nm and a mean mass-weighed particle size of 16 nm were obtained (Fig. S3b, ESI), though it is noted that the interconnected morphology introduces a reasonable level of uncertainty into these values.

Further, a systematic examination of the effect of the temperature of the support maintained during spray deposition (Tdep) on the characteristics of the resulting AgBiS2 films was undertaken. The use of Tdep below 125 °C did not allow for the complete transformation of the precursor to the target material, while an excessively hot surface (Tdep > 200 °C) promoted formation of unknown phases, presumably silver and/or bismuth oxide-based, in addition to AgBiS2 (grey curve in Fig. 2a).
Within the optimal 125–225 °C range, the mean crystallite size (estimated for (111), (200) and (220) peaks by applying the Scherrer equation with a shape factor of 0.94) gradually increased with temperature from 11 nm at 125 °C to 29 nm at 225 °C (Fig. 2a). The highest intensity of the diffraction peaks and therefore the highest degree of the structural order of the AgBiS2 cubic phase was achieved at 150 °C. Spray deposition of the material at higher temperatures resulted in a notable deviation of the relative intensities of the (111) and (200) reflections from the tabulated data for the AgBiS2 cubic phase (Fig. 2a), which was ascribed to a slight distortion of the crystal structure at Tdep > 150 °C.
The surface composition of the spray-deposited AgBiS2 films was determined by XPS, and the results are summarised in Fig. 2b, c and Fig. S5 (ESI). The only elements detected at the surface were silver, bismuth, sulphur, oxygen and carbon. The presence of C and O is not unexpected. Most likely, it is at least in part due to the products of decomposition of the AgBiLY2 precursor, which would be consistent with the observed decrease in the concentration of C with an increase in the spray-deposition temperature (Fig. 2c). It is also very common to detect adventitious carbon contamination (incorporating carbon–oxygen functional groups) on any surface by XPS. For the materials obtained at Tdep = 125 and 150 °C, the binding energy of the Bi 4f7/2 peak (158.5 eV) is higher than the value corresponding to elemental Bi (156.9 eV), and is close to reference values for Bi2S3 (158.8 eV, see NIST XPS BE database). Binding energy values measured for Ag 3d5/2 (368.0 eV) and S 2p3/2 (161.3 eV), while not unambiguous, are consistent with Ag–S bonding. The binding energy of S 2s was found to have a consistent value of 225.7 eV. No evidence was detected for the presence of oxidised sulphur species at higher binding energy. At the higher spray-deposition temperature of 175 °C, the Ag 3d peak displayed a shift to lower binding energy by about 0.2 eV, and a strong higher binding energy shoulder was observed in the case of the Bi 4f doublet. Both observations suggest the formation of Ag- and Bi-oxides (note that silver represents an exception amongst metals: oxidised species display a negative binding energy shift compared to the metal). The presence of metal oxides at Tdep = 175 °C was confirmed by the appearance of a strong O 1s peak at approximately 530 eV (Fig. S5b, ESI). Importantly, the stoichiometric Ag:Bi ratio of 1:1 is achieved for the films deposited at 150 °C, while lower and higher deposition temperatures promote segregation of bismuth and silver, respectively (Fig. 2c).
The morphology of the AgBiS2 films deposited at different Tdep was studied by SEM. Again, the deposition temperature of 150 °C provided the best results, which in the given context are reflected by the very dense and uniform packing of the particles with a very low number of pin holes (essentially unidentifiable by SEM), as can be seen in both the top- and side-view images in Fig. 3 (top-view micrographs of the underlying ZnO support are provided in Fig. S6, ESI for comparison). The lowest number of deposition cycles needed to achieve such quality of coverage of the support surface with the material was 12. The use of Tdep lower or higher than 150 °C (keeping the number of deposition cycles unchanged) deteriorated the quality of the coatings, resulting in a high concentration of voids or formation of crude segregated agglomerates, respectively. The thickness of the AgBiS2 films deposited under the employed conditions with Tdep = 150 and 175 °C was uniform within the 60–70 nm range, with only slight fluctuations across several-micron-wide side-view SEM images (Fig. 3b). A further precise increase in the film thickness is possible via successive spray depositions under identical conditions. In contrast, coatings deposited at 125 °C exhibited highly variable profiles with thickness ranging from 0 to 120 nm.
AgBiS2 films produced by spray pyrolysis exhibited a very broad UV-Vis-NIR absorbance with a cut-off edge at approximately 1100 nm (Fig. 4a). It is important to note that recording UV-Vis-NIR spectra of the examined samples in transmission mode only would produce misleading results with apparent significant absorption at wavelengths above 1100 nm (Fig. S7, ESI). The underlying reason is the notable reflectance of the films (Fig. S7a, ESI), which was measured herein along with transmittance and used to produce the spectra provided in Fig. 4a. When analysed in the (αhν)n − hν coordinates, the absorption spectra adopt the Tauc pattern for n = 1/2, which suggests an indirect allowed transition. Bandgap values (Eg) estimated by extrapolating linear regions of these plots to zero were essentially independent of the deposition temperature and were close to 1.25 eV.
The valence band edge (EVB) measured by photoelectron spectroscopy in air (Fig. 4b and Fig. S8, ESI) and ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (Fig. S9 and Table S1, ESI) varied slightly within a 0.1 eV range depending on Tdep, with the deepest level of ca. −5.2 eV found for the films obtained at 150 °C. Both Eg and EVB values found here were similar to those reported recently for dense thin layers of AgBiS2 particles. However, it is noted that the spray-deposited material exhibits a slightly narrower bandgap (1.25 vs. 1.30 eV) and lower energy of the valence band edge (−5.2 vs. −5.1 eV), the latter providing slight advantages from the perspective of integration with hole transporters in photovoltaic devices.
Overall, the structure and morphology of the silver bismuth sulphide films obtained via spray pyrolysis of the AgBiLY2 precursor based on methylbenzodithioate and octanethiol ligands were found to be highly sensitive to the temperature of the support. Notwithstanding such a delicate susceptibility to Tdep, the spray deposition procedure was found to be highly reproducible. The highest quality of the coatings was always achieved at 150 °C, which was further mirrored in their photovoltaic properties (vide infra). At the same time, the temperature maintained during deposition did not significantly affect the optoelectronic properties of the AgBiS2 films.

Following the same spray deposition strategy and using a precursor mixture containing bismuth tris(4-methylbenzodithioate) with copper(I) acetate and 1,2-ethanedithiol, thin layers of orthorhombic Cu3BiS3 can be fabricated on glass or ZnO|ITO supports maintained at 150 °C ≤ Tdep ≤ 200 °C, as inferred from the XRD data (Fig. 5a). Deposition at temperatures above 200 °C promoted formation of unknown phases in addition to Cu3BiS3 (Fig. 5a), similarly to the results obtained for silver bismuth sulphide layers (Fig. 2a). Complete conversion of the precursor to Cu3BiS3 was not possible with Tdep below 150 °C.

The best quality copper(I) bismuth sulphide films with a negligible amount of pinholes (undetectable by SEM, as exemplified in Fig. 5b) were achieved when the precursor solution was sprayed over the support maintained at 175–200 °C. The thickness of films obtained at these Tdep values was highly reproducible within the range 70–80 nm when using 12 deposition cycles, which was required for uniform coverage (Fig. 5c). Importantly, the quality of the Cu3BiS3 films in terms of homogeneity and thickness reported here is significantly better than that of any reported before. Indeed, the finest thin film layers of this material fabricated by spray deposition or an evaporation technique were well above 200 nm in thickness and contained coarse (>50 nm), not densely packed Cu3BiS3 aggregates (see SEM data in ref. 32 and 33).
Spray deposited thin films of copper(I) bismuth sulphide exhibited broad light absorption up to ca. 1000 nm (Fig. 5d). Reflectance of these films was notably lower than those of the AgBiS2 samples examined herein (Fig. S7b, ESI), but was still considered. Analysis of the UV-Vis-NIR data in the (αhν)n − hν coordinates does not demonstrate a well-defined linear region, which prevents reliable determination of the bandgap (approximation for n = 1/2 is exemplified in Fig. 5d).
The valence band edge of spray-deposited Cu3BiS3 was determined by PESA as ca. −4.7 eV (Fig. 5d), which is consistent with the data reported previously for this material obtained using different methods. From the perspective of application as a light-absorber in a photovoltaic device, Cu3BiS3 would require a hole-transporting material (HTM) with a EVB (or highest occupied molecular orbital energy level, HOMO) more positive than −4.7 eV, which is currently unavailable to us. Attempts to use HTMs listed in Fig. 4c or no HTM for solar cells based on thin spray-deposited Cu3BiS3 layers expectedly produced non-functioning devices. On this basis, the photovoltaic performance of the produced material was not assessed herein.

The energy levels of the major components of planar Ag|HTM|AgBiS2|ZnO|ITO solar cells are summarised in Fig. 4c. The choice of ZnO over TiO2 as an electron transporting material was motivated by a recent promising report on AgBiS2-based solar cells, as well as general considerations of higher electron mobility. Moreover, initial optimisation experiments undertaken here demonstrated worse results obtained with TiO2 as compared to ZnO when using a spray pyrolysis method for depositing the AgBiS2 light-absorber.

The comparatively positive valence band edge of silver bismuth sulphide, viz. −5.2 to −5.1 eV, requires an appropriate hole-transporting material to have a HOMO/EVB above this energy level. Theoretically, HTMs not complying with this requirement should not allow for any reasonable photon to current conversion efficiency. However, and surprisingly, this was not the case in the work of Bernechea et al. who achieved the best results for their AgBiS2-based devices, viz. a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 4.8 ± 0.4%, when using PTB7 with the HOMO level of −5.3 eV. Slightly worse, though still reasonable PCEs of 3.3 and 1.2% were reported in their work for solar cells employing PCE-10 (HOMO at −5.4 eV) and spiro-OMeTAD (HOMO at −5.2 eV), respectively. Interestingly, a HTM that provides suitable energy alignment with AgBiS2, viz. P3HT having its HOMO at −4.8 eV, allowed for lower performance (PCE 4.0%) as compared to PTB7 in the work of Bernechea et al. It should be noted that these results were obtained with HTM layers that were additionally modified with evaporated MoO3, which might influence the electronic characteristics of the hole transporters. We were able to successfully reproduce the above results from ref. 19 when using MoO3-modified spiro-OMeTAD and P3HT as HTMs, but unexpectedly, failed to achieve reasonable performance with PTB7 notwithstanding a significant number of attempts undertaken (Fig. S10 and Table S2, ESI). Rationalisation of the latter result requires further investigations that go beyond the scope of the present work.
Herein, we also examined a range of compounds as hole-transporting materials in the planar photovoltaic devices based on spray-deposited AgBiS2, which included PTB7 (HOMO −5.3 eV), CuSCN (EVB −5.3 eV), CuI (EVB −5.2 eV), spiro-OMeTAD (HOMO −5.2 eV, as reported elsewhere and confirmed here by UPS), [Co(bpyPY4)](OTf)2.66 (HOMO −4.9 eV) and P3HT (HOMO −4.8 eV) (Fig. S11 and Table S3, ESI). The effect of MoO3 evaporated onto pre-deposited organic HTM layers was also considered. The performance of the Ag|HTM|AgBiS2|ZnO|ITO solar cells with different HTMs is summarised in Table S3 (ESI).
Devices with no hole transporting layer did not generate any measurable photocurrent. The photovoltaic performance achieved with inorganic HTMs and [Co(bpyPY4)](OTf)2.66 was also very poor: PCE 0.20 ± 0.04% for CuSCN and PCE < 0.1% for CuI and a cobalt complex. The latter result was to some extent unexpected, as alignment of the HOMO energy level of this hole-transporter (−4.9 eV) and the EVB of the light-absorber (−5.2 eV) was highly favourable. Similarly well-aligned P3HT also provided a low open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 227 mV and a PCE of only 0.43% with spray-deposited silver bismuth disulphide, and no improvements were possible by introducing evaporated MoO3 or common HTM additives like lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (LiTFSI) and tert-butylpyridine (tBP). This finding was again unexpected given that P3HT was confirmed here to allow for reasonable efficiency of the AgBiS2-based solar cells fabricated following the strategy devised by Bernechea et al. (Fig. S10 and Table S2, ESI). Moreover, the quality of the films obtained by the procedure from ref. 19 was not better than that achieved via spray pyrolysis of AgBiLy2 (cf. Fig. S10a, ESI and Fig. 3, Tdep = 150 °C). This observation suggests that factors other than short-circuiting through pin holes in a thin light-absorber film produced by the latter method contributed to the poor photovoltaic performance with P3HT as a hole transporter (Fig. S11 and Table S3, ESI). Unsatisfactory results were obtained when PTB7 was used as a HTM in the planar solar cells based on the spray-deposited AgBiS2 thin films, which was rationalised in terms of unsuitable alignment of the energy levels (Fig. 4c).
Among all the HTMs examined, only partially oxidised spiro-OMeTAD sustained reasonable photovoltaic efficiency of the solar cells based on AgBiS2 obtained via spray pyrolysis (Table S3, ESI), and therefore a detailed investigation of the devices with this configuration was undertaken. Examples of the photocurrent density (J) vs. voltage (V) curves, quasi-steady-state PCE transients and incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra of the devices are provided in Fig. 6a–c, while major photovoltaic parameters derived from these data are summarised in Fig. 6d and Table S4 (ESI). All examined cells exhibited small (Fig. 6a) or essentially no hysteresis (Table S4, ESI) during J–V measurements under the employed conditions. Photovoltaic performance was also stable during short-term chronoamperometric measurements at the voltage corresponding to the maximum power point in the voltammetric curves (Fig. 6b).
Modification of the HTM layer with MoO3 significantly enhanced short-circuit current density (Jsc) and open-circuit voltage of the AgBiS2-based solar cells examined here (Fig. 6d). Moreover, the introduction of MoO3 decreased the series resistance and increased the shunt resistance of the devices as inferred from the J–V data (exemplified in Fig. S12 and Table S5, ESI). According to the literature, MoO3 minimises recombination and interfacial power losses, and enhances the carrier mobility rate. Notably, PESA measurements undertaken here suggest that depositing MoO3 over spiro-OMeTAD upshifts the HOMO level of the HTM material by 0.1 eV (Fig. 4c), which might facilitate hole extraction and thereby improve the photovoltaic efficiency. The possibility for evaporated MoO3 to penetrate into charge-transporting layers and thereby alter their electronic properties was reported previously.

Fig. 6c, d and Table S4 (ESI) summarise the effect of the temperature used for spray deposition of the AgBiS2 light absorber on the photovoltaic performance of the Ag|MoO3 + spiro-OMeTAD|AgBiS2|ZnO|ITO solar cells. The highest IPCE, power conversion efficiency, short-circuit current density and open-circuit voltage were achieved with Tdep = 150 °C, which is consistent with the outcomes of the physical characterisation. Indeed, the best-quality films (Fig. 3), the highest degree of crystallinity of undistorted and pure cubic AgBiS2 (Fig. 2a), appropriate surface stoichiometry (Fig. 2c), and slightly improved optoelectronic characteristics (Fig. 4) were all achieved at this temperature. Decreased series resistance at Tdep = 150 °C as compared to those fabricated at 125 or 175 °C (Table S5, ESI) reflects better charge separation leading to higher short-circuit current. It is reasonable to suggest that recombination of photogenerated charges in the examined films should depend on the concentration of defects that changes with Tdep and affects the current generation and quantum efficiency (Fig. 6c and Table S4, ESI). Fill factor improved negligibly with an increase in Tdep (Fig. 6d and Table S4, ESI), but significantly lower series resistance was provided by the deposition temperature of 150 °C (Table S5, ESI), which can be interpreted in terms of improved electrical contact between AgBiS2 and the charge-transporting layers.
The solar cells in Fig. 6 demonstrated a very promising short-circuit current density, but their open-circuit voltage and fill factor were comparatively low. These devices were fabricated with the number of AgBiS2 spray deposition cycles of 12, which produced 60–70 nm thick chalcogenide layers at Tdep = 150 °C for the best-performing cells. Notwithstanding the SEM evidence for the very high quality of the spray-deposited films obtained under the optimised conditions at 150 °C (Fig. 3), we hypothesised that voids in these thin AgBiS2 layers might still be present and contribute to the low Voc and FF. Indeed, investigation of the effect of the number of deposition cycles on the photovoltaic performance circumstantially confirmed the above supposition, as summarised in Fig. S13 and Table S6 (ESI). The open-circuit voltage and fill factor enhanced from 187 ± 6 mV to 434 ± 4 mV and from 32.2 ± 0.4 to 42.1 ± 0.4, respectively, when the number of spray cycles was increased from 10 to 18. Unfortunately, the short-circuit current density did not follow the same trend, but peaked at 12 cycles and abruptly degraded for thicker films. Most probably, the short charge diffusion length in AgBiS2 is the major cause for the reduced short-circuit current density in the thicker films. Significant recombination of the photogenerated charge carriers in the examined AgBiS2-based devices is supported by the not strictly linear dependence of the short-circuit current density on the illumination intensity (P), Jsc ∝ P0.95 (Fig. S14a, ESI). An ideality factor of 1.5 derived from the dependence of Voc on P (Fig. S14b, ESI) indicates trap-assisted recombination, which is probably due to the pin holes in the film and possible surface defects leading to notable reductions in the open-circuit voltage.
Thus, the best photovoltaic performance under 1 sun irradiation was achieved here with the AgBiS2 layers deposited at 150 °C with the thickness of 60–70 nm and MoO3 + spiro-OMeTAD as a hole-transporter. These devices exhibit a short-circuit current density of 18.1 ± 0.6 mA cm−2, which is higher than that reported previously for the AgBiS2 cells featuring MoO3 + spiro-OMeTAD HTM layers (6.6 mA cm−2). In principle, the higher thickness of the AgBiS2 light absorber layer in our devices (60–70 nm vs. approximately 40 nm in ref. 19) might be a plausible reason for this improvement, although the data reported by Bernechea et al. and our results (Table S5, ESI) suggest that this difference cannot produce such a large enhancement in photocurrent. One can also hypothesise that the higher Jsc might be due to the denser packing of the AgBiS2 crystallites within the films and overall improved homogeneity thereof provided by the spray deposition technique, but we acknowledge that no solid confirmation of this supposition is currently available. Moreover, the notably lower Voc achieved with our method along with other evidence presented above suggests that recombination and short-circuiting in the devices based on the spray-deposited AgBiS2 is more pronounced than in the previous report. Given that the fill factor of the solar cells examined here was also lower, one might also suggest that charge transfer across the interfaces between the light absorber and charge selective materials requires thorough optimisation. Passivation of the surface of AgBiS2 with tetramethylammonium iodide did not improve the performance of our devices. Obviously, other strategies need to be established to allow for facilitated charge injection from AgBiS2 into hole- and electron-transporting materials.
Nevertheless, the power conversion efficiencies of the Ag|MoO3 + spiro-OMeTAD|AgBiS2|ZnO|ITO solar cells based on spray-deposited silver bismuth sulphide reached 1.7 and 1.2% when tested with an aperture of 0.16 and 1.00 cm2, respectively (Fig. 6 and Table S4, ESI). This is better performance than 1.2% measured with an aperture of 0.16 cm2 for the devices where the light-absorber was deposited by spin coating a dispersion of pre-formed oleate-capped nanoparticles (Fig. S10, ESI). Finally, non-encapsulated devices with AgBiS2 layers produced by spray deposition and MoO3 + spiro-OMeTAD as a HTM exhibited essentially no degradation when stored for 1 month under diffuse light under ambient conditions at approximately 50% relative humidity and 24 ± 2 °C. Indeed, all major photovoltaic parameters only slightly varied over the examined period, as shown in Fig. S15 (ESI).

The low-temperature spray pyrolysis of bismuth(III) tris(4-methylbenzodithioate) solutions containing a relevant first group metal precursor enables deposition of <100 nm thick films of α cubic rock salt AgBiS2 and orthorhombic Cu3BiS3 onto flat supports at temperatures not higher than 200 °C in air. The deposition conditions were optimised here to produce homogeneous and densely packed films of 10–20 nm crystallites of the above ternary chalcogenides with uniform thickness as low as 60–70 nm. Deposition temperature was identified as a key parameter determining the morphology, structure, and to a much lower extent, the optoelectronic properties of the resulting materials. Integration of the spray-deposited AgBiS2 films with a ZnO electron transporting layer and MoO3-modified spiro-OMeTAD hole transporting material produces thin planar solar cells with an average power conversion efficiency of 1.5 ± 0.1% that are stable under ambient conditions for at least 1 month. These devices exhibit a high short-circuit current density of 18.1 ± 0.6 mA cm−2 under 1 sun irradiation, which is a notable improvement over previous reports on AgBiS2-based photovoltaic cells. However, the overall performance is limited by lower than expected open-circuit voltage and fill factor, which might be associated with short-circuiting through very small pinholes in thin spray-deposited AgBiS2 layers, although we could not identify this morphological imperfection in the produced films using SEM. Notable improvement in Voc up to ca. 400 mV is possible with an increase in the thickness of AgBiS2, though it comes at the expense of the photocurrent density. Future studies to explore injection mechanisms and to understand the effects of surface passivation and structural defects are needed for the design of better performing devices with suppressed recombination and facilitated charge transfer between chalcogenide light-harvester and charge-selective transporting layers.

In summary, the low-temperature, solution-based and highly reproducible method reported in the present work offers a new versatile strategy for fabrication of ternary chalcogenide thin films for various applications. Another critical advantage of the developed method is straightforward scalability. Herein, fabrication of thin AgBiS2 and Cu3BiS3 films with the dimensions of 2.5 cm × 2.5 cm is demonstrated, as is a functioning 1 cm2 AgBiS2-based photovoltaic device. The only requirement for spray coating of larger surfaces is uniform heating of the support.

There are no conflicts to declare.


The authors are grateful to Dr I. Benesperi for the synthesis of [Co(bpyPY4)](OTf)2.66, and they acknowledge the Australian Centre for Advanced Photovoltaics (ACAP), the Australian Renewable Energy Agency and the Australian Research Council for the financial support through the ARC Centre of Excellence in Exciton Science (CE170100026), ARC Centre of Excellence for Electromaterials Science (CE140100012) and Discovery Project DP160104575. Electron microscopy access provided by the Monash University Centre for Electron Microscopy (MCEM) is greatly acknowledged.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: NMR and IR spectra; XP spectra; TEM images; SAED pattern; TGA data; PESA and UPS plots, J–V curves; summary of photovoltaic parameters; stability data. See DOI: 10.1039/c7tc05711c
‡ To the inexpressible sorrow of the co-authors, Prof. Leone Spiccia has passed away before this work could be published.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018