 DOI: 10.1039/D2TC01494G
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 9714-9722


Lina
Hu
,

Longlong
Zhang
,

Weihua
Ren
,

Chenxi
Zhang
,

Yukun
Wu
,

Yifan
Liu
,

Qinjun
Sun
,

Zhen
Dai
,

Yanxia
Cui
,

Linfeng
Cai
,

Furong
Zhu
* and 

Yuying
Hao
*

Key Lab of Advanced Transducers and Intelligent Control System, College of Physics and Optoelectronics, Taiyuan University of Technology, Taiyuan 030024, China. E-mail: haoyuying@tyut.edu.cn

Department of Physics, Hong Kong Baptist University, 224 Waterloo Road, Kowloon Tong, Hong Kong, China. E-mail: frzhu@hkbu.edu.hk

Received
12th April 2022
, Accepted 29th May 2022
First published on 1st June 2022
Different interface engineering approaches have been adopted for development of high efficiency and stable perovskite solar cells (PSCs). In this work, we report our efforts for realizing high efficiency PSCs using a poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA):2,3,5,6-tetrafluoro-7,7,8,8-tetracyanoquinodimethane (F4-TCNQ)-modified poly(bis(4-phenyl)(2,4,6-trimethylphenyl)amine) (PTAA) hole-transporting layer (HTL). The results reveal that PMMA molecules on PTAA induce an interface dipole at the PTAA/perovskite interface, caused by the electrostatic interaction between the ester groups in the PMMA molecules and the electron-deficient N+ free radicals in the PTAA molecules. The existence of the PMMA-induced interface dipole at the PTAA/perovskite interface increases the built-in potential in the PSCs, resulting in a 60 mV increase in the open circuit voltage. The increase in the built-in potential aids in an efficient charge collection process. The incorporation of F4-TCNQ molecules into PMMA further promotes the hole extraction by creating an intermediate state. In addition, PMMA and F4-TCNQ, especially PMMA, also passivate interface defects and promote perovskite crystallization. As a result, the MAPbI3-based PSCs with a PMMA:F4-TCNQ-modified PTAA HTL achieve a power conversion efficiency of >20%, which is evidently higher than that of a control PSC with a pristine PTAA HTL (∼17%). Moreover, the stability of PSCs is also improved efficiently. Our findings unveil the importance of PMMA:F4-TCNQ interfacial modification for mitigating charge recombination loss through controlled growth of the perovskite semiconductor layer, reduced interface defects and high built-in potential for efficient operation of the PSCs.

Many exciting advancements have been made in the development of high-performance perovskite solar cells (PSCs), prepared using hybrid organic–inorganic lead halide perovskite semiconductors, due to their advantages of high absorption, large carrier diffusion length, high charge carrier mobility, low exciton binding energy and suitable bandgap, making PSCs promising candidates for next-generation photovoltaic technology. Simultaneous improvements in power conversion efficiency (PCE), including fill factor (FF), short-circuit current density (JSC), open circuit voltage (VOC), and operational stability are needed if PSCs are to become one of the commercially viable options for application in sustainable energy.

The drop in VOC of PSCs is associated with the following two reasons: (1) the presence of defects in the functional perovskite semiconductor layer and at the perovskite/contact interfaces, and (2) the existence of an undesired energy-level mismatch between different functional layers. Different methods have been used to address these problems. For example, KCl was introduced into triple A-cation mixed-halide perovskite films to passivate the defects at the perovskite grain boundaries, yielding a high VOC of 1.16 V. The linear conjugated polyelectrolyte PPNNA was doped into perovskite films to reduce the electronic trap states to achieve a high VOC of 1.12 V in inverted PSCs. The incorporation of the guanidinium thiocyanate in the perovskite semiconductor film assists in mitigating the defects at the grain boundaries through formation of the two-dimensional (2D) perovskite structures, resulting in a 60 mV increase in the VOC. The use of an organic halide salt phenethylammonium iodide surface defect passivation layer on the perovskite layer assists in suppressing the non-radiative recombination, producing a high VOC of 1.18 V in the PSCs. The linear naphthalene imide dimer containing an indacenodithiophene unit was developed as an interface engineering material to passivate the perovskite surface efficiently and enhance the interface contact, resulting in a high VOC of 1.12 V. Similarly, the use of the linear conjugated tetramer IDTT4PDI as a surface-modification layer improved the interfacial contact between the perovskite layer and PCBM film, reduced the trap-assisted recombination, resulting in a 40 mV increase in the VOC. Additionally, the use of an interface dipole at the perovskite/contact interface for increasing VOC in PSCs has also been reported. It shows that the presence of a quasi-3D azetidinium lead iodide interface dipole on perovskite active layer creates a high VOC of 1.18 V in the PSCs. The use of an interface dipole, creating a permanent 3-aminopropanioc acid dipole on the ZnO ETL surface, also helps to improve the energy level alignment, thereby leading to an increase in VOC from 0.99 to 1.07 V in the PSCs.
Poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA)-based interlayers are widely used for passivating the surface defects of the perovskite semiconductor layers in the PSCs. For example, a thin PMMA-modified poly(bis(4-phenyl)(2,4,6-trimethylphenyl)amine) (PTAA) HTL is beneficial for the growth of the perovskite, resulting in a 40 mV increase in VOC. The presence of a PMMA interlayer between the perovskite active layer and the 2,2,7,7-tetrakis(N,N’′di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9-spirobifluorene (Spiro-OMeTAD) HTL or that between the perovskite active layer and the poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) HTL results in a remarkable improvement in JSC and FF, but it has a smaller influence on VOC in the PSCs with a PEDOT:PSS HTL or a Spiro-OMeTAD HTL. These reports indicate that the impact of the PMMA-modified HTL on the performance of PSCs is not fully understood yet.
Although a PMMA film can improve the performance of PSCs, its insulation properties block the charge carrier transport and extraction. However, few efforts have paid attention to this negative effect of PMMA. Wang et al. demonstrated that PMMA doping into PTAA reduces the conductivity of the hole transport layer. In general, hole extraction is less efficient than electron extraction in planar p–i–n PSCs. Inserting a passivation layer of PMMA between the HTL and the perovskite inevitably aggravates the imbalance of carrier transport and extraction. Therefore, the improvement in the conductivity of PMMA is very important for making it a more excellent interface modification material.
In this work, we report our efforts for realizing high efficiency PSCs prepared using a PMMA:2,3,5,6-tetrafluoro-7,7,8,8-tetracyanoquinodimethane (F4-TCNQ)-modified PTAA HTL. F4-TCNQ is a p-dopant used in other optoelectronic devices for its strong electron accepting ability. The results reveal that PMMA interlayer induces an interface dipole at the HTL/perovskite interface, caused by the electrostatic interaction between the ester groups in the PMMA molecules and the electron-deficient N+ free radicals in the PTAA molecules. The use of a PMMA:F4-TCNQ hybrid interlayer further improves the performance of the resulting PSCs through the combined effect of a higher built-in potential and an increased charge extraction efficiency. It shows that the existence of the F4-TCNQ molecules in the PMMA:F4-TCNQ hybrid interlayer improves the performance of the PSCs in two ways: (1) by creating an intermediate state assisting in improving hole extraction, and (2) by enabling an effective transformation of PbI2 into the perovskite, and thereby reducing the PbI2 residues in the perovskite film. In addition, PMMA and F4-TCNQ, especially PMMA, also passivate interface defects and promote perovskite crystallization. As a result, the use of the PMMA:F4-TCNQ hybrid interlayer leads to the formation of MAPbI3-based PSCs with a PCE of >20%, which is evidently higher than that of a control PSC with a pristine PTAA HTL (∼17%). The ambient environment stability of PSCs is also improved efficiently.

The cross-sectional view of the planar p–i–n PSCs comprising a layer configuration of ITO/modified-PTAA/MAPbI3/PC61BM/BCP/Ag is shown in Fig. 1a. The PMMA:F4-TCNQ-modified PTAA acts as a HTL and the PC61BM layer serves as an ETL. A thin BCP is a cathode buffer layer. To study the effect of the PMMA:F4-TCNQ-modified PTAA HTL on the performance of PSCs, PSCs built with F4-TCNQ-, PMMA- and PMMA:F4-TCNQ-modified PTAA HTLs were fabricated for comparison studies. Fig. 1b shows the J–V characteristics measured for the PSCs with different HTLs under AM1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2). A summary of the cell parameters measured for the PSCs with different interlayer modified PTAA HTLs and the control cell with a pristine PTAA HTL, averaged from the measurements of 30 cells, is listed in Table 1. It shows clearly that the PSCs built with F4-TCNQ-, PMMA-, and PMMA:F4-TCNQ-modified PTAA HTLs possess a higher VOC of 1.06 V (F4-TCNQ/PTAA), 1.12 V (PMMA/PTAA), and 1.12 V (PMMA:F4-TCN/PTAA), along with a higher JSC of 22.07, 21.94 and 22.85 mA cm−2, and the increased FF of 0.770, 0.770 and 0.782, and a higher PCE of 17.98%, 18.92% and 20.08%, respectively, as compared to the control PSC with a pristine PTAA HTL. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra recorded for the PSCs with different HTLs are shown in Fig. S1 (ESI). The integrated current densities calculated using the EQE spectra recorded for PSCs with the F4-TCNQ-, PMMA-, and PMMA:F4-TCNQ-modified PTAA HTLs and the control cell with a pristine PTAA HTL, are 21.95, 21.53, 22.53 and 21.03 mA cm−2, respectively, which are very close to the corresponding JSC values obtained from the corresponding J–V characteristics. Compared with the control device, it shows that the use of the F4-TCNQ-modified PTAA HTL helps to improve JSC and the use of a PMMA-modified PTAA HTL helps to increase VOC and FF while the PSCs with a PMMA:F4-TCNQ-modified PTAA HTL results in a simultaneous increase in VOC, JSC and FF. These results also reveal clearly that the use of a PMMA:F4-TCNQ-modified PTAA HTL helps to mitigate the hysteresis behavior in the PSCs, as shown in Fig. 1c. The steady photocurrent output values measured for the PSCs operated at the maximum power point conditions are shown in Fig. 1d; the PSCs with modified PTAA HTLs have very stable photocurrents operated at the maximum power output conditions. The PSCs with F4-TCNQ-, PMMA-, and PMMA:F4-TCNQ-modified HTLs have higher JSC values of 21.81, 21.63, and 22.76 mA cm−2 as compared to that measured for a control PSC with a pristine PTAA HTL (21.02 mA cm−2). In order to understand the impact of the different interlayer modified HTLs on the performance of the PSCs, the results of the cell performance discussed in the work are averaged from the measurements of more than 30 corresponding cells, respectively. The distributions of the cell parameters measured for different PSCs are shown in Fig. S2 (ESI). The PSCs constructed using different interlayer modified HTLs have good reliability and reproducibility. The control PSC has an average PCE of 16.75%, an average VOC of 1.06 V, an average JSC of 20.75 mA cm−2, and an average FF of 0.751. In contrast, PSCs with F4-TCNQ-, PMMA- and PMMA:F4-TCNQ-modified HTLs have higher average PCEs, i.e., 17.68% (F4-TCNQ/PTAA), 18.58% (PMMA/PTAA) and 19.41% (PMMA:F4-TCNQ/PTAA), respectively. The increase in PCE of the PSCs with the F4-TCNQ-modified PTAA HTL is primarily attributed to the increase in JSC. The increase in the PCE of the PSCs with a PMMA-modified PTAA HTL is mainly due to the increase in VOC and FF. However, a simultaneous increase in VOC, JSC and FF was observed for the PSCs with a PMMA:F4-TCNQ-modified PTAA HTL, achieving a highest average PCE. The results imply that the use of the PMMA molecules in the interlayer assists in increasing VOC and FF, and the presence of the F4-TCNQ molecules in the interlayer helps in enhancing JSC.

HTL

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)
Best PCE (%)
PTAA
1.06 ± 0.01
20.75 ± 0.30
0.751 ± 0.01
16.75 ± 0.35
17.21
F4-TCNQ/PTAA
1.06 ± 0.02
21.81 ± 0.46
0.763 ± 0.01
17.68 ± 0.30
17.90
PMMA/PTAA
1.12 ± 0.02
21.48 ± 0.38
0.770 ± 0.01
18.58 ± 0.41
18.92
PMMA:F4-TCNQ/PTAA
1.12 ± 0.03
22.78 ± 0.43
0.771 ± 0.01
19.41 ± 0.55
20.08
To understand the role of PMMA molecules on the performance of PSCs with a PMMA-modified PTAA HTL, we further investigated the performance of the PSCs with a PEDOT:PSS HTL and a NiOx HTL, and the corresponding results are listed in Tables S3 and S4 (ESI). The results reveal that there is no obvious change in VOC in PSCs constructed using a PMMA-modified PEDOT:PSS HTL or a PMMA-modified NiOx HTL. The increase in VOC only occurs in PSCs with a PMMA-modified PTAA HTL or a PMMA:F4-TCNQ-modified PTAA HTL, agreeing with a previous report. However, it is not clear why PSCs with a PMMA-modified PTAA HTL possess a higher VOC. The UPS spectra recorded for the PTAA layer and the PMMA-, F4-TCNQ- and PMMA:F4-TCNQ-modified PTAA layers are shown in Fig. 2. No obvious change in the cut-off of the secondary electrons is observed in the UPS spectrum recorded for the F4-TCNQ-modified PTAA film. However, there is a clear shift of 0.06 eV in the cut-off of the secondary electrons toward the low binding energy in the UPS spectra recorded for the PMMA- and PMMA:F4-TCNQ-modified PTAA layers, as compared to that recorded for a pristine PTAA film. The shift in the cut-off of the secondary electrons reveals the presence of a positive interface dipole induced by the interaction between PTAA and PMMA, leading to a shift in the vacuum-level at the PTAA/perovskite interface, as shown in Fig. 3a–c.
Due to the strong electron-donating properties of N atoms, PTAA is more easily oxidized to form electron-deficient N+ free radicals and exhibits electropositivity. PMMA is a polar molecule with a dipole moment of the ester group antiparallel to the CO bond. The electrostatic potential (ESP) of PMMA obtained through the density functional theory (DFT) method is utilized to visualize the electron density distribution. As shown in Fig. S3 (ESI), the negative charge center is located in the region near CO (red color), revealing the strong electron-withdrawing nature of CO. The electrostatic interaction between the ester groups in PMMA molecules and the electron-deficient N+ free radicals in the PTAA molecules causes the formation of a PMMA interface dipole at the HTL/perovskite interface. The PMMA-induced interface dipole provides an additional interfacial potential resulting in an increase in the built-in potential across the perovskite photoactive layer, and thereby leading to the improvement of the VOC in the PSCs. The built-in potential in the PSCs was also analyzed using the capacitance–voltage (C–V) characteristics measured for the PSCs with the F4-TCNQ-, PMMA- and PMMA:F4-TCNQ-modified PTAA HTLs and the control PSC with a pristine PTAA HTL. Mott–Schottky analysis of the C–V characteristics was carried out using eqn (1):
(1)
where
C is the capacitance, ε is the relative permittivity, ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, A is the active area of the PSCs, N is the carrier concentration, and V is the applied bias. The built-in potential Vbi can be derived from the intercept of the applied bias (X-axis). It can be seen from Fig. 4a that PSCs constructed using PMMA- and PMMA:F4-TCNQ-modified PTAA HTLs have a higher Vbi of 1.01 V and 1.00 V, as compared to that of the control PSC with a pristine PTAA HTL (0.93 V). The PSC with the F4-TCNQ-modified PTAA HTL has the same Vbi as that of the control PSC. The Mott–Schottky analysis agrees with the UPS results in showing that the use of the PMMA- and PMMA:F4-TCNQ-modified PTAA HTLs helps to increase the Vbi across the perovskite photoactive layer, caused by the formation of a PMMA-induced interface dipole at the HTL/perovskite interface. The transient photovoltage (TPV) spectra were recorded for the PSCs with the F4-TCNQ-, PMMA- and PMMA:F4-TCNQ-modified PTAA HTLs and the control PSC with a pristine PTAA HTL, and the results are shown in Fig. 4b. Compared to the control PSC with a PTAA HTL, a mild variation in photovoltage is observed for the PSCs with a PMMA- or a PMMA:F4-TCNQ-modified PTAA HTL, due to the decrease in the recombination of the charge carriers. This is attributed to the enhanced internal built-in potential caused by the existence of a PMMA-induced interface dipole. The analyses of the UPS, C–V and TPV results reveal clearly that the introduction of a PMMA-induced interface dipole at the PTAA/perovskite interface enables an enhanced built-in potential across the perovskite photoactive layer, which is very favorable for efficient hole extraction in PSCs.

In order to understand the effect of the F4-TCNQ dopant on the performance of the PSCs with a PMMA:F4-TCNQ-modified PTAA HTL, the steady-state and transient PL spectra of the MAPbI3 films, grown on the glass, PTAA layer and different interlayer modified PTAA layers were recorded using the 467 nm and 376 nm excitation sources, respectively; the results are shown in Fig. 5a and b. Compared to the steady-state PL spectra recorded for MAPbI3 layer formed on the glass, an obvious quenching in the PL spectra recorded for that grown on the PTAA layer is observed, indicating the hole extraction from the MAPbI3 layer to the HTL. In particular, the F4-TCNQ-modified PTAA layer has the lowest PL intensity, which means the F4-TCNQ layer is the most favorable for the hole extraction at the HTL/MAPbI3 interface. However, a relatively stronger PL intensity is evidently observed for the MAPbI3 layer grown on the PMMA-modified PTAA layer, suggesting that the PMMA-modified PTAA HTL is inefficient for hole extraction due to the insulation properties of PMMA. Comparatively, there is an obvious decrease in the PL intensity measured for the MAPbI3 layer formed on the PMMA:F4-TCNQ-modified PTAA layer, similar to that observed for the perovskite formed on the pristine PTAA layer, indicating that the PMMA:F4-TCNQ-mofidied PTAA HTL has advantages of simultaneously favoring enhanced hole extraction and retaining a high built-in potential (Fig. 3) for efficient operation of the PSCs. The change in the PL lifetime of perovskite films formed on different HTLs is closely related to the carrier extraction efficiency at the HTL/perovskite interface. The lower PL lifetime means a higher hole extraction ability. Based on the transient PL measurements, we find that the pure MAPbI3 sample has an average PL lifetime of 238.22 ns, the MAPbI3/PTAA sample has an average PL lifetime of 151.43 ns, while the MAPbI3/F4-TCNQ-modified PTAA sample exhibits the shortest average PL lifetime of 114.89 ns. The MAPbI3/PMMA-modified PTAA sample has a longer PL lifetime of 220.42 ns than that of the MAPbI3/PTAA sample, indicating that the PMMA-modified PTAA HTL is relatively less efficient for hole extraction. In comparison to the perovskite formed on the PMMA-modified PTAA layer, the MAPbI3/PMMA:F4-TCNQ-modified PTAA sample has a shorter PL lifetime of 171.16 ns, revealing that the PMMA:F4-TCNQ-modified PTAA layer has the combined effect of efficient hole extraction and improved built-in potential. These results are consistent with the steady state PL spectra as shown in Fig. 5a. The advantages of using the PMMA:F4-TCNQ-modified PTAA HTL can be further manifested by analyzing the charge collection efficiency (ηcc) of the PSCs with different HTLs. The photocurrent density–effective voltage (Jph−Veff) characteristics measured for the PSCs with a pristine PTAA HTL and the F4-TCNQ-modified PTAA HTL are shown in Fig. 5c, and those measured for a PSC with a PMMA:F4-TCNQ-modified PTAA HTL and a PSC with PMMA-modified PTAA HTL are shown in Fig. 5d. The values of Jph and Veff were determined using the equations Jph = JL − JD and Veff = V0 − Va, respectively, where JL is the dark current density measured under the illumination and JD is the dark current density. V0 is the voltage when JL = JD and Va is the applied voltage. An obvious increase in the ηcc is obtained for the PSCs with the F4-TCNQ-modified PTAA HTL, as shown in Fig. 5c. The use of a PMMA:F4-TCNQ-modified PTAA HTL improves the ηcc in PSCs (see Fig. 5d). The above results clearly reveal that the use of either the F4-TCNQ-modified PTAA HTL or a PMMA:F4-TCNQ-modified PTAA HTL is favorable for an efficient hole extraction. This result can be easily understood because the use of the F4-TCNQ in the PMMA:F4-TCNQ-modified PTAA HTL provides an intermediate state due to its higher LUMO energy level, matching with the valence band maximum of the perovskite layer. Therefore, the use of a PMMA:F4-TCNQ-modified PTAA HTL enables an efficient hole extraction and a high built-in potential across the perovskite layer, caused by the PMMA-induced interface dipole in the PSC, shown in the inset in Fig. 5d.
The possible chemical interaction between PMMA and F4-TCNQ and the impact on the performance of the PSCs were examined using the ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) absorption spectra and the FTIR spectra. It shows that the normalized UV-vis spectra measured for the PMMA and PMMA:F4-TCNQ solutions are the same (see Fig. S4a, ESI). The stretching vibration of the cyano (CN) groups at the wavenumber of 2196 cm−1 and the stretching vibration of the carbonyl (CO) groups at the wavenumber of 1730 cm−1 for pure PMMA, pure F4-TCNQ and PMMA:F4-TCNQ samples were analyzed using the FTIR measurements, as shown in Fig. S4b and c (ESI). There is no observable change in the peak wavenumbers of the vibration modes of the cyano and the carbonyl groups in these films, indicating that there is no chemical interaction between the PMMA and F4-TCNQ molecules. Therefore, the use of the PMMA:F4-TCNQ-modified PTAA HTL has the advantages of simultaneously favoring an enhanced hole extraction and retaining a high built-in potential for efficient operation of the PSCs.
The impacts of the F4-TCNQ- and PMMA-modified PTAA HTLs on the growth of the MAPbI3 photoactive layers were further examined using water contact angle measurements. The surface hydrophobicity values measured for the surfaces of the PTAA, F4-TCNQ-, PMMA- and PMMA:F4-TCNQ-modified PTAA layers are shown in Fig. S5 (ESI). Compared to the contact angle measured for the pristine PTAA layer, there is no obvious change in the hydrophilicity of the F4-TCNQ-modified PTAA layer. However, the surfaces of both PMMA- and PMMA:F4-TCNQ-modified PTAA films become more hydrophilic due to the hydrophilic CO group of PMMA, which induces better perovskite crystallization. The surface topography of the interlayer modified PTAA layers is analyzed by atomic force microscopy (AFM) measurements, and the results are shown in Fig. S6 (ESI). The root-mean-square (RMS) roughness (rRMS) of the pristine PTAA layer is 0.399 nm, while a smaller rRMS values of 0.309 nm, 0.291 nm, and 0.211 nm were obtained for the F4-TCNQ-, PMMA-, and PMMA:F4-TCNQ-modified PTAA layers. The AFM measurements suggest that the PMMA- or PMMA:F4-TCNQ-modified PTAA layer leads to a better contact between the perovskite and the HTL layer. The SEM images measured for the perovskite films grown on the pristine PTAA, PMMA- and PMMA:F4-TCNQ-modified PTAA layers are shown in Fig. 6a–c. It shows that the perovskite film deposited on PTAA substrate has the average grain size of 325.86 nm. Higher average grain sizes of 394.28 nm and 395.92 nm were obtained for the MAPbI3 layers formed on PMMA- and PMMA:F4-TCNQ-modified PTAA HTLs. The improvement in the hydrophilicity of the PMMA- or PMMA:F4-TCNQ-modified PTAA substrate results in the higher crystallinity of the perovskite. In addition, a similar increase in the MAPbI3 grains is observed for the perovskite layers formed on PMMA-modified NiOx and PMMA-modified-PEDOT:PSS HTLs (Fig. S7, ESI). However, there is no observable change in the VOC in PSCs constructed using a PMMA-modified NiOx HTL or PMMA-modified PEDOT:PSS HTL. Therefore, it indicates that the increase in VOC of PSCs with a PMMA-modified PTAA HTL is attributed to the formation of the PMMA-induced interface dipole.
The XRD patterns measured for the perovskite films grown on a pristine PTAA layer and the ones formed on different interlayer modified PTAA layers are shown in Fig. 6d. The intensities of the XRD peaks located at 14.20° and 28.6°, corresponding to (110) and (220) crystal planes of the MAPbI3 films grown on the PMMA-, F4-TCNQ- and PMMA:F4-TCNQ-modified PTAA layers, are obviously higher than the ones observed for the perovskite film formed on the PTAA layer. The intensity of the PbI2 peak at 12.7° measured for the MAPbI3 films grown on the F4-TCNQ- or PMMA:F4-TCNQ-modified PTAA layer (see Fig. 6e and f) is evidently lower than the one observed for the perovskite film formed on the PTAA or PMMA-modified PTAA layer. This suggests that the PbI2 residuals in the MAPbI3 film formed on the F4-TCNQ- or PMMA:F4-TCNQ-modified PTAA layer is evidently reduced due to the improved transformation of PbI2 into the perovskite. To investigate the interaction between F4-TCNQ and PbI2, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was carried out (see Fig. S8, ESI). There are two main peaks of Pb 4f7/2 and Pb 4f5/2 at 137.04 and 141.92 eV, respectively, for the pure MAPbI3 film. The two peaks have a small shift (137.00 eV and 141.82 eV) for MAPbI3 deposited on PMMA. However, they shift towards a lower binding energy after F4-TCNQ incorporation (136.87 eV and 141.75 eV), indicating the chemical interaction between F4-TCNQ and PbI2. Additionally, the two very small peaks appear at 135.15 and 140.09 eV due to the presence of metallic Pb. The metallic lead species in the film are likely to act as non-radiative recombination centres which impair solar cell operation. The atomic Pb peak is obviously reduced in the PMMA:F4-TCNQ-treated film relative to the pure MAPbI3 film and the PMMA-treated film. The XPS and XRD results further reveal the advantages of the PMMA:F4-TCNQ-modified PTAA HTL for the controlled growth of high-quality perovskite films.
To characterize the charge carrier recombination properties inside the PSCs, we carried out electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) at a bias of 0.9 V under dark conditions. Fig. 7a shows the Nyquist plots of four kinds of devices and the related fitted circuit (see the inset). The relative Rrec parameters are summarized in Table S5 (ESI). For low frequency areas, we find that the introduction of either PMMA or PMMA:F4-TCNQ improves the recombination resistance Rrec efficiently, and PMMA:F4-TCNQ has a more remarkable effect on reducing interface recombination. Furthermore, the single-electron devices with the structure of ITO/PTAA/with or without interlayer/MAPbI3/PTAA/Ag were measured by the space charge limited current (SCLC) method to further prove the role of these interlayers. At a low bias voltage, the linear J–V region reflects an ohmic response. After the voltage is increased to the trap filling limit (TFL) voltage, the current increases non-linearly. The trap-state density (Ntrap) can be estimated from the trap filled limit voltage (VTFL) according to the equation:
(2)
where
ε0 and ε are the vacuum permittivity and the relative permittivity of the perovskite, respectively, e is the elementary charge, and L is the film thickness of the perovskite. From Fig. 7b and c, we obtain the VTFL values for the devices without and with F4-TCNQ, PMMA, and PMMA:F4-TCNQ interlayers to be 1.01, 0.94, 0.75, and 0.68 V, respectively. Accordingly, the calculated Ntrap are 3.59 × 10−14, 3.35 × 10−14, 2.67 × 10−14, 2.42 × 10−14 cm−3, respectively. It can be seen that PMMA plays a predominant role in reducing the trap state density due to the influence of PMMA on the substrate of PTAA, which is consistent with the EIS measurement results.

To verify the influence of F4-TCNQ, PMMA, and PMMA:F4-TCNQ interlayers on device stability, the photovoltaic performance of unencapsulated PSCs were monitored in an ambient environment at about 25–50% humidity for 16 days. It can be seen from Fig. 8 that the devices with interlayers are more stable than the control one. In particular, the PSCs with the PMMA:F4-TCNQ layer maintained more than 85% of the initial PCE values, which is an indicator of the reduction of bulk and interface defects of perovskite films.

In summary, we report the findings of the formation of the PMMA-induced interface dipole at the PTAA HTL/perovskite interface, caused by the electrostatic interaction between the ester groups in the PMMA molecules and the electron-deficient N+ free radicals in the PTAA molecules. The presence of an interface dipole at the HTL/perovskite interface helps to increase the built-in potential across the PSCs, resulting in an enhanced charge extraction, an increase in VOC and thereby a high PCE. The use of the F4-TCNQ molecules in the hybrid PMMA:F4-TCNQ-modified PTAA HTL helps to improve the performance of the PSCs in two ways: (1) it creates an intermediate state at the HTL/perovskite interface, assisting in charge extraction, and (2) it favors efficient transformation of PbI2 into the perovskite. In addition, PMMA and F4-TCNQ, especially PMMA, also passivate interface defects and promote perovskite crystallization. Therefore, MAPbI3-based PSCs with a PMMA:F4-TCNQ-modified HTL demonstrate a higher PCE of >20% and more stable devices than the control PSC with a pristine PTAA HTL (17.21%). This work mainly unveils the importance of having a high built-in potential for efficient operation of the PSCs through incorporating an interface dipole.


L. H. conducted the device fabrication and prepared the manuscript. L. H., W. R., C. Z. and Y. W. measured the device performance. Y. C. and L. C. provided the data analysis. Y. L., Q. S. and Z. D. helped in data analysis. Y. H. revised the manuscript. F. Z. guided and supervised the whole study. All authors contributed to the discussion.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This research work was supported by the National Natural Scientific Foundation program of China (62074108), the Joint Fund for Regional Innovation and Development (U21A20102), the NSFC-Joint Foundation program of Shanxi Coal Based Low Carbon Nurturing Project (U1710115), the Major special projects of Shanxi Province in science and technology (20201101012), the Platform and Base Special Project of Shanxi (201605D131038), and the Natural Science Foundation of Shanxi Province (201801D121015, 201901D211051, and 201901D211114). F. Zhu is thankful for the support from the Research Grants Council, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China (12302419, C5037-18GF, and N_HKBU201/19).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2tc01494g
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022