 DOI: 10.1039/C7CP08038G
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 6264-6273


Themmila
Khamrang
,

Marappan
Velusamy
,

Madhavan
Jaccob
*,

Mohan
Ramesh
,

Murugavel
Kathiresan
 and 

Arunkumar
Kathiravan
*

Department of Chemistry, North Eastern Hill University, Shillong 793 022, Meghalaya, India

Department of Chemistry, Loyola College, Chennai–600 034, Tamil Nadu, India

Computational Chemistry Laboratory, Loyola Institute of Frontier Energy (LIFE), Loyola College, Chennai–600 034, Tamil Nadu, India

Functional Materials Division, CSIR-Central Electrochemical Research Institute, Karaikudi 630 003, Tamil Nadu, India

Electroorganic Division, CSIR-Central Electrochemical Research Institute, Karaikudi 630 003, Tamil Nadu, India

National Centre for Ultrafast Processes, University of Madras, Taramani Campus, Chennai–600 113, Tamil Nadu, India. E-mail: akathir23@gmail.com

Received
30th November 2017
, Accepted 29th January 2018
First published on 31st January 2018
The geometry (twist vs. planar) of a dye is one of the most pivotal factors for determining intramolecular charge transfer (ICT), light harvesting and photovoltaic properties of dye-sensitized solar cells. In order to comprehend the role of dye geometry on the above properties, we have devised the pyrene based D–π–A dyes namely 2-cyano-3-(5-pyren-1-yl-furan-2-yl)-acrylic acid (PFCC) and 2-cyano-3-(5-pyren-1-ylethynyl-furan-2-yl)-acrylic acid (PEFCC). The synthesized pyrene dyes were well characterized by NMR and EI-MS spectrometry. In both the dyes, the donor (pyrene) and acceptor (cyanoacrylic acid) segments remained the same. The varied π-spacers were furan and ethynyl furan. The influences of the ethynyl spacer on the energy levels, light absorption, dynamics of excited states and photovoltaic properties of the DSCs were systematically investigated via theoretical calculations and spectroscopic measurements. UV-visible absorption spectral measurements indicated that the introduction of the ethynyl spacer enhances the molar absorptivity of a dye (PEFCC) in the order of 2, but does not shift the absorption range, which is consistent with the results obtained from density functional theory (DFT) calculations. The theoretical analysis indicated that the charge transfer transition is mainly constituted of the HOMO to the LUMO that were found to be located on donor and acceptor segments, respectively, which is supportive for efficient charge separation and electron injection processes. TDDFT calculations highlighted that the LUMO of the PEFCC dye is more stabilized by the incorporation of the ethynyl group between the pyrene and furan moieties that aid to inject electrons efficiently into TiO2 thereby resulting in an enhanced power conversion efficiency of 2.47% when compared to the PFCC dye. Notably, the overall conversion efficiency of the PEFCC dye reached 60% with respect to that of an N719-based device (4.12%) fabricated under similar conditions. Transient absorption kinetic studies demonstrated that a slower charge recombination rate is an essential factor behind enhanced efficiencies in PEFCC based cells.

Visible light active sensitizers are appealing candidates for solar energy conversion technology and they have attracted immense interest due to easy fabrication, low cost of construction, flexibility and transparency, which are potential advantages for practical applications compared with the conventional silicon solar cells. Fascinated by such benefits, there have been many attempts to develop new and efficient sensitizers for dye sensitized solar cells (DSCs). There are three classes of sensitizers that have proven to be effective in DSCs: ruthenium complexes, porphyrins and metal free organic dyes showing certified power conversion efficiency (PCE) values of 12%, 13% and 14% respectively. However, the rarity of ruthenium metal in the earth's crust and cost due to complicated synthesis and purification steps might hamper commercialization of the technology. Therefore, metal-free organic dyes have been considered as potential alternative sensitizers for solar energy conversion technology. A good dye should contain an electron acceptor (A) segment (where the LUMO is localized) and an electron donor (D) part (where the HOMO is localized). These two parts should be linked by a π-conjugated bridge and the overall device is then known as the D–π–A structure. By adopting the D–π–A architecture, great varieties of metal-free organic dyes have been reported with a record efficiency of 14%.

One of the key factors for the enhancement of PCE in DSCs is the degree of light-harvesting of D–π–A organic dyes, which can be tuned by varying the donor (D), π-spacer (π), and acceptor (A) segments. These modifications will unswervingly influence the light harvesting properties as well as the energy levels of the dyes. D–π–A dyes with various kinds of electron donor moieties have been assembled and moderate to high efficiency DSCs have been apprehended. The arylamine based organic dyes are found to be promising donors for highly efficient DSCs among the donors assembled for DSCs. Cyanoacrylic acid is commonly used as an acceptor in D–π–A dyes, owing to its relatively strong electronic coupling with the TiO2 electrode and capability of instigating an intense charge transfer transition resulting in broader absorption in the visible region. To ease charge transfer and later charge separation between the donor and acceptor parts in the excited state, several π-conjugated systems including benzene, thiophene and furan rings generally have been incorporated into D–π–A dyes as π-linkers.
Pyrene is a well-known aromatic hydrocarbon and most widely studied organic sensitizer in the field of photochemistry and photophysics, due to its unique photophysical and photochemical properties, such as high fluorescence quantum yields, long lived excited-state lifetimes and good thermal stabilities. On the other hand, pyrene derivatives have also been utilized as electron donors and electron acceptors in the light harvesting systems. In addition, pyrene has multiple substitution sites for molecular engineering. Taking these properties into consideration, many pyrene-based dyes have been developed over the past few decades and they have been used as potential candidates for various applications. However, the use of pyrene derivatives in DSCs is less common and very limited reports are available in the literature. For instance, Yu et al. reported a novel D–π–A structured pyrene dye as a sensitizer for DSCs for the first time which showed a conversion efficiency of 6.1% under standard AM 1.5 conditions. Later, Lu et al. reported the D–π–A structured pyrene-conjugated porphyrins with the overall power conversion efficiency of 8.7% under standard AM 1.5 conditions. Very recently, Nagarajan et al. reported a novel ethynyl-pyrene substituted phenothiazine based metal free organic dye in DSC with 12% conversion efficiency. These reports suggested that the pyrene derivatives have potential in DSC fields.
Herein, we have designed the two new pyrene based D–π–A dyes [Scheme 1] which were developed based on the results we obtained in our previous work. Our approach is to further improve the photophysical and photovoltaic performance of PCC dye (0.34%) with slight modifications by choosing electron rich π-bridges such as furan and ethynyl furan. Incorporation of these bridges between the pyrene core and cyanoacetic acid which facilitate the donor–acceptor interaction may result in the exhibition of higher power conversion efficiency. In fact, a minor change in the π-bridge will show different and interesting photophysical, electrochemical and other properties compared to the PCC dye. Unsurprisingly, insertion of a furan bridge showed an increment in the efficiency of the PFCC sensitizer compared to the parent compound PCC. Furthermore, the better improvement in efficiency was observed via incorporating ethynyl furan into the PCC sensitizer. Replacing the furan unit with the ethynyl furan further reduces the charge recombination, furnishing the sensitizer PEFCC with the highest efficiency for pyrene dyes studied in this article. UV-visible absorption, steady state fluorescence, time resolved fluorescence techniques and computational methods have been used to probe the effect of π-spacers on the ground and excited state properties of the synthesized dyes. Furthermore, the nanosecond transient absorption kinetic measurements were carried out in order to rationalize the difference in PCE of the dyes.

Unless otherwise specified, all the reactions and manipulations were performed under an argon atmosphere using standard Schlenk techniques. All of the reagents, pyrene-1-boronic acid, 5-bromo-2-furaldehyde benzaldehyde, 1-ethynylpyrene, Pd(PPh3)4 and cyanoacetic acid were procured from commercial sources and used without further purification.


Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy was performed on a BRUKER spectrometer operating at 400 MHz for 1H and 100 MHz for 13C and collected at ambient probe temperature with spectra calibrated to either internal tetramethylsilane (TMS) standard or to a residual protio solvent. Electron ionization-Mass spectra (EI-MS) analyses were acquired using a JEOL GC mate-II mass spectrometer with photomultiplier tube (PMT) detector. Electrochemical measurements were performed on a CHI620B electrochemical analyzer (CH Instruments, Inc.) in deaerated CH3CN containing 0.1 M Bu4NPF6 as a supporting electrolyte at room temperature. The working electrode was a glassy carbon disk (area = 0.07 cm2, Sinsil) and the counter electrode was a Pt wire. The reference electrode was a Ag/AgCl/KCl (3 M) electrode (Sinsil) separated by a salt bridge containing 0.1 M KCl/H2O. Prior to each experiment, the working electrode was carefully polished with alumina powder and rinsed with distilled water. The scan rate was 0.05 V s−1. UV-vis absorption spectra of samples were recorded using a CARY 100 Bio UV-visible spectrophotometer. The fluorescence spectral measurements were carried out using a Fluoromax-4P spectrofluorometer (Horiba Jobin Yvon). For fluorescence studies, much dilute solution was used to avoid spectral distortions due to the inner-filter effect and emission reabsorption. Time resolved fluorescence decays were obtained by the time-correlated single-photon counting (TCSPC) technique. The instrument response function for a TCSPC system is ∼50 ps. The data analysis was carried out by the software provided by IBH (DAS-6), which is based on a deconvolution technique using nonlinear least-squares methods. Transient absorption experiments were carried out using nanosecond laser flash photolysis (Applied Photophysics, UK). The third harmonic (355 nm) of a Q-switched Nd:YAG laser (Quanta-Ray, LAB 150, Spectra Physics, USA) with 8 ns pulse width and 150 mJ pulse energy was used to excite the samples. The transients were probed using a 150 W pulsed xenon lamp, a Czerny–Turner monochromator, and a Hamamatsu R-928 photomultiplier tube as a detector. The transient signals were captured with an Agilent infiniium digital storage oscilloscope, and the data were transferred to the computer for further analysis.


All the quantum chemical calculations were carried out using the G09 program. The accuracy of the computed results is solely based on the suitable functional. So we have optimized the pyrene dyes with five different functionals such as B3LYP, CAM-B3LYP, M06, ω-b97Xd and PBE using 6-311+G** basis set. Among the five functionals, CAM-B3LYP functional was found to corroborate well with experimental values of pyrene dyes which are provided in Table 1. Throughout this work, we have used the popular functional, which has been confirmed to give results for both geometries and energies as good as the more expensive methods. The harmonic frequencies were carried out at each stationary point in order to confirm its nature as a minimum energy geometry with positive frequencies. The TDDFT method is used to calculate the electronic excitations at the ground state geometries for the lowest singlet–singlet vertical transitions. The role of THF solvent on the absorption spectrum was examined using the polarizable continuum model (SCRF-PCM).

Functional

λ
max (nm)

PFCC


PEFCC

B3LYP
492
526
CAM-B3LYP
395
424
M06
467
498
ω-b97Xd
384
412
PBE
464
497
Experiment
429
425

FTO glasses were cleaned in detergent solution, distilled water, acetone and isopropyl alcohol under ultrasonic bath for 20 min each, and further subjected to UV treatment. The blocking layer of TiO2 was deposited by spin coating of a TiO2 complex (TiO2 complex was prepared by taking 20 μl of titanium isopropoxide in a 1:1 ratio of ethanol and DI water (20 ml) and 200 μl of H2O2 was added slowly) on FTO glasses at 4000 rpm and sintered at 500 °C for half an hour. Then, TiO2 paste of ≈8 μm was coated by a doctor blade technique and sintered at 500 °C for 30 minutes. Further TiCl4 treatment was carried out and calcined at 500 °C for an hour. The TiO2 coated glasses were immersed in 0.3 mM of pyrene derivatives overnight and unadsorbed dye molecules were washed with ethanol and dried over the N2 flow. PEO-PEG/alkali iodide gel electrolyte (0.5 M DMPII, 0.05 M iodine, and 0.5 M TBP in acetonitrile) droplet was dropped on the dye coated TiO2 film and sandwiched with platinum coated counter electrode. The platinum coated counter electrode glass was prepared as follows. A 0.05 M solution of chloroplatinic acid in isopropyl alcohol was spin coated on cleaned FTO glass and heated at 420 °C for 30 minutes. In order to avoid shorting the two electrodes were separated by hot melt polymer film (thickness 25 mm) (Meltonix-1170-25) with an active area of 0.19 cm2. Current–Voltage measurements were performed under solar simulator illumination of 100 mW cm−2 with the optical filter of AM 1.5G (Science tech (SS 1.6 K, AAA)).


The pyrene derivatives were synthesized according to the synthetic routes shown in Scheme S1 in the ESI. The synthetic route and structure characterization data are provided in ESI, Fig. S1–S9.



Fig. 1 shows the absorption and emission spectra of pyrene derivatives (PFCC and PEFCC) in THF solvent. The pyrene dyes exhibit two distinct absorption bands in the range of 300 to 500 nm. The bands in the shorter wavelength (300–350 nm) are ascribed to π–π* transition of the pyrene chromophore, while the bands at longer wavelengths (350 to 500 nm) correspond to intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) transition from pyrene core to cyanoacrylic acid. The absorption spectra of PFCC (429 nm) and PEFCC (425 nm) exhibit significant bathochromic shift as compared with that of the thiophene derivative namely 2-cyano-3-(5-pyren-1-yl-thiophen-2-yl)-acrylic acid (PTCC, 388 nm) and without spacer (PCC, 383 nm). This is due to the introduction of an electronegative oxygen atom in the furan unit. This observation is consistent with a similar type of D–π–A type compounds reported in the literature.

The ICT nature of pyrene derivatives is further established by both experimental and computational methods. Experimentally, the presence of ICT in D–π–A dyes was established in the literature by monitoring the absorption maxima of D–π–A dyes with increasing concentration of triethylamine (TEA). Typically, the origin of ICT in D–π–A based dyes is due to the electron pulling nature of the acceptors. The purpose of adding TEA to the solution of D–π–A dyes is to deprotonate the carboxylic acid, and as a result, it would diminish the electron-pulling strength of the acceptor moiety (–CN), which in turn may comprehensively decrease the push–pull character of the D–π–A dyes. The same tactic has been adopted to establish the ICT character of the pyrene derivatives. Fig. 2 shows the absorption spectra of PFCC with increasing concentration of TEA.
Upon addition of TEA to the solution of PFCC, the intensity of absorption maximum increases with a simultaneous hypsochromic shift also observed. Similar results were also obtained for PEFCC dye (Fig. S10, ESI). This observation clearly suggests that the band at the longer wavelength is due to ICT transition. The ICT nature of pyrene dyes was also corroborated by the acid–base equilibrium of the dyes. As cf. above, addition of TEA on pyrene dyes displayed a significant blue shifted ICT band. However on addition of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), the pyrene dyes displayed a red shifted ICT band (Fig. S11, ESI). The response of the ICT absorption band toward TFA and TEA indicates the alteration of donor–acceptor interactions due to protonation and deprotonation of a cyanoacrylic acid unit. Such observations were previously recognized for the ICT based dyes. Further, in order to probe the effect of solvent polarity on the ICT character of the dyes, the solvatochromic analysis was performed. The absorption and emission spectra were recorded in various solvents such as dimethylformamide (DMF), methanol (MeOH), tetrahydrofuran (THF), dichloromethane (DCM) and dioxane. The results are presented in Fig. 3. As the solvent polarity increased the maximum absorption wavelength of PFCC (433 to 402 nm) and PEFCC (427 to 401 nm) blue shifted stemming from a polar interaction and/or deprotonation. Similarly, emission maximum of PFCC (537 to 510 nm) and PEFCC (546 to 494 nm) also blue shifted. These results indicated that both dyes have a negative solvatochromism effect. For instance, in DCM solvent, the more red-shifted wavelength maximum was observed for both absorption and emission spectra. Concurrently, the peaks were shifted to a lower wavelength upon increasing the solvent polarity (Fig. 3). This result reveals the more efficient solvation of the dyes in the polar solvents. This result also corroborates the ICT nature of the dyes. In DCM solvent, both dyes exhibited a red-shift, while in THF solvent an imperative blue shift was observed. The red-shift in absorption in DCM solvent may be due to an instantaneous stabilization due to a rapid reorganization of polarizable electrons during excitation. Further, the blue shift observed for the dyes in THF solvent probably due to the hydrogen bonding interactions of carboxylic acid with the oxygen atom present in tetrahydrofuran solvent may result in a partial deprotonation. This could in turn diminish the donor–acceptor interaction in the dyes and results in a blue shift in absorption. However, a drastic blue-shift was witnessed for both dyes in DMF solvent. Fascinatingly, in DMF, the absorption maxima of the dyes closely matched with those observed in the presence of TEA. This indeed suggests that the dyes are in the deprotonated state in DMF, due to the basic character of DMF.
Further, in order to ascertain this ICT phenomenon, we have performed the frontier molecular orbital (FMO) analysis to understand the nature of electronic excitation as well as ICT character. The highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) levels are illustrated in Fig. 4.
This figure clearly visualizes the push–pull character of the dyes. At HOMO, the electron density mainly localized on the donor (pyrene) part, concurrently at LUMO, the electron density localized on the acceptor part. Therefore, these dye molecules were found to exhibit effective intra-molecular charge transfer from the donor unit to the acceptor unit through the spacer. On critical evaluation of the FMO contribution (Fig. 4), PFCC and PEFCC relatively show similar donor and acceptor contribution for the ICT transition. However, the intensity of ICT band is prominent for PEFCC dye. This is due to retention of 9% of the electron density on the ethynylene bridge (Table S1, ESI). Resultantly, both planarity as well as intensity of the ICT band of the molecule is enhanced. This cause is further confirmed through the examination of optimized geometries of PFCC and PEFCC dyes. Optimized geometries of pyrene derivatives with notable structural parameters are provided in Fig. 5. PFCC is found to exhibit the twisted geometry where the donor group (pyrene unit) is inclined with acceptor and π-bridge (cyanoacrylic acid and furan groups respectively) units at the angle of 141.2°. Strikingly, upon introducing the ethynylene bridge in PFCC dye, the entire D–π–A architecture in PEFCC becomes planar with an angle of −0.11°. The increase in planarity of the entire PEFCC dye reasoned out the origin for a prominent ICT band.
On the other hand, there is a significant electronic density populated on the anchoring group after photoexcitation of the pyrene derivatives. This is encouraging for enhancement of the effective electronic coupling of the excited state dye with the wave function of a TiO2 conduction band. In addition, the ELUMO values (−1.97 eV for PFCC and −2.10 eV for PEFCC) of pyrene derivatives were located above the conduction band edge (Ecb) of TiO2 (−4.0 eV vs. vacuum), while the EHOMO values (−7.15 eV for PFCC and −6.97 eV for PEFCC) were below the energy of the redox species of iodide/triiodide (−4.8 eV vs. vacuum). From these energy levels, we have concluded that both the electron injection and regeneration processes are energetically favourable (Scheme 2). Hence, these molecules are effective candidates for DSC applications.
The absorption spectrum of pyrene derivatives at different concentrations in THF solvent are shown in Fig. S12 (ESI). As can be seen from this figure, upon increasing the concentration of pyrene derivatives, the intensity of absorbance increases and no new bands were observed for either PFCC nor PEFCC. Concurrently, Beer–Lambert law was also obeyed for both PFCC and PEFCC in the concentration ranges from 0.01 to 0.05 mM showing that the pyrene derivatives are not significantly aggregated in the ground state. It should be noted that the molar absorption coefficient value is higher for PEFCC (3.17 × 104 M−1 cm−1@425 nm) than PFCC (1.27 × 104 M−1 cm−1@429 nm). A comparison between these molar absorption coefficient values allows one to observe the effects of the ethynylene substitution. The introduction of an ethynylene spacer increases the extinction coefficient by a factor of almost 2. Such a high absorption coefficient property holding dye will have potential in DSC applications. Hence, it is expected that PEFCC dye may harvest the solar light efficiently. The concentration dependent measurements were also carried out in the excited state by using a fluorescence spectrometer. For fluorescence studies, the samples were excited at the middle tail of the absorption spectrum. The fluorescence spectrum of a 0.01 mM concentration of PEFCC had a maximum at 500 nm. Upon increasing the concentrations, the band at 500 nm shifted to 506 nm, additionally, the intensity of the 506 nm band was decreased relative to the intensity of a 500 nm band (Fig. S13, ESI). However, such observations are not observed for PFCC dye. These results suggested that the PEFCC is more prone to form aggregates in the excited state. Furthermore, to explore the origin of reduction in fluorescence intensity at higher concentrations, we have performed the excited state optimization using the TDDFT method. This optimization is performed mainly to comprehend the structural change in the two dyes upon photoexcitation from S0 to S1 state. Fig. 6 shows the ground and excited state geometry of the dyes and their notable structural parameters.
Upon inspecting this figure, there is not much difference in the S0 and S1 states of PEFCC whereas PFCC is found to have twisted geometry in its S0 state and planar geometry in its S1 state. Intriguingly, both dyes were found to have planar geometry in the S1 state. This planar structure may aggregate in the excited state; as a result it hampers the fluorescence intensity. However, experimentally PEFCC dye shows more pronounced aggregates than PFCC dye. Further, to establish the aggregation of dyes, we have studied the aggregation induced emission changes by varying the water fraction in THF solvent. To study the aggregation induced emission changes in a molecule, a THF:water mixture was employed, since this mixture is commonly used for aggregation induced emission changes. Adding water to the THF solution of a molecule will cause aggregation and result in an emission change. With this context, the fluorescence spectra of pyrene dyes in THF:water mixtures were measured to recognize the aggregation induced emission changes and the results are presented in Fig. 7 and Fig. S14 (ESI).
On close inspection of these figures, PEFCC dye shows an efficient quenching compared to PFCC dye in (10:90) THF:water mixtures. This result unambiguously reveals that PEFCC dye is more prone to aggregation.
Furthermore, the role of the ethynylene spacer on the excited state fluorescence lifetime was investigated. The fluorescence lifetime can be obtained by measuring the fluorescence decay using the time resolved fluorescence technique. Therefore, we have employed the time correlated single photon counting technique to perceive the fluorescence lifetime of pyrene derivatives in THF solution. Fig. 8 shows the fluorescence decay of pyrene derivatives at the excitation wavelength of 375 nm. The decay of PEFCC shows a single exponential whereas PFCC shows a biexponential. Generally, the twisted structure of a dye shows a relatively short and biexponential decay and a more stable conformer results in a single exponential decay. The fluorescence lifetime of PEFCC shows a single exponential decay with a lifetime of 2.27 ns whereas PFCC shows a biexponential decay with lifetimes of 0.12 ns (85%) and 1.38 ns (15%). The average lifetime of PFCC is 0.30 ns. For an efficient dye sensitized semiconductor device, electron injection processes from the excited dye to the semiconductor are likely to take place on the time scale of 1–10 ps. Thus, the dye should hold the lifetime of the singlet excited state for about >1 ns. The relatively longer fluorescence lifetime (>1 ns) of PEFCC may have higher power conversion efficiency than PFCC. This further demonstrates the importance of the ethynylene spacer on the dye molecule.

The electrochemical properties of pyrene dyes in THF solution were investigated by cyclic voltammetry to probe more information on the feasibility of electron injection and dye regeneration processes (Fig. S15, ESI and Table 2). Both dyes showed quasi-reversible behavior and the Eox was around 1.3–1.4 V vs. NHE, suggesting that the changes in π-spacers do not make a large difference. To understand the role of π-spacers in electrochemical properties, we have compared similar dye molecules described in the literature. The ground state oxidation potential of the dyes vary in the order 1.42 V (PCC) > 0.906 V (PTCC) > 1.31 V (PFECC) > 1.30 V (PFCC), illustrating the influence of π-spacers between the pyrene and acceptor moieties. The cathodically shifted HOMO level values are confirming the manifestation of the effect of sulphur and oxygen atoms in the five membered spacer rings. Thus the incorporation of a thiophene group with a less electronegative character facilitates the oxidation while that of a furan group with electronegative oxygen substituents to give PFCC discourages it. However, the more positive potential of pyrene dyes than the electrochemical potential of the iodide/triiodide redox couple (0.4 V vs. NHE) ensures the feasible regeneration of the oxidized dye. Moreover, the excited-state oxidation potentials (*Eox) of PFCC and PEFCC are derived from the difference between ground state oxidation potential and energy gap (Eox − E0–0) are −1.30 V and −1.31 V, respectively. The E0–0 is estimated from the intersection wavelength of the normalized emission and absorption spectra of the dyes in solution. The *Eox potentials of the two dyes are more negative than the conduction band edge of TiO2 (−0.5 V vs. NHE), ensuring that the electron injection process from the excited state of the dyes into the TiO2 is thermodynamically favorable. These results confirm that the newly synthesized dyes have sufficient driving force for both the injection of electrons from the excited state of the dyes into the TiO2 and the oxidized dyes to recapture an electron from the I−/I3− electrolyte. A close similarity in the energy levels of pyrene dyes directs the question of getting significant difference in power conversion efficiency.

Parameters

PFCC


PEFCC


λ
max (nm)
429
425

ε (M−1 cm−1)
1.27 × 104
3.17 × 104

λ
emi (nm)
521
500

τ
S (ns)
0.3
2.27

E
(0,0) (eV)
2.69
2.71

E
(ox) (V)
1.30
1.31

E
(ox)* (V)
−1.39
−1. 40

J
sc (mA cm−2)
5.24
5.96

V
oc (V)
0.58
0.64
FF
0.62
0.64

η (%)
1.89
2.47

In order to comprehend the role of the ethynylene spacer in the light harvesting properties of pyrene derivatives on a TiO2 surface, 4 μm-TiO2 nanocrystalline films were prepared from a commercially available TiO2 paste (Solaronix SA, Ti-Nanoxide HT/SC series) and they were sensitized in 0.5 mM of pyrene derivatives in THF at room temperature for 1 h. The normalized UV-vis absorption spectra of pyrene derivatives adsorbed on transparent TiO2 films are shown in Fig. S16 (ESI). The maximal absorption peaks for PFCC and PEFCC on TiO2 films appeared at 425, and 420 nm, respectively. Moreover, their absorption characteristics on TiO2 film are different from the THF solution. On TiO2 surface, the absorption spectra of pyrene derivatives were broadened due to the interaction of the anchoring group of the dyes with TiO2 which was usually observed for dye/TiO2 systems. More importantly, the tail of absorption spectra of PFCC and PEFCC are 525 nm and 575 nm, respectively. This long tail absorption allows the dye molecules to harvest visible light more efficiently and thus increases the photocurrent response region with an increase of short-circuit current density (Jsc). Intriguingly, ethynylene spacer containing PEFCC dye has a long tail absorption, therefore one can expect higher short current density for this dye compared with PFCC. Moreover, the amount of dye molecules adsorbed on the TiO2 surface was determined using eqn (1) and found to be 3.42 × 10−8 mol cm−2 for PFCC and 4.58 × 10−8 mol cm−2 for PEFCC.

Γ = A(λ)/σ(λ)
(1)
where,
A(λ) is the absorbance and σ(λ) is the optical cross section at a given wavelength, respectively. Using eqn (2), one can able to calculate the σ(λ).

σ(λ) = ε(λ) × 1000 (cm3 L−1)
(2)
The obtained higher surface coverage value for a PEFCC molecule suggests that the overall light harvesting efficiency (LHE) or Jsc of the devices will be strongly affected.


Fig. 9a shows the current–voltage (I–V) characteristics of the pyrene derivative-based devices under AM 1.5G solar irradiation. The short-circuit photocurrent density (Jsc), open-circuit voltage (Voc), and fill factor (FF) of the solar cell based on PEFCC are 5.96 mA cm−2, 0.64 V, and 0.64, respectively, yielding an overall conversion efficiency (η) of 2.47%. Under the same conditions, the device based on PFCC shows lower Jsc and Voc values, leading to an inferior η value of 1.89% (Table 2). For a fair comparison, the N719-sensitized DSC was also fabricated under the same conditions and yielded η value of 4.12%. Of all the dyes tested, the cell based on PEFCC displays the higher η of 2.47% reaching ∼60% of the standard N719-based cell (4.12%) fabricated under the same conditions. Intriguingly, PEFCC shows better solar cell performance compared with that of its thiophene derivative (0.60%) and without spacer (PCC, 0.34%). As discussed above, the PEFCC results in a higher Jsc value than PFCC. In order to rationalize the observed higher Jsc of PEFCC, the following discussions were made.

LHE is the fraction of light intensity absorbed by the dye in the DSCs and strongly depends on the molar absorption coefficient value of the dye and its surface coverage (Γ) onto the TiO2 film as given by the following eqn (3) and (4)
LHE = 1–10−Γσ(λ)
(3)
(4)
Based on eqn (3), the LHE spectra of the dye/TiO2 films are plotted and shown in Fig. 9b. From this figure, it is clear that PEFCC have higher LHE than PFCC. This factor is responsible for the observed higher power conversion efficiency of PEFCC. Further, from LHE, it is possible to obtain the generated photocurrent density in short-circuit (Jsc) by using the following eqn (5)
(5)
where
q is the electron charge, F(λ) and LHE(λ) are the incident photon flux under AM 1.5 and the LHE at wavelength λ, respectively, φinj is the electron injection efficiency, and ηcoll is the electron collection efficiency. It is clear from eqn (3) and (5) that increasing the ε value of the dyes, their adsorbing amount (LHE) will lead to higher photocurrent (ISC) of DSCs. Between the dyes, the device based on PEFCC shows the highest ISC of 5.96 mA cm−2 which is larger than that of PFCC. The higher ISC of PEFCC than PFCC is due to its high molar absorptivity and a large dye-absorbing amount.

Generally, recombination of injected electrons in the conduction band of TiO2 with dye cations, leading to lower open-circuit voltage (Voc), depends strongly on the molecular structure of the dye sensitizer. The reported timescale of recombination is 1–100 microseconds, therefore nanosecond laser flash photolysis measurements have been carried out in order to probe the variation in Voc of the pyrene dyes. To probe the recombination kinetics, the dye cation absorption is very necessary. To visualize the spectral features of the dye cation, the pyrene derivatives were chemically oxidized by the addition of one equivalent of nitrosonium tetrafluoroborate in THF. Fig. S17 (ESI) shows the spectral changes of pyrene derivatives with nitrosonium tetrafluoroborate. This figure exhibits the new and a broad absorption band with peak maxima at 460 nm that was apparent for the Py˙+ species. Based on this spectral evidence and previous reports, we unanimously assigned the new band maximum at 460 nm to the cation radical of the pyrene. Hence, a probe light at 460 nm was used in the transient kinetic measurements. Fig. 10 shows the transient absorption decay of pyrene derivatives. This figure clearly reveals that pyrene with ethynylene spacer (PEFCC) shows the long decay dynamics compared to PFCC dye. Further, through fitting of the decays, the electron recombination rates have been determined and were found to be 1.75 × 105 s−1 & 4.20 × 104 s−1 for PFCC & PEFCC, respectively. This clearly suggests that the electron recombination pathway is minimized through the incorporation of the ethynylene spacer.
Further, the trends in Voc of the pyrene dyes can be evaluated by estimating the electron transport resistance (Rct2) in the devices across the TiO2/dye/electrolyte interface with the aid of electrochemical impedance spectroscopic (EIS) measurements. The electrochemical impedance analyses of the devices were performed over the frequency range of 100 mHz to 200 kHz under illumination at an AC amplitude of 10 mV. The Nyquist plot of pyrene dyes are displayed in Fig. 11, which shows two semicircles which correspond to the charge-transfer resistances at the counter electrode and TiO2/dye/electrolyte interface, respectively. In general, the EIS spectrum of DSCs having a configuration of FTO/TiO2/dye/electrolyte/Pt/ITO, displays three semicircles with the different frequency ranges. The first and second semicircles correspond to the charge-transfer resistances at the counter electrode (Rct1) and the TiO2/dye/electrolyte interface (Rct2), respectively. In our studies the value of Rct2 is considered to be important since the interfacial resistance value differs based on the dye structure. From the obtained data, order of the Rct2 values was found to be: PFCC (232 Ω) > PEFCC (108 Ω). This trend was consistent with that observed for the Voc values of the pyrene dyes. The low Rct2 observed for the PEFCC device is matching with the high Jsc and Voc values. Further, the high Voc for PEFCC is supported by the relatively long electron lifetime deduced from the transient absorption kinetic studies (Fig. 10). To summarize, the best performance of PEFCC mainly originates from long lived electrons and low Rct2.

In summary, we have synthesized two new D–π–A dyes (PFCC and PEFCC) based on pyrene donor, cyanoacrylic acid acceptor comprising of furan and furan-ethynyl unit as π-spacers by employing Suzuki, Sonagashira coupling and Knoevenagel condensation reactions. The ground and excited state properties of the dyes have been investigated both theoretically and experimentally. It was found that the dye with the ethynyl unit showed a higher molar extinction coefficient, which is an essential property for harvesting the light efficiently. A strong interaction between the PEFCC dye and TiO2 was evidenced by an appreciable absorption tail extending to 580 nm. Indeed, the excellent light-harvesting capability of PEFCC dye led to a high Jsc of 5.96 mA cm−2. Moreover, PEFCC dye exhibits an over 60 mV enhanced open-circuit voltage (Voc) than PFCC owing to a slower charge recombination rate. With this incredible increase of Voc, PEFCC bestows a high efficiency of 2.47%, reaching 60% of the ruthenium dye (N719) based reference cell under the same conditions. Overall, planar dye (PEFCC) exhibited significantly better PCE as compared with the twisted dye. These findings provide more insight into structure–property relationships for organic dyes essentially employed in DSCs applications.


There are no conflicts to declare.


A. K. thanks the Department of Science and Technology, India, for DST-INSPIRE Faculty Award [IFA12-CH-78]. A. K. also acknowledges IIT, SAIF, for the NMR and MS-EI facilities.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: NMR and Mass characterization and additional figures. See DOI: 10.1039/c7cp08038g
This journal is © the Owner Societies 2018