 DOI: 10.1039/C7TA00404D
(Highlight)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 11401-11409


E. L.
Unger
*,

L.
Kegelmann
,

K.
Suchan
,

D.
Sörell
,

L.
Korte
 and 

S.
Albrecht


Chemical Physics and NanoLund, Lund University, Box 124, SE-22100, Lund, Sweden Lund, Sweden. E-mail: eva.unger@chemphys.lu.se

Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin für Materialien und Energie GmbH, Young Investigator Group Hybrid Materials Formation and Scaling, Kekuléstraße 5, 12489 Berlin, Germany. E-mail: eva.unger@helmholtz-berlin.de

Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin für Materialien und Energie GmbH, Institut für Silizium-Photovoltaik, Kekuléstraße 5, 12489 Berlin, Germany

Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin für Materialien und Energie GmbH, Young Investigator Group Perovskite Tandem Solar Cells, Kekuléstraße 5, 12489 Berlin, Germany

Received
12th January 2017
, Accepted 29th March 2017
First published on 29th March 2017
Solar cells based on metal-halide perovskite semiconductors inspire high hopes for efficient low cost solar cell technology. This material class exhibits a facile tunability of the band gap making them interesting for multi-junction device technology. We here compare and highlight trends in the band gap tunability and device performance metrics in reported metal halide perovskite alloys of a wide compositional range from low band gap compounds, such as FA0.75Cs0.25Sn0.5Pb0.5I3 with an absorption onset of 1.2 eV, to high bandgap compounds, such as CsPbBr3 with an absorption onset close to 2.4 eV. In between, metal halide perovskites can seemingly be seamlessly tuned by compositional engineering. However, mixed bromide–iodide compounds with band gaps above 1.7 eV often exhibit photo-induced phase segregation inducing domains with lower band gaps that emit photons of low energy. This effect also reduces the photoluminescence quantum yield and hence the maximum open circuit voltage achievable in devices. This highlight summarizes general trends for metal halide perovskites with respect to their absorption onset. Furthermore recent progress as well as possible roadblocks for the band gap tunability of metal halide perovskites are highlighted as this is of particular importance for the development of multifunction solar cell technology.
E. L. Unger
Eva Unger is an Assistant Professor at the Department of Chemistry at Lund University (Sweden) and an affiliated member of NanoLund. After her PhD studies at Uppsala University (Sweden), she investigated dynamic hysteresis phenomena in hybrid perovskite solar cell devices and in-process film formation during her postdoctoral research at Stanford University (USA) with a stipend from the Marcus and Amalia Wallenberg Foundation (Sweden). She is currently co-affiliated between Lund University, Sweden and Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin, Germany through an International Career Grant from the Swedish research agency, cofunded by the Marie Sklodowska Curie Actions. She recently became a Young Investigator Group leader focusing on the scaling and in-process formation studies of hybrid materials for printable optoelectronic devices at Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin.
S. Albrecht
Steve Albrecht is a Young Investigator Group leader for perovskite based multijunction photovoltaics at the Helmholtz Center Berlin for Materials and Energy. He received a PhD in physics from the University of Potsdam for his work on understanding the photon to collected charge conversion in organic solar cells. For his PhD he was awarded with the Carl-Ramsauer-Prize and the Young Researcher Prize of the Berlin physical Society and the Leibniz-Kolleg Potsdam, respectively. After PhD he started a Postdoc at Helmholtz-Center Berlin where he developed, together with collaborators from EPFL, the first monolithic perovskite/silicon heterojunction tandem solar cell. His recently established group focuses on the further development of highly efficient perovskite based multijunction devices.

Solar cells based on metal halide perovskites have become a hot topic in solar energy research as reported device efficiencies have increased at a staggering pace ever since the first solar cells with power conversion efficiencies approaching 10% were realized in 2012. After a few years of intensive world-wide research record device efficiencies exceeding 22% have been demonstrated.Fig. 1 illustrates power conversion efficiency trends of metal halide perovskite solar cell devices as a function of the absorption onset of the metal halide perovskite absorber. In comparison, the estimated maximum power conversion efficiency for a solar cell device with negligible reflectance loss, converting all photons above the absorption onset with unity probability (as in Fig. 4, left), the maximum open-circuit voltage being absorption onset minus 0.3 eV (Fig. 4, right) and with an assumed fill factor of 0.8 is shown. Note that in this highlight, we preferably refer to the absorption onset rather than the band gap when discussing experimental data as it is usually the former that is directly available from experimental data sets due to excitonic contributions to the spectrum close to the band gap. A range of materials of different band gaps are obtained by compositional engineering of ABX3 perovskite semiconductors, where methylammonium (MA), formamidinium (FA) and cesium (Cs) are most commonly utilized as monovalent A-cations within the perovskite lattice. Higher band gap perovskite absorbers have been realized through bromide–iodide alloying. Recent work demonstrated the potential to obtain low band gap hybrid perovskites with absorption onsets of 1.2 eV in lead–tin alloys of metal halide perovskites.

Engineering efficient solar cell devices comprising absorber materials with different band gap energies is of high importance in regard to making efficient multi-junction solar cell devices. Tandem solar cell devices comprising metal-halide based perovskites as one or both absorbers in a tandem stack have been identified as a promising approach to realize scalable and low-cost hybrid tandem solar cell device technology.
Experimental work has demonstrated monolithic perovskite/silicon tandem devices reaching more than 23% power conversion efficiency and 4-terminal devices with 25%. For perovskite/CIGS tandems power conversion efficiencies higher than 22% have been reported for a 4-terminal configuration. For perovskite/perovskite tandem devices, 18% and 21% in monolithic and 4-terminal configuration were shown, respectively.
Theoretical estimations predict that the efficiency of tandem devices incorporating perovskite solar cell technology with established silicon technology can approach 30%. These estimates, based on optical simulations, predict that further improvements in the experimental device performance are feasible by minimizing parasitic absorption losses in contact layers and tuning the band gap of the metal halide perovskite absorber to about 1.75 eV. Modeling often assumes that all light above the absorber's band gap is absorbed and converted into current with unity efficiency. For optimized state-of-the-art perovskite solar cell devices, increasing the band gap to 1.75 eV will also require a concurrent increase of the absorber layer thickness to 1.3 μm. Charge carrier diffusion lengths have to exceed this value to ensure efficient charge carrier collection. Recent experimental results demonstrate that the charge carrier diffusion length of electrons and holes can be up to 50 μm (ref. 39) in the absence of grain boundaries; the latter will limit the charge carrier diffusion length due to recombination at surface defect states. Models also assume, that the open circuit voltage scales with the band gap of the perovskite absorber with the discrepancy being 0.5 eV at most.
We here highlight the progress and achievements in engineering hybrid perovskite based solar cell device technology with particular focus on the band gap tunability of these materials. The power conversion efficiency of selected experimental data sets for hybrid perovskite based solar cells is summarized in Fig. 1 as a function of the absorption onset of the hybrid perovskite absorber. The data compared herein reflects the current state of perovskite solar cell technology with an emphasis on the tunability of the band gap and discusses limitations in the phase stability of higher band gap materials obtained by halide-alloying due to photo-induced phase segregations caused by halide ion migration, coined the Hoke effect.
We further compare experimental device performance metrics such as the power conversion efficiency, the short circuit current and the open circuit voltage of single junction devices as a function of the absorption onset of the perovskite absorber to assess how close devices are to their theoretical limit. This comparison highlights the state-of-the art, the necessity for further research and development as well as possible bottle-necks for hybrid perovskite solar energy conversion devices.

Already in the first reports on methylammonium containing lead and tin based halide perovskites by Weber in 1978, crystals of different colors were obtained by varying the halide composition. This demonstrated that the band gap and the lattice parameter of the semiconducting materials correlates with the effective anion radius of the halides. In solar cells, band gap tuning of organic metal halide perovskites by halide substitution was reported by Noh et al. in early 2013 in the MAPb(BrxI1−x)3 series. Since then, a vast compositional space of perovskite compounds with the general formula ABX3 has been investigated and tested for their use as absorbers in solar cell devices.


Fig. 2 relates reported experimental values for the absorption onset of ABX3 compounds and alloys comprising multiple cations or anions, to the estimated pseudo-cubic lattice parameter a0. Details on how the experimental data shown here was determined for each individual dataset of the original report is specified in the ESI. The data sets compared here stem from a range of different ABX3 compounds where A could be monovalent organic cations such as methylammonium (MA+) or formamidinium (FA+), inorganic cations such as cesium (Cs+), or a mixture of these. For the scope of this comparison, ABX3 compounds comprising lead (Pb2+), tin (Sn2+) or a mixture of these as the divalent B2+-cation are compared. Regarding the anion, we limited our scope to bromide (Br−) or iodide (I−) but mostly mixtures as we were particularly interested to highlight trends in the energetic range accessible for halide alloys. The data sets compared here are just a fraction of the reported results for metal halide perovskite based semiconductors. We here focused on reports presenting series of compounds to analyze and generalize trends for a broad compositional range spanning band gaps of interest for multi-junction devices.
The pseudo-cubic lattice parameter a0 of tetragonal or orthorhombic phases can often be related to a pseudo-cubic lattice by simple geometrical considerations, or be determined from the volume of the unit cell. For the MAPb(BrxI1−x)3 series, compounds with bromide contents exceeding 15% adopt a cubic crystal structure while compounds with a lower Br content adopt a tetragonal crystal structure similar to MAPbI3 at room temperature.
Plotted in blue color and highlighted with a pink bar in Fig. 2, we here compare five data sets for the MAPb(BrxI1−x)3 series derived from published data by Noh et al., Hoke et al., Sadhanala et al. and Fedeli et al. as well as experimental data from the master thesis of D. Sörell (see ESI). A certain discrepancy between the experimental data sets is expected as the respective methods to e.g. determine the absorption onset from optical absorption (Tauc plotsvs. absorption onsets) was not identical for the different data sets and small deviations could arise from data sets being measured and analyzed in different laboratories. Yet, the data sets follow a reasonably similar trend. This is especially apparent for absorption onsets ranging from 1.6 eV to about 1.8 eV, above which data points are considerably more scattered. The larger discrepancy in the experimental data for absorption onsets larger than 1.8 eV can be rationalized by the observed ionic inhomogeneity of higher band gap MAPb(BrxI1−x)3 compounds that we will discuss further in Section 2.2. For the pure MAPbBr3 compounds, however, the experimental data points are quite congruent again, explicable with the absence of ionic inhomogeneity in these materials.
In comparison to the trend observed for MAPb(BrxI1−x)3, the lead-halide derivatives comprising (FA), the mixed (MA/FA) or mixed (Cs/FA) cations follow the a0 dependency of the absorption onset quite closely. This agrees with band gap calculations for lead-halide perovskite materials that have shown that the lowest energy electronic band-to-band transition is dominated by the Pb-6p orbitals for the conduction band minimum and Pb-6s and I-5p orbitals for the valence band maximum. The central A+-cation only affects the band gap by influencing the lattice size but its orbitals do not directly contribute to band to band electron transitions. The CsPb(BrxI1−x)3 (ref. 16 and 17) series (Fig. 2, highlighted with an orange bar) deviates from the trend observed for MAPb(BrxI1−x)3 towards lower a0 for higher Br contents. Some of the compounds of the triple-cation (MAyFA1−y)1−zCszPbI3 alloys (Fig. 2, brown/white square) introduced by Saliba et al. exhibit a similar offset compared to the CsPb(BrxI1−x)3 series suggesting that Cs inclusion on the A-site of the lattice affects the band gap in a comparable manner. Cs-inclusion in the crystal lattice was also confirmed by the relative increase of the X-ray reflex stemming from the diagonal plane in the cubic crystal lattice suggesting the inclusion of a heavier atom with a higher structure factor compared to the weakly scattering organic moieties. A parallel trend but shifted to lower a0 is also observed for tin based MASn(BrxI1−x)3 (ref. 26) compounds (Fig. 2, green/white diamond). A similar shift of the trend is also observed in tin–lead alloys MA (PbzSn1−z)I3 and (CsyFA1−y)(PbzSn1−z)I3 compounds recently investigated by Patrini et al. (petrol arrows) and Eperon et al. (petrol diamonds), that have been investigated for low band gap absorber perovskite solar cell devices of particular interest for perovskite–perovskite tandem solar cells.
For tin-based perovskite semiconductors, trends in the absorption onset as a function of lattice parameter a0 do not exhibit the same close agreement in experimental data sets and values for identical compounds do not always agree. This can be rationalized by the facile oxidation of divalent Sn2+ to tetravalent Sn4+ in ambient conditions making material characterization difficult and causing materials to exhibit metallic rather than semiconductor properties. Further studies of experimental data sets produced under controlled synthesis and measurement conditions are necessary to establish a trend line similar to the one found for lead based compounds.
We conclude that the absorption onset of metal-halide perovskite can be readily tuned by compositional engineering. Lower band gaps have been successfully engineered by alloys of divalent tin and lead cations while higher band gap perovskites can be feasibly obtained by halide alloys. The general tunability of metal halide perovskites through compositional engineering alone is not sufficient to ensure efficient power conversion under operating conditions as will be emphasized in the following sections.

For higher band gap perovskite materials such as MAPb(BrxI1−x)3, Hoke et al. observed a peculiar photo-induced formation of a low-energy emission peak during photoluminescence measurements, which they explained with a photo-induced phase segregation in mixed halide lead perovskite alloys. This effect is partially reversible exhibiting phase segregation under illumination and phase homogenization in the dark. Former colleagues of the author who described this phenomenon first have termed it Hoke effect, an expression which we will happily adopt here. This phenomenon was for the first time giving direct evidence of photo-induced halide migration that we had postulated to play a role in current–voltage hysteresis. Ion migration is now an established phenomenon in metal halide perovskite semiconductor devices and was also invoked to explain trap-state curing effects giving rise to photo-induced photoluminescence enhancement. X-ray diffraction data proved that illumination indeed causes the mixed halide phase to segregate into a low-energy iodide phase and a bromide-enriched high-energy phase.

To capture the effect of photo-induced shifts in the photoluminescence, we compiled experimental values of the peak energies of the initial and final photoluminescence emission peak energy after light-soaking in Fig. 3 for several different mixed bromide/iodide lead-halide alloys. Again, combining several data sets enables us to identify general trends in the experimental data more clearly and permits generalized insights into fundamental properties of metal halide perovskites independent of particular sample preparation and measurement conditions of individual data sets.
Firstly, for all compounds the band gap can initially be increased by chemical substitution of iodide with bromide. Above a certain threshold, about 1.7 eV for MAPb(BrxI1−x)3 and about 1.9 for CsPb(BrxI1−x)3, all data sets exhibit the formation of lower energy emitting sites. What determines the onset of the effect and the energy or composition of the lowest energy emitting site is yet not entirely clear. While Cs0.15FA0.85Pb(Br0.4I0.6)3 (ref. 35) compound contains more bromide the onset of the Hoke effect for these compounds coincides with the MAPb(BrxI1−x)3 and hence does not seem to be determined by the Br content alone. Despite the inclusion of a smaller cation, the effective ion radius of Cs0.15FA0.85 is 2.4 Å and hence larger than the ion radius of 2.17 Å for methylammonium. This counter balances the effect on the lattice dimensions and hence the band gap by the smaller bromide ion. Secondly, pure bromide compounds do not exhibit phase segregation proving that the Hoke effect indeed is related to the presence of mixed halides. Thirdly, for some compositions of (MAyFA1−y)Pb(BrxI1−x)3 (ref. 12) as well as the CsPb(BrxI1−x)3 (ref. 16 and 17) series, higher band gap compounds of up to 1.9 eV seem to be realizable without significant PL peak shifts upon soaking. This gives reason to hope that phase homogeneity can be stabilized through obtaining alloys with higher crystallinity and ionic homogeneity.
Another intriguing feature is that the PL emission peak of the low energy phase after light-soaking seems to depend on the cation. For FAPb(BrxI1−x)3 the lowest PL emission energy is 1.52 eV, for MAPb(BrxI1−x)3 it is closer to 1.7 eV and for CsPb(BrxI1−x)3 even higher photo-stable band gaps of about 1.9 eV can be reached, indicated by dashed arrows in Fig. 3. What determines the energy of those lower energy phases formed preferentially out of a mixed bromide/iodide phase remains unclear. As this must be a phase or composition favored by the thermodynamics of the material under illumination, some reports have speculated on a minimum in the Helmholtz free energy for the de-mixed state under illumination. For MAPb(BrxI1−x)3 the onset of the Hoke effect and energy of the low energy phase is about 1.68 eV, which according to Fig. 3 corresponds to a0 = 6.22 Å which is approximately the composition where the tetragonal-to-cubic phase transition for the MAPb(BrxI1−x)3 series at room temperature is observed. The energetically most favorable phase coinciding with the lattice parameter where the cubic lattice would be the largest is an alternative explanation to the observed phenomenon.
Numerous recent reports address the driving force for the Hoke effect. Transient absorption data exhibits ground state bleach signals of species characteristically different in energy indicating the co-existence of a bromide and an iodide-rich phase. Fast energy transfer of excitations in the higher energy phase was observed to occur to the lower energy phase that acts as a trap. In a detailed analysis of the excitation energy and repetition rate dependence of the Hoke effect, Yang et al. were able to postulate the existence of long-lived photo-induced polaronic states with depopulation times reaching ms. These polar states are hypothesized to locally drive ion migration with lower energy sites being formed and growing into bigger domains over time and acting as charge carrier traps. This interpretation is corroborated by the work of Bischak et al. who visualized the spatial segregation into iodide and bromide rich domains through cathodo-luminescence experiments.
In this regard, the compositional inhomogeneity seems to be one of the determining factors favoring the population of lower energy sites. Whether low energy trap states are intrinsic to materials exceeding a certain bromide content or whether these states are photo-induced has been subject to some debate. Compositions exhibiting a strong Hoke effect are found to exhibit a slower decay vs. energy (higher Urbach energy) in the exponential tail-state distribution reflecting a high ionic inhomogeneity. The ionic homogeneity directly correlates with the charge carrier lifetime and mobility. Also, photo-induced halide segregation is suppressed in highly crystalline materials. This suggests that higher band gap alloys could indeed be obtained, if alloys with no phase inhomogeneity are prepared.
One should consider, however, that both the formation energy and activation energy for halide vacancy migration are comparatively small in lead halide perovskites. Creation of low energy trap states and ionic inhomogeneity is hence very likely to occur in these materials under operation conditions of solar energy conversion devices. Compounds comprising only one type of halide such as the higher band gap lead bromide compounds, the recently explored low band gap Sn–Pb iodide alloys or mixed cation compounds recently optimized for record devices might hence be a better choice in the exploration of higher band gap materials for multi-junction devices.

Comparing various data sets for a vast compositional space of metal halide perovskite absorber materials ranging in their band gap energy from 1.2 eV for low absorption onset (CsyFA1−y)(PbzSn1−z)I3 compounds to a high band gap of 2.3 eV for bromide-based lead perovskites, trends and limitations of state-of-the art perovskite solar cell technology can be assessed. Compiling many experimental data sets available in the literature, the tremendous progress in device performance of hybrid perovskite solar cells can be appreciated. Devices based on materials with absorption onsets of about 1.6 eV are getting closer to the theoretical performance limit for single junction devices and efficient high band gap devices have been achieved as well. Plotting the device performance as a function of absorption onset also clearly shows that there is further room for improvements for lower band gap metal halide perovskite based devices. For higher band gap compounds, the device performance trends seem to exhibit a gap between materials with absorption onsets of 1.7 eV and 2.3 eV probably related to limitations stemming from the Hoke effect discussed in Section 2.2 which we will discuss further in Section 3.2.

We will here compare both trends in the short circuit current density, JSC, and the open circuit voltage, VOC, as a function of the band gap of the absorber layer. These two performance metrics reflect whether a solar cell device technology approaches its theoretical maximum or whether there is room and the necessity for improvements.

The maximum photocurrent that can be generated by a solar cell is defined by the integral over the product of the spectral dependence of the external quantum efficiency, EQE, of the light harvesting material and the spectrum of the light source. In Fig. 4 (left), the expected maximum short circuit current density JSC that can be generated is plotted as a function of the absorber's absorption onset estimated by integration of the AM1.5 G spectrum over the absorption onset. This calculations neglects parasitic absorption losses. Notably, some of the reported experimental values for the short-circuit current density are extremely close to the maximum short-circuit current for a device comprising an absorber of this band gap. Reported short-circuit current densities could be subject to slight inaccuracies in the determination of the active area of the device and the intensity of the illumination source as well as a spectral mismatch between the illumination source used for measurements and the AM1.5 spectrum. In addition, photocurrents are prone to be overestimated when capacitive effects in current–voltage measurements are not accounted for ref. 49 and 65.

Included in Fig. 4 (left) are experimental short-circuit current values for various different compounds reported in the literature of devices with MAPb(BrxI1−x)3, FAPb(BrxI1−x)3, CsPb(BrxI1−x)3 (ref. 16, 17 and 22) and mixed cation derivatives as well as lower energy compounds containing tin. The data collection showcases the tremendous progress made in perovskite photovoltaics due to intensive device and material engineering in the past couple of years. The emergence of mixed-cation materials has led to new device efficiency records that clearly outperform single junction devices of pure MAPbI3. Intriguingly, for many of the different band gap materials, photocurrents approaching the theoretical limit have been reported in the literature. During the last year, great progress has also been made in the development of Sn-based perovskite solar cell devices that hold the promise for devices with a lower Pb content. In terms of the obtained JSC these compounds still perform far from their optimum, but further progress can be expected through device engineering in the next years. These lower band gap materials are of particular interest for the realization of perovskite/perovskite tandem solar cell devices.


Fig. 4 (right) shows a summary of reported open circuit voltages, VOC, of the different ABX3 compounds. Again, a significant improvement of the device performance has been achieved since early reports on metal halide perovskite solar cell devices e.g. by Noh et al. in 2013. This, again, can be attributed to substantial improvements in the device architecture, selective contact layers, deposition procedures and compositional engineering of the absorber material. Recent record efficiency devices exhibit outstanding energetic differences below 0.5 eV between the absorption onset and the open circuit voltage under one sun illumination. Some of the lower energy, Sn based perovskite, absorber materials already perform even more favorably in terms of the difference between the absorption onset and VOC. The lowest reported difference between the VOC and the absorption onset for a perovskite solar cell is 0.35 eV for tin-based and 0.39 eV for lead-based hybrid perovskite absorbers, which makes perovskite solar cell device technology comparable to highly efficient silicon solar cells.

For compounds with band gaps exceeding 1.65 eV the comparison of various data sets emphasizes a sudden drop off in the VOC accompanied with an increasing difference between measured and expected voltage in Fig. 3 (left). This effect was already visible in the data published by Noh et al. The transition coincides with the onset of the Hoke effect discussed in Section 2.2. The photo-induced formation of a lower energy phase will lead to a reduction in the photoluminescence quantum yield directly affecting the VOC. However, the feasibility of synthesizing photo-stable materials with a band gap of 1.7 eV and high open circuit voltages is good news for the realization of hybrid tandem devices with low band gap absorbers such as silicon or CIGS.
Interestingly, while Cs-based compounds do not exhibit the Hoke effect for compounds with the absorption onset up to 1.9 eV, the experimental VOCs of devices prepared with these materials still perform far below the expected value. Potentially, this can be rectified by device engineering but potentially also these compounds will prove to be more prone to photo-induced phase segregation when simultaneously exposed to an electrical bias. The beneficial effect of systematic device engineering and contact optimization on device performance is apparent from the achieved increase of device performance for high band gap pure bromide lead perovskite devices.
The physical origin and thermodynamic driving force of the Hoke effect is becoming increasingly clear and the dynamics and extent of this phenomenon is strongly related to the ionic homogeneity of mixed halide perovskite semiconductors. Optimistically, we hope to be able to mitigate this effect through optimization of the crystallinity and ionic homogeneity of higher band gap materials. The choice of cation and cation-alloys show some promise as approaches towards achieving this goal. However, as already remarked in Section 2.2, metal halide perovskite absorbers under operation in a solar cell device might eventually succumb to light and thermally induced stress that could lead to the formation of ion vacancies, which would consecutively lead to ion migration and phase segregation.

Through the collection and comparison of several experimental data sets we were able to draw generalized conclusions regarding the tunability, photo-stability and device performance metrics of metal halide perovskites. We examined a broad compositional space of alloys with band gap energies ranging from Sn-containing materials with an absorption onset of 1.2 eV to pure bromide lead-based compounds with absorption onsets around 2.3 eV.

The absorption onset of the metal halide semiconductors correlates with the size of the pseudo-cubic perovskite crystal lattice dimensions and absorption data suggests that the band gap of hybrid (containing MA or FA) and fully inorganic (containing Cs or Rb) metal halide perovskites is tunable over a wide energetic range. However, there is a limitation to the tunability due to photo-induced phase segregation for compounds in the band gap range between about 1.7 eV (1.9 eV for Cs-based perovskites) and 2.3 eV. For solar cell devices based on higher band gap mixed halide perovskites, the implications of the Hoke effect are that despite the seemingly seamless tunability of the optical band gap, the photo-voltage of higher band gap devices is often significantly below the theoretically limiting value. However, the existence of photo-stable metal halide perovskite absorbers with a band gap of 1.7 eV is promising for the realization of efficient multi-junction device technology based on devices with a 1.1 eV band gap such as silicon or CIGS.
Overall, viewing experimental data sets in direct comparison categorized by the absorption onset of the perovskite absorber recapitulates the tremendous progress in metal halide based perovskite solar cell devices world-wide. Making alloys by mixing different cations and anions has been a successful strategy to increase the efficiency and stability of single junction devices. Recent work on Sn–Pb alloys shows great promise in obtaining low band gap materials and further improvements to the device performance can be expected by device, contact and process engineering. Also, the tunability of metal halide perovskites is not seamless as photo-induced phase segregation in mixed bromide–iodide alloys might prove to be an obstacle difficult to overcome and different chemical strategies have to be explored to obtained stable hybrid perovskites in the band gap range between 1.7 and 2.3 eV.


Fig. 1 and 4: adapted from experimental data in ref. 22 published under an ACS Author Choice Licence. Reprinted with permission from ref. 9. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. Adapted from ref. 14. Published by The Royal Society of Chemistry (RSC) from ref. 18. Reprinted with permission from AAAS Copyright 2016. Adapted with permission from ref. 17. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society, adapted from ref. 16. Copyright 2016, published by WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. Adapted from ref. 12 with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry (RSC) from ref. 35. Reprinted with permission from AAAS. Adapted from ref. 23. Copyright 2016, published by WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. Adapted from ref. 24 with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry. Adapted from ref. 25. Copyright 2016, published by WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. Adapted from ref. 3 published under a Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial 3.0 Licence by The Royal Society of Chemistry (RSC) from ref. 4. Adapted with permission from AAAS. Adapted with permission from Macmillan Publisher Ltd: Nature Photonics from ref. 26. Copyright 2014. Adapted from ref. 19. Copyright 2016, published by WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. Adapted with permission from ref. 20. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.


Fig. 2: ref. 11 – published by The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015. Reprinted with permission from ref. 9. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. Reprinted with permission from ref. 10. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. Adapted with permission from ref. 17. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. Reprinted with permission from Macmillan Publisher Ltd: Nature Photonics from ref. 26. Copyright 2014. Adapted from ref. 12 with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry (RSC) from ref. 35. Reprinted with permission from AAAS Copyright 2016. Adapted from ref. 3 published under a Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial 3.0 Licence by The Royal Society of Chemistry (RSC) from ref. 18. Reprinted with permission from AAAS Copyright 2016. Adapted with permission from ref. 46. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. Adapted with permission from ref. 45. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.

Fig. 3: ref. 11 – published by The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015. Reprinted with permission from ref. 9 Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. Adapted with permission from ref. 17. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. Adapted from ref. 12 with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry from ref. 35. Reprinted with permission from AAAS Copyright 2016. Adapted from ref. 55. Published by The Royal Society of Chemistry (RSC).

E. L. U. and K. S. acknowledge financial support from the Swedish Research Council (grant no. 2015-00163) and Marie Sklodowska Curie Actions, Cofund, Project INCA 600398, NanoLund and the Marcus and Amalia Wallenberg foundation. E. L. U. would also like to acknowledge financial support from the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF – NanoMatFutur: 03XP0091). S. A., L. K. and L. K. acknowledge financial support by the Bavarian Ministry for Economics, Media, Energy and Technology through the joint project Hi-ERN, by the BMBF within the project “Materialforschung für die Energiewende” (grant no. 03SF0540), the HyPerCell (Hybrid Perovskite Solar Cells) joint Graduate School as well as the German Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy (BMWi) through the “PersiST” project (grant no. 0324037C).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: I. Experimental data from D. Sörells Master Thesis and II. Comments on how data presented here was derived from original Publications. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta00404d
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017