 DOI: 10.1039/C8TA01215F
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 14215-14223


Hao-Wei
Pang
,

Hsin-Fu
Yu
,

Yi-June
Huang
,

Chun-Ting
Li
 and 

Kuo-Chuan
Ho
*

Department of Chemical Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan. E-mail: kcho@ntu.edu.tw; Fax: +886-2-2362-3040; Tel: +886-2-2366-0739

Institute of Polymer Science and Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan

Advanced Research Center of Green Materials Science and Technology, National Taiwan University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan

Received
5th February 2018
, Accepted 18th June 2018
First published on 20th June 2018
Three novel polymeric ionic liquids (PILs), denoted as PFII-F, PFII-E, and PFII-S, are successfully synthesized by grafting different molar ratios (one-fourth, one eighth, and one sixteenth, respectively) of 1-butylimidazolium iodide onto poly(vinylidene fluoride-co-hexafluoropropylene) (PVDF-HFP). These PFII PILs are fabricated as polymer membranes via a simple electrospinning technique, which are used as the electrolyte for quasi-solid-state (QSS) dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). The PFII membranes have multiple functions including: (1) encapsulation of the liquid electrolyte with good charge transfer and ionic conductivity properties, (2) chelation of Li+ through the lone pair electrons on their fluoride atoms, and (3) filling the dye-uncovered TiO2 surface with their imidazolium segment. Function (1) endows DSSCs with prominent long-term stability, while functions (2) and (3) suppress the dark current. The best QSS-DSSC with the PFII-F membrane shows a larger open-circuit voltage (VOC), comparable short-circuit current density (JSC), better power conversion efficiency (η) of 9.26%, and superior long-term stability (up to 97% of its initial η) over 1500 h compared to the cell with standard liquid electrolyte (8.63%).

Efficient and stable electrolyte systems are necessary for the practical development of dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). As a key component for dye regeneration and charge transportation, a suitable electrolyte for DSSCs needs to meet the following requirements: (1) high redox potential, (2) large diffusion coefficient, (3) good ionic conductivity, (4) negligible visible-light absorption, (4) good thermal and chemical stability, (5) inert toward device components, and (6) limited evaporation and leakage from the device. Accordingly, quasi-solid-state (QSS) electrolytes have attracted significant attention due to their promising performance to prevent the evaporation and leakage of organic solvents, thus extending the durability of DSSCs. Generally, five types of materials are used to gel liquid electrolytes to form QSS electrolytes, including nanoparticles (can reach a cell efficiency (η) of up to 7.00%), ionic liquids (η up to 8.36%), polymers (η up to 8.10%), polymeric ionic liquids (η up to 8.18%), and polymeric membranes (η up to 10.25%). Among them, polymeric membranes normally reach a higher η. Thus, this observation and our previous study on high performance polymeric membranes encouraged us to further explore novel membranes composed of polymeric ionic liquids with good thermal, chemical, and mechanical stabilities.

Considering the required thermal, chemical, and mechanical stabilities of membranes mentioned above, poly(vinylidene fluoride-co-hexafluoropropylene) (PVDF-HFP) is a promising material due to its low cost, good ionic conductivity, high photo/electrochemical stability, and easy-to-process flexibility. Besides, the highly electronegative fluorine atoms on the PVDF-HFP polymer chain have been reported to benefit charge transport and to reduce recombination in the electrolyte of a DSSC via their multiple lone-pair electrons. In their pioneering research on PVDF-HFP-based membranes for DSSCs, Priya et al. and Kim et al. successfully fabricated mesoporous PVDF-HFP membranes via a promising electrospinning technique, which was an effective approach to achieve higher cell efficiency than the spin-coating technique. In the study by Priya et al., the PVDF-HFP membrane electrolytes rendered the DSSCs good η up to 7.30% and outstanding long-term stability over several weeks. However, compared to the cell with liquid electrolyte, the tremendous decrease in the short-circuit current density (JSC) and low fill factor (FF) of the PVDF-HFP membrane electrolyte certainly limited the cell efficiency. This may be attributed to the strong hydrophobicity, high viscosity, high crystallinity, and insufficient ionic conductivity of the pristine PVDF-HFP. Accordingly, an atmospheric-pressure plasma treatment was performed on the electrospun PVDF-HFP membrane to reduce its hydrophobicity and thus increase the JSC. Several polymers (e.g., polystyrene (PS), polyethylene oxide (PEO), polyethylene oxide-co-polypropylene oxide-co-polyethylene oxide (P123) and polyaniline (PANI)) were mixed with PVDF-HFP to increase the porosity or the ionic conductivity of the PVDF-HFP membrane. Furthermore, nanoparticles (e.g., TiO2, CoS, silicates, and multi-walled carbon nanotubes) and salts (e.g., lithium chloride (LiCl)) were added to the PVDF-HFP matrix to reduce the crystallinity and increase the ionic conductivity of the PVDF-HFP membrane, respectively. However, to date, the addition of LiCl salt into the PVDF-HFP membrane gave its QSS-DSSC the highest reported η (8.73%) with a moderate open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 746 mV and JSC of 14.31 mA cm−2.
In our previous research on polymeric ionic liquids as electrolytes in DSSCs, the covalent grafting of imidazolium iodide/selenocyanate onto a polymer chain was a promising strategy to reach a high VOC by suppressing the dark current and to obtain good JSC by increasing the ionic conductivity through the π–π stacking of the imidazole segment. Therefore, in this study, we were inspired to synthesize a novel type of polymeric ionic liquid (namely PFII) by partially grafting imidazolium iodide onto the polymer chain of PVDF-HFP and to prepare a PFII membrane as the electrolyte for the QSS-DSSC via a simple electrospinning technique. In the PFII membrane, PVDF-HFP endows the polymer matrix with good mechanical strength as an electrolyte absorber and a transporting layer for the liquid iodide electrolyte, while the grafted imidazolium iodide not only enhances the ionic conductivity but also reduces the crystallinity of PVDF-HFP. By adjusting the molar ratio of imidazolium iodide/PVDF-HFP, the influence of imidazolium iodide on the morphology, electrochemical properties, and photovoltaic performance of the PFII membrane is systematically investigated. This is our first attempt to use an imidazole-grafted PVDF-HFP membrane in a QSS-DSSC. The best PFII membrane (with a quarter molar ratio of imidazolium iodide/PVDF-HFP, denoted as PFII-F) endows its QSS-DSSC with a high η of 9.26%, good VOC (0.78 V), high JSC (17.03 mA cm−2), and excellent long-term stability (up to 97% of its initial η over 1500 h).

Considering the strong polarity of the C–F bond on PVDF-HFP, nitrogen, which contains a lone pair of electrons, can be used as an effective reagent for the grafting of functional groups onto the PVDF-HFP backbone in the presence of dimethylformamide (DMF) as the solvent. Accordingly, a novel polymeric ionic liquid (PIL), poly[vinylidene fluoride-co-hexafluoro propylene-co-vinylideneaminooxomethyl-1-butylimidazolium iodide] (PFII), was synthesized via a simple three-step procedure, as shown in Scheme 1. (i) The starting material, poly(vinylidene fluoride-co-hexafluoropropylene) (PVDF-HFP, 20 g, ≈94.0 mmol of monomer), was mixed with the linker 2-chloroacetamide (4.4 g/47.0 mmol, 2.2 g/23.5 mmol, or 1.1 g/11.8 mmol) in N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF, 133 g), and the mixture was heated to 60 °C and left for 24 h under stirring. (ii) 1-Butylimidazole (BIm, 2.9 g/23.5 mmol, 1.5 g/11.8 mmol, or 0.8 g/5.9 mmol, respectively) was added to the above mixture, and then the mixture was heated to 120 °C and left for 24 h under stirring. (iii) After cooling down to room temperature, excess potassium iodide (KI, 7.8 g/47.0 mmol, 3.9 g/23.5 mmol, or 2.0 g/11.8 mmol, respectively) was added in the above mixture, which was left for 12 h for the precipitation of potassium chloride (KCl). The PFII product was extracted from the solution mixture by rotary-evaporation. By grafting different molar ratios (1/4, 1/8, and 1/16) of imidazolium iodide onto PVDF-HFP, three types of PFII were derived and denoted as PFII-F (one-quarter), PFII-E (one-eighth), and PFII-S (one-sixteenth), respectively. The compositions of the precursors for the synthesis of the PFII polymers are summarized in Table S1 in the ESI. The molecular structure of the synthesized PFII-based polymeric ionic liquid was established via its 13C (Fig. S1a) and 1H (Fig. S2a) nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectra as well as the 13C NMR (Fig. S1b) and 1H NMR (Fig. S2b) spectra of PVDF-HFP. Moreover, the increase in average molecular weight (Mw) and number average molecular weight (Mn) of the PFII PILs compared to the pristine PVDF-HFP were clearly shown with gel permeation chromatography (GPC), as presented in Fig. S3 and Table S2.


For the assembly of the DSSC, the PFII-F, PFII-E, and PFII-S membranes were prepared via a simple electrospinning technique. The precursor containing 25 wt% of the synthesized PFII polymer in the solvent of DMF/acetone (3/2 in volume ratio) was loaded in a needle-type injector with a distance of 15 cm between the needle tip and the collector. A pre-cleaned soda-lime glass was used as the substrate for collecting the electrospun membrane prepared under the experimental conditions (with an applied voltage of 25 kV, inlet flow rate of 0.015 mL min−1, spinning time of 20 minutes, average temperature of 23 °C, and average humidity of 50%).


The fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) substrate was cleaned with several ultrasonic baths using the solvents of acetone, diluted neutral cleaner (neutral cleaner/water = 1/10 in volume), de-ionized water, acetone, and isopropanol, sequentially. The photoanode consisted of a mesoporous TiO2 film containing a compact layer (100 nm), a transparent layer (10 μm), and a scattering layer (4 μm). Each layer was fabricated via the following process and then annealed individually at 500 °C for 30 min in an ambient environment. (1) A compact layer was spin-coated onto the clean FTO substrate using the precursor of TTIP/2-methoxyethanol (1/3 in mass). (2) A transparent and scattering layer were sequentially coated on the compact layer via the doctor blade technique using a commercial paste (Ti-nanoxide HT/SP, average diameter ∼13 nm, Solaronix, S. A., Aubonne, Switzerland) and a home-made paste, respectively. Subsequently, the resulting TiO2 film (with the active area of 0.20 cm2) was soaked in 5 × 10−4 M of N719 dye (cis-diisothiocyanato bis(2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylato) ruthenium(II) bis(tetrabutylammonium), Solaronix, S. A., Aubonne, Switzerland) solution at room temperature for 24 h. The solvent used for the dye solution was a mixture of acetonitrile (ACN)/tert-butyl alcohol (1/1 volume).

A platinum-coated FTO substrate was prepared via a simple sputtering deposition technique, which was used as the counter electrode. The electrospun polymer PFII-F, PFII-E, and PFII-S membranes or pristine PVDF-HFP were individually soaked with the liquid electrolyte (0.6 M) 1,2-dimethyl-3-propylimidazolium iodide (DMPII), 0.035 M iodine (I2), 0.1 M guanidinium thiocyanate (GuSCN), and 0.5 M 4-tert-butylpyridine (tBP) in 3-methoxypropionitrile/acetonitrile (MPN/ACN, at the volume ratio of 1:1) before use. The soaked membrane (PFII-F, PFII-E, PFII-S or pristine PVDF-HFP, <1 cm2) was individually inserted between the N719-adsorbed TiO2 photoanode and Pt counter electrode as the electrolyte layer. A 25 μm-thick Surlyn® film was used to fix the cell gap and to seal the cell by heating. For the standard cell using the liquid electrolyte, a drop of the liquid electrolyte was injected into the cell gap with a syringe. The ESI gives details of the materials and analytic techniques used in this study.

Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR, Fig. 1a) and thermogravimetric analysis (TGA, Fig. 1b) were performed to evaluate the molecular bonds and thermal stability of PVDF-HFP and the synthesized PFII-based polymeric ionic liquid, respectively. In Fig. 1a, all the samples exhibit the fingerprint for the α- and β-phase of PVDF-HFP, where the former is located at 533, 614, 762, 796, and 975 cm−1 and the latter appears at 490 cm−1. All the synthesized PFII show weaker peaks for both the α- and β-phase of PVDF-HFP than that of the pristine PVDF-HFP. This is attributed to the decrease in crystallinity of the PVDF-HFP component in the synthesized PFII owing to the insertion of an imidazolium segment. Accordingly, X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis (Fig. S4a) and Raman spectroscopy (Fig. S4b) were carried out to confirm the reduction in crystallinity in the different PFII materials. In the XRD analysis curves, PVDF-HFP shows the characteristic peaks of the crystalline α-phase (2θ = 18.7° and 26.8°) and β-phase (2θ = 20.3°). In contrast, the PFII polymeric ionic liquids both exhibit weaker characteristic peaks of the crystalline α-phase and β-phase than PVDF-HFP, which confirms the reduction in crystallinity due to the presence of imidazolium segments. Moreover, all the PFII polymeric ionic liquids exhibit weaker characteristic peaks in their Raman spectra than that of PVDF-HFP. Thus, these observations confirm the decrease in crystallinity in the presence of the imidazolium segment. Besides, compared to pristine PVDF-HFP, all the synthesized PFII show weaker peaks for the C–F bond (1065 cm−1) and exhibit additional peaks corresponding to the CO (1619 cm−1) and CN (1687 cm−1) double bonds. This indicates the successful grafting of the acetamide segment onto the backbone of PFII. The peaks for the C–N bond (1276 cm−1) for all the PFII samples reflect the promising addition of the imidazolium segment. Consequently, it can be concluded that the PFII-based polymeric ionic liquids were successfully synthesized.

In Fig. 1b, the decomposition temperatures (Td) at 5 wt% loss for PFII-F (178 °C), PFII-E (228 °C), and PFII-S (246 °C) were directly determined from their TGA curves at the cross-points to the horizontal line at 95 wt%. Td decreases in the order PFII-S > PFII-E > PFII-F, which indicates that a lower content of the acetamide-imidazolium fragment (i.e., lower number of imine bonds, CN) in PFII results in better thermal stability for the PFII-based polymeric ionic liquids. Additionally, this phenomenon can be further substantiated via the TGA curves for pristine PVDF-HFP, two intermediates of PFII, and final PFII (Fig. S5). Compared to the pristine PVDF-HFP (Td = 417 °C), intermediate 1 obtained after synthetic step 1 (Scheme 1) shows a large decrease in Td to 105 °C, which indicates that the decrease in the thermal stability of PFII is mainly due to the grafting of the acetamide segment onto PFII. After the incorporation of the imidazolium segment (intermediate 2 obtained after synthetic step 2) and anion exchange reactions (final PFII), the pertinent Td values increased due to the existence of the C–N bond, and decomposition occurred in the temperature range of 177–302 °C. In brief, all the PFII-based polymeric ionic liquids show sufficient thermal stability for practical application in DSSCs.

The morphologies of the electrospun PFII-F, PFII-E, and PFII-S polymer membranes were observed from their field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) images, as shown in Fig. 2. All the electrospun polymer membranes show a mesoporous structure composed of uniformly interconnected nanofibers with average diameters of 80.6 ± 25.8 nm for PFII-F (Fig. 2a), 143.5 ± 33.6 nm for PFII-E (Fig. 2b), and 222.3 ± 34.4 nm for PFII-S (Fig. 2c), which were calculated based on fifty random nanofibers. The diameters of the PFII nanofibers of the membranes increase in the order of PFII-F < PFII-E < PFII-S when the molar ratio of imidazolium iodide in the PFII polymer decreases. This phenomenon can be explained by the fact that the addition/mixing of imidazolium-based materials into polymer materials has been reported as an effective approach to reduce the crystallinity and viscosity of the polymer. The more imidazolium iodide in the PFII polymer leads to lower viscosity in the PFII precursor for the electrospinning procedure, which thus produces thinner electrospun nanofibers for the PFII membrane. Moreover, since the membrane is confined in a fixed space, the thinner PFII nanofiber implies a larger pore size within the PFII membrane, which is beneficial for charge transport and ion diffusion of the redox mediators in DSSCs (vide infra). Additionally, the thickness of each polymeric membrane can be found in Fig. S6 in the ESI. Each membrane was randomly measured at ten positions to obtain the average thickness. The thickness of the PFII membrane shows a decreasing tendency of PVDF-HFP > PFII-S > PFII-E > PFII-F, which is consistent with the tendency of the nanofiber diameter. Thus, it can be concluded that the increase in the polymer membrane thickness is related to the decrease in pore size for charge transporting and ion diffusion, and thereby renders a negative effect on the JSC values of the corresponding DSSC.


For its application in DSSCs, the electrospun PFII membrane not only acts as a separator between the photoanode and platinum (Pt) counter electrode, but also as a transporting layer for the iodide liquid electrolyte. As listed in Table 1, different amounts of the iodide liquid electrolyte (see details in the ESI) were absorbed per gram of PFII-F (7.56 ± 1.06 g g−1), PFII-E (6.47 ± 1.52 g g−1), and PFII-S (6.16 ± 1.21 g g−1) membrane. By using a dummy cell with the configuration of fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO)/Pt/soaked PFII membrane/Pt/FTO, linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) were performed to evaluate the apparent diffusion coefficient (Dapp) of the triiodide ion (I3−) within the PFII membrane and ionic conductivity (σ) of the soaked PFII membrane, respectively. The Dapp of I3− was calculated according to eqn (1), where d is the distance between two electrodes of the dummy cell, n is the number of electrons transferred in the reaction (n = 2), F is the Faraday constant, and C is the concentration of I3−. The limiting current density (Jlim) was determined from the horizontal zone (|V| > 500 mV) in Fig. S7a.

Dapp = dJlim(2nFC)−1
(1)
Electrolyte
Physical properties
Photovoltaic properties

T
d (°C)
Diameter (nm)
AA (g g−1)

D
app
 (10−6 cm2 s−1)

σ
 (mS cm−1)

η (%)

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF

a The data are based on the average diameter of fifty arbitrarily selected nanofibers.
b Electrolyte absorbing amount (AA) in the membrane; the data are based on the average of ten measurements.
c The data are based on three dummy cells.
d The data are based on three dummy cells.
e The data are based on three DSSCs.

Liquid
—
—
—
6.53 ± 0.00
11.69 ± 0.35
8.63 ± 0.02
0.73 ± 0.00
17.19 ± 0.21
0.69 ± 0.01

PFII-F

178
80.6 ± 25.8
7.56 ± 1.06
6.53 ± 0.04
11.49 ± 0.10
9.26 ± 0.03
0.78 ± 0.00
17.03 ± 0.08
0.69 ± 0.00

PFII-E

228
143.5 ± 33.6
6.47 ± 1.52
6.27 ± 0.05
11.22 ± 0.53
8.18 ± 0.06
0.77 ± 0.01
15.29 ± 0.10
0.69 ± 0.00

PFII-S

246
222.3 ± 34.4
6.16 ± 1.21
6.09 ± 0.03
10.15 ± 0.20
5.87 ± 0.04
0.75 ± 0.00
10.96 ± 0.08
0.72 ± 0.00
In Table 1, the Dapp of I3− for the PFII-F (6.53 × 10−6 ± 0.04 × 10−6 cm2 s−1), PFII-E (6.27 × 10−6 ± 0.05 × 10−6 cm2 s−1), and PFII-S (6.09 × 10−6 ± 0.03 × 10−6 cm2 s−1) membranes are all comparable to that of the pristine liquid iodide electrolyte (6.53 × 10−6 ± 0.00 × 10−6 cm2 s−1), which indicates unimpeded charge transport within the mesoporous PFII membranes. With an increase in the content of imidazolium iodide in the PFII membrane, the Dapp value slightly increases (PFII-F > PFII-E > PFII-S) due to the increase in the pore size of the PFII membrane, where the pores can be considered as ion diffusion channels.
The σ value of the soaked PFII membrane was calculated from the ohmic serial resistance (Rs) determined from the onset point on the left-hand side in Fig. S7b and eqn (2), where, d has the same meaning as that in eqn (1), and A is the active area of the electrode. The cell constant of d/A was calibrated using a standard NaCl solution (σ = 12.9 mS cm−1).
σ = d(ARs)−1
(2)
As listed in Table 1, all the σ of the PFII-F (11.49 mS cm−1), PFII-E (11.22 mS cm−1), and PFII-S (10.15 mS cm−1) membranes are just slightly smaller than that of the pristine liquid electrolyte (11.69 mS cm−1), which indicates that all the PFII-based polymer membranes provide sufficient charge transport pathways through their mesoporous structures. It is found that the membrane composed of the most imidazolium iodide (i.e., PFII-F) not only loads the most amount of liquid iodide electrolyte, but also provides the best ionic conductivity and diffusivity.

Under 1 sun illumination (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2), the photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) curves of the DSSCs with the liquid and soaked PFII membranes as the electrolytes are shown in the upper part of Fig. 3a, in which the correlated parameters for each condition were obtained based on five cells (Table 1). The DSSCs with the soaked PFII membranes reach power conversion efficiencies (η) ranging from 5.87% to 9.26%. The increase in the η value (PFII-F > PFII-E > PFII-S) is mainly due to the tremendous increase in both the open-circuit voltage (VOC) and short-circuit current density (JSC) values, which are apparently influenced by the increase in the amount of imidazolium iodide in the PFII membrane. According to the works of J. V. Vaghasiya et al., the VOC of a DSSC can be determined from the potential difference between the flat band potential (Efb) of the photo-excited TiO2 and the standard potential of the redox mediator (I−/I3−). Also, the redox potential values (E1/2) of the mediator in liquid electrolyte and all the PFII-based electrolytes were estimated by cyclic voltammetry, as shown in Fig. S8 and Table S3. Accordingly, the increase in the VOC values of the PFII-based cells is mainly caused by the increase in the Efb of the photo-excited TiO2, which is caused by the increase in the electron density in the TiO2 conduction band. Additionally, the increase in electron density is due to the decrease in the dark current (i.e., charge recombination) between the photo-excited electrons on the TiO2 surface and the electron-deficient ions (Li+ and I3−) in the electrolyte. As shown in the lower part of Fig. 3a, the dark current densities of the DSSCs decreased consistently in the order of PFII-S > PFII-E > PFII-F. Thus, the highest VOC value (0.78 V) obtained from the best PFII-F membrane (containing the most amount of imidazolium iodide) is due to its highest dark-current-suppression ability. This can be attributed to the following two key functions (Scheme 2): (1) the chelation of Li+ through the lone pair electrons of its fluoride atoms, which prevents Li+ from approaching the TiO2 surface and (2) the filling of the dye-unadsorbed TiO2 surface via its imidazolium segment, which obstructed both Li+ and I3− ions. Although the increased amount of imidazolium iodide means a decrease in the amount of perfluoro groups in the PFII membrane, all the DSSCs with PFII membranes still presented higher VOC values (0.78–0.75 V) as well as higher JSC values (17.03–10.96 mA cm−2) than that of the cell with the pristine PVDF-HFP membrane soaked with liquid electrolyte (VOC = 0.74 V and JSC = 10.02 mA cm−2, as shown in Fig. S9). For the VOC, the presence of the imidazolium group in the PVDF-HFP has the previously stated functions of suppressing the charge recombination between the photo-excited electrons on the TiO2 surface and the electron-deficient ions in the electrolyte. For the JSC, the imidazolium segment has the effect of decreasing the viscosity and the crystallinity, thus the PFII membrane exhibits better ionic conductivity than the soaked pristine PVDF-HFP membrane electrolyte. This result indicates that the partial insertion of imidazolium segment into PVDF-HFP is a promising strategy to combine the advantages of both PVDF-HFP and imidazolium to enhance the photovoltaic performance of DSSCs. Besides, all the DSSCs with the pristine PVDF-HFP and PFII membranes achieved higher VOC values (0.78–0.74 V) than that with the standard liquid electrolyte (VOC = 0.73 V), verifying that the polymer membranes containing PVDF-HFP segment indeed suppress the dark current. On the other hand, the highest JSC value (17.03 mA cm−2) was obtained with the best PFII-F membrane having the most amount of imidazolium iodide in its nanofibers, which can be substantiated from several factors as follows. (1) The thinnest nanofibers in the PFII-F membrane provide the largest pores for charge transport/diffusion pathways. (2) The highest absorbing amount of liquid electrolyte in the PFII-F membrane offers the best penetration of electrolyte within the mesoporous TiO2 film. (3) Its highest ionic conductivity and apparent diffusivity accelerate the rate-determining step of the charge transport, while the added iodide ion (I−) in the PFII-F membrane via the substitution with KI promotes dye regeneration in the DSSC. Even though the DSSC with the PFII-F electrolyte exhibited a similar FF and slightly smaller JSC compared to that with the liquid electrolyte, the higher VOC (0.78 V) of the PFII-F-based DSSC still results in a relatively higher cell efficiency. Eventually, the DSSC with the best PFII-F membrane reaches a higher VOC, comparable JSC, and thus higher η of 9.26%, compared to that with the standard liquid electrolyte (8.63%).


Fig. 3b shows the at-rest long-term durability data of the DSSCs with the best PFII-F membrane and the standard liquid electrolyte. The cell efficiency (η) was measured once every 2 days continuously for 70 days. The normalized efficiency is defined as the η value normalized to the η value measured on the first day. The best DSSC with the PFII-F membrane remains at 97% of its initial cell efficiency after 63 days, while the cell with the liquid electrolyte shows only 84% of its initial η value. The decreased cell efficiency for the cell with the liquid electrolyte related to the inevitable leakage of the liquid electrolyte and evaporation of the volatile organic solvent. By using the best PFII-F membrane in the DSSC, the significant improvement in the long-term stability of the cell results from its successful encapsulation of the liquid electrolyte. Accordingly, it is concluded that the best PFII-F membrane endows outstanding long-term stability to its DSSC and offers unlimited possibilities for the future applications of DSSC.

Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was applied to study the charge transfer properties in the dark (Fig. 4a and b) and under 1 sun (100 mW cm−2) light illumination (Fig. 4c), and the corresponding parameters are listed in Table 2. In Fig. 4a, three of the PILs show two semicircles in the left-hand side in the middle frequency range (105 to 101 Hz). Among them, PFII-E and PFII-S exhibit only one semicircle due to the fact that both have a larger diameter for the first semicircle, which overlaps with the second one. More importantly, for the charge recombination behavior at the photoanode/soaked PFII membrane interface in the DSSC, the charge recombination resistance (Rrec) and lifetime (τdarke) were measured in the dark with an applied bias of −0.85 V. The Rrec value was determined from the diameter of the second semicircle in the pertinent Nyquist plot (Fig. 4a), and the τdarke value was calculated from the frequency value at the maximum phase (fmax) using eqn (3).

τdarke = (2πfmax)−1
(3)
Electrolyte

R
rec (Ω)

τ
darke (ms)

R
ct1 (Ω)

R
ct2 (Ω)

Z
w (Ω)

τ
TASe (μs)
Liquid
13.6
2.5
1.9
6.1
9.8
418

PFII-F

46.8
16.5
2.2
6.6
11.7
652

PFII-E

38.8
6.5
3.6
7.7
16.2
513

PFII-S

34.5
4.7
4.4
23.4
22.0
468
The larger Rrec and longer τdarke reflect the fact that fewer electrons accumulated on the TiO2 surface and subsequently recombined with the charges (Li+ and I3−) in the electrolyte. The values of Rrec and τdarke both decrease in the order of PFII-F (46.8 Ω, 16.5 ms) > PFII-E (37.9 Ω, 6.5 ms) > PFII-S (24.3 Ω, 4.7 ms) > liquid (19.8 Ω, 2.5 ms), which indicates that the incorporation of imidazolium iodide in the PFII membranes indeed prevents the charge recombination reaction and prolongs the electron lifetime. Accordingly, the results obtained from the previous J–V curves (i.e., the VOC values and dark currents) were perfectly justified. On the other hand, the overall charge transfer behavior in the DSSC was measured under 1 sun with an open-circuit bias and evaluated by dividing it into three parts: (1) charge transfer resistance at the soaked PFII membrane/counter electrode interface (Rct1), (2) charge transfer resistance at the photoanode/soaked PFII membrane interface (Rct2), and (3) Warburg diffusion resistance (Zw) within the soaked PFII membrane. The values of Rct1, Rct2, and Zw were obtained from the diameters of the first, second, and third semicircles, where, the semicircles appear in the high, middle, and low frequency range in the pertinent Nyquist plots, respectively (Fig. 4c). All the PILs in Fig. 4c show three semicircles. Among them, the larger diameter of the second semicircle of PFII-S overlapped with the first semicircle, which made it hard to distinguish. As summarized in Table 2, the values of Rct1, Rct2, and Zw all decrease in the order of PFII-S > PFII-E > PFII-F > liquid. Among the PFII membranes, the best PFII-F membrane provided comparably low obstruction for the charge transfer to the liquid electrolyte because it contained the most amount of imidazolium iodide and thereby the largest pores, highest absorbing amount of liquid electrolyte, best σ, and high Dapp (Table 1). It is notable that the results obtained from the JSC values are highly consistent with the values of Rct1 and Rct2, and the results obtained from the Zw values agree well with the Dapp values.

Transient absorption spectroscopy (TAS) is a powerful technique to study the dye recombination with the charges on the TiO2 surface (dye+ + e−(TiO2) → dye, t > 10 μs) at the interface of the photoanode/soaked PFII membrane in the DSSC. For the dye recombination reaction (Fig. 5), the curves of the normalized optical density (ΔOD) versus time show the decay kinetics in the presence of the liquid electrolyte and the soaked PFII membranes, and the pertinent electron lifetime (τTASe) values are summarized in Table 2. The values of τTASe decrease in the order of PFII-F (652 μs) > PFII-E (513 μs) > PFII-S (468 μs) > liquid (418 μs), which indicates that the incorporation of imidazolium segment in the PFII membranes successfully hinders dye recombination by blocking the possible sites for electron leakage on the TiO2 surface. Overall, the imidazolium segment in the PFII membranes successfully prohibits the photo-excited electrons on the TiO2 surface from recombining not only with the electron-deficient ions (Li+ and I3−) in the electrolyte (see Rrec, and τdarke values) but also with the dye molecules (see τTASe values).


A novel type of polymeric ionic liquid (PIL), poly[vinylidene fluoride-co-hexafluoro propylene-co-vinylideneaminooxomethyl-1-butylimidazolium iodide] (PFII), was synthesized by covalently grafting 1-butylimidazole onto PVDF-HFP, and the molecular structure of the PFII PIL was well characterized via NMR and FTIR spectroscopy. An increase in the molar ratio of imidazolium iodide/PVDF-HFP in the PFII PIL resulted in: (1) a decrease in the crystallinity and decomposition temperature of the PFII PIL, (2) increase in the porosity and electrolyte absorbing amount of the PFII membrane, (3) increase in the diffusion coefficient of I3− and ionic conductivity in the soaked PFII membrane, and (4) increase in the dark current suppression for the DSSCs using the soaked PFII membrane as the QSS electrolyte. In the case of the suppressed dark current, our finding was repeatedly substantiated by the decreased dark current and increased values of VOC, Rrec, τdarke, and τTASe, regardless of the analytical technique used. Moreover, the successful electrolyte encapsulation based on the soaked PFII membrane was proven to be effective in preserving good charge transfer properties (low Rct1, Rct2, and Zw) for the DSSC, thus providing outstanding long-term stability for the cell. Compared to the DSSC with the standard liquid electrolyte (η = 8.63%), the DSSC with the best PFII-F membrane exhibits a much higher power conversion efficiency of 9.26% and better durability, which indicate that the electrospun membrane of the new polymeric ionic liquid (PFII) is a promising material for application in QSS-DSSCs.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was financially supported by the “Advanced Research Center of Green Materials Science and Technology” from The Featured Area Research Center Program within the framework of the Higher Education Sprout Project by the Ministry of Education (107L9006) and the Ministry of Science and Technology in Taiwan (MOST 105-2221-E-002-229-MY3, 106-2119-M-007-004, and 107-3017-F-002-001).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta01215f
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018