 DOI: 10.1039/C4TA00877D
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 10231-10238


Ke
Meng
,

Praveen K.
Surolia
 and 

K. Ravindranathan
Thampi
*

School of Chemical and Bioprocess Engineering, University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin 4, Ireland. E-mail: ravindranathan.thampi@ucd.ie; Fax: +353 17161177; Tel: +353 17161995

Received
19th February 2014
, Accepted 9th April 2014
First published on 14th April 2014
For the first time, layers of nano-sized perovskite BaTiO3 particles were successfully applied as photoelectrodes for making CdS quantum dot sensitized solar cells (QDSSC). The optical and electrochemical properties of BaTiO3 on FTO glass substrates were studied. The performance of cells was maximized by controlling growth cycles of CdS and surface passivation of BaTiO3 films. The encouraging power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 1.51% achieved points to the potential of using perovskites for sensitization and co-sensitization applications in third generation solar cells. It agrees well with the recent trend of finding more compatible and stable perovskites for applications in mesoscopic sensitized solar cells.

The third generation PV comprising advanced thin films and newer PV concepts promise potentially higher energy conversion efficiencies and lower costs, among which dye- and Q-dot-sensitized solar cells (DSSC and QDSSC) are particularly promising. QDSSC have a particular advantage due to the beneficial optoelectronic properties of QDs. It includes tuneable bandgaps, high molar extinction coefficients, large intrinsic dipole moments and the scope for multiple charge carrier generation capabilities. Semiconductor QDs of Cd-chalcogenides and PbS have been successfully applied as sensitizers in solar cells.

In a typical QDSSC, QDs are deposited on a wide band gap mesoporous semiconductor electrode film and typically TiO2 is the most used electrode material. ZnO, SnO2, Nb3O7 and Zn2SnO4, have also been studied as wide band gap semiconductor materials for Q-dot sensitization. Chen et al. applied single- and multi-layer porous ZnO nanosheets to make CdS QDSSC, which showed a maximum power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 1.16%. SnO2 was used as a wide band gap semiconductor material for CdS QDSSC by Zhou et al. while their cells resulted in a PCE of only 0.22%. Zhang et al. used a highly crystalline Nb3O7F nanostructured photoelectrode in CdS QDSSC and achieved a PCE of 1.68%. Zn2SnO4 nanorod arrays were introduced in CdS QDSSC by Bora et al. leading to a PCE of 1.24%. Although the energy conversion performance of solar cells applying these wide band gap materials remain lower than that of cells applying TiO2 nanostructures, various groups have investigated the effect of the wide band gap materials' optical and electrochemical properties on the photovoltaic performance of the solar cells in the hope that better QDSSC could be developed in the near future using some of these highly stable wide bandgap oxides. Our report is a positive development in this direction.
Recently perovskite materials are intensively being studied in the realm of efficient third generation photovoltaic cells. Perovskite like CH3NH3PbI3 materials were employed as sensitizers in heterojunction solar cells providing power conversion efficiencies of over 15%. (CH3NH3)PbI3 nanocrystals were also introduced as co-sensitizers in QDSSC yielding a power conversion efficiency of 6.5%. There is also a study reporting perovskite materials as redox mediators from our group itself. This recent trend to find replacements for traditional materials assumes significant importance for producing stable and reliable PV technologies even if the initial power conversion efficiencies are not record breaking. An all perovskite based stable solar cell is becoming a distinct possibility for which stable perovskites with good energy conversion efficiencies are required. Traditional perovskites of the ABO3 type are very stable and requires a revisit, especially where wide bandgap materials are suited for sensitization.
BaTiO3 is a perovskite ferroelectric semiconductor with a band gap of 3.2–3.5 eV. It was applied in the past as a wide band gap semiconductor for sensitization in DSSC; however, it was described as ‘inert’ due to its poor performance and the inability to bind dyes to the surface. A thin BaTiO3 layer was tested in QDSSC as a passivation layer for TiO2 films in order to improve the cell performance by preventing charge recombination. To the best of our knowledge, however, BaTiO3 has not yet been successfully applied in QDSSC.
In this study, BaTiO3 was introduced in QDSSC as a wide band gap semiconductor material for the first time. BaTiO3 nanoparticles with diameters of tens of nanometres were synthesized first, followed by depositing it as meso-porous layers on FTO substrates via screen-printing. The obtained BaTiO3 film was characterized to evaluate its electrical and optical properties. The BaTiO3 films were then sensitized by CdS QDs to fabricate QDSSC. The cells' performance was maximized by controlling the QDs growth cycles. Further cell performance improvement was obtained by passivating the BaTiO3 films with ZnO coating layers. An overall power conversion efficiency of 1.51% was obtained with Voc = 673 mV, Jsc = 4.78 mA cm−2 and FF = 47.69% from our best cells. These results demonstrate that perovskite BaTiO3 can be a promising photoelectrode material for QDSSC and perhaps also for constructing an all perovskite stable novel PV cell allowing 15–20% PCE in the near future.

BaTiO3 nanoparticles were synthesized through a hydrothermal method reacting TiCl4 with BaCl2 in a basic medium. Typically, 5 ml of TiCl4 (Aldrich) was added to 70 ml of chilled deionized (DI) water with stirring. 18 g of BaCl2·2H2O (Sigma) was then added to this solution while stirring. 150 ml of 2 M NaOH was further added to provide a basic pH. The final mixture was kept at 100 °C for 8 hours in a round bottomed flask equipped with a condenser for facilitating the BaTiO3 crystal growth. The resulting precipitate was filtered and washed with DI water several times and dried in a furnace at 60 °C.


The BaTiO3 paste was prepared by following a standard procedure used to prepare the TiO2 paste. Photoelectrodes were manufactured using the screen-printing method based on a layer-by-layer printing of the BaTiO3 paste on fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) conducting transparent glass sheets. By controlling the number of prints, BaTiO3 films with accurate thicknesses were fabricated. After this, the electrodes were sintered at 325 °C, 375 °C, 450 °C and 500 °C for 5 min, 5 min, 15 min and 30 min, respectively. The cell active area was 0.28 cm2. A ZnO passivation layer on the BaTiO3 films was manufactured by simply immersing the photoelectrode in 0.5 mM Zn(NO3)2 ethanol solution followed by air drying and sintering at 400 °C for 30 min, when required. A TiO2 passivation layer on the BaTiO3 films was formed by dipping the photoelectrode in 50 mM TiCl4 solution for 30 min at 70 °C, followed by rinsing and sintering at 500 °C for 30 min. A BaTiO3 passivation layer was deposited on the BaTiO3 films by immersing the photoelectrode in 50 mM BaCl2 and 50 mM TiCl4 mixed solution for 10 min, followed by 30 min sintering at 400 °C.


The BaTiO3 films were sensitized with CdS quantum dots using the successive ionic absorption and reaction (SILAR) method. Briefly, 0.5 M Cd(NO3)2 ethanol solution and 0.5 M Na2S methanol–DI water (v/v 1:1) solution were prepared as the starting solutions for the SILAR process. The bare electrodes with BaTiO3 layers were immersed into Cd(NO3)2 solution for 1 min at first, followed by 1 min rinsing with ethanol and 1 min drying by argon flow. The electrodes were then dipped into Na2S solution for 1 min followed by further rinsing with methanol for 1 min and drying. Each series of the two dipping processes was called ‘one SILAR cycle’. A ZnS passivation layer was always deposited on the CdS quantum dots by dipping the CdS sensitized electrodes alternately into 0.2 M Zn (NO3)2 in ethanol and 0.2 M Na2S in methanol–DI water for 1 min per dip. The electrodes were rinsed and dried with argon after each dipping.


A water based polysulfide electrolyte and Cu2S counter electrodes were applied for fabricating cells. The electrolyte contains 1 M Na2S, 1 M S and 0.1 M NaOH in DI water. The counter electrodes were fabricated following the procedure described in our earlier report. Briefly, a Cu film with hundreds of nanometres thickness was firstly electrodeposited on FTO glass electrodes in a three-electrode system involving an Ag/AgCl reference electrode, a platinum wire counter electrode and an electrolyte of 5 mM CuSO4, 1 M Na2SO4 and 0.5 M H3BO3 in deionized water. The Cu plated FTO glass piece was then immersed in a polysulfide solution containing 1 M Na2S and 1 M S in DI water for 1 min, followed by DI water rinsing and drying under argon flow. The working electrode and counter electrode were sandwiched together using a hot melt Bynel™ polymer gasket (50 micron thick). The electrolyte was filled into the space between the two electrodes through a hole in the counter electrode using the vacuum back filling method. The back hole was finally sealed with a piece (0.1 mm thick) of glass heat sealed with the Bynel™ polymer.


Absorption and transmission spectra were recorded using a SPECORD 210 PLUS Double Beam UV-VIS spectrophotometer. XRD was measured using a Siemens D500 diffraction meter. SEM images were recorded with a Hitachi TM-1000 Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) (Hitachi High Technologies Ltd). EDX was carried out using an APOLLO XV Silicon Drift Detector and a Kratos Axis ULTRA was used to record the XPS spectra. Photoelectrochemical measurements including current density/voltage (J–V) curves, open circuit voltage (Voc), short circuit current density (Jsc) and fill factor (FF) were measured using a Newport 91195A-1000 solar simulator and Newport 69920 Arc Lamp Power Supply. A Newport 81088A air mass filter was placed before the output of the solar simulator to simulate the AM 1.5 spectrum with irradiance powers of 1000 W m−2. J–V, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and open circuit voltage decay (OCVD) measurements were recorded with a GAMRY Instruments Potentiostat. Incident photon to current conversion efficiency (IPCE) was measured and recorded using a Gilden Photonics IPCE system and software.


The crystal structure and the nature of the as-prepared BaTiO3 nanoparticles, BaTiO3 films on FTO substrates and the CdS sensitized BaTiO3 films on FTO substrates were characterized using X-ray diffractometry. Fig. 1(a) presents the XRD pattern of the as prepared BaTiO3 powders. All the characteristic peaks were well indexed to the cubic phase of BaTiO3 (JCPDS file no. 74-1968). The sharp peaks indicated the formation of well-crystallized, single phase BaTiO3 crystal grains. Fig. 1(b) presents the XRD pattern of the BaTiO3 films on FTO substrates. The newly emerged peaks were indexed to the FTO substrate (JCPDS file no. 77-0447). No separate peaks were observed after the CdS sensitization of the BaTiO3 film coated FTO substrates as displayed in Fig. 1(c). The peaks of CdS are superimposed by both BaTiO3 and FTO peaks. However, the enhanced CdS coupled with BaTiO3 or FTO peaks and weakened remaining peaks indicate the formation of CdS QDs, though with possible nano-sizes and lower crystallinity.

Scanning electron microscopy allowed investigation of the morphology of the BaTiO3 nanoparticles and its films. The surface SEM image of BaTiO3 nanoparticles shown in Fig. 2(a) and the particle-size distribution histograms seen in Fig. 2(b) indicate a narrow size distribution of the nanoparticles with an average diameter of around 34 nm, while the BaTiO3 powders having an agglomerated shape and an aggregate size of 125–350 nm. Fig. 2(c) and (d) present surface and cross-section SEM images of the BaTiO3 films on FTO substrate. The cross-section image (Fig. 2(d)) shows the porous structure of the BaTiO3 film; while it also shows the resulting film is 26 μm in thickness. Fig. 2(e) and (f) show the surface and cross-section SEM of the CdS quantum dots sensitized BaTiO3 films. Due to the small sizes of the QDs, no obvious difference was observed after the sensitization, however, the remaining micro-size pores even after the CdS deposition allow an intimate contact between the electrolyte and the Q-dots, which enhances the regeneration of the QDs after electron injection and suppresses the charge recombination rate, thus improving the overall cell performance. The uniform coating of CdS QDs on the BaTiO3 film can be concluded from the EDX mapping on the cross-section of the CdS sensitized BaTiO3 films as shown in Fig. 2(g).
Light scattering ability of the wide band gap material in QDSSC is important for improving the light harvesting and thus the incident photon to current conversion efficiency (IPCE) of the cell. UV-visible absorption and transmission spectroscopy was employed to characterize the light scattering ability of the BaTiO3 films. According to Fig. 3, the transmission of the BaTiO3 films is only slightly higher than 20% in the visible range. The results strongly indicate the significant light scattering ability of the BaTiO3 films. The scattering of light by spherical particles highly depends on the particle size and incident light wavelengths. The BaTiO3 nanoparticle aggregates with sizes of hundreds of nanometres have comparable size with the wavelength of visible light resulting in an enhanced light scattering. The multi-reflection between the BaTiO3 particles can effectively enhance the optical pathway of incident light.
The energy level alignment between the wide band gap material and the sensitizer plays a vital role to construct efficient photovoltaics. UV-vis absorption spectroscopy and X-ray photoelectron valance-band spectroscopy (XPS) determined the band edges of the BaTiO3 nanoparticles. According to the UV-vis absorption spectrum of the BaTiO3 films as shown in Fig. 3, a band gap of 3.26 eV can be estimated for the BaTiO3 nanoparticles. The XPS spectrum in Fig. 4(a) indicates that the maximum valence band edge value is ca. 1.4 eV for the BaTiO3 nanoparticles. According to the energy diagram in Fig. 4(b), with similar band gap positions as TiO2, the BaTiO3 nanoparticles should be a promising wide band gap material for CdS QDSSC due to the well matched band edges between CdS QDs and BaTiO3 nanoparticles.
With the enhanced light scattering property and good band gap match, the BaTiO3 nanoparticles could be considered as good wide band gap materials for QDSSC. CdS quantum dots were deposited on BaTiO3 films as sensitizers via the SILAR method. 3–11 SILAR cycles of CdS were deposited on 26 μm BaTiO3 films printed on FTO glass. The CdS quantum dots were always passivated with a ZnS thin layer. The J–V characteristics of solar cells are presented in Fig. 5 and the cell parameters obtained from the J–V curves are listed in Table 1. The results show that with the increase of SILAR cycles from 3 to 9, the Jsc gradually increases from 1.04 to 3.79 mA cm−2, which can be ascribed to additional SILAR cycles enhancing the deposition of bigger sizes and larger numbers of CdS quantum dots on BaTiO3 films providing enhanced light absorption; while the Voc increased from 491 to 608 mV and FF increased from 45.51 to 55.41%, which is due to the better coverage of CdS quantum dots on BaTiO3 films. This reduces the charge recombination at the BaTiO3–electrolyte interface. Further increase of CdS SILAR cycles to 11 leads to decreased Jsc of 3.36 mA cm−2 and FF of 49.82%. This can be reasoned by the fact that after optimum deposition of CdS, too many SILAR cycles lead to more surface defects on the QDs, which increase the chances for charge recombination. Moreover, the overloaded CdS QDs may lead to pore blocking, which hinders the holes scavenging process. Thus, the optimized number of CdS SILAR cycles on 26 μm BaTiO3 films is obtained at 9 cycles with a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 1.26%. The thickness of BaTiO3 films was also varied by controlling the number of BaTiO3 layers on the FTO substrate to maximize the cell performance. Solar cells with 3, 5, 7 and 9 layers of BaTiO3 sensitized by 9 cycles of CdS were fabricated and cells with 7 layers of BaTiO3 showed the best performance. The 7 layered BaTiO3 film has a thickness of 26 μm and it is considered for all other film characterizations.
Cycles

V
oc (mV)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)

η (%)
3
491
1.04
45.51
0.24
5
508
1.79
54.32
0.50
7
543
3.07
53.64
0.89
9
608
3.74
55.41
1.26
11
606
3.36
49.82
1.00
As discussed in the introduction part, an earlier study, which used BaTiO3 nanoparticles based photoelectrodes for DSSC applications, has described this material as ‘inert’ when interacted with dyes. However, in cells where they decorated the 50 nm diameter BaTiO3 particles with 5 nm TiO2 nanoparticles, a promising overall power conversion efficiency of more than 5% was measured. They attributed the low performance of the BaTiO3/dye system to the poor affinity of the dye on BaTiO3 particles, and by introducing a network of TiO2 particles the dye adsorption was greatly enhanced. This resulted in enhanced photocurrents and higher photo-conversion efficiencies. Indeed, the interaction between the dye and TiO2 is mainly attributed to the affinity between the carboxylic anchoring-group of the dye and the Ti4+ ions on the TiO2 (101) plane. When Ba2+ ions are introduced through the crystalline BaTiO3 into such a semiconductor system, the bonding affinity and electronic coupling between the dye and the titanium ions in the BaTiO3 could be weakened. However, in the BaTiO3/CdS QD case, the CdS quantum dots are crystallized and grown directly on the BaTiO3 particles without any anchoring –COOH group. The situation with respect to its affinity to BaTiO3 and its electron injection ability are considerably different. Thus the promising performance of CdS quantum dot sensitized BaTiO3 solar cells is made possible.
UV-vis absorption spectra of the CdS QDs sensitized BaTiO3 photoelectrodes were recorded to evaluate the sizes and numbers of the incorporated CdS QDs and are presented in Fig. 6(a). The absorbance increases with increasing SILAR cycles indicating the increased amount of CdS QDs deposition, while the growth of the CdS QD size is suggested by the red shift of the absorbance shoulder and onset position.Fig. 6(b) shows the incident photon to current conversion efficiency (IPCE) of cells fabricated with 9 cycles of CdS deposition on BaTiO3 films. A maximum IPCE of 30% was obtained at 400 nm. The IPCE values were integrated with the incident photon flux of standard AM1.5 to get the calculated Jsc, which is 2.83 mA cm−2. The measured Jsc value of 3.74 mA cm−2 as shown in Table 1 is slightly higher than the calculated value, which is due to the fact that charge separation and collections are more efficient under a much higher illumination intensity (J–V measurement) than that used for the IPCE measurement.
In an effort to enhance the electron transfer from QDs to BaTiO3 and suppress the back electron transfer at the electrode–electrolyte interface, different passivation layers were introduced on the BaTiO3 films. All the cells with different passivation layers on BaTiO3 films contained 9 SILAR cycles of CdS deposition. The performance parameters of the cells with different coating layers are listed in Table 2. Single or double passivation layers were deposited on the BaTiO3 films. As shown in Table 2, the different passivation strategies have different effects on the cell performance; the single ZnO or TiO2 coating layer enhances the cell performance while the double TiO2, TiO2 + ZnO or BaTiO3 coating layer suppresses cells' over all power conversion efficiencies. Among all the coating strategies employed, cells with the ZnO coating layer show optimized power conversion efficiencies. Hence, further studies were taken on cells applying ZnO passivation layers. Solar cells applying bare ZnO films consisting of ZnO nanoparticles synthesized using procedures reported in the literature were also fabricated for comparison. The relevant cell performance parameters are listed in Table 2. The measured PCE of cell with the bare ZnO photoelectrode is 0.57%, which is mainly restricted by the low fill factor of 23.03%. This may be due to the surface defects present on the ZnO nanoparticles.
Coating layers

V
oc (mV)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)

η (%)
Bare BaTiO3
608
3.74
56.18
1.26
Bare ZnO
473
5.25
23.03
0.57
ZnO
673
4.78
47.69
1.51
TiO2
550
4.20
60.09
1.39
Double TiO2 layer
465
3.35
44.71
0.70
TiO2 + ZnO
539
4.09
55.87
1.23
BaTiO3 layer
630
3.02
45.50
0.87
The J–V characteristics and cell parameters with and without the ZnO passivation layers on BaTiO3 films are shown in Fig. 7 and Table 2, respectively. With introduction of the ZnO passivation layer, the Voc of the cells increased significantly from 608 mV to 673 mV. Voc is determined by the difference between the quasi-Fermi level of the photoelectrode and the redox potential of the electrolyte; it is also dependent on the rate of the electron recombination at the semiconductor–electrolyte interface. The introduction of ZnO with its high conduction band edge helps to increase the quasi-Fermi level of the photoelectrode while the compact ZnO layer itself operates as an energy barrier to the back electron transfer from BaTiO3 nanoparticles to the electrolyte. Both of these contribute to the higher Voc. The Jsc of the cells applying the ZnO passivation layer also increases by 1 mA cm−2, which further suggests the suppression of electron recombination occurring at the BaTiO3–electrolyte interface. Overall, the cells with the ZnO passivation layer show a promising power conversion efficiency of 1.51%, which is 20% higher than cells with bare BaTiO3 films sensitized by CdS QDs.
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was introduced to investigate the impact of the ZnO passivation layer on the cell performance. Fig. 8(a) shows typical Nyquist plots of the cells with and without the ZnO coating layer. A typical EIS spectrum of DSSC consists of three semicircles responding to the high-frequency, middle-frequency and low-frequency regions when the cells are biased at its Voc; while the responses are attributed to the charge transfer at the counter electrode–electrolyte interface, the carrier transport at the photoanode–electrolyte interface and the ions diffusion process in the electrolyte, correspondingly. This characteristic is also applicable to QDSSC except that for a relatively low-performing QDSSC, a double-semicircle spectrum is always observed where the feature of the diffusion process is not presented. In this study, we focus on the charge transfer and recombination at the BaTiO3–electrolyte interface in the middle-frequency region. Nyquist plots of both cells indicate the ZnO layer reduces the charge transfer resistance, which is mainly due to the suppression of charge recombination at the BaTiO3–electrolyte interface. The Bode-phase plots of the cells obtained from EIS measurement (Fig. 8(b)) were introduced to investigate the electron life time (τn) in the CdS sensitized BaTiO3 nanostructure using the equation τn = 1/(2πfmax) where fmax is the maximum frequency of the middle-frequency peak. The fmax values for cells with and without the ZnO layer are 30 Hz and 63 Hz, respectively. Correspondingly, the electron lifetime is calculated to be 5.3 ms and 2.5 ms for the cells assembled by BaTiO3 films with the ZnO coating layer and bare BaTiO3 films, respectively. The longer electron lifetime by introduction of the ZnO layer demonstrates the retardation of charge recombination at the BaTiO3–electrolyte interface.
Open circuit voltage decay (OCVD) measurements helped to further analyse the excited electron lifetimes. The results in Fig. 9 indicate that the Voc decay of cells with the ZnO coating layer is much slower than cells with bare BaTiO3. Lower Voc decay leads to increase in the electron life time. This further indicates the ZnO layer's ability to suppress electron recombination at the BaTiO3–electrolyte interface. The results obtained from OCVD are consistent with the results acquired from the EIS measurements. We conclude that ZnO coating on BaTiO3 films can therefore effectively suppress electron leakage and thus enhance the overall cell performance.

Fig. 10 is a schematic illustration of the effect of the ZnO passivation layer on BaTiO3 films. The electron recombination is suppressed by the coating of the ZnO layer. As per the proposed mechanism, excited electrons in the conduction band of CdS can effectively be injected into the conduction band of BaTiO3 through the ZnO intermediate energy level; however, the ZnO layer works as an energy barrier prohibiting the back electron transfer from the conduction band of BaTiO3 into the electrolyte. As a result, the number of electrons injected into the FTO substrate increases leading to a higher Jsc while the electron accumulation in the BaTiO3 is also enhanced resulting in a high Voc, thereby the overall power conversion efficiency is improved.

BaTiO3 nanoparticles were synthesized and characterized to investigate their optical and electrical properties. To the best of our knowledge, for the first time the nanoparticles were further introduced successfully as a wide band gap material in QDSSC. Sensitized by CdS QDs via the SILAR method, the QDSSC applying the BaTiO3 films showed maximum power conversion efficiencies at 9 SILAR cycles. A ZnO coating layer was then applied on BaTiO3 films and a PCE of 1.51% was obtained which is 20% higher than cells with bare BaTiO3 films. The enhancement of cell performance is attributed to the suppression of back electron transfer at the BaTiO3–electrolyte interface by the ZnO passivation layer, which was ascertained by EIS and OCVD measurements. The results indicate that the perovskite type BaTiO3 material is indeed a promising wide band gap material for third generation solar cells such as QDSSC. This is to be seen in the light of the recent advancements made in solar cells using perovskites.


Ke Meng acknowledges the funding support received from China Scholarship Council. Praveen K. Surolia received support from European Commission's FP7 SMARTOP project under the Grant Agreement number 265769. K. R. Thampi acknowledges the SFI-Airtricity Stokes professorship grant.


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014