 DOI: 10.1039/C4RA09474C
(Paper)
RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 55067-55076

Hamed Sharifi Dehsari
,
Elham Khodabakhshi Shalamzari,
Jaber Nasrollah Gavgani,
Faramarz Afshar Taromi* and 
Shima Ghanbary

Department of Polymer Engineering and Color Technology, Amirkabir University of Technology, P.O.Box-15875-4413, Tehran, Iran. E-mail: afshar@aut.ac.ir; Tel: +98 2164542401

Department of Chemical Engineering, Amirkabir University of Technology, P.O.Box 15875-4413, Tehran, Iran

Received
29th August 2014
, Accepted 23rd September 2014
First published on 28th October 2014
We herein report an investigation of ultralarge graphene oxide (UL-GO) sheet/poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) thin composite layers fabricated by spin coating on an indium–tin-oxide (ITO) anode as hole transport layer (HTL) in polymer light-emitting diodes (PLEDs), as well as polymer solar cells (PSCs). Monolayer UL-GOs were first synthesized based on a novel solution-phase method involving pre-exfoliation of graphite flakes which were then mixed into the PEDOT:PSS solution in various specific amounts. The PEDOT:PSS composite film mixed with 0.04 wt% UL-GO by weight exhibits a conductivity of 749.4 S cm−1 and a transmittance of 88.6% at 550 nm. The PEDOT:PSS/GO HTL shows enhanced charge carrier transport because of improved conductivity by the weakening of the coulombic attraction between PEDOT and PSS by the functional groups on GO nanosheets, and the formation of an extended conductive network. Moreover, it can effectively block electrons and reduce resistance in the HTL, leading to better injection and transport of holes and lower turn-on voltage and resulting in a higher overall efficiency in PLEDs. Similarly, it remarkably increases the short circuit current (Jsc), and PSC efficiency because of a remarkable reduction of exciton quenching that results in higher charge extraction in PSCs. The optimized PLEDs and PSCs with a PEDOT:PSS/GO composite HTL layer show a maximum luminosity of 725.6 cd m−2 (at 10.6 V) for PLEDs, as well as a power conversion efficiency of 3.388% for PSCs, which were improved by ∼11% and 12%, respectively, compared to reference PLEDs and PSCs with a PEDOT:PSS layer.

Solution-processable organic (or polymeric) semiconducting devices such as organic (or polymer) light-emitting devices (OLEDs or PLEDs) and polymer solar cells (PSCs) represent an invigorating class of renewable energy technology and have attracted considerable attention due to their low cost, lightness, thinness, high mechanical flexibility, and fast and simple fabrication process. Over the last few years, the performance of such solution-processable organic have become more efficient; solution-processable OLEDs have been reported with a luminosity of approximately 53 lm W−1, and the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of PSCs has exceeded 10.6% at the single cell level. Until now, however, PLEDs and PSCs have been found to exhibit relatively low efficiency and stability; further improvement is still required for their commercial application.

One way to improve the efficiency and stability in solution processable devices is via a reduction in the height of the energy barrier at the electrode contacts; for cathode contacts, this involves the modification of the metal cathode interface by matching the work function of the cathode to the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) (or the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO)) of the active layer. For anode contacts, the energy barrier height can be improved by the utilization of a hole transparent layer (HTL) on the top of the anode, resulting in an enhanced charge carrier mobility and a reduced contact barrier, in addition to balanced charge transport via the impeding of majority carriers to maximize the recombinations of charges in PLEDs or to restrain recombinations to maximize the extraction of charges toward electrodes in PSCs for higher device performance and greater efficiency.
Several attempts have been made to match the energy band using various material systems, as well as to reduce the roughness and to obtain a uniform surface. Among these, an aqueous dispersion of a highly transparent conducting polymer of poly (3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) has been widely used as an HTL in solution-processable devices. However, the acidity of PEDOT:PSS due to sulfate ions can damage the surface of the ITO and can also gradually reduce the device performance over time. In addition, the radiative exciton quenching generally happens at the interface between the PEDOT:PSS and the emission layer because of the low conductivity of PEDOT:PSS, leading to a decrease in the efficiency of PLEDs. These problems make it necessary to modify PEDOT:PSS by depositing a few nano-sized interlayers between ITO and the active layer or with a p-type metal oxide such as MoO3, or NiO to solve the problems associated with PEDOT:PSS regarding device stability and efficiency.
Recently, some consideration has been given to the benefit of stable aqueous dispersions of neutral graphene oxide (GO) sheets as an HTL material for ITO anodes. Water-soluble GO has a unique heterogeneous electronic structure because of the presence of mixed sp2 and sp3 hybridizations. GO is an insulator because of the disrupted sp2 conjugation of the graphene lattice, but its residual sp2 clusters can still allow hole transport to occur via hopping, and GO is thus an intriguing nanomaterial that shows promise as a water processable, flexible, low-cost material, with tremendous potential for large-area electronics. The efficiency of GO films as HTLs has been exhibited in spin-coated PSCs consisting of bulk heterojunction (BHJ) photovoltaic (PV) layers of poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and fullerene derivative phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) blends, providing a PCE of 3.25%. It has also been reported that the use of a layer of GO below PEDOT:PSS (GO/PEDOT:PSS) could preserve ITO from ion diffusion and acid corrosion, and extract holes from the active PV layer. The use of these bi-layer HTLs of GO/PEDOT:PSS ameliorated PSC performances, with a PCE of 3.53%. The efficiency values of PSCs with a GO layer are comparable to those of PSCs with a PEDOT:PSS layer, and the luminous efficiency values of PLEDs with a GO layer are more than two times higher than those with a PEDOT:PSS layer. On the other hand, ohmic contact of GO layers is difficult to obtain because of its insulating properties. Moreover, there is some difficulty in obtaining full coverage with a single coating of GO. Therefore, a GO and PEDOT:PSS composite layer was demonstrated as an interconnect layer for the simple fabrication of solution-processable organic tandem solar cells by exploiting the adhesive properties of a mixture of GO and PEDOT:PSS. In addition, the GO and PEDOT:PSS composite film showed higher electric conductivity than that of pure PEDOT:PSS because of the chain conformation of the benzoid−quinoid transition and unique morphology. In previous work, after synthesizing a novel donor–acceptor (DA) polymer, we explored the effect of this novel DA polymer as a dopant on the air-stability of polyfluorene (PFO)-based thin films on spectrally stable blue PLEDs. Our results demonstrated that a single emitting layer containing a tailor-made DA polymer is an efficient and very simple approach to achieve higher charge balance and reduced intermolecular interaction between fluorene moieties. Moreover, using 0.01 wt% GO in PEDOT:PSS as a modified HTL in the PFO blend system resulted in a maximum 80 luminance of 5500 cd m−2 with the Commission Internationale d′Eclairage (CIE) coordinates of (0.1744, 0.1626) at 15 V applied voltage. Nonetheless, to obtain a high conductivity and transparency, low cost and low roughness film as HTL using a simple method is still a challenge.
In this paper, we have produced smooth, highly conductive, and transparent film as an HTL by simply mixing water soluble UL-GO with PEDOT:PSS solution. Monolayer UL-GOs were prepared employing a modified chemical method that involved pre-exfoliation of graphite, which was then mixed into the PEDOT:PSS solution in various amounts. As a result, the PEDOT:PPS/GO composite film achieved a conductivity of 749.4 S cm−1 with an optical transmittance of 88.6% at 550 nm, and the film roughness is even lower than that of the original PEDOT:PSS films (40.4 S cm−1). The PEDOT:PSS/GO composite layer enhances the charge carrier transport at the anode due to improved conductivity by benzoid−quinoid transitions with a well-matched work function between the PEDOT:PSS/GO and ITO, and to the blocking behavior of the electrons from the cathode due to the large bandgap of GO. In previous work, the synthesis and modification of poly(2-methoxy-5(2′-ethyl)hexoxy-phenylenevinylene) (MEH-PPV) by the controlled oxidation of vinylene double bonds has been reported. Therefore, we investigated the effect of a PEDOT:PSS/GO composite HTL on the performance enhancement of PLEDs and PSCs. The influence of doping concentration on device performance was systematically studied from various aspects of characteristics. Introducing the PEDOT:PSS/GO HTLs between the modified MEH-PPV emitting layer and ITO in PLEDs obviously improved the current density and luminance of the PLEDs. In PSCs, recombinations are suppressed between the PEDOT:PSS/GO composite layer and the active layer, and the extraction of charges toward anodes is maximized through the use of the PEDOT:PSS/GO composite layer in PSCs.

Natural graphite flakes (Sigma-Aldrich, Germany) and sulfuric acid (H2SO4) (95.5–96.5%, General Chemical) were mixed and stirred in a round-bottom flask at a speed of 200 rpm. Fuming nitric acid (HNO3) (Sigma-Aldrich, Germany) was then added into the mixture. The mixture was maintained at room temperature and stirred for 24 h. Then, deionized water was slowly poured into the mixture. The resulting mixture was washed three times with DI water, followed by centrifugation and drying at 60 °C for 24 h to obtain graphite-intercalation compounds (GICs). To obtain fully oxidized graphite and preserve the high initial lateral sizes of the graphite flakes, as well as to improve the yield of the process, expanded graphite (EG) was used to obtain the GO dispersions. The dry GIC powder was thermally expanded at 1050 °C for 15 s to obtain EG, which had a thickness typically in the range of ≈5–100 nm. 1 g of EG and 200 mL of sulfuric acid were mixed and stirred in a three-necked flask. 10 g of KMnO4 (Junsei Chemical Co. Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) was added dropwise to the mixture. The mixture was transferred into an ice bath, and 200 mL of deionized water and 50 mL of H2O2 (Sigma-Aldrich, Germany) were slowly poured into the mixture, resulting in a color change of the suspension to light brown. After stirring for another 30 min, the GO particles were washed and centrifuged with a HCl solution (9:1 water:HCl by volume, Merck, Germany), and then centrifuged again and washed with deionized water until the pH of the solution became 5 to 6. The obtained GO particles were diluted using DI water (∼1 mg mL−1) and mildly sonicated for 20 min in a bath sonicator, followed by probe sonication for 10 min. UL-GO sheets with a mean lateral size of more than 20 μm were obtained. The concentration of GO solution was maintained at approximately 3 mg mL−1.


A patterned indium–tin-oxide (ITO)-coated PET sheet with a sheet resistance of 65 ohms (Sigma-Aldrich, Germany) was used as the substrate in both the devices (PLEDs and PSCs). The ITO substrates were ultrasonically cleaned sequentially with DI water, methanol, acetone and isopropyl alcohol (IPA), and then dried in sequence followed by ultraviolet ozone treatment for 15 min, and were maintained there until the start of the spin coating process. PEDOT:PSS aqueous solution (Clevious PH1000) was filtered through a syringe filter (0.45 μm pore size), and then various amounts of UL-GO (0–0.08 wt%) and 6 wt% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO, Merck, Germany) were added to the PEDOT:PSS solution and stirred for 3 h. A homogenous film was obtained by spin coating the composite solution as a HTL onto the transparent anode, ITO at 2000 rpm for 60 s and heating at 100 °C for 30 min on a hot plate. For multilayer films, the process was repeated multiple times. The synthesis and modification of poly(2-methoxy-5(2′-ethyl)hexoxy-phenylenevinylene) (MEH-PPV) by the controlled oxidation of vinylene double bonds has been reported. Chloroform and toluene were found to be good solvents for MEH-PPV in comparison with other organic solvents according to our investigation. Therefore toluene was chosen as the solvent because of fewer fractions of physical defects along the backbone due to extreme collapse of polymeric chains and more effective conjugated length. Therefore, for the PLED, the synthetic MEH-PPV was first dissolved in toluene (C7H8). Second, this solution was coated upon the HTL by spin coating at 2000 rpm for 40 s followed by baking at 70 °C for 5 min on a hot plate to remove any residual solvent. Finally, the cathode metals, a bilayer structure of LiF (1 nm) and aluminum (100 nm) were deposited on the emitting layer using thermal evaporation at a vacuum pressure of 6 × 10−6 Torr.

For PSCs, the active layer was coated following literature procedures. P3HT and PCBM were mixed with a 1:1 weight ratio and co-dissolved in 1,2-dichlorobenzene with a final P3HT concentration of 20 mg mL−1. The resulting solution was spin coated at 600 rpm for 18 s on the top of the PEDOT:PSS/GO layer and was thermally annealed at 140 °C for 5 min, resulting in a 200 nm thick blend layer. Then, a 1 nm thick LiF layer and a 100 nm thick aluminum layer were consecutively deposited by physical vapor deposition at 2.25 × 10−6 Torr to complete the device fabrication. Fig. 1(a and b) describe the device structure of PLEDs and PSCs using the PEDOT:PSS/GO composite layer as a HTL, and the chemical structures of GO and PEDOT:PSS.

The GO sheets were examined under an optical microscope (Olympus BH2-DMA). Aqueous dispersions with different concentrations of GO in DI water were examined under a polarized optical microscope in transmission.

Freeze dried GO samples were examined on a scanning electron microscope (SEM, JEOL-6390) to obtain high quality images.
Transmission electron microscope (TEM) images were obtained using a JEM-2200 FS at 200 kV to observe the GO sheets. For TEM investigation, 0.2 mg mL−1 of GO dispersions were prepared in distilled water by ultra-sonication for 5 min and the dispersions were drop-cast on a fresh carbon TEM grid.
For the characterization of the GO, Raman spectra of the GO were observed with a Nanofinder 30 (Tokyo Instruments Co., Osaka, Japan).
The XRD studies were performed using a powder XRD system (Philips1825) with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 0.154 nm), operating at 40 keV and with a cathode current of 20 mA, to characterize the interlayer spacing of the GO samples. To prepare the samples, droplets of the suspensions were dried in air on a cellulose acetate filter.
The roughness and surface morphology of the hole transport layer was analyzed by atomic force microscopy (AFM, Nanosurfeasyscan 2 AFM, Nanosurf AG Switzerland Inc.). The sheet resistance was measured for the electrical characterization of the composite films using a four-point probe. The optical transmittance of the spin-coated films on the glass substrate was measured by a UV-vis spectrometer (Scinco, S-3100).
A source meter (Keithley 2400, Keithley Co) was used to measure the EL characteristics of current–voltage–luminance (J–V–L) measurements. The power conversion efficiencies of the PSCs were measured using an Iviumstat source meter (Ivium Technologies Co.) under an AM 1.5G spectrum from a solar simulator (1000 W m−2; Model PEC-L01, Peccell Technologies Co.)
The measurement of ionization potential (HOMO) and the electron affinity (LUMO) of the PEDOT:PSS/GO composite thin film was executed using a cyclic voltammeter (CV, CH Instruments-611C).

Optical microscopy (OM) was employed to investigate the morphology of the GO sheets. The size and transparency of the individual GO sheets consisting of single-atom-thick layers made them very difficult to visualize under optical microscopy. Fig. 2a presents typical optical micrographs of the GO sheets produced in this study, confirming a lateral size of tens of micrometers. The wrinkles observed on the surface are a fundamental morphology found in solution-processed GO or reduced GO structures.

The corresponding SEM micrograph that complements the optical microscopy is presented in Fig. 2b. The GO sheets, shown in black, had a lateral size predominantly on the order of 70–100 μm with many sheets even larger than 150 μm and up to 300 μm. However, the fragments of smaller GO sheets, typically 10–20 μm in diameter were also observed, which is thought to be inevitable because of breakages during the exfoliation process.
The monolayer exfoliation of GO sheets can be further confirmed using transmission electron microscopy (TEM). The TEM images presented in Fig. 2c indicate that the GO sheets indeed consist of single layers whose size is in excess of several micrometers, in good agreement with the OM observations.
The structure of the GO sheets was characterized using XRD spectroscopy. Fig. 3 shows the XRD patterns of both the graphite flakes and the GO samples, indicating that the starting material represented a fully graphitic system with a sharp (002) peak, while the as-prepared GO had a distinct peak at 2θ = 10.1°, corresponding to a d-spacing of approximately 8.78 Å according to Bragg's law: 2dsinθ = nλ, where n is an integer determined by the given order, and λ is the wavelength. This d-spacing value represents, approximately, a one-molecule-thick layer of water entrapped between the GO layers, presumably through a hydrogen bond. A recent theoretical study also suggested that the water content controls the extent of these interlayer hydrogen-bond networks, thereby affecting the interlayer spacing. The individual GO platelets are interlinked via a non-uniform network of hydrogen bonds mediated by oxygenated functional groups and water molecules. This means that the interlayer spacing of GO sheets is proportional to the degree of oxidation. The mean crystallite size of the GO sheets that were oriented perpendicular to the diffracting plane in the dried suspension was calculated from the half-width-at-full-maximum (HWFM) value of the X-ray diffraction peak using Scherrer's equation and was found to be 7.8 ± 0.4 nm.
Raman spectra are extensively used to characterize graphene based materials. The Raman spectra of the nanographitic systems have two main peaks: the peak at ∼1575 cm−1 is the G-band, which corresponds to the planar configuration of sp2 bonded carbon that constitutes graphene, while the peak at ∼1352 cm−1 is the D-band represents structural disorder defects that break the translational symmetry (e.g., impurity, functionalization, structural defects.). The Raman spectrum shown in Fig. 4 indicates that the G-band of GO appeared at approximately 1599 cm−1. The appearance of the G peak of GO at a higher region is ascribed to the extensive oxidation of graphite and destruction of its periodic structure.
By adding 6 wt% DMSO and various amounts of UL-GO to PEDOT:PSS, the conductivity of the formed composite film is remarkably increased as shown in Fig. 5. This amelioration may be brought about by the separation of PSS and PEDOT chains, because the coulombic attraction between PEDOT and PSS is weakened by some functional groups on GO nanosheets (such as –COOH and –OH). These PEDOT chains can bond with GO nanosheets to widen the conductive network. From Fig. 5, the conductivity of the PEDOT:PSS composite film significantly increases, and the highest value of approximately 749.4 S cm−1 is obtained with 0.04 wt% UL-GO. However, the conductivity was reduced with a further increase of UL-GO. This may be related to the reduction of the oriented conductive network of PEDOT chains with higher UL-GO concentration. This variation trend indicates that the conductivity of PEDOT:PSS composite films is mainly influenced by the addition of UL-GO.
In order to further investigate phase separation between PEDOT and PSS, measurements of AFM images were conducted. As shown in Fig. 6, the observed bright and dark domains in the phase image are attributed to PEDOT-rich grains and PSS-rich grains, respectively. The shape of PEDOT-rich grains is transformed from a short curved domain to an extended network by increasing the ratio of UL-GO to 0.04 wt%. This demonstrates that UL-GO can reduce the insulating PSS and generate larger contact areas between oriented PEDOT-rich grains, and this morphology can prepare more conductive pathways for carriers to enhance the conductivity of the composite film. Moreover, the roughness of the composite film is reduced with the addition of UL-GO. When the addition of UL-GO is 0.04 wt%, the roughness of the film is only 1.33 nm, which is considerably lower than that of the pristine PEDOT:PSS film (2.85 nm). The conductivity improvement of PEDOT:PSS doped with UL-GO can mainly be ascribed to the separation of PSS and PEDOT chains, and separated PEDOT chains can bond with UL-GO nanosheets to extend the conductive network. It is confirmed that in the original PEDOT:PSS aqueous solution, excess PSS can cause the stable dispersion of hydrophobic PEDOT chains in water. Here PEDOT chains attach to the PSS chain through coulombic attraction. In order to obtain minimum interactions between PEDOT and water, the PSS segments together with attached PEDOT chains have a coiled conformation as blobs to prevent the contact of PEDOT with water. Moreover, the coulombic repulsions among the PSS cause the PSS segment to serve as the strings between blobs. When DMSO is introduced into the original PEDOT:PSS solution, the PEDOT and PSS chains are separated. The PEDOT chains are mainly surrounded by DMSO because of strong coulombic attractions and the PSS chains are surrounded by water. The coulombic attraction between the PEDOT and PSS chains is effectively weakened. As a result, the coulombic repulsions among the positive (or negative) charges in the PEDOT (or PSS) chain become the dominant factor for the chain conformation, such that both PEDOT and PSS shift to the linear and extended-coil conformations (Fig. 7). The linear PEDOT chains have stronger inter-chain interactions, which assists the inter-chain charge transport. The functional groups on GO nanosheets (such as –COOH and –OH) can effectively separate PSS and PEDOT chains. Consequently, the addition of GO to the PEDOT:PSS solution can further weaken the coulombic attraction between the PEDOT and PSS chains and improve the formation of the linear and extended-coil conformation of the PEDOT and PSS chains. Therefore, the conductivity of PEDOT:PSS doped with a small amount of GO is increased.
Fig. 8 shows the transmittance of PEDOT:PSS/GO composite films. The transmittance measured at 550 nm decreases with the increasing concentration of UL-GO. However, the transmittance of the composite films with the highest UL-GO concentration (0.08 wt%) is still beyond 86% at 550 nm. The PEDOT:PSS composite film doped with 0.04 wt% UL-GO can obtain a conductivity of 749.4 S cm−1 and a transmittance of 88.6%, which could be useful for transparent conductive electrodes (TCEs) with high surface conductivity and high transmittance in the visible wavelength range.
The operating characterizations of the PLEDs with the PEDOT:PSS/GO HTL are shown in terms of (a) the current density versus applied voltage (J–V), (b) the luminance versus applied voltage (L–V) and (c) the electroluminescence (EL) spectra of the devices in Fig. 9. The curve for the pure PEDOT:PSS showed the lowest current density and, on the other hand, the device with 0.04 wt% UL-GO had the highest current density, which is consistent with the conductivity results. The curves in this figure clearly exhibited the tendency of the current density to increase with the increase of UL-GO concentration to 0.04 wt%. The luminance of the PLED device was monotonically enhanced with the increase of voltage and the device failed when the voltage was too large. The reachable maximum luminance for the device using PEDOT:PSS as the HTL was approximately 647.1 cd m−2, occurring at a voltage of 11.2 V, and that could be increased to 725.6 cd m−2 at even a slightly lower voltage of 10.6 V for the device with doping concentration of 0.04%. The EL spectra of the pure PEDOT:PSS device without UL-GO shows a maximum at around 560 nm and a tail at around 700 nm, while the emission of the as-prepared sample containing a PEDOT:PSS/GO HTL comprises one maximum at around 580 nm and a tail at around 700 nm, assigned to the 0–0 and 0–2 interaction singlet transition, with the 0–0 transition being the most intense (excitation wavelength, 450 nm). The main characteristic of these peaks is that the peak intensity of 0–0 is never lower than that of 0–2. It is clear that in pure PEDOT:PSS HTL devices the intensity ratio of the 0–0 line changes with increase of the GO amount in the HTL. However, in the blended system, the usual vibronic structure can be observed with the peak intensity decreasing going from the 0–0 line to the 0–2 line. The results revealed that the suppression of the green emission intensity in the EL spectrum must be attributed to the enhanced carrier transport in the active layer and the modification in the emission pathway.
More complete electrical characteristics of the PLED device are listed in Table 1. It can be seen that, in addition to the reachable maximum luminance, the current density and the turn-on voltage (Vt) were improved by the addition of GO. The Vt was 5.35 V for the PLED device with a pure PEDOT:PSS HTL, and the value decreased with the increase of UL-GO concentration. Vt reached the lowest value of 3.65 V at a concentration of 0.04%. When the doped concentration was higher than 0.04%, the turn-on voltage increased again. The variation in the turn-on voltage of the device is usually affected by the work functions and carrier mobility of thin films.
GO (wt%)
Threshold voltage [V]
Turn-on voltage [V]
Max. luminance (cd m−2)
λEL (nm)
EL intensity (a.u.)
0
5.45
5.35
647.1
552.9
0.736
0.02
4.10
3.85
676.8
555.3
0.734
0.04
3.70
3.65
725.6
558.9
0.735
0.06
3.80
3.75
691.1
559.5
0.738
The work functions of ITO, PEDOT:PSS, and UL-GO are 4.7, 5.17, and 4.8 eV, respectively. These values and the HOMOs of the composite layer with 0.04 wt% UL-GO for PLED and PSC are listed in the energy diagram shown in Fig. 10. The energy barrier between ITO and PEDOT:PSS was 0.48 eV. The work function of UL-GO is 4.8 eV, which is lower than that of PEDOT:PSS. Therefore, with the addition of an appropriate amount of UL-GO to PEDOT:PSS, the work function of this composite layer was reduced and the energy barrier was also lowered, which facilitated the transport of holes and led to the reduction of the turn-on voltage. On the other hand, this statement will cause the extra energy required for charge injection from PEDOT:PSS/GO to the HOMO of MEH-PPV (−5.3 eV). When the concentration was higher than 0.04 wt%, the work functions of the composite films were lower than that of ITO. A Schottky barrier was formed at the contact, which hindered hole injection and led to an increase in the turn-on voltage.
The PEDOT:PSS/GO HTL enhances the charge carrier transport at the anode because of the improved conductivity by benzoid−quinoid transitions with a well-matched work function between the PEDOT:PSS and the GO and the blocking behavior of the electrons from the cathode because of the large bandgap of GO. Moreover, it reduces the radiative exciton quenching between the emissive MEH-PPV layer and the PEDOT:PSS/GO composite layer in PLEDs; therefore, leading to an enhancement of device efficiency in PLEDs.
Next, in order to demonstrate the charge carrier injection properties of the PEDOT:PSS/GO HTLs studied in fabricated PSCs, the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the PSCs with different UL-GO concentrations (0–0.06 wt%) are shown in Fig. 11 and summarized in Table 2. The PSCs with PEDOT:PSS (reference device) had a short circuit current (Jsc) of 7.106 mA cm−2, a fill factor (FF) of 68.2%, an open circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.615 V, and a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 2.982%, whereas the PSCs with the PEDOT:PSS/GO composite layer exhibited remarkably improved power conversion efficiencies, compared to the reference PSCs. In particular, optimized PSCs with the PEDOT:PSS/GO (0.04 wt%) composite layer exhibited the highest device efficiency value with the values of Jsc = 8.573 mA cm−2, FF = 62.8%, and Voc = 0.630 V with PCE = 3.388%. The main increase in the device efficiency result from the enhancement of Jsc because of the suppression of recombinations between the active layer and the PEDOT:PSS/GO composite layer and the enhanced extraction of charges toward the electrodes.
GO (wt%)
Voc [mV]
Jsc [mA cm−2]
FF
FF (%)
PCE%
0
0.615
7.106
0.682
68.2
2.982
0.02
0.625
8.185
0.632
63.3
3.245
0.04
0.630
8.573
0.628
62.8
3.388
0.06
0.630
8.397
0.621
62.1
3.285

In conclusion, we have investigated the use of simple spin coated PEDOT:PSS/UL-GO films as hole transport layers to improve the performance of solution-processable PLEDs and PSCs. The stable dispersions of UL-GO were prepared employing a modified chemical method that involved pre-exfoliation of graphite. Upon the elimination of the sonication process, high yields of monolayer UL-GO sheets were obtained, and then mixed into the PEDOT:PSS solution in various amounts. Homogeneous and smooth PEDOT:PPS/GO films can be successfully deposited from aqueous dispersion on the top of an ITO electrode with high surface coverage, low surface roughness, and controllable thickness by spin coating. The PEDOT:PSS with 0.04 wt% UL-GO had the highest conductivity of 749.4 S cm−1 and a transmittance of 88.6% at 550 nm. The effects are attributed to the shifting phase structures of PEDOT-rich grains and the formation of a superior conductive network by moderate UL-GO nanosheets. We also showed that the device performance of PLEDs and PSCs with spin coated HTLs of PEDOT:PSS/GO was superior to those with conventional spin coated PEDOT:PSS HTLs due to improved hole mobility and the remarkably reduced exciton quenching and recombinations at the contact between the PEDOT:PSS/GO HTLs and the active layer.


† First three authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014