 DOI: 10.1039/B503062E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 2220-2225

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Nadia
Camaioni
*,

Giovanni
Ridolfi
,

Valeria
Fattori
,

Laura
Favaretto
 and 

Giovanna
Barbarella


Istituto per la Sintesi Organica e la Fotoreattività (CNR-ISOF), via P. Gobetti 101, I-40129 Bologna, Italy. E-mail: camaioni@isof.cnr.it; Fax: + 39 051 6399844; Tel: + 39 051 6399779

Received
1st March 2005
, Accepted 22nd March 2005
First published on 11th April 2005
Two branched V-shaped benzo[b]thiophene-based structures were investigated as novel electron-acceptor materials in blended photovoltaic devices. Photoinduced charge transfer was demonstrated in blends between a regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene) and the oligothiophenes, via photoluminescence spectroscopy. The enhanced photovoltaic performance exhibited by the blended cells, with respect to that of pristine devices in which the polymer was the active layer, represented further evidence for exciton dissociation. Remarkable improvement of the performance of the blended devices upon mild thermal annealing was achieved. Furthermore, the effect of the molecular structure of the branched benzo[b]thiophenes on the blend photoresponse is discussed.

Electrically and optically active organic materials are the basis of the emerging field of organic electronics. Because of the flexibility of molecular synthesis, it is possible to tune the physical properties of organic films to meet the requirements of technological applications. During the last couple of decades, much effort has been put in the synthesis of new materials, the investigation of fundamental physical phenomena, and the structuring of practical active devices.

Organic semiconducting materials are currently regarded as promising candidates for applications in the field of photovoltaic cells, the cheap and well developed technology of thin film plastic deposition being the great benefit of organic photovoltaics. The fabrication of prototypes of solar cells based on mixtures of an electron-donor (D) and an electron-acceptor material (A) represents an encouraging breakthrough in organic photovoltaics. For the generation of the electrical current by absorption of light it is necessary to dissociate the photogenerated excitons into separate charges. The interpenetrating D/A network within these so-called “bulk-heterojunction” solar cells provides an efficient exciton dissociation at the interface between the donor and acceptor components, extended to the entire device volume and, at the same time, creates pathways on the way to electrodes for both types of charge carriers. Conjugated polymers are currently used as electron-donor materials, because of their good hole-transporting properties and light absorption ability, whereas different electron-acceptor materials have been tested. Polymers, dyes, fullerenes, and inorganic nanoparticles have been proposed as acceptor components in blended solar cells.
Recently we have proposed linear-shaped oligothiophene-S,S-dioxides as a new class of electron-acceptor materials for photovoltaic applications. The chemical transformation of one of the thienyl rings of a thiophene oligomer into the corresponding thienyl-S,S-dioxide modifies the energies of both the π and π* molecular orbitals, causing a remarkable increase in the electron affinity. Photoinduced charge transfer was demonstrated in blends of a regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and various oligothiophene-S,S-dioxide derivatives via photoluminescence spectroscopy. Further evidence for exciton dissociation came from the enhanced photovoltaic performance exhibited by the blended cells with respect to that of pristine devices in which the polymer was the active layer.
Strong coupling occurs between close molecules of linear oligothiophene-S,S-dioxide compounds, leading to a remarkable phase segregation in the investigated P3HT/oligothiophene-S,S-dioxides photoactive blends. In this study, two branched V-shaped benzo[b]thiophene-based structures (BTs) are investigated as the electron-acceptor component in D/A blends in which P3HT is used as the donor. We show that the replacement of the conventional linear structure of the oligothiophenes by the branched one prevents molecular aggregation and leads to amorphous blends with better photoresponse.

Regioregular P3HT was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. The synthesis of branched 2,3-bis[3,3′-bis(cyclohexyl)-2,2′-bithienyl]-benzo[b]thiophene-1,1-dioxide (BT1) and 2,3-bis(2,2′-bithienyl)-benzo[b]thiophene-1,1-dioxide (BT2) has already been described.

Optical absorption spectra were recorded with a Perkin-Elmer λ9 spectrophotometer. Emission spectra were obtained with a Spex Fluorolog II spectrofluorimeter (continuous 150 W Xe lamp), equipped with a Hamamatsu R-928 photomultiplier tube. In order to monitor only the BT emission, the photoluminescence intensities (IPL) were measured at 560 nm (no P3HT emission is detected below 600 nm) and were normalized to the same BT absorption for each blend with the equation:
where
Imis is the experimental intensity, α1 and α2 are the extinction coefficients of BT and P3HT respectively at the excitation wavelength; p1 and p2 are their weight ratios; d is the film thickness.

Time-correlated single-photon-counting photoluminescence studies were performed with an IBH spectrometer equipped with a IBH Nanoled-03 (repetition rate 0.1 MHz, λexc = 373 nm, 0.1 ns pulse duration). The detector was a red-sensitive (185–850 nm) Hamamatsu R-3237-01 photomultiplier.
Non-contact Scanning Force Microscopy (SFM) was employed recording both the height signal (output of the feedback signal) and the phase signal (phase lag of the oscillation relative to the driver). While the first type of images provides a topographical map of the surface, the latter is extremely sensitive to structural heterogeneities on the sample surface, being therefore ideal to identify different components in a hybrid film. The SFM Autoprobe CP research (Thermomicroscope) was run in an air environment at room temperature with scan rates of 1–0.5 Hz line−1. Images with scan lengths ranging from 40 µm down to 5 µm were recorded with a resolution of 512 × 512 pixels using the 100 µm scanner and non-contact Si ultralevers with a spring constant in the range between 2.1 and 40 N m−1.
Photocells were prepared by spin-coating the oligothiophene–P3HT blends, at different D/A weight ratios, from chloroform solution onto the top of PEDOT : PSS/indium-tin-oxide/glass electrodes (PEDOT : PSS = poly(ethylenedioxythiophene) doped with polystyrene sulfonic acid; from Bayer AG). Typically, the concentration of the solutions used was 15 g L−1. The spin-coating conditions were adjusted to give photoactive layer between 80 and 90 nm. Finally, a 1 nm thick layer of LiF (Sigma Aldrich) and 80 nm of Al were evaporated at a base pressure of 3 × 10−6 mbar through a shadow mask. A semi-transparent Al electrode (about 10–11 nm) was deposited for the cells used in the annealing experiments. The active area of the devices was 3.14 mm2. Film thickness measurements were performed with an Alphastep 200 profilometer (Tencor). Device fabrication was performed, apart from the cathode deposition, under ambient conditions. The electrical characterization of the devices was done in a home-made chamber, provided with a heating stage, under dynamic vacuum (about 2 × 10−4 mbar). Current–voltage tests were carried out using a Keithley 2400 source measure unit. The light source was a 300 W Xe arc lamp (Oriel). The light intensity, measured with an Oriel thermopile, was varied by using neutral density filters.
The thermal treatment was performed in the chamber for the electrical characterization under dynamic vacuum (10−4 mbar). Devices were heated at a rate of 1 °C min−1 and cooled back to room temperature at the same rate. The device temperature was measured with a Pt100 thermoresistor directly on the top of the glass substrate. In the case of the annealing experiments, the cells were illuminated through the semitransparent aluminium electrode because the frame of the characterization chamber does not allow irradiation through the back ITO electrode during the annealing processes.

The oxygenation of the core thienyl sulfur atom modifies the energies of both the π and π* molecular orbitals of the branched thiophenes (insets of Fig. 1), causing the increase of the oxidation potential and a more accentuated shift of the reduction potential towards less negative values with respect to those of the precursor oligomer. A similar effect has been observed in linear oligothiophene-S,S-oxides. The energy levels of BT1 and BT2 are sketched in Fig. 1 and compared with those of P3HT (from reference 21). The ionization potentials (IP) of the BTs were determined from the electrochemical oxidation peak potentials and converted to values relative to the vacuum level. The onset of the absorption spectra (Fig. 2) was used to evaluate the energy gap between the ionization potentials and the electron affinities (EA). Photoinduced charge transfer between the polymer and the branched thiophenes is likely to take place as both the energy levels of BTs are higher than those of P3HT.

Photoexcited excitons are expected to dissociate at the polymer/oligomer interfaces so that negative carriers could be injected into the BTs and positive ones into the polymer. A quenching of the strong photoluminescence of the BTs in the blends with P3HT would support the expected photoinduced charge transfer. Both BTs are good photoluminescent and electroluminescent materials. Light-emitting diodes made of these oligomers exhibited a luminance as high as 10500 cd m−2. Selective excitation of the oligomer in the P3HT–BTs blends, in order to detect quenching of the oligomer photoluminescence, is not possible because BTs and P3HT absorption spectra are overlapping (Fig. 2). On the other hand, both BTs exhibit strong emission bands in the 500–700 nm spectral region while P3HT has no detectable photoluminescence at wavelengths shorter than 600 nm, hence pure BTs' photoluminescence in the blends can be monitored at λ < 600 nm. In Fig. 3 the emission intensity at 560 nm is reported as a function of the blend composition. Intensity values are normalized to the same BTs absorption, as described above. Photoluminescence significantly decreases for both BTs with increasing amount of P3HT. An emission quenching of 90% and 50% occurs for BT1 and BT2 respectively upon the addition of only 25% of P3HT. Photoluminescence quenching is also evident from the time-resolved measurements carried out on a BT1 pristine film and on a P3HT–BT1 (1 : 3 w/w) blend film and reported in Fig. 4.
The strong photoluminescence quenching in the blended films is also an indication of an intimate mixing of the polymer with the BTs, due to the excellent solubility and miscibility of the materials. To learn more about the morphology of the blends we studied the film microstructure by scanning force microscopy in non-contact mode. SFM images showed fairly smooth surfaces and no clear phase separation was observed, independently of the composition of the blends. These results indicate that the phase separation is likely to occur below the detection limit of our SFM apparatus. A representative SFM image is shown in Fig. 5.
The blends were employed as the active layer in photovoltaic devices using the glass/ITO/PEDOT : PSS/blend/LiF/Al configuration. The devices, realized under ambient conditions apart from the cathode deposition, were tested in dynamic vacuum (2 × 10−4 mbar). An improvement of the photovoltaic performance of the blended devices, with respect to pristine P3HT cells, was observed for both P3HT–BT1 and P3HT–BT2 active layers (Fig. 6). This indicates that the blended films do indeed generate photocurrents through charge separation at the donor–acceptor bulk heterojunction. Under white-light irradiation of 80 mW cm−2, devices with P3HT–BT1 blend in a ratio of 1 : 3 showed a short-circuit current (jsc) and a power conversion efficiency (η) of 3.2 × 10−2 mA cm−2 and 5.2 × 10−3%, respectively. Much more interesting were the values of jsc (0.24 mA cm−2) and η (0.074%) exhibited by the BT2-based cells. A gain of over forty-fold for the short-circuit current was obtained in the case of P3HT–BT2 cells with an acceptor content of 50%, with respect to the neat donor cells (from 5.7 × 10−6 to 2.4 × 10−4 A cm−2). Taking advantage of the improvement of the values of the open-circuit voltage (Voc) in the blended devices (see below), an increase up to nearly eighty-fold was achieved for the power conversion efficiency (from 9.4 × 10−4% for neat donor cells to 0.074% for blended cells with a BT2 content of 50%).
As already observed in the case of cells based on linear oligothiophenes, a considerable increase of the open-circuit voltage (Voc) was observed in the blended cells with respect to the value (0.4 V at 80 mW cm−2) measured for P3HT-based pristine devices. Surprisingly, the Voc value of the BT2-based cells (around 1.0 V at 80 mW cm−2 and not highly affected by the D/A weight ratio) was found to be significantly higher than that observed for the BT1-based devices (around 0.76 V at 80 mW cm−2 and not highly affected by the D/A weight ratio). It has been demonstrated that the open-circuit voltage of D/A bulk-heterojunction solar cells is related to the difference between the HOMO level of the donor and the LUMO level of the acceptor component. Given the energy levels of the investigated materials (Fig. 1), a lower Voc value for the BT1-based cells is not expected. However the energetic distance between the HOMO of the donor and the LUMO of the acceptor is a thermodynamic limit for Voc, which can be lowered by several factors such as a low parallel resistance of the devices.
The values of the fill factor (FF), slightly dependent on the D/A weight ratio, were found to be rather poor, particularly for the BT1-based cells. FF ranging between 0.16 and 0.19 was calculated in this latter case at an irradiation power of 80 mW cm−2, whereas values in the range 0.22–0.26 were extracted from the current–voltage curves of the P3HT–BT2 cells. In general, an increasing series resistance and a decreasing shunt resistance tend to reduce the fill factor. Furthermore, charge recombination phenomena, reducing the fraction of the photogenerated charge carriers that are collected from the electrodes, affect FF other than the short-circuit current. In this connection, the trend of jsc with the light intensity was investigated. The plots of the short-circuit current as a function of the illumination intensity are shown in Fig. 7 for P3HT–BT1 and P3HT–BT2 cells with an acceptor content of 75% by weight. The fit of the data by a power law gave a power factor (α) of 0.86 and 0.93 for the BT1- and BT2-based cell, respectively. A clear trend of α with the D/A weight ratio of the blends was not observed. Power factors ranging between 0.83 and 0.86 were found for the BT1-based cells, whereas higher values (0.91–0.95) were obtained from the fits of the data related to the BT2-based cells. The sub-linear behavior indicates partial contribution of bimolecular recombination, which lowers the device efficiency at high illumination intensities. The higher values of α for the BT2-based cells are an indication of reduced recombination phenomena, likely due to better transport properties, compared to the cells in which BT1 was the acceptor.
Given the BTs' molecular structures, the better performance of the BT2-based devices is not surprising. It has been demonstrated that the functionalization with cyclohexyl groups (BT1) leads to a remarkable increase in the molecular distortion and likewise to increased intermolecular distances due to the large volume of the substituents. Both these factors should greatly affect the transport properties as well as the optical properties of BT1 (Fig. 2). Taking into account the good film-forming properties of all the investigated samples, we believe that the difference of nearly one order of magnitude in the power conversion efficiency can be mainly ascribed to very different transport properties of the two BTs.
To improve the performance of the cells, the devices were annealed in the chamber for the electrical characterization. The thermal annealing was done, in the dark and at a pressure of about 10−4 mbar, at 50 °C for 40 min. A dramatic improvement of the photoresponse was observed after the thermal treatment, irrespective of the blend components and composition. As an example, the current–voltage (I–V) curves of a 1 : 1 P3HT–BT2 cell taken at room temperature before and after the treatment are shown in Fig. 8. The short-circuit current underwent more than a threefold increase upon the thermal treatment (from 0.14 mA cm−2 to 0.48 mA cm−2). An improvement of both the fill factor (from 0.24 to 0.32) and the open-circuit voltage (from 0.94 V to 1.04 V) was also obtained after the treatment. For the annealing experiments, the cells were illuminated through the aluminium electrode because the frame of the characterization chamber does not allow irradiation through the back ITO electrode. The irradiation incident on the cells was adjusted so that the fraction transmitted through the semitransparent Al electrode was not lower than 50 mW cm−2. Since the illumination intensity was kept constant during the experiments, it was possible to evaluate the improvement of the power conversion efficiency from the ratio PMa/PMb, where PMa is the maximum power output per unit area (Voc
×
jsc
× FF) after the annealing and PMb is its value before the treatment. An enhancement of five-fold for the power conversion efficiency was calculated by using the photovoltaic parameters extracted from the I–V curves of Fig. 8. Given the value of 0.074% (Fig. 6) for the power conversion efficiency of the most efficient cells (P3HT–BT2 in 1 : 1 w/w) illuminated through the ITO contact with an irradiation of 80 mW cm−2, a value of η between 0.3% and 0.4% can be estimated after the described thermal treatment.
It has already been reported that a thermal annealing or the combination of a thermal annealing and the application of an external voltage greatly enhance the photoresponse of solar cells based on blends between P3HT and fullerene derivatives. In this connection, power conversion efficiencies up to 3.5% under simulated solar light have been reported. The increase of the short-circuit current has been mainly ascribed to an improved mobility of the charge carriers in the active layer, due to an enhanced crystallization of the polymer during the heating process. A change of the charge transfer properties between the active layer and the electrodes has been also hypothesized, leading to better ohmic contacts and a reduced device series resistance. Furthermore, “burning” of shunts, promoted by the thermal process, translated into an enhancement of the open-circuit voltage. This likely occurs in the present case, in which an increased Voc was often observed in the treated cells (Fig. 8). The burning of shunts, leading to a higher parallel resistance of the device, also has an effect on the value of the fill factor. Indeed, a better FF has been always observed upon thermal treatment, as occurs for the BTs-based cells (Fig. 8). However, the enhancement of FF could be partly ascribed to the enhanced transport properties of the active layer. In order to verify this hypothesis, the trend of the short-circuit current with the irradiation intensity was investigated before and after the thermal treatment (Fig. 9). An increasing of the power factor α was observed as a consequence of the annealing process, irrespective of the blend components and composition. In the case shown in Fig. 9, α, starting from the value of 0.91, increased to 0.96 after the thermal annealing. The improved power factor is an indication of better transport properties promoted by the heating process.

Oligothiophenes with excellent solubility and showing no tendency to molecular aggregation were obtained by replacing the linear structure with the branched V-shaped one. In this way, fairly smooth films were obtained when the BTs were blended with P3HT and the SFM images did not show phase separation, in contrast to what was observed for linear oligothiophene-S,S-dioxide/P3HT blends.

The oxygenation of the core thienyl sulfur atom modifies the energies of both the π and π* orbitals of the branched thiophenes, leading to electronic properties similar to those already observed for linear oligothiophene-S,S-dioxides. The strong quenching of the photoluminescence intensity and the improved photoresponse of the blends between the branched thiophenes and P3HT confirm that the interaction of the oligomers with the polymer results in an enhanced charge separation, as has already been observed for blends in which the linear-shaped oligothiophenes were the electron acceptors.
BT1–P3HT cells were found to be significantly less efficient than those based on the BT2 electron acceptor. A difference of one order of magnitude was observed in the values of both the short-circuit current and the power conversion efficiency exhibited by the two kinds of cells. The poorer performance of the BT1-based cells is likely to be ascribed to poor transport properties of the acceptor component. Indeed, the presence of the cyclohexyl substituents in BT1 increases the molecular distortion as well as the intermolecular distances, thus reducing the intermolecular interactions.
The photoresponse of BT1–P3HT and BT2–P3HT based cells greatly improved upon mild thermal annealing at 50 °C for 40 min. A power conversion efficiency between 0.3% and 0.4% was estimated for the most efficient thermal treated cells. We believe that these values can be further improved by realizing the cells in controlled atmosphere (e.g. in a glove box).

We are grateful to Prof. M.C. Gallazzi (Politecnico di Milano) for the purification of P3HT and to Mr. A. Geri (CNR-ISOF) for technical support.


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2005