 DOI: 10.1039/C8TA01192C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 10233-10242


Bin
Ding
,

Shi-Yu
Huang
,

Qian-Qian
Chu
,

Yan
Li
,

Cheng-Xin
Li
,

Chang-Jiu
Li
 and 

Guan-Jun
Yang
*

State Key Laboratory for Mechanical Behavior of Materials, School of Materials Science & Engineering, Xi'an Jiaotong University, No. 28, Xianning West Road, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710049, P. R. China. E-mail: ygj@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Received
5th February 2018
, Accepted 13th March 2018
First published on 14th March 2018
Hybrid organic–inorganic perovskite solar cells (PSCs), particularly planar PSCs, have attracted significant attention because of their high efficiency, low fabrication costs, and simple preparation process. However, planar PSCs exhibit lower efficiency and stability than mesoporous PSCs primarily owing to defects in the electron transport layer (ETL). Herein, we introduced a SnO2 nanoparticle-modified TiO2 film (SnO2@TiO2) as an ETL. In addition, we proposed a simple three-step chemical bath method to achieve this SnO2@TiO2 structure at low temperatures (140 °C). The SnO2@TiO2 ETL significantly enhances electron extraction and decreases the trap states at the perovskite/ETL interface. We achieved average efficiencies of 21.27%, 19.79%, 17.21%, and 16.31% at the reverse scan and forward scan for the device areas of 0.10 cm2, 1.13 cm2, 5.25 cm2, and 10.56 cm2, respectively. Moreover, we achieved a certificated efficiency of 15.65% for a normal planar perovskite solar module with a masked area of 10.55 cm2. The SnO2@TiO2-based PSCs exhibit enhanced photocurrent and reduced hysteresis. Furthermore, the solar cell retained about 89% of its initial efficiency after about 750 hours of aging in dark and about 93% for 528 hours under full-sun illumination. Owing to the low-temperature processability and the absence of spin-coating steps, SnO2@TiO2 ETLs will provide a promising path for the commercialization of PSCs.

Advanced hybrid organic–inorganic lead halide materials have boosted the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of perovskite-based solar cells (PSCs) from 3.8% to 22.7% for devices with area under 1 cm2 (ref. 1–4) and more than 23% for silicon–perovskite tandem cells. Due to their low cost and remarkably high efficiency, PSCs are on the way from the research laboratory to commercial production, and problems such as long-term stability and large-area fabrication of devices are being gradually solved by tuning the perovskite component, controlling crystal nucleation and growth, applying stable electron transport layers or using hydrophobic materials to protect the perovskite. Normally, stable and high-efficiency PSCs require a mesoporous scaffold (such as TiO2) that needs a high-temperature (>450 °C) process, and it is difficult to deposit this scaffold at a uniform thickness of ∼150 nm by spin-coating on large areas. However, the mesoporous scaffold can be removed in planar heterojunction structure PSCs, where the perovskite absorber is sandwiched between the electron transport layer (ETL) and the hole transport material (HTM). The planar device structure further evolved into an n–i–p structure, known as the normal planar device structure, and a p–i–n structure, known as the inverted device structure, which attracted significant attention for their low-temperature fabrication process and roll-to-roll manufacturing procedure. However, the PCE of the normal planar PSCs is significantly lower than that of the mesoporous-type PSCs; this may be due to increased charge recombination caused by the short diffusion length of electrons. In general, the high-efficiency normal planar PSCs typically use a compact TiO2 layer as the ETL, which is deposited via spin-coating followed by a low-temperature (<150 °C) treatment or high-temperature (>450 °C) sintering. However, the spin-coated TiO2 layers have a very unequal thickness because of the rough surface of the FTO layer; this causes an ineffective electron transfer where the TiO2 layer is too thick and a severe recombination where the TiO2 layer is too thin. The spin-coated ETL can result in a relatively lower efficiency of the planar PSCs due to thickness nonuniformity and imperfect contact with the substrate. Moreover, the device area of most normal planar PSCs is less than 0.2 cm2(ref. 28–30) possibly due to size limitations of the spin-coating process. Spray pyrolysis is a promising large-scale manufacturing approach for the TiO2 ETL; however, it still requires a high-temperature sintering at up to 450 °C, and the conversion efficiency is only 16.3% for devices based on the TiO2 ETLs fabricated by spray pyrolysis with device area larger than 1 cm2.

Another important issue of concern is the serious hysteresis existing in the normal planar PSCs. The mechanism of the hysteresis phenomena is attributed to several effects such as ion migration or trapping of electrons at the interfaces. In planar PSCs with TiO2 ETLs, the trapping of electrons at the TiO2/perovskite interface significantly affects the hysteresis more than that at the perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD interface because of the low electron mobility of TiO2 ETL and the trap states appearing at the TiO2 surface, especially upon exposure to UV light. To overcome these drawbacks, various modifications of the TiO2 ETL have been proposed such as using a fullerene self-assembled monolayer to passivate the TiO2 surface, using phosphotungstic acid to obtain a better band alignment between the TiO2 and the perovskite, and using the 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate ionic liquid to reduce the density of traps. However, in an unexpected development, Tan et al. have recently applied chlorine-capped TiO2 nanocrystal films as ETLs, significantly reducing the interface recombination, thus achieving a certified efficiency of 19.5% without hysteresis for 1.1 cm2 devices. However, the process of preparation of the chlorine-capped TiO2 ETL is complexed by the wet-chemical method involving several steps such as heating at 85 °C for 12 hours, chemical precipitation by the addition of diethyl ether, and centrifugation for three times. These results imply that the trap states at the TiO2/perovskite interface are indeed one of the reasons for the hysteresis existing in planar PSCs.
Recently, SnO2 has been reported to be a promising candidate to decrease or even eliminate hysteresis in normal planar PSCs because of its low-temperature solution fabrication process, more efficient electron transfer ability (even faster than that of TiO2), better alignment of the conduction band to perovskite, and faster electron extraction. However, to date, the SnO2 ETL is mostly fabricated by spin coating for high-efficiency PSCs and the so-called low temperature reaches up to 180 °C, which is still too high for the flexible solar cells. Recently, SnO2 ETLs combined with potassium-containing quadruple-cation perovskite have achieved an efficiency of 15.76% without hysteresis for normal planar perovskite solar modules; this indicates that SnO2 ETLs have enormous potential.
In this study, we introduced a SnO2 nanoparticle-modified TiO2 film (SnO2@TiO2) as the ETL for normal planar PSCs. Moreover, a three-step chemical bath method has been proposed to deposit SnO2@TiO2 on the FTO substrate, which can yield high-quality and highly reproducible SnO2@TiO2 films. The TiO2 compact layer was first deposited on the substrate via a two-step chemical bath method at low temperatures, not exceeding 120 °C. Next, SnO2 was deposited on the TiO2 film via a three-step chemical bath method at a temperature less than 140 °C. The results indicate that the SnO2@TiO2 ETL can significantly enhance electron extraction and decrease the trap states at the ETL/perovskite interface. Then, upon combining this technique with our previous method for producing high-quality and large-scale perovskite films, we achieved average efficiencies of 21.27%, 19.79%, 17.21%, and 16.31% at the reverse scan and forward scan for the active device areas of 0.10 cm2, 1.13 cm2, 5.25 cm2, and 10.56 cm2, respectively. More importantly, an average PCE of 15.65% was certified by the PV test laboratory of Newport Corporation PV Lab (one of the six worldwide-recognized certification bodies), a record certificated efficiency for normal planar perovskite solar modules and second only to 17.4% (ref. 51) for perovskite solar modules certificated by the same certification body.

The TiO2 nanoparticle film deposited on the FTO substrate normally presents pinholes/voids, which produce a direct contact between perovskite and FTO and cause severe recombination. To avoid pinholes/voids, we fabricated TiO2 films using a two-step chemical bath method. Since many trap states are located at the perovskite/TiO2 interface, SnO2 nanoparticles have been added to the TiO2 film, separating the perovskite from TiO2 (Fig. 1a). As shown in Fig. 1b, the FTO substrate was first soaked in the TiCl4 solution, having a relatively high concentration of 200 mM, that is normally used to treat the TiO2 mesoporous layer in mesoporous-type perovskite solar cells. Then, the substrate was soaked in a 20 mM TiCl4 solution with the aim to further increase the density of the film obtained in the previous step. Sequentially, the substrate was soaked in the SnCl2 solution. The temperature of the chemical bath during the abovementioned three steps was 70 °C. Finally, the substrate was annealed at 140 °C. All experimental details are given in the ESI. After the FTO substrates were sequentially soaked in a high-concentration TiCl4 (H-TiCl4) solution, low-concentration TiCl4 (L-TiCl4) solution, and SnCl2 solution, the surfaces of the FTO crystals were fully covered with nanoparticles, and the crystals retained their rough surface topology, i.e., the nanoparticle films uniformly covered the FTO film in a conformal manner (Fig. 1c–f). The morphology of the TiO2 film grown from the H-TiCl4 solution (Fig. 1d) remains unaltered after treatment with a L-TiCl4 solution (Fig. 1e) and SnCl2 solution (Fig. 1f). To observe the film grown from L-TiCl4 and SnCl2 solutions, the FTO substrates were directly soaked in the L-TiCl4 solution (Fig. 1g) and SnCl2 solution (Fig. 1h). It is obvious that the nanoparticle films generated from H-TiCl4 solution (Fig. 1d) are thicker than those generated from L-TiCl4 solution (Fig. 1g) and SnCl2 solution (Fig. 1h). The hydrolysis products of TiCl4 are normally regarded as hydrous titanium oxides; therefore, the TiO2 film prepared by the chemical bath method is subsequently annealed at 120 °C to dehydrate hydrous titanium oxides. This would shrink the TiO2 film and lead to the generation of pinholes. However, the pinholes were then filled by the treatment of L-TiCl4 solution.

X-ray photoelectron spectroscopic (XPS) measurements reveal the composition of the films obtained from the hydrolysis of TiCl4 and SnCl2. The full XPS spectra are shown in Fig. S1a (ESI). In the XPS spectra of Ti, O, and Sn elements (Fig. 2a–c), TiO2 is observed, whereas SnO2 is absent for the TiO2/FTO film; this indicates that the TiO2 film completely covers the FTO substrate. Moreover, two small peaks of Ti4+ are observed in the SnO2@TiO2/FTO films (Fig. 2a), which can be attributed to the very small thickness of the SnO2 layer. All SnO2@TiO2/FTO films annealed at different temperatures exhibited two strong Sn4+ peaks at 495.3 eV and 487.0 eV without any Sn2+ peaks (Fig. 2b); when combined with the oxygen peak O 1s observed at 531.0 eV (Fig. 2c), this result demonstrated that pure SnO2 films were successfully prepared using the SnCl2·2H2O precursor. Therefore, we could significantly decrease the temperature for the preparation of the SnO2 film from SnCl2 to 80 °C, whereas in the previously reported processes, the temperature was almost up to 180 °C. We can ascribe the successful results obtained even at this lower temperature to the oxidation of Sn2+ to Sn4+ by oxygen dissolved in the SnCl2 solution during the hydrolysis procedure at 70 °C and to the very small thickness of the freshly prepared film obtained from SnCl2 that allows an effective oxidation of the SnO2 film by oxygen in the air during the subsequent annealing process. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns obtained for the abovementioned films are shown in Fig. S1b (ESI), and they indicate that no other peaks of metallic oxide phases are found in FTO. According to the transmission spectra, both the TiO2 film and SnO2@TiO2 film obtained by the chemical bath method hardly affect the transparency of the FTO substrate in the visible region (Fig. S1c, ESI); this may be due to the very small thickness of the TiO2 film and SnO2@TiO2 film. Moreover, the SnO2 layer has little influence on the electrical conductance of the TiO2 electron transport layer obtained directly from the slope of the I–V curves of the FTO/ETL/Au devices (Fig. S1d, ESI). UV-vis absorption spectra of the perovskite ((FAPbI3)0.3(MaPbI3)0.7) films deposited on FTO, TiO2/FTO, and SnO2@TiO2/FTO substrates were obtained, and all the spectra exhibited the typical perovskite absorption spectra with a sharp absorption onset at 800 nm (Fig. 2d).
To study the charge transfer properties, steady photoluminescence (PL) and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) were measured. As shown in Fig. 2e, the perovskite film on SnO2@TiO2 exhibits an enhanced PL quenching in comparison with that on the TiO2 film. The TRPL data were fitted using bi-exponential decay to obtain the decay lifetime for the slow recombination process that means recombination at the ETL/perovskite interface. The perovskite film deposited on the SnO2@TiO2 film shows a lifetime of 174 ns, much shorter than 536 ns and 448 ns for the glass and TiO2 films, respectively. Moreover, the electron diffusion coefficient was estimated by fitting the TRPL data with the eqn (S1) (ESI). The electron diffusion coefficient is 4.3 × 10−3 cm2 s−1 for the perovskite film deposited on the SnO2@TiO2 film, much larger than 2.19 × 10−3 cm2 s−1 for the perovskite film deposited on the TiO2 film. As observed from the PL and TRPL results, the SnO2@TiO2 film displays a fast electron transfer and an efficient electron extraction, which can be attributed to the good conduction band alignment between the SnO2 film and the perovskite film.

Fig. 3a shows the cross-sectional SEM image of perovskite/SnO2@TiO2/FTO. More images of the morphology of the perovskite films deposited on TiO2 or SnO2@TiO2 are shown in Fig. S2 (ESI). It can be clearly observed that TiO2 or SnO2@TiO2 nanoparticle films grow in a conformal manner on the surface of the FTO substrates and form thin, uniform, and pinhole-free blocking layers, closely connected to the substrate. Moreover, the perovskite films grow conformally on the TiO2 or SnO2@TiO2 films, showing dense, uniform, and pinhole-free morphology. The XRD spectra show that perovskite films with or without annealing on TiO2 or SnO2@TiO2 exhibit a pure tetragonal phase free of PbI2 (Fig. S3, ESI). However, many details about the SnO2@TiO2 nanoparticle films remain unclear due to the nanoscale sizes of the particles and film thickness (about 40 nm, as estimated from the SEM image shown in Fig. 3a). Therefore, high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was employed to characterize the distribution of SnO2 nanoparticles on the TiO2 film, the SnO2@TiO2/FTO interface, and the exact thickness of the SnO2@TiO2 film. Fig. 3b shows high-angle annular dark field (HAADF) scanning cross-sectional-view TEM image of the perovskite film deposited on the SnO2@TiO2/FTO substrate; the corresponding low-magnification image is shown in Fig. S4a (ESI). The magnified cross-sectional TEM image shows an explicit view of the SnO2:F (FTO)/SnO2@TiO2 interface and the SnO2@TiO2/perovskite interface, demonstrating a close contact among the three layers (Fig. S4b). Individual elemental maps of F, O, Sn, and Ti for the area indicated by the white box in Fig. 3b clearly outline the SnO2:F/SnO2@TiO2 interface and show the existence of SnO2 (Fig. 3c–f). Other elemental maps of C, N, I, and Pb are shown in Fig. S4c–f (ESI). The energy-dispersive spectra for two points reveal the existence of SnO2 (Fig. S4g–I, ESI). As shown in Fig. 3g, the thickness of SnO2@TiO2 is ∼30 nm, significantly thinner than that of the ETLs described in the literature, but thick enough to form a compact layer due to the three-step sequential chemical bath method that forms extremely small nanoparticles (Fig. 1). An atomic resolution TEM image shows clear lattice fringes, thus revealing a clear interface indicated by the white line at the atomic scale (Fig. 3h). A crystalline structure with a lattice spacing of 0.24 nm might be indexed as the (220) plane of FTO, further confirmed by the XRD of FTO (Fig. S3, ESI). Another crystalline structure with a lattice spacing of 0.32 nm might be indexed as the (110) plane of the rutile phase of TiO2. Within the SnO2@TiO2 film, as shown in Fig. 3i, the randomly oriented tiny grains can be clearly observed although most grains are damaged by the Ga beam during sample preparation via focused ion beam; the grains exhibit small and large sizes, as outlined.
According to the abovementioned analysis, we can conclude that the thin SnO2@TiO2 film has been successfully deposited on the FTO substrate via the three-step chemical bath method. The SnO2@TiO2 ETL demonstrates significantly enhanced electron transfer and electron extraction, which would improve the performance of PSCs. To validate this point, we further fabricated normal planar PSCs with a structure of gold/spiro-OMeTAD/(FAPbI3)0.3(MAPbI3)0.7/SnO2@TiO2(or TiO2)/FTO (Fig. 4a). The initial cross-sectional SEM images of the SnO2@TiO2-based PSCs show no differences from that of the TiO2-based PSCs (Fig. S5, ESI). The entire device was prepared at low temperatures in air at an ambient temperature of 22–25 °C and a relative humidity of 45–55%, except for the gold layer that was made by thermal evaporation. At first, SnO2 films of different thicknesses were deposited on TiO2 as ETLs by varying only the concentration of SnCl2 solution with other conditions unchanged (Fig. S6a, ESI). All the devices were measured with a 0.1 cm2 mask under a simulated AM 1.5G solar illumination of 100 mW cm−2 at an ambient temperature of 22–25 °C and a relative humidity of 45–55%. The corresponding photovoltaic parameters containing photocurrent density (JSC), open-circuit voltage (VOC), fill factor (FF), as well as PCE are listed in Table S1 (ESI). We have found that the JSC increases with the increasing concentration of the SnCl2 solution, but almost remains the same when the concentration is higher than 40 mM; on the other hand, the VOC decreases if the solution concentration is too high; this is in accordance with the previous studies on cells based on the pure SnO2 ETL. As already explained, the TiO2 films were fabricated using the two-step chemical bath method, which should be dense enough to avoid the serious carrier recombination owing to the direct contact between perovskite and FTO. Thus, the enhancement in the JSC is mainly due to the fast electron transfer and enhanced electron extraction achieved using SnO2, which significantly alleviates charge accumulation at the trap states on the TiO2 surface. Finally, we optimized the concentration of the SnCl2 solution at 40 mM, at which high JSC and VOC could be obtained.
Thus, all the SnO2@TiO2 ETLs assembled into devices were then fabricated using the 40 mM SnCl2 solution. Fig. 4b shows the PCE statistical graph of the devices based on TiO2 ETLs and SnO2@TiO2 ETLs (72 devices in total). Other photovoltaic parameters are shown in Fig. S6b–d (ESI). The average PCE is significantly improved from 19.55 ± 0.51% to 21.22 ± 0.44% at the reverse scan using SnO2@TiO2. Interestingly, we found that both devices with TiO2 and SnO2@TiO2 ETLs showed an ultra-high fill factor of ∼82%, generally higher than that of the devices based on spin-coated ETLs. We ascribed this to the ETL conformally growing on the surface of the FTO films via the chemical bath method; this morphology ensured a good contact between FTO and ETLs and avoided pinholes and gaps between the ETLs and FTO films always appearing during the spin-coating process. Furthermore, the very small thickness of ∼30 nm (Fig. 3g) of the ETL ensures a small resistance. Among the 36 devices that used TiO2 ETLs, the champion cell achieves an efficiency of 20.72% (at the reverse scan), measured by the reverse and forward scans at the scan step of 23.7 mV and delay times of 100, 500, 1000, and 1500 ms at each point under a simulated AM 1.5G solar illumination of 100 mW cm−2 (Fig. 4c). All the photovoltaic parameters are listed in Table S2 (ESI). It is apparent that the reverse scan rate hardly influences the PCE; instead, with the decreasing forward scan rate, the PCE increases, but is still much smaller than that obtained under reverse scan; this is a normal phenomenon for planar PSCs with TiO2 ETLs. Moreover, we found that the device based on the TiO2 ETL produced current density higher than short-circuit current density at high bias voltages in the J–V curves (Fig. 4c) at the reverse scan, and it could be called current shoulder that was also shown in the literature and possibly caused by the deep trap states on the TiO2 surface. Using SnO2 modification, the phenomenon can be alleviated or even eliminated (Fig. S6). For SnO2@TiO2 ETLs, the champion cell was investigated, as shown in Fig. 4d. All the photovoltaic parameters are listed in Table S3 (ESI). The PCE of the champion cell shows little change at different scan rates, and the highest PCE of 21.96% at the reverse scan and 20.57% at the forward scan was obtained with almost no hysteresis. Furthermore, the output photocurrent density (J) and the PCE at maximum power point of the champion cell were measured at a bias voltage of 975 mV. The J stabilized at 22.12 mA cm−2, and PCE stabilized at 21.56% for about 200 s (Fig. S6e, ESI). Moreover, the incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) of the champion solar cells with TiO2 ETL and SnO2@TiO2 ETL was measured, as shown in Fig. S6f (ESI). The integrated JSC of 23.28 mA cm−2 for the SnO2@TiO2-based device is much higher than 20.62 mA cm−2 for the TiO2-based device. However, the integrated JSC of both devices is slightly smaller than the JSC obtained from the J–V curves measured under one simulated sun illumination; this may be due to the weak response of the devices to monochromatic light with relatively weak intensity especially for the long wavelengths ranging from 740 nm to 850 nm during the measurement of the IPCE.
To investigate the influence of different ETLs on charge transfer and charge recombination of the device, we measured the transient photocurrent decay under short-circuit condition and photovoltage decay under open-circuit condition. As shown in Fig. 4e, the results exhibit that the decay time is 72.60 μs for the SnO2@TiO2-based device, comparable to 71.97 μs for the TiO2-based device. However, as observed from the transient photocurrent decay measurements, the decay time is significantly reduced from 22.57 μs to 2.3 μs; this indicates that using the SnO2-modified TiO2 film, the charge extraction of the device can be significantly enhanced, thus resulting in a higher JSC. The electrical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) spectra of devices were obtained and fitted by a circuit consisting of one resistance element and two lumped RC elements in series (Fig. S7a, ESI). The Nyquist plots of the devices based on TiO2 and SnO2@TiO2 ETLs at different bias voltages are shown in Fig. S7b and c (ESI), respectively. The addition of the SnO2 layer to the TiO2 layer does not produce an increase in the series resistance (RS) of the device, as shown in Fig. S7d (ESI). The charge transfer resistances (RCT) of the SnO2@TiO2-based device are larger than those of the TiO2-based device (Fig. S7e, ESI); this may be because the ETL becomes thicker upon the addition of the SnO2 layer. The recombination resistances (RCR) for the charge recombination process at the ETL/perovskite interface decrease with the increasing bias voltages for two devices (Fig. S7f, ESI), corresponding to the pervious results. It can be seen that the SnO2@TiO2-based device displays a larger RCR than the TiO2-based device; this demonstrates that the former presents a slower charge recombination process at the ETL/perovskite interface and a larger VOC, corresponding to the results obtained from the J–V measurements (Fig. S6c, ESI).
The simple and low-temperature SnO2@TiO2 film is expected to substitute the spin-coated ETLs and can be used for fabricating large-scale devices, which will benefit the future commercial applications. We then fabricated planar PSCs with an active area larger than one square centimetre. We obtained an average PCE of 18.79 ± 0.70% at the reverse scan for 36 devices. The PCE statistical graph of the devices is shown in Fig. 5a, and other photovoltaic parameters are shown in Fig. S8a–c (ESI). Similar to the small-area devices, the large-area devices show high efficiency with high fill factor and excellent reproducibility; this indicates that SnO2@TiO2 films have good uniformity. The best device exhibits a PCE of 20.40% at the reverse scan and 19.18% at the forward scan (Fig. 5b), stabilizing at 20% at maximum power point (Fig. S8d, ESI). Furthermore, we fabricated solar modules with different active areas. The best solar module shows a PCE of 17.80% at the reverse scan and 16.62% at the forward scan for the device with a masked area of 5.25 cm2 (Fig. 5c); for a masked area of 10.56 cm2, the efficiencies are 16.81% and 15.80% at the reverse and forward scans, respectively (Fig. 5d). The fabrication details of the solar module are shown in Fig. S9 and S10. Finally, the larger solar modules with a substrate area of 27.5 cm2 achieved a certified efficiency of 15.65% (15.87% at the reverse scan and 15.43% at the forward scan) for perovskite solar modules with a masked area of 10.55 cm2 (Fig. S11–S14). Therefore, the SnO2@TiO2 film has been proven to be a more promising ETL for large-scale perovskite solar cells as compared to other modified ETLs related to SnO2, which can also significantly enhance the performance of perovskite solar cells, but still has the demand of spin-coating process or higher cost.
As the PSCs are approaching commercial production, the long-term stability should be another issue of concern. Then, we measured the long-term stability of the planar PSCs with SnO2@TiO2 and TiO2 ETLs during about 750 hours of aging. Both devices without encapsulation were stored in an auto-drying cabinet at 20 °C with a relative humidity of 15%. The devices were measured in air at a temperature of 22–25 °C and a relative humidity of 45–55%. After 750 hours of ageing, the SnO2@TiO2-based device maintained about 89.0% of its initial efficiency, whereas the TiO2-based device only maintained about 59.3% of its initial efficiency (Fig. 5e). It can be seen that the main decrease in the PCE of TiO2-based devices is caused by the decline of FF owing to the instability of the TiO2/perovskite interface especially under UV light exposure. Instead, previous results have demonstrated that SnO2-based PSCs are very stable. Thus, due to the SnO2 nanoparticle on the TiO2 film, the trap states at the ETL/perovskite interface are effectively suppressed; this leads to a much more stable interface even after a long time of aging. An unencapsulated SnO2@TiO2-based device was aged at maximum power point under a simulated AM 1.5G solar illumination of 100 mW cm−2 for 14 h with N2 flow cooling the surface of the device in air with a relative humidity of 45–55%. As shown in Fig. 5f, the efficiency of the device kept decreasing with time under continuous illumination; after aging, the efficiency decreased to 76.6% of its initial efficiency, which showed much better stability than that of devices tested under air conditions with continuous illumination reported to date. Interestingly, after the aged device was stored in dark for 12 h, the efficiency exhibited recovery to 94.4% of its initial efficiency. The abovementioned results completely correspond to the results of a previous study in which a SnO2-based device has been tested. Moreover, one device was tested under ideal conditions, namely under continuous full-sun illumination without UV-light under a nitrogen atmosphere, as shown in Fig. 5g. Impressively, the SnO2@TiO2-based perovskite solar cell showed excellent stability, retaining 93.28% of its initial efficiency after continuous full-sun illumination for 528 hours, better than that for pure TiO2-based perovskite solar cells that only retained 90% of their initial efficiency after 500 hours of illumination. More importantly, perovskite solar cells require encapsulation to cut off from water and oxygen and thus can obtain much better stability under illumination, which can also be seen in the previous studies.

In summary, we proposed SnO2 nanoparticle-modified TiO2 as the ETL in PSCs. Using the simple three-step chemical bath method, the SnO2@TiO2 film can be successfully fabricated with a dense, uniform, and pinhole-free morphology. The SnO2@TiO2 films can significantly enhance the electron extraction and decrease the trap states at the ETL/perovskite interface, effectively suppressing the charge recombination, resulting in reduced hysteresis and superior stability for planar PSCs and attaining an efficiency of higher than 21%. On large solar modules, the SnO2@TiO2 ETL also boosts an efficiency of 16.81% at the reverse scan. The SnO2@TiO2-based perovskite solar cells retained 89.00% and 93.28% of the initial efficiency after about 750 hours of aging in air under darkness and 528 hours under continuous illumination under a nitrogen atmosphere, which thus boosted excellent long-term stability of planar perovskite solar cells. Moreover, the three-step chemical bath method can cause a close contact between the SnO2@TiO2 layer and the FTO layer and can also be directly transferred to commercial applications. This technique yields thin, but extremely dense ETLs on substrates of any size and removes spin-coating deposition that suffers from thickness, non-uniformity, and substrate size limitations. Furthermore, the SnO2@TiO2 films can be facilely produced at low temperatures, i.e., less than 140 °C, thus offering a promising path to future fabrication of flexible devices. Therefore, the large-scale fabrication of SnO2@TiO2 ETLs has enormous potential and will take a giant step forward in commercializing perovskite solar cells.


There are no conflicts of interest to declare.


The authors acknowledge the financial support received from the National Program for Support of Top-notch Young Professionals. We thank Dr Jun Xi and Mr Zaiyu Wang, and Dr Hao Li for the PL, IPCE testing, as well as transient photovoltage decay and photocurrent decay.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta01192c
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018