 DOI: 10.1039/C9NR03030A
(Communication)
Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 9281-9286


Li
Wan
,

Wenxiao
Zhang
,

Yulei
Wu
,

Xiaodong
Li
,

Changjian
Song
,

Ying
He
,

Wenjun
Zhang
* and 

Junfeng
Fang
*

Key Laboratory of Graphene Technologies and Applications of Zhejiang Province, Ningbo Institute of Materials Technology and Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Ningbo 315201, China. E-mail: fangjf@nimte.ac.cn; zhangwenjun@nimte.ac.cn

Department of Polymer Materials, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Shanghai University, Shanghai 200444, China

Center of Materials Science and Optoelectronics Engineering, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China

Received
9th April 2019
, Accepted 18th April 2019
First published on 22nd April 2019
Nanostructures have proved to be advantageous in light harvesting, improving the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of photovoltaic devices. However, the reported light-harvesting nanostructures all require extra processing beyond that for device fabrication, with multiple steps for nano-patterned structures or plasmonic nano-particles. Here we synthesized a conjugated polymer PFPDI which could simply form a nanostructured film on perovskite by spin coating. PFPDI possesses a perylene diimide-based backbone and phosphite ester pendants, which makes it a robust electron-transporting material (ETM) in perovskite solar cells. Furthermore, the perovskite solar cells with PFPDI as the electron-transporting layer (ETL) exhibited a higher light-harvesting efficiency compared to the standard phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) devices. The JSC of the PFPDI device was enhanced from 19.71 mA cm−2 to 23.43 mA cm−2. SEM images and reflectance spectra confirmed that the PFPDI formed ditch-like nanostructures on perovskite film and induced a better light-harvesting efficiency. Further research indicated that the interaction of PO with Pb was essential to the formation of the nanostructures of PFPDI on perovskite. Therefore, our work not only offers an efficient organic ETM, but also opens up new horizons for simply constructing nanostructures with light-harvesting ability in photovoltaic devices.

Methylammoniun lead iodide (CH3NH3PbI3 or MAPbI3) is a mixed inorganic–organic semiconductor with a fixed band gap, which has great prospects in light absorption, especially as a light harvester for perovskite solar cells (PSCs). After years of development, PSCs have revolutionized thin film photovoltaic cells with power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) enhanced from less than 4% to over 22%. Although the photocurrent density of the champion devices is constantly increasing, the current value is still much lower than that of the theoretical device (26 mA cm−2). Therefore, in order to improve the photovoltaic performance of PSCs, great efforts are urgently needed to find strategies to improve light harvesting and conversion efficiency.

On the one hand, by incorporating photonic nanostructures, lots of light-trapping strategies have been introduced into photovoltaic devices to improve their light-harvesting efficiency. Some of these have been successfully applied in PSCs to manipulate the absorption of light and improve the short-circuit current density (JSC) and PCE. However, in general, the reported schemes involve multiple-step procedures with extra layers beyond those found in the routine device architecture. These characteristics are disadvantageous for commercial processes and cost-containment. For example, the imprinting technique is a powerful method for incorporating periodic nanostructures into PSCs, however, besides the precise scale-control, the pre-patterned molds require extra processes to imprint nanostructures on the substrates of glass or electron transporting layers (ETLs). Some of them even need a sputtering of transparent electrode and metal oxide, which runs counter to the solution-processing property of PSCs. Gold nanoislands were also introduced into PSCs to enhance the light harvesting by plasmonic-effects. However, the PCE was disappointingly low and the gold nanoislands involved helicon sputtering followed by a 300 °C anealling.
On the other hand, relatively few electron-transporting materials (ETMs) for interface engineering have been reported and most of them have been metal oxides and fullerene derivatives. Compared to these, n-type organic materials are expected to be the better candidates for ETMs. Compared to metal oxides and fullerene derivatives with their complex preparation processes and relatively fixed structures, organic ETMs have advantages including diversified structures and tunable energy levels achieved by varying the different structural units, the potential for interactions with the perovskite and electrode from the design of different functional groups, and the capability to be processed with low-temperature solutions. Furthermore, inverted device structures in which the ETLs usually include several layers of transporting material are not suitable for large-area preparation and commercial applications. Therefore, great efforts are urgently required to find nanostructured organic ETMs which are suitable for use in simple device structures.
Here, we designed and synthesized a perylene diimide-based conjugated polymer PFPDI, which is an n-type conjugated polymer with polar groups of phosphite ester as pendants. Interestingly, a nanostructured ETL is spontaneously formed during the spin-coating of PFPDI on a perovskite layer. Moreover, the nanostructured PFPDI layer not only acts as an ETL but also improves the light harvesting of the PSCs. Due to the special nanostructure on the surface of the perovskite, the PFPDI device exhibits a JSC of 23.43 mA cm−2. Impressively, this JSC is one of the highest currents among MAPbI3 solar cells. The reflectance spectra reveal that the organic nanostructures can adjust the light field and improve absorption. Further research indicates that the coordination of Pb2+ with the phosphite ester groups plays an important role in the formation of the PFPDI nanostructure on perovskite. Our work presents a simple way to construct an organic nanostructure on perovskite and improves the light harvesting of PSCs.

The chemical structure of PFPDI is shown in Fig. 1a, and detailed synthetic procedures are shown in the ESI. The polar phosphite ester groups endow PFPDI with the ability to modify the interface but the PFPDI retains its solubility in chloroform and chlorobenzene, which is compatible with the solution processing of perovskite. In this work, chloroform is employed to prepare the precursor solution of the ETM. Fig. 1b shows a schematic illustration of the p-i-n-structured CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite light harvester which is sandwiched between a bottom poly(3-(4-carboxylbutyl)thiophene) (P3CT) hole transport layer (HTL) and an upper ETL. Both the HTL and ETL are deposited on the substrate by spin-coating. Indium-tin oxide (ITO) and silver (Ag) are chosen as the anode and cathode, respectively. More detailed experimental procedures are described in detail in the method section (ESI). A cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the PSC is presented in Fig. 1c. The thicknesses of CH3NH3PbI3, PFPDI and Ag are estimated to be 420, 60 and 80 nm, respectively. In addition, we can see that the layer of ETM on the perovskite prevents direct contact between the perovskite and the metal electrode. Fig. 1d depicts the corresponding energy level diagram of the device. The lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) level of the PFPDI is located at −4.02 eV, which is low enough for electron extraction and transportation. Meanwhile, the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) level of the PFPDI is located at −5.66 eV, which is lower than that of perovskite (−5.4 eV) and endows a suitable hole blocking ability.


Fig. 2a depicts the optical absorption spectra of 6,6-phenyl C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM; one of the most commonly used ETMs) and PFPDI thin films. There are three distinctive absorption peaks, one at ≈384 nm due to π–π* transitions, and the others centered at ≈510 nm and 643 nm, resulting from the strong intramolecular charge transfer characteristic of the polymers. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurements were executed to extract the HOMOs and LUMOs of the different ETMs (shown in Fig. 2b) and their energy level diagrams are summarized in Fig. 1d together with the valence band and conduction band of CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite. The specific values are listed in Table 1, and conform with values obtained by ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) (Fig. S2). To study the charge transporting properties of the ETMs, electron-only devices based on the architecture of ITO/ZnO/ETM/Ca/Al were prepared and the electron mobilities were extracted by fitting the data with the space-charge-limited current (SCLC) model. By linear fitting the J1/2–V curves in the SCLC conduction region (Fig. 2c), we obtained the electron mobilities of PCBM and PFPDI: 3.82 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 1.75 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively. These results demonstrate that PFPDI is an effective ETM for acquiring a high JSC. To further study the relation between the interfacial contact and the charge extraction/transport behaviors, we obtained steady-state photoluminescence (PL) quenching spectra and time-resolved PL (TRPL) decay curves of the perovskite films with different ETLs. Fig. 2d depicts the curves of pristine perovskite film, and perovskite films with PCBM or PFPDI layers on the ITO/P3CT substrate. As shown in Fig. 2d, when the samples were excited with an excitation wavelength of 466 nm, the perovskite film with the PFPDI layer exhibited a decrease in PL intensity of over 90% when compared to the pristine perovskite film, indicating that PFPDI is an efficient ETM; the result is similar to that for the perovskite film with the PCBM layer. TRPL characteristics also verified the outstanding carrier transfer from perovskite to PFPDI (Fig. S3 and Table S1).
Name

λ
onset (nm)

E
optg (eV)

E
LUMO (eV)

E
HOMO (eV)

E
cvg (eV)
PCBM
635
1.95
−3.95
−6.05
2.1
PFPDI
770
1.63
−4.02
5.66
1.64
The ETL morphology on the perovskite layer plays an important role in the device performance, and therefore the top-view SEM images of PFPDI on perovskite were first examined. As shown in Fig. 3a, the perovskite/PFPDI surface morphology presents a special shape of a nanometer “ditch”. To the best of our knowledge, no other organic ETL with a nanostructure similar to that of PFPDI has been reported. To further confirm the nanometer ditch-like surface of PFPDI, we examined the surface images of pristine perovskite film (Fig. 3b), PCBM on perovskite, and PFPDI film (Fig. 3c) on an ITO substrate. The pristine perovskite film shows a well-developed grain structure, with crystalline sizes that appear to be of the scale of hundreds of nanometers in length. The perovskite/PCBM has a comparatively smooth surface. These results imply that the molecular structure of PFPDI plays a key role in the formation of the nanostructured ETL. In order to confirm whether or not PFPDI could affect the crystal structure of perovskite, we measured the X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of MAPbI3 film and MAPbI3/PFDPI film. As shown Fig. S4, intense diffraction peaks at 14.08°, 23.48°, 28.40°, and 31.86° could be respectively assigned to the (110), (211), (220), and (310) diffractions of the tetragonal MAPbI3 crystal structure, similar to the results of a previous study. The results imply that PFPDI cannot affect the crystal structure of perovskite. The different surface morphologies of perovskite, PFPDI and PCBM were also confirmed by atomic force microscopy (AFM) images (Fig. S5). We could obviously see distributed fine crystal grains along the surface of perovskite. After the deposition of PCBM, a very smooth surface was obtained, while undulating hills on the surface were presented after the deposition of PFPDI. Besides, we should also mention that the root-mean-square (RMS) surface roughness of perovskite was reduced from 11.2 nm to 5.03 nm after the deposition of PFPDI. This means that only the surface of PFPDI exhibits the nanometer “ditch” structure with a compact bulk film. This is consistent with the observations from a cross-sectional SEM image of the ITO/P3CT/perovskite/PFPDI (Fig. S6). The compact bulk film of PFPDI ETL could prevent the metal penetration from cathode to perovskite, which is beneficial to the charge recombination and device stability. Finally, the PFPDI film morphology on other substrates like ITO glass was also investigated by SEM (Fig. 3d). Unlike its morphology on perovskite, the PFPDI film on ITO exhibits a uniform and smooth surface, which indicates that there is a special interaction between PFPDI and the perovskite film that results in the formation of the unique nanostructure of perovskite/PFPDI.
To clarify the possible interaction between the perovskite and PFPDI ETL, Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy was performed (Fig. S7). The intensity of the characteristic infrared peak of PO (1260 cm−1) in perovskite/PFPDI is weakened compared to that in pristine PFPDI film, as shown in Fig. 4a. Furthermore, a characteristic peak of Pb–O (627 cm−1) also appears in the infrared spectrum (Fig. 4b). The results indicate that there is a coordination interaction between the perovskite and phosphite ester groups of PFPDI. This coordination could not only favor the electron extraction from the perovskite to PFPDI, but also induce a self-assembled nanostructure.
The nanostructured PFPDI film was then introduced as the ETL into p-i-n-structured PSCs based on MAPbI3. For comparison, PSCs with a PCBM ETL were also fabricated. Fig. 5a shows the optimal J–V curves of the PSCs with the PFPDI and PCBM ETLs under standard simulated AM 1.5G illumination at 100 mW cm−2. The corresponding parameter values are summarized in Table 2. The thickness of PFPDI was optimized first (Fig. S8a) and the detailed photovoltaic parameter values are summarized in Table S1. The optimal thickness of PFPDI is 60 nm and the device exhibits a PCE of 15.01% with an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 0.963 V, a JSC of 23.43 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 66.5%. For the PSC employing the PCBM ETL (50 nm), the PCE is 15.34% with a VOC of 1.077 V, a JSC of 19.71 mA cm−2, and a FF of 71.3%. Although the VOC and FF of the PFPDI devices are lower than that of the PCBM devices, the JSC of the PFPDI devices is greatly higher than that of the PCBM devices. The JSC of the PFPDI devices is one of the highest currents obtained for PSCs based on MAPbI3. The lower VOC and FF values of the PFPDI devices can be attributed to the lower LUMO level of PFPDI than that of PCBM, which induces greater energy loss when electrons are transferred from perovskite to the cathode, which can also be verified by the UPS spectra of cathodes with PCBM and PFPDI (Fig. S2). Statistical device parameters were obtained by an examination of 20 identical devices from 5 batches, as shown in Fig. S9. Once more, we could observe the much higher JSC of the PFPDI devices with lower VOC and FF. The higher JSC for the PFPDI device is in accordance with the external quantum efficiency (EQE) curves (Fig. 5b). The EQE of the champion PSC device based on the PFPDI ETL presents a remarkably high value of >80% at 420–700 nm, which is much higher than that of the PCBM device. Steady-state photocurrent output experiments at the maximum power point (0.79 V for the PFPDI device and 0.85 V for the PCBM device) were performed to confirm the reliability of the device performance. As shown in Fig. S8b, both the PFPDI and PCBM devices exhibit a stable power output. After 100 s of continuous illumination at the maximum power point, the PFPDI device exhibits a JSC of 18.25 mA cm−2 compared to the initial JSC of 18.36 mA cm−2; the corresponding PCE is 14.42% compared to the initial PCE of 14.5%.
Cells

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
PCBM
19.71 (19.52 ± 0.32)
1.077 (1.069 ± 0.01)
72.3 (71.1 ± 0.76)
15.34 (14.78 ± 0.38)
PFPDI
23.43 (22.27 ± 0.44)
0.963 (0.960 ± 0.03)
66.5 (66.9 ± 0.65)
15.01 (14.47 ± 0.33)
In order to make clear whether or not the organic nanostructured ETL can achieve light harvesting in the PSC device and to explore the reasons for the high JSC of the PFPDI devices, we conducted absorption and reflection measurements using the devices. Fig. 6a depicts schematic diagrams of the absorption and reflectance spectral measurements. Light is incident from the ITO side in both, but the absorption spectra measure light emitted from the ETL side, while the reflection spectra measure the light emitted from the ITO side which is reflected back by the electrode and is secondarily absorbed by the device. Fig. 6b shows the absorption spectra of the pristine perovskite film, and the perovskite with the PCBM and PFPDI ETLs. The optical absorption properties of these films are quite similar. However, the reflectance spectra of the devices based on PCBM and PFPDI ETLs show significant differences. As shown in Fig. 6c, compared to the PCBM ETL, the device based on the PFPDI ETL exhibits a lower reflectance over the range 300 to 750 nm, which implies that the PFPDI device achieves more efficient light harvesting. The optical study suggests that the nanostructured PFPDI ETL plays the role of a light spacer, and the improved light harvesting of the PFPDI device results from the spatial redistribution of the light intensity. Fig. 6d depicts the disparity between the reflectance spectra and EQE spectra for the PCBM device and PFPDI device. Excitingly, the trend of the two curves is similar; the results reveal that the PFPDI ETL can adjust the light field to enhance the absorption of light and the conversion of light to photocurrent.
Finally, we also compared the stability of the unencapsulated devices based on both PCBM and PFDI ETLs under ambient air conditions with an average temperature of 25 ± 5 °C and humidity of 40 ± 10% (Fig. S10). The devices based on the new PFPDI ETL show better stability: the PCE dropped to 76.5% of the original value after 100 h of storage time while that of the PCBM based devices reduced to 57.8% of the original PCE after 100 h, as shown in Fig. S9a. In order to further analyze the difference in stability, we measured the contact angles of the pristine perovskite film, the perovskite film with the PCBM ETL, and the perovskite film with the PFPDI ETL. As shown in Fig. S9b, the contact angle of the pristine perovskite film is 62.6°, while the contact angle of the perovskite film with the PFPDI ETL (93.7°) is higher compared to that of the perovskite film with the PCBM ETL (89.3°). We suggest that the improved stability may be attributed to the stronger packing between the polymer chains, which provides a better physical barrier to reduce the H2O penetration rate to the perovskite layer.

In summary, we designed and synthesized a new perylene diimide-based conjugated polymer PFPDI as an efficient ETL to replace fullerenes in p-i-n PSCs. SEM images illustrated that the PFPDI ETL can form organic nanostructures on perovskite film due to self-assembly, and the reflectance spectra revealed that the organic nanostructures can adjust the light field to improve the light-harvesting capability of PSC devices. The PFPDI device exhibited a high JSC of 23.43 mA cm−2. It is worth noting that the organic nanostructured ETL is achieved without increasing the number of processes required for device fabrication, which is conducive to the wide-spread application of the light-trapping method and to cost-containment for PSC devices. Further molecular structure regulation of the ETL could suppress the energy loss and recombination, and lead to a highly efficient PSC device.


The authors declare no competing financial interest.


We are grateful for funding from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (no. 21875272, 51773213) and the Zhejiang Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China (LY18E030012). This work was also supported by the Key Research Program of Frontier Sciences (QYZDB-SSW-JSC047) and the Zhejiang Province Science and Technology Plan (2018C01047).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9nr03030a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019