 DOI: 10.1039/C3TA00117B
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 10474-10486

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Maria
Bidikoudi
,

Thomas
Stergiopoulos
*,

Vlassis
Likodimos
,

Georgios Em.
Romanos
,

Maria
Francisco
,

Boyan
Iliev
,

Gabriela
Adamová
,

Thomas J. S.
Schubert
 and 

Polycarpos
Falaras
*

Division of Physical Chemistry, Institute of Advanced Materials, Physicochemical Processes, Nanotechnology and Microsystems (IAMPPNM), National Center for Scientific Research “Demokritos”, 153 10 Aghia Paraskevi Attikis, Athens, Greece. E-mail: stergt@chem.demokritos.gr (TF); papi@chem.demokritos.gr (PF); Fax: +30-2106511766; Tel: +30-2106503632 Tel: +30-2106503644

Dept. Chemical Engineering and Chemistry, Eindhoven University of Technology, Den Dolech 2, 5612 AZ, P.O. Box 513, STO 1.21, 5600 MB Eindhoven, The Netherlands

IOLITEC, Ionic Liquids Technologies GmbH, Salzstraße 184, D-74076 Heilbronn, Germany

Received
9th January 2013
, Accepted 25th June 2013
First published on 26th June 2013
Innovative redox electrolytes for dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) were prepared using binary mixtures of 1-methyl-3-propylimidazolium iodide (MPII) with 1-alkyl-methylimidazolium tricyanomethanide, CνmimTCM (ν = 2, 4, 6, 8) ionic liquids (ILs) to lower the high viscosity of MPII. The investigation of the physicochemical properties of the IL blends as a function of temperature has shown that both density and viscosity strongly depend on the kind of the Cνmim cation in the mixture. The corresponding Raman spectra were dominated by the vibrational modes of the IL components in an additive way and confirmed the absence of any specific interaction, independent of the Cν alkyl chain length. The electrochemical properties (triiodide diffusion coefficients, specific conductivity), determined in symmetrical thin layer cells using polarization and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements, have shown that both diffusion and conductivity decreased with increasing viscosity, and further confirmed the electrolytes' compatibility with the cathode. Incorporation of the novel electrolytes in DSC devices revealed a systematic dependence of the cell photovoltaic performance on the alkyl chain length of CνmimTCM; the maximum power conversion efficiency exceeded 5 and 6.5% under 1 and 0.1 sun AM 1.5 G illumination, respectively, for the ionic liquid with the shortest alkyl chain. The solar cells were further characterized by EIS (IMPS) spectroscopy, exploring charge recombination dynamics and identifying conduction band edge shifts. Solidification of the electrolytes with silica nanoparticles, demonstrated that the ionic liquid electrolytes with long chain length (ν > 4) not only retain their efficiencies, but also exhibit a 22% efficiency enhancement, which is most pronounced for the electrolytes employing ionic liquids with the longest (hexyl- and octyl-) alkyl chains.

Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) are the archetypal representatives of a new generation of hybrid organic–inorganic photovoltaic cells, beyond standard Si solar cells, currently presenting certified efficiencies (η) of 11.4% for spot solar cells and 9.9% for a submodule of 17 cm2 under standard 1 sun AM1.5 G (1000 W m−2) illumination conditions. Generally, in a DSC the active photoelectrode consists of a thin layer of nanostructured wide band-gap semiconductor (TiO2 has been almost exclusively used as a semiconductor in high performance DSCs) deposited on a conducting substrate and a monolayer of a visible light-absorbing dye (metallorganic complex or pure organic dye) chemically adsorbed onto the semiconductor nanoparticles. Photoexcitation of the dye molecules is followed by ultrafast electron injection into the semiconductor conduction band. The oxidized dye is regenerated by the redox shuttle present in the electrolyte (usually containing I−/I3− species dissolved in acetonitrile) and the electrons are extracted to the external circuit and returned to the system by reduction of the oxidized component of the redox couple at the counter electrode.

After the breakthrough of the 10% efficiency attained by a liquid DSC fabricated by O′ Regan and Grätzel in 1991, significant research efforts were devoted to enhance the efficiency and stablity of this type of molecular photovoltaic devices (in liquid or solid-state form). In terms of efficiency advancement, intensive work has been focused on the development of sensitizers affording strong solar light harvesting, TiO2 nanostructures with enhanced electron transport and electrolytes with optimum electrochemical redox potential. This latter approach very recently led to the most significant breakthrough thus far, reaching (uncertified) efficiencies up to 12.3% using a cocktail of porphyrin and pure organic dyes in conjunction with a cobalt-based redox system.
Concerning stability issues, long-term stable operation of the DSC using a liquid electrolyte based on the I−/I3− mediator (under prolonged illumination and thermal stress at temperatures up to 85 °C) was achieved only by the replacement of a volatile organic solvent (e.g. acetonitrile) with ionic liquids (ILs) by preventing electrolyte leakage and thus performance deterioration. The use of ILs in stable DSCs is now established, despite their lower efficiency in DSCs (about 70–80% of the corresponding efficiencies of electrolytes dissolved in conventional organic solvent) and higher cost. ILs are organic salts composed of only free ions and ion pairs, exhibiting high thermal and chemical stability, broad electrochemical windows and non-flammability; especially room temperature ionic liquids (RTILs), having melting points below 100 °C, present attractive physicochemical properties such as negligible vapour pressure. Their field of use is growing at an extremely high pace due to their promising potential for a great number of diverse applications, including their use in lithium-ion batteries, electrochemical actuators, supercapacitors, reaction media, separation solvents, fuel cells and CO2 capture.
A unique feature of ILs is that simple changes in the cation–anion combinations or the nature of the moieties attached to each ion allow their physical properties to be tailored for specific applications. In DSCs, mixtures of 2 or 3 ILs are used, serving both as iodide source and solvent. An example of the successful use of ionic liquids in redox-active electrolytes is the fabrication of flexible and lightweight DSCs, based on plastic substrates, which are attractive even if their solar conversion efficiency is moderate; for these devices, the use of organic solvents is not advisable, as they would permeate across the plastic cell walls. Commonly, the IL acting as the iodide source is 1-methyl-3-propylimidazolium iodide (MPII) which shows an appreciable conductivity of 0.58 mS cm−1 at room temperature. To further increase this value, a net decrease of its high viscosity (1000 cP at 25 °C) is necessary; for this purpose, MPII is usually mixed with alkyl substituted imidazolium-based ionic liquids of much lower viscosities that employ anions other than iodide such as fluorous-free tetracyanoborate [B(CN)3]−, dicyanamide [N(CN)2]− and tricyanomethanide [C(CN)3]− (with viscosities lower than 25 cP at 25 °C).
Mixing MPII with low viscosity ILs results in blends of much lower viscosity than MPII, however, one cannot predict the conductivity properties of the blend since, in most cases charge transport is non-Stokesian. This unusual behaviour is attributed to the Grotthuss bond-exchange processes contributing to physical ionic diffusion as well as ion pairing processes, assuring the production of a high short-circuit photocurrent in DSCs, in spite of the high viscosity of ILS compared to organic solvents. To study the correlation of the viscosity–conductivity properties of MPII-based blends with the photovoltaic performance of solar cells employing this type of electrolytes, only a few reports have been realized focusing mainly on the blending of MPII with different ILs based on ethyl-methylimidazolim(C2mim). Using these ions, very promising power conversion efficiencies of the order of 7.4% were obtained, stimulating increased interest in the field. Although the effect of cation nature and anionic substitution in the IL molecule (ILs containing imidazolium, pyridinium, pyrrolidinium and ammonium cations as well as tricyanomethanide-TCM and tetracyanoborate –TCB anions) has been recently reported, the literature lacks information on the role and influence of the alkyl group moiety on the behavior of the corresponding redox electrolytes and their application in DSCs.
As the number of ILs containing the above ions is very limited and their applications have been scarcely explored, it is important to systematically examine room temperature ionic liquids consisting of bulky and asymmetric organic cations of the imidazolium family and tricyanomethanide [C(CN3)]− anions. In this direction, we proceeded with the synthesis of a series of ILs based on 1-alkyl-methylimidazolium group, of the type CνmimTCM, where the alkyl chain length is progressively modified by increasing the number of carbon atoms (ν = 2, 4, 6, 8). Giving special emphasis to the role of the cation, in this work the CνmimTCM ionic liquids were used upon mixing with MPII in the form of blends in solvent free ionic liquid based redox electrolytes. The new redox electrolytes were thoroughly characterized and incorporated with success in regenerative DSCs. Additionally, in order to make our electrolytes even more robust, silica nanoparticles were used for their solidification and the photovoltaic performance of the quasi-solid state DSCs, employing the above systems, was explicitly investigated.

Different 1-alkyl-methylimidazolium chloride-based ionic liquids were prepared in Iolitec. The Z907 dye is a Ru2+ based dye, RuLL'(NCS)2 (L = 2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylic acid; L′ = 4,4′-dinonyl-2,2′-bipyridine), purchased from Dyesol UK. Transparent conductive glass substrates were obtained from Pilkington (Active glass, 15 Ohm per square). Ti Nanoxide D/SP paste, containing small (15–20 nm) and larger diffusing particles (100 nm), was purchased from Solaronix, Switzerland. TiCl4 was bought from Fluka. Fumed silica nanoparticles (NPs) were obtained from Sigma (S-5130, particle size: 7 nm, surface area: 390 m2 g−1) and were used without any further treatment (drying etc.).


The novel 1-alkyl-3-methylimidazolium tricyanomethanide ionic liquids were synthesized according to the experimental procedures established in Iolitec. Briefly, 1 mol of the corresponding imidazolium-based ionic liquid chloride (EMIM Cl, BMIM Cl, HMIM Cl or OMIM Cl, >98%, Iolitec) was dissolved in 1500 ml of dry dichloromethane. 1.05 mol of sodium tricyanomethanide was added at once and the reaction mixture was stirred for 48 h at room temperature. The mixture was then filtered through celite, the mother liquor evaporated under reduced pressure and the product dried under high vacuum for 24 h at 40 °C. Ionic chromatography showed Cl content of below 1%. Yields in both cases exceeded 90%. Purity was controlled by ion chromatography.


Ionic liquid based electrolytes consisting of 0.1 M LiI and 0.2 M I2 were prepared by dissolving the redox couple in MPII (reference electrolyte) and in a blend of MPII/CνmimTCM [MPII = 1-methyl-3-propylimidazolium iodide and CνmimTCM = 1-alkyl-3-methylimidazolium tricyanomethanide (ν = 2, 4, 6, 8)], in a 13:7 v/v proportion. 0.4 M 4-tert-butyl pyridine (4-TBP) was also added to the final mixture in order to increase the photovoltaic efficiencies. For simplicity reasons, the above electrolytes will be referred as C2, C4, C6 and C8 according to the above compositions. For the final set of experiments, the above electrolytes were solidified by adding an amount of silica NPs (5% w/w) under continuous stirring (further denoted as C2–SiO2, C4–SiO2, C6–SiO2, C8–SiO2).


To construct the photoelectrodes, opaque TiO2 films (about 5.5–6 μm thick, determined by an AMBIOS XP-2 profilometer) were deposited by doctor-blading the TiO2 paste (Ti Nanoxide D/SP) on transparent conductive glass substrates and annealed at 125 (5 min), 325 (15 min) and 525 °C for 30 min in air (heating rate: 5 °C min−1). Afterwards, the films were post-treated with an aqueous solution of 40 mM TiCl4 for 30 min at 70 °C. Subsequently, they were thoroughly cleaned with de-ionized water and ethanol and left to dry in air. Finally, the films were heated once again at 450 °C for 60 min and further sensitized by their immersion in a 0.3 mM solution of Z907 dye in acetonitrile/tert-butanol (1:1 v/v) containing equal moles of chenodeoxycholic acid. Pt counter electrodes (100 nm thick) were prepared by sputtering. Open (non-sealed) DSCs were fabricated by putting a small drop of the electrolytes onto the sensitized photoelectrode and simply sandwiching the counter electrode against the first electrode. All DSCs had an active area of 0.25 cm2 and were tested one hour after their preparation.


The Raman spectra of the electrolytes (and components) were recorded on a Renishaw inVia Reflex spectrometer in backscattering configuration employing a near infrared (NIR) diode laser (λ = 785 nm) as the excitation source. Rayleigh scattering was rejected with a 100 cm−1 cut-off dielectric edge filter, and analysis of the scattered beam was performed on a 250 mm focal length spectrometer along with a 1200 lines per mm diffraction grating and a high-sensitivity CCD detector. Subtraction of the luminescence background on the Raman spectra has been performed by a polynomial fitting interpolation routine, while spectral deconvolution has been carried out by nonlinear least-squares fitting of the Raman peaks to a mixture of Lorentzian and Gaussian line shapes, providing the peak position, width, height, and integrated intensity of each Raman band.

The density and the viscosity were determined at atmospheric pressure and at temperatures ranging from 298 to 363 K. Due to the high hygroscopicity of the samples, both properties were measured using an Anton Paar SVM 3000/G2 Stabinger viscometer provided with a high-precision thermostat with stability of 0.005 K and calibrated by the manufacturer. The uncertainties of density (with viscosity correction) and viscosity measurements are ±0.0005 g cm−3 and 0.35% respectively. The equipment requires only a total volume of sample of 2.5 ml for the determination of both the properties and a lack of contact with the open atmosphere avoids moisture capture from air.
Linear sweep voltammograms (LSV) were recorded on thin layer symmetrical cells made of identical Pt blocking electrodes (prepared by sputtering) by filling them with the electrolytes. LSV experiments were conducted using an Autolab PGSTAT-30 potentiostat (Ecochemie) with a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 and a voltage range from −0.7 to +0.7 V vs. Pt. Electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) were recorded on the above cells using the same potentiostat, equipped with a frequency response analyzer (FRA), at 0 V vs. Pt in the dark and recorded over a frequency range of 100 kHz to 10 mHz. In order to accurately determine the conductivity cell constant, a calibration was carried out using a standard solution (10 mM of KCl in water) with known conductivity (1413 μS cm−1). The obtained spectra were fitted with the FRA software provided by the Autolab in terms of appropriate equivalent circuits.
Current–voltage (I–V) measurements were performed by illuminating the DSCs using solar simulated light (1 sun, 1000 W m−2) from a 300 W–Xe source (Oriel) in combination with an AM 1.5 G optical filter. The active area of the DSCs was set at 0.15 cm2, using a large black mask in front of the cells in order to avoid any light pipping inside the cell. The J–V characteristics were recorded using linear sweep voltammetry on the Autolab potentiostat working in a 2-electrode mode at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1. EIS measurements on complete DSCs were performed under dark in a potential window from 0 to −0.8 V and electron transit times at different light intensities were determined by Intensity-Modulated Photocurrent Spectroscopy (IMPS) using the same system (Autolab). A red light (625 nm) emitting diode was used as the light source for both AC and DC illumination controlled by the FRA module. Photoelectrochemical and photovoltaic characterization was performed on a batch of at least three DSCs for each electrolyte, and the mean value (without a significant deviation) for the obtained results was derived. Results from electrochemical and photoelectrochemical measurements were deduced from the cells that presented the optimum performance.

The molecular structures of the new CνmimTCM ionic liquids (ILs) used for the development of composite redox electrolytes are shown in Fig. 1. The CνmimTCM ionic liquids were mixed with MPII (in a standard 7:13 v/v ratio) and the resulting blends were used to prepare redox electrolytes with the addition of LiI, I2 and 4TBP. The physicochemical and transport properties of the resulting four new electrolytes are necessary for the investigation and optimization of their operation in a dye-sensitized solar cell. The determination of density (ρ) and viscosity (η) of the new redox electrolytes were carried out at atmospheric pressure and at temperatures ranging from 298 to 363 K. The experimental values (included kinematic viscosity kvisc) are reported in Tables S1–S4.

Both density and viscosity of the new redox electrolytes based on MPII/CνmimTCM blends showed a clear dependence on the number of carbon atoms in the CνmimTCM component (Fig. 2). The highest density and lowest viscosity corresponded to the C2 electrolyte based on MPII/C2mimTCM blend employing the ionic liquid with the smallest alkyl chain length. In addition, the density data of the new electrolytes correlated linearly with the temperature (T) following the empirical equation ρ = Dρ + FρT (Fig. 2a), where Dρ is the density at 0 K and Fρ stands for the coefficient of volume expansion. This equation permits to express the density of the electrolytes as a function of temperature and the fitting permitted the calculation of the corresponding parameters Dρ and Fρ (summarized in Table 1); both parameters follow the same trend as in the case of the density values (they decrease as the number of the carbon atoms in CνmimTCM increases). Likewise, the temperature dependence of the viscosity could be accurately fitted to the Vogel–Tammann–Fulcher (VTF) equation: η = η0e[E/T − TV] expressed in the form ln(η) = A + B/(T − C), where A = ln(η0), B = E (E being the activation energy), and C = TV (where TV stands for the Vogel temperature).
Electrolyte

D
ρ (g cm−3)

F
ρ (10−4 g cm−3 K−1)

A (10−1 mPa s)

B (K)

C (K)
C2
1.63
−7.86
−1.8
693.2
−191.7
C4
1.61
−7.75
−1.8
758.0
−191.3
C6
1.61
−7.79
−2.0
821.4
−189.6
C8
1.60
−7.65
−2.2
877.2
−186.6
The Vogel temperature (Tv) corresponds to the temperature at which the viscosity is infinite and flow can no longer occur (it is relatively close to the glass transition temperature). When TV tends to 0, the VTF equation reduces to the simple Arrhenius form. From the analysis and the determination of all A, B and C parameters, the most important feature is that the electrolyte corresponding to the C2mimTCM constituent in the MPII/CνmimTCM blend presents the lowest activation energy B (Table 1).

The structural properties of the neat CνmimTCM ionic liquids as well as their binary blends with MPII and redox electrolytes were investigated by Raman spectroscopy. Fig. 3 displays the Raman spectra of the neat CνmimTCM salts in the liquid state. Comparison between the Raman spectra of the different ILs containing the same anion allowed identification of the tricyanomethanide anion and [Cνmim]+ cation Raman bands. Five distinct Raman bands were observed due to [TCM]−, including the intense in-plane CCN bending mode at 158 cm−1, the weak out-of-plane bend at 483 cm−1, and the strong symmetric CC and CN stretching modes at 648 and 2212 cm−1, respectively, together with an inhomogeneously broadened but intense band at 2165 cm−1, attributed to the antisymmetric CN vibration (inset A of Fig. 3). Increasing the alkyl chain length of [Cνmim]+ resulted in a slight but progressive shift to lower frequencies of the strong 158 and 2212 cm−1 [TCM]− modes by ca. 1–2 cm−1, implying a weak effect of the substituted alkyl side chains on the TCM structural conformation.

Likewise, the counter cation Raman bands were identified following previous studies for 1-alkyl-3-methylimidazolium analogue salts. Specifically, C2mimTCM presented the characteristic composite band at ∼440 cm−1 stemming from the superposition of two modes at 430 and 448 cm−1 assigned to the non-planar and planar [C2mim]+ conformers, respectively. In addition, a rather broad Raman band was observed at 1341 cm−1, whose broad width (full width at half maximum FWHM = 18 cm−1) can be related to the contributions of both [C2mim]+ conformers in the liquid state. Conformational isomerism was further identified in C4mimTCM by the observation of four distinct Raman modes at 809, 827, 884 and 908 cm−1, predicted for the four combinations of gauche (G) and anti (A) [C4mim]+ conformation states GG, GA, AG, and AA, respectively. An additional band was observed at 324 cm−1 arising from the contributions of both GA and AA conformers, along with two discrete bands at 601 and 624 cm−1 that can be related to the superposition of the GG/GA and AG/AA conformer groups, respectively. The latter vibrational modes were also identified on both C6mimTCM and C8mimTCM ILs, supporting that the corresponding isomerism is a common feature of the long alkyl-chain methylimidazolium cations. Compared to its butyl analogue, C6mimTCM exhibited a series of new bands at 820, 852, 869, 893 and 916 cm−1 assigned to the alkyl chain deformation modes, most of them persisting for C8mimTCM, as well. Furthermore, a new band emerged at 1311 cm−1 for both hexyl and octyl methylimidazolium ILs, assigned to the combination mode of the chain twisting CH2 with the in-plane imidazolium ring bending vibrations.
Comparison of the CνmimTCM Raman spectra in the CH vibration region (2700–3200 cm−1) revealed marked variations of the alkyl chain CH modes (below 3050 cm−1), as shown in the inset B of Fig. 3. In particular, increase of the number of methylene groups in the alkyl chains resulted in significant blue shift of the CH bands together with the increase of spectral weight at lower frequencies due to the contribution of additional normal modes from the longer alkyl chains. On the other hand, the higher frequency CH mode at 2964 cm−1 was least affected by the alkyl group variation, confirming its assignment mainly to the terminal methyl group of the imidazolium ring. Furthermore, the imidazolium ring CH stretching modes were found as a broad composite band centred at 3103 cm−1 and a narrower and more intense band at 3171 cm−1. These modes considered as most sensitive to the anion–cation interaction via hydrogen bonding between the anion and the ring-bound H atoms, did not change significantly for the CνmimTCM series with increasing ν. This would further imply relatively weak variations of the coupling strength between the [Cνmim]+ cations and [TCM]− as the length of the alkyl chain increases.

Fig. 4 shows the Raman spectra of the MPII/CνmimTCM blends and electrolytes for ν = 2 and 4, compared to their pure components. The Raman spectra of the binary mixtures are dominated by the vibrational modes of the most abundant (13:7 v/v) and considerably more dense (1.54 g cm−3) MPII component, while only the strong 158, 648, 2212 and 2165 cm−1 modes of the tricyanomethanide anion are observed from CνmimTCM. Furthermore, calculation of the mole fraction (x) weighted sums of the pure MPII and CνmimTCM Raman spectra reproduces well all features of the experimental Raman spectra, as shown by the dashed lines in Fig. 4. Similar results were obtained for the blends containing the hexyl- and octyl-methylimidazolium ILs (Fig. S1 and S2), verifying that the Raman spectra of the binary MPII/CνmimTCM mixtures are additive, independent of the alkyl chain length. This would further imply ideal mixing and no pronounced structural heterogeneity in the studied compositional range of the MPII/CνmimTCM system. The Raman spectra of the corresponding electrolytes exhibited a very intense, sharp peak at 111 cm−1, characteristic of the symmetric stretching mode of discrete I3− ions, which exceeds greatly the intensity of the MPII/CνmimTCM Raman modes. A strong band is also observed at 150 cm−1 stemming from the antisymmetric triiodide stretching mode, indicative of the formation of asymmetric I3− ions. Two additional modes of weak intensity were observed at 715 and 998 cm−1 arising from the most intense Raman modes (out-of-plane ring deformation and ring stretching modes) of the 4-tert-butyl pyridine (4-TBP) electrolyte additive (Fig. S3).

The electrochemical properties of the CνmimTCM/MPII blend-based redox electrolytes were investigated in order to determine their conductivity and ionic diffusion properties. These parameters, largely influencing the effective behaviour of the electrolytes in a dye-sensitized solar cell, were determined in symmetrical cells of the type Pt/electrolyte/Pt using linear sweep voltammetry (LSV-Fig. 5a) and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS-Fig. 5b), and the obtained results are summarized in Table 2.

Electrolyte

R
s (Ohm)

R
ct (Ohm)

B (s1/2)

D
I3− (10−7 cm2 s−1)

κ (mS cm−1)
Reference
18.09
76.70
5.29
1.98 (2.84)
1.05
C2
8.25
12.20
3.14
3.91 (5.66)
2.29
C4
10.02
13.48
3.69
3.18 (4.10)
1.88
C6
11.07
17.81
3.85
2.72 (3.76)
1.71
C8
12.56
13.04
3.90
2.67 (3.70)
1.50
Initially, the apparent diffusion coefficients (Dapp) of current-limiting I3− species were estimated from the cathodic steady-state currents of the linear sweep voltammograms according to the relation Dapp = Jliml/(2nFC), where Jlim is the limiting current density, l is the distance between the two electrodes, F is the Faraday constant, C is the bulk concentration of the diffusion-limiting species and n is the number of electrons transferred in the I3− + 2e− → 3I− redox reaction. The diffusion coefficients of all blends (C2–C8) were found to be around 2.5–4 × 107 cm2 s−1, in good agreement with literature results, significantly higher than those of the reference (only MPII) electrolyte, highlighting the need for the co-existence (along with MPII) of a second ionic liquid with much lower viscosity (as the new CνmimTCM). The DI3− values decreased with the increase of viscosity, which in turn decreases with a decrease in the alkyl chain length. However, the above blends did not exhibit a Stokesian behaviour, at least under room temperature, as the values of the Einstein–Stokes ratios of the I3− diffusion coefficients (DI3−η/T) of the blends did not stay constant as anticipated, following the (modified) Stokes–Einstein equation:DI3−η/T = kB/6πrH, where kB is the Boltzmann constant and rH stands for the effective hydrodynamic radius of triiodide (Fig. S4). These results are in full agreement with similar studies in literature. This anomalous transport behaviour has been qualitatively explained by the Grotthus-like exchange mechanism, which contributes to the physical ionic diffusion, thus increasing the apparent diffusion coefficients of redox species, despite the relatively large viscosity of the systems (being around 125–300 mPas at room temperature for the C2 to C8 ionic liquid blends, Tables S1–S4).
The observed trend in diffusion coefficients was further verified by recording EIS spectra on the same symmetrical cells. The spectra composed of two depressed semicircles (Fig. 5b) attributed to charge transfer at the Pt–electrolyte interface and to the diffusion of ions in the electrolyte, respectively. An electrical equivalent circuit of the type Rs(Cdl[RctO]) was used, where Rs is the series resistance, Rct and Cdl stand for the charge transfer resistance and double layer capacitance at the Pt–electrolyte interface respectively, and O is an element defining the diffusion complex impedance, expressed by the following equation: ZDif (ω) = RDif {[coth(jωτ)1/2]/(jωτ)1/2} with RDif = B/Yo and τ = B2. All the basic parameters, determined by spectral fitting, are summarized in Table 2. The symmetrical cells, comprising the four different electrolytes, differ in the Ohmic resistance values, and since the resistances of the two electrodes (and cables) are identical for all systems, this difference should be reflected at the conductivity of the electrolytes. Using the simple equation κ = 1/ρ (and ρ = RsA/l), where κ is the specific conductivity, ρ is the resistivity and A is the active area of the cell in cm2, values of 1.5 to 2.3 mS cm−1 could be estimated, in agreement with the relevant values found in literature. The observed trend, i.e. decrease of the specific conductivity upon viscosity increase (Fig. S5), correlates very well with the observed differences in the diffusion coefficients. We should note again here that the conductivity of all electrolytes was substantially improved in comparison with the reference electrolyte. The triiodide diffusion coefficients could be independently determined also using the following equation: DI3− = (0.5 l/B)2. The obtained DI3− were higher (3.7 up to about 5.7 × 106 cm2 s−1) compared to those determined by linear sweep voltammetry, however, the tendency observed in polarization measurements, was confirmed in this case, too. This feature is not unusual, since similar differences in diffusion coefficients were previously observed, when these are deduced from polarization or impedance spectroscopy measurements on symmetrical cells based on the standard I−/I3− redox couple.
Another important issue is the variation in the charge transfer resistance at the electrode–electrolyte interface (Rct) upon changing the ionic liquid electrolyte. It was found that Rct progressively increased when moving from C2 to C6 electrolyte (Table 2). These findings are in great accordance with the progressive decrease of the fill factor of the DSCs (see following paragraph). On the other hand, C8 electrolyte presented a rather low Rct (very close to the Rct attained by the C4 electrolyte), also in agreement with the higher FF attained when compared with the C6 electrolyte; the better compatibility of C8 with the cathode in comparison with C6 is the result of the lower Rct, however, we are not able to explain at the moment the reason for this behaviour.

The prepared redox electrolytes were incorporated in solar cells using nanoparticulate titania films sensitized with the Z907 dye as photoanodes and their photovoltaic performance was examined. The current–voltage measurements (J–V curves, Fig. 6a) were obtained by applying a potential scan from 0 V (short-circuit conditions) to the open-circuit potential, under constant 1 sun (AM 1.5 G) illumination conditions and the electrical parameters are included in Table 3. All the efficiencies (and the other individual electrical characteristics) were largely enhanced in comparison with those attained by the reference MPII electrolyte (average efficiency of 2.8% accompanied with a short circuit current density of 9.53 mA cm−2, an open circuit voltage of 660 mV and a fill factor of 0.44).

Electrolyte
Illumination intensity

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (mV)
FF

η (%)
C2
1 sun
12.48
670
0.63
5.23
0.5 sun
6.45
662
0.70
6.00
0.23 sun
3.19
647
0.73
6.52
0.1 sun
1.45
624
0.73
6.62
C4
1 sun
12.34
664
0.60
4.94
0.5 sun
6.39
656
0.70
5.88
0.23 sun
3.18
641
0.72
6.39
0.1 sun
1.45
616
0.73
6.50
C6
1 sun
11.30
648
0.50
3.63
0.5 sun
5.88
642
0.66
5.00
0.23 sun
2.95
631
0.72
5.75
0.1 sun
1.38
613
0.70
5.97
C8
1 sun
10.29
648
0.55
3.70
0.5 sun
5.43
644
0.68
4.76
0.23 sun
2.73
632
0.70
5.25
0.1 sun
1.27
612
0.71
5.49
The IL-electrolyte that presented the lowest viscosity, accompanied by the greatest conductivity and highest diffusion coefficient, proved to be the most effective when incorporated in a DSC configuration; C2-electrolyte attained the highest photocurrent density (Jsc) of 12.48 mA cm−2 and an overall power conversion efficiency (η) of 5.23%, while the other three electrolytes presented lower efficiencies of 4.94, 3.63 and 3.70% for the C4, C6 and C8-electrolytes respectively. Besides highest efficiency, C2 optimum electrolyte also attained the maximum values of Jsc, open-circuit photovoltage (Voc) and fill factor (FF); when moving from C4 to C8 electrolyte, one could observe that the related electrical parameters generally followed a decreasing trend. A small deviation exists in the case of photovoltage where C2 and C4 electrolytes attained a similar Voc of 664–670 mV and the other 2 electrolytes presented an identical photopotential of 648 mV in agreement with the literature. The relatively low Voc values compared to those attained by cells based on highly-efficient electrolytes dissolved in conventional organic solvents, are attributed to the high concentration of the recombining species (0.2 M I2), which are necessary to efficiently transfer the charges in a medium with low viscosity.
The slight variations observed in Voc for the different electrolytes were further verified by measuring the dark current of the cells (Fig. 6b); it was indicated that all cells had a similar onset of the cathodic current at around −0.42 V, while the relative magnitude of the dark current was similar. Their main difference arises from marginal shifts of the dark current towards negative potentials (10–20 mV) that could be due to differences in recombination dynamics and/or due to different Fermi level position inside the semiconductor.
The corresponding J–V curves under different solar light illumination conditions (from 0.5 down to 0.1 sun) were also taken (not shown) and the corresponding electrical parameters are included in Table 3. It was then found that upon decreasing the illumination intensity, the C2 electrolyte increased the efficiency from 5.23% up to 6.62% at 0.1 sun; accordingly, all the other electrolytes presented a similar (increasing) behaviour. These phenomena have been frequently observed in the literature and have been assigned to restricted diffusion of the ions or regeneration issues under strong light illumination, i.e. conditions where the dye injects a lot of electrons and needs a lot of iodide for efficient regeneration. Limitations were further verified by plotting the photocurrent against the incident power density (Fig. S6); all electrolytes presented a deviation from perfect linearity while the most prominent problems occurred for the two electrolytes that gave the highest viscosity (C6 and C8). In any event, we should highlight that our ionic liquid electrolytes could effectively work under low light conditions, by carrying the charges more easily between the two electrodes, attaining efficiencies of 5.5–6.6% under 0.1 sun.

To better understand the photovoltaic behaviour of the different DSCs and correlate it with the electrolyte's composition, the recombination dynamics of the cells were explored via EIS. The spectra (not shown) typically exhibited three prominent semicircles, presenting the classical behaviour, previously perceived for standard iodine-based electrolyte cells. The equivalent circuit used to fit the spectra was similar to the one utilized for the symmetrical cells by simply adding in series an extra RC circuit, which appeared at intermediate frequencies, representing the TiO2–electrolyte interface. Here, we focused on the charge recombination resistance at the TiO2–electrolyte interface (Rrec) and the chemical capacitance (Cμ) that stands for the change of the electron density as a function of the Fermi level.

We should point out first that the values of series resistances (Rseries) did not show any differences among the cells, and varied between 7 and 7.5 Ohm cm−2. Then, the chemical capacitance was estimated through fitting and plotted (Fig. 7a) against the actual voltage drop in the photoelectrode (denoted as VF); VF was estimated as VF = Vapplied − Vseries, where VF is the corrected voltage, Vapplied is the applied voltage during the measurement and Vseries is the voltage drop at the total series resistance Rseries. The chemical capacitance showed, as expected, an exponential behaviour confirming the exponential trap energy distribution below the conduction band edge. If we assume that all cells have similar trap distributions (since they use the same TiO2 working electrode), the observed shifts can be attributed to shifts in the conduction band edge (Ec). The small Ec shifts, observed by varying the alkyl chain of the EMiTCM ionic liquid, could be explained by the different dipole moments of the four different organic salts, affecting the charge of the TiO2 surface upon contact with the electrolyte.
Taking as reference the energy of the conduction band edge for the C2 electrolyte-based DSC and shifting the (Rrec–VF) curves of the other 3 electrolytes-based DSCs, we could draw Rrec against Vecb (Fig. 7b), that is the voltage at the equivalent band position. Thereby, we were able to directly compare the recombination resistances of the DSCs independently of conduction band edge shifts. It was then evidenced that the recombination rates of all cells were quite similar and the observed differences in their Voc values could be assigned to small Ec shifts. For instance, despite the C8 cell having a slightly larger Rrec than that attained by the other cells, it produced the lowest Voc due to the largest downward shift in comparison with the other DSCs.
To provide complementary information on the internal dynamics of the corresponding DSCs, IMPS experiments were conducted and the electron transit times (τ) at different Jsc values for the different electrolytes were determined (Fig. S7). Thereby, it was found that charge transport was similar (the slopes were almost equal pointing to the presence of exponential distribution of traps with equal distribution widths) for all the systems, verifying the absence of any appreciable effect of the different ionic liquid electrolytes on electron transport.; we strongly believe that transit times would be identical if measured under the same Fermi level.

In the previous sections, we have seen that the solar cell performance of the ionic liquid-based DSCs follows the general trend that the photocurrent (and the ensuing efficiency) decreases upon increasing the viscosity (and thus decreasing the conductivity and diffusion) of the ionic liquid-based blend. In a final step, we proceeded to the solidification of the above electrolytes with standard silica nanoparticles in order to investigate whether this trend holds also for solidified ionic-liquid electrolytes. Many attempts were made in the past in order to solidify the electrolyte either with an organic and/or organic–inorganic network or by incorporation of inorganic nanoparticles in order to increase their robustness and thus the stability of the as-fabricated solar cells. Recently, a relative improvement of the DSC conversion efficiency by up to 20% was reported, when nanoparticles were added to the IL electrolyte, although the electrolyte was solidified. This improvement could be explained by ordering of the electrolyte structure being beneficial for electron hopping (exchange reaction); imidazolium cations are adsorbed on the surface of the nanoparticles, which are surrounded with continuous chains of I− and I3− anions.

The novel redox electrolytes (Fig. S8) were prepared by addition of amorphous silica nanoparticles (5% w/w) in the reference C2–C8 electrolytes. Then, they were incorporated in solar cells and the J–V curves of the DSCs were recorded under 1 sun (AM 1.5 G) illumination conditions (Fig. 8); the corresponding electrical parameters are summarized in Table 4.
Electrolyte

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (mV)
FF

η (%)
Δη (±%)
C2–SiO2
12.34
680
0.59
5.04
−3.63
C4–SiO2
11.14
640
0.64
4.58
−7.29
C6–SiO2
11.20
660
0.63
4.66
+22.10
C8–SiO2
11.86
640
0.62
4.72
+21.61
C2 and C4 electrolytes were thus found to loose only 4.5–7% of their initial efficiency upon solidification; a very promising result if we bear in mind the solid, non-volatile and stable character of this type of electrolyte. However, the most intriguing feature of solidification was observed for the two electrolytes (C6 and C8) that originally possess the maximum viscosity. Specifically, the C6–SiO2 electrolyte preserved almost all the photocurrent of the initial ionic liquid C6 electrolyte in combination with a slight increment of Voc (by 12 mV) and a concomitant optimization of FF (from 0.50 to 0.63), resulting finally in an efficiency increase of 22%. Very similar results were also attained by the C8–SiO2 electrolyte, whose efficiency increased from 3.70 to 4.72%.
Similar to the case of the liquid electrolytes, in order to further investigate the photovoltaic behaviour of the quasi-solid state DSCs, EIS spectra were recorded and fitted. Plots of Cμ with VF and of Rrec against Vecb are shown in Fig. S9. Negligible Ec shifts (with a maximum shift of only 10 mV between C2–SiO2 and C8–SiO2 electrolytes) were observed upon changing the electrolyte while more significant effects were remarked on recombination dynamics; Rrec decreases when moving from C2–SiO2 to C8–SiO2.
Trying to better understand the observed differences between liquid and solidified electrolytes, we plotted the similar graphs as above by comparing now the different dynamics of solar cells based on liquid and solidified electrolytes; characteristic plots for C2 and C8 cells (prior to and after solidification) are shown in Fig. 9 (note that similar results were attained by C4 and C6-based DSCs). From these results, it was evident that the incorporation of SiO2 nanoparticles in the electrolytes leads to small shifts in the conduction band edge (Ec) with respect to the initial electrolyte; an upward shift of about 16 mV realized on C2 cell after solidification which led to a small Voc increase despite the slightly lower Rrec. On the contrary, a downward shift of 10 mV took place for the C8 electrolyte after addition of silica which, along with a Rrec decrease, slightly reduced the cell photovoltage. Similar shifts and differences in recombination dynamics were observed by us in cobalt electrolytes when solidified by silica. No specific information could be extracted by EIS about the underlying mechanism behind the photocurrent enhancement of C8–SiO2 electrolyte; such Jsc increase has been very recently attributed to the improved triiodide diffusion for solidified ionic-liquid electrolytes with functionalized silica nanoparticles.
Contrary to Jsc, EIS could deliver significant information about the FF variation upon solidification, which seems to be a very important parameter to control the overall efficiency (FF decreases for C2 electrolyte while it significantly increased for C8 system upon solidification); besides Rrec and Cμ, values of interfacial resistances were also determined after fitting of the EIS spectra. Then, notable differences were observed especially on the resistance at the interface Pt–electrolyte (RPt/el) when testing C2 or C8 characteristic cells (Fig. S10); RPt/el increased upon solidification for the C2 cell while the same resistance decreased for the C8 cell; results similar to the C8 cell were found for cell C6 too (data not shown here). This trend is in perfect correlation with the increase and decrease of FF, respectively, at the two cells. It seems that a better contact at the interface between cathode and electrolyte is created with respect to the electrolyte used; an ionic liquid (IL) electrolyte with a large chain length solidified with silica is more ideally connected to the cathode when compared to an IL solidified electrolyte with much shorter chain length. In any case, further work is certainly needed to better comprehend the behaviour of the solidified systems. Nevertheless, the present results clearly demonstrate that highly efficient solidified ionic liquid electrolytes can be straightforwardly fabricated without the need for persisting on ionic liquids with the minimum viscosity.

Ionic liquids based on 1-alkyl-3-methylimidazolium tricyanomethanide (CνmimTCM) were synthesized, by varying the alkyl (ethyl, butyl, hexyl and octyl) chain. These ILs allowed a systematic exploration of the effect of the alkyl chain length on the physicochemical properties of ionic liquid electrolytes based on blends with 1-methyl-3-propylimidazolium iodide and on their photovoltaic performance upon incorporation in dye solar cells. Density and viscosity measurements as a function of temperature revealed that the viscosity of the electrolyte blends followed the classical Vogel–Tammann–Fulcher (VTF) law, while Raman spectroscopy indicated that ideal mixing and no pronounced structural heterogeneity took place in the MPII/CνmimTCM mixed systems. Linear sweep voltammetry and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy experiments have proven that both diffusion and conductivity decreased with increasing viscosity, even though charge transport did not follow a Stokesian behaviour like other standard liquid conductors, due to the activation of the Grotthus-like exchange mechanism in ionic liquids. Moreover, we have demonstrated that the alkyl chain length of the CνmimTCM constituent in the MPII/TCM-IL blend influenced the overall power conversion efficiency and electrical parameters of the corresponding DSCs. The best performance was observed for cells based on the MPII/C2mimTCM blend, where the power conversion efficiency (η) reached 5.23%. The photocurrent of the DSCs decreased progressively with the decrease of the electrolyte conductivity/diffusion, while Voc was found to depend mainly on conduction-band edge position and to a much lesser extent on different recombination dynamics dictated by the specific CνmimTCM component. Variations in the fill factor were attributed to differences in the resistances at the Pt–electrolyte interface. Solidification of the ionic liquid electrolytes with amorphous silica nanoparticles revealed that electrolytes with the lowest viscosity loose only a marginal percentage of their initial efficiency, and most importantly that those with the greater viscosity increased their efficiency by more than 20%. The reported results prove the high potential of the ionic liquid blends and pave novel roads towards further optimization and practical applications of these materials in industrial solar energy conversion devices (namely dye-sensitized solar cells) and other energy-related applications.


This work was funded by the European Community's Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007–2013) under grant agreement of the IOLICAP (no. 283077) and SANS (no. 246124) projects.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Additional density–viscosity data as a function of temperature, Raman spectra, Stokes–Einstein ratios for ionic liquid blends at room temperature as a function of the increasing alkyl length, specific conductivity of the ionic liquid blends at room temperature as a function of the viscosity, short-circuit photocurrent against the light power density for the different ionic liquid electrolytes, IMPS results, photographs of liquid and solidified electrolytes, additional EIS data comparing liquid and solidified electrolytes. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ta00117b
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013