 DOI: 10.1039/C8NR09836K
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 3968-3978


Binwen
Chen
,

Yurong
Ruan
,

Jianmin
Li
*,

Weihuang
Wang
,

Xinlian
Liu
,

Huiling
Cai
,

Liquan
Yao
,

Jian-Min
Zhang
*,

Shuiyuan
Chen
 and 

Guilin
Chen
*

Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Quantum Manipulation and New Energy Materials, College of Physics and Energy, Fujian Normal University, Fuzhou, 350117, China. E-mail: glchen@fjnu.edu.cn; jmzhang@fjnu.edu.cn; Tel: +86 591 22867577

Fujian Provincial Collaborative Innovation Center for Optoelectronic Semiconductors and Efficient Devices, Xiamen, 361005, China

Fujian Provincial Engineering Technology Research Center of Solar Energy Conversion and Energy Storage, Fuzhou, 350117, China

Department of Physics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong. E-mail: b142916@cuhk.edu.hk

Received
5th December 2018
, Accepted 5th February 2019
First published on 5th February 2019
GeSe is considered as a potential absorber material for thin film solar cells owing to its ideal band gap, strong light absorption, remarkable air durability, Earth-abundance and non-toxic constituents. However, the high vapor pressure of GeSe at a temperature below its melting point makes it difficult to synthesize a high-quality GeSe film. To alleviate this limitation, in this work, a thermal evaporation combining a novel sandwiching post-annealing method was introduced to deposit high quality GeSe thin films with (100)-orientation. The self-assembling mechanism of the highly oriented GeSe film was carefully investigated by the systematic experiments and confirmed by the lowest total energy of the (100) crystal plane. Finally, the fully-inorganic, low-cost and non-toxic planar device with the superstrate configuration of FTO/TiO2/GeSe/carbon/Ag was also successfully fabricated. Notably, as a result, an impressive open circuit voltage (VOC) of 340 mV (maximum: 456 mV) was achieved, which is the highest VOC of GeSe solar cells reported so far. Furthermore, through current–voltage, capacitance–voltage profiling and drive level capacitance profiling measurements, it was demonstrated that the limiting factors of the GeSe solar cell performance were the narrow depletion width (138 nm) and the drastic recombination at the TiO2/GeSe interface.

In the past few years, thin film solar cells (TFSCs) have attracted increasing research attention due to their low-cost constituent, high stability, high efficiency and device flexibility, which have been considered as a potential alternative to silicon-based photovoltaic devices. Cadmium telluride (CdTe) and copper indium gallium selenide (CIGS), as the leading players in TFSCs, have reached a champion power conversion efficiency (PCE) of over 22%. Due to the disadvantages of toxic elements (Cd in CdTe) and scarcity of raw materials (Te in CdTe, In in CIGS), seeking low-toxic, Earth-abundant and low-cost absorber materials for high-efficiency TFSCs is of great research importance. Currently, environmentally friendly and Earth-rich absorber materials, such as Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4, CuSb(S,Se)2, Sb2(S,Se)3, SnS(e), FeS2 and GeSe, have been intensively investigated. Among them, GeSe is proposed as an emerging absorber material for sustainable photovoltaics for the following reasons: (1) the elemental components of GeSe are comparatively Earth-abundant and low-toxic in nature, which makes it superior to traditional CdTe and CIGS. (2) Both experimental investigation and theoretical simulation demonstrate that GeSe has a suitable band gap of 1.1–1.2 eV, lying within the optimal bandgap value for a single junction solar cell. Meanwhile, it also has a high optical absorption coefficient exceeding 104 cm−1 in the visible region, which enables full light absorption within one micrometer thick layer. (3) GeSe, as a typical binary IV–VI group semiconducting compound, crystallizes in layered structures with few and weak dangling bonds between the layers, which makes it possess high chemical stability and low surface defect density confirmed by theoretical and experimental studies. (4) GeSe adopts a low melting point of 670 °C, which represents a favorable feature for growing high-quality films at a relatively low temperature.

Despite the promising properties mentioned above, the material of GeSe has not been extensively explored for solar cell applications. The early investigation on the material of GeSe focused primarily on the development of various synthetic methods for GeSe micro/nanostructures. Beginning in 2010, Seok's group first introduced the vaporization–condensation–recrystallization approach to fabricate comb-like single-crystalline GeSe microstructures, which demonstrated p-type semi-conductivity with photoswitching behavior. Schaak's group applied the one-pot solution-chemistry route to synthesize single-crystal colloidal GeSe nanosheets. The films composed of these nanosheets indicated an indirect band gap of 1.14 eV, matching well with the solar spectrum. In 2012, Wan's group synthesized high-quality micrometer-sized single-crystal GeSe nanosheets by mixing GeI4, diphenyl diselenide and hexadecylamine, and these nanosheets exhibited remarkable photoresponse properties with novel anisotropic on/off switching characteristics. In the same year, Schaak's group reported the solution-based seedless growth strategy to obtain GeSe nanobelts. However, the photovoltaic performance of GeSe-based TFSCs has rarely been reported in the literature until last year (2017). Xue et al. demonstrated the synthesis of high-quality GeSe thin films on a CdS buffer layer by self-regulated rapid thermal sublimation and fabricated a superstrate ITO/CdS/GeSe/Au solar cell with a PCE of 1.48% and an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 240 mV. Recently, our group has reported the preparation of GeSe films by magnetron sputtering and constructed a prototypical FTO/CdS/GeSe/carbon/Ag device with a PCE of 0.05% and a VOC of 220 mV. However, these reported device efficiencies are far below the theoretical Shockley–Queisser efficiency limit (about 30%) for a GeSe single junction solar cell based on its bandgap of 1.14 eV. The reason might be the improper preparation methods, annealing conditions, the lack of deep understanding of GeSe, and so on. For instance, the feature that GeSe has high vapor pressure at a temperature below its melting point makes it easy for GeSe thin films to sublimate, leaving voids on the substrates as low-resistance shunting paths which seriously reduce the VOC of GeSe solar cells. On the other hand, the preparation of highly oriented GeSe thin films is still challenging to reduce dangling bonds at the grain boundaries. Therefore, in view of the lack of ideal routes to synthesize preferentially oriented GeSe thin films and effective strategies to suppress the sublimation of GeSe during annealing, it is highly worthwhile to explore effective methods to fabricate high-quality GeSe thin films for highly efficient photovoltaic applications.
As compared with other vacuum deposition technologies, such as magnetron sputtering, molecular epitaxial and pulsed laser deposition, thermal evaporation with relatively low deposition energy has the advantage of preventing the dissociation of GeSe molecules, which were introduced to deposit amorphous GeSe precursor films in the work. In order to improve the recrystallization of GeSe thin films and suppress the sublimation of GeSe molecules from the substrate at relatively high temperatures, a novel sandwiching post-annealing treatment was applied. By fine tuning the post-annealing procedures, self-assembled and (100)-oriented GeSe films were obtained, as confirmed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM), X-ray diffraction (XRD) and Raman spectrum characterization. A series of experiments and theoretical calculations were designed to investigate the self-assembly process from amorphous precursor films to highly oriented GeSe films. For the first time, the stable and non-toxic TiO2 with a wide bandgap was used to replace the toxic CdS buffer layer for GeSe TFSCs with proper band gap alignment. A full-inorganic low-cost prototypical photovoltaic device FTO/TiO2/GeSe/carbon/Ag was successfully constructed, achieving an encouraging open circuit voltage of 340 mV. Finally, the limiting factors of GeSe solar cell performance were discussed and revealed by using current–voltage, capacitance–voltage profiling and drive level capacitance profiling measurements.

GeSe precursor thin films were fabricated at room temperature by thermal evaporation with 99% pure GeSe powder (Xinfeng Guangguang JingYan Material Factory) using the resistance evaporation thin film deposition system (GSL-1700X-SPC-2, MTI Co. HeFei, China). The soda lime glass (SLG) substrates were ultrasonically cleaned with acetone, isopropanol, and ethanol for about 30 minutes followed by drying with N2 gas (purity > 99.999%), prior to loading into the vacuum chamber. A schematic of the experimental setup of the thermal evaporator is shown in Fig. 1. GeSe powder was held in an alumina coated tungsten basket which had a distance of about 15 cm with SLG substrates. The SLG substrates were clamped on the rotatable substrate holder (10 rad min−1), which could promote the formation of uniform thin films. The vacuum chamber was originally pumped down to a pressure of 7.2 × 10−6 Torr before evaporation and the working pressure was kept at approximately 2.6 × 10−3 Torr throughout the evaporating process. The deposition rate was controlled by tuning the current of the alumina coated tungsten basket. In order to avoid an abrupt evaporation of the powder or a strong decomposition of the original GeSe powder, a low deposition rate of 2.5 Å s−1 was selected and lasted for 30 min. Afterwards, the deposition of GeSe precursor films was terminated by turning off the current switch and the alumina coated tungsten basket was naturally cooled down.

Subsequently, the sandwiching post-annealing treatment was applied to the as-deposited GeSe precursor films. The process of the sandwiching post-annealing treatment is also schematically depicted in Fig. 1. The washed and equal-area SLG was placed on the as-synthesized GeSe precursor film, which was then clamped together by a clamp and placed in a tube furnace for annealing. To study the growth process, the sandwiching post-annealing temperatures were set at 350–500 °C (denoted as WS 350 °C, WS 400 °C, WS 450 °C and WS 500 °C). For comparison, the as-deposited GeSe precursor films were directly annealed in a furnace tube without the sandwiching treatment at the same temperatures (denoted as W/O S 350 °C, W/O S 400 °C, W/O S 450 °C and W/O S 500 °C). The annealing process was carried out under flowing Ar at standard atmospheric pressure (Ar gas flowing rate = 50 sccm, purity > 99.999%). The temperature was increased to the target value at a rate of 5 °C min−1 and held for 30 min. After annealing, the tube furnace was naturally cooled down to room temperature.
Finally, the device based on the prepared GeSe thin films (W/S-450 °C) was assembled with the superstrate structure FTO/TiO2/GeSe/carbon/Ag. Firstly, TiO2 as the buffer and electron collection layer was prepared by spin-coating TiO2 precursor sol–gel solution. 3 ml of tetra-n-butyl titanate (98%, Aladdin) was mixed with 1 ml of acetylacetone (>99.6%, Aladdin) and 37 ml of ethyl alcohol (>99.5%, Aladdin) in a flask under continuous magnetic stirring for 5 h. TiO2 solution was spin-coated at 7000 rpm for 15 s onto the cleaned FTO substrates. The prepared samples were immediately baked in air on a hotplate at 200 °C for 10 min. The as-synthesized film was subsequently annealed in a muffle furnace at 450 °C for 30 min. Sequentially, the GeSe film was prepared on the TiO2 buffer layer according to the evaporation and sandwiching post-annealing processes described above. Then, the conductive graphite paint was coated on the GeSe film to serve as the carbon back electrode. After coating the silver paste on the carbon back electrode, the completed TFSCs with a total effective area of 0.09 cm2 defined by the carbon electrode were assembled.
The morphology of the film was observed using a field emission scanning electron microscope (SEM, JSM-6700F). The surface roughness of the films was measured by Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM, Bruker Dimension Icon). The crystal structure characterization of the samples was identified by the X-ray diffraction (XRD, D/Max-rA) method with Cu Kα radiation (wavelength λ = 1.54178 Å). The Raman spectra were characterized at room temperature using a LABRAM-HR micro-Raman system with a laser source of 532 nm. The optical properties were observed using a UV-vis-365-type spectrophotometer in the range of 400–1500 nm. The photoluminescence (PL) spectrum was obtained using a He-Cd laser (325 nm) as the excitation source (Fluorolog 3-22 spectrofluorometer, Horiba Jobin Yvon). The current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the photovoltaic devices were tested using a source meter (Keithley 2400) with an AAA SAN-EI Electric solar simulator under standard AM 1.5 G light illumination (100 mW cm−2, 25 °C). The capacitance–voltage (C–V), C–V profiling and drive level capacitance (DLCP) profiling measurements were measured using a semiconductor characterization system (Keithley 4200SCS).
The electron structure and total energy were calculated using first-principles based on density functional theory (DFT) implemented in the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP). The exchange–correlation energy was treated by the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) using the Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof (PBE) functional. The plane wave cutoff energy of 450 eV was adopted. The lattice constant fixed at the theoretically optimized values of a = 11.31 Å, b = 3.91 Å, c = 4.45 Å, and the position of all atoms were fully relaxed until the force on each atom was less than 0.01 eV Å−1. In the calculation of the band structure, a gamma-centered 5 × 13 × 11 k-mesh was adopted for the Brillouin zone sample containing 4 Ge and 4 Se atoms. In addition, since the band gap was usually underestimated in the GGA, the Heyd–Scuseria–Ernzerhof (HSE) hybrid exchange–correlation functional was carried out to give reliable results of the energy band gap. For the total energy calculation of the crystal face, we employed a 1 × 2 × 2 supercell containing 8 Ge and 8 Se atoms. In order to prevent the interaction between the periodicity, a vacuum buffer space of 15 Å was added.

Since the quality of the absorber layer had a considerable impact on the performance of TFSCs, the GeSe precursor film deposited by thermal evaporation at room temperature was first researched in detail. Fig. 2(a) and (b) show the top-view and cross-sectional microscopy images of GeSe precursor films, respectively. The compact and continuous GeSe precursor film free of pinholes and cracks was observed. From the cross-sectional SEM micrographs, the GeSe precursor film exhibited a high degree of adhesion to the SLG substrate and a uniform morphology with a thickness of about 400 nm. Atomic force microscopy analysis (Fig. 2(c)) further indicated that the GeSe precursor film was smooth with a surface roughness of 2.08 nm. The XRD patterns of the precursor powder and precursor film were put together for comparison, as shown in Fig. 2(d). It should be noted that although the purity of the polycrystalline GeSe powder was as high as 99%, there were still trace amounts of GeSe2 and Ge impurities. After evaporation deposition, only a broad peak assigned to SiO2 glass was observed at 26° from the XRD pattern. No other diffraction peaks of crystalline phases appeared, which indicated that the as-deposited GeSe precursor film was a typical characteristic of the amorphous state.


Fig. 3(a)–(d) show the SEM surface morphology of the GeSe films annealed without the sandwiching treatment at the temperatures of 350–500 °C. It could be seen that small crystal grains were formed in the GeSe film annealed at 350 °C, which indicated that the GeSe film had begun to recrystallize. When the annealing temperature was increased to 400 °C, the degree of recrystallization of the GeSe film was improved, but the whole film was not completely recrystallized. When the annealing temperature was further increased to 450 °C, only a small amount of GeSe residue remained on the SLG substrate. The situation worsened when the annealing temperature was increased up to 450 °C and the film completely escaped from the SLG substrate, leaving nothing on the SLG substrate. The morphological development of GeSe films annealed at various temperatures can be clearly observed from the photograph shown in ESI, Fig. S1. The effects of different annealing temperatures on the recrystallization process and morphological evolution of GeSe films can be explained by the Antoine equation: logP = A − B/T, where P is the GeSe vapor pressure in atmosphere (atm), A is 8.51, B is 8824, and T is the absolute temperature in kelvin. According to this formula, the temperature-dependent saturated vapor pressure of GeSe is shown in Fig. 4. It can be clearly seen from the curve that GeSe has a very high vapor pressure at elevated temperatures, even below its melting point (670 °C). For example, the vapor pressure is 20.5 Pa at 450 °C and 126.02 Pa at 500 °C, which demonstrates the characteristics of GeSe's easy re-evaporation or even sublimation. Therefore, it is difficult to deposit a dense GeSe film with high crystallinity at relatively high temperatures while suppressing its re-evaporation simultaneously.
In order to increase the degree of recrystallization of the GeSe film as well as suppress the re-evaporation of the GeSe film from the SLG substrate, a novel sandwiching post-annealing treatment was applied to the precursor GeSe film which is shown in Fig. 1. SEM images of GeSe films annealed with the sandwiching treatment at different temperatures (350 °C, 400 °C, 450 °C and 500 °C) are shown in Fig. 3(e–h). It can be clearly seen that the surface morphology of the films strongly depends on the sandwiching post-annealing temperature. The size of the grain at 350 °C (Fig. 3(e)) was small and uniform, whereas the grain was further grown and the stick-like structure was formed on the surface of the GeSe film at a higher sandwiching post-annealing temperature of 400 °C (Fig. 3(f)). With a further increase in sandwiching post-annealing temperature to 450 °C (Fig. 3(g)), the grain grew up drastically. However, a significant change in the microstructure was observed at 500 °C (Fig. 3(h)); the stick-like structure turned into a sheet-like structure with a size larger than 10 μm, resulting in a discontinuous film. Hence the optimal temperature was fixed at 450 °C by using the sandwiching post-annealing temperature.
Generally, the morphology of the sample with sandwiching treatment distinctly differs from that of the sample without sandwiching treatment. The formation of different morphologies in the GeSe thin films might be illustrated as follows. As shown in the schematic in Fig. 5(a), in the case of conventional annealing (without sandwiching treatment), due to the high saturated vapor pressures at relatively high temperatures, the gaseous GeSe molecules sublimated rapidly from the precursor GeSe thin film, resulting in serious damage to the quality of the GeSe films. In contrast, similar to the face-to-face annealing strategy, the sandwiching post-annealing method can create a mini closed annealing space, in which only a small amount of sublimating GeSe molecules is required to achieve saturated vapor pressure, thus avoiding further sublimation of the GeSe thin film. On the other hand, the upper SLG in the sandwiching annealing set acting as the baffle plate can limit the further sublimation of GeSe molecules as well as enhance the recrystallization process of the GeSe film, thus forming a well-recrystallized GeSe film. In brief, the sandwiching treatment during the high temperature annealing can not only effectively suppress the sublimation behavior of GeSe molecules, but also improve the degree of recrystallization of the GeSe thin film.
The X-ray diffraction patterns of GeSe thin films annealed with sandwiching treatment at various temperatures (350–500 °C) are shown in Fig. 6(a). From 350 °C to 500 °C, the XRD peaks matched the GeSe orthorhombic phase (JCPDS #48-1226) well. XRD peaks were located at 16.34°, 32.05°, 33.03°, 50.46°, 52.76° and 69.30°, corresponding to the diffraction between the following crystallographic planes: (200), (111), (400), (220), (511) and (800), respectively. As it could be observed, the diffraction peaks of phase impurities GeSe2 and Ge presented in the GeSe precursor powder did not appear in the XRD patterns, which revealed that the samples annealed with the sandwiching treatment were pure phase orthorhombic GeSe. It was also visualized that the (400) diffraction peak (belongs to the (100) plane) with the highest intensity observed at 33.03° was the preferential re-crystallographic direction for all W–S samples annealed at different temperatures. The synthesis of such highly oriented GeSe thin films can be illustrated by the self-assembling process as shown in Fig. 6(d). The diatomic GeSe molecule gas was firstly sublimated due to the lower energy consumption than that of the separated Ge and Se atomic gas, which sequentially formed the isotropous GeSe precursor films (Fig. 6(d)). These randomly oriented GeSe films were self-assembled into highly (100) oriented GeSe thin films after suffering from the sandwiching post annealing. The Ge–Se layer was then lidded on the surface of substrates. What is more, as the annealing temperature increased, the diffraction peaks of GeSe became sharper, which demonstrated that the size of GeSe recrystallized grains grew larger. In order to directly represent the changing trend of the grain size, the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the (400) peaks of GeSe samples was calculated, which is shown in Fig. 6(b). The FWHM of the (400) peaks decreased as the temperature of the sandwiching annealing increased. Obviously, from 350 °C to 500 °C, the FWHM of the (400) peaks declined rapidly from 0.19 to 0.07, which matched well with the SEM results where stick-like GeSe transformed into high-recrystallization sheet-like GeSe.
Raman spectroscopy is used as a complementary technique to identify the possible trace impurities (i.e., Ge and GeSe2) which are difficult to make a clear distinction by using XRD. Fig. 6(c) shows the Raman spectra of the GeSe thin films annealed with the sandwiching treatment at different temperatures. The films annealed with sandwiching treatment at 350 °C, 400 °C and 450 °C exhibit two main peaks which correspond to the typical B2u and Ag vibrational modes of GeSe, respectively. Compared with the Raman spectra recorded from 350 °C, 400 °C and 450 °C, one can easily see that the Raman peaks of the B2u mode and the Ag mode of the GeSe film annealed at 500 °C shift towards a higher wavenumber which reveals the higher degree of crystallinity of GeSe films. Therefore, the above Raman spectral analysis further confirms the existence of pure GeSe solely without any other possible phases.
It is worth noting that all the pure-phase GeSe thin films annealed with sandwiching treatment at different temperatures exhibited highly preferred orientations along the planes of (200) and (400), observed in the XRD patterns (Fig. 6(a)). The formation of the crystal preferred orientation was strongly controlled by the surface energy of thin films. Therefore, we used the first-principles method to calculate the preferred orientation of the crystal plane growth in GeSe thin films. We selected several more significant peaks of crystal planes, including (100), (110), (111), (311), (511), and compared the total energy of them. The lower the total energy of the crystal plane, the more stable the thermodynamic properties, and the easier it is to grow preferentially toward the crystal plane. Fig. 7 shows the variation of the total energy of different crystal planes, which uses the (100) crystal plane as the reference. The results show that the (100) plane is the lowest crystal plane, which is about 4 eV lower than that of the (110) plane. Both the total energy calculation and XRD results indicate that the preferred orientation of GeSe growth is the (100) crystal plane. Therefore, considering the amorphous characteristics of the GeSe precursor, the sandwiching annealing treatment is identified as an effective self-assembly route for highly oriented GeSe thin films.
The optical properties of GeSe thin films such as the optical transition type (direct or indirect) and the optical band gap have significant effects on the performance of solar cells. Fig. 8(a) shows the spectral transmittance curve of GeSe films annealed with sandwiching treatment at 450 °C on the SLG substrate in the range of 400–1500 nm. Beginning at about 900 nm, the GeSe film transmittance reduced steeply and decreased to almost zero at a wavelength shorter than 700 nm. It indicated that the as-prepared GeSe thin films possess a high absorbance in the visible region. Based on the transmittance spectrum, we further observed a good linear zone by plotting (αhν)1/2versus hν and obtained an indirect band gap of 1.25 eV, as shown in Fig. 8(b). The band gap value agreed reasonably well with our following theoretical calculations. The band structure of bulk GeSe is plotted in Fig. 8(c). The results suggest that bulk GeSe exhibits the characteristics of an indirect semiconductor, in which the valence band maximum (VBM) is at point gamma and the conduction band minimum (CBM) is located along X–Γ. The minimum indirect and direct band gaps are 0.73 eV and 0.91 eV, respectively, based on the GGA method. However, the GGA method usually underestimates the band gap, so we use a more accurate HSE hybrid functional for calculations, and the minimum indirect and direct band gap of bulk GeSe increases to 1.24 and 1.46 eV, respectively, but it is worth noting that there is only a slight change in the relationship of band dispersion. The energy gap results obtained by the HSE method are in good agreement with the experimental result. Photoluminescence (PL) characterization is an effective and convenient tool to characterize the defect properties of the semiconductor material. Fig. 8(d) shows the PL spectrum measured at room temperature. It could be seen that there was a large symmetrical peak of emission localized at 1.06 eV (1172 nm). This PL emission peak energy was much lower than the plotted optical band gap of about 1.25 eV, and slightly smaller than the previously reported values (1.10–1.20 eV) as well. It might be attributed to the existence of the band tailing state which can be caused by electrostatic potential fluctuations.
The suitable buffer layer plays an important role in improving the performance of thin film solar cells. Compared with highly toxic CdS, TiO2 was selected as the buffer layer to couple with GeSe and construct the photovoltaic device based on the following reasons: (1) because of its advantages of non-toxicity, high abundance, low cost and perfect research, TiO2 conforms to our pursuit of low-cost and low-toxicity photovoltaic devices. (2) The wide band gap (about 3.6 eV) of TiO2 is helpful to reduce the absorption of incident light and possesses an optimal band offset with GeSe to form a Type II staggered heterojunction. (3) TiO2 exhibits excellent chemical stability for photovoltaic applications. By calculating the Gibbs free energy (ΔG) of possible reactions at different interfaces (GeSe/TiO2 and GeSe/CdS interfaces), it can be easily found that the Gibbs free energy of the GeSe/CdS interface is always larger than that of the GeSe/TiO2 interface over the range of temperatures 0–1000 °C, as shown in Fig. S2. This conclusion indicates that TiO2 is less likely to react with GeSe even at high annealing temperatures, as compared with CdS. However, to the best of our knowledge, there is no report on TiO2-based GeSe solar cells so far. Therefore, TiO2 is selected as a buffer layer to couple with the p-type GeSe thin film and construct FTO/TiO2/GeSe/carbon/Ag photovoltaic devices. Fig. 9(a) shows the cross-sectional SEM image of the as-fabricated GeSe TFSCs. Compact TiO2 with a thickness of about 100 nm was firstly spin-coated on the washed FTO. The 400 nm thick GeSe film was then deposited on the TiO2 buffer layer according to the optimized evaporation and annealing processes (evaporation for 30 min at a deposition rate of 2.5 Å s−1 followed by post-annealing with sandwiching treatment at 450 °C for 30 min under an Ar atmosphere). Similarly, the uniform GeSe film deposited on the FTO/TiO2 substrate also revealed the (100) preferred orientation which was confirmed by XRD and SEM (Fig. S3 and S4). Conductive carbon with low cost and good chemical stability was chosen as the hole selection material and electrode. Upon carbon/Ag electrode deposition, the complete device was completed. The built-in field was established at the GeSe/TiO2 interface when p-GeSe contacted with n-TiO2 and achieved the Fermi equilibrium. Once illuminated, the photogenerated holes in p-GeSe would be collected by the carbon/Ag electrode, while the photogenerated electrons would be injected into the TiO2 layer forced by the built-in field between GeSe and TiO2, and finally collected by FTO. For describing the transport mechanism more clearly, the band alignment diagram of devices is shown in Fig. 9(b). The energy levels versus vacuum of FTO, TiO2, GeSe, carbon and Ag are presented. The formation of the energetically favorable band gap offset facilitates the charge injection from GeSe to TiO2 and hole transport from the valence band of GeSe to the carbon electrode, which will lead to a performance improvement in GeSe TFSCs.

Fig. 9(c) shows the current density–voltage characteristics of our best GeSe solar cells under 100 mW cm−2 simulated AM1.5G irradiation. The champion device (0.09 cm2) exhibited a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 3.19 mA cm−2, an open circuit voltage (VOC) of 340 mV, and a fill factor (FF) of 25.15%, corresponding to a PCE of 0.27%. The VOC was 100 mV higher than the first and best result (240 mV) of GeSe TFSCs previously reported by Xue et al. What's more, we also made statistics on the VOC distribution of GeSe devices with a total number of 999. As shown in Fig. 9(d), there were 293 GeSe TFSCs with a VOC between 325 and 349 mV. What's more, there were even three GeSe TFSCs with a VOC higher than 450 mV. The impressive VOC may be attributed to the highly crystalline and pore-free GeSe absorber (profited from the sandwiching annealing treatment), as well as high stability of TiO2 at elevated temperature. However, this value of JSC was still at a relatively low level compared with Xue's result (14.48 mA cm−2). The low JSC might be caused by the un-compacted carbon electrode with high resistance (>25 Ω □−1), which formed the poor contact with the GeSe film (please see Fig. 9(a)), resulting in the blockage of carrier collection. In addition, the depletion width would also affect carrier transport, and the detailed analysis is given in the following part.
To evaluate the quality of the formed p–n junction in the fabricated TiO2/GeSe TFSCs, the capacitance–voltage (C–V) characteristic was tested (being adopted in the dark state). As shown in Fig. 10(a), the doping density (NA) of the GeSe film annealed with sandwiching treatment at the temperature of 450 °C could be calculated from the C−2–V curve using the following equation:
(1)
where
C, q (1.60 × 10−19 C), A (9 × 10−2 cm2), ε0 (8.85 × 10−14 F cm−1), εr,p (15.3), V, Vbi, and NA represented capacitance, electron charge, device area, vacuum permittivity, relative permittivity, bias voltage, built-in voltage and doping density, respectively. Based on these parameters and the slope of the 1/C2–V plot, the doping density (holes) of the GeSe film was calculated to be approximately 1.77 × 1017 cm−3. The depletion width (Wd) of the GeSe device calculated at the 0 V bias was 138 nm, which was far less than the thickness of the GeSe absorber layer (about 450 nm), demonstrating that the GeSe device was not completely depleted. Due to the thin Wd, the incompletely depleted GeSe device was unable to effectively collect all photogenerated carriers, resulting in the poor performance of the GeSe device. It is obvious that C−2 and V displayed a linear relationship in the range of 0 to 0.3 V. From the extrapolation of the linear fitting line, the built-in voltage (Vbi) of the GeSe film was extracted as 645 mV, which was larger than the VOC of the GeSe device (340 mV), indicating a 305 mV loss presented in the p–n junction. The loss of voltage might be caused by the interfacial recombination.

In order to further confirm the existence of interfacial defects at the TiO2/GeSe heterojunction interface, both C–V profiling and deep-level capacitance profiling (DLCP) measurements were performed at room temperature. For the C–V profiling measurements, DC bias was swept from −0.10 V to 0.2 V. DLCP measurements were tested with an AC amplitude from 20 mV to 140 mV and a DC bias from −0.5 V to 0.5 V. Generally, NC–V (defect density calculated from the C–V measurement) is composed of free carrier density, bulk defect density, and interfacial defect density, while NDLCP (defect density calculated from the DLCP measurement) only consists of free carrier density and bulk defect density. Therefore, the difference between NC–V and NDLCP reflects the interfacial defect density at the TiO2/GeSe interface. As shown in Fig. 10(b), NC–V was 1.64 × 1017 cm−3 while NDLCP was 9.29 × 1016 cm−3. The value calculated by subtracting NDLCP from NC–V was up to 7.11 × 1016 cm−3, considering that the volume–surface ratio is Wd, so the interfacial defect density was 9.81 × 109 cm−2, which demonstrated that interface recombination dominated in the device. Therefore, further improvement in the p–n junction is essential for highly efficient GeSe solar cells.

In conclusion, we introduced successive thermal evaporation, for the first time, to synthesize amorphous GeSe precursor films. Sequentially, a novel and effective post-annealing with sandwiching treatment at relatively high temperatures was developed to self-assemble (100)-oriented and well-recrystallized GeSe thin films. In addition, we designed a series of experiments and theoretical calculations to investigate the self-assembling process from amorphous precursor films to highly oriented GeSe films. Finally, TiO2 instead of toxic CdS was used to construct TiO2/GeSe TFSCs. The VOC distribution of GeSe devices confirmed the achievement of a high VOC, which can be attributed to the effective sandwiching route induced pore-free characteristics and stable TiO2 buffer layer. The careful analysis of the electrical properties of the solar cell revealed that the poor device performance can be attributed to the thin depletion width (138 nm) and the serious interface recombination at the TiO2/GeSe junction.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51502037, 11874113) and the Natural Science Foundation of Fujian Province of China (Grant No. 2015J05096, 2017J06001).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8nr09836k
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work and should be considered co-first authors.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019