 DOI: 10.1039/C6TA00533K
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 7390-7397


Xin
Zhao
,

Mingxuan
Lu
,

Mark J.
Koeper
 and 

Rakesh
Agrawal
*

School of Chemical Engineering, Purdue University, 480 Stadium Mall Drive, West Lafayette, IN 47907-2100, USA. E-mail: agrawalr@purdue.edu

Received
19th January 2016
, Accepted 2nd April 2016
First published on 4th April 2016
Molecular precursor processing from homogeneous and stable precursor solutions has become an important thrust in inorganic thin-film research because of its potential to provide low-cost, robust, and high-throughput deposition of various semiconductor films and devices. Here we demonstrate a versatile monoamine–dithiol mixture which possesses the remarkable ability to rapidly dissolve a variety of metal salts and metal chalcogenides under ambient conditions for the fabrication of device quality Cu(In, Ga)Se2 (CIGSe) films. By using soluble precursors, an ultrathin CIGSe film solar cell with an undetectable level of sulfur with an efficiency of 10.3% has been fabricated for a total cell area of 0.457 cm2. We further report an optimization study of the film composition and grain growth for a thicker CIGSe absorber layer, which has led to an increased solar cell efficiency of 12.2%, the highest reported values for solar cells using an amine–thiol solvent system. This study outlines a simple strategy to formulate inorganic semiconductor inks for processing high-quality selenide absorber layers of multinary compounds, which shows promise for increasing the efficiency of solution-processed thin-film solar cells.

Metal chalcogenide thin films offer a pivotal opportunity to provide low-cost photovoltaic (PV) modules to replace the use of conventional energy sources. The thin-film PV technology based on Cu(In, Ga)Se2 (CIGSe) layers has been the focus of extensive investigation due to their direct bandgap, high optical absorption coefficients, high tolerance of defects and impurities, and tunable bandgap. Remarkably, a record power conversion efficiency of 21.7% has been reported for lab-scale CIGSe solar cells prepared by co-evaporation. Compared with vacuum-based techniques such as evaporation or sputtering, non-vacuum deposition methods are often promoted as alternative approaches to reduce capital investment costs, offer high throughput processing and eventually reduce the PV module prices. Solution processing and deposition of inorganic semiconductors is particularly desirable among non-vacuum approaches due to its relative simplicity and potential economy, which has become an important thrust within large-scale macroelectronic applications including photovoltaics, thermoelectrics, thin-film transistors and phase-change data storage.

Among solution processes, there are two distinct approaches in the literature. In one approach, nanoparticles are first synthesized and then used to coat the absorber layer. In an alternative approach, the nanoparticle formation step is skipped and dissolved molecular precursors are directly used to deposit the absorber layer. The intermixing of pure molecular precursor solutions allows the formation of smooth homogeneous films with potentially reduced risk of composition variation related defects. However, the first challenge of this direct solution process is the insolubility of metal and chalcogen precursors in commonly available solvents. To address the issue of dissolution, a hydrazine-based process was successfully developed for chalcogenide materials by IBM researchers. Efficiencies up to 10.3% for Cu(In1−xGax)(Se1−ySy)2 (CIGSSe) devices were obtained and through the introduction of controlled Sb-doping into the CIGSSe layer during film processing the efficiency was further improved to 15.2%. The explosive and highly toxic properties of hydrazine make it difficult to scale up and commercially use this process. This fact has stimulated research based on non-hydrazine routes utilizing molecular precursors derived from other solvents, such as thioacetic acid, butyldithiocarbamic acid, alcohol with coordinating ligands, DMSO and thiourea,etc. While some of these solvent systems have been successfully introducing reasonably efficient CIGSSe solar cells, none are higher in efficiency than those from the hydrazine system. A limiting factor may be that only limited types of metal salts and few organosulfur sources can be dissolved in these solvents. Therefore, it is highly desirable to develop alternative solvents or solvent mixtures that can dissolve a wide variety of metal precursors and chalcogens with sufficient volatility for broadly realizing pure solution-processed metal chalcogenide thin films.
Recently, both Yang and our group have discovered that selenium (Se) can be easily dissolved in an amine–thiol solvent mixture to form a very stable homogeneous solution at room temperature and ambient pressure. The versatility of this process allows the utilization of an array of amines (primary, secondary, and diamines) and alkyl thiols. Brutchey's group has demonstrated the use of a diamine–dithiol solvent mixture for the dissolution of a series of V2VI3 chalcogenides and metal oxides for subsequent film deposition. A low temperature Cu2ZnSn(S, Se)4 (CZTSSe) deposition approach based on hexylamine (HA)–propanethiol (PT) solution was developed utilizing copper, zinc, and tin chloride precursors, which resulted in up to 7.86% efficient cells. Wu's group successfully dissolved pure Cu, In, and Ga metals in a 1,2-ethanedithiol and 1,2-ethylenediamine solvent mixture by heating the solutions at 60 °C for several hours, and efficiencies up to 9.5% were obtained. Although the exact dissolution mechanism remains unknown at present, it is obvious that this new “universal” solvent system with the flexibility of a wide range of volatility holds great potential for solution deposition of high-quality active layers for solar cells, transistors, and thermoelectrics.
Here we further explore the potential of the amine–thiol molecular solution route for CIGSe by using HA–1,2-ethanedithiol (EDT) solvent mixtures. This monoamine–dithiol system is expected to be less aggressive than hydrazine or other diamine–dithiol mixtures. A 10:1 vol/vol mixture of HA–EDT was found to possess excellent solvent abilities for metal selenides, metal salts, and elemental Se at room temperature and ambient pressure. In an early study with nanoparticle films, Guo et al. found that while CIGSe nanoparticles do not coarsen into large micron size grains at high temperature, the sulfide form Cu(In, Ga)S2 (CIGS) reproducibly coarsen into large device quality grains under high temperature Se treatment. Consistent with this observation, most of the reported solution-based Cu(In, Ga)(S, Se)2 CIGSSe deposition approaches employ CIGS precursor films as intermediate materials which are subsequently selenized to produce CIGSSe alloys. The existence of residual sulfur in CIGSe increases the bandgap, which leads to an improved open-circuit voltage (Voc). However, those CIGSSe solar cells encounter stronger recombination compared to pure CIGSe devices due to larger defect densities and lower carrier densities. Similarly, it has been reported that a high sulfur content CZTSSe device shows a deeper defect energy level as well as high bulk defect density, which causes strong recombination losses in such films. Researchers have also reported that high series resistance and interface recombination are only observed in CZTSSe devices, whereas the performance of pure Se-devices [S/(S + Se) ≤ 0.03] is not limited by these constraints. Therefore, it has been proposed that improved performance should be achievable with a high (essentially pure) Se content. Berner et al. recently reported a 13.3% efficient CIGSe solar cell with no sulfur by annealing the metal formate precursor films under a Se atmosphere. A pre-synthesis procedure of metal formate salts was required and the used selenization temperature of 600 °C is very high. The use of such a high temperature (>550 °C), necessitates the use of special expensive glass as a substrate. Here our approach results in the fabrication of highly sulfur depleted CIGSe films after selenization at 500 °C in spite of the presence of sulfur in EDT used for the preparation of the molecular precursor solution. With an absorber thickness of only 520 nm, a power conversion efficiency of 10.3% is achieved for a total area of 0.457 cm2 under standard AM 1.5G illumination. We also identify two main problems that limit the cell performance: (1) a strong Cu loss during the film deposition process, which is likely to be a common problem for amine–thiol solution processing; (2) difficulty in growing a thicker (>1 μm) coarsened absorber layer. By carefully optimizing the hotplate annealing conditions, the Cu composition ([Cu]/([In] + [Ga])) was improved from 0.76 to 0.91. Here we first introduce a simple and reproducible cation precursor solution treatment to minimize the fine grain layer in the selenized film. Then, ∼1.1 μm thick well coarsened CIGSe layers are obtained. After the optimization of film compositions and grain growth, the power conversion efficiency is enhanced to 12.2% (12.7%) with a total area of 0.492 cm2 (an active area of 0.472 cm2). In addition, although a high efficiency CZTSSe solar cell from metal chloride HA–PT precursor solutions has been reported, we find that the use of chloride salts in amine–thiol solvents lead to the loss of gallium during processing, which has a strong effect on the final composition of the CIGSe absorber. This finding indicates that chloride-free precursor solutions are necessary for high efficiency CIGSe solar cells fabricated by amine–thiol solvent inks.

A variety of molecular precursor solutions were successfully prepared by dissolving metal chalcogenides and metal salts in a binary mixture of a thiol (EDT or PT) and HA at room temperature and ambient pressure. Metal acetates (Cu(OAc)2, and In(OAc)3)/acetylacetonates (Cu(acac)2, In(acac)3, and Ga(acac)3)/halides (CuCl, InCl3, GaCl3, and GaI3) can be readily dissolved (on the order of minutes) in both monoamine–monothiol (HA–PT, vol/vol = 4:1) and monoamine–dithiol (HA–EDT, vol/vol = 10:1) mixtures. Metal selenides (Cu2Se, In2Se3) can only be dissolved in monoamine–dithiol (HA–EDT) mixtures. The resulting cation precursor solutions are all optically transparent (Fig. 1) and remain stable for months. Solubility limits of the various metal salts and metal chalcogenides in HA–EDT (vol/vol = 10:1) and HA–PT (vol/vol = 4:1) under ambient conditions are shown in Table S1. The proposed reaction mechanism of chalcogens with amine and thiol mixtures is that the thiol is deprotonated due to the existence of R–NH2 groups, and the resulting thiolate opens the sulfur/selenium ring by a series of nucleophilic attacks. A reasonable hypothesis for the dissolution of these metal salts and metal selenides appears to be the formation of thiolatometallate/thiolatoselenometallate anions counterbalanced by R–NH3+ cations. Thiolatothiometallate anions are well studied in previous literature.

As seen from Fig. 1, amine–thiol mixtures provide many possible choices to fabricate CIGSe precursor films. Here we demonstrate one particular system whereby the precursor solutions were formed from individual component solutions (Cu2Se, In(OAc)3, Ga(acac)3 and Se), each prepared by dissolving in the HA–EDT (vol/vol = 10:1) mixture. After mixing individual solutions together, the CIGSe precursor solution is transparent dark red and remains stable for months, which can be directly used to deposit a CIGSe thin film without any further purification. By simply varying the relative amount of each component solution in the mixture, the composition of the CIGSe film can be easily adjusted. The concentration ratio of [Cu]:[In]:[Ga] = 0.92:0.7:0.3 in the CIGSe absorber layer is known to provide high efficiency solar cells. Therefore, this cation concentration ratio was used in the mixed CIGSe precursor solution (see Experimental section).

Spin-coating was employed as a representative solution-based process for depositing the CIGSe precursor films. Hotplate thermal annealing treatments were performed between each layer coating at a temperature in the range of 250 °C to 350 °C. After eight layers of coating, images from a Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) (Fig. 2) depict that the resulting CIGSe precursor film is very smooth, uniform and approximately 560 nm thick. The chemical composition of the precursor film is Cu0.79In0.73Ga0.27S0.56Se1.61 as determined by averaging the data collected from 6 random spots using energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) in SEM. It is noticeable that a small amount of sulfur from the molecular precursor complexes still remains in the film during the hotplate annealing process, and participates in the formation reaction of CIGSSe. The Raman spectrum of the precursor film (Fig. 3a, bottom line) shows two weak peaks corresponding to the A1 and B2/E modes of chalcopyrite CIGS sulfide at 301 and 352 cm−1, which also confirms the formation of CIGS. Yet the other two strong Raman peaks at 184 cm−1 and 232 cm−1 were indexed to typical A1 and B2/E modes of chalcopyrite CIGSe, implying that CIGSe is the main product after annealing.

During the selenization step at 500 °C, all the remaining sulfur in the precursor film in the CIGSSe structure leaves and is replaced by Se from vapor, leading to a highly sulfur depleted CIGSe final product. The Raman spectrum (Fig. 3a, top line) contains no detectable CIGS sulfide contributions, and the concentration of sulfur in the film drops below the detection limit of EDX. The selenized CIGSe film has a composition of Cu0.76In0.72Ga0.28Se2.03. Only characteristic peaks of the CIGSe chalcopyrite structure at 178 cm−1 (A1 mode), 218 cm−1 (B2/E mode), 231 cm−1 (B2/E mode), 252 cm−1 (E mode), and 73 cm−1 (B1 mode) appear in the Raman spectrum (Fig. 3a, top line). The minor peak at 240 cm−1 is assigned to elemental Se, which suggests the existence of excess Se in the film, while the Raman spectrum of a CIGS nanoparticle film (Fig. S1) after the same selenization process still shows clear peaks at 301 and 352 cm−1 corresponding to the A1 and B2/E modes of sulfide CIGS. Thus, it is interesting that the small amount of sulfur from EDT that leads to CIGS in the precursor film is removed to an undetectable level through selenization at 500 °C.
The crystal structures of the as-prepared precursor film and the selenized CIGSe film were examined by X-ray diffraction (XRD) (Fig. 3b). The precursor film exhibits broad diffraction peaks, indicating the formation of very small nanocrystals within the film. The crystal domain size is estimated to be ∼2.3 nm as calculated from the Scherrer equation based on the widths of the (112) and (204) peaks, which is much smaller than the size of the CIGS nanoparticles (∼15 nm) in the previous study. This might be a possible reason why Se can easily replace all the sulfur in the precursor film through selenization. The XRD data of the selenized film demonstrate a well-crystallized chalcopyrite film. The minor peaks that are unique to the chalcopyrite structure are clearly observed at 17.3°, 36.0°, and 42.8° corresponding to (101), (211), and (105), respectively. However, the appearance of a small shoulder peak-indicated by * at 25.9° is derived from the InCu anti-site stacking faults in the cation sublattice, which arises as a result of a deficiency of Cu during the film formation. This is also verified by the observance of a weak ordered vacancy compound (OVC) shoulder in the 150–160 cm−1 region in the Raman spectrum (Fig. 3a, top curve). This indicates that an increase in Cu content is required to improve film quality and device performance.
Fig. S2 displays top-view (a) and cross-sectional (b) SEM images of the selenized CIGSe film. The surface morphology shows a typical microstructure comprising large grains (800 nm to 1.6 μm in-plane). The cross section image further confirms good film crystallinity with grains extending across the film thickness. A cross-section of the fractured CIGSe device in Fig. 4 shows that the average thickness of the absorber layer is approximately 520 nm with a very thin (<100 nm) fine grain layer underneath near the molybdenum (Mo) substrate. EDX line scans were employed to measure the composition fluctuation within the absorber layer. The vertical compositional profiling demonstrates homogeneous cation and anion distribution across the film (Fig. S3b). The horizontal line scan shows a slight depletion in Cu which occurs across grain boundaries (Fig. S3a). This phenomenon has been often observed by other researchers and the copper-poor nature of the grain boundaries in CIGSe has been proposed to be important in terms of reducing recombination at the grain boundaries.
Light and dark current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics are shown in Fig. 5a for one of the high performing ultrathin CIGSe solar cells. The detailed device parameters are reported in Table 1. The short-circuit current density (Jsc), open-circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (FF), and total area power conversion efficiency are 32.7 mA cm−2, 0.54 V, 59%, and 10.3% (9.9% without light soaking), respectively, based on a total device area of 0.457 cm2 (including the grid area) under standard AM 1.5G illumination after light soaking for 5 min. Other devices have similar performance, and an average power conversion efficiency of 9.88% has been achieved (as shown in Table S2). Owing to the Cu-poor stoichiometry ([Cu]/([In] + [Ga]) = 0.76) in the film, the average Jsc value of 29.4 mA cm−2 is relatively low when compared with other high efficiency CIGSe solar cells by solution-processed methods or vacuum-based depositions. The series resistance (Rs) of 0.48 Ω cm2 is much lower than the other solution-processed CIGSSe solar cells, which may be due to the high Se content (undetectable sulfur) in our film or partially due to the reduced thickness of the film. The low shunt resistance (Rshunt) (306 Ω cm2) could be attributed to pinholes in the absorber layer (Fig. S2). The external quantum efficiency (EQE) without light bias of the record CIGSe device is shown in Fig. 6a. The absorber bandgap can be estimated from the data near the band edge by plotting [Eln(1 − EQE)]2versus the photon energy (E) as shown in the inset of Fig. 6a and looking at the x-axis intercept. The band gap estimated from this plot is around 1.16 eV, which is close to the established empirically optimized band gap of 1.14 eV for CIGSe. The EQE is >70% in the visible range and gradually decays for longer wavelengths. The ultrathin CIGSe absorber layer is unable to efficiently absorb long wavelength photons and likely contributes to the inefficient collection of low energy photons.
Cell

η (%)
FF (%)

V
oc (mV)

E
g (eV)

J
sc (mA cm−2)

R
s (Ω cm2)

R
shunt (Ω cm2)

A


J
o (mA cm−2)

a 
R
s, Rshunt, A, and Jo are the series resistance, shunt resistance, ideality factor, and reverse saturation current determined from illuminated J–V by Hegedus and Shafarman's method.

Ultrathin CIGSe
10.3
59
540
1.16
32.7
0.48
306
1.55
3 × 10−4
Modified CIGSe
12.2
65.4
560
1.17
33.3
0.84
1188
1.69
6 × 10−5
It should be noted that high efficiency CIGSe solar cells have absorber film thickness greater than 1.4 μm. Recently, an attempt has been made to make ultrathin CIGSe solar cells to reduce the use of indium. With a 300 nm thick absorber layer, the researchers had to use a back reflective surface to obtain an efficiency of 9%. Therefore, efficiencies consistently in the vicinity of 10% for our devices with a thickness of ∼520 nm containing some pinholes could be considered surprising. While we do not have a definitive reasoning for this performance, a possible explanation may be due to the somewhat redeeming feature of the fine grain layer sandwiched between the large grain absorber layer and the Mo surface. The fine grain layer is conductive (resistivity ∼ 3.5 Ω cm) but not as conductive as Mo (resistivity on the order of ∼10−6 Ω cm) at room temperature, thereby it mitigates the impact of pinholes by offering resistance to carrier flow due to shunting. The device area is much larger than the pinhole area and therefore, the resistance to current flow from the big grains to Mo through fine grains is much reduced. This might be mitigating the impact of pinholes leading to an enhanced efficiency of ∼10% for our ultrathin solar cells.
However, to further improve the performance of our CIGSe solar cells, an increase in the absorber layer thickness is required. Therefore, the next section describes our attempt towards increasing absorber film thickness and further improving device efficiency.

It is noticeable that there is a significant reduction in ([Cu]/([In] + [Ga])) in the precursor film when compared to the precursor solution, which results in the InCu anti-site defects and the low Jsc values. In order to understand the relative loss of Cu during spin coating, a CIGSe film was doctor bladed with the precursor ink and annealed under the same conditions on the hot plate. In this case, no relative loss of Cu from the annealed film was observed. Therefore, we conjecture that after hot plate annealing, soluble Cu complexes are still present in the film and some of these dissolve in the precursor ink during the subsequent spinning step. It could be a very common problem, not only for Cu but also for other elements in many inorganic semiconductor films deposited by spin coating using amine–thiol precursor inks due to their excellent solubility in amine–thiol mixtures. This also partly explains the difficulty in getting thick precursor films from such inks via spin coating. Therefore, thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) is applied here to optimize the hotplate annealing conditions. Fig. S4a shows a typical TGA scan of the Cu2Se precursor. Decomposition of the precursor is completed by ∼325 °C. The TGA profile of the CIGSe precursor (Fig. S4b) also shows that the CIGSe precursor is completely decomposed into CIGSe at ∼325 °C. Based on our experimental results, either increasing the hotplate annealing temperature or annealing time can facilitate those “free” Cu complexes to decompose and incorporate into CIGSe molecules to avoid the loss of Cu. However, a higher temperature (500 °C) or longer annealing time (>10 min) strongly enhances the crystallinity of the CIGSe precursor film, resulting in a film which does not coarsen into large grains during the selenization process. After fine tuning of the annealing conditions, the modified CIGSe precursor film was annealed at 325 °C and the annealing time was increased to 5 min after each coating. A molecular precursor solution with a concentration ratio of [Cu]:[In]:[Ga] = 0.95:0.7:0.3 was used, and after selenization the modified CIGSe film with a composition of Cu0.94In0.68Ga0.32Se2.07 was obtained. No OVC signal is observed in the Raman spectrum and the shoulder peak at 25.9° in the XRD pattern disappears for these films (Fig. S5), which indicates that the film quality has improved.


The low thickness of the large-grain absorber layer in Fig. 4 clearly limits the solar cell performance. Many published CIGSSe/CIGSe molecular precursor routes have encountered this problem. As the thickness of the precursor film is increased, a much thicker fine grain layer is generated, which strongly lowers the device performance. Fig. S6 and S7 show our results for a 1.1 μm thick precursor film. With such thick precursor layers, we always observe the formation of a sandwiched fine grain layer of thickness greater than ∼430 nm upon selenization. A detailed explanation of the fine grain layer formation was presented in our previous paper. Fig. S7 shows the J–V performance curve with an efficiency of 6.68% (with no antireflective coating) for the cell with the sandwiched fine grain layer.

It is likely that the porosity of the thick layer precursor film is such that during selenization, Se rapidly diffuses through the film and one has the presence of liquid Se at the bottom to start grain coarsening there along with the expected coarsening from the top. This results in the formation of the fine grain layer in the middle of the selenized film. Thus to eliminate the fine grain layer from the middle of the selenized coarsened film, at the end of spin coating and annealing of the thick CIGSe precursor film under the optimized annealing conditions, we soaked the precursor film in a 0.05 M molecular precursor solution that only contains the cation precursors in HA–EDT (10:1, v/v) for 10 min. The composition ratio of this cation precursor solution is the same as that of the CIGSe precursor ink for film deposition. The soaked film is dried at 300 °C for 2 min. The film was then selenized under our standard conditions. Fig. 7 depicts the top-view and cross-sectional SEM images of the selenized film. Compared with the selenized ultrathin CIGSe film (Fig. S2), the in-plane grain size is enlarged (800 nm to 3 μm). In addition, the average thickness of the CIGSe layer is approximately 1.1 μm, with a much smaller fine grain layer (<100 nm) which is closer to the bottom compared with the earlier sandwich-structured film (Fig. S6). The film has a composition of Cu0.91In0.70Ga0.30Se2.05. Soaking the precursor film in the cation precursor solution as a final step is likely to reduce the porosity of the film, thereby slowing the diffusion of Se to the bottom of the film. Furthermore, the supply of another source of Cu, In, and Ga to the coarsening grains during selenization could contribute to enhanced grain growth and reduction in the fine grain layer.
Through optimization of the chemical composition and grain growth, the performance of the modified CIGSe solar cells shows great improvement. The J–V data of the best device measured under standard AM 1.5G illumination after light soaking for 5 min based on a total area of 0.492 cm2 is shown in Fig. 5b. The solar cell has a power conversion efficiency of 12.2% (12.7% for an active area of 0.472 cm2) and the Jsc, Voc, and FF are 33.3 mA cm−2, 0.56 V, and 65.4%, respectively. This efficiency is even higher than that of the hydrazine-based CIGSSe solar cells without Sb-doping. Other devices have similar performance, and the average power conversion efficiency is 11.8% (Table S3). Prior to application of light soaking, device total area efficiencies as high as 11.9% are measured. Compared to the ultrathin solar cell, most of the parameters have improved (as shown in Table 1). In particular, Rshunt has increased from 306 Ω cm2 to 1188 Ω cm2. The EQE without light bias of the modified CIGSe solar cell is shown in Fig. 6b. Compared to the ultrathin device, the modified solar cell has improved carrier collection for all wavelength ranges, and a significant improvement of carrier collection is observed at longer wavelengths. In the visible range, the EQE is >80%. The absorber bandgap extracted from the [Eln(1 − EQE)]2 − E plot as shown in the inset of Fig. 6b is 1.17 eV.

Amine–thiol solvent mixtures provide a variety of precursor choices for the fabrication of CIGSe films. However, the particular choices of metal precursors are essential to the deposition of high-quality metal chalcogenides films. In this work, we have identified the critical effect of using chloride (Cl−) salts in an amine–thiol solvent system on the loss of metals and on tailoring the final stoichiometry of the absorber during film processing (Table S4). Significant gallium loss (up to 86%) from the process was observed when Cl− salts were added into the ink, which resulted in highly Cu-rich absorbers. It is worth noting that whether the Cl− ions are directly from the gallium precursor (GaCl3) or other precursor sources (e.g. CuCl and InCl3), gallium loss always occurs in the final films. Increasing the [Ga]/([In] + [Ga]) ratio from 0.3 to 0.5 in the ink did not mitigate the problem. In order to understand this phenomenon during the annealing process, a mixture of cation precursor solutions (CuCl, InCl3, and Ga(acac)3) was drop-casted and dried at room temperature (Fig. S8a). The XRD pattern of the cation precursor mixture shows CuCl, In2Cl3, and GaCl3 phases. This suggests that Cl− ions from either CuCl or InCl3 react with Ga3+ and crystallize as GaCl3 when the solvent evaporates. GaCl3 has a relatively low boiling point (201 °C) and it is very easy for it to leave the film at the higher annealing temperatures. After annealing the cation precursor mixture at 250 °C for 5 min (Fig. S8b), GaCl3 peaks disappear in the XRD spectrum and EDX confirms gallium loss from a [Ga]/([In] + [Ga]) ratio of 0.3 in the room temperature dried film to a ratio of 0.014. Therefore, these results indicate that in the CIGSe precursor film fabricated with inks containing Cl− ions, Ga3+ leaves the film as GaCl3 at lower temperatures before incorporating into CIGSe, which suggests that chloride-free precursor solutions are necessary for high efficiency CIGSe solar cells fabricated by using amine–thiol solvent inks.


In summary, we have found that a variety of metal cation sources such as metal acetate/acetylacetonate/halide salts and metal selenides can be very rapidly dissolved in a monoamine–monothiol (HA–PT), or a monoamine–dithiol mixture (HA–EDT) at room temperature and ambient pressure to provide stable molecular precursor solutions for the fabrication of device quality CIGSe absorber films. These solvent mixtures are potentially less hazardous or aggressive than hydrazine and other diamine–dithiol solvent systems. Cl− ions are found to be critical to the loss of gallium in CIGSe precursor films from amine–thiol solvent inks. In this study, the CIGSe molecular precursor solution obtained by dissolving Cu2Se, In(OAc)3, Ga(acac)3, and elemental Se in HA–EDT was used to deposit high quality CIGSe absorber layers. After selenization, a highly sulfur depleted ultrathin CIGSe absorber film (no detectable sulfur left) was obtained with the corresponding band gap of 1.16 eV, yielding a power conversion efficiency of 10.3%.

Two main reasons that limited the solar cell performance were identified: (1) relative loss of Cu from the precursor films and (2) the difficulty in grain growth for a thick precursor film due to the formation of a sandwiched fine grain layer. With the optimization of annealing conditions during spin coating of the precursor layer and a subsequent cation precursor solution treatment as the final step before selenization, the efficiency of the modified CIGSe solar cell is enhanced to 12.2% (12.7%) for a total area of 0.492 cm2 (an active area of 0.472 cm2). While this efficiency is lower than the highest efficiency of ∼15% solution-processed CIGSSe solar cells, these are early experiments and potential exists to improve performance through further research. Also, the encouraging results demonstrate the potential of the amine–thiol solvent system.
Our study defines a robust solution-processing strategy to achieve absorber layers with undetectable sulfur making their selenium content comparable to the high-efficiency films from physical vapor deposition, which may also provide a good opportunity to push the efficiency of the solution-deposited multinary compound thin-film solar cells to higher values.

All amine–thiol based solutions were prepared in a nitrogen-filled glovebox with oxygen and moisture levels below 0.1 ppm. The CIGSe molecular precursors were prepared by dissolving cation sources and elemental Se in the HA–EDT solvent mixture (10:1, v/v). Component solutions were formed as follows: 0.6 mmol of Cu2Se, 0.9 mmol of In(OAc)3, 0.9 mmol of Ga(acac)3 and 3 mmol of Se were added to 3 mL HA–EDT solvent mixture (10:1, v/v) separately and subjected to continuous stirring at room temperature until all the solids were fully dissolved. Cu2Se (0.2 M) and Ga(acac)3 (0.3 M) were fully dissolved in 3 h, and 7 min, respectively. In(OAc)3 (0.3 M) was fully dissolved after overnight stirring.

The solutions for spin-coating were prepared by mixing appropriate amounts of each component solution to yield a targeted elemental composition (Cu0.92In0.7Ga0.3Se2.6) in a single solution. A 30% excess of Se was employed in the solution to ensure complete reaction with the cations. After mixing, the solution was transparent dark red.

The CIGSe precursor solution was spin-coated on a 1′′ × 1′′ molybdenum coated (∼800 nm) glass substrate. Spin-coating was performed in a nitrogen-filled glovebox. Each layer was spin-coated at 800 rpm for 30 s. After each coating, the film was immediately annealed on a preheated hot plate at 250–350 °C for 2 min. Generally, this deposition step was repeated for 8–10 cycles to reach a film thickness of ∼560 nm. The as-prepared precursor films were soaked in a 1 M sodium chloride (NaCl) solution for 10 min and then selenized under our standard conditions by exposing the films to Se vapor in a graphite box (containing the sample and elemental Se pellets) at 500 °C for 40 min in a preheated tube furnace.

The modified CIGSe film was deposited by using a precursor solution with an elemental composition of Cu0.95In0.7Ga0.3Se2.6. After each coating, the film was annealed on a preheated hot plate at 325 °C for 5 min. The deposition step was repeated for 12 cycles. A 0.05 M cation precursor solution was prepared by mixing Cu, In, and Ga solutions together with the same composition ratio as the CIGSe precursor ink. The precursor film was soaked in the cation precursor solution for 10 min and then rinsed three times with isopropanol. The film was annealed on the hotplate at 300 °C for 2 min to evaporate the organic solvent. Then, ∼10 nm sodium fluoride (NaF) was deposited on top of the film by electron-beam deposition. The selenization process is the same as that mentioned above.

Devices were completed by chemical bath deposition of ∼50 nm cadmium sulfide (CdS), sputtering of ∼80 nm intrinsic zinc oxide (ZnO) followed by ∼220 nm indium-doped tin oxide (ITO), and electron-beam deposition of Ni/Al grids. Each device was isolated by mechanically scribing with an ∼0.47 cm2 total area. For most devices, ∼100 nm magnesium fluoride (MgF2) anti-reflective layer was applied on top to enhance light absorption. Potassium cyanide (KCN) etch has not been used.


Powder X-ray diffraction data were collected using Cu Kα radiation in a Rigaku SmartLab X-ray diffractometer. An FEI Quanta 3D FEG Dual-beam SEM with an energy dispersive X-ray detector was used to obtain the top-view and cross-sectional images and to perform EDX compositional analysis of the CIGSe films. Raman spectroscopy was obtained using a Horiba/Jobin-Yvon HR800 microscope with an excitation laser wavelength of 633 nm. The J–V characteristics were measured with a four-point probe station using a Keithley 2400 series sourcemeter while the sample rested on a temperature-controlled stage at 25 °C. Illumination was provided by a Newport Oriel solar simulator with an AM 1.5 filter set and calibrated to 1 sun intensity using a Si reference cell certified by NIST. The EQE was measured at a chopper frequency of 161 Hz with a preamplifier used for signal processing. TGA scans were performed on a TA Instruments Q50 system, in a flowing helium atmosphere and with a 10 °C min−1 ramp to 500 °C.


Thanks to Dr Kevin Brew, Brian Graeser and Robert Boyne for their assistance in providing the Mo-coated soda lime glass. The authors also gratefully acknowledge the funding of the NSF Solar Economy IGERT Program (No. 0903670-DGE) and SERIUS (DEAB6-08G028308).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Cation precursor preparation, solubility limits of metal precursors, Raman spectrum of the selenized CIGS nanoparticle film, SEM and SEM-EDS of the ultrathin CIGSe film, TGA scans of Cu2Se, GIGSe precursors, Raman spectrum and XRD of the modified CIGSe film, SEM and J–V characteristics of the sandwich-structured CIGSe solar cell, photovoltaic parameters for 4 ultrathin CIGSe solar cells and 3 modified CIGSe solar cells, and composition and XRD of the Ga loss precursor films. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta00533k
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016