 DOI: 10.1039/C5TA08743K
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 4962-4970


F. Javier
Ramos
,

Manuel
Oliva-Ramírez
,

Mohammad Khaja
Nazeeruddin
,

Michael
Graetzel
,

Agustín R.
González-Elipe
 and 

Shahzada
Ahmad
*

Abengoa Research, Abengoa, C/Energía Solar no 1, Campus Palmas Altas, 41014, Sevilla, Spain. E-mail: shahzada.ahmad@abengoa.com

Instituto de Ciencia de Materiales de Sevilla, (CSIC-Universidad de Sevilla), C/Americo Vespucio 49, 41092 Sevilla, Spain

Laboratory of Photonics and Interfaces, Department of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Station 6, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland

Received
29th October 2015
, Accepted 26th February 2016
First published on 29th February 2016
Hybrid organic–inorganic perovskite solar cells are a topic of increasing interest, as in a short time span they are able to lead in the third generation photovoltaics. Organohalide perovskites possess exceptional optoelectronic and physical properties, thus making their implementation possible in many diverse configurations of photovoltaic devices. In this work, we present three different configurations of porous 1-dimensional photonic crystals (1-DPCs) based on alternated nanocolumnar layers of oxides with different refractive indices (n) that were deposited by Physical Vapor Deposition at Oblique Angle Deposition (PVD-OAD). They are then implemented as the photoanode in CH3NH3PbI3 solar cells to improve the management of light into the device. These configurations improved the performance of the photovoltaic system by designing a light interference structure capable of enhancing the absorption capability of the perovskite. A device fabricated using these photonic crystal structures presented an efficiency >12% in contrast with only 10.22% for a reference device based on non-photonic crystal TiO2 layers deposited under analogous conditions.

Organolead halide perovskites are being employed as semiconducting absorbers for solar cell applications. Their ability to harvest light with very high molar extinction coefficient compared to organic sensitizers, low exciton binding energy, low non-radiative recombination and ambipolar nature of high electron and hole conduction has revolutionized thin film based photovoltaics. This is being seen as a cost effective solution for the sustainability of our planet. Power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) have made unprecedented progress in less than 5 years. Devices with a PCE in excess of 10% can be easily fabricated in diverse architectures and choice of materials. However, most of the research efforts are centered on state-of-the-art materials and their ability to further push the PCE.

On the other hand, photonic crystals are known for their ability to selectively localize the light electrical field strength. Depending on the number of directions where the periodic alternation of the refractive index occurs, photonic crystals are classified into: 1-dimensional (1D), 2-dimensional (2D) and 3-dimensional (3D) ones. The utilization of 1-dimensional photonic crystal (1-DPC) structures where the periodic modulation of the refractive index arises in the same direction the light goes through has been a concept successfully employed in order to tune the photocurrent in solar cells. Consequently, photonic crystals have been used in several photovoltaic applications such as dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), solid-state-DSSCs (ss-DSSCs) and, more recently, in perovskite solar cells where their working principles have been reported. Light dispersion effects based on light scattering have also been claimed to contribute to the performance of DSSCs. In the recent past, the introduction of photonic crystal structures into perovskite solar cells has been exploited basically for tuning the color of the devices but at the expense of the photocurrent and consequently PCE values. Researchers were able to show a wide color palette but the measured PCE was 8.8% for the champion cell and 3.86% when an optical cavity behind the back electrode was introduced.
The implementation of nanostructured 1D architectures, such as nanoribbons, nanowires, nanorods and nanocolumns with a high aspect ratio and a high surface-to-volume ratio to increase either collection or transport properties, has also been extensively explored in diverse electro-optical applications and in different types of solar cells. In particular, metal oxide nanostructured 1D architectures have been reported for perovskite solar cells using a variety of techniques well known and established in the literature such as ZnO by chemical bath deposition, ZnO by plasma-enhanced chemical vapour deposition (PE-CVD), TiO2 by chemical bath deposition (solvothermally grown), TiO2 by electrospinning, electrospun lead-doped TiO2 nanofibers by in situ perovskite synthesis and TiO2 by physical vapour deposition at oblique angles (PVD-OAD). From these techniques, those where a solvent bath is not required, i.e. electrospinning, PE-CVD and PVD-OAD are deemed industrially scalable processes in a facile manner due to their ability to uniformly coat large area surfaces.
Usually, in the field of photonic crystals, 1D nanostructures have been applied to fabricate 2-DPCs, where the periodic modulation of the refraction index of the system is controlled by the distance between columns or rods. Unlike this topography, planar 1-DPCs in the form of porous Bragg reflectors prepared by PVD-OAD are formed by the arrangement of 1D nano-structural units in the form of a film and consist of an alternating stack of nanocolumnar porous layers with different refractive indices. Recently, this type of architecture has been applied for optofluidic analysis and to increase the efficiency of DSSCs. However, to the best of our knowledge, 1-DPCs made by alternating 1D porous nanostructured films prepared by PVD-OAD have not been explored for perovskite solar cell applications.
Herein, as a proof of concept on the perovskite solar cell performance, we studied the effect of using photoanodes consisting of alternate nanocolumnar layers of porous oxides to induce photonic crystal-like effects in the modulation of light. To obtain a precise and homogeneous arrangement of the different nanocolumnar layers, the PVD-OAD technique was selected for their preparation.
Particularly, three different types of nanostructured 1-DPCs were fabricated and compared with similar structures where light confinements due to photonic crystal effects are not expected. Photonic Crystal type 1 (PC1) consists of 5 stacked porous layers of nanocolumnar TiO2 with alternant refractive indices. The principle applied to systematically vary the refraction index of the same material from one layer to the next was to adjust the incident zenithal angle (α) of deposition. This parameter is known to induce a variation in the porosity of the films prepared by this method and, consequently, in the refractive index of the film. According to the effective medium approximation theory, an increase in porosity leads to a decrease in refraction index (n). In PC1, the TiO2 layers deposited at α = 60° and α = 85° had a thickness of 75 nm and approximate refraction indices of n = 1.80 and n = 1.63, respectively. The selection of a TiO2 anode of approximately 5 × 75 nm thickness was dictated by previous results where a maximum efficiency of the perovskite solar cell was found for a similar thickness of a homogeneous TiO2 anode prepared by PVD-OAD. For Photonic Crystal type 2 (PC2) and Photonic Crystal type 3 (PC3), the alternation in the refractive index was not due to changes in the angle of deposition and therefore in the porosity of a single material, but due to the alternation of two materials presenting different refraction indices. In PC2 and PC3, alternated porous TiO2 and SiO2 layers were employed to create a photonic crystal-like effect while keeping the tilting angle of the nanostructures and the film porosity constant from one layer to the next. More importantly it was found that the incorporation of a non-electron injecting photoanode material like SiO2 did not affect significantly the cell performance, an effect that must be attributed to the high diffusion length of excimers in perovskite materials. In any case, the control of the thickness of each individual layer, the number of layers, the variation in their refractive indices and the optical interference effects of these 1-DPCs with the FTO substrates were designed to cover the absorption spectral region of the perovskite. This effect should contribute to the total absorption of the film and to enhance the generated photocurrent. Unlike previous reports, herein we were not only able to fabricate different photoanodes based on the tailored designed photonic crystals, but also able to improve the light harvesting capabilities and final performance of the fabricated perovskite solar cells. Photovoltaic behaviour (JSC and PCE) of the solar cells prepared in the present work with PC1 (JSC = 19.29 mA cm−2; PCE = 10.94%) and PC3 (JSC = 18.77 mA cm−2; PCE = 12.03%) was much improved with respect to that of similar TiO2 tilted nanocolumnar photoanodes deposited by PVD-OAD (JSC = 18.25 mA cm−2; PCE = 10.22%). It must be stressed that due to the rational design of the photonic crystal, the obtained photocurrents and efficiencies were higher than state-of-the-art values of other perovskite solar cells containing photonic crystals. In this regard, it is also worth noting the additional advantages of the PVD-OAD procedure for series fabrication due to its facile and easy scalability at the industrial level.

For a comprehensive visualization, Fig. 1a–c present in the form of schemes the different architectures of the perovskite solar cells essayed in the present work that are characterized by different photonic crystal structures. For comparison purposes, the schematic configuration of the TiO2 nanocolumnar photoanodes employed as the reference is included in the ESI (Fig. S1). These schemes are complemented in Figs. 1d–f by a detailed summary of the key characteristics and properties of the prepared photonic crystal films, such as the type of material and thickness, number of layers, glancing angle of deposition employed during PVD-OAD (α) and refractive index of each single layer (n). According to Fig. 1a, PC1 consists of 5 nanocolumnar layers of TiO2 prepared at two alternating deposition angles. This procedure is known to change the porosity of the individual layers and hence their refractive index. For PC2 (Fig. 1b) a compact layer of TiO2 was first deposited to act as both the buffer layer and first layer of the PC structure due to its high refractive index. Then, it was followed by a porous nanocolumnar SiO2 (low n) layer and, on the top, another nanocolumnar TiO2 layer deposited by keeping the deposition angle (α) fixed. Here, the different refraction indices of SiO2 and TiO2 induce an interference effect typical of 1-DPCs. In a similar fashion, PC3 alternates nanocolumnar TiO2 and SiO2 layers prepared at the same deposition angle α and characterized by a similar porosity. In this case, the bottom layer consisted of a nanocolumnar TiO2 film prepared at an oblique angle and an additional very thin buffer under-layer made by spray pyrolysis deposition (SPD) had to be incorporated. More details about the porosity of each film can be found in the Experimental section. Figs. 1g–i illustrate the transmittance spectra of the prepared photonic crystal films deposited onto quartz substrates. A good agreement was found between the experimental spectra and the simulated curves under the assumption of a constant value of the refraction index along the thickness of each single layer. The small discrepancies should be attributed to small deviations in porosity (and therefore refraction index) along each layer thickness, a variation that is common in PVD-OAD thin films. In the three spectra, it is apparent that a band in the 400–450 nm region coincides with the wavelengths where perovskite light harvesting is maximum. Although the purpose of the present work is not to carry out a precise description of the light confinement effects within the film structure, it is worth noting that the optical behaviour of the cell should also take into account the interference effects between the 1-DPC and the underlying FTO layer in the substrate. The resulting light interference and dispersion effects show that a decrease in transmission occurs in a spectral region covering the whole visible range of the spectrum (experimental and simulated spectra are reported in the ESI S2a–c) encompassing the whole absorption band of the perovskite (ESI S2d reports a comparison of the transmission spectra of the 1-DPC/FTO system before and after infiltration with the perovskite).

Pictures of the different types of studied photonic crystals deposited onto quartz are included in the ESI (Fig. S3), showing a certain coloration of these films. In summary, the final designs of the PCs were as follows: PC1 is ∼375 nm thick with alternating layers of TiO2 with n = 1.80 and n = 1.63; PC2 is around 210 nm, being composed of a 70 nm thick dense TiO2 monolayer (n = 2.10) and equivalent porous nanocolumnar SiO2 (n = 1.31) and TiO2 (n = 1.77) films with a total mesoporous thickness of 140 nm; PC3 is also about 210 nm having three equivalent layers of alternated porous nanocolumnar TiO2 (n = 1.77) and SiO2 (n = 1.31). Fig. 2a represents a scheme of the geometrical arrangement used for the preparation of the different layers by PVD-OAD, where the evaporation angle is controlled by the position of the substrate regarding the evaporation source. PC1 was designed to be relatively thicker (5 layers) than PC2 and PC3, as here the change in n was created by the same materials just by changing the porosity and the variation in n was relatively lower than with a TiO2/SiO2 alternation. However the infiltration of perovskite was not found to be an issue for any of the configurations studied here as the total thickness in all the case remains <500 nm.
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was employed to confirm the porous and nanocolumnar microstructure of the different PCs. Fig. 2b shows a cross-sectional SEM micrograph taken with secondary electrons for a ca. 300 nm thick TiO2 tilted nanocolumnar film deposited on silicon. A similar film deposited on FTO has been employed here to fabricate a reference cell with no photonic crystal-like effect. Here an accurate control in the deposition angle of the nanocolumnar film is maintained along the layer.

Figs. 2c and d correspond to a PC1 film deposited on silicon and reveal a clear distinction between the TiO2 layers deposited at 60° and 85° and slightly different inclinations and widths when passing from one layer to the next. The high porosity evidenced by this micrograph clearly demonstrates that the PC1 film could be used in a similar manner to the homogenous TiO2 film for perovskite infiltration.Figs. 2e and f show the cross-sectional images of the PC2 film. In the backscattered SEM picture (Fig. 2e), the darker and lighter zones reveal the different materials, SiO2 and TiO2, respectively, of each constituent layer (TiO2 backscatters electrons more effectively than SiO2 due to the higher atomic weight of Ti). The expected thickness of 210 nm, with a highly porous layer of 140 nm, due to both TiO2 and SiO2, can be clearly visualized in the images. Similarly, Figs. 2g and h clearly depict the stack of different material layers employed for the fabrication of PC3. A general tendency that can be deduced from most of these images is that the nanocolumns progressively open and become wider when moving from the bottom to the top of the films. This is a common evolution in OAD films that is attributed to an increase in width of some nanocolumns at the expense of others that stop growing. This tendency is in part responsible for the inaccuracies found between simulated and experimental transmission spectra of the different 1-DPC (Figs. 1g–i).
Before finishing the solar cell fabrication, top view SEM images were taken before and after perovskite deposition. This comparative analysis of the capping layer morphology on top for the different photonic crystals showed no significant differences depending on photonic crystal based photoanodes (ESI, Fig. S4). Additionally, cross-sectional SEM micrographs taken for the photoanodes after perovskite infiltration and for the solar cells prepared with the three photonic crystals confirmed that the underlying 1-DPC photoanodes did not affect the morphology and crystal properties of the perovskite capping layer that, in all cases, was characterized by the same thickness and a similar size and cuboid shape of the perovskite crystals (ESI Fig. S5).

The three types of photonic crystal films were used as hosts to distribute the perovskite absorber through their pore structure and atop it in the form of an homogeneous and pin-hole free capping layer (Figs. S4 and S5 in the ESI). The experimental strategy adopted was similar to that previously reported for using single TiO2 PVD-OAD films as anodes.

To assess their application in the photovoltaic devices, current–voltage characterization curves (J–V) and incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) were recorded for the fabricated solar cells. In Table 1, results are summarized indicating average values and their standard deviations together with the best values attained (in brackets), for the following parameters: short-circuit current (JSC), open-circuit voltage (VOC), fill factor (FF) and power conversion efficiency (PCE). For the best results achieved, the J–V curves and the IPCE spectra with the integrated photocurrent are reported in Fig. 3. The increase in IPCE intensity in PC1 and, particularly, PC3 devices for practically the whole spectral region can be accounted for by light electrical field localization and dispersion effects occurring in the photonic crystal/FTO system. The photonic behavior of the inorganic multilayer formed by the 1-DPC and the FTO is characterized by a lower transmission in a wide spectral zone (see ESI S2) and supports that light interference and dispersion effects promoted by the photonic crystal/FTO ensemble can be the cause of the observed IPCE increase. Recent simulations of these light interference effects within the multilayer structure of 1-DPCs show a preferential localization of the light electrical field at given spatial depths and wavelengths and may occur both inside and just outside the Bragg reflector. They have been claimed responsible for the increase in the photonic yield of DSSCs. Hence, a similar effect is expected here, with the difference that in the studied perovskite based solar cells, the active absorbing phase distributes both within the photonic crystal and outside it and both regions can thus experience the effect of a preferential localization of light electrical field (see Scheme in ESI S6).

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (mV)
Fill factor
PCE (%)
NC–TiO2 (ref. 48)
17.87 ± 0.532 (18.25)
934.4 ± 10.71 (949.0)
0.568 ± 0.02 (0.588)
9.56 ± 0.37 (10.22)
PC1
18.56 ± 0.554 (19.29)
867.7 ± 11.92 (928.9)
0.615 ± 0.03 (0.659)
10.05 ± 0.7 (10.94)
PC2
15.05 ± 1.152 (16.68)
883.1 ± 60.28 (954.9)
0.312 ± 0.06 (0.396)
4.28 ± 1.32 (6.39)
PC3
18.44 ± 0.322 (18.77)
1026.1 ± 5.46 (1032)
0.603 ± 0.02 (0.617)
11.52 ± 0.30 (12.03)
In the form of box–whisker plots, Fig. 4 gathers the information for all studied devices. According to this figure, PC1 solar cells presented an enhanced absorption as compared to the reference TiO2 nanocolumnar photoanode. Not only JSC and IPCE of the champion PC1 (JSC = 19.29 mA cm−2) based solar cells are higher than the reference NC–TiO2 based one (JSC = 18.25 mA cm−2), but also all of the samples prepared with PC1 (JSC = 18.56 ± 0.55 mA cm−2) presented a higher JSC than the average for the reference TiO2 anode (JSC = 17.87 ± 0.53 mA cm−2). This better performance supports the idea that PC light management effects are the main factors contributing to the increase in IPCE. On the other hand, PC1 solar cells showed a slightly lower open circuit voltage (VOC = 867.7 ± 11.92 mV vs. VOC = 934.4 ± 10.71 mV), possibly due to the more irregular interlayer shape which would create more trap sites and an intermittent contact between perovskite and TiO2, contributing to increase the recombination processes in this case. This idea is supported by the comparison with the other photonic crystal structures, since PC1 showed the relatively lowest voltage among all of them. Nevertheless, due to its higher IPCE, PC1 solar cells were more efficient (PCE = 10.05 ± 0.69%) than their analogous reference devices without the PC effect (PCE = 9.56 ± 0.37%). For these series of magnitudes, the high reproducibility of the experiments for the twelve tested devices must be stressed.
In order to make the variation in the refractive index (n) more pronounced, photonic crystal structures PC2 and PC3 were fabricated with the introduction of nanocolumnar layers of SiO2. For the PC2 devices, although the variation in “n” is quite high, the fabricated solar cells performed modestly with a PCE (JSC = 15.05 ± 1.15 mA cm−2; VOC = 883.1 ± 60.28 mV; FF = 0.312 ± 0.06 and PCE = 4.28 ± 1.32%) lower than that of cells prepared on the PVD-OAD anodes. We relate this behavior to electronic factors so that the incorporation of a non-electron injecting oxide (first layer of nanocolumnar porous SiO2) just above the thick buffer layer of TiO2 produces a distorted planar junction with extra series resistance and lower charge collection, due to which carriers are transported slower by bulk perovskite (when non-injecting SiO2 was employed directly onto buffer layer), than through the semiconducting porous TiO2 film (if injecting porous TiO2 was the first monolayer onto the buffer layer), resulting in a poor fill factor. To avoid this effect, in PC3, the first compact TiO2 layer was replaced by a porous nanocolumnar film grown on a thin compact layer of this material deposited by spray pyrolysis. PC3 based devices show the best PV properties in this work: JSC = 18.44 ± 0.32 mA cm−2; VOC = 1026.1 ± 5.46 mV; FF = 0.603 ± 0.02 and PCE = 11.52 ± 0.3%. Photocurrent collection was clearly improved in comparison with the reference anode, although it was slightly lower than that found for PC1. The substantial improvement in terms of voltage regarding reference and PC1 cells is explained by the reduction of the total thickness where the perovskite absorber has infiltrated a feature that limiting the recombination allows achieving a better fill factor. Moreover, according to Fig. 4, this structure has earned both a lower dispersion and a better performance, resulting in a competitive power conversion efficiency over 12% (JSC = 18.77 mA cm−2; VOC = 1032 mV; FF = 0.617 and PCE = 12.03%).

Chemicals and solvents were purchased either from Sigma Aldrich or Agros and were used without any further treatment. Spiro-OMeTAD represented as 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenyamine)-9,9-spirobifluorene was purchased from Merck KGaA, while methylamine iodide, CH3NH3I (MAI), was synthetized according to the known literature.


In the case of alternate porous nanocolumnar layers of TiO2 with different tilting angles (PC1), five layers around 75 nm thick (i.e. total thickness of the film in the order of 375 nm) were prepared by PVD using an electron beam evaporator in an oblique angle deposition (PVD-OAD) geometry. Details about this method of evaporation for TiO2 materials can be found in previous publications. Herein, to get stacked layers of different porosity and therefore refraction index, we have changed the zenithal angle of deposition (α) from 60° to 85° from one layer to the next.

The photonic crystals structures made of alternated nanocolumnar layers of SiO2 and TiO2 (PC2 and PC3) were also fabricated by means of the PVD-OAD technique. More detailed information about the use of this procedure to prepare this type of photonic structure can be found in previous studies. PC2 consists of a dense 70 nm thick TiO2 layer prepared by PVD in a normal configuration (α = 0°), followed by 70 nm thick SiO2 and TiO2 layers both prepared by PVD-OAD (α = 70°) under similar deposition conditions. These two latter layers are porous and present a tilted nanocolumnar microstructure. For PC3, 70 nm thick alternating TiO2/SiO2/TiO2 layers were deposited by PVD-OAD (α = 70°) to create a PC-like structure formed by tilted nanocolumns. The determination of the refractive indices for the different architectures was carried out by UV-Vis absorption spectroscopy analysis of single layers of these materials directly prepared on quartz under equivalent geometrical configurations. UV-Visible spectra were recorded in the transmission mode in a Cary 100 spectrometer. In the case of PC1, refractive indices of n = 1.80 (porosity = 45%) and n = 1.63 (porosity = 60%) were obtained for the TiO2 nanocolumnar films prepared at α = 60° and α = 85°, respectively. For PC2, the refractive indices obtained were n = 2.1 for the first TiO2 compact layer, n = 1.31 (porosity = 49%) for the SiO2 nanocolumnar layer at α = 70°, and n = 1.77 (porosity = 49%) for the TiO2 nanocolumnar film at α = 70°. Finally, for PC3, the refraction indices obtained were n = 1.31 for the SiO2 and n = 1.77 for TiO2 nanocolumnar films both prepared at α = 70° and an approximate porosity of 49%. These porosity values were an estimation determined by means of an effective medium approximation considering that pores in the films were filled with air.
Films and photonic crystal structures were prepared on quartz substrates for UV-Vis absorption analysis, on silicon wafers for scanning electron microscopy (SEM) observation and, onto FTO covered with a thin layer of compact TiO2 prepared by spray pyrolysis for device fabrication (except in PC2 where the dense TiO2 layer made by PVD also works as the buffer layer). To induce the crystallization into the anatase phase of the TiO2 films, a sequential annealing step (see the Device fabrication section) was applied to all architectures.
Simulation of the transmission spectra of the photonic crystal arrangement deposited on quartz or on the FTO substrate was carried out using a homemade code based on the transfer-matrix approach. The code considered the typical Cauchy variation for the wavelength dependence of the refractive index of the films in the photonic crystal. The reported refractive indices and thicknesses of the porous layers obtained as an output of the fitting procedure agreed well with the values determined experimentally by the analysis of the single layers. Properly describing the optical gap of the system was the main criteria used for fitting. The same fitting parameters were used to simulate the transmission spectra of the 1-DPC/FTO system, in this case including the thickness and refraction index of the FTO and some light dispersion effects described by Rayleigh dependence.

FTO-coated glass was patterned by laser etching, followed by cleaning using Hellmanex solution and rinsed with deionized water and ethanol. Subsequently these substrates were ultrasonicated in 2-propanol and dried with compressed air. Prior to the compact layer deposition, the substrates were treated with ultraviolet/O3 for 30 minutes. When a thin compact TiO2 layer was required (for PC1 and PC3 but not for PC2 because the bottom 70 nm TiO2 dense layer acts as the buffer layer as well), a thin layer made of dense TiO2 was deposited by spray pyrolysis at 450 °C using 1 mL of titanium diisopropoxide-bis(acetyl acetonate) precursor solution (75% in 2-propanol, Sigma Aldrich) in 19 mL of pure ethanol using O2 as the carrier gas and, subsequently, samples were kept for further 30 minutes at 450 °C for the anatase formation. They were then allowed to attain room temperature and were subjected to a TiCl4 treatment (dipping in a 0.02 M TiCl4 solution in deionized water at 70 °C for 30 minutes). The substrates were then washed with deionized water, fired at 500 °C for 15 minutes and cool down slowly. At that point, 1-DPCs were deposited using the previously described method. Before the perovskite deposition or before further characterization, 1-DPC electrodes were subjected to a sequential sintering step (5 min at 125 °C, 5 min at 325 °C, 5 min at 375 °C, 15 min at 450 °C and finally 30 min at 500 °C) to form the anatase phase. Then, CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite was sequentially deposited. In this case, 1.25 M lead iodide (PbI2) was spin coated (6500 rpm for 30 s with 5500 rpm s−1 as acceleration) using 50 μL per cell of PbI2 solution in N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF). To circumvent the insolubility of PbI2, the solution was previously dissolved in DMF at 115 °C and allowed to cool down to reach 70 °C temperature that was maintained during the whole lead iodide deposition. After the PbI2 deposition, the electrodes were heated at 70 °C for 15 minutes and cooled down to room temperature. The photoanodes containing PbI2 were then dipped in MAI solution in 2-propanol (8 mg mL−1) for 20–25 s, to allow the conversion in the perovskite structure and the colour change from yellow to dark brown-black was observed. Afterwards they were rinsed in 2-propanol and dried using a spin coater; finally they were annealed at 100 °C during 15 minutes. The selected hole transporting material (HTM) was Spiro-OMeTAD and it was spin coated at 4000 rpm for 30 s (acceleration 1650 rpm s−1). For this, 35 μL of solution were dropped from a stock solution which was made by dissolving 72.3 mg of Spiro-OMeTAD in 1 mL of chlorobenzene; 21.9 μL of tris(2-(1H-pyrazol-1-yl)-4-tert-butylpyrydine)cobalt(III)-bis(trifluoromethylsulphonyl)imide (FK209) stock solution (400 mg of FK209 in 1 mL of acetonitrile), 17.5 μL of lithium bis(trifluoromethylsulphonyl)imide (LiTFSI) stock solution (520 mg of LiTFSI in 1 mL of acetonitrile) and 28.8 μL of 4-tert-butylpyridine (tBP) were also added to the solution as additives. For the cathode, 80 nm gold was thermally evaporated atop of the HTM in a vacuum between 10−6 and 10−5 Torr. PbI2, MAI and Spiro-OMeTAD solutions were prepared inside an argon atmosphere (H2O level: <1 ppm and O2 level: <10 ppm). PbI2 spin coating, MAI dipping and HTM depositions were developed inside a dry box glovebox with moisture and oxygen controlled.


For photovoltaic measurements, a 450 W Xe lamp (Oriel) having a Schott K113 Tempax sunlight filter (Praezisions Glas & Optik GmbH) was the light source (around 100 mW cm−2). For J–V measurements, a digital source meter (Keithly model 2400) was used to apply the voltage to the devices while current was recorded. For IPCE measurements, a 300 W Xe lamp (ILC Technology) was coupled to a Gemini-180 double monochromator (Jobin Yvon Ltd.) to provide the desired light beam. A constant white light bias of 5% was applied to measure perovskite cells, using an array of white LEDs. An SR830 model DSP lock-in amplifier (Standford Research Systems) was utilized to record the performance. Both for J–V and IPCE measurements the active area was fixed to 0.16 cm2 using a black mask at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1. The PCE value was fixed to 1 Sun value. The surface and in-depth microstructure of the 1-DPC were observed by top-view and cross-sectional Field-emission SEM, respectively, using a Hitachi S5200 field-emission microscope operating at 5.0 keV. The transmittance spectra of the 1DPC were measured using a Cary 100 spectrometer.


Using oblique angle physical vapour deposition (PVD-OAD), three different types of 1-DPCs were deposited at low temperature. 1-DPC type 1 consists of 5 alternated layers of TiO2 deposited at different incident angles to induce distinct porosities and refractive indices (n = 1.80 & n = 1.63), while for type 2 one dense layer of TiO2 (n = 2.10) followed by SiO2 (n = 1.31) and then the nanocolumnar TiO2 layer at α = 70° (n = 1.77). Type 3 photonic crystals were fabricated using TiO2/SiO2/TiO2 with alternating refractive indices n = 1.77/n = 1.31/n = 1.77, and gave the most efficient result studied here. We demonstrated the precise controlled growth of nanocolumnar photonic crystal thin films with a preferential orientation and a low concentration of defects. A CH3NH3PbI3 based semiconducting absorber was then infiltrated in these structures and solar cells were fabricated. PC1 solar cells showed a performance of 10.94% PCE, while PC2 cells exhibited a relatively low PCE up to 6.39%, which was even lower compared to a reference cell without photonic crystal effects. PC3 type cells showed the best performance here, and PCE in excess of 12% was measured.

In conclusion, we were able to fabricate perovskite solar cells with several photonic crystal structures more efficiently than the state-of-the-art cells. This improved behaviour has been attributed to the rational control of the photonic crystal/FTO system being tuned with certain characteristics such as material selection, thickness of each individual layer, total number of layers and the variation in the refractive indices of each film. It is believed that these photonic effects maximize the light absorption of CH3NH3PbI3 and lead to an enhancement in the JSC. While the FF was kept within reasonable values in these cell structures, the VOC increased, leading to higher PCEs than those in reference cells with nanocolumnar films but without photonic crystal effects. We believe that the presented concept can be well utilized in the mixed perovskite structure to fabricate high performance solar cells, and the approach will pave way to optimize the light management in perovskite solar cells.

SA acknowledges a grant from Torres Quevedo and “Quantcells” (CDTI), Spain, for the realization of this work. ICMSE acknowledges MINECO (project MAT2013-40852-R) for the realization of this work.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta08743k
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016