 DOI: 10.1039/C8TA11006A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 1307-1314


Wanbin
Li
,

Guangda
Li
,

Huan
Guo
,

Xia
Guo
,

Bing
Guo
,

Qinglian
Zhu
,

Qunping
Fan
,

Wei
Ma
,

Maojie
Zhang
* and 

Yongfang
Li


Laboratory of Advanced Optoelectronic Materials, College of Chemistry, Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, Soochow University, Suzhou 215123, China. E-mail: mjzhang@suda.edu.cn

State Key Laboratory for Mechanical Behavior of Materials, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710049, China

CAS Research/Education Center for Excellence in Molecular Sciences, CAS Key Laboratory of Organic Solids, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China

Received
16th November 2018
, Accepted 12th December 2018
First published on 13th December 2018
A new wide bandgap (WBG) conjugated polymer PFOPB based on a fluorinated-alkoxyphenyl benzodithiophene donor unit and a benzodithiophene-4,8-dione acceptor unit was designed and synthesized for application as a donor in non-fullerene (NF) polymer solar cells (PSCs). In order to investigate the effect of side chain fluorination on the photovoltaic performance, a corresponding non-fluorinated polymer POPB was also synthesized as a comparison material. Compared to POPB with a bandgap of 1.81 eV, a highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) energy level of −5.38 eV, an extinction coefficient of 5.31 × 104 cm−1 at 577 nm and a hole mobility of 3.96 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, the fluorinated polymer PFOPB possesses a wider bandgap of 1.86 eV, a deeper HOMO level of −5.50 eV, a higher extinction coefficient of 8.45 × 104 cm−1 at 612 nm and a higher hole mobility of 1.51 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1. The PFOPB:IT-4F-based PSCs exhibit a much higher power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 11.7% than POPB:IT-4F-based devices (6.2%). These results suggest that side-chain fluorination is an effective strategy to improve the optoelectronic properties of WBG polymers in NF-PSCs.

Polymer solar cells (PSCs) with the advantages of light weight, low cost, ease of fabrication and capability to be fabricated into large area and flexible devices have attracted considerable attention and made great progress in improving the power conversion efficiency (PCE). The most typical bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) PSCs consist of a p-type conjugated polymer as the donor and an n-type organic semiconductor as the acceptor. Fullerene derivatives used as acceptor materials, such as [6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM), have been extensively studied and the PCEs for single-junction solar cells have exceeded 10%. Compared to fullerene derivatives with the drawbacks of poor absorption in the visible region, limited tunability of energy levels and unstable morphology, non-fullerene (NF) acceptors could overcome these issues above and have developed rapidly in the last few years. So far, NF-PSCs have achieved outstanding PCEs up to 11–14% for single-junction devices.

In order to fabricate highly efficient NF-PSCs, it is necessary for photoactive materials to have complementary absorption to harvest sufficient sunlight. In recent years, many high-performance NF small molecule acceptors have been designed and developed, such as 2,2′-((2Z,2′Z)-((5,5′-(4,4,9,9-tetrakis(4-hexylphenyl)-4,9-dihydro-s-indaceno[1,2-b:5,6-b′]dithiophene-2,7-diyl)bis(4(2-ethylhexyl)thiophene-5,2-diyl))bis(methanylylidene))bis(3-oxo-2,3-dihydro-1H-indene-2,1-diylidene))dimalononitrile (IEIC), 3,9-bis(2-methylene(3-(1,1-dicyanomethylene)-indanone))-5,5,11,11-tetrakis(4-hexylphenyl)-dithieno[2,3-d:2′,3′-d′]-s-indaceno[1,2-b:5,6-b′] dithiophene (ITIC) and IT-4F, which possess strong absorption in the region of 600–800 nm with narrow optical bandgaps (NBG), suitable energy levels, favorable charge transport properties and high crystallinities. In order to achieve a well complementary absorption spectrum with NBG NF-acceptors, wide bandgap (WBG) polymer donors are highly desirable. Among many WBG polymer donors, polymers based on the benzodithiophene-4,8-dione (BDD) acceptor unit showed excellent photovoltaic performance. For example, a PBDB-T polymer containing alkylthiophene-substituted benzodithiophene (BDT-T) and BDD units was reported by Hou's group. PBDB-T showed a strong aggregation effect in the solution state and possessed the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) energy level of −5.33 eV. PSCs based on PBDB-T:ITIC showed a high PCE of 11.2%. When changing the matched acceptor from ITIC to IT-M, the PCE of PSCs based on PBDB-T:IT-M was further improved to 12.05%. Moreover, it is very important for WBG polymer donors to have a deep HOMO energy level and a high hole mobility to obtain a high open circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (FF) and short-circuit current density (Jsc) in the devices. Recently, our group reported BDD-based polymers PM6 (ref. 52) and PM7. PM6 with a fluorinated-thienyl benzodithiophene (BDT-2F) unit and PM7 with a chlorinated-thienyl benzodithiophene (BDT-2Cl) unit showed higher extinction coefficients, stronger crystallinity, lower HOMO energy levels and higher hole mobility compared with PBDB-T. The devices based on PM6:IDIC and PM6:IT-4F showed excellent PCEs of 11.9% and 13.5%, respectively. The devices based on PM7:IT-4F processed with toluene showed a high PCE of 13.1%. Fluorination has attracted much attention due to its multiple effects on the absorption, molecular energy level, crystallinity, charge mobility and the morphology of the active layer. A series of polymers based on donor units which are BDT-based derivatives with alkoxyphenyl side chains substituted with various numbers of fluorine atoms in the meta position and a fluorinated benzothiadiazole acceptor unit were synthesized and utilized in a fullerene system. Among these polymer donors, PSCs based on a polymer with phenyl side chains mono-fluorinated in the meta position showed a PCE of 7.64% owing to its high crystallinity and the well developed morphology of the active layer. The fluorine substitution of the alkoxyphenyl conjugated side chain could effectively reduce the HOMO energy level, and affect the molecular conformation and crystallinity of the polymer. Therefore, a fluorinated-alkoxyphenyl benzodithiophene donor unit is suitable for the design of high performance WBG polymer donors.
In this work, we designed and synthesized a new WBG conjugated polymer donor PFOPB based on a fluorinated-alkoxyphenyl benzodithiophene donor unit and a BDD acceptor unit. In order to investigate the effect of side chain fluorination on the photovoltaic performance of the polymer donor in NF-PSCs, a corresponding non-fluorinated polymer POPB was also synthesized as a control polymer. Fluorine atoms were introduced into the meta-position of the phenyl conjugated side chain of the donor unit in PFOPB. Compared to POPB with a bandgap of 1.81 eV, a HOMO level of −5.38 eV, an extinction coefficient of 5.31 × 104 cm−1 at 577 nm and a hole mobility of 3.96 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, the fluorinated polymer PFOPB possessed a wider bandgap of 1.86 eV, a deeper HOMO level of −5.50 eV, a higher extinction coefficient of 8.45 × 104 cm−1 at 612 nm and a higher hole mobility of 1.51 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1. Inverted PSCs with the polymers as donors and IT-4F as the acceptor were fabricated. The PFOPB-based PSCs exhibited a PCE of 11.7% with a Voc of 0.89 V, a Jsc of 20.4 mA cm−2 and an FF of 64.5%, which is much higher than those of the POPB-based devices (a PCE of 6.2% with a Voc of 0.72 V, a Jsc of 16.8 mA cm−2 and an FF of 51.2%).

The chemical structures of the two polymer donors and the NF small molecule acceptor IT-4F are shown in Fig. 1a. The synthetic route to the two polymers is presented in Scheme S1 in the ESI. The two polymers were synthesized by the Stille-coupling polymerization reaction and the detailed synthetic processes are described in the ESI. High temperature gel permeation chromatography (GPC) was performed to measure the molecular weights of the two polymers by using polystyrene as the standard and 1,2,4-tricholorobenzene as the eluent at 160 °C. The number average molecular weight (Mn), weight average molecular weight (Mw) and polydispersity index (PDI) of the two polymers are shown in Table S1 in the ESI. The polymers exhibited good solubility in common organic solvents, such as chloroform (CF), chlorobenzene (CB) and o-dichlorobenzene (o-DCB). As shown in Fig. S1a, the decomposition temperatures (Td) at 5% weight loss of the two polymers were over 400 °C, which was measured by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA), indicating that the two polymers exhibited good thermal stability and were suitable for applications in PSCs. No obvious exothermic or endothermic peaks were observed between 30 °C and 300 °C in the differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) measurement (see Fig. S1b in the ESI).

The UV-Vis absorption spectra of the two polymers in dilute chloroform solution and thin films are shown in Fig. S2a and 1b, respectively. In solution and thin films, the two polymers showed two obvious absorption bands in a short wavelength region of 350–450 nm and long wavelength region of 500–700 nm. Compared with POPB, the fluorinated PFOPB exhibited a sharper shoulder peak in the long wavelength region, indicating that PFOPB possessed stronger intermolecular interactions due to the introduction of the fluorine atom. Notably, as shown in Fig. S2b, the extinction coefficient of the polymer film increased from 5.31 × 104 cm−1 at 577 nm for POPB to 8.45 × 104 cm−1 at 612 nm for PFOPB, which was favorable for harvesting more photons and achieving a higher Jsc in PSCs. The absorption edges (λedge) of the two polymers are located at 685 nm and 667 nm, corresponding to the optical bandgap (Eoptg) of 1.81 eV and 1.86 eV for POPB and PFOPB, respectively. In addition, PFOPB showed a higher hole mobility of 1.51 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 than POPB (3.96 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1) as shown in Fig. S4 (ESI), benefiting from the stronger intermolecular interaction and more ordered molecular packing of the polymer caused by the fluorination.
Electrochemical cyclic voltammetry (CV) was performed to measure the electronic energy levels of the two polymers. As shown in Fig. S3, the onset oxidation potentials (φox) of POPB and PFOPB are 0.67 V and 0.79 V vs. Ag/Ag+, respectively. The HOMO energy levels (EHOMO) of POPB and PFOPB were calculated to be −5.38 eV and −5.50 eV, respectively, according to the equation,EHOMO = −e(φox + 4.71) (eV). These results indicated that the HOMO energy level of the polymer donor becomes deeper through side chain fluorination, which is beneficial to obtain a higher Voc in PSCs. The LUMO energy levels (ELUMO) of POPB and PFOPB were −3.57 eV and −3.64 eV, respectively, which were deduced from the equation, ELUMO = EHOMO + Eoptg. As shown in Fig. 1c, the HOMO energy level offset (ΔEHOMO) between the donor and the acceptor materials was 0.31 eV for POPB and 0.19 eV for PFOPB, respectively. The small ΔEHOMO was favorable to reduce the energy loss (Eloss) during the exciton dissociation process thus obtaining a higher Voc in the devices.
In order to study the photovoltaic performance of the two polymer donors in NF-PSCs, PSCs were fabricated with an inverted structure of ITO/ZnO/PFN/active layer/MoO3/Al and the NF small molecule IT-4F was used as the electron acceptor material. The active layer was spin-coated from the CB solution, and 1,8-diiodooctane (DIO) was selected as the solvent additive to optimize the morphology of the active layer and improve the photovoltaic performance of PSCs. The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics and external quantum efficiency (EQE) curves of the devices are shown in Fig. 2a and S5. The corresponding photovoltaic parameters of the devices are summarized in Tables 1 and S3. For the as-cast devices, the devices based on POPB:IT-4F showed a low PCE of 4.9% with a Voc of 0.75 V, a Jsc of 15.2 mA cm−2 and an FF of 43.3%. By contrast, the PFOPB:IT-4F-based devices showed a higher PCE of 10.1% with a Voc of 0.94 V, a Jsc of 17.8 mA cm−2 and an FF of 60.4%. When adding 0.5% DIO (v/v) into the CB solution, the photovoltaic efficiencies of the devices based on the two polymers were further improved owing to the enhanced Jsc and FF. As a result, The PSCs based on PFOPB:IT-4F showed a higher PCE of 11.7% with a Voc of 0.89 V, a Jsc of 20.4 mA cm−2 and an FF of 64.5% in comparison with the PCE of 6.2% with a Voc of 0.72 V, a Jsc of 16.8 mA cm−2 and an FF of 51.2% for the POPB:IT-4F-based PSCs. Furthermore, the devices based on PFOPB:IT-4F displayed a higher Voc, Jsc and FF, which was well consistent with the deeper HOMO energy level, higher extinction coefficient and higher hole mobility for PFOPB. Obviously, the increased Voc value by 0.17 eV was attributed to the lower HOMO energy level of PFOPB, which demonstrated that our molecular design to reduce the HOMO energy level by side chain fluorination is effective. The improved Jsc and FF values are probably due to the higher extinction coefficient and the well complementary absorption spectra of PFOPB and IT-4F. The enhanced Jsc of the devices can be confirmed from the EQE spectra. As shown in Fig. 2b, all the devices possessed a broad response in the region of 300–800 nm. The EQE values of the PFOPB-based devices are higher than those of the devices based on POPB in the range from 300 to 800 nm. Moreover, the obvious enhanced photo response in the region of 400–650 nm was mainly attributed to the stronger sunlight harvesting capability of PFOPB. The integral Jsc values calculated from the EQE curves were well consistent with the measured Jsc within 5% error.
Polymer

V
oc (V)

J
sc
 (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)

a Values in parentheses were calculated from EQE curves.
b Average PCEs in parentheses from 20 devices.


POPB

0.72
16.8 (16.4)
51.2
6.2 (6.0)

PFOPB

0.89
20.4 (19.8)
64.5
11.7 (11.6)
In order to investigate the charge transport properties of related blend films, the charge carrier mobilities of related blend films were measured by the SCLC method. Hole-only devices with the structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/active layer/MoO3/Al and electron-only devices with the structure of ITO/ZnO/PFN/active layer/PFN/Al were fabricated. As shown in Fig. S4 and Table S2, for the blend films based on the two polymers with 0.5% DIO, both the μh and μe were improved in comparison with those without DIO. Moreover, the devices based on PFOPB:IT-4F with 0.5% DIO show higher and more balanced μh/μe (1.28) charge mobilities compared with the devices based on POPB:IT-4F (1.69), which was beneficial to achieve higher Jsc and FF in the PSCs.
To understand the influence of side chain fluorination on the exciton dissociation process in NF-PSCs, the photocurrent density (Jph) versus effective voltage (Veff) of the devices was measured. The Jph is defined as Jph = JL − JD, where JL and JD are the current densities under illumination and dark conditions, respectively. The Veff is defined as Veff = V0 − V, where V0 is the voltage at which Jph is zero and V is the applied voltage. For the polymer:IT-4F devices, Jph reaches saturation (Jsat) at large Veff (Veff ≥ 2 V), suggesting that all of the photogenerated excitons are dissociated into free carriers and collected by the electrodes. Thus, the exciton dissociation probability (P(E, T)) can be estimated from the Jph/Jsat ratio. As shown in Fig. 2c, the Jph/Jsat ratios were 86.4% for POPB:IT-4F and 93.7% for PFOPB:IT-4F-based devices with 0.5% DIO under short-circuit conditions, respectively. This result implied that fluorination in the side chain could improve exciton dissociation, which contributed to the improvement of Jsc in PSCs. To explore the effects of fluorination in the side chain on the recombination mechanism involved in the devices, we measured the dependence of Voc and Jph on different light intensities. The slope of Vocversus ln(Plight) can be used to estimate the degree of trap-assisted recombination in the devices. The slope equals kT/q if the bimolecular recombination is dominant, and it is equal to 2kT/q when the trap-assisted recombination is dominant in the devices. As shown in Fig. 2d, the slopes of the devices based on POPB:IT-4F and PFOPB:IT-4F with 0.5% DIO were 1.80kT/q and 1.23kT/q, respectively. These results indicated that the trap-assisted recombination was dominant in the devices based on POPB:IT-4F and fluorination in the side chain could suppress trap-assisted recombination. The relationship between Jph and Plight can be described by Jph ∝ (Plight)S, where S implies the extent of bimolecular recombination and the S value close to 1 indicates weak bimolecular recombination in the device.Fig. 2e shows the plot of the relationship between Jph and Plight, and the S values of the devices based on POPB:IT-4F and PFOPB:IT-4F with 0.5% DIO were 0.998 and 0.999 for POPB and PFOPB, respectively, which indicated that the bimolecular recombination was weak in the devices and fluorination in the side chain had a negligible impact on bimolecular recombination. These results above partially accounted for the improved photovoltaic performance of PFOPB:IT-4F-based devices.
The photoluminescence (PL) spectra were measured to study the photo-induced electron transfer behavior between the polymers and IT-4F. As shown in Fig. 2f–i, compared with the PL spectra of the pure polymers, the PL quenching efficiencies were 84.5% and 99.6% for POPB:IT-4F and PFOPB:IT-4F blend films with 0.5% DIO, respectively. The higher PL quenching efficiency meant that the electron transfer from the PFOPB to IT-4F for the excitons generated in the donor phase is more effective. For the pure IT-4F, the PL quenching efficiencies for POPB:IT-4F and PFOPB:IT-4F blend films with 0.5% DIO were 92.1% and 95.6%, respectively. The higher PL quenching efficiency meant that the hole transfer from IT-4F to PFOPB for the excitons generated in the acceptor phase is more efficient. These results indicated that fluorination in the side chain was beneficial for photo-induced charge transfer between the polymer donor and IT-4F, which was consistent with the higher Jsc for the corresponding devices.
Grazing incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) was measured to investigate the influence of side chain fluorination on the crystallinity and molecular orientation of the neat and blend films.Fig. 3 presents the GIWAXS patterns and the corresponding scattering profiles in the in plane (IP) and out of plane (OOP) direction of the pure films and related blend films with 0.5% DIO. All films displayed obvious lamellar peaks (100) in the IP direction and a strong π–π stacking peak (010) in the OOP direction. For the pure polymer films, the π–π stacking peaks (010) in the OOP direction became much stronger and sharper when the fluorine atom was introduced into the meta-position of phenyl in the conjugated side chain of donor units, suggesting that the fluorination in the meta position can enhance the crystallinity of the polymer. Moreover, the π–π stacking in the OOP direction is distinctly stronger than that in the IP direction, suggesting that molecules take predominantly face-on orientation relative to the substrate. A similar trend could be observed for the blend films as well. We calculated the coherence length (CL) deduced from the full width at half maximum of the out-of-plane (010) peaks using the Scherrer equation (see Table S4 in the ESI). PFOPB exhibits a higher CL of 35.85 Å than POPB (27.70 Å) in the π–π stacking direction, which was beneficial for the charge transport and resulted in a higher Jsc and FF for the PFOPB:IT-4F-based devices.
Resonant soft X-ray scattering (R-SoXS) was used to investigate phase separation and average composition distribution of the blend films. A photon energy of 284.2 eV was selected to provide a high material contrast. As shown in Fig. 4, the domain spacing of the POPB:IT-4F and PFOPB:IT-4F blend films calculated by 2π/q was 121.2 nm and 58.0 nm, respectively. Therefore, the domain sizes in real space were 60.6 nm and 29.0 nm for POPB:IT-4F and PFOPB:IT-4F blend films, respectively. This difference was in good agreement with the characteristics observed from the transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images. The ideal domain size for the PFOPB:IT-4F blend film was beneficial to decrease the recombination loss in the devices, leading to a higher FF and better photovoltaic performance.
To study the surface and bulk morphology of the active layers, atomic force microscopy (AFM) and TEM measurements were carried out. As shown in Fig. 5, in the AFM images, the root-mean-square (RMS) values are 7.21 nm and 2.38 nm for the blend films with 0.5% DIO additive based on POPB and PFOPB, respectively. The surface of the PFOPB:IT-4F blend film was smoother with the fluorination in the side chain in comparison with that of the POPB:IT-4F blend film. The smoother surface was favorable to form a good contact with the electrodes and improve the charge collection properties. In the TEM images, the POPB:IT-4F blend film displayed large phase separation and large black humps could be observed, which decreased the interface area between the polymer donor and IT-4F acceptor, while the PFOPB:IT-4F blend film displayed desired nanoscale phase separation and bi-continuous penetrated networks with a fibrillar structure, which was favorable for exciton dissociation and charge transport, leading to the higher Jsc and FF in the devices.
In conclusion, a new WBG conjugated polymer, PFOPB, based on a fluorinated-alkoxyphenyl benzodithiophene donor unit and a BDD acceptor unit was designed and synthesized for application as a donor in NF-PSCs. Compared with the non-fluorinated polymer POPB, the fluorinated polymer PFOPB showed a deeper HOMO level, higher extinction coefficient and higher hole mobility. NF-PSCs based on the polymers as donors and IT-4F as the acceptor were fabricated. As a result, the devices based on PFOPB:IT-4F with side chain fluorination exhibited a higher PCE of 11.7% with a Voc of 0.89 V, a Jsc of 20.4 mA cm−2 and an FF of 64.5%, while the devices based on POPB without fluorination in the side chain exhibited a relatively low PCE of 6.2% with a Voc of 0.72 V, a Jsc of 16.8 mA cm−2, and an FF of 51.2%. The dramatic improvement in the photovoltaic performance of the PFOPB:IT-4F-based devices could be attributed to the better nanoscale phase separation, appropriate domain size and the preferred face on molecule orientation in the active layer. These results demonstrated that side-chain fluorination is an effective strategy to improve the optoelectronic properties of WBG polymers and further enhance the photovoltaic efficiencies of NF-PSCs.

The detailed synthetic processes for polymers (PFOPB and POPB), instruments and measurements, fabrication and characterization of the PSCs are described in the ESI.


The authors declare no conflict of interest.


This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) (No. 51573120, 51773142 and 91633301), Ministry of science and technology (No. 2016YFA0200700). The X-ray data were acquired at beamlines 7.3.3 and 11.0.1.2 at the Advanced Light Source, which is supported by the Director, Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, of the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231. The authors thank Chenhui Zhu at beamline 7.3.3, and Cheng Wang at beamline 11.0.1.2 for assistance with data acquisition.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta11006a
‡ W. Li & G. Li contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019