 DOI: 10.1039/C2TA00680D
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 1341-1348

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Sining
Yun
*,

Huawei
Zhou
,

Liang
Wang
,

Hong
Zhang
 and 

Tingli
Ma
*

School of Materials & Mineral Resources, Xi'an University of Architecture and Technology, Xi'an 710055, China. E-mail: alexsyun1974@yahoo.com.cn; Fax: +86 29 85535724; Tel: +86 29 82202022

State Key laboratory of Fine Chemicals, School of Chemical Engineering, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, 116024, China. E-mail: tinglima@dlut.edu.cn; Fax: +86 0411 39893820; Tel: +86 0411 39893820

Received
12th October 2012
, Accepted 12th November 2012
First published on 13th November 2012
Hafnium oxygen nitride binary/ternary nanocomposites were prepared by combining Hf7O8N4, HfO2, and amorphous carbon through a simple chemical synthesis. The obtained HfO2 (Hf-R0-U), HfO2–C (Hf-R5-B), and Hf7O8N4–HfO2–C (Hf-R12-T) were characterized by XRD, SEM, FESEM, and electrochemical measurements. Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) with binary Hf-R5-B and ternary Hf-R12-T composites as counter electrode (CE) showed superior electrocatalytic activity for I3− reduction and high power conversion efficiencies (PCE) of 6.71% and 7.85%, respectively, matching the performance of DSCs with Pt CE (7.19%). The design strategy demonstrated is promising for fabricating highly efficient and low-cost composite CE catalysts for DSCs.

Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) have attracted great attention as the most powerful devices for converting solar energy directly to electric power because of their simplicity, low-cost, and environmentally friendly fabrication. Thus, DSCs may serve as alternatives to silicon-based and thin-film solar cells. The Pt counter electrode (CE) in DSCs is crucial for reducing I3− ions in the electrolyte. However, the use of Pt in DSC development, which requires considerable amounts of Pt metal for efficient operation, has several disadvantages: (1) high cost, (2) limited worldwide supply, (3) corrosion of Pt CE by the I3−/I− redox couple in the electrolyte, and (4) increased demand in CE catalysts of DSCs due to the emergence of new photo-electrodes and electrolytes. Thus, non-Pt and Pt-like CE catalysts are needed to replace the noble Pt electrode in DSCs. Early transition metal (ETM) carbides, nitrides and oxides are promising catalysts for replacing noble Pt-group metals (Pt, Ir, Pd, Rh, Ru) that are highly required in heterogeneous catalysis and clean energy technologies. To date, various CE materials have been explored to replace the noble Pt in DSCs. However, only a few candidates are good enough to supersede Pt CE in DSCs.

In a DSC system, CEs work as electron collectors that accelerate the electron transfer from the external circuit to the redox electrolyte and as catalysts that promote the regeneration of the redox couple in the electrolyte. Therefore, CE materials with high electrical conductivity and superior electrocatalytic activity are highly desired in DSCs. However, most exploited CEs do not possess both superior properties. Composites provide synergistic effects, making them potential CEs in DSCs. Series of composite CEs such as PEDOT/PSS/carbon, CoS/PEDOT/PSS, carbon/TiO2, TiN/CNTs and TiN/NG were previously developed. Although DSCs with these composite CEs present high power conversion efficiency (PCE), the improved PCEs of these DSCs are still far from the general level of DSCs with Pt CE (approximately 7%). Our recent studies have shown that DSCs with oxides and carbides imbedded in mesoporous carbon as CEs demonstrate superior photovoltaic performance that matches that of DSCs with Pt CE.
The aforementioned studies suggest that the enhanced PCE of DSCs with composite CEs can be attributed to the combination of the excellent characteristics of all the components of the composite. The strong interaction formed by combining ETM compounds (active component) and carbon (support) would be useful for the production of a highly active catalyst. In the present study, we designed and prepared hafnium oxygen nitride binary/ternary composite CE catalysts with excellent electrocatalytic activity and high electrical conductivity for DSCs via a simple chemical synthesis. Under the same conditions, the obtained composite CE catalysts showed superior electrocatalytic activity for I3− reduction in the electrolyte to Pt CE catalysts. Thus, composite catalysts are highly desirable for several applications in solar cells, fuel cells, biosensors, hydrogen generation, and pollution control because of their high efficiency, cost effectiveness and specific electrocatalytic activities.

Hafnium oxygen nitride binary/ternary composites were prepared using a simple chemical synthesis similar to the urea-metal route. Hafnium chlorides were used as metal precursors, and ethanol or urea were used as the oxygen source. Urea could also be used as either the carbon or nitrogen source depending on the molar ratio of urea to metal chloride (R). The expected products were obtained by modifying R. In detail, 1.60 g HfCl4 was dissolved in 20 mL ethanol, followed by the addition of different amounts of urea (0 g for R = 0, 1.5 g for R = 5, and 3.6 g for R = 12). The solution was vigorously stirred for 2 h to 3 h and until the urea was dissolved completely. The solution was dried at 120 °C, and then a gel was obtained. The as-prepared gel was sintered at 600 °C to 1100 °C for 3 h under N2 at a heating rate of 200 °C h−1 to provide pure hafnium oxide (HfO2, R = 0, 600 °C to 1100 °C, Hf-R0-U), binary composites (HfO2–C, R = 5, 800 °C to 1100 °C, Hf-R5-B) and ternary composites (Hf7O8N4–HfO2–C, R = 12, 1100 °C, Hf-R12-T). In these composites, C is the amorphous carbon, which is a typical side product of binary/ternary composite formation via the urea-metal route, and U, B and T represent unary, binary, and ternary composites, respectively. No further purification was performed before and after the temperature treatment. The experimental details are summarized in Table 1.

Metal precursor
Ratio (R)
Samples
Expected product
Crystallite size d (nm)
XRD
FESEM

a By applying the Scherrer equation to the highest intensity peak, the crystalline sizes of HfO2 and Hf7O8N4 were estimated from the (11) plane and the (003) plane, respectively.

HfCl4
0
Hf-R0-U, unary
HfO2

d
(11) = 25.57
40–130
5
Hf-R5-B, binary
HfO2–C

d
(11) = 24.06
30–240
12
Hf-R12-T, ternary
Hf7O8N4–HfO2–C

d
(11) = 32.42; d(003) = 15.02
50–150
In the fabrication of composite CEs, 200 mg of composite CE powder and 6 g ZrO2 pearl were dispersed in 6 mL isopropanol and then milled for 4 h. The solution obtained was then sprayed on a fluorine-tin-oxide (FTO) glass substrate (Asahi Glass, type-U, 14 Ω sq−1, Japan) using an airbrush (TD-128, Tiandi Co., Ltd.). The FTO substrate coated with the Hf-based CE film was annealed under a N2 atmosphere at 400 °C for 30 min in a tube furnace to obtain the expected Hf-R0-U, Hf-R5-B and Hf-R12-T CEs. The Pt CE was prepared using a two-step dip-coating process.

A 12 μm thick TiO2 film (P25, Degussa, Germany) sensitized by N719 dye (Solaronix SA, Switzerland) was used as the photoanode. Details on the fabrication of the photoanode are provided in the literature. The electrolyte consisted of 0.06 M LiI, 0.03 M I2, 0.6 M 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium iodide, 0.5 M 4-tert-butyl pyridine, and 0.1 M guanidinium thiocyanate in acetonitrile solution. Hf-R0-U, Hf-R5-B, Hf-R12-T, and Pt were used as the CEs. A sandwich DSC with an active area of 0.16 cm2 was assembled with a dye-sensitized TiO2 photoanode, a CE, and an electrolyte. The as-assembled cells were used for photovoltaic performance tests. A symmetrical dummy cell was fabricated using two identical CEs, filled with the electrolyte similar to that used in the assembled DSCs, and then sealed with double-faced insulated adhesive tape. The as-fabricated symmetrical cells were used in the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and Tafel polarization tests.


Cyclic voltammetry (CV) was performed on a CHI 660 (Chenhua, Shanghai) electrochemical analyzer in a three-electrode system in an argon-purged acetonitrile solution containing 0.1 M LiClO4, 10 mM LiI, and 1 mM I2 at a scan rate of 0.01 V s−1. Pt and Ag/Ag+ served as the CE and reference electrode, respectively. The electrochemical properties were measured with an electrochemical system (Zennium Zahner, Germany) over a frequency range of 100 mHz to 1 MHz at the bias potential of −0.75 V and AC amplitude of 10 mV. The spectra of the obtained EIS measurements were analyzed with an appropriate equivalent circuit using Z-view simulation software. Tafel polarization tests were carried out on an electrochemical workstation system (LK-9805, Tianjin Lanli Inc., Tianjin).


X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) patterns were obtained using an automated X-ray powder diffractometer (D/Max 2400, Rigaku, Japan). The surface morphologies of the CE materials were observed using a scanning electron microscope (SEM, FEI Quanta 200 FEG, USA) with X-ray energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) and a field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM, FEI Hitachi S-4800, Japan). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, Thermo VG Scientific, UK) was performed on a VG probe spectrometer with a monochromatic Al K-alpha radiation source at room temperature. The photocurrent-voltage (J–V) performance of the DSCs was measured with a Keithley digital source meter (Keithley 2601, USA) under simulated sunlight illumination conditions (Xe arc lamp, 1.5 AM, 1000 W m−2, PEC-L15, Peccell, Japan).



Fig. 1 shows the XRD patterns of the hafnium oxygen nitride composites. When no urea was added (R = 0) and the metal precursor was sintered at 1100 °C for 3 h, HfO2 (JCPDS: 65-1142) was obtained. This result indicates that ethanol served as the oxygen source in the formation of HfO2. Structural phase transformations were observed in Ta-, Nb- and W-based oxides. By contrast, no phase transformation was observed when the calcination temperature was adjusted from 600 °C to 1000 °C (Fig. S1, ESI). When R = 5, the Hf-R5-B sample sintered at 800 °C for 3 h showed an XRD pattern composed of a mixed species of HfO2 and Hf2ON2 (JCPDS: 50-1171), accompanied by obvious impurities (Fig. S1). As shown in Fig. 1b, HfO2 was obtained after the temperature was further increased to 1100 °C. When 12 equiv. of urea were added, the XRD patterns were very close to HfO2 but were accompanied by Hf7O8N4 (JCPDS: 50-1173) generation. This finding indicates that a Hf7O8N4–HfO2 composite was formed by heat treatment at 1100 °C for 3 h under N2 (Fig. 1c). The detailed peak assignments for Hf7O8N4 and HfO2 are summarized in the ESI. Using the Scherrer equation for the highest intensity peak, the crystalline sizes were estimated to be less than 30 nm, which are close to those obtained from FESEM investigations (Table 1). Mass-transfer impedance and electrochemical polarization increase with increasing particle size. Therefore, optimizing synthesis conditions is crucial to improve the ionic and electronic conductivities of CE materials by controlling nanoparticle morphologies.

The amount of carbon in the final products via the urea-metal route increases with increasing R. However, no traces of side products (such as amorphous carbon) in this case were observed through XRD. In samples with high R values, the formation of amorphous carbon cannot be excluded but is less easily detected through XRD. In fact, amorphous carbon can be clearly observed in FESEM images. Previous works demonstrated the transition of oxides → nitrides → carbides, such as MoO2 → Mo2N → Mo2C, Cr2O3 → CrN → Cr3C2, V2O3 → VN → VC(N), TiO2 → TiN → TiC(N), Nb2O5 → NbN → NbC(N), and W2N → WC, by modifying R or the sintering temperature. At high R values, increasing the temperature results in the removal of excess nitrogen from the glass phase but does not affect the amount of carbon. As a result, N-doped metal carbides, such as TiC(N), VC(N), and NbC(N), are formed, where carbon is substituted by nitrogen in its unit cell positions. However, this effect is not seen in the case of hafnium even at high R values (R = 5 and 12). This case is similar to that observed in the fifth-period transition Zr element. ZrO2 was obtained easily, whereas ZrN and ZrC could not be synthesized by increasing either R or the sintering temperature. This finding may be attributed to the fact that Zr and Hf, as group IV ETM elements, have a strong tendency to combine with oxygen rather than nitrogen or carbon. In addition, studies show that the composition and coordination environment in the glasses are crucial to determine further the fragmentation schemes and the composition of the amorphous intermediate particles. To obtain Zr and/or Hf nitride and carbide, urea may be substituted by available starting products such as guanidine carbonate and 4,5-dicyanoimidazole precursors for setting a coordination environment where all further reactions are controlled. Extensive investigation on the transition of oxides → nitrides → carbides for Hf and Zr should be conducted in future studies.
Despite the previous observations, the synergistic catalytic effects of composites on the development of efficient composite CE catalysts for DSCs should still be further examined. In the present study, hafnium oxygen nitride composites (Hf-R5-B and Hf-R12-T) were prepared via the urea-metal route. This preparation strategy directly provides the feasibility of reducing the cost of DSCs and improving the photovoltaic performance of DSCs with these composites as CE catalysts, with an aim of superseding noble Pt CE.
Typical FESEM images of Hf-based CEs are shown in Fig. 2. As shown in the figure, spherical nanoparticles were generally predominant. Irregular-shaped nanoparticles formed by the accumulation of spherical nanoparticles were also observed. In the case of Hf-R0-U (Fig. 2a), the nanoparticles abundantly agglomerated and linked together. Agglomeration was frequently observed in the urea-metal route. In the cases of Hf-R5-B and Hf-R12-T (Fig. 2b and c), residual carbon (e.g., amorphous graphitic carbon) was not an unwanted side product. It filled the crannies among particles or coated the particles. This finding suggests that binary (HfO2–C) and ternary (Hf7O8N4–HfO2–C) composites were formed. Meanwhile, improved dispersion of nanoparticles due to the existence of amorphous graphitic carbon can be clearly observed in the FESEM images. Moreover, some well-defined uniform ellipsoid or spherical nanoparticles tend to switch from individual and isolated particles to more organized network structures that strongly link but do not agglomerate. As shown in the inset of Fig. 2b, some other individual and isolated particles were wrapped with graphitic carbon. The results of XRD and FESEM analyses showed that Hf nitride and carbide were not formed. The expulsion of excess carbon caused the formation of amorphous graphitic carbon around the particles. This phenomenon is similar to that observed in the case of VN nanoparticles with a coating shell composed of residual carbon. As shown in the SEM images in Fig. S2 (ESI), the surface morphologies of the CE samples showed large-scale homogeneity.
Here, we want to stress that it is not enough to identify the presence of C and N elements in the Hf-based binary/ternary nanocomposites from the FESEM morphological images and XRD patterns. To determine their chemical composition, different spots labeled A and B in Fig. S3 (ESI) were selected for the EDS analysis. The EDS spectra have clearly demonstrated the presence of C and O elements in the Hf-based binary/ternary nanocomposites. To show the presence of the N element in the Hf-based nanocomposites more clearly, we performed an XPS analysis, which confirmed that N elements exist in the Hf-based nanocomposites, as illustrated in Fig. S4 (ESI). In the direct synthesis of CE particles, amorphous graphitic carbon can impart properties to the composites. For example, it can improve the catalytic activity and electrical conductivity of WC, MoC, WO2 and VC. Furthermore, the addition of oxides can yield high-efficiency CEs in DSCs.

Hf-based CEs and Pt electrode were integrated into DSCs under the same experimental conditions. The J–V characteristics of these devices are shown in Fig. 3, and the corresponding photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table 2. The photovoltaic performances of DSC devices with various CEs were compared. Three non-Pt CEs exhibited systematic trends in short-circuit current density (Jsc), open-circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (FF), and PCE. That is, Voc (Jsc, FF, PCE) comply with the order Hf-R12-T > Hf-R5-B > Hf-R0-U. DSCs with a binary composite CE (Hf-R5-B) showed a high PCE of 6.71%, which is 93.3% that of DSCs with Pt CE (7.19%). This finding indicates that the performance of DSCs with a binary composite CE matches that of DSCs with Pt CE. The Voc and FF of DSCs with Hf-R5-B CE are very close to those of DSCs with Pt CE (Table 2). However, the Jsc of DSCs with Pt CE (13.99 mA cm−2) was higher than that of the DSC with Hf-R5-B CE (12.96 mA cm−2). This finding may be attributed to the excellent scattering effect of the device using Pt CE, enhancing its light-harvesting efficiency, as demonstrated in reported literature.

CEs

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)

R
s (Ω)

R
ct (Ω)

Z
N (Ω)
Hf-R12-T
0.80
14.13
0.70
7.85
14.53
0.77
10.8
HF-R5-B
0.77
12.96
0.67
6.71
20.59
0.92
24.6
Hf-R0-U
0.73
12.63
0.40
3.73
20.78
64.45
54.7
Pt
0.75
13.99
0.68
7.19
12.89
5.18
5.21
DSCs with a ternary composite CE (Hf-R12-T) had the highest PCE of 7.85%, which is approximately 9% higher than that of the DSC with Pt CE. Compared to DSCs based on the two composite CEs, DSCs with HfO2 CE had a poor photovoltaic performance, which was mainly caused by a poor FF (Table 2). Nonetheless, the PCE of DSCs with HfO2 CE (3.73%) was much higher than that of DSCs with other oxides used as CEs such as TiO2 (0.76%), Cr2O3 (1.07%), ZrO2 (2.60%), and MoO2 (2.40%). The catalytic properties of HfO2 CE can still be improved because we did not optimize its fabrication conditions (e.g., thickness, porosity, particle size, and so on). The surface area is less than 100 m2 g−1 for most pure ETM-oxides, -nitrides, and -carbides. However, the existence of amorphous carbon as the side product in the final product and the formation of a ternary or doped compound significantly increase the surface area, which was confirmed in our previous report. For the two composite CEs with amorphous carbon, the enhanced surface area and the improved dispersion of nanoparticles due to the formation of the amorphous carbon side product via the urea-metal route as compared with HfO2 CE might have provided the optimum surface morphology for the facile penetration of redox electrolyte and I3− reduction, which improved the FF and PCE. Overall, the results of J–V tests proved that Hf-based composites as CEs in DSCs exhibit competitive photovoltaic performances, which can be attributed to their superior electrocatalytic activities for I3− reduction.

To verify the electrocatalytic activity of Hf-based CEs for I3− reduction, CV tests were carried out using a three-electrode system. Fig. 4 shows the CVs of the three Hf-based CEs and Pt CE. Two typical pairs of redox peaks can be clearly observed for Pt and Hf-R5-B CE. The relatively negative pair is attributed to the redox reaction shown in eqn (1), whereas the positive pair can be assigned to the redox reaction shown in eqn (2). The former showed a direct effect on the performance of DSCs whereas the latter exhibited only a slight effect on it.

I3− + 2e ⇌ 3I−
(1)
3I2 + 2e ⇌ 2I3−
(2)
Clearly, the profile and location of the relatively negative pairs of the redox peaks of composite CEs were close to those of the Pt electrode, indicating that both can exhibit Pt-like electrocatalytic activity for I3− reduction. Compared to Hf-R12-T CE, Hf-R5-B CE showed better invertibility. This finding indicates a smooth redox reaction of triiodide/iodide ions on the CE surface, which is favorable for the regeneration of the sensitizer. By contrast, no redox peak at low potential was observed for Hf-R0-U, demonstrating its poor electrocatalytic activity. The profile of the redox peaks of Hf-R12-T CE at high potential was different to that of both Pt and Hf-R5-B CEs, and a clear redox peak cannot be observed. This case often occurs in CEs with amorphous carbon. In addition to the perfect profile of the redox peaks, the cathodic peak current densities of Hf-R12-T, Hf-R5-B, and Hf-R0-U for I3− reduction occurring on the CE surface were 1.05 mA cm−2, 0.61 mA cm−2 and 0.01 mA cm−2, respectively. This result indicates that binary/ternary composite CEs have better catalytic activity than unary HfO2 CE. Therefore, combining the high catalytic activity and good electrical conductivity of amorphous carbon into binary/ternary composites (Hf-R5-B and Hf-R12-T) is a feasible method for obtaining a superior catalyst with enhanced electrocatalytic activity. The high catalytic activity and good electrical conductivity of carbon materials have been reported by our group.
To interpret the catalytic activity of the four fabricated CEs in the DSC system, we performed EIS tests with symmetrical cells fabricated with two identical CEs and investigated the charge transfer process at the electrode–electrolyte interface. The resulting Nyquist plots are illustrated in Fig. 5. The EIS data (Table 2) were obtained by fitting the Nyquist plots with an equivalent circuit (Fig. S5, ESI). The first semicircle in the high-frequency domain represents the charge transfer resistance (Rct) at the electrode–electrolyte interface and the corresponding double layer capacitance (Cμ). The second semicircle in the low-frequency domain reflects the contribution of the Nernst diffusion impedance (ZN) of the redox couple transport in the electrolyte. The Rct values were 0.77, 0.92, 64.45 and 5.18 Ω for symmetric cells based on Hf-R12-T, Hf-R5-B, Hf-R0-U, and Pt, respectively. This finding indicates that composite CEs possess a high catalytic activity for I3− reduction, which may be attributed to their high intrinsic catalytic activity resulting from the unique components and morphologies of the nanocomposites. Hf-R5-B CE presented a higher ZN compared to Pt CE, which might be the main factor causing a relatively lower electrocatalytic activity. By contrast, Hf-R0-U showed greater Rct and ZN values, indicating its poor catalytic activity, as demonstrated by CV tests.
The series resistances (Rs) values of Hf-R12-T, Hf-R5-B, Hf-R0-U, and Pt CEs were 14.53, 20.59, 20.78 and 12.89 Ω, respectively, which may be related to the conductivity of the electrodes. Hf-R0-U CE showed the largest Rs, which may be attributed to the poor bonding strength between the CE layer and the FTO glass, causing the larger contact resistance to worsen the conductivity. By contrast, the Rs values of the two composite electrodes were not as low as expected. This finding indicates that the Rs value can be improved by optimizing the fabrication conditions to significantly improve the photovoltaic performance of DSCs. The observed small values of both Rct and ZN for the binary/ternary composite CEs imply that the FF of the device was improved substantially when nanocomposites were used as CEs for DSCs.
Generally, carbon materials possess good electrical conductivity, excellent catalytic activity, and smaller Rct and ZN. when carbon and HfO2 were combined (Hf-R5-B), the Rct and ZN values were greatly decreased, both of which were lower than the corresponding values for HfO2. In the case of Hf-R12-T, combining Hf7O8N4 and HfO2–C into one composite (or combining Hf7O8N4, HfO2 and carbon into one composite), the Rct and ZN values were further decreased. This result indicates that Hf7O8N4 and amorphous carbon as side products in the synthesis of ETM compounds via the urea-metal route can effectively improve the electrochemical properties and catalytic activity of HfO2 CE. As shown in the FESEM images (Fig. 2c), the particle size decreased when Hf7O8N4 and amorphous carbon side products were produced in the preparation of Hf-R12-T samples. The number of catalytic sites for I3− reduction increases with decreasing Hf7O8N4 particle size and increasing amorphous carbon surface area (385 m2 g−1 to 672 m2 g−1 for most carbon materials) in the ternary CE. Therefore, the superior electrocatalytic activities of nanocomposite CEs can be attributed to the synergetic catalytic effects of the different components of the composite materials. This finding is in agreement with recent research reports.
To elucidate the results and further confirm the electrocatalytic activity of the composite electrodes, Tafel polarization tests were performed with symmetrical cells similar to those used in the EIS measurements. The exchange current density (J0) and the limiting diffusion current density (Jlim) related to the catalytic activity of the catalysts can be determined from the Tafel curves, as shown in Fig. 6. The Tafel curves, which can be divided into three zones, were analyzed in detail in our previous works. In the Tafel zone, the intersection of the cathodic branch and the equilibrium potential line can be regarded as J0, which can be obtained by extending the line to zero voltage and measuring the intercept on the J-axis (y-axis). A steep gradient of the Tafel zone to some degree means a large J0. The branches of the Tafel curves of Hf-R12-T CE exhibited a J0 larger than that of the Pt electrode. This finding suggests that Hf-R12-T has superior catalytic activity for I3− reduction. In contrast, the curve for Hf-R0-U showed the lowest J0, demonstrating that Hf-R0-U cannot perform as effectively as composite CEs or Pt electrode. In the diffusion zone, the intersection of the cathodic branch with the y-axis can be regarded as Jlim. Hf-R12-T presented a higher Jlim than Pt, suggesting a higher diffusion velocity for the redox couple in the electrolyte, leading to the relatively higher photovoltaic performance when Hf-R12-T was used as CE. Hf-R5-B exhibited moderate J0 and Jlim values, whereas Hf-R0-U exhibited the worst current density in its Tafel curve.
Theoretically, J0 changes inversely with Rct, which is in good accordance with the EIS results according to eqn (3). Moreover, Jlim was determined by the diffusion properties of the redox couple and the CE catalysts in terms of eqn (4). A large Jlim indicates a large diffusion coefficient and a small ZN at the same potential.
(3)
(4)
where
R is the gas constant, T is the temperature, F is the Faraday constant, n is the number of electrons exchanged in the reaction at the electrolyte–CE interface, D is the diffusion coefficient of the triiodide, C is the triiodide concentration and l is the spacer thickness.

After a comprehensive analysis of the electrocatalytic activity of CEs for the triiodide/iodide redox couple, we conclude that the photovoltaic performance of these CEs used in DSCs generally agrees with the CV, EIS and Tafel test results. In the present research, the Hf-based binary/ternary composites demonstrated a superior catalytic activity for I3− reduction and exhibited a competitive photovoltaic performance with high Voc, Jsc and FF. Therefore, these composites may be expected to replace the noble Pt CE in DSCs.

In conclusion, we prepared novel hafnium oxygen nitride binary/ternary composites using a simple urea-metal chemical synthesis route. HfO2–C and Hf7O8N4–HfO2–C as composite CEs demonstrated impressive catalytic activity for I3− reduction, with the corresponding DSCs giving PCEs of 6.71% and 7.85%, respectively, matching the PCE of DSCs with Pt CE (7.19%). The superior catalytic activity of these composite CEs can be attributed to the synergistic catalytic effects. Thus, these composite CEs may be used to replace the noble metal Pt in DSC systems. The design strategy demonstrated in this work is promising for fabricating highly efficient and low-cost composite CE catalysts for DSCs.


Financial support from the 863 Program (2009AA03Z220), NSFC (50773008, 51273032), Shaanxi Provincial Department of Education (2010JK655) and Sci-Tech R&D Program of Shaanxi Province (2010K01-120, 2011JM6010) is acknowledged. The project was partly sponsored by SRF for ROCS, SEM.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2ta00680d
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013