 DOI: 10.1039/C8TC05653F
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 2676-2685


Chang
Li
,

Ge
Wang
,

Yajun
Gao
,

Chen
Wang
,

Shanpeng
Wen
*,

Huayang
Li
,

Jiaxin
Wu
,

Liang
Shen
,

Wenbin
Guo
 and 

Shengping
Ruan


State Key Laboratory on Integrated Optoelectronics and College of Electronic Science & Engineering, Jilin University, Changchun 130012, P. R. China. E-mail: sp_wen@jlu.edu.cn

KAUST Solar Center (KSC), Physical Sciences and Engineering Division (PSE), King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Thuwal 23955-6900, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia

Received
10th November 2018
, Accepted 26th January 2019
First published on 29th January 2019
Although ZnO electron transport layers (ETL) contribute to the world record for single-junction polymer solar cells, its sintering temperature, which is higher than 200 °C, imposes limits on the application of low-cost flexible devices. In this study, we report a modified low-temperature processed ZnO ETL by incorporating a composited nanostructure (Au@CNTs). Compared to the doping-free ZnO, the introduction of Au@CNTs improves the device performance in various aspects, through the initial charge generation until the following dissociation and transport processes. Furthermore, visible light soaking of the cells triggers the electric trap filling effect within the ZnO matrix, enabling the ZnO ETL to perform better in the electron extraction and transport and then reduces the interfacial recombination rate. Photoluminescence spectra together with Kelvin probes indicate that the visible light arouses a hot charge injection from Au nanoparticles (on CNTs) into ZnO, which populates the ZnO trap states and is responsible for the observed performance enhancement. As a result, a promising power conversion efficiency of 10.67% was achieved based on a state-of-the-art PTB7-Th:PC71BM photoactive system. Thus, we demonstrate that Au@CNTs nanocomposites have the potential to contribute toward promising ETL design for efficient polymer solar cells.

Polymer solar cells (PSCs) have shown promising commercial application prospects due to their low-cost, short energy payback time and high throughput flexible fabrication. PSCs with an inverted structure have been proposed to match the vertical component gradient in active layers and also improve storage stability. The development of more efficient electron transport layer (ETL) materials with this geometry has been one of the most important topics towards the high device performance. Transition metal oxides (TiO2, ZnO, SnO2, etc.) are often regarded as one type of attractive ETL material due to their excellent processability and semiconductor properties. Until now, a record for a single-junction solar cell efficiency of over 14% was achieved by using a combination of ITO/ZnO and MoO3/Ag electrodes. However, obstacles still exist on the way to realizing high efficiency and great reproducibility based on the solution processing method. A larger population of structural defects were generated, and they caused a serious loss due to charge recombination. Take ZnO for instance, numerous intra-gap states were formed during the low-temperature solution process, which effectively trapped electrons, leading to low charge transport and interfacial recombination losses.

To solve this issue, a promising concept is to inject extra electrons to populate these trap states and improve the electric conductivity of ZnO. The most straightforward way is by UV or UVO exposure for a brief period, which causes charge excitation in ZnO and helps partially fill its unoccupied electronic states. This method, however, has the risk of deteriorating the organic active layer and adversely affecting the cells’ efficiency. To this end, we proposed a plasmonically sensitized ZnO ETL in our previous study by embedding designed metallic nanoparticles (MNPs) into the ZnO matrix. This composite film converted low-energy photons in the visible spectral range into hot charge carriers by the LSPR effect, which in turn supported the trap filling for ZnO and improved the film charge transport/recombination properties. Ultimately, the MNPs based solar cells’ efficiency could be boosted without the need to damage UV or UVO light soaking.
Despite the above progress, it should be noted that incorporating MNPs without light excitation in advance actually failed to improve electron transport in PSCs, and it became even worse. This is because the plasmonic metal components commonly trap free carriers and thereby retard charge transport. The carbon-based materials like carbon nanotubes (CNTs) with cylinder-like, one-dimensional structures have shown the capability of promoting charge selective transport and encouraging separation of the carriers, which tend to recombine at the metal. Additionally, in a film composed of ZnO nanoparticles, electrons migrate in the medium of randomly distributed nanoparticles, which inevitably results in a “zigzag” transport towards the collector electrode. Therefore, the charge transport properties of the conventional ZnO ELT need to be further improved. Introducing high-conducting materials like CNTs has also been proven to be an effective strategy for enhancing charge carrier transport and collection. The high carrier mobilities along one-dimensional axes of CNTs render it an ideal path for electron migration and guide the charge to be collected by the electrodes. Excited state interactions between ZnO and CNTs have also been utilized for inhibiting carrier recombination at particle grain boundaries and improving the device performance. Based on the above consideration, it is reasonable to design a multifunctional MNPs-CNTs nanocomposite as a ZnO layer dopant and further improve the solar cell efficiency by integrating the advantages of both.
Herein, we report the decoration of N-doped CNTs with Au nanoparticles and the development of a bulk-doped ZnO electron transport layer with a Au@CNTs composition for polymer solar cells. The positive effects of Au@CNTs on the photovoltaic performance were systematically investigated by steady-state SCLC as well as transient TPC, TPV and CELIV methods. It is beneficial that the mere introduction of Au@CNTs can improve the charge transport and increase the device efficiency. Furthermore, visible-light soaking enables the cells to perform better in electron extraction, transport and reducing the interfacial recombination rate. We demonstrate that the plasmonically mediated charge injection from Au@CNTs into ZnO populate the ZnO trap states, which should be the predominant mechanism for the observed charge dynamics advancements. With these properties, the maximum efficiency based on the modified ZnO increases to 10.67% in the state-of-the-art PTB7-Th:PC71BM system.

In order to obtain a Au@CNTs nanocomposite, the Au NPs covered with a very thin PEG layer and functionalized with carboxyl acid groups were synthesized first, as shown in Fig. 1a. The obtained Au NPs were relatively uniform with an average size of around 20 nm. The measured plasmon resonance extinction peak of the aqueous dispersion was located at 521 nm. Then, Au@CNTs composites were prepared by blending Au NPs with N-doped CNTs in weakly acidic (pH = 5) water. In such a medium, the surface of the CNTs is positively charged because of the protonation effect of N dopants, which electrostatically allows a strong absorption of the carboxylate (COO–) groups by Au NPs, as schematically shown in Fig. 1d. A detailed synthesis of the Au@CNTs is described in the experimental section. The transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and high-resolution TEM (HR-TEM) images of the Au@CNTs composites are also shown in Fig. 1, from which we can see that the length of the used CNTs is hundreds of nanometers and the diameter is around 60 nm. Au NPs are attached onto the CNTs effectively with a clear visualization of the lattice fringe planes of Au NPs and CNTs (Fig. 1b). The zoomed-out TEM image (Fig. 1c) also confirms the substantially bounded Au NPs along the entire CNT.

To demonstrate the application of Au@CNTs in promising ETL design for highly-efficient polymer solar cells, we adopted bulk doping in which the sol–gel ZnO solution was mixed with varying amounts of Au@CNTs at ZnO:Au@CNTs weight ratios of 0 wt%, 0.4 wt%, 0.5 wt% and 0.63 wt%. Then, a ZnO layer was formed by spin-coating the mixed solution and thermally decomposing at a relatively low temperature of 150 °C that is endurable for most of the flexible substrates. The loading of Au@CNTs in the resulting film is evident from the atomic force microscopy (AFM) height images. As shown in Fig. 2, both samples exhibit the granular morphology feature of ZnO nanoparticles. Most of the areas in Fig. 2b are dark brown except for those dots indicated by arrows. These bright dots are obviously higher than the other areas, presumably indicating that the Au@CNTs are randomly distributed inside the ZnO nanoparticle film and protrude from the surface. The protruding CNTs extend into the active layer so as to potentially influence the excitons’ dissociation as well as the charge generation rates. It should be noted that although the root-mean-squared (RMS) surface roughness of doped ZnO film increases from 3.1 nm to 4.3 nm, the morphology surrounding the Au@CNTs is not adversely affected, which guarantees interfacial contact with the above active layer.
Using the above modified-ZnO and MoO3 combination as a charge transporting layer, the device was assembled as shown in Fig. 3a. Representative current density versus applied voltage (J–V) curves of PSCs under AM 1.5 G illumination at 100 mW cm−2 are depicted in Fig. 3b. It can be seen that the control device exhibits an open circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.79 V, a short circuit current density (Jsc) of 17.00 mA cm−2, a fill factor (FF) of 63.41%, and a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 8.52%, which is lower than the reported efficiency of devices based on a PTB7-Th:PC71BM system. This is because the ZnO extraction layer prepared at a low temperature has a low conductivity and an undesirable interfacial recombination. When Au@CNTs are incorporated, all J–V curves present a desirable shape with a significantly improved fill factor. A low doping level of just 0.5 wt% Au@CNTs improves the PCE from 8.52% to 10.01%. Fig. 3c indicates that the Jsc and FF are the main factors for the improved efficiency, whereas the change in Voc values is very limited. When the doping level exceeds 0.5 wt%, the device performance reduces. A dark J–V measurement, as shown in the inset of Fig. 3b, reveals that the diode rectification characteristics deteriorated and a significant increase in the leakage current at reverse bias is visible. This is presumably because some CNTs pierce the active layer and form short circuiting paths between electrodes and the device becomes electrically unstable. Based on the optimized weight ratio, the devices were placed under visible light that contained a plasmonic resonance wavelength rather than a UV component for several minutes (denoted as pre-illumination) and then measured. We observed further improvement in the device performance, exhibiting a Jsc of 18.58 mA cm−2, the Voc of 0.80 V, FF of 71.83% and a maximum PCE of 10.67%. It is apparent that the composite structure of Au@CNTs plays multiple roles in boosting the device performance and one of them is directly associated with the plasmon resonance effect. Derived from 20 individual devices, the average parameters are summarized as follows: Voc of 0.798 ± 0.004 V, Jsc of 18.37 ± 0.15 mA cm−2, FF of 71.53 ± 0.38% and the PCE of 10.49 ± 0.15% (see Table 1). This is one of the highest photovoltaic performances exhibited by a PTB7-Th:PC71BM system. Other measured average photovoltaic parameters are also summarized in Table 1.
ZnO:Au@CNTs (wt%)

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
0
0.792 ± 0.004
16.87 ± 0.15
62.95 ± 0.60
8.41 ± 0.07
0.4
0.794 ± 0.005
17.24 ± 0.12
68.63 ± 0.60
9.40 ± 0.10
0.5
0.798 ± 0.004
17.79 ± 0.10
69.90 ± 0.41
9.92 ± 0.05
0.5a
0.798 ± 0.004
18.37 ± 0.15
71.53 ± 0.38
10.49 ± 0.15
0.63
0.792 ± 0.004
17.58 ± 0.12
66.82 ± 0.81
9.31 ± 0.10

Fig. 3d shows the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra of the devices, from which we are able to validate the accuracy of the J–V measurement. Jsc was calculated by integrating the EQE spectra and the standard solar emission spectrum equal to 15.64, 15.83, 16.22, 15.89 and 16.91 mA cm2. The mismatches between the calculated Jscs and the real measured Jscs were around 8–9%, indicating the reliability of the device performance. Additionally, we also calculated the IQE spectra, shown in Fig. S3c (ESI). It can be seen that the IQE enhancement of the devices based on the ZnO-Au@CNTs composite ELT show a weak dependence on the wavelength in the main response region. The transmission spectra (Fig. S3d, ESI) indicate that the transmission slightly decreases after incorporating Au@CNTs. This evidence suggests that such an enhancement originates from an electrical aspect instead of an optical aspect.
To get insight into the reasons behind the improved photovoltaic results, we first carried out a space charge limited current (SCLC) measurement to study the positive effect of Au@CNTs on charge transport. Electron-only devices with different ETLs or treatments were constructed: ETLs containing pure ZnO and ZnO embedded with Au@CNTs. The treatments included pre-illumination of the samples by visible light (no UV component). Fig. 4 shows the resulting dark J–V curves on a linear x–logy scale. By fitting the SCLC regime, we can obtain the zero-field electron mobility (μe) of every device. It turns out that μe of a pure ZnO-based device changes very little (3.32 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1vs. 3.58 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1) before (black solid circle) and after (black empty circle) the visible light pre-illumination. When measured directly, the electron current density for the Au@CNTs-ZnO device (red solid circle) is significantly higher than that of the Au@CNTs-free device (black solid circle), which suggests that the mere presence of Au@CNTs can accelerate the electron transport even without light excitation. The calculated μe increases from 3.32 × 10−4 to 1.21 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1. This originates from the 1D Au@CNTs, which serve as the directional transport channel for carriers in the disordered nanoparticle system. This helps us understand the significantly improved device performance without pre-illumination. When the Au@CNTs-ZnO device is measured after it has been exposed to visible light, the electron current density goes up further and μe increases to 2.67 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1. The large μe confirms the enhanced electric conductivity and electron extraction capability of ZnO, which coincides with the observed photovoltaic results.
Next, we conducted steady-state photoluminescence (PL) measurements of ZnO films. Fig. 5a shows the resulting PL spectra (excited @ 350 nm) of ZnO films without and with different weight ratios of Au@CNTs. Before the measurement, the pure ZnO or ZnO/Au@CNTs composite films were also light-soaked for several minutes, but we avoided exciting the intrinsic transition of ZnO. It can be seen that the pure ZnO film exhibits an obvious green emission located at 528 nm, which has been unambiguously assigned to the surface defects and intra-gap states in ZnO nanostructures. When 0.4 wt% Au@CNTs were embedded into the ZnO film, the location of the emission peak did not change significantly, but the intensity of the defects emission was reduced by over 30%. Such quenching ability of Au@CNTs was reinforced (over 50%) when the doping weight ratio increased to 0.5 wt% and was saturated afterwards. The suppressed defects PL indicates that Au@CNTs largely eliminate these defect-related electronic states. In contrast, the cyan curves reveal that the defect emission quenching in CNTs is very limited. This can be safely ascribed to the fact that the plasmonically excited Au NPs are taking effect. In our scenario, the size of the Au NPs attached on the CNTs was around 20 nm, which was expected to meet the requirement of hot electron generation and injection into the ZnO matrix. The injected extra electrons will change the electron density in the materials and thus shift the work function (WF). We therefore conducted Kelvin probe microscopy on ZnO films with and without Au@CNTs, which can intuitively reflect changes in the WF, as shown in Fig. 5b. We note that after the mere introduction of Au@CNTs into the ZnO sample, the WF change was limited (∼40 meV), which was attributed to the interaction between CNTs and ZnO nanoparticles. When we recorded the WF data after visible light-soaking the samples, the WF of ZnO decreased to around 4500 meV. This suggests a larger electron density and further confirms the charge injection induced by the Au nanoparticles, which is responsible for the reduced trap states of ZnO.
To obtain further supportive evidence to justify the effect of the Au@CNTs, the net photocurrent density (Jph) as a function of effective voltage (Veff) was plotted. This analysis was derived from the J–V characterization in the dark (dark current density JD) and under standard illumination (photocurrent density JL). Jph is calculated by Jph = JL − JD, Veff is calculated by Veff = V0 − V, where V0 is the voltage that renders Jph to be zero and V is the applied bias voltage.Fig. 6 shows the Jph–Veff curves belonging to devices using different ETLs: pure ZnO, Au@CNTs-ZnO and pre-illuminated Au@CNTs-ZnO. These curves display that Jph linearly increases in the low Veff region and then becomes saturated when the Veff is high enough. In the linear region, the field-dependent charge drift is the dominant factor, therefore, a higher Jph indicates that the charge drift is improved after doping the Au@CNTs, further activating these elements. Then, in the saturation region, the exciton dissociation rate (Pd) and the maximum generation rate (Gmax) are calculated by Pd = Jph,sc/Jph,sat and Jph,sat = qGmaxL, respectively. Jph,sc and Jph,sat represent Jph values at the short-circuit point and the saturation point, respectively. q is the electronic charge and L is the thickness of the active layer.Table 2 summarizes the Pd and Gmax values of the three devices. Apparently, adding the Au@CNTs into the ZnO film promotes the exciton dissociation process and increases the charge generation rate. The observed AFM and SEM images suggest that the Au@CNTs extend into the active layer. Both CNTs and Au NPs can promote the exciton dissociation by acting as exciton dissociation centres or by the exciton-NPs coupling effect, which is favourable for fast generation of free carriers and improving the device performance.
ZnO
ZnO + Au@CNTs (0.5 wt%)
ZnO + Au@CNTs (0.5 wt%) pre-illumination

P
d

93.1%
97.5%
97.9%

G
max

1.13 × 1028
1.15 × 1028
1.16 × 1028
In addition to the above steady-state characterizations, we further employed transient techniques of charge extraction by linearly increased voltage (CELIV), transient photocurrent (TPC) and transient photovoltage (TPV) to analyse the charge transport, carrier lifetime and density, as well as the relevant charge recombination behind these systems. We obtained the typical photo-CELIV curves composed of a displacement current step of an RC-circuit (j(0)) and a charge extraction current bulge (Δj) above the j(0) step (Fig. S1, ESI). CELIV is utilized not only to study carrier transport by measuring the time point (tmax) at which Δj reaches a maximum, but also the probe carrier lifetime and recombination by fitting the time dependence of the carrier density. From the photocurrent transients we can see that the device using pure ZnO as an ETL presents an obtuse extraction current bulge, while those of the Au@CNTs-ZnO devices are sharper. As a result, the extraction current peak occurs earlier upon the introduction of Au@CNTs. Calculated from the 1 μs (delay time between the laser pulse and reverse bias pulse) CELIV transient, the averaged charge mobility of the pre-illuminated Au@CNTs-ZnO device (3.74 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1) is still higher than those of the ZnO (1.68 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1) and Au@CNTs-ZnO (2.49 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1) device. This is consistent with the trend as seen from the SCLC analysis and confirms the enhanced electron transport after removing the defect-related electronic states.
These photo-CELIV curves were further utilized to determine the carrier density–time dependency from which we could study the charge recombination occurring inside the devices, as shown in Fig. 7. The density of the extracted carriers can be obtained by integrating the Δj bulge above the j(0) step. As the time interval between the photo-excitation and voltage-extraction increased, the extracted carrier density (n) decreased because of the carrier recombination loss. This decay usually can be fitted by a time-related, carrier recombination dynamic model:
in which
n(0) represents the initial photo-generated carrier density and τ represents the carrier recombination lifetime. Through fitting these discrete points in Fig. 7, the n(0) for ZnO, Au@CNTs-ZnO and pre-illuminated Au@CNTs-ZnO devices are estimated to be 2.62 ± 0.40 × 1022 m−3, 2.89 ± 0.15 × 1022 m−3, and 3.09 ± 0.24 × 1022 m−3, respectively, indicating a similar initial photo-generated carrier density within the devices. The τ are 46.5 μs, 89.0 μs, and 105.1 μs. Compared to the ZnO device, the lifetimes were longer when 0.5 wt% Au@CNTs was added and then pre-illuminated, suggesting that the recombination was reduced. The lower recombination rate combined with improved electron transport and passivated trap states are in agreement with their superior photovoltaic performance.

These findings are supported by the transient photocurrent (TPC) and the transient photovoltage (TPV) measurements, which are widely used to analyse the charge extraction time and recombination in organic solar cells. The laser intensity was well attenuated by neutral density filters to meet the small signal perturbation, for instance the voltage increment (ΔV) of less than 50 mV, allowing us to simulate a quasi-equilibrium condition. In the TPV test, the device was placed in an open-circuit condition to ensure no external current flow. Therefore, most of the photogenerated carriers underwent internal recombination thus reflecting a recombination rate. Fig. 8 shows the measured TPV curves using different ETLs. The recombination lifetime (τ1) of the device with pre-illuminated Au@CNTs-ZnO ELT increased to 5.01 μs in comparison with 2.89 μs of the pure ZnO device and the Au@CNTs-ZnO device, which indicates that the charge recombination is effectively suppressed after manipulating the electron transport property and ZnO trap level. For the TPC regime, the devices were switched to the short-circuit condition and the decay rate of the photocurrent transient has been linked to a charge extraction capability. The typical extraction times (τ2) of the devices using different ETLs are also listed in Table 3. The shortest τ2 suggests the best charge extraction capability of the Au@CNTs-ZnO ELT after pre-illumination, which dominantly results from higher mobility and reduced charge trap states.
ZnO
ZnO + Au@CNTs (0.5 wt%)
ZnO + Au@CNTs (0.5 wt%) pre-illumination

n(0)
2.62 ± 0.40 × 1022
2.89 ± 0.15 × 1022
3.09 ± 0.24 × 1022

τ

46.5 μs
89.0 μs
105.1 μs

τ
1

2.89 μs
4.18 μs
5.01 μs

τ
2

0.49 μs
0.39 μs
0.25 μs

In conclusion, Au nanoparticle-decorated CNTs were synthesized and used as an efficient low-temperature-processed ZnO dopant for improving the performance of inverted polymer solar cells. The resulting Au@CNTs-ZnO electron transport layer presented multiple intriguing features including UV light-soaking free, plasmonically-assisted trap filling, improved electron extraction and conductivity, as well as reduced interfacial recombination. An enhancement of exciton dissociation was achieved simultaneously. Consequently, the fabricated single-junction inverted PTB7-Th:PC71BM BHJ solar cells afforded the best PCE of 10.67% with FF approaching 72%. We have therefore presented a facile way to modify the transition metal oxide interfacial layer for enabling high efficiency in polymer solar cells.


Firstly, functionalized Au NPs were synthesized. 50 mg COOH-PEG 3400-SH powder and 100 mL (0.04%) HAuCl4 were dispersed in deionized (DI) water by vigorously stirring at 135 °C, and then 2 mL (4%) C6H5Na3O7 dispersion in DI water was added into the mixture. After the solution became red, it continues to react for 15 minutes. The size of the functionalized Au NPs was 20 nm. Secondly, CNT powder was dispersed in DI water (0.3 mg mL−1) by ultrasonication for 30 minutes. 15 mL of the CNT solution was added into a Au NP solution and stirred at 50 °C for 30 minutes, while the pH was 5. Finally, Au@CNTs were obtained by suction filtration and vacuum drying.


ITO glass substrates (15 ohm per square) were cleaned by ultrasonic baths with detergent, deionized water, acetone and isopropyl alcohol subsequently. A sol–gel ZnO solution was prepared with zinc acetate in 2-methoxyethanol. 2-Aminoethanol and Au@CNTs were dispersed into 2-methoxyethanol and doped in the sol–gel ZnO solution with different volumes by ultrasonic treatment for 15 min. The mixture solution was spin-coated on the clean ITO surface at 3000 rpm for 1 min. Then, the substrates were annealed at 150 °C for 1 hour in a muffle furnace, and then put into a nitrogen-filled glove box. The active layer solution was prepared with PTB7-Th and PC71BM (1:1.5 w/w) and dissolved into chlorobenzene, so that the concentration of PTB7-Th was 10 mg mL−1, and added into a minor composition of 1,8-diiodooctane (3 wt%). The active layer solution was stirred at 55 °C for 24 hours in a nitrogen-filled glove box. The solution was then spin-coated on the ZnO film at 1400 rpm for 1 min, and was subsequently spin-coated by anhydrous isopropyl alcohol at 2500 rpm for 30 s two times. A MoO3 (6 nm)/Ag (90 nm) anode film was prepared by thermal evaporation in a vacuum (vacuum pressure ≈ 5 × 10−4 Pa).


The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the devices were measured by a Keithley 2601 Source Meter. The illumination source was an Air Mass 1.5 Global (AM 1.5G) with an Oriel 300 W solar simulator with an intensity of 100 mW cm−2 (denoted as 1 sun). A TEM (Hitachi H-800) measured the morphology of the Au NPs and Au@CNTs. An AFM (Veeco Dimension 3100) characterized the surface morphologies of ZnO/PTB7-Th:PC71BM and ZnO:Au@CNTs/PTB7-Th:PC71BM. The EQE spectra were obtained with a Crowntech QTest Station 1000 AD. The EQE measurement system was composed of a 250 W QTH lamp as the light source, a filter wheel, a chopper, a monochromator, a lock-in amplifier and a calibrated silicon photodetector.


In order to obtain the electron mobility, we used the SCLC model, in which the structure of the electron-only devices was ITO/ZnO/PTB7-Th:PC71BM/BCP/Al or ITO/ZnO:Au@CNTs/PTB7-Th:PC71BM/BCP/Al. The log scale of the dark J–V characteristics determined the mobility, which is described by the formula:
in which
J is the current density, ε0 is the permittivity of free space, εr is the relative permittivity of the material, μ0 is the electron mobility, L is the thickness of the active layer, and Vbi is the built-in voltage.


During the TPV measurements, the device was held at an open circuit under steady state conditions controlled by a continuous white light bias and a small pulsed perturbation of excess charge carriers was produced by a laser (700 nm).
In the photo-CELIV measurement, the devices were irradiated through the ITO side by one 10 ns 532 nm laser pulse with an energy flux of 96.8 μJ cm−2. After a variable tdel, a linear extraction ramp was applied via a function generator. The ramp was 100 μs long and 2 V in amplitude.
where
d is the thickness of the active layer, Δj is the extracted current, j(0) is the constant current, and A is the voltage rise speed.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This study was supported by the International Cooperation and Exchange Project of Jilin Province (20170414002GH, 20180414001GH), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 15 11574110), the Project of Science and Technology Development Plan of Jilin Province (Grant 16 No. Grant No. 201602041013GX, 20180414020GH), the Project of Jilin Provincial 17 Development and Reform Commission (2018C040-2), Opened Fund of the State Key Laboratory on Applied Optics, and the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (Grant No. 2014T70288, 2 2013M541299).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8tc05653f
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019