 DOI: 10.1039/C3NR05177C
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 1011-1019


Swaminathan
Venkatesan
,

Nirmal
Adhikari
,

Jihua
Chen
,

Evan C.
Ngo
,

Ashish
Dubey
,

David W.
Galipeau
 and 

Qiquan
Qiao
*

Department of Electrical Engineering, Center for Advanced Photovoltaics, South Dakota State University, Brookings, SD, USA. E-mail: qiquan.qiao@sdstate.edu

Center for Nanophase Materials Sciences, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN 37831, USA

Received
28th September 2013
, Accepted 19th October 2013
First published on 22nd October 2013
Charge transport and bimolecular recombination dynamics were correlated with nanomorphology in polymer solar cells. The morphology of poly(diketopyrrolopyrrole-terthiophene) (PDPP3T) and phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PC60BM) blend films was modified using different solvent additives namely 1-chloronaphthalene (CN), 1,8-diiodooctane (DIO) and 1,8-octanedithiol (ODT) and their role on steady state and transient optoelectronic properties was investigated. The energy filtered transmission electron microscopy (EFTEM) images showed that additives (e.g. CN and DIO) improved the domain purity which leads to significantly higher short circuit current densities (Jsc). However when the cells were processed with the ODT additive, the fill factor (FF) and open circuit voltage (Voc) decreased dramatically. Films processed with the ODT additive showed a smaller domain size but were more connected compared to films processed using CN and DIO additives. Transient photocurrent analysis indicates faster charge collection in the case of CN and DIO processed solar cells and the slowest charge collection in ODT processed solar cells. Interestingly devices processed with the ODT additive also showed the longest charge carrier recombination lifetime and lowest bimolecular recombination coefficient. This is attributed to the smaller donor domains that are connected with each other to provide a more interconnected and efficient charge transport matrix but longer pathways in ODT films. Such a matrix helped the charge to escape from the donor–acceptor interfaces and thus reduces the bimolecular recombination, while the longer pathway increases the charge collection time. Further insight is provided into the selection of processing conditions to achieve an ideal active layer morphology consisting of domains with higher polymer purity and optimal size that lead to higher Jsc and FF.

Polymer solar cells (PSCs) are promising candidates for future photovoltaic devices owing to their low cost of material production and device processing, low temperature processing for flexible devices and ease of fabrication. However due to their lower lifetime and efficiency, PSCs require a deeper understanding to eradicate the aforementioned drawbacks. One of the most important parameters that influence the charge transport and recombination dynamics in bulk heterojunction solar cells is the nanomorphology. In the past several methods such as the choice of solvents, solvent additives, solvent annealing, thermal annealing, etc. have been utilized to obtain an optimized morphology to attain higher power conversion efficiency. Also over the last decade, several groups have been working on defining and resolving different aspects of morphology such as the domain size, purity, crystallinity, miscibility, interface sharpness/roughness, lateral and vertical phase separation or aggregation. In most cases such morphological attributes are correlated with device performance in steady state illumination and there is still a lack of understanding on the effect of domain size, purity and their spatial distribution on the charge transport and recombination behaviour. Bimolecular recombination has widely been shown to be the dominant recombination mechanism in bulk heterojunction solar cells. Hence there is a need to understand the role of processing conditions in order to achieve an optimal nanomorphology to suppress the bimolecular recombination in bulk heterojunction solar cells.

Lyons et al. performed rather interesting morphological alterations using Cahn–Hilliard modelling and correlated it with solar cell performance as predicted by Monte Carlo simulations. In the paper, domain purity and interface sharpness were emphasized assuming that domain sizes were below 10 nm. However the authors neglected the effect of domain aggregation that can lead to a lower donor acceptor interface and cause charge accumulation at the donor–donor interface. In another important study by Spoltore et al. the authors report the role of polymer crystallinity on the bimolecular recombination order and defect density; however the authors failed to analyse the role of domain size and crystallinity on the device efficacies. Most studies on recombination kinetics of polymer bulk heterojunction solar cells provide lesser insight into the nanomorphological parameters such as domain purity, domain size and interfaces; hence it is hard to visualize the role of morphological parameters on charge transport.
In this work, we have sequentially studied and analysed the role of different solvent additives on morphological and structural features such as domain purity (crystallinity), size and interfaces after which we have correlated the nanomorphology with the charge carrier lifetime and carrier concentration which were derived from small perturbation transient optoelectronic measurements. Finally the effects of nanomorphology on steady state current voltage characteristics were discussed.

Sol–gel zinc oxide (ZnO) was synthesized by stirring 1 g of zinc acetate dihydrate dissolved in 2-methoxyethanol (10 mL) and 0.28 g of mono-ethanolamine was added as a stabilizer. Poly(diketopyrrolopyrrole-terthiophene) (PDPP3T) was purchased from Solarmer Materials and PC60BM was purchased from Nano-C Inc. Both were used as received. 1-Chloronaphthalene (CN) and 1,8-diiodooctane (DIO) were purchased from Sigma Aldrich and 1,8-octanedithiol (ODT) was purchased from Alfa Aesar.


Pre-patterned indium tin oxide (ITO) coated glass slides were cleaned by ultrasonication for 20 minutes in detergent water, de-ionized water, acetone and 2-propanol sequentially. The ITO substrates were then subject to oxygen plasma cleaning for 25 minutes before spin-coating a sol–gel zinc oxide (ZnO) layer. ZnO sol–gel was spin-coated at 4500 rpm for 60 seconds and the films were subjected to annealing on a hot plate at 300 °C for 30 minutes. ZnO coated substrates were then transferred to a nitrogen filled glove box having lower than 1 ppm of O2 and H2O. A blend solution of PDPP3T (Solarmer materials) and PC60BM (Nano-C) was prepared in a 1:2 weight ratio with 10 mg mL−1 of polymer concentration and was kept stirring overnight. 3% by volume of CN, DIO and ODT were added to the parent solution in separate vials before spin-coating. For comparison the blend solution without additives was also kept in a separate vial. The blend solution was spin-coated at 2000 rpm for 60 seconds and then transferred to a thermal evaporator where 10 nm of molybdenum trioxide (MoO3) and 80 nm of silver (Ag) were evaporated at a pressure below 10−5 Torr.


Current–voltage characteristic measurements were done on an Agilent 4155C semiconductor parameter analyser integrated with a Newport xenon lamp as solar simulator (AM 1.5). A National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) calibrated silicon photodetector was used to calibrate the light source with a light intensity of 100 mW cm−2.

Transient photocurrent/photovoltage measurements were done using a nitrogen laser (operating at 337.1 nm) pumping a dye laser (OL-401 Optical Building Blocks Corp.). The output of the dye laser was confined to 635 nm using a monochromator. The pulsed laser light was incident on the solar cell having a pulse width less than 1 ns as measured from the rise time of the reference photodetector. The cell was either short circuited using a 20 Ω resistor to record the transient photocurrent or kept in open circuit using 1 MΩ input impedance of an oscilloscope to record the transient photovoltage response of the cell. The cells were constantly illuminated with an external halogen lamp source with variable intensity control up to 1.5 suns.

Samples for energy-filtered transmission electron microscopy (EFTEM) were prepared by immersing the films on PEDOT:PSS coated ITO substrates in deionized water and picking up the floating active layer with 600 mesh honeycomb shaped Ni grids (Ted Pella). EFTEM was conducted using a Zeiss Libra 120 with an in-line Omega energy filter. EFTEM experiments were performed at 120 kV with a low emission current (LaB6 filament) of ∼5 μA in order to minimize the electron-beam-caused polymer damage. SAED patterns were recorded with a camera length of 576 mm under minimum dose conditions. The obtained patterns are calibrated against an Al (111) standard (0.234 nm).

Raman spectroscopy was performed on a LabRam HR (Horiba Scientific) on several areas of the active layer using 784.32 nm as the excitation wavelength. The typical acquisition time was 5 seconds with an average of two scans and a spectrometer with 1800 gratings was used for collection of data.
Topographic and phase imaging was performed on an Agilent 5500 AFM using a Budget Sensors TAP 300 Al tip having 300 kHz resonant frequency. Imaging was done in tapping mode where the tip was engaged in net attractive mode.

The device schematic is shown in Fig. 1a. Inverted devices were specifically chosen to be studied due to higher stability. The devices studied showed minimal (<5%) degradation after complete testing. Zinc oxide (ZnO) acts as an electron transport layer and molybdenum oxide (MoO3) as a hole transport layer. ITO and silver act as the cathode and anode, respectively. The active layer morphology was altered with different commonly used additives for polymer bulk heterojunction solar cells namely CN, DIO and ODT. For comparison, active layers without any solvent additives (pristine) were also spin-cast. Chemical structures of the additives are shown in Fig 1b.

Tapping mode atomic force microscopic (AFM) imaging was performed to evaluate the surface morphology and phase separation of PDPP3T:PCBM films. The topographic images (Fig. 2a–d) show that all films exhibited a fibrillar type of morphology. These fibrils are mainly associated with polymer domains as seen usually in polymer thin films. Adding additives leads to the formation of thicker and longer fibers as seen in the case of DIO, CN and ODT processed films, indicating higher structural order within the polymer phase. It is well known that additives are good solvents for fullerene derivatives but poor solvents for donor components leading to polymer aggregation into more crystalline phases and enabling nanoscale phase separation. Such structural ordering leads to larger polymer domains thereby resulting in higher root mean square (RMS) roughness of the film surface. The RMS roughness increases from 2.67 nm for pristine films to 5.13 nm, 4.18 nm and 5.53 for films cast with DIO, CN and ODT additives, respectively. It is evident that for films cast without any additives, smaller fiber-like domains are seen, indicating the higher density of domain boundaries. Such interfaces are most likely the cause of traps which can lead to higher recombination in such cells. On the other hand the films cast with additives show bigger fiber-like domains. Films cast with DIO additives show the thickest fibers and films cast by the ODT additive show the longest fibers.
To deeply investigate the bulk morphology of these films, energy filtered TEM (EFTEM) was used, as shown in Fig. 2i–p. The advantage of the EFTEM technique over conventional TEM is the selectivity to probe and image the local domain of both donor and acceptor phases. Due to their differences in the low eV plasmon peak, the donor polymer shows brighter regions in the 19 ± 4 eV image, while the PCBM acceptor exhibits brighter spots in the corresponding 30 ± 4 eV image. The donor and acceptor maps for each type of film were compared. In the pristine films (Fig. 2i and m), we do not see much correlation or contrast inversion between the two images. Specifically, the bright regions (e.g. yellow marked region) in the donor map (Fig. 2i) are also bright regions (Fig. 2m) in the acceptor map, suggesting that the donor (PDPP3T) and acceptor (PCBM) are highly intermixed without clearly separated donor rich or acceptor rich domains. Therefore the bright regions in Fig. 2i and m have both the donor and acceptor. It has also been reported by others that spatial randomness in maps of films cast without additives is due to the formation of a mixed phase where the fullerene molecules intercalate between amorphous or semi-crystalline matrix of polymer chains. Therefore, the brighter and darker spots in pristine films are only caused by the thickness variation because the donor map (Fig. 2i) and acceptor map (Fig. 2m) showed similar patterns to those seen in the TEM thickness map (Fig. S1a) shown in the ESI.
However, in the DIO, CN and ODT additive processed films, we see that wherever there are brighter regions in donor maps there are corresponding darker regions. The bright regions (e.g. yellow marked region) indicate high purity donor domains in the donor maps in Fig. 2j–l, which correspond to the dark regions showing acceptor poor domains in the acceptor maps of Fig. 2n–p, respectively. Such a spatial correlation indicated that high purity donor rich and acceptor rich domains were formed in the blend films when cast with solvent additives. Additives induce purer polymer domains shown by enhanced contrast (bright spots) in the donor maps. In the case of DIO and CN (Fig. 2j and k), we see some tripod shaped and rod-like domains of polymer rich regions shown by yellow marked areas. Most of these domains are 10–20 nm in width. These domains are much larger than those shown in Fig. 2l from the films cast with the ODT additive. Thus, when the additives changed from DIO or CN to ODT, the high purity donor region size decreased.
In addition, by qualitatively analysing the maps for domain purity, we see enhanced contrast inversion in the case of films cast with DIO indicating purer domain separation. The 19 eV map for the DIO film also shows a bigger donor type domain size. One to one correlation between 19 eV and 30 eV maps in CN shows lower contrast inversion compared to corresponding DIO maps indicating lower domain purity for CN. This could be due to higher solubility of both polymer and fullerene component in CN. For the films cast with the ODT additive higher purity polymer domains seem to connect with each other to provide a more interconnected and efficient charge transport matrix but longer pathways in ODT films from both the donor (Fig. 2l) and acceptor (Fig. 2p) maps. It is important to note that EFTEM images represent a two dimensional projection of a three dimensional morphology, hence the vertical phase segregation is harder to visualize. Contrary to prior reports which have shown that additives induce better nanoscale phase separation for the same or a similar polymer structure we find that additives induce higher domain crystallinity (purity) in the polymer phase. This is confirmed by selected area electron diffraction (SAED) patterns shown in Fig. 3a. To evaluate the intensity of diffraction rings the greyness profile of SAED patterns is plotted in Fig 3b. The peak at 50–65 pixels is attributed to the d-spacing of PCBM. Peak broadening is obvious in the case of pristine samples at a radius of 120 pixels attributed to the d-spacing of PDPP3T; however there is negligible or no change in domain crystallinity when PDPP3T:PCBM films were cast with different solvent additives. Similar behaviour was also obtained in Raman spectra shown in Fig. 3c where we see a small/minor change of full width half maximum (FWHM) at 1421 cm−1 for all films processed with additives when fit with the Lorentz function. This is attributed to the CC stretching in the polymer phase and is the main reason for π-electron delocalization related to the chain packing as emphasized in previous reports. As seen in the Raman spectra, the FWHM at 1421 cm−1 is the highest for pristine samples indicating poor chain packing compared to films processed with solvent additives. Hence the use of different solvent additives does not change or has a negligible impact on the domain crystallinity or chain packing in the donor rich domains; however they do affect the donor domain size. As discussed earlier, the polymer rich domains in the DIO or CN additive processed films are larger than those from the ODT made films.
To further investigate the influence of morphological characteristics on charge transport and recombination kinetics, we employed transient photocurrent (TPC) and transient photovoltage (TPV) techniques. Such measurements have shown recent success in understanding the recombination behaviour in bulk heterojunction solar cells. In the TPC technique, the charge collection time is measured by the short lived photogenerated charge carrier decay while keeping the cell under short circuit conditions. The short lived photocurrent is generated by a nanosecond pulse of a dye laser incident on solar cells under short circuit conditions (by shunting across a very low resistor at 20 Ω). As seen in Fig. 4, we see that cells processed with CN and DIO additives show faster decay of photocurrent than those processed without additive and cells processed with the ODT additive. When fit with a mono-exponential decay, the collection time was calculated to be 220.6 ns and 246.4 ns for CN and DIO processed cells, respectively. The slow photocurrent decay in ODT processed cells (decay lifetime of 342.6 ns) indicates charge accumulation as supported by the J–V results in Fig. 6. The cells were also kept under open circuit conditions using high input impedance (1 MΩ) under constant illumination from an intensity controlled source. In such cases when a short pulse (1 ns) of light is incident, one can study the dependence of charge carrier lifetime on charge carrier concentration. The charge carrier concentration is varied using different intensities of the white light source. Using both TPC and TPV techniques we can calculate the variation of charge carrier lifetime and recombination coefficient as a function of charge carrier concentration (details in the ESI).

Fig. 5a shows the variation of charge carrier lifetime on the charge carrier concentration for the pristine and different additive PDPP3T:PCBM solar cells. It is evident that the charge lifetime decreases with increase in carrier concentration which is representative of the distribution of tail trap states present within the bandgap of the polymer. It is seen that for pristine, DIO and CN processed cells, the slope (λ) at higher intensities is larger (more negative) than that for ODT cells. This slope indicates the recombination order (i.e. λ + 1) and is generally greater than 2 for recombination dominated by hole trap states within the polymer and at the polymer–fullerene (inter-domain) interface. The inter-domain interfaces can either lead to exciton dissociation or bimolecular recombination of charges due to trap states at the polymer–fullerene interface. For ODT processed cells, we see that a much higher charge carrier lifetime at higher charge carrier densities also has a lower slope and reduced bimolecular recombination in these cells. The slope is the smallest for ODT processed cells, suggesting the lowest bimolecular recombination. This can be attributed to the smaller polymer domains that connect with each other to provide a more interconnected and efficient charge transport matrix but longer pathways in ODT films shown in Fig. 2l and p. The improved interconnected matrix may reduce the bimolecular recombination as it provides the better pathway to escape from the donor–acceptor interfaces, which makes it harder for separated charges to meet each other for bimolecular recombination. However, the smaller donor domains may also lead to a longer charge transport pathway and cause a longer charge transport/collection time.

Fig. 6a and b show the current–voltage characteristics of inverted PDPP3T:PCBM solar cells under AM 1.5 illumination conditions and in the dark, respectively. The results from the measurements are summarized in Table 1. The Jsc increases significantly for cells processed with additives compared to cells without additive (pristine). The cells processed with the DIO additive showed the highest current density of 10.75 mA cm−2 and also the highest power conversion efficiency of 4.77% having a Voc of 0.68 V and a FF of 0.65. It is interesting to observe that the solar cells processed with the ODT additive showed similar Jsc to CN and DIO but possessed the lowest FF and Voc compared to all the other cells. Also S-shaped behaviour was noticed for cells processed with ODT. It is important to note that all films were cast from the same parent solvent where a precise amount of parent solvent was pipetted out and mixed with 3% by volume of additive in separate vials, hence eliminating any human error due to concentration and/or weight ratio changes. Also all cells were fabricated in the same batch keeping all processing parameters constant including spin speed, acceleration, evaporation rate, thickness of electrode and all other processing parameters.

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF
Efficiency (%)
Pristine
0.68 (0.67)
5.55 (5.62)
0.68 (0.65)
2.58 (2.45)
DIO
0.68 (0.67)
10.75 (10.04)
0.65 (0.64)
4.77 (4.33)
CN
0.67 (0.68)
9.5 (9.18)
0.68 (0.67)
4.33 (4.13)
ODT
0.46 (0.46)
9.54 (9.59)
0.46 (0.45)
2.01 (1.96)

Fig. 6b shows the dark current–voltage characteristics of the cells. Current leakage is defined by the recombination at the space charge region at low voltage biases. The cell processed with the DIO additive shows the least amount of current leakage at low and reverse biases as compared to the pristine, CN and ODT processed cells. A higher shunt resistance for the pristine, DIO and CN cells was observed as compared to the ODT fabricated cells. Values for the shunt and series resistances of the cells can be seen in Table 1. Saturation current at higher biases is affected primarily on the series resistance of the cell. At higher biases the pristine, DIO, and CN cells show higher current saturation than the ODT cell; this correlates with the lower series resistance as compared to the cell processed with the ODT additive. The higher series resistance (23.8 Ω cm2) and lower shunt resistance (780 Ω cm2) in the ODT devices than those in the DIO or CN cells led to a lower FF. The ODT cell also shows the lowest threshold voltage; this can be seen as an earlier onset of current in the medium bias voltage range as compared to the pristine, DIO, and CN cells, which leads to a corresponding lower Voc in the ODT cells.
As shown in Fig. 2j–l, the width of most high purity polymer domains in the DIO, CN and ODT based films is about 10–20 nm, which falls within the exciton diffusion lengths of ∼20 nm for typical polymers. Thus exciton dissociations in the DIO, CN and ODT additives will be comparable to each other. In addition, the slower charge collection time in the ODT cells than in the DIO and CN devices was compensated by its lower bimolecular recombination. These reasons may explain why Jsc values are comparable in these cells using different additives. However, by coordinating the EFTEM images with the J–V characterization, it can be seen that both high purity of the separated donor or acceptor domains and their sizes are important to achieve high Jsc, Voc and FF.
Correlating the nanomorphological and structural characterization with device results, we can emphasize that the domain purity plays a significant role in Jsc because the high purity donor and acceptor domains, even at different domain sizes, in the DIO, CN and ODT cells led to a comparable Jsc (9.5–10.75 mA cm−2), which is much higher than that (5.55 mA cm−2) of the pristine cells where the donor and acceptor are intermixed. As discussed above, the high purity donor domain sizes are within the exciton diffusion lengths and seem to have negligible effects on Jsc. However, the smaller high purity donor domains in the ODT cells can affect the Voc and FF as a result of charge transport and recombination. Fullerene intercalation between polymer chains (shown in Fig 7a for pristine films) leads to higher impure polymer domains as well as the highest inter-domain interfaces and/or isolated regions giving rise to higher bimolecular recombination as charge recombination is enhanced by the trap states present at the inter-domain interfaces. However, lower PCBM intercalation in the additive-added films led to lower bimolecular recombination due to the formation of high purity donor domains and acceptor domains that reduced donor–acceptor interfaces and improved electron/hole transport pathways. This caused a higher Jsc in the additive-added (DIO, CN and ODT) cells than in pristine devices. However the smaller donor domains in ODT cells led to higher series resistance and lower shunt resistance, causing a lower FF than the DIO and CN devices. The donor and acceptor domain purity, distribution, and size affect charge collection to the electrodes, bimolecular recombination at the domain interfaces, and charge carrier lifetime. In order to attain high photovoltaic device performance it is necessary to both suppress bimolecular recombination and reduce the charge transport/collection time. Hence it is important to select appropriate solvents, additives and active layer processing conditions to create an ideal morphology in bulk heterojunction devices consisting of optimum polymer domain purity, size (within exciton diffusion length), and distribution.

Charge transport and bimolecular recombination dynamics were correlated with nanomorphology in polymer solar cells by studying the role of domain purity and domain size on charge transport and recombination kinetics in inverted bulk heterojunction solar cells. Domain purity was found to play an important role in short circuit current density while the fill factor is mainly dependent on domain sizes. Further work to reduce charge recombination in polymer solar cells should be directed towards attaining high domain purity and optimal domain sizes with lower density of trap states.


We acknowledge the support from NASA EPSCoR (NNX13AD31A), NSF CAREER (ECCS-0950731), NSF EPSCoR (grant no. 0903804), and SD BoR CRGP. A portion of this research was conducted at the Center for Nanophase Materials Sciences, which was sponsored at Oak Ridge National Laboratory by the Division of Scientific User Facilities, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, U.S. Department of Energy.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c3nr05177c
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014