 DOI: 10.1039/C6RA04376C
(Paper)
RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 28599-28606

Hyeong Pil Kim,
Seung Joo Lee,
Abd Rashid bin Mohd Yusoff and 
Jin Jang*

Department of Information, Display, Kyung Hee University, Dongdaemun-ku, Seoul 130-171, Republic of Korea. E-mail: jjang@khu.ac.kr; Fax: +82 2 961 0270; Tel: +82 2 961 0270

Received
18th February 2016
, Accepted 8th March 2016
First published on 10th March 2016
Interface engineering may lead to a high performance organic photovoltaic as well as long lifetime. Incorporating the commonly used conducting polymer PEDOT:PSS with GO as an the anode interfacial layer, poly[[4,8-bis[(2-ethylhexyl)oxy]benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl][3-fluoro-2-[(2-ethylhexyl)carbonyl]thieno[3,4-b]thiophenediyl]] (PTB7):fullerene derivative (PC71BM) bulk heterojunction (BHJ) organic photovoltaics (OPVs) were fabricated. This conventional OPV demonstrated a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 7.53%, which has outperformed the highest reported PEDOT:PSS combined metal oxide, the highest reported efficiency with a solution processed PEDOT:PSS:GO interfacial layer as well as a PEDOT:PSS-based OPV (reference device). Moreover, the versatility of PEDOT:PSS:GO has also been demonstrated in the medium bandgap BHJ system employing poly[4,8-bis(5-(2-ethylhexyl)thiophen-2-yl)benzo[1,2-b;4,5-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl-alt-(4-(2-ethylhexyl)-3-fluorothieno[3,4-b]thiophene-)-2-carboxylate-2-6-diyl] paired with PC71BM yielding an astonishing high PCE of 9.12%. We believe proper interface engineering could lead to high performance devices.

Recently, organic photovoltaics (OPVs) received huge interest as cost-effective, and flexible power sources. We have seen a rapid improvement during the last few years in terms of power conversion efficiency (PCE), where Yang's group and Heliatek along with their respective co-workers have surpassed the 10% efficiency barrier in multiple junction solar cells. In addition, Yusoff and coworkers have reported an 11.83% efficiency in a triple-junction OPV. This big jump from the previously reported 9.2% PCE from Zhou and co-workers is probably due to the fact that the synthesized photosensitive active materials are able to generate more excitons. Despite these advancements, a major drawback in OPVs is related with instability at the interface between the commonly used transparent electrode, indium tin oxide (ITO) and an anode interfacial layer. One of the methods is to make use of metal oxide because a deep valence band which makes this material stable. Another route is to make full use of an inverted architecture, where one can simply avoid the unsolved interface issue; ITO/PEDOT:PSS. Here, we report that combining PEDOT:PSS with other materials such as tungsten oxide (WOx), molybdenum oxide (MoOx), carbon nanotube (CNT) or graphene oxide (GO) can improve the device performance as well as their respective lifetime. Interestingly, the fabricated OPV combining PEDOT:PSS with GO results in 7.53% (PTB7:PC71BM) and 9.12% (PBDTTT-EFT:PC71BM) efficiencies compared to 7.27% (PTB7:PC71BM) and 8.63% (PBDTTT-EFT:PC71BM) efficiencies for PEDOT:PSS OPV (reference devices). Our OPVs incorporating the well-characterized and popular electron donating polymer poly[[4,8-bis[(2-ethylhexyl)oxy]benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b0]dithiophene-2,6-diyl][3-fluoro-2-[(2-ethylhexyl)carbonyl]-thieno[3,4-b]thiophenediyl]] (PTB7; Fig. 1a) and the fullerene electron acceptor [6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric-acid-methyl-ester (PC71BM) and also a medium bandgap polymer poly[4,8-bis(5-(2-ethylhexyl)thiophen-2-yl)benzo[1,2-b;4,5-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl-alt-(4-(2-ethylhexyl)-3-fluorothieno[3,4-b]thiophene-)-2-carboxylate-2-6-diyl] (PBDTTT-EFT) paired with PC71BM; Fig. 1a). While the efficiency level is currently state-of-the-art, the performance of PTB7 devices and many other OPV systems is limited by inhomogeneous structural and electrical properties of PEDOT:PSS. Thus, many works have been reported to alternative polymeric, cross-linking, self-assembling, and inorganic anode interfacial materials as PEDOT:PSS replacements.


In this work, we show that, utilizing novel solution-processed PEDOT:PSS:GO can be deposited as anode interfacial layer onto ITO transparent electrode and at the same time offering better transparency than PEDOT:PSS. The molecular structures of PTB7, PC71BM, WOx, MoOx, CNT and GO, the device schematic structure and the energy levels of the used materials in this work are depicted in Fig. 1. The details preparations are documented in the Experimental section. In brief, our conventional OPVs did not undergo any thermal annealing treatment expect for anode interfacial layer. The work function of PEDOT:PSS, PEDOT:PSS:WOx, PEDOT:PSS:MoOx, PEDOT:PSS:CNT, and PEDOT:PSS:GO were determined using Kelvin probe measurements. The work function of PEDOT:PSS:GO is approximately 4.6 eV, which is close to the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of PC71BM (4.5 eV). Hence, hole transport to ITO is desirable.

Fig. 2a and b show the dark current (J–V) and J–V characteristics under AM1.5G illumination at 100 mW cm−2 for conventional OPVs with different anode interfacial layers (PEDOT:PSS, PEDOT:PSS:WOx, PEDOT:PSS:MoOx, PEDOT:PSS:GO, and PEDOT:PSS:CNT), respectively. Table S1 collects the photovoltaic parameters for all devices. The device with PEDOT:PSS anode interfacial layer has a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 14.5 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.75 V, a fill factor (FF) of 67% along with PCE of 7.27%. When PEDOT:PSS is combined with WOx as anode interfacial layer, the Voc decreases from 0.75 to 0.73 V but both Jsc and FF remain unchanged. However, as we substitute WOx with MoOx, both Jsc and FF drop to 11.4 mA cm−2 and 64.2%, respectively.
Since the Voc of OPVs is determined by the difference in LUMO of acceptor and HOMO of donor, as well as the work function difference between anode and cathode, the decrease in Voc can be attributed to the enhanced valence band of anode after PEDOT:PSS:MoOx deposition (4.87 eV for PEDOT:PSS:MoOx coated ITO vs. 5.04 eV for PEDOT:PSS, see Fig. 3a). This argument is supported by the dark J–V curves in which PEDOT:PSS:MoOx device shows a low current in the forward direction and high leakage current in reverse direction. The series resistance (Rs) increases to 8.86 Ω cm2 and the shunt resistance (Rsh) decreases to 693.1 Ω cm2 in PEDOT:PSS:MoOx device, compared to PEDOT:PSS device which has Rs and Rsh of 7.62 Ω cm2 and 714.3 Ω cm2, respectively. On the other hand, the combination of PEDOT:PSS and CNT layer enhances Jsc, Voc and FF concurrently, and thus PCE of 7.48% was achieved.
The reduced work function of combined PEDOT:PSS and CNT (3.8 eV from 4.5 eV, Fig. 3b) increases the work function difference between anode and cathode, increasing the Voc to 0.74 V. The Rs reduces to 6.26 Ω cm2 and Rsh decreases to 533.3 Ω cm2. The FF and Jsc increase from 67 to 68.1% and from 14.5 to 14.8 mA cm−2, respectively. Finally, blending PEDOT:PSS and GO improves all photovoltaic parameters including Jsc, Voc, and FF along with PCE of about 7.53%. Further reduction in work function of combined PEDOT:PSS and GO (3.8 eV from 4.5 eV) increases the work function difference between anode and cathode, increasing the Voc to 0.75 V. The Rs reduces to 7.5 Ω cm2 and Rsh decreases to 702.9 Ω cm2. Both FF and Jsc enhance from 67 to 68.3% and from 14.5 to 14.9 mA cm−2, respectively. In both cases (PEDOT:PSS:CNT and PEDOT:PSS:GO) the outstanding diode quality factor (1.3595 and 1.3574, respectively) along very low negative bias leakage current density and high rectification ratio are obviously shown in Fig. 2a. While the role of GO in the enhancement of Jsc and FF of device is not clear at this point, we speculate that the increased built-in potential and internal electric field, due to reduced work function of cathode, might facilitate the charge carriers to escape shallow traps and reduce trap-assisted recombination.
We performed the UPS analysis to understand the influence of the proposed HTLs on the device performances. Fig. 3b–f show the energy-level diagrams for various HTLs on the ITO layer. The ΔVB for ITO/PEDOT:PSS layer is 0.50 eV. When the WOx, and MoOx were blended into the PEDOT:PSS, the ΔVB values were decreased from 0.50 eV to 0.40 eV, 0.35 eV, respectively while the ΔVB increased from 0.50 eV to 0.55 eV. The anticipated hole injection barrier can be estimated by the difference between the Fermi level and the valance band of the HTL. The results show that a decrease or increase of hole injection barrier, and thereby demonstrate that hole injection barrier was influenced by the introduction of additional interlayers and also show that interface engineering is particularly important in designing a high performance organic photovoltaic device. Thus, the decrease or increase of hole injection barrier caused by shift of ΔEvac lead to a larger and smaller hole injection barrier. On the other hand, when we introduced GO into PEDOT:PSS, the hole would transport more efficiently from the active layer to the anode.
To support our speculation, Fig. 4 demonstrates a significant decrease in hole injection barrier in the PEDOT:PSS:GO case via the downshift of the ΔEvac that accounts for the enhanced Jsc and PCE.
To explore the origins of the differences in device performance, the surface topography of each anode interfacial layer was studied by atomic force microscopy (AFM). Fig. 5 presents AFM images of the PEDOT:PSS, PEDOT:PSS:WOx, PEDOT:PSS:MoOx, PEDOT:PSS:CNT, and PEDOT:PSS:GO films on ITO substrates. Note the significant vertical scale differences in the two images, which illustrate the very different surface roughness of these five anode interfacial layers. In particular, the PEDOT:PSS film (Fig. 5a) exhibits an overall root-mean-square (RMS) roughness of 2.1 nm, whereas Fig. 4b reveals a slightly higher RMS roughness of 2.4 nm for the PEDOT:PSS:WOx layer. Fig. 5c shows a distinctive feature, where RMS roughness of 4.2 nm was obtained for the PEDOT:PSS:MoOx layer. Whereas, Fig. 5d and e depict a 2.1 nm RMS roughness for both PEDOT:PSS:CNT and PEDOT:PSS:GO layers, respectively. Fig. S1 shows the SEM images of these interlayers.
To gain further insight into the relative OPV performance of the PEDOT:PSS, PEDOT:PSS:WOx, PEDOT:PSS:MoOx, PEDOT:PSS:GO, or PEDOT:PSS:CNT anode interfacial layers, optical transmission (Fig. 2c) and external quantum efficiency (EQE) (Fig. 2d) measurements were carried out as a function of wavelength. The transmittance plots show that the transparencies of PEDOT:PSS:WOx, PEDOT:PSS:MoOx, PEDOT:PSS:GO, and PEDOT:PSS:CNT layers are better compared to the PEDOT:PSS layer across the entire visible spectrum. Moreover, device fabricated with PEDOT:PSS:GO anode interfacial layer outperformed the one with PEDOT:PSS anode interfacial layer in the 400–700 nm wavelength range.
The EQE value for PEDOT:PSS:GO device approaches 70.4% at around 460 nm. The integral Jsc calculated from the EQE spectrum from 300 nm to 800 nm is 14.71 mA cm−2 is indeed in a good agreement (1.27% error) with Jsc of 14.9 mA cm−2 obtained from J–V characteristics (Fig. 2b). Other integrated Jsc's values from the EQE spectra are also in good agreement with 1–3% error with Jsc obtained from J–V plots (Fig. 2b). In addition, we also tested solvent resistance measurements for all these anode interfacial layers including chlorobenzene, dichlorobenzene, and trichlorobenzene. All interfacial layers survived both dichlorobenzene and trichlorobenzene solvents, however, all interfacial layers were damaged after being treated with chlorobenzene solvent. This can be beneficial especially in using these interfacial layers as interconnecting layer in tandem solar cell (Fig. S2).
In order to understand the capability of PEDOT:PSS:GO as the promising anode interfacial layer, we designed and characterized another series of OPVs with a newly developed medium bandgap polymer, poly[4,8-bis(5-(2-ethylhexyl)thiophen-2-yl)benzo[1,2-b;4,5-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl-alt-(4-(2-ethylhexyl)-3-fluorothieno[3,4-b]thiophene-)-2-carboxylate-2-6-diyl] paired with PC71BM. Fig. 6a shows the J–V curves of PBDTTT-EFT:PC71BM measured under AM1.5G illumination (25 °C, 100 mW cm−2). The complete conventional device comprises of ITO/HTL/PBDTTT-EFT:PC71BM/PFN/Al. It is worth noting that no annealing treatment has been carried out toward the active layer. Details fabrication procedure can be obtained in the Experimental section. The Jsc, Voc, FF and PCE along with the Rs and Rsh values for OPVs are listed in Table S2. As can be seen from Table S2, the Voc is similar for all fabricated devices, which is reasonable because Voc is governed by the energetic relationship between the donor and acceptor in the BHJ-based OPVs. As shown, the cells with PEDOT:PSS:MoOx of (35 nm) show relatively poor performance due to a significantly low FF compared to that of other devices, mainly due to the high Rs and low Rsh values. The poor performance of PEDOT:PSS:MoOx-based device can be supported by the fact that it demonstrated lower currents and higher leakage currents in the forward and reverse directions, respectively (Fig. 6b). All photovoltaic parameters are enhanced by the integration of PEDOT:PSS:GO (34 nm) as the anode interfacial layer. The PCE of the cells with PEDOT:PSS:GO improved by 4.23% from 8.75 to 9.12%. This is largely due to the increased in the Jsc value to 16.9 mA cm−2 compared to that of PEDOT:PSS-based device with only 16.1 mA cm−2. The improvement in PCE can be evidenced by the downshift of the ΔEvac (Fig. S1) leading to efficient hole transport process from the PBDTTT-EFT:PC71BM to the anode.
To understand the origin of this remarkable improvement, Fig. 6c demonstrates the EQE spectra for PBDTTT-EFT:PC71BM-based OPVs. As one can see from these spectra, the conventional single-junction OPVs realizing PEDOT:PSS:GO exhibited the maximum EQE of 75.4%, which corresponds to efficient photo-to-electron conversion. In addition, the lowest EQE comes from the cells with PEDOT:PSS:MoOx, where the maximum EQE is 73.7%. Moreover, for all PBDTTT-EFT:PC71BM-based devices, the integral current density deduced by EQE spectra are in good agreement with our experimental recorded Jsc values. The different between measured and the calculated current density values are within 5%, indicating that the photovoltaic measurement is reliable.

We have successfully demonstrated a conventional OPV with 7.53% and 9.12% with PTB7:PC71BM and PBDTTT-EFT:PC71BM, respectively using PEDOT:PSS:GO anode interfacial layer. Blending PEDOT:PSS with GO increases the efficiency of the conventional OPV as a result of reducing the work function of the anode. The PEDOT:PSS:GO HTL plays a vital role in enhancing Jsc and PCE in OPV and thus demonstrates the highest PCE of 7.53% and 9.12% and the EQE of 70% and 75.4% for PTB7:PC71BM and PBDTTT-EFT:PC71BM, respectively. Thus, it is believe that proper interface engineering could lead to highly efficient OPV.


This work was supported by MOTIE Ministry of Trade, Industry & Energy (10052044) and KDRC (Korea Display Research Corporation) support program for the development of future device technology for display industry.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ra04376c
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016