 DOI: 10.1039/C7TC01329A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 6798-6804


Zhe
Liu
,

Deyu
Liu
,

Weiye
Chen
,

Junyi
Wang
,

Feng
Li
,

Di
Wang
,

Yonghai
Li
,

Mingliang
Sun
* and 

Renqiang
Yang
*

Institute of Material Science and Engineering, Ocean University of China, Qingdao 26100, People's Republic of China. E-mail: mlsun@ouc.edu.cn

CAS Key Laboratory of Bio-based Materials, Qingdao Institute of Bioenergy and Bioprocess Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Qingdao 266101, People's Republic of China. E-mail: yangrq@qibebt.ac.cn

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China

Key Laboratory of Rubber-Plastics of Ministry of Education/Shandong Province, School of Polymer Science and Engineering, Qingdao University of Science & Technology, 53 Zhengzhou Road, Qingdao 266042, China

Received
29th March 2017
, Accepted 17th June 2017
First published on 17th June 2017
Two novel copolymer donors based on one-dimensional (1D)–two-dimensional (2D) asymmetrical benzodithiophene (BDT) units (BDTPH-H and BDTPH-OR) and 2,3-diphenyl-5,8-di(thiophen-2-yl)quinoxaline (DTQx) were synthesized and compared with one-dimensional or two-dimensional symmetric BDT unit based photovoltaic polymers. Both asymmetrical polymers exhibited promising photovoltaic performance compared with 1D and 2D symmetric BDT polymers. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of PBDTPH-DTQx based polymer solar cells is 5.6%, with balanced VOC = 0.7 V, JSC = 11.89 mA cm−2 and FF = 67.3%, which is almost the highest PCE compared with similar BDT unit and fluorine-free substituted DTQx based polymer. What is more, PBDTPH-DTQx shows better performance than PBDTPHO-DTQx due to the single phenyl making DTQx more planar and with better π–π stacking than alkoxy phenyl. These findings demonstrate that the 1D–2D asymmetrical BDT units are also applicable to poor planarity fluorine-free substituted quinoxaline acceptor system.

In the last fifteen years, much effort has been devoted to study bulk heterojunction (BHJ) polymer solar cells (PSCs) due to their flexibility, light weight, low cost, and solution-processing synthesis. The power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of PSCs has been improved to over 11%. In a BHJ structured PSC device, the most important element is the active layer which is made of two main materials: a conjugated polymer electron donor and a soluble fullerene or non-fullerene derivative electron acceptor. In order to achieve high PCE, great efforts have been focused on the design of molecular structure to tune the band gaps (Eg) and energy levels of the active-layer polymers. In this way, researchers can maximize the short-circuit current density (JSC), open-circuit voltage (VOC) and fill factor (FF). A donor–acceptor (D–A) alternating structure is a common structure used to design high-performance PSC donors.

As to the acceptor units in copolymer donors, electron deficient quinoxaline units are often used to construct narrow Eg PSC polymers. Quinoxaline derivatives prepared by introducing aryl side chains are widely used as acceptor building blocks, which have more substitution positions to improve the solubility of the resulting polymers. 2,3-Diphenyl-5,8-di(thiophen-2-yl)quinoxaline (DTQx) is one such quinoxaline derivative with two disjunction benzene rings, which could affect the planar structure of polymers and thus JSC and PCEs.
In addition to donor units, as a star unit to build PSC donor materials, rigid and planar benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene (BDT) is attractive for achieving highly tunable molecular energy levels and optical band gaps as well as high hole mobilities. Copolymers based on BDT units and DTQx show excellent optical performance. However, up to now most of the reports about high-performance PSCs involve BDT chemical structures that are two-dimensional (2D) or one-dimensional (1D) symmetric structures, and asymmetric BDT unit based polymers have not been reported. What is more, these common 1D or 2D BDT units and DTQx copolymers do not show good FF and JSC. Recently, Yang and co-workers reported an asymmetric 1D–2D structure that can give decent VOC with high JSC and FF. The 1D–2D asymmetric BDT structure is made of one aromatic ring and an alkoxy side chain. This BDT structure was proved to be suitable for a 4,7-di(thiophen-2-ethylhexyl)-5,6-difluoro-2,1,3-benzothiadiazole (DTffBT) and 2-ethylhexyl-3-fluorothieno[3,4-b′]thiophene-2-carboxylate (TT) co-monomer system. The benzene ring attached to the BDT unit makes a higher twist angle between BDT units and DTQx backbone to improve polymer solubility. Furthermore, the alkoxy side chain can increase the polymer intermolecular stacking. This 1D–2D structure based polymer shows high JSC and VOC, which is the advantage of one-dimensional or two-dimensional structures, respectively. The 1D–2D asymmetric structure may improve the polymer planarity due to the flexible alkoxy group compared with 2D structure made of two rigid aromatic ring side chains.
Both DTffBT and TT are good planarity acceptor units according to a previous report. To demonstrate that asymmetric structures are suitable for poor planarity acceptor systems, we selected fluorine-free substituted quinoxaline derivative as acceptor unit. In this work, asymmetric BDT units (BDTPH-H and BDTPH-OR) were used to build two new polymers to improve the planarity of the DTQx acceptor based polymers. These two polymers show good solubility due to the high twist angle between BDT units and phenyl ring. In addition, JSC and FF can maintain a high level while the PCE is almost the highest for the poor planarity fluorine-free substituted BDT-quinoxaline system.

The relevant molecular structures are shown in Scheme 1. The two polymers mentioned above were synthesized by the same method. Polymers were obtained through Still coupling with Pd2(dba)3 and P(o-tol)3 as catalysts and toluene as solvent. The polymers showed good solubility in chloroform or o-dichlorobenzene. The two polymers were treated by Soxhlet extraction to get the pure material. PBDTPHO-DTQx and PBDTPH-DTQx could dissolve in chloroform at room temperature. The Mn of PBDTPH-DTQx and PBDTPHO-DTQx are 30 × 103 and 25 × 103 respectively. The thermal properties of PBDTPH-DTQx and PBDTPHO-DTQx were determined by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) under nitrogen atmosphere, as shown in Fig. 1. TGA shows that the onset decomposition points of PBDTPH-DTQx and PBDTPHO-DTQx are 336 °C and 320 °C, respectively. The thermal stability of the two polymers makes them suitable for PSC applications. The relevant data are summarized in Table 1.

Polymer

M
n (kDa)

M
w (kDa)
PDI

T
d (°C)
PBDTPH-DTQx
30
45
1.50
336
PBDTPHO-DTQx
25
57
2.28
320

The UV-visible absorption spectra of the polymers are shown in Fig. 2. The corresponding detailed absorption data are summarized in Table 2, including corresponding absorption onset and optical bandgap, as well as maximum absorption peak in solution and film. Both polymers show similar absorption feature in solution and thin film, which is a general feature of D–A polymers and caused by the strong intramolecular charge transfer state. The peak at 410 nm was attributed to the π–π* transition of the BDT and quinoxaline polymer backbone. The absorption peaks of PBDTPH-DTQx in solution and solid film are both at ∼610 nm; the absorption peaks of PBDTPHO-DTQx in solution and solid film are at ∼610 nm and 620 nm, respectively. The absorption peak of PBDTPHO-DTQx in film is red-shifted almost 10 nm compared to PBDTPH-DTQx which is due to the electron-donating ability of the alkoxy chain attached to the phenyl ring. The optical band gaps of PBDTPH-DTQx and PBDTPHO-DTQx are almost the same. The Eoptg of PBDTPH-DTQx and PBDTPHO-DTQx are 1.75 and 1.74 eV respectively, calculated from the onsets of film absorption, according to the equation: Eoptg = 1240/λ.

Polymer
Solution λonset (nm)
Film λonset (nm)
Solution λmax (nm)
Film λmax (nm)
HOMO (eV)
LUMO (eV)
HOMO (eV)
LUMO (eV)

E
optg (eV)

a Calculated by DFT.
b Measured by cyclic voltammetry.

PBDTPH-DTQx
697
710
610
610
−4.92
−2.25
−5.37
−3.62
1.75
PBDTPHO-DTQx
695
713
610
620
−4.89
−2.23
−5.34
−3.60
1.74
To further investigate the intermolecular aggregation interaction of PBDTPH-DTQx and PBDTPHO-DTQx, the UV-visible absorption spectra evolving with temperature were measured and the corresponding spectra are shown in Fig. 2b and c respectively. With an increase of temperature, the peaks decay gradually. This implies that both PBDTPH-DTQx and PBDTPHO-DTQx have strong intermolecular aggregation.

Electrochemical cyclic voltammetry (CV) is used to evaluate molecular energy levels of conjugated polymers. The electrochemical properties of the two polymers were measured by CV with the polymers coated on the surface of glassy carbon electrodes. The relevant data are listed in Table 2. The highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) energy level of the two polymers was obtained from the oxidation onset and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energy level was determined from the optical band gap and HOMO energy level. As shown in Table 2, the HOMO energy levels of PBDTPH-DTQx and PBDTPHO-DTQx are calculated to be −5.37 and −5.34 eV respectively by the empirical equation EHOMO = −e(Eox + 4.8 − E1/2, (Fc/Fc+)), and the potential of the Fc/Fc+ was calculated to be 0.39 V vs. SCE. PBDTPHO-DTQx shows higher HOMO than PBDTPH-DTQx which is due to the electron-donating ability of the alkoxy attached in the phenyl side group. Then the LUMO energy level was calculated by the equation: ELUMO = EHOMO + Eoptg. The high LUMO energy levels of PBDTPH-DTQx and PBDTPHO-DTQx ensure adequate driving force for charge transfer from the polymers to PC71BM.


For a deeper understanding, the optoelectronic properties of the two polymers were investigated. The different conformations of the polymers were determined from density functional theory (DFT) using the Gaussian 09 program at the B3LYP/6-31G(d,p) level. As shown in Fig. 3, the dihedral angles of the two polymers between the BDT unit and DTQx main backbone are 6.34° and 11.74°, respectively. These small dihedral angles reflect good planarity and easy charge transfer to afford higher JSC. In addition, the rigid phenyl attached to the BDT unit and BDT skeleton formed a large twist angle. This high degree of twisting is beneficial to improve polymer solubility. The HOMO and LUMO of these two polymers show similar situation. The LUMO was mainly delocalized in the DTQx unit, while the HOMO energy level was located both in the BDT and DTQx units. Energy level data measured by DFT calculations coincide with CV results. The HOMO and LUMO energy levels measured by DFT calculations and CV curves are presented in Table 2.


PSC devices were fabricated with an architecture of indium tin oxide (ITO)/PEDOT:PSS/BHJ blend/Ca/Al. PC71BM was used as the electron acceptor material, and o-dichlorobenzene was selected as the processing solvent for fabricating the active layers. The weight ratios of PBDTPH-DTQx and PBDTPHO-DTQx to PC71BM varied from 1:1 to 1:1.5, 1:2, and 1:3. The optimal weight ratio between the two polymers and PC71BM was 1:2.

As previously reported, during the spin-coating process, annealing or using 1,8-diiodooctane (DIO) as additive treatment of the device can further improve device performances. In this work, these two methods were both employed to improve the device performance. Both devices were annealed from 100 °C to 120 °C and measured under the simulated AM 1.5 G illumination condition. We found that after annealing at 120 °C, both JSC and FF of these two devices can be improved simultaneously without affecting VOC. DIO additive did not work for these two polymers. The current density–voltage (J–V) curves of these two polymers are shown in Fig. 4a. The PBDTPH-DTQx polymer based device has a VOC of 0.75 V, a JSC of 9.63 mA cm−2 and an FF of 60.4%, resulting in a PCE of 4.36%. The PBDTPHO-DTQx device shows an increased PCE of 5.60% with a VOC of 0.70 V, a JSC of 11.89 mA cm−2 and an FF of 67.3%. The relevant data are shown in Table 3. In order to verify that the asymmetric BDT units show decent performance in DTQx and BDT copolymer systems, we chose three similar efficient fluorine-free substituted quinoxaline and BDT copolymers from the literature for comparidon. From the data in Table 3, we can see that asymmetric structures based on PBDTPH-DTQx polymer show balanced JSC, FF and higher PCE, which could be attributed to the much improved morphology of the blends. Furthermore, the asymmetric structure BDT unit based DTQx polymers exhibit a more balanced JSC, FF and VOC, combining the 1D and 2D advantage. In general, the asymmetric structure BDT unit has an excellent performance in the BDT-DTQx system.
Polymer:PC71BM (1:2 w/w)

E
g − eVOC

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%) max. (ave)
Ref.

a Average PCE in parentheses (15 devices).

PBDTPH-DTQx
1.05
11.89
0.70
67.3
5.60 (5.47)
This work
PBDTPHO-DTQx
0.99
9.60
0.75
60.4
4.36 (4.25)
This work
PTOBDTTQ2
0.76
9.40
0.83
54.0
4.24

35

PBDTDTQx-T
0.91
10.13
0.76
64.3
5.0

36

P(BDT-DTQx)
1.03
6.30
0.65
55.2
2.3

37

The donor photon energy loss is calculated by the equation: Eg − eVOC, Eg being the optical band gap while VOC is obtained from the corresponding device with PC71BM. The donor photon energy loss values of PBDTPH-DTQx and PBDTPHO-DTQx were calculated and are shown in Table 3. The Eg − eVOC values of PBDTPH-DTQx and PBDTPHO-DTQx are 1.05 and 0.99 eV respectively, which are close to those of other efficient PSC materials PBDTDTQx-T (0.91 eV) and P(BDT-DTQx) (1.03 eV). This implies the two polymers can show good photovoltaic performance in polymer analogs with the same backbone.
To confirm the PCE, the external quantum efficiency (EQE) of the devices was measured under monochromatic light illumination. As shown in Fig. 4b, the PBDTPH-DTQx and PBDTPHO-DTQx devices show similar photoresponse between 300 and 750 nm, but the device based on PBDTPH-DTQx shows higher EQE values. The EQE peak values of the PSC devices based on PBDTPH-DTQx and PBDTPHO-DTQx are 70% and 59%, respectively, which means PBDTPH-DTQx shows better light harvesting properties. This result indicates that the more planar PBDTPH-DTQx is helpful in improving the Jsc performance of PSCs. The Jsc values, calculated by the integration of the EQE of the devices, are close to the Jsc values obtained from the J–V curves.

Furthermore, the hole mobility is an important factor that influences JSC. We measured the hole mobility of the D–A blend films in terms of the space charge limited current (SCLC) based on the device structure (ITO/PEDOT:PSS/polymer:PC71BM/Au), and the results are shown in Fig. 5. The hole motilities of PBDTPH-DTQx and PBDTPHO-DTQx are 3.8 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 2.7 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively. Both polymers show good hole motilities. PBDTPH-DTQx exhibited higher hole mobility than PBDTPHO-DTQx, which leads to a larger JSC and FF.


Furthermore, the morphology characteristics were explored by transmission electron microscopy (TEM). According to previous reports about quinoxaline and BDT copolymers, thermal annealing plays an important role in morphology control in PSC devices. The TEM images of the blends are shown in Fig. 6. From the four TEM images, the device based on PBDTPH-DTQx/PC71BM formed an obvious interpenetrating network structure to make the polymer easily mix with PC71BM ensuring better exciton dissociation and charge transport. However, there are some aggregated PC71BM domains in the device based on PBDTPHO-DTQx, which would decrease exciton transfer to the donor/acceptor interface and is not favorable for charge separation. That may be another reason to explain why the device based on PBDTPH-DTQx has higher FF and JSC than that based on PBDTPHO-DTQx. The crystallinity of the two polymer films was measured by X-ray diffraction (XRD), as shown in Fig. 7. There are no peaks in the XRD patterns, indicating these two polymers are amorphous in nature.


In this work, we synthesized and characterized two novel polymers, PBDTPH-DTQx and PBDTPHO-DTQx, based on 1D–2D asymmetric BDT donor building blocks. These two polymers exhibit good absorption and appropriate molecular energy levels. According to the advantages of 1D–2D asymmetric BDT units, both polymers show better photovoltaic performance by improving the planarity of the BDTs and DTQx copolymers. Thereby JSC and FF can achieve better levels in BDT unit and quinoxaline copolymer system with moderate Voc. PBDTPH-DTQx shows excellent optical performance with high JSC = 11.89 mA cm−2 and FF = 67.3% in similar BDT structures and copolymer systems. It is worth mentioning that the PCE of PBDTPH-DTQx is almost the highest of BDT structures and fluorine-free substituted quinoxaline copolymer systems. These results indicate that the asymmetric structure BDT units in the poor planarity quinoxaline system also show a promising photovoltaic performance.


The catalyst and the starting chemicals were purchased from J & K and other commercial companies and used without any further purification. Tetrahydrofuran (THF) and toluene used for water-sensitive reactions were distilled with sodium under an argon atmosphere.


Elemental analysis was conducted with a Vario El Cube Elementar analyzer. Ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) absorption spectra were measured with a Hitachi U-4100 UV-vis spectrophotometer. The number average molecular weight (Mn) and polydispersity index (PDI) were estimated by gel permeation chromatography (GPC) with an ELEOS system using THF as the eluent and monodispersed polystyrene as the standard. TGA measurements were performed by an SDT-Q600 analyzer with a heating rate of 10 °C min−1 under a nitrogen atmosphere. The electrochemical CV experiments were conducted using a CHI660D electrochemical workstation with a three-electrode system, with glassy carbon disk, Pt wire, and calomel electrode as the working electrode, counter electrode, and reference electrode, respectively, in a solution of tetrabutylammonium hexafluorophosphate (0.1 M) in acetonitrile. The DFT calculations were performed using the Gaussian 09 program with a model of B3LYP/6-31G in the gas phase. The PCE of the two polymers were measured under AM 1.5 G illumination with an intensity of 100 mW cm−2. EQEs of devices were recorded with a Newport incident photon conversion efficiency (IPCE) measurement system. XRD patterns were recorded with a Bruker D8 Advance.


PSC devices with an architecture of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/BHJ:PC71BM/Ca/Al were spin-coated on ITO-coated glass substrates. The ITO-coated glasses were washed in sonicating baths (for 20 min) using deionized water, acetone and isopropanol sequentially. And then substrates were dried with a stream of N2 gas, and finally treated in an oxygen plasma chamber for 10 min. After this pre-treatment, the PEDOT:PSS was spun-cast on the ITO-coated substrate surface at 4500 rpm and dried at 150 °C for 20 min. PC71BM and polymers were mixed inside a glove box. The polymers and PC71BM were dissolved in o-dichlorobenzene at a concentration of 10 mg mL−1 with weight ratios of 1:1, 1:1.5, and 1:2, and then the blend solutions were stirred overnight. The blend solutions were spin-coated on top of the ITO/PEDOT:PSS surface as the active layer. The active layer area of the PSC devices was 0.1 cm2. Before cathode deposition, the substrates were thermally annealed at 120 °C. To complete the device fabrication, Al and Ca were directly thermally evaporated onto the substrates without breaking the vacuum. The PSC devices based on PBDTPH-DTQx and PBDTPHO-DTQx were characterized under AM 1.5 G illumination with an intensity of 100 mW cm−2. The current–voltage (I–V) characteristics of all PSC devices were measured using a Keithley 2420 source meter. The hole mobility of the device active layers was measured by the SCLC test using devices with structure: glass/ITO/PEDOT:PSS/polymer:PC71BM/Au. We used the optimized active layers to measure the mobility.


These three compounds were synthesized according to a previous report.


A mixture of BDTPHSn (83.24 mg, 0.10 mmol), DTQx (86.08 mg, 0.10 mmol), Pd2(dba)3 (3 mg), P(o-tol)3 (6 mg) and toluene (6 mL) was added into a flask under argon atmosphere, which was then heated to 120 °C and stirred overnight. Then after cooling to room temperature, the solution was added dropwise into methanol to afford the polymer. The raw product was purified further by Soxhlet extraction with hexane, dichloromethane and chloroform as solvent. The remaining solid was dissolved with heated chloroform and was washed by column chromatography. Finally, after removing the solvent, the remaining solid was added into methanol again. A dark red solid was obtained after filtration (105.3 mg, 87% yield). PBDTPH-DTQx elemental analysis calcd (%) for C76H88N2O3S4: C 75.67, H 7.40, found (%): C 75.70, H 7.36. Mn = 30 kDa, PDI = 1.50, Td = 336 °C.

Synthesis of polymer PBDTPHO-DTQx. BDTPHOSn (96.06 mg, 0.10 mmol) and DTQx (86.08 mg, 0.10 mmol) were used, with the amount of catalyst and solvent being the same as for PBDTPH-DTQx. The treatment was also the same as for PBDTPH-DTQx. The final product was a dark red colour solid (108.36 mg, 80.4% yield). PBDTPHO-DTQx elemental analysis calcd (%) for C85H106N2O4S4: C 75.67, H 7.96%, found (%): C 75.74, H 7.93. Mn = 25 KDa, PDI = 2.28, Td = 320 °C.

The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from the NSFC (51573205 and 21274134).


† Zhe Liu and Deyu Liu contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017