 DOI: 10.1039/D3NJ01953E
(Paper)
New J. Chem., 2023, 47, 13331-13341


Kidan G.
Gebremariam
,

Fikadu G.
Hone
,

Jane
Dai
,

Genene T.
Mola
,

Wendimagegn
Mammo
 and 

Newayemedhin A.
Tegegne
*

Department of Physics, Addis Ababa University, 1176 Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. E-mail: newaye.medhin@aau.edu.et

Department of Physics, Kotebe University of Education, 31248 Addis Ababa, Ethiopia

Department of Physics, Laser research Institute, Stellenbosch University, Private Bag X1, 7602, South Africa

School of Chemistry and Physics, University of Kwazulu Natal, Pietermaritzburg Campus, Private Bag X01, Scottsville 3209, South Africa

Department of Chemistry, Addis Ababa University, 33658, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia

Received
27th April 2023
, Accepted 15th June 2023
First published on 15th June 2023
Degradation of polymer molecules is one of the main factors that reduces the lifetime of thin film organic solar cells. The mechanisms of such degradations are not at all well-established because of the different nature of the polymer molecules. In this work, PBDTQ-4O, a donor (benzodithiophene)–acceptor(benzo-1,4-dioxane substituted quinoxaline-benzodithiophene)-based copolymer was successfully designed and synthesized using the Stille cross-coupling reaction to study the effect of light stress on organic solar cells (OSCs). PBDTQ-4O:PC70BM-based inverted OSCs exhibited a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 4.8%. The stability of light stressed and unstressed OSC devices was investigated to highlight the contribution of an ambient environment to the light-induced degradation in the devices. The solar cells showed a fast loss in PCE of 17 and 9% in the first 2 h followed by 34 and 24% loss after 10 h of ageing in light stressed and unstressed devices, respectively. Furthermore, the formation of a coarse morphology with ageing confirms the development of large domain sizes that hinder exciton dissociation and reduce the measured photo-current. Ageing of the devices was also found to enhance the bi-molecular recombination due to the drastic decrease in electron mobility due to the reduction of the conductivity of the electron transport layer, ZnO, in both devices. In conclusion, our findings show that ambient environmental conditions play a significant role in light-induced degradation recorded in air.

Organic solar cells (OSCs) are a potential green energy technology with distinct advantages such as low cost, light weight, flexibility, and large scale roll-to-roll processing, thereby attracting strong commercial interest. OCSs have recently demonstrated power conversion efficiencies (PCE) close to 20% for single junction devices and over 20% for multi-junction devices. Great effort has been put into the development of novel materials, active layer morphology control, and device structure optimization in order to obtain high PCEs. One of the key strategies for reducing band gaps and achieving high PCEs is the donor–acceptor (D–A) technique. Combining electron-rich (D) and electron-deficient (A) units on the polymer backbone results in a polymer with a reduced band gap that allows for the efficient harvesting of a significant portion of the solar spectrum. Furthermore, the optical and electrochemical properties of polymers can be fine-tuned using this technique to improve charge generation and mobility in OSCs. Among the many electron donor units, benzo[1,2-b′:4,5-b′]dithiophene (BDT) has received a lot of attention due to its structural rigidity, planarity, extended conjugation length, and favorable interchain stacking in the solid state. BDT has been employed in the synthesis of polymers that have achieved outstanding PCEs exceeding 19%. On the other hand, appropriate acceptors such as quinoxaline units are needed to fine-tune the band gap of BDT-based copolymers for higher efficiency and stability. The ease of synthesis and multiple substitutions make quinoxaline a suitable acceptor unit for high-performing devices. Zeng et al. reported that side chain engineering of quinoxaline using different ester side chains increased their PCE to over 10% in all polymer solar cells. A high PCE of 16.1% was obtained by improving the structure of quinoxaline-based copolymers with chlorobenzene side chains. Furthermore, a high PCE of above 17% was obtained using a fluorinated bithienyl-benzodithiophene donor unit in a qunoxaline-based copolymer as the photoactive material, in addition to optimizing the quinoxaline unit.

Despite the aforementioned success in achieving highly efficient OSCs, the operational stability of the resulting device is still the main barrier for commercialization of such devices. Hence, efforts are underway to improve the performance and stability to facilitate the commercialization of OSCs. The stability of OSC devices has received a lot of interest in recent years, leading to extensive investigation of some of the elements that contribute to their degradation, including oxygen, moisture, temperature, and light. For instance, much effort has been expended in preventing oxygen and water diffusion through the use of appropriate encapsulation methods. However, light irradiation is one of the unavoidable factors driving OSC device degradation by causing various morphological and molecular changes such as active layer material rearrangement, cross linking, and chain scission.
For conjugated polymers, a number of studies that compare the photo-stability of diverse materials in air by observing their absorption spectra have deepened our understanding of their inherent stability. Findings of such studies revealed that their photochemical stability and the rate of degradation of polymers are dependent on their chemical bond, electronic properties related to their reactivity with light and oxygen, HOMO levels, structural conformation, intra- and inter-chain interactions of the chains, and solubility and processibility. Moreover, photo-induced degradation processes in air are reported to be significantly faster than those that occur when materials are irradiated in the absence of oxygen. In addition, the number, size and nature of side chains play a fundamental role in their stability. Gedefaw et al. have investigated the effect of polymer side chain variations on photochemical stability in quinoxaline-based polymers. Side chains play a crucial role in the photooxidative degradation of polymers where stability is more affected by the presence of linear or branched side chains. Introduction of alkoxy side groups on the aromatic skeleton generally improved photostability compared to alkyl side groups. The introduction of aromatic-oxy-alkyl links makes materials more resistant to photooxidative degradation by reducing the abstraction of benzylic hydrogen atoms (sites alpha to the conjugated backbone).
By far the most widely studied quinoxaline-based polymer is TQ1 although a wide variety of p-type polymers containing the quinoxaline moiety have been prepared for organic solar cell (OSC) applications. The rapid degradation of active layer materials when exposed to light has been a major concern when it comes to the commercialization of OSCs. Studies by Moons et al. and Andersson et al. revealed that the photobleaching of TQ1 can mainly be attributed to chain scission due to photo-induced oxidation.
In order to create a medium band gap copolymer (PBDTQ-4O) in this contribution, lengthy alkyloxy side chains were removed and a benzo-1,4-dioxane substituted quinoxaline acceptor unit was copolymerized with a benzodithiophene (BDT) donor unit as shown in Scheme 1. It had been proposed that adding 2,3-ethylenedioxybenzene units to the quinoxaline moiety might increase the photo-oxidative stability of PBDTQ-4O. Due to the lack of benzylic hydrogen atoms and lengthy alkyl side chains, the stability is anticipated to increase with the addition of 2,3-ethylenedioxybenzene moieties on the quinoxaline unit in PBDTQ-4O. It is well-documented that materials with aromatic-oxy-alkyl side chains are more resistant to photooxidative degradation because they reduce the abstraction of the benzylic hydrogen atom through a free-radical process. The abstraction of hydrogen atoms from benzylic positions by a free radical is attributed to be the first step in many photooxidation reactions in the presence of UV-visible light in air. In the presence of oxygen or a radical, labile benzylic hydrogen atoms react fast to form a relatively stable radical which can then react in a variety of ways giving rise to chain scission.
Hence, the effect of the ambient environment on the photostability of OSCs based on PBDTQ-4O was investigated by monitoring the evolution of the PCE of light-stressed and unstressed devices over time. The initial PCE value of an inverted OSC based on PBDTQ-4O:PC70BM (1:2) was 4.8%. After 10 h, the light-stressed and unstressed devices retained 66 and 76% of their initial PCE, respectively. The short circuit current density (Jsc) was found to have an effect on the evolution of the PCE, while the open circuit voltage (Voc) and fill factor (FF) had a lesser impact. The decrease in Jsc is primarily due to larger phase separation between the donor and the acceptor domains, which reduced exciton dissociation in both stressed and unstressed devices. Furthermore, bimolecular recombination was found to be induced as both devices aged. As a result, the environment had a significant effect on the light-induced degradation of the PBDTQ-4O-based OSC.

The PBDTQ-4O copolymer was prepared using the Stille polymerization reaction between 5,8-bis(5-bromo-4-dodecylthiophen-2-yl)-2,3-bis(2,3-dihydrobenzo[b][1,4]dioxin-6-yl)quinoxaline (9) and 2,6-bis(trimethylstannyl)-4,8-bis(2-ethylhexyloxy)benzo[1,2-b;4,5-b]dithiophene (10) as depicted in Scheme 1. Monomer 10 was obtained from a commercial source. The synthesis of monomer 9 was accomplished starting from benzo-1,4-dioxane (4) in four steps as shown in Scheme S1 (ESI). Thus, the treatment of 4 with oxalyl chloride and aluminum chloride afforded 1,2-bis(2,3-dihydrobenzo[b][1,4]dioxin-6-yl)ethane-1,2-dione (5). Condensation of 5 with 3,6-dibromobenezene-1,2-diamine (3), which was prepared starting from benzo[c][1,2,5]thiadiazole (1) in two steps, gave 5,8-dibromo-2,3-bis(2,3-dihydrobenzo[b][1,4]dioxin-6-yl)quinoxaline (6). The Stille coupling reaction between compound 6 and (4-dodecylthiophen-2-yl)trimethylstannane (7) afforded 2,3-bis(2,3-dihydrobenzo[b][1,4]dioxin-6-yl)-5,8-bis(4-dodecylthiophen-2-yl)quinoxaline (8) which was subsequently brominated with N-bromosuccinimide to give monomer 9.


The square wave voltammetry measurement was performed using a BASi Epsilon-EC potentiostat. A three-electrode setup was used, with a platinum disk as a working electrode, a platinum wire as a counter electrode, and Ag/Ag+ as a quasi reference electrode. A 0.1 M solution of tetrabutylammoniumperchlorate (TBAP) in anhydrous acetonitrile was used as a supporting electrolyte. A thin polymer film was cast from CHCl3 solution onto the working electrode. Nitrogen was bubbled into the electrolyte solution prior to the experiment. During scans, nitrogen was flushed over the electrolyte surface. The platinum disk was polished by using 0.5 and 0.3 μm Al2O3 slurries followed by thoroughly rinsing with deionized water and acetonitrile. The potential of the quasi-reference electrode was corrected to the Ag/AgCl reference electrode by measuring the ferric/ferrous (FeIII/FeII) redox couple in the supporting electrolyte–solvent system, which was found to be 0.1 V versus Ag/AgCl. All potentials were reported in volts against the Ag/AgCl reference electrode. The HOMO and LUMO energy levels were deduced from their respective ionization potentials and electron affinities, estimated from the oxidation (Eoxonset) and reduction(Eredonset) onset potentials according to the formula given in eqn (1)

EHOMO/LUMO = −(Eoxonset/Eredonset ± 4.4) eV
(1)

The absorption and photoluminescence (PL) spectra of the samples investigated were recorded using a PerkinElmer Lambda 19 UV-vis spectrophotometer and a JY Horiba Fluoromax-4 spectroflourometer, respectively. Thin films of the pristine PBDTQ-4O and its blend with PC70BM were prepared using an ortho-dichlorobenzene (o-DCB) solvent at a concentration of 25 mg mL−1 that was stirred at a temperature of 80 °C for 4 h. To drive out the solvent, the spin coated thin films were annealed at 130 °C for 10 min.


The OSC devices were fabricated in an inverted geometry of ITO (indium tin oxide)/ZnO (zinc oxide)/PBDTQ-4O:PC70BM/MoO3 (molybdenum-trioxide)/Al (aluminum). ITO coated glasses were cleaned in a sonicating bath for 10 min each in deionized water, acetone, and isopropanol sequentially. The substrates were then dried in an oven at 60 °C for 20 min followed by UV-ozone treatment for 15 min to drive out solvent traces. A 0.52 M ZnO solution was prepared by dissolving zinc acetate dihydrate (Zn(CH3COO)2.2H2O) in a mixture of 2-methoxyethanol (10 mL) and an ethanolamine stabilizer and stirring at room temperature overnight. The ZnO solution was spin coated at 3000 rpm for 50 s on the pre-cleaned ITO substrate, followed by annealing at 150 °C for 1 h and slowly cooling to room temperature to produce a 40 nm thick electron transport layer (ETL). The bulk heterojunction PBDTQ-4O:PC70BM (1:2) active layer solution was prepared at a concentration of 25 mg mL−1 in o-DCB solvent and spin coated at a spin speed of 1000 rpm over the stack. The active layer was then annealed on a hotplate for 10 min at 130 °C to drive out the solvent traces. Finally, 10 nm MoO3 and 100 nm Al were thermally deposited sequentially at a pressure of less than 1 × 10−6 mbar to cap the device. The photovoltaic (PV) performances of the optimized unencapsulated devices were determined using a Keithley-2400 source meter and a solar simulator MODEL SS-50AA operating at 100 mW cm−2 matching the AM 1.5G solar spectrum. The active layer morphology of the devices was investigated using an atomic force microscope (AFM) model NT-MDT-NTE-GRA in a tapping mode.


The degradations of active layer thin films and OSC devices were monitored under an ambient atmosphere. A tungsten lamp operating at an intensity of 100 mW cm−2 was used to degrade the light-stressed samples according to the ISOSL-3 protocol. Unstressed devices were aged in the dark under ambient conditions for the environmental stability tests. All the degradation studies were recorded by periodically taking the measurements and putting the samples back for further degradation.


The absorption spectra of the pristine PBDTQ-4O both in the film and in the o-DCB solution as well as its bulk PBDTQ-4O:PC70BM blend film are shown in Fig. 1a. The absorption of the pristine PBDTQ-4O in the solution and the thin film exhibited the common two-band profile due to the alternating donor–acceptor bonding in the copolymer. The high energy band (below 500 nm wavelength) is attributed to the π–π* transition, whereas the low energy band (above 500 nm wavelength) is due to the intra-molecular charge transfer (ICT) between the electron–donor (BDT) and electron–acceptor (quinoxaline) moieties. The absorption spectrum of PBDTQ-4O in the solution revealed a featureless profile with no vibronic shoulder while a weak red-shifted shoulder is observed around 650 nm in the spectrum of the thin film. This is an indication of the aggregate formation in the solid state due to the interchain interaction while it is quite flexible and non-planar in the solution. The ICT transition in the PBDTQ-4O film was red-shifted by 35 nm from its solution spectrum confirming the formation of strong π–π stacking which could facilitate charge transport in the OSC devices. Consequently, the optical band gap of PBDTQ-4O determined using the Einstein relationship (Eg = 1240/λonset) was 1.74 eV, making it a medium band gap polymer. The absorption spectrum of the PBDTQ-4O:PC70BM BHJ film clearly demonstrated the superposed absorption of the donor and the fullerene acceptor PC70BM. The acceptor makes a major contribution to the blend's absorption below 450 nm, but the copolymer makes a significant contribution beyond 450 nm. The contribution of PC70BM to exciton formation is negligible due to the low photon flux of solar irradiation below 450 nm, indicating that its main function in the bulk heterojunction film is as an electron transport material.

The frontier molecular orbital energy levels of PBDTQ-4O were determined using cyclic voltammetry as depicted in Fig. 1b. The calculated highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energy levels of PBDTQ-4O were found to be −5.19 and −3.28 eV, respectively. The medium-lying HOMO level is beneficial to achieve a moderate Voc. The electrochemical band gap Eelg = EHOMO − ELUMO of PBDTQ-4O is larger than that of its optical band gap deduced from the absorption λonset, and this can be attributed to electrons and holes in a conjugated polymer remaining electrostatically bound in the exited states after photon absorption.

Charge transport in a π-conjugated polymer greatly depends on its backbone geometry. Hence, density functional theory (DFT) calculations were executed using the Gaussian 16 software package using B3LYP level of theory and 6-31G* basis set. The optimized ground state backbone geometry of PBDTQ-4O (Fig. 2) was found to be twisted that the BDT unit is out by more than 22° from the plane of the quinoxaline moiety while the benzo-1,4-dioxane rings were twisted at an angle of 46° from the pyrazine ring. Note here that the calculation is performed in a gas phase. The twisted conformation of PBDTQ-4O in the absence of the interchain interaction is in agreement with its featureless absorption profile in solution as shown in Fig. 1a. The copolymers non-planar geometry might hinder its charge mobility when used in organic electronics. However, it should be noted that the interchain interaction when the polymer is solidified into a film can change its conformation.

The distribution in the frontier orbitals show that the HOMO is delocalized along the polymer backbone, while the LUMO is localized in the acceptor unit as depicted in Fig. 2. This is a confirmation that the HOMO–LUMO transition has an ICT characteristic as was also confirmed by its two-band absorption profile. The calculated HOMO and LUMO energy levels of PBDTQ-4O were found to be −5.07 and −2.93 eV, respectively. The energy gap between the HOMO and LUMO levels obtained from the DFT calculation is larger than the experimentally obtained value (see Table 1). These differences are expected because of the single repeating unit considered in the DFT calculation unlike the polymer which is composed of many repeating units.
Polymer
Electrochemical
Optical
HOMO (eV)
LUMO (eV)

E
elg (eV)

λ
max (nm)

λ
onset (nm)

E
g(eV)

PBDTQ-4O

−5.19
−3.28
1.91
577
720
1.74

The photovoltaic (PV) performance of PBDTQ-4O was investigated in the inverted BHJ OSC configuration with an architecture of ITO/ZnO/PBDTQ-4O:PC70BM (1:2)/MoO3/Al, as shown in the inset of Fig. 3a. The current density–voltage (J–V) curves recorded under AM 1.5G illumination are shown in Fig. 3a while the corresponding PV parameters are summarized in Table 2. The best-performing device with an optimized donor:acceptor ratio (1:2) exhibited a PCE of 4.8% with a Voc of 0.76 V, a Jsc of 14.9 mA cm−2 and an FF of 42%. The Jsc of the device is consistent with its broad absorption that extends to over 700 nm. On the other hand, the Voc is in close agreement with that obtained using the empirical formula: Voc = 1/e(EDHOMO − EALUMO − 0.3) V, taking a LUMO of PC70BM to be 4.0 eV. The modest FF of the devices is the main reason for the moderate PCE of the device which might be related to the relatively high concentration of the PC70BM acceptor in the active layer. However, a higher PC70BM is beneficial to mask the device from photo-induced degradation.


PBDTQ-4O:PC70 BM ratio

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCEmax (ave) (%)

a Average PCE calculated for 4–6 devices.

1:2
0.76
14.9
42
4.8 (4.78 ± 0.02)

The total power generated by a device during its operation life time is the product of its PCE over time with its life time, making the device stability critical. Two devices of similar PCE (∼4.8%) were prepared for the degradation study and their J–V curves are shown in Fig. S1 (ESI). The J–V curves of both the light-stressed and unstressed devices, i.e., those kept in the dark, were monitored as shown in Fig. S2a and b (ESI), in order to better understand how light stress affects the degradation of PBDTQ-4O based OSCs. The evolutions of the PV parameters with time are depicted in Fig. 4a–d and summarized in Table S1 (ESI). The PCE of the light stressed and unstressed devices revealed a fast loss of 17 and 9%, respectively, in the first 2 h. Upon increasing the time of irradiation, the PCE of the light stressed device started to stabilize to reach to a value of 66% of its initial value while the unstressed device maintained 76% of its initial PCE. Comparing the short time of degradation, it can be seen that the effect of light on the degradation is quite aggressive over ambient environmental conditions while at a later time its effect is almost similar. This can be due to the oxidation of the donor as the HOMO level of PBDTQ-4O (−5.19 eV) is close to the oxidation threshold energy (−5.20 eV). However, the higher degradation in the presence of light confirms that the oxidation process is stronger in the presence of light. This is in agreement with the work of Gedefaw et al. on similar copolymers and many others. Moreover, the stable PCE of both the stressed and unstressed devices at a later degradation time is an indication that the photo-oxidation process is a short-time process that eventually fades out.

Looking closely at the evolution of the PV parameters, it is evident that the decrease in PCE is mainly due to the reduction of Jsc while Voc and FF remained stable. A number of reasons could contribute for the reduction of Jsc that include the (1) loss of polymer conjugation resulting in decreased absorption, (2) phase separation between the donor and the acceptor may cause the donor acceptor interface to deteriorate, resulting in reduction in exciton dissociation, and (3) generation of traps. To further elucidate the effect of the ambient environment on the degradation mechanisms of the devices, we interrogated the optical, morphological and electrical properties.

Since the current generated in a device is determined by the absorption of photons in the active layer, the evolution of the absorbance of both the pristine and blend films was recorded with and without light over the ageing time. After 10 h of light irradiation, the absorption spectra of light-stressed pristine PBDTQ-4O and its blend with PC70BM exhibited more than 12 and 17% photo-bleaching, respectively, while keeping their profile as shown in Fig. 5a. In contrast, the films kept in the dark for 10 h showed a negligible absorbance loss confirming that the loss of conjugation is not the reason for the PCE loss of the unstressed devices (see Fig. 5b). Gedefaw et al. reported an absorbance loss of over 15% after 5 h of irradiation of a quinoxaline-based copolymer with the alkoxylated BDT donor and attributed the loss to the cleavage of the side chains. Likewise, the cleavage of the alkoxy side chain on the BDT moiety of PBDTQ-4O by irradiation could initiate the photo-bleaching of the copolymer.

Moreover, the loss in Jsc can be due to the degradation-induced phase separation of the electron donor and acceptor domains in the active layer resulting in a poor exciton dissociation. To investigate the contribution of morphology degradation on the fast drop of Jsc, we took AFM topography images of fresh, 2 h and 10 h degraded active layers of the stressed and unstressed devices as depicted in Fig. 6. In the first 2 h of degradation, the morphology of both the stressed and unstressed devices changed significantly that the roughness of the fresh film (1.01 nm) was increased to 1.85 and 2.09 nm in the stressed and unstressed devices, respectively. The drastic PCE loss in the first 2 h in both the stressed and unstressed devices can thus be attributed to the morphological evolution. Interestingly, the morphology evolution is not caused by light. It is well-documented that the active layer morphology of an OSC is thermodynamically unstable that evolves to a stable state in time without any stressor. Our finding also confirms that the morphology change is mainly due to the ageing time rather than the irradiation on the devices. The roughness of the active layer of the stressed device remained the same while it was improved to 1.33 nm after 10 h of ageing in the unstressed device. Clearly, the loss of Jsc in both devices is related to the deteriorated active layer morphology of both devices.
PL measurements were also performed to probe the de-mixing between the electron donor and the electron acceptor domains to compliment the morphology study as shown in the inset of Fig. 6. The PL spectra of the PBDTQ-4O:PC70BM BHJ film excited at 580 nm revealed an emission from PC70 BM while the excitons from PBDTQ-4O (λ = 746 nm) are completely quenched. This is due to the higher concentration of PC70 BM in the active layer. Hence, the emission of PC70 BM (λ = 673 nm) is used to probe the donor–acceptor de-mixing during the ageing time. This emission increased over the ageing time for both the light-stressed and unstressed devices as shown in the inset Fig. 6 confirming the formation of separated domains of the donor and the acceptor that are larger than the exciton diffusion length. This is detrimental to the photo-generation in the devices which can be one of the main reasons for the observed loss consequently resulting in lowered PCE. These results are in agreement with the morphological evolution shown in Fig. 6. Note that the phase segregation that led to a decreased current was visible in both the light-stressed and unstressed devices, demonstrating the strong influence of the environment on the PCE loss of the light-degraded devices, according to both the PL and morphological investigations. Light-induced degradation in the device is expected to lower the photo-generated current. To underpin the recombination dynamics, light intensity-dependent J–V curves of the PBDTQ-4O-based OSCs before and after degradation were recorded for both the light-stressed and unstressed devices as depicted in Fig. 7a–c. The corresponding Jsc and Voc values, measured under different light intensities for light-stressed and unstressed devices, as well as their fit, are shown in Fig. 7d and e. Under the short circuit conditions, the Jsc follows power-law dependence with the light intensity (Pin) as given by eqn (2).
Jsc ∝ Pαin
(2)
where any deviation from
α ≈ 1 denotes the presence of bimolecular recombination. The values of α in PBDTQ-4O-based devices were found to be 0.90 and 0.86 before and after 10 h of light stress, respectively, while the unstressed device had a value of 0.89 after degradation (see Fig. 7d), confirming that irradiation induces stronger bimolecular recombination. This could be due to the formation of a space charge limited region after degradation affecting the charge collection in the device and thus the Jsc prominently. In addition, the higher bimolecular recombination in the light-stressed device can presumably be due to the unbalanced electron and hole mobility. Furthermore, the recombination kinetics in the devices can be understood by the light intensity dependence of Voc as represented by eqn (3).

(3)
The
nkT/q factor, where n, k, T and q are the ideality factor, the Boltzmann constant, temperature, and the elementary charge, respectively, is the slope of the fitting line of the plot of Vocversus ln(Pin) as depicted in Fig. 7e. When n is close to 1, bimolecular recombination is dominant, but as n approaches 2, trap-assisted recombination takes over as the recombination mechanism. The calculated n values were 1.13 and 1.14 before and after 10 h ageing, respectively, for both the stressed and unstressed devices as shown in Fig. 7e, confirming that degradation did not affect the trap-assisted degradation in the devices. Hence, the trap-assisted recombination loss did not contribute to the observed PCE loss in both devices. Furthermore, the recombination kinetics study indicated that bimolecular recombination, which is greater in the presence of irradiation, is the primary cause of degradation in both stressed and unstressed devices.

Bimolecular recombination is highly influenced by the charge mobility in the devices. In this regard, the electron and hole mobilities of the device were determined from the space charge limited current (SCLC) using the Mott–Gurney formulation. Hole- and electron-only devices were fabricated with the geometry of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PBDTQ-4O:PC70BM/MoO3/Al and ITO/ZnO/PBDTQ-4O:PC70BM/Al, respectively. The J–V curves together with the SCLC fittings are shown in Fig. S3 (ESI). The corresponding charge mobilities and their evolution with ageing time are depicted in Fig. 8a and b. The fresh device exhibited hole and electron mobilities of 1.73 × 10−3 and 3.37 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively. The one-order difference in the electron and hole mobilities could be the reason for the modest FF of 42% in the fresh PBDTQ-4O-based OSCs. In the first 2 h of ageing, the hole mobility of the light-stressed and unstressed devices was decreased by 7 and 6% of their initial mobilities, respectively. On the other hand, the light-stressed and unstressed devices lost over 14 and 12% of their initial electron mobilities in the first 2 h of ageing, respectively. Bimolecular recombination undoubtedly worsens due to the substantial disparity in the decrease in electron and hole mobilities, which results in an unbalanced charge transport. Hence, the bimolecular recombination in the devices, as a result of deterioration, was also responsible for the large decrease in Jsc in the first 2 h of ageing in both light-stressed and unstressed devices. Interestingly, both the hole and electron mobilities in both the devices did not show a significant decrease after 2 h of ageing further confirming that the fast decrease in Jsc is highly influenced by the bimolecular recombination of charge carries that is mainly caused by unbalanced carrier mobility. Furthermore, the decrease in device electron mobility can be attributed to the electron transport layer, ZnO, which has been reported to induce photo-oxidation at the interface, further reducing device electron mobility in the devices. To elucidate the decrease of electron mobility related to the ZnO degradation, we determined the conductivity (σ) of ZnO in a device with the geometry of ITO/ZnO/Al using Eqn 4
(4)
where
G is the conductance which can be calculated from the slopes of J–V curves shown in Fig. 8c, d is the thickness of the ETL (40 nm) and A is the area (0.04 cm2). The conductivity of the fresh ZnO ETL is calculated to be 2.7 × 10−7 S cm−1 while it decreased to 2.0 × 10−7 S cm−1 and 2.2 × 10−7 S cm−1 after 10 h of ageing in the stressed and unstressed films, respectively. The decreased conductivity of the electron transport layer in the devices thus contributes to the increased bimolecular recombination. Note here that the decrease in conductivity in the unstressed device is lower further confirming that irradiation could induce a stronger bimolecular recombination.



PBDTQ-4O, a donor–acceptor copolymer based on BDT and quinoxaline, was successfully designed and synthesized using the Stille cross-coupling reaction. Because of its strong ICT properties, the copolymer is a medium band gap polymer (Eg = 1.74 eV), as confirmed by the electron cloud distribution in the LUMO calculated by DFT calculations. The polymer had a medium lying HOMO level of −5.19 eV. The initial PCE of the PBDTQ-4O:PC70BM -based OSC device was 4.8% with a Jsc of 14 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.76 V, and an FF of 42%. The photo-induced degradation of the OSCs was monitored by tracking the evolution of the PV parameters of light-stressed and unstressed devices, which maintained PCEs of 66 and 76% after 10 h, respectively. The decrease in Jsc during ageing was found to be the primary cause of PCE loss in both devices. Furthermore, the coarse morphology was observed with a concomitant increase in the PL of the blend, confirming the formation of large domain sizes that hinder exciton dissociation and reduce the measured photo-current. The charge recombination kinetics study confirmed that degradation induces the bimolecular recombination of charge carriers with higher recombination in the light-stressed device. Further investigation into the evolution of electron and hole mobilities in stressed and unstressed devices confirmed that unbalanced charge transport occurs as a result of the drastic decrease in electron mobility while the hole mobility decreased slowly and this is the primary cause of the induced bimolecular recombination. The conductivity of the ZnO layer was found to be one of the reasons for the decrease in electron transport, which could significantly contribute to bimolecular recombination. In summary, the effect of light over a longer period of time on the degradation of PBDTQ-4O:PC70BM-based devices was found to be mainly due to the ambient environmental factors that caused the deterioration of the morphology and induced bimolecular recombination.


KG did all the experimental work and first draft writing, FH and JD contributed to data curing, analysis and interpretation, and GT, WM and NT did conceptualization, supervision and final manuscript editing. We all contributed to the development of the draft and editing along the way.


The data reported in this work are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.


The authors assert that there are no known conflicts of interest in this work to declare.


This work is supported by the Organization for Women in Science for the Developing World (OWSD) in Trieste, Italy. We would also like to thank the International Science Program (ISP) of Uppsala University, Sweden for funding the polymer physics laboratory at Addis Abeba University. WM also would like to acknowledge ISP for their financial support.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d3nj01953e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2023