 DOI: 10.1039/C2JM35070J
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 22958-22963

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Boram
Kim
,

Junghoon
Lee
,

Jung Hwa
Seo
,

Fred
Wudl
,

Sung Heum
Park
* and 

Changduk
Yang
*

Interdisciplinary School of Green Energy and KIER-UNIST Advanced Center for Energy, Low Dimensional Carbon Materials Center, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), Ulsan 689-798, Korea. E-mail: yang@unist.ac.kr; Fax: +82-52-217-2909; Tel: +82-52-217-2920

Department of Physics, Pukyong National University, Busan 608-737, Korea. E-mail: spark@pknu.ac.kr

Center for Energy Efficient Materials, University of California Santa Barbara, CA 93106, USA. E-mail: wudl@chem.ucsb.edu

Department of Materials Physics, Dong-A University, Busan 604-714, Korea

Received
30th July 2012
, Accepted 10th September 2012
First published on 28th September 2012
The direct bisaddition of methyl 5-azido-5-phenylpentanoate to C60 takes place in the two neighboring pentagon–hexagon junctions of the same five-membered ring, yielding a regioselective bisazfulleroid, namely bisimino-PCBM. Because of its open annulene structure, this new bisheterofullerene is not only considered to be an isoelectronic analogue of pristine C60, but also it is less symmetrical than previous reported mono-functionalized fullerenes, thereby displaying a stronger absorption in the visible region. The BHJ devices based on P3HT:bisimino-PCBM give a higher VOC of 0.77 V relative to those using the PCBM in the literature, which can be attributed to the combination of the nature of the nitrogen atom and the open bridged mode in a fullerene cage. Furthermore, the bisimino-PCBM consisting exclusively of a doubly bridged open 11-membered ring with a hydroacenaphthylene perimeter is very new, therefore there is still plenty of room to establish better efficiencies of BHJ photovoltaic cells.

One of the most effectively used electron acceptors in bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) polymer solar cells (PSCs) is [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM), which dramatically increased the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of early PSCs by enabling the fullerene component to be co-soluble with the p-type conjugated polymers. In order to further improve the PCE of PSCs, progress in developing new p-type conjugated polymers has been impressive, however there has been much less attention on new fullerene derivative acceptors. Much of the research efforts towards new fullerene derivatives has been devoted to modifying the substituents of PCBM by introducing additional substituents on its phenyl ring, or replacing the phenyl ring with other groups, since the electronic properties of PCBM derivatives can be altered by the interaction between the aromatic substituent and the fullerene cage which occur through ‘periconjugation’. From literature studies, it is interesting to note that a direct structural modification on the fullerene cage can drastically influence their optical and electronic properties. For example, endohedral fullerenes modified inside the fullerene cage possess a higher LUMO energy level of PCBM, thereby increasing the VOC without negatively impacting the band gap of the donor. Furthermore, outside-multifunctional fullerenes such as bis-PCBM and bisindene-C60 (bis-ICBA), formed by two symmetric addend units covalently connected to the fullerene surface, have been demonstrated to improve the performance of P3HT-based PSCs by raising LUMO energy levels, as well as increasing the absorption in the visible region relative to the mono-adducts.

Recently, our group reported two isomeric imino-PCBMs (open and closed structures) as heteroanalogues of PCBM for application in organic field-effect transistors (OFETs) and photovoltaic acceptor materials, respectively. Very interestingly, the results indicated that both the n-channel OFETs and the performance of the open imino isomer as the acceptor in the P3HT-based PSCs were greatly superior to those of the closed imino isomer. For further pioneering the potential of the iminofullerene derivatives in BHJ PSCs, we herein report a bisimino-PCBM (open bisazafulleroid) that formed by a carbon atom adjoining to two nitrogen atoms (Fig. 1). Characteristic features that distinguish the bisimino-PCBM in this study are: (i) hitherto elusive regioselective formation as bisadducts (a doubly bridged open 11-membered ring with an hydroacenaphthylene perimeter as well as a 7-membered 1,3-diazepane heterocycle); (ii) potential tunability of the fullerene cage's electronic properties by inducing the two nitrogen heteroatoms as well as the binding mode in the fullerene framework; (iii) lower structural symmetry from two addends, which produces an increased absorption in the visible and suppresses the crystallization, most likely being beneficial for achieving long lifetime in PSCs.


Scheme 1 describes the synthesis of bisimino-PCBM by [3 + 2] cycloaddition of methyl 5-azido-5-phenylpentanoate to C60 followed by the in situ thermal elimination of nitrogen. The bisimino-PCBM was directly obtained as a by-product of the preparation of mono-imino PCBMs ([5,6]-open azafulleroid and [6,6]-closed aziridinofullerene). After isolating the unreacted C60 and two monoadducts by column chromatography in the regular manner, the regioselective bisimino-PCBM was collected upon elution with dichloromethane (see Experimental section). In the bisimino-PCBM, two neighboring, open 5,6-bonds were imino bridged. Although the reasons for such a structural form are not well understood, it is clear that the double bonds adjacent to the nitrogen bridge are more reactive towards further cycloaddition of the azides than the other double bonds in the fullerene framework. The bisimino-PCBM was readily soluble in common organic solvents (THF, dichloromethane, toluene, o-DCB, etc.). The MALDI-MS spectrum of bisimino-PCBM exhibits a pseudomolecular ion peak at m/z 1131.1 [M + H]+, consistent with its molecular weight (see Fig. S1 in ESI).

The unique structure of bisimino-PCBM was established by means of 1H spectrum (Fig. 2). There are two striking features: (i) The 1H NMR signals of the tertiary hydrogens adjacent to the nitrogen (δ = 5.37–5.19 ppm) display nearly the same chemical shift as the mono [5,6]-open azafulleroid (δ = 5.20 ppm) in earlier studies (in the case of the closed isomer, δ = 4.56 ppm). (ii) The 13C NMR spectrum does not show any resonances in the range of δ = 60–80 ppm that could be assigned to the quaternary bridgehead carbons of the fullerene cage (see Fig. S2 in ESI). In addition, the caveat exists that a small amount of another non-separable bisadduct by the direct synthesis of azafulleroids from C60, probably caused the broad and featureless NMR signals. Such observations support the open annulene structure. Prior to this work, it was claimed that the addition could occur at the two ring junctions between six-membered rings ([6,6]-junctions) of a phenanthrene unit in a fullerene cage through the reaction of mono-[6,6]-closed aziridinofullerene with an excess of azidoformate; this was followed by a ring-opening process. However, it is interesting to note that none of these reactions lead directly to the formation of bisimino-fullerenes with an open transannular [6,6] structure. In the 13C NMR spectrum, we do not observe the typical signals of the bridgehead carbons at δ = 110–120 ppm for the doubly bridged systems like 8-membered 1,4-diazocine heterocycle, reflecting the absence of the open [6,6]-bridged bisisomer. Further evidence for the assignment of bisimino-PCBM was obtained from the UV/Vis spectrum, which is similar to that of the [5,6]-open azafulleroid. The characteristic absorption for [6,6]-closed fullerene derivatives at 420 nm are not observed, where PCBM serves as a standard mono-functionalized closed isomer for comparison (Fig. 3). In addition, the doubly open [6,6]-bridged isomer as a Cs-symmetric compound in solution showed a green color in the report previously, whereas the bisimino-PCBM was a dark wine red color. This implies that the optical features of the C60 analogues are significantly affected by the binding mode of the bridged atoms in the fullerenes. Furthermore, the visible absorbance of bisimino-PCBM in all spectrum regions was stronger than that of PCBM, most likely being beneficial to the solar light harvesting and photocurrent conversion of the P3HT-based PSCs.
Although in the inspection of electrochemical behavior by cyclic voltammertry (CV) in o-DCB solution we do not observe a significant difference between bisimino-PCBM and PCBM, the first reduction potential of bisimino-PCBM is slightly less negative than the first reduction potential of PCBM. Thus, the LUMO level (−3.90 eV) of bisimino-PCBM was somewhat reduced with respect to the LUMO level of PCBM (−3.87 eV). This is not unexpected since the bisimino-PCBM, as an isoelectronic analogue of pristine C60, still has 60 π-electrons and the higher electronegativity of the nitrogen atom, relative to the analogous carbon atom which can lead to slightly reduced electron density in the fullerene shell.
Quantum-chemical calculations at the density functional theory (DFT) level using B3LYP/6-31G were conducted to establish qualitative charge distribution, binding characteristics and frontier molecular orbital levels of the open bisimino-PCBM (Fig. 4 and Fig. S3 in ESI). The two imino nitrogen atoms in the C60 cage are negatively charged and all the carbons within the hydroacenaphthylene perimter are positively charged, especially the highest positive Mulliken charge of +0.23e at C-2, which is attributed to the two neighboring nitrogens with a relatively high electronegativity. All other C atoms of the fullerene core exhibit Mulliken charges of 0.00 ± 0.01e. Note that despite the two identical, symmetric addends, as well as their same structural positions in the C60 skeleton, the charged values of each conjoined nitrogen are different (−0.55e and −0.66e), reflecting the slightly broken symmetry (see Fig. S4 for the asymmetric electrostatic charge distribution in ESI). This would lead to considerable line-broadening of the NMR peaks above as another reason. Besides, as a result of the asymmetric structure, the distance between the bridgehead N and C-2, as well as N and C-3, is 1.41 Å, whereas the bond length between N and C-1 is 1.44 Å, thus exhibiting the different BLYP/6-31G calculated bond angles of 105.3° for C-l,N,C-2 and 106.8° for C-2,N,C-3, in which the both N atoms of the imino bridges are pyramidalized.
Using P3HT as a donor polymer, we have fabricated solar cells based on bisimino-PCBM as an electron acceptor. Fig. 5a and b illustrate the structure of a BHJ device together with the molecular structures as well as the energy level diagram of the component materials. The current density versus voltage (J–V) characteristic of a solar cell under air mass 1.5 global (AM 1.5G) irradiation from a calibrated solar simulator with irradiation intensity of 100 mW cm−2 is shown in Fig. 5c. The device reproducibly yields a short-circuit current (JSC) = 7.7 mA cm−2, open-circuit voltage (VOC) = 0.77 V, fill factor (FF) = 0.43 and power conversion efficiency (ηe) = 2.54%. When we fabricated a conventional P3HT:PCBM device under the same conditions, the device exhibited a JSC = 8.11 mA cm−2, VOC = 0.66 V, FF = 0.66 and ηe = 3.4%. While the P3HT:PCBM device shows a higher JSC and FF, the P3HT:bisimino-PCBM device demonstrates a significantly higher VOC of 0.77 V (see Fig. S5 in ESI). Despite the fact that the LUMO values reveal remarkable similarities between PCBM and bisimino-PCBM, the VOC of 0.77 V is substantially higher than the value obtained for typical BHJ devices using PCBM (0.55–0.60 V). However, the relatively lower JSC and FF values lead to an overall decrease in PCE (ηe) in comparison with the PSCs system using P3HT:PCBM as a donor by device optimization. Since both devices are based on identical P3HT donor material with a much higher optical density compared to bisimino-PCBM and PCBM acceptor, it is obvious that the lower JSC for P3HT:bisimino-PCBM device originates from a lower internal quantum efficiency (IQE). Therefore we infer that the structural morphology of bisimino-PCBM causes unfavorable mixing conditions with the P3HT donor material resulting in a decrease in the IQE of the device. In addition, it is a well-established fact that the FF of solar cells correlates with the mobility of charge carriers. Thus, one can conclude that bisimino-PCBM has somewhat negative side effects on either the charge-transport properties or uniform nanomorphology of the blend layers due to the two addends added to the fullerene cage. Many studies have shown that the VOC depends on the energy gap between the HOMO level of the donor component and the LUMO level of the acceptor component of the BHJ. From our results, it should be worth noting that VOC for PSCs can be also affected either by the combination of the nature of the bridged atom (N atom) and the binding mode (open or closed) of the fullerene cage or the different morphology arising from two addends in the fullerene acceptor when compared to mono-functionalized fullerenes. Fig. 5d demonstrates the IPCE spectrum of the device. Since the absorption coefficient of P3HT is stronger than that of the bisimino-PCBM in the visible spectral range, the photocurrent of the device mainly originated from the P3HT donor material, and consequently the shape of the IPCE spectrum is almost same as the absorption spectrum of P3HT. In addition, the current value calculated from the integration of the product of the IPCE with the AM 1.5G solar spectrum is well matched to the current value from the J–V curve.

In summary, we have described the first direct synthesis of bisimino-PCBM from the twofold reaction of C60 with methyl 5-azido-5-phenylpentanoate. The regioselective Cs-symmetric bisazfulleroid structure for bisimino-PCBM has been characterized by 1H NMR, 13C NMR spectra and UV-Vis spectroscopy. Despite the bisfunctionalization of the fullerene cage, not only does the bisimino-PCBM retain the intact π-electron system of the parent C60 (60 π-electrons) but also has a broader absorption compared to PCBM (58 π-electrons). We have also investigated the device performance of BHJ PSCs based on P3HT as the donor and bisimino-PCBM as the acceptor. Even though the LUMO value (−3.90 eV) of bisimino-PCBM is almost identical to that of PCBM, the devices with P3HT:bisimino-PCBM exhibit a higher VOC of 0.77 V than the optimal cells using the PCBM previously reported from the literature studies. This implies that both the nature of the bridge atom and the bridge mode in a fullerene cage have a definite effect on the VOC of the solar cells based on fullerene. Obviously, it is very important to note that bisimino-PCBM has a different electronic state and the density of states in the solid state would be broadened. We therefore expect that the bisheterofullerenes will provide the organoelectronic community with a novel tool for the development of new acceptor materials of organic solar cells and related devices.


All starting materials were purchased either from Aldrich or Acros and used without further purification. All solvents were ACS grade unless otherwise noted. Anhydrous THF was obtained by distillation from sodium–benzophenone prior to use. Anhydrous toluene was used as received. 1H NMR and 13C NMR spectra were recorded on a Varian VNMRS 600 spectrophotometer using CDCl3 and CS2/acetone-d6 as the solvent and tetramethylsilane (TMS) as the internal standard and MALDI-MS spectra were obtained from Ultraflex III (Bruker, Germany). UV-Vis spectra were taken on a Cary 5000 (Varian USA) spectrophotometer. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurements were performed on an AMETEK VersaSTAT 3 with a three-electrode cell in a nitrogen bubbled 0.1 M tetra-butylammonium perchlorate (Bu4NClO4) solution in o-DCB at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1 at room temperature. Ag was used as the Ag/Ag+ (0.1 M of AgNO3 in acetonitrile) reference electrode, platinum counter electrode and polymer coated platinum working electrode respectively. The Ag/Ag+ reference electrode was calibrated using a ferrocene–ferrocenium redox couple as an internal standard, whose oxidation potential was set at −4.8 eV with respect to zero vacuum level. The LUMO levels of fullerene derivatives were obtained from the equation LUMO = −(Eonsetred − Eonset(ferrocene) + 4.8) eV. Eoptg = 1240/λedge. HOMO = −(Eoptg − LUMO).


Solar cells were fabricated on an indium tin oxide (ITO)-coated glass substrate in the following structure; ITO-coated glass substrate/poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)(PEDOT:PSS)/P3HT:bisimino-PCBM/Al. The ITO-coated glass substrate was first cleaned with detergent, ultrasonicated in acetone and isopropyl alcohol, and subsequently dried overnight in an oven. PEDOT:PSS (Baytron PH) was spin-cast from aqueous solution to form a film of thickness of 40 nm. The substrate was dried for 10 min at 140 °C in air and then transferred into a glove box to spin-cast the charge separation layer. A solution containing a mixture of P3HT:bisimino-PCBM (1:1.2) in chlorobenzene solvent with a concentration of 1 wt% was then spin-cast on top of the PEDOT:PSS layer. Then, an aluminum (Al, 100 nm) electrode was deposited by thermal evaporation in a vacuum of about 5 × 10−7 Torr. Current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the devices were measured using a Keithley 236 Source Measure Unit. The irradiation was done using an Air Mass 1.5 Global (AM 1.5G) solar simulator with an irradiation intensity of 1000 W m−2. The aperture (12.7 mm2) was used on top of the pixel to remove extrinsic effects such as cross-talking, waveguide, shadow effect, etc. A spectral mismatching factor was calculated by the comparison of a solar simulator spectrum with an AM 1.5G spectrum at room temperature. The processing was carried out in a glove-box under nitrogen and at room temperature.


DFT calculations were performed using the Gaussian 03 package with the nonlocal hybrid Becke three-parameter Lee–Yang–Parr (B3LYP) function and the 6-31G basis set to elucidate the optimization of the geometry of bisimino-PCBM.


A mixture of 5-azido-5-phenylpentanoate (0.7 g 3.0 mmol), C60 (2.16 g, 3.0 mmol) and o-DCB (150 mL) was placed in a round bottom flask under argon and stirred at RT for 15 min. The homogeneous mixture was stirred at 60 °C under argon overnight. The solution was heated at 135 °C and allowed to continue stirring overnight again. The resulting mixture was concentrated in vacuo to 100 mL and pre-eluted with chlorobenzene (100 mL) and then toluene on SiO2–toluene, 40 × 10 cm. After this, the fractions containing monoadducts [5,6]-open azafulleroid (Rf = 0.57) and [6,6]-closed aziridinofullerene (Rf = 0.53) were collected, respectively. Upon elution with CH2Cl2, the fractions containing a mixture of regioisomeric mixture of bisimio-PCBMs were collected. The solution was concentrated in vacuo, redissolved in a minimal amount of toluene and transferred to a centrifuge tube. The product was precipitated with MeOH, centrifuged and decanted. The product was treated with MeOH several times in the same manner. Isolated yield = 550 mg as a brown solid. 1H NMR (600 MHz, 3:1 CS2/acetone-d6): δ ppm 7.72–7.41 (m, 10H), 5.37–5.19 (m, 2H), 3.59–3.57 (m, 6H), 2.45–2.31 (m, 8H), 1.63 (m, 4H). 13C NMR (150.1 MHz, 3:1 CS2/acetone-d6): δ ppm 170.74, 144.66–143.79, 129.05–128.67, 64.84, 50.93, 36.28, 33.65, 20.98. MALDI-MS m/z: 1131.1 [M + H]+. Elemental analysis: calculated for C84H30N2O4: C, 89.19; H, 2.67; N, 2.48; O, 5.66; found: C, 89.23; H, 2.39; N, 2.50; O, 5.77%.


This work was supported by the Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology (2010-0002494) and the National Research Foundation of Korea Grant funded by the Korean Government (MEST) (2010-0019408, 2010-0026163, 2010-0026916, C-D-2012-0322).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Electrostatic charge distributions, calculated HOMO and LUMO values, and MALDI-MS spectrum of bisimino-PCBM. See DOI: 10.1039/c2jm35070j
‡ These authors contributed equally.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012