 DOI: 10.1039/D1EE03134A
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 693-704


Hongling
Guo
,

Rutao
Meng
,

Gang
Wang
*,

Shenghao
Wang
,

Li
Wu
,

Jianjun
Li
,

Zuoyun
Wang
,

Jiabin
Dong
,

Xiaojing
Hao
* and 

Yi
Zhang
*

Institute of Photoelectronic Thin Film Devices and Technology and Tianjin Key Laboratory of Thin Film Devices and Technology, Nankai University, Tianjin 300350, P. R. China. E-mail: yizhang@nankai.edu.cn

Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 5625 Renmin Street, Changchun, Jilin, 130022, China. E-mail: wsu@ciac.ac.cn

Materials Genome Institute, Shanghai University, Shanghai 200444, P. R. China

Key Laboratory of Weak-Light Nonlinear Photonics, Ministry of Education, School of Physics, Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, China

School of Photovoltaic and Renewable Energy Engineering, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia. E-mail: xj.hao@unsw.edu.au

Received
6th October 2021
, Accepted 13th December 2021
First published on 14th December 2021
Fabrication of highly efficient solar cells is critical for photovoltaic applications. A bandgap-graded absorber layer can not only drive efficient carrier collection but also improve the light harvesting. However, it is very difficult to realize such a bandgap-graded structure in kesterite-structured films due to the similar cation diffusion rates in the high-temperature selenization process. Here, we design and successfully realize a bandgap grade in Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 (CZTSSe) film by sufficient annealing during the deposition of an Al-doped ZnO film. This annealing strategy facilitates the solid-state ion-exchange reaction between Cu+ and Cd2+ at the heterojunction interface. Consequently, n-type CdS is partially converted to p-type Cu2S and CZTSSe is converted to Cd-graded CZTSSe, thereby forming a desired bandgap-graded CZTSSe solar cell. The tailored band alignment between the p–n junction not only improves the electron transport but also reduces the carriers recombination. As a consequence, the open-circuit voltage and fill factor are significantly improved, and a certified power conversion efficiency of 12.25% is obtained. The graded bandgap engineering of the absorber achieved here illuminates the future pathway towards highly efficient solar cells.

Kesterite Cu2ZnSn(S,Se) (CZTSSe), as an alternative of Cu(In,Ga)Se2 (CIGS), has achieved an encouraging power conversion efficiency of 13%. The V-shaped bandgap grading of CIGS using a non-uniform Ga/In ratio is very important for improving the efficiency of CIGS solar cells. However, it is difficult to build a similar bandgap structure in CZTSSe due to its similar cation diffusion rates in the high-temperature selenization process. The key to preparing bandgap grading is to change the band gap of the light-absorbing layer with different thicknesses. It is well known that the Cu2S/CdS heterojunction can be achieved by a cation exchange reaction between Cu+ and Cd2+; therefore, an appropriate annealing process can transform the CZTSSe/CdS heterojunction into a CdS/Cu2S/CZTSSe:Cdhigh/CZTSSe:Cdlow heterojunction. More importantly, the order of the approximate conduction band minimum is Cu2S > CZTSSe > CZTSSe:Cdlow > CZTSSe:Cdhigh, thereby forming desired bandgap grading in the CZTSSe solar cell. The heterojunction modifications by annealing were systematically investigated to understand the origin of the performance improvement. Achieving more than 12% efficiency, which showed an encouraging improvement of more than 45% compared with the traditional preparation method, provides a new perspective for further improving the efficiency of CZTSSe solar cells.


Kesterite metal chalcogenides have aroused extensive research interest for the fabrication of high-efficiency thin film solar cells. Particularly, chalcogenide solar cells based on Cu2(In,Ga)Se2 (CIGSe), CdTe, Sb2(S,Se)3, AgBiS2 and Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 (CZTSSe) have reached impressive certified power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of 23.35%, 22.1%, 10.0%, 6.3% and 13.0%, respectively. CZTSSe solar cells, as an alternative to CIGSe and CdTe cells, have a similar crystal structure to CIGSe cells and the same device structure; hence, it is expected that researchers can learn from the successful experience of CIGSe solar cells. The success of CIGSe is attributed to its bandgap-graded absorber layer and good defect performance. However, the similar ion diffusion rates in the high-temperature sulfuration/selenization process and the complexity of defect physics associated with CZTSSe appear to be among the main challenges limiting the further improvement of kesterite device performance, demanding new and efficient step-change improvement strategies. Numerous works have reported the passivation of the grain interior and grain boundary defects of CZTSSe, such as (i) the use of isoelectronic cation substitution (Ag, Li for Cu, Cd for Zn, and Ge for Sn) to reduce CuZn antisite defects or Sn-related deep energy level defects, (ii) the artificial introduction of passivation layers at the front or back interface, and (iii) alkali metal doping strategies to passivate grain boundary defects. However, in the CZTSSe absorber layers, the flat bandgap structure cannot effectively improve the collection of photogenerated electrons and reduce the recombination even when efficient passivation methods are employed, requiring the development of further strategies, such as a graded bandgap. Some groups have prepared bandgap-graded light-absorbing layers by adjusting the ratio of S/Se or introducing doped cations, and they have demonstrated significant progress. Unfortunately, metal cations such as Cu+, Zn2+, Cd2+, Sn4+, and Ge4+ in pristine or doped kesterite compounds have similar diffusion rates in the high-temperature annealing process, whilst the widely adopted Ag+ is prone to distribute uniformly or uncontrollably throughout the absorbers due to its high diffusion rate; thus, it is very difficult to achieve an ideal bandgap-graded CZTSSe absorber. At present, bandgap grading control is an urgent problem for further improving the performance of CZTSSe solar cells.

In addition to the cation doping of the absorber layer, CZTSSe/CdS heterojunction annealing is an effective method to adjust the surface band gap of the CZTSSe absorber layer and thus improve the band alignment of the heterojunction. A survey of recent studies of CZTS-based solar cell heterojunction annealing, shown in Table S1 (ESI), demonstrates the optimal regulation of the annealing temperature and duration as well as the associated effects on cell performance. It is found that annealing of heterojunctions results in two changes: one is the diffusion of elements between the heterojunction interfaces, and the other is changes in the Cu and Zn elements in the absorber layer. Generally, maintaining high-temperature heterojunction annealing (>200 °C) at a short duration of 1–15 min resulted in a significant improvement in cell performance. This high-temperature annealing provides higher kinetic energy for the diffusion of elements, and the types of elements diffused are relatively complex. It can be concluded that high-temperature heterojunction annealing requires a short annealing duration to achieve a beneficial elemental diffusion, passivation of defects and reduction of carrier recombination within the heterojunction region. In contrast, the low-temperature annealing process can drive diffusion of fewer species of elements, but the length of time increases the distance of ion diffusion. Therefore, low-temperature heterojunction annealing requires a relatively long annealing duration to maximize the efficiency. Neuschitzer et al. observed a significant diffusion of Cu into the CdS layer by annealing Cu2ZnSnSe4/CdS at 200 °C for 35 min, where changes in the absorber layer surface chemistry resulted in a higher quality CdS:Cu/Cu2ZnSnSe4 heterojunction that significantly improved device performance. Furthermore, based on the reported Cu2S/CdS heterojunctions, it is known that Cu+ can spontaneously replace Cd2+, as in eqn (1):
CdS + 2Cu+ = Cu2S + Cd2+
(1)
Additionally, heating can greatly facilitate this reaction. Therefore, according to this solution-phase or solid-state cation exchange reaction, the n-type CdS can be partially or completely converted to p-type Cu2S, given sufficient time and appropriate temperature of the reaction. In CZTSSe absorbers, inadequate annealing may result in an incomplete diffusion process, forming Cu-doped CdS, Zn-doped CdS, Cd-doped CZTSSe, etc., which depends on the specific annealing conditions. The analysis of the above-reported work shows that the migration of the main cations during an adequate CZTSSe/CdS heterojunction annealing process (annealing at low temperature for a prolonged duration) are Cu+ and Cd2+. With sufficient diffusion, on one hand, the diffusion of Cu+ into CdS at high concentrations can form CdS/Cu2S heterojunctions. On the other hand, the diffusion of Cd2+ into CZTSSe can form CZTSSe with a Cd gradient. Therefore, an adequate annealing process is required to transform CZTSSe/CdS heterojunctions into CdS/Cu2S/CZTSSe:Cdhigh/CZTSSe:Cdlow or CdS/Cu2S/CZTSSe:Cdlow/CZTSSe heterojunctions (high and low are used to represent the changes in the doping concentration of Cd). Interestingly, the conduction band minima (CBM) of the new structures are in the order of Cu2S > CZTSSe > CZTSSe:Cdlow > CZTSSe:Cdhigh, thereby forming desired bandgap grading in the CZTSSe solar cell. This may provide a novel and effective strategy for improving the efficiency of CZTSSe solar cells.
Inspired by the above analysis of the sufficient heterojunction annealing process, we developed a sufficient annealing strategy to build bandgap grading in CZTSSe solar cells. The results clearly indicate that the CZTSSe/CdS heterojunction is transformed into CdS/Cu2S/CZTSSe:Cdhigh/CZTSSe:Cdlow by the designed annealing process. We also found that desired bandgap grading is formed in the CZTSSe solar cell. The tailored band alignment between the p–n junction not only improves the electron transport, but also reduces the carrier recombination. As a consequence, we demonstrate devices with a certified power conversion efficiency of 12.25%, which showed an encouraging improvement of over 45% enhancement in PCE compared with the traditional reference preparation process.

The CZTSSe absorber layer was fabricated by a sol–gel process, and the investigation of its properties, such as morphology and crystallization (as shown in Fig. S1–S3, ESI by SEM, XRD, and Raman spectroscopy) confirmed that we obtained a pure kesterite absorber layer with a highly crystalline quality. The annealing process for the heterojunction was performed during the sputtering of aluminum-doped ZnO (AZO) on CZTSSe/CdS/i-ZnO, which is also equivalent to the in situ annealing of AZO. We attempted mild annealing temperatures of 100 °C, 150 °C and 200 °C during a sputtering time of 90 min. The statistical photovoltaic performance results of the devices prepared at different heat treatment temperatures are shown in Fig. S4 (ESI). The values of short-circuit current density (JSC) are similar, and the open circuit voltage (VOC) continually increases monotonically with increasing annealing temperature. In addition, fill factor (FF) and PCE increase monotonically and reach a peak at 150 °C. When the annealing temperature reaches 200 °C, the device performance deteriorates rapidly due to the degradation of FF. We found that the best and most reproducible performance results are obtained when the devices are processed at about 150 °C for 90 min. Here, the 150 °C-annealed sample and the room temperature sample are denoted as “HT” and “RT” for further discussion.

We first analyzed the specific regions of the actual device using HAADF-STEM and EDS to determine the effect of the annealing treatment on the elemental composition. Fig. 1a and b show the element distributions (Cu, Zn, Sn, Cd, S, Se) of the RT and HT devices. It is obvious that Cu, Zn, Sn, S and Se are in the CZTSSe absorber layer, S is in the CdS buffer layer, and Zn is in the ZnO and AZO window layers. For the RT device, it was observed that the Cd and S elements are well overlapped. However, the HT device underwent significant inter-elemental diffusion between the CdS and CZTSSe. Compared with the RT device, for which the Cd signal can be clearly seen, the CdS buffer layer in the HT device comprises almost all the signals of Cu, with a very low signal of Cd. Cu accumulates at the CZTSSe/CdS interface, coinciding with the S signal; this indicates that most of the CdS may be converted to Cu2S. Cu2S is well recognized as a classic p-type light harvesting absorber material in thin film solar cells. With CdS completely converted to Cu2S, the CZTSSe/CdS p–n junction will be converted to the CZTSSe/Cu2S/ZnO heterojunction. Another possibility is that CdS is mostly converted to Cu2S, and the p–n junction of CZTSSe/CdS will be converted to the CZTSSe/Cu2S/CdS heterojunction. Hence, other measurement methods are required to prove that the CdS completely transformed into Cu2S after annealing. The HT device was subjected to additional time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (TOF-SIMS) measurements to observe the depth profile distribution of the elements (Fig. 1c). Surprisingly, it can be clearly observed that high-intensity Cd and S signals were detected near the interface with the ZnO layer, indicating that a part of the CdS was retained. In addition, the Cd gradient distribution from the surface of the absorber layer to the bulk can be clearly observed in the CZTSSe absorber layer, indicating that the CdS layer can be employed as a supplier source for the diffusion of Cd2+ into the CZTSSe. Furthermore, the CZTSSe/CdS heterojunction annealed at 150 °C for 90 min in the sputtering chamber was measured by XPS (Fig. 1d). It was found that only Cd and S elements can be detected, which was consistent with the SIMS results. The average depth of analysis for an XPS measurement is approximately 5 nm; therefore, at least 5 nm-thick CdS remained in the buffer layer. The HAADF-STEM, TOF-SIMS and XPS measurements clearly indicate that the CZTSSe/CdS heterojunction was transformed into CdS/Cu2S/CZTSSe:Cdhigh/CZTSSe:Cdlow upon the designed annealing.
In addition, high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) analysis of the CZTSSe/CdS heterojunctions at the RT and HT devices was used to further confirm the lattice changes due to the elemental diffusion of Cu and Cd (Fig. 2a and b). The HRTEM images and corresponding fast Fourier transform (FFT) patterns of the CZTSSe (blue box) and CdS (red box) regions in the CZTSSe/CdS heterojunctions, as well as the inverse fast Fourier transform (IFFT), are shown in Fig. 2c–j, respectively. These four parallelogram relationships correspond to the tetragonal phase of CZTSSe and the cubic phases of CdS and Cu2S, respectively. The measured crystal plane spacing has been marked in blue and red in the corresponding IFFT, respectively. Note that the (112) and (204) plane spacings in the CZTSSe region with Cd doping for the HT sample are 0.4 nm and 0.23 nm, respectively; these are higher than the theoretical values of 0.33 nm and 0.2 nm, with an average deviation of 16%. The details of the planar distances and angles are presented in Fig. S5 and Table S2 (ESI). The lattice expansion is mainly caused by Cd doping, due to the larger ionic radius of Cd2+ (0.92 Å) than of Zn2+ (0.74 Å) or Cu+ (0.74 Å). In addition, extensive stacking faults and dislocations are present in the IFFT pattern of CdS for the RT device, while these are not observed on the corresponding HT device. This indicates that the new phase Cu2S formed after annealing eliminates the dislocations of the RT device, which is more favorable for reducing the carrier recombination.
To clarify the element changes at the surface of the absorber layer for the RT and HT devices, XPS measurements were performed. First, 3 groups of RT and HT devices (A, B and C) were immersed in 25 wt% hydrochloric acid to dissolve the Al/AZO/IZO/CdS/Cu2S layers until the CZTSSe absorber layer was completely exposed; then, they were rinsed with deionized water and dried for the XPS measurements. Fig. S6 (ESI) shows the high-resolution XPS spectra of three major elements, Cu, Zn, and Sn. Semi-quantitative calculations were performed based on the peak areas to obtain the atomic concentration ratios, where the average Cu/(Zn + Sn) values on the absorber layer surfaces of the RT and HT samples were 1.07 ± 0.1 and 0.69 ± 0.04 and the average Zn/Sn values were 1.05 ± 0.11 and 1.29 ± 0.2, respectively, as shown in Table 1. This indicates that the surface composition of the RT sample is close to stoichiometric, whilst the surface composition of the HT sample is Cu-poor and Zn-rich. The migration of Cu+ from CZTSSe to the CdS buffer layer induces Cu-depletion near the surface of the CZTSSe absorber for the HT device. The local Cu-depletion and Zn-sufficiency favor the formation of beneficial [VCu + ZnCu]. Furthermore, the back surface of the CZTSSe was exposed by mechanically stripping a pre-cured layer of 1 mm-thick AB glue on the top surface of the CZTSSe absorber. Then, we performed XPS profile measurements on the top and back sides of the above hydrochloric acid etched CZTSSe films (Fig. S7, ESI). The Cd/(Cd + Zn) values at different depths were obtained by XPS semi-quantitative calculations. According to the linear band gap relation with Cd/(Cd + Zn), we calculated the bandgap with the profiling depth of the Cu2CdxZn1−xSn(S,Se)4 (CCZTSSe) film, and the results are shown in Table S3 (ESI). The band gap at the surface of the CCZTSSe absorber (CZTSSe:Cdhigh) was estimated to be 0.962 eV. For the back surface of the absorber, the band gap of CZTSSe:Cdlow was estimated to be 1.072 eV. Therefore, the band gap of the CCZTSSe absorber for HT increased spatially from the top surface to the back surface.
Sample
Cu/(Zn + Sn)
Zn/Sn
RT
HT
RT
HT
A
1.07
0.69
0.97
1.21
B
0.97
0.73
1.18
1.14
C
1.17
0.65
1
1.52
Average
1.07 ± 0.1
0.69 ± 0.04
1.05 ± 0.11
1.29 ± 0.2
Further energy band alignment analyses of CdS/CZTSSe and CdS/Cu2S/CZTSSe:Cdhigh/CZTSSe:Cdlow are shown in Fig. 3. CdS and CZTSSe typically show a conduction band alignment with a “spike” structure. When the conduction band offset (CBO) exceeds 0.4 eV, the photogenerated electrons cannot cross the spike barrier, resulting in an abrupt decrease of the JSC. Therefore, the CBO of a typical CdS/CZTSSe heterojunction is 0–0.4 eV (Fig. 3a). In the heterojunction annealing process, two Cu+ cations can diffuse from CZTSSe into n-type CdS to replace one Cd2+, thereby forming p-type Cu2S layers (Fig. 3b). Simultaneously, Cd2+ cations diffuse into the absorber layer to form a Cd-gradient CZTSSe (CZTSSe:Cdhigh/CZTSSe:Cdlow). Xiao et al. concluded that the bandgaps of Cu2CdxZn1−xSnS4 films and the doping concentration of Cd are negatively linearly dependent. The paradoxical band gap reduction due to Cd doping can be attributed to the fact that the unit cell volume expansion of CZTS/CZTSSe weakens the antibonding component of the s–s and s–p hybridization between Sn4+ and Se2− (S2−), leading to the reduction in CBM. In contrast, the valence band maximum (VBM) is controlled by the anti-binding component of the p–d hybridization between Se2− (S2−) and Cu+, so the strain induced in the lattice of CZTS when larger Cd2+ ions replace Zn2+ only causes a slight decrease in the VBM, as previously reported. Therefore, the surface band gap of CZTSSe:Cdhigh is smaller than the band gap of CZTSSe:Cdlow. According to previous reports, Cu2S is a p-type semiconductor material with a band gap of ∼1.2 eV by a cation exchange reaction of Cu+ with CdS films. The CBM of CdS is lower than that of Cu2S, and the band alignment between them is a “cliff” structure with a CBO of −0.14 or −0.18 eV, as previously reported. Hence, the p-type Cu2S, CZTSSe:Cdhigh and CZTSSe:Cdlow can build a band-gap-graded absorber layer (Fig. 3c). Given the double-gradient effect in CIGSe solar cells, the reduced bandgap gradient from Cu2S toward CZTSSe:Cdhigh can effectively reduce the front interface recombination. Furthermore, the increased bandgap gradient from CZTSSe:Cdhigh toward CZTSSe:Cdlow is more favorable for electron transport to the forward interface, thus reducing the recombination in the rear contact (Fig. 3c). Therefore, the formation of the bandgap-graded absorber layer has great potential to improve the device performance of solar cells. It is important to point out that considering the heterojunction band alignment, an unfavorable “cliff” band alignment structure is formed between CdS and Cu2S, which can enhance the recombination of electrons and holes at their interface. On the other hand, the Cu2S layer can also be regarded as a thin p-type interface layer between Cd-gradient CZTSSe and CdS. The CBO between Cu2S and Cd-gradient CZTSSe can allow electrons to tunnel through the Cu2S layer. Whether the “cliff” band gap structure leads to unfavorable interfacial recombination needs to be further confirmed by the preparation of photovoltaic devices.

Fig. 4 shows the device performance of the RT and HT devices. The HT cells show significantly higher performance than the RT cells, with an average PCE increase from 7.5% to 11.8% (Fig. 4a). This is due to the great enhancements in the average VOC from 398 to 480 mV and in the FF from 52.1% to 66.3%, as well as a slight increase in JSC from 36.1 to 37.2 mA cm−2. It must be pointed out that the in situ annealing can also improve the electrical and crystalline quality of AZO films (Table S4 and Fig. S8, ESI), which is beneficial to the device performance of CZTSSe solar cells. The in situ annealed AZO films have lower square resistance, increased mobility and carrier concentration, and better crystalline quality than traditional AZO films. According to the report by Su et al., the contribution of ITO's carrier density to the device performance is far less than that of the interdiffusion of elements by a post-annealing process. Therefore, the bandgap grading plays a decisive role in improving device performance. With this sufficient annealing strategy, we demonstrated that our best HT device has an efficiency of 12.24% (effective area efficiency) without a MgF2anti-flection coating, as well as VOC, JSC and FF values of 484 mV, 37.79 mA cm−2 and 66.9%, respectively (Fig. 4b and Table 2). This maximum device efficiency of 12.25% was independently certified at the Shanghai Institute of Microsystem and Information Technology, Chinese Academy of Science (SIMIT) (total area efficiency of 11.17%), with VOC of 484.75 mV, JSC of 37.37 mA cm−2 and FF of 67.69% (Table 2 and Fig. S9, ESI). Furthermore, the diode parameters extracted from the dark-state J–V curves of the RT and HT devices, including series resistance (Rs), shunt conductance (G), ideality factor (A) and reverse saturation current density (J0), are shown in Fig. S10–S12 (ESI) and Table 2. Rs and G are greatly reduced for the HT cell compared to the RT cell, indicating that an adequate heterojunction annealing process optimizes the carrier transport while reducing the shunt path. The reduction in A and J0 of the HT cell indicates a reduction in recombination within the space charge region. It can be concluded that the sufficient annealing process promotes the formation of new heterojunctions due to interfacial ion exchange reactions, which leads to a significant improvement in the quality of the diode. In addition, we measured a HT device with 12.1% efficiency after 180 days of storage in air at room temperature. Compared with the freshly prepared CZTSSe solar cells (1 day), the VOC remains almost unchanged, despite a slight degradation of JSC and FF (Fig. S13 and Table S5, ESI). The slight degradation of device performance may come from the increased RS, as the resistance of AZO is known to increase upon prolonged exposure to moisture.
Device

V
OC [mV]

J
SC [mA cm−2]
FF [%]
PCE [%]

R
S [Ωcm2]

G [m S cm−2]

A


J
0 [A cm−2]
RT
412
35.65
57.48
8.44
6.5
0.75
1.43
1.39 × 10−7
HT
484
37.79
66.9
12.24
1.46
0.14
1.28
8.15 × 10−9
Certification
484.75
37.37
67.69
12.25
—
—
—
—
Moreover, a remarkable increase in EQE response of the HT device in the range of 400–600 nm indicates that the heterojunction quality is significantly improved after annealing, which can be attributed to the contribution of the decreasing thickness of CdS and the front gradient formed by Cu2S and CZTSSe (Fig. 4c). Meanwhile, the increase in the EQE response of HT in the range of 700–900 nm corresponds to an improvement in the bandgap structure of the absorber layer. However, the EQE for HT in the long wavelength region (900–1050 nm) exhibits a slight decrease relative to RT, which can be attributed to the degradation of the long wavelength absorption due to the decrease in the depletion region width. This is confirmed in the subsequent capacitance–voltage (C–V) measurements. The inset picture of Fig. 4c exhibits the corresponding band gaps of the RT and HT absorbers, which were plotted from the EQE curves by mapping [E × ln(1 − EQE)]2vs. Eg. The band gap values of the RT and HT absorber layers were estimated to be 1.075 and 1.066 eV, respectively (Fig. 4c). Considering the slightly decreased bandgap of the HT cell and that the VOC usually increases with the band gap, it is safe to infer that the increase of VOC for the HT device with a low band gap is mainly due to the optimized bandgap structure. In this work, the band gap of Cu2S is ∼1.20 eV and the thickness is <30 nm. Furthermore, the band gap of the Cd-grading CZTSSe is in the range of 0.962 to 1.072 eV, and the thickness of the Cd-grading CZTSSe is over 1000 nm. Therefore, the final band gap should be mainly determined by the thick Cd-grading CZTSSe. The final band gap obtained by the EQE test is 1.066 eV; this demonstrates that the band gap is contributed by Cu2S and band-gap-graded CZTSSe together, and the Cd-grading CZTSSe plays a major role.
To obtain more insights into the effects of the bandgap grading on the electronic transport properties, we carried out C–V measurements on the RT and HT devices and obtained C–V scan curves of the RT and HT devices, as shown in Fig. S14 (ESI). Fig. 5a shows the plots of the space charge density (NCV) and the depletion region width (Xd). The carrier densities NCV of the two devices are 2.5 × 1015 cm−3 for the RT cell and 7.5 × 1015 cm−3 for the HT cell. The increased carrier concentration of the HT cell indicates that the Cu2S interfacial layer and the Cd2+ doping can improve the p-type conductivity of the absorber layer. According to previous reports, increasing the absorber carrier concentration is an efficient strategy to increase the VOC of CZTSSe solar cells. In a standard p–n junction solar cell without considering interfacial and space charge region (SCR) recombination, the VOC is related to the acceptor carrier density as:
(2)
where Δ
p(Δn) are the photogenerated holes (electrons), ni is the intrinsic carrier density, k is the Boltzmann constant and q is the electronic charge. Therefore, the improvement of VOC (ΔVOC) of the HT cell compared to the RT cell can be estimated by the following eqn (3):

(3)
where
NHTcv and NRTcv are the space charge density of the HT and RT cells, respectively. The calculated ΔVOC (28.3 mV) for HT is lower than the experimentally measured ΔVOC (72 mV) compared to RT. Therefore, in addition to the improved p-type doping concentration, there are other factors contributing to the synergistic enhancement of the VOC.

Temperature-dependent current–voltage measurement was implemented to determine the recombination mechanism of the RT and HT devices, as shown in Fig. 5b. The activation energy (EA) can be obtained by linearly extrapolating VOC to T = 0 K. The EA of the HT device is 0.945 eV, which is closer to its optical band gap of 1.066 eV estimated by EQE (Fig. 4c), whereas the RT device has a significantly lower EA of 0.882 eV, far below its optical bandgap of 1.075 eV (Fig. 4c). This indicates that the formation of CZTSSe:Cdhigh/Cu2S/CdS heterojunctions can effectively reduce the interfacial recombination. The temperature-dependent VOC results relieved our doubts about the role of this new heterojunction in CZTSSe solar cells.

Fig. 5c and d show the temperature-dependent photoluminescence (PL) spectra of the RT and HT heterojunction samples with a 635 nm laser. The penetration depth (dα) of the laser in the PL measurement is related to the absorber coefficient (α) of the tested material, dα = 1/α. The penetration depth of the 633 nm laser used for CZTSSe films is 218 nm according to Salomé et al. Based on the C–V results, the Xd values of the RT and HT devices are 298 nm and 109 nm, respectively. Therefore, the PL measurement with the 635 nm laser mainly responds to the recombination within the space charge region. As the temperature increases from 80 K to 300 K, a blue shift of the PL peak is observed for the two devices, and the peak intensity gradually decreases. The PL peaks are all defect-related transitions, and the blue shift in the peak position with increasing temperature indicates that these defects are gradually thermally emptied. For the RT sample, the PL peak energy at 300 K is 1.062 eV, which is close to the Eg derived by EQE. HT shows a lower peak PL energy of 1.035 eV at 300 K, which is 0.031 eV lower than the Eg derived by EQE. This may be related to the reduced band gap due to the Cd2+ doping. The RT sample shows a more pronounced shift toward lower energies relative to the HT sample, which is believed to be due to the potential fluctuations caused by the high concentration of charged defects. In addition, the PL signal of HT is significantly higher than that of RT, suggesting a reduction in non-radiative recombination due to the graded bandgap structure.
Since the heterojunction annealing leads to the cation exchange of Cu+ and Cd2+ between the CZTSSe and CdS layers, the defect properties of the absorber layers may change accordingly. To obtain insights into the correlation of interdiffusion and the deep trap states, we performed admittance spectra (AS) measurements with the RT and HT devices. The AS is taken from 100 Hz to 1 MHz in the temperature range of 120–300 K (Fig. 6a and b). Fig. 6c shows the Arrhenius plots of RT and HT, from which we obtained the defect activation energy (Ea) values for the corresponding defects. The values of Ea1 = 43 meV for RT and Ea = 65 meV for HT are very close, indicating that these defects are of the same origin. The acceptor defect in CZTSSe with activation energies ranging from 20 to 66 meV can usually be designated as the primary shallow energy level acceptor VCu. Meanwhile, another defect level of Ea2 = 129 meV in the RT device can be attributed to a deeper CuZn defect. The transformation of the CuZn defects in the RT device to the shallower VCu defects in the HT device seems to be well responsed by a sufficient annealing process, resulting in a Cu-poor composition due to ion exchange on the heterojunction interface. Notably, the defect density (Nt) of VCu (Nt = 2.5 × 1015 cm−3) in HT is higher than the Nt of the VCu (Nt1 = 4.4 × 1014 cm−3) and CuZn (Nt2 = 9.1 × 1014 cm−3) defects in RT (Fig. 6d and e), which contributes to the high free carrier density and device conductivity. This is consistent with the increased carrier concentration from the C–V measurements. In addition, by employing time-resolved photoluminescence decay (TRPL) measurements, we obtained the minority carrier lifetimes of the RT and HT heterojunction samples, as shown in Fig. 6f. The TRPL decay curves of HT and RT were fitted to a bi-exponential equation, and the corresponding results are summarized in Table S6 (ESI). The effective minority carrier lifetimes (τ) of RT and HT are 1.94 ns and 4.38 ns, respectively. The HT sample shows a slower decay compared to the RT sample, indicating that the bandgap grading can effectively reduce the recombination of the CZTSSe bulk and improve the photogenerated carrier collection efficiency.
The heterojunction undergoes a sufficient annealing process at 150 °C for 90 min, and this mild annealing temperature and sufficient annealing time transform the CdS/CZTSSe heterojunction into a CdS/Cu2S/CZTSSe heterojunction. Based on their conduction band alignments, an ideal gradient band gap was formed, which is more favorable for carrier transport and separation and reduces carrier recombination at the back surface. The C–V and AS results confirm the changes of the Ncv and defect types caused by the Cu2S interfacial layer and the Cd2+ doping. Furthermore, the PL and TRPL measurements indicate that the bandgap grading can effectively reduce the recombination, thereby significantly improving the device performance of CZTSSe solar cells.

The bandgap-graded structure was designed and realized by annealing during AZO deposition. The HAADF-STEM, EDS, SIMS and XPS results unambiguously demonstrate that the CZTSSe/CdS heterojunction is transformed into CdS/Cu2S/CZTSSe:Cdhigh/CZTSSe:Cdlow after sufficient annealing. Encouragingly, the order of CBM for Cu2S, CZTSSe:Cdhigh, and CZTSSe:Cdlow indicates that a desired bandgap grading in the CZTSSe solar cell is formed. In addition, the Cu2S layer is favorable for reducing the interfacial recombination and improving the p-type conductivity of the absorber layer. Furthermore, the diffusion of Cd2+ into the CZTSSe layer and the formation of Cu-depletion near the surface of the absorber layer resulted in the passivation of defects, and the defect type is converted from CuZn anti-site defects to shallower VCu defects. Meanwhile, the HT sample shows a slower decay compared to the RT sample, indicating that the bandgap grading can reduce the recombination of the CZTSSe bulk and improve the photogenerated carrier collection efficiency. Ultimately, we observed a dramatic improvement of the PCE of the CZTSSe device from 8.44% to 12.25% by applying a facile heterojunction treatment technique. Our annealing strategy does not require additional equipment or changes in the equipment structure. Therefore, it is very easy to introduce our method into the preparation of CZTSSe solar cells, which demonstrates substantial applicability in production. In addition, this work provides a guideline to achieving bandgap-graded CZTSSe solar cells, and it can be extended to other metal chalcogenide solar cells.


The CZTSSe absorber layers were fabricated by sol–gel and selenization processes. The CZTS precursor solutions and the precursor films were prepared by the methods described in previous work. The composition of the precursor solution was a Cu-poor and Zn-rich stoichiometry, where Cu/(Zn + Sn) = 0.72 and Zn/Sn = 1.0. The CZTSSe films were synthesized by annealing the CZTS precursors under Se atmosphere with N2 flow in a rapid thermal furnace. After selenization, ammonia solution etching (25%, 120 s) was employed on the CZTSSe absorbers at room temperature. The CdS buffer layer with a thickness of 30 nm was deposited on the CZTSSe thin films by chemical bath deposition (CBD). The CBD process involved immersion of the CZTSSe films in a solution prepared by mixing CdSO4 (0.045 mol L−1, 10 mL), ammonia (20 wt%, 20 mL), and thiourea (0.22 mol L−1, 10 mL) in 260 mL deionized water and maintaining it at 70 °C for 9 min. Then, 50 nm-thick high-resistivity i-ZnO was sputtered. Next, the Al:ZnO thin film was deposited by radiofrequency sputtering at room temperature, 100 °C, 150 °C and 200 °C, respectively. Finally, a Ni/Al top grid was deposited by e-beam evaporation. The active area of each CZTSSe solar cell was about 0.19 cm2, defined by mechanical scribing.


The sheet resistivity, mobility and carrier density were measured by a Hall instrument for AZO, and the transmittance of the AZO thin films was measured by a Varian Cary 5000 UV-Vis-NIR spectrophotometer between 300 and 1300 nm. The structural properties of the CZTSSe thin films were analyzed by an X’Pert pro X-ray diffractometer (XRD) with Cu Kα as the radiation (λKα = 1.5416 Å). Raman spectra were recorded using microscopic confocal Raman spectrometry (Labram HR 800) with an excitation of 532 nm laser light. The top-view and cross-section morphologies of the films were characterized by a scanning electron microscope (SEM, Hitachi S-4800). X-Ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements (ESCALAB 250Xi, Thermo Scientific, monochromatic Al Kα X-ray absorber source) were used to characterize the surface composition and metal ratios of the films at RT and 150 °C. The cross-sectional element composition distribution and lattice structure of the CZTSSe solar cell were studied by atomic resolution high angle annular dark field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) integrated with energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) and high-resolution transmission electron microscope (HRTEM) measurements (FEI-Talos F200X). The TEM lamellae with a thickness of about 100 nm were prepared using a focused ion beam scanning electron microscopy (FIB-SEM) system (Helios NanoLab 460HP). The radiative recombination was investigated by photoluminescence (PL) in the temperature range of 80–300 K with an excitation wavelength of 635 nm (NanoFinder30A, Tokyo Instrument). The C–V measurements of the solar cells employed a 100 kHz alternating current (AC) excitation source and a direct current (DC) bias from 0.5 to −1 V. The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics were measured by a solar simulator calibrated with a certified Si solar cell under the standard conditions (AM 1.5 G, 1000 w m−2, 25 °C). The external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra were measured using a chopped white light source (150 W halogen lamp) calibrated with a certified Si solar cell and InGaAs solar cell. The lifetime of the carriers was investigated by time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) with an excitation wavelength of 532 nm (FluoTime 300, PicoQuant Gmbh). Admittance spectroscopy (AS) was measured with Agilent 4284 in the temperature range of 120–300 K under dark conditions with an AC voltage of 30 mV by varying the frequencies from 100 Hz to 1 MHz.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the National Key R&D Program of China (2018YFE0203400), National Natural Science Foundation of China (U1902218, 11774187), and 111 Project (B16027). We thank Dr F. Liu for XRD measurement. We also thank the discussion with Prof. J. S. Luo, J. P. Ao, and W. Liu.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ee03134a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022