 DOI: 10.1039/C5TA10192A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1915-1922


Fuzhi
Wang
,

Bing
Zhang
,

Qiuxiang
Li
,

Zhenzhen
Shi
,

Lu
Yu
,

Hao
Liu
,

Yaping
Wang
,

Songyuan
Dai
,

Zhan'ao
Tan
* and 

Yongfang
Li


State Key Laboratory of Alternate Electrical Power System with Renewable Energy Sources, Beijing Key Laboratory of Novel Thin Film Solar Cells, North China Electric Power University, Beijing 102206, China. E-mail: tanzhanao@ncepu.edu.cn

CAS Key Laboratory of Organic Solids, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China

Received
14th December 2015
, Accepted 4th January 2016
First published on 6th January 2016
Improving the light absorption of the photoactive layer is a key issue to enhance the photovoltaic performance of polymer solar cells (PSCs). Herein, the transfer-matrix method is used to model the absorption spectra and optical electric field distribution within the multilayer stack of conventional and inverted PSCs based on PBDTTT-C-T:PC70BM blends. The simulation results show that the short-circuit current density (Jsc) of the devices increases with increasing photoactive layer thickness and an oscillation can be observed for both conventional and inverted devices. By applying an inverted architecture, higher optical electric field energy dissipation in the photoactive layer can be realized, and higher Jsc can be achieved. Guided by the simulation results, high performance conventional and inverted PSCs based on PBDTTT-C-T:PC70BM are experimentally fabricated. Comparing the external quantum efficiency (EQE) with the absorption spectra for both devices, the increased Jsc for the inverted device is attributed mainly to the enhanced absorption. The conventional device shows a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 7.09%, while the inverted device shows enhanced Jsc and FF, and the PCE reaches 8.81%, which is increased by 24.3% in comparison with that of the conventional device. The agreement between the modeling and experimental results confirms the directive function of optical modeling on device design and optimization.

Polymer solar cells (PSCs) have gained great attention due to their potential applications in terms of being low-cost, solution-processable and light-weight. The architecture of conventional PSCs typically consists of a bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) photoactive layer sandwiched between a modified transparent indium tin oxide (ITO) anode and a top metal cathode. Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) and low-work-function metals are commonly used as anode and cathode interfacial materials, respectively. However, the acidic PEDOT:PSS can etch ITO, thus causing problems with respect to morphology uniformity and chemistry stability. Also, the low-work-function metals used as the cathode interfacial materials are vulnerable to oxygen and water, leading to device degradation. Additionally, the thermodynamically favored stratified composition formed during the formation of a polymer-fullerene blend film is composed of a slightly fullerene-rich region concentrated at the bottom and caped with a polymer-rich air interface, which is not conducive to the collection of the separated charge carriers. In recent years, the concept of inverted PSCs (Fig. 1(b)) has been introduced to overcome these problems. In an inverted structure, an ITO electrode modified by air stable low-work-function materials serves as the cathode and some high-work-function metals serve as the anode, which enables the inverted PSCs to exhibit higher environmental stability in comparison with the conventional PSCs.

Through continuous optimization, a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of above 10% has been achieved for both conventional and inverted PSCs. The essence of device performance optimization involves the management of light and electricity, regardless of the structure of conventional or inverted PSCs. In a multilayered device, only the light absorbed by a photoactive layer contributes to the electricity output. Therefore, improving the light absorption of the photoactive layer is a key issue to enhance the device performance. For a photoactive layer with given materials, utilizing a thicker film is the simplest way to improve light absorption. However, there is a trade-off between light absorption and charge carrier collection. Due to the relatively low carrier mobility and short exciton lifetime, the exciton diffusion length in the organic film is only 5–10 nm, which means that increasing the photoactive layer thickness will cause a decreased carrier collection efficiency, thus resulting in a lowered fill factor (FF) and poorer PCE. In this case, how to enhance the light absorption in the organic film with a fixed thickness is one of the key issues that need to be addressed.
In PSCs, the electric field component of a plane wave at a position x, E(x), can be used to simulate the optical field distribution, since most of the organic photoactive materials have no significant interaction with the magnetic field component. Therefore, the optical electric field refers to the energy density which is delivered by the electric field part in the electromagnetic wave, and the light absorption of a certain film is directly proportional to the squared optical electric field, therefore, simulation of the internal optical electric field distribution within the device is necessary to evaluate the obtainable device current. PSCs are usually composed of a plurality of functional layers (transparent electrode, electrode buffer layers and photoactive layer). When light is irradiated on the cell, the incident light travels through these films and finally reaches the metallic electrode, where reflection occurs and the reflected light passes through the cell again for secondary absorption. During this process, reflection and refraction will occur at each interface due to the different optical constants of these functional materials. In addition, optical interference also happens between the incident light and that reflected from the metal surface and other interfaces in this stacked structure since the thickness of each film is far smaller than the wavelength of its absorbed light. The optical electric field at a position x in layer j can be resolved into two components, which propagates in the positive (E+j(x)) and negative E−j(x) directions, respectively. A standing wave is formed due to the interference effect between the incident light and the reflected light. The total electric field, Ej(x), is described by the expression
Ej(x) = E+j(x) + E−j(x) = t+j[eiξjx + r′′jeiξj(2dj−x)]E+0
where
dj is the thickness of layer j, E+0 is the incident plane wave electric field and . t+j and ξj are both related to the complex index of refraction of the film N(λ)j = n(λ)j + ik(λ)j. By using the interface matrix, the layer matrix and the total system transfer matrix, the expression of the optical electric field in any functional layer can be calculated. The resultant standing wave is oscillated throughout the multilayered device, in which the optical electric field is near-zero at the metallic electrode surface and the quantity of the optical field dissipated in each film depends on the light wavelength and the optical properties of these functional films. In multilayer stacked PSCs, each functional layer can absorb incident light, but only the light absorbed by the photoactive layer can produce excitons and contribute to the efficiency improvement. Therefore, managing the light distribution in the PSCs to maximize the optical absorption within the photoactive layer is crucial to improve the power conversion efficiency of the device. In previous literature studies, transfer matrix formalism is usually used to precisely calculate the one-dimensional distribution of the optical electric field distribution in every layer across the device. However, in most of these studies, optical modeling was only used to interpret the phenomena observed in the experiments, and few attempts have been made to exploit the optical theory to guide the device design for manipulating the light in-coupling and propagation to improve the device performance.

In this work, we investigated the photoelectric properties of PBDTTT-C-T:PC70BM-based conventional and inverted PSCs by using transfer matrix formalism and experimental methods. A previously reported solution processed titanium chelate, TIPD, was used as the electron collecting material to construct the inverted PSCs and optical electric field redistribution was realized by applying this architecture. Transfer matrix simulations were used to calculate the maximum obtainable short-circuit current density (Jsc) and the optical electric field distribution for both conventional and inverted multilayered devices. The management of optical electric field distribution in multilayered devices was realized through device architecture design and interface engineering under the guidance of simulation. The performance of the devices was optimized based on the best compromise between light collection and the charge carrier collection. The good agreement between the experimental and calculated results proves the guiding significance of the theoretical simulation in device architecture design and optimization.

Patterned ITO glass with a sheet resistance of 10 Ω per square (CSG Holding Co., Ltd.) was used as the anode. PEDOT:PSS (Clevios™ P VP AI 4083) was purchased from H. C. Starck, Inc. and used as the hole transport layer. PBDTTT-C-T was synthesized according to the previously reported procedures. PC70BM was purchased from Nano-C. MoO3 and TIPD were purchased from Alfa Aesar and used as hole and electron collecting materials, respectively.


The conventional and inverted devices were fabricated with the architectures of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PBDTTT-C-T:PC70BM/Ca/Al and ITO/TIPD/PBDTTT-C-T:PC70BM/MoO3/Al, respectively. A patterned ITO substrate was used as the transparent electrode. The ITO substrate was washed with detergent, deionized water, acetone, and isopropanol, sequentially. Then, the substrate was transferred to the UV-ozone cleaning system to undergo treatment for 15 min to remove organic residue. For the conventional device, PEDOT:PSS is used as the anode buffer layer for hole collection, which was spin-coated on the pretreated ITO substrate and then baked at 150 °C for 10 min. The thickness of PEDOT:PSS is estimated to be 30 nm using a Dektak XT (Bruker) surface profilometer. In the inverted device, a thin layer of TIPD is used as the cathode buffer layer for electron collection, which was prepared by spin-coating (3500 rpm) a 3.75 wt% TIPD isopropanol solution on the pre-cleaned ITO substrate and followed by annealing in a nitrogen atmosphere at 150 °C for 15 min. The thickness of the TIPD film was estimated to be 9 nm from spectroscopic ellipsometry. The donor polymer PBDTTT-C-T and acceptor PC70BM were dissolved in dichlorobenzene with a 1:1.5 (w/w, polymer concentration of 12.5 mg mL−1) weight ratio. About 4% volume ratio of (1,8-diiodooctane (DIO) was added as an additive to achieve a better film morphology. The photoactive layer was fabricated by spin-coating (1000 rpm) the solution of PBDTTT-C-T:PC70BM on the modified ITO substrate and the thickness of the photoactive layers is around 120 nm. Finally, the substrate was transferred to a vacuum chamber for the evaporation of Ca (10 nm)/Al (100 nm) or MoO3 (24 nm)/Al (100 nm) for conventional or inverted devices.


The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the cells were tested using a Keithley 2400 Source Measure Unit under a nitrogen atmosphere in a glove-box. The photocurrent was measured under simulated AM1.5G solar irradiation with a light intensity of 100 mW cm−2 (from SAN-EI, AAA grade). The external quantum efficiency (EQE) measurement was carried out on QE-R systems (Enli Tech). The light intensity at each wavelength was measured using a standard single-crystal Si photovoltaic cell. The EQE measurements were performed under ambient conditions at room temperature. The optical constants (n and k) of all layers are required for the optical simulation and were derived from spectroscopic ellipsometry by using a SENTECH SE400 rotating compensator ellipsometer.


The optical absorption of the photoactive layer and the optical electric field distribution in the devices were modeled by using the standard optical transfer matrix formalism, which is a commonly used method for modeling the optical intensity distribution within multilayered devices with well-defined, optically homogeneous and isotropic, parallel layers. Complex refractive indices (n and k) of the materials involved in the devices are used for the simulation. For the optical simulation, the architectures of conventional and inverted devices are depicted in Fig. 1(b), in which the thickness of ITO is 180 nm.


The molecular structures of TIPD, PBDTTT-C-T and PC70BM are given in Fig. 1(a). Fig. 1(b) shows the architectures of the conventional device and the inverted device. The conventional device was fabricated with a photoactive layer sandwiched between the PEDOT:PSS-modified ITO anode and the Ca/Al cathode. For the inverted device, TIPD was used as the electron collection layer to modify the ITO cathode and MoO3 was used as the hole collection layer to modify the Al anode. The energy levels of the materials involved in the devices are shown in Fig. 1(c). The electronic energy levels of PBDTTT-C-T and PC70BM and the work function of MoO3 are taken from the literature. For the conventional-architectured device, the work function of the anode interfacial material, PEDOT:PSS (5.1 eV), is very close to the HOMO of PBDTTT-C-T, therefore, an ohmic contact can be formed at the anode side. For the inverted-architectured device, MoO3 also can form an ohmic contact with the PBDTTT-C-T donor material due to its high work function of 5.5 eV. At the cathode side, the LUMO of TIPD is almost the same as that of PC70BM, thus the electrons can easily transport to the ITO electrode through TIPD.

The extinction coefficient (k) of TIPD is nearly zero throughout the visible range (Fig. 2(a)), therefore, the TIPD film shows almost no absorption in the visible region according to the absorption coefficient . The optical function of the TIPD film is to modulate the interference between the incident and reflected light and thereby change the light intensity dissipated in the device. In order to determine the optimum thickness of the photoactive layer, the expected maximum Jsc of the devices as a function of photoactive layer thickness was calculated; the photoactive layer thickness varies from zero to 400 nm. For the modeling, the architectures of conventional and inverted devices are depicted in Fig. 1(b), in which the thickness of ITO is 180 nm and the internal quantum efficiency (IQE) is assumed to be 100% over the entire wavelength range. All the optical constants (n and k) of ITO, PEDOT:PSS, PBDTTT-C-T:PC70BM, TIPD, MoO3 and Ca are input into our program. The calculated results are shown in Fig. 2. As can be seen from Fig. 2, the maximum obtainable Jsc of the inverted device is always higher than that of the conventional device, regardless of the photoactive layer thickness. For the conventional device, the simulated Jsc increases rapidly with the thickness of the photoactive layer, and reaches ∼17.1 mA cm−2 with a 120 nm thick photoactive layer. The increase of the Jsc slows down when the thickness exceeds 140 nm, and a maximum value of 19.23 mA cm−2 is obtained with a thickness of 170 nm. When the thickness increases further, no obvious variation is observed for the simulated Jsc. For the inverted device, the simulated Jsc enhances more rapidly with the photoactive layer thickness in comparison with that of the conventional device. Therefore, a higher Jsc can be achieved with inverted architecture, especially for a thin photoactive layer. A simulated maximum Jsc of 22.5 mA cm−2 is obtained when the thickness of the photoactive layer is 120 nm, which is increased by 32% in comparison with that of the conventional device. For the inverted device with a thicker photoactive layer, the variation trend of the simulated Jsc is similar to that of the conventional device. From the above simulated results, inverted devices can be expected to exhibit better performance than conventional devices. Considering the short exciton diffusion length caused by low carrier mobility and short exciton lifetime in PSCs, low exciton-to-free-carrier is detrimental to Jsc enhancement. Therefore, the optimal photoactive layer thickness should be between 100 and 180 nm.
The effect of the photoactive layer thickness on the photovoltaic performance of conventional and inverted devices was experimentally investigated. Considering the effects of film thickness on the light absorption and charge transportation, the thickness of the photoactive layer is determined to be 60–160 nm. Fig. 3(a) shows the J–V characteristics of the conventional devices with the photoactive layer thickness ranging from 60 to 160 nm under dark conditions. The leakage current of the devices under reversed bias decreases with increasing photoactive layer thickness, which is beneficial for the achievement of higher FF. The series resistance (Rs, summarized in Table 1) of the devices is calculated from the dark J–V curves at 1 V. The Rs increases with the increase of the film thickness due to the limited charge carrier mobility of the photoactive layer. The J–V curves of the devices under the illumination of AM1.5G, 100 mW cm−2 are illustrated in Fig. 3(b), and the parameters are also summarized in Table 1. From the energy-level alignments of the materials involved in the devices, as shown in Fig. 1(c), the interface contact characteristics remain unchanged, regardless of the photoactive layer thickness, thus all the five devices show a similar open circuit voltage of ∼0.76 V, while the Jsc and FF increase with the increase of the photoactive layer thickness, since more light can be absorbed with a thicker film. However, the trade-off between the light absorption and charge transportation/collection leads to a saturated Jsc at ∼140 nm. The conventional device with a 140 nm photoactive layer exhibits the best PCE of 7.06%, with a Voc of 0.76 V, a Jsc of 14.9 mA cm−2, and an FF of 62.8%. A thicker photoactive layer of 160 nm leads to a decrease in FF. The devices with inverted architecture also exhibit the same Voc of 0.76 V due to the well-aligned energy levels at both electrode interfaces. The Jsc and FF of the inverted devices show a similar trend to that of the conventional devices. However, the inverted devices demonstrate much higher Jsc, leading to superior performance compared to their conventional counterparts. The inverted device with a 120 nm thick photoactive layer exhibits a Voc of 0.76 V, a Jsc of 18.0 mA cm−2, a FF of 64.1% and a PCE of 8.81%. However, excessive thickness of the photoactive layer cannot help to optimize these parameters, but deteriorates them significantly, resulting in a decline in the PCE. This confirms the above speculation that a too thick photoactive layer is not conducive to the collection efficiency of electrons and holes generated by the exciton separation.
Device
Photoactive layer thickness (nm)

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)

R
s
 (Ω cm2)

a 
R
s values of PSCs in the dark are obtained at around 1 V.

Conventional
60
0.76
11.3
59.1
5.07
2.20
90
0.76
13.1
61.9
6.14
2.93
120
0.76
14.4
63.8
6.98
3.54
140
0.76
14.9
62.8
7.13
4.85
160
0.76
14.9
59.2
6.78
4.96
Inverted
60
0.76
15.5
60.3
7.10
2.7
90
0.76
17.2
61.6
8.06
3.8
120
0.76
18.0
64.1
8.81
4.5
140
0.76
17.4
59.9
7.92
5.4
160
0.76
16.9
58.5
7.54
5.8
In order to understand the reason for the Jsc enhancement of the inverted device, the EQE spectra of the two devices are compared, as shown in Fig. 4(a). The inverted device shows higher EQE in comparison with the conventional device throughout the wavelength range of 350–700 nm, which is consistent with the higher Jsc of the corresponding devices. However, the two devices show totally different light response in the wavelength range of 380–530 nm. There exists a deep valley with the valley bottom located at ∼420 nm for the conventional device. In contrast, a strong peak appears in this wavelength range for the inverted device, indicating the improved light response of the inverted device. We calculated the optical absorption in the photoactive layer for both conventional and inverted devices through optical simulation. As can be seen from Fig. 4(a), the optical absorption inside the photoactive layer of the inverted device is much higher than that of the conventional device over the whole absorption spectrum, and the characteristics of the EQE curves are in good agreement with those of the corresponding modeled fraction of absorbed light in the photoactive layer for both conventional and inverted devices. In order to investigate the reasons for Jsc enhancement of the inverted device, the EQE and absorption enhancement of the inverted device with respect to the conventional device are calculated, as shown in Fig. 4(b). It is found that the EQE enhancement curve matches well with the absorption enhancement curve, which proves that the higher Jsc stems mainly from the absorption improvement of the photoactive layer for inverted devices.
For PSCs, the number of excitons generated at position x in a multilayered device is proportional to the energy absorption, Q(x), which is described by the expression
where
c is the speed of light, ε0 is the permittivity of free space, and α and n are the absorption coefficient and refractive index, respectively. |E(x)|2 represents the modulus squared of the electric field. Therefore, calculating the squared electric field distribution helps to analyze the cause of photocurrent variation. The electric field at position x in a certain layer is related to the complex index of refraction of each material involved in the device, stacking pattern of the films and the thickness of each film; therefore, the electric field distributions are different in the conventional and inverted device structures. Fig. 5(a) and (b) show the normalized calculated distribution of the squared optical electric field strength |E|2 inside the devices for light of different wavelengths with the same y-axis scale-bar for conventional and inverted devices, respectively. The thickness of the photoactive layer is 120 nm for both devices. By adopting the inverted architecture, the overall simulated electric field strength in the photoactive layer is increased for light throughout the visible region. Meanwhile, the maximum of the electric field moves towards the back electrode. From these simulation results, it can be concluded that the increased photocurrent for the inverted device mainly originates from the enhanced optical electric field.

In BHJ PSCs, the higher Jsc originates not only from the stronger light absorption, but also the more efficient charge separation and collection efficiency. In addition to the film thickness and interface properties, the position of the exciton generated in the blend film and the morphology of micro-phase separation also influence these efficiencies. The exciton generation rate in devices is also calculated, as shown in Fig. 5(c). The generated excitons are widely distributed throughout the photoactive layer for both conventional and inverted devices. For the conventional device, the maximum excitons are generated near the interface of the PEDOT:PSS/photoactive layer. For the preparation of the PBDTTT-C-T:PC70BM BHJ film, the use of a high boiling point additive (DIO) induces thermodynamically favored vertical stratification with PBDTTT-C-T preferentially enriched near the top region and PC70BM enriched near the bottom region of the BHJ film. The abundance of the PBDTTT-C-T polymer near the BHJ layer/cathode interface is not conducive to the collection of electrons generated at the PEDOT:PSS/BHJ layer interface, leading to a relatively low FF. For the inverted device, the main difference is that the profile of the exciton generation rate moves towards the back electrode. The polymer-rich phase provides a hole transport path to the top anode, while the fullerene-rich phase provides an electron transport path to the bottom cathode. Therefore, charge extraction can be increased, which is verified by the higher FF achieved with the inverted device.
In order to examine the effect of the substrate on the preferred orientation of the photoactive layer, we used transmission electron microscopy (TEM) to analyze the film morphology of the photoactive layer on the PEDOT:PSS and TIPD substrate, as shown in Fig. 6. Fig. 6(a) and (b) present images of the PBDTTT-C-T:PC70BM blend layer on the ITO/PEDOT:PSS substrate. The bright and the dark regions in the TEM images correspond to the polymer-rich and PC70BM-rich domains, respectively. It can be observed that the PBDTTT-C-T-rich domains construct a continuous network with PC70BM-rich domains orderly embedded in it, and the size of the polymer-rich domains is about 15–20 nm. Obviously, the concentration of the polymer composition within the surface of the blend film is much higher than that of the fullerene derivatives. When ITO/TIPD is used as the substrate for inverted devices, the bi-continuous interpenetrating networks of PBDTTT-C-T and PC70BM are further optimized (Fig. 6(c) and (d)), in which the diameters of polymer and fullerene aggregation can be decreased to 10 nm or less. In BHJ PSCs, the photo-generated excitons need to diffuse to the vicinity of the polymer-fullerene interface for efficient separation. However, the diffusion length of excitons in most conjugated polymer materials is quite short (5–10 nm) due to their short lifetime. Therefore, the scale of the polymer and fullerene phases in the blend layer is critical to the exciton dissociation efficiency. A large domain size, which exceeds the exciton diffusion length, leads to increased exciton quenching ratio, which is detrimental to photocurrent enhancement. The decreased domain size of the two phases is beneficial to exciton dissociation, thus reducing the photocurrent loss.

In conclusion, high performance conventional and inverted PSCs based on PBDTTT-C-T:PC70BM were obtained by the guidance of standard optical transfer matrix formalism simulation to optimize the light distribution within the photoactive layer. Based on this optical model, the relationship between the maximum Jsc and the photoactive layer thickness is obtained. The total absorption of the photoactive layer can be maximized using an inverted architecture; therefore, the inverted devices are expected to exhibit better performance than conventional devices. Physical devices are prepared under the design guideline derived from the transfer matrix simulation. The theoretical results and experiment and modelling are in good agreement. The Jsc, FF and PCE of the inverted device have improved greatly than those of the device with a conventional structure. Considering the restrictions of carriers' short diffusion length, the optimal photoactive layer thicknesses are near 140 and 120 nm, respectively. Light absorption, optical electric field distribution and the morphology of the photoactive layer were compared to analyze the reasons for the improved Jsc and FF. The inverted device shows higher light absorption, enhanced optical electric field and optimal phase separation, thus leading to higher charge generation, extraction and collection. The PCE of the optimized device with an inverted structure reaches 8.81%, which is increased by 24.3%, compared to that of the device with a conventional structure (7.1%). Overall, we present a comprehensive analysis of the dependence of the PSC performance on device geometry, and our finding will provide insight into the importance of light distribution management in polymer solar cells.


This work was supported by the NSFC (51573042, 51173040, 51303052), SRFDP (20130036110007), The National Key Basic Research Program of China (973 project, 2015CB932201), Program for New Century Excellent Talents in University (NCET-12-0848), The Science and Technology Commission of Beijing Municipality, China (Z141100003314003), Beijing Higher Education Young Elite Program (YETP0713), State Key Laboratory of Physical Chemistry of Solid Surfaces (Xiamen University, 201404) and Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities, China (13ZD11, 2014MS35, 2014ZZD07).


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016