 DOI: 10.1039/C7TA09543K
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 24820-24825


Mingyu
Zhang
,

Jingshuai
Zhu
,

Kuan
Liu
,

Guanhaojie
Zheng
,

Guanchao
Zhao
,

Liwei
Li
,

Yuan
Meng
,

Ted
Guo
,

Huanping
Zhou
* and 

Xiaowei
Zhan
*

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, College of Engineering, Peking University, Beijing 100871, P. R. China. E-mail: xwzhan@pku.edu.cn; happy_zhou@pku.edu.cn

ENN Solar Energy Co., Ltd, Huaxiang Road 106, Langfang, Hebei 065001, P. R. China

Received
30th October 2017
, Accepted 9th November 2017
First published on 9th November 2017
A fused-ring electron acceptor based on indacenodithiophene (IDIC) was used to replace TiO2 and work as an electron transport layer in planar n–i–p perovskite solar cells. IDIC improves perovskite crystallinity and film quality due to its hydrophobicity and incompatible wetting surface. IDIC facilitates electron extraction and transport due to its high mobility and suitable energy levels matched with the perovskite. IDIC reduces charge recombination in the devices due to trap passivation at the perovskite surface. The IDIC-based devices exhibit a champion power conversion efficiency of 19.1%, which is higher than that of TiO2-based devices (17.4%). Moreover, the device stability is significantly improved by IDIC.

Organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite materials based on methylammonium lead halides (CH3NH3PbX3, X = Cl−, Br−, I−) exhibit strong and broad absorption in the visible region, ambipolar charge transport, a long charge diffusion length and lifetime, and solution processability. Over the past few years, the power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have encouragingly been boosted from 3.8% to 22.1%. PSCs are regarded as a potential alternative to conventional silicon-based photovoltaics. PSCs typically have a sandwich structure of a perovskite layer, electron transport layer (ETL) and hole transport layer (HTL) with conventional n–i–p and inverted p–i–n configurations.

For n–i–p PSCs, TiO2 is the most commonly used ETL. However, the TiO2 ETL usually requires high temperature sintering/annealing to improve crystallinity and charge carrier mobility. This complicated preparation process is not compatible with the production of large-area devices based on flexible plastic substrates. Meanwhile, the UV sensitivity of TiO2 is harmful to the stability of the devices. Therefore, it's necessary to replace or modify the TiO2 layer. On the other hand, organic semiconductors can be solution processed at room temperature and used as an ETL in PSCs. For example, fullerene derivatives have already been introduced into n–i–p PSCs as the ETL, which exhibited PCEs of 12–19%. Nevertheless, fullerene derivatives suffer from some disadvantages, such as limited energy level variability, photochemical instability and high cost. Recently, several non-fullerene organic semiconductors have been used as the ETL in n–i–p PSCs, which exhibited PCEs of 16–17%.
Since 2015, we have reported a series of fused-ring electron acceptors (FREAs) with an acceptor–donor–acceptor structure based on electron-donating extended fused rings end capped with strong electron-withdrawing groups. Relative to traditional fullerene derivatives, the optical bandgap and energy levels of FREAs can be readily tuned, and FREA-based organic solar cells (OSCs) exhibited higher PCE and better thermal and photochemical stability. There have been three reports on FREA application in PSCs as an interfacial layer to modify the surface of perovskite or TiO2 films.
In this work, we report the first example of using a FREA as an ETL in n–i–p PSCs to replace TiO2. Our previous work demonstrated that IDIC (Fig. 1a) exhibited excellent performance in OSCs. Since IDIC has good solution processability, a high electron mobility of 1.1 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 and a suitable LUMO energy level matched with the conduction band of the perovskite layer, we used it as an ETL in n–i–p PSCs and compared with TiO2-based devices. The devices based on the IDIC ETL showed a champion PCE of 19.1%, superior to that of the devices based on TiO2 (17.4%). The PCE of 19.1% is the highest value reported for n–i–p PSCs based on non-fullerene ETLs (the reported best was 17.66%) and rivals those of fullerene-based n–i–p PSCs (the reported best was 19.1%). Furthermore, the stability and hysteresis of the IDIC-based devices have been significantly improved against the TiO2-based devices.

In order to investigate the capability of IDIC to serve as an efficient ETL, conventional n–i–p PSCs with a structure of glass/ITO/IDIC/CH3NH3PbI3(Cl)/spiro-OMeTAD/Au were fabricated (Fig. 1b). The IDIC layer is uniform and smooth with a roughness of 0.55 nm (Fig. S1) and a thickness of around 20 nm. The cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the device confirms that the device has a well-defined layer-by-layer structure (Fig. S2, ESI). The LUMO (−3.9 eV) and HOMO (−5.7 eV) energy levels of IDIC are calculated from cyclic voltammetry measurements. The LUMO level of IDIC is higher than the conduction band of TiO2 (−4.1 eV) and well matches the conduction band of CH3NH3PbI3(Cl) (−3.9 eV), indicating a favorable electron transport from CH3NH3PbI3(Cl) to IDIC (Fig. 1c). Meanwhile, the HOMO level of IDIC is much deeper than the valence band of CH3NH3PbI3(Cl) (−5.4 eV), which benefits the hole blocking.

The UV-visible absorption intensity of perovskite films on the TiO2 and IDIC substrates is the same (Fig. 2a). The crystal structures of the perovskite films were studied by X-ray diffraction (XRD). As shown in Fig. 2b, both perovskite films on the TiO2 and IDIC substrates show intense diffraction peaks at 14.2° and 28.3°, assigned to the (110) and (220) planes of a tetragonal phase perovskite, respectively, in accordance with the previous work. However, the diffraction peaks of the perovskite film on the IDIC substrate are much stronger than those on the TiO2 substrate, indicating the improvement in the crystallinity of the perovskite film, which is important for high performance devices. The top-view SEM images of the CH3NH3PbI3(Cl) film on TiO2 and IDIC substrates are shown in Fig. 2c and d. A high-quality and homogeneous perovskite film with larger crystalline domains is formed on IDIC substrates, which is beneficial to enhancing the device performance. To explain this, we investigated the wettability of different ETL substrates. The water contact angles of TiO2 and IDIC are 41.2° and 83.5°, respectively (Fig. S3). Apparently, compared with TiO2, the incompatible wetting surface of the IDIC substrate to the perovskite will provide a weaker surface tension and dragging force for perovskite precursor solution to form larger perovskite crystalline domains.
To investigate the charge extraction, we measured the steady-state photoluminescence (PL) and time-resolved PL spectra of glass/TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3(Cl) and glass/IDIC/CH3NH3PbI3(Cl) (Fig. 3a and b). The PL intensity of the perovskite film on the glass/IDIC substrate is much weaker than that of the perovskite film on the glass/TiO2 substrate, indicating more efficient charge transfer at the interface of IDIC/perovskite. Meanwhile, a blue-shift of the PL peak from 779 to 773 nm was observed for the perovskite film on the glass/IDIC substrate relative to the perovskite film on the glass/TiO2 substrate, which reveals that IDIC has the ability to fill and passivate the trap states on the surface of the perovskite film leading to the recovery of the bandgap and blue-shifts of the PL peak. The time-resolved PL decay was measured with the peak emission at 780 nm as shown in Fig. 3b. Fitting the data with two-component exponential decay (here, the longer lifetime was used for comparison) yields the lifetime of carriers. The PL lifetime of the perovskite film on the glass/TiO2 substrate is 98 ns, while the PL lifetime of the perovskite film on the glass/IDIC substrate is substantially shortened to 34 ns, suggesting a faster electron extraction from the perovskite film to the organic ETL.
To further explore the charge carrier behaviors in entire devices based on different ETLs, we carried out transient photovoltage (TPV) and photocurrent (TPC) measurements, which are widely used to study the charge recombination and transfer dynamics of solar cells, respectively. The TPV and TPC measurements are performed under dark conditions, excited with a 532 nm pulsed laser with a certain intensity, and the data are fitted with a bi-exponential decay function. As shown in Fig. 4a, the IDIC based devices exhibit a photovoltage decay time of 0.15 ms, which is longer than that of the control devices based on TiO2 (0.13 ms). The prolonged lifetime suggests that less carrier recombination takes place in the devices with IDIC. From the TPC measurements (Fig. 4b), the IDIC based devices exhibit a larger photocurrent than the control devices based on TiO2. Furthermore, a shorter charge transfer time is obtained for the devices based on IDIC (1.03 μs) compared with the control devices based on TiO2 (1.21 μs), indicating the improvement of electron transport and charge collection efficiency.
The photovoltaic parameters of the modified devices based on the IDIC ETL with different concentrations are summarized in Table S1. The optimal IDIC concentration is 4 mg mL−1. The device performances of PSCs with different ETLs under a simulated solar illumination of AM1.5G 100 mW cm−2 are shown in Fig. 5a and b. The IDIC based devices exhibit a best PCE of 19.1% with a short circuit current density (JSC) of 23.0 mA cm−2, an open circuit voltage (VOC) of 1.08 V, and a fill factor (FF) of 77.0%, which are higher than those of the TiO2 based devices with a maximum PCE of 17.4%, a JSC of 22.2 mA cm−2, a VOC of 1.05 V and a FF of 74.1% (Table 1). The IDIC based devices show reduced hysteresis with the reverse and forward scan PCEs of 19.1% and 16.9%, respectively, while the TiO2 based devices exhibit hysteresis with the reverse and forward scan PCEs of 17.4% and 14.2%, respectively. Fig. 5c shows the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra of the devices. The IDIC based PSCs show a stronger photocurrent response from 300 to 800 nm than the TiO2 based devices, which is consistent with the results of JSC. Meanwhile, the integrated JSC from the EQE spectra matches the measured JSC well (Table 1). Fig. S4a shows the steady-state current density and power output measured at the maximum power point of the PSCs with different ETLs. The device with the IDIC ETL exhibits a stabilized efficiency of 16.9%, superior to that of the device with the TiO2 ETL (15.5%). Both stabilized efficiencies match well with those from J–V measurements. Moreover, the IDIC based PSCs show good reproducibility in the PCE histogram of 20 devices (Fig. S4b).
ETL
Scanning direction

J
SC (mA cm−2)
Calculated JSC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Best
Average
TiO2
Reverse
22.2
20.7
1.05
74.1
17.4
15.7
Forward
22.0
1.02
63.4
14.2
IDIC
Reverse
23.0
21.0
1.08
77.0
19.1
17.5
Forward
22.5
1.04
72.0
16.9
The stability tests of PSCs with different ETLs were performed under ambient conditions (humidity about 40% and temperature of 25 °C) without encapsulation, and the stability curves are shown in Fig. 5d. The PCEs of the devices based on the TiO2 ETL remain at about 30% of their initial values over 7 days, while those of the devices based on the IDIC ETL remain at about 85% of their initial PCEs during the same test period. The devices based on the IDIC ETL exhibit much better stability than the TiO2 based devices. According to the XRD and SEM measurements of perovskite films grown on different substrates, larger crystalline domains with better crystallinity of the perovskite film on the IDIC substrate were observed. The high-quality and compact perovskite film can prevent moisture from penetrating into the interior of the perovskite layer, suppress the decomposition of the perovskite material and improve the device stability.

We demonstrate the first example of using a FREA as an ETL to replace TiO2 in planar n–i–p PSCs. PSCs based on IDIC show a champion PCE of 19.1%, higher than that of devices based on TiO2 (17.4%). The PCE of 19.1% is the highest value reported for n–i–p PSCs based on organic non-fullerene ETLs. XRD and SEM measurements confirm that the IDIC ETL is beneficial to perovskite crystalline grain growth due to its hydrophobicity and incompatible wetting surface, enhancing perovskite crystallinity and film quality. Steady-state and time-resolved PL spectra as well as TPC measurements reveal that the IDIC ETL facilitates efficient electron extraction and transport from the perovskite layer to the ETL due to its high mobility and suitable energy levels matched with the perovskite. TPV measurements suggest that less charge recombination takes place in the IDIC based devices. Benefiting from the high-quality perovskite film, efficient electron extraction, trap passivation, and reduced charge recombination, the efficiency and stability of PSCs based on the IDIC ETL are enhanced relative to those of the control devices based on TiO2. This work demonstrates that FREAs can be a promising alternative to TiO2 as the ETL in planar n–i–p PSCs to realize simple preparation, high efficiency and excellent stability.


The molecule IDIC was synthesized by one-step simple Knoevenagel condensation, according to our previously published procedure. Unless stated otherwise, all reagents were obtained commercially and were used without further purification. PbI2 (99.999%), N,N-dimethylformamide (99.99%), isopropanol (99.99%) and chlorobenzene (99.9%) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Aminomethane (CP) and ethanol (AC) were purchased from Beijing Chemical Works. Hydrogen iodide (57%) was purchased from Alfa Aesar. Spiro-OMeTAD was purchased from Luminescence Technology Corp.


PSCs were fabricated with a structure of ITO/ETL/CH3NH3PbI3(Cl)/spiro-OMeTAD/Au. The indium tin oxide (ITO) glass was pre-cleaned in an ultrasonic bath of detergent water, ultrapure water, acetone and isopropanol successively. For reference devices based on TiO2, a TiO2 nanoparticle suspension in ethanol (5.3 mg mL−1) with an appropriate amount of titanium diisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate) was spin coated onto an ITO glass substrate and annealed at 150 °C for 30 min in air to form an ETL (40 nm thick). Next, the substrates were transferred into a nitrogen-filled glovebox. For the IDIC-based devices, the ITO glass was treated with ultraviolet ozone for 20 min and transferred into a nitrogen-filled glovebox. The IDIC solution (4 mg mL−1 in chloroform) was subsequently spin-coated onto the ITO substrates at 4000 rpm for 60 s and annealed at 70 °C for 10 min. Then a solution of PbI2 (dissolved in DMF, 450 mg mL−1) was spin-coated on TiO2 and IDIC substrates at 3000 rpm for 30 s and annealed at 70 °C for 20 min. A mixture of CH3NH3I (50 mg mL−1) and CH3NH3Cl (5 mg mL−1) dissolved in isopropanol was spin-coated onto the dried PbI2 layer at 3000 rpm for 30 s. The obtained films were annealed at 150 °C for 15 min in air. The doped spiro-OMeTAD was spin-coated at 3000 rpm for 30 s at a concentration of 80 mg mL−1 with the addition of 35 μL of Li-TFSI/acetonitrile (260 mg mL−1) and 28 μL of 4-tert-butylpyridine. Finally, an 80 nm gold layer was deposited on the top of spiro-OMeTAD through shadow masks via thermal evaporation under high vacuum (∼2 × 10−6 Torr).


The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of photovoltaic devices were obtained using a Keithley 2400 source-measure unit under simulated sunlight from an Oriel 300 solar simulator, and the light intensity was calibrated using a KG-5 Si diode. The effective area of each cell was 0.102 cm2 defined by masks for all the photovoltaic devices discussed in this work. The EQE spectrum was measured using a Solar Cell Spectral Response Measurement System QE-R3011 (Enlitech Co., Ltd). The light intensity at each wavelength was calibrated using a standard single crystal Si photovoltaic cell. The UV-visible absorption spectra were measured using a UV-visible spectrophotometer (Agilent 8453). AFM images were obtained by using a Multimode 8 scanning probe microscope (Bruker). The top-view and cross-sectional SEM images were obtained using a scanning electron microscope (Hitachi S4800). The XRD spectra were obtained using a D/MAX 2400 diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation (Rigaku). Steady-state PL and time-resolved transient-state PL were measured by using an FLS980 (Edinburgh Instruments Ltd) with an excitation at 470 nm. Transient photovoltage (TPV) and photocurrent (TPC) measurements were performed with a self-designed system excited with a 532 nm (Brio, 20 Hz, 4 ns) pulsed laser. A digital oscilloscope (Tektronix, DPO 7104) was used to record the photocurrent or photovoltage decay process with a sampling resistor of 50 Ω or 1 MΩ, respectively. Static contact angles were measured on a Dataphysics OCA25 contact-angle system at ambient temperature (the test liquid is water). The thickness of the IDIC layer was measured using a Bruker Dektak-XT. All the measurements of the solar cells were performed under an ambient atmosphere at room temperature without encapsulation.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the NSFC (21673011) and ENN Solar Energy Co., Ltd.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Cross-sectional SEM image, water contact angles, steady-state measurement of PSCs and histogram of efficiencies, and photovoltaic parameters of the modified devices based on IDIC with different concentrations. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta09543k
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017