 DOI: 10.1039/C6TA09117B
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1906-1912


Junghwan
Kim
,

Sun Min
Lee
*,

Yun-Hwa
Hwang
,

Seongyu
Lee
,

Byoungwook
Park
,

Jae-Hyung
Jang
 and 

Kwanghee
Lee
*

Research Institute for Solar and Sustainable Energies, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, Gwangju 61005, Republic of Korea. E-mail: sunmin06@gmail.com; klee@gist.ac.kr

Materials Science and Engineering, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, Gwangju 61005, Republic of Korea

School of Information and Communications, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, Gwangju 61005, Republic of Korea

Received
20th October 2016
, Accepted 9th December 2016
First published on 9th December 2016
Self-charging power packs (SPPs), integrating both a solar cell and energy storage capacitor (EC) into a single device, are very promising energy systems due to their multiple functions of energy harvesting and storage. Despite their promising potential, however, the monolithic stacking of solid-state ECs onto a large-area solar cell without any external wires is one of the crucial challenges. Here, we successfully demonstrate compact and monolithically stacked SPPs combining a polyvinyl alcohol (PVA)/phosphoric acid (H3PO4)-based solid-state supercapacitor and an organometal halide perovskite- or polymer-based solar cell (PeSC or PSC). As a result of robust interconnection formed via a novel electric glue and efficient solar cells with an enlarged photo-harvesting area of up to 100 mm2, the SPPs exhibited a very high storage efficiency (ηstorage) and overall efficiency (ηoverall) of 80.31% and 10.97%, respectively, for the PeSC-supercapacitor power pack, and 64.59% and 5.07%, respectively, for the PSC-supercapacitor power pack. To the best of our knowledge, the ηoverall value of our PeSC-supercapacitor power pack is by far the highest reported efficiency for integrated self-charging power packs.

To meet the dramatically increased energy demands, most state-of-the-art energy generation approaches have depended heavily on nuclear power and fossil fuels during the past several decades. However, (1) serious environmental problems such as global warming and fine dust; (2) exhaustion of fossil fuels; and (3) increased demand for portable/wearable electronics, electric vehicles, and internet-of-things system have necessitated the replacement of traditional power generation methods with new types of energy systems with mechanical flexibility, low weight, low cost, renewable, and eco-friendly features.

Among these energy systems, photovoltaics and energy storage systems (ESSs) of batteries or supercapacitors have attracted great attention as next-generation energy suppliers. Photovoltaics, which convert solar light into electricity, are the most efficient energy conversion devices among the many types of renewable energy systems such as wind and geothermal systems. Recently, third-generation thin film photovoltaics of perovskite- and polymer-based solar cells (PeSCs and PSCs) have been intensively researched because of their promising properties as lightweight and flexible power generators. However, the efficiency of photovoltaics inherently depends on the light intensity fluctuation caused by diurnal cycle, weather, and location, among other factors, which results in power supply instability and/or the breakdown of electronic devices connected to the solar cells. In the case of ESSs, which store energy for device use, although the storage capacity, cycling lifetime, and operational safety have been dramatically improved, the restricted power capacity and long charging time are still key challenges to be addressed when designing versatile power suppliers for wearable devices and electric vehicles. According to recent studies, the supercapacitors are capable of providing both high power and energy delivery with a fast response time. Therefore, integrating both the solar cell and ESS into one device, termed ‘self-charging power pack’ (SPP), is a promising strategy to alleviate the limitations of each device. The power fluctuation of the solar cell can be compensated by the supercapacitors, thereby providing a stable power output. In addition, the supercapacitor is frequently charged by the solar cell during the daytime, preventing complete discharge and reducing the charging time.
Recently, Du and coworkers reported the fabrication of solid-state supercapacitors based on self-stacked solvated graphene films and their integration with PeSCs. Xu et al. and Wee et al. also demonstrated a power pack combining a polymer electrolyte based supercapacitor with mesoporous PeSCs or PSCs, respectively. The integration of lithium-ion batteries with dye-sensitized solar cells or PeSCs has also been reported by several groups. However, most of the previously reported SPPs have been demonstrated by connecting the two individual devices (solar cell and ESS) with long external wires horizontally or by integrating liquid electrolyte-based capacitors and solar cells, which should be simplified for practical incorporation of the integrated systems into portable and wearable electronics. In addition, the solar harvesting area of previous photovoltaics should be enlarged to further shorten the charging time of the integrated ESS devices. Therefore, to be used as self-sustaining power packs with easy portability and versatile applications, it is important to integrate large-area solar cells and solid-state ESSs into a compact and single device with a monolithic connection. In addition, by stacking the solar cell and ESS vertically, the energy density of the power modules that connect several power packs in a panel can be dramatically increased. However, despite their promising properties, to the best of our knowledge, directly stacked power packs comprising a solid-state ESS and a large-area solar cell have not yet been reported.
In this work, we report compact and monolithically stacked self-charging power packs combining a polyvinyl alcohol (PVA)/phosphoric acid (H3PO4)-based solid-state supercapacitor and an organometal halide perovskite- or polymer-based solar cell. By introducing a highly conductive electric glue between the supercapacitor and solar cells, the power packs were successfully constructed with strong mechanical adhesion and minimized electric resistance. In addition, owing to the enlarged solar devices up to an area of 100 mm2, the integrated supercapacitors (specific capacitance ∼ 144 F g−1) were efficiently photo-charged with a short charging time of 8–15 s. In particular, as a result of the robust interconnection and efficient solar cells, we have achieved a very high storage efficiency (ηstorage) and overall efficiency (ηoverall) of 80.31% and 10.97%, respectively, for the PeSC-supercapacitor power pack and 64.59% and 5.07%, respectively, for the PSC-supercapacitor power pack. To the best of our knowledge, the ηoverall of our PeSC-supercapacitor power pack is by far the highest reported efficiency for integrated self-charging power packs.

Fig. 1a presents a schematic of the fabrication process and device architecture of the SPP combining the solid-state electrochemical supercapacitor (EC) and the large-area photovoltaic cell. First, we independently fabricated the two individual modules of the EC and solar device. Then, the EC was directly attached to the top of the solar cell using silver epoxy. The detailed fabrication methods are described in the Experimental section. It is noteworthy that the silver epoxy played a crucial role in the successful integration of the SPP because of its strong adhesion, high electric conductivity, lack of chemical/mechanical damage to the underlying film (see ESI S1 and S2). As shown in Fig. 1a and b, the SPP features a compact and area-saving architecture with three electrical terminals (T1–T3). During the daytime, the photo-generated carriers within the solar cell are effectively stored in the upper supercapacitor by connecting T1 and T2 (charging mode). In the discharging mode, the stored energy (charge) during the charging process can be applied to the external load by connecting T1 and T3. The external load can also obtain power from the solar cell and from a combination of the solar cell and supercapacitor via the T2–T3 and T1–T2–T3 connection, respectively. The equivalent circuit shown in Fig. 1c illustrates the charging/discharging mode of the SPP.
To construct a high-performance power pack system with versatile potential for use in wearable and portable electronics, we have introduced a PSC and a PeSC in our SPP because of their mechanical flexibility, low weight, and easy processing. In particular, because the crucial parameters of integrated power packs such as ηstorage, ηoverall, and charging time are strongly affected by the power conversion efficiency (PCE) and photo-current capacity of the solar devices, we have fabricated highly efficient solar devices with enlarged photoactive areas (see Fig. 2a). For the PSCs, we have adopted a well-known high-performance bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) system comprising poly[4,8-bis(5-(2-ethylhexyl)thiophen-2-yl)benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiopheneco-3-fluorothieno[3,4-b]thiophene-2-carboxylate] (PTB7-Th) as an electron donor and [6,6]-phenyl C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM) as an electron acceptor. In particular, our BHJ blend system has introduced the modified solvent mixture of chlorobenzene (CB) and 1,2,4-trichlorobenzene (TCB) rather than the typical recipe of CB:1,8-didiodoctane (DIO) solvent to enhance the BHJ morphology and uniformity over a large area. The device architecture is an inverted-type BHJ solar cell with indium tin oxide (ITO)/ZnO/BHJ/MoO3/Ag.
In the case of the PeSC, the P–I–N planar type architecture of ITO/polystyrene sulfonic acid (PSS)/PTAA/perovskite/PC61BM/polyethylenimine (PEI)/Ag was fabricated because of its low-temperature, easy processing and reduced hysteresis behaviour, where the PTAA and PC61BM are poly[bis(4-phenyl) (2,4,6-trimethylphenyl)-amine] and [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester, respectively. The PSS and PEI were used as electric dipole layers to adjust the work function of ITO and PC61BM, respectively, resulting in more efficient hole and electron extraction at each interface. P–I–N type PeSCs usually exhibit relatively low open circuit voltage (Voc) values ranging from ∼0.8 V to 0.9 V compared to those of mesoporous N–I–P PeSCs, which is one of crucial bottlenecks precluding high performance. By introducing a thin (∼5 nm) PTAA hole transport layer onto the ITO/PSS in our P–I–N planar devices, the Voc values of the PeSCs increased up to 1.06 V, which is among the highest Voc reported for P–I–N planar PeSCs. It is noted that the PTAA used in this study was not doped by any dopants such as Li-salt and/or 2,3,5,6-tetrafluoro-7,7,8,8-tetracyanoquinodimethane (F4-TCNQ) to prevent the side effects of the dopant on device stability. In addition, to produce highly uniform large-area perovskite films, the perovskite precursor solution was prepared using a slightly modified solvent mixture of that presented by Seok et al. (see ESI S4). The energy level diagrams of the PSC and PeSC are shown in Fig. S3.

Fig. 2a and b show the photo of solar cells with an active area of 100 mm2 and 4.64 mm2, respectively, and their current–voltage (I–V) characteristics measured under simulated AM 1.5G irradiation with an intensity of 100 mW cm−2. Using our modified fabrication techniques for PeSC and PSC, we have successfully deposited large-area perovskite and BHJ films with excellent film uniformity (Fig. 2a). In addition, as shown in Fig. 2b, the photo-generated currents of the PeSC and PSC with a 100 mm2 area are ∼22 times larger than those of small area solar devices, which is sufficient to shorten the charging time of the integrated supercapacitor. To directly compare the performance of the solar devices, we plotted the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the PeSC and PSC devices with an active area of 4.64 mm2 and 100 mm2, respectively, in Fig. 2c. The device performance parameters are summarized in Table S1. The PeSC with a 4.64 mm2 area exhibited a high PCE of 16.10% with Voc = 1.06 V, short circuit current density (Jsc) = 19.44 mA cm−2, and fill factor (FF) = 78%, which is a competitive performance for a P–I–N planar type PeSC. In addition, our PeSC shows hysteresis-free behaviour due to an excellent perovskite film and balanced electron/hole collection at each electrode (see ESI S5). For the PSC with the 4.64 mm2 area, a relatively lower PCE of 9.00% (Voc = 0.79 V, Jsc = 15.80 mA cm−2, and FF = 72%) was obtained compared to the PeSC. By scaling up the devices, the PCEs of the PeSC and PSC were slightly reduced to 13.66% and 7.85%, respectively, which is mainly due to the increased sheet resistance of the ITO electrode and defects in the large-area films. Nevertheless, our large-area solar devices still exhibit very high PCEs that maintain ∼85% of their initial values in the small-area solar cells, affording efficient photo-charging for a supercapacitor.
Next, we fabricated a solid-state EC by employing reduced graphene oxide (RGO) electrodes coated with the PVA/H3PO4 electrolyte (PVA/RGO) for the energy storage portion of our SSP. The two pieces of the PVA/RGO electrodes were easily assembled together to form a RGO/PVA/separator/PVA/RGO structure as a symmetric supercapacitor (see ESI S6). In particular because our EC features strict encapsulation with no electrolyte leakage, the self-power packs are safe and lightweight.

Fig. 3a and b present the electrochemical performance of the PVA-based supercapacitor using cyclic voltammetry (CV) and galvanostatic charge/discharge (GCD) measurements, respectively. Fig. 3a shows clearly favourable symmetrical rectangular shapes of the CV curves over a range of scan rates of 5–100 mV s−1, implying that the RGO electrode material charges and discharges quickly and efficiently at the electrode/electrolyte interface. It is noted that the current magnitude is normalized to the voltage scan rates, i.e., the actual current is larger than the apparent value on the graph for higher scan rates (see ESI S7). More curvature at the corners of the CV was caused by the equivalent series resistance (ESR) in the device; in a GCD plot, the ESR was observed as a voltage drop at the beginning of the discharge curve. Within a 1.0 voltage range, all the charging curves in Fig. 3b are symmetrical with their corresponding discharge counterparts and exhibit desirably linear voltage–time profiles, which is consistent with the behaviour of CV curves. The specific capacitance with respect to the mass of the active material of a single electrode in a two-electrode cell is calculated using eqn (1) and determined to be 155 F g−1 at a discharging current density of 0.5 A g−1, which is a typical value among the reported PVA-based supercapacitors. In addition, as shown in Fig. 3c, the specific capacitances of our PVA-based supercapacitor retained approximately 67% of their initial values when the current density was increased from 0.5 to 20 A g−1, indicating high capacitance stability and high rate capability.
Based on the optimized device performances of the large-area solar devices and ECs, we proceeded to demonstrate two types of monolithically assembled SPPs incorporating perovskite- and polymer-based solar cells (denoted as PeSC/EC and PSC/EC, respectively) to enable simultaneous energy harvesting and storage in a single device. Fig. 4a and b show the photo-charging/galvanostatic-discharge curves of the PeSC/EC and PSC/EC, respectively. In the charging process (yellow section), the PeSC/EC in Fig. 4a immediately presented a capacitor voltage (Vcap) of 0.90 V with a very short charging time of ∼8 s, which is competitive with the reported values of 15–300 s (see the ESI T4). For the PSC/EC, the Vcap was 0.70 V with a charging time of 15 s (Fig. 4b). Because the solar devices used in this work provide a large amount of current to the supercapacitor of their large photo-harvesting area of 100 mm2, the charging time of the supercapacitor was significantly reduced compared with those of the previously reported studies. Under continuous illumination, the Vcap values increased to the saturated values of 0.910 V and 0.727 V for the PeSC/EC and PSC/EC, respectively. It should be mentioned that the difference in Vcap values between the SPPs originates primarily from the different Voc values of the solar cells; the higher Jsc of the perovskite-based SC clearly results in a faster charging time than that of the PSC/EC. The similar photo-charging curves in external wire systems were observed with supercapacitors and solar cells (see ESI S8).
The discharge behaviour of the ECs after shutting down the light source was plotted by extracting the current densities as shown in the grey sections of Fig. 4a and b. The specific capacitances at a discharge current density of 0.5 A g−1 were calculated to be 142 F g−1 and 144 F g−1 for the PeSC/EC and PSC/EC devices, respectively, which are close to the maximum performance of un-integrated ECs, indicating the successful integration of the ECs into the solar devices. The overall photoelectric conversion and storage efficiency versus photo-charging time were calculated based on eqn (2)–(4). Thus, in Fig. 4c, the monolithic self-power pack of PeSC/EC yielded maximum ηstorage and ηoverall values of up to 80.31% and 10.97%, respectively. The SPP with a PSC exhibited ηstorage ≈ 64.59% and ηoverall ≈ 5.07%. Considering that the photo-charge voltage of the EC part is actually a reflection of the different Voc values generated by perovskite- and polymer-based solar cells, the higher Voc of a perovskite-based solar cell provides a larger photo-charge voltage (∼0.91 V) and augments the amount of stored energy. Because the output efficiency of the integrated power pack is strongly dependent on the Voc and Jsc of the solar devices, further enhanced efficiency is expected from the optimization of crystallinity and composition of perovskite films by introducing more efficient perovskite compositions such as formamidinium (FA) lead iodide or mixed cations of FA:cesium (Cs) and mixed halide (I:Br) into our typical methylammonium lead iodide (MAPbI3).

In summary, we have successfully developed highly efficient self-charging power packs with a simplified and monolithic architecture by integrating a PVA/H3PO4-based EC and large-area PeSC or PSC. The integrated SPPs featured a robust interconnection between the EC and solar cells because of a novel silver electric glue, minimizing photo-charged energy loss. In addition, from the photo-charge/galvanostatic-discharge measurements of the PeSC/EC and PSC/EC, we found that the Vcap and charging time of the EC are strongly dependent on the Voc and Jsc values of solar devices, respectively. Consequently, by optimizing the performance of the large-area PeSC and the interconnection between the EC and PeSC, we have achieved ηoverall ∼ 10.97% with a short charging time of 8 s, which is the highest value for reported integrated SPPs (Table S2, ESI). This result provides a feasible example of a self-sustaining power system with easy portability and versatile applications for future portable/wearable electronics and electric vehicles. In addition, we firmly believe that a range of energy and environmental problems will be solved by further improving the performance of the self-charging power packs with new device architectures and materials.


Graphene oxide (GO) was prepared by the pre-oxidation of a natural graphite powder (<20 μm, Sigma Aldrich) with a modified Hummers' method. Then, the as-prepared GO was placed into a horizontal tube furnace at 300 °C for 5 min under a flow of 5% H2/Ar gas to produce reduced graphene oxide (RGO) powders. For the preparation of electrodes, the RGO powders (85 wt%, active material) were mixed with acetylene black (5 wt%, conductive agent) and poly(vinylidene fluoride) (10 wt%, PVDF, binder) in N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) solvent. A slurry of the aforementioned mixture was ground using an agate mortar and pestle for 2 h and then cast onto carbon papers by a doctor-blade technique. After drying the electrode in an oven at 100 °C for 1 h, it was thermally and mechanically pressed for 5 s at 10 MPA and 100 °C.


The PVA/H3PO4 electrolyte was fabricated from an aqueous solution prepared by mixing a polyvinyl alcohol (50 wt%, PVA, Aldrich MW = 89000–98000) with phosphoric acid (50 wt%, H3PO4, Aldrich). A thin layer of the PVA/H3PO4 was coated on the surface of the RGO electrode (PVA/RGO), followed by drying the PVA/RGO electrode in an oven at 100 °C for 1 hour. The solid-state electrolyte electrochemical supercapacitors were assembled in a symmetric configuration using two pieces of PVA/RGO electrodes and a porous polypropylene separator (Celgard 3501). The as-assembled devices were finally pressed for 10 s under 2 MPa.


All materials, including PSS, PEI, reagents, and solvents, were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich unless otherwise stated. The PbI2 and CH3NH3I were purchased from Alfa Aesar and One Materials, respectively. The conjugated polymer PTB7-Th (10 mg, One Materials) and PC71BM (15 mg, Nano-C) were dissolved in 1 mL of CB:TCB (97:3, volume ratio). For the ZnO precursor solution, zinc acetate dehydrate (Zn(CH3COO2·H2O), Sigma-Aldrich, 99.9%, 1 g) and ethanolamine (NH2CH2CH2OH, Sigma-Aldrich, 99.8%, 0.28 g) were dissolved in 2-methoxyethanol (CH3OCH3CH2OH, Sigma-Aldrich, 99.8%, 10 mL), and the solution was vigorously stirred in air for 12 h.


Polymer solar cells were fabricated with a structure of ITO/ZnO/PTB7-Th:PC71BM/MoOx/Ag. Patterned ITO/glass substrates (15 Ω sq.−1) were cleaned with detergent, ultrasonicated in acetone and isopropyl alcohol, and subsequently dried overnight in an oven. For the electron selective layer of the PSCs, a sol–gel ZnO precursor solution was spin-cast in air onto the pre-cleaned and UV/ozone-treated ITO/glass substrates at 5000 rpm for 30 s (∼15 nm thickness). Then, the films were pre-heated on a hot plate at 200 °C for 15 min. The substrate (ITO/ZnO) was transferred into a N2-filled glovebox, where a PTB7-Th:PC71BM solution was coated onto the ITO/ZnO substrate at 1000 rpm for 40 s. Finally, these samples were pumped down to a vacuum (1 × 10−7 torr; 1 torr ≈ 133 Pa), and an approximately 5 nm-thick MoOx and 110 nm-thick Ag electrode (active area: 4.64 mm2) was deposited on top of the devices. The large-area (100 mm2) solar cells were fabricated similarly except for substrate and mask size.


For the PeSCs, the device structure was ITO/PSS/PTAA/perovskite/PC61BM/PEI/Ag. The PSS (Sigma Aldrich) was diluted to 0.25 wt% in DI-water and spin-coated onto a pre-cleaned ITO substrate at 5000 rpm for 20 s. After drying the ITO/PSS substrate at 150 °C for 10 min, a PTAA solution (2.5 mg mL−1 in toluene) was spin cast (at 6000 rpm for 40 s) on top of the ITO/PSS. The PTAA film was then annealed at 150 °C for 10 min in air. The perovskite precursor solution (MAPbI3, 1.5 M in 1 mL of DMF:DMSO (8.5:1.5, volume ratio)) was spin cast (at 4000 rpm) onto the PTAA film, and diethyl ether (1 mL) was dropped on the perovskite precursor film after 10 s in the N2-filled glovebox. The precursor film was annealed on a hot plate at 100 °C for 10 min. Then, a PC61BM solution (40 mg mL−1 in chlorobenzene) was spin cast (at 1500 rpm for 40 s) onto the MAPbI3 film to form an approximately 100 nm-thick film. After spin-casting a PEI (0.25 wt%, IPA) onto the PC61BM at 5000 rpm, a 110 nm-thick Ag electrode was then successively deposited on top of the devices.


The J–V characteristics were measured using a Keithley 237 source measure unit in an N2 atmosphere. The solar–cell parameters were obtained using an AM 1.5 G solar simulator with an irradiation intensity of 100 mW cm−2. The lamp was calibrated with an NREL-calibrated KG5 filtered silicon reference cell.


The power packs were fabricated by stacking the supercapacitor onto the large area solar cells. First, small amount of silver epoxy (MG chemicals, #8331) was put onto the middle surface of the Ag electrode of the solar devices. Then, the supercapacitor was carefully put down onto the below Ag electrode and attached to the solar cell by applying pressure (2646 Pa). Because the silver epoxy exhibits strong adhesion, high electric conductivity, and lack of chemical/mechanical damage to the underlying film, both the devices were successfully integrated. After then, the integrated power pack was encapsulated with a glass substrate by using transparent epoxy (Devcon 31345).


CV, GCD and photo-charge tests were performed using a Bio-Logic electrochemical workstation (SP-150 Potentiostat). The specific capacitances (CEC) of the solid-state electrochemical supercapacitor (EC) with a PVA/H3PO4 electrolyte are calculated from the galvanostatic-discharge curves at different current densities using the following formula:

CEC = 2 × I × Δt/m × ΔV
(1)
where
I is the constant current, m is the active mass of one electrode, and Δt is the time after a full discharge, and ΔV corresponds to the potential charge for a full discharge (see the ESI for the full derivation of the eqn (1)).

The energy density (EEC) from photo-charging/galvanostatic-discharge curves was calculated by using the equation:
EEC = 0.5 × CEC × (ΔV)2
(2)
where Δ
V is the operating voltage window obtained from the discharge curves excluding the voltage drop.

The overall conversion efficiency of the integrated power pack (ηoverall) is calculated by multiplying the photoelectric conversion efficiency (ηconversion) in the solar cell part and energy storage efficiency (ηstorage) in the PVA/H3PO4-based supercapacitor part from the following:
ηoverall = ηstorage × ηconversion
(3)
ηoverall = EEC × SEC/(Pin × t × SSC)
(4)
where
Pin is the illuminated light density (100 mW cm−2), t is the photo-charging time, and SEC and SSC are the effective area (100 mm2) of the PVA/H3PO4-based supercapacitor and perovskite- and polymer-based solar cell portion of the self-powered packs, respectively.


This research was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grants funded by the Korean government (MSIP) (NRF-2014R1A2A1A09006137 and NRF-2015K1A3A1A16002247) and the R&D programme of MSIP/COMPA (2015K000199). K. L. also acknowledges support provided by the Technology Development Program to Solve Climate Changes of the National Research Foundation (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT & Future Planning (NRF-2015M1A2A2057510) and the “GRI (GIST Research Institute)” Project through a grant provided by GIST in 2016.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta09117b
‡ Present addresses: Dept. of Electrical & Computer Engineering, University of Toronto, 10 King's College Road, Toronto, Ontario, M5S 3G4, Canada.
§ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017