 DOI: 10.1039/C8TA08948E
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 22503-22507


Shichao
Wang
,

Zuojia
Li
,

Xiaopeng
Xu
,

Meiling
Zhang
,

Guangjun
Zhang
,

Ying
Li
 and 

Qiang
Peng
*

Key Laboratory of Green Chemistry and Technology of Ministry of Education, College of Chemistry, State Key Laboratory of Polymer Materials Engineering, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610064, P. R. China. E-mail: qiangpengjohnny@yahoo.com

Received
14th September 2018
, Accepted 24th October 2018
First published on 29th October 2018
We developed a series of novel small molecular conjugated electrolytes (SMCEs) via side chain engineering. The introduced n-type 1,3,4-thiadiazole/1,3,4-oxadiazole side chains featured the related SMCEs with self-doping nature and high electron conductive property. On using as cathode interlayers in non-fullerene-polymer solar cells, a high power conversion efficiency (PCE) of up to 13.21% was achieved with an excellent thickness-insensitive property.

Organic photovoltaics (OPVs) are regarded as one of the most promising solar technologies for renewable energy application all over the world due to their light weight, flexibility, solution-process ability, and low-cost large-area printable production. Rapid progress has been made in material design, device and interfacial engineering. In particular, the non-fullerene acceptor-based polymer solar cells (NF-PSCs) showed excellent features to realize high device performance. In addition, state-of-the-art power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) have been exceeding 14%, implying the bright future of NF-PSCs for practical applications.

In the field of OPVs, interfacial engineering plays a key role in further improving the device performance and stability. Interfacial materials sandwiched between the photosensitive layer and respective electrodes can alleviate the interfacial energy barriers with reduced ohmic loss, thus facilitating the charge extraction. Among the reported efficient interfacial materials, water/alcohol-soluble conjugated polymer electrolytes (WSCPEs) have been used widely as cathode interlayers (CILs) to enhance the electron collection in OPVs due to their excellent intrinsic optoelectronic property and unique solubility. Unfortunately, most WSCPEs possessing electron-rich (p-type) conjugated backbones with amino functionalized alkyl side chains showed relatively high highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and/or lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) levels as well as low electron mobility. Therefore, such WSCPEs only worked efficiently within a low thickness (<10 nm), which could hardly be adaptable for their large-scale roll-to-roll (R2R) production in the near future. In contrast, WSCPEs based on electron-deficient (n-type) conjugated backbones possessed improved electron transport property, which would be suitable for OPV applications as efficient CILs. Moreover, the abovementioned WSCPEs often showed strong absorption in the visible region, which would cause a competition with the used photosensitive layer in devices, particularly when using a thick layer of CIL. In this regard, non-conjugated polymers, such as polyethyleneimine (PEI) and polyethyleneimine ethoxylate (PEIE) might be good candidates due to their low absorption in the visible light region. However, conductivities of these polymers are very low, making the device performance very sensitive to the CIL thickness. Quarterisation of the abovementioned neutral amino polymers could improve the conductivity, leading to better film thickness insensitivity. Nevertheless, CILs with high electron conductivity and weak absorption in the visible region are still desirable. Furthermore, most design efforts in this field are still focused on the conjugated main chains attached with various functionalized aliphatic side chains, and rare studies were performed to explore the effects of conjugated side chain groups. Recently, fabricating two dimensional (2D) conjugated side chains has been regarded as a successful strategy to develop high-performance organic semiconductors. The excellent features of 2D side chains triggered us to expand their applications in the field of interfacial materials for OPVs.
Compared with the WSCPEs, small molecular conjugated electrolytes (SMCEs) have well-defined molecular structures, high purity and good batch-to-batch reproducibility. Herein, we present the design and synthesis of a new series of SMCEs, namely, ATF, STF and OTF, for efficient CILs used in NF-PSCs (Scheme S1). 1,3,4-Thiadiazole/1,3,4-oxadiazole (TDZ/ODZ) were introduced as 2D side chains to improve the electron conductivity. TDZ and ODZ skeletons are highly polarizable with large electron affinity, and have been used to construct efficient electron-transporting and hole-blocking materials for organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs), high mobility D–A copolymers in OPVs and organic field effect transistors (OFETs). Very high electron mobilities of 10−2 to 10−1 cm2 V−1 s−1 have been achieved by incorporating the TDZ/ODZ units to construct n-type semiconductors, showing their potential in the field of OPV. In this study, TDZ/ODZ-based SMCEs of STF and OTF exhibited optimized energy levels and improved conductivity compared with those of the control ATF with alkyl side chains. In addition, OTF exhibited stronger self-doping property than STF with the TDZ side chains, which further improved the conductivity. Using OTF as the CIL, the significantly improved PCEs from 11.30% to 13.21% in the NF-PSCs was achieved, and such devices maintained relatively high performance with a wide range of film thickness.
The synthesis routes of the SMCEs are shown in Scheme S1, and the detailed synthesis processes as well as structure characterizations are described in the ESI. All three SMCEs could readily dissolve in highly polar solvents, such as methanol, ethanol and water, but are insoluble in other common organic solvents, such as chloroform (CF), chlorobenzene (CB), tetrahydrofuran (THF) and toluene, indicating their potential for fabricating multilayer devices through a wet process without interfacial mixing/erosion.
The UV-visible absorption spectra of these SMCEs showed similar absorption peaks at around 350 nm, which were attributed to the π–π* transition associated with their identical conjugated backbone (Fig. 2a and b). The additional absorption peak of OTF at shorter wavelength (300 nm) was mainly due to the absorption of the peripheral ODZ groups. The absorption ranges of all three small molecules didn't exceed 400 nm, which could minimize the parasitic absorption induced by the interlayer in devices. The optical bandgaps (Eoptgs) were calculated to be 3.19, 3.20 and 3.18 eV for ATF, STF and OTF, respectively (Table S1). The HOMO/LUMO levels were estimated to be −5.70/−2.54, −5.92/−2.81 and −5.99/−2.90 eV from the cyclic voltammetry (CV) results (Fig. S1), and −6.31/−3.14, −6.64/−3.44, and −6.70/−3.50 eV for ATF, STF and OTF, respectively, from ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy results (UPS, Fig. 2c). The electron deficient TDZ/ODZ significantly lowered the energy levels of STF/OTF, resulting in more ideal LUMO level match with the IT-4F acceptor (Fig. 2d), which was expected to realize better interfacial contact and reduce the charge extraction barriers.
The interfacial modification ability of the three SMCEs as CILs were investigated in NF-PSCs by using PBDTS-TDZ as the polymer donor and IT-4F as the acceptor with a device architecture of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PPBDTS-TDZ:IT-4F/CIL/Al (Fig. 1b and c). The weight ratio of donor to acceptor (D:A) was optimized to be 1:1, and were then dissolved in a green solvent 2-methyltetrahydrofuran (MeTHF) with a total concentration of 15 mg mL−1 and 0.5 v/v% 1,8-diiodooctane (DIO) as the additive. The SMCEs were dissolved in methanol with an optimized concentration of 0.5 mg mL−1 and spin-coated on the top of active layer at 4000 rpm for 60 s. As shown in Fig. 3 and Table 1, the control devices without any CIL exhibited a low open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.78 V, short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 15.39 mA cm−2 and fill factor (FF) of 59.0%, resulting in the poor PCE of 7.08%. After modifying with ATF (5 nm), the devices produced the Voc of 0.88 V, Jsc of 18.83 mA cm−2 and FF of 68.2%, and generated the best PCE of 11.30%. Using STF instead of ATF, simultaneously improved Voc of 0.89 V, Jsc of 19.32 mA cm−2 and FF 70.5% were achieved, giving rise to the higher PCE of 12.12%. Moreover, the device performance was further improved to 13.21% by using OTF as the CIL, due to the enhanced Jsc of 19.89 mA cm−2 and FF of 74.6%. Owing to the lowered HOMO levels, the STF and OTF modified devices displayed stronger hole blocking properties, as confirmed by the dark J–V curves (Fig. S2). The Jsc improvement was confirmed by external quantum efficiency (EQE) measurements (Fig. 3b). The control devices exhibited a maximum EQE of about 61%, which was improved to 74%, 76% and 78% after modification with ATF, STF and OTF, respectively. The calculated Jsc values were 15.27, 18.72, 19.15 and 19.80 mA cm−2 for the control devices, ATF, STF and OTF based devices, respectively, which agreed well with the measured Jsc values.
CIL

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)

R
s (Ω cm2)

R
sh (Ω cm2)
NO
0.78 (0.76 ± 0.01)
15.39 (15.21 ± 0.18)
59.0 (57.7 ± 1.3)
7.08 (6.67 ± 0.41)
15.8
959
ATF
0.88 (0.87 ± 0.01)
18.79 (18.78 ± 0.09)
68.2 (67.1 ± 1.1)
11.30 (10.97 ± 0.33)
7.0
1350
STF
0.89 (0.88 ± 0.01)
19.32 (19.25 ± 0.07)
70.5 (69.4 ± 1.1)
12.12 (11.76 ± 0.36)
5.7
1709
OTF
0.89 (0.88 ± 0.01)
19.89 (19.83 ± 0.06)
74.6 (73.6 ± 1.0)
13.21 (12.85 ± 0.36)
5.2
2141
To obtain an insight into the interfacial modification ability of these SMCEs, ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) was performed (Fig. 4a). The WF of Al electrode was 4.28 eV. After being coated with the SMCEs, the WF decreased to 3.92, 4.12 and 4.18 eV for ATF, STF and OTF, respectively, which was mainly due to the permanent interfacial dipole forming spontaneously on the top of Al electrode during the CIL deposition (Fig. 4b). The lowered WF could decrease the energy barrier between the active layer and Al cathode, which was beneficial for charge extraction. It made sense to observe a variation in WF values enabled by changing the side chains, which would allow fine-tuning of the WF of electrodes and realization of better energy level matching with different acceptor materials.
The alternating current (AC) mode impedance of NF-PSCs was recorded at the Voc condition. The resulting Nyquist plots of the devices could be well fitted with three semicircles from high frequency to low frequency (Fig. 4c, insert), corresponding to the active layer, interlayer and the interface between the active layer and the interlayer, respectively.Rs evolved from the contribution of the series resistance. A similar Rs for three devices evolved due to their same device structure (Table S3). Generally, smaller resistance (R1, R2 and R3) would be helpful for charge carrier transport. R1, R2, and R3 values of the ATF-based device were 107.1, 40.2 and 11.5 Ω, respectively, which reduced to 99.9, 19.6 and 5.2 Ω for the STF-based device, and 96.7, 17.6 and 3.5 Ω for the OTF-based device. These results indicated that STF and OTF exhibited excellent energy barrier reduction abilities, and improved the compatibility between the active layer and electrodes, minimizing the contact resistance.
The current–voltage (I–V) characteristics of the devices with a sandwiched structure of ITO/SMCE/Al were measured at dark condition (Fig. 4d). The DC (direct current) conductivity (σ0) can be calculated from the equation I = σ0Ad−1V, where A is the area and d is the thickness. The conductivities were then calculated to be 2.5 × 10−5, 4.0 × 10−5 and 4.3 × 10−5 S cm−1 for ATF, STF and OTF devices, respectively. The better energy level match and higher conductivity enabled by TDZ/ODZ side chain engineering could be beneficial for further fabricating thickness-insensitive devices, which is crucial for industrial production. To clarify this, PSCs with different film thicknesses of the SMCEs were fabricated (Fig. S3 and Table S3). As the film thickness increased, the performance of ATF-based devices decreased sharply. In contrast, STF and OTF based devices retained an impressively high PCE of 8.18% and 9.54%, respectively, even when their film thicknesses reached up to 50 nm. It is also worth noting that although these devices exhibited similar Vocs in thin CIL film devices (<10 nm), the ATF-based devices showed considerably decreased Vocs in thick film devices. It has been demonstrated that the involved mechanism for ΔWF of electrodes might change if the thickness of the interfacial layer is increased. In the thin film case, the formation of permanent interfacial dipoles at the electrode surface is the dominant mechanism for conjugated electrolyte interlayers to change WF and charge injection with respect to the quantum mechanical tunnelling limit (∼10 nm). These CILs had the same ionic side groups and trifluorene-based conjugated backbones, leading to the very close interfacial dipoles and thus the close series resistance and interfacial energy barriers. Therefore, similar Vocs were observed in thin CIL film devices. The higher Jsc and FF values of STF and OTF-based devices should be mainly due to the higher electron conductively and more efficient charge extraction via self-doping mechanism (vide infra). As the thickness of the interlayer exceeds such a tunnelling limit, the ionic motion or molecular reorientation within interlayers under an applied bias needs to be taken into consideration. In the ionic migration model, the counter ions can independently drift to the respective electrodes under the external electrical field while the ionic side-chains of electrolytes are reoriented to be adjacent to the electrodes in the molecular reorientation model. For thick conjugated electrolyte-based interlayers (>20 nm), both mechanisms have profound influences on the ΔWF and charge extraction. In the thick CIL film devices, the energy level matching between CIL and the active layer played a very important role in affecting interfacial energy barriers for charge transfer. The higher energy level of ATF induces larger energy barriers for charge extraction from the active layer leading to the increased series resistance and reduced Voc as well as lowered PCE. In contrast, the reduced energy levels of STF and OTF enabled by electron deficient groups reduce the energy barriers between the active layer and interfacial layer. On the other hand, higher conductivity and the self-doping property of STF and OTF can also have a positive effect on reducing the charge extraction barrier in such case. Therefore, the STF and OTF modified devices can maintain higher Vocs and efficiencies in thick CIL film conditions.
A few reports had demonstrated that amines and ammonium salts might self-dope the conjugated backbone, leading to enhanced conductivity and improved charge extraction efficiency. To get more solid proof of the higher conductivity of STF and OTF induced by the self-doping process. To confirm this, electron spin resonance (ESR) spectroscopy was performed on the solid CIL films in the dark (Fig. 5a). A strong ESR signal from the unpaired electron with a g value around 2.0 was observed for STF and OTF, revealing a self-doping mechanism in this material system. However, no evident resonance peak was observed in the ATF film, suggesting no electron transfer from amino groups or bromide anions to the trifluorene conjugated backbone. Thus, the self-doping process occurred between the ammonium bromide groups and the electron deficient TDZ/ODZ side chains, contributing to their higher conductivities.
Space charge limited current (SCLC) was determined to evaluate the electron mobilities of electron-only devices with an architecture of ITO/Al/active layer/CIL/Al (Fig. 5b). The electron mobilities were calculated from the J–V curves and were determined to be 3.2 × 10−4, 6.6 × 10−4 and 7.5 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 for ATF-, STF- and OTF-based devices, respectively. These results indicated that the electron extraction barrier of the resulting devices would be reduced significantly by using TDZ/ODZ-containing side chains instead of the alkyl side chains, leading to the elevated device performance.
Atomic force microscope (AFM) and transmission electron microscope (TEM) were used to investigate the active blend morphology induced by the CILs (Fig. 6). The as-cast active layer displayed a highly smooth top surface with a small root-mean square (RMS) roughness of 1.19 nm. The surfaces modified by the ATF, STF and OTF were slightly rougher with the RMS values of 1.22, 1.27 and 1.35 nm, respectively. The TEM images showed the highly uniformed phase separation with fibril like interpenetrating net-frameworks along the blend films, and there were no significant differences before and after CIL modification, indicating that these CILs have less effect on the phase separation. The AFM and TEM results again verified that the usage of these SMCEs as CILs would not destroy the morphology of the active layer. Moreover, the improved device performances is not attributed to the improved phase separation but to the more efficient charge extraction, as discussed above.

In conclusion, a new series of SMCEs were successfully designed and synthesized by side chain engineering for highly efficient NF-PSCs. Using the strong electron deficient 2D-conjugated TDZ and ODZ side chains instead of the alkyl side chains, the related SMCEs, STF and OTF, displayed better energy level match with the photosensitive layer and improved electron transport. Moreover, the TDZ/ODZ side chains could induce a self-doping process between the ammonium bromide groups and the TDZ/ODZ skeletons, further contributing to enhanced conductivity. NF-PSCs fabricated using PBDTS-TDZ:IT-4F as the active layer exhibited significantly improved PCE from 11.30% (ATF as CIL) to 12.12% (STF as CIL) and 13.21% (OTF as CIL). These results indicated that the SMCEs were good candidates as CILs for improving the performance of OPVs. The high conductivity of STF and OTF also endowed them with the thickness-insensitive property, which could be beneficial for large scale production of OPVs in the future. This study provides a new guidance for developing highly efficient CILs via side chain engineering strategy.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This study was supported by the NSFC (51573107, 91633301 and 21432005), the Foundation of State Key Laboratory of Polymer Materials Engineering (sklpme 2017-2-04).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Materials synthesis, NMR spectra, optical and electrochemical data and device optimization conditions. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta08948e
‡ These authors have contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018