 DOI: 10.1039/C2JM14896J
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 4349-4355

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Han
Yan
,

Denghua
Li
,

Chao
Li
,

Kun
Lu
,

Yajie
Zhang
,

Zhixiang
Wei
*,

Yanlian
Yang
* and 

Chen
Wang


National Center for Nanoscience and Technology, Beijing, 100190, P. R. China. E-mail: weizx@nanoctr.cn; Tel: +86-10-82545559; yangyl@nanoctr.cn; Fax: +86-10-62656765; Tel: +86-10-82545565

The Graduate School of the Chinese Academy of Science, Beijing, 100039, P. R. China

Received
30th September 2011
, Accepted 22nd November 2011
First published on 16th January 2012
Bridging the mesoscopic blend structure and property to macroscopic device performance is a key issue for further improvement of photovoltaic conversion efficiency in polymer solar cells (PSCs). The present paper provides a detailed study of the composition and morphology of the blend film of poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and [6,6]-phenyl C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM), a classical system in PSC. The electrostatic interactions and charge separation were studied using electrostatic force microscopy and Kelvin probe force microscopy. The correlation was directly constructed between the mesoscopic morphology and the macroscopic device performance (highest efficiency above 4%). The hierarchical phase separation behavior of P3HT in the active layer is beneficial for efficiency improvement. A micro–nano hierarchical phase separation model is proposed to describe the ideal mesoscopic structure of the active layer. This model may also provide a guideline for the rational design of high performance devices with novel materials.

Since the discovery of fast electron transfer between conjugated polymers and fullerene derivatives in polymer solar cells (PSCs), various efforts to optimize the performance of these systems have been made. The efficiencies of world champion cells have increased rapidly in recent years; the most recent published efficiency record is 8.37%. In conjunction with their low cost and ease of large-area processing, the promising performance of these optimized PSCs has attracted great interest from academic and industrial researchers for the development of inexpensive solar energy harvesting systems. However, improvements are still needed. Integrated module efficiencies in the 8% to 10% range with lifetimes of roughly seven years have been cited as a target for organics to compete for commercial power generation. Further efforts to synthesize novel materials in the laboratory and effectively translate these millimetre-scale devices to large-scale industrial production must confront the challenge of characterizing and optimizing the blend film morphology.

At present, PSC devices with the highest performance are based on a bulk heterojunction (BHJ) structure, in which an electron-donor material and electron-acceptor material are blended to form an active photovoltaic layer. The energy diagram in Fig. 1a demonstrates the classical system and summarizes the general operating mechanism. Absorption of a photon by the polymer generates an exciton, and the exciton diffuses to the interface of the electron-donor and acceptor materials, dissociating into free charges during its brief lifetime. As an active layer in PSCs, the blend must contain efficient pathways for charge transport to the electrodes in addition to its large interface area. Numerous factors can affect the morphology of a PSC film. Thus, correlating these effects with device performance is highly desirable, that is, how the underlying film morphology is altered by different processing variables and, in turn, how these changes in morphology affect the optoelectronic properties of the devices.
In the past few years, a series of characterization methods have been introduced to study blend film morphology, such as electron microscopy, X-ray techniques, and other high-tech methods. Although powerful, most methods lack the capability to directly correlate local morphology/structure with performance. Scanning probe microscopies (SPM) have demonstrated their capability to characterize high-resolution morphology and local electric properties. Various SPM techniques have been applied to investigate the active layer, including conducting atomic force microscopy (cAFM),electrostatic force microscopy (EFM), and scanning Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM). These methods provide possible venues for direct correlation between local optoelectronic properties and device performance by combining with other characterization techniques.
Using a combination of various characterization methods (AFM, TEM, EFM, and KPFM), the present study reports the relationship of mesoscopic morphology and macroscopic PSC performance based on the blend film of poly (3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and [6,6]-phenyl C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM). A micro–nano hierarchical phase separation (MNHPS) model is proposed to describe the ideal mesoscopic structure of the active layer.


P3HT (Sigma-Aldrich, Mn ∼ 64000, 98% regioregular) and PCBM (American Dye Source, Inc., 99.5%) were used as received. Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxy thiophene):poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) (Baytron P VP Al 4083) was purchased from H. C. Stark. 1,2-Dichlorobenzene (oDCB) was distilled prior to use.



Indium-tin oxide (ITO)-coated glass (15 Ω sq−1) was cleaned successively with deionized water, ethanol, acetone, and isopropyl alcohol three times for 15 min, and then dried at 150 °C for 30 min. After completely drying, the ITO glass was exposed to UV-ozone for 15 min. The PEDOT:PSS was filtered through a 0.45 μm syringe filter, spin coated for 40 nm thickness, and then annealed at 120 °C for 1 h in an ambient atmosphere. P3HT and PCBM (fixed at 15 mg mL−1P3HT, 3:1, 2:1, 1:1, 1:2, and 1:3 by weight) were dissolved in oDCB. The solutions were stirred for at least 14 h at 40 °C. The PSCs were processed in a N2-filled glove box. The spin-coated PSCs were fabricated at 600 rpm using the solutions with different concentrations. After spin-coating, the sample was immediately placed in a semi-closed petri-dish for solvent annealing. To improve the device performance, thermal annealing was performed prior to electrode deposition at 110 °C for 10 min. After the whole film-forming process, Al (80 nm)/Ca (20 nm) were thermally evaporated on top of the active layer under vacuum lower than 2 × 10−6 mbar. The active area of the standard PSC device was 0.04 cm2.


For in situ measurement and characterization, the samples were processed using the same method as the PSC production. The morphology of the active layer was observed using AFM (Dimension icon, Bruker Nano) and TEM (Tecnai G220 S-TWIN, FEI). The crystallinity and composition of the active layer were investigated viaelectron diffraction (ED) and energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) (Tecnai G220 S-TWIN FEI). EFM and KPFM measurements were performed with the same AFM system for non-contact characterization. KPFM investigations were performed in the dark and under continuous wave laser illumination at 532 nm using a commercial diode-pumped solid state laser at 50 mW. This wavelength has been selected because it fits well within the peak of the absorption band of P3HT. The photovoltaic performance was measured using a Keithley 2400 sourcemeter under AM1.5G (100 mW cm−2) simulated by a solar simulator (Newport Oriel). The light intensity was calibrated using a photodiode and light source meter prior to measurement.


In the present study, the regioregular P3HT:PCBM system was selected as the model system because it currently represents state-of-the-art PSCs, although new materials show promising performance. To find any correlation of device performances with the markedly different compositions of the blend films (PCBM concentration: 25 wt%–75 wt% and fixed P3HT concentration of 15 mg mL−1), the performance change of the P3HT:PCBM solar cells was investigated using the same processing conditions (as-cast solvent annealing and thermal annealing at 110 °C for 10 min). A standard sandwich type P3HT:PCBM PSC was fabricated, with a hole-collecting layer of PEDOT:PSS coated on the ITO glass substrate (shown in the inset of Fig. 1b). All PSCs were tested under AM1.5G, 100 mW cm−2. Fig. 1b shows the current–voltage (J–V) curves of the PSCs at different ratios of P3HT to PCBM. The photovoltaic performance data, including the open circuit voltage (Voc), short circuit current (Jsc), fill factor (FF), and power conversion efficiency (PCE) values, are summarized in Table 1. As shown in Table 1, the PSCs based on the 1:1 ratio (P3HT:PCBM wt%) demonstrate the highest performance with a PCE value of 4.01%. On the contrary, those solar cells with ratios of 3:1, 2:1, 1:2, and 1:3 show poorer PCE values of 1.87, 2.79, 2.27, and 1.49%, respectively. The higher PCE value for the 1:1 ratio mainly results from an obviously higher Jsc. The resistance at Voc and Jsc can separately reflect the series resistance and parallel resistance. Given that the two resistances have inverse effects on the FF, similar FFs were observed in all optimized devices. The experiments were repeated more than 10 times. The tendency of the effect of the composition variations on photovoltaic performances is the same and clearly reproducible.


P3HT:PCBM

V
oc/V

J
sc/mA cm−2

FF (%)

PCE (%)
R at Voc[Ω/cm2]
R at Jsc[Ω/cm2]
Film Thickness(nm)
3:1
0.59
5.67
52.8
1.87
517
16.5
100
2:1
0.61
8.24
52.1
2.79
372
12.4
110
1:1
0.60
11.72
52.9
4.01
253
12.0
135
1:2
0.58
7.09
52.1
2.27
323
12.8
188
1:3
0.59
4.57
52.7
1.49
644
12.9
239

The local molecular ordering, nanoscale phase separation, and microscale morphology of the PSC active layer are important for its overall performance. The microscopic morphologies of the active layer at different P3HT:PCBM ratios were investigated using tapping-mode AFM. The topography images of the as-cast films clearly show a typical hill-and-valley surface morphology for phase-separated polymer films (Fig. S1 and S2 in supporting information). The domain size is on a sub-micrometre scale with two kinds of domain shapes, namely, strips and spheres.

As shown in Table S1, there is a clear interdependence between P3HT:PCBM ratio and domain depth. The root-mean-square (RMS) surface roughness decreased with increasing PCBM concentration, from 15.6 nm to 1.48 nm. As reported previously, the rough surface is a signature of phase separation due to the self-organization of PCBM and P3HT. This is further proven by an AFM phase image (see Fig. 2), in which brighter domains are attributed to aggregations of P3HT according to previous reports. The strip domains with higher contrast are ascribed to the P3HT assembly with ordered structures originating from the anisotropic π–π interactions (3:1 and 2:1), whereas the sphere domain is the aggregation of PCBM (1:2 and 1:3). Interestingly, the sizes of the domains are quite similar to those in the tomography images. This finding indicates that in the blend films, the P3HT aggregations are always buried under the PCBM. Hence, P3HT is the framework in the BHJ structure, and PCBM acts as the stuffing.
The typical exciton diffusion length in a conjugated polymer is limited to approximately 10 nm. Hence, the electron donor and acceptor materials should form nanoscale interpenetrating networks for efficient charge separation and transport throughout the whole active layer. To obtain the nanoscale morphology information, TEM was used for a better understanding. Typical bright-field TEM images of the P3HT:PCBM blend films recorded in slightly defocused conditions are shown in Fig. 3. The relatively bright area in contrast to the dark background comprises the P3HT phase. Fibrillar P3HT nanostructures were observed over all the ratios. The width of the fibrillar P3HT nanostructures was approximately 15 nm, in accordance with the reported P3HT nanowires. The P3HT nanofibers tended to form a network, although not entirely connected with one another. The absence of other distinct nanostructures is associated with the homogeneous distribution of the PCBM phase within the P3HT framework. The insets show the selected area electron diffraction (SAED) patterns of these blend films. The corresponding XRD images are listed in Fig. S3. It shows the same trend as the SAED results.
Two typical diffraction rings appeared. According to the previous reports, the outer ring is attributed to the (020) reflection of P3HT crystals, and the inner ring originated from the PCBM crystals. By adjusting the weight ratio of P3HT:PCBM, the intensity of the SAED patterns varies in the opposite direction, whereas the tendency is consistent with the relative content of the two materials. The intensity of the SAED patterns reflects the quality and quantity of crystallization during film formation. When the ratio was 1:1, a high degree of crystallization for the two separated phases occurred. Thus, the best device performance should be given. This phenomenon is consistent with our device testing results. The mesoscopic morphology is noticeably improved by varying the weight ratio of the two materials, which results in the creation and stabilization of interpenetrated networks with crystalline order.

In contrast to the morphology and structure study, the local electric properties of the electron donor and acceptor system have received little attention despite their importance. For example, the presence of charge or electric fields will significantly affect charge carrier lifetimes and electron transport properties. Therefore, further analysis focusing on the variations in electric properties between P3HT and PCBM were performed viaEFM. A Veeco Dimension icon AFM with a conductive tip of Pt-Ir was used to record the sample topography and EFM phases in a two-pass mode. In the first pass, the conductive tip traces the sample tomography. In the second (interleave) pass along the same scan line, the tip is biased with a DC voltage and retraces the topography at a fixed lift height h above the surface. The cantilever is mechanically driven by resonance, and the phase shift of the cantilever oscillation is measured as a function of tip position.

In the EFM measurements, the blend films were first identified using AFM topographic images. As shown in Fig. 4a–4e, the images represent the topography. First, the relations between the topography and surface component were constructed in the blend film. At ratios of 3:1 and 2:1,(Fig. 4a, 4b, 4f, and 4g) the spots with bright contrast in the topographic images represent the P3HT-rich phase. The spots with relatively dark contrast represent the bicontinuous phase (see Supporting Information for detailed analysis).
This may indicate that P3HT deposits earlier than PCBM in the film formation process, and that the PCBM tends to fit within the matrix of the P3HT aggregations. The over-crystallization of P3HT can result in detrimental grain boundary formation in P3HT:PCBM films, obstructing the charge transport. When the P3HT:PCBM ratios were 3:1 and 2:1, a clear phase contrast was observed (Fig. 4f and 4g). In Fig. 4d–4e, and their corresponding EFM images (Fig. 4i–4j), the composition of the high and low spots are almost uniform, indicating a smaller degree of phase separation. This phenomenon is consistent with the previous report: for P3HT/PCBM films, the higher crystallinity and tighter packing in the highly regioregular P3HT cause greater PCBM phase segregation. The resulting PCBM aggregations propagate defects to increase the grain boundary density throughout the P3HT film. When the ratio was 1:1, although the P3HT rich phase was observed, smaller P3HT aggregations were observed in the blend film, which fits with the phase image. At this ratio, the phase separation degree is smaller, indicating a better mixture. No obvious phase separation exists at the surface of the blend film when the ratio is further increased to 1:2 and 1:3. This could be explained by excessive PCBM coverage.

The photovoltaic properties of the P3HT:PCBM blend system raise the question of the physical properties of charge separation, including its mechanism and extent. Surface charges were further detected to quantify the charging effects. This will aid in developing systems where photovoltaics are controlled by the composition of the semiconductors. Herein, the 1:1 ratio was listed as an example in Fig. 5a–5c. Images with other ratios are shown in the Supporting Information.

Shown in Fig. 5a is a typical AFM image of the P3HT:PCBM sample with 1:1 ratio. At a larger length scale, the topography is consistent with previous AFM investigations shown in Fig. 2c. The SP image in the dark is measured by KPFM as shown in Fig. 5b, which corresponds to the topography acquired simultaneously. KPFM is used to measure SP distribution because it can provide intuitive SP information and is highly sensitive to the incident light. As reported previously, the potential contrast originated from the difference of work function between the surface components. In a flat band model, SP in the absence of charges should be aligned with the bottom substrate. However, such a picture cannot account for the existence of a dark contrast between the donor and acceptor components of the active layer. Following the previous conclusions, the contrast in the dark was attributed to the band-bending of the donor–acceptor blend at the PEDOT:PSS interface. P3HT is positively charged, whereas PCBM becomes negatively charged.
The SP is dramatically modified under illumination at 532 nm, as shown by the contrast between Fig. 5b and 5c at the same location. There is a redistribution of potential contrast towards lower values under illumination. A space charge extension emerged by comparing Fig. 5b and 5c. This extension may have resulted from the accumulation of space charge, more specifically, the mean work function decreases of PCBM and increases or lesser decreases of P3HT. The interfacial charge transfer causes the relative alignment of the energy bands of P3HT and PCBM, leading to less contrast between the two types of domains. There seems to be a significant variation for the voltage at the same location (encircled in Fig. 5a–5c). Because KPFM could detect the subsurface information, this could suggest a different partial PCBM coverage of P3HT. Hence, P3HT was embedded in the blend film for the most part. The contrast shifts with and without the 532 nm illumination are referred to the variation between their central values indicated by red dashed lines in Fig. 5d. Contrast shift values are increased with the increase in the PCBM content. For samples with ratios from 3:1 to 1:1, the contrast shift values were negative and the absolute values decreased from 3.57 mV, 1.93 mV, to 1.23 mV, which can be attributed to the better connection of the P3HT network to the bottom electrode (connected to the ground in the current setup). For the 1:2 and 1:3 ratios, contrast shift values were positive and increased from 0.94 mV to 1.52 mV. This reverse tendency may have originated from the contrast of excessive PCBM, a contrast between negatively charged PCBM and the ground state PCBM.
The variation in surface voltage (1:1 ratio) with and without light is shown in Fig. 5e. A steep step appeared when light was applied. The SPs in the dark and under illumination for all ratios are summarized in Fig. 5f. The SP continuously decreases by increasing the concentration of PCBM due to its negative charge. From 3:1 to 1:1 (P3HT:PCBM), the SP decreases, revealing a net accumulation of negative charge at the surface. This negative charge accumulation is attributed to a better connection of the P3HT network to the bottom electrode. Such a scenario has been confirmed recently by an electron tomography experiment and is commonly assumed as an important ingredient for high power conversion photovoltaic devices. A turning point arises at the ratio of 1:2, at which the SP of the sample with and without illumination is the same. This phenomenon is interestingly consistent with the solubility of P3HT and PCBM. As reported by the group of Yang, the solubility of P3HT in 1,2-dichlorobenzene (oDCB) is about 50 mg mL−1 and about 100 mg mL−1 for PCBM. During the film forming process, P3HT and PCBM deposit almost simultaneously, and the quality of the P3HT is almost equivalent to that of PCBM. Further increasing PCBM to the ratio of 1:3 results in more PCBM at the bottom. Electron transfer from the electrodes represents holes, resulting in positive charge accumulation in the blend film.

As proven by the measurements above, MNHPS was proposed to depict the active layer based on high-efficiency PSCs. The active layer of P3HT:PCBM consists of a hierarchical architecture composed of interpenetrating networks by a synergetic effect, and two scale phase separation plays its own role. First, there exists a sub-micrometre scale phase separation, and the whole active layer could be generally separated into two parts (Fig. 6a, 6b, and 6c): the P3HT-rich region and the bi-continuous region. By changing the weight ratio of P3HT to PCBM, the sub-micrometre scale phase separation decreases until it disappears. For the 3:1 and 2:1 ratios (Fig. 6a), P3HT is relatively excessive, making it easy to form large aggregations. PCBM tends to deposit on top of these aggregations. Under this condition, a large P3HT phase exists. The characterization clearly reveals that the sub-micrometre phase is embedded in the bi-continuous phase. When the ratio changes to 1:1 (Fig. 6b), loose distributed aggregations form. More PCBM fills the space between P3HT networks. Although direct observation cannot be implemented for vertical phase dispersion, combining with the KPFM images, it can be inferred that the P3HT-rich phase accumulates at the bottom anode. When the quantity of PCBM was increased (Fig. 6c), no obvious phase separation was observed in the active layer. This is attributed to the filling and covering of PCBM in the P3HT networks. The sub-micrometre scale phase separations are responsible for effective charge collection at the electrodes. Second, mesoscopic phase separation was revealed by amplifying the bi-continuous phase (Fig. 6d). The resulting bi-continuous phase composed of P3HT crystals with high aspect ratio and aggregated nano-crystalline PCBM domains provides continuous pathways in the entire photoactive layer for efficient exciton dissociation, and charge transport. By changing the weight ratio, the degree of filling and covering of PCBM in P3HT networks varies greatly. This hierarchical architecture offers a maximum interface area between the constituents for efficient exciton dissociation and efficient and continuous pathways for charge transport and collection.


The relationship between the composition of P3HT:PCBM and PSC device performance was deduced by systematically investigating the morphology, crystallinity, mesoscopic composition, and optoelectronic properties. AFM was used to analyze the micro–nano scale morphology using different ratios of P3HT and PCBM. AFM phase images proved the formation of sub-micrometre scale P3HT aggregates. The high resolution morphology of interpenetrating networks was revealed by TEM. The SAED patterns showed the crystallinity change tendency of P3HT and PCBM. The higher crystallinity and tighter packing in the highly regioregular P3HT obstructed the crystallinity of PCBM, and the best device performance coincided with the best crystallinity for both components. Using EFM for measurements, a composition map with high resolution was obtained. Based on the electrostatic interactions, the electron trap of the active layer was mapped. Hence, excessive PCBM would act as an electron trap thus decreasing the overall performance of the device. The SP images were tested by KPFM in the dark and under 532 nm illumination. There was obvious space charge extension under illumination. The variation in SP value with and without illumination showed an obvious positive shift with the increase in PCBM content. This is attributed to the better connection with the bottom electrode. According to the variations in SP, the vertical dispersion of P3HT and PCBM can be inferred. All results depicted a specific picture of the high performance of the PSC active layer. Finally, an MNHPS model is proposed, which is a two-scale phase separation synergistically improving the overall performance of the PSCs. The present findings elucidate the active layer of PSCs. The morphology map depicted in the present article can serve as a guideline for optimizing other material systems to achieve higher PCE.


The work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grants 20974029 and 20972035), The Ministry of Science and Technology of China (2009CB930400, 2010DFA64680, 2011CB932300), and Chinese Academy of Sciences (KJCX2-YW-M13).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2jm14896j
‡ These two authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012