 DOI: 10.1039/C4NR03181D
(Communication)
Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 10505-10510


Zhongwei
Wu
,

Sai
Bai
,

Jian
Xiang
,

Zhongcheng
Yuan
,

Yingguo
Yang
,

Wei
Cui
,

Xingyu
Gao
,

Zhuang
Liu
,

Yizheng
Jin
 and 

Baoquan
Sun
*

Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Carbon-Based Functional Materials & Devices, Institute of Functional Nano & Soft Materials (FUNSOM) and Collaborative Innovation Center of Suzhou Nano Science and Technology, Soochow University, 199 Ren'ai Road, Suzhou, 215123, People's Republic of China. E-mail: bqsun@suda.edu.cn

State Key Laboratory of Silicon Materials, Cyrus Tang Center for Sensor Materials and Applications, Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, People's Republic of China

Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility, Shanghai Institute of Applied Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 239 Zhangheng Road, Pudong New Area, Shanghai 201204, People's Republic of China

Received
10th June 2014
, Accepted 7th July 2014
First published on 8th July 2014
Graphene oxide (GO) is employed as a hole conductor in inverted planar heterojunction perovskite solar cells, and the devices with CH3NH3PbI3−xClx as absorber achieve an efficiency of over 12%. The perovskite film grown on GO exhibits enhanced crystallization, high surface coverage ratio as well as preferred in-plane orientation of the (110) plane. Efficient hole extraction from the perovskite to GO is demonstrated.

Solution-processable solar cells are attractive because of their cost- and energy-efficient merits for large-scale and flexible applications compared with the established crystalline silicon photovoltaics. Organic solar cells (OPV) and dye sensitized solar cells (DSSC) are two significant representatives, and tremendous efforts have been undertaken to improve their power conversion efficiency (PCE). Nowadays, both of them can achieve over 10% efficiencies by comprehensive material design, structure optimization and molecule engineering. However, perovskite-based solar cells with an encouraging efficiency of over 15% are becoming important players in the field of photovoltaics, and have been considered as feasible candidates that can address the low-cost solution process and outstanding efficiency simultaneously.

Organometal halide perovskite, with a direct band gap, large absorption coefficient and high carrier mobility, was first used in a DSSC as a sensitizer, and the device achieved an efficiency of 3.81%. However, this type of device exhibited poor stability because of the dissolution of the sensitizer by the liquid electrolyte. Subsequently, replacing the electrolyte with a solid organic conductor improved device performance and stability, and even boosted the efficiency to over 10%. Since then, 12–15% efficiencies were frequently achieved by material and structure optimization. The high performance of the device was attributed to the long electron–hole diffusion lengths exceeding 1 μm and 100 nm in CH3NH3PbI2Cl and CH3NH3PbI3 films, respectively, which were considerably longer than the exciton diffusion lengths in conjugated polymers. Such long electron–hole diffusion length justifies the high performance of the planar heterojunction (PHJ) perovskite solar cell.
Two architectures are symbiotic in the perovskite-based solar cell: meso-superstructured and PHJ perovskite solar cells. The meso-superstructured device consists of a metal-oxide (such as TiO2, Al2O3) scaffold infiltrated with perovskite. Although the meso-superstuctured device has champion efficiency, the homogeneous infiltration of the perovskite precursor remains an issue, which results in a large standard deviation in the meso-superstuctured device. The PHJ structure, a perovskite absorber sandwiched between electron and hole conductors, avoids the pore filling problem and simplifies the device fabrication process without sacrificing efficiency compared to the meso-superstructured device. In the PHJ structure, the conductor (also called n- or p-type quencher) plays a critical role in the working mechanism of the device. An efficient conductor assures charge transfer at the cathode or anode interface, thereby selectively guiding charge transport to the corresponding electrode. Although some conductor-free (hole or electron conductor) devices were demonstrated, their PCEs remained mediocre. Known from the originally emerged PHJ perovskite solar cell with a structure of fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO)/TiO2/perovskite/2-7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9-spirobifluorene (Spiro-OMeTAD/Ag), phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) and poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) are the most efficient n- and p-type conductors in the so-called inverted PHJ perovskite solar cell respectively, where holes are collected through the transparent conductive oxide (TCO) anode and electrons are collected through the metal cathode. The inverted structure is suitable for fabricating low-temperature (below 150 °C) solution-processable perovskite devices, which are compatible with flexible substrates. The inverted devices based on PCBM and PEDOT:PSS as conductors have achieved efficiencies of 10–11%. Recently, NiOx has been demonstrated as another efficient hole conductor in the CH3NH3PbI3-based inverted planar cell with an efficiency of 7.8%. However, outstanding and stable conductors are still rarely developed and applied in the inverted PHJ perovskite devices. Therefore, the implementation of innovative interfacial materials is still essential to maximize the device performance.
Recently, the nanocomposites of graphene and TiO2 nanoparticles were utilized as electron collection layers in the meso-superstructured perovskite solar cells, significantly decreasing the processing temperature from 500 °C to 150 °C. Furthermore, an ultrathin layer of graphene quantum dots (GQDs) between perovskite and TiO2 significantly enhanced the performance of perovskite solar cells. It was found that the inserted GQDs dramatically enhanced electron extraction. These successful attempts indicate that the graphene-based derivatives have the potential to contribute significantly toward high-performance perovskite solar cells.
Herein, an intimate graphene derivative, graphene oxide (GO), is first introduced into the perovskite solar cell as a hole conductor. An inverted PHJ perovskite solar cell, employing CH3NH3PbI3−xClx as absorber and GO as hole conductor, achieves a champion PCE of 12.4%. The charge transfer between GO and the perovskite and the morphology and crystallization of the perovskite film grown on GO are also investigated.

Methylammonium iodide (MAI) was synthesized according to the literature. Colloidal ZnO nanocrystals were synthesized by a solution-precipitation process according to literature procedures. GO was obtained from a modified Hummer's method with flake expandable graphite used as the original material according to a previously reported protocol. PCBM and PEDOT:PSS (CLEVIOS Al 4083) were purchased from Solenne and Heraeus.

To prepare the perovskite precursor solution, MAI and lead chloride (PbCl2, 99.999%, Alfa) powder were mixed in anhydrous dimethylformamide (DMF, amine free; 99.9%, Aldrich) with a molar ratio of 3:1. The perovskite precursor solution was stirred at 60 °C overnight and filtered through PTFE filters (0.45 μm) prior to use.

The glass substrate coated with patterned indium tin oxide (ITO) with a sheet resistance of ∼10 Ω sq−1 was cleaned with a detergent, ultrasonicated in acetone and ethanol, and then blow dried with nitrogen. Subsequently, the substrates were treated with ultraviolet ozone plasma for 15 min. PEDOT:PSS and GO aqueous solution were spin-coated onto the substrates at 5000 rpm for 60 s. After baking at 120 °C for 20 min, the substrates were transferred into a glovebox for subsequent layers coating and electrode deposition. A 40 wt% CH3NH3PbI3−xClx precursor solution was spin-coated at 6000 rpm for 40 s. After lying in a Petri dish at room temperature for ∼15 min, the perovskite films were annealed on a hot plate at 100 °C for ∼20 min, allowing the color of the films to turn to dark brown. The PCBM layers were deposited from a 30 mg ml−1 chlorobenzene solution at 2000 rpm. Subsequently, the ZnO layers were formed by spin-coating a colloidal ZnO nanocrystal solution (8 mg ml−1 in ethanol) at 3000 rpm for 40 s. Finally, 150 nm-thick Al was evaporated through a shadow mask under 10−6 Torr (Mini spectra, Kurt J. Lesker). The area of each device was 7.25 mm2, as determined by a shadow mask.


Device characteristics and current density–voltage (J–V) curves were measured in a glovebox under a Newport 94023A solar simulator equipped with a 300 W Xenon lamp, and an air mass (AM) 1.5G filter was used to generate a simulated AM 1.5G solar spectrum irradiation source. The irradiation intensity was 100 mW cm−2 calibrated by a Newport standard silicon solar cell 91150. A Newport monochromator 74125 and power meter 1918 with a silicon detector 918D were used for external quantum efficiency (EQE) measurements. All the electrical data were recorded by a Keithley 2612. The steady-state photoluminescence (PL) measurements were acquired using an Edinburgh Instruments FLS920 fluorescence spectrometer. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) topography image was obtained using a MultiMode V (Veeco) operated in the tapping mode. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images were obtained from a field emission scanning electron microscope (FEI Quanta 200). Optical characterization was conducted on a UV-Vis spectrophotometer (PerkinElmer Lambda 750). The thickness of GO was determined by an ellipsometer, and the thick GO layer was confirmed by cross-sectional SEM measurement. The grazing incidence X-ray diffraction (GIXRD) measurements were performed at the BL14B1 beamline of the Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility (SSRF). Two-dimensional (2D) GIXRD patterns were acquired by a MarCCD mounted vertically at a distance ∼223 mm from the sample, the grazing incidence angle of X-ray was 0.2° and exposure times were <20 s. The 2D GIXRD patterns were analyzed using the FIT2D software and displayed in scattering vector q coordinates, where q = 4πsinθ/λ, θ is half of the diffraction angle, and λ is the X-ray wavelength. Conventional XRD measurement was conducted using PANalytical (Empyrean) equipment. For the characterizations, the required layers in the samples were prepared immediately after device fabrication. For optical and XRD measurements, the perovskite films were sealed by spin-coating a layer of poly(methylmethacrylate) (PMMA) on top.


GO was applied as a hole transporting layer in the polymer solar cells because of its suitable work function (∼4.9 eV) and acceptable vertical resistivity or its surface doping effect on the active layer, which ensured the matched energy alignment and unrestricted hole transport at the electrode-active layer interface. To utilize GO as an efficient hole conductor in PHJ perovskite solar cells, charge transfer between the perovskite and GO was monitored by a PL measurement. The perovskite films were deposited on GO films with thickness of ∼2, ∼6 and ∼20 nm. These GO films were obtained by spin-coating from its neutral aqueous suspensions with concentrations of 0.25 mg ml−1 (∼2 nm), 1 mg ml−1 (∼6 nm) and 4 mg ml−1 (∼20 nm). As shown in Fig. 1, PL intensity is quenched when CH3NH3PbI3−xClx is coupled with GO, indicating that the charge transfer occurs between them. In addition, the thicker the GO film is, the more seriously the PL quenches.

As listed in Table 1, the PL quenching efficiency is roughly evaluated by integrating the PL spectra over wavelength and comparing with the pristine perovskite layer. 2 nm-thick GO displays a quenching efficiency of 52.8%, which is comparable with the value of TiO2 (47%). When GO thickness is increased to 20 nm, PL is almost completely quenched with an efficiency of 98.9%, which is slightly higher than the quenching efficiency of PEDOT:PSS. Up to now, most high-performing regular perovskite cells have been fabricated using TiO2 as an electron conductor. In other words, 2 nm-thick GO is sufficient to afford a high-performance device when only considering the charge transfer process. The different quenching efficiencies of ∼2 nm, ∼6 nm and ∼20 nm GO may be correlated with GO coverage on ITO, as well as its roughness. Larger coverage ratio and higher roughness will lead to an enhanced contact area between perovskite and GO, and render more efficient charge transfer. In general, a thick GO film will result in a larger coverage ratio and higher roughness, which has been investigated in a previous report. As shown in Fig. S1, the GO used here exhibits few-layered sheets with a typical thickness of ∼2 nm. Indeed, the SEM images of GO on ITO indicate that the thicker GO, spin-coated from a high suspension concentration, achieves a better coverage on ITO (Fig. S2).
Hole conductor
W/O
GO (0.25 mg ml−1)
GO (1 mg ml−1)
GO (4 mg ml−1)
PEDOT:PSS
Quenching efficiency
—
52.8%
97.9%
98.9%
98.5%
Motivated by the outstanding charge transfer between GO and perovskite, we fabricated an inverted PHJ perovskite solar cell with the structure of ITO/GO/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx (170 nm)/PCBM (60 nm)/ZnO (20 nm)/Al (Fig. 2a). As illustrated in Fig. 2b, the cross-sectional SEM image of the device shows distinguishable planar layer-by-layer structure. A thick GO-based device has an identified visible GO layer in the cross-sectional SEM image, which is shown in Fig. S3. By tuning the concentrations of GO neutral aqueous suspensions from 0.25 mg ml−1 to 4 mg ml−1, GO with thickness of ∼2 nm to ∼20 nm can be obtained. In addition, the as-prepared GO film exhibits good solvent resistance (Fig. S4), which assures the robust and unique interfacial role of GO in the devices.

Table 2 summarizes the photovoltaic parameters of devices measured under AM 1.5G solar illumination at 100 mW cm−2. As presented from the data, the presence of an efficient hole conductor is critical for achieving a high-performance device. The common PEDOT:PSS-based device results in an efficiency of 9.26%, which is extremely improved from the original 2.64% efficiency of the device without a hole conductor. Regarding to the devices employing GO as a hole conductor, efficiencies of over 7% can be obtained. When an ultra-thin GO (∼2 nm) is employed by depositing from the 0.25 mg ml−1 GO solution, a PCE of over 11% is obtained, corresponding to an open circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.99 V, a short circuit current density (Jsc) of 15.59 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 0.72. Increasing the GO thickness decreases the transmittance of the anode (Fig. S5) and increases the series resistance (Rs), which leads to lower Jsc. In addition, it is unclear that the thick GO film also results in a reduced Voc. Another parameter, FF, exceeds 70% in either thick or ultra-thin GO-based devices, and shows an inferior value in the moderately thick device. We assume that it is determined by the balance between the electron and hole transport to the corresponding electrodes as well as Rs in the device. In general, to cover the rough perovskite surface, the n-type quencher, PCBM, has to be sufficiently thick to achieve a high surface coverage ratio. The PCBM layer used here is ∼60 nm. In addition to the 20 nm ZnO, electrons need to travel a ∼80 nm-distance from the perovskite–PCBM interface to the Al cathode. The length for hole transporting from the perovskite–GO interface to the ITO anode is from 2 nm to 20 nm. However, long-range balanced electron- and hole-transport length and mobilities in perovskite have been demonstrated, which implies that the balanced electron- and hole-transport in our planar device is only determined by electron and hole conductors. For a thick GO (20 nm), the charge generation rates for electron (PCBM:PL quenching efficiency: 91%) and hole (GO:PL quenching efficiency: 98.9%) are comparable. A relatively thick GO film balances the electron and hole transport, decreases the charge recombination and results in a high FF. For devices based on ultra-thin GO (2 nm), the smallest Rs leads to a high FF. Interestingly, as indicated in Fig. S6, our GO-based device tested in nitrogen did not show obvious PCE variation phenomenon under different sweep directions in the J–V measurement.
Hole conductor layers
Concentration (mg ml−1)

V
oc
 (V)

J
sc
 (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)

R
s (Ω cm2)

a All the photovoltaic parameters are the average of a batch of six devices.

GO
4
0.84
12.88
0.73
7.90
5.81
2
0.92
13.71
0.72
9.08
5.65
1
0.99
14.50
0.64
9.19
5.26
0.5
0.99
15.02
0.67
9.96
5.08
0.25
0.99
15.59
0.72
11.11
4.98
PEDOT:PSS
—
0.93
15.09
0.66
9.26
6.94
W/O
—
0.55
11.70
0.41
2.64
13.89

Fig. 3 shows the J–V characteristic, EQE spectrum of a champion device and the histogram of the efficiencies of devices with 2 nm GO as a hole conductor. The champion device exhibits a Voc of 1.00 V, a Jsc of 17.46 mA cm−2, and a FF of 0.71, yielding a PCE of 12.40%. The Jsc calculated by integrating the EQE curve with an AM 1.5G reference spectrum is 17.39 mA cm−2, which is very consistent with the corresponding Jsc obtained from the J–V curves. A histogram of efficiencies measured from a batch of 30 devices shows an average PCE of 10.88% and a relative standard deviation of 7.06% in PCE. These encouraging results again demonstrate that GO is an efficient hole conductor to obtain high-performance perovskite solar cells.
Morphology of the perovskite film, possessing a uniform coverage, plays a key role in device performance. As shown in the SEM images of the perovskite films on different substrates (Fig. 4), GO and PEDOT:PSS clearly improve the formation and growth of perovskite film, leading to homogeneous surface coverage compared with the bare ITO. In addition, the insertion of GO allows the perovskite film to grow into larger textured domains, resulting in a nearly complete coverage (Fig. S7). Contrastingly, there are several pores in the film grown on PEDOT:PSS, indicating that the existence of GO film enhances the coverage ratio of perovskite film. GO-based device exhibits lowered dark current (Fig. S8), which is consistent with the improved film coverage. As indicated in Fig. S9, the perovskite film on GO shows more rough characteristics on a large scale compared with the film on PEDOT:PSS, which will enhance its light harvesting capability because of enhanced light scattering. The combined effects of better coverage, larger domains and rougher surface enhance the absorption of perovskite film in the range from 450 nm to 790 nm (Fig. S10). An abrupt absorption peak at ∼400 nm for the film on PEDOT:PSS is contributed by the anti-reflection effect of PEDOT:PSS film on ITO, which is consistent with the transmittance of the PEDOT:PSS-coated ITO substrate. In general, the GO attached on the ITO substrate offers a positive effect on the growth of perovskite film, resulting in a uniform and overlapped coverage with large textured domains.
Very recently, it was found that processing conditions could affect the crystallization and crystal plane orientation of the perovskite film. It was found that a short rapid thermal annealing resulted in the growth of large micron-sized textured perovskite domains with a more preferential in-plane orientation of the (110) plane. The corresponding device based on large perovskite domain size displayed enhanced performance. In addition, improved crystallization and in-plane orientation of the (110) plane can be achieved by an additive procedure. Apart from the large perovskite domains formed on GO, which is proven by the SEM images, more information should be required to evaluate the quality of the perovskite film. As shown in conventional XRD spectra (Fig. 5d), the CH3NH3PbI3−xClx perovskite films grown on PEDOT:PSS and GO substrates exhibit a set of strong peaks at 14.1°, 28.5° and 31.9°, corresponding to the (110), (220), and (310) crystal planes, respectively, of a mixed-halide perovskite with an orthorhombic crystal structure. The strong and sharp (110) peaks imply that the films possess good crystallization and large crystal size. Furthermore, GIXRD measurement was conducted to further investigate the crystal plane orientation. Fig. 5a and b shows the 2D GIXRD profiles of perovskite films on GO and PEDOT:PSS. Extremely similar diffraction profiles in both the samples with spotty patterns were obtained, indicating highly textured perovskite crystal domains forming on both the GO and PEDOT:PSS layers. Perovskite domains with high-quality crystallization may be one of the reasons that the PCEs of GO- and PEDOT:PSS-based planar devices can be easily pushed to around 10%. In addition, as indicated in Fig. 5c, radially integrating intensity plots along the ring at q = 10 nm−1 is assigned to the (110) plane of CH3NH3PbI3−xClx perovskite structure. Both the samples suggest a preferential in-plane orientation with sharp peaks at the azimuth angle of 90°. The perovskite grown on GO appears to give a higher orientation order than that on PEDOT:PSS, as indicated by relatively sharper peaks.

In summary, we have successfully developed GO as a hole conductor for PHJ perovskite solar cell, and a champion efficiency of up to 12.4% has been demonstrated. The underlaid GO layer can efficiently extract the hole out of the perovskite, facilitate the formation of homogenous large domains and improve surface coverage. In addition, the perovskite films grown on GO possess highly textured perovskite crystal domains and preferential in-plane orientation of the (110) plane, as indicated by GIXRD measurement. All this comprehensive information (e.g. domain size, coverage, crystal orientation) may provide guidelines to develop morphology- and crystallization-compatible interlayers towards high-performance PHJ perovskite solar cells.


This work was supported by the National Basic Research Program of China (973 Program) (2012CB932402), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (61176057, 91123005, 61211130358), the Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Additional device cross-section, GO morphologies on ITO, transmittance of different substrates, morphologies and absorbances of perovskite films on different substrates and electrical characterization of devices with different hole conductors. See DOI: 10.1039/c4nr03181d
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014