 DOI: 10.1039/D1TA09815B
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 10227-10241


Osama M.
Alkhudhari
,

Amal
Altujjar
,

Muhamad Z.
Mokhtar
,

Ben F.
Spencer
,

Qian
Chen
,

Andrew G.
Thomas
,

Nigel W.
Hodson
,

Xuelian
Wang
,

Patrick
Hill
,

Janet
Jacobs
,

Richard. J.
Curry
 and 

Brian R.
Saunders
*

Department of Materials, University of Manchester, MSS Tower, Manchester, M13 9PL, UK. E-mail: brian.saunders@manchester.ac.uk

Photon Science Institute, The Henry Royce Institute, University of Manchester, Manchester, M13 9PL, UK

BioAFM Facility, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, Stopford Building, University of Manchester, Oxford Road, Manchester, M13 9PT, UK

School of Chemical Engineering and Analytical Science, University of Manchester, M13 9PL, UK

Photon Science Institute, Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, University of Manchester, Manchester, M13 9PL, UK

Received
15th November 2021
, Accepted 6th April 2022
First published on 6th April 2022
Semitransparent perovskite solar cells (STPSCs) continue to attract enormous interest because of their potential to provide low-cost renewable energy for building and automotive applications. Whilst many studies have shown that small molecule additives can improve STPSC properties, here we use relatively colossal poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) microgel particles (MGs) as polymer colloid sponge-like additives for the first time. Uniquely, these MGs have an inherent tendency to form highly ordered 2D non-close-packed particle arrays when deposited. Remarkably, this morphology is transcribed to the perovskite layer in the form of 2D non-close-packed nanopore arrays. The nanopores contain shunt-blocking MGs. The perovskite/MG-based STPSCs devices achieve a champion power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 11.64% for a device average visible transmittance (AVT) of 25.3%. The average light utilization efficiency (LUE) for the optimum system is 2.60% which is much higher than that for the MG-free control system and is larger than the 2.50% threshold that is required, in principle, for application. The MGs bind to the Pb2+ ions and passivate the perovskite film. Finite difference time domain (FDTD) simulation data show that the MGs increase the AVTs of the films compared to uniform MG-free films. The MGs are proposed to act as nanoscale optical windows. Our new approach to preparing STPSCs delivers perovskite films containing 2D nanopore arrays in a single step that provide improved PCEs and AVTs and may accelerate future STPSC applications.

Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) are potential future candidates to replace the silicon-based solar cells that currently lead the solar cell market. For PSCs a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 3.81% in 2009 increased in just over a decade to reach 25.5% in 2020. This rapid improvement is one reason why PSCs continue to attract great attention. The need for semitransparent solar cells is rising due to their ability to contribute to building-integrated photovoltaic (BIPV) applications, tandem solar cells and wearable electronics. Similar to all semitransparent solar cells, the performance of semitransparent perovskite solar cells (STPSCs) involves a trade-off between the PCE and transmission of light. Researchers have increased their attention to STPSCs due to their ability to be utilized as power-generating windows, transparent roofs and facades. For such applications the device average visible transmittance (AVT) should be ≥25%; whilst the light utilization efficiency (LUE = AVT x PCE) should be greater than 2.5%. The aim of the present study is to investigate new STPSCs prepared with colloidal size additives that spontaneously form 2D arrays within perovskite films and improve both device PCE and AVT.

The PCEs of STPSCs have continued to improve as the processing and formulation approaches have evolved. In a seminal study, Eperon et al. reported neutral-colored STPSCs using a micro-island approach which utilized spatial segmentation to fully transmit or absorb the incident light. However, most reported studies of STPSCs have involved non-wavelength-selective devices. Such devices generate charge by broad absorption of the spectrum and often appear red-brown, which may limit potential applications as power generating windows. Bag and Durstock reported an improved film quality for a planar STPSC architecture using thiourea as an additive. Those devices exhibited a PCE of 8.2% and an AVT of 34%. Gaspera et al. reported a PCE of 5.3% with an AVT of 31% by applying a dielectric/metal/dielectric (DMD) as a semitransparent top electrode and reducing the perovskite thickness. Lee et al. prepared MAPI-based STPSCs with Cu as a top electrode and reported a PCE of 11.95% with an AVT of ∼20%.
Additives that improve the properties of STPSCs are important for their continued development and eventual deployment. The overwhelming majority of such additives for STPSC studies to date are small molecules (e.g., thiourea or CsBr) or linear polymers (e.g., polyvinylpyrrolidone). Whilst such additives propelled the PCEs of the devices to higher levels, there remains the question of where the additives actually reside. Unfortunately, these small additives are often too small to directly visualize using electron microscopy. Han et al. used high-resolution TEM to assert that linear poly(propylene carbonate) resides at the perovskite grain boundaries for their perovskite-polymer composites. Particulate additives that are of colloidal scale offer an interesting alternative because inter-particle interactions can compete with perovskite crystallization during co-deposition of the photoactive layer. This has potential to generate new types mesoscopic order within PSCs. In this study, we demonstrate the use of self-organising colloidal sponges (i.e., microgels, (MGs)) that direct formation of 2D nanopores within new STPSCs which is achieved using one step deposition.
MGs are crosslinked polymer colloids in the size range 10–1000 nm that swell in a thermodynamically good solvent. Poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNP) MG is the most famous class of MG and was discovered more than 35 years ago. These MGs are temperature-responsive in water and exhibit a volume phase transition temperature (VPTT) at ∼32 °C. They have been extensively studied in water and as biomaterials, but have rarely been studied in non-aqueous solvents. MGs have a remarkably strong tendency to remain dispersed without aggregating when in the swollen state. This provides a unique pathway to depositing isolated particles with very high specific surface areas within perovskite films. Recently, we showed that poly(N-vinyl formamide-co-2-(N-vinylformamido) ethyl ether) (PNVF-NVEE) MGs included in PSCs flattened and provided an insulating “plug” that prevented shunting between the electron- and hole-transport layers. We also reported semi-transparent perovskite/PNVF-NVEE MG thin-films. However, STPSCs were not prepared in that study. We also used PNP MGs as a sacrificial pore-forming agent to increase the porosity of meso-TiO2 for PSCs. The present study differs substantially from our earlier work because in this paper the PNP MGs are used as permanent 2D array nanopore formers within the perovskite layer of STPSCs for the first time.
PNP MGs stand out from other types of MGs because they have a remarkable tendency to form non-close-packed 2D arrays when deposited from water. This effect was first reported by Pelton and Chibante. The mechanism for such 2D array formation relies upon deposition of swollen, repulsive, monodisperse MGs at the liquid–air interface onto the underlying substrate. We hypothesized that by combining the spontaneous formation of 2D PNP MG arrays with the tendency of MGs to act as pore-forming additives in perovskite/MG films, 2D nanopore arrays would form within a new type of STPSC. This is the subject of the present study. The present work differs from other perovskite studies that have used preformed substrates such as anodized alumina or colloidal crystals to prepare 2D nanopores. Uniquely, our MG approach does not require substrate prefabrication for nanopore formation or subsequent template removal after photoactive layer deposition. The 2D arrays prepared using PNP MGs form during perovskite deposition and provide additional beneficial functions such as shunt-blocking and passivation.
There were two motivations for the present study. Firstly, we aimed to establish a new scalable single-step approach to increase the AVT of STPSCs. This was devised to avoid a fundamental limitation for STPSCs; wherein, increasing the AVT usually requires a decrease in film thickness. The latter inevitably results in pinholes and a decrease in device performance. Previous approaches to avoid this bottleneck used micro-islands or microsphere lithography. Whilst the use of micro-islands with passivation or shunt-blocking layers have improved STPSC performance, the procedures used required multiple steps. STPSCs prepared using microsphere lithography also required multiple steps. Our second motivation was to introduce 2D order into STPSCs in one step as part of our research program for scalable photonic perovskite films. Photonic perovskite films have been prepared by microsphere lithography; however, the processes used also required multiple steps. In this study, we achieve long range 2D order using scalable one-step deposition that employs standard STPSC substrates and processing conditions.
Here, we report new STPSCs prepared by co-depositing PNP MGs with a mixed dual cation methylammonium-formamidinium lead iodide (MAFAPbI3) precursor solution (see Fig. 1). We first study the new perovskite/MG composite photoactive layers and then construct STPSC devices. The MGs increase the PCE, AVT and LUE and we investigate the causes for these behaviors. We also discuss the mechanism for 2D nanopore array formation. Our champion STPSC exhibited a PCE of 11.64% and an AVT of 25.32%. This work establishes a remarkably simple method to build-in extended 2D order within STPSCs using single step deposition. The process responsible for 2D nanopore array formation is likely scalable which bodes well for future potential use in STPSCs.

Methacrylic acid (MAA) (98%), N-isopropylacrylamide (NP) (≥99%), methylenebisacrylamide (BIS, 99%), potassium persulfate (KPS, 99%), and sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS, 98.5%) were all purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and used as received. Methylammonium chloride (MACl, 99%), methylammonium iodide (MAI, 98%) titanium isopropoxide (TIP, 97%), 2-methoxy ethanol (99.8%), ethanolamine (≥99.5%), 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis[N,N-di(4-methoxyphenyl)amino]-9.9′-spirobifluorene (Spiro-OMeTAD, 99%), 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP, 96%), bis(trifluoromethane) sulfonimide lithium salt (LiTFSI, 99.95%), and 1-butanol (BuOH, anhydrous, 99.8%) were also all purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and used as received. Formamidinium iodide (FAI, 98%, Ossila), and PbI2 (99.99%, TCI) were used as received. N,N-Dimethylformamide (DMF, 99.8%), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO, 99%), tris(2-(1H-pyrazol-1-yl)-4-tert-butylpyridine) cobalt(III) tri[bis(trifluoromethane) sulfonimide] (FK 209 Co(III) TFSI), acetonitrile (99.9%), chlorobenzene (CBZ, 99.8%), and 2-propanol (IPA, 99.5%) were all purchased from Acros and used as received. Acetone (ACS reagent, ≥99.5%) and absolute ethanol (EtOH, 99.8%) were purchased from Fisher Scientific and used as received. All water used was ultrahigh purity and deionized.


PNP MGs were synthesized using precipitation polymerization following a previously reported method. NP (0.182 g, 1.61 mmol), MAA (0.012 g, 0.14 mmol), BIS (3.0 mg, 0.019 mmol) and SDS (5.4 mg) were added to water (20.0 mL) in a glass reactor. The reactor was degassed by N2 purge for 1 h. Then, KPS solution (0.012 g) dissolved in water (5.0 mL) was added. The mixture was maintained at 70 °C for 7 h under a N2 atmosphere with vigorous stirring and then cooled to room temperature. Repeated centrifugation and redispersion cycles in water were carried out to purify the MGs. The MG particles were then transferred from water into DMF/DMSO (4:1) by repeated centrifugation and redispersion and finally diluted to a concentration of 10.0 wt% in DMF/DMSO (4:1).


A mixture of PbI2 (0.461 g, 1.00 mmol), FAI (0.12 g, 0.698 mmol), MAI (0.037 g, 0.233 mmol) and MACl (0.015 g, 0.222 mmol) was dissolved in DMF/DMSO (4:1) (0.63 g) and heated for 2 h at 50 °C with vigorous stirring. The total concentration of perovskite precursor concentration was 50.1 wt%. The MAFAPbI3 precursor was filtered using a syringe filter (0.45 μm). Then, the proper volume of MG dispersion in DMF/DMSO was added to the perovskite precursor solution based on the concentration required. The films are abbreviated as MFxMGy where x and y are the concentrations of the MAFAPbI3 and MG precursors (in wt%), respectively, in the precursor solution. For example, MF15MG5 (100 μL) was prepared by mixing one solution containing 50.1 wt% perovskite precursor (30 μL) and another containing 10.0 wt% MG (50 μL) with additional DMF/DMSO (4:1) (20 μL). The mixture was mixed using a vortex mixer for 10 s prior to deposition. Similar methods were used for the other MFxMGy systems.


STPSCs were constructed with the n-i-p architecture shown in Fig. 1. Unpatterned FTO-coated glass substrates (thickness 1.1 mm, 20 Ω sq−1) were cleaned by ultrasonication in a 1.0 wt% Hellmanex solution, rinsed with water, followed by acetone and IPA, and then dried with N2. Prior to film deposition, the FTO substrate surface was treated with UV-ozone for 15 min. Then, the blocking electron transport layer (bl-TiO2, 80 μL) was deposited onto the FTO substrate at 4500 rpm and 500 rpm s−1 for 30 s by spin-coating. The bl-TiO2 precursor was prepared by mixing TIP (160 μL) and ethanolamine (140 μL) in 2-methoxy ethanol (2.0 mL) which was then heated at 45 °C for 5 min and filtered using a syringe filter (0.45 μm). The FTO/bl-TiO2 (40 nm) substrates were then annealed on a hot plate for 45 min at 450 °C. The MAFAPbI3 precursor solution containing MG (total volume 100 μL) was spin-coated onto the FTO/bl-TiO2 substrates in a two-speed protocol; (1) 1000 rpm, increasing at 200 rpm s−1 over 10 s, and (2) 4000 rpm for 30 s including an initial increase of 1000 rpm s−1. CBZ (180 μL) was used as an antisolvent and added quickly at the end of 10 s of the second step. The samples turned brown within 2 to 3 s upon placing them on a preheated hot plate for 50 min at 100 °C. Spiro-OMeTAD (0.090 g), tBP (34 μL), LiTFSI solution in acetonitrile (0.52 g mL−1, 19 μL) and FK209 solution in acetonitrile (0.30 g mL−1, 10 μL) were dissolved in CBZ (1.0 mL). This solution was heated at 45 °C for 5 min and filtered using a 0.2 μm syringe filter. Then, the HTM precursor solution (80 μL) was dynamically spin-coated onto the perovskite layer at 3000 rpms for 30 s. The HTM thickness was 200 nm. Finally, Au was deposited by thermal evaporation as the top electrode (10 nm).


Dynamic light scattering (DLS) was conducted using a Malvern Nano ZS instrument to measure the z-average diameter (dz). A Mettler-Toledo instrument was used for %MAA titration. UV-visible spectra were measured using a PerkinElmer lambda 25 spectrometer. The AVT values were calculated by measuring the average transmittance in the wavelength range of 380 to 760 nm. Reflectance measurements were measured at an angle of 60°. Photoluminescence (PL) and TRPL spectra were measured using an Edinburgh instrument FLS980 with the beam incident on the perovskite side. For the PL, the excitation wavelength was 470 nm. A long-pass filter at 590 nm was used. For the TRPL, the excitation wavelength was 405 nm with a pulse period at 200 nm. All measurements not involving solar cells were recorded using glass/ITO/bl-TiO2 as the substrate. A Quanta 200 and Tescan Mira3 SC SEM instruments were utilized for SEM. MG samples were coated by Au or Au/Pd. AFM images were acquired using a Bruker Bioscope Catalyst AFM with a Nanoscope V controller (Bruker UK Ltd, Coventry, UK), operating under the Bruker Nanoscope controller software (v9.15), and mounted on a Nikon Eclipse Ti–I optical microscope (Nikon Instruments Europe B.V.). Images were captured in air using ScanAsyst™ (peak-force tapping) mode with ScanAsyst Air probes. Image analysis was performed using the Bruker Nanoscope Analysis (v1.4) software package (Bruker Corporation, USA). A Malvern PANalytical XRD 2 was used to obtain XRD diffraction data. X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) was performed using an ESCA2SR spectrometer (ScientaOmicron GmbH) using monochromated Al Kα radiation (1486.6 eV, 25 mA emission at 300 W, 1 mm spot size) with a base vacuum pressure of ∼1 × 10−9 mbar. Binding energy scale calibration was performed using C–C in the C 1 s photoelectron peak at 284.8 eV. Analysis and curve fitting was performed using Voigt-approximation peaks using CasaXPS. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) data were obtained using phase-sensitive detection of the current using a lock-in amplifier. The measurements were made under illumination (0.2 Suns) at the open circuit voltage with a superimposed AC voltage of 20 mV. The voltage was supplied using an Agilent 33210A function generator. Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) was performed using a vacuum ultraviolet source generating HeI (21.2 eV, 60 W, FOCUS GmbH) and an Argus electron energy analyser (ScientaOmicron GmbH), biased with 20.7 V, and measured using a pass energy of 5.0 eV. The binding energy was calibrated by removing the bias voltage and aligning the gold Fermi edge to 0 eV. The current-density voltage characteristics were measured using a Keithley 2420 Sourcemeter with AM 1.5 G illumination (100 mW.cm−2) via an ABET solar simulator. The instrument was calibrated and corrected for spectral irradiance mismatch using a certified Oriel Si-reference cell. The device area was 0.079 cm2 which was defined using a square aperture. The illumination was from the glass side for all devices. Unless otherwise stated, the PCEs and other data discussed in this work are from the reverse scans. A Newport QuantX-300 instrument was used for measuring EQE data.


Finite difference time domain (FDTD) were conducted using Lumerical FDTD Solutions (Release 2021.R1; Version 8.25.2525). A plane wave was incident perpendicular to the surface of a model film/substrate and the reflectance and transmittance determined by numerically solving Maxwell's equations. The wavelength range for the calculations was 340 to 900 nm using 113 data points with equally spaced wavelengths. Perfectly matched layers were placed at the z-axis extremes. The geometries used for the simulations were based on the morphologies found and are discussed later.


PNP MGs are well-known in the biomaterials literature and easily prepared. PNP has a lower critical solution temperature of 32 °C in water and our MGs exhibit the VPTT effect which is manifested as a decrease in dz from 590 nm to 243 nm as the temperature increases from 25 to 60 °C (see Fig. S1, ESI). The MGs were transferred to DMF/DMSO (4:1) and combined with the perovskite precursors to prepare STPSCs (Fig. 1). The MG dz value in DMF/DMSO (4:1) is 780 nm compared to 590 nm in water (Fig. 2a) (The polydispersity index values are shown in Table S1, ESI). Hence, the MGs swelled strongly in the DMF/DMSO blend used for STPSC preparation. Potentiometric titration data (Fig. S2a, ESI) showed that the MGs contained 6.50 wt% MAA and the pKa was 5.5. The presence of MAA caused pH-triggered swelling of the MGs in water when the pH approached and then exceeded the pKa (Fig. S2b, ESI). PNP MGs form non-close-packed 2D arrays when deposited from water.Fig. 2b shows that non-close packed hexagonal 2D array formation occurs when the MGs are deposited from DMSO, which is also a good solvent for PNP. The Fourier transform pattern (inset) shows a hexagonal geometry confirming the high degree of order. The line profile (Fig. 2b) shows that the MGs flatten substantially upon deposition since the MG height-to-diameter ratio is ∼1:13. The 1:1 height vs. distance profile illustrates the flattening of these MGs.

We aimed to achieve STPSCs with AVTs of at least 25% as this value is the threshold for potential application. MFxMGy films were first investigated with a range of compositions to establish how x (perovskite precursor concentration) and y (MG concentration) affect the AVT (see Fig. S3a, ESI). It can be seen from Fig. S3b and S3c (ESI) that the AVTs decrease with increasing x for the MFx films. Fig. S3d and S3e show that for the MFxMGy films increasing y (at constant x) increases the AVT for x ≤ 9.0% or decreases the AVT for x ≥ 13.0%. We focussed on the MF15 MGy series of films in this study. Whilst the MFxMGy films have a wavelength-dependent transmittance, the PNP MGs do not absorb light (Fig. S4, ESI). We used the MF15 MGy series to prepare devices because the AVTs of the films were close to 30% (Fig. S3d, ESI) and an AVT decrease of ∼5% was expected for the devices.
STPSCs were constructed using the architecture depicted in Fig. 1. Photographs of the complete semitransparent devices are shown in Fig. 3a. Transmission spectra are shown (Fig. 3b) from which the AVTs were calculated (Fig. 3c). The AVTs for the MF15, MF15MG0.5, MF15MG1.5 and MF15MG5.0 devices are 39.5, 24.4, 25.3 and 22.0%, respectively. These values are lower than those of the respective films (Fig. S3d, ESI) due to the Spiro and Au layers in the devices. Also, the ITO used for the films was replaced with FTO for the devices. Fig. 3d shows the J–V data for the best devices. The champion device is MF15MG1.5 which has a PCE of 11.64%. The EQE spectra (Fig. 3e) for the MF15, MF15MG0.5, MF15MG1.5 and MF15MG5 devices gave Jsc values of 13.37, 15.15, 15.96 and 13.56 mA.cm−2, respectively, which are within 7% of the average values measured from the J–V measurements (Table S2). The EQE is relatively low at wavelengths between 550 and 850 nm because the films transmit more light in that wavelength region (Fig. 3b). The PCE obtained for the best device in this study (MF15MG1.5) is amongst the highest of those reported for other STPSCs which have an AVT of ∼25% as shown in Fig. 3f.
The measured short-circuit current density (Jsc), open-circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (FF) and PCE values from the devices are presented in Fig. 4a–4d and Table S2 (ESI).Fig. 4d shows that the PCEs are higher for all of the MF15MGy devices compared to the MG-free control (MF15). Hence, inclusion of the MGs in these STPSCs increases their efficiencies. All of the device parameters for MF15MG0.5 and MF15MG1.5 are higher than those for MG15. The Jsc and FF values are a maximum for MF15MG1.5 and this is responsible for the relatively high PCE values for this system. The fact that the Voc values for the MF15MGy devices are all higher than that of MF15 (Fig. 4b) indicates the MGs passivated the perovskite. We return to this topic later.
The light utilization efficiency (LUE = PCE × AVT) is a useful measure for comparing different semitransparent solar cells for potential future application. The calculated average LUEs for the devices are shown in Fig. 4e. Both the MF15MG0.5 and MF15MG1.5 have the highest LUEs. The LUE for the latter is 2.60%, which is in the range that is desirable for applications. Furthermore, the devices containing MGs exhibited significantly lower hysteresis index (HI) values (Fig. S5, ESI). Indeed, MF15MG1.5 shows the lowest hysteresis value of 10.0%. In contrast, the HI value for MF15 is 26.70%. Inequalities in ion migration are a major cause of hysteresis. Consequently, it follows that the MGs strongly decreased the unequal build-up of mobile ions at the perovskite interfaces.

To understand the reasons why the MGs increase the LUEs for MF15MG0.5 and MF15MG1.5, we first consider the causes for the PCE increases. The AVT improvements are addressed later. AFM and SEM images were measured to study the film morphology (Fig. 5). We used AFM to investigate the topography of the films (Fig. 5a–d). The morphologies change dramatically from polycrystalline to nanopore-like when MGs are included. The insets show perspective views. Nanopores are easily seen for MF15MG0.5 and MF15MG1.5. The insets of Fig. 5b and c show that the pores are surrounded by perovskite crystals. The AFM image for MF15MG5.0 (Fig. 5d) shows that there are occasional relatively tall nano-volcano-like features on the surface. These features are attributed to MGs deposited on top of the first MG layer that form part of an incomplete second layer. The MGs act as templates for perovskite growth. Line profiles for the films are shown in Fig. S6 (ESI). The nanopores have a slightly raised section near to the centres which may be due to the dome of a flattened MG (compare with lower profile in Fig. 2b).

SEM images for the films are shown in Fig. 5e to l. Non-close-packed 2D nanopore arrays are evident for MF15MG0.5 (Fig. 5f), MF15MG1.5 (Fig. 5g) and MF15MG5.0 (Fig. 5h) The Fourier transform patterns of the images (insets) reveal that extended order is present for MF15MG1.5 and MF15MG5.0. The Fourier transform pattern for MF15MG1.5 shows a pronounced hexagonal structure, which is a signature of an extended 2D crystalline array (Compare to inset of Fig. 2b.). Whilst related morphologies have been achieved using multistep sacrificial colloid crystals, achieving a highly ordered 2D nanopore morphology for a perovskite film deposited in one step is unprecedented. Comparison with the SEM images for the control MF15 film (Fig. 5a) confirms that the 2D nanopore morphology is due to the MGs. Nanopore diameter distributions (Fig. S7, ESI) give average diameters for MF15MG0.5, MF15MG1.5 and MF15MG5 of 1570, 469 and 237 nm, respectively. The line profile for MF15MG0.5 (Fig. S6b, ESI) shows that these nanopores have an outer shallow region and an inner deep central region. The inner central region extends through the full thickness of the film (Fig. 5b). The size distribution for these nanopores from AFM (Fig. S7e, ESI) gives an average diameter of 456 nm.
Higher magnification SEM images are shown for the films in Fig. 5i–l. The hexagonal non-close packed arrangement of the nanopores is highlighted. Fig. S8 (ESI) shows that the grain size distributions and average grain sizes for the films. The grain size reaches a maximum of 417 nm for the MG15MF1.5 film. At higher MG concentrations, the grain size is constrained by the decreased separation of the nanopores. The latter is quantified in Fig. S9 (ESI). The thicknesses of films ranged from 54 nm for MF15 to 155 nm for MF15MG5 and increased with increasing y (Fig. S10, ESI). We suggest that the available area for unobstructed perovskite growth between the MGs decreased as the MG content increased. We assume that the MGs locally prevented perovskite growth, i.e., crystallization could barely occur within the deposited MG. It follows that if the same volume of perovskite phase were to be crystallized from a given deposition, z-directional growth would result in a thicker perovskite film as the MG content increased. The formation mechanism of the nanopores is discussed in more detail in the ESI and Fig. S11 (ESI).
The fact that the MF15 photoactive layer is much thinner (54 nm) than those for the MF15 MGy films (128–155 nm, Fig. S10 of ESI) may account for the lower PCE of the MF15 device. To test this suggestion, we prepared MF18 devices and measured their performance (Fig. S12, ESI). The thickness for MF18 is 145 nm and the device AVT is 22.04%. The average PCE is 7.62%. This value is significantly lower than the average PCEs for MF15MG0.5 (9.24%) and MF15MG1.5 (10.26%). Hence, the perovskite thickness difference noted above cannot account for the PCE improvements of the MF15 MGy devices compared to MF15. Consequently, we investigated other factors.
X-ray diffraction patterns were measured to examine the film structures (Fig. 6a). The full-width at half maximum height (FWHM, Fig. 6b) is smallest for MF15MG1.5. This trend indicates an increase in crystallite size according to the Scherrer equation. The changes of the FWHM values for the films generally concur with the respective grain size values in Fig. S8e (ESI). The ratio of the (110) and (310) peaks is a measure of the crystal orientation in perovskite films. This ratio is shown in Fig. 6c and is much smaller for the MF15 MGy films (1.0–4.9) compared to MF15 (ratio = 135). Notably, it is smallest for MF15MG1.5 (ratio = 1.0). The ratios reported for the M15 MGy films are in the range reported for high PCE PSCs. Furthermore, the relative peak intensities for the (112) and (202) peaks compared to the (110) peak also increased. Consequently, the MGs increased the orientation diversity of the crystals.
Achieving preferred orientation for perovskite films requires synchronized nucleation and growth of perovskite grains; whereas, unsynchronized crystallization results in grains with different growth directions. We propose that the RCOOH groups of the MGs complex with perovskite precursors and thereby slow crystallisation in the vicinity of the MGs (Evidence for such binding is found from the FTIR and XPS data below). Additionally, the relatively large size of the MGs and high intra-MG particle viscosity would restrict supply of precursor to crystals growing close to the MG. However, further away from the MG surface the crystallisation should be faster as this would not be affected by complexation or precursor supply constraints. Hence, a gradient of crystallization rates is proposed for the MG-containing systems, which results in more random growth directions of the crystals between the MGs and greater orientation diversity compared to the MG-free control (MF15). The AFM line profiles of MF15MG0.5 and MF15MG1.5 (Fig. S6b and S6c) show gradual increases in height with distance from the nanopore centre (and hence flattened MG) and support this proposal.
We next investigated perovskite-MG interactions. PL measurements of the films deposited on glass were undertaken to investigate passivation (see Fig. 7a). The pure perovskite (MF15) exhibited a peak intensity at around 800 nm, which is in agreement with literature. There is a strong increase in PL intensity for the MF15 MGy films as y increases (see Fig. 7b). This trend does not follow the variation of the grain sizes (Fig. S8e, ESI). The increase in PL intensity due to the MGs implies a lower trap density when MGs are present and is strongly suggestive of passivation of the perovskite. To further probe this suggestion time-resolved photoluminescence lifetime (TRPL) data were measured and are shown in Fig. S13a, ESI. The data were fitted to a single exponential decay model. Notably, here the τ values increase with increasing MG concentration used to prepare the films (Fig. S13b) reaching 157 ns for MF15MG5. This trend confirms the steady-state PL data (Fig. 7b) and supports our proposal that the MGs passivate the perovskite. It follows from these results that a favourable perovskite-MG interaction was present.
FTIR spectra were recorded to investigate the possibility of an interaction between the MG and Pb (Fig. 7c). The spectrum for PNP has Amide I and Amide II bands at 1635 cm−1 and 1535 cm−1, respectively. The former band moves to 1625 cm−1 while the latter band greatly diminishes in magnitude when the MG is mixed with PbI2. The Amide I band is mainly due to CO stretching. Hence, the CO stretching is strongly perturbed by interaction with Pb. The Amide II band has a contribution from N–H bending. Furthermore, the C–H band deformation at 1455 cm−1 (isopropyl –CH3 asymmetric deformation) moves to 1424 cm−1 in the presence of PbI2. These three changes strongly indicate a pronounced interaction of the N-isopropylacrylamide unit of the MG with Pb. The –COOH groups from MAA likely also contribute to this interaction as such groups within PNP MGs were shown to absorb Pb in 1997. However, for the present MGs the proportion of RCOOH groups is ∼8 mol% with respect to NP and is too small to be apparent in the FTIR spectra.
XPS spectra were measured to probe the surface of the MF15MG5 and MF18 films (see Fig. 7d). The Pb 4f spectra for MF18 shows peaks at 138.6 and 143.5 eV, which are due to Pb2+. There are also two smaller peaks that are ascribed to under-coordinated Pb0 and they are indicated by vertical red arrows. Pb0 is considered as a recombination centre for PSCs. Interestingly, the Pb0 peaks are barely visible for MF15MG5. Moreover, the 4f7/2 and 4f5/2 Pb2+ peaks shifted to 138.1 and 143.0 eV for MF15MG5. This equates to a relatively large 0.5 eV shift to lower binding energies (BE). The decreased Pb0 content and BE shift for Pb2+ point to binding between Pb and the NP/MAA repeat unit in these MGs.
I 3d XPS spectra were also obtained and show significant differences for the two films (Fig. S14, ESI). The two peaks for the control film at 619.0 and 630.5 eV are at the BE values normally observed for perovskite flms. However, they both move to lower BE by 0.5 eV for MF15MG5 and are consistent with a strong interaction between the additive and perovskite. This result is suggestive of the surface iodine species gaining additional negative charge. Additionally, electron density may be provided by the MG through an amide-to-iodide interaction. In summary, the PL, FTIR and XPS data are all indicative of a strong MG-to-perovskite interaction.
Electrochemical impedance data were measured to probe charge transfer processes. The Bode plots (Fig. S15a, ESI) indicate that one charge transport process was dominant. Scrutiny of the Nyquist plots (Fig. S15b) shows one main arc (high frequency process) and the beginnings of a second (low frequency) arc for MF15MG0.5 and MF15MG1.5. We ascribe the main arc to a global hole transport process with a resistance of (RP) (the second, low frequency process, may be due to recombination). The data were fitted to a model of a series resistor (Rs) and one parallel resistor/capacitor. The value for Rs were in the range of 0.93 to 1.06 Ω cm2 and changed by less than 10% over the series (Fig. S15c). The value for Rp for MF18, MF15MG0.5, MF15MG1.5 and MF15MG5.0 were 302, 211, 114 and 112 Ω cm2, respectively. These data imply that the hole charge transfer rate increases as the MG content increased. A decrease in RP should favour a high FF value. These data help explain the relatively high FF values for MF15MG0.5 and MF15MG1.5 (Fig. 4c).
The effect of the MGs on band alignment was investigated by measuring the UPS spectra for the films (see Fig. S16a and 16b, ESI). From the cut-off and onset energies as well as the band gaps derived from Tauc plots (Fig. S17, ESI), the band positions were determined as shown in Fig. S16c. The energy levels for MF15 are close to those reported for related perovskites. The Fermi levels were close to the conduction band minimum energies which shows that all of the films had n-type doping. Interestingly, the Fermi level energies decreased as the MG content increased, which may be due to electron donation from the MGs. The difference between the energy of the conduction band minimum and the Spiro HOMO increased as the MG content increased, which could contribute to an increase in Voc. The MG-induced alteration of band positions together with the MG-passivation discussed above both contribute to the high Voc values for the MG-containing films (Fig. 4b).

We next consider the ability of the MGs to improve the light management in the films. Reflectance spectra were measured for the films (see Fig. 8a). The films containing MGs had a much lower reflectance than MF15. We simulated the reflectance and transmittance spectra using the morphologies deduced from the SEM and AFM studies. The values of the nanopore diameters, film thicknesses and periods used for the FDTD simulations are shown in Table S4 (ESI). An example geometry used for the simulations is shown in Fig. S18 (ESI). The simulated reflectance data (Fig. 8b) follow the same general trends as the experimental data. The numerical differences are in part because the experimental reflectance data were measured at a fixed angle. The trends for the measured transmittance spectra (Fig. 8c) are also reproduced by the simulated data (Fig. 8d). This good agreement can also be seen from a comparison of the AVTs from the measured and simulated spectra (see Fig. 8e).

Having captured the physics of the light transmission with the FDTD simulations, we then examined the role of the nanopores in light management. FDTD was used to simulate transmission spectra for uniform (MG-free) MF15 films with the same thickness as the MF15MGy films (see Fig. S19, ESI). The MF15MG0.5 and MF15MG1.5 films have higher transmission at wavelengths less than 600 nm. The AVTs calculated for the MF15MGy systems (Fig. 8f) show the greatest improvement for MF15MG1.5. The simulated AVTs show that for MF15MG0.5 and MF15MG1.5 films the nanopores increase light transmittance compared to the uniform MF15 film. This is because of the larger size of those pores (Table S4). In support of the simulated data, the experimentally measured AVT for MF15MG1.5 (28.68%, Fig. S3d, ESI) is significantly greater than that measured for MF18 (24.97%, Fig. S3c, ESI) even though both films have almost identical thicknesses of 146 and 145 nm, respectively. Hence, including MGs in the perovskite films increases their AVT.

The LUE is, by definition, proportional to the product of the PCE and AVT. Fig. S20a and S20b (ESI) show the variation of the LUE values with PCE and AVT, respectively. The MF18, MF15MG0.5, MF15MG1.5 and MF15MG5 photoactive layers have similar thicknesses (128 to 155 nm) and the variation of their LUE values closely follows both the PCE and AVT values. Indeed, the gradients of LUE vs. PCE and LUE vs. AVT are 0.322 and 0.316, respectively. This shows that for these STPSCs the contributions to LUE from the composition-induced PCE changes and AVT changes are the same. The MF15 system does not follow these trends because the AVT is the more dominant contributor to the LUE (compared to the PCE) in that case.

We now address the question of why the LUE of MF15MG1.5 is the largest of all the systems studied. MF15MG1.5 has the highest PCE of all the systems studied because it has highest Jsc and FF as well as a high Voc (Fig. 4b). The Jsc benefits from the large grain size (Fig. S8e, ESI) and fewer grain boundaries. The number of grain boundaries is inversely proportional to the average grain size for a polycrystalline film. Hence, the number of grains per unit area is inversely proportional to the square of the grain size. Using the average grain sizes for MF15MG1.5 (417 nm) and MF15 (155 nm), the former would contain a factor of ∼7 fewer grain boundaries than the latter. Whilst it is correct that the nanopores in MF15MG1.5 add additional grain boundaries, their area fraction of the film is only ∼10%. Hence, overall, including the MGs and forming the 2D nanopores decreased the number of grain boundaries. The FF and Voc values are high because of passivation via strong MG-to-PVK interactions as well as improvements in hole transport and energy band positions. Regarding the AVT, Fig. 8f shows that the MGs in MF15MG1.5 increase the AVT most (∼20% relative increase) with respect to that of a uniform MG-free film of the same thickness. Hence, MF15MG1.5 increases both the PCE (due to structural and passivation improvements) and the AVT (due to the nanopores) more effectively than the other systems.

In this work, we have studied STPSCs prepared by one-step deposition of non-close-packed 2D nanopore arrays using PNP MGs for the first time. The tendency of the MGs to form non-close-packed 2D arrays dominated perovskite layer crystallization and altered perovskite grain size as well as increased crystal orientation diversity. Remarkably long-range 2D nanopore arrays are present for MF15MG1.5 as evidenced by the Fourier transform pattern of the SEM image (Fig. 5g). The latter device had a champion PCE of 11.64% and an AVT of 25.32%. The MGs passivated the perovskite and gave films with higher AVTs compared to uniform films of the same thickness. The MGs also complexed with Pb2+via the amide and –COOH groups and decreased the proportion of Pb0. FDTD simulations of the optical properties of the films provided good agreement between the simulated and experimental AVT values. The MF15MG1.5 system was found to provide an LUE greater than 2.5% by virtue of the dual role of the MGs in providing increased PCE and AVT. Given that the MF15 MGy films were deposited in one step, the compositions of PNP MGs can be readily changed and they are prepared by a scalable method. This study opens up a potentially scalable pathway to new types of high LUE STPSCs containing 2D nanopore arrays.


OMA conducted most of the experiments, AA performed the FTIR measurements and helped with the SEM and TRPL measurements. MZM assisted with the solar cell and EQE measurements. BFS conducted the XPS and UPS measurements and AGT assisted with data interpretation. NWH conducted the AFM measurements. XW assisted with the MG titration and analysis. QC and PH assisted with SEM measurements. JJ conducted the EIS measurements and RC assisted with data interpretation. BRS wrote most of the manuscript and directed the research.


There are no conflicts to declare.


BRS gratefully acknowledges financial support for this work from the EPSRC (EP/R020590/1). The authors also thank the staff in the EM Core Facility in the Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health for their assistance and the Wellcome Trust for equipment grant support to the EM Core Facility. The XPS work was supported by the Henry Royce Institute, funded through EPSRC grants EP/R00661X/1, EP/P025021/1 and EP/P025498/1. OMA would like to thank Taif University and the Saudi Arabian Cultural Bureau (SACB) for financial support. We also gratefully acknowledge the use of the Department of Materials X-ray Diffraction Suite and the technical assistance and data collected by Mr Gary Harrison. We also thank Amal Alruwaili for help obtaining the photographs of the films.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See https://doi.org/10.1039/d1ta09815b
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022