 DOI: 10.1039/C8NJ02379D
(Paper)
New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 18824-18836


Hee-Je
Kim
 and 

Venkata Thulasi-Varma
Chebrolu
*

School of Electrical Engineering, Pusan National University, Gumjeong-Ku, Jangjeong-Dong, Busan 609-735, Republic of Korea. E-mail: chebrolu.thulasi@gmail.com; Fax: +82 515130212; Tel: +82 1097909029

Received
14th May 2018
, Accepted 5th September 2018
First published on 6th September 2018
Hierarchical nanostructures have recently attracted massive attention due to their remarkable performances in energy conversion, storage systems, catalysis, and electronic devices. Considering the advantage of hierarchical nanostructures, we have formulated a facile and cost-effective chemical bath deposition method to synthesize novel NiCo2S4 on a conductive substrate for quantum dot sensitized solar cells & methanol electro-oxidation. Owing to the unique nanoarchitecture, the NiCo2S4 electrodes were used to grow high quality thin films containing nanoflowers, nanoplatelets, or nanosheets. The nanoplate-structured NiCo2S4 CE in QDSSCs under one-sun illumination (AM 1.5, 100 mW cm−2) yielded a high short circuit current density (Jsc) of 11.91 mA cm−2, open circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.602 V, fill factor (FF) of 0.50, and power conversion efficiency (η) of 3.53%. These values are much higher than those of the Pt CE (Jsc = 6.98 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.579, FF = 0.36, and η = 1.10%). The electrocatalytic performance was investigated by cyclic voltammetry and chronoamperometry for NiCo2S4 electrodes via methanol electro-oxidation. Electrochemical studies reveal that the as-prepared NiCo2S4–NCS6h electrode displayed a significant enhancement in the electrocatalytic activity and stability for methanol oxidation in the presence of 2 M KOH with 0.5 M methanol. The results indicate that the hierarchical structure of NiCo2S4 offers a promising electrode material for QDSSCs and methanol electro-oxidation.

Increasing energy demands, global population growth, and global warming have highlighted the need for a breakthrough in energy conversion and storage devices to satisfy the future development of a low-carbon and sustainable economy. In recent years, nanomaterials and metal sulfide nanostructures have played a critical role in the recent advances of some key technologies, such as dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), quantum dot sensitized solar cells (QDSSCs), super-capacitors (SCs) and fuel cells.

Over the past two decades, quantum dot sensitized solar cells (QDSCs) have grown significantly, and the technology has been considered one of the most cost-effective compared with silicon based solar cells because of their high conversion efficiency, and simple fabrication process. The advantages of QDSCs are tunable band gap, large intrinsic dipole moment, high molar absorption coefficient, and solution processability. The mechanism of QDSSCs is similar to that of dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) include with a photo anode, electrolyte, and a counter electrode (CE). Over the last few years, considerable efforts have been made to improve the performance of QDSSCs using a range of strategies; however, the reported photovoltaic conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of QDSSCs are mainly below 5% with a few over 7–9%. Recently, Zhenwei et al. reported an impressive energy conversion efficiency of 11.6% achieved using metal oxides on Zn–Cu–In–Se with recombination control of QDSSCs. The photovoltaic performance of QDSSCs is still very low compared to DSSCs due to inefficient charge separation and transfer at the various interfaces. Therefore considerable efforts have been made to improve the performance of QDSSCs focusing on the optimization and design of QD sensitizers and interfacial-charge transfer to the redox couple at the counter electrode (CE).
Besides, direct methanol fuel cells (DMFCs) are considered as a potential candidate for power generation in electric vehicles. This stems from the facts that methanol is a relatively high energy density fuel, it is liquid at ambient temperature, it is of low cost and available on an industrial scale and the infrastructure for production and distribution is already available. Direct methanol fuel cells, as a type of fuel cells, have attracted considerable interest due to the abundance of raw materials and low operating temperatures as well as low pollution. Thus, the exploration of new electrode materials, including noble and non-noble metals, is necessary for performance improvements.
Generally, a platinum (Pt) CE used in DSSCs shows poor activity when employing a polysulfide electrolyte in QDSSCs. On the other hand, the Pt CE fails to effectively catalyze the polysulfide electrolyte due to sulfur adsorption on the Pt surface, which results in low short-current density (Jsc), open-circuit voltage (Voc), and fill factor (FF). To overcome this obstacle, it is important to identify replaceable materials for the CE with excellent electro-catalytic activity, low charge transfer resistance (Rct), and good stability with respect to QDSSCs. In DMFCs, transition metal oxides are widely considered as the most potential candidates for methanol oxidation owing to their low cost, low toxicity, environmental friendliness, and multiple oxidation states. However, these transition metal oxides suffer from poor conductivity, which hinders electron transport, leading to the gradual loss of capacitance. Therefore, in order to meet the requirements of DMFCs, it is desirable to explore new electrode materials with high conductivity, and enhanced current density.
Recently, a range of Pt-free inorganic chalcogenide materials have been studied for use as the polysulfide electrolyte, such as Cu2S, CoS, NiS, PbS, Cu2ZnSnSe4, Au, and carbon. Among those materials, carbon and Au showed lower electro-catalytic activity, whereas CuS, NiS, and CoS exhibit the best results. On the other hand, studies on the methods for preparing metal sulfide CEs have been inadequate. The method for preparing highly efficient metal foils involves direct immersion into a sulfide solution to obtain an interfacial layer of metal sulfides. Some metal substrates may suffer from corrosion and mechanical instability to the extent that such foils will disintegrate completely in the presence of a sulfide/polysulfide electrolyte. To overcome this problem, inexpensive solution processing techniques have been applied to deposit metal sulfides on FTO or ITO glass, such as sol–gel based coating, chemical-electrochemical deposition, spray pyrolysis, electroplating, chemical bath deposition, and successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR). In recent years, nickel and cobalt ions in bimetallic sulfides can provide relatively rich redox reactions and higher electronic conductivities than single-component sulfides (nickel sulfide or cobalt sulfide). Moreover, both are semiconductors that are more abundant than CuS and PbS. To the best of the authors’ knowledge, there are limited reports on the use of NiCo2S4 CEs for QDSSCs and methanol oxidation using FTO substrates.
In the present study, NiCo2S4 was grown in situ on FTO glass substrates by a facile CBD method using urea for different deposition times. The preparation of NiCo2S4 with a novel nanostructure of hexagonal nanoplates on the basis of the Kirkendall effect. This unique and novel architecture displays an improved performance of QDSSCs and it exhibits remarkable performance in methanol electro-oxidation. Our results suggest that NiCo2S4 nanoplatelet arrays can act as high-performance electrode materials for QDSSCs, and methanol electro-oxidation applications.

Nickel chloride hexahydrate (NiCl2·6H2O, 99%), cobalt chloride (CoCl2·6H2O, 99%), thioacetamide (CH3CSNH2, 99.0%), urea (CH4N2O), cadmium acetate Cd(CH3COO)2, sodium sulfide (Na2S·9H2O), sodium sulfite (Na2SO3), selenium (Se, 100 mesh 99.5%), zinc acetate (ZnCH3CO2)2, 99%, potassium chloride (KCl), potassium hydroxide (KOH), and TiO2 paste (Ti-nanoxide HT/SP) were purchased from Sigma Aldrich and used without further purification.


NiCo2S4 CEs with different morphologies and compositions were co-deposited electrochemically onto fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) by CBD for different deposition times. Prior to deposition, the FTO substrates were cleaned ultrasonically with acetone, ethanol, and deionized water (DI) for 10 minutes each. Briefly, NiCl2·6H2O was used as a nickel precursor, CoCl2·6H2O was used as a cobalt source, C2H5NS was used as a sulfur source, and CH4N2O was used as a reagent in the deposition. Urea acts as a stabilizer and enriches the S2− concentration versus S atoms in the preparation process. No visible coating was observed on the FTO substrates without urea. In a typical synthesis of NiCo2S4, 0.1 M of NiCl2·6H2O and CoCl2·6H2O were dissolved in 12.5 ml of deionized water DI (solution A) to form a composite dispersion and 0.4 M of thioacetamide (CH3CSNH2) then was dissolved separately in 12.5 ml of DI water (solution B) with continuous magnetic stirring for 30 minutes to form a uniform suspension. With constant stirring, the two transparent solutions were mixed, and 0.8 M of urea (CH4N2O) was added to the solution. The mixture was stirred vigorously for another 30 minutes. Finally, pieces of cleaned FTO substrates were immersed vertically in the growth solution and placed in a hot air oven. Deposition was carried out at a constant temperature of 90 °C for time periods of 5 h, 6 h, 7 h, and 8 h, and these are denoted as NCS5h, NCS6h, NCS7h, and NCS8h, respectively. When the deposition time was 9 h, the NiCo2S4-coated substrates peeled off from the film, so further experiments were done with NiCo2S4 CEs using deposition times of 5 h, 6 h, 7 h and 8 h. After the deposition, the NiCo2S4-coated thin films were removed from the oven and cooled to room temperature. After cooling, the NiCo2S4-coated FTO substrates were rinsed with DI water and ethanol and dried with an air stream. To fabricate the Pt electrode, a well cleaned FTO glass substrate was coated with a Pt paste (Pt catalyst T/SP, Solaronix) using the doctor blade method and sintered at 450 °C in air for 10 minutes.


To prepare the photoanodes, the SILAR technique was used to fabricate QD-sensitized photoanodes. FTO substrates were cleaned ultrasonically with acetone, ethanol, and DI water for 10 min each. Briefly, the FTO glass substrates were coated with a commercial porous TiO2 paste with a particle size of 20 nm (Ti-Nanoxide HT/TP, Solaronix) using the doctor blade method and sintered at 450 °C for 30 minutes. After solvent evaporation, the thickness was 7.5 μm with an active area of 0.27 cm2. Before depositing the CdS QDs, anionic (Cd2+) and cationic (S2−) ion sources were prepared with 0.1 M Cd (CH3CO2)2 and 0.1 M Na2S, respectively. First, the TiO2 electrodes were immersed in an aqueous solution of Cd (CH3COO·2H2O) for 5 minutes to allow the Cd2+ ions to coat the TiO2 electrode. The film was rinsed with DI water and ethanol for 1 min to remove the excess Cd2+ ions and dried under N2 gas. The adsorbed anionic (Cd2+) photoanodes were then dipped into the Na2S solution for approximately 5 minutes for the cations (S2−) to adsorb and react with the anions (Cd2+) to form CdS QDs. This was followed by rinsing with DI water and ethanol, removing the anions, and drying with N2 gas. This two-step dipping procedure is considered as a single cycle. The process was repeated for 5 cycles at room temperature to achieve good adhesion on the substrate. The as-prepared electrodes were denoted as TiO2/CdS5 photoanodes. The CdS-sensitized TiO2 electrodes were dipped into aqueous solutions containing a 0.1 M Cd (CH3COO)2 and Na2SeSO3 solution for 5 minutes, and the process was repeated for up to 8 alternate dipping cycles. They were then rinsed with DI water and ethanol and dried with N2 gas. To prepare the Na2SeSO3 solution, a reflexing technique was used with 0.2 M of Se and 0.4 M of Na2SO3 at 120 °C for 4 h. The as-prepared photo-anodes are called TiO2/CdS5/CdSe8 electrodes. Finally, the ZnS passivation layer was deposited onto the QD-sensitized photo-anodes in an aqueous solution of 0.1 M of Zn(CH3COO)2·2H2O and 0.1 M of Na2S, which was applied for 1 minute and approximately 2 cycles. This was followed by rinsing alternately with DI water and ethanol and drying with N2 gas. The ZnS passivation can efficiently prevent the corrosion of QDs in the presence of a polysulfide electrolyte to block the recombination of electrons into the electrolyte. The prepared (TiO2/CdS/CdSe/ZnS) photo-anode and CE were inserted between hot-melt sealing sheets (SX 1170-60, Solaronix) at 100 °C. The space between the electrodes was filled by capillary action with a redox liquid electrolyte containing 1 M Na2S, 2 M S, and 0.2 M KCl in methanol and DI water at a ratio of 7:3.


The symmetric CEs of NiCo2S4 and Pt thin films were inserted between hot melting sheets (SX 1170-60, Solaronix) at 100 °C, and the internal space was filled with a redox liquid electrolyte containing 1 M Na2S, 2 M S, and 0.2 M KCl with methanol and DI water at a ratio of 7:3. EIS and Tafel polarization at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 were performed using a BioLogic potentiostat/galvanostat/EIS analyzer (SP-150, France) for symmetrical dummy cells of NiCo2S4 and Pt CEs in dark conditions over the frequency range of 100 mHz to 500 kHz.


The electro-catalytic properties of NiCo2S4 electrodes were measured by cyclic voltammetry (CV), and chronoamperometry (CA) tests carried out at room temperature. The electro-catalytic activities of the NiCo2S4 electrodes for oxidation of methanol were investigated using a SP-150 Bio-Logic electrochemical workstation. A standard three electrode systems was employed which consisted of a NiCo2S4 working electrode, a Pt foil counter electrode and Ag/AgCl reference electrode. Solutions containing 1 M KOH with 0.5 M methanol were used as the electrolyte (Scheme 1).


The crystal structure of the CE films was characterized by powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) on a D8 ADVANCE with a Cu Kα radiation source (λ = 1.54060) operated at 40 kV and 40 mA in the range 20–80°. The surface morphology, thickness, and elemental composition of the NiCo2S4 CE films were estimated by a field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM, SU-70, Hitachi) operated at 10.0 kV, with an energy-dispersive X-ray spectrometer (EDX) operated at 15 kV. The surface roughness of the NiCo2S4 FTO substrate was characterized by atomic force microscopy (JPK NanoWizard II AFM, JPK Instruments, Berlin, Germany) at a scan rate of 0.8 Hz in contact mode. The photo current–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the QDSSCs were obtained under one-sun illumination (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2) using an ABET technologies (USA) solar simulator with an irradiance constancy of ±3%. UV-visible absorption spectroscopy was carried out using an Optizen 3220 UV spectrophotometer. EIS was performed using a Biologic potentiostat/galvanostat/EIS analyzer (SP-150, France) under one sun illumination over the frequency range of 100 mHz to 500 kHz.


To determine the crystal phase of NiCo2S4 on the FTO substrate, XRD was carried out and the results are shown in Fig. 1. The XRD patterns were dominated by the diffraction peaks from the FTO substrate. All diffraction peaks at 26.54°, 33.74°, 37.21°, and 51.47° (2θ) imply that the crystal structure aligned along the [2 2 0], [3 1 1], [4 0 0], and [5 1 1] miller planes of NiCo2S4 with a face-centered cubic structure. The reported values are good agreement with the standard X-ray diffraction data file (PDF No. 43-1477). The absence of any other prominent diffraction peaks in the XRD analysis indicates that there are no other crystalline phases such as NiO or CoO4.

To confirm the presence of NiCo2S4, the chemical state of each element in NiCo2S4 was investigated further by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), Fig. 2. No other elemental peaks were observed on the surface of the samples, indicating that the as-prepared NiCo2S4 CEs are relatively pure. The binding energies of Ni2p3 for NiCo2S4 CEs from 5 h to 8 h were 856.66 eV, 856.42 eV, 856.51 eV, and 856.42 eV, respectively, which indicated the existence of Ni2+ (Fig. 2b). Similarly the binding energies of Co2p3 for NiCo2S4 were 781.97 eV, 781.59 eV, 781.63 eV, and 781.63 eV, indicating Co2+ (Fig. 2c). These results are good agreement with the reported data of NiCo2S4. Moreover, the S2p scan was fitted with a main peak and a shakeup satellite peak. The peaks at binding energies of 168.83 eV, 168.49 eV, 168.6 eV, and 168.63 eV correspond to the S2p band for NiCo2S4, while the peak centered at 168.4 eV was attributed to sulfur ions in high coordination at the surface of the samples. This is consistent with the metal–sulfur bonding reported previously. These results show that Ni2+, Co2+, and S2− ions are present on the surface of the synthesized parallel NiCo2S4 nanoplatelets, which match the literature results for NiCo2S4.

Fig. 3 shows the HR-SEM images at low magnification and high magnification of NiCo2S4 nanostructure thin films prepared at different deposition times via CBD. The deposition time of the NCS6h film results in uniform surface morphology and good quality over the entire FTO substrate without any empty surface regions. The deposition times played an important role in the formation of NiCo2S4 nanostructures in the presence of acetic acid and urea. The formation of NiCo2S4 on the FTO substrate was not observed when the deposition time was less than 5 h. The deposition time clearly affects the surface morphology of the films and can produce high surface areas. When the deposition time was 5 h, the surface morphology had the appearance of flower type nanoparticles with a thickness of 893 nm. When the deposition time was increased from 5 h to 6 h, the flower type nanoflowers were converted to a nanoplatelet surface morphology, and the flowers formed aggregates of denser nanoplatelets. The film thickness also gradually increased from 893 nm to 900 nm. This indicates that along with the increasing deposition time, the diffusion velocity of nanoflowers in the system was accelerated and their porosity declined due to the aggregation of the platelets. After 6 h, the film had improved morphology, as shown in Fig. 3(b), which may increase its electro-catalytic activity to efficiently transfer electrons in QDSSCs. When the deposition time further increased to 7 h, several sheets began to form a nanosheet-like morphology, as shown in Fig. 3(c and c1). The film thickness was approximately 1002 mm. On the other hand, at 8 h deposition, a nanosheet structure began to form on the layer of denser nanosheets. The thickness of the film also gradually increased to 1162 nm. When the deposition time was longer than 9 h, the NiCo2S4 begins to peel off from the substrate. The growth and change in surface morphology of NiCo2S4 nanostructures with different deposition times are described in Scheme 1.
When the deposition time was 6 h, the NiCo2S4 nanoplatelets had good adhesion to the FTO substrate. The adhesion of the counter electrode is a major factor for obtaining efficient QDSSCs. If the material does not adhere well to the thin film, then it may adversely affect the performance of the QDSSCs and peel off from the FTO substrate. Apart from the intrinsic catalytic properties of the materials, the difference in the surface morphology should also be responsible for improving charge transfer at the interface of the CE and polysulfide electrolyte.Fig. 4 represents the thickness variation of NiCo2S4 nanostructures at various deposition times. In the preparation process, two main phenomena explain the formation of nanostructures. The first is the formation of nanostructure aggregates in the chemical solution related to nucleation, and second are the two growth mechanisms in CBD: ion-by-ion and cluster-by-cluster mechanisms. In CBD, these two mechanisms randomly occur and the aggregates form from the cluster-by-cluster mechanisms. The SEM images show that the average sizes of NiCo2S4 nanostructures are increased with the deposition time. Therefore, the range of deposition time from 5 h to 8 h is optimal for preparing high-quality NiCo2S4 nanostructures.
To better understand the morphology of NiCo2S4 nanostructures clarified by TEM analysis, as shown in Fig. 5. The low magnification TEM images confirms that NiCo2S4 nanostructures are composed of nanoflowers, nanoplatelets, and nanosheets structure. The contrast of light and dark indicates the hollow nature of the structure. A typical TEM image of the NiCo2S4 nanoplatelets is shown in Fig. 5(b) and (b1), providing further information on the nanoplatelet structure, which is consistent with the SEM observation. Moreover, a close examination of Fig. 5(b) and (b1) shows the low and high magnification of nanoplatelets uniformly covered on the surface of the FTO substrate. Finally, SEM and TEM images clearly demonstrate the nanoplate structure in favor of electrolyte accessibility and electron transportation during electrochemical reactions.
Atomic force microscopy (AFM) is a promising technique for studying the surface topography of thin films because it provides valuable information regarding the film growth mechanism, the shape and size of grains, and the surface roughness of a sample. Fig. 6 presents 2-dimensional (2D) and 3-dimensional (3D) AFM images of NiCo2S4 thin films deposited on FTO substrates for various deposition times from 5 h to 8 h at a constant temperature. The AFM images reveal a uniform surface roughness, a smooth surface, and good adhesion to the substrate with a narrow particle size distribution. The root mean square roughness (Rrms) was found to be 696.6 ± 1.3, 163.1 ± 0.8, 62.49 ± 0.4, and 173.5 ± 0.9 nm for samples (a)–(d), respectively. The estimated average root mean square (rms) roughness of the NCS5h CE was about 699.6 nm. The grains showed almost uniform sizes of approximately 1.3 μm and the film had an intermediate surface roughness. The morphology revealed the presence of granular grains and white spots were observed on the film.
On the other hand, the (rms) roughness of the NCS6h CE was 163.1 nm. The roughness value decreased from 699.6 to 163.1 nm which results the surface morphology seemed uniform and many plate-like particles covered on the surface. The roughness of the NCS6h CE is strongly affected by a transition of the active deposition mechanism during the course of deposition. In the case of 7 h deposition, the growth of small grains occurred across the surface of the substrate and the size was approximately 0.4 nm. When the deposition time was 8 h, some aggregation of nanosheets and relatively non-uniform morphology were observed. The surface roughness was unavoidable because the grain size differed from that at 5 h, 6 h, and 7 h, indicating an irregular growth rate of the grains. Overall, AFM indicates that the NiCo2S4 6 h CE contains more electrocatalytic activity sites for the reaction of the (S2−/Sn2−) redox couple in the polysulfide electrolyte and has a larger surface area between the electrode and electrolyte. Therefore, the deposition time plays a vital role in the properties of NiCo2S4 thin films and affects the crystallization and surface roughness.
The electrocatalytic activity of the NiCo2S4 thin films towards the reduction of a polysulfide electrolyte was verified by cyclic voltammetry (CV), symmetrical cells were made and measured at a scan rate of 10 to 120 mV s−1, and the obtained CV is shown in Fig. 7(a). The role of the CE in a QDSSC is to collect the charge carriers from the external circuits and to reduce the Sx2 to S2 ions in the polysulfide electrolyte. From the CV curve, the negative and positive peaks correspond to the reduction of Sn2− and the oxidation of nS2−, respectively. The high current peak indicates active electrocatalytic reaction of the electrode for the S2−/Sn2− redox couples in the polysulfide electrolyte. The optimized deposition time of the NCS6h counter electrode shows the highest current density, which accounts for its better electrocatalytic activity and better photovoltaic performance in a QDSSC. This results from its improved surface morphology, higher surface roughness, optimized thickness, and better carrier concentration that are enriched by the sulfur ions. The deposition time of NCS5h and NCS7h counter electrodes shows moderate current density, but NCS7h exhibits much less electrocatalytic activity. From the CV results, the NCS6h electrode can be deduced to have a strong impact on the catalytic activity in reducing the polysulfide electrolyte.

Fig. 7(b) shows the CV curves of the NCS6h counter electrode at different scan rates from 10 to 120 mV s−1. In contrast, with an increased number of scan rates, the CV curves of the NCS6h counter electrode do not change significantly and show stable peak current density. The Jsc value strongly depends on the electrocatalytic ability of the CE. From the CV results, we concluded that the NCS6h counter electrode can be inferred to have a strong impact on the catalytic activity in reducing the polysulfide electrolyte.
In QDSSCs, the CE and electrolyte play key roles in maintaining the regeneration cycle of the QDs. Electrons need to be transferred to recover the holes of the QDs, which allow the QDs to be regenerated. Therefore, the oxidized species (i.e., Sx2− ions) should be reduced continuously at the CE according to the following reaction:
Sx2− + 2e− → Sx−12− + S2−
(1)
To understand the charge transfer process at the interface between the electrolyte and counter electrode, EIS was performed using the symmetrical sandwich-type configuration in the presence of a redox couple.
Fig. 7c shows the Nyquist plot obtained at the open circuit bias potential in the frequency range 100 mHz–500 kHz, and 0.6 V, as well as the equivalent circuit used to fit the impedance data of the NiCo2S4 and Pt CEs at different deposition conditions. The equivalent circuit shows the series resistance (Rs) at the high frequency intercept on the real axis, the charge-transfer resistance (Rct) with the constant phase angle element (CPE) at the CE/electrolyte interface in the middle frequency region, and the Nernst diffusion impedance (Zw) of the electrolyte in the low frequency region. The equivalent circuit in the inset in Fig. 7c was used to fit the Nyquist plots using Z-view software; the fitted parameters are summarized in Table 1.

CEs

R
s (Ω)

R
ct (Ω)
CPE (μF)

Z
w (Ω)
NCS5h
6.52
7.19
0.97
0.75
NCS6h
5.87
5.69
79.45
0.28
NCS7h
7.57
7.25
0.50
1.32
NCS8h
7.57
7.63
0.46
1.42
Pt
8.07
7.83
0.35
1.45

R
ct controls the charge exchange between the CE and polysulfide electrolyte. The low series resistance and charge transfer resistance improves the conductivity and catalytic activity and it is beneficial for fill factor (FF) and power conversion efficiency of QDSSCs. The Rct values of NCS5h, NCS6h, NCS7h, NCS8h, and Pt CEs were 7.19, 5.69, 7.25, 7.63, and 7.81 Ω respectively. Because of corrosion of the Pt surface by various S species, the Pt CE showed a higher Rct value than the NiCo2S4 CE, which improved the electron transfer kinetics for Sn2− reduction. In contrast to Pt, the NiCo2S4 CEs gave smaller semicircles, particularly NCS6h, which showed better electro-catalytic activity than NCS5h, NCS7h, NC8h, and Pt. This indicates better electro-chemical activity and increased electron transfer at the CE/electrolyte interface. The charge transfer resistance at the CE/electrolyte interface was also swear by the power conversion efficiency. In addition to the charge transfer impedance, the sheet resistance of the counter electrode (Rs) is another important factor affecting the performance of the counter electrode. The Rs value of NCS6h showed the lowest sheet resistance and the other counter electrodes had similar values. This shows that NiCo2S4 has a prominent conductivity and good adhesion of the CE onto the FTO substrate. The chemical capacities (Cμ) of the CEs are determined mainly by their contact area with the electrolyte. As shown in Table 1, the Cμ values of the NCS5h, NCS6h, NCS7h, NCS8h, and Pt CEs were 0.97, 79.45, 0.50, 0.46, and 0.35 μF, respectively, showing that the NiCo2S4 CEs have higher CPE values than the Pt CE.
The low recombination and larger electrochemical surface area of the NCS6h CE imply the availability of more catalytic sites, which is a key factor for the high electrocatalytic activity. In addition, the growth of NiCo2S4 nanoplatelets on the NCS6h CE is beneficial for the diffusion of the polysulfide electrolyte, which leads to a much lower Zw. Zw of NCS6h is also much lower than that of the NCS5h, NCS7h, NCS8h, and Pt CEs. This result indicates a better electrolyte diffusion capability in the nanoplate structure, which facilitates faster mass transport and improves the photovoltaic performance of QDSSCs. Overall, the impedance spectra of the symmetrical cells showed that the NCS6h facilitates the penetration of the electrolyte into the film and exposes more electrochemical active sites to the Sx2−/S2− redox reaction.
The Tafel polarization technique is an effective electrochemical characterization method for evaluating the interfacial charge-transfer properties and electrochemical catalytic activity of NiCo2S4 CEs using the S2−/Sn2− couple. Fig. 7d shows the Tafel plots of the symmetrical cells of the NiCo2S4 CEs and Pt CE under dark conditions at a scan rate of 10 mV s −1 and as a function of the logarithmic current density (logJ) vs. potential (V). Generally, the Tafel curve can be divided into three zones. The first is the curve at low potentials attributed to the polarization zone. The second is the curve at the middle potential with a sharp slope attributed to the Tafel zone, which represents the catalytic ability of the CE. The third zone at high potential (horizontal part) is attributed to the diffusion zone. The limiting current density, Jlim, can be derived from the plot at high potential. The exchange current density, J0, was obtained from the zero intercept of the approximately linear region of the curve. In Tafel analysis, the exchange current density (J0) and limiting current density (Jlim) are two crucial parameters to evaluate the electrocatalytic activity of CEs. J0 depends on the Rct value obtained from EIS analysis:
(2)
where
R is the gas constant, T is temperature, F is the Faraday constant, n is the number of electrons involved in the reduction of disulfide at the CE, and Rct is the charge transfer resistance at the CE/electrolyte interface obtained from the EIS spectra.

In the plot, the NiCo2S4 CEs clearly exhibited higher slopes than the Pt CE. The J0 value of the NiCo2S4-based NCS6h CE was higher than that of the NCS5h, NCS7h, NCS8h, and Pt CEs, meaning more reduction of the polysulfide electrolyte at the CE/electrolyte interface. A higher J0 means greater ability to reduce the polysulfide electrolyte. The improvement of the catalytic activity of NiCo2S4 also increases the logarithmic current densities in the anodic and cathodic reduction of the Tafel polarization. In addition, the NCS6h CE has a higher value of Jlim than that of the Pt CE and the other as-prepared CEs, which suggests that the NiCo2S4 CE can support a higher diffusion velocity of the redox couples in the electrolyte.Eqn (3) presents the relationship of Jlim and the diffusion coefficient of Sn2− (D). Because of the high Jlim, the NiCo2S4 CEs achieve good catalytic activity compared to Pt in the reduction of the electrolyte, which is due to NiCo2S4 electrodes inducing a relatively higher diffusion coefficient, as shown in eqn (3). Moreover, a higher Jlim is an important factor for increasing the photovoltaic performance of QDSSCs. This is also consistent with the D value revealed by EIS.
(3)
where
D is the diffusion coefficient of the polysulfide, l is the spacer thickness, n is the number of electrons involved in the reduction of disulfide at the counter electrode, F is the Faraday constant, and C is the polysulfide concentration. The surface morphology of the nanoplate-structured counter electrode thin films with a particularly large surface can decrease the charge transfer resistance, accelerate the diffusion of the electrolyte, and increase the electron lifetime, which are the factors determining the QDSSC performance. From the Tafel plot, an increase in the slope and a decrease in the charge transfer resistance in the EIS data were confirmed for the NiCo2S4 nanoplate structured CE, which has the highest catalytic activity for QDSSCs.

The optical properties of the NiCo2S4 CEs were characterized by UV-vis absorption spectroscopy. Fig. 8a presents the absorption spectra of the NiCo2S4 CEs obtained in the wavelength range of 300 to 800 nm. The spectra revealed a peak centered at approximately 349 nm. This can be attributed to the metal–ligand charge transfer, which is a dπ–π* transition. Compared to NCS5h, NCS7h, and NCS8h, the absorption spectra of the NCS6h CE exhibited significant improvement and the absorption range is shifted to the red region. The NCS5h, NCS7h, and NCS8h thin films showed similar absorption intensities for the entire wavelength range and absorbed very strongly due to the high thickness and free-carrier intraband absorbance of the thin film. Moreover, the steep absorption edges observed indicated a uniform particle size and morphology with fairly good crystallinity. In the present study, the increase in absorbance could enhance the light harvest efficiency (LHE) of the QDSSCs.

Fig. 8b presents the J–V characteristics obtained under AM 1.5 sunlight illumination (100 mW cm−2) for QDSSCs with NiCo2S4 and Pt CEs along with TiO2/CdS/CdSe/ZnS as the photoanode. The QDSSC photovoltaic performance is determined by the short-circuit current density (Jsc), open-circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (FF), and power conversion efficiency (η) which are summarized in Table 2. For the preparation of NiCo2S4 CEs, we optimized deposition time from 1 h to 8 h respectively. Unfortunately there was no visible coating on the FTO substrate below 5 h. With the presence of urea in the preparation of NiCo2S4 CEs, we observed semitransparency in the polysulfide electrolyte and good adherence to the FTO substrate.
Parameter

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF

η (%)
NCS5h
0.597
11.50
0.48
3.32
NCS6h
0.602
11.91
0.50
3.53
NCS7h
0.501
10.45
0.45
2.20
NCS8h
0.512
10.02
0.40
2.08
The NiCo2S4 CEs showed better performance than the Pt CE. The Pt CE showed very poor performance in the QDSSCs with Jsc, Voc, and FF values of 6.98, 0.579, and 0.36, respectively, resulting in a low PCE. These results are due mainly to the sulfides (S2−, Sx2−) adsorbing onto the Pt surface and poisoning it, which affects the electrocatalytic activity and reduces the FF and surface morphology. For the NiCo2S4 NCS6h CE, the Jsc, Voc, and FF values improved significantly to 11.91, 0.602, and 0.50, respectively, and it had the best η of 3.53 compared to the NCS5h, NCS7h, NCS8h, and Pt CEs. The PCEs of NCS5h, NCS7h, and NCS8h were 3.32, 2.20, and 2.08 respectively. A similar Voc and slight changes in Jsc were observed. The Jsc depends mainly on the light harvesting efficiency, charge collection efficiency, and electron and hole injection efficiency.
The improved morphology of the NCS6h CE increases charge transfer at the CE/electrolyte interface, and reduces the internal resistance, recombination rates, and concentration of gradients in the electrolyte, resulting in improved FF, Jsc, and η. The Jsc and η values of the NCS6h CE were much higher than those of the other CEs, showing that the fabrication of NiCo2S4 CEs through CBD is much better than that of other methods, such as hydrothermal, sputtering, and electrodeposition methods. The energy conversion efficiency of the NiCo2S4 CEs improved with up to 6 h of deposition and decreased greatly thereafter. Overall, the results show that the NiCo2S4 NCS6h CE is the best substitute for Pt and other metal sulfide CEs.
To obtain better insight into the dynamics of the interfacial charge transfer process, the electron transport properties, and recombination properties, EIS analysis was employed with TiO2/CdS/CdSe/ZnS based photoanodes and NiCo2S4 and Pt CEs in QDSSCs.Fig. 8(c) shows the corresponding Nyquist plots for the frequency range 100 mHz–500 kHz. Under one-sun, electrons in the valence band have sufficient energy to inject into the QD-sensitized photoanode through the FTO substrate, and the photoanode is charged by the transport of the injected electrons (in the conduction band). At the same time, some of the electrons in the conduction band of the photoanode recombine with the electrolyte. To classify these phenomena, Z-view software was used to analyze the impedance spectra from EIS analysis with an equivalent circuit consisting of two parallel RC circuits along with the Warburg impedance (Zw), as shown in Fig. 7(c). In accordance with the EIS model, the electron lifetime (τn) is determined from the peak angular frequency in the Bode plot, as shown in Fig. 8(d).

Table 3 lists the electrochemical parameters and electron lifetime. The RCE values of the NCS5h, NCS6h, NCS7h, NCS8h, and Pt CEs were 1.64, 1.15, 2.11, 1.8, and 109.41 Ω, respectively. NCS6h had the lowest RCE value, which indicates higher electrocatalytic activity than the other CEs. The Rct, Zw and Cμ values of the NCS6h CE were 5.36 Ω, 0.28 Ω, and 18.76 μF, respectively. The values for the Pt CE were 15.96 Ω, 6.84 Ω, and 0.26 μF, respectively. The Pt CE has much higher values than the NiCo2S4 CEs, which means greater internal energy loss at the CE/electrolyte interface, which leads to a lower FF (0.28). The Cμ value (18.76 μF) of the NCS6h sample was superior to that of the other CEs. A greater Cμ value suggests the high surface area of the electrode, which leads to better electrocatalytic activity. According to this information, low recombination results in high capacitance, which is essentially associated with a large number of photoexcited charge carriers in the conduction band of the photo anode. The small Zw value (0.28 Ω) for NCS6h indicates additional electrolyte diffusion with faster mass transport of electrons. RCE and Rct suggest that NCS6h is the best CE for the reduction of the polysulfide-based redox couple in QDSSCs.
Parameter

R
s (Ω)

R
CE (Ω)

R
ct (Ω)

C
μ (μF)

Z
w (Ω)

τ
n (ms)
NCS5h
8.04
1.64
5.41
4.2
0.52
0.001
NCS6h
7.69
1.15
5.36
18.76
0.28
7.19
NCS7h
9.04
2.11
3.83
2.82
1.18
0.003
NCS8h
9.52
1.8
4.89
1.56
1.84
0.003
To support the EIS results, the electron lifetime (τn) in the NiCo2S4 and Pt CEs for QDSSCs was estimated. Fig. 8(d) presents the corresponding Bode phase plots for the NCS5h, NCS6h, NCS7h, and NCS8h CEs. The electron lifetime (τn) can be determined from the peak angular frequency in the Bode plot. The value of τn can be obtained using the following equation:
(4)
where
fmax is the peak frequency in the mid frequency ranges. As shown in Fig. 8(d), the τn values of the NCS5h, NCS6h, NCS7h, and NCS8h are 0.001, 7.19, 0.003, and 0.003, respectively. When the deposition time was increased from 5 h to 8 h, the electron lifetime in the NiCo2S4 CEs improved, which supports the lower recombination rate of injected electrons for reduction of the polysulfide electrolyte.fmax is inversely proportional to the electron lifetime of electrons, and the larger value of the NCS6h leads to a longer lifetime and faster diffusion rate. On the other hand, the higher τn value of the NCS6h suggests that the electrons have slower charge recombination in the polysulfide electrolyte, resulting in a higher Jsc and enhanced power conversion efficiency for the QDSSCs.

To demonstrate their use in another energy device application, CV and chrono-amperometry (CA) measurements were used to investigate the electro-oxidation of methanol on NiCo2S4 electrodes. Here, we have used 0.5 M methanol to form the maximum possible quantity of NiCo2S4 and to avoid an unwanted chemical reaction at a higher concentration of methanol, which reduces the quantity of NiCo2S4.Fig. 9(a and b) show the CV curves measured at a scan rate of 20 mV s−1 for the NiCo2S4 electrodes in 2 M KOH + 0.5 M CH3OH electrolytes. After the addition of 0.5 M methanol into the 2 M KOH electrolyte, during the forward scan, the anodic current density remains nearly the same up to 0.4 V.
It is well known that the anodic current density and onset potential are the two important parameters to evaluate the catalyst efficiency of the methanol oxidation reaction. In Fig. 9a, the onset potential of methanol oxidation for the NCS6h electrode is about 0.4 V, which is lower than that on NiO, Co3O4 and the reported NiCo2O4. The low onset potential of the NCS6h counter electrode delivers the binary function of Ni and Co species in the electro-oxidation of methanol. However, the onset potential of NCS6h is still much higher than the reported noble metal catalysts (Pt, Ru, Pd), which is a phenomenon existing in all transition metal oxide/hydroxide catalysts for alkaline direct methanol fuel cells. Therefore, there needs to be more research on the electrocatalytic performance of metal chlorides for practical application. Besides the onset potential, the current density is another important parameter. From Fig. 9b, the current density of NCS6h at 0.5 V (vs. SCE) reaches 10.13 mA cm−2 in comparison with NCS5h, NCS7h, and NCS8h, indicating higher electro-oxidation activity of NCS6h. The low onset potential and high current density demonstrate the high electrocatalytic performance of NiCo2S4 for methanol oxidation. This may be due to the fact that NiCo2S4 is a mixed valence oxide, and the redox couples of Co2+/Co3+ and Ni2+/Ni3+ can produce two kinds of active sites for the oxidation of methanol; another effect is that the mesoporous structure of NiCo2S4 could act as channels for the rapid exchange of materials in the reaction process.

Fig. 10(a–c) illustrates the CV plots of the NCS5h, NCS7h, and NCS8h CEs in the 2 M KOH electrolyte in the presence of 0.5 M methanol at different scan rates from 5 to 50 mV s−1. A pair of broad and strong redox peaks were observed, which originate mainly from the charge transfer processes of solid state redox. The current of the NCS5h CE was much lower than that of the NCS7h, and NCS8h CEs signifying that the effect of the 5 h deposition time on the electro-catalytic oxidation of methanol can be ignored. The current densities of NCS7h, and NCS8h in 1 M KOH with 0.5 M methanol were almost similar to the NCS6h CE.
The stability of the catalyst is one of the important factors for the usability of the electrode for longer time. Thereby, Fig. 10d shows the chrono-amperometric curve recorded for an extended time of 3700 s at an initial voltage of 0.5 V. The electrode performance showed no obvious decay in 3700 s. A higher anodic peak current showed higher catalytic activity for NCS6h (nanoplatelets) and NCS5h-nanoflower-like (NFs) electro-catalysts than NCS7, and NCS8h (nanosheets, NSs). This results suggests that the NiCo2S4 nanoplatelets deliver high electro-oxidation activity and electro-oxidation stability.

The present study reports the simplistic and cost-effective chemical bath deposition approach being used to synthesize high-quality NiCo2S4 nanostructures on FTO substrates. To the best of the authors’ knowledge, this is the first report of the fabrication of vertically aligned NiCo2S4 CEs with improved nanoplatelet morphology on a FTO substrate and their application to QDSSCs and methanol oxidation. Interestingly, the morphology of NiCo2S4 changed from nanoflowers to nanoplatelets and nanosheets according to the deposition time from 5 to 8 h. Therefore, the size and shape of the NiCo2S4 nanostructures can be controlled easily by varying the deposition time. The QDSSCs based on the NCS6h CE showed an impressive η of 3.53%, which was higher than that of NCS5h (3.32%), NCS7h (2.20%), NCS8h (2.08%), and Pt (1.10%) CEs. EIS of the NiCo2S4 CE revealed the lowest charge transfer resistance (5.6 Ω) compared to the Pt CE (0.00 Ω) at the polysulfide/electrolyte interface. Moreover, the NCS6h CE exhibited a longer electron lifetime of 3.22 ms compared to the other CEs. The presence of a 0.5 M methanol with KOH electrolyte shows excellent electro-oxidation activity and stability at an onset potential of 0.4 V. We believe that the present study revealed that the novel NiCo2S4 nanoplate structure shows significant improvement for its application in QDSSCs and DMFCs.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This research was supported by Basic Research Laboratory through the National Research Foundations of Korea funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT and Future Planning (NRF-2015R1A4A1041584). In addition, this work was supported by BK 21 PLUS, Creative Human Resource Development Program for IT Convergence, Pusan National University, and Busan, South Korea.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8nj02379d
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2018