 DOI: 10.1039/B919327H
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 995-1000

Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical Terms


Luca
Valentini
*,

Marta
Cardinali
,

Silvia
Bittolo Bon
,

Diego
Bagnis
,

Raquel
Verdejo
,

Miguel Angel
Lopez-Manchado
 and 

Josè M.
Kenny


Dipartimento di Ingegneria Civile e Ambientale, Università di Perugia, INSTM, UdR Perugia, 05100, Terni, Italy. E-mail: mic@unipg.it

Instituto de Ciencia y Tecnologia de Polimeros, CSIC, Juan de la Cierva, 3, 28006, Madrid, Spain

Department of Chemistry and the Materials Research Center, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois 60208-3113, USA

Received
16th September 2009
, Accepted 19th November 2009
First published on
14th December 2009

We describe a facile method to use soluble chemically derived few-layer graphene sheets (GSs) as part of a transparent electrode for the preparation of polymer solar cells. Chemically functionalized GSs were obtained by first covalently attaching fluorine and then exposing the obtained fluorinated graphene sheets to an aliphatic amine at room temperature. Scanning electron microscopy, atomic force microscopy and UV-Vis analyses confirmed that transparent graphene sheets with an average thickness of 0.7–0.9 nm had been obtained. Their application in a polymer solar cell is demonstrated. Such functionalized graphene, which is cheap and easily prepared, is expected to be used as hole acceptor material in polymer photovoltaic applications.

Graphene, which consists of a two-dimensional sheet of covalently bonded carbon atoms, has outstanding electronic properties and can be considered as a building block for new nanomaterials with different device applications, such as field-effect transistors, resonators, transparent conductors in organic photovoltaic devices. Graphene sheets can be prepared by various techniques including mechanical exfoliation of graphite and chemical reduction of exfoliated graphite oxide. The development of methods that allow processing of graphene sheets has become a challenge to be overcome.

An ideal monolayer of graphene has transparency of 98% with sheet resistance of 6 kΩ sq−1, making it suitable for transparent and conducting electrodes. However, for technological feasibility, its layering is necessary. The functionalization of graphene has been considered to be important for improving its solubility and self-assembly properties. So far, chemical functionalization of graphene has focused on improving its solubility/processability in both water and organic solvents using different soluble groups.
Soluble chemically converted graphene oxide has been used as acceptor material in the active layer of bulk heterojunction polymeric solar cells. In other cases reduced graphene oxide has been used as a transparent anode. To the best of our knowledge, for the bulk heterojunction solar cells the effects of graphene and a hole-trapping conducting polymer on the morphological and electrical properties of the polymeric photoactive layer when they are used as a composite material for the realization of an anode have not been studied.
More recently, with a novel approach it is demonstrated that the direct fluorination of graphene sheets and their subsequent derivatization provide a versatile tool for the preparation of layered graphene sheets.
This last method has been used in this paper to fabricate transparent poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene (PEDOT) : poly(styrenesulfonate) (PSS)/graphene composite films by spin coating. The composite film coated indium tin-oxide electrode was used as an anode for polymer bulk heterojunction solar cells reaching an overall power conversion efficiency of about 0.75% upon excitation with 100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5 white light.

Theoretical investigation reveals that monocrystalline graphite belongs to the D46h space-group symmetry. Thus, an out-of-plane A2u mode at around 868 cm−1 and an in-plane E1u mode at around 1588 cm−1 are infrared-active. Typical FTIR spectra of both GSs and fluorinated graphene sheets (F-GSs) are shown in Fig. 1a. We found the A2u mode at around 839 cm−1 and the E1u mode at 1590 cm−1.

The IR spectrum of the GSs (inset of Fig. 1a) is very similar to that reported by Si and Samulski and shows the absence of the peaks at 1365 cm−1, 1250 cm−1, and 1060 cm−1 indicating the absence of epoxy and hydroxyl groups attached to the graphene. The IR spectrum of F-GSs also illustrates the peak at 1730 cm−1 which is characteristic of the CO stretch of the graphene sheets.
The presence of the CO groups has been demonstrated to come from acid moieties localized on the edge of the graphene sheets, without influencing the electronic properties of the graphene.
C–F vibration modes are located in the 1000–1400 cm−1 region, including the –CF2 stretching mode at 1120 cm−1 (ref. 27) and the F-aryl modes at 1150 and 1260 cm−1. IR spectroscopy was used to verify the occurrence of this reaction by dispersing our F-GSs in a commercial primary aliphatic amine such as butylamine (BAM) at room temperature (Fig. 1b). The absorptions of the primary amine at 3290 and 3370 cm−1, due to asymmetric and symmetric N–H stretching vibrations of the BAM when it was mixed with the GSs, changed after its reaction with F-GS and formed a broad band at 3400 cm−1 attributed to a secondary amine. XPS analysis shows how the fluorine atoms have been substituted by the nitrogen atoms after the treatment with the butylamine moiety (Table 1). These findings suggest that the mechanism of interaction between fluorinated graphenes and primary amine proceeds via elimination of fluorine and the formation of a N–H bond (Scheme 1).
Sample
Atomic percentage
GSs
C/O
1/0.15
F-GSs
C/O/F
1/0.11/1.12
BAM modified F-GSs
C/O/N
1/0.10/0.06
Field-emission scanning electron microscopy was used to obtain direct visualization of GSs and F-GSs dispersed in butylamine. In the case of neat GSs, what is observed is an agglomeration of clustered structures (Fig. 2a). TEM and XRD analyses reported elsewhere showed for this material stacks of a small number of graphene sheets with inter-graphene spacing of 0.6 nm together with the loss of the long range ordering. These findings are in agreement both with those reported by McAllister et al. and with the calculation of the ideal graphene layer thickness from the UV-Vis data as reported below.
It is also clear that after dispersing the F-GSs in butylamine using sonication, the graphene sheets were dispersed uniformly onto the substrate and they appeared flattened after the amine functionalization (Fig. 2b).
Atomic force microscopy (AFM) has been used as a direct method of quantifying the degree of exfoliation to graphene sheet level. The tapping-mode AFM image and the height profile of the BAM modified F-GSs are reported in Fig. 3. Amino functionalized F-GSs were previously diluted in DMF and then cast on a glass support before their observation by AFM. Well-dispersed graphene sheets have been obtained. Graphene sheets with average thickness of 0.7–0.9 nm were observed, which is characteristic of exfoliated graphene sheets.
At this stage it should be mentioned that the use of one-dimensional nanostructures like carbon nanotubes for device applications, which are very promising due to their ballistic conduction mechanism with high carrier mobilities, being optically transparent and flexible is hindered by their rough bundled surface. These bundles are problematic for device fabrication because they protrude up from the active layers causing short circuit. The utilization of flat exfoliated graphene sheets removes this problem, reducing the surface roughness to few nanometres.
In order to investigate the role played by the graphene exfoliation on the optical transparency, GSs and amine modified F-GSs were deposited on glass substrates and further characterized by UV-Vis spectroscopy. The graphene morphology affects the transmittance, as shown in the spectra reported in Fig. 4. As expected, a higher degree of exfoliation delivered thinner films that were more optically transparent, with those obtained from BAM modified F-GSs displaying optical transmittances of 97% at 550 nm. Note that for neat graphene a decrease of the overall absorbance has been observed.
From the Bouguer–Lambert law, the absorption coefficient is dependent on the intensity change of the light, the length of the pathway, and the concentration; in our case there is no dependence on the concentration since the deposited graphene sheets have a perfect structure. From the sheet distance of graphite it is possible to calculate the absorption coefficient of graphene (εgraphene) that is equal to 301655 cm−1. From these data the ideal thickness (dideal) of our samples has been calculated from dideal = −log(I/I0)/εgraphene where I is the transmission in % and I0 is 100% of transmittance. The sheet thickness is 3.31 nm for the GS; this value is very similar to what was found previously elsewhere and it is consistent with a structure consisting of approximately 3–4 layers. The BAM modified F-GSs have a thickness of roughly 1 nm, in accordance with what was found by AFM (Fig. 3), which typically corresponds to a monolayer or bilayer of graphene.
Four-point sheet resistance measurements were then made. The PEDOT : PSS/GS film showed a sheet resistance of 1500 kΩ sq−1. Control experiments were also performed on neat PEDOT : PSS and PEDOT : PSS/BAM modified F-GS films, which reveal sheet resistances of 3 × 104 kΩ sq−1 and 800 kΩ sq−1, respectively. To explain the decrease of the sheet resistance of the PEDOT : PSS/BAM modified F-GS electrode, we suggest as reported in Fig. 2b the formation of an extended network of graphene flakes bridging the gaps between them.
From the thickness of ideal graphene sheets the “conductivity of transparency” of a transparent sample can be calculated fromσopt = εgraphene/−log(I/I0) × ρsample where ρsample is the sheet resistance of the sample expressed in Ω sq−1. The conductivity of transparency calculated for the GS and BAM modified F-GS films was 0.14 S cm−1 and 0.20 S cm−1, respectively. Generally the amine addition to the F-GSs delivers a higher dc conductivity with respect to the GS film. The PEDOT : PSS/BAM modified F-GS film showed a conductivity of ∼29.69 S cm−1 with respect to a value of ∼8.97 S cm−1 measured for the PEDOT : PSS/GS one.
The role played by these graphene modified electrodes on the crystalline and morphological arrangement of the active layer (i.e. P3HT : PCBM film) of the solar cell device has been investigated by wide angle X-ray scattering, WAXS, and AFM measurements.
The presence of intensive (h 0 0) peaks at about 5° and 11° and the absence of an (0 1 0) peak measured in the reflection geometry for the ITO/PEDOT : PSS/GSs/RR-P3HT : PCBM, ITO/PEDOT : PSS/BAM modified F-GSs/RR-P3HT : PCBM and ITO/PEDOT : PSS/RR-P3HT : PCBM films (Fig. 5) confirmed the orientation effect of the P3HT molecular alignment caused by the solution-cast, that is, the side chains oriented preferably perpendicular to the film surface, whereas the π–π stacking of main chains oriented preferably parallel to the film surface. In addition, the morphology of the active layer was found to be dependent upon the presence of chemically derived graphene sheets as shown in Fig. 6.
Tapping-mode phase AFM images of the P3HT : PCBM layer deposited onto PEDOT : PSS/GSs and PEDOT : PSS/BAM modified F-GS electrodes are reported in Fig. 6. We chose phase imaging because the phase shift is very sensitive to the local surface properties, such as the rigidity, and only the phase shift can extract information on the changes of the surface properties.
From the AFM analysis it was found that the P3HT : PCBM layer deposited onto the PEDOT : PSS/GS electrode (Fig. 6a) is less planar (RMS surface roughness 2.6 nm) than those spin-cast onto the PEDOT : PSS/BAM modified F-GS one (RMS surface roughness 0.95 nm) (Fig. 6b). Moreover, we can see how the appearance of large regions with higher stiffness (i.e. brighter regions) in Fig. 6a has been reduced in size with the phase separation that is now taking place on a much smaller scale (Fig. 6b).
As reported below, the effect of the chemically functionalized graphene sheets on morphology was found to play a very important role in controlling the heterojunction device performance in particular by increasing the short-circuit current density.

Fig. 7 shows the results obtained by comparing the performance of the prepared organic solar cells; the average current density–voltage curves of multiple measurements on different electrodes realized on each device are reported in Fig. 7; the calculated electrical parameters are summarized in Table 2.
Device

V
OC/mV

J
SC/mA cm−2
FF

η (%)
ITO/PEDOT : PSS/GSs/RR-P3HT : PCBM/LiF/Al
525
2.52
0.29
0.38
ITO/PEDOT : PSS/BAM modified F-GSs/RR-P3HT : PCBM/LiF/Al
556
3.26
0.41
0.74
ITO/PEDOT : PSS/RR-P3HT : PCBM/LiF/Al
514
2.02
0.41
0.42
Without thermal annealing, the power conversion efficiency for the ITO/PEDOT : PSS/RR-P3HT : PCBM/LiF/Al device is very poor and it is almost the same as that measured recently elsewhere.
The short-circuit current density (JSC), open-circuit voltage (VOC), fill factor (FF), and power conversion efficiency (η) are 3.26 mA cm−2, 556 mV, 0.41, and 0.74%, respectively, for the active layer on BAM modified F-GSs, and 2.52 mA cm−2, 525 mV, 0.29, and 0.38%, respectively, for the cell on neat GSs.
It was demonstrated how in the carbon nanotube–PEDOT composites, the current–voltage data and photoluminescence suggested an electronic interaction between nanotubes and PEDOT; the electronic interaction originates from the hole-trapping nature of the carbon nanotubes in a hole-conducting polymer.
More recently it has been demonstrated how similar devices fabricated on neat graphene have an efficiency of approximately 0.1% while devices fabricated with PEDOT : PSS alone were not able to work. Since the electronic properties of graphene are similar to those of nanotubes, the obtained results also suggested that the GSs may interact as hole traps in hole-conducting polymers. Moreover, as demonstrated by Sariciftci and co-workers the morphology of the active layer plays an outstanding role in the performance of the bulk heterojunction solar cells; in particular it was shown how a smoother morphology with a reduced phase separation improves the performance of devices. In fact for efficient devices, the created charge needs to be transported to the electrodes within their lifetime. In particular the fill factor is determined by charge carriers reaching the electrodes when the built-in field is lowered toward the open-circuit voltage. This means that the use of butylamine modified graphene sheets as part of the anode enhances the charge carrier transport reducing the recombination effect of the active layer.

Graphene sheets were produced starting from natural graphite powder (universal grade, 200 mesh, 99.9995%) as previously reported. Briefly, graphite powder was dispersed in 20 mL of fuming nitric acid for 20 min; next, potassium chlorate (8 g) was slowly added over 1 h and the reaction mixture was stirred for 21 h at 0 °C. The obtained graphite oxide was thermally exfoliated at 300 °C for 3 min under air atmosphere giving rise to graphene sheets (GSs).

The obtained GSs were then ultrasonicated in toluene (2 mg per 20 mL) for 1 h. The GS dispersion was spin-cast (1000 rpm) onto indium tin-oxide (ITO)-coated glass (electrical sheet resistivity of 14 Ω sq−1). The material was then annealed at 70 °C for 2 h in order to desorb any residual solvent.
Fluorinated graphene sheets (F-GSs) were obtained by the plasma assisted decomposition of CF4 employing a 13.56 MHz radio frequency plasma source. The plasma treatment was carried out at room temperature with the CF4 gas pressure fixed at 10−2 Torr for 45 min. The CF4 flow rate was kept constant at 21 sccm. The graphene fluorination was performed with a RF bias voltage fixed at −250 V. A commercially available grade of butylamine (CH3(CH2)3NH2, BAM) supplied by Sigma-Aldrich Chemicals was used in this research. F-GSs were dispersed in the liquid amine using an ultrasonication probe for 1 h in a thermostatic bath at 5 °C to avoid the evaporation of the amine.
The morphologies of GSs and amino modified F-GSs were investigated by field-emission scanning electron microscopy and atomic force microscopy (AFM) Nanoscope IV from Digital Instruments. AFM images were obtained in tapping-mode. Infrared (IR) (KBr pellets method) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopes were used to confirm the presence of covalently bound fluorine and the amino functionalization of the F-GSs.
The poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) : poly(styrenesulfonate) (PSS) (purchased from Aldrich, PEDOT and PSS contents were 0.5 wt% and 0.8 wt%, respectively, 1.3 wt% dispersion in H2O) was spin-cast (4000 rpm for 1 min) onto the ITO substrate, and was subsequently dried at 150 °C for 1 h in air. The thickness of the PEDOT : PSS layer was 50 nm.
The GSs and amine modified F-GSs were spin-cast (1000 rpm) onto the PEDOT : PSS coated ITO substrate. The sheet resistance of PEDOT : PSS and PEDOT : PSS/graphene films was obtained by four-point probe measurements. Transmittance of these films was measured with a UV-Vis spectrometer.
Regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene) (RR-P3HT purchased from Aldrich, molecular weight 46000, used as received) and [6,6]-phenyl C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM, purchased from Solenne, used as received) were used for this research.
The solar cells were fabricated with the structures ITO/PEDOT : PSS/BAM modified F-GSs/RR-P3HT : PCBM/LiF/Al and ITO/PEDOT : PSS/GSs/RR-P3HT : PCBM/LiF/Al, respectively. As reference, a solar cell with the structure ITO/PEDOT : PSS/RR-P3HT : PCBM/LiF/Al was also fabricated.
The photosensitive layer was prepared by spin coating (1000 rpm, 20 s) from an o-dichlorobenzene (ODCB) solution of the RR-P3HT : PCBM (1 : 1 weight ratio) blend with the solution concentration of 20 mg mL−1 onto the ITO/PEDOT : PSS/graphene electrode. The thickness of the spin-cast photosensitive layer was 100 nm as estimated by AFM. The thickness of the layers has been determined by depositing each layer and removing it with an appropriate solvent. Then the top metal electrode, which is made up of LiF and Al, was deposited on the active layer by vacuum evaporation (∼10−6 Torr) with an optimized thickness of 0.7 and 60 nm, respectively, through a shadow mask consisting of stripes with 2 mm width and 2 mm length. The device layout consists of PEDOT : PSS, graphene and the photoactive layer sandwiched between patterned and crossed ITO and LiF/Al stripes as electrodes. The area of each device is the crossing portions of the patterned electrodes.
The current–voltage (I–V) measurement of the devices was conducted on a computer-controlled Keithley 4200 Source Measure Unit. The photocurrent was measured under AM1.5D 100 mW cm−2 (Pin) illumination from a Thermal Oriel solar simulator. The performance of each cell was measured positioning the photovoltaic device on the maximum optical power measured at the sample with a radiant power energy meter Newport 70260.
The AFM and wide-angle X-ray scattering (WAXS) experiments were carried out on the spin-cast films of ITO/PEDOT : PSS/RR-P3HT : PCBM, ITO/PEDOT : PSS/BAM modified F-GSs/RR-P3HT : PCBM and ITO/PEDOT : PSS/RR-P3HT : PCBM. The WAXS experiment was done by using an ATX-G diffractometer in reflection mode with a parallel beam optics attachment. The instrument was operated at a 50 kV voltage and a 240 mA current and was calibrated with a standard silicon sample. Copper Kα radiation (λ = 0.154 nm) was used.

We have developed a novel approach that is able to lead to a stable dispersion and rearrangement of graphene sheets in a layered structure when they were exposed to organic moieties and spin-cast onto a substrate. We emphasize that such chemically modified graphene even if contains residual oxides is conductive and can be used as part of transparent conductive electrodes for polymer photovoltaic cells. 


The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the Ministry of Science and Education (MEC, Spain) through its project MAT 2007-61116. The authors also acknowledge Prof. T. J. Marks and Prof. A. Facchetti for the availability of the XRD and AFM equipment for the polymer solar cell characterization at the Department of Chemistry and the Materials Research Center of Northwestern University.


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010