 DOI: 10.1039/C9TC06038C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 2171-2177


Bing
Zheng
,

Juan
Liu
,

Xuexue
Pan
,

Yu
Zhang
,

Zaiyu
Wang
,

Feng
Liu
*,

Meixiu
Wan
 and 

Lijun
Huo
*

School of Chemistry, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China. E-mail: huolijun@buaa.edu.cn

Department of Physics and Astronomy, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, P. R. China. E-mail: fengliu82@sjtu.edu.cn

Received
5th November 2019
, Accepted 23rd December 2019
First published on 24th December 2019
To pursue effective charge transport and high fill factor (FF) in photovoltaic devices, adopting ordered polymers with enhanced hole mobility is greatly desired. Currently, a popular strategy in improving charge transport has been applied by enforcing the coplanarity of fused-ring conjugated structures. However, their synthetic complexity hinders their further development. Here, we successfully developed an effective strategy to introduce soluble alkenyl side chains in D–A type photovoltaic polymer backbones to improve the charge transport ability and photovoltaic performance. The introduction of the trans-vinylene (CHCH) linkage in alkenyl side chains strengthens the polymeric crystalline properties and charge transport ability, and further improves the photovoltaic performance. Meanwhile, a high FF of 0.73 can still be obtained for a device with a film thickness of 200 nm. The low cost, feasible chemical strategy could potentially be applied for other thickness-insensitive organic photovoltaic materials design.

Over the past two decades, great progress has been made in organic photovoltaic (OPV) technologies. Compared to their inorganic counterparts, simple device structure, light weight, and low fabrication cost by solution-processing are distinguished advantages for OPV. Benefitting from the bulk heterojunction (BHJ) device structures, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of OPV cells has approached about 15–17%. Generally, the PCE of OPV is determined by the open-circuit voltage (Voc), the short-circuit current (Jsc), and the fill factor (FF). Among all these device performance parameters, FF is the most complicated to control because it has a close relationship with photoactive materials and interfacial layers. So far the FF value of many promising donor materials is normally in the range of 60–70%. The limited FF of OPVs has been explained by several mechanisms including charge carrier collection losses, diffusion-limited transport, field-dependent charge generation and so on. A general consensus on this issue is that insufficient hole mobility is the major reason for the limited FF and device performance. Therefore, pursuing high FF in OPVs by adopting reasonably ordered polymers with enhanced hole mobility as the donor is greatly desired. Typically strategies for high hole mobility are realized through enforcing the coplanarity of π-conjugated rings to promote π-electron delocalization such as extending the thiophene ring to benzo[1,2-b;4,5-b′]dithiophene (BDT) and further to dithieno[2,3-d;2′,3′-d′]benzo[1,2-b;4,5-b′]dithiophene (DTBDT); or through strengthening the quinoidal character of the conjugated backbone such as the development of thieno-[3,4-b]thiophene (TT) and dithieno[3,4-b:2′,3′-d]thiophene (DTT) material systems. Great progress based on these strategies has been made in π-conjugated backbones but the synthetic complexity hinders their further development. In contrast, flexible side chains are less developed and usually used only as solubilizing groups. Actually, it has been proved that solubilizing alkyl side chains attached to the conjugated backbones has a great effect on the molecular packing, charge transport properties and subsequently the photovoltaic device performance. Therefore investigations on the length, odd–even nature, branch, chirality, rigidity and linking position of the side chains, as well as some significant features of siloxane terminated alkyl chains, oligo(ethylene glycol) and fluoroalkyl chains have been carried out. However, there has been only limited attention paid toward developing new soluble functional alkyl substituents that are significant in tuning the packing properties and charge mobility.

Recently, as novel side chains, alkenyl side chains have been first attempted for application in organic field effect transistor (OFET) materials and it was found that the incorporation of a trans-vinylene (CHCH) linkage in the alkenyl side chains not only enhances the coplanarity but also potentially prolongs the electronic conjugation and improves the charge mobility. Motivated by the preliminary investigations on alkenyl side chains in OFETs, we tried to introduce alkenyl side chains to D–A type photovoltaic polymer backbones to comprehensively evaluate their effects on the photo–electron properties, charge transport ability and photovoltaic performance.
Therefore, in our research, simple and low-cost alkenyl side chains of (E)-3,7-dimethylocta-2,6-dienyl were introduced to a polymer of LP4 backbones, in which the double trans-vinylene (CHCH) linkage in alkenyl side chains could not only guarantee solution-processability but also facilitate charge transport. And consequently, potentially high charge mobility and high FF are expected. To study the trans-vinylene bond effect, a 3,7-dimethyloctanyl substituted counterpart without vinylene bonds was also synthesized to form a polymer of LP3 for comparison (Scheme 1). Their photophysical, electrochemical, hole mobility, and device characterization were carefully investigated and discussed. As a result, the alkenyl side chains incorporated into LP4 reduce the side-chain steric hindrance and improve the main-chain planarity, leading to enhanced crystallinity, which was detected from GIWAX measurements. Meanwhile, alkenylated LP4 showed a much better hole mobility than the corresponding alkylated LP3, by four times. Consequently, the LP4 based non-fullerene solar cell showed a higher FF of 77% and PCE of 10.1%, and also greatly outperforms the LP3-based device.

The synthetic routes to copolymers LP3 and LP4 are shown in Scheme 1. The tin monomer (4,8-bis(5-(2-ethylhexyl)thienyl)benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl)bis(trimethylstannane) was prepared according to previous methods. For the acceptor unit, firstly, alkyl/alkenyl alcohols were reacted with thiophenyl dicarboxylic acid and excess SOCl2 to obtain thienyl-3,4-dicarboxylate. Then the intermediate compound was coupled with trimethyl(thiophen-2-yl)stannane by a typical Stille reaction with a moderate yield. Subsequently, the polymeric monomer was easily obtained after a bromination reaction. The copolymers LP3 and LP4 were synthesized through a similar Stille-coupling polymerization in toluene, with Pd(PPh3)4 as the catalyst under a refluxing reaction for 8 h. The obtained target copolymers show good solubility in chloroform and o-dichlorobenzene. The molecular weights of these polymers were measured by gel permeation chromatography (GPC) in a chloroform eluent with a polystyrene standard, as a result, the number-average molecular weights (Mn) of LP3 and LP4 are 17.6 kg mol−1 and 9.9 kg mol−1, and the corresponding polymer dispersity indexes (PDI) are 2.0 and 1.6, respectively. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) was used to investigate their thermal stabilities. The TGA curves of these two polymers were obtained at a heating rate of 20 °C min−1 as shown in Fig. S1 (ESI). It was found that the 5% weight-loss temperatures (Td) of the polymers were 295 °C and 279 °C for LP3 and LP4, respectively. LP4 with alkenyl-side chains shows a slightly lower weight-loss temperature compared to LP3. Considering that the device fabrication temperature is far lower than 200 °C under nitrogen, these two polymers have adequate thermal stability beyond processing conditions. Meanwhile, the thermal properties of the polymers were investigated by differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) at a heating rate of 10 °C min−1 and a cooling rate of −10 °C min−1. However, they did not show any noticeable glass transition during DSC analysis in the temperature range of 25–290 °C (Fig. S2, ESI).


The UV-vis absorption peaks of these two polymers in a dilute chloroform solution (10−5 M) and in solid films are presented in Fig. 1a. In the diluted solution, these two polymers exhibit two notable absorption peaks. One is located at a short wavelength band, due to π–π* transitions, and the other one at a longer wavelength band is attributed to the intramolecular charge transfer. From solution to thin films, both LP3 and LP4 show red-shifted absorption ascribed to the strengthened aggregation behavior. It is interesting to note that in the short wavelength (300–400 nm) range, the absorption intensity of LP4 both in solution and films is enhanced compared to that of PL3, which indicates that the introduction of alkenyl side chains could extend the degree of conjugation and increase π–π* transitions in comparison with aliphatic alkyl side chains.

In addition, the absorption edges of the two polymer films are at 629 nm for LP3 and 642 nm for LP4, corresponding to the optical band gaps of 1.97 and 1.93 eV, respectively. The absorption onset of the latter exhibits a slight bathochromic shift of ca. 13 nm compared to that of the former, and it is assumed that the alkenyl side chains may cause a stronger aggregation of the main-chain backbones in the solid state. Considering the low bandgap acceptor of ITCPTC, these wide bandgap polymer donors can provide a complementary absorption with the acceptor.
The energy levels were evaluated by an electrochemical cyclic voltammetry (CV) method. The CV curves of both polymers in 0.1 M tetrabutylammonium hexafluorophosphate (Bu4NPF6) acetonitrile solution are shown in Fig. 1b. The HOMO and LUMO levels were calculated according to their onset oxidation and reduction potentials, respectively. As shown in Fig. 1b, both polymers have comparable LUMO levels of −3.52 to 3.54 eV. Meanwhile, the HOMO levels of LP3 and LP4 are −5.43 eV and −5.32 eV, respectively, which implies that the alkenyl side chains partly increase the HOMO values compared to the alkyl substituted counterpart. Additionally, their electrochemical bandgaps (Eecg) are 1.89 eV and 1.80 eV, respectively, which is agreeing well with the optical bandgap results. Fig. 1c shows the energy level diagrams of the polymer donors and the ITCPTC acceptor for a clear comparison. It is found that both the energy levels of these two polymer donors are matchable with those of the ITCPTC acceptor, which means efficient dissociation could be expected to occur in their interfaces.
To investigate the photovoltaic properties of the two polymers, OPVs were prepared with a device structure of ITO/ZnO/polymers:ITCPTC/Mo3/Al. The photovoltaic performance was measured under AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2). The optimized donor/acceptor weight ratio of 1:1 was found for both LP3 and LP4 based devices (Fig. S3, ESI); the device parameters are summarized in Tables S1–S5 (ESI). The current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the champion solar cells based on the two polymers are shown in Fig. 2 and the device parameters are summarized in Table 1. Furthermore, when an additive 1,8-diiodooctane (DIO) was added into the blend films, respectively, LP3-based devices exhibited a Voc of 0.91 V, a Jsc of 13.50 mA cm−2 and a FF of 0.69, leading to enhancement in the PCE of 8.48%. With 1% DIO, all the parameters based on LP3 devices decreased. Similarly, an effective improvement in LP4 was observed with 0.5% DIO as the additive for LP4-based solar cells, which showed a Voc of 0.89 V, a Jsc of 14.72 mA cm−2 and a distinguished FF of 0.77, leading to a champion PCE of 10.09%. In comparison with LP3 based devices, there is a pronounced improvement of the FF in LP4 based devices. Meanwhile, when the film thickness of the LP4 blend increased to 200 nm, its device still showed a high FF of 0.73. When the film thickness increased to 300 nm, the PCE of the LP4 based device was still maintained at a high value of 9.43%, which implies that the introduction the alkenyl side chains has great potential in realizing thick film devices. Moreover, to confirm the Jsc difference in devices based on LP3 and LP4, the external quantum efficiencies (EQEs) were measured (Fig. 2b). It was found that both LP3 and LP4 have EQE values above 40% in the range of ca. 370–740 nm, which is ascribed to the contribution of the polymer and the acceptor. Under the optimized conditions, it is observed that LP4 has a higher EQE response than LP3 especially in the range of ca. 400 nm to 600 nm. We can conclude that the LP4 based devices show a more efficient photon-electron conversion.
Polymer:ITCPTC
DIO (%, v/v)

V
oc [V]

J
sc [mA cm−2]
FF (%)
PCEmax (PCEavg)

J
sc
 [mA cm−2]
Thickness [nm]

a All average values were calculated from six devices.
b Calculated Jsc values.


LP3

—
0.92
12.41
67
7.65 (7.49)
12.07
100
0.5
0.91
13.50
69
8.48 (8.37)
13.14
100

LP4

—
0.90
13.28
72
8.61 (8.44)
13.20
130
0.5
0.89
14.72
77
10.09 (10.03)
14.51
130
Moreover, the space-charge-limited current (SCLC) method was adopted to measure the carrier mobilities of these two polymers with different side chain configurations in pure and blend films, respectively (Fig. S4 and Table S6, ESI). The LP3 pure film shows a moderate hole mobility of 1.09 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 and the LP4 pure film shows an improved mobility of 4.16 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 by four times. The higher mobility of LP4 could be attributed to the more strengthened aggregation caused by lateral alkenyl side chains. In blend films, LP4:ITCPTC exhibited a higher hole mobility of 2.73 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 than the LP3:ITCPTC blend with 8.81 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1. This means the hole mobility of the blend film could be well improved by alkenyl side chain modifications. Because high mobility is greatly helpful for facilitating charge transport and restraining the carrier recombination, the result could experimentally explain the obvious improvement in FF and PCE for the LP4 based device. Moreover, the more balanced electron and hole mobility ratios of 1.04 vs. 0.82 for LP4:ITCPTC and LP3:ITCPTC based devices additionally explained the reason for the higher FF in the former than in the latter. The proposed nanoscale charge transport is shown in Fig. 2c. For these two different blends, although the polymer main chain backbones are identical, for the LP4:ITCPTC blend, the hole transport ability is strengthened by alkenyl side chains in LP4. A more balanced hole/electron ratio rationalizes the above results in the LP4 blend.
To deeply investigate the molecular packing and crystalline properties of LP3 and LP4 thin films with different side chains, atomic force microscopy (AFM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) were carried out. The root-mean-square (rms) roughness values of the pure films from the AFM topographical images are found to become higher from LP3 to LP4 films (2.18 nm for LP3 and 3.11 nm for LP4) (Fig. S5, ESI), demonstrating a strengthened aggregation with the alkenyl side chains. Furthermore, their blends were also investigated by AFM to illustrate the morphology evolution differences. Before adding DIO into blend films, LP3:ITCPTC and LP4:ITCPTC blend films show surface roughness degrees with RMS values of 0.47 nm and 0.55 nm (Fig. 3a and c), respectively, which indicates that there is a slightly greater intermolecular aggregation in the LP4 blend than in the LP3 blend. With the addition of 0.5% DIO, both the RMS values of LP3 and LP4 blend films were increased to 0.65 nm and 0.76 nm, respectively, (Fig. 3b and d) which means that the addition of DIO could lead to a more aggregated morphology and a more crystalline LP4 still exists in the blend. Meanwhile, the same trend was observed in the TEM images of LP3 and LP4 blend films (Fig. 3e and f) with DIO as the additive. The morphology of the LP3 blend film has more amorphous character than that of the LP4 blend film.
The two-dimensional (2D) grazing incidence wide angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) images and their line-cuts of in-plane (IP) and out-of-plane (OOP) direction are shown in Fig. 4a and b. In the OOP direction, the pronounced π–π stacking diffraction peaks were observed in both the pure polymer films, illustrating a preferential face-on molecular orientation. The difference is that LP3 showed weaker crystallinity with a weak lamellar (100) peak at q ≈ 0.27 Å−1 (d-spacing: 23.27 Å) and a π–π stacking (010) peak at q ≈ 1.66 Å−1 (d-spacing: 3.78 Å), but LP4 exhibited better crystallinity with a sharper and closer π–π stacking (010) peak at q ≈ 1.73 Å−1 (d-spacing: 3.63 Å), which should be closely related to the stronger interchain interactions after the introduction of alkenyl side chains. This result is coincident with the AFM RMS values of these two pure films mostly due to the more strengthened crystalline properties by alkenyl side chains and decrease of the corresponding π–π stacking distance. In addition, for these two blend films, in the out-of-plane (OOP) direction (Fig. 4c and d), the (100) lamellar diffraction peak intensity for the LP4 blend is much stronger than that for the LP3 blend, which suggests that the stronger interactions in alkenyl side chains along the lateral direction were mostly retained. Meanwhile, it was found that the LP4:ITCPTC blend shows a slightly stronger (010) peak at qz ≈ 1.77 Å−1 than the LP3:ITCPTC blend (010) peak at qz ≈ 1.72 Å−1, corresponding to π–π stacking diffraction distances 3.55 Å and 3.65 Å, respectively. The results indicated that the enhanced self-assembly properties of LP4 are still retained in the blend film. Therefore, it could be reasonably concluded that the increase of the polymeric crystallinity by alkenyl side chains leads to better carrier transport properties, and enhanced Jsc and FF, and consequently a better PCE was obtained in the LP4 based device.
Furthermore, the stability test on photovoltaic devices was performed by heating the devices at 100 °C for different times, and the normalized device performances are shown in Fig. S6 (ESI). After thermal treatment at 100 °C for 700 min, LP4 based devices retained ∼80% of their initial PCEs. However, those for the LP3 based devices were largely reduced to ∼60% of their initial PCE. Therefore, LP4 based solar cells exhibit much better thermal stability than LP3 based solar cells, demonstrating a significant advantage of LP4 as a promising polymer donor for practical applications in OPV.
In summary, to regulate the charge transport properties of the polymer donor and improve its photovoltaic parameters especially FF, a simple and low-cost alkenyl side chain (E)-3,7-dimethylocta-2,6-dienyl was introduced to the polymeric backbones, in which the double trans-vinylene (CHCH) linkage strengthens the polymeric crystalline properties and improves the charge transport ability compared to its counterpart without trans-vinylene side chains. For the polymer of LP4 with alkenyl side chains, combining all experimental data, it exhibits a higher PCE with an impressive FF of 77% in comparison with LP3 with traditional alkyl side chains. Even a high FF of 0.73 can still be retained for the LP4 based device with a film thickness of 200 nm. The advantage of LP4 could be mainly attributed to a higher and more balanced charge-carrier transport between the donor and acceptor. All these SCLC, AFM, TEM and GIWAXS measurements rationalize that the alkenyl side chains can have a significant role in strengthening the polymer aggregation properties, and improving the charge transport ability and photovoltaic performances. The results illustrate that, the introduction of soluble functional alkenyl side chains guarantees polymeric solubility and more importantly, the enhancement of the charge mobility of the polymers via simple alkenyl side chains has preliminarily proved its great potential for effective photovoltaic material design.

There are no conflicts to declare


This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) (No. 21774003) and funded by Beihang University Youth Talent Support Program (YWF-18-BJ-J-218).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9tc06038c
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020