 DOI: 10.1039/C2JM34856J
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 22781-22787

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Pan-Pan
Cheng
,

Guo-Fu
Ma
,

Jian
Li
,

Yan
Xiao
,

Zai-Quan
Xu
,

Guo-Qiang
Fan
,

Yan-Qing
Li
*,

Shuit-Tong
Lee
 and 

Jian-Xin
Tang
*

Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Carbon-Based Functional Materials & Devices, Institute of Functional Nano & Soft Materials (FUNSOM), Soochow University, Suzhou 215123, China. E-mail: jxtang@suda.edu.cn; yqli@suda.edu.cn

Received
23rd July 2012
, Accepted 10th September 2012
First published on 11th September 2012
The enhanced performance of inverted polymer solar cells enabled by a plasmonic backscattering effect is reported upon. To produce localized surface plasmons (LSPs) at the rear anode, thermally deposited Ag nanoparticles (NPs) are embedded in the MoO3 hole extraction layer. Upon optimizing the MoO3/Ag NPs/MoO3 sandwich structure, enhanced light harvesting is achieved via plasmonic backscattering into the photoactive layer of poly(3-hexylthiophene)/[6,6]-phenyl-C61 butyric acid methyl ester (P3HT:PCBM), resulting in an increase in photocurrent without sacrificing electrical properties, and ∼20% enhancement in power conversion efficiency, of 4.32% vs. 3.61% of the reference device. The performance improvement of the inverted PSCs is ascribed to the enhanced light absorption as a result of the light backscattering as well as the excitation of LSPs induced by Ag NPs embedded in the MoO3 layer. The present method provides a promising pathway for the fabrication of high-efficiency PSCs in an inexpensive and scalable way.

Bulk heterojunction (BHJ) polymer solar cells (PSCs) based on a conjugated polymer/fullerene derivative blend have increasingly become the focus of research in recent years because of their potential as renewable energy sources with low cost and ease of solution processing. The external quantum efficiency (ηEQE) of PSCs is determined by ηEQE = ηA × ηD × ηCC. Here, ηA is the optical absorption efficiency, ηD is the fraction of photo-generated exciton dissociation at the donor–acceptor interface before recombining, and ηCC is the charge collection efficiency of photo-generated carriers by the corresponding electrodes. Although the exciton dissociation bottleneck in PSCs has been removed through the introduction of donor–acceptor BHJs with ηD ≈ 100%, the mismatch between optical absorption length and charge transport scale still limits the improvement in power conversion efficiency (PCE). A thick photoactive layer in PSCs for higher ηA inevitably increases the carrier recombination losses and series resistance, and hence reduces the ηCC, due to the comparatively low charge transport mobility of organic materials. For efficient electron and hole extraction, the total thickness of the photoactive layer in PSCs is usually in the range of 100–200 nm, which is typically an order of magnitude smaller than the optical absorption length. Consequently, a large fraction of incident light is not absorbed within the photoactive layer, thus limiting photocurrent generation and hence PCE.

Extensive efforts have been devoted to develop various methods and designs for efficient light trapping in PSCs, such as the insertion of an optical spacer to spatially redistribute the light intensity, the implementation of periodic nanostructures to increase the optical path length, the microcavity and photonic crystal effect, and plasmonic effect. In particular, the excitation of localized surface plasmons (LSPs) induced by metallic nanoparticles (NPs) yields unique optical properties, such as light concentration and/or scattering into a thin active layer, which provides an alternative approach for the enhancement of light absorption and thereby the improved photocurrent in a thin photoactive layer of PSCs.
The widely used approach to introduce the plasmonic effect in PSCs is via the incorporation of metallic NPs into the interface between the transparent front electrode and the photoactive layer, which can lead to the near-field enhancement of light absorption in the photoactive layer of PSCs. However, metallic NPs embedded at the interface between the front electrode and the photoactive layer can also function as the subwavelength scattering elements to the incident light, and light scattering from metallic NPs is nearly symmetrical in the forward and reverse directions. On the contrary, the incorporation of metallic NPs at the reflecting rear contact can induce a light backscattering effect as well as surface plasmonic coupling effect, which trap the incident light in the thin active layer due to multiple and high-angle scattering, and simultaneously trigger the excitation of LSPs by metallic NPs.
Here, we present a method for enhancing the performance of inverted PSCs by surface plasmonic backscattering and coupling effect induced by a thermally deposited MoO3/Ag NPs/MoO3 sandwich structure as the hole collection layer for the rear anode, as schematically illustrated in Fig. 1. Enhanced light harvesting via plasmonic backscattering into poly(3-hexylthiophene)/[6,6]-phenyl-C61 butyric acid methyl ester (P3HT:PCBM) BHJ active layer was achieved, with a positive electrical effect as compared to the reference device fabricated and tested under the same conditions, leading to an improvement in short-circuit current (JSC) from 9.55 mA cm−2 to 10.73 mA cm−2, and thus the enhancement of PCE from 3.61% to 4.32%. The method proposed here shows great potential of incorporating the surface plasmonic backscattering effect for high-efficiency PSCs.


Fig. 1 shows a schematic of the inverted PSCs structure, in which the thermally deposited Ag NPs were sandwiched in the MoO3 hole extraction layer. The devices were fabricated on ITO-coated glass substrates with a sheet resistance of 20 Ω per sq. Prior to the preparation of ZnO layer, the ITO substrates were successively cleaned by ultrasonication in detergent, acetone, ethanol and DI water, and subsequently dried in an oven. The ZnO precursor solution was prepared by dissolving 0.5 M zinc acetate and 0.5 M monoethanolamine in 2-methoxyethanol with vigorous stirring for 12 h for the hydrolysis reaction at ambient conditions. The sol–gel-derived ZnO layer was prepared by spin-coating the ZnO precursor solution onto an UV–ozone treated ITO substrate at a rate of 4000 rpm for 40 s, and then thermally annealing at 150 °C for 5 min in ambient air, during which the precursor was converted to a dense ZnO film by hydrolysis. The ZnO-coated substrates were then transferred into a nitrogen-filled glove box for spin-coating of the blend of P3HT:PCBM with a 1:0.8 weight ratio (10 mg mL−1, dissolved in dichlorobenzene) at 700 rpm for 50 s. The wet film was subjected to solvent annealing and thermal annealing at 110 °C for 10 min. Finally, to complete the device fabrication, a MoO3 (x nm)/Ag NPs/MoO3 (10 − x nm) sandwich structure and an Al (100 nm) anode were thermally deposited on top of the active layer in a high vacuum system at a base pressure of 2 × 10−6 Torr. The deposition rate and film thickness were monitored by a quartz crystal oscillator. A shadow mask was used to define the Al anode, and the device area determined by the overlap between ITO cathode and metal anode was estimated to be 0.1 cm2.


Current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of inverted PSCs without any device encapsulation were examined in air at room temperature using a programmable Keithley 2612 source measurement unit under illumination from a 150 W Newport 91160 solar simulator with an air mass (AM) 1.5G filter. The illumination intensity was adjusted to be 100 mW cm−2, which was calibrated using a standard Si optical power meter. The incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) measurement was conducted with a photo-modulation spectroscopic setup (Newport monochromator). The morphology of Ag NPs was characterized using a scanning electron microscope (SEM) (FEI Quanta 200 FEG). Absorption spectra were measured using an UV/vis/near-IR spectrometer (Perkin Elmer Lambda 750). The steady state photoluminescence (PL) spectra were recorded in the transmission mode under ambient air conditions with a HORIBA JOBIN YVON Fluoromax-4 Fluorescence spectrometer. For time-resolved PL measurements, samples were excited at 484 nm by a Micro Time 200 pulsed laser. The dynamic signal was collected at 650 nm using a time-correlated single photon counting spectrometer with the Fluorolog-3 spectrofluorometer (Horiba-FM-2015), which is synchronized to the pulse.



Fig. 1 depicts a schematic representation of the inverted device structure with a configuration of ITO/ZnO/P3HT:PCBM/MoO3/Ag NPs/MoO3/Al. In this device, the thermally deposited MoO3/Ag NPs/MoO3 sandwich structure is used as the hole collection layer, while the sol–gel-derived ZnO film used as an electron collection layer was prepared using zinc acetate in 2-methoxyethanol as a precursor solution. The details of device fabrication are described in the Experimental section. The thicknesses of the resulting ZnO and P3HT:PCBM layers are approximately 40 and 180 nm, respectively, as determined by the alpha-SE™ Spectroscopic Ellipsometer. The inset of Fig. 1 displays the scanning electron microscopic (SEM) image of the thermally deposited Ag NPs on MoO3. It is noted that thermal evaporation provides an inexpensive and scalable way for fabricating random arrays of Ag NPs with almost uniform diameter and hemispherical shape, which are highly isolated on the MoO3 layer.


Fig. 2(a) plots the dark current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the inverted PSC incorporating a MoO3 (6 nm)/Ag NPs/MoO3 (4 nm) sandwich structure as hole collection layer. For comparison, two other inverted PSCs with a pristine 10 nm thick MoO3 layer and Ag NPs/MoO3 (10 nm) structure were fabricated using identical process parameters during the same batch processing, and their corresponding J–V properties are also shown in Fig. 2. It is observed in Fig. 2(a) that the dark current of the inverted PSC incorporating a MoO3/Ag NPs/MoO3 sandwich structure is almost identical to that of the reference device with a pristine MoO3 layer, revealing that the total series resistances of these devices are almost the same and the presence of Ag NPs embedded in MoO3 has a negligible effect on the charge transport property. Fig. 2(b) depicts the J–V curves of the corresponding inverted PSCs recorded under AM 1.5G simulated solar illumination at an incident intensity of 100 mW cm−2. The extracted photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table 1. The reference device with a pristine MoO3 layer yields an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 0.60 V, a JSC of 9.55 mA cm−2, a fill factor (FF) of 63%, and a resulting PCE of 3.61%. However, compared to the reference device, the insertion of Ag NPs into the MoO3 layer causes a significantly enhanced photovoltaic response with an increase in JSC up to 10.73 mA cm−2. Apart from the improved photocurrent, the inverted PSC with Ag NPs embedded in MoO3 shows a slightly higher VOC (0.62 V) compared to the reference device (0.60 V). This is due to the increased photocurrent as described in the Shockley relation: VOC = (kBT/q) ln(Iphoto/Idark + 1), where kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is temperature, q is the charge, Iphoto is the photocurrent, and Idark is the dark current. In addition, the FF of the inverted PSCs integrating the MoO3/Ag NPs/MoO3 sandwich structure is comparable to the corresponding reference device, revealing a positive effect on electrical properties. Accordingly, the resulting PCE of the inverted PSC with a MoO3/Ag NPs/MoO3 sandwich structure is pronouncedly enhanced to 4.32%, corresponding to ∼20% improvement as compared to the reference device. It should be emphasized that the inverted PSCs yield good reproducibility and the averaged device results over 5 solar cells with the same structure exhibit the same trend. Unlike the MoO3/Ag NPs/MoO3 sandwich structure, inserting Ag NPs directly between the P3HT:PCBM and MoO3 layers results in poor photovoltaic performance under white light illumination and poor rectification characteristics in the dark (see Fig. 2). The device integrated with Ag NPs/MoO3 (10 nm) structure yields an overall reduction in PCE (1.34%) with a lower VOC, JSC, and FF in comparison with the reference device, suggesting the poor nature of the electrode–polymer interface. Therefore, it can be concluded that Ag NPs embedded in the MoO3 layer could prevent direct contact between NPs and the P3HT:PCBM blend, thus suppressing exciton quenching on the Ag NPs' surface.
Device structure

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Reference
0.60
9.55
63
3.61
Ag NPs/MoO3
0.29
9.23
50
1.34
MoO3/Ag NPs/MoO3
0.62
10.73
65
4.32
The incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra of the corresponding devices were measured, and the results are displayed in Fig. 3. It is noted that the IPCE for the inverted device with Ag NPs embedded in MoO3 layer is different in shape from the reference device with a pristine MoO3 layer, and the spectral response enhancement is clearly observed within the wavelength ranging from 400 nm to 600 nm after embedding the Ag NPs. Since the P3HT:PCBM BHJ active layer in these two PSCs is expected to possess similar morphology and crystallinity degree, it is reasonable to deduce that the performance enhancement, especially the increase in JSC, is ascribed to the enhanced light harvesting within the photoactive layer of P3HT:PCBM by Ag NPs embedded in MoO3 layer.
To identify the origin of the enhanced performance induced by the MoO3/Ag NPs/MoO3 sandwich structure, the optical properties of the corresponding samples were examined. Fig. 4(a) shows the normalized absorption of MoO3 layer, pristine Ag NPs, and MoO3/Ag NPs/MoO3 sandwich structure deposited onto ITO glass substrates. For the MoO3 layer, there is no absorption in the wavelength range from 400 nm compared to the Ag NPs and MoO3/Ag NPs/MoO3 sandwich structure. It is noted that the absorption peak of Ag NPs embedded in the MoO3 layer redshifts to the range of 460 nm to 520 nm as compared to the sharp peak of pristine Ag NPs at approximately 440 nm, which is a common phenomenon associated with the change of the dielectric constant of MoO3 relative to air. Fig. 4(b) shows the absorption spectra of the pristine P3HT films spin-coated on ITO glass substrates, which were capped by pristine MoO3 (10 nm) or the MoO3 (6 nm)/Ag NPs/MoO3 (4 nm) sandwich structure. It is noted that the shape of their absorption spectra are consistent with the IPCE spectra in Fig. 3, indicating that P3HT is the primary contributor to the light absorption and exciton generation in the P3HT:PCBM active layer. More importantly, it also shows that a P3HT film capped with a MoO3/Ag NPs/MoO3 sandwich structure exhibits a higher absorption intensity than that with a pristine MoO3 layer, implying an increase of light absorption in the photoactive layer. Consequently, it can be inferred that the increases in JSC and IPCE are mainly due to the increase of light absorption and exciton generation induced by the incorporation of Ag NPs into the MoO3 layer.
Two factors may be responsible for the enhanced light harvesting. One factor is related to the light scattering effect induced by the randomly distributed Ag NP arrays embedded in MoO3, which can act as an effective optical reflector to preferentially scatter and trap light into the photoactive layer by multiple reflective and high-angle scattering, causing an increase in the effective optical path length of PSCs with enhanced light absorption efficiency. The other factor is related to the plasmonic near-field coupling effect. The excitation of LSPs near the interface between dielectric and metallic NPs can result in a strong local electromagnetic field, which converts the energy of incident light in a LSP mode and thus increases the effective absorption cross-section in the surrounding active layer. The excitation of LSPs induced by metallic NPs is achievable when their resonance peak matches the frequency of the incident light, while the resonance peak of LSPs depends strongly on the size, shape, and the dielectric environment of the metallic NPs.

Fig. 5(a) shows the steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra of pristine P3HT layers spin-coated onto ITO glass substrates, which were covered by MoO3 (10 nm)/Al (100 nm) or MoO3 (6 nm)/Ag NPs/MoO3 (4 nm)/Al (100 nm) with the identical thicknesses used in device fabrication. It is shown that the P3HT film capped with the MoO3/Ag NPs/MoO3 sandwich structure exhibits a lower PL intensity than that with the pristine MoO3 layer, which is inconsistent with the observation of enhanced light absorption in Fig. 4(b). However, the discrepancy between the absorption and steady-state PL measurements provides evidence of the light backscattering effect induced by Ag NPs in the MoO3 layer. In the steady-state PL measurement, the presence of Ag NPs causes the reflective high-angle scattering, which randomly redistributes the PL emission of P3HT reflected at the back contact and thereby leads to the decrease in the intensity of recorded PL signal as compared to the sample capped with a flat MoO3/Al reflector.
A time-resolved PL measurement was performed to further address the influence of Ag NP-induced LSPs on the radiative decay of photo-generated excitons in P3HT. The excitation wavelength of 486 nm was selected, which matches with the resonance frequency of LSPs induced by Ag NPs as shown in Fig. 4(a). The PL decay of the corresponding samples at 650 nm is presented in Fig. 5(b). According to the PL decay profiles of P3HT films in Fig. 5(b), it is obvious that the presence of Ag NPs embedded in MoO3 facilitates the exciton recombination and causes the decrease in exciton lifetime in the photoactive layer. As shown in Fig. 4(a), the absorption regime of Ag NPs embedded in the MoO3 layer is located between 460 nm and 520 nm, which matches the absorption peak of the P3HT:PCBM blends very well. Accordingly, it is indicative of the possible optical coupling between the plasmonic field and excitonic state of P3HT. The result shown here is consistent with the data reported previously that the plasmonic field can strongly affect the photo-induced charge separation or recombination processes, when the resonance frequency of metallic NP-induced LSPs matches the absorption band of P3HT (see Fig. 4). Consequently, physical functions in terms of light backscattering and plasmonic coupling by the excitation of LSPs can be achieved simultaneously with Ag NPs embedded into the MoO3 layer on the rear side of inverted PSCs, which have a significant influence on the increase of light absorption in the P3HT:PCBM active layer as well as the PCE enhancement.
To gain more insight into device performance with Ag NP-induced light backscattering and LSPs, two series of inverted PSCs with MoO3/Ag NPs/MoO3 sandwich structure as hole collection layer were fabricated, to investigate the effects of the position of deposited Ag NPs and the thickness of thermally deposited Ag NPs. It should be emphasized that all the devices in each series were fabricated in the same batch processing and tested under the same conditions. In Fig. 6(a and b), the photovoltaic response for inverted PSCs with a MoO3/Ag NPs/MoO3 sandwich structure under 100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5G irradiation is plotted, where the distance of 0.25 nm thick Ag NPs relative to the P3HT:PCBM/MoO3 interface ranges from 0 nm to 9 nm. Compared to the direct deposition of Ag NPs between P3HT:PCBM and MoO3 layer, all photovoltaic parameters are improved when Ag NPs are embedded in the MoO3 layer. It is obvious that the insertion of Ag NPs into MoO3 layer will keep the good contact between P3HT:PCBM and MoO3 for low ohmic losses. Additionally, it is evidenced in Fig. 6(a and b) that the device performance is insensitive to the position of Ag NPs in MoO3 layer, and all photovoltaic parameters achieve high values. This might imply that the local field enhancement from the excitation of LSPs by Ag NPs is not the dominant factor for the enhancement of light absorption, since the near-field effect exponentially decreases with increasing distance of Ag NPs to the active layer.

Fig. 6(c and d) shows the photovoltaic response for inverted PSCs with a MoO3 (6 nm)/Ag NPs/MoO3 (4 nm) structure, where the nominal thickness of thermally deposited Ag NPs varies from 0 nm to 2 nm. The results clearly show that the device with nominally 0.25 nm thick Ag NPs deposited into MoO3 yields the best performance, with a significant increase in the photovoltaic parameters of VOC and JSC, and thus the maximum PCE of 4.32%. However, it is also noted that further increase in the nominal thickness of deposited Ag NPs over 0.25 nm will result in steadily declining values of VOC and JSC, although the FF slightly increases from 65% to 67%. The resulting PCE is reduced to 3.44% accordingly. The results indicate that the efficiency of light harvesting in the photoactive layer is greatly improved with incorporation of only thin deposited Ag NPs.
To elucidate the mechanism governing the thickness dependence of device performance, the topography of Ag NPs deposited on the MoO3 layer was examined by SEM measurements, where the nominal deposition thickness of Ag NPs varied from 0.25 nm to 2 nm. As shown in the SEM images of Fig. 7, the increase in the deposition thickness of Ag NPs leads to an increase in particle size and a reduction in the density of Ag NPs formed on the MoO3 layer. For example, the average diameters of Ag NPs with a thickness of 0.25 nm, 0.5 nm, 1 nm, and 2 nm are 18 ± 3, 22 ± 3, 42 ± 3 nm, and 54 ± 4 nm, respectively. This observation is also supported by the atomic force microscope images (not shown here). It has been reported that the size of metallic NPs is the key factor determining their scattering and coupling efficiencies, in which smaller NPs couple a larger fraction of the incident light into the active layer because of enhanced near-field coupling. In addition, a ∼10% coverage of metallic NPs on the active layer would suffice to capture most of the incident light into plasmon excitations, since the scattering cross-sections for metallic NP scattering can be as high as ten times the geometrical area. The optical properties of the MoO3/Ag NPs/MoO3 sandwich structures with various deposition thicknesses of Ag NPs were also measured. Fig. 8(a) shows the reflectance spectra of the sandwich structures capped with a 100 nm thick Al layer. For comparison, the reflection spectrum of a 10 nm thick MoO3 layer on Al substrate is also plotted. It is noted that the reflection is reduced with the increase in the deposition thickness of Ag NPs. Meanwhile, the absorption spectra of the MoO3/Ag NPs/MoO3 structures shown in Fig. 8(b) reveals they exhibit a higher absorption intensity and a gradual redshift as the thickness of Ag NPs increases. These results indicate the reduction of light absorption in the P3HT:PCBM photoactive layer, and thus the decrease in JSC as shown in Fig. 6(c and d). As discussed above, the corresponding VOC of inverted PSCs will slightly decrease with respect to the variation of JSC. As a result, it can be deduced that the reduction in device performance with respect to the increase in deposition thickness of Ag NPs is associated with the reduced light backscattering efficiency and the plasmonic coupling by the excitation of LSPs due to the formation of fewer and larger Ag NPs. Consequently, the dependence of the resulting device performance on the thickness of Ag NPs correlates well with the trend of the density of Ag NPs.

In summary, we have demonstrated a method for the performance enhancement of inverted polymer solar cells by the surface plasmonic backscattering effect. Beneficial physical functions in terms of light backscattering and excitation of LSPs at the rear anode of inverted PSCs are achieved simultaneously by thermally deposited Ag NPs embedded in the MoO3 hole extraction layer. By optimizing the MoO3/Ag NPs/MoO3 sandwich structure, the inverted PSC gains increases in short-circuit current to 10.73 mA cm−2, and PCE to 4.32%, which corresponds to 20% PCE enhancement over that of the reference device without Ag NPs. The performance improvement of PSCs is ascribed to the enhanced light absorption in the photoactive layer as a result of light backscattering and LSP-induced near-field enhancement triggered by Ag NPs with a negligible effect on charge transport in the device. The method proposed here demonstrates the feasibility of integrating plasmonic scattering and coupling effects in PSCs via the introduction of nanostructures in the back contact, which is readily adaptable for large-area PSC production in an inexpensive and scalable way.


This work was financially supported by NSFC (no. 91027041, 61007020, 61107022, 61036009), 973 program (no. 2010CB934500, 2011CB808404), Jiangsu Science and Technology Department (no. BK2011280, BY2009007), and a Project Funded by the Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions (PAPD).


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012