 DOI: 10.1039/C8TC01870G
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 6250-6256


Kisu
Lee
,

Haejun
Yu
,

Jong Woo
Lee
,

Jungkyun
Oh
,

Sohyeon
Bae
,

Seong Keun
Kim
 and 

Jyongsik
Jang
*

School of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Seoul National University, 1 Gwanak-ro, Gwanak-gu, Seoul 08826, Republic of Korea. E-mail: jsjang@plaza.snu.ac.kr; Fax: +82 2 888 1604; Tel: +82 2 880 7069

Department of Biophysics and Chemical Biology and Department of Chemistry, Seoul National University, 1 Gwanak-ro, Gwanak-gu, Seoul 08826, Republic of Korea

Received
19th April 2018
, Accepted 15th May 2018
First published on 4th June 2018
Inverted-structure perovskite solar cells (PSCs), with low-temperature processed poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene-sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) and perovskite-passivating phenyl–C61–butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) employed as charge transport layers, have great potential as efficient, flexible, and hysteresis-free solar cells. However, PEDOT:PSS processed from an aqueous solution has a hygroscopic nature, and can degrade the ambient stability of moisture-vulnerable perovskite electronics. Furthermore, excess insulating PSS in the PEDOT:PSS complex can deteriorate the hole extraction and photovoltaic performance of the solar cell. In this work, polyaniline doped with camphorsulfonic acid (PANI-CSA) is introduced as a hole transport layer (HTL) to promote hole extraction ability and improve the efficiency and stability of inverted PSCs. The device fabricated with PANI-CSA exhibited superior photovoltaic performance, with a maximum efficiency of 15.42%, compared to 14.11% efficiency for the device fabricated with PEDOT:PSS. Most notably, the stability of the device fabricated with PANI-CSA was greatly improved due to a stable HTL/perovskite interface against exposure to ambient moisture.

Organic–inorganic hybrid metal halide perovskite is emerging as a promising photovoltaic material, due to its superior optical and electronic properties. This material has the potential to realize highly efficient single-junction, solution-processed photovoltaic devices. With developments in processing, compositional, and interfacial engineering methods, perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have achieved a power conversion efficiency (PCE) over 20%, rivaling that of crystalline silicon solar cells.

Among the different device structures, the inverted structure is attracting increasing attention due to low-temperature processing, achieved by use of a conducting polymer hole transport layer (HTL), and low hysteresis due to the passivation effect of fullerene derivatives. The most common HTL is poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene-sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS), but inverted PSCs using this type of HTL suffer from serious stability issues, owing to the hygroscopic nature of PEDOT:PSS. Additionally, excess PSS creates an insulating PSS-rich layer on the top surface of the PEDOT:PSS film, which causes inhomogeneity of the out-of-plane conductivity, and impedes hole extraction from the perovskite layer. Hence, there is a need for a novel hole transport material (HTM) with highly conductive, homogeneous, and stable properties.
Polyaniline (PANI) is a representative p-type conducting polymer that has been widely used for organic electronics due to its high conductivity, ease of synthesis, low cost, and environmental stability. For these reasons, researchers have tried to apply PANI to PSCs as a HTL. For instance, Li et al. used electropolymerized PANI for sandwich structure PSCs and Shin et al. used PANI nanoparticles in normal-structure PSCs. More recently, Lee et al. reported solution-processable PANI:PSS for inverted PSCs, and our group subsequently modified PANI:PSS using surfactant to enhance hole extraction ability. However, the resulting devices have shown unsatisfactory PCEs, and moreover the stability of PANI-based PSC has not been studied yet.
Here, we used PANI doped with camphorsulfonic acid (PANI-CSA) as the HTL to fabricate efficient and stable inverted PSCs. PANI-CSA can produce a highly conductive and uniform film due to expansion of chain conformation by interaction with m-cresol, which is an effective secondary dopant as well as a good solvent. The solution-processed PANI-CSA film exhibited excellent hole extraction ability. As a result, our PANI-CSA-fabricated PSCs achieved a maximum PCE of 15.42% (compared to 14.11% for PEDOT:PSS-fabricated PSCs), with negligible J−V hysteresis. This PCE is the highest achieved for PSCs based on PANI. More importantly, the PSC ambient stability was greatly improved by replacing hygroscopic PEDOT:PSS with PANI-CSA. The efficiency of the PEDOT:PSS-fabricated device stored at ambient conditions (temperature = 25 °C, relative humidity = 40 ± 5%) gradually decreased, and after 10 days the device no longer worked. On the other hand, the device fabricated with PANI-CSA maintained 75% of its initial performance after 1 month, under the same ambient conditions. We also fabricated a flexible PSC device with PANI-CSA, which exhibited good performance with a PCE of 11.42%.


Fig. 1a shows the molecular structure of the conducting polymers used in this work. In PEDOT:PSS, conjugated PEDOT is doped with counter-ion PSS to delocalize charge carriers. PSS also acts as a dispersing agent to form a stable aqueous polymer dispersion. With protonic acid doping, PANI transitions from insulating emeraldine base (EB) form to conductive emeraldine salt (ES) form. CSA is the preferred substance to protonate PANI because PANI-CSA has good conductivity, two or three orders of magnitude higher than that of PANI doped with hydrochloric acid. PANI-CSA powder is dispersed in m-cresol/chloroform co-solvent. m-cresol acts both as a secondary dopant, to increase conductivity by expanding the polymer chain conformation, and as a viscous solvent to enable a uniform film formation. With this method, we obtained a highly stable and homogenous PANI-CSA dispersion, used as the HTL, with characteristic green color as shown in Fig. 1b. In Fig. S1 (ESI), glass/fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) substrates coated with PEDOT:PSS and PANI-CSA both demonstrated transmittance over 80% in the 400 to 800 nm spectral range, which corresponds to the absorption range of the perovskite layer. As shown by the spectra, most of the optical loss occurs when the light passes through the glass and FTO layers. The conducting polymer HTLs have an extremely high transparency, which minimizes optical losses.

We investigated the optical and structural properties of perovskite film deposited on the PEDOT:PSS and PANI-CSA HTLs. Cesium-containing mixed-composition perovskite (Cs0.05MA0.16FA0.79Pb(I0.84Br0.16)3) was used to obtain a highly crystalline perovskite film with excellent photostability and moisture stability, processed using a one-step solvent engineering method. In Fig. S2 (ESI), the absorption spectra of perovskite films on PEDOT:PSS and PANI-CSA indicate a band gap value of 1.55 eV, and no differences are observed between the two samples. The top-view FE-SEM images in Fig. 1c and Fig. S3 (ESI) confirm that the perovskite films on both PEDOT:PSS and PANI-CSA were densely packed with 200–400 nm crystallites without any pinholes.
Contrary to absorption spectra and surface morphology, X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements show a small but meaningful difference between the two perovskite films (Fig. 1d). Both patterns exhibit dominant peaks corresponding to photo-active ‘‘black’’ perovskite, indicating the high crystallinity of the films. We used a non-stoichiometric precursor solution containing excess PbI2, which acts as a grain boundary passivation layer and induces larger crystal grains. Both patterns show a weak peak at 12.8°, corresponding to the (011) plane of PbI2, as expected. However, for the PEDOT:PSS-based perovskite film, the peak at 12.8° is more intense compared to that of the PANI-CSA-based perovskite film, as shown in Fig. 1e. This result possibly indicates that redundant PbI2 is produced by decomposition at the PEDOT:PSS/perovskite interface. Although XRD measurements were conducted using fresh perovskite films, the hygroscopic PEDOT:PSS film absorbed some ambient moisture during the fabrication process, which caused slight perovskite decomposition. Based on absorption spectra, surface morphology, and crystallinity, the quality of both perovskite films seems to be about the same, and therefore the slightly excess PbI2 by the inherent decomposition would have insignificant impact on the initial device performance. But in terms of stability, it might crucially affect device stability with respect to moisture, by accelerating perovskite degradation. This effect will be discussed later in the result of stability test.
After investigation of the optical properties, morphology, and crystallinity of the perovskite layer, we fabricated photovoltaic devices and evaluated their performance and optoelectronic properties. The architecture of our inverted PSCs is illustrated in Fig. 2a, where PEDOT:PSS or PANI-CSA is employed as the HTL, and phenyl–C61–butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) is employed as the electron transport layer. The devices were fabricated on FTO, which has higher conductivity and better thermal stability than indium–tin oxide (ITO). The energy level alignments of the component layers are presented in Fig. 2b. The work functions of FTO, PEDOT:PSS, and PANI-CSA are calculated from the ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) measurement, as shown in Fig. S4 (ESI).

Fig. 2c and d display the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristic of PSCs with PEDOT:PSS and PANI-CSA HTLs. The average value and distribution of various photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table 1 and Fig. S5 (ESI), respectively. The PANI-CSA HTL was optimized by varying the concentration of dispersion and the protonation level, depending on the CSA dopant ratio. The related data and explanation are provided in the ESI (Fig. S6 and S7). The device fabricated with PEDOT:PSS had a PCE of 13.76%, an open circuit voltage (VOC) of 0.93 V, a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 21.03 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 0.70 for reverse scan conditions. The efficiency was ∼0.75% lower for forward scan due to the hysteresis effect (Fig. 2c). The device fabricated with PANI-CSA achieved a PCE of 15.19% with enhanced JSC (21.74 mA cm−2) and FF (0.75). Notably, the efficiency discrepancy between the reverse and forward scan is only 0.27%. The maximum PCE was 15.42% and the corresponding J–V curve is presented in Fig. S8 (ESI). The improvements in photovoltaic parameters and hysteresis behavior suggest that PANI-CSA has an excellent hole extraction ability, which is discussed further in later sections.
HTL

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF

η
avg (%)

η
max (%)
PEDOT:PSS
0.93
21.34
0.66
13.03 (±0.81)
14.11
PANI-CSA
0.94
21.47
0.72
14.64 (±0.52)
15.42
We further investigated the reliability of the devices by measuring steady-state photo-current density at the maximum power point. In Fig. S9 (ESI), both devices stabilize within a few seconds and remain stable during 300 s of light exposure, and their stabilized current density and efficiency are consistent with the J–V characteristics. However, the photo-current densities measured under the light on/off cycle show different transient behavior (Fig. 2e). The current density of the device fabricated with PANI-CSA reaches a steady-state maximum faster than the device fabricated with PEDOT:PSS. When the light is off, the current density of the device fabricated with PANI-CSA rapidly drops back to 0 mA cm−2, while the reference device shows some relaxation of the photo-current. In addition, the response of the device fabricated with PANI-CSA is the same for both the first and second illumination cycles, whereas the response of the device fabricated with PEDOT:PSS declines with the second illumination cycle. The instantaneous and stable response of the device fabricated with PANI-CSA can be ascribed to reduced charge accumulation, promoted by the superior hole extraction ability of PANI-CSA and reduced defects at the HTL/perovskite interface.
Because hygroscopic PEDOT:PSS is generally used underneath the moisture-vulnerable perovskite layer, poor air stability of inverted PSCs can be a critical issue. We tested the air stability of the un-encapsulated devices for a month under ambient conditions (temperature = 25 °C, relative humidity = 40 ± 5%). As shown in Fig. 3a, after 10 days of air exposure, the PCE of the reference device fabricated with PEDOT:PSS was only ∼35% of the original value, and efficiency was so severely degraded that the device ceased to work. This degradation tendency is similar to results reported by other PEDOT:PSS-based PSC studies. On the other hand, the device fabricated with PANI-CSA demonstrated superior stability and maintained 75% of the initial PCE after the month-long test. The J–V characteristics and related photovoltaic parameters of the devices before and after the stability test are displayed in Fig. S10 and Table S3 (ESI), respectively. The significantly enhanced stability of the PANI-CSA device can be attributed to the stable interface of PANI-CSA and perovskite, compared to the interface of hygroscopic PEDOT:PSS and perovskite, as observed by XRD. As shown in Fig. 3b, cross-sectional FE-SEM images of the PSCs after the stability test verify our hypothesis. After a month of ambient exposure, we found decomposed domains in the perovskite layer of the PEDOT:PSS-based PSC, marked with yellow arrows in Fig. 3b. This result indicates that the photovoltaic performance degradation of the FTO/PEDOT:PSS/perovskite/PCBM/Au structure primarily originated from the instable PEDOT:PSS/perovskite interface. Conversely, the PANI-CSA device retains a seamless perovskite layer after a month of ambient exposure. PANI-CSA prevented perovskite decomposition by ambient moisture, and greatly improved device stability.
To identify the origin of the outstanding hole extraction ability of PANI-CSA, we obtained the direct current (DC) conductivity and charge mobility of HTLs from I–V characteristics measured for the FTO/PEDOT:PSS or PANI-CSA/Au configuration. In the ohmic region of the I–V curve (Fig. 4a), the DC conductivities (σ0) of each HTL were calculated using the equation I = σ0Ad−1V, where A is the active area and d is the thickness of the HTL. The active area was 0.09 cm2 and the film thicknesses of PEDOT:PSS and PANI-CSA were verified to be 41 and 39 nm, respectively, using the atomic force microscopy (AFM) profile system (Fig. S11, ESI). The calculated conductivity of PEDOT:PSS was 3.50 × 10−3 mS cm−1, whereas PANI-CSA had a higher conductivity of 4.33 × 10−3 mS cm−1. In Fig. 4b, the curves in the space-charge-limited current (SCLC) region, which is beyond the ohmic region, are fitted via the Mott-Gurney law (J = (9/8)με0ε(V2/d3), where μ, ε0, ε, and d are the charge mobility, free space permittivity, relative dielectric constant, and film thickness, respectively) to determine the charge mobility. The PANI-CSA charge mobility was calculated to be 1.29 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1, which is higher than that of PEDOT:PSS (6.86 × 10−6 cm2 V−1 s−1). As a result, it is conjectured that PANI-CSA can extract photo-generated holes more efficiently and achieve charge-carrier balance. To validate this hypothesis, charge-carrier dynamics at the HTL/perovskite interface were investigated through time-resolved photoluminescence (TrPL) measurement (Fig. 4c). Measurements were taken for the glass/perovskite, glass/PEDOT:PSS/perovskite, and glass/PANI-CSA/perovskite samples. TrPL spectra were well-fitted with a bi-exponential decay function. The obtained parameters are summarized in Table S4 (ESI). It is clear that the photoluminescence (PL) lifetime for the glass/PANI-CSA/perovskite sample (τavg = 8.9 ns) decreased compared to the glass/PEDOT:PSS/perovskite sample (τavg = 16.0 ns), indicating more effective charge extraction by PANI-CSA, as expected based on high conductivity and charge mobility. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) analysis was carried out to further characterize the charge transfer in the full devices (Fig. 4d). The spectra were fitted by the equivalent circuit model presented in the figure, and the fitted parameters are summarized in Table S5 (ESI). The RCT, corresponding to the semicircle in the high-frequency region, represents the charge transfer resistance of the devices and is generally related to FF. The only difference between the devices is the HTL. Therefore, the lower RCT value of the device with PANI-CSA represents reduced energy loss during the charge transport process through FTO/PANI-CSA/perovskite relative to FTO/PEDOT:PSS/perovskite. This result is consistent with the remarkable improvement of the FF in the J–V characteristic.
Contrary to sol–gel processed metal oxide, which requires high temperature sintering (over 300 °C), conducting polymers are processed at low temperature. As all annealing treatments in our PSC fabrication procedures are conducted at temperatures under 120 °C, it is possible to employ a polymer/ITO substrate in place of a glass/FTO substrate. We fabricated a flexible device with a polyethylene terephthalate (PET)/ITO/PANI-CSA/perovskite/PCBM/Au structure, which yielded a PCE of 11.84%, a VOC of 0.88 V, a JSC of 21.33 mA cm−2, and an FF of 0.63 (Fig. 5). Despite efficiency loss from the inevitable fractures in the perovskite and charge transport layers, the flexible PSC exhibited good performance, with a PCE over 10%, demonstrating the versatility of PANI-CSA HTLs.

In summary, we have demonstrated the utilization of PANI-CSA as an HTL for inverted PSCs. This novel hole transport material exhibited higher conductivity and charge mobility compared to PEDOT:PSS, and these factors led to superb hole extraction ability. The PSCs fabricated with PANI-CSA achieved a maximum PCE of 15.42% (14.11% for PEDOT:PSS) with negligible J−V hysteresis. More importantly, the stability of the device under ambient moisture conditions was significantly improved by replacing hygroscopic PEDOT:PSS with PANI-CSA. In addition, low-temperature processed PANI-CSA enables fabrication of PSCs on flexible polymer substrates, realizing a high-performance flexible PSC with a PCE of 11.84%. Hence, our results demonstrate that PANI-CSA has great potential as a hole transport material for efficient and stable perovskite electronics.


Unless otherwise stated, all materials were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and used without further purification. Formamidinium iodide (FAI, CH(NH2)2I), Methylammonium bromide (MABr, CH3NH3Br), PCBM (phenyl–C61–butyric acid methyl ester, >99%), and PEDOT:PSS dispersion were purchased from Lumtec. PbI2 (99.9985%) was obtained from Alfa Aesar. Hydrochloric acid (HCl, 35–37%), chloroform (CHCl3, 98%), and ammonia solution (NH4OH) were purchased from Samchun Chemical (Korea).


PANI powder was synthesized using a self-stabilized dispersion polymerization (SSDP) method to reduce undesirable side reactions; with this method, chemical oxidative polymerization occurs at the aqueous medium/organic solvent interface at low temperatures. 2 g of aniline monomer was added to 40 mL of 1.2 M HCl aqueous solution. Then, 60 mL of chloroform was poured into the aqueous anilinium ion solution to induce interfacial polymerization of aniline monomers. Oxidizing agent was prepared by dissolving 2.4 g of ammonium persulfate in 15 mL of 2 M HCl aqueous solution. The resulting oxidizing agent was added into the reaction medium to initiate polymerization. The polymerization of aniline proceeded with vigorous stirring for 16 h at −40 °C. After washing with water, ethanol, and acetone, precipitates of greenish PANI ES powder were obtained. The PANI ES power was dispersed in 200 mL of 0.6 M NH4OH aqueous solution and stirred for 12 h to fully reduce. The products were washed with water, ethanol, and acetone to produce brownish PANI EB powder. Secondary doping of the PANI EB powder was conducted by grinding with CSA (the mole ratio of CSA to aniline = 1:2) using a mortar. CSA-doped PANI powders were dispersed in m-cresol/chloroform (7:3, v/v) co-solvent to a concentration of 3 mg mL−1. The PANI-CSA dispersion was vigorously stirred and sonochemically treated for 24 h to obtain homogenous dispersion. The PANI-CSA remained well-dispersed in m-cresol/chloroform for months without agitation. Before use, the dispersion was diluted to 0.5 mg mL−1 by adding chloroform.


The PSCs were fabricated on patterned, FTO-coated glass with a sheet resistance of 15 Ω sq−1. FTO substrates were cleaned sequentially in deionized water, acetone, and 2-propanol for 30 min using an ultra-sonication bath. HTLs were deposited by spin-coating PEDOT:PSS and PANI-CSA dispersions at 5000 rpm and annealing at 120 °C for 20 min. The mixed perovskite (Cs0.05MA0.16FA0.79Pb(I0.84Br0.16)3) precursor solution was prepared by dissolving FAI (1M), PbI2 (1.1 M), PbBr2 (0.2 M), MABr (0.2 M), and CsI (0.06 M) in dimethylformamide:dimethyl sulfoxide (DMF:DMSO; 4:1, v-v) co-solvent, with stirring at 60 °C. The perovskite precursor solution was dropped onto the pre-heated substrate at 40 °C, and spin-coated at 1000 rpm for 10 s and 5000 rpm for 23 s. After ∼15 s of second spin-coating step, 0.3 mL of chlorobenzene was dripped onto the center of the substrate to induce fast crystallization of the perovskite film. After the whole spin-coating process, the substrate was annealed at 100 °C for 20 min. PCBM solution (20 mg mL−1 in chlorobenzene) with Triton X-100 (3 wt% of PCBM) was prepared as described in our previous report and deposited via spin-coating at 2500 rpm for 40 s. Finally, a 65 nm-thick Au top electrode was deposited by thermal evaporation for better ambient stability. All solar cell fabrication procedures were carried out in ambient air (temperature = 23 °C, relative humidity <30%).

For the flexible PSCs, PET/ITO substrates were mounted on glass during the fabrication; the fabrication procedures were the same as those described above for the rigid devices.

The FE-SEM images were obtained from JSM-7800F Prime microscopes (JEOL, Japan), installed at the National Center for Inter-university Research Facilities (NCIRF), Seoul National University. The transmittance of the conducting polymer films and ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) absorption spectra of the perovskite films were measured with a Lambda 35 double beam UV-vis spectrophotometer (Perkin-Elmer, USA). The UPS spectra were measured by Axis Supra (Kratos, UK) with a minimum step size of 1 meV and sensitivity of 1000000 cps at 120 meV resolution. XRD of the perovskite films was measured using SmartLab (Rigaku, Japan). The J–V characteristics of the PSCs were measured using an I–V tracer (MP-160; Eko Instruments, Japan) under standard AM 1.5 G (100 mW cm−2) illumination from a 500 W xenon lamp, calibrated with a KG5-filtered Si reference cell (K801; McScience Inc., Korea). Steady-state photocurrent output and electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) of the PSCs, and J–V plots of the hole-only devices were measured by the Zive Lab equipment (WonATech, Korea). The Mott-Gurney law equation (J = (9/8)με0ε(V2/d3)) was used to determine the charge mobility, where μ, ε0, ε, and d are the charge mobility, free space permittivity, relative dielectric constant, and film thickness, respectively. The relative dielectric constant for both PEDOT:PSS and PANI-CSA is assumed to be 3, which is a typical value for conjugated polymers. The TrPL were measured under exposure to a 520 nm pulse laser (PicoQuant, Germany).


There are no conflicts to declare.


This research was supported by Global Frontier R&D Program on Center for Multiscale Energy System funded by the National Research Foundation under the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology, Korea (NRF-2012M3A6A7054855, NRF-2012M3A6A7054861). The authors thank Prof. Mansoo Choi and Taemin Lee of the MELab affiliated in Seoul National University for their help in thermal evaporation deposition.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Transmittance of the HTLs, UV-vis absorption spectra of perovskite films, top-view FE-SEM images of perovskite films, UPS spectra of the HTLs, distribution of photovoltaic parameters, photovoltaic performance of PSCs depending on concentration of PANI–CSA and protonation level of PANI, photovoltaic performance of the best-performing PSC, steady-state photocurrent density of PSCs under continuous illumination, photovoltaic performance of PSCs before and after the stability test, line profiles of PEDOT:PSS and PANI–CSA films, photograph of perovskite films stored in ambient air, TrPL decay parameters, EIS parameters of PSCs. See DOI: 10.1039/c8tc01870g
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018