 DOI: 10.1039/D0CP04973E
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2020, 22, 28414-28422


Yunzhi
Gao
,

Kai
Wu
,

Wei
Hu
* and 

Jinlong
Yang
*

Department of Chemical Physics, Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at the Microscale, and Synergetic Innovation Center of Quantum Information and Quantum Physics, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui 230026, China. E-mail: whuustc@ustc.edu.cn; jlyang@ustc.edu.cn

Received
19th September 2020
, Accepted 24th November 2020
First published on 24th November 2020
Tellurene, a two-dimensional (2D) semiconductor, meets the requirements for optoelectronic applications with desirable properties, such as a suitable band gap, high carrier mobility, strong visible light absorption and high air stability. Here, we demonstrate that the band engineering of zigzag tellurene nanoribbons (ZTNRs) via edge-modification can be used to construct highly efficient heterojunction solar cells by using first-principles density functional theory (DFT) calculations. We find that edge-modification enhances the stability of ZTNRs and halogen-modified ZTNRs showing suitable band gaps (1.35–1.53 eV) for sunlight absorption. Furthermore, the band gaps of ZTNRs with tetragonal edges do not strongly depend on the edge-modification and ribbon width, which is conducive to experimental realization. The heterojunctions constructed by halogen-modified ZTNRs show desirable type 2 band alignments and small band offsets with reduced band gaps and enhanced sunlight absorption, resulting in high power conversion efficiency (PCE) in heterojunction solar cells. In particular, the calculated maximum PCE of designed heterojunction solar cells based on halogen-modified ZTNRs can reach as high as 22.6%.

With the increasing energy crisis and environmental pollution problems, it is a general trend to replace fossil fuels with renewable energies. Solar cells, a prospective renewable energy strategy converting solar energy into electricity directly, have drawn much attention. In order to design highly efficient solar cells, a promising mechanism has been proposed by constructing a heterojunction consisting of two types of semiconductors serving as the donor and acceptor. In principle, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of single junction solar cells has a maximum value of 33% according to the Shockley–Queisser limit, which has not been achieved in theoretical and experimental research studies yet, thus it is still significant to improve the PCE of solar cells. Generally, to obtain solar cells with a high PCE, the component materials are required to have suitable band gaps as well as high carrier mobility and high air stability. Two-dimensional (2D) materials can be exploited for optoelectronic applications such as solar cells and optoelectrodes due to their large light absorption areas and multiple electronic properties. Since the mechanical exfoliation of graphene in 2004, the studies on 2D materials have quickly expanded. For instance, many theoretical and experimental studies have been carried out for analogous elemental 2D monolayers composed of group 3 (borophene), 4 (silicene, germanene, and stanene), and 5 (phosphorene and antimonene) elements.

Recently, tellurene, a group 6 elemental 2D material with several dynamically stable structures, such as β-Te (a tetragonal structure), α-Te (a 1T-MoS2-like structure) and γ-Te (a 2H-MoS2-like structure), has been proposed by first-principles calculations. β-Tellurene films have been synthesized in experiments via either molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) or the substrate-free solution method. High carrier mobility (105 cm2 V−1 s−1), strong sunlight absorption (106 cm−1) and high stability under ambient conditions have been observed for β-tellurene, making it promising for high-performance optoelectronic devices. Multivalent nature and coordinate covalent bonds indicate the flexibility of bonding between Te atoms. Furthermore, theoretical calculations have reported the delocalization of the lone-pair electrons in Te, which causes the nearly isotropic electrical transport of chemically anisotropic Te. One-dimensional (1D) nanoribbons (NRs) terminated along different orientations (armchair or zigzag edge direction) usually display distinct electronic properties different from their 2D counterparts. A simulation of the tetragonal edge (TE) – zigzag tellurene nanoribbon (ZTNR) MOSFET model indicated that tellurene NRs exhibit excellent transport performance, which makes tellurene NRs competitive candidates for nanodevices.
The acceptor and donor semiconductors forming heterojunctions applied to solar cells are usually different, which generates band alignment at the interface. Among the various band alignments, the type 2 alignment (Fig. 1(b)) bounds electrons and holes localized in individual monolayers, which is beneficial to charge separation. Compared to matching lattices of two semiconductors both meeting the solar cell requirements, the realization of a heterojunction by NRs from their 2D counterpart is more convenient in experiments. For instance, heterojunctions composed of graphene nanowiggles (GNWs) with edges substituted by B or N atoms were predicted to provide ultra-thin solar cells with a PCE up to 22.0%, which indicates that edge-modified NR heterobilayers are promising for highly efficient solar cells. Usually, the band gaps of NRs are dependent on the ribbon width, which makes it easy to find NRs with desirable band gaps for optoelectronic applications. Even for semi-metallic graphene without a band gap, transformation into NRs endows these GNRs with a large range of band gaps. Moreover, edge-modification of NRs with different functional groups is also a valid method of band engineering, which can realize more precise adjustments on the band edge positions (VBM and CBM) due to the diversity of the functional groups used for edge-modification. Different electronegativities of the modifying elements and constituent elements will introduce polar covalent bonds with electric dipole moments. A functional group with a strong electron withdrawing ability can lead to a large electric dipole moment and band edge position shift. For example, pseudohalogen (CN and OCN) passivated phosphorene nanoribbon (PNR) heterobilayers could achieve overall water splitting with desired positions of the VBM and CBM while X (X = H, F, Cl, and OH) passivated PNRs could not, due to the weak electron withdrawing ability of X functional groups. Simultaneously, the CN/OCN-PNR heterobilayers achieve a high PCE of 20.0% because of the suitable band gaps and small conduction band offset, which benefits from the combined effect of the ribbon width and edge modification. However, the dependence of band gaps of graphene nanoribbons on the ribbon width and type of modifying functional group increases the difficulty of experimental preparation. Although the band gaps of phosphorene nanoribbons are little impacted by the type of the modifying functional group, 2D phosphorene dissociates easily under ambient conditions, which limits its optoelectronic applications in experiments.
In the present work, we propose to use edge-modified tellurene nanoribbons (TNRs) directly as highly efficient solar cells. The electronic structures of halogen (F, Cl and Br) modified TNRs are investigated by using first-principles calculations. We find that halogens modified TNR heterobilayers show desirable type 2 band alignments with enhanced charge separation and visible light absorption. In addition, the band gaps of ZTNRs with tetragonal edges (TE) are little affected by the type of modifying functional group and ribbon width, which is instrumental for the experimental realization. The calculated maximum PCE of our designed F/Br-HE (hexagonal edge) – ZTNR and Cl/Br-TE (tetragonal edge) – ZTNR heterojunction solar cells can reach as high as 21.8% and 22.6%, respectively.

When a 2D material is cut into NRs, edge modification can stabilize the NRs through eliminating dangling bonds at the edges. Various functional groups can be used to modify the edges of NRs, such as hydrogen (H), halogen (F, Cl and Br), hydroxyl (OH) and pseudohalogen (CN). Among them, the hydrogen atoms are commonly used to stabilize low dimensional materials by saturating dangling bonds in experiments and theoretical calculations, since its weak electron-donating and electron-withdrawing abilities can reduce the modifying group effect on the electronic properties of original materials. Halogen (F, Cl and Br) atoms have the potential to induce unique properties so they are widely used to modify edges in theoretical calculations. Usually, halogen atoms with relatively high electronegativity will attract electrons from the NRs and bond edge atoms of NRs by covalent bonds in the form of X−–N+ (X and N represent the modifying atoms with electron-withdrawing ability and the constituent atoms of NRs). These covalent bonds create dipoles at the edges of NRs as shown in Fig. 1(a). Electrons around the modifying atoms and holes tend to occupy the location of original edge atoms of NRs. The edge dipoles introducing constant electric potential ϕ() can be calculated by the following formula:

(1)
where
r is the distance to the edge, q is the charge of X− or N+, and l is the distance between the negative (X−) and positive (N+) charge line. The product of these two physical quantities ql is equal to the value of electric dipole moment . Such an electric potential around the edges shifts all single particle energy levels, including the CBM and VBM. Different atoms introduce different dipole moments and different energy level shifts, so that NRs with distinct edges can serve as both the donor and acceptor of a heterojunction with type 2 band alignment as displayed in Fig. 1(b). It is worth noting that the models in this work are hardly affected by the properties of the original materials, so in addition to tellurene, these models are also applicable to other 2D materials. Edge modification by different functional groups can efficiently adjust the energy levels of NRs with the combined modulation of the ribbon width, which makes edge modified NRs from the same 2D counterpart construct heterobilayers with desirable band alignments. Accordingly, it helps in broadening the selection range of materials to construct heterojunction solar cells, making it possible to build heterojunction solar cells with higher PCE.


Our first-principles calculations are implemented in the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP). The generalized gradient approximation of Perdew–Burke–Ernzernhof (GGA-PBE) exchange–correlation functional is adopted to optimize the lattice structures and calculate the electronic structures of edge-modified β-tellurene nanoribbons and heterobilayers. Heyd–Scuseria–Ernzerhof hybrid functional (HSE06) and spin–orbit coupling (SOC) are used to obtain more reliable band structures. The Brillouin zone is sampled with a grid of 8 × 1 × 1 with the Monkhorst–Pack special k-point scheme. All geometry structures are fully relaxed until energies and forces converged to 10−5 eV and 0.01 eV Å−1, respectively. The plane wave cutoff energy for the wave function is set to 500 eV. The effect of van der Waals (vdW) interactions is accounted using the correlation functional proposed by Grimme (vdW-D2). A vacuum slab of 20.0 Å and 30.0 Å along the vertical and in-plane aperiodic directions is used to avoid spurious interactions between two adjacent periodic images.


Ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) simulations are performed to study the dynamic stability of edge-modified TNRs. The simulation time is 10.0 ps and the time step is 1.0 fs; a Nosé–Hoover thermostat is adopted to control the temperature near 300 K.
We use the density functional perturbation theory performed in VASP to compute the optical properties of edge-modified TNRs. The optical properties are characterized by absorption coefficients α(ω), which originates from the dielectric response function as
(2)
where
ω is the frequency of the incident light. ε1 and ε2 denote the real and imaginary parts of the dielectric function. The imaginary part is determined by a summation over empty states as

(3)
where the indices c and v refer to conduction and valence band states, respectively.
Ω is the volume of the unit cell, and ωk is the k-point weight. εck and uck are the conduction band eigenvalues and the cell periodic part of the orbitals at the k-point k. eα and eβ are the unit vectors for the three Cartesian directions. The real part can be evaluated by the usual Kramers–Kronig transformation as

(4)
where
P denotes the principle value and the complex shift η is determined by the parameter CSHIFT in VASP. We adopt a large number of band states (twice number of bands with respect to the VASP default) and 2000 grid points in density of states to accurately calculate the optical properties.

According to the efficiency estimation method proposed by Scharber et al., which is widely applied for estimating the efficiency, the maximum PCE of a ZTNR heterojunction solar cell with type 2 band alignment is described as
(5)
where 0.65 is the fill factor (
βFF), and P(ħω) is the AM1.5 solar energy flux (stated in W m−2 eV−1) at the photon energy ħω. Ed is the band gap of the donor semiconductor. ΔEc is the conduction band offset between the donor and acceptor. The (Ed − ΔEc − 0.3) term is an estimation of the open circuit voltage (Voc, eV), and the integral term in the numerator is the short circuit current density (Jsc) under the assumption that external quantum efficiency is 100%. The energy integral from 0 to infinity in the denominator is the power of incident solar radiation (Psolar = 1000 W m−2). The PCE is crucial to evaluate the performance of a solar cell, so it is our primary objective to construct heterojunction solar cells with a high PCE.


We first check the geometric structure of monolayer β-tellurene, and the calculated lattice constants are a = 4.17 Å and b = 5.47 Å, in good agreement with previous experimental measurements and theoretical calculations. As shown in Fig. 2, there are four edges in monolayer β-tellurene, corresponding to two different terminations, hexagonal edge (HE) and tetragonal edge (TE), along two different orientations, armchair (A) and zigzag (Z) directions. HE-ATNRs can dissociate easily into chains and TE-ATNRs also have a tendency to dissociate according to our structural relaxation results, while TE-ZTNRs possess excellent transport properties. Thus we chose only ZTNRs, including TE-ZTNRs and HE-ZTNRs, to modify edges. We perform geometric optimizations for TE-ZTNRs and HE-ZTNRs with width N varying from 4 to 11. Functional groups of elements that have electronegativity larger than the tellurium element, including F, Cl and Br, are used to modify edges of ZTNRs, and the X−–Te+ (X = F, Cl and Br) polar covalent bonds are generated accordingly.

To energetically examine the structural stability of the ZTNRs, we calculated the formation energy Ef of the edge-modified ZTNRs, which is defined as
Ef = EX-ZTNR − EZTNR − NX × EX
(6)
where
EX-ZTNR and EZTNR are the total energies of the edge-modified X-ZTNRs and bare ZTNRs, EX is the energy of the X atoms modifying the ZTNRs, which is calculated from its most stable elemental form, and NX is the number of X atoms in X-ZTNRs. As shown in Fig. S1 (ESI), all formation energies of X-ZTNRs are negative, demonstrating the better stability of edge modified ZTNRs. Additionally, the formation energies are almost unchanged as the width increases, illustrating that they are likely to be independent of the ribbon width. The formation energies illustrate the thermodynamic stability of the edge-modified ZTNRs. The average energy differences between unmodified HE-ZTNRs and TE-ZTNRs per atom are also listed in Table S1 (ESI), and the positive values illustrate that unmodified TE-ZTNRs are more stable than HE-ZTNRs. AIMD simulation on halogen-modified ZTNRs with a width of 11 is performed to further prove the dynamic stability of the edge-modified ZTNRs. After 10.0 ps of calculation at room temperature of 300 K, the structures of X-ZTNRs (X = F, Cl and Br) are basically preserved without obvious dissociation and deformation as shown in Fig. S2 (ESI), demonstrating its high dynamic stability. The combination of formation energy calculations and AIMD simulations proves the stability of ZTNRs from a more holistic perspective.


We calculate the electronic structures of bare ZTNRs and edge-modified ZTNRs with width varying from 4 to 11 by PBE functionals. All HE-ZTNRs and TE-ZTNRs are metallic due to the existence of the edge states. The band structures of HE-ZTNR-10 and TE-ZTNR-10 are shown in Fig. S3(a) and (b) (ESI) as examples, respectively. Edge-modification makes both HE-ZTNRs and TE-ZTNRs semiconductors; the band structures of Br-HE-ZTNR and Br-Te-ZTNR are displayed in Fig. S3(c) and (d) (ESI), respectively. Owing to different electronegativities of tellurium and halogen (F, Cl and Br), electrons transfer from tellurium atoms to halogen atoms. Thus the band of edge state across the Fermi level shifts up, causing halogen-modified ZTNRs become semiconductors and the CBMs of halogen-modified ZTNRs shift down.

Because the GGA-PBE functional usually underestimates the band gaps in the electronic structure calculations, we further perform the HSE06 calculations on the band structures of halogen-modified ZTNRs for more accurate electronic structures. At the same time, the SOC is adopted. Because HSE06 calculations with SOC are much more expensive than PBE functionals, we adopt them merely on halogen-modified ZTNRs with the width ranging from 6 to 11. Fig. 3(a) and (b) display the band gaps of edge-modified ZTNRs as a function of width. From the overall trend, the band gaps decrease as the width increases and eventually get stabilized, which is similar to other zigzag nanoribbons such as boron nitride nanoribbons and phosphorene nanoribbons. On the other hand, energy levels of VBM and CBM of halogen-modified ZTNRs increase slightly as the width increases as shown in Fig. 3(c) and (d). All F/Cl-HE-ZTNR, F/Br-HE-ZTNR, Cl/Br-HE-ZTNR, F/Cl-TE-ZTNR, F/Br-TE-ZTNR and Cl/Br-TE-ZTNR heterojunctions show desirable type 2 band alignment. In addition, the CBMs of F-ZTNR, Cl-ZTNR and Br-ZTNR are close to each other, demonstrating that they are likely to be promising candidates as components of highly efficient heterojunction solar cells. It can be seen that the conduction band offsets between Cl-HE/TE-ZTNR and Br-HE/TE-ZTNR are smallest, making Cl/Br-HE(TE)-ZTNR heterobilayers more suitable for solar cells than F/Cl-HE(TE)-ZTNR heterobilayers and F/Br-HE(TE)-ZTNR heterobilayers. Moreover, F/Cl/Br-ZTNRs have suitable band gaps for light adsorption, which make them meet another requirement of constructing heterojunction solar cells.
For example, we display band structures of Br-HE-ZTNR-10 and Br-TE-ZTNR-10 in Fig. 4(a) and (c), respectively. The corresponding band structures calculated by the PBE functional shown in Fig. S3(c) and (d) (ESI) can be used for comparison. The band structures calculated by different functional groups are similar, and the positions of their VBM and CBM are both located in the gamma point regardless of the adopted functional and edge shape. And besides, they are not affected by the ribbon width and the type of atom modifying the edges. According to the results using HSE06, the direct band gaps of Br-HE-ZTNR-10 and Br-TE-ZTNR-10 are 1.35 and 1.44 eV, which are larger than the ones using PBE (1.05 and 1.11 eV), illustrating that the Br-ZTNRs have suitable band gaps for light adsorption. The projected band structures of Te and Br atoms are also shown in Fig. 4(a) and (c), the red circles representing the Te atoms are obviously larger than the blue circles which denote the Br atoms for both Br-HE-ZTNR-10 and Br-TE-ZTNR-10, indicating that the band structures, especially the VBM, are mainly contributed by tellurium atoms. For Br-TE-ZTNR-10, the CBM is also almost totally contributed by tellurium atoms, but in the case of Br-HE-ZTNR-10, the contribution of bromine atoms to the CBM is relatively larger, which can also be validated by the projected DOS of Te and Br atoms in Fig. 4(b) and (d). It can be inferred that the band gaps of X-TE-ZTNRs are rarely affected by the type of modifying atom X, while those of X-HE-ZTNRs are influenced by different atoms X. In particular, the band gaps of Cl-TE-ZTNRs and Br-TE-ZTNRs are almost the same; moreover, the band gaps of F-TE-ZTNRs are close to those of Cl/Br-TE-ZTNRs with a difference of about 0.03 eV, demonstrating that edge-modification by different functional groups has little impact on band gaps, which facilitates experimental preparation.
Dipoles shown in Fig. 1(a) can introduce negative electric potentials in the ZTNR area due to the electron withdrawing ability of halogen atoms, leading to downward shifts of energy levels. The shift reduces as the ribbon width increases, causing the VBM and CBM to move up as shown in Fig. 3(c) and (d). We also check the charge transfer by Bader analyses of halogen-modified ZTNRs with a ribbon width of 11, and calculate the dipole moment and electric potential induced by the dipole using the formula  = ql and eqn (1). The distance r is half of the ribbon width ranging from 31.9 Å to 33.1 Å for the six edge-modified ZTNRs. The results are listed in Table 1. It is clear that fluorine atoms induce the most electron transfer from tellurium atoms for both HE-ZTNRs and TE-ZTNRs (0.66 and 0.58 e) because of the largest electronegativity, corresponding to the largest dipole moments (1.41 and 1.80 × 10−29 C m) as well. For TE-ZTNRs, the largest electric potential is introduced by fluorine atoms (−0.036 V), which is in accordance with the energy levels of VBMs in Fig. 3(d). However, for HE-ZTNRs, the Cl–Te covalent bonds introduce the largest electric potential (−0.027 V) due to the combined effects of the relatively large dipole moment (1.39 × 10−29 C m) and longer distance of dipoles, which are related to the atomic radius of chlorine. We notice that the electric potential results of F-TE-ZTNR-11 and Br-TE-ZTNR-11 are inconsistent with the energy levels of the VBM in Fig. 3(c). Maybe it is because the largest atomic radius of bromine enhances the attraction interactions between the bromine and the nearest non-bonded tellurium atoms, which are neglected in the calculations of dipole moments and ultimately lead to the underestimation of dipole moments and electric potentials.
X-ZTNR

Q


ϕ()
F-HE-ZTNR-11
0.66
1.41
−0.025
Cl-HE-ZTNR-11
0.48
1.39
−0.027
Br-HE-ZTNR-11
0.38
1.22
−0.024
F-TE-ZTNR-11
0.58
1.80
−0.036
Cl-TE-ZTNR-11
0.39
1.47
−0.030
Br-TE-ZTNR-11
0.28
1.13
−0.027

Based on the electronic properties of ZTNRs, we propose to construct efficient solar cells by halogen-modified ZTNR heterobilayers. All six heterobilayers show type 2 donor–acceptor interface band alignments for ZTNRs with the same width and edge type, including F/Cl-HE-ZTNRs, F/Br-HE-ZTNRs, Cl/Br-HE-ZTNRs, F/Cl-TE-ZTNRs, F/Br-TE-ZTNRs, and Cl/Br-TE-ZTNRs. The calculated binding energy Eb and equilibrium interlayer distance D of ZTNRs heterobilayers with width 11 are listed in Table S2 (ESI), demonstrating that the acceptor and donor semiconductors are combined by weak vdW interactions. The binding energy Eb of X/Y-ZTNRs heterobilayers (X, Y = F, Cl and Br) is defined as

Eb = (EX/Y-ZTNRs − EX-ZTNR − EY-ZTNR)/NX/Y-ZTNRs
(7)
where
EX/Y-ZTNRs and NX/Y-ZTNRs are the total energy of the X/Y-ZTNR heterobilayer and the number of atoms in it. EX-ZTNR and EY-ZTNR are the total energies of the compositions X-ZTNR and Y-ZTNR, respectively. The equilibrium interlayer distance D is defined as the vertical distance between the lowest Te sub-layer of upper ZTNR and the topmost Te sub-layer of lower ZTNR. Although the interactions between components of vdW heterojunctions are weak, they bring out new properties while maintaining the instinct nature of composition materials. We notice that the binding energies of these heterobilayers are larger than that of general vdW heterojunctions and the distances are shorter than that of ordinary vdW heterojunctions. For comparison, the binding energy and interlayer distance of bilayer tellurene are close to those of heterobilayers, as listed in Table S2 (ESI), which further certifies that the heterobilayers are combined by vdW interactions like 2D tellurene.

Then we study the optoelectronic properties of the Cl/Br-TE-ZTNRs-10 heterobilayer, Cl-TE-ZTNR-10 and Br-TE-ZTNR-10. The band structures of Cl-TE-ZTNR-10, Br-TE-ZTNR-10 and Cl/Br-TE-ZTNRs-10 heterobilayers are shown in Fig. 5(a), (b) and (c), respectively. Usually, the band structure of a vdW heterojunction is roughly the combination of the original bands of each component because the vdW interactions combining two materials are too weak to obviously modify the electronic properties of each part. The band structures of Cl-TE-ZTNR-10 and Br-TE-ZTNR-10 are similar, so that the band structure of the Cl/Br-TE-ZTNRs-10 heterobilayer maintains the similarity. As shown in Fig. 5(c), the VBM and CBM of the heterobilayer are located in Γ point consistent with the ZTNRs. The shapes of the band structures are also similar. It is common that layer-dependent band gaps are observed in 2D layered materials. The band gap generally decreases as the number of layers increases. Like the effect of the interlayer coupling of layered materials, constructing the heterobilayer reduces the band gaps, which is 1.03 eV for the Cl/Br-TE-ZTNRs-10 heterobilayer, while the band gaps of Cl-TE-ZTNR-10 and Br-TE-ZTNR-10 are both 1.44 eV. The reduced band gap is beneficial to expand the range of light absorption, which can be verified by the absorption spectrum. Fig. 6 displays the calculated absorption spectra of Cl-TE-ZTNR-10, Br-TE-ZTNR-10 and Cl/Br-TE-ZTNRs-10 heterobilayers. The heterobilayer shows a larger range and enhanced intensity of optical absorption compared to the components. In particular, the absorption coefficient significantly increases in the visible light region (wavelength range from 380 to 780 nm).

In view of practical applications, PCE is a vital basis to evaluate the quality of a heterojunction solar cell. Eqn (5) demonstrates that the interface band alignment between the donor and acceptor semiconductors is critical to the maximum PCE. For instance, for the heterobilayer composed of Cl-TE-ZTNR-11 and Br-TE-ZTNR-11, the donor Br-TE-ZTNR-11 has a desirable band gap of 1.44 eV for the absorption of the solar spectrum, and the conduction band offset ΔEc between Cl-TE-ZTNR-11 and Br-TE-ZTNR-11 is 0.016 eV, which make the Cl/Br-TE-ZTNRs-11 heterobilayer have a maximum PCE of 22.6%. We compute the PCE of halogen-modified ZTNR heterojunction solar cells with a width of 11 as shown in Fig. 7. As per our prediction, the PCEs of F/Cl-HE-ZTNRs-11, F/Br-HE-ZTNRs-11, and Cl/Br-HE-ZTNRs-11 heterobilayers are expected to be up to 19.1%, 21.1% and 21.8%, respectively. Besides, the PCEs of F/Cl-TE-ZTNRs-11 and F/Br-TE-ZTNRs-11 heterobilayers are expected to be up to 20.5% and 20.3%, respectively. The other PCEs of halogen-modified ZTNR heterojunction solar cells with widths of 9 and 10 are listed in Table S3 (ESI).

In Table 2, the PCEs of the Cl/Br-TE-ZTNRs-11 heterobilayer (22.6%) and other existing heterojunction solar cells based on 1D nanoribbons and 2D materials are compared, including α-AsP/GaN XSCs (22.1%), Te/WTe2 heterobilayers (22.5%), ZrS3/MoSeTe heterobilayers (16.0%), B/N-GNW heterobilayers (22.0%), CN/OCN-PNR heterobilayers (20.0%) and AMoS2NR-SW/HfS2 heterobilayers (17.0%), which demonstrate that our proposed Cl/Br-TE-ZTNRs-11 heterobilayer has a competitive edge over existing 2D heterojunction solar cells.
Heterojunction solar cells
PCE (%)
Ref.
Year

α-AsP/GaN XSCs
22.1

52

2016
Te/WTe2 heterobilayer
22.5

8

2019
ZrS3/MoSeTe heterobilayer
16.0

61

2020
B/N-GNW heterobilayer
22.0

34

2015
CN/OCN-PNR heterobilayer
20.0

38

2017
AMoS2NR-SW/HfS2 heterobilayer
17.0

62

2019
Cl/Br-TE-ZTNRs heterobilayer
22.6
This work
2020

The synthesis of tellurene nanoribbons is experimentally feasible even if there is a lack of experimental reports on preparation of its nanoribbons, which is because tellurene is a nascent material. Up to now, there have been many reports that 2D tellurene films have been synthesized, as well as Te nanoribbons and nanowires. In addition, the small amount of C, N and O elements demonstrates the possibility of functional group modification. On the other hand, the preparation and edge-modification processes of graphene, black phosphorene and silicon nanoribbon are efficient. Thus, we believe that the production and edge modification of tellurene nanoribbons can be achieved experimentally.


In summary, we perform first-principles DFT calculations to study the structural and electronic properties of halogen-modified (F, Cl and Br) ZTNRs with hexagonal edge (HE) and tetragonal edge (TE), and the ribbon width varies from 4 to 11. Edge-modification efficiently stabilizes ZTNRs from a thermodynamic point of view. AIMD calculations illustrate the dynamic stability of edge-modified ZTNRs. In general, band gaps of edge-modified ZTNRs decrease as the ribbon width increases. For the halogen-modified ZTNRs, the energy levels of the CBM and VBM shift up as the width increases. Edge-modified ZTNRs show similar band structures. According to the calculations using the HSE06 functional, the halogen-modified ZTNRs with width varying from 6 to 11 have suitable band gaps (1.34 to 1.53 eV) for light absorption. Type 2 band alignments and small conduction band offsets are observed at the same time, making the ZTNRs potential candidates for constructing highly efficient heterojunction solar cells. The vdW heterobilayers composed of halogen-modified ZTNRs with the same width display reduced band gaps and enhanced optical absorption compared to the components. ZTNR heterobilayers with type 2 band alignments exhibit a high PCE. In particular, Cl/Br-TE-ZTNRs-11 heterobilayers have a maximum PCE of 22.6% with a small conduction band offset of 0.016 eV and an appropriate band gap of donor semiconductor of 1.44 eV. In addition, the band gaps of X-TE-ZTNRs are little affected by the type of the modifying functional group, making the possibility of experimental fabrication increase. On the other hand, the stability of unmodified TE-ZTNRs is higher than that of HE-ZTNRs, further leading to the superiority of TE-ZTNRs over HE-ZTNRs from an experimental perspective. Therefore, it is expected that edge-modified ZTNRs can be applied for highly efficient heterojunction solar cells.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work is partly supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21688102, 21803066), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (KJ2340000031), by the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2016YFA0200604), the Anhui Initiative in Quantum Information Technologies (AHY090400), the Strategic Priority Research Program of Chinese Academy of Sciences (XDC01040100), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (WK2340000091), the Research Start-Up Grants (KY2340000094) and the Academic Leading Talents Training Program (KY2340000103) from the University of Science and Technology of China. The authors thank the Supercomputing Center of Chinese Academy of Sciences, the Supercomputing Center of USTC, the National Supercomputing Center in Wuxi, and Tianjin, Shanghai, and Guangzhou Supercomputing Centers for the computational resources.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0cp04973e
This journal is © the Owner Societies 2020