 DOI: 10.1039/C2JM35646E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 25057-25064

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Fang Jeng
Lim
,

Krishnamoorthy
Ananthanarayanan
,

Joachim
Luther
 and 

Ghim Wei
Ho
*

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National University of Singapore, Blk EA #06-10, 9 Engineering Drive 1, 117575 Singapore. E-mail: elehgw@nus.edu.sg; Fax: +65 6775 4710; Tel: +65 6516 8121

Solar Energy Research Institute of Singapore (SERIS), National University of Singapore, 7 Engineering Drive 1, 117574 Singapore

Department of Material Science and Engineering, National University of Singapore, Blk E4 #01-01, 9 Engineering Drive 1, 119260 Singapore

Received
20th August 2012
, Accepted 1st October 2012
First published on 1st October 2012
Under ambient conditions the long term stability of non-encapsulated organic solar cells with conventional device architecture is lower than the technical lifetime of devices with an inverted configuration. The removal of the interface between the ITO (indium tin oxide) layer and the acidic PEDOT:PSS layer along with the substitution of a low work function metal electrode with a high work function metal electrode in the inverted device configuration renders relatively higher stability in these devices. However, one of the main inherent difficulties involving the fabrication of devices with such inverted architecture is the wettability of the hydrophilic PEDOT:PSS onto the photoactive layer such as the P3HT:PCBM blend which is hydrophobic in nature. To overcome this, we have used a novel fluorosurfactant, Capstone® Dupont™ FS-31 (CFS-31), as a substitute to the conventional Zonyl FS-300 as an additive to PEDOT:PSS. A smooth and uniform PEDOT:PSS layer was coated onto the P3HT:PCBM blend layer by addition of CFS-31 alone without any further treatments. Using this surfactant, an efficiency of 3.1% and a stable device performance (up to 400 hours) under ambient conditions without encapsulation have been achieved.

Though impressive progress with improving the power conversion efficiency of organic solar cells (OSCs) has been made, their practical use is still hampered due to their inherent poor stability. The degradation of organic semiconductors in the presence of oxygen and moisture still remains a key issue that needs to be addressed by the research community. Device instability of non-encapsulated conventional OSCs under ambient conditions is often ascribed to the etching of the indium-doped tin oxide (ITO) substrate by the acidic poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)–poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) and the presence of an easily oxidized low work function metal electrode like aluminium. Inverted device architecture is frequently adopted to overcome the above stated disadvantages. In this type of architecture, PEDOT:PSS is shifted to the top of the photoactive layer instead of being in contact with the ITO (see Fig. 1(a) and (b) for device architecture comparison) and in addition to this a more air-stable high work function metal such as silver or gold is used as the metal electrode. Due to these advantages, a device with inverted architecture is expected to show better stability under ambient conditions compared to its non-inverted conventional counterpart.

OSCs with inverted architecture require selective electron transporting layers (ETLs) and hole transporting layers (HTLs) for effective charge transport. N-type metal oxides such as TiOx, ZnO and Cs2CO3 were generally used as an ETL. This layer is also necessary to break the symmetry of the charge carrier pathways. Consequently, ITO becomes the electron collecting electrode and the metal becomes the hole collecting electrode. Materials such as MoOx and PEDOT:PSS were normally used as a HTL. Many research groups have indeed shown that the inverted OSCs have longer device stability than conventional devices. Yang et al. have recently reported an inverted bulk heterojunction (BHJ) device based on the PBDTTT-C-T/PC71BM blend with gold nanoparticles and nanograting design with an efficiency of 8.79% (device stability was not reported and the device efficiency was not certified independently). Hau et al. demonstrated an inverted flexible OPV device using ZnO as an interfacial layer which could retain 80% of the initial device performance after 40 days of exposure in air. McGehee et al. reported a PCDTBT polymer based OSC with inverted architecture that shows a shelf life of 7 years under encapsulation under ambient conditions.
Though encouraging device performance (with respect to both stability and efficiency) is seen in inverted OPV devices, coating of PEDOT:PSS onto the photoactive layer remains to be one of the main technical challenges involved in the fabrication of these devices. The hydrophobic nature of the underlying photoactive layer (such as P3HT:PCBM) produces high surface tension upon contact with hydrophilic PEDOT:PSS, causing a serious wettability issue. Without the aid of additives, PEDOT:PSS can hardly be coated onto the photoactive layer. Removal of PEDOT:PSS as a hole transport layer (HTL) is not an option to resolve this issue as this will render the photoactive layer susceptible to oxygen and moisture, causing detrimental effects on the device performance. Furthermore, the absence of a selective hole transport layer (HTL) would result in poor device performance. Therefore, the use of additives is necessary to circumvent this wettability issue. Isopropyl alcohol (IPA) is the most commonly used additive for PEDOT:PSS to reduce the surface energy. Other alternatives such as Triton X-100 and Zonyl FS-300 were also used previously. The use of fluorosurfactants such as Zonyl FS-300 is more beneficial than hydrocarbon based surfactants (Triton X-100) in reducing the surface tension between the PEDOT:PSS and the polymeric layer. This is attributed to the lipophobic nature of the C–F tail which tends to concentrate at a liquid–air interface, in contrast with the lipophilic C–H tail that concentrates in condensed phase interfaces. In the fabrication of inverted OPV devices, Zonyl FS-300 is often used together with IPA because Zonyl FS-300 or IPA alone is insufficient for PEDOT:PSS to lie within the wetting envelope of P3HT:PCBM. Undesirable and detrimental surface treatment of the photoactive layer with UV-ozone prior to PEDOT:PSS coating is often required to increase its surface energy.
In this work, we propose the use of a new type of non-ionic fluorosurfactant: Capstone® Dupont™ FS-31 (herein referred to as CFS-31) as a substitute to Zonyl FS-300 in the fabrication of an inverted OPV device. To the best of our knowledge, usage of CFS-31 in enhancing the wettability and film quality of PEDOT:PSS on top of the photoactive layer in inverted OPV devices has not been reported to date. CFS-31 is capable of providing remarkably low surface tension (∼15 mN m−1) compared to Zonyl FS-300 (∼23 mN m−1) in aqueous or solvent-based products (ideal for PEDOT:PSS) that could enable better wetting. We have conducted our studies with the bulk heterojunction P3HT:PCBM model system in inverted device architecture with solution-processed TiOx as an electron transport layer (ETL) along with a PEDOT:PSS HTL with CFS-31 additive. The following positive aspects of CFS-31 are highlighted in this work: (1) improvement of the device performance of solution-processed TiOx inverted OPV devices; (2) enabling of appropriate PEDOT:PSS coating onto P3HT:PCBM without requiring additional additives and surface treatments; (3) provision of the invariant optimal thickness of a TiOx ETL; and (4) realization of a stable device performance for at least 400 hours when exposed to ambient atmosphere without encapsulation.

Titanium isopropoxide (TTIP, 97%, Sigma Aldrich), acetylacetone (AA, Sigma Aldrich) and isopropanol (IPA, reagent grade, Aik Moh Paints & Chemical Pte Ltd.) were used to prepare the TiOx electron transport layer. Regioregular (>98%) poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT, product code M101, average Mw 65500, Ossila), phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PC61BM – 99.5% purity, product code Nano-CPCBM-BF, Nano-C) and poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS – Heraeus Clevios P VP Al 4083, product code M121, Ossila) were used as donor, acceptor and hole transport layer, respectively. ortho-Dichlorobenzene (ODCB, Sigma Aldrich) was used as the solvent for the donor and acceptor. Capstone® FS-31 (Dupont) was added into PEDOT:PSS prior to spin coating. Silver (Ag) was purchased from K. J. Kurt Lesker & Co. All the above mentioned materials were used as received.


The TiOx precursor solution was prepared by adding an appropriate amount of acetylacetone dropwise into TTIP under continuous stirring. Isopropanol was then added into the mixture as a solvent. The volume ratio of TTIP:AA:IPA was set to 1:0.5:5. The sol was then stirred for at least 2 hours prior to spin coating onto the substrate. The as-prepared sol exhibited an orange-yellow color, indicating the d–d absorption originated from the titanium complex ion formed by the reaction between titanium isopropoxide and the stabilizer acetylacetone. PEDOT:PSS/fluorosurfactant solution was prepared by blending the PEDOT:PSS solution with Capstone® FS-31 (CFS-31) with a 0 to 15% volume ratio with respect to PEDOT:PSS. The P3HT:PCBM blend was made in the ratio 1:0.8 (the concentration of P3HT was 15 mg ml−1, whereas the PCBM concentration was found to give best results at 12 mg ml−1) in 1 ml of ODCB. The mixed solution was stirred and heated at 60 °C overnight in a N2 filled glove box prior to spin coating.


Inverted bulk heterojunction organic solar cells based on P3HT:PCBM were prepared on pre-patterned indium tin oxide (ITO, Xinyan Technology Ltd.) coated glass substrates. The sheet resistance of the ITO (thickness: 90 ± 10 nm) was found to be around 15–20 Ω □−1. The substrates were pre-cleaned using a detergent solution, followed by successive sonication in de-ionized water, isopropanol and acetone for 15 minutes each. The substrates were then dried in an oven at 60 °C for two hours. Firstly, the prepared TiOx sol was spin cast onto the substrate, followed by hydrolysis in air under a controlled condition of RH 45 ± 2%, 22 °C. The hydrolyzed films were then annealed at 180 °C (at a ramp rate of 1 °C min−1). The annealed films were then transferred into the N2 filled glove box without further treatment and spin coated with the P3HT:PCBM blend at 800 rpm for 30 seconds and the resultant wet film was then annealed on a hot plate at 140 °C for 1 minute. The thickness of the photoactive layer was found to be around 200 nm. 70 nm of PEDOT:PSS blended with various concentrations of CFS-31 (denoted as PEDOT:CFS-31 in future occurrences) was then coated onto the active layer in air through a 0.45 μm cellulose filter and annealed at 140 °C for 1 minute in the N2 filled glove box. To complete the device, an Ag metal electrode (thickness: 100 nm) was then thermally evaporated through a shadow mask, resulting in an active device with an area of 9 mm2. Each ITO-coated glass substrate contained 6 such devices. The vacuum during the evaporation was around 2 × 10−6 mbar. The finished device is of the architecture glass/ITO/TiOx/P3HT:PCBM/PEDOT:CFS-31/Ag. Fig. 1(b) and (c) show the inverted OPV device architecture and the energy level diagram under flat band conditions. The energy levels for P3HT:PCBM, Ag and other layers were obtained from ref. 29–31, respectively. Cell degradation studies were carried out by storing the device under ambient atmosphere, following the ISOS-D shelf scheme.


The current density–voltage (j–V) measurements were carried out under 1 sun illumination (ABET technologies Sun 2000 solar simulator) whose intensity was calibrated using a calibrated silicon reference cell (Fraunhofer ISE). Steady-state j–V characteristics were recorded with a Keithley 2400 sourcemeter. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) of the solar cells was measured using a system developed by Bentham Instruments Ltd. The required illumination light was obtained using a light source (Xenon/halogen) which is coupled to a monochromator (TMc300 monochromator). To detect and measure small signals accurately, a lock-in amplifier along with a built-in chopper controller was used. A calibrated Si diode with known spectral response was used as a reference. Optical microscopy images of PEDOT:CFS-31 were taken using an optical microscope (Olympus BX 51M). Atomic force microscopy (AFM) images were taken using a Dimension 3100 atomic force microscope (Digital Instruments). The thicknesses of all the layers were measured using a Veeco DEKTAK 150 Stylus Profilometer. All the fabrication steps, except coating of TiOx and PEDOT:PSS, were performed inside a glove box of N2 atmosphere (Charslton Technologies, ≤1 ppm moisture and O2).



Table 1 and Fig. 2 show the device performance of inverted BHJ solar cells with PEDOT:PSS HTL and TiOx ETL as a function of varying concentration of CFS-31. The data were collected and averaged (for at least 10 reproducible cells). As can be seen from Fig. 2, a concentration region of 4–8% CFS-31 in PEDOT:PSS is required for high device performance. The amount of CFS-31 required to achieve an optimal device performance can be controlled with relative ease. When the surfactant concentration is low (0–4%), high surface tension between the hydrophilic PEDOT:PSS and the hydrophobic P3HT:PCBM results in non-wetting and non-uniform films. The large amount of surface defects that are present between the two layers inherently cause high leakage current and high series resistance, resulting in a low fill factor and consequently poor device efficiency. In this regime (0–4%), the device is characterized by no or poor coverage of the HTL on P3HT:PCBM. The absence of hole selectivity between the P3HT:PCBM–Ag interface increases the interfacial recombination losses significantly. As the surfactant concentration increases towards 4%, a more uniform layer of PEDOT:PSS starts to form which results in a well defined hole extraction layer. This well defined layer results in an increase in the open circuit voltage (Voc), short circuit current density (jsc) and fill factor (FF).

PEDOT:CFS-31 volume ratio [%]

V
oc [±20 mV]

j
sc [±0.6 mA cm−2]
FF [±6%]
Efficiency [±0.3%]
0.0
318
5.2
32.5
0.5
0.5
308
4.8
27.8
0.4
1.0
503
5.2
35.9
0.9
1.5
623
7.2
44.1
2.0
2.0
600
7.8
49.5
2.3
3.0
600
7.4
54.9
2.4
3.5
607
7.8
54.9
2.6
4.0
594
8.0
63.6
3.0
4.5
605
8.2
62.6
3.1
5.0
613
8.0
63.0
3.1
5.5
607
7.8
65.4
3.1
6.0
612
7.6
65.0
3.0
8.0
599
7.8
65.4
3.1
10.0
603
7.2
61.3
2.7
15.0
593
6.2
59.2
2.2
In the optimal surfactant concentration region (4–8%), the champion device had an efficiency of 3.1% which is higher than that of the previously reported solution processed TiOx ETL inverted OPV devices (P3HT:PCBM as a photoactive layer) using various other additives. The enhanced device efficiency compared to devices with low surfactant concentration (less than 4%) is attributed to a less significant hindrance of the PEDOT conductive pathway imposed by the CFS-31 molecules. This will consequently form films with low defect density and high uniformity, giving a high fill factor of 66% that is close to the predicted maximum for P3HT:PCBM based devices. Relatively good charge carrier transfer and extraction with minimal bi-molecular and interfacial recombination is observed within this concentration regime, resulting in a high jsc. Furthermore, Voc is very close to the effective bandgap of P3HT and PCBM, suggesting a good ohmic contact throughout the device. In the case of a high surfactant concentration (>8%), jsc becomes the detrimental factor for the observed reduced device performance (Fig. 2). This observation is attributed to the hindrance in the hole conduction pathway of PEDOT by the surfactant molecules as confirmed by the microscopic image in Fig. 4. This phenomenon was also observed earlier when PEDOT:PSS is added with excess Zonyl FS-300 surfactant.
The variation in the observed fill factor in the range of surfactant concentrations used in this study follows from the corresponding j–V characteristics and resistances of representative samples under illumination as shown in Fig. 3(a) and (b). Since the resistivity in OPV devices is voltage and area dependent, the shunt resistance (Rsh) was extracted by averaging dV/dI around zero bias (V = 0) conditions whereas the series resistance (rs) was extracted around Voc of the respective device. A large gradient (dV/dI) at V = 0 (large Rsh) is desired as this indicates less defective interfaces. On the other hand, a low gradient (dV/dI) at V = Voc (low rs) is desired as this translates to good lateral connection within the same layers for better charge extraction. In the absence of a surfactant, almost no PEDOT:PSS was coated on P3HT:PCBM (see Fig. 4(a)). We observed a large leakage current (RshA = 0.15 kΩ cm2) and large series resistance (rsA = 42.8 Ω cm2) (the active area of the device is 0.09 cm2). A thick and non-uniform PEDOT:PSS layer was formed in the low surfactant concentration regime (0.5–1%). This has direct influence on the series resistance of the device. As evidenced in Fig. 3(b), we observe an increase in the series resistance of the device in this regime and also a large leakage current (low shunt resistance, RshA = 0.11 kΩ cm2). This is due to the high defect density present in the film. Furthermore, the inferior PEDOT:PSS film formation on P3HT:PCBM caused by poor adhesion is a problematic issue for lateral conduction (rsA = 54.5 Ω cm2). When the surfactant concentration increases beyond 1.0%, a sharp increase in the shunt resistance and a decrease in series resistance were observed. The PEDOT:PSS film slowly becomes more uniform and less defective as the surfactant concentration increases, giving rise to high shunt resistance which stabilizes at around 1–1.4 kΩ cm2. Correspondingly, the series resistance decreases from 69.8 Ω cm2 to 12.6 Ω cm2. The series resistance indeed increases slowly when the concentration of the surfactant increases beyond 5.5% and this leads to a slight decrease in the fill factor of the device. However, the cause for the reduced device performance is still attributed predominantly to the reduction in jsc. For the purpose of further device analysis, samples with 5.5% CFS-31 were chosen. The corresponding champion device performance is as follows: Voc = 607 mV, jsc = 7.8 mA cm−2, fill factor (FF) = 65% and efficiency = 3.1%.

Fig. 5 shows the external quantum efficiency (EQE) of devices with 0% and 5.5% surfactant concentrations. EQEs of around 25% and 53% were observed, respectively. A low device EQE can be attributed to combinatorial effects of relatively poor light absorption, charge separation and charge carrier extraction (effect of charge transport, contacts and recombination). Since there is no appreciable difference in the UV-vis absorption spectra and photoluminescence for these two devices formed under identical conditions (see Fig. S1 and S2 in the ESI), we can assume that both devices share the same charge generation and separation. Hence, poor charge carrier extraction in the 0% surfactant device is possibly a key reason for the lower EQE. Since poor device charge carrier extraction is often caused by various loss mechanisms such as bi-molecular recombination, charge trapping and trap-assisted recombination, a correspondingly lower jsc (and thus lower efficiency) is expected.


Fig. 4(a)–(h) show the optical microscopy images taken with 5× magnification of PEDOT:CFS-31 on the P3HT:PCBM film. The morphology observed shows strong correlation with the device performance. When no CFS-31 is added (Fig. 4(a)), the high surface tension prevents PEDOT:PSS from adhering onto P3HT:PCBM, giving a high contact angle and hence resulting in almost no PEDOT:PSS layer coated. As a result, only the P3HT:PCBM layer is observed. At low surfactant concentrations ranging from 0.5 to 1% (Fig. 4(b) and (c)), poor coverage of PEDOT:PSS onto P3HT:PCBM is observed. The observed morphology strongly correlates with the corresponding poor performance of the device as discussed previously (Fig. 2). Once a layer of the PEDOT:PSS film is able to fully cover the P3HT:PCBM layer (observed from 1.5% CFS-31 onwards, the representative image is shown in Fig. 4(d)), the device Voc increases to 600 mV and remains constant with further increase of the surfactant concentration. However, the PEDOT:PSS at this stage is still not yet well phase-separated. The phase separation of PEDOT and PSS chains is crucial for PEDOT to form a conductive channel which enhances the charge carrier transport.

In the optimal region (5.5% surfactant concentration, Fig. 4(e)), films with bright (yellow) networks and dark (orange) regions were observed. We attribute the bright networks and dark clusters to the PEDOT networks and PSS agglomerates, respectively. Based on AFM imaging studies, it is known that PEDOT tends to form three-dimensional networks and PSS tends to form agglomerates. Bao et al. have recently reported that the addition of a moderate amount of non-ionic fluorosurfactant such as Zonyl FS-300 promotes phase segregation of PEDOT and PSS. Thus, by correlating this image with the device performance, we can infer that CFS-31 also promotes PEDOT:PSS phase segregation which results in the formation of a well defined PEDOT conduction pathway and also helps in maintaining a good contact with the P3HT:PCBM photoactive layer. The low root-mean-square roughness (3.2 nm) shown in the corresponding atomic force microscopy (AFM) height image in Fig. 6 further reaffirms the existence of a good contact between PEDOT:PSS and P3HT:PCBM.
Further increase in the concentration (Fig. 4(f)–(h)) will further promote phase segregation while having conduction pathways blocked by the surfactant molecules. The blocking effect is especially evident in the sample with 15% surfactant concentration (Fig. 4(h)) by the formation of pink networks on the PEDOT:PSS film. As seen from the optical microscopy image, an increase of the surfactant concentration eventually results in a hindrance of the PEDOT:PSS network by the surfactant molecule. It is also reported earlier that excess Zonyl FS-300 will cause a detrimental effect on the film morphology. Therefore, we conclude that any further addition of CFS-31 will cause a detrimental effect on the device performance and indeed we are able to correlate this with the observation of a significant decrease in the short circuit current density of the device in Fig. 2(b).
In addition, we would like to emphasize that by using CFS-31 alone, the PEDOT:PSS lies within the wetting envelope of P3HT:PCBM (minimum wetting surface tension, γ ∼ 28 mN m−1) without requiring additives such as IPA. It is also worth mentioning here that there is no need for further surface treatment with UV ozone to reduce the surface energy of P3HT:PCBM. The oxygen surface treatment is known to have unfavorable effects on the device performance by forming oxygen induced traps.

The presence of a selective electron transport layer (ETL) in inverted OPV devices is as important as the selective hole transport layer. We have conducted a systematic study on the variation of the thickness of the TiOx ETL layer on the device performance using a device fabricated with a 5.5% CFS-31 concentration. The variation in the TiOx thickness was achieved by varying the spin coating speed of the precursor solution. Fig. 7 shows Voc, jsc, fill factor and efficiency with varying TiOx thicknesses. The device shows optimal performance in the thickness range (TiOx) of 130–140 nm. In the absence of TiOx, the absence of the hole blocking effect results in a high amount of interfacial recombination, giving rise to poor selective charge extraction to the ITO. This effect is strongly reflected in the low Voc and jsc observed in the device. At an optimal thickness of 130 nm, TiOx not only effectively performs the role of an ETL but also acts as a protective layer for the donor–acceptor blend from the attack of superoxides or hydrogen peroxide caused by UV light. The superoxides and hydrogen peroxides from air and moisture aggressively attack the adjoining P3HT:PCBM layer and lower the device stability. The TiOx layer prepared in this study is amorphous in nature as the annealing temperature used is only 180 °C. As a consequence, a large amount of sub-band trap states are formed. Above the optimal thickness, these impurities slightly absorb visible light and hence lower the overall amount of light absorbed by the photoactive P3HT:PCBM layer. TiOx at its optimal thickness is able to provide the optimal UV filtering effect without significantly decreasing visible light absorption of P3HT:PCBM. It yields the best result with a device efficiency of 3.1%. CFS-31 added PEDOT:PSS devices provide better device performance compared to IPA added (2.06%) and Zonyl FS-300 added (2.61%) devices at a TiOx thickness of ∼100 nm and ∼50 nm, respectively.


The addition of this novel surfactant into PEDOT:PSS shows no detrimental effects on the stability of the inverted device under ambient conditions (Fig. 8). We can observe that the device has superior stability over non-encapsulated non-inverted devices, which degraded to 50% of its initial value in less than 3 hours after exposure to air (Fig. 8, inset). The inverted devices were light-soaked for approximately 10 to 20 minutes before recording the parameters to fill the trap states of TiOx. A sample with an optimized concentration of CFS-31 (5.5%) is able to retain almost 76% of its initial device performance even after 400 hours when exposed to ambient air (without encapsulation). This reveals that Capstone® FS-31 has no detrimental effects on the photoactive layer, P3HT:PCBM. The observed degradation of the device efficiency is mainly caused by the continual decrease in jsc. This is attributed to the change in both chemical and physical morphologies of the active layer components of the device.

During the initial exposure in air, the device efficiency increases by up to 25% compared to freshly prepared cells. We have also observed an initial increase in the Voc and fill factor but a decrease of jsc with time. Lloyd et al. also observed a similar phenomenon without using PEDOT:PSS. The initial increase in the efficiency for the as-fabricated device stored under ambient conditions is attributed to the oxidation of silver to silver oxides. This results in a shift of the work function to −5.0 eV with respect to the vacuum level, which in turn increases the Voc. Detailed studies are required to further understand the mechanism. Nevertheless, we can conclude that addition of CFS-31 to PEDOT:PSS improves the wettability without having any detrimental effects on the photoactive layer.

A systematic study on the role of a new type of fluorosurfactant Capstone® Dupont™ FS-31 (CFS-31) as a substitute for conventional surfactants in inverted organic solar cells was carried out. Smooth and uniform films that lie within the wetting envelope of P3HT:PCBM can be achieved by CFS-31 alone without the need of additional additives and/or UV ozone treatment on P3HT:PCBM. Optimal device parameters such as TiOx thickness did not alter compared to samples prepared without using CFS-31. Addition of CFS-31 to PEDOT:PSS is not detrimental for hole transport from P3HT to the Ag contact. We have demonstrated that solution processed TiOx inverted OPV cells using CFS-31 added PEDOT:PSS exhibit a device efficiency of up to 3.1%. At least 65% of the initial performance was retained in the course of 400 hours for the optimized device without encapsulation. All these attributes of CFS-31 make it more advantageous than standard surfactants. Capstone® Dupont™ FS-31 seems to be beneficial for overcoming wettability issues encountered in the fabrication of solution-processed inverted organic photovoltaic devices.


SERIS is sponsored by the National University of Singapore (NUS) and Singapore's National Research Foundation (NRF) through the Singapore Economic Development Board (EDB). Fang Jeng Lim would also like to express his sincere gratitude to NRF (Energy Innovation Programme Office) for providing a PhD scholarship. We gratefully acknowledge Dupont™ through MegaChem Limited, Singapore for supplying Capstone® FS-31.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2jm35646e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012