 DOI: 10.1039/C2CP41501A
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 10547-10555

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Jaemin
Kong
,

Jongjin
Lee
*,

Geunjin
Kim
,

Hongkyu
Kang
,

Youna
Choi
 and 

Kwanghee
Lee
*

School of Materials Science & Engineering, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, Gwangju 500-712, South Korea. E-mail: klee@gist.ac.kr; Fax: +82 (62)715 3204; Tel: +82 (62) 715 2345

Research Institute for Solar and Sustainable Energies (RISE), Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, Gwangju 500-712, South Korea. E-mail: bandy1@gist.ac.kr; Fax: +82 (62) 715 3204; Tel: +82 (62) 715 3205

Received
10th May 2012
, Accepted 31st May 2012
First published on 28th June 2012
Additional post-processing techniques, such as post-thermal annealing and UV illumination, were found to be required to obtain desirable values of the cell parameters in a tandem polymer solar cell incorporated with solution-processed basic n-type titanium sub-oxide (TiOx)/acidic p-type poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) interlayers. Subsequent to the fabrication of the tandem polymer solar cells, the open-circuit voltage (VOC) of the cells exhibited half of the expected value. Only after the application of the post-treatments, the VOC of a tandem cell increased from the initial half-cell value (∼0.6 V) to its full-cell value (∼1.2 V). The selective light-biased incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) measurements indicated that the initial VOC originated from the back subcell and that the application of the post-processing treatments revived the front subcell, such that the net photocurrent of the tandem cell was finally governed by a recombination process of holes from the back subcell and electrons from the front subcell. Based on our experimental results, we suggest that a VOC enhancement could be ascribed to two types of subsequent junction formations at the interface between the TiOx and PEDOT:PSS interlayers: an ‘ion-mediated dipole junction’, resulting from the electro-kinetic migration of cationic ions in the interlayers during post-thermal annealing in the presence of a low-work-function metal cathode, and a ‘photoinduced Schottky junction’, formed by increasing the charge carrier density in the n-type TiOx interlayer during UV illumination process. The two junctions separately contributed to the formation of a recombination junction through which the electrons in TiOx and the holes in PEDOT:PSS were able to recombine without substantial voltage drops.

Over the last two decades, considerable effort has been focused on the development of organic photovoltaics (OPVs) because of their simple structure and their potential for low-cost manufacturing. The current state-of-the-art OPVs, known as bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) devices, have thin-film photoactive layers that are formed by a blend of donor polymers and acceptor fullerene derivatives. The BHJ solar cells are approaching the commercialization stage as the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of OPVs continues to improve with the development of efficient donor materials and other processing factors. Even though new types of photoactive conjugated polymers are continuously being developed, the full range of the solar spectrum has not yet been covered using a single photoactive material due to the narrow absorption band. As a result, multi-stacking tandem architectures have been introduced to overcome the inherent limitation in the solar light harvesting of photoactive materials.

Recently, an 8.3% PCE has been reported in a small molecule-based organic tandem solar cell. In addition, an 8.6% PCE has been achieved in a polymer tandem solar cell. By serially stacking different photoactive materials with complementary absorptions, one can achieve a high open-circuit voltage (VOC) that corresponds to the sum of the VOC of the individual subcells while minimizing the loss of the short-circuit current (JSC) in the tandem structure. For high-performance tandem solar cells, two constituent subcells should be electrically connected by high quality interlayers, which primarily consist of n/p-type semiconductors, acting as a charge-recombination junction.
A typical implementation of the charge-recombination junctions is a tunnel recombination junction (TRJ), in which the Fermi levels are located within each of the allowed bands and the electrons in the conduction band (CB) of n-type material and the holes in the valence band (VB) of the p-type material can recombine without substantial energy loss. If the electron density in the n-type semiconductor is insufficient for compensating the diffused holes from the p-type semiconductor, electrons and holes do not belong to the same Fermi level in the allowed bands, thus requiring substantial energy (or voltage) to efficiently recombine with each other at the recombination junction. Thus, the charge-recombination junctions have been extensively investigated in the form of heavily doped (degenerate) p–n junction tunnel diodes or TRJs in inorganic tandem solar cells.
In polymer tandem solar cells, various types of interlayers have been used to demonstrate charge-recombination junctions, borrowing the concept of a degenerate p–n junction in inorganic solar cells. Most of the polymer tandem cells have adopted water-based poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) as the heavily doped p-type material because the solution-processed interlayers should function not only as charge-recombination layers but also as solvent-resistive layers. However, the working mechanism of the solution-processed interlayers incorporating PEDOT:PSS has been only partially understood in polymer tandem solar cells, and this lack of understanding has hindered the prevalence of this tandem strategy in achieving high PCE.
In this study, we investigated the phenomenological evolution of the VOC and the other cell parameters in every process step just after metal evaporation (post-thermal annealing and UV illumination after top cathode evaporation). A new type of charge-recombination junction, called the ion-mediated dipole junction, was found to be formed by the electro-kinetic migration of protons during the post-processing treatments in solution-processed n/p-type interlayers which were cast from basic TiOx sol-precursor and acidic PEDOT:PSS polyelectrolyte solution. In addition, a photoinduced Schottky junction was found to be formed during light irradiation due to the increased electron density in the n-type interlayer. The two suggested recombination junctions could facilitate the fabrication of high-performance polymer tandem solar cells with a convincing demonstration of a 5.2% PCE.

The TiOx solution was synthesized using sol–gel chemistry as follows: titanium(IV) isopropoxide (Ti[OCH(CH3)2]4; Aldrich, 99.999%, 10 mL) was prepared as a precursor and mixed with 2-methoxyethanol (CH3OCH2CH2OH; Aldrich, 99.9+%, 50 mL) and ethanolamine (H2NCH2CH2OH; Aldrich, 99+%, 5 mL) in a three-necked flask equipped with a condenser, thermometer, and nitrogen-gas inlet/outlet. Then, the mixed solution was heated to 80 °C for 2 hours in a silicon-oil bath with magnetic stirring, followed by heating to 120 °C for 1 hour. The two-step heating process (80 and 120 °C) was then repeated until the precursors were condensed into gelated TiOx. The TiOx gels were diluted in isopropyl alcohol (IPA) to be utilized in the solution processes.


In this work, tandem polymer solar cells incorporated with TiOx/PEDOT:PSS (Clevios P) interlayers were fabricated using two photoactive materials with different band gaps: a low band gap (Eg = 1.37 eV) material of poly[(4,4-didodecyldithieno[3,2-b:20,30-d]silole)-2,6-diyl-alt-(2,1,3-benzothiadiazole)-4,7-diyl] (SDT-BT) and a high band gap (Eg = 1.90 eV) material of poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl) (P3HT) blended with 6,6-phenyl C71 butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM), as shown in Fig. 1.

In the fabrication of the tandem polymer solar cells, the ITO-coated glass substrates were first cleaned with detergent, ultrasonicated in acetone and IPA, and finally dried in a dry-oven overnight. The hole transporting layer of PEDOT:PSS filtered by a 0.45 μm filter was spin-cast at 5000 rpm from an aqueous solution to form a layer with a thickness of ∼25 nm. The substrates were dried for 10 min at 140 °C in ambient air and then moved into a glove box for the spin-casting of the photoactive layers. The dichlorobenzene solution composed of SDT-BT (1 wt%) plus PC71BM (1 wt%) was spin-cast at 2000 rpm on top of the PEDOT layer. Then, the TiOx interlayer was spin-cast with diluted TiOx solution (5 mg per 1 mL IPA) on top of the photoactive layer (SDT-BT:PC71BM blend) in ambient air, resulting in an approximately 10 nm-thick film on each substrate. After spin-casting, the samples were heated at 80 °C for 5 min in air to convert the precursor film to titanium sub-oxide (TiOx) film by hydrolysis and condensation. On top of the TiOx layer, a hole transport layer (HTL) using PEDOT:PSS (pH ∼ 2; CLEVIOS P, H. C. Starck GmbH) or neutral pH PEDOT (pH ∼ 6.8; Orgacon Neutral pH, Agfa-Gevaert NV) was spin-cast at 5000 rpm with a thickness of ∼25 nm. The substrates were dried for 5 min at 120 °C in an N2 glove box. Next, the second photoactive layer was spin-cast with a chlorofrom solution composed of P3HT (1 wt%) and PC71BM (0.7 wt%) at 1200 rpm on top of the PEDOT interlayer. After drying the sample at 80 °C for 10 min, an optional TiOx precursor solution was spin-cast on top of the second photoactive layer (P3HT:PC71BM blend) in ambient air to produce an electron transport layer (ETL) with a thickness of 10 nm (this step to produce an ETL was omitted in the study of the top cathode dependence to clarify the effects of the work function difference). Then, the sample was dried at 80 °C for 5 min in ambient air. The sample was subsequently pumped down in vacuum (<10−7 torr), and a ∼100 nm-thick Al or Au electrode was deposited on top. The active area of each device is 14 mm2, as defined by the metal-deposited area beneath a shadow mask. Because the post-annealing adversely affects the morphology change of SDT-BT: PC71BM blend film, while it changes the morphology of P3HT: PC71BM blend film favorable for charge transfer and transport, we conducted the post-annealing with high temperature for a short time (e.g., less than 160 °C for ca. 60 s) to optimize the thermal effect on the overall performance of the tandem device.

Light intensity was calibrated using calibrated standard silicon photovoltaic (PV) solar cells certified by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL). A xenon lamp with an AM 1.5 filter (150 W Oriel) was used to simulate the solar spectrum.


The current density–voltage (J–V) curves were measured using a Keithley 238 source measurement unit. The solar cells were located in a glove box and illuminted with light guided by high-quality optical fibers.


The C–V measurements were performed using an Agilent 4155B semiconductor parameter analyzer. The alternating current (AC) excitation frequency was set to 1 kHz, the amplitue was 70 mV peak-to-peak, and the sweep direction of the external DC bias was from reverse-bias to forward-bias.


Selective light-biased incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) measurements were conducted by utilizing a lock-in detection system. The probe light provided monochromatic excitation to the tandem solar cell, while a monochromatic bias-light (532 or 700 nm) illuminated the device to elucidate the recombination conditions before and after post-processing treatments. The probe light was modulated with an optical chopper with a chopping frequency of 100 Hz.


Immediately after the fabrication of tandem polymer solar cells incorporated with TiOx/PEDOT:PSS interlayers, the expected value of the VOC (∼1.2 V) in the tandem structure was not observed; instead, the initial VOC of the as-fabricated tandem cell was measured to be approximately 0.6 V, similar to the VOC of one of the two subcells.

To obtain the desired VOC value for the tandem structure, post-annealing at approximately 150 °C and UV illumination for a few minutes were found to be necessary (see Fig. 2). The inferior device characteristics of the as-fabricated tandem cell were partially enhanced after post-annealing, and the desired parameter values of the tandem structure were finally attained after the UV illumination process, as summarized in Table 1.
Pristine
Postannealing
Illumination

V
oc/V
0.68
0.98
1.17

J
SC/mA cm−2
2.73
5.97
7.20
FF
0.23
0.25
0.62
PCE (%)
0.43
1.46
5.20

The initial VOC of the as-fabricated tandem cell was nearly the same as that of a single subcell. To identify the origin of the initially low VOC, we partitioned the tandem cell into a front half-cell and a back half-cell, which consisted of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/SDT-BT:PC71BM/TiOx/PEDOT:PSS/Al and ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PC71BM/TiOx/Al, respectively.

As shown in Fig. 3, the front half-cell exhibited an initially low VOC of nearly 0 V with little photocurrent, while the back half-cell exhibited an initial VOC of approximately 0.6 V and a JSC of approximately 8 mA cm−2 before applying the post-processing treatments. After the post-processing treatments, the VOC and JSC of the front half-cell were significantly enhanced, while the cell parameters of the back half-cell remained nearly constant. When we changed the partitioning order for the TiOx/PEDOT:PSS interlayers to be included at the bottom of the back half-cell, it exhibited normal value of VOC (∼0.6 V), but had a very low fill factor of 0.12 due to its high series resistance. After the post-processing treatments, the alternate back half-cell also had increased fill factor of 0.5 (see Fig. S1, ESI).
The photocurrent response of the tandem cell was alternately measured by IPCE before and after post-processing treatments to show that the front subcell did not initially contribute to the total photovoltaic response. The photo-response of the tandem device was measured under a 532 nm-wavelength light bias, by which both of the two photoactive materials (SDT-BT and P3HT) were excited. The initial photocurrent spectrum (black line) shown in Fig. 4a follows only the absorption band of P3HT in the back subcell, but the absorption of SDT-BT in the front subcell does not contribute to the photocurrent at all. After post-annealing, the photocurrent from the SDT-BT front subcell appears in the main absorption band of SDT-BT at approximately 800 nm, while the spectrum of the P3HT back subcell decreases significantly at the absorption peak of P3HT near 530 nm (green line in Fig. 4a). UV illumination of the post-annealed device for 10 min enhances both of the two IPCE spectra bands of the front and back subcells (red line in Fig. 4a). Although the JSC of the partitioned back half-cell slightly increases after post-processing treatments (Fig. 3a), the IPCE results of the tandem cell show significant decreases in the main absorption band (530 nm) of the P3HT back subcell (from the black line to the red line in Fig. 4a). The different behavior between the photocurrents in the two back cell configurations implies that the net photocurrent of the tandem cell was ultimately governed by a recombination of charge carriers, namely holes from the P3HT back subcell and electrons from the SDT-BT front subcell. This recombination behavior is supported by the observation that the IPCE spectrum of the SDT-BT front subcell could not be extracted at all, while that of the P3HT back subcell could be fully extracted (Fig. 4b) when we changed the bias light from a wavelength of 532 to 700 nm. Because the P3HT was not excited by the 700 nm light bias, the back subcell could not provide an opportunity for charge carriers generated at the SDT-BT front subcell to recombine at the interlayer junction; on the other hand, the IPCE spectrum of the P3HT back subcell could be fully extracted under a sufficient supply of photocurrent from the 700 nm-wavelength light-biased SDT-BT front subcell.
Thus, the initial VOC and JSC of the tandem cell primarily resulted from the back subcell, while the front subcell minimally contributed to the photovoltaic response, simply behaving like a hole-transporting layer in the as-fabricated devices (see Fig. S2, ESI). These results indicate that the TiOx interlayer could not act as a symmetry-breaking layer for the front subcell in the as-fabricated conditions. The post-processing treatments restored the electron-selective function of n-type TiOx as a symmetry-breaking layer with respect to the bottom anode electrode (ITO/PEDOT:PSS) across the front active layer. Because the TiOx was previously reported as a good symmetry-breaking, electron-selective n-type layer, it could be considered that the n-type TiOx interlayer temporarily lost its symmetry-breaking properties during the device fabrication when the aqueous PEDOT:PSS solution was spin-cast on top of it and that it recovered the properties after post-processing treatments.

The post-processing treatments consist of two sequential steps: post-annealing and UV illumination processes. We first investigated the role of the post-annealing process, which consists of applying heat to the as-fabricated tandem cell sandwiched between two electrodes (high work function ITO/PEDOT:PSS anode, and low work function Al cathode), i.e., the active layers were thermally annealed under an asymmetric potential offset. When we annealed a device before depositing the Al top cathode (hereafter, referred to as pre-annealing), the annealed device did not exhibit any enhancement of the VOC and the other cell parameters after subsequent Al deposition, while the post-annealing enhanced the VOC (Fig. S2a, ESI). Moreover, when we thermally annealed the as-fabricated device with a high-work-function Au top electrode (φAu ∼ 5.0 eV) instead of an Al electrode (φAl ∼ 4.3 eV), there was no change in the VOC of the device after post-annealing (see ESI therein, Fig. S3b). Consequently, the work-function offset between electrodes seemed to be crucial to enhance the VOC of the as-fabricated tandem cell during post-annealing.

To substantiate the effect of the asymmetric potential offset in the post-annealing, an additional external bias, which was larger than the work function difference (∼1 eV) between the two electrodes, was imposed and reversed by changing the polarities of the bias voltage. As shown in Fig. 5a, when we successively applied a +4 V forward bias and a −4 V reverse bias at 120 °C for 1 min to an as-fabricated tandem cell, the VOC of the device increased by +0.35 V after the first forward bias and decreased to its initial low value after the second reverse bias. As this method, namely bias-temperature stress (BTS), has been commonly used to determine the existence of mobile ionic impurities in the SiO2–Si system, it is expected that the VOC changes in our tandem cell were related to the presence of mobile ions inside the devices.
Because the n-type TiOx interlayer was fabricated using a basic TiOx sol-precursor (pH ∼ 10), some of the basic residues remain in the gel-like TiOx film in the form of terminal amine groups (–NH2) and hydroxyl groups (–OH) even after spin-casting and thermal drying. During the subsequent spin-coating of the PEDOT:PSS solution on top of the TiOx interlayer, protons from the acid PEDOT:PSS solution can interact with the protonation sites (–NH2 and –OH) on/in the gel-like TiOx interlayer, producing the protonated amine (–NH3+) and hydroxyl groups (–OH2+). As we applied heat to the as-fabricated tandem cell, protonated cations in the TiOx were able to detach and undergo an electro-kinetic migration toward the interface between the TiOx and PEDOT:PSS layers, resulting in the accumulation of positive space charges at the boundary surface of the n-type TiOx adjacent to the PEDOT:PSS. Simultaneously, electro-kinetic migration/reorientation of protons could also occur in the PEDOT:PSS because the polyelectrolyte PSS has a glass transition temperature (Tg) of about 100 °C and will be softened and reoriented during post-annealing. With this redistribution of mobile ions originating from electrostatic acid–base interactions, a dipole layer can be formed by the positively charged face of TiOx and the negatively charged face (anionic sulfonate groups (R–SO3−) and/or deprotonated PEDOT) of PEDOT:PSS at the interface between the n-/p-type interlayers during post-annealing or the BTS process.
In summary, the post-annealing process is thought to induce an electro-kinetic migration in which the mobile positive ions move toward/over the interface between TiOx and PEDOT:PSS, accumulating positive space charge at the boundary surface of n-type TiOx adjacent to PEDOT:PSS and simultaneously accumulating negative space charge at the interface of PEDOT:PSS in contact with TiOx. As a result, a dipole layer could be formed by the positively charged face (chemisorptions of –NH3+ and/or –OH2+ groups) of TiOx and the negatively charged face (sulfonate groups of R–SO3− and/or deprotonated PEDOT) of PEDOT:PSS in between the n-/p-type interlayers, originating from electrostatic acid–base interactions.
To confirm the effect of the mobile ions (such as protons, H+) on the VOC changes of the tandem cell, we fabricated additional devices using three controlled PEDOT aqueous solutions, based on the neutral pH PEDOT (pH ∼ 6.8, Agfa-Gevaert N.V.) as a parent solution. The first solution was a pristine neutral pH PEDOT solution, the second solution was a PEDOT solution (pH ∼ 5) doped with 2 vol% PSS:H (Mw ∼ 75000, 18 wt% in water, Aldrich Chemicals), and the third solution was a PEDOT solution (pH ∼ 5) with a pH buffer solution (37% HCl in water, Aldrich Chemicals) added to adjust the pH level to that of the PSS-doped PEDOT solution. Fig. 5b shows the changes in VOC with respect to the post-processing treatments in the tandem devices fabricated with different PEDOT solutions. Because the PEDOT solution with a neutral pH was almost free from excess mobile ions, there could be no VOC gain due to the absence of a net ion buildup. However, the VOC of a tandem cell with the PSS-doped PEDOT increased after post-annealing, yielding the same results as those of acidic PEDOT:PSS (Clevios P). Note that we did not observe a VOC enhancement after post-annealing when we used HCl-added PEDOT solution. Although many mobile ions (H+ and Cl−) were introduced into the neutral PEDOT solution, the Cl− ions move in the opposite direction of the protons and thus could not form a negatively charged surface because there was no structural frame or sites in which the Cl− ions could attach at the surface of the TiOx interlayer. In contrast, anionic ions in the PSS-doped PEDOT solution could not penetrate into the TiOx layer because the backbones of the PSS polyelectrolyte had a much higher molecular weight (Mw ∼ 75000), resulting in negative space charges (R–SO3− groups) at the boundary surface.
Therefore, the VOC enhancement after post-annealing required homo-mobile-ion movement rather than hetero-mobile-ion movement. The electro-kinetic migration of the homo-mobile ions leads to the ion-mediated dipole junction in between the interlayers, thereby lowering the band offset of the n-/p-type interlayers to enhance the VOC of the as-fabricated tandem cell after the post-annealing process.

In the previous section, we noted that the VOC of the tandem cell was partially recovered through the post-annealing process alone. When white light was illuminated onto the post-annealed tandem cells, the VOC and the other cell parameters of the devices also began to increase. We note that the effect of illumination was independent of the details of the post-annealing process, namely the work functions of the top electrodes, the presence of mobile ions, and the bias polarities during the application of BTS.

The illumination effect depends only on the wavelengths of the incident light; illumination using UV or blue light (with center wavelengths of 365 and 450 nm, respectively) strongly influences the VOC enhancement, while illumination using red (680 nm) or green (530 nm) light does not (Fig. 6a). The considerable overlap between the main absorption band of TiOx and the illumination wavelengths for the effective VOC recovery (Fig. 6b) indicates that the n-type transition metal oxide (TiOx) interlayer has a significant connection to the photoinduced VOC enhancement during the illumination process.
To verify the effect of UV illumination on the performance enhancement of the cell, we designed a simple device structure (ITO/TiOx/PEDOT:PSS/Au) that simulated the interlayers of the tandem cell (inset of Fig. 7a). In the initial stage, the device exhibited nearly symmetric J–V characteristics of Ohmic behavior, which implied that a metal–semiconductor Schottky junction barely formed between the highly p-doped conjugated polymer of PEDOT:PSS and the semiconducting n-type TiOx, as shown in Fig. 7a. However, the rectification behavior rapidly appeared after the device was exposed to UV light (Fig. 7a). The enhanced rectification indicates the formation of an improved metal–semiconductor Schottky junction at the interface between TiOx and PEDOT:PSS, thereby improving electron–hole recombination, i.e., the key to a successful tandem structure. The improved junction property was expected to originate from the increase in the number of charge carriers in the n-type TiOx layer through photodoping. As shown by capacitance–voltage (C–V) measurements (Fig. 7b), the zero-bias capacitance increases monotonically as the UV-illumination time increases. The depletion layer can be derived through the parallel plate capacitor equation, namely C = εr × ε0 × W−1, where C is the capacitance per unit area, εr is the dielectric constant of our TiOx film (εr ∼ 9) (see Fig. S4, ESI), ε0 is the vacuum permittivity (8.85 × 10−14 F cm−1), and W is the depletion layer thickness. The value of the dielectric constant of our TiOx film (εr ∼ 9) is much smaller than those of other conventional crystalline TiO2 films (εr ∼ 55 for anatase and 100 for rutile). This difference might be related to the degree of densification and crystallization of the films. The dielectric constant of amorphous TiO2 films has been reported to be approximately 13, which is closer to that of our sol–gel derived film than to crystalline TiO2 films. During UV illumination, the thickness of the depletion layer decreases from 9 to 6 nm (an approximately 30% decrease) even though the device is still under zero bias (with no external bias change).
Note that the initial depletion layer thickness is nearly the same as the thickness of the TiOx interlayer (10 nm). The bias-independent reduction of depletion layer thickness provides additional evidence for an improved Schottky junction between the TiOx and PEDOT:PSS layers. The UV illumination simultaneously causes the front subcell to be placed between asymmetric contact potential energies as the Fermi level of n-type TiOx gradually approaches the conduction band edge by enhancing the concentration of charge carriers in TiOx.

Based on our experimental results, we propose that the TiOx/PEDOT:PSS recombination layer was formed by the following mechanism:

(i) In an as-fabricated tandem cell, only the back subcell contributed to the VOC and the JSC of the device, while the front subcell exhibited values of nearly zero in photo-voltage and current, thus behaving as a hole-transporting medium. The semi-metallic p-type PEDOT:PSS layer had a much larger hole density than the electron density of the n-type TiOx, which could be fully depleted by the diffused holes from the p-type interlayer. In addition, protons and/or water molecules from the acidic PEDOT:PSS aqueous solution were able to permeate the TiOx interlayer during the device fabrication, thereby decreasing the free carrier density of the n-type interlayer due to protonation and oxidation of electron donating sites (oxygen vacancy, amine group, and hydroxyl group) in the sol–gel-derived TiOx interlayer. This decrease in carrier density could make the n-type TiOx interlayer lose its symmetry-breaking function and deactivate the photovoltaic behavior of the front subcell (Fig. 8a and b).
(ii) After the post-annealing of an as-fabricated tandem cell, the VOC was enhanced due to the electro-kinetic migration of mobile ions, such as protons, in TiOx/PEDOT:PSS interlayers. The mobile cationic ions in the TiOx interlayer migrate toward/over the interface boundary, accumulating positive space charges (chemisorptions of –NH3+ and/or –OH2+ groups) at the boundary surface of n-type TiOx interlayer contacting with the p-type PEDOT:PSS. Simultaneously, the electro-kinetic migration of protons also occurs, leaving negative space charges, such as anionic sulfonate groups (R–SO3−) and/or deprotonated PEDOT, at the boundary of the p-type PEDOT:PSS contacting the TiOx interlayer. As a result, a dipole layer is formed by the positively charged face of TiOx and the negatively charged face of PEDOT:PSS in between the n-/p-type interlayers, thereby lowering the energy barrier to enhance the VOC of the as-fabricated tandem cell after the post-annealing process (Fig. 8c).
(iii) After UV illumination of the post-annealed device, the VOC finally approached its desired value (approximately 1.2 V), and the other cell parameters, such as fill factor, were also enhanced. The VOC enhancement is related to the band-to-band absorption of the TiOx interlayer. The photo-doping process increases the electron density in the n-type interlayer and reduces the depletion layer thickness in the junction while recovering the symmetry-breaking function to collect electrons from the front active layer; electrons from the front subcell and holes from the back subcell efficiently recombine with each other in the heavily doped n–p junction (Fig. 8d).
Even though the Schottky junction is not an ideal tunnel junction, it operates as an adequate junction to connect the two solar cells in series with the aid of an ionic dipole junction. If we can increase the charge carrier density of the n-type TiOx layer to the level of that in the heavily doped p-type PEDOT:PSS, we will be able to obtain an optimal recombination junction in the tandem polymer solar cell, even without any post-processing treatment.

Tandem polymer solar cells incorporating all-solution-processed n-type TiOx and p-type polyelectrolyte of PEDOT:PSS were studied and were observed to require the additional post-processing treatments of post-annealing and UV illumination to properly operate. Two types of post-treatments separately contributed to the formation of two different recombination junctions. The ‘ion-mediated dipole junction’ was induced by the electro-kinetic migration of homo-mobile cationic ions, while the ‘photo-induced Schottky junction’ was formed by an increased charge carrier density and the resulting decreases in the depletion width of the junction.

From our investigations, if one tailors the potential of the ionic junctions as charge-recombination layers with the appropriate acidic–basic interactions, the ion-mediated dipole junction could lower the barrier of the charge-recombination junction without incurring substantial voltage drops. In addition, if physically and chemically robust highly n-doped materials were prepared, one could make high quality interlayers to connect two stacked subcells in tandem solar cells without any post-treatments. We believe that our study contributes to the development of multi-stacked polymer solar cells and other solution-processed electronic devices.

This research was supported by the National Research Foundation (NRF) of Korea (No. 20090093869, R15-2008-006-002001-0, 2012R1A1A2006831), and by the Core Technology Development Program for Next-generation Solar Cells of Research Institute for Solar and Sustainable Energies (RISE). K. Lee also acknowledges the World Class University (WCU) program at GIST for partial support through a grant provided by the MEST of Korea (Project No. R31-2008-000-10026-0). We thank G. C. Bazan (UCSB) for providing the narrow bandgap material, SDT-BT.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2cp41501a
This journal is © the Owner Societies 2012