 DOI: 10.1039/C3TA12349A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 11874-11879

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms

Jiahao Guo,
Yantao Shi*,
Chao Zhu,
Lin Wang,
Ning Wang and 
Tingli Ma*

State Key Laboratory of Fine Chemicals, School of Chemistry, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, 116024, P. R. China. E-mail: tinglima@dlut.edu.cn; shiyantao@dlut.edu.cn; Fax: +86-411-84986230; Tel: +86-411-84986237

College of Science, Anhui Science and Technology University, Fengyang, Anhui 233100, P. R. China

Graduate School of Life Science and Systems Engineering, Kyushu Institute of Technology, 2-4 Hibikino, Wakamatsu, Kitakyushu, Fukuoka 808-0196, Japan

Department of Physics and William Mong Institute of Nano Science and Technology, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, P. R. China

Received
17th June 2013
, Accepted 1st August 2013
First published on 1st August 2013
Developing Pt-free and highly efficient counter electrodes (CEs) is meaningful and necessary for the cost reduction of dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs). In this work, via a facile and reductant-free solvothermal approach, we report the controllable synthesis of NbSe2 nanosheets (NSs), nanorods (NRs), as well as the composite NbSe2/C for use as CEs in high efficiency DSCs. The morphology and structure of the three samples were characterized by SEM, XRD and TEM. Meanwhile, by cyclic voltammetry measurements, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy and Tafel polarization, we found some key issues which explain the difference in their electrocatalytic activity in the reduction of triiodide (I3−). Compared with electrodes based on NbSe2 NRs, NbSe2 NS-based CEs demonstrated lower resistances in charge transfer and ionic diffusion. Subsequently, DSCs with NbSe2 NS-based CEs achieved a conversion efficiency of 7.34%. In addition, NbSe2/C composite-based CEs could further reduce the series resistance and finally a conversion efficiency of 7.80% was obtained, comparable to an efficiency of 7.90% for Pt-based CEs. The NbSe2 in our work provides a cost-effective CE alternative to the noble metal Pt in DSCs.

Due to its low cost, environmental friendliness, simple fabrication and relatively high photoelectric conversion efficiency (PCE), dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) have attracted strong scientific interest since the first report by O'Regan and Grätzel in 1991. Except for the conductive substrate, DSCs are composed of three parts: (i) a semiconductor oxide nanocrystalline film sensitized by dye molecules, (ii) an electrolyte including a redox couple (usually triiodide/iodide), and (iii) a counter electrode (CE) which is a crucial component since it collects the electrons flowing from the external circuit and catalyzes the reduction of I3− to I−. Due to the high electrocatalytic activity and good chemical stability, in most cases platinum (Pt) is used as the CE material to obtain high efficiency DSCs. However, as a noble metal, Pt is relatively scarce and expensive, which are big obstacles for the large-scale application of DSCs. Therefore, to promote the industrialization of DSCs, it is vital to develop low-cost Pt-free CE materials with high catalytic activity.

To replace Pt with low-cost and efficient materials, substitutes such as carbon materials, conductive polymers and composite materials have been exploited for use as CEs in DSCs. In the last two years, some inorganic compounds such as transition metal nitrides, oxides and carbides have shown good catalytic activity for the reduction of I3− to I− and have proved competitive alternatives to Pt. More recently, transition metal chalcogenides have also attracted tremendous attention due to their special electronic properties, interesting chemical behavior and chemical stability. Some research groups have used transition metal sulfides as CEs in DSCs and attained comparable results to those with traditional Pt CEs. For example, Wu et al. synthesized MoS2 and WS2 particles by a hydrothermal method and used them in high efficiency DSCs. Additionally, Kung et al. employed a two-step strategy to in situ prepare cobalt sulfide (CoS) acicular nanorod arrays on a fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) substrate and which also displayed good performance in DSCs.
In 2012, in DSC systems, transition metal selenides demonstrated notable electrocatalytic activity, even greater than Pt in terms of the final PCE. For example, using hydrazine hydrate as the reductant in an in situ hydrothermal process, Gong et al. reported the synthesis of two selenides, Co0.85Se and Ni0.85Se, for application as CEs in DSCs. Subsequently, high PCEs of 9.40% and 8.32% were obtained which established new records for DSCs with non-Pt CEs. This result showed that transition metal selenides were suitable CE materials for DSCs. To date, however, further research on selenide-based CEs has seldom been carried out.
In this work, by adjusting the cooling rate, NbSe2 nanostructures were controllably synthesized via a reductant-free solvothermal method. The structures of these samples were systematically characterized by SEM, XRD and TEM. We found that on accelerating the cooling rate from 5 °C min−1 to 20 °C min−1, the sample structures varied from nanosheets (NSs) to nanorods (NRs). In addition, we also in situ prepared a NbSe2/C composite sample by adding graphite into the reaction system. As CEs for DSCs, cyclic voltammetry, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy and Tafel polarization measurements indicated that the three samples showed high electrocatalytic activity for the reduction of triiodide (I3−). Compared with NbSe2 NR-based CEs, NbSe2 NS-based CEs demonstrated lower resistances for charge transfer and ionic diffusion. In addition, the graphite composite-based NbSe2/C CE could further improve the electrocatalytic activity through reducing the ionic diffusion resistance. Photovoltaic tests indicated that the DSCs with NbSe2 NS-based CEs achieved a conversion efficiency of 7.34%, higher than that of the NbSe2 NR-based CEs. In addition, the composite NbSe2/C-based DSCs achieved a conversion efficiency of 7.80%, comparable to that of 7.90% based on Pt CEs. In addition to their high performance in DSCs, our strategy in fabricating selenide CEs is favorable for the mass production and cost-reduction of DSCs.
In a typical procedure, 0.540 g NbCl5 (2 mmol) and 0.316 g Se powder (4 mmol) were mixed and added into 40 mL degassed (with N2) oleylamine (OLA) at room temperature. After continuous stirring for 5 min, the reaction mixture was transferred into a three-neck round-bottomed flask, sealed, and then degassed in a pure N2 atmosphere for 10 min under magnetic stirring. Then the mixture was heated up to 280 °C and allowed to react for 4 h at this temperature in a N2 atmosphere with vigorous agitation. Finally, the mixture was cooled down slowly to room temperature at a rate of ∼5 °C min−1, and black products precipitated at the bottom of the flask. A large amount of hexane was then added into the crude solution and the products were isolated by repeated centrifugation, dried under vacuum, and heated at 450 °C for 3 h under a N2 atmosphere.
For the synthesis of NbSe2 NRs, the experimental parameters were kept the same as for synthesizing the NbSe2 NSs, with the only difference being the cooling speed. Specifically, the reacted mixture was cooled down to room temperature naturally (∼20 °C min−1).
For the synthesis of the NbSe2/C composite, the same procedure was carried out as for NbSe2, but 4.8 mg graphite (0.4 mmol) was added into the reaction mixture with different cooling speeds.

To obtain the NbSe2 slurry, 200 mg of selenide powder and 4 g of zirconium dioxide pearl were dispersed in 4 mL isopropanol and then milled with a star ball mill (QM-Q × 04, Nanjing NanDa Instrument Plant) for 4 h. The obtained slurry was sprayed on a fluorine tin oxide (FTO) glass substrate (Asahi Glass, type-U, 14 Ω sq−1, Japan) using an airbrush (TD-128, Tiandi Co., Ltd) connected to a minicompressor. The FTO substrate coated with NbSe2 film was then annealed under a N2 atmosphere at 500 °C for 30 min in a tube furnace to form the expected NbSe2 CE. The Pt CE was prepared according to our previous research.


A 12 μm thick TiO2 film (P25, Degussa, Germany) was loaded on FTO glass by the screen-printing technique. Then the TiO2 film was sintered at 500 °C for 30 min. After cooling to 80 °C, the TiO2 film was immersed in 5 × 10−4 M of N719 dye (Solaronix SA, Switzerland) in acetonitrile–tert-butyl alcohol (1:1 volume ration) for 21 h to obtain the photoanode. The DSC device was fabricated by sandwiching a dye-sensitized TiO2 film and a CE. The redox electrolyte (containing 0.06 M LiI, 0.6 M 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium iodide, 0.03 M I2, 0.5 M 4-tert-butyl pyridine and 0.1 M guanidinium thiocyanate in acetonitrile solution) was injected into the interspace between the photoanode and the counter electrode. The two electrodes were sealed by double-faced insulated adhesive tapes. The as-assembled DSCs with an active area of 0.16 cm2 were used for the photovoltaic performance tests. A symmetrical cell was assembled by sandwiching two identical CEs with the same electrolyte as used in the DSC assembly. The as-assembled symmetrical cell was used for the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy and Tafel polarization measurements.


The X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) profiles of the synthesized NbSe2 samples were recorded with an automatic X-ray powder diffractometer (D/Max 2400, RIGAKU, Japan). The 2θ angular regions between 10° and 90° were investigated at a scan rate of 8° min−1 with a step of 0.02°. The surface morphology and microstructure of the samples were characterized using field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM, FEI HITACHI S-4800) and high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM, JEM-2100F, JEOL). Cyclic voltammetry (CV) was carried out using a CHI630D electrochemical workstation (Chenhua, Shanghai) in a three-electrode system containing an anhydrous acetonitrile solution of 0.1 M LiClO4, 10 mM LiI and 1 mM I2 at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. The as-prepared NbSe2 counter electrodes acted as the working electrode, a Pt wire acted as the counter electrode and an Ag/Ag+ electrode acted as the reference electrode. The electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were conducted with the symmetrical cell on a computer-controlled electrochemical workstation (Zennium Zahner, Germany) in dark conditions. The measured frequency ranged from 100 mHz to 1 MHz with a bias of −0.75 V, and the AC amplitude was set at 10 mV. The spectra of the obtained EIS measurements were analyzed with an appropriate equivalent circuit by means of Z-view software. Tafel polarization measurements were employed using an electrochemical workstation (CHI630D, Chenhua, Shanghai) with the symmetrical cell, at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. The photovoltaic performance of the DSCs was evaluated with a Keithley digital source meter (Keithley 2601, USA) under simulated sunlight illumination conditions (Xe arc lamp, 1.5 AM, 100 mW cm−2, PEC-L15, Peccell, Japan).


XRD analysis was employed to identify the crystal structures of the NbSe2 samples. XRD patterns of the NbSe2 NS, NbSe2 NR and NbSe2/C samples are illustrated in Fig. 1. For the NbSe2 NS and NbSe2 NR samples, four diffraction peaks located approximately at 2θ values of 14.00°, 30.38°, 36.92° and 53.06° can be assigned to the reflections of the (002), (101), (103) and (110) planes, respectively. These results are in good agreement with the hexagonal structure of NbSe2 (PDF # 19-0872) and indicate that these two NbSe2 samples have been well crystallized. The XRD pattern of NbSe2/C is identical to that of NbSe2 except for the diffraction peak located at 26.48°, which is associated with the (002) plane of graphite. These results thus confirm that the NbSe2 samples have been successfully synthesized and the graphite was combined into the NbSe2 sample.

The morphology and sizes of the as-synthesized NbSe2 NS, NbSe2 NR and NbSe2/C samples were firstly characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM), as shown in Fig. 2a–c, respectively. As seen in Fig. 2a, the NbSe2 NS sample presents an intercrossed nanosheet conglomeration. The thickness of the nanosheets is approximately 10 nm with typical lateral dimensions between 70 and 250 nm. It is known that nanosheets usually possess a large specific area and can also speed up the diffusion of the electrolyte, thus in turn improving the electrocatalytic activity. This effect was proved by the subsequent electrochemical and photovoltaic measurements. The morphology of the NbSe2 NRs, which were synthesized by cooling the mixture rapidly, is illustrated by Fig. 2b, in which the dominant structures are irregular nanorods, while some nanosheets can still be observed. The lengths of the NbSe2 NRs range from 500 nm to 1.7 μm and their diameters are between 60 nm and 250 nm. The formation of nanostructures in non-equilibrium solution systems usually features nucleation, growth and oriented aggregation. It is known that the cooling rate mainly affects the supersaturation, an important driving force of the first stage of nucleation and subsequent growth into nanocrystals. Thus, the amount, size and shape of the consequent nanocrystals will differ a lot according to the degree of supersaturation. At the second stage, nanocrystals aggregate in an oriented manner and 1D, 2D or 3D nanostructures are formed. It has been thought that, with relatively low supersaturation, NbSe2 nanocrystals tend to aggregate along two directions and finally 2D nanosheets can be obtained, as in the case of our NbSe2 nanosheets (NSs). With a rapid cooling rate of 20 °C min−1, the degree of supersaturation was enhanced and nanocrystals were inclined to aggregate along one direction to form NbSe2 nanorods (NSs).
In the NbSe2/C composite, NSs and NRs co-exist, as shown in Fig. 2c. The lengths and diameters of the NRs, nevertheless, both decreased. This could be attributed to the addition of graphite which might suppress the growth of the NRs. On the other hand, the bulk in NbSe2/C can be recognized as graphite. Further insight into the morphology was conducted by TEM, as shown in Fig. 2d–f. The same morphology of the inter-crossed nanosheets conglomeration for the NbSe2 NS sample was confirmed by the TEM image shown in Fig. 2d. The TEM image in Fig. 2e also demonstrates the co-existence of NSs and NRs in the NbSe2/C composite, which is consistent with the observations in the SEM image in Fig. 2c. Furthermore, as shown in the HRTEM image in Fig. 2f, the NbSe2/C composite exhibits a d-spacing of 0.293 nm corresponding to the (101) plane of NbSe2.

To assess the electrochemical catalytic activities of our three NbSe2-based CEs in the reduction of triiodide, we made comparisons with Pt by performing CV characterization. Fig. 3 shows the CV curves of the triiodide/iodide redox couple on three NbSe2-based CEs and Pt CEs. Two typical pairs of redox peaks can be clearly observed for all of the four CEs. The negative pair is ascribed to the redox reaction of I3−/I− and the positive pair is associated with the redox reaction of I2/I3−. The former directly affects the DSC performance, whereas the latter has a slight effect on the performance. The peak current densities and peak-to-peak separation (Epp), which is negatively correlated with the standard electrochemical rate constant of a redox reaction, are two important parameters for comparing the catalytic activities of different electrodes. The cathodic peak current reflects the reduction velocity and the peak-to-peak separation (Epp) is associated with the reversibility of the redox reaction. The profile and location of the negative pairs of the redox peaks of the NbSe2 CEs were close to that of the Pt CE, suggesting that NbSe2 can exhibit Pt-like electrocatalytic behaviour in I3− reduction. Compared to the Pt CE (Epp = 150 mV), the NbSe2 NS CE possessed a smaller peak-to-peak separation (Epp = 115 mV) and a similar reduction peak current, indicating better electrocatalytic activity and reversibility in the I3−/I− redox reaction. In contrast, the NbSe2 NR-based CE has a larger peak-to-peak separation (Epp = 230 mV) and a reduced peak current density, finally leading to a bad invertibility in the I3−/I− redox reaction and a DSC with a lower power conversion efficiency. With the addition of graphite into NbSe2, the peak current density was enhanced and the peak-to-peak separation (Epp = 125 mV) was reduced, indicating that the graphite can further improve the electrocatalytic activity for I3− reduction.


To evaluate the electrochemical characteristics of the NbSe2 NSs, NbSe2 NRs and NbSe2/C-based CEs, electrochemical impendence spectroscopy (EIS) experiments were carried out with symmetric cells consisting of two identical electrodes under dark conditions. The results are shown in Fig. 4, in which an equivalent circuit diagram is also provided for fitting the Nyquist plots by the Z-view software. The detailed EIS parameters are summarized in Table 1. Owing to the symmetric configuration of the dummy cell, the real Rct value was calculated as half of the value obtained from the Z-view fitting. The high frequency intercept on the real axis corresponds to the series resistance Rs, which includes both the sheet resistance of two identical electrodes and the electrolytic resistance. The first semicircle in the middle-frequency region arises from the charge transfer resistance Rct (for the I3− reduction) and the corresponding constant phase element (CPE) at the CE/electrolyte interface. The constant phase element is frequently used as a substitute for the capacitor in an equivalent circuit, to fit the impedance behavior of the electrical double layer more accurately when the double layer does not behave as an ideal capacitor. In the low-frequency region, the second semicircle is derived from the Nernst diffusion impedance (ZN) of I3−/I− in the electrolyte.

CE
Rs/Ω
Rct/Ω
CPE/μF
ZN/Ω
Voc/V
Jsc/(mA cm−2)
FF
PCE/%
Pt
8.15
2.35
7.13
4.20
0.72
15.88
0.69
7.90
NbSe2 NSs
27.72
2.59
12.81
2.52
0.77
15.04
0.63
7.34
NbSe2 NRs
19.38
6.21
47.80
6.63
0.76
13.94
0.64
6.78
NbSe2/C
24.07
3.52
209.6
1.78
0.77
15.58
0.65
7.80
As seen from Table 1, the Rs values for the NbSe2 NSs, NbSe2 NRs and NbSe2/C CEs are 27.72 Ω, 19.38 Ω and 24.07 Ω, respectively, higher than 8.15 Ω for the Pt CE. This result suggests that the conductivity of the NbSe2-based CEs is inferior to the noble metal-based Pt CE. Among these three selenide CEs, probably due to the good conductivity of the one dimensional nanostructure, the NbSe2 NR-based CE presents a relatively smaller Rs, superior to that of the NbSe2 NS-based CE. In terms of charge transfer at the CE/electrolyte interface, however, the Rct of the NbSe2 NSs is smaller than that of the NbSe2 NRs (or NbSe2/C) and close to that of Pt, suggesting better and Pt-like electrocatalytic activity for I3− reduction. Of these four CEs, the NbSe2/C composite demonstrates the highest CPE, indicating a large contact surface area between the CE and electrolyte, which is desired for improving the catalytic activity. Additionally, the ionic diffusion impedance ZN of NbSe2/C is 1.78 Ω, which is significantly lower than that of the three other CEs and suggests a larger apparent diffusion coefficient D of I3− within our composite CE. The EIS results illustrate the effect of the nanostructure on the interface charge transfer and ionic diffusion, proving that the CE based on NbSe2 NSs is superior to the NR-based CE. On the other hand, with and without graphite in the selenide CEs, the Rs, Rct and ZN are remarkably different. Thus, using our strategy to in situ mix graphite with selenide, the electrocatalytic activity of the composite CE can be further improved. The above results confirm the positive effect of carbon materials such as graphite in the electrocatalytic enhancement of CEs for DSCs.
Furthermore, we also utilize Tafel polarization measurements to confirm the catalytic activities of the NbSe2 NSs, NbSe2 NRs, NbSe2/C and Pt CEs. Fig. 5 shows the Tafel curves of the four different CEs. The exchange current density (J0) and the limiting current density (Jlim) related to the catalytic activity of the catalysts can be determined from the Tafel curves. The Tafel curves can be divided into three zones. From Fig. 5 we can see that, compared with the NbSe2 NR CE, in the Tafel zone the NbSe2 NSs and NbSe2/C CEs both exhibit a large J0 and are similar to the Pt CE, suggesting a higher electrocatalytic activity. This is in good accordance with the lower charge-transfer resistance Rct revealed by EIS.
In diffusion zone, the NbSe2 NSs and NbSe2/C composite showed a high limiting diffusion current density (Jlim), close to that of Pt. In contrast, the performance of NbSe2 NRs in this zone was poorer. The relationship between the ionic diffusion coefficient D and Jlim can be expressed as in eqn (1):
(1)
where
L is the spacer thickness, C is the I3− concentration, F is the Faraday constant and n is the number of electrons involved in the reduction of I3− at the CE. According to eqn (1), NbSe2 NSs and NbSe2/C can ensure a fast diffusion velocity of the redox couple, similar to the Pt CE. The Tafel polarization experiments are therefore consistent with the EIS results.


Photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) curves of the DSCs using CEs consisting of NbSe2 NSs, NbSe2 NRs, NbSe2/C and sputtering Pt were measured under a standard light intensity of 100 mW cm−2. The J–V curves are shown in Fig. 6 and the related photovoltaic parameters, including the short circuit current density (Jsc), open circuit voltage (Voc), power conversion efficiency (PCE) and fill factor (FF), are summarized in Table 1. As shown in Table 1, all of the DSCs based on NbSe2 CEs had a comparatively similar Voc (0.76–0.77 V), higher than that of 0.72 V based on the Pt CE. According to previous reports, this phenomenon could be attributed to the relatively high Rs of selenide CEs that was revealed by the above EIS measurements. Among these four DSCs, a lower Jsc and η (6.78%) are observed for the DSC using the NbSe2 NR CE which demonstrated low electrocatalytic activity. The increase in Jsc can be observed for the DSCs with the NbSe2 NS CE, thus resulting in an improvement in η (7.34%). In comparison with the NbSe2 NRs, the enhanced Jsc mainly originates from the high electrocatalytic activity of the NbSe2 NSs. For the DSCs based on the NbSe2/C composite CE, a Voc of 0.77 V, Jsc of 15.58 mA cm−2, FF of 0.65 and η of 7.80% was obtained, comparable to the DSC using the Pt CE (η = 7.90%) and consistent with the aforementioned CV, EIS and Tafel polarization tests. With the addition of graphite, the efficiency is obviously improved, which may be related to the good conductivity of graphite. The approach to improve the efficiency by increasing the content of graphite however is not desirable because of the poor adhesion between graphite and the FTO substrate. As we know, except for CE, the photovoltaic performance of DSCs is also determined by other components, such as the dye, photoanode and electrolyte. In this work, we fabricated our TiO2 photoanode film with commercial P25 nanoparticles. Thus, it was reasonable that the conversion efficiency was inferior to that based on TiO2 nanocrystallines used in previous research. Therefore, in terms of photovoltaic enhancement, we believe that there is potential for DSCs featuring our NbSe2-based CEs.


In summary, by adjusting the cooling rate in the solvothermal system, we successfully realized the controllable synthesis of NbSe2 nanostructures, including nanosheets, nanorods, as well as a composite with graphite. When used as CEs for DSCs, these samples exhibited high electrocatalytic activity for the reduction of I3−. Our results confirmed the effects of the nanostructure of the selenides on the electrocatalytic activity of CEs. Moreover, by facilitating interface charge transfer and ionic diffusion within the porous CE, the electrocatalytic activity was further improved, as in the case of the NbSe2/C composite prepared by in situ mixing. Finally, DSCs assembled with NbSe2 NSs and NbSe2 NR-based CEs achieved PCEs of 7.34% and 6.78%, respectively. Meanwhile, the PCE of the DSCs based on NbSe2/C CE was further improved to 7.80%, comparable to that of 7.90% based on the Pt CE. In addition to the high photovoltaic performance, our strategy in fabricating selenide CEs is favorable for the mass production and cost-reduction of DSCs.


We are grateful for financial support provided by the National High Technology Research and Development Program for Advanced Materials of China (grant 2009AA03Z220), National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant 51273032), Doctoral Found of Ministry of Education of China (grant 2110041110003) and Open Project Program of the State Key Laboratory of Physical Chemical of Solid Surfaces, Xiamen University (grant 201210). This research was also supported by the State Key Laboratory of Fine Chemicals of China.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: comparison of the DSC performance parameters from different reports; detailed fitting parameters of the Nyquist plots in the EIS experiments. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ta12349a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013