 DOI: 10.1039/C3CP44048F
(Communication)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 4286-4290

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Sining
Yun
*,

Liang
Wang
,

Chunyu
Zhao
,

Yanxiang
Wang
 and 

Tingli
Ma
*

School of Materials & Mineral Resources, Xi'an University of Architecture and Technology, Xian, 710055, China. E-mail: alexsyun1974@yahoo.com.cn; Fax: +86 29 85535724; Tel: +86 29 82202022

State Key Laboratory of Fine Chemicals, School of Chemical Engineering, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, 116024, China. E-mail: tinglima@dlut.edu.cn; Fax: +86 0411 39893820; Tel: +86 0411 39893820

Jingdezhen Ceramic Institute, Jingdezhen 333403, China

Received
14th November 2012
, Accepted 1st February 2013
First published on 1st February 2013
A Pt/SiC nanocomposite with ∼10 wt% Pt loading was used as a counter electrode (CE) in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs), it shows a high power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 7.07% (a DSC with a SiC CE has a PCE of 3.29%), reaching 98.5% of the level obtained using a Pt CE (7.18%). This work provides substantial support for developing low-cost Pt-loaded composite CEs for DSCs. Pt/SiC use is expected to reduce the dependence on the Pt in DSCs, while it can also be expected to be used in many chemical and electrochemical processes required to control the amount of Pt and prevent Pt nanoparticle aggregation.

Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs), the third generation of solar cells, are a potential cost-effective alternative to silicon-based and thin-film solar cells, due to their environmentally friendly properties, simple preparation, wide availability, low cost and high power conversion efficiency (PCE). A typical DSC consists of a FTO glass substrate, a dye-sensitised TiO2 thin film, a liquid redox electrolyte, and a Pt counter electrode (CE). The Pt CE, an important DSC component, is crucial for I3− reduction in the electrolyte. However, the high price (monthly average price $51.96 per gram for May 2012, Johnson Matthey Plc) and limited worldwide supply of noble metal Pt severely restrict its use in the development of DSCs requiring large quantities of Pt catalysts for efficient operation. To solve this problem, one approach is to replace Pt with a low-cost and high efficiency non-Pt or Pt-like CE material, with similar catalytic activity. However, the fact remains that there are few alternatives good enough to replace Pt materials in low-cost DSC systems. Another possibility is to reduce the required amount of Pt on CE by developing Pt-loaded nanocomposite catalysts. Both are key steps to further open up the possibility of cost reduction of the devices, vital to promote large-scale commercial applications of DSCs.

Recently, acetylene black, carbon black, graphite, multi-walled carbon nanotubes, single-walled carbon nanotubes, graphene, mesoporous carbon, polypyrrole and poly(3,3-diethyl-3,4-dihydro-2H-thieno-[3,4-b][1,4]-dioxepine) (PProDOT-Et2) were used as support materials, a series of Pt-loaded nanocomposite CE materials has been developed by thermal reduction of H2PtCl6, thermal decomposition of H2PtCl6, radio frequency sputtering, pulsed laser deposition (PLD) and a modified microwave-assisted polyol process, and their potential as substitutes for Pt catalysts in DSCs has been investigated. Superior electrocatalytic activity of the Pt-loaded nanocomposite CE results from the synergistic effect of the different components of the composite materials. The main advantage of using Pt loading is that: first, one can obtain the level of PCE close to that of a Pt electrode using much lower amounts of Pt, second, Pt/SiC use is expected to reduce the dependence on the Pt in DSCs while it can be expected to be used in many chemical and electrochemical processes required to control the amount of Pt and hamper Pt particle aggregation, and third, Pt loading onto the surface of SiC can also improve the mechanical rigidity and electrochemical stability of the electrocatalyst against abrasion.
SiC is a typical non-metallic compound with good thermal and chemical stability. It has high-strength, is cheap and widely available and has been mass-produced since 1893 for many industrial uses. In addition, β-SiC has been used as a support for heterogeneous catalysts, due to its high surface area compared to α-SiC. Pt has established itself as the preferred CE material in DSCs due to its high catalytic activity. Combining SiC with Pt, a small amount of Pt loaded onto β-SiC has promising potential to reach the same level of efficiency as that obtained using a Pt electrode. In addition, this Pt/SiC composite electrode could be used in many chemical and electrochemical processes required to control the amount of Pt and prevent Pt nanoparticle aggregation. Replacing a Pt catalyst with cheaper and more abundant SiC materials allows loading a small amount of Pt, maintaining the same level of efficiency, reducing the fabrication cost and facilitating mass production of the devices, which makes clean energy technology more competitive with conventional energy conversion processes.
In this communication, low-cost SiC has been used as a support material to prepare a Pt/SiC electrocatalyst (∼10 wt% Pt calculated loading) using a microwave-assisted modified ethylene glycol method (ESI), which has been proven to be more environmentally friendly, requiring less energy than conventional processes (a Pt CE was usually prepared by electrochemical deposition, sputtering and thermal decomposition. The limitation of these methods is the poor control over the Pt particle size and agglomeration, which can be overcome by the use of a porous support material with high surface area.). Pt/SiC was then tested as a CE catalyst in a DSC system. The results show that the Pt/SiC possesses superior catalytic activity for I3− reduction, matching the catalytic activity of the dipped Pt CE. PCE improvement was stunning after a small amount of Pt loading (PCE: SiC 3.29%, Pt/SiC 7.07%). To the best of our knowledge, no report has focussed on the use of SiC as a Pt support for the electrocatalytical reduction of tri-iodide in DSCs at present.

Fig. 1 shows the XRD patterns of SiC and Pt/SiC. They can be indexed to the cubic β-SiC and the diffraction peaks match closely the corresponding JCPDS data (65-0360). No extra peaks due to impurities were detected for SiC, indicating that high purity products were obtained. In addition, the three main peaks of Pt were detected in Pt/SiC, indicating that Pt/SiC combines the crystalline features of Pt and SiC. The detailed peak assignments are summarized in the ESI.
To further confirm that the Pt was successfully loaded on the surface of the SiC, we examined the microscopic surface morphology of the Pt/SiC nanocomposites by SEM. It is clear from Fig. 2a and b that the Pt nanoparticles were loaded or embedded on the SiC surface. This was further testified by a typical TEM image of the Pt/SiC. As shown in Fig. 2c, Pt nanoparticles were distributed on the SiC surface, with no obvious agglomerations. The crystallinity of the Pt nanoparticles anchored on the SiC surface was further examined using HR-TEM. As shown in Fig. 2d, two well-defined crystalline lattices can be observed, with d-spacings of 0.245 nm and 0.211 nm, corresponding to the (111) and (200) planes of SiC, respectively. The corresponding Fourier transform pattern of the image (d) is also presented in Fig. S1 (ESI). By contrast, the size range of the SiC particles was about 30–50 nm while that of the Pt nanoparticles was about 3–5 nm. Fig. 2e shows the SEM image of the dipping Pt electrode. It can be found that small Pt nanoparticles were well dispersed on the FTO glass substrate. The SAED pattern of the Pt/SiC nanocomposites is shown in Fig. 2f, in which a series of well-defined rings can be assigned to various diffraction planes of face-centered cubic (fcc) SiC and Pt. These results are in good agreement with the XRD data. Generally, the microwave-assisted thermolytic synthesis technique proved to be an efficient way to synthesise Pt/SiC nanocomposites.
An ideal CE for DSCs must provide superior catalytic activity for I3− reduction in the electrolyte. To measure the catalytic activities of the CEs, cyclic voltammetry (CV) tests were performed. Fig. 3a shows the CVs of SiC, Pt/SiC and a Pt electrode. Two typical pairs of redox peaks are clearly observed for Pt/SiC and Pt but not for SiC. The relatively negative pair is attributed to the oxidation and redox of I−/I3−, while the positive pair is attributed to the redox of I2/I3−. The former directly affects the DSC's performance while the latter has only a slight effect on it. In contrast, it is clear that the profile and the location of the pairs of redox peaks of Pt and Pt/SiC are very similar, indicating that they should have similar CE electrocatalytic activity. From the CV results we can conclude that a small amount of Pt (∼10 wt%) loaded onto the SiC surface greatly improves its electrocatalytic activity.
To investigate the excellent catalytic activity of Pt/SiC, the photovoltaic performance of the DSCs using Pt/SiC as CE was evaluated. Fig. 3b shows the photocurrent density–photovoltage (J–V) curves of DSCs using the various CEs. The detailed photovoltaic parameters are listed in Table 1. The DSC using Pt/SiC as a CE shows an extraordinarily high PCE of 7.07, because of its superior catalytic behavior, up to about 98.5% of the efficiency of the Pt CE. The high fill factor (FF = 0.69) and high open-circuit voltage (Voc = 0.81 V) of DSCs using Pt/SiC as a CE are the main reasons for the notable PCE values. Compared with Pt/SiC, DSCs using SiC as a CE have a remarkably low FF (0.37) and Voc (0.71 V), but only a slightly lower short-circuit current density (Jsc = 12.56 mA cm−2). This suggests that ∼10 wt% Pt loaded onto the SiC surface can improve its electrocatalytic activity for I3− reduction, resulting in an increase in the PCE, matching well the photovoltaic performance of DSCs based on Pt CEs (7.18%). These results are in good agreement with the CV results.
CEs

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)

R
s (Ω)

R
ct (Ω)

Z
N (Ω)

a Dipping Pt, see the ESI.

SiC
0.71
12.56
0.37
3.29
15.8
56.3
102.1
Pt/SiC
0.81
12.71
0.69
7.07
16.3
2.8
5.4
Pt
0.75
13.88
0.69
7.18
13.8
5.8
9.1
The real photovoltaic performance depends strongly on the intrinsic electrochemical characteristics of the CE materials. To provide further insight into the electrochemical activity of SiC and Pt/SiC CEs, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was employed to investigate the charge transfer process and evaluate the electrocatalytic activity. The results are shown in the form of typical Nyquist plots, as illustrated in Fig. 4a. The EIS data (Table 1) were obtained by fitting the Nyquist plots using an equivalent circuit. The high-frequency semicircle on the left side represents the charge-transfer resistance (Rct) of the electrode/electrolyte interface and the corresponding double layer capacitance (Cμ). The low-frequency semicircle on the right is attributed to the Nernst diffusion impedance (ZN) of the redox couple transport in the electrolyte.Rct is 56.3 Ω for SiC, while its values for dipping Pt and Pt/SiC are 5.8 Ω and 2.8 Ω, respectively. The SiC CE presents a larger ZN value up to 102.1 Ω compared with Pt/SiC (5.4 Ω) and Pt CE (9.1 Ω). These larger Rct and ZN values are the main reasons for relatively low catalytic activity when SiC is used as a CE in DSCs. By contrast, Pt and Pt/SiC CEs show relatively small Rct and ZN values, maintaining high electrocatalytic activity for I3− reduction. Usually, a high PCE value means that the CE material has a relatively low Rct value and a smaller ZN value, and vice versa. A small amount of Pt loading onto the surface of the SiC gives rise to reduced Rct and ZN values of the Pt/SiC, lower than those of SiC and Pt CEs, indicating an improved electrocatalytic activity for I3− reduction and photovoltaic performance, which can be attributed to the synergistic catalytic effects of the SiC and Pt components of the Pt/SiC nanocomposites. Such a design of Pt-loaded SiC nanohybrid materials makes full use of the superior electrocatalytic ability of Pt nanoparticles and the control ability of SiC as a support material to Pt particle size and agglomeration, which can improve the mechanical rigidity and electrochemical stability of the electrocatalyst against abrasion, highly desired for practical applications. This finding is in accordance with recent reports. In addition, the smaller ZN means a faster diffusion of the redox couple in the electrolyte, a result which is further confirmed by the Tafel polarization measurement described below. In the Nyquist plots, the impedance at high frequency, where the phase is zero, stands for the ohmic series resistance (Rs), mainly composed of the sheet resistance of the CEs and the electrolyte resistance. The former is dominant here, while the latter can be neglected. The Rs values for dipping Pt/SiC were not as low as we expected, which might be due to the spray-coating process giving a larger sheet resistance.
To further confirm the catalytic activity, we performed Tafel tests for the three CEs. From the Tafel curves (Fig. 4b) we can obtain the exchange current density (J0) and the limiting diffusion current density (Jlim), which are closely associated with the catalytic activity of the CEs (see the ESI for the Tafel test details). The Jlim of Pt/SiC is lower than that of Pt but higher than that of SiC, reflecting the fact that SiC has a higher diffusion coefficient (D) after Pt loading and consequently a higher diffusion velocity for the redox couple in the electrolyte. Therefore, the high diffusion velocity is one reason why the DSCs exhibit a relatively high photovoltaic performance when Pt/SiC is used as a CE. The branches of the Tafel curves of Pt/SiC are very close to those of the Pt electrode, suggesting that the Pt/SiC and Pt CEs have similar catalytic activity. The slope of the Pt/SiC curve is slightly lower than that of Pt, indicating a roughly similar J0. In contrast, SiC shows the smallest J0, indicating poor catalytic activity, in good agreement with the EIS and CV results. Based on this systematic evaluation of electrocatalytic activity, it is clear that Pt/SiC demonstrates superior catalytic activity for I3− reduction and results in competitive photovoltaic performance, with a higher Voc, Jsc and FF. Pt/SiC is expected to replace Pt as a potential CE catalyst in DSCs if the EIS parameters can be further reduced by optimized fabrication of the CE, including the use of a highly porous structure and control of the thickness of the CE films.
In summary, a Pt/SiC nanocomposite with ∼10 wt% Pt loading can be easily synthesized using a microwave-assisted method for potential mass production. Pt/SiC composites as CEs show impressive improvement of catalytic activity for I3− reduction, with a high PCE of 7.07% in DSC systems (SiC as a CE has a PCE of 3.29% in DSCs), equivalent to 98.5% of the level obtained using a dipping Pt CE (7.18%). Superior electrocatalytic activity and photovoltaic performance of the Pt-loaded nanohybrids result from the synergistic effect of the different components of the composite materials. Through this kind of technical strategy makes full use of the synergistic effect to overcome the Pt challenge, the dependence on the Pt is expected to greatly reduce, and noble metal Pt should be used economically to meet the increasing demands on an industrial scale. This work highlights the potential of employing carbide as a support for a small amount of precious Pt loading to fabricate nanohybrids, providing substantial support for developing a new class of low-cost Pt-loaded early transition metal compounds (oxides, carbides, nitrides, sulfides, etc.) with similar electronic and catalytic properties to Pt metals. Although present work focused on the use of SiC as a support for the Pt/SiC CE in a DSC, this nanohybrid electrode could be expected to be used in many chemical and electrochemical processes required to control the amount of Pt and hamper Pt particle aggregation. Also, Pt loading onto the surface of the SiC can also improve the mechanical rigidity and stability of the electrocatalyst, which is highly desired for practical applications.

Financial support from the 863 Program (2009AA03Z220), NSFC (50773008, 51102122), Projects in the National Science & Technology Pillar Program during the Twelfth Five-year Plan Period (2012BAD47B02), Shaanxi Provincial Department of Education (2010JK655) and the Sci-Tech R&D Program of Shaanxi Province (2010K01-120, 2011JM6010) is highly acknowledged. The project was partly sponsored by SRF for ROCS, SEM.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Additional experimental details and data. See DOI: 10.1039/c3cp44048f
This journal is © the Owner Societies 2013