 DOI: 10.1039/C8TA06378H
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 17401-17408


Ping
Shen
,

Mengnan
Yao
,

Guoxin
Wang
,

Ruoning
Mi
,

Wenbin
Guo
,

Yang
Bai
* and 

Liang
Shen
*

State Key Laboratory of Integrated Optoelectronics, College of Electronic Science and Engineering, Jilin University, 2699 Qianjin Street, Changchun 130012, People's Republic of China. E-mail: shenliang@jlu.edu.cn

Nanomaterials Centre and Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD 4072, Australia. E-mail: y.bai@uq.edu.au

Received
3rd July 2018
, Accepted 14th August 2018
First published on 14th August 2018
Electron transporting layers (ETLs) existing between active layers and an electrode play a critical role in improving the performance parameters of polymer solar cells (PSCs). Traditional wide bandgap semiconductor metal oxides as ETLs usually require high temperature fabrication process, which is incompatible with flexible substrates as well as roll-to-roll manufacturing technology. Herein, we demonstrate high-efficiency PSCs with integrated low temperature solution-processed tin dioxide (SnO2) nanocrystals and a poly-[(9,9-bis(3′-(N,N-dimethylamino)propyl)-2,7-fluorene)-alt-2,7-(9,9-dioctylfluorene)] (PFN) stacked structure as an ETL with excellent photoelectric performance. A combination of characterizations including ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy, transient photovoltage and transient photocurrent measurements, and impedance spectroscopy were used to systematically study the interfacial effects induced by the SnO2/PFN ETL. It shows that SnO2 nanocrystals can serve as an efficient electron-selective buffer except for an unmatched energy level, while the PFN interlayer can intentionally reduce the energy misalignment of devices through forming dipoles at the interface and effectively reduce the work function. With these dual functions, the-state of the-art PSCs based on SnO2/PFN outperform those based on SnO2-only in power conversion efficiency, from 4.31% to 11.05%. We believe that the SnO2/PFN bilayer structure integrating the function of enhanced electron extraction and reduced charge recombination can be applied to produce higher performance devices by using a low temperature solution-processed technique.

With the environmental deterioration and rising energy consumption around the world, great efforts have been devoted to photovoltaic technologies that convert sunlight to electricity in a sustainable way. As one of the promising photovoltaic devices, polymer solar cells (PSCs) have good potential to meet the demands of clean and renewable resources. Owing to their salient advantages of low cost, good mechanical flexibility, solution processability and large-area manufacturing, PSCs have attracted extensive attention in the last decade. Vigorous progress has been made by thermal annealing, developing new materials for active and hole/electron transport layers, using processing additives and solvent mixtures, new print techniques and interface and bandgap engineering. These combined efforts have resulted in single-junction PSCs with power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) as high as 13%. In particular, the efficient hole/electron transport interlayers have multiple functions in PSCs. They are able to reduce the energy barrier between the active layer and the electrode, thus forming ohmic contacts for effective charge extraction. Moreover, optical field modulation and protection of the direct chemical or physical interactions between the electrodes and active layers are also important functions that can be provided by the interlayer. In general, to be a suitable interlayer for PSCs, a material should fulfill several requirements: (1) it should benefit the interfacial compatibility with the active layer and have optical transparency throughout the visible region of the spectrum. (2) It should have good electrical conductivity to minimize the interfacial resistance loss and form an ohmic contact with the electrodes. (3) It should have good charge selectivity to improve the charge collection efficiency at the corresponding electrodes. Besides, for the cathode interlayer material, the work function (WF) should be close to the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) value of the acceptor material of active layers to boost electron-collection, while its highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) level should be low enough to block holes. For an anode interlayer material, the WF should be close to the HOMO value of the donor material of active layers to facilitate hole-collection, while the LUMO level should be high enough to block electrons. However, this kind of material that simultaneously satisfies the above requirements seems scarce. It is particularly difficult to adjust its conductivity and WF, retaining enough carrier-blocking capability simultaneously. In the traditional device structure, the active layers were sandwiched by a poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)/poly-(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) coated indium tin oxide (ITO) anode and a low WF metal cathode (e.g., Al). However, PEDOT:PSS is a low band-gap material with inherently acidic nature and exhibits poor electron-blocking capability, which limits the further improvement of the power conversion efficiency (PCE). To address this issue, an inverted structure has been widely used in PSCs due to its better air stability than the normal structure. The electron transport layer (ETL) in inverted PSCs plays an important role in the device performance and stability, since it facilitates the formation of ohmic contact between the active layer and the cathode, thus enhancing electron collection efficiency. Titanium oxide (TiOx) and zinc oxide (ZnO) which are n-type metal oxides have been proven to be efficient ETLs due to their good solution processability, environmental stability, and high transparency in the visible wavelength range. However, some key issues still exist in these metal oxides. For instance, forming TiOx films require a high-temperature sintering process (>400 °C), which is undesirable for flexible and lightweight substrates. Meanwhile, the square resistance of ITO will be increased several fold after the high-temperature process, which immensely reduces the short current density. For ZnO, serious charge recombination caused by excessive surface trap states makes the device suffer from poor efficiency. Recently, tin oxide (SnO2) has emerged as a promising candidate of an ETL, which shows excellent chemical stability, low cost, low-temperature process, and high electron mobility (100–200 cm2 V−1 s−1), suggesting faster transport of photoinjected electrons to the conductive current collector. Further efforts are made to improve the performance of PSCs with a planar structure based on SnO2 ETLs. However, the performance of PSCs incorporating solely SnO2 nanocrystals as ETLs has been far from satisfactory. There is still a big contact barrier between the ITO/SnO2 and active layers. Furthermore, the surface defects of SnO2, such as dangling bonds and oxygen containing groups, typically act as recombination sites, which decrease the PCE and the lifetime of PSC devices. Any pinholes in the compact SnO2 layer can lead to direct contacts and shunt pathways between active layers and substrates, resulting in serious charge carrier recombination at the interface. Therefore, due to the surface traps and energy misalignment of the as-synthesized SnO2 NPs, a single thin SnO2 ETL cannot suppress the carrier recombination effectively and may not be an optimal blocking layer for PSCs. Most recently, inverted PSCs based on both n-doping hybrid polymeric ETLs and polyethyleneimine ethoxylate (PEIE)-1,8-diiodooctane (DIO) mixed ETLs with a 3D conductive network have breaking 10% efficiency. Especially, poly-[(9,9-bis(3′-(N,N-dimethylamino)propyl)-2,7-fluorene)-alt-2,7-(9,9-dioctylfluorene)] (PFN) as a kind of conjugated polyelectrolyte (CPE) represents another important interfacial material that can circumvent the issues associated with surface defects in metal oxides as an ETL. It can be used as a surface modifier for the ITO electrode to drastically reduce the energy misalignment between ITO and the active layer, resulting in the ohmic contact between the two layers. Thus, the effects of the PFN interlayer on the improvement of device performance is multifold: an enhanced built-in potential across the device due to the existence of an interface dipole, improved charge-transport properties, elimination of the buildup of the space charge, and reduced recombination loss. It is noted that the thick layer of PFN (>10 nm) will act as an insulator due to its low conductivity, which dramatically increases the series resistance of the device. Oppositely, the ultra-thin PFN layer incompletely covers the ITO electrode, which may make direct contact between the electrodes and affect the device performance.

Herein, we report the integration of SnO2 nanocrystals and a PFN stacked structure through a facile low-temperature solution-processed method and explore their applications as ETL materials in high efficiency PSCs. The device architecture is shown schematically in Fig. 1a. The thermal annealing temperature for spin-coated SnO2 (synthesized by a sol–gel method) films is as low as 100 °C. The SnO2/PFN bilayer structure effectively reduces the energy barrier between the active layer and the electrode. The PSCs incorporating the SnO2/PFN bilayer as an ETL exhibits a dramatically improved PCE from 4.31 ± 0.18% to 11.05 ± 0.11% compared to the SnO2-only devices. Moreover, the ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) results reveal the upward shift of the Fermi level owing to employing a SnO2/PFN stacked structure, leading to improved energy level alignment. Additionally, we further study the effects of the SnO2/PFN bilayer as an ETL on the charge carrier recombination and transport characteristics by measuring the charge carrier lifetime and charge carrier extraction time via transient photovoltage (TPV) and transient photocurrent (TPC) methods, respectively. We believe that this work represents an important step towards developing efficient ETLs for high-performance PSCs.

The PSCs investigated in this paper have an inverted structure of ITO/SnO2/PFN/poly[4,8-bis(5(2-ethylhexyl)thiophen-2-yl)benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiopheneco-3-fluorothieno[3,4-b]-thiophene-2-carboxylate]:phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester(PTB7-Th:PC71BM)/MoO3/Ag. The ITO conducting glass substrate (a sheet resistance of 15 Ω sq−1) was first precleaned with acetone, ethanol, and deionized water followed by UV ozone treatment for 10 min. SnO2 (synthesized by a sol–gel method) was dissolved in ethanol with a concentration of 1.5 mg mL−1 and spin-coated on top of the ITO to form a thin film after annealing at 100 °C for 20 min. Then, a 3 nm PFN film was spin-coated on the SnO2 film without thermal annealing. The blend solution was prepared by dissolving a 1:1.5 weight ratio of PTB7-Th (1 materials, used as received) and PC71BM (1 materials, used as received) in a mixed solvent of a 1,2-dichlorobenzene (DCB) with 3 vol% of a 1,8-diiodoctane (97:3% by volume) additive, in which the total concentration was controlled at 20 mg mL−1. Subsequently, it was spin-coated on the PFN film at 2000 rotations per minute (rpm) for 60 s in a glovebox. Finally, the samples were evaporated with 10 nm MoO3 and 100 nm Ag in sequence under high vacuum (5 × 10−4 Pa) without disrupting the vacuum. The deposition rate was about 0.1 nm s−1, which was monitored using a quartz-oscillating thickness monitor (ULVAC, CRTM-9000). The active area of the device was 0.064 cm2.


For J–V characteristic curves, air mass 1.5 G simulated irradiation with an Oriel 300 W solar simulator with an intensity of 100 mW cm−2 was employed with a computer-programmed Keithley 2601 source meter. The IPCE spectra were measured with a Crowntech QTest Station 1000 AD. The transmittance spectra were recorded using an ultraviolet/visible spectrometer (UV-1700, Shimadzu).

Moreover, the XRD patterns of the samples were obtained using a Rigaku D/MAX 2550 diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation (wavelength of about 1.5418 Å). TEM was carried out using a JEM-2100F microscope. Besides, the He I (21.22 eV) radiation line from a discharge lamp with an energy resolution of 0.1 eV was used in UPS measurements. For TPV and TPC measurements, the samples were serially connected to a digital oscilloscope and the input impedance of the oscilloscope was set to 1 MΩ and 50 Ω, respectively, to form the open- and short-circuit conditions, respectively, for monitoring the charge density decay and charge extraction time. Impedance spectroscopy, which measures the dielectric properties of a material and an interface as a function of frequency, was measured using an impedance analyzer (Wayne Kerr Electronics 6520B) with a bias of 1 V in the frequency range of 20 Hz to 2 MHz.
The thickness of each layer was measured using a spectroscopic ellipsometer (XLS-100, J. A. Woollam) and a step profiler (ET 150, KOSAKA).

The crystallographic structures of the as-synthesized SnO2 nanocrystals were examined by the X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements as shown in Fig. 1b. It was observed that all diffraction peaks, including (1 1 0), (1 0 1), (2 0 0), (2 1 1), and (1 1 2), can be well indexed to tetragonal rutile SnO2 (JCPDS card: 41-1445) nanocrystals. And no other crystalline phase was found. Then, transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was used to characterize the morphology of SnO2 nanocrystals. In Fig. 1c, it can be seen that SnO2 nanoparticles are extremely small and have an average diameter between 2 and 4 nm. A typical high resolution TEM (HRTEM) image of SnO2 nanoparticles is shown in Fig. 1d. The clear lattice fringes observed in the HRTEM image further confirm the high crystallinity of these SnO2 nanocrystals. The interplanar distance was measured to be approximately 0.33 nm, which corresponds to the (1 1 0) diffraction planes of the rutile-type structure.

To test the performance of stacked SnO2/PFN as an ETL in inverted PSCs, the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of SnO2-only, SnO2/PFN, and PFN-only devices are compared in Fig. 2a. The corresponding performance parameters, including short circuit current density (JSC), open circuit voltage (VOC), fill factor (FF), and PCE are summarized in Table 1. The more conductive SnO2-only device just exhibits a PCE of 4.31 ± 0.18% (VOC of 0.5 ± 0.01 V, JSC of 16.37 ± 0.13 mA cm−2, and FF of 52.7 ± 0.2%), which is probably attributed to the interface trap induced recombination at the SnO2/active layer interface. By incorporating both SnO2 nanocrystals and the PFN interlayer into the inverted PSCs, all the photovoltaic parameters are simultaneously enhanced as compared to the SnO2- or PFN-only devices. Very encouragingly, the VOC, JSC and FF increased dramatically to 0.8 ± 0.01 V, 19.41 ± 0.12 mA cm−2 and 71.12 ± 0.2% in the PSCs employing a SnO2/PFN stacked structure, respectively, resulting in an enhanced PCE of 11.05 ± 0.11%. The excellent FF can be further checked by series resistance (Rs) and shunt resistance (Rsh), which are calculated from the J–V curves and are listed in Table 1. The smallest Rs and the largest Rsh indicate that the charge carrier transport and collection ability are enhanced by using SnO2/PFN as an ETL, resulting in the increase of FF and PCE. Such a great enhancement in photovoltaic performance reveals the superior interface properties of the SnO2/PFN as an effective ETL. Meanwhile, the PCE of PSCs with PFN-only is 9.05 ± 0.13% (VOC of 0.79 ± 0.01 V, JSC of 16.55 ± 0.11 mA cm−2, and FF of 69.2 ± 0.2%). The PFN-only device shows undesirable performance, although the formation of a PFN dipole layer is supposed to better align the energy levels between the ITO electrode and the active layer. This is probably due to the incomplete coverage of the PFN ultrathin layer onto the ITO electrode.
Devices style

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)

R
s (ohm)

R
sh (ohm)
SnO2
16.37 ± 0.13
0.5 ± 0.01
52.7 ± 0.2
4.31 ± 0.18
170.59
3867.21
SnO2/PFN
19.41 ± 0.12
0.8 ± 0.01
71.2 ± 0.2
11.05 ± 0.11
121.62
10697.06
PFN
16.55 ± 0.11
0.79 ± 0.01
69.2 ± 0.2
9.05 ± 0.13
135.07
7118.40
To further certify the JSC enhancement, the IPCE of devices with SnO2-only, SnO2/PFN, and PFN-only was measured, and the obtained spectra are plotted in Fig. 2b. The JSC measured from J–V characteristics is in good agreement with the integrated values derived from the incident-photon-to-current efficiency conversion (IPCE). The IPCE spectrum of the SnO2/PFN bilayer device exhibits the onset of photoresponse at ∼450 nm and a broad slight fluctuation between the wavelengths of 350 and 750 nm, with a maximum IPCE of over 80%. In contrast, SnO2- and PFN-only devices show lower IPCE, which are consistent with the lower JSC for these two devices. The changing trend of IPCE spectra provides direct evidence that suitable SnO2/PFN as a stacked ETL plays an important role in enhancing the JSC through efficient electron extraction.

Fig. 2c compares the UV-visible transmission spectra of glass substrates coated with SnO2 and SnO2/PFN films. Both SnO2 and SnO2/PFN films have good transparency, which indicates that there was no obvious transmittance loss in the visible-light region. Slightly enhanced absorption in the blue-light region (∼400 nm wavelength) was observed in the case of SnO2/PFN. The absorption of SnO2 is also plotted and shown in Fig. 2d, which is below 5% from 320 nm to 800 nm. The similar variation trend also manifests that the light absorption efficiency of the active layer could be rarely affected when used as part of the stacked SnO2/PFN interlayer.
We then further studied the effects of the SnO2/PFN stacked structure on the charge carrier recombination and transport characteristics in complete devices by measuring both the charge carrier lifetime and extraction time via TPV and TPC methods, respectively. As the recombination of holes with the trapped electrons can accelerate the decay of open-circuit photovoltage of the devices, the electron lifetime in the PSCs can therefore be used to analyze the recombination dynamics. As shown in Fig. 3a, the carrier lifetime of the SnO2/PFN device was substantially increased to 6.61 μs, compared with 2.23 and 4.96 μs in SnO2- and PFN-only devices. The longer charge recombination lifetime indicates the suppressed interfacial charge recombination rate and thus enhanced VOC in the devices. In Fig. 3b, devices with the SnO2/PFN stacked ETL showed a faster photocurrent decay time of 0.54 μs under short circuit conditions, while those of devices based on SnO2- and PFN-only ETLs was 1.67 and 0.91 μs. The high charge carrier extraction capability of the SnO2/PFN stacked structure reduced the charge carrier extraction time by 3 times, thus benefiting the efficient charge carrier separation and extraction.
ETLs play an important role in PSCs as carrier transporting/blocking layers, so we continue to investigate the effect of using the SnO2/PFN stacked structure on interface electronic characteristics and try to find the origin of performance improvement with UPS measurements. As shown in Fig. 4a, the WF of SnO2 before and after coating with a PFN ultrathin layer was studied. The bare SnO2 exhibited a WF of 4.46 eV. Notably, the WF was reduced significantly to 3.9 eV upon deposition of the PFN layer. Meanwhile, the Fermi energy was driven up by ∼0.56 eV, suggesting a vacuum level decreasing equivalently by ∼0.56 eV. For the energy difference between the valence band and zero binding energy, the device of SnO2/PFN (ΦV2 = 3.93 eV) is superior to the SnO2-only device (ΦV1 = 3.31 eV), which facilitates more efficient electron extraction and collection, and less recombination at the interface of the polymer and the ETL. Here, the WF change of the SnO2 surface was attributed to the PFN and interface formed dipoles to reduce the energetic misalignment of devices. The WF decrease of the SnO2/PFN layer can result in a large built-in potential and improved charge collection, leading to significantly enhanced VOC and FF.
To further elucidate the influence of different ETLs on charge extraction, the J–V characteristics of the electron-only devices were tested to make an intuitional evaluation of the effective electron mobilities (μe). The devices were tested by the space charge limited current (SCLC) method in the dark with structures of ITO/SnO2/PTB7-Th: PC71BM/BCP/Ag, ITO/SnO2/PFN/PTB7-Th: PC71BM/BCP/Ag, and ITO/PFN/PTB7-Th: PC71BM/BCP/Ag, where the BCP is the hole-blocking layer. As shown in Fig. 5a, the JSC of SnO2/PFN based devices was improved remarkably compared with the SnO2- and PFN-only devices, which reveals that the stacked EAL of SnO2/PFN has positive effect on the electron transport. According to the Mott–Gurney formula, three kinds of μe in the devices with about a 100 nm active layer have been evaluated. The μe of the device with SnO2/PFN was increased to 7.35 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, higher than 9.43 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1 for the SnO2-only device and 4.18 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 for the PFN-only device. As a consequence, the enhanced electron mobility indicates that the stacked ETL of SnO2/PFN exhibits better electron transport properties and an electron extraction ability, resulting in the outstanding JSC for the SnO2/PFN-based PSCs.
The enhanced electron transporting ability of the ETL after using a SnO2/PFN stacked structure will result in decreased contact resistance and enhanced photocurrent, so the impedance spectra of the devices were measured using a Nyquist plot in a frequency range of 20 Hz to 2 MHz with an alternating current signal of 1 V. The complex impedance spectra of devices with SnO2-only, SnO2/PFN, and PFN-only are shown in Fig. 5b. According to the device structure, the equivalent electrical circuit is defined and shown in the inset of Fig. 5b. The first parallel connection element (R1//C1) can be equivalent to the blend active layer, the second parallel connection element (R2//C2) corresponds to the interface layers, and the series resistance R3 can be assigned to the corresponding electrodes and an external circuit. From the diagram it can be seen that the shapes of impedance spectra are all semicircles which can help us to investigate the resistance of different structures of PSCs. It is noted that the diameters of the semicircles for the three kinds of devices are different. The diameters of devices with SnO2- and PFN-only are much larger than that of the SnO2/PFN device. The decline of equivalent resistance means that the introduction of a SnO2/PFN stacked ETL in inverted PSCs by using a low temperature solution-processed technique can effectively decrease the series resistance of PSCs, which is consistent with the enhanced photocurrent.

In summary, highly efficient inverted PSCs were successfully demonstrated by incorporating low temperature solution-processed SnO2 nanocrystals and a PFN stacked structure as an ETL with excellent photoelectric performance. UPS spectroscopy studies revealed that the PFN in the new ETL plays a critical role in balancing the energetic misalignment of devices through forming dipoles at the interface and reduce the work function, which improves the photovoltaic parameters of the PSCs. Moreover, we study the charge carrier recombination and transport characteristics in the SnO2/PFN bilayer structure by measuring the charge carrier lifetime and charge carrier extraction time via TPV and TPC methods, the corresponding PCE is dramatically improved from 4.31 ± 0.18% to 11.05 ± 0.11% compared to the device with SnO2-only. Therefore, we believe that this work provides valuable material design guidelines to develop new interfacial materials that not only can match the work function and charge recombination to improve the performance of PSCs but also may be suitable for the future production of large-area PSCs based on a low temperature solution-processed technique.


There are no conflicts to declare.


The authors are grateful to the International Cooperation and Exchange Project of Jilin Province (20170414002GH, 20180414001GH) for the support to the work.


† These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018