 DOI: 10.1039/C1CP22290B
(Communication)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 19302-19306

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Shlomit
Greenwald
,

Sven
Rühle
*,

Menny
Shalom
,

Shay
Yahav
 and 

Arie
Zaban
*

Department of Chemistry, Bar Ilan University, Ramat Gan 52900, Israel. E-mail: sven.ruhle@gmail.com; zabana@mail.biu.ac.il; Fax: +972-(0)3-738-4053; Tel: +972-(0)3-531-7876

Received
14th July 2011
, Accepted 20th September 2011
First published on 7th October 2011
A quantum dot sensitized solar cell based on a porous ZrO2 film, sensitized with CdSe quantum dots using CdS as an intermediate layer is presented. We observe electron injection from photo-excited quantum dots into the ZrO2, which is unexpected due to the much higher conduction band edge (closer to the vacuum level) of bulk ZrO2 compared to TiO2.


Quantum dots (QDs) have recently attracted considerable attention as light absorbers for solar cell applications due to their tunable size-dependent absorption properties. Deposited onto a wide bandgap nano-structured semiconductor, light to electric power conversion efficiencies (η) up to 4–5% have been achieved. In quantum-dot sensitized solar cells (QDSCs) electrons are injected from an excited QD state into the conduction band (CB) of the wide bandgap semiconductor while a redox electrolyte is regenerating the oxidized QDs.

The working principle of QDSCs is very similar to dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) where the photovoltage is determined by the energy difference between the electron quasi Fermi level (EFn) in the nano-structured film and the redox potential (Eredox) of the liquid electrolyte. The photovoltage is ultimately limited by the energy difference between the conduction band edge (ECB) and Eredox, considering that recombination will prevent strong electron accumulation in the semiconductor CB and keep EFn below the band edge. QDSCs and DSCs are mostly based on a mesoporous TiO2 film where QDSCs are typically sensitized with CdS,CdSe, PbS, or Ag2S QDs while ruthenium dyes have been the most popular absorbers in DSCs until now. The best performances in QDSCs were achieved with an aqueous polysulfide redox electrolyte in conjunction with a PbS, CoS or Cu2S counter electrode, while DSCs mostly employ an organic I−/I3−redox electrolyte with a Pt counter electrode.
To boost the conversion efficiency of QDSCs and DSCs the difference between the optical gap of the absorber and the photovoltage has to be minimized. In DSCs surface treatments of the nano-structured film, co-adsorbed dipole molecules and different redox couples have been studied to increase the energy difference between ECB of the sensitized semiconductor and Eredox. Alternative wide bandgap semiconductors with different ECB such as ZnO, SnO2, Nb2O5, In2O3, SrTiO3 were investigated, all of which are able to accept electrons from the photo-excited dye.ZrO2 with its wide bandgap and lower electron affinity (i.e. ECB closer to the vacuum level) would have been a very promising candidate to increase the photovoltage, but no electron injection from the Ru-dye was observed. Similar observations have been made in QDSCs with a solid state hole conductor (spiro-OMeTAD), where no electron injection from PbS QDs into the ZrO2 CB was detected. In contrast to that we show that CdSe QDs can inject electrons from their lowest excited state into ZrO2 when an aqueous polysulfide redox electrolyte is used to recharge oxidized QDs. Based on the CB level of ZrO2, electron injection from QDs is not expected and to the best of our knowledge this is the first demonstration of ZrO2 as a substrate for sensitized solar cells. It was the aim to increase the photovoltage by using ZrO2, however the measurements did not show significant differences compared to TiO2 based cells. We explain the photovoltaic action by a shift of the energy levels caused by QD deposition in conjunction with the adsorption of potential determining ions (PDIs) from the polysulfide electrolyte. While the unique role of the polysulfide redox electrolyte in terms of hole transfer kinetics has been recently pointed out we show that the interaction of ionic species differs significantly in TiO2 and ZrO2 based QDSCs. This can be of great importance when the liquid electrolyte is replaced by a solid state hole conductor such as spiro-OMeTAD and might require the addition of PDIs to improve interface energetics.

Dense compact layers (CL) were prepared by spray pyrolysis on Fluorine-doped Tin Oxide (FTO) covered glass substrates (Pilkington TEC 15) at 450 °C using compressed air as a carrier gas. A solution of 12 mM zirconium(IV)propoxide (Aldrich) and 0.6 M acetyl acetone dissolved in 1-propanol was used to prepare ZrO2 layers while a solution of 0.2 M titanium(IV)isopropoxide (Aldrich) and 0.4 M acetyl acetone dissolved in ethanol was used to deposit compact TiO2 layers.

Porous ZrO2 films were prepared by electrophoretic deposition (EPD) from ethanol suspension containing 0.065 g ZrO2 submicron powder (Aldrich) at a current density of 0.5 mA cm−2 (2 cycles of 30 s). Afterwards the electrodes were dried at 120 °C for 30 min and sintered at 550 °C for 1 hour in air. Mesoporous TiO2 films were prepared by the doctor blade method using commercial TiO2 pastes (HT Solaronix), and were sintered at 450 °C for 30 min in air. The thickness of all the mesoporous electrodes was 2–3 μm, measured by a Dektack profilometer.
CdSe-QDs were deposited in situ on the electrodes by chemical bath deposition (CBD) using an intermediate CdS layer, which was deposited by Successive Ionic Layer Adsorption and Reaction (SILAR) on the mesoporous electrodes or by CBD on the compact films (see ESI). For QDSCs an aqueous polysulfide redox electrolyte (1 M Na2S, 0.1 M S, 0.1 M NaOH) was used in conjunction with a PbS/Pb back electrode.
For DSCs fabrication, electrodes were sensitized in a 0.5 mM N3 ethanolic solution for 12 hours, rinsed and dried in a filtered air stream. A Pt-coated FTO glass was used as a counter electrode and an I−/I3−redox electrolyte (0.6 M dimethylpropylimidazolium iodide, 0.1 M LiI, 0.05 M I2, 0.5 M tert-butylpyridine in 1:1 acetonitrile–methoxy-propionitrile) was filled in between the electrodes.

I–V characteristics were recorded in the dark and under illumination (class A solar simulator, Newport) with a potentiostat (Autolab) using a two-electrode sandwich cell with an effective area of 1.03 cm2; the FTO substrate was contacted as working electrode while the counter and reference were connected together to the back electrode. Teflon tape was used as a spacer and the liquid electrolyte was filled in between the front and the back electrode.

The I–V characteristics of a porous ZrO2 electrode sensitized with CdSe QDs are shown by solid black lines in Fig. 1. Under 1 sun illumination (100 mW cm−2, simulated AM 1.5G spectrum) a short circuit current density (Jsc) of 1.36 mA cm−2, open circuit voltage (Voc) of 426 mV and fill factor (FF) of 63% were measured. Incident photon to current conversion efficiency (IPCE) measurements show that electron injection occurs at energies that correspond to the optical bandgap of the CdSe QDs (see ESI). For comparison the I–V characteristics in the dark and under illumination of a flat, compact ZrO2 electrode sensitized with CdSe QDs are shown by dashed lines in Fig. 1. A Jsc of 0.65 mA cm−2, Voc of 338 mV and FF of 34% were measured at 1 sun. The I–V characteristics clearly show photovoltaic action of both devices. To attribute the photovoltaic action to electron injection from CdSe QDs into ZrO2, alternative paths for electron collection at the FTO electrode were excluded. Fig. 2a depicts the conventional path for charge separation at the ZrO2/QD/electrolyte interface followed by electron diffusion through the porous particle network (path A). To prevent electron transport along the QD layer to the FTO substrate (path B), which can be significant in in situ prepared QD multilayers, the FTO electrodes used in Fig. 1 were covered by a compact ZrO2 layer (schematically shown in Fig. 2b and c). The compact layers were characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and cyclic voltammetry to exclude electron transfervia pinholes (see ESI). Consequently, we can attribute the observed photocurrent to electron transportviaZrO2 following injection from CdSe QDs. This conclusion is furthermore supported by the higher photocurrent observed in the porous system, which suggests that the enhanced surface area contributes to the charge separation process. We note that both the flat and the porous QDSCs were not optimized for this fundamental study.

Based on the ECB of ZrO2 (−3.4 eV) and the first excited CdSe QD level taken from the literature (−3.94 to −3.65 eV, depending on size and preparation method) an energy barrier of 0.3–0.6 eV should prevent electron injection from the first excited CdSe state, which is located in the bandgap of the ZrO2 (Fig. 2d). However, these QD energy levels were measured in vacuum while in QDCSs the photoelectrode is immersed into a liquid electrolyte. To understand how CdSe QD sensitized ZrO2 electrodes operate, we will first consider the working principle of TiO2 based QDSCs. The redox potential of the polysulfide electrolyte (−0.51 V vs.normal hydrogen electrode, NHE) is located roughly 1 V closer to the vacuum level compared to the I−/I3−redox couple (+0.53 V vs.NHE). This approximately corresponds with ECB of TiO2 in DSCs and no significant photovoltage should be observed in polysulfide based QDSCs. However, TiO2 based QDSCs are able to generate open circuit voltages of around 450–650 mV. This means that the CB of TiO2 shifts by at least the same amount towards the vacuum level, which can occur for the following reasons:
(1) Adsorption of ions from the electrolyte, which determines the surface potential of the semiconductors (potential determining ions, PDIs). For oxide surfaces H+ and OH− are known as PDIs that can shift the energy levels by 59 meV per pH unit. It was furthermore shown that the pH induced shift can introduce electric fields into compact TiO2 layers. Thus, the polysulfide electrolyte can shift ECB towards the vacuum level due to its basic pH.
(2) The synthesis and deposition procedure of the QD sensitizer can create an interface dipole between the porous semiconductor and the electrolyte that shifts the semiconductor bands with respect to Eredox. The intermediate CdS layer for example may create a dipole shell around the porous oxide film.
(3) Enhanced electron accumulation at the mesoporous electrode surface due to an increased trap density at basic pH can lead to an upward shift of the TiO2 bands. Strong inhomogeneous accumulation as a function of distance from the front electrode can even lead to a bending or slanting of ECB and thus create an additional driving force for electron collection. While this effect seems to be negligible in DSCs it can become relevant in QDSCs.
Furthermore, interaction of oxide surfaces with sulfur ions can affect the energy levels but it is more complex and less investigated compared to the effect of H+ and OH−. We summarize that a band shift of the mesoporous TiO2 is required to explain the Voc in polysulfide based QDSCs.
The onset of electron injection from CdSe QDs usually corresponds well with the optical bandgap, indicating that also the QD levels are shifting upwards with the TiO2. This might be caused by the interaction of sulfide and selenide surfaces with S2− ions; dissolved sulfide for example is a known PDI for CdS surfaces.
To verify the shift of energy levels in more detail and to understand its impact on ZrO2 and TiO2 based QDSCs, we deposited mesoporous TiO2 films onto FTO substrates that were covered with a compact layer of either TiO2 or ZrO2. These electrodes were used to produce either a DSC with an organic I−/I3−redox solution (N3 dye, Pt counter electrode), or a QDSC with an aqueous polysulfide electrolyte (CdSe QDs, CdS intermediate layer, PbS/Pb counter electrode). I–V characteristics in Fig. 3a show a current density of 8 mA cm−2 for the DSCs with a compact TiO2 layer while only 25 μA cm−2 were measured when a thin ZrO2 layer was separating the FTO substrate from the mesoporous TiO2. In contrast to that, rather small differences in the performance were observed for the QDSCs, where a slightly higher Voc and Jsc were measured for the cell with the compact TiO2 layer (Fig. 3b).
We propose that the energy levels of the QD sensitized TiO2 strongly shift towards the vacuum in the presence of an aqueous polysulfide electrolyte while the ZrO2 levels are significantly less affected by QD deposition and the polysulfide environment. Energy band diagrams in Fig. 4 show the valence and conduction band edges in the mesoporous TiO2 in the four case matrix: a DSC (left) and QDSC (right) with a compact TiO2 (top) and ZrO2 layer (bottom). Electron transport to the FTO contact occurs without difficulties in a DSC with a compact TiO2 layer (Fig. 4a). In contrast a compact ZrO2 layer strongly decreases the photocurrent due to an energy barrier, created by the conduction band offset at the ZrO2/TiO2 interface (Fig. 4c). In a polysulfide based QDSC the TiO2 energy levels shift upwards, which increases the energy difference between ECB and Eredox and allows the system to generate photovoltages of hundreds of mVs (Fig. 4b). In QDSCs only a slight current decrease is observed when a compact ZrO2 layer is introduced to the electrode. Thus we propose that the ZrO2 levels are not strongly affected by the polysulfide redox electrolyte. Consequently the QD sensitized TiO2 levels shift and align with the ZrO2 conduction band such that no transport barrier is created at the ZrO2/TiO2 interface.
To explain the photovoltaic behaviour of CdSe sensitized ZrO2 electrodes (with a CdS intermediate layer) we propose a shift of the QD levels towards the vacuum level caused by specific adsorption of PDIs from the polysulfide electrolyte. The ZrO2 bands on the other hand are only weakly affected by the ionic composition of the redox solution such that excited QD states can shift above ECB and inject electrons upon photo-excitation into the ZrO2. The photovoltage of ZrO2 based CdS/CdSe QDSCs is similar to that of TiO2 based systems, suggesting that ECB of both oxides is comparable in the polysulfide environment in contrast to the energy levels in vacuum. This has very important implications for the current understanding of how QDSCs and DSCs operate. While the photovoltage is ultimately limited by the energy difference between ECB and Eredox we find that ECB as well as the QD absorber levels are not intrinsic material properties but depend strongly on the chemical composition of the surrounding media.
The strong shift of the energy levels as a result of the interaction with the electrolyte has important implications for solid–solid interfaces e.g. between the compact ZrO2 layer and TiO2 nano-crystals. The energy levels with respect to the electrolyte are determined by the semiconductor surface together with the PDIs while the energy levels at the solid state interface are determined by the materials that form the interface. As a result strong electric fields can occur which subsequently might create barriers for electron transport. While the dimensions in nano-crystals and QDs are in general sufficiently small to allow efficient electron tunneling such barriers can affect the solar cell performance if the porous film consists of larger particles.

Here we have shown that CdSe QDs can inject electrons from the first excited state into ZrO2 when the electrode is immersed into an aqueous polysulfide redox electrolyte. This is in contrast to DSCs, where no electron injection is observed from the commonly used ruthenium dyes into ZrO2. We propose that in nano-composite solar cells the adsorption of potential defining ions from the electrolyte has a huge impact on the energy level positions of the individual materials. Consequently, the electrolyte composition can determine whether electron injection from the absorber into the wide bandgap electron occurs or is energetically forbidden. This has important implications for the replacement of the liquid electrolyte by a solid state hole conductor that might affect the energy levels in a less favorable fashion and lead to a reduction in the light to electric power conversion efficiency.


SR acknowledges financial support from the European Union within the FP7 framework (Marie Curie Intra-European Fellowship for Career Development). The authors acknowledge financial support within the Israeli Ministry of Science Tashtiyot program.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c1cp22290b
This journal is © the Owner Societies 2011