 DOI: 10.1039/C3RA42418A
(Communication)
RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 17003-17006

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms

Xiao Li Zhang*,
Fuzhi Huang,
Yang Chen,
Yi-Bing Cheng* and 
Rose Amal*

ARC Centre of Excellence for Functional Nanomaterials, School of Chemical Engineering, The University of New South Wales, Kensington, Sydney 2052, Australia. E-mail: xiaolizhang.z@gmail.com; r.amal@unsw.edu.au

Department of Materials Engineering, Monash University, Clayton, Melbourne 2052, Australia. E-mail: yibing.cheng@monash.edu

Received
15th May 2013
, Accepted 22nd July 2013
First published on 23rd July 2013
Tuning the packing of materials in electrode films enabled highly efficient charge transport and a slowdown in recombination that were witnessed by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). When used in dye-sensitized solar cell preparation, this led to significant enhancements of the overall solar power conversion efficiency by up to 11.7%.

The utilization of a mesoporous TiO2 electrode by O'Regan and Grätzel in 1991 brought dye-sensitized solar cell (DSC) technology from a promising concept close to real-life application. Today's DSCs that combine low-cost materials, low-tech construction processes with competitive solar power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) have become an emerging alternative to silicon photovoltaics for green electricity generation. However, the inefficient charge transport through long zigzag paths in the photoanode films, still prohibits these devices from reaching their optimum performance. Conductive nano-architectures, e.g. graphene nanosheets and one-dimensional nanomaterials, have been used to create charge transport freeways in the electrode films. Nevertheless, the significant drawbacks of reduced surface areas and increased light absorption from the incorporated materials prevented these devices from obtaining fairly good PCE performances. This was accompanied by considerable concerns regarding the cost and stability of the complex structures and the necessary multi-step construction processes.

Whereas the conductivity of photoanode films is ultimately reliant on the phoanode material, the quality of the photoanode films, such as the inter-particle connection, is also believed to have a strong influence on charge transport. As shown in Scheme 1 a), a conventional electrode has many relatively large spaces with poor contact between the randomly attached nanoparticles as a result of using an organic binder. In such films, to reach the collecting electrode, photo-generated electrons need to transfer across many grain boundaries where a lot of recombination occurs resulting in dramatic electron loss. The development of electrode films with well connected nanoparticles would tackle the problem of the slow charge transport mechanism in the current DSC devices. This would also greatly contribute to the development of high efficiency electrochemical and photoelectrochemical devices utilizing mesoporous semiconductor nanaoparticle electrodes across a comprehensive range of energy and environmental applications.
Herein, we demonstrate that the charge transport properties of photoanode films can be upgraded through an innovative approach – a simple film compression treatment. As illustrated in Scheme 1 b), the compression process develops densely packed nanoparticles throughout the film where the improved contact between the neighboring nanoparticles offer charge transport shortcuts to the collecting electrode.
Unlike the uniaxial pressure of mechanical press techniques that is generally accompanied with pressure variation along the applied surface, the cold isostatic press (CIP) technique utilized in this work provides an isostatic pressure through a pressurized liquid medium. It allows for uniform compression in all directions for large-area films on rigid substrates that are flat, curved or even in more complicated shapes. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time that the CIP technique has been used in the preparation of rigid fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) glass based photoanode films to reduce the large inter-particle spaces. This room temperature process also facilitates necking between TiO2 particles during the subsequent sintering treatment. The compression of the photoanodes was successful and the overall PCE performances were enhanced by up to 11.7% for the films prepared from crystalline TiO2 nanoparticle aggregates and commercial Degussa P25 TiO2 nanoparticles, proving the feasibility and benefit of employing this simple compression technique in device construction. The extensive enhancements in open-circuit voltage and short-circuit current density reached over 30 mV and 0.6 mA cm−2, respectively. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), a proven technique for analysing kinetic processes in DSCs, was used to investigate the influence of the compressing process on the PCE enhancements.
In this work, crystalline TiO2 nanoparticle aggregates (HA), with a proven superior light harvesting capability as a photoanode material, are used to demonstrate the effect of nanoparticle packing on device performance. The morphology and detailed surface structure of HA are revealed in Fig. S-1 (ESI). For comparison, HA photoanodes were constructed with and without the compression treatment in order to determine its impact on the performance and charge transport properties of the photoanode.
The overall morphologies of the HA electrode film before and after compression are displayed in Fig. 1 a) and b). The compressed HA photoanode film has fewer relatively large spaces and better contact between the neighbouring spherical features compared to the film before compression, as can be observed in the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images. In Fig. 1 c) and d), the cross section images of the electrode film confirm the structural change by showing a significant decrease in the film thickness from 18.4 down to 15.5 μm, an approximately 16% decrease after compression. This agrees well with the results from the film thickness analyses using a profilometer. The nitrogen gas sorption measurements shown in Fig. 1 e) and its inset reveal a negligible drops in the specific surface area from 86.0 m2 g−1 to 83.3 m2 g−1 and the average pore size from 19.0 nm to 16.3 nm. This suggests that the large spaces between the agglomerates were removed without changing the mesoscopic structure of the electrode film. The maintained surface loading capacities and electrolyte accessibility of the electrode film are further confirmed by the almost unchanged dye adsorption value of the film, with 52.1 nmol g−1 vs. 48.5 nmol g−1 before and after the film compression.
In Fig. 2, the photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) under simulated 1.5 AM 1000 W m−2 sunlight and incident photo-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) characterisations of the commercial N719 (Dyesol) sensitized HA photoanodes before and after compression demonstrate the advantages of using film compression. Under simulated full sunlight, a great PCE in excess of 9.9% was achieved by compressing an 18 μm HA potoanode film, exhibiting an 8.8% increase in overall PCE performance when compared to the uncompressed HA device. This was based on an improved open circuit voltage (Voc) from 798 to 833 mV and an increased short-circuit current density (Jsc) from 15.8 to 16.4 mA cm−2 with a better fill factor. The enhanced photovoltaic performance was also demonstrated by the compressed HA photoanode having a higher PCE value of 10%, at a low light intensity under simulated 0.1 AM 1.5 sunlight, as shown in Fig. S-2 (ESI). Similar phenomena were again observed with compressed HA photoanodes of varying film thickness, as summarized in Table 1, displaying a constant advantage of film compression on the photovoltaic performances. The compression also has a greater impact on thick films where the real electron diffusion length from the top layer of the film is close to the effective electron diffusion length, the electrons are likely to be recombined with I3− species before being collected. The dramatic shortening of the real diffusion length due to the improved particle contact by film compression explains the greater impact on thick films.
Film thickness before compression
HA
Film thickness after compression
HA-C
Voc (mV)
Jsc (mA cm−2)
FF
η (%)
Voc (mV)
Jsc (mA cm−2)
FF
η (%)
6 μm
830 ± 4
11.2 ± 0.1
0.74 ± 0.01
6.9 ± 0.1
5 μm
857 ± 4
11.9 ± 0.1
0.72 ± 0.01
7.4 ± 0.1
12 μm
811 ± 6
13.2 ± 0.2
0.73 ± 0.01
7.8 ± 0.1
10 μm
829 ± 7
13.7 ± 0.2
0.75 ± 0.01
8.5 ± 0.2
18 μm
798 ± 5
15.8 ± 0.2
0.72 ± 0.01
9.1 ± 0.1
15 μm
833 ± 9
16.4 ± 0.3
0.73 ± 0.01
9.9 ± 0.2
The noteworthy improvements in Voc and Jsc can be attributed to the greatly enhanced quantum efficiency as the dark current shifts to a higher potential after film compression, which is closely related to the recombination slowdown. In Fig. 2 b), the compressed photoanode film presented a close to quantitative conversion of incident photons to current with a maximum IPCE of 90.4% at 550 nm, which is in contrast to that of 82.8% before compression, indicating that the compressed film has a superior charge transport property. This is slightly lower than the IPCE of 92% reported recently by Grätzel's group using the C101 dye that has a stronger absorption at 600–800 nm than N719.
Further, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) studies of the dynamics of electron lifetime, electron transport and recombination of the sensitized photoanodes, analysed the factors that govern the superior PCE performance. In the dark, under external applied bias, the electronic processes in the electrode film include electron injection from the FTO to TiO2 film, the charging of the TiO2 film by electron propagation, and the electron consumption by reducing the oxidant species in the electrolyte. This can be described with a transmission line model.
The electron life times (τn) and diffusion coefficients (Dn) as a function of the common equivalent conduction band positions (Vecb) of the sensitized HA photoanodes are shown in Fig. 2 c). For the entire range of Vecb, between 0.5 to 0.9 V, the electron life times (τn) for the compressed HA device are superior by at least twice that of the uncompressed HA device, suggesting a slowdown in electron recombination with I3− species in the compressed device. The electron diffusion coefficients (Dn) for both HA DSCs show a dependence on the Vecb and increase as the quasi-Fermi level of the electrons builds up towards Voc. Meanwhile, the compressed HA device also presents an over two-fold increase in the Dn values compared to the conventional HA DSC at the same Vecb. This indicates that there is a structural change in the photoanode film after compression. The reduced number of relatively large pores and the improved contact between the densely packed neighbouring nanoparticles dramatically shorten the electron transport paths to the collecting electrode. The short electron transport paths have fewer grain boundaries where it is believed the recombination largely occurs as there is a relatively high concentration of crystalline defects at the boundary areas. As a result, the compressed films have a lower recombination rate because the back reaction opportunities on the electron transport paths are decreased.
Assuming the charge carrier generation is uniform throughout the film, electron diffusion length (Ln) can be calculated from Dn and τn by the equation,
The well-developed interconnected network of the highly crystalline TiO2 nanoparticle aggregates (HA) results in a superior electron diffusion length when compared to a conventional HA device. The significantly improved Ln of the compressed film, with values far prior to the film thickness, ensures that a sufficient number of electrons can reach the collecting electrode reflecting the reduction in back reactions. As shown in Fig. 2 (d), the improved contact between the neighbouring TiO2 aggregates in the compressed film also significantly promoted electron transport and retarded the back reactions with a minimum of a five times lower electron transport resistance (Rt) and higher electron recombination resistance (Rct) throughout the entire range of applied biases. This well explains the superior photovoltaic performances in the Voc, Jsc, and fill factor, as well as the overall PCE enhancements.
When the compression process was used on electrode films prepared from commercial Degussa P25 TiO2 nanoparticles similar results were observed with occurrences of superior charge transport and lower recombination properties, as well as significantly enhanced solar energy conversion performances of an up to 11.7% increase. This strongly supports the prospect of a realistic gain from using the commercially available CIP pressing technique in electrode preparation. The EIS analysis results and photovoltaic peroformances of the P25 photoanode films are summarized in Fig. S-4, S-5 and Table S-1 (ESI).

In summary, the application of a simple film compression process in photoanode preparation brought about a dramatic enhancement in device performance including an up to 11.7% increase in overall PCE performance. Well developed connections between the neighbouring densely packed nanoparticles after film compression greatly shortened the charge transport paths to the collecting electrode. Evidenced by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy analyses, the film compression led to a five-times faster charge transport with a slowdown in the recombination rate in the compressed photoanode films, resulting in upgraded Voc, Jsc, and fill factor values and thus better overall PCE performances.


The authors would like to thank the Australian Research Council for providing financial support. Dr X. L. Zhang greatly appreciates the University of New South Wales (UNSW) for providing a Vice-Chancellor's Postdoctoral Research Fellow with funding support. The authors acknowledge use of facilities in the Electron Microscope Unit at UNSW.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: SEM, IV, IPCE and EIS of sensitized P25 photoanodes. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ra42418a
‡ The authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013