 DOI: 10.1039/D2TA02322A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 13247-13253

Sehun Seo
,
Jong-Hoon Lee,
Yejoon Kim,
Seungkyu Kim,
Chang Jae Yoon,
Hojoong Choi,
Sanseong Lee,
Kwanghee Lee,
Heejoo Kim and 
Sanghan Lee*

School of Materials Science and Engineering, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, Gwangju, 61005, Republic of Korea. E-mail: sanghan@gist.ac.kr

Chemical Science Division and Liquid Sunlight Alliance, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA

Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801, USA

Research Institute for Solar and Sustainable Energies, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, Gwangju, 61005, Republic of Korea

Heeger Center for Advanced Materials, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, Gwangju, 61005, Republic of Korea

Graduate School of Energy Convergence, Institute of Integrated Technology, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, Gwangju, 61005, Republic of Korea

Received
23rd March 2022
, Accepted 13th May 2022
First published on 14th May 2022
Photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting based on organic semiconductors (OSs) is a promising way to enable sustainable hydrogen production because of their high photovoltaic performance and mass productivity by low-cost printing. However, their application to photocathodes has drawbacks such as low efficiency and poor operational stability, which result from rapid device degradation or failure under harsh operating conditions. In this study, we developed a stable and efficient OS-based PEC photocathode module using the metal encapsulation technique. Our OS-photocathode shows a photocurrent density of −12.3 mA cm−2 at 0 V versus the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) and an onset potential of 1 VRHE. These are similar to the values of both the short circuit current and open circuit potential of its photovoltaic cell. Notably, our photocathode represents unprecedented stability: maintaining over 95.4% of the maximum photocurrent for over 30 h without significant degradation of the OS. In addition, we successfully demonstrate a PEC module based on OS-photocathodes in parallel connection in a real environment, confirming the potential of the OS-based photoelectrodes for sustainable hydrogen production.

With the increase of global warming and environmental pollution, our present carbon-based society greatly needs to develop eco-friendly energy sources for a zero-emission society. Hydrogen has been recognized as a promising candidate for next-generation eco-friendly energy sources because of its usage as a powerful and clean source of energy as well as its abundant supplies. However, it is paradoxical that hydrogen is supplied from the process of transforming and refining fossil fuels, such as natural gas reforming and coal gasification. Thus, it is important to develop a clean process using clean energy sources like solar energy for sustainable hydrogen production. Among solar-driven hydrogen production methods, photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting is an attractive approach because it has the advantages of (1) a photocatalyst capable of mass hydrogen production without a grid system and (2) photovoltaic (PV)-assisted electrolysis capable of high conversion efficiency from solar energy to hydrogen. However, the PEC system has not yet crossed the threshold of systemic research on mass hydrogen production for commercialization owing to difficulties in developing appropriate materials that satisfy the primary requirements of photoelectrodes, such as scale-up potential for mass production, high solar to hydrogen efficiency (STH), and durability with long-term stability.

π-Conjugated organic semiconductors (OSs) used as photoactive materials in organic PV cells (OPVs) are promising candidates to meet requirements for the realization of commercial PEC hydrogen production. Their advantages include excellent compatibility with various printing technologies for mass production, high power conversion efficiency (PCE) approaching 19% attributed to diversity and flexibility in engineering of their chemical structures, and superior mechanical properties such as flexibility resulting from the interdigitated network and strong interaction between molecules. In addition, long-term stability of OPV cells has been achieved by interface engineering to prevent chemical degradation of the photoactive layer, the introduction of a third component to balance charge carrier mobilities, and the design of new chemical structures of the donor and the acceptor to suppress morphological changes with time. Despite these numerous advantages of OSs, there is a constraint on their use in PEC photoelectrodes because of their chemical instability in aqueous electrolytes and sluggish charge transfer, resulting in a relatively low photocurrent density compared with that of the OPV cell.
To overcome these problems, various approaches such as the introduction of an interface layer, a charge transport layer, or an electrocatalyst have been attempted, improving photogenerated charge transfer and thereby prolonging the stability of the OS-based photocathode where fullerene is used as an electron acceptor. Liang Yao et al. reported that a non-fullerene-based OS such as a perylene diimide-based polymer electron acceptor enhances the photostability of the device by enhancing electron transport, which limits charge accumulation at the organic/electrolyte interface. Nevertheless, most OS-based photoelectrodes exhibit poor operational stability and significant degradation in photocurrent during chronoamperometry (CA) measurements. Therefore, it is essential to find a way to ensure the long-term stability of OS-based photocathodes with high PEC performance.
Metal foil encapsulation is one of the most powerful approaches to realize long-term stable OS-based photocathodes, because it can impede the penetration of electrolytes into the OS, which has been demonstrated in our previous studies and other reported state-of-the-art OS-based photoelectrodes. Here we demonstrate a long-term stable OS-based photocathode by introducing metal foil to passivate and protect the OS from the electrolyte. Our OS-based photocathode showed an onset potential of 1 V versus the reversible hydrogen electrode (VRHE), a photocurrent density of −12.3 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE, and dramatic operational stability without significant degradation of photocurrent (over 95.4%) for 30 h. This is a record to the best of our knowledge. Furthermore, we demonstrated an OS-based PEC module to investigate the operation of the OS-based photocathodes in a substantial environment under real sunlight.

We first designed the OS-based photocathode based on a normal-type OPV structure as shown in Fig. 1. For photoactive materials, we used a wide-band-gap donor polymer, poly[4,8-bis[5-(2-ethylhexyl)-2-thienyl]benzo[1,2-b4,5-b′]dithiophene-alt-(4-(2-ethylhexyl)-3-fluorothieno[3,4-b]thiophene)-2-carboxylate-2-6-diyl] (PTB7-Th) and an indacenodithiophene-derivative nonfullerene acceptor (EH-IDTBR). These materials exhibit excellent long-term stability compared to other photoactive materials and large-area printability with a high open-circuit voltage (Voc) of approximately 1 V. This is useful in reducing the external bias required for hydrogen production. Fig. 1a displays the energy level diagram of the photocathode using PTB7-Th/EH-IDTBR with ZnO nanoparticles (NPs) as the electron transfer layer, poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS) as the hole transport layer, and silver (Ag) as the top electrode. The OPV cell was fabricated under ambient conditions, which is essential for the mass production and practical application of the OS-based photocathode in the future. The optimized OPV cell exhibited a Voc of 1.02 V, a short circuit current density (Jsc) of −14.21 mA cm−2, a fill factor (FF) of 57.3%, and a PCE of 8.29% as shown in Fig. 1b. The UV-vis spectrum of the optimized PTB7-Th:EH-IDTBR film shows its photoactivity in the visible range of 300–800 nm as shown in Fig. S1. The atomic force microscopy image of PTB7-Th/EH-IDTBR displays a smooth morphology with 0.911 nm of root mean square average of height deviation as shown in Fig. S2. By encapsulating the optimized OPV cell with the platinum (Pt)-decorated titanium (Ti) foil, our OS photocathode was fabricated as shown in Fig. 1c. As described in the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of Pt-decorated Ti foil (Fig. S3), the Pt catalyst was well dispersed in the form of nanoparticles with a diameter of 170–300 nm on the surface of the Ti foil. An indium–gallium eutectic alloy (EGaIn) was used as an adhesion layer for electrical contact between the metal foil and the OPV cell.


To verify the effect of metal encapsulation on the PEC performance of the OS photocathode, we systematically designed and compared four different types of photocathodes as described in Fig. 2a: an OS without Ti foil encapsulation (Ag/OS), a Pt-decorated OS without Ti foil encapsulation (Pt/Ag/OS), a Ti-foil-encapsulated OS (Ti/Ag/OS), and a Pt/Ti-foil-encapsulated OS (Pt/Ti/Ag/OS). Fig. 2b shows the linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) curves of the OS photocathodes measured using a three-electrode configuration system under AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2) using 0.5 M H2SO4 (pH 1) electrolyte. The hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) polarization curves of Pt-decorated OS photocathodes (red lines) show more positive onset potentials than those of Pt-free OS photocathodes (blue lines), implying superior HER catalytic properties of Pt. It is interesting to note that the photocathodes with Ti foil exhibited a positively-shifted onset potential as well as higher photocurrent density at 0 VRHE than those without Ti foil: −7.2 (Pt/Ag/OS, red dotted line) to −12.3 mA cm−2 (Pt/Ti/Ag/OS, red solid line) for Pt-decorated OS photocathodes and −4.4 (Ag/OS, blue dotted line) to −7.7 mA cm−2 (Ti/Ag/OS, blue solid line) for OS photocathodes without Pt.

We believe that the increased photocurrent and the positive shift of the onset potential in the Ti-foil-encapsulated OS photocathodes originated from the improved stability of the OS photocathode. As shown in Fig. 2c, during the CA measurement, the photocurrent of Ag/OS and Pt/Ag/OS instantly degraded within 20 min, whereas the Ti-foil-encapsulated OS photocathodes work well for over 120 min although there is degradation of photocurrent in the Ti/Ag/OS photocathode in the initial 20 min. The photocurrent degradation of Ti/Ag/Os is most probably caused by the poor HER catalytic characteristics of Ti foil, which results in charge trap during initial CA measurements. However, incorporation of a suitable catalyst, e.g., Pt, improves charge transfer between the metal foil and electrolyte, thereby minimizing charge accumulation in OS photocathodes. In this respect, the Pt/Ti/Ag/OS photocathode exhibited excellent stability while maintaining its maximum photocurrent density without significant degradation for over 30 h (>95.4%) (Fig. 2d). This result shows that metal encapsulation thoroughly prevents the ZnO, PEDOT:PSS, and photoactive layers from chemical degradation by sulfuric acid, resulting in more stable photocurrent generation during the operation. This results in better PEC performance compared to that of non-metal encapsulated OS photocathodes. In addition, metal foil encapsulation leads to a tremendous synergy with the co-catalyst decoration, thereby significantly improving the stability of OS photocathodes without current degradation. Consequently, our Pt/Ti/Ag/OS exhibits superior PEC performance in all respects, including the onset potential, photocurrent density, and stability of OS-based photocathodes as described in Table 1. That is, the combination of metal foil passivation and suitable catalyst decoration is an effective strategy to construct stable and highly active OS-based PEC cells.
Photoactive layer
Catalysts
Photocurrent density at 0 VRHE (mA cm−2)
Stability
Onset potential (VRHE)
Electrolyte
Ref.
 a PEI: poly(ethyleneimine), NPs: nanoparticles. 
P3HT:PC61BM
MoS3
−0.2
0.75 h at 0.16 VRHE (>70%)
0.64
0.5 M H2SO4
 25 
P3HT: PC61BM
MoS3
−8.4
0.75 h at 0 VRHE (>88%)
0.32
0.5 M H2SO4
 26 
P3HT:PC61BM
MoS3
−2.2
1 h at 0 VRHE (>80%)
0.41
0.5 M H2SO4
 27 
P3HT: PC61BM
RuOx
∼-3.7
>3h at 0 VRHE
0.5
0.5 M Na2SO4 + 0.1 M NaH2PO4
 28 
P3HT:PC61BM
Pt
−3
1.67 h at −0.17 VRHE (0%)
0.67
0.1 M H2SO4–Na2SO4
 29 
P3HT:PC61BM
Pt/PEI
−5.25
0.67 h at 0 VRHE (>50%)
0.6
0.1 M H2SO4–Na2SO4
 30 
P3HT:PC61BM
Pt
−7.1
1.25 h at 0 VRHE (>25%)
0.7
0.1 M H2SO4 + 0.1 M Na2SO4
 31 
PBDB-T:ITIC:PC71BM
Pt
−11.98
—
0.85
0.1 M H2SO4
 32 
PTB7:PC61BM
Pt
−7.27
1 h at 0 VRHE (>25%)
0.63
0.1 M Na2SO4
 33 
P3HT:PC61BM
Pt
−2.48
8 h at 0.2 VRHE (>70%)
0.56
0.1 M H2SO4
 34 
PTB7-Th:PDI-V
RuO2
−8.2
20 h at 0 VRHE (>67%)
0.67
0.3 M H2SO4 + 0.5 M Na2SO4
 35 
PTB7-Th:EH-IDTBR
Pt NPs
−12.3
30 h at 0 VRHE (>95.4%)
1.00
0.5 M H2SO4
This work
For further verification of the stability of the OS photocathode, we performed 100 cycles of LSV measurements for Pt/Ti/Ag/OS (Fig. 2e). During the cycles, a slight increase in the photocurrent was observed with a positive shift of onset potential, which is consistent with the results of the CA measurement for an initial 2 h as shown in Fig. 2d. This phenomenon can be caused because the energy barrier at the interface with ZnO can be reduced under continuous illumination by the increased charge carrier density, which can enhance electron transport and the balance of electron and hole mobilities.
In addition, we investigated the HER polarization curves of the Pt/Ti/Ag/OS photocathode in different electrolytes, such as strongly basic and neutral electrolytes (Fig. S4). The photocurrent density and onset potential were −7.7 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE and 0.6 VRHE in a strongly basic electrolyte (1 M NaOH, pH 13.4) and −5.3 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE and 0.5 VRHE in a neutral electrolyte (0.5 M Na2SO4, pH 6.05), respectively. Also, the Pt/Ti/Ag/OS photocathode retained 80% of its initial photocurrent over 8 h in 0.5 M Na2SO4 and 25 h in 1 M NaOH during CA measurements (Fig. S5). Although the PEC performance of the Pt/Ti/Ag/OS photocathode in neutral and basic electrolytes is lower than that measured in 0.5 M H2SO4 owing to the low hydrogen ion concentration, the Pt/Ti/Ag/OS photocathode showed better stability and slightly lower photocurrent compared with the reported OS-based photocathodes (Table 1). This means that our OS photocathode has the potential to be combined with other photoanodes for bias-free systems or non-noble metal catalysts that do not work in sulfuric acid.

Half-cell (HC)-STH is an important indicator of whether this photoelectrode is suitable for a bias-free PEC system and predictable maximum STH in a bias-free system. To evaluate the HC-STH, we obtained the faradaic efficiency of the Pt/Ti/Ag/OS photocathode by analyzing the hydrogen yields produced per photogenerated electron using gas chromatography. The average faradaic efficiency was ca. 98.4%, which means that most photogenerated charges were used to convert hydrogen ions to hydrogen gas (Fig. 3a). Based on the faradaic efficiency and the LSV curve, the HC-STH was evaluated as shown in Fig. 3b. The maximum HC-STH efficiency of our photocathode was 5.3% at 0.64 VRHE. Since the HC-STH efficiency was observed at a relatively high potential of 0.64 VRHE, an STH efficiency of more than 5% can be expected if combined with an appropriate photoanode.


To verify the feasibility of mass hydrogen production using OS photoelectrodes, we investigated the working characteristics of large-scale photoelectrodes under daylight. The OS photocathode-based PEC module (OS-PEC module) was fabricated by connecting twelve OS photocathodes in parallel (Fig. 4a). Fig. 4b shows the real solar irradiation measured at 1 minute intervals, and the photocurrent of the PEC module was simultaneously measured by CA (Fig. 4c). During the initial one hour of measurement, the solar irradiation changed from 0.1 to 0.8 Sun moment by moment because of cloudy weather. Thereafter, overall low solar irradiation was maintained because the clouds obscured the sun (inset image in Fig. 4d). The tendency of the photocurrent is consistent with the overall change in solar irradiation. It is important to note that the photocurrent of the module decreased to −4 mA at 11:40 due to the hydrogen bubbles, although solar irradiation remained over 0.7 Sun. When the hydrogen bubbles were artificially removed (black arrows in Fig. 4d), the photocurrent increased again. This is because the OS photocathodes were fabricated based on back irradiation PEC photoelectrodes as shown in Fig. 4a, d, and e. The OS-PEC module was set at an angle of approximately 30° so that its back (glass part) faces the sky and the front (Pt/Ti foil) faces the opposite direction. Hence, the hydrogen bubbles were easily trapped on the surface of the Pt/Ti foil, disturbing charge transfer between the electrolyte and the OS-PEC module.

Furthermore, the retardation of electron transfer by hydrogen bubbles can induce charge accumulation and thereby accelerate the degradation of the OS photocathode. When the solar irradiation increased again to ca. 0.8 Sun after 13:40, the increased photocurrent was relatively lower than the photocurrent at 11:40 owing to the degradation of a few OS photocathodes in the OS-PEC module. Collectively, the lab-scale prototype of the Pt/Ti/Ag/OS photocathode exhibited excellent stability over 30 h when constant light was irradiated on the vertically erected photoelectrode. However, in the case of the OS-PEC module, the photoelectrodes produced hydrogen at a certain angle instead of standing up vertically under fluctuating solar irradiation. Since this certain angle and fluctuating solar irradiation result in trapped hydrogen bubbles on the surface, a practical way to remove the generated hydrogen bubbles is required. For example, the surface modification of metal to control aerophilicity or aerophobicity can be a good approach for removing hydrogen bubbles.

We fabricated a durable and highly efficient OS-based photocathode by blocking electrolyte penetration and maximizing surface kinetics via coupling of metal encapsulation and co-catalyst decoration. This Pt/Ti/Ag/OS photocathode presents a reasonable photocurrent density (−12.3 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE) and an onset potential (1 VRHE) comparable with those of its OPV cell (Jsc of −14.21 mA cm−2, Voc of 1.02 V). Notably, the Pt/Ti/Ag/OS photocathode maintained its photocurrent over 30 h without significant current degradation (over 95.4%). Furthermore, a parallel-connected OS-PEC module was successfully demonstrated under actual sunlight. Although the new task of effectively removing hydrogen bubbles has arisen, we confirmed the feasibility of the OS photocathode as a large-scale PEC photocathode for hydrogen production.


S. S., J.-H. L, Y. K., and S. L. designed the study. S. S., J.-H. L, and Y. K. fabricated the OS photocathodes and measured their PEC performance. S. S., Y. K., S. K., and H. C. quantified and analyzed the H2 gas generated at the OS photocathodes. S. S., Y. K., and S. K. fabricated OS-PEC modules and measured their PEC performance under real sunlight. C. Y., and S. L. measured the PV performance. S. S., J.-H. L., Y. K., K. L., H. K. and S. L. co-wrote the manuscript.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the program of Future Hydrogen Original Technology Development (No. 2021M313A1084747), through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF), funded by the Korean government (Ministry of Science and ICT(MSIT)); by the NRF grant funded by the Korea government (MSIT) (No. 2020R1A2C1005590); and by the GIST–MIT Research Collaboration grant funded by the GIST. S. S., J.-H. L., Y. K., H. C., and S. L. would like to thank the GIST Christian Research Crew for supporting this study.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ta02322a
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022