 DOI: 10.1039/C9TA01947B
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 23895-23903


Boxin
Wang
,

Fei
Wu
,

Shiqing
Bi
,

Jiyu
Zhou
,

Jianqiu
Wang
,

Xuanye
Leng
,

Dongyang
Zhang
,

Rui
Meng
,

Baoda
Xue
,

Chengzhong
Zong
*,

Linna
Zhu
,

Yuan
Zhang
* and 

Huiqiong
Zhou
*

School of Polymer Science and Engineering, Qingdao University of Science and Technology, Qingdao 266042, P. R. China. E-mail: qdzcz@qust.edu.cn

CAS Key Laboratory of Nanosystem and Hierarchical Fabrication, CAS Center for Excellence in Nanoscience, National Center for Nanoscience and Technology, Beijing 100190, P. R. China. E-mail: zhouhq@nanoctr.cn

School of Chemistry, Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Biomedical Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, P. R. China. E-mail: yuanzhang@buaa.edu.cn

School of Materials and Energy, Southwest University, Chongqing 400715, P. R. China

Received
20th February 2019
, Accepted 24th May 2019
First published on 25th May 2019
The characteristics of perovskite solar cells (PSC) are affected by interface traps. In this work, we introduce an interfacial modifier based on polyaspartic acid sodium (PASP) that is incorporated between a methylammonium lead iodide (MAPbI3) photo-absorber and P3CT-Na hole transporting layer. PASP contains a large number of –COO− anions and Na+ cations, thus enabling a strong chelating cooperation for metal polyvalent ions. The incorporated PASP leads to an effective passivation of the surface traps originating from Pb2+ and I− in MAPbI3 and control over the crystallization of MAPbI3 with slightly enlarged grains. The combined benefits with the introduced PASP enable boosting the power conversion efficiency to 20.05% with an impressive FF of 82.20% in MAPbI3 based p–i–n PSCs.

Inorganic–organic lead halide perovskites have become very attractive photo-absorbing materials in photovoltaics with a strong absorption coefficient, long carrier diffusion length, low binding energy and high solution processability. A rapid leap of the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of perovskite solar cells (PSC) has been witnessed in the last couple of years, from the initial 3.8% to currently the record of 23.7%. During the processes of crystallization of perovskites in a solution phase and subsequent thermal annealing, non-stoichiometric reactions of perovskite precursors and thermal decomposition may occur, resulting in an abundance of under-saturated metal or halide ions remaining in the perovskite solids. In consequence, interfacial traps originating from these point defects are formed, which hamper the photovoltaic characteristics of PSCs, due to increased surface (or trap-assisted) charge recombination and non-radiative voltage losses. To tackle these problems, interfacial charge transporting layers (CTLs) are necessitated for both p–i–n and n–i–n PSCs.

To date, CTLs based on inorganic semiconductors, e.g. metal oxides, have been dominant because of their robustness and compatibility with the perovskite active layer in regard of work function (WF) or surface wettability. There have been documented approaches for the modification of inorganic CTLs e.g. through contact doping or self-assembled monolayers to reduce the mismatch between the energetic levels in perovskites and electrodes, or to mitigate the interfacial charge trapping, enabling enhancements in the ultimate solar cell performance and stability. In our previous work, we have introduced an interfacial anchor layer based on biopolymer heparin sodium (HS) and metformin for planar PSCs with compact TiO2. The SO3− group in the HS or NH2+ group in metformin was found to act as an effective passivation site that could bind to under-coordinated ions in the perovskite and TiO2 films with defects. With these strategies, charge trapping at the TiO2 cathode/perovskite interface was favourably suppressed, leading to simultaneously enhanced solar cell parameters and device stability.
Concerning the required high temperature processing for inorganic metal oxide based CTLs, polymer alternatives with the desired solution and low-temperature processability have been proposed. An exemplary case is PTAA which has been demonstrated to work effectively as a hole transporting layer (HTL) in p–i–n PSCs. However, PTAA has poor solubility and its surface hydrophobicity raises the difficulty of film deposition of perovskite films from polar solvents. Recently, poly[3-(4-carboxylatebutyl)thiophene] (P3CT-Na, see the chemical structure in Fig. 1a) has been tentatively utilized as the HTL in PSCs with the merits of water-solubility and facile processability. The highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) in P3CT is positioned at 5.23 eV, roughly matching with the valence band of commonly used halide perovskites. However, the shallower HOMO of P3CT-Na with respect to PTAA tends to induce larger voltage losses in PSCs, likely related to non-radiative recombination. Also, the lack of appropriate functional groups that can interact with the under-saturated ions in the perovskite limits the ability of interfacial trap passivation when used as a HTL. So far, the best devices with P3CT still underperform compared to those containing PTAA HTLs, typically caused by the reduction of open-circuit voltage (Voc).
In this work, we introduce an interfacial modifier based on polyaspartic acid sodium salt (PASP, see the chemical structure in Fig. 1a) that is incorporated between a methylammonium lead iodide (MAPbI3) photo-absorber and P3CT-Na HTL. PASP contains a large number of –COO− anions and Na+ cations, thus enabling a strong chelating cooperation for polyvalent metal ions. We show that the incorporated PASP leads to an effective passivation of surface traps originating from Pb2+ in MAPbI3, and also controls the crystallization of MAPbI3 to attain slightly enlarged grains. The combined benefits with the introduced PASP have led to an enhanced PCE of 20.05% with a FF of 82.20% in MAPbI3 based p–i–n PSCs. We further probe recombination kinetics by light intensity (Plight) dependent impedance analysis to unravel the photophysical origin for the enhanced performance. The PASP modified devices exhibit longer carrier lifetimes at different Plight in association with a reduced recombination order. Aided by transient photocurrent (TPC) analysis, we found that the hole extraction through P3CT toward the ITO anode is considerably promoted in the presence of PASP, which reduces non-radiative Shockley–Read–Hall (SRH) recombination at the anode interface such that the Voc increases to 1.07 V. Upon storing under an inert gas atmosphere, the solar cells modified with PASP maintain 92.6% of the initial efficiency after 175 days, compared to more severe degradations (84.1%) in the devices without PASP. The demonstrated strategy provides an enabler to deal with the critical problems in PSCs toward reducing the performance gap with respect to the Shockley–Queisser limit.

PASP is a typical environmentally friendly material and has been used as a heavy-metal-binding agent. Since it contains carboxyl and amide groups, PASP could chelate with Pb2+ ions through two units with one Pb2+ ion. Therefore, we selected PASP as an interfacial modifier in this work to enhance the passivation of under-coordinated Pb2+ ions at the perovskite surface compared with P3CT-Na which only contains carboxyl functional groups. Fig. 1b shows energy diagrams for the MAPbI3 photo-absorber along with those of the utilized CTLs and electrodes. As can be seen, the bare ITO anode has a work function of 4.85 eV, which tends to induce a hole injection barrier to the valence band of MAPbI3 (∼5.3 eV). The deepened HOMO energy at 5.23 eV in P3CT-Na could mitigate this interfacial barrier to increase the Voc. To understand how the work function (WF) of P3CT is influenced by PASP, we performed ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) with the results shown in Fig. S1 (ESI). We attained a HOMO of 5.23 eV for untreated P3CT, in agreement with the value reported in the literature. The PASP-coated P3CT shows a slightly changed HOMO at 5.24 eV. In this situation, increased losses in the photo-carrier and ultimate efficiency are possible (see the illustration for surface recombination in Fig. 1c). We speculate that this unfavourable recombination channel could be effectively suppressed in the presence of PASP, due to a strong chelating cooperation for metal polyvalent ions. As a result, holes should be more effortlessly extracted through P3CT toward the ITO anode (see Fig. 1d). The scheme described above outlines the main motif to incorporate PASP in our devices.

As a background study, we measured thin film absorption of P3CT-Na and P3CT/PASP along with those of P3CT-Na/MAPbI3 and P3CT-Na/PASP/MAPbI3. From the results (Fig. S2, ESI), we cannot observe any substantial changes with the addition of PASP, which indicates that the optical transmittance of the HTL is almost unaffected, an important criterion for HTLs to reduce the optical losses. Fig. S3 in the ESI displays topographic images of P3CT-Na and P3CT-Na/PASP films captured by atomic force microscopy. The film of P3CT-Na exhibits a featureless surface and upon deposition of PASP, the surface morphology hardly changes. Both films show a low surface roughness (RMS) and with PASP the RMS only decreases from 2.39 nm (w/o PASP) to 2.36 nm.
The grain sizes and associated grain boundaries in perovskites play an important role in achieving the ultimate level of structural traps that dictate the bulk recombination and charge losses. To this end, we examined scanning electron microscopy of MAPbI3 films prepared identically to the active layer of PSCs. Fig. 2a shows the SEM cross-sectional images obtained on the PASP modified solar cell. We clearly resolve the interfaces between individual layers except for P3CT-Na/PASP whose total thickness is far beyond the resolution of SEM. In Fig. 2b we compared top-view SEM images of MAPbI3 films prepared on different substrates. Of note, the grain size of the MAPbI3 film cast on PASP slightly enlarges, displaying a more flattened structure. We should note that the introduced PASP mainly modifies the bottom surface of the perovskite layer. To mimic this situation, we also performed SEM of thinner MAPbI3 films with only 50 nm thickness (see Fig. S4, ESI). The average grain sizes significantly reduce with decreasing the film thickness while a more homogeneous morphology can be found for the sample containing PASP, consistent with the results on thick perovskite films. Also, we cannot see any visible aggregations of bottom P3CT as reported in the literature. The smooth PASP/perovskite interface should benefit the increase in shunt resistance and ultimately the fill factor (FF) in MAPbI3 solar cells. We also examined the impact of PASP on the WF of P3CT by scanning Kelvin probe microscopy. As shown by the mappings of surface contact potential (SCP) in Fig. 2c, a homogeneous distribution with resembling structures can be seen, implying a uniform coverage of PASP on P3CT. The average WF is shifted by 20 meV, from 4.72 eV to 4.74 eV in the presence of PASP toward the deeper-lying valence band of MAPbI3. Based on this result, the hole extraction could be promoted in the presence of PASP.
We further explored the crystallinity of MAPbI3 films by X-ray diffractometry (XRD) and the results are shown in Fig. 2d. Similar crystal structures are observed on MAPbI3 deposited on PC3T-Na and P3CT-Na/PASP. The XRD peaks appearing at 14.54 degrees, 28.8 degrees, and 32.3 degrees can be assigned to the (110), (220) and (110) crystallographic planes, respectively. For the main (110) diffraction peak, there is no significant change of the full width at half maximum (FWHM) in the presence of PASP. It may indicate an insignificant enhancement in the crystallinity in the presence of PASP, at least in the top surface region.
In order to promote our understanding on the interface modification with PASP at the molecular level, we performed X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). As shown by XPS survey spectra in Fig. S5 (ESI) for P3CT and P3CT/PASP, a pronounced N 1s peak at 400 eV was found in the latter, confirming the presence of PASP films with the described approach. Fig. 2e and f display high-resolution XPS of core level Pb 4f and I 3d in MAPbI3. In order to mimic the bottom interface between the perovskite and HTL in the device, here MAPbI3 was cast from a diluted precursor solution with a film thickness of only 10 nm. Evidently, the doublet peaks for Pb 4f present a downshift toward lower binding energies in the presence of PASP. This phenomenon can be related to the higher electronegativity with the passivation of polyvalent Pb ions (e.g. Pb2+) by PASP. At the same time, zeta potential on the surface of P3CT and P3CT/PASP films was measured (Fig. S6, ESI) which indicates that both P3CT and P3CT/PASP are negatively charged. At pH = 7, the PASP film has higher negative charges than the P3CT film. This feature may promote the interaction with MAPbI3 perovskites, consistent with the displacement of the peak in XPS. In contrast, the shift in the doublet peak of I 3d does not appear, which may suggest a less significant impact of PASP on the halide ions. We further calculated the peak percentage ratio of I 3d to Pb 4f, and the ratio in the presence of PASP amounts to 3.12, approaching the theoretical value. The improved stoichiometry points to the effectiveness of trap passivation for under-coordinated metal ions via interactions of the functional group in PASP interlayers with the MAPbI3 photo-absorber.
With the proposed interface modulations, we now turn to the effect of PASP on solar cell characteristics. The devices adopted a p–i–n structure and the combination of C60/BCP acts as an effective electron-transporting/hole blocking layer (ETL) and concurrently isolates environmental moisture and O2 (see the sketched device architecture in Fig. 3a inset). In order to establish the optimal film thickness of PASP, we first examined the device behaviours with PASP cast from solution with different concentrations. Fig. S7, ESI displays current density versus voltage (J–V) characteristics (reverse scan direction) of the resultant MAPbI3 solar cells under standardized AM 1.5 g solar irradiation (100 mW cm−2). Detailed solar cell parameters are summarized in Table 1. Obviously, the presence of PASP leads to a simultaneous enhancement of the short-circuit current (Jsc), Voc and FF. With the variation in the PASP solution concentration, the resultant PCE exhibits non-monotonic changes, likely due to the interplay between the film coverage (poorer at lower concentrations) and contact resistance (larger at higher concentrations). We established an optimal concentration of 0.1 mg mL−1 for PASP at which the PCE reaches a champion value of 20.05%. The film thickness of PASP with 0.1 mg mL−1 concentration was determined to be around 0.51 nm based on ellipsometry (see results in Fig. S8, ESI). To simplify our analysis, all the following measurements involving PASP HTLs are based on the optimized conditions (0.1 mg mL−1) unless otherwise stated.

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Control
1.01
21.48
79.17
17.18
0.01 mg mL−1
1.03
21.65
81.26
18.12
0.05 mg mL−1
1.05
21.51
81.52
18.41
0.10 mg mL−1
1.07
22.8
82.2
20.05
0.50 mg mL−1
1.06
22.53
81.3
19.42
1.00 mg mL−1
1.06
22.16
80.82
18.98
In Fig. 3a we compared the J–V characteristics of the best MAPbI3 solar cells with PASP (0.1 mg mL−1) and without the PASP interlayer. All the photovoltaic parameters increase simultaneously in the presence of PASP. The modified device produces a larger Jsc of 22.80 mA cm−2 compared to a Jsc of 22.26 mA cm−2 in the reference cell. The FF increases to 82.20% which is among the highest values reported for p–i–n type MAPbI3 solar cells. The Voc slightly increases from 1.04 V to 1.07 V as well. The ultimate PCE is boosted from 18.32% (without PASP) to 20.05%. Given the 20 mV difference in the WF of P3CT-Na and P3CT-Na/PASP, the larger gain in the Voc (60 meV) in addition to the reduced mismatch of energy levels can be ascribed to the mitigated carrier losses via recombination. The modified device with PASP also exhibits a small hysteresis with the hysteresis index being 0.0294 (see J–V curves in forward and reverse scan directions in Fig. S9, ESI). This improvement can directly result from the suppression of surface charge trapping or the reduced ion motion involving iodide in the perovskite.Fig. 3b shows the incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) of MAPbI3 solar cells. We observe a notable enhancement in IPCE with PASP in nearly the whole absorption spectrum of MAPbI3. As the light penetration depth in MAPbI3 strongly varies with the energy of incident photons, the enhanced IPCE over the wide spectral range implies that the gains of photocurrent occur not only at the electrode interface but also in the bulk of the photo-absorber.
To unambiguously demonstrate the effectiveness of PASP passivation for the improved device efficiency, we plot the histogram of device parameters along with the average values in Fig. 3c–f. On average, the Jsc, Voc and FF increase respectively from 21.65 mA cm−2 to 22.80 mA cm−2, from 1.02 V to 1.06 V, and from 79.14% to 80.98%. Notedly, the distribution of ultimate PCEs becomes narrow in the presence of PASP, suggestive of improved device reproducibility. This likely benefits from the combined improvements in the contact properties at the MAPbI3/HTL interface with reduced charge trapping.
To explore the photophysical origin of the enhanced efficiencies with PASP, we performed steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy of MAPbI3 prepared on P3CT-Na and P3CT-Na/PASP (Fig. S10a). In the presence of a HTL, the quenching of PL is commonly ascribed to the hole transfer from the active layer to the HTL. Differently, we observe a slightly higher PL intensity in the presence of PASP. It should be noted that this tendency does not necessarily indicate an impaired hole extraction if traps in the interface play a role. Similar results with enhanced PL after surface passivation have been observed. Therefore, our results of PL point to a likelihood that non-radiative recombination either in the bulk of MAPbI3 or at the HTL/perovskite interface is suppressed in the presence of PASP. Then, we measured PL decay kinetics with the results shown in Fig. S10b and Table S1, ESI. To better correlate the PL results with the device operation, we examined the decay kinetics of MAPbI3 covered with the same ETL used in the PSC (PC60BM/C60/BCP). Of note, the decay kinetics for the samples based on MAPbI3/HTL and MAPbI3/ETL display resembling profiles (nearly overlap) in the presence of PASP. This result suggests that the PASP devices may have a balanced hole and electron extraction with the modified interface at the anode.
We further performed TPC measurements on irradiated PSCs to unveil the impacts of PASP on the charge sweepout process. Fig. 4a shows the representative TPC decay kinetics of the control and PASP-modified solar cells under short-circuit conditions excited at 488 nm. An obvious difference is seen in the compared devices and that with the PASP layer shows an expedited charge extraction. This result is fully consistent with time-resolved PL spectroscopy. The charge extraction time (τextr) determined through mono-exponential decay fittings is 54.1 ns and 38.2 ns for the cells without and with the PASP layer, respectively (see the fitting parameters for TPC in Table S2, ESI). Since the bulk properties in the perovskite film tend not to be changed significantly, the shortened charge extraction should be mainly attributed to the improved interfacial characteristics. To differentiate the two carriers in the TPC measurements, both of which eventually need to be swept out of the solar cells to actualize the photovoltaic effect, we fabricated single-carrier devices based on a structure of ITO/P3CT-Na/(PASP)/MAPbI3/P3HT/Au. The results of TPC measured on the single-carrier devices are provided in Fig. 4b and Table S2 (ESI) under the same test conditions. As can be seen from those decay traces, the device containing PASP consistently shows an expedited sweepout for holes, corresponding to a reduced τextr of 80.88 ns, compared to τextr = 108.3 ns without PASP. Based on these analyses, the improved carrier sweepout should be responsible for the enhanced device performance.
With the promoted extraction of holes, we expect that the recombination properties in the operational cell are altered. In this context, we probed charge recombination kinetics by means of Plight dependent impedance spectroscopy. Fig. 5a shows Nyquist plots of impedance spectroscopy performed on the PSCs under 100 mW cm−2 solar irradiation (open-circuit conditions) accompanied by fitting with equivalent circuit modelling (ECM). From the fitting results (see Table S3, ESI), a pronounced difference is found in the reduced series resistance (Rs) that in general is affected by contact properties. The determined Rs by ECM (see the inset of Fig. 5a) is 36.74 Ω (w/o PASP) and 28.8 Ω (w/PASP). Besides, the recombination resistance increases to 23.79 Ω in the PASP containing cell. These results point to reduced charge recombination and improved contact properties after PASP modification. Based on measuring the chemical capacitance at different Plight (see Nyquist plots at various Plight in Fig. S11, ESI) we determined the charge carrier density (Nd) in the PSCs at under operational conditions (see the detailed method in the ESI). Under open-circuit conditions, the measured capacitance and resistance respectively reflect the charge/discharge and recombination processes in the solar cell, thus being referred to as the chemical capacitance (Cμ) and the recombination resistance (Rrec). From the Nyquist plot, it can be seen that both solar cells (without or with PASP) exhibit a similar tendency that the decrease of Cμ is in association with an increase of Rrec at lower reducing Plight. These behaviours have been consistently observed previously and can be understood from the decreased charge carrier density with reduced Plight, which effectively decreases the encounter probability between the photocarriers. Fig. S12 (ESI) shows the extracted Nd as a function of Plight for the two solar cells. The Nd of both devices exhibits a power law dependence on light intensity and interestingly the power seems not to be affected by the present PASP layer, indicated by the nearly identical slopes in Fig. 5b. On average, the Nd is enhanced by ∼28.93% in the PASP modified device and in high Plight regimes approaching 1 sun, the difference in Nd even increases, pointing to a more efficient suppression on the photo-carrier losses near 1 sun in the device with PASP. The lifetime of photo-carriers (τcarr) can be estimated from the product of recombination resistance and chemical capacitance. Under open-circuit conditions, the τcarr is mainly dictated by the recombination strength. With this knowledge, we compared the τcarr at different Plight in our PSCs. As shown in Fig. 5b, at lower Plight, the τcarr merely changes, while under stronger irradiation, the τcarr sharply decreases with increased Nd. Similar behaviours have been observed in organic solar cells. It is important to note that τcarr in the device containing PASP becomes evidently longer across a wide range of irradiation. This trend agrees with the general picture of mitigated recombination in the solar cell where the carriers become longer-lived. We also found that the recombination order (RO) is smaller in the PASP based solar cell, revealed by the characteristics of τcarr against Nd shown in Fig. 5c. A reduction of RO has been proposed to be related to decreased charge trapping in solar cells. To this end, the observation is in line with the key role of interfacial modification by PASP.
Finally, we also examined the shelf stability of these devices through monitoring their photovoltaic performance as a function of dark storage time in a N2-purged glove box (temperature between 25 °C to 30 °C and water oxygen levels less than 0.1 PPM). As shown in Fig. 6, the efficiency of the device without PASP passivation decreases from 19.25% to 16.19% after 176 days, maintaining 84.1% of the original efficiency. Under the same conditions, the PASP-passivated device exhibits a retardation in degradation, with the PCE reduced from 20.05% to 18.75%. As such, 92.6% of the initial performance is retained. This result manifests an improved stability in the presence of PASP. Such an enhancement is likely attributed to the dense and even film morphology of the perovskite or the prevented diffusion of ions into the bulk region of the active layer. With the PASP incorporated interface, further gains of environmental stability may be afforded by efforts directed towards increasing the film quality and water repelling ability of perovskites through solvent or additive engineering.

To summarize, we show that a biopolymer PASP layer can work effectively to passivate the surface traps in MAPbI3 perovskite solar cells. The crystallization of MAPbI3 with reduced defect density is improved in the presence of PASP revealed by the results of SEM, XRD and AFM. Under optimal conditions, the PCE of MAPbI3 devices with PASP increases from 17.18% to 20.05% owing to the reduction of non-radiation SRH recombination at the anode interface. Benefitting from the interface modification with PASP, the degradation of perovskite solar cells significantly slows down, leading to retaining 92.6% of the initial PCE after 175 days. Through transient TPC analysis, we found that the PASP layer significantly improves the hole extraction at the anode and reduces interfacial non-radiation SRH recombination. We further probe recombination kinetics by light intensity dependent impedance analysis to unravel the photophysical origin of the enhancement performance. The PASP modified devices are associated with longer carrier lifetimes at different Plight showing a lower recombination order. This work enriches our fundamental understanding on the interfacial characteristics of PSCs, with which further enhancements of the device efficiency and stability can be achieved with biopolymer based interface modification.


All chemicals and reagents were employed as received from chemical companies without any further purification. P3CT-Na was synthesized through the reaction of poly[3-(4-carboxylbutyl)thiophene] (P3CT, Mw: 30–40 K, Rieke Metals) with sodium hydroxide (NaOH, molar ratio 1:1.025) in H2O at 60 °C under stirring. Polyaspartic acid sodium water solution (PASP, 40 wt%) from Maya-R company (China). Before use, PH was adjusted to 7 with glacial acetic acid and diluted with deionized water to 1, 0.5, 0.1, 0.05, and 0.01 mg mL−1 and other purity. PC61BM, BCP, and C60 were purchased from Lumtec (Taiwan).


The ITO/glass substrate was cleaned by successive sonication in detergent, deionized water, acetone and isopropyl alcohol, and then dried by using a nitrogen flow. Then the ITO substrates were treated with O2-plasma for 15 min. P3CT-Na was spin-coated on ITO at 4000 rpm for 60 s. After thermal annealing at 140 °C for 20 min in air, PASP (0.1 mg mL−1) was spin-coated on P3CT-Na at 4000 rpm for 30 s. After thermal annealing at 140 °C for 20 min in air, the substrates were transferred into a glove box filled with N2. The perovskite precursor solution was prepared by dissolving CH3NH3I and PbI2 (1:1, 1.40 M) in 1 mL mixed solvent of DMF and DMSO (volume ratio 4:1). Perovskite films were fabricated using an anti-solvent method at 400 rpm 3 s and 4800 rpm 30 s. And the anti-solvent chlorobenzene (CB, 200 μL) was added onto the substrate 14 s after the spin-coating started. Then the substrate was put on a hotplate at 75 °C for 2 min and 90 °C for 4 min to form perovskite films. After the substrate cooled to room-temperature, PCBM solution (12.5 mg mL−1 in CB) was spin-coated on the perovskite films at 400 rpm for 3 s and 4800 rpm for 30 s. Then the substrate was transferred to a vacuum chamber. 20 nm C60, 8 nm BCP and 100 nm Ag were deposited by thermal evaporation using a metal shadow mask. The device area was 4 mm2.


The current-density versus voltage (J–V) characteristics of MAPbI3 solar cells and single carrier devices were recorded by using a Keithley 2400 Source Meter under a nitrogen environment. MAPbI3 solar cells were tested under irradiation by using a solar simulator calibrated with a standard Si cell or and single carrier devices were tested in the dark. The irradiation intensity was adjusted by using an optical wheel filter and determined according to the current reading of the calibration cell. The incident photon to current efficiency (IPCE) of CH3NH3PbI3 solar cells was measured by using a Newport external quantum measurement system (Model 66920). Impedance spectroscopy of CH3NH3PbI3 solar cells was performed by using a potentiostat under a nitrogen environment and the data were analysed by using the ZView 2 program. Different intensities of sunlight were simulated with filters of different transmittances.


There are no conflicts to declare.


The work was financially supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2017 YFA0206600), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) (No. 21773045), and the Chinese Academy of Sciences (100 Top Young Scientists Program). Y. Zhang thanks the NSFC (No. 21674006) and the 111 Project (B14009).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta01947b
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019