 DOI: 10.1039/C9TC02781E
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 10795-10801


Nafees
Ahmad
,

Xuning
Zhang
,

Shuo
Yang
,

Dongyang
Zhang
,

Jianqiu
Wang
,

Saud uz
Zafar
,

Yanxun
Li
,

Yuan
Zhang
,

Sabir
Hussain
,

Zhihai
Cheng
,

Anbu
Kumaresan
 and 

Huiqiong
Zhou
*

CAS Key Laboratory of Nanosystem and Hierarchical Fabrication, CAS Center for Excellence in Nanoscience, National Center for Nanoscience and Technology, Beijing 100190, P. R. China. E-mail: zhouhq@nanoctr.cn

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, P. R. China

School of Chemistry, Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Biomedical Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, P. R. China

Beijing Key Laboratory of Optoelectronic Functional Materials and Micro-nano Devices, Department of Physics, Renmin University of China, Beijing 100872, P. R. China

Received
24th May 2019
, Accepted 22nd August 2019
First published on 25th August 2019
The cathode interlayer plays a key role in the photovoltaic performance in organic solar cells. In this work, we demonstrate that polydopamine/ZnO can be used as efficient electron transport layers (ETL) in inverted non-fullerene organic solar cells. In comparison to the devices with the ZnO ETL, the power conversion efficiency of inverted PBDBT:ITIC solar cells with the PDA/ZnO ETL can be boosted from 10.15% to 11.14%, due to the simultaneously enhanced open-circuit voltage, short-circuit current and fill factor. The increased photovoltaic performance is mainly attributed to a faster charge extraction ability at the cathode interface and longer carrier lifetime, confirmed by transient optoelectrical analyses. Revealed by conductive-AFM and KPFM coupled with absorption spectroscopy, high optical transmittance and vertical electrical conductivity with a suitable low work function and a doping effect induced by PDA were observed in the PDA modified ZnO, which makes it a good ETL material for inverted solar cells and indicated universal applicability. This work provides a new approach to modify the cathode interfacial properties towards high efficiency organic solar cells with non-fullerene acceptors.

Organic solar cells (OSCs) offer attractive advantages for renewable energy conversion because of their solution processability, flexibility, low cost, light weight and promising compatibility for manufacturing using roll-to-roll printing technology, which has gained considerable attention. In the last couple of years, remarkable advances have been made in the enhancement of the power conversion efficiency and stability of OSCs. To date, a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of over 15% has been reported in the laboratory. Among the OPV device configurations, the inverted architecture is advantageous for device stability and superior charge extraction due to the favourable vertical phase separation. Generally, inverted OSCs are composed of an active layer in a blend of a conjugated polymer donor with an electron acceptor sandwiched by the interfacial layers and electrodes. The bottom cathode interfacial layers play a significant role in the electron extraction and interfacial charge recombination. So far, several classes of materials have been used as electron transporting layers (ETLs) including polymers, small molecules, metal salts, and transition metal oxides. Among these, zinc oxide (ZnO) is one of the most commonly used ETLs due to the satisfactory solution processability, suitable energy level, and high transparency in the ultraviolet-visible range. Due to its usefulness and popularity, several approaches to improve the performance of ZnO-based electron contacts have been investigated, as bare ZnO often suffers from deficiencies including lower mobility leading to strong recombination of photo-generated charges, causing considerable reduction in the performance of solar cells; this is based on a consideration that charge extraction and recombination both depend on the transport properties and the required high post-annealing temperature also tends to raise the incompatibility with the desired low-temperature processing for OSCs.

To this end, controlling the deficiencies regarding ZnO is essential for next generation high efficiency OSCs. As shown in previous studies, the interface properties in OSCs can be effectively modified by incorporating an interfacial layer between the active layer and electrode and also by a doping strategy. It was found that the photovoltaic performance was considerably enhanced by solvent treatment. Based on fullerene OSCs, we have investigated the solvent effects and interface properties of ZnO to improve the PCE and stability and, in addition, the role of a pH-neutral CMP film based on the carbazole group in in situ electrochemical deposition. It was shown that the thickness and polarity of the processing solvents play a vital role in the electron extraction efficiency and ultimate device performance. Recently Eisner F. et al. applied the bilayer ETL concept to OPV and inorganic lead-sulphide QD solar cells. They developed a metal oxide In2O3/ZnO (In2O3 at the bottom of ZnO films) bilayer and applied it in inorganic colloidal quantum dot solar cells and OPV. Consistent device improvement was observed due to smoothening of the ZnO surface, reducing the resistance, increasing the electron mobility, a higher fill factor, and the obvious reduction in the cathode work function. The results highlight the potential of bilayers as novel ETL systems for future developments.
Recently, surface modification has become a key approach to develop functional surfaces. Among the various surface modification techniques, polydopamine (PDA) has gained increasing attention due to its robust and strong adhesive strength to almost all types of surface, irrespective of the substrate's chemistry and combined biological, optical, electrical and chemical properties. It is prepared by oxidation polymerization, which includes only simple immersion of the substrate in a dilute aqueous solution of commercially available low-cost dopamine hydrochloride, buffered to an alkaline pH, resulting in spontaneous deposition of a thin polydopamine film. In addition, the chemical structure of PDA contains many functional groups i.e. catechol, amine and imine moieties, all of which may serve as an anchor for transition metal ions and the starting point for covalent/non covalent modification with the associated surface material. Moreover, PDA exhibits satisfactory thermal stability and it can tolerate a temperature at least up to 200 °C without any considerable decomposition. Owing to these merits, PDA could be an appropriate interface material for opto-electronic devices.
In this contribution, we develop the idea of improving the performance of ZnO by introducing an additional, very thin, polydopamine (PDA) layer in between the cathode (ITO) and the ZnO film in order to modify the ZnO layer and improve the organic solar cell performance based on the polymerization of PDA. We investigate the interface properties of PDA/ZnO and non-fullerene solar cell device characteristics with the PDA/ZnO ETL. We found that the introduction of a PDA film (around 10 nm) underneath ZnO leads to improving the PCE of PBDBT:ITIC solar cells to 11.14%, compared to 10.15% in the devices with the bare ZnO ETL. The surface morphology, work function and electrical conductivity of PDA/ZnO are investigated by AFM, KPFM, and c-AFM, showing a good vertical conductance and homogeneity, while the doping effect of PDA is revealed by ESR (Electron Spin Resonance) spectroscopy. XRD results show that the crystallinity and crystal orientation in ZnO change after inserting the PDA film. The transmission data showed that PDA/ZnO has no negative effect on light absorption. The charge extraction efficiency and charge recombination dynamics of PBDBT:ITIC devices with PDA/ZnO ETLs are probed by transient-photocurrent (TPC) and photovoltage (TPV) recombination, which reconciles the enhanced PCE. To the best of our knowledge, the approach with polymerized PDA has not yet been demonstrated for inverted OSCs with non-fullerene acceptors.

PDA was synthesized by self-polymerization of dopamine hydrochloride at room temperature and the film formation of PDA on the ITO substrates was afforded by using the dip-coating method (see Fig. 1). During self-polymerization, we observed an obvious change in the solution color after 5 min, 15 min and 30 min of polymerization during the dipping process (Fig. S1, ESI).

To confirm the structure of polydopamine, we characterized the thin film of PDA, PDA/ZnO, and ZnO by FTIR (Fig. 2a). The broad peak at 3309 cm−1 is attributed to O–H and N–H stretching vibrations in PDA, while in PDA/ZnO this peak down shifts to 3200–2800 cm−1, showing slightly broadened features, which may arise due to development of interactions between catechol, amine moieties, and ZnO. The signals at 1603 cm−1 and 1510 cm−1 are assigned to CC (aromatic) or CO and CN stretching vibrations of PDA and the stretching vibration at 1283 cm−1 could be due to the C–O bond. In the case of PDA/ZnO, the peak shifts to lower wavelength at 1585 cm−1 and becomes slightly broadened, which might be attributed to the formation of hydrogen bonding between H of PDA and the O atom of ZnO, while the other peaks stay the same as in the PDA film. The characteristic stretching vibration of Zn–O appeared at 743 cm−1.
The crystallinity in bare and PDA-modified ZnO was identified by X-ray diffractometry (XRD) (Fig. 2b). We observe diffraction peaks at 2θ = 30.5° (100) and 35.6° (002) in the ZnO and PDA/ZnO samples. It implies the hexagonal wurtzite structure of the thin ZnO film, no matter the presence of PDA. It can also be seen that the peak intensity increased in PDA/ZnO compared to bare ZnO, which reveals that the crystallinity of ZnO has been enhanced on top of PDA. The ZnO film morphology and crystal orientation are both subject to the precursor nature, additive, film formation method, thickness, solvents and chemical systems. As pointed out by Fujihara et al., the sol–gel film orientation is basically governed by nucleation and the surface properties of substrates should be considered for the structural properties of sol–gel films. To this end, the interaction between the PDA surface and sol–gel ZnO films may lead to the enhanced crystallinity of ZnO films.
We test our hypothesis and examine the charge transfer between PDA and ZnO by using ESR spectroscopy. We observed no ESR signal in pure PDA and bare ZnO samples. In contrast, there is a pronounced ESR peak (Fig. 2c) in the PDA/ZnO sample with a g-factor value of 2.003, which indicates the presence of a doping effect in ZnO induced by PDA; such an effect promotes the electron extraction and transport in PDA/ZnO ETLs.
We further explored the transmittance of the ETLs by UV/vis spectroscopy (see Fig. 2d). The incorporation of PDA has no negative effect on the optical transparency of the ZnO thin film in a visible region (500–750 nm) with a negligible difference. We ascribe the slightly different optical transparency to the optimized optical field distribution (Fig. S2, ESI) by PDA and/or to the reduced reflection at the ITO/PDA/ZnO interface due to its increased surface smoothness confirmed by atomic force microscopy (AFM) (Fig. S3, ESI). The surface morphology of ZnO changes slightly after introducing PDA. The surface roughness of PDA and ZnO is 1.42 nm and 1.62 nm, respectively. Benefitting from the increased surface smoothness, the surface roughness of PDA/ZnO remains almost the same as in pure PDA (1.47 nm). This improvement may be favourable for the enhancement of the fill factor in the solar cell.
We also measured the absorbance of bulk heterojunction films cast on top of PDA/ZnO (Fig. S4, ESI). As expected, the absorbance of PBDBT:ITIC BHJ films nearly overlaps with using different ETLs in the spectral range of 350–800 nm. This suggests that the absorbed photon densities in the solar cell should not be affected by the presence of PDA.
To achieve efficient electron extraction in the solar cell, the matching of the work function (WF) of the ETLs with the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) in the acceptor is a prerequisite. In this context, we determined the WFs of PDA-10 nm/ZnO and ZnO films by Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM) (see Fig. 3a and b). The WF decreased in the case of PDA/ZnO to −4.57 as compared to bare ZnO at −4.65 eV. In the inverted solar cell, the lower work function of the bottom cathode interfacial layer helps prompt the extraction of electrons and maintain the built-in potential in the solar cells.
We further compared the electrical conductivity of ZnO and PDA/ZnO thin films in the vertical direction by conductive atomic force microscopy (c-AFM) in contact mode using Ti/Ir coated tips with the bias voltage ranging from −4 V to +4 V. As can be seen from Table S1 in the ESI, the current through PDA/ZnO is much higher than ZnO. For example, the currents measured on the PDA/ZnO thin film are 5.428, 422.43, 493.489 and 683.39 pA at +1 V, +2 V, +3 V and +4 V, while they amount to 8.026, 8.91, 21.334, and 23.891 pA respectively at the same bias conditions for the ZnO film. The results point to enhanced vertical conductivity in PDA/ZnO. The modified electrical properties in PDA/ZnO might be attributed to the doping effect induced by PDA helping to prompt the extraction of electrons. And there might be a chemical interaction between PDA and ZnO allowed by the partially formed Zn–PDA complexes at the interface in the presence of O or N chelating sites within PDA.
With the suitable electrical and optical properties of PDA/ZnO, now we turned to the photovoltaic behaviours in organic solar cells. Fig. 4a shows the utilized inverted device structure. All the devices with different ETLs were fabricated under the same conditions for ease of comparison. We first examined the impact of the PDA film thickness on the cell performance. Fig. 4b shows the current density versus voltage (J–V) characteristics of PBDBT:ITIC solar cells with PDA layers of different thicknesses (4 nm, 10 nm and 22 nm) combined with ZnO (here the PDA film thickness was adjusted by the dip-coating time), and the device parameters are organized in Table S2 (ESI). From the results, the best PCE was achieved when the PDA film is 10 nm, followed by that with 22 nm of PDA and lastly the one with 4 nm of PDA. The reduced performance with thinner PDA may be caused by the poor contact (with ZnO) or film quality, while upon further increasing the thickness to 22 nm, the lowered electrical conductivity may impede electron extraction, causing the drops of Jsc and the PCE. With the established optimal PDA thickness, we compared the device parameters with those based on pure ZnO, pure PDA or PDA/ZnO (see the results in Fig. 4c and Table 1). The control device with ZnO yields a Jsc of 16.77 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.87 V and a FF of 68.77%, resulting in a PCE of 10.15%. This value is consistent with the reported PCE in previous work. By using the PDA-only ETL, we observe a dramatic decrease in PCE (= 2.24%), possibly related to the poor electrical conductivity or unsuitable WF, giving rise to inefficient electron extraction and strong recombination at the cathode interface. Markedly, the device based on the PDA/ZnO ETL produces the highest efficiency, showing a boosted Jsc of 17.86 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.88 V, and a FF of 70.91% with the ultimate PCE reaching 11.14%. The higher PCE can be well correlated to the enhanced electrical conductivity in PDA/ZnO as well as the rising WF. Fig. 4d displays the external quantum efficiency spectra of the according solar cells. The Jsc calculated from the EQE spectra is 13.39 mA cm−2, 16.96 mA cm−2, and 16.30 mA cm−2 for the PDA, PDA/ZnO and ZnO containing devices. The integrated photocurrents based on the EQE are in good agreement with the measured Jsc from J–V measurements with deviations of less than 5%.
ETL

V
oc/V

J
sc/mA cm−2
EQE
FF/%
PCE/%
PDA-10 nm/ZnO
0.88
17.86
16.96
70.91
11.1
ZnO 30 nm
0.87
16.77
16.30
68.77
10.2
PDA 10 nm
0.34
13.65
13.39
48.43
2.2
As aforementioned, there is a doping effect in the ZnO ETL induced by PDA, which promotes the electron extraction efficiently and likely reduces the recombination of photocarriers near the cathode interface. In order to confirm our hypothesis, we performed TPC and TPV measured on irradiated solar cells, from which charge sweepout and the recombination lifetime can be assessed. Fig. 5a displays the TPC decay kinetics of PBDBT:ITIC devices containing different ETLs. Based on the fittings to these decay traces with a monoexponential decay model, the charge extraction time for PDA/ZnO was determined to be 80.85 ns, considerably shorter than that for the ZnO device (102.09 ns). The shortening of extraction indicates a superior carrier extraction property with the PDA/ZnO ETL. Fig. 5b shows the TPV decays of the same set of devices at the open-circuit condition. We similarly extracted the recombination lifetime at this bias condition for these solar cells. The recombination lifetime is 78.82 μs for the ZnO devices and it enhances to 102 μs for the PDA/ZnO devices. This elongated recombination lifetime provides a suggestion on the suppressed interfacial charge recombination in the PDA/ZnO device. The combined results of faster extraction time and delayed recombination can explain the improvement of the FF in the PDA/ZnO device.
To gain further insights into the modified carrier extraction and recombination, we measured the carrier mobility in these BHJ solar cells. This is based on a consideration that charge extraction and recombination both depend on the transport properties. Here we determined the mobility with the well-established space-charge-limited current (SCLC) method based on single carrier devices (ITO/ETL/BHJ/Al) (Fig. S5, ESI). The determined electron mobility for the device with PDA/ZnO and ZnO is 3.99 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 7.69 × 10−6 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively. With the PDA modified ZnO, the mobility in PBDBT:ITIC can be high enough for efficient sweepout of electrons to reduce the interfacial recombination losses. These results confirm that the PDA/ZnO ETL helps increase the selectivity of charge extraction at the cathode.
To explore the universality of PDA/ZnO ETLs, we also measured the device performance with ITM and ITCC systems; both showed an obvious improvement in cell performance (Fig. S6 and Table S3, ESI). We compared the device parameters with pure ZnO and PDA-10 nm/ZnO. The control device based on the PBDBT:ITM system with a ZnO electron transport layer yields a Jsc of 16.72 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.92 V and a FF of 66.49%, resulting in a PCE of 10.2%, while the device based on the PDA-10/ZnO ETL produces the highest efficiency, showing a boosted Jsc of 17.57 mA cm−2, and a FF of 67.19%, with the ultimate PCE reaching 10.9%. The same enhancement trend was observed in the case of PBDBT:ITCC devices. The control device based on ZnO yielded a Jsc of 15.95 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.98 V and a FF of 63.97%, resulting in a PCE of 10.0%, whereas PDA-10 nm/ZnO showed good performance with an improved Jsc of 16.53 mA cm−2, and a FF of 65.16%, with a PCE of 10.5%.

In conclusion, we report a simple and effective interfacial approach towards modification of ZnO electron transport layers by inserting a polymerized polydopamine interlayer beneath the ZnO with the dip-coating method. We achieved an enhanced PCE of 11.14% in PBDBT:ITIC solar cells with a PDA/ZnO ETL due to the simultaneously enhanced Jsc, Voc, and FF. The results of transient photovoltage and transient photocurrent evidence that the PDA modifier layer improves the charge extraction and carrier lifetime and effectively mitigates carrier losses via interfacial charge recombination. ESR measurements showed electron transfer between PDA and ZnO, pointing to the presence of a doping effect induced by PDA. From the results of c-AFM and KPFM, the electrical conductivity and work function of PDA/ZnO were confirmed to be more suitable than ZnO. This work provides a new approach to modify the cathode interfacial properties towards high efficiency organic solar cells with non-fullerene acceptors.


Firstly, ITO-coated glass substrates were cleaned with detergent, distilled water, acetone and IPA in an ultrasonic bath followed by UV-ozone treatment for 15 minutes. Polydopamine (2 mg mL−1) was prepared in 10 mM Tris buffer solution (pH 8.5) by self-polymerization of commercially available dopamine hydrochloride. Secondly, a PDA film was coated onto the ITO glass by the dip-coating method; for this purpose ITO substrates were immersed vertically into the solution for 5, 15, and 30 minutes with constant stirring at room temperature, and then rinsed with de-ionized water and dried in nitrogen.


Zinc oxide was prepared by the sol–gel method as reported in the literature. Zinc acetate dihydrate (1 g) and ethanolamine (0.28 g) were added to 2-methoxyethanol (10 mL). The resulting cloudy solution was stirred for several hours till it formed a clear transparent solution.


A PBDBT:ITIC (w/w, 1:1) blend was dissolved with a concentration of 20 mg mL−1 in chlorobenzene and then stirred for 4 hours at 160 °C; 0.5% 1,8-diiodooctane (DIO) (v/v, 99.50:0.5) was also added about 40 minutes prior to the spin coating.


Pre-cleaned ITO-coated glass substrates were immersed vertically into PDA solution for 5 min, 15 min, and 30 min and then rinsed in de-ionized water and dried in nitrogen. A sol–gel solution of ZnO was then spin coated onto PDA-coated ITO glass at 5000 rpm at 150 °C for 30 minutes and transferred into a nitrogen-filled glove box for BHJ coating. After that, the PBDBT:ITIC solution was spin-coated with a rotation rate of 3000 rpm followed by annealing at 160 °C for 15 minutes. Finally, hole transport layer MoO3 (7 nm) and Al (80 nm) as the anode were thermally deposited on the BHJ under a high vacuum (3 × 10−4 Pa) through a shadow mask.


The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of solar cells were measured using a Keithley 2400 source meter under AM1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2) provided by an Oriel solar simulator. The incident light intensity was adjusted with a silicon calibration photodiode (Peccell Technologies). Single carrier devices were characterized by using a Keithley 2400 source in a dark environment. For the electron-only device, the ZnO layer was obtained by spin coating the precursor solution on precleaned ITO substrates followed by thermal annealing and then the BHJ films were cast on top of the ZnO hole-blocking layer. Finally, an Al top electrode was thermally deposited on the BHJ under a high vacuum (3 × 10−4 Pa) through a shadow mask. EQE spectra were measured using a Solar Cell Spectral Response Measurement System QE-R3011 (Enlitech, Taiwan). The light intensity at each wavelength was calibrated with a single-crystal Si photovoltaic cell. The transmittance and absorbance spectra were attained by using a UV-vis spectrometer (PerkinElmer Lambda 650/850/950 UV-vis spectrophotometer). The FTIR spectra were recorded with a Spectrum One FT-IR spectrometer (PerkinElmer Instruments, Inc.). The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the samples were recorded on a Rigaku D/MAX-TORIII (CBO) X-ray diffractometer equipped with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.5419 Å). KPFM and c-AFM were obtained on an Asylum Research MFP-3D infinity while AFM images were acquired on a Nanoscope V AFM (Bruker) microscope in tapping mode. ESR measurements were performed using a Bruker ELEXSYS E500 instrument. For ESR analysis, firstly we made three standard samples: (1) DMPO (10 μL) was added to (50 μL) DI water; (2) DMPO (10 μL) + 2-methoxy ethanol (50 μL); and (3) DMPO (10 μL) + 2-methoxy ethanol (25 μL) + DI water (25 μL). Then for our sample characterization: (1) DMPO (10 μL) was added to (50 μL) PDA solution in water; (2) DMPO (10 μL) was added to sol–gel ZnO in 2-methoxy ethanol (50 μL); and (3) DMPO (10 μL) was added into a mixture of (25 μL) PDA solution in water + sol–gel ZnO in 2-methoxy ethanol (25 μL).


There are no conflicts of interest to declare.


The work was financially supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2017YFA0206600), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) (no. 21773045), and the Chinese Academy of Sciences (100 Top Young Scientists Program). Y. Zhang thanks the NSFC (no. 21674006) and the 111 Project (B14009).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9tc02781e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019