 DOI: 10.1039/C4NR00130C
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 6679-6683


Hak-Beom
Kim
,

Hyosung
Choi
,

Jaeki
Jeong
,

Seongbeom
Kim
,

Bright
Walker
,

Seyeong
Song
 and 

Jin Young
Kim
*

School of Energy and Chemical Engineering, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), Ulsan, 689-798, South Korea. E-mail: jykim@unist.ac.kr; Fax: +82-52-217-2909; Tel: +82-52-217-2911

Received
8th January 2014
, Accepted 2nd April 2014
First published on 4th April 2014
We investigate mixed solvents of N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) and γ-butyrolactone (GBL) to produce the smooth surface of a perovskite film and uniform crystal domains. This ideal morphology from mixed solvents enhances the power conversion efficiency to over 6% by improving the exciton dissociation efficiency and reducing the recombination loss at both interfaces of PEDOT:PSS/perovskite and perovskite/PCBM.

Hybrid solar cells (HSCs) using organometal halide perovskites as light absorbers have received much attention recently due to their advantages including broad light absorption from visible to the near-infrared region, high extinction coefficients, long charge-carrier diffusion lengths and bandgaps which can easily be tuned via compositional changes. Significant efforts have been expanded to investigate new perovskite materials such as methyl ammonium lead halides, (CH3NH3PbX3) and cesium tin iodide, (CsSnI3); to explore new architectures such as meso-structured metal oxide layers (titanium dioxide, TiO2 and aluminum oxide, Al2O3); to investigate novel deposition methods such as sequential and vapour deposition; and to explore polymeric hole conductors such as poly-3-hexylthiophene, P3HT and poly-triarylamines, PTAA, etc. These efforts have led to dramatically improved power conversion efficiencies (PCE) in conventional perovskite-based HSCs (pero-HSCs) of up to 15%. In conventional pero-HSCs, mesoporous TiO2 and Al2O3 play an important role as the electron accepting/transport or scaffold layer, respectively. In addition, 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis-(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD) or semiconducting polymers deposited on top of perovskite layers play a critical role as hole transport layers (HTL). Liu et al. reported a PCE of 15.4% without a meso-structured TiO2 layer by developing a vapour-deposition route to obtain high-quality CH3NH3PbI3−xClx perovskite films as light absorbing layers. In spite of high device efficiencies obtained with these conventional pero-HSCs, high temperatures of over 500 °C are required for calcination of the compact TiO2 layer. Since thermal treatment at such high temperatures is not suitable for flexible substrates, new device architectures are urgently needed. Jeng et al. have reported the inverted-type perovskite/fullerene planar heterojunction HSCs (ipero-HSCs) by depositing various fullerene derivatives, such as fullerene (C60), [6,6]-phenyl-C60 butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) and indene-C60-bisadduct (ICBA), on top of methyl ammonium lead iodide (CH3NH3PbI3) perovskite layers via thermal evaporation. Although new inverted structures have been introduced for pero-HSCs, there remain significant problems in terms of low device efficiency and the need for high-vacuum processing to deposit the fullerene derivatives as electron acceptors. Recently, Lam and Snaith groups have developed highly efficient ipero-HSCs by depositing the perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3 or CH3NH3PbI3−xClx) and PCBM films via low-temperature and solution-processing. However, there is still considerable room for further enhancement in device efficiency through careful optimization of perovskite film morphologies and device architectures.

Here, we demonstrate the strategy for morphology optimization of perovskite films using solvent mixtures in CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM ipero-HSCs in which all layers are deposited via solution processing at a low temperature. In the inverted structure, we employ a simple device configuration of indium tin oxide (ITO)/poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):polystyrene sulfonic acid (PEDOT:PSS)/CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite/PCBM/aluminum (Al). The improved morphology is observed in the perovskite film deposited from mixed solvents, leading to an improved exciton dissociation efficiency and reduced recombination losses at both interfaces of PEDOT:PSS/perovskite and perovskite/PCBM, and improvements in the device efficiency to over 6%.

Lead iodide (PbI2), anhydrous N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF), and γ-butyrolactone (GBL) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and used without further purification. Methyl ammonium iodide (CH3NH3I) and the precursor solution of ammonium lead iodide (CH3NH3PbI3) were prepared as previously reported. An equimolar ratio of CH3NH3I and PbI2 was dissolved in GBL with a concentration of 20 wt% and dissolved in DMF and the DMF–GBL mixed solvent (97:3 [vol%]) with a concentration of 12 wt%. These solutions were stirred at 60 °C for 12 h inside a glovebox filled with nitrogen gas.


Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):polystyrene sulfonic acid (PEDOT:PSS) was spin-cast at 5000 rpm onto a cleaned ITO substrate after UV-ozone treatment for 20 min and dried at 140 °C for 10 min. On top of the PEDOT:PSS layer, three types of CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite precursor solution (12 wt%) were spin-cast at 8000 rpm for 60 s and dried on a hot-plate at 100 °C for 15 min. The PCBM solution (0.7 wt% in chloroform) was spin-cast at 3000 rpm on top of the perovskite layer. Subsequently, Al (100 nm) electrodes were deposited on the PCBM layer under vacuum (<10−6 Torr) by thermal evaporation. The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of PSCs were measured using a Keithley 2635A source measure unit. The solar cell performance was characterized under illumination by an Air Mass 1.5 Global (AM 1.5 G) solar simulator with an irradiation intensity of 100 mW cm−2. External quantum efficiency (EQE) measurements were obtained under ambient conditions using a PV measurement QE system, with monochromatic light from a xenon lamp. The monochromatic light intensity was calibrated with a Si photodiode and chopped at 100 Hz. Masks (13.0 mm2) made of a thin metal plate were attached to each cell before measurement for J–V characteristics and EQE.


To form CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite layers with an interconnected crystalline structure and appropriate film morphology on top of the PEDOT:PSS layer, we used γ-butyrolactone (GBL), N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) and mixtures of GBL and DMF as processing solvents for precursors comprised of equimolar amounts of CH3NH3I and PbI2. Fig. 1a and b show the device structure and energy band diagram of ipero-HSCs, respectively. Contrary to conventional pero-HSCs which rely on n-type electron transport layers as substrates, we employed a PEDOT:PSS layer, which is extensively used as a hole transport material in polymer solar cells, spin-coated on top of glass/ITO anodes (Fig. 1a) as the substrate. The active layer of ipero-HSCs is a heterojunction consisting of CH3NH3PbI3 (electron donor) and PCBM (electron acceptor). Most exciton generation occurs in the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite layer via absorption of light and these excitons are effectively dissociated at the electron donor/acceptor interface because of the long-range charge-carrier diffusion length (∼100 nm) and low exciton binding energy (37–50 meV) inherent to the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite. The highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) (5.4 eV) and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) (3.9 eV) levels of the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite are well-matched with those of PCBM (HOMO: 6.1 eV, LUMO: 4.3 eV), leading to a cascading energy alignment for efficient exciton dissociation and charge extraction (Fig. 1b). Specifically, photo-dissociated electrons can be transferred to the LUMO band of PCBM within 0.40 ns and be collected at the Al cathode, while dissociated holes can be transferred to the PEDOT:PSS in less than a nanosecond to be collected at the ITO anode.

One of the key factors in the design of highly efficient pero-HSCs is the complete coverage and uniformity of perovskite films on substrates. Solution-processed perovskite films tend to have voids between crystals, which are detrimental to device performance. We collected scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and atomic force microscopy (AFM) images to investigate the coverage and morphology of perovskite films prepared from different solvents.
The CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite films were prepared by spin-coating a perovskite precursor solution on top of PEDOT:PSS-coated ITO substrates and drying at 100 °C for 15 min. Fig. 2a–c present SEM top-view images of perovskite films prepared from different solvents. All the films exhibited unique crystalline features of a perovskite with length scales in the order of several hundred nanometers. In the film prepared from GBL, there were large voids between crystal boundaries, indicating that the perovskite film did not completely cover the PEDOT:PSS layer (Fig. 2a). Although the film from DMF had relatively smaller voids and almost completely covered the PEDOT:PSS layer, there were uneven crystal domains with small (∼100 nm) and large (200–300 nm) grain sizes (Fig. 2b). To optimize the crystalline structure and improve the morphology of perovskite films, we used a solvent mixture of GBL and DMF (DMF–GBL = 97:3 [vol%]) to make the perovskite precursor solution. In contrast, the film from the solvent mixture had uniform crystal domains with smaller grain sizes (∼100 nm) (Fig. 2c). These results are consistent with AFM topography images. As shown in Fig. 2d–f, the film from GBL exhibited large domains with the highest root-mean-square (RMS) roughness of 24.53 nm among the three films (Fig. 2d). The film from DMF had a reduced RMS roughness of 8.88 nm and a great number of large clusters (Fig. 2e), whereas the film from the solvent mixture of DMF and GBL had the lowest RMS roughness of 6.60 nm with small and uniform crystal domains (Fig. 2f). Uniform and smooth perovskite films with interconnected crystalline networks were obtained from the mixed solvent system due to the optimized evaporation time for perovskite film formation. Small amounts of GBL have the same function as the additives in polymer solar cells. This improved morphology allows enhanced interfacial contact and reduced voids between the perovskite and PCBM.
Additional AFM topography images were collected for films after a PCBM layer had been coated on top of the perovskite films (Fig. S1). The surface roughness of the films after PCBM coating atop the perovskite layers much reduced (GBL: 8.36 nm, DMF: 1.95 nm, mixed solvent: 2.07 nm). However, the perovskite film from GBL still exhibited a fairly high surface roughness even after PCBM coating, which may lead to a rough contact between PCBM and the Al electrode and adversely affect the performance of the device.
To investigate the effect of mixed solvents on the light absorption and crystal structure of the perovskite films, we measured UV-vis absorption and X-ray diffraction (XRD) of CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite films prepared from different solvents. The same, optimized film processing conditions used for devices were used to prepare the UV-vis samples, resulting in films with a thickness of 30–40 nm (GBL: 37 nm, DMF: 32 nm, mixed: 30 nm). As shown in Fig. 3a, all the films showed absorption onsets at 800 nm with broad absorption ranging from the visible to near-IR region. The film from GBL had a higher optical density than other films due to being slightly thicker than the other samples. The X-ray diffractograms of perovskite films on PEDOT:PSS-coated glass substrates (Fig. 3b) all exhibited diffraction peaks from the tetragonal perovskite phase with diffraction peaks at 14.13°, 28.43° and 43.20°, assigned to the (110), (220), and (330) planes, respectively. There were no differences in the position of XRD peaks of the three films. The higher intensity in the film from GBL may be attributed to a slightly thicker film, or a more complete crystallization, compared to the films from DMF and mixed solvents. The negligible differences in UV-vis absorption and XRD measurements for films prepared from different solvents imply that the mixed solvent system only influences the film coverage and morphology without causing significant changes to the optical properties or crystalline structure of the material.
To investigate the effect of different solvents on the device performance, we fabricated ipero-HSCs using CH3NH3PbI3 processed with different ratios of DMF to GBL. We found that the devices prepared from DMF–GBL mixtures resulted in the best solar cell performance, as shown by the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics and external quantum efficiency (EQE) as displayed in Fig. 4a and b, respectively. Devices with a perovskite layer prepared from GBL exhibited a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 7.19 mA cm−2, open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 0.95 V, fill factor (FF) of 0.60, and power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 4.14%. The devices from DMF showed a JSC of 7.35 mA cm−2, VOC of 0.93 V, FF of 0.73 and PCE of 5.02%. These devices, in which the PCBM layer was deposited by spin-coating, had higher efficiencies than previously reported devices with PCBM deposited by thermal evaporation. To find the optimum mixed solvent ratio, we fabricated devices with controlled DMF–GBL ratios. We found a DMF–GBL volume ratio of 97:3 to be the best condition for perovskite film processing (Fig. S2 and Table S1). The optimized mixed solvent resulted in a remarkable enhancement in JSC (8.74 mA cm−2) and FF (0.76) (Fig. S3). The resulting PCE of 6.16%, represents a ∼49% and ∼23% PCE enhancement compared to those of the devices prepared from GBL and DMF, respectively. Since the VOC value of heterojunction solar cells is determined by energy difference between the HOMO level of electron donor and the LUMO level of electron acceptor, VOC values of the devices were similar while some devices with different ratios of mixed solvents show up to 1.05 V (Table S1). Detailed device characteristics are summarized in Table 1. The improvement in JSC is in good agreement with EQE measurements, which have an error range of ∼2% (Fig. 4b). All devices exhibited broad EQE curves throughout the visible spectrum to the near IR wavelength region (300–800 nm), consistent with the UV-vis absorption spectra. The device from GBL exhibited an EQE below 40%, whereas the device from DMF reached a maximum EQE of 46.5% at 470 nm. Mixed solvents led to high EQEs over 50% ranging from 400 nm to 500 nm. Partially high EQEs of the device from GBL in the range of 650–800 nm may be attributed to increased light absorption due to a greater film thickness and large perovskite crystal domains.
Solvent

J
SC [mA cm−2]

V
OC [V]
FF
PCE [%]
Cal. JSC [mA cm−2]
GBL
7.19
0.95
0.60
4.14
7.21
DMF
7.35
0.93
0.73
5.02
7.55
GBL + DMF
8.74
0.92
0.76
6.16
8.84
We calculated the internal quantum efficiency (IQE) of the devices from the EQE and measured reflectance (Fig. 4b). The IQE is the ratio of the number of electrons collected at the cathode to the number of absorbed photons, which provides information regarding recombination losses which occur during exciton diffusion, exciton dissociation, and charge transport. The device from the mixed solvent system exhibited a higher IQE over the whole spectrum with a maximum IQE of 83.4% at 410 nm, compared to those of the devices from GBL and DMF (GBL: 60.7% at 400 nm and DMF: 64.8% at 540 nm). A high IQE over 80% implies that absorbed photons are efficiently converted to dissociated pairs of charge-carriers and those photogenerated carriers are collected at the electrodes with a few losses, which can offer the possibility for further enhancing the device efficiency by increasing the thickness of the perovskite/PCBM layer.
The inset of Fig. 4a shows dark J–V characteristics of the devices from different solvents. The devices from DMF and mixed solvents show lower leakage currents and better diode characteristics with rectification ratios over 105 compared to the device from GBL (∼104), consistent with the high FF observed in the devices from DMF (0.73) and mixed solvents (0.76). Because the optical density and film thickness do not change significantly with each solvent used, enhancements in JSC and FF with solvents appear to originate from an improved morphology, supported by the uniform crystal domains and minimized voids between perovskite crystals observed in films prepared from mixed solvents. The improved morphology of perovskite films using mixed solvents results in a remarkable PCE enhancement by improving the exciton dissociation efficiency and reducing the recombination loss at both interfaces of PEDOT:PSS/perovskite and perovskite/PCBM.

Fig. 5 shows high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HR-TEM) cross-sectional images of the devices prepared from different solvents. Each layer can clearly be seen in the images. All perovskite films exhibited bumpy surfaces on the PEDOT:PSS layer, typical of solution-processed perovskite films. The device from GBL exhibited the thickest perovskite film with a large variation in the film thickness (37 ± 18 nm) (Fig. 5a), whereas the devices from DMF and mixed solvents exhibited relatively thin and flat perovskite films (DMF: 32 ± 13 nm and mixed solvent: 30 ± 11 nm) (Fig. 5b and c). These results are consistent with AFM images and also confirm poor FF in the device from GBL along with dark J–V characteristics.

We have successfully controlled the surface coverage and morphology of the perovskite layer using a DMF–GBL solvent mixture in perovskite/PCBM ipero-HSCs. The CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite and PCBM films were completely and sequentially deposited on a PEDOT:PSS-coated ITO substrate via low-temperature solution processing. Use of a mixture of DMF and GBL to process the perovskite precursor solution improves interfacial contacts and reduces the voids between the perovskite and PCBM layer by producing a smooth perovskite film and uniform crystal domains with small grain size. This ideal film morphology improves the exciton dissociation efficiency and reduces recombination losses at both interfaces of PEDOT:PSS/perovskite and perovskite/PCBM, leading to remarkable enhancements in device efficiency. Furthermore, this is the first report to introduce a mixed solvent system for the optimization of perovskite film morphology in high-performance inverted-type perovskite/fullerene planar heterojunction solar cells. Our strategy offers a simple and effective route to develop high-performance organic–inorganic hybrid solar cells on flexible substrates or via roll-to-roll mass production techniques.


This research was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea Grant (NRF-2009-0093020, NRF-2013R1A2A2A01015342) and the BK21 Plus Program (META-material-based Energy Harvest and Storage Technologies, 10Z20130011057) funded by the Ministry of Education (MOE, Korea) and National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Atomic force microscopy images and J–V characteristics can be found. See DOI: 10.1039/c4nr00130c
‡ First three authors equally contributed to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014