 DOI: 10.1039/C3TA13040A
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 13422-13425
Wenliu Zhuang*, Hongyu Zhen, Renee Kroon, Zheng Tang, Stefan Hellström, Lintao Hou, Ergang Wang, Desta Gedefaw, Olle Inganäs, Fengling Zhang and Mats R. Andersson*
Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering/Polymer Technology, Chalmers University of Technology, SE-412 96 Göteborg, Sweden. E-mail: mats.andersson@chalmers.se; wenliu@chalmers.se; Fax: +46 31 772 3418; Tel: +46 31 772 3401
Biomolecular and Organic Electronics, IFM, and Center of Organic Electronics, Linköping University, SE-581 83 Linköping, Sweden
State Key Laboratory of Modern Optical Instrumentation, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China
Received 5th August 2013, Accepted 17th September 2013
First published on 18th September 2013
We demonstrated an effective chemical approach to modulate the energy levels of conjugated polymers by synergistically combining fluorine substitution and thiophene–selenophene exchange. Such modifications from TQ1 resulted in a significantly enhanced open-circuit voltage up to 1.0 V while retaining high photovoltaic performance.

Polymer solar cells (PSCs) are a promising alternative for producing clean and renewable energy, based on solution-processed, light-weight, potentially flexible devices. The current challenges for PSCs are to make them more efficient, cheaper and more durable. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of PSCs during the last four years has improved rapidly from 5% to around 10%, thanks to the molecular design and synthesis of new conjugated donor polymers (i.e. to control frontier molecular orbital energies and molecular ordering) and optimization of device fabrication (i.e. to control the active layer morphology and interfacial engineering). Recently one particularly promising conjugated donor polymer (TQ1) (PTQ, Scheme 1) consisting of alternating thiophene and quinoxaline units has been designed and synthesized in our group, which has a high photovoltaic efficiency of 6–7% combined with an efficient synthesis. Having a simple, high-yielding synthetic route that will reduce materials' cost is of critical importance for the commercialization of PSCs. To further explore possibilities of improving the photovoltaic performance, modifications in chemical structures with fine-tuned molecular orbital energy levels have been one focus of our recent work.
In principle, to push the efficiency towards the theoretical limit in single junction photovoltaic cells, achieving both a high short-circuit current density (JSC) and a high open-circuit voltage (VOC) is crucial, along with a high fill factor (FF). Both JSC and VOC are limited by the band gap of the active material and alignment of the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) levels with respect to the acceptor material used in the donor–acceptor heterojunction. Note that the PCE is not monotonically correlated to either the band gap of the donor material or the LUMO-level offset of the donor to the acceptor, but both of them need to be optimized independently. If the band gap of the donor material is decreased, the absorption spectrum will be broadened, making it possible to absorb more photons for charge generation. Decreasing the band gap of the donor material means that the HOMO level of the donor (HOMODonor) is raised or the LUMO level of the donor (LUMODonor) is lowered. Raising the HOMO level of the donor will decrease the maximum value for VOC, as given by the difference between the HOMO level of the donor and the LUMO level of the acceptor (i.e. (LUMOAcceptor − HOMODonor)/e). Lowering the LUMO level of the donor will reduce the LUMO-level offset of the donor to the acceptor used (i.e. LUMODonor − LUMOAcceptor). The LUMODonor − LUMOAcceptor difference is considered to provide the driving force for exciton dissociation as well as to prevent recombination of photogenerated charges. Material design through band gap and energy level tuning has been graphically described by Scharber et al. Such band gap engineering of the donor polymers has played a key role in arriving at highly efficient PSCs but still requires more investigation and understanding, especially in exploration of chemical methodologies.
Here we report a new chemical strategy to fine-tune the frontier molecular orbital energy levels of conjugated polymers for photovoltaic cell applications, by synergistically combining fluorine substitution and thiophene–selenophene exchange. Introduction of electron-withdrawing fluorine atoms into the polymer backbone has been shown to be an effective chemical approach to tune the energy levels of donor polymers, which reduces the HOMO levels as well as the LUMO levels. This has resulted in many new conjugated polymers showing efficiency over 6%. However, the fluorine substitution of the two protons on the quinoxaline ring in the TQ1 repeating unit decreased the PCE to 1.6% for TQ-F (PTQF2, Scheme 1) even though a VOC up to 0.99 V was obtained. When just one fluorine atom was introduced, the resulting polymer was able to achieve a high VOC of 0.95 V with a PCE of 4% comparable to that of TQ1 (PTQ). This suggests that the extent of fluorine substitution needs to be optimized. On the other hand, the incorporation of selenophene into conjugated polymers has attracted increasing attention, which typically gives significant red-shifted UV-vis absorption as compared with its thiophene analogues, resulting in a narrowed optical gap (deduced from the absorption edge). Therefore, the combination of fluorine substitution and selenium substitution would be able to modulate synergistically the energy levels of conjugated polymers desirable for photovoltaic performance. Here, two new alternating conjugated polymers were designed and synthesized via Stille coupling from the corresponding monomers in a similar fashion for comparison with the two previously reported polymers PTQ and PTQF2, by replacing the thiophene ring in the backbone with the selenophene ring, giving PSeQ and PSeQF2 respectively (Scheme 1). All of the polymers in this study exhibited comparably high molar masses (Scheme 1; Table S1, ESI) and good solubility in common organic solvents.
The UV-vis absorption spectra of the four quinoxaline-based alternating polymers in the solid state are shown in Fig. 1a. Fluorine substitution of PSeQ to PSeQF2 resulted in a blue-shifted absorption. A similar but less significant phenomenon was observed when going from the unfluorinated polymer PTQ to its fluorinated version PTQF2. This is in good agreement with the effect of fluorination on the energy levels of conjugated polymers. The replacement of thiophene with selenophene in PTQ and PTQF2 resulted in a red shift in the absorption spectra and a narrowing of their respective band gaps. As a result, PSeQF2 possessed an optical gap (1.74 eV) comparable to PTQ (1.75 eV, Fig. 1a). The more intense absorption in the long-wavelength region relative to the short-wavelength region for PSeQF2 compared to PTQ (Fig. 1a) indicates an efficient charge-transfer-like interaction from the donor to the acceptor, which is probably enhanced by the strong electron-withdrawing nature of fluorine as well as the intermolecular Se⋯Se interactions.
The HOMO and LUMO energy levels of the polymers were deduced from their respective ionization potentials and electron affinities, estimated by square-wave voltammetry (SWV, see ESI) from the first oxidation and reduction onset potentials, respectively (Fig. 1b). For comparison, we also include the HOMO and LUMO levels of these polymers evaluated by the density functional theory (DFT) at the B3LYP/6-31G(d) level based on the two-repeating-unit model simplification (see ESI). Note that the selenium substitution does not result in significant change in the molecular geometries in the gas phase while fluorine substitution does so in this study, and that the extent of delocalization of the entire wave functions is very comparable to each other (Table S2, ESI). The effect of fluorine substitution on the energy levels of PTQ and PSeQ was confirmed by both SWV and DFT in reducing both HOMO and LUMO levels. The band gap narrowing effect of selenium substitution was confirmed by DFT (showing an increase in the HOMO level along with a decrease in the LUMO level) and UV-vis absorption spectroscopy, as well as by SWV. It has to be mentioned that the similar LUMO levels deduced from SWV for PTQF2 and PSeQF2 may fall into the error margin of electrochemical measurements, which do not follow the same trend as seen by DFT calculations. Moreover, the combination of fluorine substitution and selenium substitution to modify PTQ significantly decreased the LUMO level by around 0.2 eV, but still gave a sufficient offset (∼0.6 eV) to that of PC71BM (based on the reduction onsets), which is beneficial for charge transfer and dissociation at the polymer–fullerene interfaces.
Finally, in order to investigate the effect of the energy level modulation on photovoltaic characteristics, PSCs based on the two selenophene-based donor polymers combined with PC71BM as the acceptor were fabricated using a conventional device configuration (glass/ITO/PEDOT:PSS/active layer/LiF/Al) by spin-coating from ODCB solutions (see ESI). While the PSCs were not completely optimized, the device characteristics are summarized in Table 1 and Fig. 2. In our preliminary attempts, PSeQ showed a decreased performance and especially a reduced VOC (0.75 V) compared to its thiophene analogue PTQ (VOC = 0.89 V), which might correspond to the narrowed band gap but more likely to a decreased interfacial charge-transfer state energy with a raised effective HOMO level (Table S1, ESI). On the other hand, PSeQF2, a fluorinated version of PSeQ, achieved a high VOC up to 1.0 V and a high PCE of 4% that is comparable to PTQ (very sensitive to processing conditions with a typical PCE of 3.1% or higher), which is a significant improvement compared to PSeQ or PTQF2. Here, the VOC was increased by 0.1 V for PSeQF2 compared to PTQ, which can be attributed to the increased charge-transfer state energy arising from the deepening of the HOMO level through the energy level modulation. Very recently, donor polymers that combine a high PCE above 6% with a high VOC over 0.95 V have been reported, but to the best of our knowledge, there are only a very few donor polymers with VOC over 1.0 V that show PCE exceeding 3% when combined with PC61BM or PC71BM. In addition, PSeQF2 and PTQ, consistent with their optical absorption profiles, resulted in similar photocurrents and external quantum efficiency (EQE, see ESI), higher than PSeQ or PTQF2. Notably, the increased JSC for PSeQF2 compared to PSeQ can be explained by the improved EQE over a wide spectral range. This can be partially attributed to the more favorable morphology for the PSeQF2:PC71BM blend as evidenced by atomic force microscopy (AFM, see ESI) on the active layer surface. The larger phase separation between the PSeQ donor and the PC71BM acceptor in the active layer could lead to inefficient exciton dissociation and/or charge transport, which limits the photocurrent generation and JSC. This clearly indicates that applying both fluorine and selenium substitutions to PTQ, or even other thiophene-based conjugated polymers, can synergistically minimize the LUMO-level offset of the polymers to the acceptor materials while retaining a comparable optical gap. More importantly, this modification also makes the resulting polymers more promising candidates for use as front subcell donor components in tandem cells where a high VOC is highly desirable.
Polymer
D:A (w/w)
d (nm)
JSC (mA cm−2)
VOC (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
a Data from ref.4a.b Annealed at 135 °C for 5 min.c The active layer thicknesses.d The maximum PCEs along with the average values given in parentheses.
PTQ
1:2
113
6.54
0.89
58
3.4 (3.1)
PSeQ
1:3
93
5.03
0.75
46
1.7 (1.7)
1:2
100
5.55
0.76
38
1.6 (1.6)
PTQF2
1:2
61
3.38
0.99
50
1.6 (1.5)
PSeQF2
1:2
90
7.61
1.01
51
3.9 (3.4)
1:3
95
6.97
1.00
55
3.8 (2.9)
1:4
100
4.59
0.91
36
1.5 (1.4)
1:2
80
7.94
0.89
59
4.2 (3.6)
In summary, from our DFT and experimental study, we demonstrated an effective chemical approach to modulate the frontier molecular orbital energy levels by combining fluorine substitution and selenium substitution synergistically. This allows one to reduce the LUMO-level offset of the donor polymers to the acceptor materials, while retaining a comparable optical gap, along with a deepening of the HOMO level, which may be suitable for the molecular design of new materials for highly efficient organic photovoltaic cells. In particular, fluorine substitution lowers both the HOMO and LUMO energy levels, while selenium substitution narrows the band gap of polymers. We demonstrated that as a result of the synergic effect of fluorine substitution and selenium substitution on the energy level modulation, the resulting fluorinated selenophene–quinoxaline alternating polymer, PSeQF2, achieved a high VOC of 1.0 V while maintaining a comparably high PCE of ∼4%. This resulted in a significant improvement in VOC by 0.1 V in comparison with PTQ. This combination of modifications on existing promising donor polymers (especially thiophene-based conjugated polymers) may make them more suitable for use as donor components for the front subcell active layer in efficient tandem cells where a high open-circuit voltage is very desirable, by the optimization of fluorine substitution together with selenium substitution. This new strategy further broadens the methodology of tuning the HOMO and LUMO energy levels of molecules and polymers, and opens one possibility for minimizing the LUMO-level offset of the donor polymers (especially thiophene-based conjugated polymers) to the acceptor materials.
We thank the Swedish Energy Agency and the Swedish Research Council for financial support. We also acknowledge Chalmers' Area of Advance Materials Science for funding. The quantum-chemical computations were performed on resources provided by the Swedish National Infrastructure for Computing (SNIC) at C3SE in Gothenburg. Anders Mårtensson is gratefully acknowledged for GPC characterization, Zaifei Ma for help with AFM measurement, and Christian Müller, Angelica Lundin and Timothy Steckler for fruitful discussions.
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details, NMR spectra, additional data of UV-vis, SWV, DFT/TD-DFT, EQE and AFM. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ta13040a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013