 DOI: 10.1039/C2EE03242B
(Perspective)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8506-8516

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Nicolas
Tétreault
* and 

Michael
Grätzel


Laboratory of Photonic and Interfaces, Institute of Physical Chemistry, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland. E-mail: nicolas.tetreault@epfl.ch

Received
21st November 2011
, Accepted 18th January 2012
First published on 18th January 2012
Herein, we review our latest advancements in nanostructured photoanodes for next generation photovoltaics in general and dye-sensitized solar cells in particular. Bottom-up self-assembly techniques are developed to fabricate large-area 3D nanostructures that enable enhanced charge extraction and light harvesting through optical scattering or photonic crystal effects to improve photocurrent, photovoltage and fill factor. Using generalized techniques to fabricate specialized nanostructures enables specific optoelectronic and physical characteristics like conduction, charge extraction, injection, recombination and light harvesting but also helps improve mechanical flexibility and long-term stability in low cost materials.
Nicolas Tétreault
Dr Nicolas Tétreault has been a group leader at the Laboratory of Photonics and Interfaces at the EPFL since August 2008 where he has been developing multidimensional nanomaterials for enhanced light harvesting and charge extraction in next generation hybrid photovoltaics. In 2005, he obtained his PhD from the University of Toronto where he earned the highest Canadian honor, the Governor General Gold Medal. From 2006 to 2008, he held a postdoctoral fellowship at the Cavendish Laboratories and Nanoscience Centre at the University of Cambridge where he conducted research in nanomaterials for polymer-based optoelectronics.
Michael Grätzel
Professor at the Ecole Polytechnique de Lausanne Michael Grätzel directs there the Laboratory of Photonics and Interfaces. He pioneered studies of mesoscopic materials and their use in energy conversion systems, in particular photovoltaic cells, lithium ion batteries and photo-electrochemical devices for the splitting of water into hydrogen and oxygen by sunlight. He discovered a new type of solar cell based on dye sensitized nanocrystalline oxide films. His most recent awards include the Gutenberg Research Award, the Paul Karrer Gold Medal, the 2010 Millennium Technology Grand Prize, the City of Florence Prize of the Italian Chemical Society, the Balzan Prize and the Harvey Prize.

In the next two decades, exponential growth in photovoltaic energy production will be necessary to answer the rising energy demand of developing nations and requirement for environmental sustainability. While first and second generation solar panels have made it out of the laboratory, third generation photovoltaics still face significant challenges. Nevertheless, hybrid thin film technologies like dye-sensitized solar cells will bring further reduction in fabrication and environmental costs as long as peak performance can be maintained or improved. Lately, new nanostructures based on scalable, self-assembled and bottom-up fabrication techniques have enabled the manipulation of light and charge propagation in the cell to achieve high efficiency while maintaining low environmental and production costs.


It is now widely believed that the world energy consumption will grow by more than 50% before 2035 driven in a large proportion by the rapid economic development of non-OECD countries including China, India and Brazil. But in most parts of the world, concerns about security of energy supplies and the environmental consequences of greenhouse gas emissions have spurred governments to support the development of new renewable energy sources. As a result, renewable energy sources are expected to be the fastest growing sources of electricity generation at 3.1% per year from 2008 to 2035. In fact, solar energy generation will represent the fastest growing energy source of the next 25 years which represents a staggering increase in installed solar energy generating capacity from 14 gigawatts today to 119 gigawatts in 25 years.

There is little doubt in the industry that the majority of new installation will initially make use of first generation crystalline and polycrystalline silicon (c-Si) solar panels. They can achieve about 20–25% sun to power conversion efficiency (PCE, η) and their fabrication is straightforward using today's semiconductor industry infrastructure. However, their high material, fabrication, installation and environmental costs mean that second generation thin film technologies are expected to provide 25% of new installed capacity by 2014. These include mature semiconductor-based technologies including cadmium–telluride (CdTe, η ≈ 12–17%), copper–(indium–gallium)–diselenide (CIS/CIGS, η ≈ 17 to 20%), and silicon micromorph (η ≈ 8 to 12%). Lately, efficiencies as high as 13.8%, 18.7% and 9.8% have been reached for flexible CdTe, CIGS and Si micromorph on polymer substrates respectively.
In recent years, intense research on third generation photovoltaic materials including semiconductor quantum dots (QDPV, η ≈ 1 to 5.7%), organic semiconductors (OPV, η ≈ 3 to 8%) and dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs, η = 6 to 13%) has brought significant improvement in their PCEs. These new hybrid materials hold the promise for low temperature fabrication to significantly reduce fabrication costs and environmental impact through solution-based scalable roll-to-roll fabrication and short energy payback time. In particular, DSCs represent one of the most promising photovoltaic technologies for production of renewable, clean, and affordable energy. They are generally made from cheap and nontoxic components and can be designed in a variety of different colors and transparencies, which distinguishes them as an ideal photovoltaic concept for integrated “green” architecture. Indeed, commercial products based on DSC technologies have recently emerged from G24i, Solaronix, Sony, Toyota/Aisin, Dyesol, etc. but major breakthroughs are still needed in order to achieve higher efficiencies (∼15%) and longer stabilities. To that effect, we have proposed in the last few years a number of new nanostructured materials to enhance light and charge harvesting in DSCs. These new concepts enable the decoupling and study of various competing mechanisms found in the working electrochemical cell. Herein, we will review the state-of-the-art of DSCs as well as explain the various advances in nanostructure cells to control charge extraction, enhance light harvesting and reduce recombination losses.

It is in 1883 that Vogel first discovered that contamination of a silver halide photographic emulsion by a dye increased the red light sensitivity of a silver halide film. A century later O'Regan and Grätzel proposed the first bulk heterojunction photoelectrochemical solar cell with 7% PCE, taking advantage of the large surface area within a mesoporous TiO2 film and using a ruthenium dye as the sensitizer. To date the highest certified efficiency for a DSC using iodide/triiodide (I−3/I−) electrolytes and a ruthenium dye is 11.2% although Yella et al. have recently achieved 12.3% (13.1% at 0.5 sun) using the Co(II/III)tris(bipyridyl)-based redox electrolyte in conjunction with a donor–π-bridge–acceptor (D–π–A) zinc porphyrin dye as sensitizer (YD2-o-C8). In general, DSCs are made from cheap and nontoxic components that can be processed at low temperature in air which translates into relatively short energy payback time. It therefore seems only a matter of time before large scale production will follow.

The basic functioning principles of the DSC are related to natural photosynthesis and are fundamentally different from those of conventional semiconductor p–i–n junction solar cells such as c-Si. In DSCs, light absorption and charge transport are separated with charge carrier generation taking place in the chemisorbed self-assembled monolayer of sensitizer molecules sandwiched between the semiconducting anatase TiO2 oxide and an electrolyte acting as electron and hole conducting materials, respectively (Fig. 1a). A high surface area mesoscopic photoanode is necessary to ensure high dye loading and efficient light harvesting in the visible part of the solar spectrum. This implies that the DSC has an exceedingly large, heterogeneous interface through which electrons may be (parasitically) intercepted as a result of the slow electron transport. The latter is governed by an ambipolar diffusion mechanism controlled by trap-limited hopping through a relatively long and tortuous path to the transparent conductive electrode. It is further hindered by the low electron mobility in anatase TiO2 nanoparticles and the multiple grain boundaries in the mesoporous film. Given a charge collection time of milliseconds at the maximum power point, efficient charge extraction is only made possible when using the I−3/I− redox couple through the slow interception of electrons by adjacent I−3. The excessive driving force of 0.6 eV for dye-regeneration leads to a significant loss-in-voltage of approximately 600 mV and is one of the main limiting factors of efficiency (Fig. 1b).
The PCE of the cell is determined by its current–voltage characteristics, more precisely by the open circuit voltage (Voc), the short circuit current (Jsc) and the fill factor (ff) which depends on serial and shunt resistances in the cell:
(1)
The photocurrent (
Jsc) is mainly governed by the amount of sunlight harvested in the visible part of the solar spectrum by the sensitizer. Accordingly, recent record efficiencies have resulted from the development of new high extinction porphyrin and organic D–π–A sensitizers that have supplanted the panchromatic Ru(II) polypyridyl sensitizers and brought record efficiencies in both liquid and solid-state electrolyte DSCs. The photovoltage (Voc) is related to the energy difference between the quasi-Fermi level of electrons in the semiconductor and the chemical potential of the redox mediator in the electrolyte. In an effort to mitigate corrosion problems and the significant loss-in-voltage resulting in the use of iodine electrolyte, various alternatives have been studied. Particular success has been reported using spiro-OMeTAD (2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis-(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)9,9′-spirobifluorene), an all organic solid hole transport material (HTM), and non-corrosive Co(II/III)tris(bipyridyl) to reach PCEs up to 7.2% and 12.3% with Voc as high as 986 mV and 965 mV, respectively.

Advances in DSC PCE have mainly focused on new molecular sensitizers and redox mediators but these only address a limited set of parameters found in the electrochemical cell. Challenges remain in terms of charge transport in the mesoporous semiconductor that impact photocurrent, photovoltage and fill factor through charge collection efficiency, recombination dynamics and internal resistance. For example, a complete shift from the two-electron I−3/I− redox couple to one-electron mediators like spiro-OMeTAD or Co(II)/Co(III) mediators with faster recombination will necessitate improved electron extraction or surface passivation in order to mitigate losses and achieve their maximum efficiency. So far, both HTMs necessitate the use of a thin mesoporous TiO2 photoanode to mitigate poor conduction in spiro-OMeTAD and poor diffusion of the bulky Co complexes thus further limiting sunlight absorption. Therefore, new concepts to enhance light harvesting and keep the advantageous bifacial and transparency characteristics of the DSC will be needed.
Herein, we will focus on novel concepts based on nanostructures recently proposed to effect light harvesting, charge extraction, recombination dynamics and internal resistances in solid-state and liquid DSCs. Focus will be given to nanostructures that have the potential for commercial applications and roll-to-roll compatibility through the use of bottom-up and self-assembly fabrication techniques that could be scaled up at low cost.

While record-holding liquid electrolyte DSCs already achieve maximum quantum efficiency in the spectral range around 550 nm, light harvesting in the red and near-infrared is still relatively low. In solid-state devices, light absorption is generally limited by the film thickness, as thick mesoporous films prove to be difficult to infiltrate with the spiro-OMeTAD HTM. Using a thick layer of large titania spheres capable of backscattering visible light has proven effective in increasing light harvesting of low energy photons in liquid DSCs. However, this optical element has the unfortunate effect of rendering the DSC opaque thus depriving it of one of its main advantages over competing technologies. As a result, photonic band gap materials in the form of 3D inverted TiO2 photonic crystals (PCs) or porous Bragg stacks have been applied to DSCs and Si cells to enhance light harvesting in specific parts of the spectrum while retaining the cell transparency.

PCs can be thought of as the optical analogue of the semiconductor. Just as Bragg diffraction of electrons in silicon atomic lattices enables electronic transistors, Bragg diffraction of photons in PC dielectric lattices creates a range of “forbidden” frequencies called a photonic bandgap. Photons with energies lying in the bandgap cannot propagate through the medium. The fabrication of PCs based on colloidal crystal templating represents one of the most attractive approaches to overcome the challenge of building 3D periodic modulation of refractive index at the sub-micrometre length scale. By infiltrating the interstitial sites of these structures with high refractive index materials, such as TiO2 and later removal of the colloidal crystal scaffold, an inverted opal structure consisting of interconnected air cavities in a high dielectric constant medium is attained. This chemical approach to the fabrication of photonic crystals leads to optical-quality materials with the suitable geometry, topology, and dielectric contrast as to allow the opening of photonic bandgaps and effective manipulation of light propagation. When juxtaposed to a thin photoactive anode, PCs can significantly increase the probability of photons being absorbed in a DSC. Resonant cavities that are determined by the penetration depth of the incoming light in the PC and the thickness of the mesoporous film between the PC and the substrate give rise to photon localization in the photoanode and result in enhanced light harvesting.
The main challenges when assembling a functioning PC-mesoporous anode double layer device are to grow a 3D self-assembled polymer opal of high optical quality onto a previously deposited mesoporous TiO2 thin film. The colloidal array has to be subsequently infiltrated with high refractive index material, typically TiO2 from solution or chemical vapor deposition, without clogging the mesoscopic pores of the underlayer which would inhibit sensitization and electrolyte infiltration of the double layer device.

Fig. 2a shows a schematic of the double layer DSC. The material assembly route presented herein for the double layer DSC integrates a high surface mesoporous underlayer with an optically active 3D PC overlayer. Self-assembly material synthesis on two length-scales enabled the fabrication of a double layer DSC with electric and pore connectivity at the mesoporous and the microporous level (Fig. 2b). To summarize a copolymer-derived TiO2 mesoporous underlayer is spin-coated onto a conductive glass substrate and subsequently used as a non-porous substrate for the evaporation induced self-assembly of monodispersed polystyrene spheres dispersed in ethanol into a face-centered-cubic PC template. The template is then infiltrated using a binary atmospheric pressure chemical vapor deposition (APCVD) technique where TiCl4 and H2O are cycled using nitrogen as a carrier gas to form amorphous TiO2. Since the hybrid underlayer is still non-porous at that point, the APCVD of TiO2 does not clog the pores of the underlying TiO2 mesostructure, which would have hindered sensitization and electrolyte infiltration. The double layer could then be heated to 500 °C to burn off the organic material from the diblock copolymer underlayer and the polystyrene colloidal template as well as crystallize the TiO2.

Fig. 3 shows that due to the intimate physical contact between the layers, photonic crystal-induced resonances significantly contributed to absorption enhancement in a specific part of the spectrum. By changing the lattice constant of the PC from 160 nm to 180 nm and 240 nm we obtained enhanced absorption at and around the photonic bandgap at about 440, 480, and 625 nm, respectively. Three main effects were shown at different spectral regions for the increase in photocurrent in double layer DSCs: (1) multidirectional scattering of short wavelength photons due to defects in the PC layer, (2) back reflection of light in the stop band region of the PC due to the PC layer acting as a dielectric mirror, and (3) an absorption enhancement caused by resonant modes as predicted by Mihi and Míguez.
Inverse opal PCs have the advantage of offering large pores through which new Co(II)/Co(III) redox mediators or viscous electrolytes can diffuse through with low resistance but are limited by relatively low refractive index ratio between the TiO2 and the electrolyte. By contrast, 1D PCs in the form of thin porous Bragg mirrors offer better reflectivity over a larger part of the spectrum but electrolyte diffusion resistance significantly decreases the fill factor and limits their usefulness with next generation electrolytes. With that said, novel fabrication methods based on block-copolymer self-assembly that enable control over the pore size and interlayer connectivity could ease diffusion issues in 1D PC reflectors.

As mentioned, one of the most pressing challenges in DSC research is the increasingly fast recombination rate between electrons in the TiO2 conduction band and the oxidized form of redox mediator for new electrolytes. Indeed, ss-DSCs using spiro-OMeTAD as HTM have historically been limited to a photoanode thickness of less than 3 μm due to incomplete infiltration of the HTM and electron–hole recombination. Pore filling has been the focus of thorough studies that have linked the cell J–V characteristics, hole injection dynamics and recombination rate with thickness and pore filling. Studies also show that recombination is 2 orders of magnitude faster and electron diffusion length is 1 order of magnitude lower in ss-DSCs than in liquid DSCs. Several approaches have been proposed in order to improve charge collection in liquid electrolytes and ss-DSCs including the use of one-dimensional ZnO and TiO2 nanowires and nanotubes as photoanodes. One of the major issues with these novel photoanodes is their limited roughness factor, which greatly limits dye loading and, ultimately, absorption and photocurrent.

Thus, a new ss-DSC concept built using a 3D fibrous network of quasi-single crystal anatase nanowires self-assembled from fused amorphous nanorods was presented. This novel photoanode material incorporates a high-conductivity network for efficient electron extraction, a relatively high roughness factor for dye loading, and large pores for enhanced light harvesting through traditional light scattering and efficient infiltration with the HTM.
We are used to think of particle growth in terms of Ostwald ripening based on a reduction of surface energy. In a nutshell, Ostwald ripening is based on the formation of tiny crystalline nuclei in a supersaturated solution followed by crystal growth in which the larger particles will grow at the expense of smaller ones due to the energy difference between large particles and smaller particles of a higher solubility based on the Gibbs–Thompson law. However, Penn and Banfield proposed in 1999 a new particle growth mechanism called oriented attachment based on adjacent nanoparticles self-assembling at planar interfaces to share a common crystallographic orientation. From a thermodynamics viewpoint, the driving force for this spontaneous oriented attachment is the elimination of pairs of high-energy surfaces, which leads to a substantial reduction in the surface free energy. They observed coarsening by addition of solid particles to surfaces in a precise, crystallographically controlled manner, resulting in coherent interfaces and leading to the development of single homogeneous crystals. They also observed that twinning and other intergrowths can occur because attachment requires structural accord only in the two dimensions defined by the junction plane (see Fig. 4).
Oriented attachment and growth of a quasi-single crystal anatase network hold promise for the self-assembly of a large area of a fast electron diffusion 3D network for DSC photoanodes. The primary building block of the new 3D fibrous network is the single-crystal nanorod. These subparticles are obtained from the thermal decomposition of titanate nanowires between 20 and 60 nm in diameter and 1 and 20 μm in length. Nanowires produced by a two-step hydrothermal process are subsequently collected, washed, and dried. In order to produce a solution for doctor blading that would exhibit both good wettability on a FTO-glass substrate and produce smooth thin films, the nanowires were sonicated in isopropyl alcohol to break them up and reduce their length to 50–200 nm. Doctor blading is a cost-reducing technique widely used in the industry for its roll-to-roll compatibility and the fact that the fast evaporation induced self-assembly and oriented attachment do not necessitate the complex preparation of a traditional paste that can further decrease fabrication costs.
We found that nanowires self-assemble in two dimensions parallel to the FTO-glass substrate during the doctor blading process. The network consequently condenses during the evaporation of isopropyl alcohol, enhancing the number of contact points between the individual nanowires (Fig. 5a). During the subsequent thermal decomposition, each titanate nanowire undergoes a transformation into a chain-like assembly of truncated anatase nanorods (Fig. 5b and c).Fig. 5c and d show high-resolution TEM images of the interconnected TiO2 nanorods elongated in the [001] direction in accordance with the oriented attachment mechanism observed by Penn and Banfield. All images clearly show single-crystalline nanorods with lattice fringes of the (101) plane obtained. The analysis of the interface between two attached nanorods reveals reduced lattice fringes' misorientation through grain boundaries from one particle to the next, confirming the topotactic transformation of the nanowires. Oriented attachment also occurs spontaneously at the contact point between nanowires to yield a stabilized 3D network of nanorods with enhanced grain boundaries. Compared to traditional photoanodes, the 3D network of nanorods exhibits a 40% higher porosity and a wider pore size distribution composed of large 10–50 nm mesopores and 50–120 nm macropores resulting in about half the roughness factor of a traditional nanoparticle-based photoanode. However, lower dye loading in the 3D network film is partly compensated by significant light scattering in the film. Indeed, Chiba et al. and Sauvage et al. have shown that efficient light scattering significantly increases light harvesting in the DSC and, consequently, its photocurrent. In the nanowire-based photoanode, the aggregation mechanism provides for both large aggregates and macropores (Fig. 5a) capable of effective light scattering.
Using electrochemical spectroscopy, we observed that the conductivity of the 3D fibrous network is higher than its nanoparticle counterpart up to about 750 mV (Fig. 6a). The conductivity of the fibrous network was found to be voltage independent which indicates a high doping density caused by hydrogen intercalation during the nanowire synthesis. Likewise, the transport time in the 3D fibrous network is found to be several orders of magnitude shorter than that in the nanoparticle-based film, especially at lower bias potentials (Fig. 6b). This clearly confirms that the nanowires have an advantage in electron transport when compared to a conventional nanoparticle film due to the longer diffusion length of the electron before having to hop onto another nanowire. Finally, the comparison of the electron lifetime showed the same tendency (Fig. 6c). At low potentials (or low TiO2 conductivity), the 3D fibrous network ss-DSC shows a longer lifetime than that measured in the nanoparticle-based cell. These measurements confirm the high quality of the anatase fibrous network in terms of crystallinity and electronic properties.
The superior light scattering as well as the shorter transport time and longer electron lifetime at the maximum power point contribute to a higher photocurrent and charge collection efficiency in the ss-DSC. These favorable optical and electronic characteristics help explain the relatively high-power PCE of 4.9% obtained with this novel morphology in spite of the lower dye loading. This novel 3D network of single-crystalline nanowires presents morphological and electronic characteristics that put it in direct competition with conventional nanoparticle-based ss-DSCs, which have since been capable of achieving PCEs over 7%, thanks to new sensitizers and dopants.

In a DSC, charges recombining before they reach the electrode will have a direct influence on the photocurrent and photovoltage. As previously mentioned, the open-circuit voltage in a DSC is defined by the splitting of the quasi-Fermi level of electrons in the metal oxide and the redox potential of the electrolyte (quasi-Fermi level of holes in the HTM). Hence, the closer the Fermi level in the metal oxide can be pushed toward the conduction band and LUMO level of the sensitizer, the higher the open-circuit voltage, and the smaller the loss-in-potential going from the level of the excited state of the dye to the quasi-Fermi level in the metal oxide. Two strategies can contribute to this upward shift and increase the open-circuit potential, namely reducing the recombination rate constant enabling the Fermi level to move closer to the conduction band before the recombination rate balances the charge generation rate or shifting the conduction band itself. Finally, enhancing the electron transport could improve charge collection, reduce IR losses, and enhance the short-circuit current and fill factor as well. Several approaches have been proposed in order to reduce interfacial recombination and improve charge collection in liquid electrolytes and ss-DSCs including the use of radial collection nanostructures, one-dimensional ZnO and TiO2 nanorods, and nanowires as photoanodes. Particular attention has been given to ZnO and SnO2 as alternatives to TiO2 in DSCs due to their high electronic conductivity and electron mobility. Despite faster electron transport, only rather poor device efficiencies have been reported to date for DSCs employing nanocrystalline SnO2. In part, this was found to be due to 2–3 orders of magnitude increase in the recombination rate when the high mobility material is in direct contact with the sensitizer and/or the electrolyte. This finding led to a host of publications on the addition of blocking (passivating) layers covering the ZnO or SnO2 in order to reduce this recombination rate and, hopefully, achieve a higher photovoltage.

Recently, a new nanostructure concept that consists of a novel bottom-up 3D host–passivation–guest (H–P–G) electrode that enables complete structural control of the electron extraction, conduction band, and the recombination dynamics as well as of the optical scattering in photovoltaic devices has been demonstrated. This new type of electrode was exemplified by incorporating it into a DSC photoanode to significantly improve photocurrent, fill factor, and most importantly the photovoltage.
A schematic representation of the fabrication method for the 3D H–P–G photoanode for DSCs is shown in Fig. 7. The overall fabrication method is inspired by micromolding in inverse opals (MISO) first developed for the synthesis of large-area oxide inverse opals and then extended for high-temperature fabrication of full-photonic bandgap semiconductor PC from polymer templates. The fabrication method is simple yet scalable and compatible with the roll-to-roll process for low cost fabrication. To summarize, a dispersion of polystyrene microspheres in isopropanol is used to accelerate the capillary force-induced self-assembly and thereby obtaining a highly disordered opal template of uniform thickness. A disordered template will effectively scatter light and increase the probability of light absorption especially in the red part of the solar spectrum. In addition, monodispersed spheres enable the formation of a uniform template with predictably large interconnecting pores extending in all three spatial dimensions. Large interconnecting windows enable proper filling with the guest nanocrystalline TiO2 later on. The dispersion can then be doctor bladed on a transparent conductive substrate to reveal a large-area highly light scattering disordered template (Fig. 7a). It is then heated and infiltrated with a highly conductive metal or semiconductor oxide (e.g. Al:ZnO, SnO2, etc.) in a highly conformal fashion by atomic layer deposition (ALD) by alternating pulses of organo-metallic precursors and a hydrolytic polycondensation agent (e.g. H2O and O3) (Fig. 7b). Recently ALD has been gaining interest as a powerful research tool for creating highly conformal layers on nanostructured electrodes and has even been used for surface state passivation of TiO2 in dye sensitized solar cells and Fe2O3 in photolysis. The deposition temperature needs to be carefully optimized in order to increase the “window” or template interconnecting pore size by softening the polymer beads' contact points ensuring proper sphere necking. After removing the polymer template by high temperature annealing or with solvents at room temperature, we obtained a 3D host backbone that is well connected to the underlying FTO-glass front electrode. The direct electronic connection will ensure efficient charge extraction throughout the interconnected 3D H–P–G electrode. The surfaces of the TCO backbone were then conformally coated by ALD with a surface passivation oxide, dense TiO2 in this example, in order to reduce interfacial recombination between electrons in the highly conducting TCO backbone and the oxidized electrolyte (Fig. 7c). After calcination the hexagonal wurtzite, cassiterite, and anatase crystal structures of the Al/ZnO, SnO2, and TiO2, respectively, were confirmed by X-ray diffraction. Finally, in order to provide enough surface area for dye sensitization and efficient light harvesting, the macroporous inverse TCO backbone was infiltrated by sequential doctor-blading of a low viscosity 17 nm anatase nanocrystal paste (Fig. 7d).
The highly textured 3D nanostructure photoanode makes for fascinating scanning electron micrographs (SEMs) as presented in Fig. 8. The cross-sectional and top view (Al:ZnO host) micrographs (Fig. 8a and b) clearly show the high pore connectivity throughout the open structure as well as the significant disorder inherited from the polystyrene template. From these micrographs, it was concluded that the backbone only uses a small volume fraction of the 3D film (∼10%). This is an additional advantage of the 3D macroporous structure where the high degree of necking between the templating microspheres and the very thin (90 nm) film of metal oxide host deposited leaves the vast majority of the volume for filling with the photoactive guest material. The macroporous structure further enabled the conformal coating of the 3D host on both sides with, in this case, dense TiO2 by ALD (Fig. 8c and d). The role of the TiO2 overlayer is to passivate the TCO surface to improve its chemical stability and further reduce the recombination rate at the conductive transparent oxide–electrolyte interface. Visible in Fig. 8c is the direct contact between the 3D host and the conductive substrate that will ensure unhindered electron transfer from the 3D host–guest structure and the front DSC electrode. Fig. 8e shows a 3D Al:ZnO|TiO2|anatase nanoparticle H–P–G electrode after filling with mesoporous anatase to constitute the finished 3D TCO photoanode. It was estimated from SEM pictures that the anatase TiO2 nanoparticles filled about 50% of the internal volume. Finally, the disordered nature of the structure together with only partial filling leaving large pores at the scale of light combines to induce high optical scattering in 3D H–P–G photoanodes.
Obviously, the main interest in incorporating the 3D host photoanodes into DSC is to assess the effect of the host's diffusion coefficient on the general J–V characteristics of the cell and on the photovoltage in particular. To this end two high electron mobility hosts, Al:ZnO and SnO2 hosts (241 and 16.5 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively), were tested against a dense TiO2 host. One of the major advantages in using these low resistance transparent materials for charge injection and collection in DSCs lies in the fact that their electron mobility is 5 to 6 orders of magnitude higher when compared to that of anatase TiO2 nanoparticles (V = 0.8 V, 2.30 × 104 cm2 V−1 s−1). However, this advantage was found to be counterbalanced by faster electron recombination dynamics with the oxidized electrolyte via intra-bandgap surface states ultimately limiting the efficiency of such cells. This led to the study of various capping materials (Al2O3, TiO2, MgO, etc.) that slow down recombination leading to increases in photocurrent and photovoltage. This helps to explain why we completely covered our 3D hosts with ALD of a dense 25 nm TiO2 layer that can act as an effective protection for the chemically unstable ZnO against the acidic dye solution as well as passivate surface traps and increase charge transfer resistance to the oxidized dye and electrolyte. This is clearly visible in the significant decrease in the dark current observed from Al:ZnO to SnO2 and, finally, TiO2 (Fig. 9b). According to the literature, this can be due to a decrease in recombination or a shift of the conduction band toward vacuum. Both would lead to a shift in the quasi-Fermi level with respect to the redox potential of the electrolyte and contribute to the significant increase in the observed photovoltage.
We could also observe an increase in short-circuit current density going from a TiO2 (Jsc = 6.9 mA cm−2) to Al:ZnO (Jsc = 7.9 mA cm−2) and SnO2 host (Jsc = 10.4 mA cm−2). As expected, the photocurrent for the Al:ZnO host was found to be significantly lower than that of SnO2 because of the lack of TiCl4 treatment on the former. This treatment enhances connectivity between anatase TiO2 nanoparticles to significantly increase the photocurrent and photovoltage in state-of-the-art DSCs by improving electron hopping at the anatase nanoparticle boundaries. Even though the Al:ZnO host was somewhat protected by the dense TiO2 overlayer it was impossible to ensure a complete, pinhole free protection on such a large surface area against the low pH TiCl4 solution. In addition, the fill factor was found to be greater for the Al:ZnO (ff = 0.77) host than for the TiO2 (ff = 0.73) host. It is possible that the increase in the observed photocurrent and fill factors is a direct consequence of the high electron mobility in the Al:ZnO and SnO2 hosts compared to TiO2. In any case and regardless of the host material, the 3D H–P–G photoanodes all presented photovoltages well above the Voc = 730 mV obtained with the best performing DSCs using the standard Z907 sensitizer. Indeed, an improvement of 60 and 110 mV for TiO2 (Voc = 791 mV) and Al:ZnO (Voc = 842 mV) hosts was obtained, respectively. A significant increase in photovoltage is to be expected when reducing the dark current, which depends on the conduction band position and recombination dynamics in the cell.
When compared to previous studies using high mobility materials like SnO2 and ZnO passivated with TiO2 in liquid electrolyte DSCs we find that the photovoltage obtained with the 3D host–guest photoanodes is higher by at least 90–100 mV. Additionally, an increase of about 60 and 110 mV over our published state-of-the-art values for Z907 dye and iodine-based volatile electrolyte is obtained for 3D TiO2 and Al:ZnO hosts, respectively.
These findings on new nanostructures will motivate further mechanistic studies on the role of the various interfaces, conduction pathways, and electronic properties of the various materials that could induce band bending, affect injection dynamics, or shift the conduction band position. So far, a novel bottom-up 3D H–P–G DSC photoanode made of a high electron mobility host, a passivating conformal blocking layer and a high surface area guest that can improve short circuit current density, fill factor, and photovoltage in DSCs has been demonstrated. By completely covering the 3D host with a dense passivating thin film and filling its macropores with anatase nanoparticles, a 3D nanostructure with high surface area for dye loading while maintaining the injection dynamics typical of anatase nanoparticle-based DSCs has been successfully shown. This concept electrode is well suited for DSC since only a small volume fraction is lost to the transparent 3D host material leaving most of the volume for the light harvesting sensitized mesoporous anatase TiO2.

It has been demonstrated that effective light harvesting and charge extraction management can improve the efficiency of next-generation low-cost photovoltaic technologies. The use of straightforward and simple bottom-up techniques to fabricate large area 3D nanostructures enabled the demonstration of complex photonic crystal effects as well as more traditional optically scattering in DSC to improve photocurrent. As well, the new 3D host–passivation–guest photoanode concept enables the complete control and usage of specialized materials that effectively harvest light, extract electrons and block recombination to significantly increase the cell photovoltage, photocurrent and fill factor in various low cost photovoltaic technologies. This trend towards host–guest approaches can only accelerate in view of the new challenges in DSC with the use of new solid-state hole transport materials and Co(II)/Co(III) which necessitate larger pores and faster electron extraction. Similarly, it is no surprise that these concepts are being deployed in various other energy related materials including organic semiconductor polymer cells and in next-generation ultrafast-charge and -discharge Li-ion batteries. In fact, the integration of new multilayered nanostructures in energy harvesting and storage applications will allow researchers to manipulate specific optoelectronic and physical characteristics like conduction, charge extraction, injection, recombination and light harvesting but also help improve mechanical flexibility and long-term stability through a decrease in cracking and delamination on low temperature low-cost polymer substrates.


This publication is based on work supported by the Center for Advanced Molecular Photovoltaics (Award No KUS-C1-015-21), made by King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST).


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012