 DOI: 10.1039/C5TA07829F
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 23888-23894


Weijun
Ke
,

Dewei
Zhao
*,

Corey R.
Grice
,

Alexander J.
Cimaroli
,

Guojia
Fang
* and 

Yanfa
Yan
*

Department of Physics and Astronomy, Wright Center for Photovoltaics Innovation and Commercialization, The University of Toledo, Toledo, OH 43606, USA. E-mail: dewei.zhao@utoledo.edu; yanfa.yan@utoledo.edu

Key Laboratory of Artificial Micro- and Nano-structures of Ministry of Education of China, School of Physics and Technology, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China. E-mail: gjfang@whu.edu.cn

Received
29th September 2015
, Accepted 30th October 2015
First published on 4th November 2015
The state-of-the-art organic–inorganic lead halide perovskite solar cells use organic materials as hole selective layers that are unstable, thermally and chemically, and expensive. Here we demonstrate efficient room-temperature fully-vacuum-processed planar perovskite solar cells using small-molecule organic copper phthalocyanine (CuPc), which has chemical and thermal stability while also being relatively inexpensive, as the hole selective material. The best-performing planar perovskite solar cell using a CuPc hole selective layer achieved a power conversion efficiency of 15.42% with an open circuit voltage of 1.04 V and a fill factor of 77.47%, measured under reverse voltage scanning, and a steady-state efficiency of 14.5%. The cell showed improved stability as compared to reference cells using conventional organic hole selective layers. Our results suggest that thermally evaporated CuPc is an excellent hole selective material for fabricating large-area and low-cost flexible perovskite solar cells with good long-term stability.

Organic–inorganic lead halide perovskite absorbers have attracted extensive attention due to their excellent photovoltaic properties such as high absorption coefficient, tunable band gaps, long electron–hole diffusion lengths, and high charge carrier mobility. The record power conversion efficiency (PCE) of perovskite solar cells has rapidly increased from 3.8% to 20.1% in a short time. Efficient perovskite solar cells typically contain perovskite absorbers sandwiched by electron selective layer (ESLs) (also called electron transport layers) and hole selective layers (HSLs) (also called hole transport layers), though perovskite cells without HSLs have shown reasonable efficiencies. The ESLs are either compact metal oxides such as TiO2, ZnO, and SnO2 (ref. 24) or organic materials such as fullerene (C60) and phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM). The HSLs are mostly organic materials, such as poly(triarlyamine) (PTAA), 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis-(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD), poly-3-hexylthiophene (P3HT), and poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS). The ESLs and HSLs play key roles in extraction and transportation of electrons and holes, respectively, while also effectively inhibiting interface charge recombination, all of which are necessary for achieving high open circuit voltages (Voc's) and fill factors (FFs). Though conventional organic HSLs are critical components for achieving high-efficiency perovskite solar cells, their high cost and thermal and chemical instability are serious hindrances for viable commercialization of the emerging perovskite solar cell technology. To achieve desirable conductivity, organic HSL materials such as spiro-OMeTAD and PTAA usually need to be doped with additives such as 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP) and Li-bis-(trifluoromethanesulfonyl) imide (LiTFSI). These additives not only increase the production cost and complexity, but also leads to potential corrosion of the perovskite absorbers and performance degradation. Therefore, it is rather urgent to develop stable alternative hole selective materials that can replace the currently used organic hole selective materials. Recently, alternative HSL materials such as NiO, CuI, and copper thiocyanate (CuSCN) have been employed in perovskite solar cells. However, these materials are usually deposited by solution processes and some of the materials require high temperature sintering after deposition. For perovskite solar cells fabricated with regular structure or all-perovskite tandem solar cells, low-temperature vacuum processing is preferred for depositing the HSLs as it avoids damaging the underlying perovskite materials. Small-molecule organic copper phthalocyanine (CuPc) is another potential candidate for a stable hole selective material for perovskite solar cells. It can be easily prepared by vacuum processes, exhibits high hole mobility, and is relatively inexpensive. More importantly, CuPc is thermally and chemically stable. CuPc has previously been used as a hole conductor and donor in organic solar cells. Phthalocyanines have also been used as the HSLs in perovskite solar cells, however, the ESLs and perovskite layers were prepared by solution processes.

Here, we demonstrate efficient room-temperature fully-vacuum-processed perovskite solar cells using CuPc as the HSL. We focus on full-vacuum processes because they enable the deposition of large-scale, uniform, and dense films. Room-temperature deposition is compatible with cell fabrication on flexible plastic substrates. Our fabrication processes include sequential thermal evaporation of fullerene C60 ESLs, CH3NH3PbI3 absorbers, CuPc HSLs, and Au electrodes. Recent results have shown that C60 enhances electron extraction and transportation and has been used as the ESL. Our best-performing room-temperature fully-vacuum-processed planar perovskite solar cell achieved a maximum PCE of 15.42% with a short-circuit current (Jsc) of 19.13 mA cm−2, a Voc of 1.04 V, and an FF of 77.47% measured under reverse voltage scanning. This cell also achieved a steady-state efficiency of 14.5%, which was higher than that of our best reference cell using a spiro-OMeTAD HSL (∼12.7%). Impedance spectroscopy analysis suggests that the thermal evaporated CuPc HSLs can effectively transport holes and inhibit interface recombination. Furthermore, the perovskite solar cells using the CuPc HSLs also exhibited much better long-term stability than the reference cells using the spiro-OMeTAD HSLs. Our results suggest that thermally evaporated CuPc is a promising HSL candidate for fabricating large-area, low-cost, flexible, and stable perovskite solar cells. The realization of room-temperature fully-vacuum-processed efficient perovskite solar cells also provides an opportunity for fabricating all-perovskite tandem solar cells.

5.5 nm C60 (luminescence Technology Co., Ltd, >99.5%) ESLs were deposited on FTO substrates and PET/ITO substrates by thermal evaporation at a rate of 0.02 nm s−1. CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite films were vacuum-deposited by heating CH3NH3I and PbI2 (Sigma, 99.999%) powder in two individual crucibles with the growth conditions of PbI2 rate at 0.75 Å s−1 and CH3NH3I pressure at 5 × 10−5 Torr. CuPc films and Au electrodes were deposited by thermal evaporation at rates of 0.02 nm s−1 and 1 nm s−1, respectively. All the substrates were not heated intentionally during the evaporation processes. The different thicknesses of the CuPc films and the perovskite films were controlled by the deposition time. The solution-processed HSL consisted of 26 mM Li-TFSI (Sigma, 99.95%), 55 mM TBP (Sigma, 96%), and 68 mM spiro-OMeTAD (Shenzhen Feiming Science and Technology Co., Ltd, 99.0%), which are dissolved in a mixed solvent of chlorobenzene (Sigma, 99.8%) and acetonitrile (Sigma, 99.8%) with a volume ratio of 10:1. The solution of the spiro-OMeTAD HSL was coated on the perovskite films at 500 rpm for 1 s and then 4000 rpm for 60 s. The devices were completed by evaporating 60 nm Au electrodes. The active area of the cells defined by the Au electrodes were 0.08 cm2.


The morphologies of FTO substrate, perovskite film, CuPc films with different thickness, and the completed device were characterized by a high-resolution field emission scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (Hitachi S-4800). Absorption spectra of the CuPc film on FTO substrate and the perovskite films on the substrate covered without and with a CuPc film were measured by an ultraviolet-visible spectrophotometer (CARY5000, Varian, Australia). Atomic-force microscopy (AFM) images of the perovskite films without and with a CuPc film were measured by a Veeco Nanoscope IIIA instrument. External quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra and impedance spectra measurements were performed on a QE system (PV Measurements Inc.) and an electrochemical workstation (Voltalab PGZ-301), respectively. The crystal structure of the prepared CH3NH3PbI3 film on FTO substrate covered with a C60 film was examined by X-ray diffraction (XRD) (Rigaku Ultima III) with Cu Kα radiation under operation conditions of 40 kV and 44 mA. All the J–V curves were measured by a Keithley Model 2400 under AM1.5 simulated irradiation with a standard solar simulator (PV Measurements Inc.). The light intensity of solar simulator was calibrated by a standard silicon solar cell.



Fig. 1a shows the device structure of our fully-vacuum-processed planar perovskite solar cell consisting of a fluorine-doped SnO2 (FTO) substrate, a thermally evaporated ultrathin C60 as the ESL, a thermally evaporated perovskite as absorber, a thermally evaporated CuPc as the HSL, and a thermally evaporated Au as electrode. The substrate was not intentionally heated during any of the evaporation processes, nor were post-deposition annealing treatments applied. Fig. 1b shows the energy band diagram of the cell and the separation and transportation of photo-generated electrons and holes. The highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) level of CuPc is located at −5.20 eV, which is similar to the HOMO level of spiro-OMeTAD. Therefore, holes can be effectively transported from the perovskite film to the CuPc HSL and then to the Au electrodes. The lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) level of CuPc is higher than that of the perovskite. Therefore, electrons can be effectively blocked by the CuPc HSLs. The LUMO level of the C60 ESL and HOMO level of the CuPc HSL are aligned well with the LUMO and HOMO levels of the perovskite layers, respectively. Consequently, photo-generated carriers can be effectively separated and the interfacial recombination can be significantly inhibited throughout the device structure.


Fig. 2a and b show the SEM images of a bare FTO substrate and a perovskite film deposited on an FTO substrate covered with an ultrathin C60 film. Since thermal evaporation is capable of depositing large area uniform and dense films, our vacuum-processed perovskite film shows a smooth and dense morphology with no obvious pinholes (Fig. 2b). The XRD patterns obtained from a vacuum-processed perovskite film deposited on a C60 coated FTO substrate is similar to that obtained from our solution-processed perovskite films, indicating a high crystallinity (Fig. S1). The SEM image (Fig. 2c) of a 60 nm CuPc film on a perovskite film reveals that the CuPc is uniformly coated on the perovskite film, effectively inhibiting the direct contact between the perovskite film and the Au electrode. Fig. S2a and b show the AFM images of a 370 nm perovskite film deposited on a 5.5 nm C60 coated FTO substrate and a 60 nm CuPc film evaporated on a 370 nm perovskite film, respectively. The root mean square roughness of the perovskite film and the CuPc film are 12.6 nm and 10.6 nm, respectively. The roughness of the perovskite film is slightly reduced after the deposition of 60 nm CuPc film. Fig. S3 shows the surface morphology of CuPc films with different thicknesses. As the thickness increases, small CuPc nanorods started to grow. Fig. 2d shows a cross-sectional SEM image of a fully-vacuum-processed planar perovskite solar cell. A 5.5 nm thick C60 film, a 370 nm thick perovskite film, a 60 nm thick CuPc film, and a 60 nm thick Au film are smoothly and orderly stacked on an FTO substrate due to vacuum deposition of each layer.

Fig. 3 shows optical absorption of a perovskite/C60/FTO sample (perovskite deposited on FTO covered with C60), a CuPc/FTO sample (CuPc deposited on FTO), and a CuPc/perovskite/C60/FTO sample (CuPc deposited on perovskite coated FTO covered with C60). The perovskite/FTO sample shows an obvious absorption onset at 760 nm, similar to the absorption of perovskites reported in literature. It should be noted that the 60 nm CuPc/FTO sample exhibits absorption in the 550–750 nm wavelength range. Therefore, the CuPc/perovskite/FTO sample film exhibits stronger absorption than that of the perovskite/FTO sample, indicating that a 370 nm thick perovskite thin film cannot fully absorb the light in the 550–750 nm wavelength range.
Since the thickness of the HSL can critically affect cell performance, we have fabricated perovskite solar cells using CuPc HSLs with different thicknesses, ranging from 0 to 80 nm. The J–V curves of these cells measured under reverse voltage scanning and AM1.5G illumination are shown in Fig. 4. It is seen that the cell without an HSL (0 nm CuPc) has a very poor performance, with a PCE of 3.51%, a Voc of 0.64 V, a Jsc of 13.98 mA cm−2, and an FF of 39.02%. This is due to the direct contact between the perovskite and the Au electrode, which exhibits significant interface recombination. After a 20 nm thick CuPc film is deposited on the perovskite film, the cell performance has improved significantly, owing to the efficient extraction and transportation of holes and blocking of electrons. The cell performance firstly increased and then decreased as the CuPc thickness increased. The optimum thickness of the CuPc film was found to be approximately 60 nm. The cell using a 60 nm thick CuPc achieved the highest PCE of 15.33% with a Voc of 1.04 V, a Jsc of 18.91 mA cm−2, and an FF of 78.11%. The series resistance (RS) of the cells can be calculated according to the diode equation.
−dV/dJ = AKBT(Jsc − J)−1e−1 + RS
where
A is ideality factor, KB is Boltzmann constant, T is the absolute temperature, and e is the elementary charge. Fig. S4 shows a linear relationship between −dV/dJ and (Jsc − J)−1. The value of RS is equal to the intercept on the Y-axis. The RS firstly decreased and then increased as the CuPc thickness increased. If the CuPc layer is too thin, it cannot fully cover the perovskite layer, leading to ineffective hole extraction and electron blocking with subsequent interface recombination. However, if the CuPc layer is too thick, the CuPc film would induce a larger RS. The performance parameters of the cells using CuPc HSLs with different thicknesses are summarized in Table 1. It should be noted that the Jsc of the cells decreased as the CuPc film thickness increased. It can be attributed to the optical absorption of CuPc, which has a band gap of 1.7 eV. We suspect that CuPc absorbs the light passing through the perovskite layer, but does not contribute to photocurrents. Consequently, thicker CuPc layers will absorb more light that is reflected from the Au back contact and prevent the creation of photo-generated carriers in the perovskite layer. We have also investigated the effect of the perovskite thickness on the cell performance. Fig. S5 shows the J–V curves of the perovskite solar cells using 60 nm thick CuPc HSLs and perovskite films with different thicknesses. The Jsc increased as the perovskite thickness increased, due to the enhanced absorption. However, the Voc decreased when the perovskite layer was too thick. The optimal thickness for the perovskite absorber is about 370 nm. The photovoltaic parameters for the cells using the perovskite films with different thicknesses are summarized in Table S1.

CuPc thickness [nm]

V
oc [V]

J
sc [mA cm−2]
FF [%]
PCE [%]

R
S [Ω cm2]
0
0.64
13.98
39.02
3.51
0.90
20
1.01
19.53
65.78
12.96
0.40
40
1.01
19.20
74.24
14.44
0.47
60
1.04
18.91
78.11
15.33
0.52
80
1.02
18.79
74.26
14.26
0.74
100
1.02
18.76
68.64
13.07
0.83

Fig. 5a shows the J–V curves of the best-performing fully-vacuum-processed perovskite solar cell using a 5.5 nm thick C60 ESL, a 370 nm thick perovskite film and a 60 nm thick CuPc HSL measured under different voltage scanning. It achieved a PCE of 15.42% with a Voc of 1.04 V, a Jsc of 19.13 mA cm−2, and an FF of 77.47% when measured under reverse voltage scanning and a PCE of 13.98% with a Voc of 1.02 V, a Jsc of 19.04 mA cm−2, and an FF of 72.25% when measured under forward voltage scanning. Therefore, the cell exhibits a small hysteresis. It has been reported that fullerenes can enhance charge electron transfer and effectively reduce the hysteresis behavior in perovskite solar cells. Therefore, the small hysteresis in our planar all-vacuum-processed perovskite solar cells can be attributed to the use of C60 ESLs. Fig. 5b shows the EQE spectrum of the best-performing perovskite solar cell using the 60 nm CuPc HSL. The Jsc integrated from the EQE curve is about 18.44 mA cm−2, which is close to the Jsc obtained from the J–V curve. The cell exhibits high EQE values in the 350–750 nm wavelength range, leading to a high Jsc. The small drop in the 550–750 nm wavelength range can be attributed to the reduced absorption of the Au-reflected light due to the absorption in the CuPc film. Fig. 6 shows the steady-state efficiency of the best-performing fully-vacuum-processed perovskite solar cell using the CuPc HSL. The constant bias voltage of 0.889 V is consistent with the voltage at the maximum power point. The current density firstly increased and then stabilized. The cell achieved a high steady-state efficiency of 14.5%, which is very close to the efficiency (PCE = 14.7%, Table S2) averaged from the efficiencies measured under different voltage scanning. To investigate the reproducibility of the devices, we have fabricated 40 separate perovskite solar cells, consisting of 5.5 nm thick C60 ESLs, 370 nm thick perovskite films, and 60 nm thick CuPc HSLs. Fig. S6 shows the statistics of Jsc's, Voc's, FFs, and PCEs. The average Voc, Jsc, FF, and PCE for the 40 fully-vacuum-processed perovskite solar cells are 1.04 ± 0.01 V, 18.83 ± 0.19 mA cm−2, 76.64 ± 1.07%, and 14.94 ± 0.28%, respectively, indicating excellent reproducibility. It should be noted that the entire fabrication process involves no intentional heating. Therefore, the process is suitable for fabricating perovskite solar cells on flexible substrates. We have fabricated fully-vacuum-processed perovskite solar cells consisting of C60 ESLs, perovskite films, and CuPc HSLs on flexible polyethylene terephthalate (PET)/indium tin oxides (ITO) substrates. The best-performing flexible planar perovskite solar cell achieved a PCE of 7.26% with a Voc of 1.01, a Jsc of 17.30 mA cm−2, and an FF of 41.41% (Fig. S7). The Jsc and FF of the cell fabricated on the flexible PET/ITO substrate are much lower than those of the cell fabricated on the FTO substrate. It is primarily due to lower transparency and higher sheet resistance of the PET/ITO substrate used in our study.
For comparison, we have also fabricated perovskite solar cells using solution-processed doped spiro-OMeTAD HSLs, which consisted of 5.5 nm thick C60 ESLs and 370 nm thick perovskite films. Fig. S8a shows the J–V curves of the best-performing perovskite solar cell using the solution-processed spiro-OMeTAD HSL measured under different voltage scanning. The best-performing cell using the spiro-OMeTAD HSL achieved PCEs of 13.89% and 13.36% measured under reverse and forward voltage scanning, respectively, which are lower than that of the best-performing cell using the CuPc HSL. The cell using the spiro-OMeTAD HSL has a lower FF and a higher Jsc than the cell using the CuPc HSL. Fig. S8b shows the EQE spectrum of the best-performing perovskite solar cell using the spiro-OMeTAD HSL. It shows higher EQE values in the 550–750 nm wavelength range. Therefore, the higher Jsc can be attributed to the re-absorption of the Au-reflected light by the perovskite film. Spiro-OMeTAD has a wide band gap and does not absorb a significant amount of light in the 550–750 nm wavelength range. The photovoltaic parameters of the champion cell using spiro-OMeTAD HSL are summarized in Table S2. Fig. S9 shows the measured steady-state efficiency of the best-performing reference cell using the spiro-OMeTAD HSL. The initial PCE was 14.3%, but it decreased to 12.7% after illumination for 500 s. On the contrary, as shown in Fig. 6, the best-performing cell using the CuPc HSL did not show any degradation after illumination for 500 s, maintaining a steady-state efficiency of 14.5%.
Impedance spectra are widely used to investigate charge transport and recombination in sensitized solar cells and perovskite solar cells. Fig. S10 shows the Nyquist plots of the perovskite solar cells using the CuPc HSL and the spiro-OMeTAD HSL. The inset in Fig. S10 shows the equivalent circuit. The main semicircles in low frequency range can be attributed to recombination resistance (Rrec) and capacitance at the interface. It is obvious that the perovskite solar cell using the CuPc HSL exhibits a much higher Rrec than the reference cell using the spiro-OMeTAD HSL. Since these cells have the same ESLs, the different Rrec values indicate that the cell using the CuPc HSL should have a much lower carrier recombination at the perovskite/HSL interface than the cell using the spiro-OMeTAD HSL. It is worth mentioning that the current and the efficiency of the cell using the CuPc HSL is very stable even under illumination for 500 s (Fig. 6). However, for the cell using the spiro-OMeTAD HSL, the current and the efficiency firstly increased and then decreased (Fig. S9). It seems that the cell using the CuPc HSL has a better long-term stability than the cell using the spiro-OMeTAD HSL. To investigate the stability, we fabricated perovskite solar cells using different HSLs for the stability test. The cells were not encapsulated and were stored in atmosphere with humidity of 20% and at room temperature without light illumination. Fig. S11 shows the perovskite solar cell using the CuPC HSL exhibits a good long-term stability. After 1000 h, the PCE only decreased from 14.21% to 13.83%. The decreased performance can be mainly attributed to the degradation of the perovskite film due to no encapsulation, leading to a lower Jsc. However, for the perovskite solar cells using the spiro-OMeTAD HSL, the PCE sharply decrease from 13.66% to 8.38% after 1000 h, exhibiting significant decreases in Voc, Jsc, and FF. It is well known that spiro-OMeTAD exhibits a low hole mobility (∼4 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1) and can be improved by doping with TBP and LiTFSI dissolved in acetonitrile. LiFTSI is very easily deliquescent in air and TBP and acetonitrile can corrode lead halide perovskites. On the other hand, CuPc is a very stable material and exhibits a high hole mobility (∼10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1) even without any additives. In addition, the evaporated CuPc film can fully cover the perovskite films, inhibiting the ingression of moisture and air. Therefore, the CuPc HSLs can significantly improve the stability of the perovskite solar cells.

In summary, we have demonstrated efficient room-temperature fully-vacuum-processed planar perovskite solar cells using thermally evaporated CuPc HSLs. The best-performing perovskite solar cell using a CuPc HSL has achieved a PCE of 15.42% measured under reverse voltage scanning and AM1.5G illumination. An average PCE of 14.94 ± 0.28% and a steady-state efficiency of 14.5% has been obtained. The best-performing fully-vacuum-processed perovskite solar cell using a CuPc HSL on a flexible PET/ITO substrate has achieved a maximum PCE of 7.26%. Furthermore, the perovskite solar cells using CuPc HSLs showed much better long-term stability than the cells using spiro-OMeTAD HSLs. Our results suggest that thermally evaporated CuPc is a good candidate for fabricating flexible, large-area, and low-cost perovskite solar cells with good long-term stability.


The work at University of Toledo was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) SunShot Initiative under the Next Generation Photovoltaics 3 program (DE-FOA: 0990-1553) and the Ohio Research Scholar Program. The work at Wuhan University was supported by the National High Technology Research and Development Program (2015AA050601), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (61376013, 91433203, J1210061), and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (2014202020207).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta07829f
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015