 DOI: 10.1039/C5EE02871J
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 391-410


Naveen Kumar
Elumalai
* and 

Ashraf
Uddin
*

School of Photovoltaic and Renewable Energy Engineering, University of New South Wales, Sydney 2052, Australia. E-mail: a.uddin@unsw.edu.au; n.elumalai@unsw.edu.au

Received
17th September 2015
, Accepted 5th November 2015
First published on 5th November 2015
Organic solar cells (OSCs) have developed progressively in efficiency over the last two decades. Though it is promising, this technology is still far from realizing its full prospect. One of the most important parameters that determine the efficiency of OSCs is the open-circuit voltage (VOC), which represents the maximum voltage a solar cell can provide to an external circuit. Light harvesting materials employed in OSCs have an optical band gap of around 1.7 to 2.1 eV and yet the VOC barely exceeds 1.0 V, which is approximately just half of the photon's original energy. By contrast, in inorganic counterparts such as Si, CIGS and GaAs, the difference is only 0.3 to 0.45 eV between the material bandgap and VOC. Hence, to achieve higher power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) in OSCs, a detailed understanding of the origins of VOC and the associated energetic loss mechanisms is indispensable. The presented review takes the opportunity to elaborate various governing mechanisms and factors affecting the VOC from a comprehensive yet insightful standpoint. This report also provides a concise synthesis of intricate interdependencies among the factors influencing VOC and highlights the potential research strategies to improve VOC, rendering possible pathways to facilitate the viable commercialization of OSCs.

Naveen Elumalai

Naveen Kumar Elumalai received his PhD degree in Mechanical Engineering from the National University of Singapore (NUS) in 2014, under the supervision of Prof. Seeram Ramakrishna (NUS) and Dr Chellapan Vijila (IMRE, Singapore). Joining the School of Photovoltaics and Renewable Energy Engineering (SPREE) at UNSW in March 2015, he is currently working on the development of organic and perovskite solar cells. His research focuses on an integrated approach of combining materials, interface, device and process engineering to improve the OPV and perovskite technology. He has co-authored over 18 papers in the area of photovoltaics and materials engineering to date.

Ashraf Uddin

Ashraf Uddin obtained his PhD degree in March 1991 in Semiconductor Physics from the Osaka University, Osaka, Japan. He started his professional career at the R&D centre of Toshiba Corporation, Japan, as a research scientist (1991–1997). Later he served as an Assistant Professor at the School of Materials Science and Engineering, NTU, Singapore till 2007. He then joined the School of Photovoltaic and Renewable Energy Engineering, UNSW as an Associate Professor in 2009. His research focuses on the development of organic and perovskite solar cells. He has co-authored over 150 research papers and has 14 patents.

Sustainable renewable energy technologies form the major components of the future global energy strategy to solve the foreseeable world's energy crisis. Harnessing the energy from the sun is certainly one of the most pragmatic pathways to cater the global energy needs. Organic solar cells (OSCs) represent a transformative solar technology with prodigious potential for exceptionally high-throughput manufacturing at very low cost, and are made from non-toxic, earth-abundant materials with low energy inputs. Organic photovoltaics are particularly attractive because of their mechanical flexibility and ease of processing, which makes it an ideal candidate to serve as power sources for various commercial applications. Despite the potential of OPVs for large-scale solar deployment, their performance efficiencies are not high enough to consent direct competition against mature photovoltaic technologies. One of the most important parameters that determine the efficiency of OSCs is the open-circuit voltage (VOC), which represents the maximum voltage a solar cell can provide to an external circuit. This review elaborates the origin, fundamental governing mechanisms and associated energetic loss processes that influence the VOC of the OSCs – providing a comprehensive understanding of VOC and could help researchers to develop better materials and devices.


Organic solar cells (OSCs) have shown their potential for the next generation photovoltaic devices. Device processing of OSCs is very simple compared to other existing photovoltaic technologies. Organic semiconductors exhibit high absorption coefficients, which allow very thin films to be used. The reduced manufacturing cost, coupled with reduction in materials used, connotes that organic solar cells possess the potential to make a significant impact on the future PV market. The highest reported power conversion efficiency (PCE) for an OPV device is 12%, which is based on a small-molecule system that has already approached the benchmark what is deemed to be required for commercialisation. At present, OPV devices exhibiting the highest performance efficiency (PCE) are based on the bulk heterojunction (BHJ) type, in which a blend composed of an electron-donor material (small-molecule) and an electron-acceptor fullerene material are employed to form an active photovoltaic layer. Moreover, the photovoltaic modules based on the organic solar cells (OSCs) have the lowest energy payback time (∼0.4 years) compared to silicon (∼2.4 years for c-Si) and CdTe (∼0.7 years). In order to push the efficiency limits beyond the existing boundaries, a basic understanding of the processes that control and limit the operation of solar cells is crucial and can serve as a guide for identification of new materials for high performance devices. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of an organic solar cell depends on the following photovoltaic parameters defined by the relation PCE = JscVOCFF/Pin, where Jsc is the short circuit current, VOC is the open-circuit voltage, FF is the fill factor, and Pin is the incident solar power. Having said that, one of the prominent limitations hindering the performance of OPVs to date is their low open circuit voltage (VOC), which is typically less than half of the incident photon energy. Light harvesting materials employed in OSCs have an optical band gap of around 1.7 to 2.1 eV and yet the VOC barely exceeds 1.0 V, which is approximately just half of the photon's original energy. By contrast, in inorganic counterparts such as Si, CIGS and GaAs, the difference is only 0.3 to 0.45 eV between the material bandgap and VOC.

Prominent and rigorous research is carried out targeting the open circuit voltage (VOC) and efficiency (PCE) in organic solar cells with a consistent progress/development trend as depicted in Scheme 1. The trends clearly portray that the quest for higher VOC and PCE is much greater in the last two years than any other years before – owing to the recent development in new materials, characterization techniques and processing conditions. Therefore, any research in organic solar cells aimed at improving efficiency (PCE) cannot overlook the open circuit voltage (VOC) of the devices. Hence, to achieve higher power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) in OSCs, a detailed understanding of the origins of VOC and the associated energetic loss mechanisms is indispensable.
Numerous studies have demonstrated that VOC depends on the energy gap between the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) level of the donor and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) level of the acceptor of the BHJ, forming the basis for predicting the open circuit voltage in these devices. Notably, Scharber et al. found an empirical relationship by analyzing VOC across a wide range of material combinations: eVOC = Eg − 0.3 eV, where Eg is the donor–acceptor energy gap and e is the elementary charge. While this study was invaluable to engineering a new generation of donor polymers, it does not provide any significant physical insight into the origins of VOC. Up to now, many models and empirical relationships have been formulated to address this debatable question: what causes the 0.3 eV losses, and how can it be reduced? Yet the conclusion for this query remains an open question to date. In this review, we take the opportunity to conglomerate the existing literature addressing this issue and elaborate various governing mechanisms and factors affecting the VOC from a comprehensive yet insightful standpoint. This report also provides a concise synthesis of intricate interdependencies among the factors influencing VOC and highlights potential research strategies to improve VOC, rendering possible pathways to facilitate the viable commercialization of OSCs.
An overview of the mechanism/processes of the organic solar cell is discussed here before proceeding further: (1) light absorption and exciton generation (2) exciton dissociation into free carriers (holes and electrons) (3) the free carriers are transported to their respective electrodes via the drift/diffusion phenomenon under the influence of the built-in potential and (4) collection of the free carriers at the electrodes and the current flows through the external load. Under the open-circuit conditions of steady state illumination, the photogenerated free carriers will accumulate at the anode and cathode, constituting a potential difference, which cancels out the built-in potential. Under such conditions, carrier generation and recombination exactly counterbalance each other; therefore, no net current exists at any point within the device. Now the system is said to be in a quasi-equilibrium state, and the potential difference between the two electrodes constitutes the open-circuit voltage (VOC), which corresponds to the maximum voltage a solar cell can deliver to an external load.
In general, VOC originates due to the splitting of electron and hole quasi-Fermi energy levels actuated by light illumination:
VOC = (1/q)(EFn − EFp)
(1)
where
EFn and EFp are the electron and hole quasi-Fermi levels, respectively.

However, under practical conditions, this is not the case. Unlike crystalline inorganic semiconductors, which exhibit well-conceived hole and electron quasi Fermi-levels, the organic semiconductors possess disorder induced gap tail states. Therefore, the distribution of photogenerated carriers in such gap tail states downshifts the electron quasi-Fermi level and upshifts the hole quasi-Fermi level, thereby reducing the VOC correspondingly as shown in Fig. 1. Hence, direct determination of the electron and hole quasi-Fermi levels in bulk heterojunction organic solar cells is quite elusive. Moreover a unique relationship exists between the VOC and other influencing factors such as density of states or energetic disorder, charge transfer states, donor–acceptor interface, microstructure, and carrier density, which is of crucial importance in determining the VOC of the devices. Apart from that, various other parameters that affect the VOC of the organic (BHJ) solar cells are also discussed and elaborated in this review an overview of which is represented pictorially in Scheme 2.

A brief overview of the general solar cell equation is necessary for further understanding of the open circuit voltage (VOC). The equivalent circuit of an ideal solar cell consists of a constant current source, a diode and an external load.

Under light illumination a solar cell behaves like a current generator, delivering a photo-current density of Jph. A small fraction of this current counteracts the diode junction current, and the remaining current flows to the load.
According to Shockley's theory, the junction current density of the diode is expressed as:
Jd = J0[exp(qV/kBT) − 1]
(2)
where
kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature and J0 is the reverse saturation current density (typically in p–n junction solar cells, it denotes the current density contributed by minority charge carriers, which is the total of the hole current in the n region and the electron current in the p region) and V is the output voltage.

However, in the case of a practical solar cell, series resistance Rs and shunt resistance Rsh are non-negligible.Rs mainly constitutes the resistance of the bulk active layer, electrodes and also the interfacial contact resistance between the active layer and the electrodes. On the other hand, Rsh arises from numerous kinds of leakage currents, which include leakage current in the p–n junction, from the edge of the cell and by those induced by impurities in the cell, etc. Therefore, the actual current density J is a function of Rs and Rsh and can be written as:
(3)
 Under open circuit conditions, where
V = VOC, J = 0, and with the assumption that Rsh ≫ Rs, VOC can be expressed as:

(4)
 It is noteworthy to mention that a new parameter called
n (the ideality factor of the diode) in eqn (3) and (4).

When n = 1, it signifies that the carrier recombination in the depletion region is zero (or negligible) and diffusion current is dominant in the device. On the other hand, when n = 2, it is vice versa. Under practical conditions, the device exhibits both recombination current and diffusion current, hence, the value of n normally ranges from 1–2. As the VOC is directly proportional to n, the diode quality becomes poor when n > 2.

Saturation current density or reverse saturation current (J0) is one of the important parameters that determines the VOC of the device. VOC is inversely proportional to J0 (eqn (4)) and hence lower the J0, greater the VOC. Therefore, the origin of saturation current density (J0) is of significant interest in this regard. Potscavage et al. found that J0 was exponentially dependent on temperature by using planar heterojunction devices based on pentacene/C60. Their work concluded that J0 arises from thermally activated carrier injection at the pentacene–C60 interface and the relationship is expressed as

(5)
where
J00 is a pre-factor determined by carrier generation and recombination rate, and ΦB is the activation energy. Here the activation energy is defined as the offset between the HOMO of the donor and the LUMO of the acceptor (ΔEDA) divided by a factor (larger than 1). The factor (>1) is introduced to account non-ideal effects such as the formation of charge transfer states and vacuum level misalignments.

Perez et al. performed a similar work on OSCs with small molecule/C60 planar heterojunction and expanded eqn (5) as follows
(6)
here the factor 2 denotes the parameters within the thermal activation process
i.e. considering that the two free carriers (holes and electrons) are simultaneously generated at the donor–acceptor interface. Hence, by substituting eqn (6) into (4), the relationship between VOC, J0 and ΔEDA is elucidated as

(7)


Eqn (7) denotes a linear dependence of VOC on the interface energy gap (ΔEDA) and a logarithmic dependence on Jsc and J0. The short circuit current Jsc is directly proportional to the illumination intensity, which is experimentally observed in both bulk and planar heterojunction OSCs. A linear correlation of VOC with ΔEDA has been reported previously for several materials systems and ΔEDA provides the activation energy required for charge separation at the donor acceptor (D/A) interface. Therefore, it is clear that in order to achieve maximum VOC for a given D/A pair, J0 must be minimized. As convincing as it could be, these expressions as discussed above are concluded from experiments based on planar heterojunctions and hence its complete applicability on BHJ solar cells is still questionable. In order to close this gap, Vandewal et al. deduced the relationship between VOC and J0 in BHJs using the detailed balance from electroluminescence and photocurrent quantum efficiencies rather than using dark current. Here, the ideality factor m is nearly always found to be greater than 1 which is also corroborated from other similar reports in OSCs. Therefore, VOC in OPVs is highly influenced by recombination and its related mechanisms, which would be discussed in detail in the following sections.


The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of a solar cell is defined by the relation PCE = JscVOCFF/Pin, where Jsc is the short circuit current, VOC is the open-circuit voltage, FF is the fill factor, and Pin is the incident solar power. As the carrier recombination results in the loss of photogenerated charge carriers, gaining a discernment of the mechanisms governing the recombination is vital for enhancing the solar cell performance and VOC. Generally, VOC is related to the interfacial energy gap (ΔEDA) or effective band gap Eg = [ELUMO(A) − EHOMO(D)], but it hinges on a number of parameters, e.g. illumination intensity, temperature, exciton generation rate, mobility of charge carrier, charge carrier lifetime and recombination rates. In addition, better photovoltaic efficiency of molecular heterojunctions requires Ohmic contacts and meticulous tuning of the electron-transfer rates at the heterojunction.

Therefore, it is essential to study the recombination processes for understanding of origin and nature of VOC. The recombination process is limited by the recombination rate R. In order to quantitate the recombination rate R in OSCs, it is necessary to identify the type of recombination existing in the device i.e. whether the recombination – is monomolecular, or bimolecular, or an amalgamation of the two. In the case of monomolecular recombination, carriers recombine through a recombination centre (or a trap) and whereas in the case of bimolecular recombination; the non-geminate carriers (holes and electrons) recombine.
A latest study has pointed out that the recombination mechanism can switch from monomolecular under short circuit conditions to bimolecular under open circuit conditions.
Under short circuit conditions, the main recombination is predominantly monomolecular (trap-induced) because the electrons and holes are spatially alienated and swept out rapidly by the built-in potential. On the other hand, under open circuit conditions (VOC), bimolecular recombination is significantly increased as the built-in potential is cancelled out and photo-generated carriers linger/accumulate within the device. Under practical working conditions, the output photo-voltage can vary from zero to VOC depending on the resistance of the external load and the corresponding recombination thereby progressively shifting from monomolecular recombination to the monomolecular/bimolecular co-dominated regime, and then finally to bimolecular recombination.

Under open circuit conditions, the photogenerated current J = dJ/dx = 0 i.e., the net current and the current flux are both equal to zero. Considering both monomolecular (interfacial recombination mediated by traps) together with bimolecular recombination in the steady state, the following expression is formulated

(8)
where,
ne is the density of electrons at the LUMO level of fullerene (acceptor) and nh is the density of holes at the HOMO level of the polymer (donor), G = Ge = Gh is the exciton (electron–hole pairs) generation rate as a function of photo absorption upon illumination, Ge,trap is the rate at which trapped electrons are thermally ejected from a trap into the LUMO of fullerene, Gh,trap is the rate at which trapped holes are ejected from traps into the HOMO of the polymer, Rb is the bimolecular recombination rate, Re,trap is the rate at which electrons fall into (interfacial) traps from the LUMO of fullerene and Rh,trap is the rate at which holes are lost to traps.

Assuming that all excited electron–hole pairs diffuse to the polymer–fullerene interface and dissociate into electrons at the LUMO of the acceptor (fullerene) and holes at the HOMO of the donor (polymer) and the traps are situated predominantly at the interface of the polymer and fullerene domains, the recombination rate (R) at open-circuit voltage can be written as
(9)
where
τr is the monomolecular recombination lifetime, γ is the bimolecular recombination coefficient and noc is the electron (or hole) density inside the device under open circuit conditions. Moreover, Street et al. has reported that near short circuit conditions, bimolecular recombination is inhibited relative to monomolecular (trap-induced) recombination because the number of electrons or holes present per domain is <1 (and often zero), where the domain size is of the order 10−17 cm−3.

The recombination mechanism controls the degree to which the incident light intensity influences the VOC. Under open circuit conditions upon illumination, the voltage applied matches the difference between the quasi-Fermi levels within the polymer and fullerene phase separated domains/regimes. Based on this observation, the following expression for the open-circuit voltage is obtained:
(10)
where
ne is termed the electron density in the fullerene domains and nh is termed the hole density in the polymer domains under open circuit conditions, and Nc is the density of states (DOS) at the conduction band edge of the polymer and fullerene. The energy shift, Δ, in eqn (10) arises from disorder within the phase separated polymer and fullerene domains. Therefore, the generally expected value of VOC as a function of the difference in EALUMO and EDHOMO (i.e. VOC ≈ EALUMO − EDHOMO) is obtained only at T = 0 K following eqn (10). The rationality of the initial term in eqn (10) has been tested for numerous polymer:fullerene BHJ systems but resolved with a drop of 0.3 V. The missing 0.3 V is expected to arise due to the fundamental statistics of Fermions. At finite temperature T, the quasi-Fermi levels transgress away from EALUMO and EDHOMO, respectively i.e. into the gap above the polymer HOMO and below the fullerene LUMO and this anomalous distribution is estimated to be one of the origins of the “missing 0.3 V”. In spite of such attempts to understand the origins of the losses in VOC, the open circuit voltage seldom exceeds 1.0 V in OSCs materials, which commonly have optical gaps between 1.7 and 2.1 eV. The difference of 0.7 to 1.1 eV between the optical gap and qVOC, is approximately half of the photon's original energy leaving a cue of how it's important to close this gap to push the PCE closer to the maximum achievable limits. Therefore, in-depth understanding of VOC and its influencing parameters is indispensable for designing better devices to achieve higher efficiencies.


The open circuit voltage in bulk heterojunction OSCs is found to decrease linearly with increase in temperature and it is widely attributed to the temperature dependent mobility. Furthermore, experimental results using several BHJ configurations and flexible roll-to-roll coated modules found that VOC linearly decreases with temperature exhibiting a temperature coefficient of the order of 1 mV K−1 around room-temperature. Sarah et al. studied the temperature dependence of VOC in PCDTBT:PC71BM based BHJ solar cells under various illumination intensity. They demonstrated that by fitting the experimental data using eqn (7) and extrapolating them to T = 0 K, a convincing prediction emerged in which the dashed lines converge at the maximum interfacial band offset VOC of 1.25 V (see Fig. 2) equal to 1/e (EALUMO − EDHOMO − Δ) at T = 0 K.

However, experiments involving actual temperature closer to 120 K have revealed that the linear dependence of VOC on temperature deviates from its trend. Rand et al. observed VOC saturation at lower temperatures (around 150 K) in numerous small molecular heterojunction solar cells with bilayer configuration (Fig. 3a). VOC saturation is ascribed to the decrease in Jph because of the decreased electron transfer rate from the donor (D) to the acceptor (A). The decrease of Jph is also partly attributed to reduced mobility at low temperatures, at which carrier mobility is limited by localized states. Studies from Garcia et al. and Thakur et al. have described the VOC saturation at low temperature in bulk heterojunction OSCs and rationalized the deviation from a linear trend attributing to the Fermi level displacement with temperature and occupancy of the density-of-states. They observed that when T is greater than 200 K, the VOC is predominantly influenced by recombination and a linear dependence of VOC on T is observed. When T is less than 200 K, the tail state disorder (DOS occupancy) is the major cause of loss, causing the VOC to deviate from the linear fit. Thus, the phenomenon of VOC saturation could be employed to estimate the degree of disorder in OSCs.
Recently, Gao et al. found similar deviation in VOC at low temperature in BHJ devices employing polymer:fullerene and polymer:polymer blends (see Fig. 3b). They argued that a strong relation exists between the carrier separation and VOC, which leads to an anomalous decrease of VOC at low temperature and corroborates the critical role of charge delocalization in charge separation and its influence on VOC. They found that the reason for the variation in the transition temperature (where VOC starts to saturate or decrease) is due to reduced charge separation owing to a decrease in electron–hole distance in charge transfer (CT states) at low T.
Moreover, the temperature-dependent analyses performed on BHJ solar cells suggest that the quasi-Fermi levels are not effectively pinned at the interfacial band gap. Variations in the quasi-Fermi levels caused by the thermal alterations are in fact the main reason behind the voltage difference observed between the interfacial band gap and the VOC (evaluated at room temperature). Moreover, localization of the photogenerated carriers at low temperatures due to reduced mobility would cause a nonlinear reduction in the current and the VOC, therefore making the process of quantifying the complete interfacial gap at low temperatures quite difficult under practical conditions though it appears to be theoretically probable. Adding to the argument, the quasi-Fermi level variations as a function of temperature in the polymer and fullerene domains is found to be one of the reasons for the “missing 0.3 V” in VOC as observed by Brabec et al.

The net current is zero under open-circuit conditions (VOC), i.e. all the photogenerated carriers recombine within the device. Thus, recombination analysis at/near the open circuit is particularly susceptible to the particulars of the recombination mechanism. The open-circuit voltage varies logarithmically with illumination intensity as shown in Fig. 4a and that all the curves of δVOCvs. ln(I) for polymer:fullerene BHJ solar cells have the same slope, (kBT/e). Fig. 4b also shows the trend of a-Si solar cell (red line), with δVOC ∼ 1.7 (kBT/e) and that of single crystal silicon cells. By comparison (Fig. 4b), it can be inferred that the well-defined quasi Fermi levels in single crystal silicon solar cells exhibit a higher slope relative to that of the BHJ OSCs. The revelation substantiates that the density of state distribution (Gaussian for OSCs and well defined for crystalline Si cells) plays a crucial role in defining the VOC as a function of light intensity. Fig. 4b shows the universal/general trend of δVOC in OSCs and the inset depicts that the density of states (DOS) in the band “tails” and the intensity-dependent quasi-Fermi energies (at T = 0 K – refer dotted lines) as the tails are occupied by photoexcited electrons (in the fullerene section) and holes (in the polymer section). At finite temperatures, the quasi-Fermi energies move into the gap thereby reducing the VOC.

Sarah et al. has also demonstrated that VOC at higher illumination intensities is converged at 0 K (see Fig. 2), which provides the evidence about the maximum achievable VOC in a particular donor–acceptor blend. Furthermore, Thakur et al. studied the recombination processes in P3HT:PCBM based BHJ OSCs; as a function of light and temperature, by using transient open-circuit voltage decay (TOCVD) measurements. They found that at low VOC, carrier lifetime exhibits a constant value of ∼500 μs, which is inferred in terms of a monomolecular recombination regime as shown in Fig. 5a. At higher VOC, carrier lifetime drops rapidly following the bimolecular relaxation law. Additionally, a changeover from bimolecular to monomolecular recombination mechanisms for high and low VOC is noticed under respective conditions.

Fig. 5b shows the experimental trends of VOC as a function of temperature at different light intensities for P3HT:PCBM based BHJ devices. It clearly indicates that the convergence only occurs at high illumination intensities. Though the curves of VOCversus temperature are still linearly dependent on temperature as expected from eqn (7); they do not converge at 0 K at lower intensities of illumination. The reason for this variation is as discussed earlier – under illumination, VOC is associated with the splitting of quasi Fermi levels which is contingent on the charge carrier densities in the fullerene (LUMO) and polymer (HOMO) density-of-states (DOS). Further in-depth discussion on the influence of DOS on VOC is elaborated in its respective section.

The recombination rate of charge carriers is reliant on the carrier density in BHJ OSCs, which directly influences the VOC. The recombination rate is higher when the carrier density is higher which in turn is contingent on the voltage. As the forward bias voltage is applied, it counteracts the in-built photovoltage causing the carriers to stagnate within the device and leading to increase in carrier density. As discussed earlier, the VOC is the voltage at which the photo-generation rate and the recombination rate exactly cancels out each other. Maurano et al. quantified carrier densities and recombination rates under open-circuit conditions at different light intensities. In their report, they parameterized the recombination rates by employing empirical power-law dependence while the carrier density was parameterized by using an empirical exponential dependence on voltage. Combining these two factors, a logarithmic dependence of VOC as a function of light intensity was observed, which is in agreement with experiments.

While this general approach is able to define the behaviour of numerous material systems in terms of VOC, it offers diminutive physical insight into the origins of dissimilarities in VOC between materials. On the other hand, the ideal BHJ diode model postulated by Koster et al. (see eqn (12)) predicts VOC in terms of physical parameters, such as the donor–acceptor energy gap and the recombination rate coefficient as expressed in eqn (12)
(11)
here
Egap is the effective band gap (EFullereneLUMO − EPolymerHOMO), Nc is the effective density of states (DOS), P is the dissociation probability of a bound electron–hole pair into free charge carriers, G is the generation rate of bound electron–hole pairs, γ is the Langevin recombination constant. The product PG then represents the generation rate of free charge carriers. While discerning, this model fails to envisage the exact dependence of VOC on light intensity for the majority of real devices. It is noteworthy to mention that the investigation of the temperature dependence of VOC in polymer:fullerene solar cells (using eqn (12)) are intensely complex due to the nonexistence of a sharply defined band gap. In simple, eqn (12) does not take into the account of the existence of energetic disorder in both donor and acceptor materials, in fact their HOMO and LUMO levels display a Gaussian broadening σ of typically at-least 0.1 eV. Therefore, since the exact distribution of energy levels is not quantified, the uncertainty in Egap is of the similar order of magnitude as the variation of VOC with temperature, thereby prohibiting an exact quantitative analysis. As a result, VOC of most of the real devices are not compliant with the intensity dependence predicted by this ideal model, and variation in the density of states or energetic disorder should be considered in developing a suitable general model to explain the variation in VOC, which is discussed in the next section.


Although the recombination losses predominantly occurs at the donor/acceptor interface, the role of energetic disorder cannot be disregarded, which is significantly inherent to organic layers. Energetic disorder in the organic semiconductors, characterized by the scattering of the electronic density of states (DOS) of the donor and acceptor materials constituting the active layer, plays an important part in governing open-circuit voltage VOC, which is found to scale with ΔED. However, the donor HOMO and acceptor LUMO levels are generally determined from cyclic voltammetry of the respective materials in solution form, or sometimes in combination with absorption experiments, which cannot precisely account for the fine details about the energetic disorder involved in the organic semiconductors, consequently the deviation of VOC values from Eg is left unexplained. Moreover, it was also found that the electronic states in the fullerene exhibit broad energy dispersion. The shape of the DOS distribution has the Gaussian form, as commonly anticipated in organic materials affected by structural or chemical defects. Having said that, the energy states at the higher level in the fullerene are typically not accessible since the recombination kinetics severely limits the occupation preferably to the DOS tail states. In general, the existence of energetic disorder in the materials forming the solar cell has a significant influence on the photo-physics/processes that determines the photovoltaic properties of the device. Moreover, in organic blends where the phase segregation between the D/A materials are on the nanometre scale, energetic disorder eliminates any coherence effects, and the charge carriers are mostly localized. Garcia et al. have reported that the VOC limit is caused by recombination through tail states in BHJ (polymer–fullerene) solar cells. They demonstrated that the energetic disorder of the electronic density-of-states (DOS) of acceptor and donor materials decreases the Fermi-level splitting of the electron and hole in bulk heterojunction solar cells, by confining the accumulation of carriers into the tails of the DOS. Garcia et al. proposed a model to predict the achievable VOC values by incorporating the density of states (DOS) distributions of both donor HOMO and acceptor LUMO manifolds. In their work, the energetic disorder (prevalent for organic conductors) is modelled by means of Gaussian DOS with the mean energy ELUMO and width σn for the acceptor fullerene (and EHOMO and width σp for the donor polymer). A broad distribution of the Gaussian DOS is considered because σ ≈ 2kBT − 4kBT (being kBT the thermal energy) which is depicted in Fig. 6a.

Under steady-state conditions, thermalization of the photogenerated carriers (primarily distributed along the DOS shape) into the Gaussian tail states occurs, following a Boltzmann statistics with an average, equilibration energy Emn = σ2n/kBT below the LUMO mean. Here the mean energy level of the charge carriers is positioned above the Fermi level, i.e., EFn < Emn. Similarly for holes, the equilibration energy Emp = σ2p/kBT is above the HOMO mean. Using the rational discussed above, Garcia et al. derived an expression for the DOS for holes and electrons in disordered organic conductors exhibiting a Gaussian distribution, gh/e(E) as
(12)
here
N defines the total DOS (hole or electron states) with mean energy E0 and width σ (width of the Gaussian DOS) quantifies the energetic disorder in the Gaussian distribution. Hence, the distribution of the DOS is broad if σ > kBT (see Fig. 6a). Moreover, this can be inferred from Fig. 6b that the electron in a localized state of the fullerene recombines with a hole in the polymer as indicated by an arrow (A) and similarly an electron undergo recombination via hopping to nearby unoccupied localized states represented by arrow (B). Blakesley et al. has simulated the influence of energetic disorder on VOC, and observed that as the disorder (σ) increases, VOC drops as expected as shown in Fig. 7a and b. Moreover, both Jsc and FF also drop along with VOC, the reason is attributed to the disorder induced carrier traps decreasing the carrier mobility. Therefore, energetic disorder plays an important role in decreasing the attainable open-circuit photovoltage in BHJ OSCs.

Moreover, the electronic states of molecules in organic semiconductor films (during device fabrication) are subject to random energetic variations due to the factors such as variations in conjugation length, interactions with neighbouring conjugated molecules, rotations and kinking of polymer chains, impurities and dipoles from residual solvent molecules. It is noteworthy to mention that this disorder is not only intrinsic to the molecular structure, but it is also a property of the solid film, which is strongly dependent on film preparation. In addition, several studies have employed the concept of energetic disorder to elucidate numerous phenomena in organic semiconductors, such as temperature, electric field, and carrier density–dependent charge-carrier mobility, reduced charge injection barriers, and increased band bending at the interfaces. Moreover, the intrinsic dopant levels are characteristically lower in organic semiconductors, such that the tail states are not totally occupied in OSC operation. Hence, the relaxation of carriers into deep tail states has to be considered as a noteworthy process in determining the VOC and hence the device performance.
In line with the discussion, Lange et al. developed a measurement technique combining Bias Amplified Charge Extraction (BACE) with Kelvin Probe (KP) measurements to extract information on the relevant energetics in the blend. They studied the variation of VOC with respect to steady state carrier density in polymer:fullerene blends using (BACE) measurements and pointed out that the Gaussian type disorder in the blend plays a significant role in determining the charge carrier density as well as the VOC of the device. Fig. 8 displays that the extrapolation of the BACE data to a carrier density of 1015 cm−3 yields a VOC of 520 mV, which corresponds quite well to the quasi Fermi level-splitting of about 470 meV as deduced from the Kelvin-probe experiments. Lange et al. also showed that the dependence of VOC on blend composition and thermal dependency to be largely determined by variations of the fullerene LUMO energetics.

Defect states and crystallinity can be deliberated as some of the additional sub-parameters that affects the energetics as discussed in the previous section. Lange et al. showed that a decisive factor of open-circuit voltage is the magnitude of energy distribution of intermediate electronic states (IDOS) beneath the LUMO level of the acceptor. They demonstrated that the less crystalline fullerenes (DPM6) allow for a higher rise of the Fermi level via reduction of the available number of electronic states as shown in Fig. 9b. Likewise, the influence of composition and preparation conditions on the defect states and crystallinity was also observed in P3HT:PC70BM based devices as depicted in Fig. 9a. Though reasonable upward shifts of the P3HT HOMO were observed, depending on P3HT crystallinity, the dependence of VOC on blend composition is predominantly determined by the variation in the PCBM LUMO energy. It was found that the device processing that enables an increased crystallinity of the film is advantageous for the device performance as it reduces the defect density (energy disorder) that finally increases the maximum achievable VOC, despite the upward shift of the polymer HOMO manifold.


The relationship between open-circuit voltage (VOC) and the work function (φ) is still a matter of debate. In general, when the contact Fermi level lies close to either EHOMO,D or ELUMO,A, VOC is independent of the contact work function. Between these parameters, there is a slope of 1 which is fairly consistent with experimental observations. For Ohmic contact, under thermal equilibrium, the Fermi level of the cathode will be levelled and pinned to the LUMO level of the acceptor. The same phenomena apply to the donor and anode, where the Fermi level of the anode is pinned to the HOMO level of the donor when an Ohmic contact is established. As previously observed, disorder reduces VOC and the disorder tends to be lower when both contacts are Ohmic. It is noteworthy to mention that the effect of disorder is nearly half even when only one of the contacts is pinned. It was recently demonstrated that the band bending governs the limits of Fermi-level pinning in polymer films of more than about 10 nm thickness. These results are reminiscent of a strong association between band bending and VOC. If the energetic barrier for hole transfer between the anode and the donor is high, the contact is considered non-Ohmic. Under non-Ohmic contact, substantial surface recombination at the active layer–cathode interface occurs, whereas under Ohmic contact, such surface recombination is significantly suppressed and can hence be ignored. If both contacts are non-Ohmic, VOC is then determined by the variation in the work functions of the two electrodes, as forecasted by the MIM model (metal–insulator–metal) as shown in Fig. 10 (represented as VOC).

However, as per the simple MIM model, which denotes that the VOC is equal to the difference between the built-in voltage and the amount of band bending at each contact, is not quite accurate. In fact, VOC varies with intensity, while band bending does not; likewise, band bending differs with the thickness of the active layer, while VOC, in principle, does not.
Measuring the variations in VOC as a function of work function exemplifies the relationship amongst kinetics and relative quasi-Fermi levels. During device operation, charges reorganize at the interface, when the work function of the contact is not aligned with the quasi-Fermi level of the active layer, thereby resulting in space-charge regions that modify the local electrochemical potential of the charge carriers and varies with respect to the distance from the contact. The development of the space charge region at the interface modifies the kinetics of charge carrier injection or extraction, relative to the rate of recombination intrinsic within the bulk heterojunction of the device.
Recently Andrea et al. validated the effect of the interface material layers and semiconductor energetic disorder on the VOC in OSCs. They investigated the physical dependence of VOC on φ in P3HT:PC60BM devices and found that when the work function of the contacts is within the bandgap, the performance of the device depends intensely on even small variations of φ. Similarly, when the work function approaches the energy levels of the semiconducting polymers i.e. near the LUMO and HOMO, device operation becomes the most effective and less sensitive to variations in φ as shown in Fig. 11.

In the previous section, we focussed on the relationship between VOC and the work function (φ). It is noteworthy to highlight the inter-relationship between the density of states (DOS) and the work function (φ) on VOC since the width and distribution of the DOS can be governed by chemical purity, morphology, etc. of the blend layer. The relationship between the simulated VOCversus contact work function for various Gaussian density widths (σ) is shown in Fig. 12(a). It is observed that the anode and cathode work function vary symmetrically with respect to the middle of the blend band gap in the simulated trends. The VOC depends linearly on Δφ with a minor effect on the Gaussian widths for Δφ well near/closer to the middle of the band gap (0.05 eV < Δφ < 0.25 eV) [see Fig. 12(a)]. Furthermore, when the work function of the anode and the cathode are close to the center of the band gap the VOC is limited by the work function of the contacts, as predicted by the MIM model in which the VOC cannot outdo the built-in voltage (VBI). On the other hand, when the work function difference becomes significant (i.e. Δφ > 0.25 eV), δVOC/δφ depends significantly on the width of the Gaussian DOS as shown in Fig. 12(b). In addition, the final “saturated” value of VOC varies intensely with the DOS (see Fig. 12b). In fact, before VOC saturation, δVOC/δφ almost approaches unity for highly ordered materials (where σ ≈ 50 meV), since all the states are concentrated near to the median of the LUMO (fullerene) and HOMO (polymer) energy levels.

In other words, upon photo-generation, the quasi Fermi levels split intensely (each closer to the median HOMO and LUMO energy levels) in the case of low disorder materials; thereby providing a substantial amount of energy states for the photo-generated carriers to occupy. On the contrary for a highly disordered material (σ ≈ 150 meV), the DOS tails extend deeply into the energy gap and the broadening of the HOMO and the LUMO energy levels is much greater.

Contact selectivity is also one of the parameters that influence the VOC in OSCs. In general, carriers that approach the contacts are also vulnerable to energy loss processes occurring at the interface, where charges may experience much greater carrier densities than in the bulk region because of spatially defined transport dynamics. Moreover, at the active layer-contact interface, there is a continuous contest between extraction of free carriers and charge annihilation via recombination. Such competition manifests itself directly in the observed VOC of the device. Therefore, any reduction in recombination at the interface will straightforwardly lead to increased VOC, due to larger splitting of the quasi-Fermi levels.

The term “selectivity” infers that there is a preferential collection of one charge and/or a concurrent decline in the rate of recombination with the other free charge carriers. Mechanisms for realizing high carrier selective contacts may be obtained either by increasing the rate of preferred charge extraction or by reducing the rate of recombination. Typically, the high charge selectivity is accomplished via the blocking of the undesired charge from reaching the respective contact by employing an energetic barrier while remaining energetically favourable for extraction of the preferred charge.
In the case of electron blocking contacts, the existence of an energetic barrier to electron injection at the hole-collecting electrode reduces the dark reverse saturation current, eventually resulting in the rise in shunt resistance of the device. When a selective contact is used, it is also expected that a difference in the space charge region could be developed. As most of the blocking contacts are low carrier density oxides, it is quite possible that the intrinsic carrier density of the hole or electron blocking oxides may influence the width of the space charge region formed at the interfaces, and thus alter the rate of carrier extraction which in turn affects the VOC.

Charge Transfer (CT) state complexes are interfacial electron–hole pairs located at the donor–acceptor (D/A) heterointerface as shown in Fig. 13. CT states are also known as polaron pairs, exciplexes or charge transfer excitons. The existence of charge transfer states has been demonstrated in numerous polymer/polymer and polymer/fullerene blends.

On the other hand, only a minor part/fraction of CT states would be filled under illumination owing to the low oscillator strength – one of the intrinsic properties of CT states. In a BHJ system, the acceptor singlet state and the CT state are the two kinds of energy states that are encountered by a photogenerated exciton when it approaches the D/A interface via diffusion. Here, CT states will not affect VOC when the acceptor energy level of the singlet state is lower than that of the CT state. On the other hand, CT states will affect the VOC when the excited exciton would populate the CT state if the CT state energy level were lower than the singlet state. In addition, the newly developed CT exciton will then either dissociate into polaron pairs or decay to the CT ground state.
A reciprocity relationship between photovoltaic quantum efficiency and electroluminescent emission (EQEEL) based on the principle of detailed balance was proposed by Rau et al., which is also applicable to organic donor–acceptor heterojunctions or BHJs. The following equation was derived based on that formulation to express VOC for organic donor–acceptor junction cells:
(13)
here
ECT is the free-energy difference between the CT excited state and the CT complex ground state, λ is the reorganization energy correlated with the CT absorption, c is the speed of light in a vacuum, f is a parameter proportional to the density of CT states and h is the Planck's constant. The last two terms in eqn (13) illustrate the VOC loss from non-radiative recombination and radiative recombination, respectively. Vandewal et al. has deduced a relationship between J0 and VOC and their experimental results concur quite well with that of the model of CT states predicted in eqn 14. The dependence of VOC on temperature T and illumination intensity P0 was also successfully explained based on the model of CT states.

Vandewal et al. also demonstrated the inter-relationship between charge-transfer absorption and emission and their influence on VOC using the detailed balance and quasi-equilibrium theory. It is shown that the electroluminescence (EL) and photovoltaic external quantum efficiency spectra (EQEPV) in the low-energy, charge-transfer region are related to each other. They also found that a weak-ground state interaction exists between the polymer and the fullerene; and deduced that the formation of such states significantly affects the VOC. Furthermore, it was also shown that at VOC, the recombination current exactly balances out the photogenerated current resulting in the emission of photons by the excited charge-transfer complex (CTC), thereby suggesting that the VOC is determined by the CTC formation between the polymer and the fullerene. It was also deduced that by increasing the EQEEL by a factor of 10 would result in an increase of VOC of ∼58 mV at room temperature via eliminating radiative recombinative pathways. Similarly, Jenny Nelson and co-workers also employed electroluminescence (EL) and photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy techniques to probe the energy of the interfacial states in a selection of high-performance polymers blended with a series of fullerenes. In their studies, they detected fullerene triplet excitons in polymer:fullerene blends with high CT state energies and demonstrated that the formation of such triplet states occurs mainly when the offset energy between the donor ionization potential and acceptor electron affinity is ∼1.6 eV or greater. Faist et al. reported that the singlet activation in the EL occurs when the difference ΔECS between the energy of the CT emission, ECT,EL, and the lowest component absorption onset, Eopt,min, is smaller than 0.35 eV (refer Fig. 14). By correlating the singlet excitation with the reduction in PL quenching and photocurrent generation, they observed that for the range 0 < ΔECS < 0.35 eV; a transition from pure CT emission to predominantly polymer or fullerene singlet emission occurs, in which the working devices exhibits strongly reduced photocurrent. Based on this observation, an empirical limit for open circuit voltage for efficient polymer:fullerene solar cells is obtained as VOC ≲ Eopt,min/e − (0.66 ± 0.08) eV where Eopt,min ≡ min[Eopt,donor; Eopt,acceptor] is the minimum of the absorption onset of the donor and the acceptor. Therefore increasing the energy of the CT state via minimizing ΔECS without hindering efficient charge separation is consequently one of the major effective strategies for designing new donor and acceptor materials.

As discussed earlier, in the density of states (DOS) model, VOC loss is attributed to tail states (within the band gap) in donor and acceptor material systems whereas in the case of charge transfer (CT) state model, VOC loss is ascribed to charge carrier recombination at the donor–acceptor (D/A) interface by means of CT states. The dark saturation current is increased by the radiative and non-radiative recombination occurring at the CT states, correspondingly leading to the loss in VOC according to eqn (5). CT states predominantly originates from the intermolecular interaction between the donor–acceptor materials at the (D/A) interface, therefore CT states resides only at the (D/A) heterojunction interface. On the other hand, tail states existing within the band gap of the donor and acceptor materials (affecting the distribution profile of the DOS) are associated with the properties of the material, which are intrinsically similar across the entire donor/acceptor film. Having discussed that, in both models the dominant recombination is bimolecular under open circuit conditions. Although, the CT state model explains the VOC loss convincingly, it has been debated to date that it is incapable to elucidate the super-bimolecular recombination noticed in some BHJ OSCs, which can be yet construed by the DOS model.


Burke et al. developed a relationship for the open-circuit voltage of OSCs based on the equilibrium between charge transfer (CT) states and free carriers. In order to deliver a driving force for the exciton splitting process to occur (during photo-generation at the D/A interface), donor (D) and acceptor (A) materials are characteristically selected to have electron affinities that differ by 0.1–0.3 eV, which also moderates qVOC by the same amount. Therefore, VOC is often referenced to the CT state energy rather than the optical gap as expressed in eqn (14), since the voltage loss between optical absorption and CT state formation is believed to be an indispensable tradeoff to split the excitons efficiently. The relationship between VOC and the average energy of the total CT states Ect is expressed as

(14)
where
Ect is the average energy of the total CT states in an organic solar cell, L is the thickness of the solar cell, Jsc is its short-circuit current, E0 is the average difference between the electron affinity (EA) of the acceptor material and the ionization potential (IP) of the donor at the interface between the two, N0 is the density of states (DOS) in the device, typically taken to be around 1021 cm−3 (1 nm−3) for organic semiconductors and f is the volume fraction of the solar cell that is mixed or interfacial. It is also demonstrated that each of the CT states recombines with an average lifetime τct = 1/kr and kr is the (average) rate constant (at which CT states recombine). Reducing the CT state binding energy and the interfacial energetic disorder could potentially increase VOC by hundreds of mV without necessitating any modification to the CT state lifetime or degree of mixing. The depiction of VOC that materializes from this concept is one of a quantity that is limited mainly by the microscopic elements/characteristics of the interface between donor and acceptor molecules. By optimizing this interface, the researchers have the opportunity to substantially improve the PCE of OSCs through increase in VOC.


Blend optimization with the focus on “microstructure” can be contemplated partially as a route for increasing carrier lifetimes adequately such that substantial recombination losses are moved towards higher carrier densities and therefore towards higher cell voltages. The term “microstructure” rather broadly refers to all aspects that could affect carrier dynamics and recombination rates excluding the charge-carrier densities and related mobilities. The microstructural aspects may comprise the following: (a) domain size, (b) the existence of energetic barriers, (c) domain purity, (d) electric field gradients or dipoles at donor–acceptor interfaces, (e) the coulombic radius for the capture of charge carriers, and (f) the spatial distribution of intraband trap states. Therefore, the influence of the film microstructure on the energy levels of the materials, energetic disorder and charge carrier dynamics is essential for understanding and predicting the VOC as shown in Fig. 15.

Almost every high-efficiency OSCs developed so far were based on the approach of incorporating intermixed donor and acceptor molecules (blend) as the photon-harvesting active layer. Implicit in this approach is the prerequisite that such blends must spontaneously change into an advantageous microstructure for carrier generation and collection, which can be achieved by appropriate deposition conditions or via post deposition treatments. Moreover, it was also demonstrated that the dependence of carrier lifetime on carrier density [τ(n)] influences the total achievable VOC in the device as shown in Fig. 16(a and b).
Burke et al. proposed that the density of states (DOS) of the light absorbing active layer, as dictated by the extent of energetic disorder, the molecular orbital levels, and crystallinity, is not substantially correlated with carrier lifetime (τ). Moreover, the carrier lifetime would significantly depend on the physical interaction between those states and consequently on the detailed microstructure of the blend which implicitly denotes the carrier mobility of the blend. They also demonstrated that while some intermixing of blend components is obviously essential for proficient exciton quenching, excess of it can result in significant loss of achievable voltage. It was found that up to 200–300 mV is lost between highly phase-separated systems with slow recombination, such as P3HT and P3BT, and highly intermixed systems qualified with fast recombination, such as DPP(TBFu)2 and PCPDTBT (see Fig. 16(a and b)). Therefore, for achieving high VOC it is necessary not only to tailor the energy levels of the blend components/materials but also to increase the carrier lifetimes within the active layer via tuning the blend microstructure.

Relating morphological characteristics to the open-circuit voltage of OSCs is an open debate to date. Even though the BHJ-OPV improves Jsc, reports have revealed that morphology does not seem to have considerable effect on VOC. Adding to this argument, Alam et al. provided an explicit analytical proof demonstrating that any effort to radically increase VOC by tailoring the bulk heterojunction morphology is futile, because any increase in Jsc due to a larger interface area is compensated by the corresponding increase in recombination current. Thereby, the upper limit of VOCBHJ cannot exceed that of the corresponding planar heterojunction devices, i.e., VOCBHJ ≤ VOCPHJ. Having said that, a distinct morphological feature i.e. the ratio between the donor volume fraction and the specific interfacial area (γδ/av) is found to play a significant role in determining the VOC of OSCs. On the other hand, morphological characteristics of the donor/acceptor blend, such as the connectivity of percolation pathways, do not have substantial impact on the VOC. Zhang et al. related VOC to the magnitude of the average exciton flux (javgex) which is expressed as

(15)
where
Eeffg is the effective band gap, Ncv is the effective density of states at both positive and negative contacts, T is the temperature, P is the dissociation probability of the interfacial charge-transfer state, kr is the Langevin bimolecular recombination constant, javgex is the magnitude of the average exciton flux towards D/A interfaces, h is the interfacial length scale, e is the elementary charge and kB is the Boltzmann constant.

The relation, eqn (15), is equivalent to the VOC expression proposed by Koster et al. for BHJ OSCs as well as the one reported by Giebink et al. for PHJ OSCs, except that eqn (15) incorporates the added influence of the donor acceptor (D/A) morphology on VOC and characteristically resolve morphological features of the order of the phase-separation length scale (∼10 nm). Moreover, morphological disorders existing on the molecular and atomistic scales, because of the factors such as variations in conjugation length, impurities, rotations and kinking of polymer chains, etc. could alter material properties like Eeffg and kr considerably and thus may influence VOC. The expression (eqn 15) also elucidates that the key influence of morphology on the VOC can be attributed to a single morphological parameter: the ratio between the donor volume fraction and the specific interfacial area, (γδ/av). The open-circuit voltage of OSCs rises with increasing γδ and decreases with increasing av. It simply implies that by attaining well-ordered D/A morphologies does not result in significant improvements of the VOC.

Vandewal et al. recently demonstrated that the charge carrier lifetime in a small molecule: C60 photovoltaic devices are augmented by decreasing the physical interface area available for recombination, thereby improving the VOC. They also observed when the donor contents are below 10%, VOC improved logarithmically corresponding to the interface area while the energy of the interfacial charge-transfer state ECT remains constant as shown in Fig. 17.

Vandewal et al. determined ECT by employing sensitive measurement techniques such as electroluminescence (EL) emission spectra in their experiment. They analysed certain photon energies below the optical gap of both the donor and acceptor material to determine the weak absorption and emission bands corresponding to the direct CT state excitation and recombination. They correlated the amplitude of the low energy CT absorption band (in the EQE spectra) with the amount of ground state D–A complexes and found that it is proportional to the interfacial area.
It was found that by changing the donor concentration and consequently the interfacial area in the low donor regime, ECT remains constant. However, VOC can be increased substantially say ∼(80–150 meV), solely by a 10-fold reduction in the interfacial area, under the conditions that proper Ohmic contacts are employed. Their findings provide the foundation for a new design paradigm for organic solar cells with increased VOC.

Before discussing the possible strategies to improve VOC, it is worthy to mention that the degree of influence of the various factors affecting VOC is not equal. From future development point of view, factors such as energetic disorder, CT states, microstructure, and D/A interface area play a predominant role in determining the VOC and hold a larger ground for research and improvement. Considering this discussion, some of the probable ways to improve VOC are listed below.

1. One of the key prospects for improving the VOC is to reduce the density of trap states via proper control of the phase-separated morphology and by altering the interfacial composition of the donor–acceptor materials. Such an approach of decreasing the interfacial trap density would also facilitate the fabrication of the thick photoactive layer, which in turn would increase the short circuit current without compromising the fill factor.
2. Decreasing the conformational disorder arising at the interface, by engineering the donor and acceptor materials to exhibit preferred orientations is another promising way to improve the VOC. For instance, a small reduction in interfacial disorder contributes about 100 mV to the open-circuit voltage of the regio-regular blend (P3HT:PCBM).
3. Improving the contact work function difference by proper selection of materials (in order to reach the saturation regime of δVOC/δφ for both the cathode and the anode) along with reducing the width of the Gaussian DOS is one of the promising paths for increasing the VOC. This can be accomplished via careful synthesis and controlled deposition of the blend.
4. Designing donor molecules with a greater degree of delocalized wave function reduces the binding energy of the CT states, which directly improves the VOC. Furthermore, improving the dielectric constant of the active layer is also an efficient way for increasing the VOC. A slight increase in dielectric constant ∼5 significantly lowers/eliminates the CT state binding energy by making the CT states more delocalized.
5. Increasing the lifetime of the CT states is another way to improve the VOC. The dynamic nature of the donor/acceptor interface is speculated to play a significant role in permitting CT states to attain configurations favourable for fast non-radiative recombination. It has been demonstrated that the lifetime of the CT states are governed by the non-radiative transitions with EQE typically lower than 10−6. Considering this scenario, securing the donor/acceptor conformation could be a crucial and important way to increase the radiative quantum efficiency and hence the VOC.
6. The open circuit voltage VOC, could also be tuned independent of the interfacial energetics, and is contingent on the interfacial area accessible for charge carrier recombination. Intuitively, it implies that an optimal interfacial area at a donor/acceptor heterojunction should be adequately large enough to ensure efficient exciton dissociation, simultaneously exhibiting long charge carrier lifetime – favourable for achieving high VOC. Therefore, designing of organic semiconductor materials with larger exciton diffusion lengths would enable a reduced optimum interfacial area and thereby producing a smaller ECT − qVOC difference, which could ultimately result in higher PCEs.
In conclusion, the open circuit voltage (VOC) plays a predominant role in determining the power conversion efficiency (PCE). VOC depends on a variety of parameters as discussed in this review including elaborations on specifics to improve the VOC. Even though all of the influencing parameters are significant, few parameters among them such as density of states (DOS) distribution or energetic disorder, charge transfer (CT) states, microstructure and donor/acceptor (D/A) interface area etc. endures more weightage from a vantage point focussed on future development. In spite of exhaustive discussion, it cannot be pointed out that one particular universal model serves as the panacea for resolving the VOC issues and to drive them towards greater frontiers. As novel materials are invented each day and the sensitivity and sophistication of characterization techniques have evolved, the field of VOC research would remain a subject of on-going research at-least till near future.
† These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016