 DOI: 10.1039/C5TA08656F
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1947-1952


M. I.
El-Henawey
*,

Ryan S.
Gebhardt
,

M. M.
El-Tonsy
 and 

Sumit
Chaudhary
*

Physics Department, Faculty of Science, Mansoura University, Mansoura 35516, Egypt

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa 50011, USA. E-mail: mhenawey@iastate.edu; sumitc@iastate.edu

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa 50011, USA

Received
27th October 2015
, Accepted 22nd December 2015
First published on 23rd December 2015
The two step sequential deposition of CH3NH3PbI3-based perovskite solar cells has been modified by applying toluene and chlorobenzene vapors during the preparation of PbI2 films leading to the growth of the PbI2 grain size. PbI2 films treated with these solvent vapors have more surface area with which CH3NH3I can react leading to a more desirable perovskite layer morphology. This resulted in a significant increase in the performance of the corresponding perovskite solar cell devices where the average power conversion efficiency was enhanced from 5.2% for the control device up to 8.4 and 10.2% for toluene and chlorobenzene-treated devices, respectively.

Obtaining electrical energy from the sun using an economical method is a radical solution for the problems of limited fossil fuels and global warming. In recent years, harnessing solar energy using the traditional solar cells based on silicon has gained tremendous traction. However, exploitation of inexhaustible solar energy is still limited, and there is a need for alternative high-efficiency low-cost solutions. The new generation of the mixed organic–inorganic halide perovskite solar cells is an exciting development in this direction. Their efficiency has recently reached nearly 20%. The high efficiency stems from remarkable properties of CH3NH3PbI3 such as a large absorption coefficient, small electron/hole effective masses, a direct band gap close to the visible region, and large electron–hole diffusion lengths which may reach at least 100 nanometers. In addition to the high photovoltaic performance of the perovskite solar cells, they are easily fabricated from four common deposition methods reported thus far: one-step solution deposition; two-step sequential deposition; vapor assisted solution process and dual-source vapor deposition. In recent years, many researchers have conducted investigations to increase the efficiency of perovskite solar cells. These investigations include the exploration of various hole-transporting materials and electron-transporting materials and understanding their impact on the device performance. Although approaches such as varying the precursor molar ratios, thermal annealing, casting conditions, and using mixed solvents to produce a smooth perovskite film surface with uniform crystal domains have been investigated, controlling the morphology of the perovskite film still represents one of the main challenges in the device fabrication process. One such method to control the film morphology was the solvent engineering approach presented by Jeon et al. where the perovskite film is deposited from a precursor solution dissolved in a mixture of dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) and γ-butyrolactone immediately followed by a toluene drip, which leads to an extremely uniform and dense perovskite layer. Xiao et al. used a similar approach in which they induced the crystallization of a perovskite film by dripping chlorobenzene immediately after spin coating the precursor solution. This process produced a perovskite film with a crystal size in the order of microns and yielded an average power conversion efficiency (PCE) more than 13%.

Another strategy to optimize the morphology of a perovskite film was by employing solvent annealing; this was demonstrated by Xiao et al., who annealed a perovskite layer in the presence of dimethylformamide (DMF) vapor. Both PbI2 and CH3NH3I, the precursor constituents of a perovskite layer, are highly soluble in DMF. The solvent annealing supported the diffusion and reorganization of the precursor molecules and ions leading to growth of the perovskite crystals. Lian et al. also applied the vapors of both 1,2-dichlorobenzene (DCB) and DMSO during the second stage (i.e. application of CH3NH3I to PbI2) of the perovskite film formation. They concluded that the presence of the organic solvent vapors facilitated the growth and coalescence of the grains, which illustrates the importance of the vapor environment during perovskite formation. It is quite obvious from these and other previous studies that improving the morphology of a perovskite film by increasing the crystal size and enhancing the crystalline quality of the grains is critical to realize high performance devices.
In the current work, we modified the typical two-step sequential deposition process by exposing the wet PbI2 layer to toluene and chlorobenzene vapors. We chose toluene and chlorobenzene due to their miscibility with the host solvent DMF. We believe that this method can harness the effects of both solvent and thermal annealing in a single step. Toluene and chlorobenzene vapors provide a solvent annealing atmosphere, which can reduce the DMF evaporation rate and help to promote the growth of the PbI2 nanocrystals. In addition, PbI2 crystal growth may be assisted thermally due to the heat provided by a vapor temperature of ∼120 °C. Our approach favorably altered the morphology of the PbI2 layer by enhancing the growth of PbI2 crystallites resulting in higher porosity, which is conducive for the reaction with CH3NH3I. The resultant photovoltaic devices had higher optical absorbance and power conversion efficiency than the control devices with untreated PbI2 layers.

Devices were fabricated on fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) coated glass substrates (Delta Technologies). Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)–polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS), (Clevios P VP AI 4083) was purchased from Heraeus Precious Metals GmbH & Co. KG. [6,6]-Phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) was purchased from 1-Materials Inc. Lead iodide (beads, −10 mesh, and 99.999% metals basis) was purchased from Alfa Aesar. Methylammonium iodide (CH3NH3I) was purchased from Dyesol. Anhydrous solvents: N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF, 99.8%), 2-propanol (99.5%), toluene (99.8%) and chlorobenzene (99.8%) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. All materials were used as received.


FTO substrates were sequentially cleaned with detergent, deionized water, and 2-propanol. The substrates were blown dry with nitrogen and kept on a hot plate at 150 °C for 10 min. Then, they were exposed to air plasma for 10 min. The PEDOT:PSS solution was filtered with a PVDF 0.45 μm filter and spin-coated on FTO substrates at 4000 rpm for 30 s, followed by annealing at 150 °C for 20 min. Then, the substrates were transferred to an N2-filled glovebox with oxygen and water levels less than 10 and 0.1 ppm, respectively. A 461 mg mL−1 solution of lead iodide (PbI2) in DMF was spin-coated on top of the PEDOT:PSS layer at 3000 rpm for 30 s. The wet PbI2 films were exposed to different organic solvent vapor atmospheres, N2 (i.e. as a control), toluene, and chlorobenzene for 30 s. The toluene and chlorobenzene solvent vapors were generated by heating 2 mL of toluene or chlorobenzene in a 25 mL flask at 120 °C. The solvent vapors were directed via a tube onto the top of the PbI2 films. This process was followed by annealing the PbI2 films at 90 °C for 5 min. The substrates were left to cool to room temperature and then dipped into a solution of 2-propanol with 10 mg mL−1 CH3NH3I for 60 s.

The films were rinsed quickly with 2-propanol, followed by annealing at 90 °C for 20 min to complete the crystal formation and remove any remaining solvent. A 30 mg mL−1 solution of PCBM in chlorobenzene was spin-coated at 1500 rpm for 60 s on the perovskite layer as the electron transport layer. Finally, 100 nm of Ag was thermally evaporated in 10−6 mbar vacuum on top of the PCBM layer.

The current–voltage characteristics were obtained using a computer-controlled Keithley 236 source meter measurement unit. One sun illumination was obtained using a light source (LS150 Abet Technologies) and calibrated with a reference crystalline silicon solar cell. External quantum efficiency (EQE) was measured using a custom setup built from a single grating monochromator (Horiba Jobin Yvon), a 100 W halogen bulb (OSRAM Bellaphot), and a current pre-amplifier (Ithaco, Inc.). An optical chopper (Thor Laboratories) coupled with a lock-in amplifier (Stanford Research Systems) was used to reduce the noise in the system. Optical absorption/transmission was measured in a Varian Cary 5000 ultraviolet-visible-near-infrared (UV-vis-NIR) spectrophotometer. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were recorded using a Siemens D500 X-ray diffractometer. Samples were sputtered with 5 nm iridium before obtaining scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images using a field emission SEM (FEI Quanta-250).


The schematic illustration of our modified two-step sequential deposition process is shown in Fig. 1. After the deposition of the PbI2 layer, toluene or chlorobenzene vapor was employed to enhance the crystallization and induce growth of the PbI2 grains. As shown in Fig. 2a, it is clear that the appearance of the PbI2 film changes from transparent red-yellow for the control substrate (i.e. in N2 atmosphere) to opaque dark-yellow with a 30 s exposure to toluene or chlorobenzene vapor. To further investigate the changes occurring in the PbI2 layer, we performed XRD and SEM. The XRD patterns obtained from PbI2 films prepared under the effect of N2, toluene vapor, and chlorobenzene vapor are shown in Fig. 3. It was found that in the cases of PbI2 films exposed to toluene and chlorobenzene vapors, the intensity of the most representative XRD peak of the PbI2 nanocrystals at 2θ = 12.56° strongly increased and the full width at half maximum (FWHM) reduced.

The average grain size D of the PbI2 nanocrystals can be estimated from the (001) peak at 12.56° using the Scherrer equation: D = kλ/(βcos(θ)), where k is the Scherrer constant (equal to 0.94), λ is the X-ray wavelength (equal to 0.154 nm), θ is the Bragg diffraction angle, and β is the FWHM of the (001) diffraction peak, respectively. We found that the FWHM of the diffraction peak at 12.56° is 0.259, 0.199, and 0.159, which correspond to average PbI2 crystal sizes of 32.2, 41.8, and 52.2 nm for the control, toluene, and chlorobenzene samples, respectively. This means that the toluene and chlorobenzene vapors enhanced the growth of PbI2 crystals.
The SEM images of the PbI2 films in Fig. 4 show larger domain sizes for the films treated with toluene and chlorobenzene vapors, confirming the XRD results. Enhancement of the PbI2 crystal growth was not the only benefit of toluene and chlorobenzene vapors. As is clear from the SEM images, these vapors also helped to create cavities between the PbI2 crystals. Such cavities can enhance the penetration of CH3NH3I in the PbI2 layer during dipping, leading to more complete perovskite formation. On the other hand, CH3NH3I diffusion into the PbI2 layer may be hindered in the control sample, whose SEM image shows less prominent cavities. This effect is evident in the images of the perovskite films, shown in Fig. 2b, where the perovskite films changed from light-brown for the control to dark-black for the PbI2 layers treated with toluene and chlorobenzene vapors.

Fig. 5 shows the absorption spectra of the corresponding perovskite films. Their absorption covers a wide range of light wavelengths from the visible to the near-infrared region. It is observed that the CH3NH3PbI3 films corresponding to the PbI2 prepared under the influence of toluene or chlorobenzene vapor have higher absorbance, indicating that more PbI2 is converted into CH3NH3PbI3. These increases in the absorbance of the toluene and chlorobenzene perovskite films support the claim of increased porosity (cavities) of the PbI2 layers exposed to toluene and chlorobenzene vapors; more cavities allow CH3NH3I to more easily reach the interior of PbI2, facilitating a more complete transformation to CH3NH3PbI3.
For further investigation of the effect of the porosity on the diffusion reaction between the PbI2 film and the CH3NH3I solution, we can look at the color change of the PbI2 film with dipping time as shown in Fig. 6. It is obvious that the control sample suffers from a slow PbI2 to perovskite conversion rate. As the dipping time is increased from 5 to 60 seconds, the color only slightly changes to light brown. This difficulty in the conversion of the control sample may be related to the compact nature of the PbI2 film corresponding to this sample. In contrast, the toluene and chlorobenzene samples show a faster conversion rate and turn dark brown quickly. This supports the advantage of having a porous PbI2 film during the fabrication of a two-step perovskite layer via dipping in CH3NH3I solution.
One can expect that the change in the morphology of PbI2 films also changes the morphology of the perovskite layer. Fig. 7 shows the SEM images of the perovskite layers corresponding to the PbI2 films exposed to N2, toluene vapor, and chlorobenzene vapor. It is obvious that the grain size of the perovskite crystals is dependent on that of the PbI2 crystals where the smallest PbI2 crystals obtained from the control sample produce the smallest perovskite crystals, while the largest PbI2 crystals resulting from the exposure to toluene and chlorobenzene vapors produce the largest perovskite crystals. To confirm the existence of the CH3NH3PbI3 crystals, we carried out XRD measurements for the perovskite layers, as shown in Fig. 8. The CH3NH3PbI3 films show strong diffraction peaks at 2θ of 14.0°, 24.3°, 28.4° and 31.7°, which correspond to the (110), (202), (220) and (310) lattice planes of cubic CH3NH3PbI3 crystals, respectively.
Interestingly, the diffraction peak at 12.56°, which is attributed to unreacted PbI2, still shows a high intensity. It has been shown that the perovskite transformation is limited by the diffusion of CH3NH3I into PbI2 and unreacted PbI2 remains in the film even after 2 hours of dipping time. If the PbI2 layer is smooth, one would expect a layered structure to develop such as that shown in Fig. 9a. By increasing the porosity of the PbI2 layer via treatment with toluene or chlorobenzene vapor, one might expect a core–shell like structure to develop as shown in Fig. 9b.
It has been reported that in an n–i–p structure (FTO/TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD/gold), a thin layer of PbI2 at the perovskite–electron transport layer (TiO2) interface can have a beneficial effect of reducing recombination. However, we use a p–i–n structure with PEDOT:PSS collecting holes. If there is PbI2 present at the PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3 interface, it will likely hurt the device performance due to the unfavorable band alignment of PbI2 for hole collection (conduction band minimum of −4.05 eV and valence band maximum of −6.35 eV). Therefore, we expected that the increased porosity of the PbI2 layer caused by the toluene or chlorobenzene vapor should lead to less PbI2 at the PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3 interface in the final device, and the device performance should enhance.

It has been shown that the photovoltaic device performance is strongly dependent on the PbI2 film morphology. We also expected the morphological changes induced by toluene and chlorobenzene to improve the device performance. Fig. 10 shows the configuration and the energy level diagram of the perovskite solar cells that we fabricated.Fig. 11a shows the current density–voltage (J–V) curves with both forward and reverse scans, and Table 1 lists the photovoltaic parameters of our devices. The open-circuit voltage (Voc) and the fill factor (FF) were nearly similar for all devices, but the devices treated with toluene and chlorobenzene vapors showed better photovoltaic performance than the control device due to enhancement in the short-circuit current density (Jsc). Moreover, the toluene and chlorobenzene devices are showing slightly less hysteresis in the J–V curves compared to the control device.

Sample

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Forward
Reverse
Forward
Reverse
Forward
Reverse
Forward
Reverse
Control
0.99 ± 0.00
1.02 ± 0.00
8.5 ± 0.1
8.6 ± 0.4
60.2 ± 1.3
63.0 ± 0.8
5.1 ± 0.1
5.4 ± 0.1
Toluene
0.99 ± 0.00
0.99 ± 0.01
13.4 ± 0.9
13.7 ± 0.6
62.5 ± 0.5
62.8 ± 0.3
8.3 ± 0.5
8.6 ± 0.4
Chlorobenzene
1.00 ± 0.00
1.01 ± 0.00
16.1 ± 0.0
16.4 ± 0.0
63.4 ± 0.2
63.4 ± 1.4
10.1 ± 0.0
10.3 ± 0.1
Im et al. reported that the Jsc increases with increasing CH3NH3PbI3 cuboid size and light-harvesting efficiency and charge-carrier extraction are significantly affected by the cuboid size. It was reported that the larger perovskite crystals reduce the interfacial area, which can hinder charge collection, between grains. Larger grains also show lower bulk defects and higher mobility, so the photo-generated carriers can be more easily collected. This may explain the increase in the Jsc of the toluene and chlorobenzene devices, which showed a larger cuboid size than the control device. Fig. 11b shows the external quantum efficiency (EQE) of our devices. The devices that underwent toluene and chlorobenzene vapor processing show a broad increase in the EQE over the measured wavelengths. The integrated photocurrents from the EQE spectra (10.4, 13.2, and 15.7 mA cm−2 for the control, toluene, and chlorobenzene devices, respectively) show generally a good agreement with the J–V measurement. Finally, we were able to double the performance of the two-step CH3NH3PbI3 solar cell devices by applying toluene or chlorobenzene vapor during the preparation of the PbI2 layer for only 30 seconds, significantly shorter time than typically required by solvent annealing approaches.

In summary, we studied the effects of applying different organic solvent vapors on PbI2 films during the typical two-step fabrication of CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite solar cells. We observed that the PbI2 grain size, as well as the film porosity, increased with exposure to toluene and chlorobenzene vapors. The increased porosity allowed the CH3NH3I to more easily penetrate the PbI2 film leading to a more complete PbI2 to perovskite transformation with larger grains. These changes resulted in the enhancement of the absorbance and up to 10.2% photovoltaic power conversion efficiency, which was about 97% higher than the control device.


Mohamed EL-Henawey would like to thank the fellowship support from the Egyptian government under Contract JS3067.


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016