 DOI: 10.1039/C7CP03595K
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 20839-20846


Zhiqi
Li
,

Wenbin
Guo
,

Chunyu
Liu
,

Xinyuan
Zhang
,

Shujun
Li
,

Jiaxin
Guo
 and 

Liu
Zhang
*

State Key Laboratory on Integrated Optoelectronics, College of Electronic Science and Engineering, Jilin University, 2699 Qianjin Street, Changchun, 130012, People's Republic of China

College of Instrumentation & Electrical Engineering, Jilin University, 938 Ximinzhu Street, Changchun, 130061, People's Republic of China. E-mail: zhangliu@jlu.edu.cn

Received
28th May 2017
, Accepted 14th July 2017
First published on 14th July 2017
Developing an air-stable, low-cost, non-toxic, and high-transparency charge buffer layer is a critical strategy to achieve the high photoelectric conversion efficiency of polymer photovoltaic cells. This paper reports the remarkable improvement of device performance by employing a combination of copper bromide (CuBr2) and molybdenum trioxide (MoO3) (CuBr2/MoO3) as the hole transport layer (HTL) of inverted-type polymer solar cells (PSCs). The bulk transport processes and resistive capacitance elements in the operating PTB7:PC71BM bulk heterojunction PSCs were characterized using impedance spectroscopy. The impedance response was modeled using two equivalent circuital models, which are the general transmission line circuit (GTLC) model and the electrochemical polarization model. The effective carrier lifetime, conductivity, and mobility for both devices were extracted from the models. The improved hole transport at the anode and the efficient electron transport blocking decreased interface recombination and contact resistance, resulting in improved power conversion efficiency (PCE) values ranging from 7.30% to 9.56%. These results suggest that quantitative interpretation and modeling of the impedance spectroscopy results provide an effective way to unravel the operating mechanism of photovoltaic devices.

Organic semiconductor-based solar cells have received considerable attention as renewable energy sources due to their features, such as light weight, low-temperature processing, low cost, design flexibility, chemically tunable optoelectronic properties, and solution-based manufacturing over a large area. Thereunto, the inverted-configuration polymer solar cells (PSCs), with the modified low work-function transparent conductive electrodes (ITO or FTO) as the cathode and a high work-function metal (Au, Ag or Al) as the anode, have been extensively investigated owing to their better stability and mechanical properties for fabrication. Especially, as a result of further studies, including new polymer material design, device optimization, and the deep understanding of device mechanisms, the performance of single-stack cells has dramatically been improved. For the highly efficient inverted PSCs, the interfaces between electrodes and photoactive layers should be the ohmic contact to minimize contact resistance and interfacial recombination and to balance charge injection and transport in the interlayer. Nevertheless, the poor electron injection and transfer of the buffer layer continue to be serious problems for realizing highly efficient photovoltaic devices. For this reason, various interfacial optimizations by introducing modification layers have actively been developed. The typical interfacial modification of inverted-type PSCs often focuses on controlling the surface energy or improving contact morphology of the cathode (ITO or FTO) and cathode buffer layer (TiO2 or ZnO) to enhance the short-circuit current (Jsc) or the fill factors (FF). Meanwhile, the post-treatments of buffer layer with polar organic molecules, inorganic salts, carboxylic compounds, and zwitterions as surfactant have also proved to efficiently enhance the conductivity of the interlayer. Studies on interface modification of the anode and anode buffer layer with inorganic salts such as copper chloride (CuCl2) and copper bromide (CuBr2) treatment are rarely covered, and developing new composite hole transport layer (HTL) to balance charge transfer is essential and necessary.

Impedance spectroscopy measurement has made big achievements in determining the energetic and kinetic parameters of different electrical devices by resolving differential resistances and capacitances in the system at a particular steady state using a small perturbation method. For organic photovoltaic solar cells, it has become a powerful and established tool to calculate charge carrier lifetime, mobility, and charge carrier concentration under the varied operating biases and illumination intensities. Furthermore, several equivalent physical circuit element models have been successfully modeled on the basis of different operating mechanisms. The different internal processes can be separated, which allow efficient elucidation of the roles of new device components such as new donor or acceptor material as well as the internal interfaces of different layers. Although impedance spectroscopy is quite straightforward, the explanation of the spectrum demands a given conceptual model for the specific features of different devices. A general analysis of the impedance response of active devices with a simplified physical analog is still needed.
In this work, we investigated the operating mechanism of the efficient copper bromide (CuBr2) salt/molybdenum trioxide (MoO3) (CuBr2/MoO3) composite HTL using the transport-recombination behavior of impedance spectroscopy. Two circuital models of the general transmission line circuit (GTLC) and electrochemical polarization were successfully used to demonstrate the impedance of bulk heterojunction devices over a range of applied biases. The two key parameters of the recombination resistance and chemical capacitance were extracted from these equivalent circuits. The effects of CuBr2/MoO3 composite HTL on the conductivity, average charge carrier lifetime, electronic mobility, and charge carrier concentrations were obtained from the impedance analysis framework. The improved hole injection and transport at the anode and efficient electron transport blocking decreased interface recombination and contact resistance, leading to the enhanced power conversion efficiency (PCE) values ranging from 7.30% to 9.56%.


Fig. 1a presents the current density versus voltage (J–V) characteristics of the PSCs without and with CuBr2 under one sun illumination (simulated air mass 1.5 global (AM 1.5G) at 100 mW cm2). The control devices fabricated from PTB7:PC71BM mixed solutions show a typical average PCE of 7.10 ± 0.19% (with the highest value of 7.30%, which is consistent with our previous report), with a Jsc of 15.71 mA cm2, a Voc of 0.74 V, and a FF of 62.08%. After depositing a CuBr2 modification layer on the polymer films by thermal evaporation, an improved average PCE of 9.41 ± 0.10% was achieved (the maximum of 9.56%), including a Jsc of 19.65 mA cm2, a Voc of 0.75 V, and a FF of 65.20%. Fig. 1b indicates the incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra of both devices, with the average IPCE values of 58% and 65% (in the range 350–700 nm) for the control and CuBr2-sensitized devices, respectively. The IPCE peak values at the wavelength of 625 nm increased from 67% to 75%. The theoretical Jsc values obtained by integration of the IPCE data in Fig. 1b under AM 1.5G solar spectrum are 18.91 mA cm−2 and 15.10 mA cm−2, respectively, which are in good accordance with the J–V characteristics (Fig. 1a).

The surface morphology optimization of the composite active layer and the interface modification between the active layer and electrodes could lead to the lower contact resistance in photovoltaic devices. In order to probe whether sensitized CuBr2 affects the inner contact composition, the impedance results of the control and modified devices at different sample bias values (0–800 mV) under the measuring frequency range of 100 Hz to 20 MHz are shown in Fig. 2. The spectra exhibits a large semicircle that dominates the response over most frequencies. The diameters of the semicircle for both the control and modified devices increase with decreased sample bias. In addition, the diameter of the semicircle for the modified device (Fig. 2c) is much smaller than that of the control device (Fig. 2b), which is attributed to internal charge transfer events at the buffer layer/active layer interfaces.
To account for the efficiency of the internal coupled current carrier diffusion–recombination of the photoactive layer on indeed voltage and current, the GTLC model (shown in Fig. 2a) is employed to provide quantitative information on the different physical processes happening in the devices. In this model, the diffusion mechanism at high frequency is presented using transport resistance (Rt); the recombination process at low frequencies is combination resistance Rrec; Cu is the chemical capacitance (associated to the excess of carrier storage in the active layer), which is related to the increase of the electron occupancy in the fullerene LUMO. Also, Cg = εε0/L represents dielectric and geometrical capacitance, which are observed under some experimental conditions. Rs is anode interface, buffer layer, and wire resistance. This type of impedance pattern belongs to the responses in which the carrier transport is determined by coupled diffusion–recombination. Hence, the diffusion and recombination times are defined as τdiff = RtCμ and τrec = RrecCμ respectively. In other words, the high-frequency arc is represented by an Rt and Cg combination and attributed to the bulk resistance as well as a capacitance that includes both a geometric component and a second component relating to photo-excitation events in the film. The low-frequency arc is expressed as Rrec and Cu, which correspond to the recombination resistance and chemical capacitance associated with the internal charge transfer events at the donor/acceptor interfaces. According to the GTLC model, the omega can be expressed as
(1)
or

(2)
The equivalent circuit diagram for the PSCs in the actual test shows a capacitor connecting with the anode and the cathode. In fact, the alternating current voltage, as a modulating signal, is applied to the electrodes of PSCs, which induces current carrier across devices. This results in a capacitor-like device that stores and releases energy quickly. Fig. 3 presents the C–V characteristics and C−2–V curves of PTB7:PC71BM solar cells without and with CuBr2. Under similar conditions, a higher capacitance is obtained after incorporating CuBr2 on the top of the active layer. Thus, a higher carrier concentration corresponding to charge transfer between the active layer and the electrodes was obtained. Fig. 3b shows the C−2–V curves of PTB7:PC71BM solar cells without and with CuBr2. The built-in potential (Vbi) can be acquired according to the Mott–Schottky expression. It suggests a decreased Vbi corresponding to the enhanced charge transfer of the buffer layer, which is in good agreement with the improved Voc for devices as shown above.
Previous discussion suggests that the presence of two partial semicircular arcs corresponds to the complex equivalent GTLC model. However, in the actual measurement, the impedance spectrum starts with an oval shape that resembles two partial semicircular arcs in previous reports, and a second partial arc is not visible in the impedance curve at high frequency. Proceeding from the natures of practical measurement and the actual situation in this study, we proposed some described hypotheses. It is assumed that the generation of electrons will continue at a comparable level during natural daylight. Ideal electrons are able to diffuse within extended bulk regions, eventually reaching the electrodes, which act as selective contacts. Charge injection and transport are balanced, and there is no obvious carrier concentration gradient (position-independent) inside the bulk of devices in which recombination is not severe, i.e. τdiff ≤ τrec (or Rt ≤ Rrec). For low-recombining devices, τdiff ≪ τrec (or Rt ≪ Rrec) is usually observed. Hence, the appearance of oval shape in the impedance image resembling two partial semicircular arcs is reasonable. In this case, the GTLC models could be simplified via an electrochemical polarization model (shown in Fig. 4a) consisting of a resistor Rs in series with a resistor R1, and capacitor C1 in parallel. The series resistance (Rs) relating to the contact and wire effect will dominate the interaction of models, and the shunt resistance (R1 or Rsh) is chosen to describe the diversion effects inside the active layer that are reduced by the introduction of charge carriers, either through illumination (i.e. photoconductivity) or electrical injection at the electrodes. The J–V characteristic of the solar cell can be expressed as
(3)
where
kBT is the thermal energy, q stands for the elementary charge, j0 is the dark current, and the β represents the deviation from the diode ideal equation (inverse of the diode ideality factor). Besides, Vapp stands for the applied voltage, and Jph represents the photocurrent.

Cole–Cole plots of control and CuBr2-sensitized PTB7:PC71BM devices at the open circuit voltage condition under dark are shown in Fig. 4b. The alternating current oscillating amplitude was 1 V, and the measuring frequency range was varied from 100 Hz to 1 MHz. The experimental data of devices resemble a single semicircle in the complex plane. These plots are complex plane representations composed of the real part of the impedance (Z′) and the imaginary part of the impedance (Z′′). Imaginary part and real part are related with the omega:
Z = Z′ + Z′′
(4)
These semicircles can help us to understand the internal resistance of different modified devices. From the impedance spectra, an apparent change is observed in the modified devices. The real impedance is decreased from 4218.72 Ω (control device) to 3691.64 Ω (modified device), respectively. This can be attributed to the enhanced carrier transfer.
It is well known that a parallel R–C combination model gives rise to a semicircle in the impedance plane, so these data were consistent with the simple equivalent circuit of Fig. 4a. The omega in impedance plots mapping as a semicircle in the coordinate axes corresponds to a different form.
(5)
or

(6)
The Rs circuit element corresponds to the intersection of the semicircle with the Z′ axis. The resistance R1 corresponds to the diameter of the semicircle. The capacitance C1 is attributed to the depletion region chemical capacitance due to the connection to carrier storage.
(7)
The bulk heterojunction PSCs based upon conjugated polymer and fullerene derivative are usually reported to present a Schottky diode behavior. Band bending with a corresponding depletion zone is formed at the contact. Thus, the junction capacitance follows the Mott–Schottky expression,

(8)
and

(9)
Here, Vbi is the built-in potential, N is the current carrier density, A is the area (0.06 cm2 in this study), Vapp is the applied voltage, and ε and ε0 are the dielectric constant and vacuum permittivity, respectively.

Fig. 5a shows the capacitance (C1)-bias curves at low frequency (100 Hz). The capacitance rises with the increased forward direction applied bias, reaching a saturated peak with the voltage of approximately 0.9 V. The increased capacitance accounts for the improved concentration of carriers in the neutral regions of the device, which points to the occurrence of accelerated injection/extraction at the contacts. Charge carrier density follows the function:
(10)
Here,
e is elementary charge, A is the device area, d is the thickness of the active layer, and C is the chemical capacitance. Fig. 5b shows the C1−2-bias curves of PTB7:PC71BM solar cells without and with CuBr2 at low frequency (100 Hz). The experimental results in Fig. 5b exhibit a straight line over a wide bias voltage range. The Vbi element corresponds to the intercept of the extension with the Vapp axis. Therefore, a decreased Vbi from 0.69 V to 0.66 V corresponds to the enhanced charge transfer of the buffer layer, which is in good agreement with the improved Voc of devices as shown above. N can be calculated to be 8.25 × 1014 and 4.64 × 1014 according to eqn (8) (Mott–Schottky curve) (ε = 3 for PTB7:PC71BM system). Hence, the improved charge carrier transfer increased the number of current carriers, which accounted for the high performance. Fig. 5c shows the R1-bias curves of PTB7:PC71BM solar cells without and with CuBr2. The resistance R1 corresponds to the diameter of the semicircle and decreases in response to illumination or increasing sample bias, according to the previous description. It is attributed to the diversion effects inside the active layer, which are enhanced through the improved charge carrier transfer originating from the increased photoconductivity or electrical injection at the electrodes.

The representative impedance responses to a large range of direct-current applied bias (550–950 mV) in the complex plane, as well as the frequency dependence of the impedance (Bode plots), for control and CuBr2-sensitized PTB7:PC71BM devices at dark condition are shown in Fig. 6. The impedance spectra (Fig. 6a) are composed of a large semicircle and decreased with increased applied voltage, which agrees well with the trend of the C1-bias curves at low frequency (100 Hz). The frequency dependence of the impedance (Bode plots) for control and CuBr2-sensitized PTB7:PC71BM devices are shown in Fig. 6. Frequency is another representation of carrier transit time for most carrier currents, and the average transit time (τave) can be correlated with the frequency at which the reactance reaches its peak value in Fig. 6b and c. Larger τavg values lead to higher power conversion efficiencies for modified devices.Fig. 7 presents the C–f curve of control and CuBr2-sensitized PTB7:PC71BM devices. It can be found that cell impedance (Bode plots) rapidly changed with increasing frequency. Therefore, the electron mobility can be extracted from the equation:
(11)
and
τdc = 0.56τr
(12)
where
d is the thickness of the polymer, and Vapp is the external applied bias voltage. Compared to the control devices, the storing and releasing of capacitor energy for the optimized devices are quicker with enhanced transport time. At a typical bias of 1 V, the time of storing and releasing for the control device is about 5.61 × 10−6 s, while that of the optimal device is 4.02 × 10−6 s (the typical bias Vapp is 1 V and d is 100 nm). Larger μdc values (from 1.79 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1 to 2.50 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1) lead to higher power conversion efficiency. Additionally, to understand the reason of the accelerated charge transfer, the energy level alignment of all materials used in our PSCs is listed in Fig. 7b. The HOMO levels of MoO3 are −6.9 eV and −9.7 eV, which makes it a great electron-blocking material. The work function of CuBr2 is −5.03 eV, which is even lower than the work function of Ag, so the efficient hole potential forms well for the holes transformed. Meanwhile, the HOMO level of PTB7 (−5.1 eV) is lower than the work function of CuBr2, forming a hole-transport ladder between PTB7, Ag and CuBr2. As a consequence, the photoinduced charge transfer is energetically favourable between the Ag electrode and PTB7.


In this work, we report the remarkable performance improvement of inverted-type PSCs by employing a composited CuBr2/MoO3 HTL. The impedance responses of organic photovoltaic devices were characterized over a range of applied bias conditions. The devices were simulated by the general transmission line circuit (GTLC) model and further simplified by an electrochemical polarization. The average charge carrier conductivity, mobility, and lifetimes can be extracted from the simplified equivalent circuit model and correlated with device performance. The improved hole injection and transport at the anode and efficient electron transport blocking decreased interface recombination and contact resistance, resulting in the enhanced PCE, ranging from 7.30 to 9.56%. This work demonstrates that the electrochemical polarization model of impedance spectroscopy is an effective way to investigate the working mechanism of PSCs.


The indium tin oxide (ITO) glass substrate was purchased from Dongguan Xiangcheng Group, China. The electron-donor material PTB7 was obtained from 1-Material Inc. and used as received. The electron-acceptor material PC71BM was purchased from Lumtek Corp. without purification. The electron transport layer material TiO2 was synthesized by the sol–gel method in our lab following the procedure reported in ref. 5, 10, and 19. The inverted device structure was ITO/TiO2/PTB7:PC71BM/CuBr2/MoO3/Ag, as described in our previous report. First, the ITO-coated glass was ultrasonicated in deionized water, acetone, and isopropanol in turn and dried at 60 °C for 12 h. A 40 nm TiO2 layer was subsequently coated on top of the precleaned ITO by spin-casting at 3000 rotations per min (rpm) for 20 s. Then, the PTB7:PC71BM (weight ratio of 1:1.5, total concentration of 25 mg mL−1) blend active layer solution in a mixed solvent of chlorobenzene/1,8-diiodoctane (97%:3% by volume) with a nominal thickness of ∼100 nm was spin-coated on the top of TiO2 at 1000 rpm for 2 min. Next, the device was transferred into a vacuum chamber (∼10−5 Torr), and a 2 nm CuBr2 layer was evaporated on the PTB7:PC71BM films. Finally, a 4 nm MoO3 layer and a 100 nm Ag layer were subsequently evaporated through a shadow mask to define the active area of the devices (6.0 mm2) and form the top anode. The complete devices were transferred into air for all the tests. For comparison, the control devices with the structure of ITO/TiO2/PTB7:PC71BM/MoO3/Ag were also fabricated as described in our previous report.


The authors declare no competing financial interest.


The authors are grateful to National Natural Science Foundation of China (61370046, 11574110), the Science and Technology Innovation Leading Talent and Team Project of Jilin Province (20170519010JH), Key Project of Shanghai Science and Technology Committee (No. 16DZ1120400), and The National Key Research and Development Program of China (No. 2016YFB0501003) for the support for the work.


This journal is © the Owner Societies 2017