 DOI: 10.1039/C7NJ00204A
(Paper)
New J. Chem., 2017, 41, 3473-3486


K.
Karthick
,

Sivasankara Rao
Ede
,

U.
Nithiyanantham
 and 

Subrata
Kundu
*

Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research, CSIR-Central Electrochemical Research Institute- Campus, New Delhi, India. E-mail: subrata_kundu2004@yahoo.co.in; Fax: +91 4565-227651; Tel: +91 4565-241487

Electrochemical Materials Science (ECMS) Division, CSIR-Central Electrochemical Research Institute (CECRI), Karaikudi-630006, Tamil Nadu, India. E-mail: skundu@cecri.res.in

CIC Energigune, Albert Einstein 48, Miñano, Alava 01510, Spain

Department of Materials Science and Mechanical Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas, TX-77843, USA

Received
17th January 2017
, Accepted 22nd March 2017
First published on 24th March 2017
A new route toward the fast synthesis of aggregated, chain-like, one-dimensional SrTiO3 nanoassemblies on DNA scaffolds utilizing a simple room-temperature wet-chemical route is reported. SrTiO3 nanoassemblies were synthesized from titanium isopropoxide and strontium oxide in presence of aqueous DNA solution. The individual SrTiO3 NPs with diameters ∼25 ± 10 nm aggregated and self-condensed to generate a chain-like morphology. The specific sizes of the individual NPs and diameters of the assemblies could be tuned by controlling the starting reagent concentrations and other reaction parameters. The mechanism of formation and growth is discussed in detail. The synthesized SrTiO3 nanoassemblies on DNA scaffolds have been utilized as excellent anode materials in two energy-related applications: dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) and electrochemical supercapacitors. DSSC studies showed that both morphologies could be used as potential anode materials in photovoltaic applications, while the supercapacitor studies showed that small-sized SrTiO3 nanoassemblies gave a higher specific capacitance than the large-sized morphology. The present synthetic method is simple, cost-effective, robust, and less time-consuming, takes place at room temperature, and could be extended to other energy-related applications, such as lithium-ion batteries or thermoelectrics in future.

Nanostructured materials have generated tremendous interest in the last few years due to their significance in addressing some basic issues in fundamental physics, and their potential applications in the field of nanotechnology. The preparation of zero and one-dimensional (1-D) nanomaterials now receives tremendous interest due to their special electronic, magnetic, and catalytic properties, which depend on their size and shape. Although colloidal chemistry approaches to the synthesis of 1-D nanomaterials take place via a ‘bottom-up’ approach, only a few limited techniques are available for the precise organization of materials. Therefore, it is important to develop a facile route for the formation of self-assembled aggregated nanostructures within a short timescale. Among various oxide-based materials, perovskite-type mixed metal oxides are the most fascinating materials in condensed-matter research because of their outstanding piezoelectric, ferroelectric, and photocatalytic properties. Strontium titanate (SrTiO3) is an important n-type semiconductor with a cubic perovskite structure and a low-temperature Curie point (−55 °C). SrTiO3 has semiconductor characteristics, with an indirect band gap varying from 3.2 to 3.4 eV. However, recent work has shown that the band gap can be extended to 3.77 eV, causing an photon emission in the blue-green spectral region. Apart from its outstanding physical properties, SrTiO3 has promising practical applications, such as in tunable microwave devices, capacitors, photocatalysis, light emitters, gas sensors, and solar cells. The properties of nanomaterials depend not only on the synthetic method and chemical composition, but also on their structure. Therefore, the ability to tune the size and morphology of SrTiO3 particles is significant for fundamental studies and the preparation of composite materials with tailored properties. Moreover, it has been reported that variations in the SrTiO3 structure can modify its properties, turning it into a metallic conductor or even a supercapacitor at low temperatures (<90 K).

These titanates have been prepared by different procedures, including solid-state reaction, sol–gel method, solution-precipitation method, hydrothermal synthesis, polymeric precursor method, and microwave-heating method. Different types of biomolecules have been utilized as templates for the preparation of various nanoscale materials. Among them proteins, peptides, and amino acids, deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) have been widely investigated as a template for building inorganic nanostructures because it is an inexpensive, well-characterized, controllable, and easily adaptable material. The versatile chemical nature of DNA makes it an effective material for molecular self-assembly, and its specific properties have been reported elsewhere. In the literature, all DNA-based syntheses require only a few steps. Several research groups have reported the synthesis and formation of different metal, metal oxide, and mixed metal oxide nanomaterials, such as Au, Ag, Pd, Pt, Os, TiO2, MnO2, ZnO, NiWO4, and ZnWO4, on DNA scaffolds, mostly via electrostatic attraction. More recently, researchers used DNA as a template for the assembly of 1-D nanostructures. Furthermore, semiconductor CdS nanomaterials have been assembled on DNA using a UV photoactivation and microwave-heating route.
Many researchers have attempted to synthesize SrTiO3 nanomaterials utilizing various chemical and physical routes. Xie et al. prepared SrTiO3 NPs/nanowires by reacting layered titanate nanotubes with Sr(OH)2 in an autoclave. Souza et al. prepared SrTiO3 NPs using a microwave-assisted hydrothermal method at 140 °C. Silva et al. prepared SrTiO3 NPs using a modified polymeric precursor method. Rabuffetti et al. studied the synthesis-dependent surface acidity and structure of SrTiO3 NPs, which were prepared using three different reactions, namely solid-state reaction, molten salt, and sol-precipitation-hydrothermal methods. Klaytae et al. prepared nanocrystalline SrTiO3 powder using a sol–gel combustion method. Bui et al. prepared Cu-loaded SrTiO3 NPs and studied their photocatalytic activity for hydrogen evolution in aqueous methanol solution. Recently, Bera et al. used SrTiO3 nanomaterials to prepare an efficient electron transporter for hybrid perovskite solar cells. Park et al. prepared La-doped SrTiO3 NPs and studied their thermoelectric properties. More recently, graphene-doped SrTiO3 and Rh-doped SrTiO3 were prepared by Wang et al. for applications in solar cell and photocatalytic hydrogen evolution studies. Chen et al. reported SrTiO3 NPs as the photoanode in CdS quantum-dot-sensitized solar cells. Zhang et al. recently reported the single-step direct hydrothermal synthesis of SrTiO3 NPs from crystalline P25 TiO2 powder. Beyond these studies, there are few other reports on the synthesis of SrTiO3 nanomaterials via physical routes. Notably, most of these reported syntheses required high temperatures, long processing times, expensive precursors, and sophisticated equipment, with the final products comprising nonuniform particles of different shapes. Therefore, the controlled synthesis of SrTiO3 1-D nanoassemblies on a biomolecular scaffold remains a significant challenge and is of great interest to researchers.
In the present study, we present the first rapid synthesis of 1-D SrTiO3 nanoassemblies on DNA scaffolds using a simple wet-chemical route at room temperature for 40 min. SrTiO3 nanoassemblies are prepared by reacting titanium isopropoxide with strontium oxide in the presence of aqueous DNA solution with continuous stirring. The individual SrTiO3 NPs have final diameters of ∼25 ± 10 nm and aggregate to generate a chain-like morphology. The specific size of the individual NPs and diameters of the assemblies can be tuned by varying the concentrations of starting reagents and controlling other reaction parameters. The SrTiO3 nanoassemblies synthesized on DNA scaffolds have been used as excellent anode materials in two energy-related applications, namely dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) and electrochemical supercapacitors. In the DSSC studies, the efficiency was observed to be higher in SrTiO3 nanoassemblies containing smaller individual particles. The supercapacitor studies showed that SrTiO3 nanoassemblies had different specific capacitance (Cs) values with smaller-sized nanoassemblies producing the highest Cs values. The present synthetic method is simple, cost-effective, robust, quick, and took place at room temperature.

Double-stranded DNA from Herring testes with an average molecular weight ∼50 K bp (base pair) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Ti(IV) isopropoxide ethanol solution and strontium oxide (SrO) were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich and used as received. Acetonitrile was obtained from Fisher Scientific and used as solvent in the electrolyte. 3-Methyl-n-propyl-imidazolium iodide, tert-butylpyridine, lithium iodide (LiI), iodine (I2), hexachloroplatinic acid (H2PtCl6), di-tetrabutylammonium cis-bis(isothiocyanato)bis(2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylato)ruthenium(II) (N719 dye), and acetylacetone were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Polyethylene glycol (PEG 400) was obtained from SD Fine Chemicals, Ltd, Triton X-100 from HiMedia, and ethanol from Changshu Yangyuan Chemical Co., Ltd (China). Optically transparent and electrically conducting fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO, resistivity 7 Ω per square) substrate was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. N-Methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) and acetylene black were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and used as received. Nickel foam and polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) were obtained from Alfa Aesar. Deionized (DI) water was used for all syntheses and application purposes. SrTiO3 nanoassemblies on DNA scaffolds were characterized using several spectroscopic techniques, with details of various instrument specifications are provided in the ESI.


SrTiO3 nanoassemblies were prepared by the reaction of Ti isopropoxide (ethanolic solution) with SrO in the presence of DNA with continuous stirring at room temperature. In a typical synthesis, DNA stock solution (10 mL) was mixed with ethanol (40 mL) and stirred for 10 min. Ti isopropoxide solution (4 mL, 0.4 M) was then added dropwise over 20 minutes with continuous stirring, after which the colorless solution had become a yellowish milky white. Next, SrO (2 g) was added with continuous stirring for another 20 min. Stirring was then stopped and the white precipitate was allowed to settle, before being collected and centrifugated with DI water and ethanol four times consecutively. After centrifugation, the product was collected and heated at 80 °C for 1 h to afford a dried white mass that was used for further characterization and applications. Other sets were prepared by changing the Ti isopropoxide/DNA molar ratio while keeping other reagents and the total volume of the mixed solution the same. The stepwise formation of SrTiO3 nanomaterials on DNA scaffolds was achieved using this route. The final concentrations of all reagents used, total reaction times, and sizes and shapes of the synthesized SrTiO3 particles are tabulated in Table S1 (ESI). The SrTiO3 nanoassemblies on DNA scaffolds were characterized using UV-Vis, TEM, EDS, XRD, XPS, photoluminescence (PL), FT-IR, and thermal analyses. Their detailed fabrication and sample preparation techniques are given in the ESI.


Electrochemical studies, including galvanostatic charge–discharge (GCD), electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), and cyclic voltammetry (CV), were performed at room temperature in 1 M Na2SO4 solution using an electrochemical work station (CHI 6034C). EIS spectra were measured at an AC voltage of 5 mV amplitude, in the frequency range 0.1 Hz to 100 KHz, at an open circuit potential. The electrochemical cell had a three-electrode configuration, consisting of Ag/AgCl as the reference electrode, platinum foil as the counter electrode, and a working electrode. The working electrode was prepared by mixing carbon black, polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF), and an electroactive material in the ratio 10:10:80. A small amount of NMP was added to prepare a slurry, which was pressed on nickel foam and dried under vacuum for 12 h at 100 °C. The loading of mass of the electroactive material was 2–3 mg. CV tests were performed at different scan rates, from 5–125 mV s−1, in the potential window −0.15–0.6 V. GCD measurements were performed at current densities of 0.2–2 mA cm−2. Specific capacitances were calculated from CV and GCD curves using the following equations, respectively.

(1)
(2)
where Δ
V is the potential window, I(A) is the current density for charge–discharge, Δt is the time elapsed in the discharge cycle, m (g) is the weight of the active electrode material, and V is the scan rate (V s−1).


The DSSC assembly comprised a sandwich of the working electrode and counter electrode. The working electrode was prepared over the conducting side of FTO using SrTiO3 nanoassemblies and Ru complex dye. Transparent conducting substrates were precleaned by sonication in ethanol for around 40 min. The characterized SrTiO3 nanopowder was prepared as a paste using the binder and then coated over the FTO plate using a doctor blade method. The active area of 1 cm2 (1 × 1 cm2) on the coated photoanode was sintered at 400 °C for 2 h in a high-temperature furnace. After the SrTiO3-coated FTO plate had cooled to room temperature, it was immersed in 0.5 mm of ethanolic dye solution for around 6 h to allow uniform dye absorption. The counter electrode was depositing a solution of hexachloroplatinic acid (5 mg) in ethanol (1 mL) over the cleaned FTO plate via spin coating at 1000 rpm for around 1 min, followed by sintering at 400 °C for 60 min. The liquid electrolyte was prepared using 0.1 M LiI, 0.05 M I2, 0.5 M tert-butylpyridine and 0.6 M 3-methyl n-propyl-imidazolium iodide in acetonitrile. Finally, the working electrode and counter electrode were clipped together with a small space between them. One drop of electrolyte solution was placed between the electrodes. Photovoltaic analysis was carried out by assessing the I–V curves under ambient conditions with solar illumination of 1000 W m−2 from an Xe lamp.



Fig. 1A shows the room temperature UV-Vis spectra of different solution mixtures for the synthesis of SrTiO3 nanoassemblies on the DNA scaffold. Spectrum a in Fig. 1A shows the absorption spectrum of aqueous DNA solution, which has an intense peak at a typical absorption maximum of 261 nm due to the absorption of aromatic base molecules in its structure. Spectrum b shows the absorption spectrum of Ti isopropoxide salt solution, which has a broad absorption in the range 250–290 nm with a peak maximum at 266 nm. This peak appeared to be due to ligand-to-metal charge transfer (LMCT). SrO aqueous solution showed no specific peak, as seen in spectrum c. A mixture of DNA and Ti isopropoxide salt solution gave an absorption peak at 260 nm, as seen in spectrum d. A mixture of DNA, Ti isopropoxide, and SrO showed an absorption band at 265 nm (spectrum e) that was shifted by 3 nm compared with pure DNA (spectrum a) owing to interactions between the constituents. Spectra f and g showed an exciton absorption band of SrTiO3 for two different morphologies after dispersion in the aqueous solution. Spectrum f represents the SrTiO3 nanoassemblies with small particles, while spectrum g represent SrTiO3 nanoassemblies with large particles. Spectra f and g show broad absorption maxima at 280 nm and 307 nm, respectively. The shift to higher wavelengths and broadening of absorption maxima were due to aggregation and changes in particle size. A similar type of excitonic absorption band was previously reported by Bui et al. The band gap energies of both the synthesized SrTiO3 samples were calculated using a Tauc plot:
(hνα) ∝ (hν − Eg)n
where
α is the absorption coefficient, γ is the photon frequency, and h is Planck's constant. (αhν)2 was plotted against Eg (eV) and the extrapolated curve was used to calculate the band gap energy, as shown in Fig. 1B. The band gaps calculated for two different samples were 3.29 eV (large particles) and 3.33 eV (small particles), respectively. A similar band gap energy (3.22 eV) was reported by Bui et al. in their synthesis of Cu-loaded SrTiO3 NPs for the hydrogen evolution reaction. Sulaeman et al. also witnessed a similar band gap energy of 3.21 eV resulting from their solvothermal synthesis of nitrogen-doped SrTiO3 NPs. Gholamrezaei et al. observed a higher band gap energy of 4.15 eV in the synthesis of SrTiO3 NPs using an organic capping agent. SrTiO3 has been reported to have an indirect band gap of around 3.7 eV. In general, the small variation in the optical gap and disordered samples can be analyzed from the presence of an exponential optical absorption edge in the low energy region of the UV-Vis spectrum. The appearance of the absorption edge is controlled by the degree of structural order/disorder and causes variation in the optical band gap energies of titanates. Recent results from theoretical studies of titanates showed that the valence band (VB) was derived from oxygen atomic orbitals (2p) and was separated by the band gap of a conduction band (CB), which was derived from the atomic orbital (3d) of Ti. The top of the oxygen VB was destabilized by Ti displacement due to stretching without breaking the Ti–O bond. Therefore, new states are generated, which are located within the band gap. The authors also concluded that UV-Vis absorption is a useful tool for investigating the local degree of order/disorder in these materials, but did not indicate the structural disorder with which the localized states were associated.


Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) images of SrTiO3 nanoassemblies are shown in Fig. 2 and Fig. S1 (ESI), respectively. Fig. 2A–C show low and high magnification TEM images of SrTiO3 NPs with small individual particle sizes. Fig. 2A shows a low magnification image, in which SrTiO3 particles are aggregated over the DNA chain, generating a chain-like network structure. Fig. 2B shows the same image at higher magnification. The average size of the SrTiO3 particles was ∼25 ± 5 nm, and the length of the assemblies was extended to ∼3 ± 0.5 μm. From these images, it was clear that the SrTiO3 particles had grown over the DNA and that the DNA chains had crosslinked to form the chain-like network structure. Fig. 2C shows the high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HR-TEM) image of the same SrTiO3 particles, in which the lattice fringes are clearly visible and the average spacing between two lattice planes was ∼0.195 nm, which matched previous reports on SrTiO3.Fig. 2D shows the corresponding selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern, in which bright spots are visible, indicating that the particles are polycrystalline in nature. More bright spots appeared due to the presence of fewer particles within the electron beam area during SAED pattern measurement.


Fig. 2E–H show low and high magnification TEM images of large SrTiO3 nanomaterials. The low magnification images (Fig. 2E and F) show that the SrTiO3 particles were aggregated, self-assembled, and grown over the DNA chain, to generate nanoassemblies comprising larger individual particles. The average particles size was ∼30 ± 5 nm and the nominal length of the assemblies in which the SrTiO3 particles were aggregated was ∼4 ± 0.5 μm. Fig. 2G shows an HR-TEM image of the same particles, in which the lattice fringes are clearly visible and the average spacing between the two individual planes was ∼0.22 nm.
Little difference between the lattice spacings of the two different morphologies was observed as they were prepared using the same method and had similar shapes. The only difference was in the particle size. Fig. 2H shows the corresponding SAED pattern, which shows that the particles were polycrystalline in nature, similar to the small particles shown in Fig. 2D. Fig. S1A and B (ESI) shows low and high magnification FE-SEM images of SrTiO3 nanoassemblies on the DNA scaffold, which have an aggregated, self-assembled structure containing small individual particles. From the high magnification image (Fig. S1C, ESI), it was clear that the small SrTiO3 particles had assembled and aggregated to generate a chain-like structure. Similarly, Fig. S1C and D (ESI) shows FE-SEM images of the same SrTiO3 particles, in which the individual particles were large. The average diameter of the individual particles matched the TEM results well, but the average assembly diameter was higher because the sample preparation technique for FE-SEM analysis varied from that of TEM. Therefore, by analyzing TEM and FE-SEM, it was clear that individual small SrTiO3 particles had self-assembled, aggregated, and generated a chain-like morphology.


Fig. 3A shows the energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopic (EDS) analysis of aggregated SrTiO3 nanoassemblies on the DNA scaffold. EDS analysis was used to identify the elements probably present in our synthesized product. The EDS spectrum consisted of various elements, with different peaks for Sr, Ti, O, and C. The high intensity Sr, Ti, and O peaks came from SrTiO3 nanomaterials, and the low intensity C peak came from either the carbon film attached to the glass slide to make it conductive, or from DNA used as the scaffold for SrTiO3 nanomaterial synthesis. We did not observe any peaks for N or P, either due to their low concentration during synthesis or their low intensity compared with the highly intense Sr and Ti peaks.

X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the synthesized SrTiO3 nanoassemblies are shown in Fig. 3B. It should be noted that we dried the as-synthesized samples at 80 °C to obtain the white mass that was submitted directly to XRD analysis. Unlike TiO2 and NiWO4, annealing the samples was not necessary to obtain a crystalline phase. XRD patterns a and b were assigned to small and large SrTiO3 nanoassemblies, respectively.
Both spectra gave similar types of XRD pattern, which was expected as the only difference between the materials was the particle size. The XRD patterns of both samples were fitted with the original joint committee for powder diffraction standard (JCPDS) file number #35-0734 for assessment. In both cases, the diffraction peaks were originated from (100), (110), (111), (200), (210), (211), (220), (221), and (310) crystal planes. The XRD patterns were plotted in the 2θ range of 15–80°. All the above diffraction peaks were matched well with the cubic phase of SrTiO3 (JCPDS file number 35-0734) having space group Pmm with number (221). The highest intensity peak was observed at 2θ = 32.34°, corresponding to the (110) crystal plane. Similar XRD patterns were observed by Zhang et al., Chen et al., Park et al., Klaytae et al., and Silva et al. In addition to the SrTiO3 peaks, we observed low intensity peaks of TiO2 at 2θ values 25.66°, 36.74°, and 50.11°, which inferred the presence of a small quantity of TiO2 as an impurity in our synthesized samples.


Fig. 4 shows the results of X-ray photoelectron spectroscopic (XPS) analysis. Fig. 4A–D show the survey spectrum, Sr (3d) spectrum, Ti (2p) spectrum, and O (1s) XPS scan, respectively. The survey spectrum in Fig. 4A consists of characteristic peaks for O (1s) at 534 eV, Ti (2p) at 464 eV, Sr (3s) at 363.1 eV, C (1s) at 282.3 eV, and Sr (3d) at 134.1 eV. Fig. 4B shows the high resolution XPS scan for Sr (3d), in which the Sr (3d)5/2 and Sr (3d)3/2 peaks appear at binding energies of 133.1 eV and 135.20 eV, respectively. The P (2p) peak was also deconvoluted, appearing at a binding energy of 139.42 eV, which might come from the DNA. All peaks were fitted with a background spectrum. Fig. 4C shows the high resolution XPS spectrum for Ti (2p) scan, in which Ti 2p3/2 and Ti 2p1/2 peaks appeared at binding energies of 463.3 eV and 468.9 eV, respectively. The peak position of Ti 2p3/2 corresponded with that of the Ti4+ oxidation state. Fig. 4D shows the high-resonance XPS spectrum for O (1s) at a binding energy of 534.8 eV, which was characteristic of metallic oxides. The C (1s) peak was also deconvoluted (not shown). The chemical states of C were observed as C–C and CO at binding energies of 284.8 eV and 290.5 eV, respectively. All XPS peaks observed in our study were well matched with those obtained by Sulaeman et al., Voigts et al., and Bui et al. in their syntheses of SrTiO3 nanomaterials using different methodologies.


The PL phenomenon is considered a powerful tool for determining the electronic structure, medium-range structural organization, and light adsorption characteristics of a material, and has been used to study the relationship between the electronic structure and optical properties of SrTiO3 nanomaterials. After photon excitation, the electron–hole pair might recombine during migration from the interior to the surface of the crystal. The recombination rate is closely related to the electronic and crystal structures. Based on the XRD results (Fig. 3B), SrTiO3 was found to have a cubic structure with high symmetry. In general, PL properties are believed to be attributed to the degree of order/disorder, such as distortions in the crystal system, and can be explained by the electronic state within the band gap due to atomic vacancies, surface defects, or impurities. Therefore, the PL emission band is considered as a typical multiphenomenon process, in which relaxation occurs by several pathways involving the participation of numerous states within the band gap of the material originating from intrinsic defects in the material. The broadband absorption nature of SrTiO3 nanomaterials means that the excitation spectrum is very important for determining the maximum emission excitation wavelength.

The excitation spectra (not shown here) showed that the maximum emission occurred at an excitation wavelength of 310 nm. Fig. S2 (ESI) shows the PL emission spectra of SrTiO3 nanoassemblies, where spectrum a denotes the PL emission spectra for SrTiO3 nanoassemblies with large individual particles and spectrum b shows that of smaller individual particles. In both spectra, three different distinct emission bands were located at wavelengths of 379 nm, 420 nm, and 623 nm, respectively. Two other low intensity bands were also identified at 449 and 482 nm. The emission band at 379 nm was due to excitonic emission, whereas bands at 420 nm, 449 nm, 482 nm, and 623 nm were due to surface state emission and the recombination of trapped electron holes arising from dangling bands of the SrTiO3 nanomaterials. As the surface state is generally localized within the band gap of the semiconductor, they can trap the excited state electron, leading to a higher wavelength emission. As PL is mainly considered as a surface phenomenon, changes in the surface environment would have a significant effect on the PL process. According to the literature, violet and blue emissions in PL spectra can be attributed to shallow or surface defects, while green and yellow emissions are associated with deeper defects. Therefore, each color signifies a different type of electronic transition, which in turn depends on the specific structural organization and how clusters are inserted into this arrangement. An in-depth discussion of PL and its mechanism were reported by Souza et al. for their study on SrTiO3 nanomaterials. They highlighted the influence of particle size and morphology on the PL behavior of SrTiO3 nanomaterials. Silva et al. also discussed the PL bands of SrTiO3 in their study on SrTiO3 NPs, while Yamada et al. have emphasized the blue PL and Auger recombination of carriers in SrTiO3 NPs.
Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) and differential thermal analysis (DTA) were carried out to examine the thermal stability and crystalline conditions of SrTiO3 nanomaterials on the DNA scaffold. The as-synthesized SrTiO3 nanomaterials were heated from RT to 1000 °C at a rate of 10 °C min−1 in air. Curves A and B in Fig. S3 (ESI) are the TGA and DTA curves of the SrTiO3 nanoassemblies, respectively. The TGA curve showed a continuous weight loss from 100 °C to 400 °C. The initial weight loss at just above 100 °C was due to the loss of water molecules, moisture, or maybe ethanol from the sample. The weight loss from 200 °C to 400 °C was due to the loss of excess DNA molecules or unhydrolyzed isopropoxide present in only the as-synthesized SrTiO3 nanomaterials. The next weight loss of the SrTiO3 nanomaterials was in the range 500–780 °C, which might be due to the disintegration of bulk SrO species or incorporation of hydroxyl ions in the SrTiO3 crystal. Beyond 780 °C, the TGA curve was flat, with no further weight loss observed. The TGA experiment started with 2.63 mg of sample and, after heating the sample in air to 1000 °C, 2.16 mg of sample remained. Therefore, the percentage weight loss was 17.87%. The DTA curve (curve B) showed no endothermic peak, but rather a broad exothermic peak in the range 100–500 °C with a maximum at 245 °C. This maximum was due to the phase of the synthesized SrTiO3 nanomaterial changing from amorphous to crystalline following the removal of excess isopropoxide or DNA from the as-synthesized materials. Visuttipitukul et al. studied similar types of TGA curve and weight loss in the range 200–650 °C in their synthesis of SrTiO3 nanomaterials using sol–gel techniques. A similar type of thermal analysis curve was previously reported by Ueno et al. and Rabuffetti et al. in their studies on Ag–SrTiO3 and SrTiO3 nanomaterials, respectively.

The Fourier transform-infrared spectra of DNA only (from herring testes) and DNA-bound SrTiO3 nanomaterials are shown in Fig. 5. The FT-IR spectra were plotted in the range 4000–400 cm−1. In Fig. 5, FT-IR spectrum a represents DNA only, and spectrum b denotes SrTiO3 nanoassemblies on the DNA scaffold. We then checked that the morphologies of both SrTiO3 nanoassemblies (small and large-sized) gave similar FT-IR spectra. For example, we plotted the FT-IR spectra of large-sized SrTiO3 nanomaterials and DNA only for comparison of the FT-IR data and to examine the probable interactions occurring between SrTiO3 and DNA. As the DNA molecule contained negatively charged phosphate groups, aromatic base molecules, and deoxyribose sugar units, their probable interactions of SrTiO3 nanomaterials could be easily determined. For DNA only, (spectrum a), at lower wavenumber region with few small intense bands, such as 500–550 cm−1, 815 cm−1, 1052 cm−1, and 1219 cm−1, was observed. These bands were mostly attributed to the deoxyribose region and appeared due to the stretching vibrations of phosphate groups or stretching vibrations of C–O–C and C–C bonds. These specific peaks were not visible in the DNA-bound SrTiO3 sample (spectrum b). Peaks in the region 1350–1760 cm−1 were mainly attributed to the stretching vibration mode of C–O–X. In this region, three peaks at 1481 cm−1, 1639 cm−1, and 1742 cm−1 were observed for the DNA only sample, which were due to carbonyl stretching vibrations. The same peaks were shifted in the case of DNA-bound SrTiO3 nanomaterials, with the peak at 1481 cm−1 shifted to 1465 cm−1, and that at 1742 cm−1 shifted to 1734 cm−1, which indicated a plausible interaction between them. The peak at 1639 cm−1 appeared for both samples. The shifting of peaks again indicated probable interaction among them. A low intensity but prominent peak appeared at 2376 cm−1 for the samples, which might be due to CO2 adsorption from air. The symmetric stretching vibration that appeared at 2884 cm−1 in both samples was due to C–H bonds of the CH2 group, which clearly indicated the presence of DNA in the SrTiO3 samples. In the DNA only sample, two other peaks appeared at 3438 cm−1 and 3733 cm−1 due to hydroxyl group stretching vibrations. For the DNA-bound SrTiO3 sample, the same peak appeared with only a small change in wavenumber, as shown in Fig. 5, spectrum b. This indicated that the hydroxyl groups present in DNA interacted with SrTiO3. A high intensity peak at 575 cm−1 and another low intensity peak at 450 cm−1 were observed in the SrTiO3 sample, but were absent from DNA only. The peak at 450 cm−1 was due to the vibrational mode of the Ti–O bands and the peak at 575 cm−1 was due to vibrational mode of Sr–O bands, as previously reported. Gholamrezaei et al. also observed similar FT-IR bands in their study on SrTiO3 nanomaterials. They identified that peaks at 610 and 414 cm−1 peaks were due to Ti–O stretching vibrations, while peaks at 643 and 448 cm−1 were due to Sr–O stretching vibrations.

Visuttipitukul et al. also described a peak at 591 cm−1 corresponding to a Sr–O stretching vibration and a peak at 452 cm−1 corresponding to a Ti–O stretching vibration. In our experiment, plausible FT-IR bands appeared experimentally for the DNA used and bands reported with corresponding band assignments are shown in Table S2 (ESI). Therefore, by examining the details using an FT-IR study, we were able to ascertain that SrTiO3 was bound to the DNA molecules mainly via the DNA phosphate groups or sugar molecules.

SrTiO3 nanoassemblies with two different particle sizes (small or large individual particles) were synthesized by the reaction of Ti isopropoxide with SrO in the presence of DNA under continuous stirring at room temperature. SrTiO3 nanoassemblies of two different sizes were formed by tuning the reaction parameters, as shown in Table S1 (ESI). The specific role of DNA in this synthesis should be noted; using the same reaction conditions without DNA, SrTiO3 particles were formed, but in a highly aggregated lump-like structure of micron-sized particles without a specific morphology. Therefore, we believe that DNA played a crucial role in the growth and stabilization of the synthesized particles and directed their growth in specific directions to generate the chain-like morphology. In our synthesis of SrTiO3, we used titanium isopropoxide as the titanium precursor, which has a light yellowish color liquid, is readily soluble in ethanol, benzene, and chloroform, and has a high boiling point of 232 °C and low melting point of ∼17 °C. In the reaction, Ti isopropoxide initially reacted with C2H5OH to generate Ti(C2H5O)4, which formed a complex with DNA. The complex reacted with SrO to generate SrTiO3. The estimated overall chemical reaction for the formation of SrTiO3 was as follows:
In our reaction, as soon as the SrTiO
3 nuclei were formed, they grew over the DNA already present in the solution and generated the chain-like morphology, as confirmed by TEM and FE-SEM analysis in Fig. 2 and Fig. S1 (ESI), respectively. Moreover, after formation, they attached to the DNA mainly via phosphate groups, aromatic base molecules, and sugar moieties, as confirmed by the FT-IR analysis in Fig. 5. As DNA contains negatively charged phosphate groups, once Ti isopropoxide was added, the Ti4+ ions became attached to the DNA, generated a complex. Scheme 1 shows the schematic formation of SrTiO3 nanomaterials on DNA.

Under continuous stirring, the DNA–Ti(isopropoxide) complex reacted with ethanol to initially generate a DNA–Ti(OC2H5)4 complex. SrO was then added to the reaction medium, reacting with the DNA–Ti(OC2H5)4 complex to generate SrTiO3 nuclei, which formed as a milky white precipitate in the solution. These as-synthesized SrTiO3 nuclei grew in the solution to generate SrTiO3 crystalline particles, which agglomerated to generate SrTiO3 NPs. From Scheme 1, we deduced that all SrTiO3 NPs grew over the DNA to harvest the aggregated chain-like morphology. From Scheme 1, it was also observed that at higher DNA concentrations, the spherical SrTiO3 particles formed with smaller sizes, while at low DNA concentrations, the individual SrTiO3 particles formed with larger sizes. In both cases, the SrTiO3 particles formed were spherical, although the particle sizes varied depending upon DNA and Ti isopropoxide molar ratios. At high DNA concentrations, the nucleation and growth of particles were constrained due to the restricted environment, resulting in small individual particles. At low DNA concentrations, particle growth was comparatively unconstrained, resulting in larger individual particles. TEM and FE-SEM analysis showed that the number of assemblies and the ease of aggregation were greater at higher DNA concentrations, which was expected. Zhang et al. suggested a dissolution-precipitation mechanism for their synthesis of SrTiO3 NPs via a hydrothermal route. They used P25 TiO2 powder and Sr(OH)2·8H2O as Ti and Sr precursors, respectively. They claimed that [Ti(OH)6]2− was formed initially, which then reacted with Sr2+ ions to generate SrTiO3 crystal nuclei. After gradual dissolution of the TiO2 powder to soluble [Ti(OH)6]2−, new SrTiO3 phases were formed via the precipitation reaction of Sr2+ and [Ti(OH)6]2−. TiO2 dissolution and SrTiO3 nucleation, formation, and growth took place concurrently, to finally form SrTiO3 nuclei grown as longer grains and NPs with uniform sizes. We previously proposed a similar type of reaction mechanism for the construction of NiWO4 mixed oxide nanomaterials on a DNA scaffold. As the formation and growth mechanism of perovskite materials follow complex pathways, the exact binding nature of SrTiO3 with the specific groups and functionalities of DNA was not confirmed, and further study varying the DNA base sequences and functionalities is required and should be emphasized in future. The two different-sized SrTiO3 nanoassemblies were then tested in two potential energy related applications, namely as an anode material in DSSCs and electrochemical supercapacitor studies.


Fig. 6a shows the CV curves of SrTiO3 nanoassemblies electrodes with small and large-sized particles measured at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1 in 1 M Na2SO4 solution.

The CV curve profiles slightly deviated from ideal rectangular behavior, indicating the pseudo-capacitance behavior of the SrTiO3 electrodes. As shown by the CV curves, the small-sized SrTiO3 electrode exhibited a slightly larger area of applied voltage and output current, indicating higher charge storage compared with the large-sized SrTiO3 electrode. Small-sized SrTiO3 nanoassemblies showed an increased current intensity than their large-sized variant, which indicated that smaller-sized electrodes had higher specific capacitance. From eqn (1), we calculated the specific capacitance values of both small and large-sized SrTiO3 nanoassemblies as 3.3 F g−1 and 1.56 F g−1 at 5 mV s−1 respectively. The small-sized SrTiO3 nano-assemblies demonstrated had a higher capacitance than large-sized SrTiO3, predominantly due to their higher surface area resulting from the presence of smaller particles and a shorter diffusion path length, which allowed easy ion/electron transport with the active materials to achieve a higher specific capacitance. To evaluate the relationship between the scan rate and specific capacitance performance of small and large-sized SrTiO3 nanoassemblies, CV studies were performed at different scan rates (5–125 mV s−1). We observed an obvious increase in peak current with increasing scan rate, which indicated the SrTiO3 nanoassemblies had a good rate capability.Fig. 6b and c show the CV curves of both small and large-sized SrTiO3 nanoassemblies at various scan rates. All CV curves were nearly rectangular, even at very high scan rates, representing ideal capacitive properties and excellent working electrode reversibility. Furthermore, the specific capacitance value decreased with increasing scan rate (as shown in Fig. S4, ESI), which might be due to some electroactive surface areas becoming inaccessible (diffusion limited) and the lower availability of electrode surface area for ion diffusion and adsorption due to inadequate time.
The ideal capacitive behavior of the as-prepared electrodes was further confirmed using a galvanostatic charge–discharge technique. Fig. 6d shows the charge–discharge curves of large and small-sized wire-like SrTiO3 electrodes at a current density of 0.1 mA cm−2. Both the curves exhibited almost triangular shapes, indicating the good electrochemical behavior of the electrodes. The specific capacitance of the as-fabricated electrodes was calculated from charge–discharge data according to eqn (2). The small-sized SrTiO3 electrode showed a higher discharge rate than the large-sized electrode, demonstrating the higher specific capacitance of the small-sized electrode. The calculated specific capacitances of the small and large-sized SrTiO3 electrodes were 1 and 0.5 F g−1, respectively, at a current density of 1 mA cm−2. The charge/discharge curves were in good agreement with peaks observed in the CV curves (Fig. 6a).

Fig. 7a shows changes in the specific capacitance of small-sized SrTiO3 nanoassemblies at different current densities (0.1–0.8 mA cm−2). All GCD curves displayed near-triangular shape behavior with various current densities, further confirming the pseudo-capacitive behavior of the electrodes. To acquire more information regarding the conductive performance of the as-prepared electrodes, EIS measurements were conducted. As shown in Fig. 7b, Nyquist plots composed of semi-circles in the high-frequency region were followed by a straight line in the low-frequency region. The almost straight line indicated low diffusion resistance and demonstrated the good capacitor behavior of the electrodes. The semi-circle arc in the high-frequency region was due to charge transfer resistance (Rct). The Rct values of the as-prepared large and small-sized SrTiO3 electrodes were 157 and 273 Ω, respectively. Compared to the large-sized electrode, the small-sized electrode displayed a low Rct value, indicating its lower ion diffusion resistance and greater capacitance performance. The straight line in the low frequency region indicated Warburg resistance, which resulted from the frequency dependence of ion diffusion/transport in the electrolyte. The long-term cycling stability of the small-sized SrTiO3 electrode was further assessed by GCD at a current density of 0.3 mA cm−2 for 3000 cycles. From Fig. 7c, it was observed that the capacitance only decreased by about 28% of the initial capacitance, even after 3000 cycles, while there was only a small increase in Rct value (Fig. 7d; before cycling 157 Ω, after cycling 180 Ω). This could be due to leaching of electroactive material coated on the current collector.

Dye sensitized solar cells are among the best known renewable green energy technology and are used to convert photons into electricity. DSSCs are composed of a wide band gap semiconducting material, photosensitizer, and electrolyte solution. A schematic representation of DSSC is shown in Scheme 2. SrTiO3 is an excellent material for water splitting in hydrogen energy production, photocatalysis, and the degradation of organic contaminants under UV irradiation. In the present study, we also tested SrTiO3 nanomaterials as alternative electrode materials in photovoltaic solar cells. The efficiency of the nanomaterials was determined using the standard equation below:

(3)
(4)

Eqn (3) is used to calculate the overall efficiency value and eqn (4) is used to calculate the fill factor value. In eqn (4), Isc is the short-circuit current and Voc is the open-circuit voltage, which are reliant on entire solar cell assembly. Jsc is the short circuit current density (mA cm−2), FF is the fill factor, η is the power conversion efficiency, and Ps is the incident light intensity. Finally, Imax and Vmax denote the maximum photocurrent and photo voltage at maximum power output.
Using the one-dimensional (1-D) nanomaterials, the efficiency was increased due to the weaker defects in the materials, which provided improved direct electron transport pathways and resulted in a longer electron diffusion time. The increase in Jsc was predominantly related to the increase in injection current from excited dyes molecule to the conduction band of the semiconducting materials, which arose from the high surface area. The Voc decreased due to the augmentation of more back-transfer electrons. Two different types of SrTiO3 nanostructure were analyzed using I–V measurements, as shown in Fig. 8, and the results are compared with those of other reports in Table S3 (ESI). Smaller-sized SrTiO3 gave a Jsc value of 2.25 mA cm−2 and achieved a photon-to-current efficiency of around 0.0046%, which was higher than that of the larger-sized SrTiO3 nanomaterial. This might be due to the lower amount of dye adsorption and the high light scattering, which caused the observed low photocurrent and low efficiency. Both materials gave lower current densities because of the higher position of the flat band potential, which led to a higher interfacial resistance and lower current density. A previous report on a nanorod/NPs bilayer electrode exhibited higher conversion efficiency in the wavelength range 300–700 nm than pure nanorod or NP electrodes because the bilayer electrode had a higher incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) compared with the single layer electrodes. Therefore, we believe that doping of other semiconducting materials with SrTiO3 might afford higher current densities and increased IPCE value, which would pave the way toward a new type of highly efficient energy-driven solar cell.

SrTiO3 1-D nanoassemblies have been synthesized for the first time on a DNA scaffold using a simple wet-chemical route at room temperature. SrTiO3 nanoassemblies were formed by the reaction of Ti isopropoxide with SrO in the presence of DNA under continuous stirring in aqueous ethanolic solution. Two different sizes of SrTiO3 particles were grown over the DNA chain and generated a chain-like morphology. The individual particle sizes, extent of aggregation, and nanoassembly diameters were tuned by controlling the concentrations of the starting precursors and varying other reaction parameters. The individual particle sizes were found to be ∼25 ± 10 nm and the assembly lengths extended to ∼3 ± 0.5 μm ranges. The specific formation and growth mechanism of these particles on the DNA scaffold were elaborated in detail. The material was tested in two energy-related applications: DSSCs and electrochemical supercapacitors. The supercapacitor study showed that SrTiO3 nanoassemblies had different specific capacitance (Cs) values for the two different sizes, in the order of small-sized nanoassemblies > large-sized nanoassemblies. The fabricated electrodes exhibited an excellent cycle life, with capacitance retention of about 72% even after 3000 consecutive cycles. The DSSC study showed that both small and large-sized SrTiO3 materials could be used as positive anode materials, with the smaller-sized material affording the better DSSC. In future work, the described process could be extended to the synthesis of other perovskite-based materials for different catalytic and energy-related applications.


The authors wish to acknowledge Dr Vijayamohanan K. Pillai (Director) and Dr M. Jayachandran (HOD) of the ECMS Division, CSIR-CECRI for their continuous support and encouragement. U. Nithiyanantham wishes to thank CSIR-CECRI for the research internship fellowship. Mr K. Karthick and Mr S. R. Ede wish to thank UGC and CSIR for the JRF and SRF fellowships, respectively. The research funding from the Molecules to Materials to Devices (M2D) program, CSC0134, funded by the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR), New Delhi, and DST, SERB, New Delhi (DST Fast Track Project number # SR/FT/CS-98/2011, GAP 7/12), support from the Central Instrumental Facility (CIF), and the help of Mr A. Rathishkumar (TEM in-charge, CIF) and Mr R. Prabhu (SEM in-charge, CIF), CSIR-CECRI, Karaikudi, were greatly appreciated.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Details of the instruments and sample preparation methods used for various characterizations. Figures related to FE-SEM, PL, TGA-DTA, and supercapacitors. Tables related to synthesis parameters, FT-IR studies, and DSSC studies. See DOI: 10.1039/c7nj00204a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2017