 DOI: 10.1039/C3CE42589D
(Communication)
CrystEngComm, 2014, 16, 5227-5233


Qian
Li
,

Wuyou
Fu
,

Yannan
Mu
,

Wenjiao
Zhang
,

Pin
Lv
,

Liying
Zhou
,

Haibin
Yang
*,

Kailin
Chi
 and 

Lihua
Yang


State key Laboratory of Superhard Materials, Jilin University, Changchun, 130012, PR China. E-mail: yanghb@jlu.edu.cn; Fax: +86 431 85168763; Tel: +86 431 85168763

Department of Physics and Chemistry, Heihe University, Heihe 164300, PR China

Received
20th December 2013
, Accepted 19th March 2014
First published on 19th March 2014
The effects of cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) concentrations on the properties of electrochemically deposited cadmium telluride films have been investigated using scanning electron microscopy (SEM), energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX), X-ray diffraction (XRD), and photoelectrochemical measurements. The results show that CTAB concentration plays a very important role in directing the morphology evolution of thick films from cabbage-shaped CdTe arrays to high density nanoneedle structures. Various CdTe structures can be obtained by changing the CTAB concentration in the electrolyte. Meanwhile, it was observed that the Te/Cd ratio of the as-deposited thin film decreased with the increase of CTAB concentration. When CTAB concentrations are 0.02 M, the composition of CdTe film is near stoichiometric and Te is in excess. Growth mechanisms for shape-selective CdTe synthesis are proposed based on these results. In addition, we found that the device based on the aligned cabbage-shaped CdTe array-on-Ni configuration prepared at 0.02 M CTAB demonstrates excellent photoelectrical properties, which is ascribed to the large absorption coefficient of the material and also suggests a good electronic structure quality of the cabbage-shaped rods.

Solar power is a promising candidate as a sustainable energy supply. As a result, much effort has been put into developing inexpensive materials and architectures that reduce cost and/or increase efficiency. In the search for low-cost alternatives to monocrystalline silicon, thin film p-CdTe:n-CdS photovoltaic cells prepared by electrodeposition are reaching the point where commercial exploitation may be feasible. For optimal conversion efficiency, solar devices must absorb most of the incident light and the resulting charges must be utilized before they recombine. CdTe thin film has an optical band gap which is very suitable for its use as an absorption layer in solar cell structures, so the growth of high quality CdTe nanocrystalline thin films is important.

The best CdTe solar cells have the following layered structure: glass, transparent conducting oxide front contact (usually indium tin oxide), CdS window, CdTe absorber, and back contact. But these same cells have problems with glass breakage during manufacture since the cells must be heated to near the softening point of glass. Furthermore, the poor thermal conductivity of glass contributes to low panel yields because of temperature variations across a panel during annealing. Thin film solar cells on metal foils can solve most of these problems as well as reduce the weight for space applications, while holding promise for more efficient and less expensive panels. Therefore, an increasing number of researchers are concentrating on fabricating high-quality CdTe film on metal foils. To date, various CdTe nanostructures have been prepared by many methods including close space sublimation (CSS), thermal evaporation, hydrothermal, solution chemical, template-assisted approaches and electrochemical deposition. Among these methods, electrodeposition techniques have an advantage over other high temperature processes due to their simplicity, large scale, low cost and low temperature. In recent years, the controlled growth of CdTe nanostructures by low-temperature techniques has become the focus of world attention. Therefore, much effort has been made to provide an insight into the effects of process parameters on the growth behavior of CdTe semiconductor materials. At present, it has been proved that the growth of one-dimensional CdTe can be manipulated by adjusting the deposition voltage during electrodeposition. This is a fast, simple, and reproducible method which does not require any template, catalyst, or surfactant but can control the morphology of CdTe. In addition, it is widely accepted that one of the most promising and popular strategies of shape control is to select carefully an appropriate organic additive with functional groups that selectively adheres to the crystal facet, leading to morphological modification of the crystals. Among a variety of organic additives, cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) is one of the most common and important organic molecules that has been used extensively as the stabilizer and structure-directing agent to control nucleation, growth and alignment of crystals. For example, A. P. de Moura and coworkers reported that wire-like and flower-like ZnO nanostructures were easily prepared using a CTAB structure-directing approach.
Herein, we aim to explore the effects of surfactant CTAB concentration on the CdTe films deposited during electrochemical deposition and demonstrate the morphology evolution of films from cabbage-shaped rod arrays to nanoneedle-like structures. Our electrodeposition method works at room temperature and has a short reaction time (60 min). Also, it does not require any template or catalyst. Various CdTe crystal architectures which are simple or complex can be constructed using this facile and fast method. In addition, the Cd and Te contents and the photovoltaic performance of the as-deposited film influenced by the CTAB concentration are researched. The possible origins are discussed as well. The results of this research allow us to propose growth mechanisms for shape-selective CdTe synthesis.
In addition, we find that the CdTe cabbage-shaped rods array occurs clearly when the CTAB concentration approaches 0.02 M, this structure exhibited an improved open circuit voltage, short circuit current, fill factor, and consequently an overall enhancement of the power conversion efficiency compared with CdTe traditional nanorod arrays, so this structure may be beneficial for potential applications such as in solar cells.

The electrodeposition of CdTe was performed at room temperature in a three electrode electrochemical cell with the substrate (Ni) as the cathode, a graphite plate as the counter electrode and a saturated silver/silver chloride (Ag/AgCl) electrode as the reference electrode. Before performing the experiment, the Ni substrates had been pretreated with an ultrasonic cleaner for 20 min in isopropanol, acetone, anhydrous ethanol and doubly-distilled water, respectively. In this paper all the potentials are quoted versus Ag/AgCl. For all the experiments presented here the electrolytic solution was prepared by dissolving 0.05 M of Cd ions (the precursor salt is CdSO4·8/3H2O) in a saturated solution of Te ions (Na2TeO3, about 0.006 M). The deposition bath typically contained 0.03 M Na2SO4, which acts, amongst other roles as a supporting electrolyte. CTAB (0.02, 0.03, 0.04 or 0.05 M) was added to the electrolyte directly at room temperature. The pH of the electrolyte was adjusted by adding H2SO4. After deposition, samples were washed with distilled water to remove excess telluride from the surface.

The microstructure of the samples were examined using field-emission scanning electron microscopy JEOLJXA-8200 (SEM). The structural properties of the as-prepared product were analyzed using a Rigaku D/max-2500 X-ray diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.5418 Å). The optoelectronic properties were investigated using a conventional three-electrode system comprising a quartz cell linked with the electrochemical workstation (CH Instruments model CHI601C). The CHI electrochemical workstation was used to measure the illuminated current at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. The sunlight was calibrated by a 500 W xenon lamp (Spectra Physics) and the light intensity was simulated with a laser power meter (BG26M92C, Midwest Group), amount to light at 100 mW cm−2, AM 1.5 G.

The cathodic polarization behavior in the electroplating bath often yields useful information regarding the onset potential of the cathodic process, its rate and the existence of transport limitations. A typical voltammogram recorded in an aqueous bath of composition 0.05 M CdSO4, 0.006 M TeO32− and CTAB (0.02 M) is shown in Fig. 1.

The voltammograms were recorded at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1, on Ni substrate working electrode. In the cyclic voltammogram of Cd2+ and Te4+, as shown in Fig. 1, the first cathodic onset observed at −0.50 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) corresponds to the cathodic reduction of Te ions. With increasing cathodic scan; another sharp cathodic onset was recorded at −0.83 V, implying the initiation of a new cathodic process, two cathode current peaks appear at −0.50 and −0.70 V, which respectively correspond to the reductions of TeO32− to elemental Te and Te to Te2− according to:
TeO32− + 3H2O + 4e → Te0 + 6OH−
(1)
Te0 + Cd2+ + 2e → CdTe
(2)
TeO32− + Cd2+ + 3H2O + 6e → CdTe + 6OH−
(3)
Therefore, the deposition of CdTe on Ni substrates might be formed at a fixed potential of −0.50 V versus Ag/AgCl electrode to promote the one-step reaction of TeO32− and Cd2+ shown in eqn (3).
The lower inset of Fig. 1 shows the change of cathodic current density with time during the potentiostatic electrodeposition at a potential of −0.50 V versus Ag/AgCl for the first 150 s. It was observed that the cathodic current density decreases quickly initially and increases gradually. During electrodeposition, first, all the current densities decrease abruptly due to nucleation on the substrate surface. After the attainment of uniform nucleation on the entire surface, the current density became constant and the film growth started. After 25–30 min, a CdTe layer was deposited.


Fig. 2 shows the X-ray diffraction patterns of CdTe thin films electrodeposited using different CTAB concentration. All the diffraction peaks can be assigned to zinc-blende CdTe with the exception of some peaks attributed to the Ni substrate. The characteristic zinc blende planes of (111), (220) and (311) locating at 23.98, 39.70 and 49.90° in the 2θ range of 20 to 80° for CdTe have been observed. The (111) direction is clearly much more intensified than other directions, which suggests that the films grow preferentially oriented along the (111) direction. It can be observed that only slight changes of intensity occur in the patterns of XRD with the various CTAB concentrations, and the samples keep the characteristic peaks of CdTe intact, which indicates that the changes of surfactant concentrations as modifier does not significantly affect the perfection of the CdTe crystals.

In order to further explore the composition of CdTe film that is influenced by CTAB concentration, a compositional analysis for the as-deposited CdTe films was carried out using EDAX, and the results of the same are listed in Table 1. These data indicate that increase in the CTAB concentration results in an increase in cadmium content and a simultaneous decrease of tellurium content of the CdTe films. It is observed that the Te/Cd ratio of the as-deposited thin film is 1.37 for 0.02 M CTAB, when surfactant concentration increased to 0.05 M, the Cd and Te contents of the film are almost equal, indicating that the composition of a CdTe film is near stoichiometric and the amount of excess Te is very small. It was shown that the film deposited changed from Te-rich to Cd-rich with CTAB concentration increase.
CTAB (M)
Te (%)
Cd (%)
Te/Cd
0.02
57.6 ± 1
42.1 ± 1
1.37 ± 0.01
0.03
54.3 ± 1
43.1 ± 1
1.26 ± 0.01
0.04
46.2 ± 1
53.1 ± 1
0.88 ± 0.01
0.05
41.5 ± 1
60.5 ± 1
0.69 ± 0.01
As we know, electrodeposition of the CdTe layer can be divided into two stages. The first stage mainly represents the continued reduction of TeO32− ion, after a sufficient amount of tellurium is produced, the electrodeposition process gradually enters into the second stage, as Cd and Te deposited together.
Surfactant CTAB can hinder the electron transfer of both processes of TeO32− and Cd2+ ions in the electrolyte at the same time. Meanwhile, it can promote the adsorption and desorption of Cd2+ ions, between the two, the adsorption of Cd2+ ions is major and more significant. But on the whole, the effect of CTAB on restraining the reduction reaction of the TeO32− is much stronger than that of the reaction of Cd2+ ions reduced to Cd. In other words, CTAB only has a little effect on the Cd2+ ion compared with the TeO32− ion. Therefore, with increasing concentration of CTAB, at higher surfactant concentrations, the reduction of TeO32− ion is inhibited gradually, because of the decrease of Te atom content of the CdTe film, and leads to the low content of Te atoms compared with Cd. Consequently, concentrations of surfactant CTAB will effect the Cd and Te atom contents of the thin films, and affects the composition of the thin films and the Te/Cd ratio.

CTAB as a cationic surfactant plays an important role in controlling the formation of micro and nano architectures under the template effect. The growth of a specific architecture is associated with selective interaction of the organic surfactants on certain crystallographic facets to stimulate the crystal growth. For a better understanding of the surfactant CTAB effect, we prepared the CdTe using various surfactant concentrations. The FESEM images of the CdTe with different CTAB concentrations are shown in Fig. 3.

When the CTAB concentration was 0.02 M, the CdTe prepared exhibited the formation of vertically aligned, highly denser CdTe cabbage-shaped CdTe rod arrays with a thickness of about 2 μm tending to grow on the substrate, as shown in Fig. 3(a, b), which may ensure a direct pathway for the photogenerated charge carriers to travel along the longitudinal direction of the nanorods with a minimum loss, and also may be a promising candidate for applications in solar energy conversion devices. Fig. 3(c) and (d) present the FESEM micrographs of the as-prepared CdTe using CTAB with a concentration of 0.03 M, we can see that this surfactant concentration assists CdTe to gain a morphology of high-density CdTe flower-like rod arrays. Whereas with a higher CTAB concentration of 0.04 M, CdTe nanostructures are composed of regularly aligned and dense microrod arrays perpendicular to the Ni substrate, which can be observed as having an average thickness of 2 μm. Fig. 3(e, f) shows that large-scale vertical growth of CdTe microrod arrays has been realized. However, on increasing CTAB concentration further to 0.05 M, as shown in Fig. 3(g, h), the products consist of a large quantity of fairly uniform needle-like nanostructures with typical lengths in the range of 2–3 μm, with a diameter of about 30 nm. All of the CdTe nanoneedles show tapered morphology towards their tips. It appears that with the increase of CTAB concentration from 0.02 M to 0.05 M, the morphology evolution of films from cabbage-shaped CdTe arrays to highly dense nanoneedle-like structures occurs. We speculate that CTAB plays an important role in the formation of CdTe films. However, the interaction mechanism between CdTe and the surfactant is complicated and there are scarcely any further studies along this line currently underway to make progress in this respect.

From the above figures, it can be seen that the morphologies of the final products are greatly dependent on the CTAB concentration. It is well known that CTAB at different concentrations can form into different shapes in aqueous solution. To gain control over the synthesis, it is necessary to understand the mechanism by which the crystal is formed. It is well known that crystal formation in solution can be divided into two stages: crystal nucleation occurs followed by crystal growth occurring from the crystal nuclei. The latter process can also be understood as growth units diffusing in the solution and adsorbing on the nuclei. The formation mechanisms (seen in Fig. 4) may have be proposed to explain the different CdTe morphologies prepared with different surfactant concentrations.

Maybe at low surfactant CTAB concentrations (0.02 M), the small CdTe nanoparticles grown at first aggregate easily in order to decrease the energy of the system. CTAB is a cationic surfactant, in the electrodeposition process, under the action of an electrical force field, its positively charged groups move toward the cathode and gather on the electrode surface, then adsorb on some crystal face. The adsorption decreases the surface energy, and changes the morphology of the crystal. In zinc blende, as the positively charged Cd-(111) polar surface is chemically active and the negatively charged Te-(11) is relatively inert, this will provide a strong tendency to grow the cabbage-shaped CdTe rods along the (111) direction. Moreover, in electrodeposition, the preferred growth not only depends on the crystallography but also on the electrochemical nucleation and growth kinetics. In the control of structural characteristics, nucleation, and growth kinetics, the (111) direction that is parallel to the current direction will be the fastest growth direction among other facets in the CdTe nucleus growth process, and the cabbage-shaped CdTe rod will grow longer along the (111) direction. At low concentrations of CTAB, the surface of the nucleate is not well-covered by the adsorbed surfactant molecules. In addition, CTAB is most widely used as a cationic surfactant and the (CH3)4-N+ chains of the group are shorter than those of the C16H33− chains, so (CH3)4-N+ may be much closer to the surface of the substrate, as shown in Fig. 5. This adsorption makes the morphology of the CdTe thin film divided into two parts, as we can see from the cabbage-shaped CdTe array. A detailed time course study is expected to provide direct evidence for such a speculation. Unfortunately the experiments show the cabbage-shaped CdTe rods are formed quickly, which prevents direct observation of their detailed formation process. However, the exact mechanism for the morphological control of the CdTe film by cationic surfactants is worthy of further investigation.
With a higher CTAB concentration of 0.03 M, they may be equivalent to the lyotropic liquid crystal effects, and can act as the template of shape controlling, making the morphology of the particles attached to the nanorods change from being block shaped to smoothly spherical. As shown in Fig. 3(c) and (d), the flower-shape CdTe array is formed.
When the surfactant CTAB concentration continues to increase, the upper surface of the CdTe seeds deposited on the Ni substrate are basically covered by the surfactant molecules, so they can be dispersed well, and then grow along a given orientation, with growth orientation along the (111) direction. Finally, rod-like CdTe nanocrystals grow upon the seeds. As shown in Fig. 3(e) and (f), high-density CdTe nanorod arrays vertically aligned in a large area.
At a higher surfactant CTAB concentration (0.05 M), it might be rationalized that all the surface of the nucleate is well-covered by the adsorbed surfactant molecules. When a potential of 0.50 V is applied, all the cations in solution will move towards the cathode, the polar part of CTAB will adsorb on the electrode and all of the surface of the formed CdTe nanoparticles, changing the surface energy of different crystal surfaces of the CdTe nanoparticles, thus affecting the growth of CdTe, so nucleates grow irregularly in all directions, which causes the CdTe nanoparticles to no longer have a growth perpendicular to the electrode surface, therefore, resulting in random orientations of the large part of the CdTe nanoneedle structure.
In addition, because the CdTe crystals have a face centered cubic structure of which the (111) surface atoms is the most intensive, grains will grow first in the (111) plane, while there is slower growth in other planes, which can produce the preferred orientation. The CdTe prepared on the Ni substrate has a strong textured phenomenon. Though the polar part of CTAB will adsorb on the electrode and all of the surface of the formed CdTe nanoparticles, changing the surface energy of different crystal surfaces of the CdTe nanoparticles, at the same time, the difference in surface energy of anisotropic crystalline facets makes the (111) surface of a ZB crystal more active in most common cases.
Therefore, the (111) surfaces of the already nucleated CdTe nanocrystals could still serve as accommodating planes, allowing films to grow preferentially oriented along the (111) direction. In fact, such a mechanism dominates the growth, therefore, the (111) direction of the film is clearly much more intensified than other directions.
However, when the surfactant concentration continued to increase, the nucleate is largely covered by the adsorbed surfactant molecules, impairing the direct adsorption of CdTe ions on the nucleate surface, which can lead to poor heterogeneous nucleation sites. Thus a proper surfactant concentration is important for the formation of the morphology of CdTe structure.
An appropriate concentration of surfactant is beneficial to the seeds formed at first to aggregate partially, and then the seeds can grow into branches in every orientation to form a different morphology of CdTe films. In a word, it is indicated that a modest concentration of CTAB is required for the heterogeneous nucleation and growth of CdTe crystals but excessive CTAB would considerably impair heterogeneous nucleation of CdTe.

To further investigate the fundamental photovoltaic performance of CdTe films synthesized at various CTAB concentrations, current density versus voltage (J–V) characteristics of different samples were measured under chopped white light with an intensity of ~100 mW cm−2. The photoelectrochemical assembly consisted of a working electrode, a Pt gauze counter electrode, a Pt wire reference, and a liquid electrolyte, all in a glass cell. The aqueous electrolyte contained 0.2 M NaOH, 0.2 M Na2S, and 0.2 M S and strongly absorbs at wavelengths <500 nm. This polysulfide (Sn2−) redox mediator is known to form charge-separating junctions with CdTe and to suppress photo-oxidation.Fig. 6 shows the J–V behavior of the samples, respectively, and the main photovoltaic parameters are listed in Table 2. In the present study, the as-prepared CdTe films all show strong photovoltaic performance. The photovoltaic parameters including the short-circuit current density (Jsc), the open-circuit voltage (Voc), and the white light power conversion efficiency (η) show a clear dependence on film morphology.

CTAB
0.02 M
0.03 M
0.04 M
0.05 M

a The power of the incident light was ~100 mW cm−2.


I
sc (mA cm−2)
6.35
5.92
4.12
4.82

V
oc (V)
0.29
0.28
0.27
0.25
FF
0.52
0.42
0.25
0.37

η (%)
0.92
0.67
0.28
0.46
With various surfactant CTAB concentrations, the corresponding Jsc and η values decrease from 6.35 to 4.82 mA cm−2 and 0.92% to 0.46%, respectively, while the Voc values systematically swing around the 0.26 V. The best photovoltaic performance with Jsc = 6.35 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.29 V, fill factor (FF) = 0.52, and η = 0.92% was obtained when the electrolyte contained 0.02 M CTAB. The results can be rationalized as follows, as shown in Fig. 7, we consider that the morphology of cabbage-shaped CdTe arrays divided into two parts, the above part with a sheet-like structure, which are similar to the leaves of a cabbage can guarantee a large light-receiving area. In addition, the vertical array configuration of the rods on substrate ensures a direct pathway for the photogenerated charge carriers to travel along the longitudinal direction of rods with minimum loss. Consequently, when the sample is irradiated by the simulated solar light, it absorbs more light, and as a result, more electron–hole pairs would separate in the space charge region which is generated at the interface between the cabbage-shaped rod and the polysulphide electrolyte. Electrons are concentrated into the center of the cabbage-shaped CdTe rod to be transported, and holes are transferred to the polysulphide redox electrolyte solution. Overall, by both effects of the two parts of cabbage-shaped CdTe rod, the whole array has an overall enhancement of the power conversion efficiency compared with other samples. Although the Ni/cabbage-shaped CdTe array/polysulphide junction is an intricate system, it can be used as a benchmarking base that achieves the purposes of power output characteristics. As seen from the results of energy conversion efficiency, there is still much room for improvement. This structure would be beneficial in the application of solar cells as the submicrometer sized diameter as it would enhance the cell photovoltaic parameters.
In this study, it has been observed that the cabbage-shaped CdTe array has an enhanced short circuit current and open circuit voltage compared with traditional CdTe nanorod arrays, it shows potential for solar energy conversion devices and excellent photovoltaic performance. The characterization of the cabbage-shaped CdTe array half-cell photoelectrochemically is useful because (1) the liquid electrolyte establishes a good contact with the entire surface of the cabbage-shaped CdTe rods and (2) the photoexcited charge carriers are generated exclusively in the cabbage-shaped CdTe rods. Therefore, this work also provides a cost-effective technology and architectures suitable for the fabrication of solid-state photovoltaic cells with interpenetrating heterojunctions on the nanoscale level and high-efficiency photoelectrochemical solar cells. The excellent photovoltaic performance and its array-on-Ni configuration make them a promising candidate for applications in solar energy conversion devices.

In this work we study the structural, composition and photovoltaic performance of as-deposited CdTe thin films as a function of surfactant CTAB concentration during growth and post-deposition. Various highly crystalline CdTe structures could be obtained at a room temperature with a simple electrochemical deposition method. This is a fast, simple and reproducible method which does not require any template, catalyst or surfactant, but can synthesize various CdTe structures which are basic or complex.

Meanwhile, it is also found that the concentration of CTAB largely influences the Cd and Te contents of the product. By increasing the CTAB concentration, the as-deposited thin film changes from Te-rich to Cd-rich.
In addition, we find that cabbage-shaped CdTe arrays exhibited an improved open circuit voltage, short circuit current, fill factor, and consequently an overall enhancement of the power conversion efficiency compared with traditional CdTe nanorod arrays, so this structure may be beneficial for potential applications in solar cells.
Our results presented here provide a convenient platform where various morphologies of a variety of semiconductors on a conducting substrate are required. Meanwhile, it is believed that this synthetic approach can be used to synthesize other materials in which control of morphology is required.

This work was financially supported by the Technology Development Program of Jilin Province (grant no. 20100417) and National Natural Science Foundation of China (no. 51272086).


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014