 DOI: 10.1039/C7EE01931A
(Communication)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2109-2116


Y. C.
Kim
,

T.-Y.
Yang
,

N. J.
Jeon
,

J.
Im
,

S.
Jang
,

T. J.
Shin
,

H.-W.
Shin
,

S.
Kim
,

E.
Lee
,

S.
Kim
,

J. H.
Noh
,

S. I.
Seok
* and 

J.
Seo
*

Division of Advanced Materials, Korea Research Institute of Chemical Technology (KRICT), 141 Gajeong-Ro, Yuseong-Gu, Daejeon 305-600, South Korea. E-mail: jwseo@krict.re.kr

Central Research Facilities, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), 50 UNIST-gil, Ulsan 44919, South Korea

Department of Energy Science, School of Chemical Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 440-746, Korea

Central Advanced Research & Engineering Institute, Hyundai Motor Company, 37 Cheoldoangmulgwan-ro, Uiwang-si, Gyeonggi-do 16082, Korea

School of Energy and Chemical Engineering, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), 50 UNIST-gil, Ulsan 44919, South Korea. E-mail: Seoksi@unist.ac.kr

Received
12th July 2017
, Accepted 14th September 2017
First published on 14th September 2017
Successful commercialization of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) in the near future will require the fabrication of cells with high efficiency and long-term stability. Despite their good processability at low temperatures, the majority of organic conductors employed in the fabrication of high-efficiency PSCs [e.g., 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD) and poly(triaryl amine) (PTAA)] have low thermal stability. In order to fabricate PSCs with excellent thermal stability, both the constituent material itself and the interface between the constituents must be thermally stable. In this work, we focused on copper phthalocyanine (CuPC) as a model hole-transporting material (HTM) for thermally stable PSCs since CuPC is known to possess excellent thermal stability and interfacial bonding properties. The CuPC-based PSCs recorded a high power conversion efficiency (PCE) of ∼18% and maintained 97% of their initial efficiency for more than 1000 h of thermal annealing at 85 °C. Moreover, the device was stable under thermal cycling tests (50 cycles, −45 to 85 °C). The high PCE and high thermal stability observed in the CuPC-PSCs were found to arise as a result of the strong interfacial and conformal coating present on the surface of the perovskite facets, located between CuPC and the perovskite layer. These results will provide an important future direction for the development of highly efficient and thermally stable PSCs.

To commercialize perovskite solar cells (PSCs), long-term stability against thermal stress should be ensured. While organic hole-transporting materials (HTMs) remain the soft underbelly for thermal stability, we have developed PSCs with excellent thermal stability by employing copper phthalocyanine (CuPC) as an HTM. CuPC has been successfully applied in light-emitting diodes and organic photovoltaics, but its application to PSCs is limited by low power conversion efficiency (PCE). Here, solution-processable CuPC enables the formation of an intimate interface with the perovskite film in which the morphology and the crystal orientation are controlled to give rise to efficient charge transport and reliable adhesion. The CuPC-PSCs exhibit a PCE of 18.8% and outstanding long-term stability at 85 °C for over 1000 h as well as in 50 thermal cycles (−40 °C ↔ 85 °C) with non-encapsulated devices. The initial PCE of the CuPC-PSCs remains even at 110 °C. Stability at a temperature of over 100 °C can be required in the post-process for manufacturing solar cells such as encapsulation and in specific applications such as solar cells equipped in road vehicles.


Organolead halide perovskites are considered to be ideal light absorbers for solar cells that can be fabricated using low-cost solution-based processes. Since the first discovery by the Miyasaka group in 2009, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) has reached 22.1%. This increase in PCE was possible because of precisely controlling the film uniformity and composition of the perovskites and optimizing the device architecture of the multi-layers as well as the interfaces in between each layer. In addition to the remarkable performance, an efficient PSC must operate stably under real working conditions that can involve humidity, sunlight irradiation, and thermal stress. Therefore, significant research effort has been directed at improving the durability of PSCs in terms of their chemical-, photo-, and thermal-stability.

Stability against humidity has been mainly achieved by increasing the chemical stability of the perovskites and applying encapsulation. A few years ago, we showed that the substitution of a certain quantity of Br in methylammonium lead triiodide (MAPbI3) significantly increased the stability of PSCs under a highly humid environment. The introduction of inorganic cations such as Cs+ and the coexistence of two- and three-dimensional structures in the perovskite phase have also been reported to improve humidity stability.
To enhance photo-stability, the interfacial layers as well as perovskite compounds have been revised. We recently reported a PSC with a reduction in efficiency of only 6.7% after 1000 h of light exposure under 1 Sun containing ultraviolet light. This PSC employed La-doped BaSnO3 (LBSO) materials prepared using a low-temperature solution process as an electron transporting layer (ETL) instead of conventional TiO2.
However, until now, little research has been performed on the thermal stability of PSCs. With respect to thermal degradation, thermally stable hole-transporting materials (HTMs) and perovskites should be used preferentially to minimize the degradation of PSCs at high temperatures. The use of 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD) results in a high PCE of more than 20%, however, it reduces the stability of PSCs to thermal stress because of its relatively low glass transition temperature. It was also reported that metal electrode materials can migrate to the perovskite layer through an organic HTM, thereby producing a short path to deterioration, which is further accelerated at high temperatures of ∼75 °C.
Thermal expansion and phase change of the perovskite at high temperatures can also induce degradation of PSCs. While various inorganic materials such as CsPbI3, Al2O3, and NiO can be used for PSCs to obtain thermal stability, high PCE and low-cost production may not be achieved. Therefore, it is necessary to fabricate PSCs without compromising PCE and the cost of fabrication – a goal that can be achieved by using for example formamidinium lead triiodide (FAPbI3)-based perovskites which are superior to MAPbI3, and an organic HTM with thermal resistance.
In addition to the stability of the individual materials that make up the PSCs, the stability of the interfaces such as substrate/ETM, ETM/perovskite, perovskite/HTM, and HTM/counter electrode also exerts a strong impact on the overall stability of the device. Furthermore, the interfacial structure at each junction can directly affect the PCE since charges from a perovskite absorber are transferred through these junctions.
Among the various organic HTMs employed in optoelectronic devices to date, phthalocyanine metal complexes are well known to possess outstanding chemical and thermal stability. For example, the use of copper phthalocyanine (CuPC) in electronic devices especially as a p-type semiconductor in organic photovoltaics and organic light-emitting diodes has been commercially proven. The strong π–π interactions formed between the molecules of CuPC, possessing 18 conjugated π electrons, may induce a specific molecular ordering, thereby giving rise to a highly crystalline and robust stack with high hole mobility. It should be noted that the molecular orientation of CuPC can be strongly influenced by the specific interactions formed between the substrate surface and CuPC itself, or alternatively also by the peripheral substituents present in CuPC. In most cases, CuPC tends to be aligned almost vertically or horizontally with respect to the substrate, which is an important feature for achieving high-performance devices.
CuPC and phthalocyanine derivatives have been successfully applied as HTMs in MAPbI3-based PSCs with an efficiency of more than 17%. Nevertheless, the CuPC was mostly deposited by vacuum evaporation, the efficiency of the PSC was still low, and the thermal stability was not studied.
In this work, we have explored the thermal stability of PSCs prepared from a mixed perovskite of (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15 with a small excess of PbI2 as a light absorber and a copper(II) 2,9,16,23-tetra-tert-butyl-29H,31H-phthalocyanine. Here, the morphology of the perovskite film is beneficial for forming an intimate interface with CuPC with efficient charge transport and reliable adhesion. In addition, a PbI2-enriched perovskite film was recently reported to enhance the device performance by passivating the defects and preventing ion migration at the grain boundaries. Unlike unsubstituted CuPCs, the CuPC derivative used in this work exhibited good solubility in common organic solvents owing to the presence of bulky alkyl moieties, which enable the easier deposition of CuPC on top of the mixed perovskite film via spin-coating. The resulting PSCs showed good long-term stability even after the application of heat-stress at 85 °C for 1100 h due to superior interfacial properties between the perovskite and the CuPC as well as the intrinsic stability of them. Moreover, the device was stable under thermal cycling tests (50 cycles, −45 to 85 °C). The best performing PSC displayed a PCE of 18.8% in the reverse scan.
The choice of suitable ETMs and HTMs is essential to fabricate highly efficient PSCs. Thus far, PSCs exceeding a PCE of 20% had a configuration composed of mostly TiO2/MAPbI3 or phase stabilized FAPbI3/HTM (such as spiro-OMeTAD or poly(triaryl amine) (PTAA))/Au (Fig. 1a). However, as can be seen in Fig. 1c, the PCE of PSCs fabricated using spiro-OMeTAD or PTAA as a HTM decreased drastically at temperatures of 100 °C or above. In order to fabricate thermally stable PSCs, each material constituting the solar cells must have excellent thermal stability. TiO2 itself as an ETM is well-known to be thermally stable up to 500 °C. It should also be noted that FAPbI3 is reported to have excellent thermal durability up to 150 °C. On the other hand, as shown in Fig. S1 and S2 (ESI), spiro-OMeTAD is expected to have low thermal stability as a result of phase transition and crystallization at high temperatures, inducing physical deformation of the film. Although PTAA is robust above 100 °C and shows long-term stability of PSCs at 85 °C, the PCE of PTAA-PSCs decreases rapidly at temperatures above 100 °C and during thermal cycling with the temperature range of −40 to 85 °C. This means that other factors besides material properties can affect the thermal stability of PSCs. Generally, the performance of optoelectronic devices depends also on the properties of their various interfaces. The interfacial degradation that takes place in response to thermal energy input can significantly impact the stability of PSCs. Ultimately, careful interfacial engineering may hold the key to increasing both the charge transfer efficiency and long-term stability of PSCs.
The PSC with CuPC as an HTM has the configuration consisting of FTO/d-TiO2/mp-TiO2/(FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15/HTM/Au as shown in Fig. 1a. As can be seen from the J–V curve measured in reverse mode (in Fig. 1b), we attained a high PCE of 18.8% by a reverse J–V scan under AM 1.5G 100 mW cm−2 irradiation. The short-circuit current density (Jsc), the open-circuit voltage (Voc), and the fill factor (FF) of PSCs fabricated using CuPC were determined as 22.6 mA cm−2, 1.07 V, and 0.775, respectively. To the best of our knowledge, a PCE of 18.8% is the highest PCE that has been observed for CuPC-based PSCs to date.
The resulting cell showed hysteresis behavior in the forward scan direction, showing an average PCE of 17.5%. The hysteresis is known to be caused by various factors such as accumulated charges (including mobile ions) at interfaces or difference between the electron- and hole-transport rates. It is expected that hysteresis can be negligible through simultaneous optimization with an ETL as we have already displayed the minimization of hysteresis by controlling the structure of the ETL. The corresponding external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectrum and the histogram of the PCE are given in Fig. S3 and S4 (ESI). Although charge transfer from the perovskite to CuPC is as efficient as for spiro-OMeTAD in the time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) results (Fig. S5, ESI), the relatively lower PCE and larger hysteresis compared with spiro-OMeTAD- and PTAA-PSCs stem from the low LUMO level of CuPC (−3.5 eV) which cannot form an energy barrier high enough to block back-diffusion of electrons from the perovskite to the gold electrode.
From the resultant devices, Fig. 1c shows the changes in efficiency observed with heat treatments on a hot plate adjusted to 25, 85, 100, 115 and 130 °C under a nitrogen atmosphere (in a glove box) for 30 min. Note that the CuPC film did not show any change in morphology and crystallinity after annealing at 130 °C for 30 min (Fig. S1 and S2, ESI). Here, prior to measuring the PCE, the heat-treated device was taken out from the glove box and stored overnight at room temperature (RT) under a humidity-controlled air atmosphere. The device exhibited no observable reduction in the PCE on moving from RT to 110 °C and a decrease at 130 °C. Even a slight increase was observed when the device was heat-treated at 100 °C.
Phthalocyanine (PC) derivatives have been shown to be successfully integrated into the interface present between contacts and active semiconducting materials, including the metal–organic interface. Thus, it is believed that a slight increase in efficiency at 110 °C can improve the interfacial contact between the perovskite and CuPC. A slight reduction (∼10% of the initial value) in efficiency at 130 °C is thought to impair the interface at this temperature, in particular as CuPC and the perovskite material themselves are stable up to 130 °C.
In order to test the long-term thermal stability of CuPC-PSCs, we kept the device without any encapsulation on a hot plate at 85 °C for 1100 h in a glove box filled with nitrogen. The device was taken out of the glove box and was cooled down to room temperature in ambient air, and finally the performance was recorded under full Sun AM 1.5G light. As shown in Fig. 1d, the PCE retained 97% of its initial value. The long-term thermal stability (over 1000 h) at 85 °C is the highest among the reported non-encapsulated PSCs based on organic HTMs. Furthermore, even under exposure to ambient air (25 to 30% relative humidity, RH) at 85 °C, the device without encapsulation was stable for 200 h (see Fig. 1d).
Moreover, CuPC-PSCs are stable under thermal cycling tests for 50 cycles at temperatures ranging from −40 to 85 °C in dry air. Notwithstanding the absence of encapsulation, the CuPC-PSC almost retained its initial PCE after the test (98% of its initial PCE, Fig. 1e). Even under the thermal cycling test within the range of −40 to 110 °C, the CuPC-PSC is also very stable. After 3 cycles, the PCE of the device slightly increased to 103% of its initial value. The comparative results show that the PCE of PTAA-PSCs dropped to 74% and 58% of the initial PCE after 50 cycles between −40 °C and 85 °C and 3 cycles between −40 °C and 110 °C, respectively (Fig. S12, ESI). For the stability against thermal cycles, not only thermal stability at a maximum and a minimum temperature but also mechanical stability at the interfaces are required. Consequently, these results indicate that the interfaces in the CuPC-PSCs are stable enough to resist against thermo-mechanical fatigue.
The strongly enhanced thermal stability of the PSCs should be attributed to not only the thermal stability of CuPC itself but also the good interfacial properties between CuPC and the perovskite. Now let us characterize the interface between CuPC and the perovskite. An intimate interfacial coverage of CuPC onto the perovskite layer was observed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). As shown in Fig. 2a, the entire area of the perovskite film was covered by a thin CuPC film, and crystal domains (∼1 μm in size) were observed clearly on the grain of the perovskite crystals. Fig. 2b and c shows that a 50 nm-thick CuPC film was tightly deposited along the surface curvature of the perovskite grain without any gap.
In order to obtain deeper insights into the thermal stability of CuPC-PSCs, we calculated the binding energy (BE) for two distinct configurations, namely parallel configuration (PRC, Config 1) and perpendicular configuration (PPC, Config 2) that correspond to the face-on and the edge-on orientations between CuPC and the perovskite crystal, as displayed in Fig. 2d. The results of the calculations revealed that the BE (2.22 eV) of the PRC is higher than that of the PPC (0.51 eV). This difference can be attributed mainly to the effective interfacial contact.
In the next step, the strong chemical interactions, formed at the interface between CuPC and the perovskite surfaces, were investigated experimentally by Raman spectroscopy. In the Raman spectrum for CuPC powder, perovskite powder, and CuPC/perovskite composite powder (see Fig. 2e), strong peaks originating from the C–C stretching of the benzene and the pyrrole ring were found at 1528 (cm−1) for CuPC powder. In contrast, no distinctive peak was observed in the spectrum of the perovskite powder in the 1400–1700 (cm−1) range. In the case of the CuPC/perovskite composite powder, interestingly, a peak centered at ∼1600 (cm−1) was found to become much stronger. According to the previously reported literature, a weak peak at 1592 (cm−1) is usually observed for pure CuPC powder, which can be associated with the deformation of the pyrrole ring present in CuPC. As a result, the intense peak at ∼1600 (cm−1) suggests that some interaction may have formed between CuPC and the perovskite, thereby improving the interfacial contact.
Furthermore, strong and robust interfacial adhesion between CuPC and the perovskite layer was evaluated physically by using tape tests. Although this method does not quantify the binding energy, it allowed the adhesion at the interface between perovskite and HTMs to be compared. The results of the tape tests in Fig. 3 reveal that the adhesion of CuPC is better on the perovskite layer relatively as compared with spiro-OMeTAD and PTAA. While spiro-OMeTAD and PTAA were removed with adhesive tapes, CuPC remained intact. Using SEM analysis, we verified that the surface of the perovskite is exposed as a result of spiro-OMeTAD and PTAA being peeled off. The adhesion of PTAA was, in fact, found to be the worst in the experiment. While PTAA was completely removed when the tape was pulled off, small pieces of spiro-OMeTAD remained on the perovskite. Although adhesion has not been an influential factor in terms of charge-transport material selection for PSCs to date, we suggest that considering this parameter can help in fabricating highly reliable devices with resistance to repetitive stress such as that experienced during thermal cycling. The results of our analysis clearly indicate that CuPC-PSCs exhibit adhesion superior to those displayed by spiro-OMeTAD- and PTAA-PSCs.
The high performance of CuPC-PSCs (Fig. 1b) is most likely due to the highly crystalline and textured nature of the CuPC, which in turn is associated with a specific form of molecular ordering on the perovskite film. As shown in Fig. 4a and Fig. S6 (ESI), the majority of individual crystal grains exhibited various crystal facets, and this observation was highly reproduced when the film preparation was analyzed. We also consider that the evolution of the facets in the grains at the surface of the perovskite film was related to the direct growth of the perovskite crystals with specific orientation in our system (FAPbI3:MAPbBr3 with excess PbI2).
From synchrotron-based glazing-incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS), Fig. 4b displays a 2D scattering pattern of the sample which consists of FTO/d-TiO2/mp-TiO2/(FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15/CuPC. The incident angle is 0.15° at which a CuPC layer and a 4 nm-thick perovskite from the interface with CuPC interact with X-rays (Fig. S9, ESI). For the mixed perovskite, two main peaks are shown corresponding to (100) and (200) at q = 1.0 and q = 2.0 Å−1. As shown in Fig. 4c, the azimuthally circular-cut at q = 1.0 Å−1 exhibits four intensive peaks at the azimuthal angles of 25° (180–155°), 55° (180–125°), 125° (180–55°), and 155° (180–125°), which indicates a preferential crystalline orientation in the perovskite. The crystal orientation is also observed in the bulk region of the perovskite by GIWAXS with an incident angle of 0.3° (Fig. S9 and S10, ESI). We believe that the facets on the perovskite surface with particular orientations could play a key role in interacting with the crystalline CuPC HTM at the CuPC/perovskite interface. It was recently revealed that the crystal facets of the perovskite layer have a direct impact on the device efficiency.
The distance corresponding to one molecule (including the peripheral t-butyl groups) in the CuPC molecular layer was calculated to be ∼20–21 Å. As a consequence, the CuPC must adopt an inclined arrangement at ∼27.5–32.4° along the qz axis of the film (see Fig, S7b, ESI). This geometry matches well with the typical α-form of CuPC. In particular, as shown in Fig. S7c (ESI), the scattering at q = 0.37 Å−1 as a function of azimuthal angle indicates the preferential crystalline orientation of CuPC with three intensive peaks at the azimuthal angles of 90°, 29° (180–151°), and 151° (180–29°). Based on this orientation, we can depict the molecular arrangement of CuPC along the qz axis of the film (see Fig. S7d, ESI). Taking into consideration the dominant orientation at the azimuthal angles of 90°, we can conclude that the CuPC molecules on top of the perovskite film are oriented essentially in an out-of-plane direction along the normal direction of the substrate. As a result, we can expect a virtually face-on orientation of CuPC at the interface of the perovskite crystal facets, which are oriented along the d(100) axis, maintaining a specific inclination of ∼25°, 55°, 125° and 155°.
This plausible arrangement of CuPC on the facets of the perovskite crystals is schematically illustrated in Fig. 4e. Such a geometry at the interface of the perovskite and HTM is likely to allow these layers to interact with each other more effectively and facilitate improved hole transfer without contact resistance. This geometry was indirectly supported by the comparison of the results as shown in Fig. S8 (ESI). For comparison, actually, we induced a preferential orientation in the perovskite film along the qz axis by incorporating a chlorine precursor into the conversion process, as shown in Fig. S8 (ESI). In this case, we did not observe any distinct facets in the perovskite grains. The CuPC-PSCs with an edge-on orientation with respect to the perovskite crystal displayed a significant decrease in performance as evidenced by the dramatic reduction in Voc (see Fig. S8d, ESI). This decrease can be most likely attributed to the poor interface between CuPC and the perovskite film, which hinders the transfer of holes toward Au. Thus, the face-on interaction at the interface seems to be a key parameter to drive CuPC-PSCs exhibiting high device performances, and may also help strengthen the adhesive power of HTMs on the perovskite film.
Based on the high thermal stability due to the strong interface formed by CuPC, our solution processed CuPC-based HTM appears to provide a high-performance PSC with PTAA with around 20% PCE while also improving thermal stability relative to other high-performance HTMs (see Fig. S11, ESI).
In summary, we applied CuPC as a thermally robust interfacing HTM in FAPbI3-based mixed PSCs. CuPC was deposited via spin-coating on top of the perovskite film to afford CuPC with an essentially face-on orientation on top of a specifically-oriented perovskite film. The resulting PSCs displayed a high PCE of 18.8% and an outstanding long-term stability to thermal stress both under a nitrogen atmosphere and in air in comparison to spiro-OMeTAD and PTAA, which are attributed to exceptional interfacial properties between CuPC and the perovskite. GIWAXS analysis showed that the device performance is apparently affected by the orientation of interfacial CuPC molecules on preferentially-oriented perovskites. Finally, we believe that thermally robust crystalline metal complexes are ideal candidates for HTMs in the n–i–p PSCs that can facilitate improvements in both long-term stability and high efficiency.

J. S. and S. I. S. designed and directed this work, analyzed the results, and wrote the manuscript. Y. C. K., T.-Y. Y., N. J. J. and J. S. carried out the majority of the experimental work, material preparation and device fabrication. T.-Y. Y., S. K., E. L., S. K. and J. H. N. assisted in the characterization of the materials and the resultant devices. T. J. S. carried out the GIWAXS study. H.-W. S. performed the TRPL study. J. L. and S. J. performed a computer calculation study. All authors contributed to the revising and writing of the manuscript.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by a grant from the Hyundai Motor Company, Republic of Korea. J. S. acknowledges the financial support from the Korea Research Institute of Chemical Technology (KRICT), Republic of Korea (KK1702-A01), the Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning (KETEP) and the Ministry of Trade Industry and Energy (MOTIE) of the Republic of Korea (No. 20163010012470) and the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grants funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT and Future Planning (MSIP) of Korea (NRF-2016M3A6A7945503). S. I. Seok acknowledges the financial support provided by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grants funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT and Future Planning (MSIP) of Korea under contract numbers NRF-2011-0031565 (Global Frontier R&D Program for Multiscale Energy System) and NRF-2015M1A2A2056542 (climate change program).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ee01931a
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017