 DOI: 10.1039/C7NR01135K
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 6136-6144


Qiaoyue
Xi
,

Ge
Gao
,

Hua
Zhou
,

Yongxia
Zhao
,

Cunqi
Wu
,

Lidan
Wang
*,

Pengran
Guo
* and 

Jingwei
Xu
*

State Key Laboratory of Electroanalytical Chemistry, Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Changchun, Jilin 130022, People's Republic of China. E-mail: wangld@ciac.ac.cn; jwxu@ciac.ac.cn

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, People's Republic of China

University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui 230026, People's Republic of China

Guangdong Institute of Analysis, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Emergency Test for Dangerous Chemicals, Guangzhou, 510070, People's Republic of China. E-mail: prguo@fenxi.com.cn

Received
15th February 2017
, Accepted 29th March 2017
First published on 7th April 2017
In this work, three different CuSCN nanostructures (NSs), hexagonal prism-like (3D), pyramid-like (2D) and nanowire structures (NWs) are first applied to inverted heterojunction perovskite solar cells as p-type inorganic hole transport layers (HTLs) using a moderate electrodeposition method at room temperature. It is revealed that the crystal structure and the thickness of the CuSCN layer can dramatically regulate the morphology and the crystal orientation behavior of perovskite absorbing layers, which will further have a significant influence on the following device performance. Compared with the other two nanostructured CuSCN HTLs, devices based on 3D structured CuSCN HTLs exhibit better performance mainly attributed to the high crystalline quality of perovskite films controlled by the well-oriented hexagonal prism-like nanostructures of CuSCN. After optimization, a maximum power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 11.40% has been obtained with 3D CuSCN which has a thickness of 200 nm. It is the highest value among the current reports using nanostructured CuSCN as an inorganic HTL in inverted PSCs. The dominating effect of CuSCN nanostructures on the crystal quality of perovskites provides guidelines for future material optimization and device efficiency enhancement.

Recently, lead-based hybrid organic–inorganic perovskites have been extensively investigated owing to their unique photovoltaic properties including excellent light harvesting, high charge carrier mobility, and long diffusion length. Due to these superior optoelectronic properties, the power conversion efficiency of perovskite-based solar cells (PSCs) has been increased from 3.8% up to over 20%. Normally, perovskite solar cells can be classified into mesoscopic structure (n–i–p architecture) and inverted planar heterojunction (p–i–n architecture) solar cells. Compared with the inverted planar heterojunction, more progress has been made in the mesoporous structure, in which the n-type metal oxide material, either TiO2 or ZnO acts as an electron transporting layer (ETL) and the p-type organic material 2,2′,7,7-tetrakis(N,N-di-4-methoxyphenylamino)-9,9-spirobifluorene (spiro-MeOTAD) acts as a hole transporting layer (HTL). However, the higher sintering temperature of the metal oxide and the expensive synthetic cost of spiro-OMeTAD hinder further large-scale application of perovskite solar cells. These issues can be surmounted in inverted planar heterojunction solar cells, in which poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) is commonly employed as the HTL to come into contact with the TCO substrate directly, then the perovskite films are deposited on the HTM layer. Nevertheless, the acidic and hygroscopic nature of PEDOT:PSS is a potential threat to the stability of perovskite solar cells. In addition, an ITO electrode could be corroded by PEDOT:PSS, causing the migration of indium (In) into the PEDOT:PSS layer.

Therefore, from the perspective of cost and stability, inorganic p-type semiconductors are alternative hole-transporting materials because of their high optical transparency, superior hole transport capability, brilliant chemical stability and cost-effectiveness. Actually, many achievements have been made by applying p-type inorganic materials to inverted PSCs, such as NiOx films, CuI films and Cu2O films. A solution-derived NiOx-based inverted planar heterojunction PSC with a steady state PCE of 16.21% is achieved for an ITO-glass substrate. Moreover, Zuo et al. reported a facile low-temperature method to prepare a Cu2O film as a HTM in PSCs achieving a PCE of 13.35%, in which Cu2O cells also show nice stability, keeping a PCE above 90% of the initial value after 70 days. Recently, CuSCN, a very competitive p-type inorganic semiconductor material used as a HTM in PSCs, has been developed dramatically. Subbiah et al. employed electrodeposited CuSCN films as hole-conductors in a p–i–n type device architecture with a maximum PCE of 3.8% owing to their higher series resistance (RS) and lower shunt resistance (Rsh). Besides, Ye et al. have successfully fabricated high-quality CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite films utilizing a one-step fast deposition–crystallization method on top of rough CuSCN films. After optimization, a maximum PCE of 16.6% has been obtained, which is a comparable efficiency of PSCs based on inorganic hole conductors compared with organic hole conductors. Zhao et al. presented a CuSCN HTM using a solution-process with a PCE of 10.8%, increasing the open circuit voltage by 0.23 V compared with PEDOT:PSS.
As mentioned above, the CuSCN HTLs applied in the PSCs are all in the form of films. There are few reports on the utilization of nanostructured CuSCN semiconductor materials as a hole-transporting layer in inverted perovskite solar cells. Theoretically, compared with planar junctions, nanostructured solar cells can provide several advantages. Firstly, the nano-array neatly arranged on ITO substrates can substantially increase the light trapping efficiency by reducing reflection losses due to light scattering among the well-aligned ordered structures. On the other hand, nanorods with well-aligned radial junction geometries can increase the interfacial area between the perovskite layer and hole-transporting layer compared to the areas obtained from planar geometries, thereby improving carrier extraction. Besides, nanostructure approaches may not require long minority carrier diffusion lengths. As shown above, nanostructured CuSCN HTLs are introduced into inverted perovskite solar cells.
In this communication, three different CuSCN nanostructures (NSs), hexagonal prism-like (3D), pyramid-like (2D) and nanowire structures (NWs) have been first applied as p-type inorganic hole-transporting layers in inverted heterojunction PSCs. As is well known, the morphology of the substrate is a crucial factor in determining the quality of perovskite crystals, which can further have a great effect on the performance of the devices. Different CuSCN nanostructures have been introduced to regulate the morphology and the grain size of perovskite films and modulate the photovoltaic parameters of the devices. Among the three nanostructured CuSCN, the 3D structure mediated growth method forming a compact and homogenous perovskite film with less roughness exhibits the best performance. After optimization, a maximum power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 11.40% is achieved, which is, as far as we know, the highest reported efficiency using nanostructured CuSCN as a hole-transporting layer for inverted PSCs. Specially, all the efficient CuSCN hole contact layers are deposited using an attractive non-vacuum growth process-electrodeposition method at room temperature without post sintering treatment, making it very simple and cost-efficient for industrialization.

To investigate the effects of different nanostructured CuSCN on the growth of perovskite films, three kinds of CuSCN nanostructures as HTLs have been made. The specific CuSCN HTL preparations are given in the Experimental section. The SEM images of the plane view and the corresponding sectional view of 2D structures deposited with different times are shown in Fig. S1. It is worth noting that the 2D CuSCN NSs obviously do not form a continuous and compact film across the entire ITO substrate with the deposition time of 10 min, which may result in the short circuit of the following device. With the increase of deposition time, the surface coverage of 2D CuSCN NSs grows higher, and the ITO substrate is completely covered with the particle size having no obvious change when the deposition time increases to 20 min. With time further increasing to 30 min, the 2D CuSCN film becomes inhomogeneous with some small grains formed on top of the large grains, leading to the increasing of the thickness, which may increase the series resistance of the device. So the 2D CuSCN HTL is prepared in 20 min with the thickness of 250 nm. In addition, the other two types of CuSCN nanostructures are made using the same electrodeposition method but with different electrolytic solutions. The thickness of both types of CuSCN HTLs is controlled by adjusting the electrodeposition time so as to be as consistent as the 2D structures in thickness. Fig. S2a–c show the cross-sectional view of these three structures, the NWs and the 3D CuSCN layers are almost of the same thickness (about 250 nm) as the 2D structures when the deposition time is 3 min and 5 min, respectively. As seen from the top view shown in Fig. 1a–c, the surface morphologies of the three types of CuSCN HTLs are significantly different. The 2D CuSCN nanostructures in a triangular pyramid shape with an average diameter of 200 nm show continuous and compact films on the ITO substrates. While the NWs structures (rod-like in Fig. 1b) and the 3D structures (hexagonal prism-like in Fig. 1c), highly dense uniform growth of nanostructures are oriented and almost vertical to the substrate with the diameter of around 80 nm and 125 nm, respectively.

As confirmed by the X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns shown in Fig. 2a, intense XRD signals are observed for the crystalline phase of these three nanostructured CuSCN. The diffraction peaks appearing at 2θ of ca. 16.21°, 27.20°, and 32.69° can be assigned to the (003), (101), and (006) planes of CuSCN crystals, respectively, which can be indexed to a rhombohedral structure β-CuSCN. It is also observed that the three nanostructured CuSCNshow different intensities at the corresponding diffraction angles. The diffraction peaks of the 3D CuSCN at 2θ of ca. 16.21° are dramatically stronger than the other two structures. Nevertheless, the diffraction peaks at 2θ of ca. 27.20° are much weaker than those of the 2D and NW structures.
The different characteristics of the electrodeposited CuSCN layers may affect the morphology and the quality of perovskite films. The perovskite films are fabricated on these substrates under the same conditions. As shown in Fig. 1d, the perovskite films with different grain sizes cover the 2D CuSCN substrates completely and form closely connected grains. But it should be seen from the sectional view shown in Fig. S2d that the interface contact between the perovskite film (thickness of 270 nm) and 2D CuSCN is not as rigorous as that on 3D and NW CuSCN layers. As for the perovskite films deposited on the NW structures shown in Fig. 1e, the perovskite crystallite size is much smaller than that of the 3D and 2D structures. Besides, the surface of the perovskite films is not as smooth as those on the other two films.
The CH3NH3PbI3 films deposited on these three nanostructured CuSCN substrates are further defined by the XRD spectrum shown in Fig. 2b with the diffraction peaks at 2θ of ca. 14.19°, 28.47°, 31.94° and 43.20°, which can be assigned to the (110), (220), (310) and (314) planes of CH3NH3PbI3, respectively. It can be seen that no peak at 12.65° corresponding to the (001) diffraction peak of PbI2 is detected, indicating that the perovskite films are all well formed on top of the three CuSCN substrates. The diffraction peaks of 3D CuSCN at 2θ of ca. 16.21° and 32.69° do not appear in the XRD patterns because they are very close to the diffraction peaks at 2θ of ca. 14.19° and 31.94°, and they are covered by the (110) and (310) planes of CH3NH3PbI3. More specifically, the diffraction intensity ratio of the perovskite films deposited on the 2D and NW substrates between (110) and (220) decreases compared with the perovskite films deposited on the 3D substrates. It is worth noting that the intensities of the (310) and (314) peaks of the perovskite films based on the 3D structures are both stronger than those on the 2D structures and as for perovskite films prepared on the NW CuSCN, the two peaks nearly disappear, demonstrating the better crystal orientation of CH3NH3PbI3 on 3D structures than that of the perovskite films prepared on the other nanostructured substrates. The above analyses reveal that the different nanostructures of CuSCN substrates will not only regulate the morphology of perovskite absorbing layers, but also influence the crystal orientation and crystallinity of perovskite films, which will then have a certain impact on the following device performance.

To explore the influence of the different nanostructured CuSCN HTLs on the photovoltaic device performance, the configuration of ITO/CuSCN NSs/CH3NH3PbI3/C60/Bphen/Ag is fabricated accordingly. The corresponding device structure diagram is shown in Fig. 3a. The CuSCN NSs are first deposited on ITO substrates as HTLs by the electrodeposition method, and then the perovskite layers are spin-coated on top of the CuSCN layers. Finally, C60 and Ag are thermally evaporated on the perovskite layers as the electron-transporting layer and electrode, respectively. The energy levels of each layer in the device are shown in Fig. 3b. The performance data for solar cells using different HTLs are listed in Table 1. The J–V curves and incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) spectra are shown in Fig. 4a and b. The highest PCE of 9.81% is achieved using a 3D CuSCN HTL (250 nm) yielding a JSC of 18.70 mA cm−2, a VOC of 0.86 V, and a FF of 0.61. The devices based on ITO/2D CuSCN substrates obtain an average PCE of 8.34% with a JSC of 18.20 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 0.79 V and a FF of 0.58. It is observed that VOC is much lower than that of the solar cells with a 3D CuSCN HTL (0.86 V), which can be presumably attributed to the worse contact between the 2D CuSCN/CH3NH3PbI3 interfaces. The cells using NW CuSCN as HTLs show even lower performance, which produces a VOC of 0.71 V, a JSC of 17.00 mA cm−2, a FF of 0.60, and a PCE of 7.24%. The decreased VOC and JSC may be caused by the grain boundaries between the small perovskite crystals and the rough surface increasing the opportunity for carrier recombination in the CuSCN/perovskite interfaces. Therefore, the interfacial surface area between the perovskite and the hole-transporting material is of substantial importance.Fig. 4b shows the IPCE spectra of the three types of devices. The integrated photocurrents for the cells using 3D, 2D, and NW structured CuSCN are 18.48, 18.56 and 16.58 mA cm−2, respectively, which are consistent with the JSC values obtained from J–V measurements.

Structures
Time (min)

J
SC (mA cm−2)

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF
PCE (%)

R
S (Ω cm2)

R
sh (Ω cm2)

a Measured JSC of the devices.
b Calculated JSC from IPCE spectra.

3D
1
11.44 ± 1.02
11.56
0.83 ± 0.03
0.49 ± 0.04
4.65 ± 0.56
21.2
1429
3
19.19 ± 1.26
19.31
0.90 ± 0.02
0.64 ± 0.05
11.05 ± 0.84
9.2
1242
5
18.70 ± 0.88
18.48
0.86 ± 0.06
0.61 ± 0.03
9.81 ± 1.12
10.8
1012
10
16.81 ± 1.86
16.58
0.77 ± 0.02
0.56 ± 0.08
7.25 ± 0.65
7.1
625
2D
20
18.20 ± 2.33
18.56
0.79 ± 0.03
0.58 ± 0.03
8.34 ± 0.85
12.1
384
NWs
3
17.00 ± 1.65
16.58
0.71 ± 0.08
0.60 ± 0.06
7.24 ± 0.46
7.6
1370
Overall, the 3D CuSCN-based PSCs present the best performance than the devices based on 2D and NW CuSCN HTLs, which may be due to the higher crystallinity and better morphology of the perovskite layer. As seen in the summary of device performance listed in Table 1, the primary difference in photovoltaic performance of the three structures of CuSCN hole conductors is the low open-circuit voltage. The cells using NW CuSCN as HTLs are nearly 150 mV lower on average than that obtained using 3D CuSCN. It should also be noted that as shown in Fig. 4b, all the IPCE curve shapes of the cells based on different substrates are similar to each other, and they all have a wide absorption in the region from 400 to 800 nm, which further confirms that the light absorption of the cells is mainly from the perovskite films and the CuSCN only plays a role in hole transport. This phenomenon indicates the influence of the hole transport layers on device performance, whose structures can regulate the quality of perovskite films and the interface status between HTLs and perovskite layers.

To investigate the regulatory mechanism of the 3D CuSCN thickness on perovskite films, 3D CuSCN HTLs are prepared onto cleaned ITO substrates via the electrodeposition method at room temperature. By controlling the deposition time, the 3D CuSCN HTLs with different thicknesses and grain sizes are obtained. As shown in Fig. 5, the homogeneous hexagonal prism-like nanostructures with uniform and compact surfaces and planar top ends are formed, and the mean diameter of CuSCN is in the range of 50–300 nm with the deposition time varying from 1 min to 10 min. The grain boundary is not clear when the deposition time is 1 min. With the deposition time extending to 3 min, the grain boundary becomes clear and the diameter of the 3D CuSCN crystal increases to about 160 nm. The crystal shapes do not change significantly when the time increased to 5 min. With time further increasing to 10 min, the diameter of the 3D CuSCN grains dramatically grows to about 300 nm. From the cross section SEM images shown in Fig. S3, it can be seen that the length of the CuSCN nanorods grows with time and the majority are vertically oriented to the substrate plane with the length in the range of 70–500 nm. Consequently, we can conclude that the crystal nuclei are formed within 1 min, while the growing process is predominant with the deposition time being further increased.

The perovskite layers are then spin-coated on top of the 3D CuSCN substrates via a two-step process. Fig. 6 shows the SEM images of the perovskite films prepared on the pre-deposited 3D CuSCN HTLs. It can be seen that all the perovskite films show a compact and pin-hole free morphology. However, there are some differences among the perovskite films deposited on those four different 3D CuSCN substrates. The perovskite crystals covering the 3D CuSCN are inhomogeneous with the diameter changing from 550 nm to 2 μm when the deposition time is 1 min. As the time increases to 3 min and 5 min, the average diameter of the perovskite particles is decreased to about 1 μm and the perovskite films display a similar crystal texture, whereas the perovskite films deposited on the 5 min 3D CuSCN layers are rougher than those on the 3 min ones. With time further increasing to 10 min, the surface morphologies of the perovskite appear to be more densely packed and some crystals even stagger on the neighboring grains. As presented in the cross-sectional images shown in Fig. S4, all the perovskite films have good contact with the CuSCN nanorods below and have almost the same thickness (210–230 nm) except for that on the 10 min CuSCN substrate, which is higher (340 nm) than that of the former perovskite films deposited in a shorter time owing to the crowded crystals. In addition, the perovskite crystals extend vertically to the depth of the gap of the CuSCN hexagonal prism, which makes it possible to establish the perovskite/CuSCN bulk heterojunction. As reported in the literature, the CuSCN incorporated into the perovskite layer can be attributed to forming the perovskite/CuSCN bulk-heterojunction, which would facilitate hole transfer from the perovskite layer to the ITO electrode, passivate hole trap states in the perovskite layer, eliminate charge accumulation, and reduce recombination of charge carriers, effectively. The different morphologies of perovskite films may be attributed to their partly penetration into the CuSCN nanorod hole-transporting layer at different levels.
To fully understand the influence of the thickness of 3D CuSCN on the root-mean-square (RMS) roughness of the perovskite films, the three-dimensional AFM images of the perovskite films prepared with different thicknesses of 3D CuSCN are illustrated in Fig. 7a–d. Similarly, as observed in the above SEM pictures, the average surface roughness of the perovskite films deposited on 1 min CuSCN substrates is 27.9 nm. However, with the deposition time increasing to 3 min, the RMS roughness of the deposited perovskite films sharply decreases to 18.9 nm, which is much smaller than that deposited on 1 min CuSCN substrates. In contrast, continuing to extend the deposition time to 5 min and 10 min, the RMS roughness of the CH3NH3PbI3 layers reaches as high as 29.7 nm and 35.2 nm, respectively, revealing the formation of uneven and crowded perovskite crystals. By comparison, the perovskite films based on 3 min CuSCN substrates show a relatively smooth surface, which correlates well with the top-view SEM images. This result indicates that the thickness of the 3D CuSCN has a great impact on the root-mean-square (RMS) roughness of the perovskite films, which will subsequently affect the following device performance.

The thickness of the 3D CuSCN HTLs is further optimized by determining J–V characteristics. The current–voltage (J–V) characteristics of perovskite solar cells based on different thicknesses of 3D CuSCN substrates are characterized under 100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5 G simulated illumination and the results are displayed in Fig. 8a. Each curve is obtained by averaging over 6 cells. The average photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table 1. It is observed that the thickness of the 3D CuSCN HTLs has a great effect on the device performance. For the devices with the 1 min CuSCN, a relatively poor performance is attained with an average power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 4.65%, open circuit voltage (VOC), short circuit current (JSC) and fill factor (FF) of 0.83 V, 11.44 mA cm−2, 0.49, respectively. This may result from the inhomogeneous perovskite films caused by the low crystalline quality of CuSCN nanorods, which thereby leads to the disappointing output of the devices. Fortunately, the optimized device is achieved with an average PCE of 11.05% including a VOC of 0.90 V, a JSC of 19.19 mA cm−2, and a FF of 0.64 when the deposition time increases to 3 min. It can be clearly seen that almost all the photovoltaic parameters of the cells are improved. The increase of the open circuit voltage (VOC) and fill factor (FF) of the cells is attributed to the improved morphology and crystallinity of perovskite films deposited on the prepared 3D CuSCN substrates with a thickness of 200 nm and better contact at the CuSCN/perovskite interface allowing better charge extraction and transport. Consequently, the series resistance (RS) is reduced, as listed in Table 1. In contrast, the device performance is decreased slightly with the deposition time up to 5 min. This is probably due to the increasing of surface roughness of the perovskite films compared with the perovskite spin-coated on the 3 min CuSCN layers. Further increasing of the deposition time to 10 min leads to a lower efficiency of 7.25%, which can be ascribed to the reduced short resistance value of ca. 625 Ω cm2 of the devices (Table 1) with longer CuSCN nanorods and the over densely packed perovskite grains. Furthermore, it can be noted that current density of the device based on the 1 min CuSCN HTL is much lower than that based on the 3 min CuSCN HTL, which further illustrates that the nanostructured CuSCN can promote the perovskite light capturing efficiency. The incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) of the device is shown in Fig. 8b. All the devices exhibit a broad response in the range from 350 to 780 nm, which further shows that the main absorption of the device is from the perovskite and the nanostructured CuSCN mainly serves as a hole transport layer. The calculated integrated current density JSC is listed in Table 1, which is consistent with the measurement results given by plotting J–V curves.

The J–V characteristic of the champion device based on the 3D CuSCN HTL with the deposition time of 3 min (about 200 nm thick) shows the best performance with JSC = 19.79 mA cm−2, VOC = 0.90 V, FF = 0.64, PCE = 11.40%, as presented in Fig. 9. It is the highest value among the current reports using the nanostructured CuSCN as the inorganic hole-transporting material in the inverted perovskite solar cells. Although there have been some reports on using CuSCN as the hole transport layer in PSCs and high efficiencies have been achieved, they are almost in the form of thin films. However, in this work, different nanostructured CuSCN layers are applied to inverted PSCs for the first time, and the influence of CuSCN with different morphologies and thicknesses on the perovskite morphology and device performance has been discussed. The results exhibit good device performance, revealing the great potential of employing nanostructured CuSCN HTLs for PSCs. More importantly, CuSCN HTLs are prepared by an electrodeposition method, which is low energy consuming, easy to control and more suitable for scale-up, compared with the conventional sputtering and spin-coating methods.

In summary, we demonstrate the application of three p-type CuSCN nanostructures derived from a mild electrodeposition method as promising inorganic HTLs in PSCs. It is revealed that the quality of perovskite films can be mediated by both the thickness and the morphology of CuSCN layers, which will further have an effect on the device performance. The results show that short 3D CuSCN nanorods could provide a relatively small contact area to the perovskite films, which leads to a low current density. Too long 3D CuSCN nanorods cannot contribute to the formation of high quality perovskite films. Furthermore, better interface contact and small perovskite grain boundaries are beneficial for increasing the open circuit voltage of the device. Overall, devices based on 3D CuSCN HTLs with a thickness of 200 nm, which present a compact, homogenous, and pin-hole free morphology of perovskite films, achieve a maximum PCE of over 11%. This work implies that nanostructured CuSCN is a kind of promising hole- transporting material for further application in inverted perovskite solar cells. The dominating effect of CuSCN nanostructures on the crystal quality of perovskite provides guidelines for future material optimization and device efficiency enhancement, which lays the foundation for the further development of all-inorganic perovskite-based solar cells.


Indium tin oxide coated glass (CSG Holding CO., Ltd, 15 Ω sq−1), lead iodide (MaterWin, 99.999%), isopropanol (J&K, superdry, 99.5%), N,N-dimethylformamide (J&K, superdry, 99.8%), methylammonium iodide (MaterWin, 99%), copper(II) sulfate pentahydrate, potassium thiocyanate, ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid and triethanolamine are all purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd. All these commercially available materials are used as received without further purification.


All the three different CuSCN nanostructures are synthesized by the cost-effective electrodeposition method. The electrodeposition is performed using a standard three-electrode electrochemical cell in the potentiostatic mode at room temperature. Prior to deposition, the ITO-coated glass substrates with a sheet resistance of 15 Ω sq−1 are ultrasonically cleaned with a detergent, acetone, deionized water and ethyl alcohol, successively.


2D CuSCN is electrodeposited in an aqueous solution containing 0.01 M copper sulfate (CuSO4), 0.10 M triethanolamine (TEA, N(CH2CH2OH)3), and 0.05 M potassium thiocyanate (KSCN) at −0.40 V against SCE from 10 to 30 min. The electroplating bath is stirred with a magnetic stirrer during the electrochemical deposition process.


CuSCN nanowires are deposited on ITO coated glass in an acidic aqueous solution containing 0.012 M copper sulfate (CuSO4), 0.012 M ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) and 0.003 M potassium thiocyanate (KSCN). The pH value of the as-prepared electrolyte is around 1.5. During the deposition process, the potential is set to be −0.4 V versus the SCE referenced scale.


For 3D CuSCN electrodeposition, the electroplating bath is prepared by mixing CuSO4·5H2O (1 M equivalent) with 1 M equivalent EDTA and 1 M equivalent KSCN into deionized water. A series of 3D CuSCN layers with different thicknesses are produced by controlling the deposition time, during which the potential was fixed at −0.3 V versus the Ag/AgCl (3 M KCl) reference electrode.

Finally, all the above deposited samples are rinsed with deionized water to remove the electrolyte and dried in air naturally. No post deposition annealing is employed.

CH3NH3PbI3 is prepared by a two-step spin-coating method onto different types of CuSCN nanostructures. Briefly, PbI2 solution (0.46 g ml−1 in DMF) is spin-coated on top of the ITO/CuSCN substrates at 2000 rpm for 40 s. After the PbI2 film is annealed at 100 °C on a hotplate for 15 min, the CH3NH3I3 solution is spun on PbI2-coated substrates at 2000 rpm for 40 s, and then the substrate is dried at 100 °C for 1 h. The color of the resulting substrate turns black from dark brown gradually. To fabricate inverted heterojunction solar cells, the devices are transferred into a vacuum chamber, and then 40 nm of C60, 8 nm of Bphen and Ag electrodes (about 100 nm) are thermally evaporated on the perovskite layers under the pressure of 1 × 10−4 mbar through a shadow mask. The active device area is 0.24 cm2.


Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images are measured by using a Philips-FEI XL30-SFEG scanning electron microscope. The AFM images are obtained by using a SPA400 SPM (Seiko Instrument, Inc.) X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns are measured with a Rigaku D/Max-2500 diffractometer using Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.54 Å). Current–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the devices are measured with a Keithley 2400 source meter both in the dark and under illumination of an Orial 94023A Solar Simulator with a certified irradiation intensity of 100 mW cm−2. The voltages swept from negative to forward biases with a rate of 0.05 V s−1. The incident photon tocurrent conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra are recorded with a Stanford SR803 lock-in amplifier under monochromatic illumination.


This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (no. 61504145).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7nr01135k
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017