 DOI: 10.1039/C5NR07347B
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 6379-6385


Hao
Li
,

Kun
Cao
,

Jin
Cui
,

Shuangshuang
Liu
,

Xianfeng
Qiao
,

Yan
Shen
 and 

Mingkui
Wang
*

Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Luoyu Road 1037, Wuhan 430074, P. R. China. E-mail: mingkui.wang@mail.hust.edu.cn

Received
22nd October 2015
, Accepted 22nd December 2015
First published on 22nd December 2015
A single walled carbon nanotube (SWCNT) possesses excellent hole conductivity. This work communicates an investigation of perovskite solar cells using a mesoscopic TiO2/Al2O3 structure as a framework in combination with a certain amount of SWCNT-doped graphite/carbon black counter electrode material. The CH3NH3PbI3-based device achieves a power conversion efficiency of 14.7% under AM 1.5G illumination. Detailed investigations show an increased charge collection in this device compared to that without the SWCNT additive.

Miyasaka et al. first demonstrated perovskite CH3NH3PbX3 (X = Br, I) as an inorganic sensitizer in dye-sensitized solar cells in 2009. Since an organo-lead halide perovskite easily dissolves in polar solvents, it is not suitable for liquid electrolyte-based sensitized solar cells because of stability concerns. This instability problem can be solved by substituting a solid hole conductor for the liquid electrolyte. Due to this, organic–inorganic metal halide perovskite solar cells have received extensive attention due to their high power conversion efficiency (PCE) and low cost. Most efficient perovskite solar cell devices employ organic charge transfer materials, such as an organic hole transport material (HTM) of 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis-(N,N-di-p-methoxy phenylamine)-9,9′-bifluorene (spiro-MeOTAD) or an electron transport material (ETM) of phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) in combination with metal electrodes. The utilization of organic electronic components not only raises devices’ cost but also affects their long-team stability. Thus, it is highly desirable to develop perovskite photovoltaics which are free of organic materials. Etgar et al. first reported on a so-called HTM-free TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3 heterojunction solar cell showing a PCE of 8%. In this device, the CH3NH3PbI3 film on top of the mesoporous TiO2 acts as a light harvester as well as a hole selective extraction layer at the same time. This type of perovskite solar cell photovoltaic performance depends on the depletion layer width at the TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3 junction. A carbon counter electrode (CE) used for perovskite solar cell devices, collocated with a double layer of mesoporous TiO2 and ZrO2 as a scaffold, has been exploited by Mei et al. which achieves a PCE of 12.8%. This work highlights a low cost, easy preparation and screen printable alternative electrode to replace noble metal electrodes. (5-AVA)x(CH3NH3)1−xPbI3 (5-AVA is 5-aminovaleric acid) acts as a light harvester and a hole conductor, which is penetrated into the 2 μm thick mesoporous TiO2 and ZrO2 layer. Such a thick absorber is superfluous if only for the purposes of light capture. The photo-generated holes have to travel over a relatively long pathway in such a structure before reaching the carbon CE. This leads to an imbalance between the effective light harvesting/charge transportation and effective isolation of the carbon conductive material from the TiO2 electrode in perovskite solar cell devices using the carbon CE. An optimized CH3NH3PbI3-based perovskite solar cell is usually several hundred nanometers (∼400 nm) thick due to its high light absorption ability (∼105 mol cm−1) and relatively long carrier diffusion length (∼0.1–1 μm). These important characteristics, which are related to CH3NH3PbI3 preparation and device architecture, should be carefully utilized to optimize the device's PCE. Very recently, our group demonstrated an ∼15% efficient meso-structured perovskite solar cell based on an inorganic scaffold, which employs a quadruple-layer architecture of mesoporous TiO2/Al2O3/NiO/C. This work emphasizes the importance of charge extraction in perovskite solar cells, thus improving devices’ open-circuit voltage (VOC) and output power ability.

Carbon nanotubes (both single-walled carbon nanotubes, SWCNTs, and multi-walled carbon nanotubes, MWCNTs) are excellent electronic transporting materials due to their exceptional charge transport feature as well as their chemical stability and hydrophobicity. Carbon nanotubes have become one of the promising components in perovskite solar cells. For example, Snaith et al. demonstrated polymer-functionalized SWCNTs which can increase the thermal stability and the resistance of water for perovskite devices. Mhaisalkar et al. reported a perovskite solar cell fabricated with lamination of a carbon nanotube network film as a hole collector, achieving a PCE of 6.87%.
Here we show our findings on the introduction of SWCNTs into a carbon CE for mesoscopic structured perovskite solar cell devices. SWCNTs were selected for enhancing the hole collection efficiency in this type of device due to its’ 1D excellent conduction with a high hole mobility. Most of the SWCNTs have a diameter of 10–20 nm nanometers, with a tube length that can be many times longer. A PCE of 14.7% with an open-circuit voltage of 1.0 V has been achieved under standard testing conditions for the mesoscopic structured perovskite devices using CH3NH3PbI3 as a light absorber in association with TiO2/Al2O3/carbon as a scaffold and the SWCNT/carbon composite as the counter electrode. Compared to the pristine carbon CE, adding SWCNTs into the carbon CE enhances charge separation and transport in CH3NH3PbI3-based perovskite solar cell devices.

CH3NH3I was prepared according to the literature process. Briefly CH3NH3I was synthesized by adding 15 mL methylamine (40% in methanol, Aladdin) and 16.15 mL hydroiodic acid (57% in water, Aldrich) into a beaker at 0 °C with stirring for 2 hours. To precipitate CH3NH3I, the following steps were used to remove solvents by rotary evaporation and the products were washed several times with diethyl ether. White crystals were obtained after drying in a vacuum for 3 days.

SWCNTs were purchased from Shenzhen Nanotech Port Co. Ltd (NTP) with lengths less than 2 μm and an outer diameter distribution of 10–20 nm. The purity can reach 97%. 1 g of SWCNTs was dispersed in 20 mL ethyl alcohol and then sonicated in a bath sonicator for 30 min, and then 0.588 g ZrO2 (50 nm, Aladdin), 4 g graphite (8000 mesh) and 1 g carbon black (EC300) were added. This solution was treated with an ultrasonic probe for 5 min, followed by magnetic stirring for 10 min, and those processes were repeated three times. The mixture was subsequently centrifuged for 5 min at 4500 rpm to remove non-functionalized SWCNTs and other carbonaceous particles. The precipitate was recovered while the supernatant was discarded. The mixture was dispersed in ethyl alcohol, in which 17.6 mL terpilenol was added. The mixture was then treated by an ultrasonic probe for 5 min, followed by magnetic stirring for 10 min, and ball-milling for 16 h. 2.94 g ethyl cellulose was added to the mixture. In the last step, the ethyl alcohol was removed with rotary evaporation.

A fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) coated glass was etched with zinc powder and 0.4 M hydrochloric acid. Then, the FTO glass was ultrasonically cleaned with detergent, water, deionized water and ethanol continuously. Subsequently, a 50 nm thick compact TiO2 layer was deposited onto the FTO substrate by a spray pyrolysis deposition of titanium isopropoxide (trace metals basis, Aldrich) ethyl alcohol solution at 450 °C. After cooling to room temperature, a 400 nm thick mesoporous TiO2 nanocrystal film (30 nm sized, Dyesol) was deposited with screen printing, followed by a 650 nm thick Al2O3 insulating layer (20 nm γ-Al2O3 nanoparticles, Aladdin). Then, an approximately 9–10 μm carbon paste (graphite/carbon black, 4:1, weight ratio) was subsequently printed on top of the Al2O3 layer as a counter electrode. The triple layer structure of TiO2/Al2O3/C was sintered at 500 °C for 30 min. The deposition of CH3NH3PbI3 onto the TiO2/Al2O3/C mesoscopic porous film was achieved by a two-step sequential method after the film was cooled to room temperature. Firstly, 1.5 μL PbI2 (500 mg in 1 mL N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF)) was drop-coated onto the porous film and dried at 70 °C. Then, the films were dipped into a solution of CH3NH3I dissolved in isopropanol (10 mg mL−1) for 15 min. The film color changes from yellow to black, indicating the successful formation of CH3NH3PbI3. For comparison purpose, a perovskite solar cell using spiro-OMeTAD as a hole conductor and Au as a counter electrode was fabricated according to previous reports.

The film thickness was measured with a profile-meter (Veeco Dektak 150). The cross section of the sample was characterized with a field-emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM). The photocurrent–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the CH3NH3PbI3-based solar cells were measured by recording the current through a Keithley 2400 digital source meter. A xenon light source solar simulator (450 W, Oriel, model 9119) with AM 1.5G filter (Oriel, model 91192) was used to give an irradiance of 100 mW cm−2 at the surface of the solar cells. The devices were tested using a metal mask with an area of 0.196 cm−2. A similar data-acquisition system was used to control the incident photon conversion efficiency (IPCE) measurements. A white-light bias (10% sunlight intensity) was applied onto the sample during the IPCE measurements with an alternating current (AC) model (10 Hz). The electronic impedance measurements (IS) were performed using the PGSTAT302N frequency analyzer from Autolab (The Netherlands) together with the Frequency Response Analyzer to give voltage modulation under the given range of frequency. The Z-view software (v2.8b) was used to analyze the impedance data. The conductivity of the carbon counter electrode was determined with Van der Pauw four point probe measurements. The photovoltage/photocurrent transient decay (TPD) measurement was carried out to obtain the electron diffusion length (HuaMing, model 201501). A white light bias on the device sample was generated from an array of diodes. A ring of red light-emitting diode (LED) (Lumiled) was controlled by a fast solid-state switch. The pulse widths were 2 ms. Transients were measured at different white light intensities via tuning the voltage applied to the bias diodes. The voltage output was recorded on an oscilloscope directly connected with the cells.


Fig. 1a shows the schematic structure of a typical mesoscopic perovskite solar cell using a TiO2/Al2O3/C triple layer structure in association with a CH3NH3PbI3 light absorber. Herein, the TiO2/Al2O3 mesoscopic film about 1 μm thick was covered by a ∼10 μm mesoscopic carbon CE at the top of the device (Fig. 1b). The CH3NH3PbI3 was formed through drop-coating in combination with the sequential deposition method. Since the mesoporous film is fully filled with CH3NH3PbI3, it is difficult to identify the boundary between the TiO2 and Al2O3 layers by SEM images.


Fig. 2 shows optical images of contact-angle measurements with DMF on the carbon counter electrode before and after adding SWCNTs. Due to the strong hydrophobicity of SWCNTs, the acetylene blacks and graphite flakes composite film mixed by this additive (0.05%) exhibited a contact angle of 5° for DMF (Fig. 2b), which is smaller than that of the film without SWCNTs (being about 10°). Consequently, a drop-dipping solution with DMF as a solvent can easily spread and penetrate through the three-dimensional porous network, facilitating the pore-filling process. SWCNTs can be clearly observed between the small acetylene blacks and large graphite flakes (Fig. S1). This connection may help to collect charges from CH3NH3PbI3 to carbon. The porous carbon CE is beneficial for the infiltration of PbI2 and CH3NH3I to form CH3NH3PbI3 (Fig. S1b).
Some preliminary photovoltaic experiments were conducted to evaluate the performance of the new mesoscopic carbon counter electrode devices containing SWCNTs with different concentrations. Fig. S2 presents the J–V (reverse scan) and IPCE curves for devices A–D under standard AM 1.5G illumination at 100 mW cm−2. Their photovoltaic parameters (VOC, JSC (short-circuit current), FF (fill factor), and PCE) are presented in Fig. S3 by varying the SWCNT content in the CE. The devices with CEs containing 0, 0.02, 0.05, and 0.1% SWCNTs were labeled as A, B, C, and D, respectively. It was found that the VOC and FF increased with SWCNTs, while the JSC remains almost constant (Fig. S3). The optimized device photovoltaic performance was observed at the SWCNT content of 0.05% (device C). Fig. 3a presents the J–V curves for devices A and C from different scan directions under standard AM 1.5G illumination at 100 mW cm−2. A PCE up to 14.7% was achieved for device C with a VOC of about 1 V, a JSC of 21.26 mA cm−2, and a FF of 0.69. Under the same conditions, device A without SWCNTs in the CE exhibited a PCE of ∼9.9% with a VOC of 0.889 V, a JSC of 20.26 mA cm−2, and a FF of 0.55. For comparison purpose, a common perovskite solar cell using spiro-OMeTAD as a hole conductor and Au as a counter electrode was measured and the photovoltaic parameters are presented in Fig. 3 and Table 1. Device E with spiro-MeOTAD as the hole conducting layer shows a VOC of 0.95 V, a FF of 0.67, and a JSC of 20.83 mA cm−2 with a PCE of 13.3%. The performance of device E with a standard spiro-MeOTAD/metal contact configuration can be further improved by optimization of film thickness and morphology. However, this is not the scope of this work. Table 1 also compares the photovoltaic parameters of these devices obtained from different scan directions under room temperature. It is interesting that, compared to devices using a standard spiro-MeOTAD/metal contact CE, the main feature for perovskite solar cells using SWCNT doped graphite/carbon black CE present a smaller photocurrent hysteresis effect. The photocurrent hysteresis effect was suggested to be caused by ion transport in CH3NH3PbI3 under an external bias, rather than the ferroelectrics of CH3NH3PbI3.Fig. 3b presents the corresponding IPCE curves of various devices. Devices A and C show a wide range photocurrent response with IPCE values over 60% from 350 nm to 750 nm and a maximum IPCE value approaching 80% from 500 nm to 650 nm. The IPCE values shown in the spectra are in good agreement with the JSC as shown in Fig. 3a. The increase of FF may be attributed to the increase of connection among the acetylene black and graphite flake as well as CH3NH3PbI3 by the addition of SWCNTs. The average value of FF decreases distinctly when the content of SWCNTs increases up to 0.1 wt%. The fill factor was suggested to be correlated to the series resistance. However, it is interesting to note herein the composite counter electrodes with varying SWCNT content show similar values for square resistance (Table S1). Therefore, we argue that the increased FF in device C may not be caused by reducing sheet resistance. The addition of SWCNTs also helps the charge extraction as discussed below. Thus far, most of the highly efficient perovskite solar cells (18–20%) are using an organic electronic conductor and a metal counter electrode as well as additives, face long term stability issues and moisture induced degradation. Even though perovskite solar cells using SWCNT composite CEs in this study show a lower PCE (∼14.7%), these devices show highly promising stability and a low cost fabrication process. This has been evidenced by other inorganic materials such as CuSCN, CuI, and NiO.
Device
Scan direction

V
OC [V]

J
SC [mA cm−2]
FF
PCE [%]

a Scan direction involving reverse scan (RS) and forward scan (FS).

A
RS
0.889
20.26
0.55
9.9
FS
0.889
20.26
0.54
9.7
C
RS
1.01
21.26
0.69
14.7
FS
1.01
21.24
0.68
14.5
E
RS
0.947
20.83
0.67
13.27
FS
0.946
20.82
0.55
11.00
The work function of the counter electrode plays a critical role in hole extraction in this type of solar cell. Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) measurement was first performed for the characterization of the work function of SWCNTs/carbon composite counter electrodes. Fig. 4a and S4 present the UPS characterization results. The SWCNTs/carbon composite films A and C containing 0% and 0.05% (weight ratio) exhibited a similar value for the onset energy (Ei ∼ 0.02 eV). The cutoff energy (Ecut-off) can be evaluated to be 17.12 and 16.52 eV, respectively. Therefore, the corresponding work function (φ) was estimated to be 4.10 and 4.70 eV by using the equation of φ = 21.21 − (Ecut-off − Ei) for films A and C. This indicates a clear improvement of work function induced by the addition of SWCNTs. Fig. 4b shows an energy level diagram for various components, allowing us to understand how the device works smoothly. The photo-induced electron transfers from CH3NH3PbI3 (conduction band, CB, −3.8 eV) to the TiO2 (CB, −3.9∼−4.2 eV) while the hole transfers from CH3NH3PbI3 (valence band, VB, −5.3 eV) to carbon.

Fig. 5 presents the relationship of VOC as a function of logarithmic irradiation light intensity for devices A and C. The slope was evaluated to be 0.046 and 0.054 dec−1 for devices A and C, respectively. In principle, the VOCversus light intensity with a slope of 2kT/q (being 0.056 dec−1 at room temperature) indicates bimolecular recombination in the interfacial charge transfer process. A slope greater than 2kT/q means that an additional interfacial trap-assisted Shockley–Read–Hall (SRH) recombination is involved. The bimolecular recombination refers to the recombination of free electrons and holes in the photoactive layer, while the monomolecular recombination refers to a first-order process including the geminate recombination of a bound electron–hole pair before dissociation and the SRH recombination at the shallow traps created by defects and impurities in the interfacial layer. Therefore, we conclude that the free carrier recombination (bimolecular recombination) dominates the devices A and C. Fig. S5 presents the J–V curve for device C under different light intensities. The device shows superior linearity of efficiency with light density, reflecting that the charge collection of the devices is independent of light-intensity.
TPD measurements were further performed to examine the origin of the improved device characteristics, with which the charge-recombination lifetime and the charge-extraction time can be obtained, respectively. Fig. 6a shows transient photocurrent decay for devices A and C serving as an example. The device C shows a faster carrier transport characteristic than that of device A. A fast charge transport ensures a high charge collection, principally delivering a higher output photocurrent. This can be caused by an improved connection among acetylene blacks, graphite flakes and CH3NH3PbI3 on the introduction of SWCNTs into the carbon counter electrodes. The transient photocurrent decay curves can be fitted with a bi-exponential equation, indicating the presence of two distinguished populations of generated carriers independently. Thus, the electron and hole diffusion coefficients can be estimated to be 7.11 × 10−5 cm2 s−1 and 7.36 × 10−5 cm2 s−1 based on the transport lifetimes (τt1 and τt2 as shown in Fig. 6b), respectively. This result is consistent with those obtained from the photo-illumination spectroscopy measurements. It is interesting to note that the hole diffusion coefficient is slightly increased to 7.85 × 10−5 cm2 s−1 after adding SWCNTs into the carbon counter electrode (filled symbols in Fig. 6b). This can be attributed to the high hole conducting property of SWCNTs.
Likewise, the interfacial charge-recombination in the perovskite solar cells was further investigated with transient photovoltage decay measurements. Fig. 6c presents the charge-recombination lifetime of devices A and C. The two recombination lifetime constants (τr1 and τr2) are suggestive of the presence of two distinguished charge recombination kinetics (see Fig. 4b). A charge population bearing the short voltage decay component (τr2, filled, in the range of μs in Fig. 6c) can be attributed to the electrons recombining with holes in SWCNTs near the CH3NH3PbI3/carbon layer interface. And we associate the longer lifetime (τrl, empty, in the range of ms in Fig. 6c) might be attributable to the charge confined within the CH3NH3PbI3 bulk layer recombining with defect traps or TiO2. The charge carrier transportation and recombination are shown in Fig. 4b. An increased lifetime τr2 was observed when SWCNTs were used. The lifetime τr2 for device C is about 2 times longer than that of device A. When considering the similar electron and hole diffusion coefficients as discussed above, a long charge lifetime guarantees effective charge collection efficiency, thus the device output photovoltage. Indeed, about 80 mV enhancement in the VOC was observed for device C compared with device A. Therefore, this result indicates that the augment in VOC for device C can be contributed to the longer interfacial charge recombination lifetime at the CE/CH3NH3PbI3 side.
Electronic impedance spectroscopy (IS) characterization is a powerful tool to investigate the charge transport process and internal electrical properties in photovoltaic devices. Fig. S6 shows the Nyquist plot of devices A and C under illumination at a bias of −0.7 V in the frequency range of 4 MHz to 10 mHz. The frequency response shows three semicircles, representing three charge transfer processes. The semicircle in the high frequency regime corresponds to the electron transfer process between the TiO2 and CH3NH3PbI3 interface. The intermediate frequency semicircle represents the charge recombination process at the carbon CE/CH3NH3PbI3 heterojunction interface. The semicircle in the low frequency is attributed to ionic motion in the CH3NH3PbI3 layers. We have fitted the IS data by a three series resistance capacitance (RC) circuit as shown in the inset of Fig. S6. Thus, the interfacial recombination resistance (RCT) and the charge exchange resistances (RCE) can be obtained. As shown in Fig. 7a and b, device C shows relatively small charge transfer resistance (RCE) and a shorter charge transfer lifetime. This result indicates better charge collection ability after adding SWCNTs. Fig. 7c presents the interfacial recombination resistance (RCT) as a function of bias for devices A and C. Fig. 7d shows the corresponding charge recombination lifetime τrl, which is determined from the recombination resistance (RCT) and the geometrical capacitance (C) by τrl = RCTC. The interfacial charge recombination rate (k) can be indicated by the charge lifetime (τr1, k ≈ (τr1)−1), which is slightly inhibited when SWCNTs were added into the carbon CE. This result agrees well with the transient photovoltage decay measurements (Fig. 6c).

In summary, we have successfully fabricated the efficient mesoscopic perovskite solar cell using the SWCNT composite counter electrode. The optimized devices have achieved a power conversion efficiency of 14.7% with a VOC up to 1 V. The incorporation of SWCNTs in the carbon counter electrode modifies their working function and extends the charge recombination lifetime as well. Both are beneficial to the device photovoltaic performance, particularly the output photovoltage and fill factor.


The financial support from the Director Fund of the WNLO, the 973 Program of China (2014CB643506 and 2013CB922104), the NSFC (21173091 and 61205034), and the Wuhan National High Magnetic Field Center (PHMFF2015018) is acknowledged. The authors thank the Analytical and Testing Centre of Huazhong University of Science & Technology and the Center of Micro-Fabrication and Characterization (CMFC) of WNLO for the measurements of the samples.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5nr07347b
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016