 DOI: 10.1039/C8CP07461E
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 5409-5415


Jia-Shang
Zhao
,

Hao-Yi
Wang
,

Man
Yu
,

Ming-Yang
Hao
,

Shuai
Yuan
,

Yujun
Qin
*,

Li-Min
Fu
,

Jian-Ping
Zhang
 and 

Xi-Cheng
Ai
*

Department of Chemistry, Renmin University of China, Beijing 100872, China. E-mail: yjqin@ruc.edu.cn; xcai@ruc.edu.cn

Received
5th December 2018
, Accepted 11th February 2019
First published on 11th February 2019
The compositional engineering is of great importance to tune the electrical and optical properties of perovskite and improve the photovoltaic performance of perovskite solar cells. The exploration of the corresponding photoelectric conversion processes, especially the carrier recombination dynamics, will contribute to the optimization of the devices. In this work, perovskite with mixed methylammonium (MA) and formamidinium (FA) as organic cations, MA0.4FA0.6PbI3, is fabricated to study the influence of the bi-cation on the charge carrier recombination dynamics. X-ray diffraction analysis indicates the existence of the MAPbI3–FAPbI3 phase segregation in the bi-cationic perovskite crystal. The time-resolved photoluminescence dynamics presents a relatively fast carrier recombination process ascribed to the charge transfer from MAPbI3 to FAPbI3 in the bi-cationic perovskite film. The carrier recombination dynamics investigated by transient photovoltage measurements reveals a biphasic trap-assisted carrier recombination mechanism in the bi-cationic device, which involves carrier recombination in the MAPbI3 phase and FAPbI3 phase, respectively. The ultimate presentation of the carrier recombination process is closely related to the charge transfer between the two perovskite phases.

Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) appeared in the list of the Top 10 Emerging Technologies of 2016, since they are the fastest-advancing single-junction solar cells with the power conversion efficiency (PCE) increasing from 3.8% in 2009 to the current certified value of 23.7%. The prominent performances of perovskite materials in the photovoltaic field could be attributed to a range of intriguing optoelectronic properties, such as a remarkably high absorption coefficient, low exciton binding energy, excellent ambipolar carrier mobility, long intrinsic carrier diffusion length, low defect density and shallow trap distribution. In order to obtain highly efficient PSCs, significant efforts have been made in various aspects, including device architecture design, deposition processing, interface engineering and compositional regulation of perovskite.

The typical chemical formula of organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite is ABX3, which consists of a monovalent cation, A = (methylammonium (MA, CH3NH3+), formamidinium (FA, CH(NH2)2+), Cs+), a divalent metal cation, B = (Pb2+, Sn2+), and a halide anion, X = (Cl−, Br−, I−). The devices with various perovskite compositions possess distinct advantages in processability, photovoltaic properties, stability/durability, etc. For example, the A-site cation has significant influence on the perovskite crystal structure, active layer properties and device performance. The theoretical studies indicated that the rotation of MA cations can dynamically heal deep trap states created by lead and iodine vacancies. MA is the first and most widely used A cation, and FA is introduced owing to the extended optical absorption range. The band gap of FAPbI3 is closer to the optimum band gap (1.40 eV), according to the Shockley–Queisser limit curve for a single-junction solar cell. Therefore, FAPbI3 has emerged as a promising light harvester in PSCs. However, at room temperature, FAPbI3 tends to turn into a yellow δ-phase, a non-perovskite structure, which deteriorates the performance of the device. Interestingly, it was found that utilization of mixed organic cations, MA and FA, could significantly improve the thermal stability of the devices, as well as the photovoltaic properties.
Along with the rising efficiency of PSCs, the in-depth investigation of the photoelectric conversion process should attract more attention. The optimization of the device is usually ascribed to the enhanced carrier transport and/or the suppressed carrier recombination processes. Accordingly, some research studies have been performed in an attempt to gain insight into the carrier recombination evolution of PSCs upon compositional modulation. It was reported that the charge transport was more rapid and the recombination resistance was higher in FAPbBr3 devices than in CsPbBr3 ones. The carrier recombination processes of MAPbI3 and MAPbI3−xClx films examined using time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) spectroscopy presented a slow monomolecular behavior at low excitation intensities or high temperature, while under high excitation intensities or at low temperature, a fast bimolecular component appeared. Moreover, in FAPb(BrxI1−x)3 perovskite, the carrier dynamics investigated by time-resolved THz photoconductivity demonstrated that the bimolecular and Auger recombination rate constants were closely correlated with the Br/I ratio and both rate constants of FAPbI3 film were one order of magnitude lower than those of FAPbBr3 film. In fact, there exist various recombination processes in PSCs, including radiative recombination, Auger recombination, trap-assisted recombination, electron–phonon interaction, carrier–carrier scattering and interface recombination. Among them, it was found by electroluminescence measurements that trap-assisted recombination played an important role in perovskite photovoltaics.
As novel perovskite type, bi-cationic perovskites (MAxFA1−xPbI3) have shown superior performance, while what is the real carrier recombination process in such bi-cationic PSCs is still unclear. In this work, charge carrier recombination dynamics of perovskite films and PSCs with different A-site cations (MA, FA and bi-cations of MA–FA) are systematically investigated by TRPL and transient photovoltage (TPV) measurements, respectively. A biphasic recombination pathway is proposed to explain the carrier recombination mechanism in bi-cationic perovskite, which is strongly dependent on the phase segregation within perovskite and the charge transfer from the MAPbI3 phase to the FAPbI3 phase.

Laser-ablated FTO glass (Pilkington TEC-7, 7 Ω sq−1) was successively rinsed with detergent, deionized water, acetone and ethanol by an ultrasonic bath for 20 min, respectively. Subsequently, the substrates were treated with oxygen plasma for 15 min. A thin compact TiO2 (c-TiO2) layer was deposited on substrates by spin-coating 0.15 M titanium diisopropoxide in 1-butanol at 2500 rpm for 40 s, and then sintered at 500 °C for 1 h in an oven. The 0.73 M MAPbI3 perovskite precursor solution was prepared by mixing PbI2, MAI and MACl (1:1:1, molar ratio) in N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF). The MAxFA1−xPbI3 perovskite precursor solution was prepared by mixing PbI2, MAI, FAI and MACl (1:0.4:0.6:1.2, molar ratio, x = 0.4) in DMF. The 0.73 M FAPbI3 perovskite precursor solution was prepared by mixing PbI2, FAI and MACl (1:1:1, molar ratio) in DMF. The perovskite solutions were spin-coated on the substrates at 2500 rpm for 40 s, then annealed at 100 °C for 60 min for MAPbI3 and MA0.4FA0.6PbI3 perovskite films, while at 120 °C for 60 min for the FAPbI3 perovskite film. After the deposition of the perovskite layer, the hole transport layer (HTL) was coated at 4000 rpm for 30 s. The HTL solution was prepared by dissolving 72.3 mg of 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9-spirobifluorene in 1 mL of chlorobenzene, to which 28.8 μL of 4-tert-butylpyridine, 17.5 μL of 520 mg mL−1 lithium bis(trifluoromethylsulphonyl)imide in acetonitrile and 28.8 μL of 300 mg mL−1 tris(2-(1H-pyrazol-1-yl)-4-tert-butylpyridine)-cobalt(III) bis(trifluoromethylsulphonyl)imide in acetonitrile were added. Finally, an 80 nm-thick Au counter electrode was deposited by thermal evaporation. Unless otherwise stated, all materials were purchased from Alfa Aesar and used as received.


The morphologies of the perovskite films were characterized by field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM, Hitachi SU8010) at an accelerating voltage of 5 kV and were determined at 200 kV using high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM, JEOL JEM-2010). The perovskite samples were dispersed in chloroform and dropped onto the surface of a copper grid. X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis was conducted on a Shimadzu XRD-7000 diffractometer using Cu Kα radiation in the 2θ range from 10° to 60° at a scan rate of 2° per min. UV-vis absorption spectra were recorded on a Shimadzu UV-3600 spectrometer. Steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy was carried out by using an Edinburgh FLS980 spectrometer at an excitation wavelength of 510 nm with irradiation from the side of spin-coated materials. TRPL was performed using a picosecond diode laser (EPL-470, 95 ps) and the signal was recorded at 775 nm (MAPbI3), 795 nm (MA0.4FA0.6PbI3) and 810 nm (FAPbI3) after excitation at 475 nm. The measurement conditions were the same as the steady-state PL.

The current density (J)–voltage (V) characteristics were obtained by exposing the targeted cells to a standardized sunlight simulator, which was calibrated by a standard silicon reference cell to AM 1.5G one-sun illumination (100 mW cm−2), with sweeping over of the predetermined applied bias voltage range from open circuit to short circuit (reverse scan) at a scan rate of 1 mV s−1 without light soaking or voltage treatment history. A metal aperture mask was used to fix the active area to 0.1 cm2, and all data were acquired by a Keithley 2400 SourceMeter.

TPV measurements were conducted following a previous report. The targeted cell was kept under open-circuit conditions and was irradiated by a continuous-wave LED laser (520 nm, RGB photonics, Lambda beam) to maintain a steady-state photovoltage (Vph). Then weak laser pulses (532 nm, 7 ns) were applied to induce a small increase (ΔVph) in Vph, with ΔVph/Vph ≤ 5%. Finally, electric signals were recorded on a digital oscilloscope (64Xs, Lecroy; Input impendence, 1 MΩ). A series of desired Vph was obtained by adjusting the intensity of the LED laser through laser power and neutral filters.


The component of the active layer plays a crucial role in the performance of PSCs. In order to investigate the effect of A-site cations on the device performance and the inherent carrier recombination dynamics, three kinds of PSCs with different A-site cations were prepared i.e., MAPbI3, MA0.4FA0.6PbI3 and FAPbI3. For convenience, three target samples were referred as MA, MA + FA and FA, respectively. First of all, the morphologies of the three perovskite films were explored by SEM, as shown in Fig. 1. Apparently, perovskites with different A-site cations exhibit quite different morphologies. MA perovskite has a large number of sharp grain boundaries and the crystal domain sizes are relatively small, while the MA + FA sample presents much gentler grain boundaries and possesses much larger crystal domain sizes. Though the FA perovskite film displays the largest crystal domain sizes, there exist several pores unfortunately. To further reveal the differences in the morphologies, the entropy analysis method is employed (see details in ESI) to quantitatively describe the microscopic characteristics of morphological images. Three sets of parallel images are selected for each sample (see Fig. S1, ESI), and the average entropies are 5.57, 4.94, and 5.15 for the MA, MA + FA and FA films, respectively (see Table S1 for details, ESI). The quantitative result demonstrates that MA + FA perovskite exhibits a more uniform morphology, implying the reduction of defects density owing to the smooth grain boundaries, which should be beneficial for the device performance.

The XRD patterns also demonstrate the differences in the three perovskite films. As shown in Fig. 2a, two main diffraction peaks located at around 14° and 28° are observed for all the samples, which could be assigned to the (110) and (220) planes, respectively, indicating the formation of the perovskite crystal structure with good crystallinity. However, it is obvious that the peak positions of the FA perovskite film move toward lower angles with respect to those of the MA perovskite film, which could be attributed to the larger ionic radius of FA (1.9–2.2 Å) compared to that of MA (1.8 Å), while for the MA + FA film, the corresponding peak positions locate between those of the MA and FA films (see details in Fig. S2, ESI). It is reported that phase segregation has been observed in mixed halide perovskite, which suggests that there is coexistence of MA perovskite and FA perovskite in the MA + FA sample in our case. Therefore, the peaks of the MA + FA sample may come from the overlap of the peaks of MA and FA. As seen in Fig. 2b, the (110) diffraction peak of the MA + FA sample could be split into two components, which is in accordance with the peak positions of MA and FA single-cation samples, although the intensity and the full width at half-maximum do not match so well. The result indicates that a mixed phase structure in bi-cationic perovskite is formed, i.e., phase segregation, which is also supported by Pang et al. in the research focused on MA0.8FA0.2PbI3 perovskite films. To further confirm the occurrence of phase separation, the fine structure of the MA + FA perovskite was investigated by HRTEM, as illustrated in Fig. S3 (ESI). Obviously, MA + FA perovskite clearly shows two lattice fringes corresponding to the (220) planes of MAPbI3 and α-FAPbI3 perovskite, respectively. In addition, it is worth noting that the formation of single-phase perovskite has usually been reported through the precursor containing mixed cations of MA and FA, while phase segregation is observed in our case. Considering the special effect of chlorine in the growth of perovskite crystals and the modulation of the active layer morphology, it seems that the introduction of MACl plays a crucial role in perovskite crystallization and phase segregation. Additional studies are required to further reveal the underlying mechanism.
The UV-vis absorption and steady-state PL emission spectra of the three perovskite films on quartz substrates were also investigated, as shown in Fig. 3. By the introduction of the FA cation, the absorption onset (Fig. 3a) and PL emission peaks (Fig. 3b) gradually red-shift from 780 nm for the MA film to 810 nm for the FA film. The red-shift stems from the smaller band gap energy of FA perovskite. In addition, the MA film exhibits the strongest PL intensity, followed by the FA film. It is notable that the PL intensity of the bi-cationic perovskite film is the weakest among all samples (Fig. 3b), unlike the single-phase MA + FA perovskite, which could be due to charge transfer from the MA phase to the FA phase at the two-phase heterojunction interface in the bi-cationic perovskite microcrystals. Moreover, the peaks of FA and MA + FA samples exhibit non-Gaussian shapes (normalized in the inset of Fig. 3b) with significant tails at long wavelength, which could be ascribed to the trap state emission of FA (to be discussed in the Fig. 4).
To further explore the behaviors of the charge carriers in the three perovskite films, the TRPL experiment was conducted, and the results are presented in Fig. 4. The TRPL data were fitted with biexponential functions as shown below:
where
A1 and A2 are pre-exponential factors and τ1 and τ2 are time constants. The detailed fitting parameters are summarized in Table 1. MA and FA samples exhibit biexponential decay behavior with both fast and slow regions. The fast lifetimes contributed to the band-to-band recombination are 6 ns and 5.2 ns for MA and FA films, respectively, while their slow lifetimes are 23.7 ns and 50.5 ns, respectively, which is closely related to the trap-assisted recombination. In addition, the proportion of fast component in the MA sample is larger than that in the FA sample, which corresponds to the maximum steady-state PL emission intensity of the MA perovskite film. Moreover, slow components are observed earlier in the FA sample than in the MA sample, indicating the earlier involvement of the trap-assisted recombination process for the FA sample. As for the bi-cationic perovskite film, an intermediate behavior between the MA and FA samples could be expected by taking into account the phase segregation effect. Obviously, a relatively fast decay process is observed for the MA + FA sample, which is even faster than that of the MA and FA samples. This phenomenon implies that the fast decay process in the MA + FA sample should not belong to the simple band-to-band process. Furthermore, it is noteworthy that the slow component of the MA + FA sample is almost identical to that of the FA sample. It seems that, the excited electrons in the MA phase do not emit luminescence, but transfer to the FA phase. So that, the charge transfer process gives rise to the sharp drop of the decay dynamics, and the slow decay process completely replicates the carrier dynamics behavior of the FA sample.

Sample

A
1


τ
1 (ns)

A
2


τ
2 (ns)
MA
0.6
6
0.4
23.7
FA
0.4
5.2
0.6
50.5
MA + FA
0.5
1.3
0.5
42.2
Based on the three kinds of perovskite films, the corresponding planar devices were prepared, and the statistical distribution of the photovoltaic parameters is presented in Fig. S4 (ESI). The J–V curves with the most representative characteristics of each perovskite device are shown in Fig. 5. Apparently, the device based on bi-cationic perovskite exhibits an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 1.02 V, a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 22.36 mA cm−2 and a fill factor (FF) of 0.74, giving an overall PCE of 16.76%, whereas, MA and FA devices present relatively inferior performances. The superior performance of the bi-cationic device is mainly attributed to higher JSC and FF. It is understandable that the increase of JSC is the result of relatively narrow band gap by the introduction of the FA cation, which corresponds with the absorption spectrum. Although VOC of the bi-cationic device is little lower than that of the MA device, FF of the former is significantly improved, which could be partially attributed to the suppressed charge carrier recombination (to be exhibited in the following transient dynamics) owing to the existence of phase separation. Moreover, it is notable that the hysteresis of the bi-cationic perovskite device is obviously reduced compared with those of the other two devices, as presented in Fig. S5 and Table S2 (ESI).
According to the component-dependent PL dynamics analysis above, there should exist charge transfer between MA and FA phases in the bi-cationic perovskite films. It is reasonable to speculate that further evidence would be found in the charge carrier recombination process in the device. Subsequently, TPV measurement, a widely used approach that studies the charge carrier recombination dynamics in various solar cells, was carried out. As described in the experimental section, the carrier recombination dynamics at different Vph were investigated using a continuous steady-state laser. Fig. S6 (ESI) illustrates the corresponding semilogarithmic plots of normalized Vph against time. It is apparent that the devices present different decay profiles. The decay curves of MA (Fig. S6a, ESI) and FA (Fig. S6b, ESI) devices exhibit equal-interval change upon variation of the Vph, while the decay curves of the bi-cationic device (Fig. S6c, ESI) show dense and sparse intervals at low and high Vph, respectively. Intuitively, the bi-cationic device has a distinct carrier recombination process compared with MA and FA devices.
The charge carrier lifetimes (τr) are extracted by exponential fitting of the TPV decay curves for further analysis. Fig. 6 shows the evolutions of τr against Vph for the three devices. Obviously, for MA and FA devices, a linear correlation between τr and Vph at the semi-logarithmic scale is observed, which suggests that the carrier recombination process follows the multiple-trapping model. The FA device exhibits a moderate slope compared with the MA device, suggesting a shallower trap state distribution. Generally speaking, multiple-trapping model means that only a small portion of the total electrons is spatially mobile in the conduction band and the remaining electrons are trapped in the localized electronic states. The shallower the trap distribution, the easier it is for the localized electrons to be thermally de-trapped into free carriers. As we turn to the bi-cationic device, a two-stage linear dependence of τr–Vph relation is observed, and each stage represents a similar tendency to FA and MA devices, respectively, indicating the existence of multiple carrier recombination processes.
Given the phase segregation and charge transfer in the bi-cationic device, when the steady-state light intensity is weak, i.e. at low Vph (below ∼600 mV), the photoexcited electrons are mainly filled in the FA phase with a shallow trap-state distribution (Region I in Fig. 6). As the steady irradiation gradually increases, more and more electrons are photogenerated, and the electron population changes. The deep trap states in the MA phase begin to play a role and accelerate the carrier recombination process, giving rise to a faster drop in the τr–Vph curve (Region II in Fig. 6). Considering the presence of a heterojunction between the MA and FA phases, heterogeneous recombination might have played a crucial role in the recombination process, which contributes to the prolongation of the carrier lifetime over the entire voltage range, in agreement with the superior photovoltaic performance of the MA + FA device.
Thus, a new carrier recombination mechanism in bi-cationic PSCs, i.e. a biphasic carrier recombination, could be proposed. The inflection of the τr–Vph curve at ∼600 mV indicates that the population of the photogenerated electrons changes when the FA phase is electronically saturated or the electrons have overcome some kind of energy barrier between FA and MA phases. Further investigation is still required to reveal the real physical view of the unique transition process in the bi-cationic perovskite devices.

In summary, bi-cationic perovskite with mixed FA and MA as the organic cation was fabricated to study the perovskite structure and the influence on absorption and photoluminescence properties of the bi-cationic perovskite film, as well as the charge carrier recombination dynamics in the corresponding device. XRD analysis and TEM results indicate the existence of phase separation in the bi-cationic perovskite. The TRPL results present a relatively fast carrier recombination process, which further demonstrates the occurrence of phase separation and the presence of charge transfer from the MA phase to the FA phase. Further observation based on TPV presents a biphasic carrier recombination process in the bi-cationic device, which is determined by the carrier population and the charge transfer between the two coexisting perovskite phases. This work gives new insights into the carrier recombination process in bi-cationic devices and provides strategies for further exploration of the influence of multiple components on the performances of PSCs.


There are no conflicts of interest to declare.


This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 21473250 and 21773305) and the National Key R&D Program of China (Grant No. 2018YFA0208701). Dr H.-Y. Wang also acknowledges the support from China Postdoc Innovation Talent Support Program (Grant No. BX20180352).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8cp07461e
‡ Present address: Beijing National Laboratory for Condensed Matter Physics, CAS Key Laboratory of Soft Matter Physics, Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China.
§ Present address: School of Materials Engineering, Xi’an Aeronautical University, Xi’an 710077, China.
This journal is © the Owner Societies 2019