 DOI: 10.1039/C6TA10727C
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 3203-3207


Dávid
Forgács
,

Daniel
Pérez-del-Rey
,

Jorge
Ávila
,

Cristina
Momblona
,

Lidón
Gil-Escrig
,

Benedikt
Dänekamp
,

Michele
Sessolo
* and 

Henk J.
Bolink


Instituto de Ciencia Molecular, Universidad de Valencia, c/Catedrático J. Beltrán, 2, 46980 Paterna, Spain. E-mail: henk.bolink@uv.es; Fax: +34-963543273; Tel: +34-963544416

Received
13th December 2016
, Accepted 25th January 2017
First published on 25th January 2017
In this work we study the band gap variation and properties of the perovskite compound Cs0.15FA0.85Pb(BrxI1−x)3 as a function of the halide composition, with the aim of developing an efficient complementary absorber for MAPbI3 in all-perovskite tandem devices. We have found the perovskite stoichiometry Cs0.15FA0.85Pb(Br0.7I0.3)3 to be a promising candidate, thanks to its band gap of approximately 2 eV. Single junction devices using this perovskite absorber lead to a maximum PCE of 11.5%, among the highest reported for solar cells using perovskites with a band gap wider than 1.8 eV.

Organic–inorganic (hybrid) perovskite solar cells have attracted much attention among the emerging photovoltaic technologies due to the unique properties of the photoactive material. These include high absorption coefficients, sharp optical band edges, low exciton binding energies, and long carrier diffusion lengths. The reported efficiency of the solar cells increased rapidly from 3.8% in 2009 to the current certified record of 22.1%, making perovskites the fastest evolving photovoltaic technology to date. Previous studies mainly explored different methods to deposit methylammonium lead iodide (MAPbI3) thin films, for instance changing the solvents, the precursor compounds or the type and number of processing steps used to prepare the absorber layer, in order to yield an improved morphology and hence better performing solar cells. Besides single junction devices, one can substantially improve the efficiency of perovskite solar cells by developing tandem architectures with complementary absorbers. The most studied system is perovskite-on-silicon, as it relies on an already established technology and the most studied perovskite absorber, MAPbI3, has a close to optimal bandgap for this application. Perovskite–perovskite tandem devices, in which both absorbers are based on perovskite materials, are also being investigated since they can surpass the efficiency of single junction cells. In these reports the tandem cell efficiency does not yet surpass that of the single junction devices, due to underperforming wide bandgap cells. In order to fabricate an efficient perovskite–perovskite tandem using MAPbI3 as the low band gap photoactive material, an efficient absorber with a band gap of about 2 eV is needed for the front cell. The development of high performance solar cells employing these materials would also pave the way to fabricate triple junction all-perovskite devices. However, most reports describing efforts to tune the band gap of perovskite absorbers beyond 1.8 eV (via mixing Br− and I− ions), led to rather poor performing solar cells. Kulkarni et al. used a sequential deposition method to vary the ratio of iodide and bromide ions in the perovskite film, demonstrating a steadily tunable optical band gap ranging from 1.56 eV for the pure MAPbI3 to 2.23 eV for the pure MAPbBr3. The devices prepared from these films however did not show the expected increasing open-circuit voltage (Voc) for wider band gaps, and the overall efficiency was low. The highest PCE demonstrated so far for a mixed halide perovskite with 2 eV bandgap, MAPbIBr2, is 4.6%, limited by a low FF and open-circuit voltage (<1 V). By replacing the methylammonium cation with cesium, the inorganic perovskite CsPbBrI2 with a band gap of 1.9 eV, has been employed in solar cells with a maximum PCE of 6.8%, where this low efficiency was due to a hindered charge extraction resulting in a low FF. Jaysankar et al. studied the mixed halide MAPb(I0.6Br0.4)3 that has a smaller bandgap of 1.77 eV, which is suitable for tandem cells with silicon. After fine-tuning the crystallization dynamics, they demonstrated solar cells with a maximum efficiency of 10.6%. Hoke et al. studied mixed halide systems through photoluminescence (PL), and found that a wide range of mixed halide perovskite compositions undergo a reversible photoinduced phase separation, with a new PL peak appearing at a similar wavelength independent of the initial material composition. This arises from the formation of iodide-rich domains with a narrower band gap that likely limits the maximum obtainable Voc of the solar cells based on such materials. This behavior has been reported in several studies in which different preparation methods and compositions were explored to tune the band gap by exchanging I− with Br−. It has been shown that there is a miscibility limit which leads to photoinstability and phase separation if the Br− content is larger than 0.2. This miscibility limit can be overcome at least partially by incorporating Cs+ and FA+ ions in the perovskite lattice, yet is not clear to what extent. Saliba et al. reported a triple-cation mixed halide low bandgap (1.6 eV) perovskite that reaches a stabilized power output of 21.1%. Using a similar approach but with an increased bromide content of 0.4, McMeekin et al. designed a perovskite absorber with a bandgap of 1.74 eV, making it suitable to be efficiently applied to a silicon cell in a tandem architecture, while also providing higher voltage output compared to the triiodide perovskites. In this work, we combine the beneficial stabilizing effects of Cs+ and FA+ cations to tune the band gap of the Cs0.15FA0.85Pb(BrxI1−x)3 perovskite to values larger than 2.0 eV. We observe how the photovoltage of the solar cells increases with wider band gaps, however, the gain is not as much as one would expect. This is attributed to the presence of an iodide-rich phase, which is observed by photoluminescence measurements. Hence, also for the Cs+ and FA+ containing mixed halide perovskites a miscibility limit exists, for bromide contents higher than 0.4. Yet by optimizing the processing conditions we were able to obtain perovskite solar cells with a bandgap of 2 eV and efficiencies as high as 11.5%, the highest reported to date for devices using light-harvesters with a band gap wider than 1.8 eV.


Formamidinium iodide (FAI) and formamidinium bromide (FABr) were purchased from Dyesol, cesium iodide (CsI), cesium bromide (CsBr), lead iodide (PbI2) and lead bromide (PbBr2) were purchased from Tokyo Chemical Industry. The precursors and devices were prepared following previously published methods. Briefly, the perovskite precursor materials were mixed in a nitrogen filled glovebox to yield a 1 M solution of Cs0.15FA0.85PbBr3 and Cs0.15FA0.85PbI3, in anhydrous dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), and stirred at 60 °C until complete dissolution. The solutions were then mixed by varying volumes to yield the desired iodide to bromide ratio. Glass substrates with an indium tin-oxide (ITO) coating were subsequently cleaned in a detergent solution, Millipore water, and isopropanol, and then activated in a UV-ozone chamber for 20 minutes. After the surface treatment, a 50 nm thick TiO2 layer (Solaronix Ti-Nanoxide T-L/SC) was deposited in air, at a spinning speed of 6500 rpm for 30 seconds. The contact pads were cleaned with water, and the layers annealed at 200 °C for 30 minutes. The substrates were then transferred to a N2-filled glovebox. A 10 nm thick indene-C60-propionic acid hexyl ester (IPH) was deposited from a 7.5 mg mL−1 solution in chlorobenzene at a coating speed of 2000 rpm for 30 seconds, and annealed at 70 °C for 10 minutes. The optimized process for the deposition of Cs0.15FA0.85Pb(Br0.7I0.3)3 perovskite was the following. The precursor solution was spin-coated at 1000 rpm for 3 seconds and 2000 rpm for 85 seconds. 5 seconds before finishing the coating, 100 μL of toluene was dripped in the middle of the rotating substrate. The layers were annealed at 70 °C for 30 seconds, and then at 100 °C for 30 minutes. The samples were then transferred to a high vacuum chamber to deposit the hole transport layer (HTL), consisting of 10 nm of N4,N4,N4′′,N4′′-tetra([1,1′-biphenyl]-4-yl)-[1,1′:4′,1′′-terphenyl]-4,4′′-diamine (TaTm) and 40 nm of TaTm doped with 2,2′-(perfluoronaphthalene-2,6-diylidene)dimalononitrile (F6-TCNNQ). Gold was deposited as the top electrode. The devices were then measured under an AM 1.5G spectrum with an irradiance of 1000 W m−2, with a shadow mask (aperture: 0.01 cm2) to prohibit lateral current collection from outside the active area.


Mixed cation perovskite layers with varying bromide to iodide ratios were deposited on glass/ITO/TiO2/IPH substrates. The GIXRD analysis revealed a perovskite structure in all of the compositions studied (see Fig. S1), with the peak positions shifting to wider angles with increasing bromide content, due to the change in the cubic lattice constant. This proved that the material can crystallize without structural instability, in agreement with previous reports. To test the performance of the perovskite as a function of Br/I ratio, a series of solar cells were fabricated and their external quantum efficiency (EQE) and current–voltage characteristics (J–V curves) were measured. Fig. 1a shows the UV-Vis absorption spectra of Cs0.15FA0.85Pb(BrxI1−x)3 with a bromide content in the range of 0.7 ≤ x ≤ 1, and Fig. 1b the EQE curves of the best performing cells for each composition. With increasing bromide content, the absorption onset gradually shifts to higher energies, and the excitonic peak becomes more pronounced. The EQE of the corresponding solar cells follows the trend in absorption, and the measurements reveal that a large fraction (between 70 and 90%) of the photogenerated charge carriers can be collected regardless of the composition of the perovskite absorber. The short-circuit current density (Jsc) values calculated from the EQE measurements, and the Voc of the prepared devices are reported in Fig. 1c (see Fig. S2 for the J–V curves). The trends in photovoltaic parameters as a function of the perovskite bandgap, such as decreasing Voc and increasing generated photocurrent, are clearly observable. It is important to note that the optimal processing parameters change for each composition, and hence the performance of the devices shown here could certainly be further improved. To achieve 2-terminal monolithic tandem cells that perform better than a single cell, one needs current matched sub-cells, among many other requirements, which in the case of a double junction is optimally about 50% of the current density of what a high performance single junction cell can deliver alone. As high efficiency MAPbI3 solar cells typically generate a Jsc between 20 and 24 mA cm−2, we optimized the deposition process for the perovskite composition Cs0.15FA0.85Pb(Br0.7I0.3)3, being the absorber with the highest achievable current density. Table 1 shows the statistics of the performance extracted from 20 devices prepared with the optimized processing conditions.

Average
SD
Min.
Max.

V
oc (mV)
1183
±15
1158
1208

J
sc (mA cm−2)
11.36
±0.75
9.81
12.47
FF (%)
77.4
±2.2
71.1
80.3
PCE (%)
10.4
±0.6
9.2
11.5
The data shown suggest that the reported method is reproducible, and generally yields efficient solar cells. The J–V curves in the dark and under illumination for the best performing device are also reported on Fig. 2. We observed a small hysteresis in the J–V curve depending on the scan direction, a phenomenon that is often observed in perovskite solar cells employing TiO2. Regardless, the photovoltage measured for the mixed halide perovskite cell is higher than its pure iodide counterparts. This feature, together with the high FF and close to optimal Jsc, results in a PCE as high as 11.5%, among the highest demonstrated until now for perovskite solar cells with a band gap wider than 1.8 eV.
To test the stability of the perovskite absorber in this device architecture, an unencapsulated solar cell was left under ambient conditions, and J–V measurements were performed over time to track the degradation. We noticed that the solar cells exposed to ambient conditions showed slightly reduced performances during the first measurements, but it gradually recovered under continuous illumination (see Fig. S3). Hence, the protocol established to track the degradation was to leave the device under 1 sun illumination for 15 minutes, then record a J–V scan in the reverse direction. The inset of Fig. 2 depicts the PCE values obtained as a function of time under ambient conditions. After the first two days, when a small increase of the PCE is observed, the power conversion efficiency starts to diminish, mainly caused by a loss in fill factor. This phenomenon could possibly arise from the de-doping of the HTM deposited on top of the perovskite, leading to the formation of an energy barrier for hole extraction. Besides the favourable properties of the solar cells, there is still a large difference between the optical band gap of the perovskite (about 2 eV in the case of Cs0.15FA0.85Pb(Br0.7I0.3)3) and the measured Voc. In order to investigate the origin of this phenomenon, photoluminescence measurements on the perovskite thin films were performed. The excitation source used was a continuous wave green laser, with an emission peak at 515 nm and a power of 50 mW. Fig. 3 represents the PL spectra recorded immediately after the laser is turned on for each composition, while Fig. 4 shows the evolution of the PL spectrum for the Cs0.15FA0.85Pb(Br0.7I0.3)3 composition over time. All spectra exhibit an intense luminescence peak associated with the band-to-band recombination, hence blue-shifting for increasing Br content. However, a second weak signal at lower emission energy is present in all mixed halide perovskites.
Interestingly, the photoluminescence peaks of the mixed Cs0.15FA0.85Pb(Br0.7I0.3)3 perovskites change over time. The speed of the change is dependent on the initial composition of the perovskite material, and also on the precursor batch used to deposit the thin films. This behaviour has previously been observed and it is due to a photoinduced halide segregation. The lower energy peak stabilizes after few minutes, while the higher energy component continues to shift towards longer wavelengths. It has already been shown that the existence of mobile ionic species in perovskite type materials is possible, hence most likely under illumination bromide ions slowly migrate to feed an iodide-rich phase. The growing luminescence feature at about 750 nm probably originates from the forming iodide-rich minority phase, while the increasing intensity of the red-shifting peak at higher energy could be due to the increasing quantum yield of the majority phase as it is losing its bromide content.
While it has been shown that FA+ and Cs+ ions do help the stability of the mixed halide perovskite extending their miscibility to more bromide-rich compositions, the results we present here indicate that these materials are still not completely stable, which is one of the reasons for the limited efficiencies observed in the recent reports of 2 terminal tandem cells. In spite of this, the quality of the devices is rather good as can be seen from the high efficiencies obtained. This clearly shows the potential of mixed I−/Br− systems and encourages further research on the effect of ionic exchange/migration on the perovskite structure under illumination.

A reproducible method to prepare efficient wide band gap perovskite solar cells is presented. Benefiting from the stabilizing effect of Cs+ and FA+ cations, the devices outperform previously reported solar cells based on mixed I−/Br− perovskite absorbers to achieve similar wide band gaps. The champion device was obtained using the Cs0.15FA0.85Pb(Br0.7I0.3) perovskite, with a PCE of 11.5%. The high FF of about 80% and the close to optimal Jsc values enable this material to be used as a complementary absorber to MAPbI3. However, photoluminescence measurements showed that the photoinduced halide segregation is present even in these perovskite stoichiometries, limiting the maximum achievable Voc. These results encourage further research on the effect of different ions on the stabilization of the perovskite structure, in particular for the development of all-perovskite monolithic tandem solar cells.


We acknowledge financial support from the European Union H2020 project INFORM (grant 675867), the Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness (MINECO) via the Unidad de Excelencia María de Maeztu MDM-2015-0538, MAT2014-55200 and PCIN-2015-255 and the Generalitat Valenciana (Prometeo/2012/053). M. S. and C. M. thank the MINECO for their post-doctoral (JdC) and pre-doctoral grants, respectively. J. A. thanks the Spanish Ministry of Education, Culture and Sport for his pre-doctoral grant.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta10727c
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017