 DOI: 10.1039/C8TC03599G
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 9861-9866


Zihan
Chen
,

Zhilong
Zhang
,

Jianfeng
Yang
,

Weijian
Chen
,

Zhi Li
Teh
,

Dian
Wang
,

Lin
Yuan
,

Jianbing
Zhang
,

John A.
Stride
,

Gavin J.
Conibeer
,

Robert J.
Patterson
* and 

Shujuan
Huang
*

School of Photovoltaic and Renewable Energy Engineering, UNSW Sydney, Sydney 2052, Australia. E-mail: sj.huang@unsw.edu.au; robert.j.patterson@unsw.edu.au

Cavendish Laboratory, University of Cambridge, J. J. Thomson Avenue, Cambridge, CB3 0HE, UK

Centre for Micro-Photonics, Swinburne University of Technology, Hawthorn 3122, Australia

School of Optical and Electronic Information, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430074, China

School of Chemistry, UNSW Sydney, Sydney 2052, Australia

Received
20th July 2018
, Accepted 26th August 2018
First published on 30th August 2018
Solution-processable lead selenide (PbSe) colloidal quantum dots (QDs) are promising candidates for photovoltaics due to their efficient multiple exciton generation and carrier transport. However, despite these advantages, currently the best PbSe QD solar cells (QDSCs) still have short-circuit current densities (JSC) of about 25 mA cm−2. Here, we report the introduction a solution-processed trivalent antimony-doped tin oxide buffer layer at the interfaces in the device, which led to significant improvement in the JSC. Consistent with the optical simulations, the external quantum efficiency of the devices was improved in a region corresponding to the PbSe QD/buffer layer interfaces (400–600 nm), implying enhanced electron extraction. The improved performance is attributed to optimized gradient energy level alignment and shunt blocking at the interfaces. With this simple interfacial treatment, the JSC of the champion device was increased significantly to 26.7 mA cm−2, a more than 8% improvement compared to the control device. A further increase in the fill factor was also observed, leading to an over 11% improvement in the champion power conversion efficiency, from 7.1% to 7.9%. This work offers a simple method for interfacial engineering that led to PbSe QDSCs with efficiencies that are among the highest reported in the literature.

Colloidal quantum dots (QDs) have been widely explored as the active layer of solution-processed optoelectronic devices such as photovoltaic (PV) cells due to their tunable bandgaps (Eg), low-cost solution processing, ease of property modification via surface engineering and efficient multiple exciton generation (MEG). Among the various types of QDs, lead chalcogenides (PbX, X = S, Se or Te) are the most investigated materials for the application in PV devices. The most efficient lead chalcogenide QD solar cell (QDSC) reported to date is based on PbS, with a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 11.3%, and has resulted from the development of device fabrication processes and material synthesis. In recent years, tremendous attention has been attracted by PbSe QDs due to their unique advantages compared to PbS QDs. For example, PbSe has a larger excitonic Bohr radius (46 nm) compared to that of PbS (23 nm), which facilitates stronger QD coupling due to more significant quantum confinement effect and wavefunction overlap, resulting in more efficient carrier transport. In addition, PbSe has more efficient MEG than PbS QDs. With this process extra photo-carriers can be generated, allowing PbSe QDSCs to have the potential for surpassing the Shockley–Quiesser efficiency limit of 31%, and MEG-enhanced photocurrent has already been demonstrated in PbSe QDSCs.

In the past few years, the efficiency improvements in PbSe QDSCs have been impressive, achieved through new developments in QD synthetic methods and surface passivation. However, currently PbSe based devices still have relatively low performance compared to those of PbS. This is mainly due to their relatively low air-stability and the formation of defects and charge carrier traps during device fabrication, which significantly limit the open-circuit voltage (VOC) of the QDSCs. Additionally, there is a lack of research effort in the aspect of charged carrier collection in PbSe QD devices. Although PbSe QDs have relatively efficient MEG processes, extra carriers induced by this process usually have a short lifetime of <100 ps. Therefore, to fully apply the advantages of PbSe QDs to solar cells, as well as to suppress the problems from the air-stability, one requires a device that can more efficiently extract photo-carriers generated from the PbSe QD absorber.
Recently, researchers have demonstrated that a solution-processed buffer layer with a properly aligned energy level at the interface between the absorber and the electron or hole transport layer can enhance carrier extraction in a device. Cha et al. found that hole extraction was facilitated in perovskite solar cells when introducing a layer of mixed halide perovskite QDs between perovskite thin film and the hole-transporting layer (HTL). Zhao et al. reported enhanced electron extraction in a PbS QDSC by introducing a CdSe QD buffer layer at the n-type zinc oxide/PbS QD interfaces, leading to improved short-circuit current density (JSC) and hence the device power conversion efficiency (PCE). On the other hand, tin dioxide (SnO2) has been widely investigated for the applications in perovskite solar cells as the electron-transporting layer (ETL), due to fast electron extraction, low-temperature solution processability, good reproducibility and high transmittance. In light of these merits, it is promising to extend these works to QDSCs for the purpose of improving electron extraction.
Here, we report the introduction of a solution-processed SnO2 buffer layer at the ETL/QD interfaces in the PbSe QDSC. Moreover, we incorporated trivalent antimony (Sb3+) doping into the SnO2 layer (Sb:SnO2), The dopant has a valence number of +3 and an ionic radius similar to that of Sn4+ which allowed further tuning of the energy level alignments with the PbSe QD layer which allowed further tuning of the energy level alignments with the PbSe QD layer. With the buffer layers, obvious improvements were observed in the JSC, fill factors (FFs), PCEs, and the external quantum efficiency (EQE) at short wavelength regions (400–600 nm) of the devices. Especially the champion JSC was improved by over 8% compared to the control device. Our optical simulation also indicated that photons corresponding to the improved EQE region are mainly absorbed by QDs near the buffer layer, consistent with the expected carrier extraction enhancement. We attribute this to a gradient energy level alignment, lower charge transfer resistance and possibly shunt blocking at the interfaces of the device.

The precursor for the SnO2 buffer layer was prepared by dissolving tin(IV) chloride pentahydrate into isopropyl alcohol. For Sb:SnO2, 0.5% to 1.5% (molar ratio) of antimony(III) chloride was added to the SnO2 precursor solution. A typical QDSC structure involving a set of fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO)/titanium dioxide (TiO2)/PbSe QDs/Au layers was employed in this study. The SnO2 buffer layer is spin-coated onto the TiO2 ETL before the deposition of the PbSe QD absorber layer. All experimental details, including the synthesis of QDs, device fabrications and characterizations can be found in the ESI.


PbSe QDs with a band gap energy corresponding to 860 nm (1.4 eV) and photoluminescence at 970 nm are employed in this study (Fig. 1a). The QDs were synthesized based on previously reported cation-exchange methods to enable the fabrication of devices in ambient conditions.Fig. 1b shows the cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of a typical PbSe device with a SnO2 buffer layer at the TiO2/QD interfaces in this study. The thickness of the PbSe QD layer is about 300 nm, which we found to provide a good balance between JSC and FF and hence an optimized PCE. The total thickness of the SnO2 and TiO2 layers combined was about 120 nm, though it is difficult to distinguish the two layers in a SEM image due to their similar morphology and conductivity. Fig. S1 (ESI) shows that the SnO2 layer alone is about 40 nm in thickness, so the TiO2 layer is estimated to be 80 nm. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) further confirmed the successful deposition of SnO2 (Fig. S2a, ESI), as clear peaks corresponding to Sn3d3/2 and Sn3d5/2 can be observed. The Sb3d3/2 peak at 539.2 eV can also be observed from the XPS spectra of a typical Sb:SnO2 thin film used for this study (Fig. S2a, ESI), which indicates the successful incorporation of Sb3+ into the SnO2 layer.

Devices with three configurations were fabricated: the conventional structure (TiO2/PbSe) without the buffer layer (pristine), those with pure SnO2 buffer layers and with Sb:SnO2 buffer layers between the TiO2 and PbSe QD layer. For comparison, a control device with just SnO2 and no TiO2 has also been fabricated but with poor performance, further details will be demonstrated later. The current density–voltage (J–V) measurements were conducted under an AM 1.5 and one sun condition. The device performances of different configurations are summarized in Table 1. The pristine device has a VOC of 519 mV, a JSC of 24.7 mA cm−2, a FF of 56% and an overall PCE of 7.1%, as shown by the J–V curves in Fig. 1c. With the introduction of a SnO2 layer at the TiO2/PbSe interfaces, the JSC and FF of the device improved to 25.5 mA cm−2 and 57%, respectively. However, the VOC also decreased to 500 mV, resulting in only a slight improvement in the PCE to 7.3%. On the other hand, it was found the 1%Sb:SnO2 provided the best device performance, as the PCE of the device significantly increased to 7.9%, about an 11% improvement compared to that of the pristine cell. This improvement came from the significant improvements in both the JSC and FF, especially the JSC increased to 26.7 mA cm−2 – more than 8% improvement compared to that of the pristine device.
Configuration
Sb3+ doping (%)

V
OC (mV)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
Champion PCE (%)
Pure TiO2 (pristine)
—
519 (±8)
24.7 (±0.74)
55.4 (±0.28)
7.1 (±0.3)
Pure SnO2
—
489 (±8)
25.0 (±0.75)
45.8 (±0.23)
5.6 (±0.2)
SnO2 buffer layer
0
500 (±8)
25.5 (±0.77)
57.2 (±0.29)
7.3 (±0.3)
Sb:SnO2 buffer layer
0.5
497 (±8)
25.6 (±0.77)
57.3 (±0.29)
7.3 (±0.3)
Sb:SnO2 buffer layer
1
503 (±8)
26.7 (±0.80)
58.8 (±0.30)
7.9 (±0.3)
Sb:SnO2 buffer layer
1.5
503 (±8)
25.8 (±0.77)
57.0 (±0.29)
7.4 (±0.3)
To confirm the reproducibility, 12 devices for each configuration were fabricated. Box plots (Fig. 2a and b) indicate that the average JSC and FF of the devices were consistently improved with the presence of the SnO2 buffer layers, while with those of 1%Sb3+ doping the improvement was the most prominent. The average VOC of the devices also slightly dropped when the buffer layers were applied, however to a degree much less significant compared to the improvements in the other parameters (Fig. 2c). The average PCEs of the devices were therefore consistently improved with the buffer layers (Fig. 2d). It can be concluded that the devices in this work are highly reproducible, and these devices made with 1%Sb:SnO2 buffer layers demonstrated the highest average and champion PCE. It should be mentioned that we also fabricated devices with only SnO2 as the n-type ETL (without TiO2). However the performance was rather poor, mainly due to the low FF (Fig. S3, ESI), suggesting that the TiO2 layer is essential to the device, likely due to the suppression of pin-hole formation and hence current leakage. Devices with the SnO2 buffer layers with different Sb3+ doping levels were also fabricated (Fig. S4, ESI and Table 1), and it was found that 1% (molar ratio to Sn) concentration provided the best performance. We found that higher doping concentration (1.5%) caused lower device performance. This can be due to the change in the resistivity and defect formation, for example from incomplete activation of Sb dopants or the presence of Sb interstitials in the over-doped buffer layer, which is common in metal oxide thin films with high doping concentration.
In order to elucidate the underlying reasons for the improvement in PCEs of the devices with the buffer layers, especially the origin of the increase in JSC, external quantum efficiency (EQE) measurements were conducted for the champion devices, as shown in Fig. 3a. The integrated JSC for the pristine device, devices with SnO2 and 1%Sb:SnO2 buffer layers were 23.1, 23.4 and 24.5 mA cm−2, respectively. Both the values and the trend of the changes in JSC were in good agreement with the J–V measurements. Interestingly, the major difference in the EQE of the devices is located at the wavelengths between 400 to 600 nm (Fig. 3a). While there are no apparent changes in the transmittance of the substrates with and without the buffer layers (Fig. S5, ESI), the improvement in EQE is unlikely due to absorption enhancement of the PbSe QD absorber. Because of the relatively strong absorption of the PbSe QDs in the visible range (Fig. 1a), it is believed that most of these photons are absorbed by the QD portions near the ETL in this structure. To confirm this, we assessed the photon energy absorption profile of the device by conducting a finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) simulation (Fig. 3b). The absorption power density of the PbSe QD layer for photons within the range of 400–600 nm was simulated and found to be consistent with the improved region in the EQE. More details about the simulation can be found in the ESI and Fig. S6. As shown in Fig. 3b, when the cell is illuminated from the glass side, the high-power-density regions are located near the ETL/PbSe QDs interface, indicating that the 400–600 nm photons are readily absorbed and have short penetration length in the PbSe QD absorber. Indeed, more than 80% of the photon energy is absorbed by the first half (150 nm) of the PbSe layer near the ETL, as shown in Fig. 3c. Therefore, with the improvements in EQE at the 400–600 nm range, it is reasonable to conclude that carrier extraction near the ETL/PbSe QDs is enhanced by the introduction of the SnO2 buffer layers.
To further investigate the origin of the improved carrier extraction, we used ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) to examine the energy levels of the TiO2, buffer layers and the PbSe absorber layer that form the heterojunction. Fig. S7 (ESI) shows the UPS results from the materials. Together with the band gaps of PbSe QDs and the n-type oxide layers (fitted by the Tauc plot in Fig. S8, ESI), the energy level alignment for these materials can be estimated (see ESI for more details on the calculations).Fig. 4a and b are illustrated schematics of the band alignment among TiO2, SnO2 or 1%Sb:SnO2 and the PbSe absorber when they are in contact with equilibrated Fermi levels (Ef), based on the UPS measurement results. The SnO2 buffer layer has a reduced n-type character compared to that of TiO2, as the separation between the conduction band minimum (CBM) and the Ef increased from 0.20 eV of TiO2 to 0.33 eV. The separation further increased to 0.48 eV in 1%Sb:SnO2, which corresponds to the champion device in this study. This is consistent with our expectation that with lower valence number, Sb3+ should replace Sn4+ and provide more positive free carriers. In a conventional device structure, the photo-generated electrons are extracted from the CBM of the PbSe QD layer to that of TiO2. With the SnO2 (or 1%Sb:SnO2) buffer layer, a gradient CBM alignment is formed (Fig. 4a and b). The electrons are likely first transferred into the buffer layers and then the TiO2. Devices with similar gradient energy level alignment have been reported, and it has been suggested that a closer energy level separation between the ETL and absorber can facilitate carrier extraction, leading to improvements in the JSC and FF. In this study, the collection of electrons generated near the ETL/PbSe interfaces can be enhanced by the buffer layers, where Sb:SnO2 (1% doping) provided the best performance. It is noticeable that the slight decrease in VOC with the buffer layer is likely due to the closer splitting in the quasi fermi levels of the ETL and PbSe layer, however this is found to be minor compared to the improvements in JSC and FF.
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were also conducted on the devices in this work. Fig. 4c shows the Nyquist plots of PbSe QDSCs based on different ETL/buffer layers at open-circuit voltage bias in dark condition, across a frequency range from 1 MHz to 0.1 Hz fitted by the equivalent circuit (Fig. 4c, inset). Z′ and Z′′ represent the real and imaginary parts of the impedance and hence the resistance and reactance, respectively. The intersection between the spectra and the Z′-axis at high and low frequencies represents the series resistance (Rs) and shunt resistance (Rsh) of the device, respectively. It can be seen that the Rs of all three types of devices are similar, however the Rsh increases when the buffer layers are introduced. Higher Rsh implies that current leakage/carrier recombination at the ETL/PbSe interfaces is suppressed. This indicates that the buffer layers should also have shunt-blocking effect to the devices, possibly in ways of filling pin-holes of the TiO2 layer and inhibiting current leakage from the PbSe QD layer to FTO, hence improving the JSC and FF.VOC in the devices were not improved, and we suggest this is also due to the closer splitting in the quasi Fermi levels of the PbSe and the ETL, as shown in Fig. 4a and b.
It should be mentioned that MEG is likely induced by relatively high energy photons as the threshold energy must be >2 times the Eg of the QDs. Although the extraction of carriers generated by higher energy photons (400–600 nm) was improved with the SnO2 and Sb:SnO2 buffer layers, no direct MEG effect (i.e., EQE > 100%) was observed from the devices in this study. This is likely because the MEG efficiency of the PbSe QDs is still not sufficient for this to be observed, so MEG did not occur in the devices and contribute to the JSC. However, this study has demonstrated a simple and effective solution-based method of improving carrier extraction in PbSe QDSCs. It should provide useful guidance on the design of devices based on QDs with higher MEG efficiencies being developed in the future.

In summary, we improved the performance of PbSe QDSCs by introducing SnO2-based buffer layers at the ETL/PbSe QD interfaces, particularly when SnO2 is doped with Sb3+ atoms. The improvement comes from better extraction of carriers generated by 400–600 nm photons, as confirmed by the EQEs of the devices, resulting in increases in the JSC and FF. We discovered that 1%Sb3+-doped SnO2 buffer layer provided the most significant enhancement and the champion device demonstrated a PCE of 7.9%, compared to that of 7.1% of the pristine device. This was mainly contributed by the corresponding champion JSC of 26.7 mA cm−2, which was improved by over 8% compared to that of the pristine device. We suggest that the improvement in carrier extraction is attributed to an optimized gradient in the band alignment between the PbSe QD absorber, buffer layers and TiO2. Also, the buffer layer can serve as a shunt blocking layer at the interfaces. Although direct MEG effect was not observed in the devices, it has been confirmed that the buffer layers can improve the carrier extraction in the energy region that MEG is likely to occur. While QDs with more efficient MEG effect are being developed by the research community, this study provides important guidance to the design of QDSCs with MEG effect in the future.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the Australia Government through the Australian Renewable Energy Agency (ARENA). Responsibility for the views, information or advice expressed herein in not accepted by the Australian Government. Authors thank Dr Bill Gong, Outi Mustonen of UNSW for the XPS and UPS measurement and the Electron Microscopy Unit of UNSW for the microscopy imaging support.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8tc03599g
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018