 DOI: 10.1039/C6CC01664B
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 5706-5709


Bingkai
Zhang
,

Jiaxin
Zheng
,

Xiaoning
Li
,

Yanyan
Fang
,

Lin-Wang
Wang
,

Yuan
Lin
* and 

Feng
Pan
*

School of Advanced Materials, Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School, Shenzhen 518055, China. E-mail: panfeng@pkusz.edu.cn

Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, Key Laboratory of Photochemistry, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China. E-mail: linyuan@iccas.ac.cn

Materials Science Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, California 94720, USA

Received
24th February 2016
, Accepted 21st March 2016
First published on 21st March 2016
We report tuning band alignment by optimized CdS layers using a SILAR method to achieve the recorded best performance with about 6% PCE in TiO2/CdS/CdSe QDSSCs. Combining experimental and theoretical studies, we find that a better lattices match between CdS and TiO2 assists the growth of CdSe, and the combined effect of charge transfer and surface dipole moment at the TiO2/CdS/CdSe interface shifts the energy levels of TiO2 upward and increases Voc of the solar cells. More importantly, the band gap of CdS buffer layers is sensitive to the distortion induced by lattice mismatch and numbers of CdS layers. For example, the barrier for charge transfer disappears when there are more than 4 layers of CdS, facilitating the charge injection from CdSe to TiO2.

As an alternative renewable energy source, different kinds of solar cells have been developed in the past decades. To improve the efficiency of cells, the design and optimization of an interface have played an important role, since photoelectron separation is closely associated with the kinetics of the electron-transfer processes at the interface. As for the quantum-dot sensitized solar cells (QDSSCs), which have recently attracted much interest as promising photoelectric conversion devices due to their tunable adsorption band, high absorption coefficient and multiple exciton effect, an important interface engineering process is used to insert a CdS buffer layer between TiO2 and CdSe in the CdSe sensitized anatase-TiO2 system (TiO2/CdS/CdSe) to enhance the efficiency of cells. It is generally believed that the presence of a CdS buffer layer on one hand promotes the growth of CdSe, and on the other hand facilitates electron injection from CdSe to TiO2 by the reorganization of band levels between CdS and CdSe, that is, from type I to type II, in which by definition, both the conduction band edge (Ecb) and valence band edge (Evb) of CdSe are located in the band gap of TiO2 in the type I structure, and both Ecb and Evb of CdSe are higher than those of TiO2 in the type II structure. Nevertheless, the role of CdS buffer layers is still under debate in other experiments. Some suggested that CdS buffer layers actually impede the injection of electrons from CdSe to TiO2 due to the type-I energy alignment of CdS/CdSe and accelerate charge recombination at the TiO2/sensitizer interface. The others proposed that the CdS/CdSe quantum dots have a quasi-type-II band alignment with Ecb of CdS close to that of CdSe. Hence, it is highly desirable to further clarify and get a deep understanding of the role that the CdS buffer layer plays in TiO2/CdS/CdSe cells.

In addition, the optimization of the thickness of the CdS buffer layer is also investigated experimentally. Palomares et al. reported the best cell efficiency for the CdS/CdSe co-sensitized TiO2 system consisting of 6 cycles of CdS and 8 cycles of CdSe. While Lee et al. found that 3 cycles of CdS plus 4 cycles of CdSe exhibits the best efficiency. Dai et al. found that the increase of CdS cycles enhances the short circuit current density. All these experimental findings implied that optimizing the CdS buffer layer is vital for performances of TiO2/CdS/CdSe cells, but the detailed mechanism is still unclear: what is the relationship between the thickness of the CdS buffer layer and the energy level alignment at the TiO2/CdS/CdSe interface? How is the electronic structure of the CdS buffer layer tuned by the thickness (successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR) cycles), especially within a two-side confined interface? Such deep insights would not only be helpful for the future interface design to improve the photovoltaic performance but also be of fundamental interest for science.
Herein, we constructed the TiO2/CdS/CdSe cells with a CdS buffer layer deposited on TiO2 through the SILAR method, and tested their photovoltaic performance by varying the CdS buffer layer by controlling the SILAR cycles. Fig. 1a and b show a schematic diagram of the preparation process of TiO2/CdS/CdSe QDSSCs and a schematic construction of each material and related interfaces of TiO2/CdS/CdSe, respectively. For comparison, we also tried to prepare TiO2/CdSe by using the chemical bath deposition (CBD) method and found that CdSe hardly grows on the TiO2 film. Then, the thickness optimization of the TiO2 film and CdSe was evaluated and the details are depicted in Section 1 of the ESI. Using the optimized thickness of the TiO2 film and CdSe, we further prepared the TiO2/CdS/CdSe quantum-dot cells. The J–V characteristics of TiO2/(CdS)n/CdSe cells (Fig. 1c and Tables S1, S3, ESI) show that the current (Jsc) and power conversion efficiency (PCE%) increase more than double with the number of CdS cycles. For example, Jsc is increased from 7.77 to 18.47 mA cm−2, while PCE is increased from 2.6% to 5.94% vs. n = 1 to 6 layers of CdS. In contrast, the open circuit voltage (Voc) increases from 465 mV to 505 mV and the fill factor (FF) decreases from 0.72 to 0.64 vs. n = 1 to 6 layers of CdS, respectively, which means that both Voc and FF change much less significantly vs. CdS layers. A higher Voc suggests that Ecb of TiO2 shifts upward with the increasing number of CdS cycles. A lower FF is probably because of the low driving force for the electron injection with the cycles of CdS. Ecb of CdS shifts downward with the increasing number of CdS cycles. The higher PCE of TiO2/(CdS)6/CdSe is attributed to its broader light adsorption range which leads to a higher Jsc compared with that of TiO2/(CdS)1/CdSe. In addition, PCE and all related factors (Jsc, Voc, FF) almost remain constant after more than 6 layers of CdS (see Table S4, ESI). The best performing device has an efficiency of about 6% (5.9–6.3% in different experiments), which is higher than those of other CdS/CdSe sensitized solar cells prepared in the same way and is similar to the latest report (6.01%) in which CdS/CdSe are co-sensitized on TiO2 nanowire-coated hollow spheres. The electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements of the cells (Fig. 1d) show that the conductivity of TiO2/(CdS)n/CdSe cells is increased by the CdS cycles. The above observations implied that CdS layers with increasing cycles may broaden light adsorption and reduce the energy barrier for excited electron injection from the CdSe layer to TiO2.
In addition, J–V curves also suggest that the voltage first increases with increasing CdS cycles and then comes to a saturation after 3 cycles of the CdS layer (Fig. 1c), indicating that the band levels of the CdS layer can be tuned by its cycles from higher to lower levels. So the following questions arise: (i) From the point of quantum-dot crystal growth, how the insertion of the CdS buffer layer promotes the growth of CdSe. (ii) From the point of tuning of the electronic structure, how the insertion of CdS layers with TiO2/(CdS)n/CdSe quantum-dots affects their energy levels, and how does the number of CdS buffer layers by controlling SILAR cycles affect the band gap and alignment? To answer these questions, we did a comprehensive study on the TiO2/CdS/CdSe interfacial properties using the DFT method in the following part.
The most important step is to establish a reasonable interface structure between anatase-TiO2 and CdS for studying the TiO2/CdS/CdSe composites. As depicted in Fig. 1a, for the CdS layer grown by SILAR on anatase-TiO2, the TiO2/CdS/CdSe samples were investigated by means of TEM analyses (Fig. S6, ESI). We found that the (101) plane of TiO2 and the (110) plane of CdSe are the most exposed surfaces, respectively, which are consistent with previous studies. Therefore, the (101) surface of TiO2 is chosen as the substrate. Based on the (2 × 2) supercell parameters of TiO2(101) (10.87 × 7.73 Å2), we found the nonpolar (110) face of cubic CdS, a (2 × 2) supercell (11.65 × 8.24 Å2) to match best with the TiO2(101) surface (the lattice mismatch less than 7%). Thus, the (110) surface of cubic CdS and CdSe is chosen as the contact surface according to the best lattice matching at the interface. While the mismatch between CdSe(110) (12.11 × 8.56 Å2) and TiO2(101) is beyond 11%, suggesting that the growth of CdSe on TiO2 is difficult. The current results are consistent with experimental observations which suggests that CdS grows on the TiO2 film more easily.Fig. 1b and Fig. S1a and b (ESI) show the interface bonded with the chemical bond (O–Cd) between the O atom of TiO2 and the Cd atom of CdS in the optimized structures of TiO2/CdS/CdSe and TiO2/CdS, respectively. After relaxation, the average bond distance O–Cd is 2.38 Å, which is close to that of bulk Cd–O (2.34 Å), indicating a strong interaction between CdS and TiO2 surfaces.
In the second step, we examined the geometric and electronic structures of TiO2/(CdS)n and TiO2/(CdS)n/CdSe by selecting 5 layers of CdS as a typical model as below. Fig. 2a shows the total or project density of states (TDOS or PDOS) of the TiO2/(CdS)5 system, and the charge distributions of the states in the band edges are shown in Fig. 2a. It can be found that Evb of CdS is lower than that of TiO2 and Ecb of CdS is higher than that of TiO2, indicating that the band alignment of the TiO2/CdS system belongs to the type-II structure with both Evb and Ecb of CdS located higher in the energy level than those of TiO2. As a result, the electrons generated in CdS are energetically favorable to be transferred into TiO2 and holes are transferred into CdS. From charge distribution, it is clear that little charge is localized at the O–Cd bonding interface, implying that charge recombination at the interface seems to be unfavorable. The band edge states are delocalized in bulk TiO2 and bulk CdS, which is consistent with the prediction of the DOS results. In addition, there is no interfacial gap state, and charges could be readily transferred across the interface under visible-light irradiation. Fig. 2b shows the three-dimensional charge density divergence by subtracting the electronic charge of a TiO2/CdS composite from those of the CdS and TiO2 structures and the charge redistribution along the z-direction normal to the interface. The planar-averaged charge density divergence along the z direction also exhibits charge redistribution. The positive (negative) values represent electron accumulation (depletion). It was found that the electrons are transferred from CdS to TiO2, and more specifically, the electrons are transferred from Cd atoms to O atoms. Therefore, an interface dipole was generated in a direction from the CdS side to the TiO2 side. After further checking the structural properties of TiO2/CdS, it was found that, after relaxation, TiO2 retains the bulk TiO2-like structure but CdS induces a structural distortion. As depicted in Fig. 2c, the lattice mismatch at the interface leads to a change in the CdS structure from the cubic to a distorted tetrahedron. Compared with the cubic CdS, the average bond distance of Cd–S in the tetrahedron is lengthened from 2.562 Å to 2.635 Å, and such stress may affect its electronic structure. Besides, the DOS and PDOS of TiO2/(CdS)5/CdSe are also calculated as shown in Fig. 2d, in which CdSe grains are constructed through isomorphic replacement of the surface S atoms by Se atoms in reconstructed four Cd–S layers since CdS/CdSe is a homojunction. The energy levels of TiO2/CdS and CdS/CdSe suggested in Fig. 2d exhibit a type-II and a quasi-type-II structure, respectively. In the quasi-type-II structure of CdS/CdSe, Ecb of CdS is close to that of CdSe but Evb of CdS is lower than that of CdSe. Therefore, the energy levels obtained by insertion of CdS layers may not impede the charge transfer, just as the experimental observation and previous experimental reports indicate. Furthermore, the calculated electrostatic potential of the interface, deducing the electron transport route based on the electrostatic potential difference shown in Fig. S8 (ESI), also agrees well with the DOS analysis.
Hence, the energy levels of TiO2, CdS, and CdSe are assessed by aligning the Ecb energy with respect to their core potential energy, respectively. First, on one hand, as mentioned in Fig. 2b, the charge transfer from CdS to TiO2 generates a dipole field at the heterojunction interface (inset of Fig. 3a), which leads to a downward shift of the conduction band of TiO2. Such interface dipoles inducing energy level shifts have also been reported in other solar-cell systems. On the other hand, the accumulation of electrons in TiO2 shifts the conduction band of TiO2 upward. Thus, the shift of the TiO2 conduction band is determined by the combined effect of charge transfer and surface dipole moment. To shed light on this issue, Ecb of TiO2/(CdS)n/CdSe (n = 2–6) is shown in Fig. 3a. It was found that Ecb of TiO2 increases with the increasing thickness of the CdS layer, because the dipole potential diminishes. The increased extent of Ecb(TiO2) is labeled as ΔE as shown in Fig. 3a. The increase of Ecb(TiO2) is beneficial to Voc of the cell. Fig. 3a also suggests that the Ecb difference between CdS and TiO2 reduces with the increasing CdS cycles, which would reduce the driving force for the electron injection. These results agree with the experimental observation as shown in Fig. 1c and Table S1 (ESI). Second, band gaps can be tuned by the number of CdS layers in both ideal cubic CdS (from the ideal CdS crystal structure) with vacuum as the interface and the distorted tetrahedral CdS structure near the heterojunction interface shown in Fig. 2c and 3b, in which all band gaps first decrease rapidly with increasing CdS layers, and then to a nearly invariable value after 5–6 layers. This is because as the layers increase, the outer layers of CdS would suffer less stress from the interface and possess a more relaxed state. The enlarged Cd–S bonds suggest a weaker interaction between Cd and S atoms with the increasing cycles, which would make electrons become more delocalized and itinerant, thus narrowing the band gap. Similar results are also found at the TiO2/PbS interface, it was shown that the TiO2 surface structure induces PbS bond angle distortions which changed the energy gap of the PbS QDs at the interface. Thus, the band gap reduction (vs. n = 1 to 6 layer) affects the light adsorption range, resulting in high PCE and Jsc, as shown in Fig. 1c and Table S1 (ESI). And above 6 layers, the band gap is invariantly consistent with the small change in photovoltaic parameters as shown in Table S4 (ESI).
Therefore, the transition of energy levels from TiO2 to CdSe can be tuned by the interface dipole and the band gap of CdS buffer, which can be controlled by SILAR cycles. Insight into the CdS layers vs. band energy levels of TiO2/CdS/CdSe was further examined by analyzing the PDOS of TiO2/(CdS)n/CdSe with different CdS layers, as shown in Fig. 3c, which shows that the CdS buffer layer serves as a barrier for charge transfer when the layers are under 4. Interestingly, the barrier disappears when the layers are 4 (n = 4) and more than 4 (n > 4), which would lead to facilitation of the charge injection from CdSe to TiO2. Therefore, tuning CdS buffer layers by SILAR cycles to optimize the energy levels of TiO2/CdS/CdSe quantum-dots can tune the band alignment to enhance the solar-cell performance as shown in Fig. 3d.
In summary, the role played by CdS buffer layers in TiO2/CdS/CdSe was investigated based on experiments and theoretical calculations. The combined effect of charge transfer and dipole moment at the TiO2/CdS/CdSe heterojunction interface produces an upward energy level shift for TiO2. Besides, charges could be readily transferred across the interface under visible-light irradiation due to the absence of interfacial gap states. Most important of all, the band gap of the CdS buffer layer can be tuned by varying its number of layers, which were controllably formed by the SILAR process. Electrons could not be efficiently transferred when the CdS buffer layer was too thin (e.g. less than 4 layers of CdS), and tuning the layers of CdS can induce a suitable energy level alignment between CdS and CdSe (e.g. thicker than 4 layers of CdS). As a result, the reorganization of energy levels with the band alignment between TiO2 and CdSe by insertion of an optimized CdS buffer layer forms a stepwise structure of band-edge levels to benefit photoelectron separation to enhance solar-cell performance. These findings provide insights into the design of high performance solar-cells with optimized buffer layers.
This work was supported by the Guangdong Innovation Team Project (No. 2013N080), National Research Fund for Fundamental Key Project (2012CB932903) and the Shenzhen Science and Technology Research Grant (peacock plan KYPT20141016105435850).
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6cc01664b
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016