 DOI: 10.1039/C7NR02404E
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 9754-9761


Saemon
Yoon
,

Tae-Jun
Ha
* and 

Dong-Won
Kang
*

Dept. of Solar & Energy Engineering, Cheongju University, Cheongju 363-764, Republic of Korea. E-mail: kang@cju.ac.kr; Fax: +82-43-229-8523; Tel: +82-43-229-8558

Dept. of Electronic Materials Engineering, Kwangwoon University, Seoul 139-701, Republic of Korea. E-mail: taejunha0604@gmail.com; Fax: +82-2-940-8678; Tel: +82-2-940-8678

Received
5th April 2017
, Accepted 12th June 2017
First published on 5th July 2017
Adopting an efficient charge transport layer is crucial to improve the photovoltaic (PV) performances of organo-lead halide perovskite (PRV) solar cells. In this study, we suggest a novel hybrid hole-transport layer (HTL) consisting of single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWNTs) and poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS) for inverted-planar PRV devices. The SWNTs were drop-cast on ITO/glass substrates, and they were partly grown perpendicular to the substrates. Then, we coated PEDOT:PSS to cover the SWNTs for complete electron-blocking. A PRV light-harvester was spin-cast on the hybrid HTL, and the vertical SWNTs protruded into the PRV through penetrating the PEDOT:PSS. Steady-state photoluminescence spectroscopy evidenced that the SWNTs/PEDOT:PSS hybrid HTL showed enhanced charge-carrier quenching properties. The hybrid HTL also revealed negligible parasitic absorption loss checked by UV-Vis spectroscopy. These contributed to improve the average power conversion efficiency from 9.4% to 11.0% (up to 12.5% for the best cell) based on fabricated 90 devices. Furthermore, significant suppression of current–voltage hysteresis was attained by employing the hybrid HTL. This study not only manifests unprecedented utilization of the SWNTs for the HTL in inverted planar PRV cells but also paves the way for the development of high-performance and reliable PRV solar cells compatible with flexible processing at low temperature (<150 °C).

Recently, organic/inorganic lead halide perovskite solar cells (PVSCs) have received significant research interest due to their pronounced power conversion efficiency (PCE) over 20%. PVSCs can be prepared by solution processing at low-temperature, which offers promising benefits of low fabrication-costs, simple process, and compatibility of flexible applications. For efficient operation of PVSCs, it is crucial to adopt appropriate charge blocking/transport layers as well as perovskite (PRV) absorbers with long diffusion lengths. Various organic and/or inorganic electron transport layers (ETLs) such as titanium dioxide (TiO2), zinc oxide (ZnO), [6,6]-phenyl C61 butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM),etc. are being used, whereas 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis-(N,N-di-4-methoxyphenylamino)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (Spiro-OMeTAD), PEDOT:PSS, and NiOx are representative hole transport layers (HTLs) for PVSCs. In addition to these conventional materials for organic solar cells and PVSCs, on the other hand, interesting studies on carbon nanotubes (CNTs) employed as a HTL have been reported for applications of organic solar cells and PVSCs due to their excellent optical and electronic properties including stability. In the case of organic solar cells, R. Ulbricht et al. employed multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWNTs) as a hole collector, which showed the increase in power conversion efficiency (PCE) from 1.3 to 1.7%. J. Li et al. reported nanocomposite hole-extraction layers by co-depositing MWNTs and PEDOT:PSS through mixing MWNTs and PEDOT:PSS. This approach showed the PCE increase from 2.1 to 2.4% in organic cells. However, the above reports focused on using MWNTs due to their highly conductive properties for ballistic charge transport. On their characterization, applying such conductive MWNTs in front transparent electrodes degraded the optical transmittance due to the reduced optical band-gap, which caused the loss of short circuit current density (Jsc) and/or open circuit voltage (Voc) in the J–V characteristics of the fabricated organic solar cells as mentioned in their papers. This was a critical factor that led to their marginal PCE increase (0.3–0.4%). Furthermore, there was no solid verification for the charge transport variation using the MWNTs. On the other hand, F. Wang et al. reported interesting PVSC results with adopting single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWNTs)/graphene oxide as HTLs to replace the Spiro-OMeTAD conventional HTL. However, the reported studies applied the concept based on the conventional n-i-p structure using TiO2 as an ETL, which typically requires a high sintering temperature of 450–500 °C. This limits the significant merits of low-temperature processing, low-cost, and flexible applications for PVSCs. As for utilizing these benefits, inverted planar structures have been developed by using representative charge transport layers (CTLs) using a PEDOT:PSS HTL and a PCBM ETL. On the other hand, there have been very few studies about the application and detailed investigation of the SWNTs as the HTL for inverted planar devices compatible with low temperature processing.

In this work, we suggest a hybrid architecture of a SWNTs/PEDOT:PSS bilayer as a HTL for low temperature processed inverted planar (p-i-n type) PVSCs. Here, we have employed semiconducting SWNTs that are not metallic like those mentioned in the previous studies. Firstly, SWNTs were drop-cast on the ITO substrate to form the hole selective contact. Because the SWNTs distribute randomly, PEDOT:PSS was coated on the SWNTs to enhance electron-blocking properties. In order to elucidate the roles of the SWNTs in this proposed structure, structural and optoelectronic characteristics were analyzed. We found that the drop-cast SWNTs partially permeated into the perovskite absorber through PEDOT:PSS, and contributed to perform complementary roles in effective hole-extraction and transport. In addition, there was negligible optical loss of incident light for the hybrid HTL. In other words, we could successfully prepare free-standing and randomly distributed SWNTs by a simple drop-casting method at room temperature in air which impressively exhibited the negligible losses in optical transmittance. To the best of our knowledge, these advances have not been reported by previous studies that showed significant loss in transmittance and a marginal increase in the performances of organic solar cells. On the basis of the conventional perovskite of the methylammonium lead iodide (MAPbI3) PRV light harvester, the fabricated planar PVSCs with the SWNTs/PEDOT:PSS HTL exhibited an average PCE (PCEavg.) of 11.0%, whereas control devices with the PEDOT:PSS only revealed a PCEavg. of 9.4% estimated by statistical evaluation from 90 devices. Also, it revealed an overall improvement in photovoltaic (PV) performances (Voc: 0.95 → 0.98 V; Jsc: 15.29 → 16.62 mA cm−2; FF: 0.645 → 0.678) without sacrificing any PV parameter thanks to advanced SWNT preparation. Furthermore, slight hysteresis observed in control-devices was considerably suppressed in the cells using the proposed hybrid HTL. These experimental demonstrations suggest that the presented SWNTs/PEDOT:PSS HTL paves the way for utilizing SWNTs in low-temperature-processed planar PVSCs with impressive performance improvement, and reliable operation by negligible hysteresis.

Methylammonium iodide (MAI, Luminescence Technology Corp., 99.99%) and lead iodide (PbI2, Alfa Aesar, 99.9985%) were purchased and used as is to fabricate the precursor solutions of organo-lead halide (MAPbI3) perovskites. As for CTLs, poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS, PVP AI 4083) for the HTL and henyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM, Nano-C, 99.5%,) for the ETL were used as is. As for perovskite precursors, dimethylformamide (DMF, SAMCHUN chemical, 99.5%) and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO, SAMCHUN chemical, 99.8%) were used to dissolve MAI and PbI2 with a weight ratio of 1:1:1 (MAI:PbI2:DMSO) into DMF (948 mg mL−1) and magnetically stirred at 65 °C over 12 h. An anti-solvent of chlorobenzene (CBZ, KANTO chemical, mono, >99.5%,) was adopted to carry out the washing process (0.5 mL) during spin-coating for morphologically controlled PRV. PC61BM solution (20 mg mL−1) was prepared by dissolving PCBM in CBZ and stirred at room temperature over 2 h. SWNT solution (NanoIntergris, 99%, 0.01 mg mL−1, average length of 1 μm (distribution ranges of 100 nm–4 μm)) was used.


ITO substrates (15 Ω sq−1) were cleaned by sequential sonication with acetone, methyl alcohol, isopropyl alcohol, and de-ionized water for 10 min each. After being dried in a dry-oven (100 °C for 20 min) system, the substrates were UV-Ozone treated for 20 min to transform the surfaces to hydrophilic. In order to form dense random networks of SWNTs, poly(L-lysine) (PLL) solution (Sigma Aldrich, 0.1% (w/v) in H2O) was drop-cast onto the ITO substrate for 20 min. After soft blowing with nitrogen, SWNT solution was drop-cast on the substrates for 20 min, and the preparation was finished with soft blowing using nitrogen. Then, PEDOT:PSS solution (filtered with 0.45 μm PTFE-H) was spin-cast onto the ITO or ITO/SWNT substrates at 4000 rpm for 50 s and annealed at 140 °C for 20 min in air. Afterward, perovskite precursors (filtered with 0.45 μm PVDF) were spin-coated onto the substrates at 5000 rpm for 50 s after being accelerated up to 5000 rpm for 5 s in a glovebox; 0.5 mL of anti-solvent (CBZ) was dropped at 5–6 s during the main spin-coating duration. The resulting substrates were then annealed at 100 °C for 10 min on hot plates in air. Afterward, the PCBM solution was spin-coated onto the perovskite films at 400 rpm for 1 s and 1500 rpm at 35 s. Finally, the silver electrode was thermally evaporated under high vacuum (<1 × 10−6 Torr) through a shadow mask. The effective cell area was defined as 4 mm2.


The SWNT distribution on the ITO substrates was analyzed by using a field-enhanced scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM, Ultra Plus; Zeiss). Optical absorption/transmission spectra of the various multi-layer films were obtained by using an ultraviolet-visible (UV-Vis) spectrophotometer (UV-2700; Shimadzu). We also obtained the steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra of PRV films prepared on various HTL constitutions to observe carrier-transport dynamics. All current–voltage (J–V) characteristics and forward–backward hysteresis of the fabricated PVSCs were measured by using a solar simulator (Polaronix K201; McScience) under AM 1.5 full sunlight conditions (100 mW cm−2 at 25 °C) under atmospheric air without any encapsulation for devices. The intensity of the simulated solar spectrum was calibrated by using a reference solar cell, and the measurements were performed without an additional mask. The average PCEs of the PVSCs with various HTL structures were estimated by averaging 90 devices for each condition to obtain reliable statistics of PV performances. The external quantum efficiency (EQE, Solar Cell Scan 100; Zolix) spectra of the fabricated PRV solar cells were also obtained after calibration with a reference cell.


Since we aimed to construct inverted planar type PVSCs at low temperature, SWNTs were drop-cast on the PLL-treated ITO substrates at room temperature in air. As described in the Experimental part, we did not perform any thermal annealing for the SWNT preparation, and this also suits well with low cost and flexible electronic applications. As investigated with the cross-sectional FE-SEM image (inset, Fig. 1), the drop-cast SWNTs cover the underlying ITO surface. The several nanotubes show random distribution and we could find free-standing nanotubes whose heights were about several tens of nanometers. The relatively long SWNTs with heights around 100–180 nm were also observed. This vertical distribution of the SWNTs is expected to contribute effective hole-selective contact when a PRV absorber layer is spin-cast on them. On the other hand, PRV coating on these ITO/SWNT substrates can cause direct contact regions between the PRV and underlying ITO since the SWNTs cannot form a complete layer but show generally random networks. This can suffer from serious recombination loss since electron blocking at the ITO/PRV interface would not be achieved. To date, conventional PRV solar cell structures using a TiO2 mesoporous layer typically have adopted a compact TiO2 thin layer on FTO as an electron blocking layer before forming the mesoporous structure because the PRV absorber will infiltrate the mesoporous TiO2, and it can allow for direct contact between PRV and FTO, resulting in severe recombination in terms of PV device operation. Also, graphene oxide or PMMA layers were coated on the SWNTs to fill the vacancies made from the randomly distributed nanotubes. From this point of view, the prepared SWNTs on ITO are likely insufficient to perform both functions of hole-transport and electron-blocking. Hence, we additionally coated a thin PEDOT:PSS layer about 30 nm on the SWNTs by proceeding its penetration into randomly distributed SWNTs which forms SNWTs + PEDOT:PSS hybrid layers for full coverage of the ITO surface. As observed in Fig. 1, the PEDOT:PSS revealed good coverage on the ITO/SWNTs and it is expected to fill the voids in randomly distributed SWNTs. This structure can block effectively electrons diffusing from the PRV absorber to the ITO front contact, which is able to suppress electron–hole recombination losses. Since the PEDOT:PSS is thin (∼30 nm), relatively long free-standing SWNTs (>100 nm) are protruded on the surface of PEDOT:PSS as indicated in Fig. 1. When a PRV absorber is coated on this ITO/SWNTs/PEDOT:PSS substrate, it can infiltrate the free-standing SWNTs and simultaneously make a typical interface of PEDOT:PSS/PRV.

In addition to the structural investigation, it is also crucial to elucidate the optical properties of the SWNTs/PEDOT:PSS hybrid HTL since it constitutes the front contact with the ITO in inverted planar device architecture. Fig. 2 shows a comparison of the optical absorbance for different HTLs, measured with an UV-Vis spectrophotometer. It was found that the SWNTs/PEDOT:PSS hybrid HTL showed optical-absorption levels almost similar to the spectra of individual SWNTs or PEDOT:PSS. Optical loss by constructing the SWNTs/PEDOT:PSS bilayer structure was found to be negligible, which can be ascribed to the random distribution of SWNTs with a wide bandgap about 3.0 eV. It is thought that the SWNTs/PEDOT:PSS hybrid HTL prepared on the front ITO substrate will cause no detrimental issues in terms of optical characteristics for inverted planar solar cells.
On the basis of the structural and optical examinations, a next step was proceeded to coat MAPbI3 PRV light harvesters on the various HTLs shown above. Fig. 3(a) displays the cross-sectional FE-SEM image for the PRV absorber coated on the SWNTs/PEDOT:PSS hybrid HTL. At first, we could find dense coverage of PRV films with well-defined large crystallites, meaning that solution-processed PRV coating on the hybrid HTL was successful. Above all, the PRV film infiltrated the free-standing SWNTs by forming a compact crystalline-structure. This is similar to the previous conventional device structure of the PRV infiltrating mesoporous TiO2 prepared on a FTO/compact TiO2 ETL. At this stage, we also investigated the optical transmittance for various HTL structures, as shown in Fig. 3(b). There was strong absorption at the spectral wavelengths from UV to 500 nm due to light absorption from the PRV photoactive layer. The transmittance was drastically increased at the wavelength of about 760–800 nm which is very close to the bandgap of the MAPbI3 PRV. Furthermore, there were negligible differences in the transmittance values according to HTL variations, and this means that the absorption properties of the PRV prepared on the hybrid HTL were almost identical to the ones with individual HTLs.
Then, we elucidated photo-generated charge carrier-transport characteristics for PRV films prepared on various HTLs by measuring steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra as depicted in Fig. 4. PRV films generally reveal strong PL quenching properties as evidence of effective charge-transfer from the photoactive PRV to the contacted CTL. The PL peak was found at the wavelength of 765 nm, which indicates the bandgap (1.62 eV) of the fabricated MAPbI3 PRV. The PRV coated on a glass substrate shows strong emission from radiative recombination due to the lack of any CTL. In the case of the PEDOT:PSS/PRV, it showed strong PL quenching property, and this is one of the reasons that the PEDOT:PSS is popular as a representative HTL for PRV and/or organic solar cells. The contribution of SWNTs for PL quenching was also effective when it is compared with the PL spectrum of the PRV prepared on glass. This indicates that our drop-cast SWNTs can be a selective collector for essential hole-extraction. When it is compared to the PEDOT:PSS, on the other hand, we found relatively moderate PL quenching for the SWNTs/PRV, which can be attributed to the random distribution of SWNTs on the glass substrate. There are voids/empty-spaces between random networks, and the PRV would be in direct contact with the underlying glass substrate. In other words, the contact area between the photoactive PRV and SWNTs might be much smaller than the area consisting of PEDOT:PSS and PRV, resulting in relatively less PL quenching. However, the PL quenching property of the SWNTs/PEDOT:PSS hybrid HTL was much impressive since it showed the strongest PL quenching among all HTL structures in this study. In this hybrid structure, it is speculated that the free-standing SWNTs penetrated into the photoactive PRV would perform complementary roles in the hole-extraction and transfer. It can be implied that the vertically protruded SWNTs into the PRV absorber contribute to the charge-transfer in combination with the PEDOT:PSS. This interesting effect can be similarly compared with the influence of the TiO2 mesoporous layer constructed on the compact TiO2 widely used in conventional device structures with the assistance of electron-transport by increasing the surface area.
From the above fundamental analysis, inverted planar PVSCs adopting the SWNTs/PEDOT:PSS hybrid were fabricated by considering the architecture illustrated in Fig. 5 in order to examine their contribution for PV performances in PVSCs. In terms of energetic levels shown in Fig. 5(a), the SWNTs match well between the ITO/PEDOT:PSS interface, which can be used as a hole collector in planar PVSCs. The device structure employing the hybrid HTL is shown in Fig. 5(b). The J–V characteristics of best-performing PVSCs with different HTLs and their resulting PV parameters are described in Fig. 6(a) and Table 1, respectively. As for the individual HTL, the PVSC with standard PEDOT:PSS HTL delivered a high PCE of 12.0%, whereas the cell with the SWNTs HTL revealed a poor performance about 2.4%. The inferior open circuit voltage (Voc) and fill factor (FF) of the devices with the SWNTs HTL can be mainly ascribed to the significant electron–hole recombination loss from the ITO/PRV interface caused by penetration of the PRV through randomly distributed SWNTs. On the other hand, the conventional device has a “complete” layer of PEDOT:PSS between the ITO and PRV photoactive layer for hole-transport and electron-blocking, which can offer efficient charge separation and extraction in PV device operation. However, we could achieve an enhanced PCE of 12.5% by employing the SWNTs/PEDOT:PSS hybrid HTL. For much reliable demonstration, we obtained statistical evaluation by fabricating a lot of PVSCs about 90 devices for each HTL, as shown in Fig. 6(b) and Table 1 as described by averaged values. On the basis of the better statistical data, we could find that devices with the novel SWNTs/PEDOT:PSS hybrid HTL exhibited a PCEavg of 11.0% which outperforms the cells with the standard PEDOT:PSS HTL with a PCEavg of 9.4%. This impressive advance could be attained by the overall improvement in PV parameters. The steady-state PL quenching study (Fig. 4) offered an indication that the extraction and collection process of the photo-generated charge carriers would be improved by the hole-transporting SWNTs protruded into the PRV photoactive layer, and this carrier-transport dynamics could also affect the J–V hysteresis of the PVSCs that is one of the critical issues for highly reliable PRV technologies. As shown in Fig. 5(c), the device employing the proposed SWNTs/PEDOT:PSS exhibited enhanced EQE in wide spectral ranges compared to the one with conventional PEDOT:PSS, which implies that charge collection properties were improved by the additional SWNTs. The integrated Jsc values from the EQE and J–V of PVSCs with SWNTs/PEDOT:PSS were 17.57 mA cm−2 and 18.01 mA cm−2, respectively. Also, the estimated Jsc from the EQE and J–V of the device with conventional PEDOT:PSS was 16.59 mA cm−2 and 17.05 mA cm−2, respectively. The deviation of Jsc measured from EQE and J–V was less than 3%.
HTL

V
oc (V) (avg.)

J
sc (mA cm−2) (avg.)
FF (avg.)
PCE (%) (avg.)

V
oc, open circuit voltage; Jsc, short circuit current; FF, fill factor; PCE, power conversion efficiency.
SWNTs
0.59 (0.23)
10.74 (11.88)
0.384 (0.266)
2.4 (0.8)
PEDOT:PSS
0.99 (0.95)
17.05 (15.29)
0.714 (0.645)
12.0 (9.4)
SWNTs/PEDOT:PSS
0.98 (0.98)
18.01 (16.62)
0.713 (0.678)
12.5 (11.0)

Fig. 7(a) shows the J–V hysteresis of PVSCs with conventional PEDOT:PSS HTL, which showed slight hysteresis about 0.7% in the PCE difference. On the other hand, the PVSC device with the proposed SWNTs/PEDOT:PSS hybrid HTL was found to have negligible hysteresis about only 0.1% in PCE variation under forward and backward J–V characteristics scanned at a rate of 0.01 V s−1. With additional introduction of the SWNTs, the hysteresis phenomenon was remarkably suppressed, indicative of the SWNTs being mainly responsible for the hysteresis. This improvement can be related to the enhanced PL quenching property of the SWNTs/PEDOT:PSS hybrid charge-transporter as evidenced by the PL analysis (Fig. 4). Compared to the individual PEDOT:PSS HTL, the free-standing SWNTs protruded into the MAPbI3 PRV light harvester could reinforce selective hole extraction and transfer, and might alleviate undesirable charge accumulation at PEDOT:PSS/PRV interfaces. The SWNTs would play complementary roles in the efficient charge-extraction, and thus contributed to achieve the overall PV performance and better intrinsic stability by reducing the J–V hysteresis phenomenon. In this hybrid HTL, the SWNTs protruding into the PRV active layer can be compared with the structure of PRV light absorber infiltrating mesoporous TiO2-scaffolds to suppress J–V hysteresis characteristics. On the other hand, our hybrid HTL could offer low-temperature-processing for the devices below 150 °C, which is much lower than the sintering temperature (450–500 °C) of the mesoporous TiO2 in the conventional PVSC structure. The novel hybrid HTL supports utilization of the planar architecture for low-temperature-processing of highly efficient PVSCs by simply introducing SWNTs. Furthermore, the examined experimental results showed impressive enhancement of the PCE and meaningful reduction of J–V hysteresis, suggesting that the hybrid HTL can be an innovative approach for highly efficient and reliable inverted-planar PVSCs with low temperature processing.

The SWNTs/PEDOT:PSS hybrid charge-transporter was suggested for the HTL of low-temperature-processed inverted planar PVSCs. The drop-cast SWNTs on the ITO substrate showed random distribution and in part located toward vertical directions. PEDOT:PSS and PRV layers infiltrated the underlying free-standing SWNTs. UV-Vis absorption measurement revealed that there was negligible optical loss of the SWNTs/PEDOT:PSS bilayer at front interfaces. The steady-state PL study showed an enhanced charge quenching property by adopting the SWNTs/PEDOT:PSS hybrid HTL compared to individual HTL cases. The enhanced charge transport characteristics boosted the PV performance from 9.4% to 11.0% based on averaging 90 devices. Also, it would improve the intrinsic stability by significantly suppressing the J–V hysteresis properties. As a result, this study firstly showed successful demonstration of the SWNT hole collector applicable for inverted planar PVSCs, which can open up new routes for the development of highly efficient and reliable planar PVSCs totally processed at low temperature (<150 °C).


This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIP) (No. 2015R1C1A1A01053624) and Kwangwoon University in 2017.


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017