 DOI: 10.1039/C5TA00288E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 7830-7839


J.
Tang
 and 

A.
Gomez
*

Department of Mechanical Engineering and Materials Science, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520-8286, USA. E-mail: alessandro.gomez@yale.edu

Received
13th January 2015
, Accepted 2nd March 2015
First published on 3rd March 2015
To meet nanofabrication requirements, such as control of structure and scalability, we investigated an electrospray-based method to manufacture photoanodes for Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells (DSSCs). Charged droplets are generated, carrying TiO2 nanoparticles, and deposited using an electric field. We show how morphology, structure and performance of resulting films can be controlled by varying: (a) nanoparticle loading in the slurry and, consequently, the size of the nanoparticle clusters, (b) droplet evaporation rate before impact on the substrate and, consequently, contact of the clusters, and (c) film density. We demonstrate examples in which the film structure affects device performance. Generally, electrosprayed DSSCs have higher open-circuit voltage and fill factor as compared to standards based on spincoating, whereas the latter exhibit higher short-circuit current density. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy helped rationalize these findings in terms of larger recombination resistance and lower chemical capacitance of the electrosprayed cells. Performance merits of the two approaches can be combined synergistically into a bilayer structure of highest efficiency, with densely packed spincoated particles at the bottom of the deposit, where light absorption is critical, and a more loosely packed electrosprayed layer on top, which is advantageous for hole transport in the electrolyte and as a back-scattering layer.

Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSC) are energy conversion devices that can be manufactured inexpensively without the need of cleanrooms for high vacuum technology, at the expense of relatively modest efficiency. The operating principle of the DSSC is well established: a thin nanostructured TiO2 film anchors chemical dye molecules that absorb incoming photons and subsequently inject excited electrons into the conduction band of TiO2, generating photocurrent. To close the reaction, electrons on the other electrode, shuttled by the external circuit, feed a redox reaction in the hole-conducting electrolyte and replenish the oxidized dye molecules. The nanoparticulate film must have high surface area for dye loading and a mesoporous structure for electrolyte penetration. Its nanostructure controls the charge carrier transport in the device as well as light scattering characteristics.

This work focuses on the controlled manufacturing of the photoanode, that is, the titania film that is responsible for charge transport, arrangement of optical absorbers, and ion transport from the redox couple. Trade-offs in particle size, pore size, and film density make a highly controllable deposition technique potentially attractive as careful engineering of the TiO2 film structure has been shown to impact efficiency. However, the current, conventional methods of depositing this nanoparticle layer, based on doctors blade, spincoating, and inkjet printing, provide little control over the structure. In addition, the first two are difficult to scale up for industrial production, as they rely on batch-type processes. As a result, realizing a high degree of control over film structure with a scalable, continuous spray process remains a challenge and provides the primary motivation for developing and demonstrating an ElectroSpray (ES) deposition method.
The ES is a liquid atomization technique relying solely on electric charging to disperse a conductive liquid into fine, uniformly sized droplets. When operated in the cone-jet mode, it offers exquisite control on droplet size, up to monodispersity. Importantly, it does so over a phenomenal size range, from micrometer droplets to nanometric ones, the latter being virtually impossible to generate from any other spray technique. Furthermore, the droplets generated from the ES are highly charged, providing an additional handle by which the droplet trajectory can be manipulated and preventing droplet coagulation because of Coulomb repulsion. The ES exhibits a monotonic dependence of droplet size on flow rate. If the desired droplet size is sufficiently small, as is certainly the case if it is used in the nanoparticle context, the corresponding low flow rates result in low throughput, which hampers widespread applications of this device beyond ES ionization for analytical chemistry use. Scale up would entail running multiple ESs in parallel, that is, multiplexing, to increase throughput by several orders of magnitude. When ES sources are packed densely together, they will interfere with each other both in terms of electrostatics and fluid mechanics. A successful design must minimize the two types of interference and essentially decouple the ES sources. Design criteria that address these problems were established in. As a result, the trial-and-error involving microfabrication prototyping is eliminated, and the recipes for scale up are already in place.
Several examples of applying the ES toward DSSC technology are reported in the literature. In some examples, despite the use of the ES, the resulting TiO2 aggregates are polydisperse. In one case, the ES is only used to generate a powder of the TiO2 aggregates, but the films are made by doctor blading. Results in the literature are encouraging and support the use of ES for the superior light scattering and electron transport exhibited by ES-generated TiO2 aggregates. However, none of these contributions explored systematically the ES potential, which is a major goal of the present contribution.
We aim to capitalize further on the ES ability to control deposition, report on a systematic investigation on a variety of film structures and study their effect on DSSC performance. The primary focus of the work is to track relative changes in DSSC performance. We made no effort to achieve the high absolute efficiencies reported in the literature. However, the flexibility of the technique makes it applicable to more advanced materials systems used in high-efficiency cells, such as state-of-the-art chemical sensitizers, redox couples, or solid-state hole conductors.

ES deposition is implemented by using the experimental set up sketched in Fig. 1. Briefly, TiO2 nanopowder (P-25, Degussa) is dispersed at various concentrations into a 90% ethanol, 10% water solution containing 0.3 mM of either nitric acid or hydrochloric acid. The acid serves to stabilize the dispersion electrically, preventing nanoparticle aggregation and settling. Once mixed, the slurry is stable for several days. The slurry is fed with a syringe pump (Harvard Apparatus) at a rate of 90 μl h−1 into the ES apparatus. The ES nozzle is a metallic needle (I.D. = 30 μm, O.D. = 115 μm). The electric field between the nozzle and an extractor electrode, consisting of a brass disc with a 3 mm opening positioned 1 mm downstream, establishes an ES in the cone-jet mode. An additional electrode with a 15 mm opening positioned an additional 1.0 cm downstream is used to drive the particles to a grounded fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) glass substrate, with the area of deposition controlled by the electric field. The fields between the extractor and the accelerator and between the accelerator and the collector, fixed at 3 kV cm−1 in both cases, control the flight speed and trajectory of the charged droplets. The back-illuminated spray is monitored visually with a 30× microscope and electrically by measuring current emitted and collected.

Each droplet contains many particles, depending on the particle load in the slurry and the droplet size. The droplet size can be estimated through the scaling law:
(1)
where
d is the droplet diameter, G[ε] is an empirical function of order unity, Q is the flow rate, ε is the dielectric constant of the liquid, K is the electrical conductivity of the liquid, and ε0 is the permittivity of free space. It can be adjusted modestly by changing the liquid flow rate and is limited by the stability regime of the cone-jet mode. On the other hand, the liquid electrical conductivity can be increased by several orders of magnitude by adding trace amounts of acids, salts, or ionic liquids, which consequently decreases the droplet diameter. Thus, there is great latitude in the selection of the size of the charged droplets as dictated by the application.


Spincoated films are used for comparison to the ES-based cells. Titania particles (P-25, Degussa) are mixed in a solution of 50/50 deionized water and ethanol with a concentration of 0.25 g mL−1 by ultrasonication. Films are prepared with a spin rate of 1000 RPM with either five or two coats. Samples are allowed to air dry between coats. Each layer is 3 micrometers thick. A series of spincoated DSSC with different layers revealed that 5 layers of spincoating (15 micrometer thick films) yielded the highest efficiency devices.


Titania (P-25, Degussa) is deposited directly onto FTO glass slides (TEC7, Hartford Glass). Sintering of the deposit occurs at 450 °C for two hours in air. The sintered deposit is then sensitized in a dye bath containing 0.20 mM of N719 (Solaronix) in a 1:1 tert-butanol and acetonitrile (anhydrous grade, Sigma) mixture and rinsed in ethanol prior to assembly. The counter electrode is made by thermal decomposition of chloroplatinic acid (Sigma) onto an FTO glass slide. Cells are held together by binder clips with a Surlyn spacer (60 μm, Solaronix) between the glass slides. A commercial iodide-triiodide redox couple is used as the electrolyte (AN-50, Solaronix). All chemicals are used as received without further purification. Four cells of each manufacturing condition are assembled and tested. The films are analyzed with scanning electron microscopy (SU-70, Hitachi). TiO2 blocking layers and TiCl4 treatment are added by immersing the FTO slide (bare for the former, with sintered deposit for the latter) into an aqueous solution of 40 mM TiCl4 held at 70 °C for 30 minutes. Cells are sintered for an additional 30 minutes at 400 °C after TiCl4 treatment.


The assembled solar cells are tested under simulated AM1.5G (ABET Technologies LS 10500 Solar Simulator). A flat black opaque mask is used to cover the cells except for the active area unless otherwise noted. Active areas range between 0.15 cm2 and 0.30 cm2 and are measured by a high resolution scanner. A Keithley 2400 source meter is used to measure I–V characteristics. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy is performed under AM1.5G (Solartron, Model 1260) at open circuit voltage with 50 mV amplitude and frequency range between 0.1 Hz to 10 kHz. Curves are fitted using ZPlot and ZView software. Dye desorption from the sensitized anodes is performed using a 0.1 M NaOH solution of 1:1 deionized water and ethanol. UV-visible spectrophotometry (HP/Agilent, 8453) is used to measure N719 quantities on the TiO2 films by looking at the optical absorption at 513 nm after calibrating against known concentrations of N719 (5 μM, 10 μM, 20 μM, 40 μM, 100 μM). Sheet resistance of FTO substrates is measured using a collinear four-point probe with a Keithley 4200 SCS electrical analyser.



Fig. 2 shows Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) images of a prototypical ES deposit of TiO2 nanoparticle aggregates with top view (Fig. 2A) and cross-sectional view (Fig. 2B). In this specific case, an average of 2700 particles were loaded in each droplet by adjusting the particle loading in the slurry to 16 mg ml−1 and the droplet size. The top view exhibits a repeating pattern with “islands” of characteristic dimension of approximately 7 μm, separated by deep crevices, as evidenced by the cross sectional view on the right. The deposit appears reasonably dense as compared to those obtained with much lighter particle loading per droplet.

We verified that we can produce films of various dimensions in a controllable way by collecting several deposits with varying time exposure to the spray and measuring the resulting film thicknesses of the deposit cross sections with SEM, as in Fig. 2B. The film thickness increased linearly with time while the film area remained constant (Fig. 2C). The linear relationship between thickness and deposition time implies that the porosity is constant as the film grows taller. Note that the linear fit does not cross the origin, which implies that there is a thin layer at the start of deposition where the thickness is growing slower and/or that the initial layer is more compact. This evidence suggests that the technique allows for controlled film growth and the deposit structure is invariant with thickness, with the exception of the sub-layer adjacent to the substrate. We also observed that the linear relationship was preserved for various concentrations of nanoparticle in the feed solution, from single nanoparticles per droplet to thousands.

We investigated the effect of aggregate size on the DSSC performance by electrospraying solutions with different particle loadings at a constant flow rate and, consequently, droplet size (see eqn (1)). The total mass (or number) of particles was held constant and films were deposited using different concentrations of TiO2 nanopowder to affect aggregate size. To convert the nanoparticle concentration in the ES slurry to a physical size, the aggregate diameters are estimated from

(2)
where
A is experimentally of unity order, D is the aggregate diameter, a is the primary particle diameter, NP is the number of primary particles per aggregate (calculated by estimating droplet size from eqn (1) and the concentration of TiO2 suspended in the ES solution), and Df is 3 for spherical aggregates. The predicted agglomerate diameter was verified on some aggregates by measurements from SEM images. Fig. 3A shows the film structure for these series of cells for constant total mass loading and film area. The lower the concentration—that is, the smaller the aggregates—the less porous the film, as suggested by its reduced thickness. The nonlinear dependence of deposit thickness on particle concentration suggests that the deposit microstructure changes with the droplet nanoparticle loading. We tracked the short circuit current density as a function of nanoparticle concentration and report it in Fig. 3C as a measure of performance, since the open circuit voltages and fill factors were found not to change appreciably. The short circuit current density shows that the larger aggregates are favored. This can be the result of light scattering or trapping occurring for aggregates with sizes comparable to wavelengths of light absorbed by the N719 dye (broadband absorption up to 650 nm). Other studies claim similar optimal sizes for TiO2 aggregates for light scattering. A study on the effect of light scattering enhancements on performance for mono- and poly-disperse TiO2 and ZnO nanoparticle aggregates also supports this optimal aggregate size range. On the basis of these observations, TiO2 nanoparticle aggregates of 400–500 nm (Fig. 3B) were used in the remainder of the experiments, comprising of 3.7 × 103 nanoparticles on average. Notice that an increase in particle concentration brings about not only a change in agglomerate size but also a modest change in deposit thickness. However, based on the morphology pictures in Fig. 3A and the performance in Fig. 3C, the effect on the first variable is dominant, since we would expect the smaller aggregates to have higher available surface area for dye loading and higher charge collection efficiency because of the lower porosity with more of the particles in close proximity to the FTO contact. Despite this, the cells with the larger aggregates exhibit higher short circuit current density than the smaller aggregates for constant TiO2 mass, showing that the aggregate size is the critical factor in this series of cells.


The hierarchical structure of the films can be tuned by manipulating the solvent evaporation rate. This evaporation time was varied by adding small amounts of a less volatile solvent, such as dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), to the ES solution. When the residence time of the droplet was much longer than its evaporation lifetime, dry deposition occurred, as in the two leftmost images in Fig. 4A. This condition corresponds to Daev ≫ 1, where Daev is the Damköhler (Da) number of evaporation, representing the ratio between residence time and evaporation time. In such a case, dry, spherical TiO2 aggregates that were residues of the primary droplet were driven electrostatically to the grounded substrate. Conversely, if the residence time was much smaller than the evaporation time of the droplet, that is for Daev ≪ 1, solvent droplets containing TiO2 nanoparticles splashed onto the substrate. The liquid accumulation on the substrate led to uneven films, coffee-ring drying patterns, and eventually film cracking. Between these two extremes, when Daev = O(1), we neither observed dry deposition nor had the problems associated with liquid accumulation. In this case, some solvent still remaining in droplets hit the target, quickly dried to yield a uniform film without cracking. This condition corresponds to the three rightmost pictures in Fig. 4A.

By controlling the evaporation of the ES droplets, we controlled the interconnectivity of the film, with the microstructure evolving from well-formed spherical aggregates of TiO2 stacked on top of each other, to a web of TiO2 structures with width on the order of the aggregate diameter, as in the rightmost image in Fig. 4A. The dry deposition had fewer particle-to-particle contacts between two adjacent spherical aggregates as compared to the wet deposition structure (see leftmost image in Fig. 4A), affecting charge collection efficiency. We estimated the film porosity by measuring deposit area, film thickness, and TiO2 mass. The dry-deposited electrosprayed films are 93.3% porous and the wet-deposited electrosprayed films are 90.4% porous. Spin coated films (Fig. 5C) have 56.6% porosity.
We also investigated the effect of further densification of the TiO2 film. We submerged ES deposits into a solution of 15 wt% ethyl cellulose in ethanol prior to sintering. The result was a reduction in film porosity by up to 40%, as shown in Fig. 4B. The film is much more densely packed, which increases the optical absorption as compared to a more porous structure of equivalent thickness, once the deposit is permeated with dye.

Fig. 4D shows J–V characteristics of the best cells with various microstructure enhancements, including the addition of 3% DMSO to control evaporation rate. Note that these cells were tested without masking of the non-active areas of the FTO glass, which artificially increases somewhat the current density. However, conclusions on relative enhancements to performance of the different approaches still hold. The short circuit current density is almost doubled when either the ethyl cellulose densification or wet deposition via DMSO addition is performed. The densification step is most likely aiding optical absorption, as the dyed deposits appear as a darker purple compared to the dry or wet deposition cells. The wet deposited cells not only increase the short circuit current density, but also the open circuit voltage. Due to the higher porosity, there is less active surface area in the film, which reduces recombination that occurs at the TiO2-electrolyte interface, as further elaborated below. However, the short circuit current density is the same, suggesting that the cell harvests light more efficiently per unit mass of TiO2. Finally, after combining the wet deposition and the ethyl cellulose post treatment, we found a much higher short circuit current density and observe another increase in open circuit voltage. Closer examination of the deposit cross-section revealed a unique bilayer structure, as shown in Fig. 4C.
The bilayer structure is potentially attractive because it leads to a dual improvement with: (1) densely packed particles at the bottom half of the deposit, where light absorption is most important, as photoelectrons generated there will be most likely collected, because of the proximity to the FTO contact; and (2) a more loosely packed layer in the top half of the deposit, which is advantageous for hole transport via ion diffusion in the electrolyte that replenishes the oxidized dye molecules, and as a back-scattering layer.

Inspired by the previous findings, we persisted in the bilayer strategy by designing a thin film via spincoating followed by ES deposition. Although the previous experiments with ethyl cellulose post treatment on wet deposition were the first to show the benefits of a bilayer structure, the densification step suffers from lack of reproducibility and control, only giving the desired structure in some cells. Conversely, with this hybrid nanofabrication approach, the bilayer structure is easily and reproducibly formed by one layer of spincoating followed by wet ES deposition. Fig. 5A and B show details of this hybrid structure. Only one layer of spincoating was applied, resulting in a 3 μm-thick compact film of particles.

We tested these devices against spincoated DSSCs, with a typical SEM picture shown in Fig. 5C, that had the TiO2 blocking layer and the TiCl4 post treatment that typically serve as a reference standard. These cells were tested with a mask covering all of the FTO glass except the active area, so absolute values for performance are reliable. The bilayer structure manufactured from hybrid deposition exhibits superior short circuit current density as compared to the spincoated cells, as evidenced by the J–V curves in Fig. 5D.
The power conversion efficiency average is 4.30%, a 16% increase over 3.71%, the average efficiency of the spincoated cells. These hybrid cells did not have a blocking layer or TiCl4 post-treatment, yet have comparable fill factor and open circuit voltage to the spincoated cells that did have them, which suggests that even additional performance improvements can be achieved with this standard post-treatment. These data provide strong evidence that the TiO2 film structure is critical in determining the overall efficiency of the device and demonstrate that it can be tuned to maximize DSSC performance. It is worthwhile to note that a DSSC with a single layer of spincoating (3 micrometer thick film) yields an average short circuit density of 2.95 mA cm−2 and a DSSC with a 22 micron electrosprayed deposit under the conditions used for the hybrid cells yields an average short circuit density of 4.04 mA cm−2. Clearly there is a synergistic effect between the two layers as the hybrid cell average short circuit current density was measured to be 9.45 mA cm−2, a value much larger than the sum of its individual layers.

Inspection of the FTO surface revealed a deterioration when it was exposed to the ES, even if the spray did not contain TiO2 particles. In fact, in the impaction area of the ES on the FTO glass slide, a circle of greater transparency could easily be distinguished by naked eye from the rest of the glass. This area appeared as a darker spot under SEM examination, suggesting a locally lower electric conductivity. The fact that the spot appeared also in the absence of TiO2 particles implies that it may be caused by etching of the conductive layer in FTO by the ions generated by the ES.

When operating the spray in positive mode (nozzle at a higher voltage than the extractor), the droplets are positively charged and the ions in the droplets are protons. In negative mode, the droplets are negatively charged by the counter-ions. We decided then to vary the ions responsible for charging the liquid droplets generated by the ES by varying the ES polarity and the additives used as conductivity enhancer. We used either nitric acid or hydrochloric acid. In the case of nitric acid, the negative ions are nitrate ions, while for hydrochloric acid, the negative ions are chlorine ions. We tested how the selection of these ions affect the performance of the cells and the results are reported in Table 1.
Cell type
Average Jsc (mA cm−2)
Average Voc (V)
Average FF (%)
Average eff. (%)
HCl positive mode
3.958
0.645
0.577
1.484
HNO3 positive mode
4.040
0.666
0.589
1.594
HCl negative mode
4.261
0.665
0.590
1.674
HNO3 negative mode
4.640
0.701
0.637
2.078
The cells deposited under positive mode for either solution have similar performance because protons are the positive charging ions in both cases. However, the cells deposited under negative mode exhibit different short circuit current densities, open circuit voltages, and fill factors for nitric acid versus hydrochloric acid because of the different charging ions. Just by selecting the charging ion and polarity, an additional 14.8% increase in short circuit current density, 5.2% increase in open circuit voltage, and 8.1% increase in fill factor are achieved. These cells were tested under masked conditions and were manufactured by wet ES-deposition. As a result, they are not optimized in their performance. Nevertheless, the relative changes in performance suggest that the effect of ion etching is significant for ES deposition on bare FTO. For comparison, we also tested spincoated samples for pristine FTO and FTO that had been exposed to ES ions (positive mode, HNO3). The average short circuit current density and fill factor were reduced by 7% and 5%, respectively. This finding suggests that the interaction between the FTO substrate and the ES ions is affecting the overall performance of the DSSC. In order to quantify this interaction, we measured the sheet resistance of the FTO, using as a control the sheet resistance measurements between two different spots of a pristine FTO slide. For the samples exposed to ES ions, sheet resistance was measured on the ES spot and off the spot. Table 2 shows the change in sheet resistance for each sample between the two spots.
Sample
Ion
Molecular weight
% Change in sheet resistance
Pristine FTO (control)
None
N/A
0.77%
HCl positive mode
H+
1
10.09%
HNO3 positive mode
H+
1
13.90%
HCl negative mode
Cl−
35
7.44%
HNO3 negative mode
NO3−
62
2.19%
The control sample shows good agreement between sheet resistance measurements in two different areas of the pristine FTO slide. The nominal value for the FTO slide sheet resistivity is 6.6 Ω □−1 (consistent with technical specifications of the TEC7 grade FTO). The positive mode samples show a significant increase in sheet resistance consequent to exposure to ES ions (H+ ions, in this case). The molecular weight (or charge-to-mass ratio) correlates with the severity of the etching of the conductive layer.
The nitrate ion with the largest molecular weight exhibited the best performance, and the lowest increase in sheet resistance, while the proton with the lowest molecular weight showed the worst performance, and the largest increases in sheet resistance, consistently with the anticipated etching behaviour. The chlorine ion, with an intermediate molecular weight, exhibits intermediate solar cell performance and increases in sheet resistance. The molecular weight (or charge-to-mass ratio) determines the impact velocity, and therefore the kinetic energy imparted on the substrate upon deposition: the smaller the molecular weight, the faster and harder the ions impact the substrate. Lastly, we tested the transmission of the FTO with UV-visible spectrophotometry and did not find significant variation in the transparency of the pristine FTO versus the slides exposed to the ES, ruling out optical effects on device performance.

Even though the hybrid spincoat-ES DSSCs outperform the spincoated standards, the manufacturing process is complex and requires two different methods of nanoparticle deposition. Since the original goal to explore ES synthesis of thin films was that of streamlining the manufacturing process and ensuring scalability, we explored the optimization of solely ES-deposited DSSC, using optimal agglomerate size, control over evaporation and nitrate ion to charge the droplets to minimize etching effects on the FTO, in the hope of achieving good performance with a simple flow process. A TiO2 blocking layer was added together with the TiCl4 post treatment, as commonly reported in the literature. We compare the electrosprayed DSSCs to traditional spincoated cells with the same treatments.

The electrosprayed DSSC have increased open circuit voltage as a result of the blocking layer and the short circuit current density and fill factors are enhanced by both the blocking layer and by the TiCl4 treatment. The optimized ES DSSC have an average fill factor of 72% and power conversion efficiency of 3.38%. The spincoated cells (also with blocking layer and TiCl4 treatment) still exhibit a higher short circuit current density, but a lower open circuit voltage and fill factor than the electrosprayed cells.
While the power conversion efficiency of the electrosprayed DSSC are slightly lower than that of the spincoated cells (average of 3.71%), they are manufactured through a continuous spray process that is fast, amenable to large-scale production and compatible with roll-to-roll processing.

The amount of N719 dye absorbed onto the photoanodes was measured using a UV-visible spectrophotometer. Solutions of known N719 concentration were used to relate absorbance to dye concentration. Fig. 6 shows the spectra for various spincoated and electrosprayed films normalized by film area. Looking at the peak absorption wavelength of N719 dye, 513 nm, we can see that the concentration of dye absorbed onto the ES films of optimum thickness (22 μm) is similar to that absorbed onto a spincoated film of 6 μm, since the spectra are almost overlapping. This amount of dye is far less than that absorbed onto a spincoated film of optimal thickness (15 μm), which may explain the difference in short circuit current density between the ES and the spincoated cells. The addition of the single layer of spincoat and the 22 μm electrosprayed film—simulating the hybrid spincoat-Electrospray DSSC—would yield 49% of the dye absorbed by the optimal spincoated film, meaning that not only is the hybrid DSSC from Fig. 5 yielding a higher short circuit current density than the spincoated cells, but is doing so with half as much N719 dye.

The amount of dye absorbed can also be normalized per mass of TiO2, as reported in Table 3. From this set of data, we observe that it is relatively constant between the spincoated and electrosprayed samples. Furthermore, the dye uptake is the same for ES deposits generated in negative mode with either nitric acid or hydrochloric acid. This finding provides evidence that the ES process has no adverse effects on dye uptake.
Cell
Spincoat 1×
Spincoat 2×
Spincoat 5×
ES (HCl)
ES (HNO3)
Absorbed dye/TiO2 mass (μmol mg−1)
0.376
0.360
0.291
0.385
0.397

Impedance spectroscopy is a useful tool to explain device performance differences. We tested two spincoated cells—one with five layers, corresponding to a total film thickness of 15 μm, and one with two layers (6 μm film thickness), with dye absorption similar to the optimized ES cell, as shown in Fig. 6. We compared them to an optimized electrosprayed cell that was deposited in the negative mode with nitric acid as the conductive additive and 3% DMSO, with a deposit thickness of 22 μm. All cells had TiO2 blocking layers and TiCl4 treatment. Cells were tested under illumination and the Nyquist plots and equivalent circuit model are shown in Fig. 7.

The equivalent circuit contains the series resistance (Rs), TiO2-FTO interfacial resistance (RIT) and capacitance (CIT), charge transfer resistance (Rw), recombination resistance (Rk), and chemical capacitance (Cμ).Table 4 shows the fitted recombination resistance and chemical capacitance for the three cells.
Cell

R
k (Ohm)

C
μ (mF)
2× Spincoat
5.099
1.288
5× Spincoat
4.338
4.107
Electrospray
7.154
0.933
The chemical capacitance of the 5× spincoat is much greater than the 2× spincoat, as expected because of the much larger quantity of absorbed dye (Fig. 6). The chemical capacitance is similar between the 2× spincoat and ES, also consistent with observations from the dye absorption measurement. The recombination resistance is lower for the 5× spincoat as compared to the 2× spincoat, which is due to a larger mass of titania nanoparticles in the film, i.e. a thicker film, and therefore a larger TiO2-electrolyte interfacial surface area for recombination to occur. The ES deposit—while having the smallest chemical capacitance—has the largest recombination resistance of the three cells.
The phase-angle Bode plot (Fig. 8) shows that the mid-range frequency peak occurs at larger frequencies for the ES sample compared to either spincoated sample. The electron lifetime, τ, calculated from 
(3)
yielded values of 3.2, 10.1 and 0.8 milliseconds for the 2× and 5× spincoated samples and the electrosprayed sample, respectively. Surprisingly, the lifetime for the ES film is one order of magnitude shorter than for the spincoated films. This finding may explain the lower
Jsc value. Yet, fill factor and open circuit voltage are still relatively large which compensates for the short electron lifetimes. The lower lifetime could also be interpreted as a shorter “recombination response” time in which the photoexcited electrons spend less time in deep trap states as compared to the spincoated counterparts.

We compared the J–V curves for the 2× spincoated cells against the electrosprayed cell to assess difference in performance, even though the dye absorption is nearly equal between the two. The average efficiency for the spincoated and electrosprayed samples are 3.58% and 3.38%, respectively. Both sets had similar open circuit voltages between 730 and 740 mV. Though the efficiencies are similar, the short circuit current density of the spincoated cells were found to be higher than the electrosprayed cells. This observation is consistent with the larger chemical capacitance of the spincoated cells (Table 4). However, the electrosprayed cells made up for the loss in Jsc by having a much greater fill factor, an average of 72% versus 64%, which is consistent with the much larger recombination resistance of the electrosprayed cells as compared to the spincoated cells (Table 4). These observations confirm the critical role played by the mesoporous film structure for optical absorption and recombination rates.

We developed a platform for deposition of nanoparticulate films using the electrospray (ES) to disperse particle-laden droplets. To control film morphology and properties, we systematically varied nanoparticle loading in the droplet, evaporation time of the liquid carrier during the droplet flight to the collector, density of the deposit, as well as mass and polarity of species providing electric charge to the droplet. We showed that we can control the structure of the TiO2 film and tested its effect on the performance of DSSCs. Principle conclusions follow:

1. Morphologically, ESed mesoporous structures are more loosely packed than spincoated ones, with porosity of ∼90% and 56%, respectively. However, solar cells prepared with either method were found to be similar in performance, with the advantage that ES-nanomanufacturing lends itself to scale-up;
2. Generally, ESed DSSCs have superior charge collection efficiency, higher open-circuit voltage and fill factor as compared to standards based on spincoating, whereas the latter exhibit higher short-circuit current density. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy helped rationalize these findings in terms of larger recombination resistance, lower chemical capacitance, and shorter electron lifetime of the ESed cells as compared to the spincoated ones;
3. The relative merits of the two manufacturing approaches can be combined synergistically into a bilayer structure of highest efficiency, with densely packed spincoated particles at the bottom of the deposit where light absorption is most important, and a more loosely packed ESed layer on top, which is advantageous for hole transport in the electrolyte and as a back-scattering layer. The greater performance is at the cost of greater manufacturing complexity; and.
4. Size and polarity of the ions providing charge to the ESed particle clusters are found to have a modest adverse impact on the conductance of the FTO substrate on which the film is grown, which can be minimized with negative ions of lower charge-to-mass ratio.
Although the approach developed in this contribution is tailored exclusively toward dye-sensitized solar cells, it is adaptable to other materials, which may provide an additional advantage in the rapidly evolving field of nanostructured, mesoporous films. These films are critical components for many technologies involved in energy conversion and storage, such as electrodes in lithium-ion batteries, solid oxide fuel cells, and supercapacitors, as well as in biotechnologies and gas sensors.

The authors gratefully acknowledge: the financial support of NSF (Grant CMMI-1335383, Dr Khershed Cooper, Program Manager), Professor Minjoo Larry Lee (Electric Engineering, Yale) and his students Joseph Faucher and Stephanie Tomasulo for fruitful discussions and the use of the solar simulator, Professor Gary Brudvig (Chemistry, Yale) and his student Stafford Sheehan for first exposing us to the DSCC and helping us in the initial system set-up, Dr Michael Rooks (Applied Physics, Yale) for aid with electron microscopy, Magda Majewska (Chemical Engineering, Yale) and Dr Pawel Majewski (Brookhaven National Laboratory) for assistance with electrochemical impedance spectroscopy, and Dr Mayra Morales-Acosta and Professor Charles Ahn (Applied Physics, Yale) for providing access to equipment for sheet resistance measurements.


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015