 DOI: 10.1039/D2MH01314B
(Communication)
Mater. Horiz., 2023, 10, 473-482


Shuting
Pang
,

Zhili
Chen
,

Junyu
Li
,

Yuting
Chen
,

Zhitian
Liu
,

Hongbin
Wu
,

Chunhui
Duan
*,

Fei
Huang
 and 

Yong
Cao


Institute of Polymer Optoelectronic Materials and Devices, State Key Laboratory of Luminescent Materials and Devices, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510640, P. R. China. E-mail: duanchunhui@scut.edu.cn

Institute of Materials for Optoelectronics and New Energy, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Wuhan Institute of Technology, Wuhan 430205, P. R. China

Molecular Materials and Nanosystems & Institute for Complex Molecular Systems, Eindhoven University of Technology, 5600 MB, Eindhoven, The Netherlands

Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Joint Laboratory of Optoelectronic and Magnetic Functional Materials, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510640, P. R. China

Received
21st October 2022
, Accepted 21st November 2022
First published on 21st November 2022
The fabrication of organic solar cells (OSCs) depends heavily on the use of highly toxic chlorinated solvents, which are incompatible with industrial manufacturing. The reported alternative solvents such as non-halogenated aromatic hydrocarbons and cyclic ethers are also not really “green” according to the “Globally Harmonized System of Classification and Labelling of Chemicals” of the United Nations. Therefore, processing from real green solvents such as water, alcohols, or anisole will constitute a big breakthrough for OSCs. However, it is fundamentally challenging to obtain high-performance photovoltaic materials processable from these solvents. Herein, we propose the incorporation of a B–N covalent bond, which has a dipole moment of 1.84 Debye, into the conjugated backbone of polymer donors to fabricate high-efficiency OSCs from anisole, a real green and eco-compatible solvent recommended by the United Nations. Based on a newly developed B–N-based polymer, the OSCs with a record-high efficiency of 15.65% in the 0.04 cm2 device and 14.01% in the 1.10 cm2 device have thus been realized via real green processing.

Processing from green solvents is one of the critical prerequisites for the industrialization of organic solar cells (OSCs). Among various organic solvents, anisole is a real green and eco-compatible solvent recommended by the “Globally Harmonized System of Classification and Labelling of Chemicals (GHS)” of the United Nations. However, the prevailing photoactive conjugated polymers exhibit extremely poor processability in this solvent due to the highly hydrophobic nature of the polymers and the high polarity of anisole. Based on Hansen solubility parameters and the principle of “like-dissolves-like”, we demonstrate that the introduction of a B–N covalent bond, which possesses a dipole moment of 1.84 Debye, into the conjugated backbone is an effective and universal strategy to develop photovoltaic conjugated polymers with excellent processability in anisole. As a proof of this concept, PBNT-TzTz, a B–N covalent bond containing polymer, offered a power conversion efficiency of 15.65% in the 0.04 cm2 device and 14.01% in the 1.10 cm2 device, which represent the highest values for OSCs processed from real green and eco-compatible solvents to date. This work opens a promising avenue for developing high-efficiency OSCs via real green processing.


Solution processed organic solar cells (OSCs) have received considerable attention with significant progress being achieved recently and offer a promising prospect for portable energy resources and building-integrated photovoltaics. For the commercial application of OSCs, it is of great importance to develop high-efficiency, highly stable, green solvent processable, and low-cost photovoltaic materials. After a decade of intense research, the power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of OSCs have been improved from 10% to 20%. Meanwhile, the degradation mechanism of OSCs has also been widely investigated, and many effective strategies have been developed to enhance the stability of OSCs. It was reported that operational lifetimes over 30 years can be reached by OSCs, which are sufficient for practical application. Besides, a few high-performance photoactive materials with low synthetic complexity have been developed, which significantly reduced the cost of the materials. However, the fabrication of OSCs still relies heavily on halogenated solvents such as chloroform (CF), chlorobenzene (CB), or ortho-dichlorobenzene (o-DCB). These solvents have serious safety, health, and environmental concerns, which severely hinder the large-scale production and commercialization of OSCs. This is particularly problematic since the deposition of active layer solutions and the evaporation of the constituent solvents during the fabrication of large-area OSCs via roll-to-roll processing will be conducted in open environments where workers will be exposed to solvent vapors. Therefore, OSCs processed from non-halogenated solvents have attracted increasing attention in recent years. The non-halogenated solvents used for OSC fabrication are mainly non-halogenated aromatic hydrocarbons (such as toluene, o-xylene, trimethylbenzene, etc.) and cyclic ethers (such as tetrahydrofuran, 2-methyltetrahydrofuran, etc.). However, these solvents can produce severely toxic chemicals during metabolism in living organisms, which are harmful to the human body and the environment. In other words, these solvents are far from real green solvents (Fig. 1a and Tables S1–S3, ESI).

In this context, the development of photovoltaic materials processable from real green and eco-compatible solvents would constitute a major breakthrough in the field of OSCs, which will promote the mass production of OSCs without safety, health, and environment concerns. The “Globally Harmonized System of Classification and Labelling of Chemicals (GHS)” of the United Nations provides qualitative assessments as regards to the safety, health, and environmental impact for a large number of solvents via its “Hazard and Precautionary Statements”. Based on this, water, alcohols, and anisole are recommended or preferred in the solvent selection guides by many organizations and companies such as IMI-CHEM21, Pfizer, Sanofi, and GlaxoSmithKline (Fig. 1a and Tables S1–S3, ESI). Among these preferred solvents, water and alcohols are poor solvents for conjugated polymers and conjugated molecules. Based on the principle of “like-dissolves-like”, anisole is a possible good solvent for organic semiconductors. This solvent is commercially available with low cost and at large quantities. According to the material safety data sheets (MSDSs), anisole is harmless to the human body or the environment. There is no symbol of GHS05 (corrosive), GHS06 (toxic), GHS07 (harmful), GHS08 (health hazard), or GHS09 (environmental hazard), except for GHS02 (flammable) for anisole. In fact, anisole is found in a plant called “Tarragon”, which is a vegetable commonly used in French cuisine. Moreover, anisole has been widely used as a food additive and in pharmaceutical preparation. Besides, anisole possesses a relatively high boiling point, which makes it suitable for large-area OSC fabrication. In short, anisole is a real green and eco-compatible solvent recommended by the GHS of the United Nations, which would be conducive to the realization of green manufacturing of OSCs.
To realize the real green and eco-compatible processing of high performance OSCs, the key issue is achieving good dissolution of photoactive materials to form a favorable morphology that guarantees efficient exciton dissociation and charge transport. The solubility test showed that the state-of-the-art non-fullerene electron acceptors (e.g. L8-BO, Y6-BO, and Y6) are readily soluble in anisole, but the existing high-performance polymer donors are almost completely insoluble in anisole (Fig. 1c). Clearly, the processing of OSCs from anisole has been restricted by the poor solubility of the polymer donors. Hansen solubility parameters (HSPs) can guide the design of polymers dissolved in specific solvents, which consider three factors: intermolecular dispersion interactions (δD), intermolecular dipolar interactions (δP), and intermolecular hydrogen bonding interactions (δH). Compared with the halogenated solvents and non-halogenated solvents mentioned above, the eco-compatible solvents (water, alcohols, anisole, etc.) show higher δP values (Fig. 1b and Table S4, ESI). According to the principle of “like-dissolves-like”, the newly designed polymer donors should possess increased polarity to allow for sufficient solubility in these solvents. Introducing polar side chains is the common method to increase the δP of organic conjugated materials (Fig. 2a). For example, Kim et al. developed polymer donors and electron acceptors containing oligoethyleneglycol side chains, which enabled water/ethanol processed OSCs. Duan et al. reported a polymer donor functionalized with a tertiary amino group for the fabrication of OSCs from n-butanol. However, the introduction of polar side chains negatively affected the film properties (e.g. crystallinity and donor/acceptor miscibility) and charge transport properties, which thereby led to inferior photovoltaic performance. This dilemma leaves fundamental challenges to the design of photovoltaic materials with good solubility in eco-compatible solvents without a negative influence on the electrical and film properties.
Recently, the introduction of B–N covalent bonds into the conjugated backbone has become a novel and effective strategy to regulate the optoelectronic properties of organic semiconductors (Fig. 2b). The B–N covalent bond is isoelectronic with the CC bond, where both the B and N atoms adopt sp2 hybridization, thus offering a coplanar conjugated skeleton that benefits intermolecular charge transport. Importantly, the B–N covalent bond possesses a large dipole moment of 1.84 Debye due to the electron-deficient nature of the boron atom and the electron-rich nature of the nitrogen atom. In fact, the B–N covalent bond can be regarded as a zwitterion of −BN+ (Fig. 2b), which suggests the strong polarity of this bond. Therefore, replacing the CC bond with a B–N covalent bond in the conjugated backbone will increase the polarity of organic semiconductors but will not destroy the conjugation and electron delocalization. These imply that B–N covalent bond containing conjugated polymers would be promising electron donors for realizing high-efficiency OSCs from real green and eco-compatible solvents.
Following this rationale, we introduced B–N covalent bonds into the conjugated backbone to generate a new polymer, PBNT-TzTz, where the BNT unit and thiazolothiazole (TzTz) unit were alternately arranged in the polymer main chain (Fig. 2c). As expected, PBNT-TzTz is readily soluble in anisole with a saturated solubility of 11.2 mg mL−1 at room temperature (Fig. 2d). With anisole as the solvent for active layer deposition, the OSCs based on the PBNT-TzTz:Y6-BO blend showed an excellent PCE of 15.65% with an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.88 V, a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 25.42 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 0.70. Furthermore, the 1.10 cm2 device was fabricated and a PCE of 14.01% was obtained. These results render the PBNT-TzTz-based devices the best OSCs processed from real green and eco-compatible solvents, which greatly reduced the PCE gap between the OSCs processed from real green solvents and halogenated solvents. Moreover, the polymers derived from the BNT unit and different comonomers all showed good solubility in anisole. This suggests that the introduction of B–N covalent bonds into polymer backbones is a universal strategy to obtain high-performance polymers processable from real green and eco-compatible solvents. This work opens a promising avenue for developing high-efficiency OSCs via real green processing.

The synthetic route of PBNT-TzTz is shown in Fig. 2c. The polymer was prepared by Stille cross-coupling reaction from a dibrominated monomer (BNT) and a distannylated monomer (TzTz) with Pd2(dba)3 as the catalyst and P(o-tol)3 as the ligand. The monomer BNT and TzTz were synthesized by following the procedures reported previously. High temperature (140 °C) gel permeation chromatography demonstrated that PBNT-TzTz has a number-average molecular weight (Mn) of 42 kDa and a molar-mass dispersity (ĐM) of 2.4 (Fig. S3, ESI). The polymer is readily soluble in common organic solvents, such as chloroform, chlorobenzene, toluene, etc. The solubility of PBNT-TzTz in anisole is greater than 8 mg mL−1 in the preliminary solubility test (Fig. 2d), which meets the requirements for solution processing of OSCs.

The accurate solubility of PBNT-TzTz in anisole was further measured by a standard calibration curve method using UV-vis absorption based on the Beer–Lambert law, and the result is shown in Table S5 (ESI). The polymer is readily soluble in anisole at room temperature to reach a solubility of 11.2 mg mL−1, while the solubility of other representative polymers including D18, PM6, and PTQ10 are all lower than 0.1 mg mL−1. To verify whether the excellent solubility of PBNT-TzTz in anisole is related to the BNT unit, two reference polymers, PBDT-TzTz and PTTz-3HD, with the same TzTz unit but different comonomers were synthesized. Interestingly, both PBDT-TzTz and PTTz-3HD could not be dissolved in anisole at all (Fig. S4 and Table S5, ESI). These results suggest that the dissolution of PBNT-TzTz in anisole is indeed caused by the BNT unit. To understand why the BNT unit could promote the dissolution of the polymer in anisole, the molecular polarities of PBNT-TzTz and the reference polymer PBDT-TzTz were investigated by density functional theory (DFT) calculations. Notably, the dipole moments of both the BNT and BDT units are extremely small (Fig. S5, ESI), which should be caused by the centrosymmetric nature of these two units. As shown in Fig. 3a, the dipole moments of the monomer and trimer of PBNT-TzTz are 0.81 and 0.93 Debye, respectively, whereas those of PBDT-TzTz are 0.51 and 0.45 Debye. Such a difference in molecular polarity agrees well with the different solubility between PBNT-TzTz and PBDT-TzTz. Generally, the material with a higher dielectric constant can be readily dissolved in polar solvents. Therefore, the relative dielectric constant (εr) of PBNT-TzTz and the reference polymer PBDT-TzTz were determined by capacitance–voltage (C–V) measurements in the frequency range from 1 × 103 to 1 × 106 Hz (Fig. 3b). In comparison with the εr value of PBDT-TzTz (2.98–3.35), a larger εr value (3.23–3.58) was found for PBNT-TzTz, which is consistent with the large polarity of the B–N covalent bond. These results convincingly evidenced that the excellent solubility of PBNT-TzTz in anisole originates from the large polarity of the B–N covalent bond. Furthermore, we have synthesized four additional BNT-based copolymers (PBNT-T, PBNT-2FT, PBNT-T46, and PBNT-2FT46) with different comonomers (thiophene and difluorinated thiophene) and different side chains on the BNT unit to explore whether the B–N covalent bond can universally afford eco-compatible solvent processable polymers. Interestingly, all these polymers could be dissolved in anisole very well (Fig. S6, ESI). Notably, all the polymers mentioned above possess similar molecular weights, which excluded the influence of molecular weight on solubility (Table S5, ESI). Hence, the introduction of a B–N covalent bond into the conjugated backbone is an effective and universal strategy to access conjugated polymers processable from anisole, a real green and eco-compatible solvent.
The molecular geometry of the polymer was investigated by density functional theory (DFT) calculations at the B3LYP/6-31+G* level, where the side chains were shortened to methyl groups for simplifying the calculations. As shown in Fig. S7 (ESI), the polymer shows very flattened conformation with small torsional angles between the adjacent units along the polymer main chain, which will guarantee compact polymer packing in the solid state and efficient charge transport in the resulting OSCs. The dihedral angle between the BNT core and peripheral phenyl is 60.7°, which will inhibit intermolecular over-aggregation and promote the dissolution of the polymer.
The UV-vis absorption spectra of PBNT-TzTz and the non-fullerene acceptor Y6-BO are shown in Fig. 3c. The polymer PBNT-TzTz exhibited a strong absorption band in the range of 400–650 nm, which is complementary to the absorption of Y6-BO. The polymer exhibited very distinct 0–0 and 0–1 absorption peaks at ≈570 and 530 nm, respectively, indicating the strong π–π interactions between the polymer chains in the solid state. The polymer displayed an absorption edge at 640 nm, corresponding to an optical bandgap (Eg) of 1.93 eV. The temperature-dependent absorption spectra in dilute anisole solution were recorded to study the aggregation behavior of the polymer. As shown in Fig. S8 (ESI), the distinct 0–0 and 0–1 absorption peaks were retained at room temperature. When increasing the temperature from 25 to 95 °C, the absorption spectra were gradually blue-shifted with a slightly decreased 0–0 absorption intensity, which implied the strong aggregation of the polymer in solution. The electrochemical properties and energy levels were investigated by square wave voltammograms (Fig. S9, ESI). According to the equation ELUMO/HOMO = −(5.13 + Eox/re − EFc/Fc+) eV, the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energy levels were calculated to be −5.56 and −3.73 eV for PBNT-TzTz, respectively (Fig. 3d). The HOMO/LUMO levels of PBNT-TzTz are well matched with those of Y6-BO, making the polymer very suitable for application in OSCs. The polymer exhibited a decomposition temperature of approximately 423 °C as revealed by thermal gravimetric analysis (TGA), suggesting that PBNT-TzTz is thermally very stable (Fig. S10, ESI). In the differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) test, the sharp endothermic peak and crystallization peak were observed in the second heating and cooling run for the polymer. The melting temperature (Tm) and crystallization temperature (Tc) are 239 and 218 °C, respectively, indicating the high crystallinity of PBNT-TzTz.
The photovoltaic properties of PBNT-TzTz were investigated in OSCs with a device configuration of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PBNT-TzTz:Y6-BO/PNDIT-F3N/Ag, where PEDOT:PSS is poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):polystyrene sulfonate and PNDIT-F3N is poly[(9,9-bis(3′-(N,N-dimethylamino)propyl)-2,7-fluorene)-alt-5,5′-bis(2,2′-thiophene)-2,6-naphthalene-1,4,5,8-tetracarboxylic-N,N′-di(2-ethylhexyl)imide]. The OSC fabrication conditions, including the PBNT-TzTz:Y6-BO weight ratio, active layer thickness, solvent composition, and thermal annealing were comprehensively optimized, and the details regarding the optimization process are described in Table S6 (ESI). It is well known that state-of-the-art OSCs often require the use of high boiling-point solvent additives (e.g., 1, 8-diiodooctane, 1-chloronaphthalene, etc.) to optimize the active layer morphology. However, most of the solvent additives are halogenated, which are also harmful to the environment. Besides, high boiling-point solvent additives are found to dramatically accelerate photooxidation of the OSCs due to the fact that they cannot be fully removed during device processing. In this work, we choose limonene (LM) as the solvent additive, which is widely found in citrus and other fruits and is generally recognized to be safe as a food additive or flavoring agent, and as a fragrance additive. Moreover, the world production of limonene is over 70000 tons per year, being supplied at low price. In addition, the boiling point of LM is only 177 °C, which is much lower than those of 1,8-diiodooctane, 1-chloronaphthalene, and other commonly used solvent additives (Fig. S11, ESI). These characteristics render limonene conducive to the regulation and optimization of active layer morphology. It is found that the anisole:LM volume ratio has a significant influence on the device performance of the PBNT-TzTz:Y6-BO solar cells. The J–V curves and external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra of the solar cells with different anisole:LM ratios are shown in Fig. 4a and b, respectively. The photovoltaic parameters of the corresponding devices are summarized in Table 1.
Device
Area (cm2)

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)

J
sc
 (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)

a The Jsc values are integrated from the EQE spectra.

Anisole:LM = 10:0
0.04
0.88
24.40
23.33
0.66
14.06 (13.64 ± 0.41)
Anisole:LM = 8:2
0.04
0.88
25.42
24.38
0.70
15.65 (15.25 ± 0.40)
1.10
0.88
24.38
23.10
0.65
14.01 (13.58 ± 0.43)
Anisole:LM = 6:4
0.04
0.88
24.64
23.87
0.67
14.51 (14.35 ± 0.16)
The devices processed from pure anisole exhibit a good PCE of 14.06% with a Voc of 0.88 V, a Jsc of 24.40 mA cm−2, and an FF of 0.66. Upon adding an appropriate amount (20%) of LM into the solvent mixture, the solar cell offered a more remarkable PCE of 15.65% due to the improved Jsc (25.42 mA cm−2) and FF (0.70). To the best of our knowledge, this PCE represents the highest value for OSCs processed from real green and eco-compatible solvents to date (Fig. 4c and Table S13, ESI). As the content of LM in the solvent mixture increases further, the PCE dropped slightly to 14.51% with a Jsc of 24.64 mA cm−2 and an FF of 0.67. The Jsc values calculated by integrating EQE spectra are in good accordance with the values obtained from the J–V characteristic measurements (within 2% error), which confirmed the accuracy of the device parameters. The OSCs exhibit evidently increased EQE values in the whole wavelength range after introducing 20% LM, which should benefit from the pre-aggregation induced absorbance enhancement (Fig. S12, ESI). As the content of LM increases further, the response of EQE at long wavelengths decreased slightly, which suggests the formation of less optimal active layer morphology at high LM content. Inspired by the excellent device performance of the OSCs processed from the real green and eco-compatible solvent in small area devices, we further fabricated the large-area devices based on the PBNT-TzTz:Y6-BO blend. The 1.10 cm2 devices were fabricated by spin-coating. Impressively, a PCE of 14.01% has been obtained although it is slightly lower than that of the small area device due to the decrease in Jsc and FF (Fig. 4d and Table 1). This is understandable considering the losses induced by sheet resistance and film defects during scale-up. Notably, the PCE of 14.01% is also the best PCE of large-area OSCs fabricated with real green and eco-compatible solvents to date. This further confirms the great prospect of PBNT-TzTz for mass production of OSCs.
To explore the charge transfer characteristics in the OSCs, the photoluminescence (PL) spectra of the neat and blend films were measured and shown in Fig. S13 (ESI). The neat film of PBNT-TzTz showed a strong PL emission peak at 622 nm. When blended with the non-fullerene acceptor Y6-BO, the PL of PBNT-TzTz has been efficiently quenched in all the blend films. The blend processed from the anisole:LM = 8:2 solvent mixture exhibited slightly higher PL quenching efficiency (95.4%) in comparison with the other two blends (90.5% for anisole:LM = 10:0 and 93.3% for anisole:LM = 6:4) (Table S7, ESI). The same trend was also found in the PL quenching efficiency for the non-fullerene acceptor Y6-BO and the blend films, i.e. the highest PL quenching efficiency of Y6-BO was obtained for the blend film processed from the anisole:LM = 8:2 solvent mixture. The highest quenching efficiencies suggest the most efficient exciton dissociation in the blend film processed from the anisole:LM = 8:2 solvent mixture, which is consistent with the highest Jsc value of the OSCs. Notably, the PL peaks of the anisole:LM = 8:2 and anisole:LM = 6:4 blends show a small red-shift compared with that of the anisole:LM = 10:0 blend. This phenomenon agrees well with the slight red-shift of the absorption spectra of the blend films upon adding LM as an additive (Fig. S12, ESI), which can be ascribed to the improved packing ordering of Y6-BO.
The charge transport characteristics were investigated by the space-charge limited current (SCLC) method in single-carrier devices (Fig. S14 and Table S8, ESI). Both the highest hole and electron mobilities were obtained using the anisole:LM = 8:2 devices, which are 1.19 × 10−3 and 1.51 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively. In comparison, the hole/electron mobilities of the anisole:LM = 10:0 and anisole:LM = 6:4 devices are 7.72 × 10−4/9.97 × 10−4 and 9.15 × 10−4/1.22 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively. The higher carrier mobilities of the anisole:LM = 8:2 devices imply the formation of more favorable blend morphology.
To further study the exciton dissociation and charge extraction properties of the devices, the plot of the photocurrent density (Jph) versus the effective voltage (Veff) is shown in Fig. 4f. Jph is given by Jph = JL − JD, where JL and JD are the current densities obtained under AM1.5G irradiation and in the dark, respectively. Veff is defined as Veff = V0 − Vappl, where V0 and Vappl are the voltage at Jph = 0 and applied bias voltage, respectively. The exciton dissociation properties can be evaluated by the exciton dissociation probability (P(E, T)) using the equation P(E, T) = Jph/Jsat, where Jsat is the saturation photocurrent density. Notably, the P(E, T) value improved from 95.3% for the anisole:LM = 10:0 device to 96.7% for the anisole:LM = 8:2 device (Table S9, ESI). The charge recombination behaviors were investigated by plotting the Jsc as a function of the incident light intensity (Plight). The relationship between Jsc and Plight is expressed as Jsc ∝ Pαlight, where α is an exponential factor that should be unity if all carriers can be swept out before recombination. The anisole:LM = 8:2 device offered an α value of 0.987, which is larger than the value of α = 0.951 for the anisole:LM = 10:0 device and α = 0.964 for the anisole:LM = 6:4 device (Fig. 4g), suggesting the suppressed bimolecular recombination in the anisole:LM = 8:2 device. Clearly, the introduction of LM with an appropriate content is beneficial to promoting the charge transport and extraction efficiency and to suppressing the charge recombination of the PBNT-TzTz:Y6-BO devices, thus contributing to a higher Jsc and FF. The charge transport and extraction dynamics were further probed by transient photovoltage and transient photocurrent measurements (Fig. S15, ESI). The anisole:LM = 8:2 device exhibited the longest charge carrier lifetime and shortest decay time among the three devices (Table S10, ESI). The long charge carrier lifetime and short decay time suggest that the charge carrier transport and extraction are more efficient, which contributed to the higher Jsc and FF of the anisole:LM = 8:2 device.
The surface morphologies of the blend films were probed by atomic force microscopy (AFM) (Fig. 5a). The PBNT-TzTz:Y6-BO blend film processed by pure anisole exhibited a smooth surface with a root-mean-square (RMS) roughness of 2.08 nm. When 20% LM was added, the blend film exhibited a slightly enlarged RMS roughness (2.71 nm), which suggests improved phase separation and thus better charge transport. However, the higher LM content (40%) caused a too large RMS roughness (3.78 nm). The difference in the morphology of the three blends can be further confirmed by the transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images (Fig. 5b). It is clear that the PBNT-TzTz:Y6-BO blend film processed from the anisole:LM = 8:2 solvent mixture exhibited moderate phase separation with improved dark/bright contrast, which is in favor of exciton dissociation and charge transport. In comparison, the film of anisole:LM = 10:0 exhibited too uniform morphology, while the film of anisole:LM = 6:4 exhibited over-sized phase separation with the formation of large crystalline grains. The difference in morphology explained the device parameters and electrical characteristics of the OSCs.
The molecular ordering and packing behavior of the neat and blend films were further investigated by grazing incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS). The neat PBNT-TzTz and Y6-BO films show preferential face-on orientation as evidenced by the (010) diffractions in the out-of-plane (OOP) direction (Fig. S16, ESI). As displayed in Fig. 5c and d, the PBNT-TzTz:Y6-BO blend films displayed dominant face-on orientations as suggested by the (010) diffraction peaks in the OOP direction and (100) diffraction peaks in the in-plane (IP) direction. The three blend films offered the same π–π stacking distance of 3.63 Å, but the crystalline coherence lengths (CCL) for π–π stacking were estimated to be 12.71, 15.28, and 14.81 Å for the anisole:LM = 10:0, anisole:LM = 8:2, and anisole:LM = 6:4 films, respectively. The highest CCL suggests the best molecular crystallinity and ordering in the blend film processed from anisole:LM = 8:2. Besides, the corrected pole figures of the (010) diffraction peaks suggested that the face-on/edge-on ratios are 4.89, 9.27, and 9.15 for the anisole:LM = 10:0, anisole:LM = 8:2, and anisole:LM = 6:4 processed blend films, respectively (Fig. 5e). These results suggest the most favorable molecular orientation in the anisole:LM = 8:2 processed blend film, which is beneficial to vertical charge transport in OSCs.

We designed and synthesized a B–N covalent bond containing polymer, PBNT-TzTz, to achieve high-performance OSCs from a real green and eco-compatible solvent. By taking advantage of the highly polar characteristic of the B–N covalent bond, the polymer PBNT-TzTz is readily processable from anisole, a real green and eco-compatible solvent recommended by the “Globally Harmonized System of Classification and Labelling of Chemicals (GHS)” of the United Nations. With anisole as the host solvent and limonene as the co-solvent for active layer deposition, the OSCs based on PBNT-TzTz:Y6-BO offered an excellent PCE of 15.65% with a Voc of 0.88 V, a Jsc of 25.42 mA cm−2, and an FF of 0.70. Furthermore, the 1.10 cm2 device was fabricated and a PCE of 14.01% was obtained. These results render the PBNT-TzTz-based devices the best OSCs processed from a real green and eco-compatible solvent, which greatly reduced the PCE gap between the OSCs processed from a real green solvent and a halogenated solvent. Moreover, the polymers derived from B–N covalent bond containing building blocks and different comonomers all showed excellent solubility in anisole. This suggests that the introduction of B–N covalent bonds into conjugated backbones is a universal strategy to develop photovoltaic polymers with excellent processability from real green and eco-compatible solvents. This work opens a promising avenue for developing high-efficiency OSCs via real green processing, which will bring real green energy to human life.


C.D. conceived the idea and supervised the project. S.P. synthesized the polymers and performed the fabrication and characterization of the solar cells. Z.C. synthesized the comonomer TzTz under the guidance of Z.L. and C.D. J.L. performed the GIWAXS measurements and data analysis. Y.C. contributed to the dielectric constant measurements and data analysis under the guidance of H.W. F.H. and Y.C. helped with the project administration. S.P. and C.D. prepared the manuscript. All authors commented on the manuscript.


There are no conflicts to declare.


Shuting Pang thanks Bingyan Yin for the help in TPC and TPV measurements. The research was financially supported by the Ministry of Science and Technology of China (2019YFA0705900), National Natural Science Foundation of China (21875072, U20A6002, and 22109046), Guangdong Innovative and Entrepreneurial Research Team Program (2019ZT08L075), Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation (2022A1515011417), and Guangzhou Basic and Applied Basic Research Project (202201010325). This study also received financial support from China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2020TQ0102).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2mh01314b
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023