 DOI: 10.1039/C6TA05894A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 14849-14856


Wenliang
Feng
,

Leilei
Zhao
,

Jun
Du
,

Yan
Li
* and 

Xinhua
Zhong
*

Shanghai Key Laboratory of Functional Materials Chemistry, Institute of Applied Chemistry, School of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, East China University of Science and Technology, Shanghai 200237, China. E-mail: yli@ecust.edu.cn; zhongxh@ecust.edu.cn; Fax: +86 21 6425 0281; Tel: +86 21 6425 0281

Received
13th July 2016
, Accepted 26th August 2016
First published on 30th August 2016
Although the highest power conversion efficiency (PCE) of quantum dot sensitized solar cells (QDSCs) has been continuously updated recently, the stability limited by the volatilization and the leakage of liquid electrolytes remain main challenges for the application of QDSCs. To construct a quasi-solid-state QDSC, a new gel electrolyte was developed by solidifying a polysulfide aqueous solution using sodium carboxymethylcellulose (CMC-Na) with superabsorbent and water-holding capability. With a high mobility of ions in the three dimensional porous network provided, the gel electrolyte obtained exhibits a satisfactory conductivity compared to common liquid polysulfide electrolytes. Through the strong coordination between carboxylate groups on CMC-Na polymer chains and metal ions of the photoanode surface, the gel electrolyte prepared also shows good contact with the surfaces of mesoporous photoanodes. As a result, an impressive PCE of 9.21%, among the highest efficiency of quasi-solid-state and solid-state QDSCs reported, was obtained for gel electrolyte based QDSCs with CdSeTe as the photosensitizer and Cu2S as the counter electrode. Furthermore, the stability of the resultant QDSC device is improved significantly.

With the characteristics of multiexciton generation, high absorption coefficient, tunability of band gaps and low cost, colloidal quantum dots (QDs) served as an economical alternative light harvesting material to the conventional molecular dyes in dye sensitized solar cells (DSCs). Quantum dot sensitized solar cells (QDSCs) with a theoretical efficiency up to 44% have become one of the most promising cost-effective candidates for the third-generation photovoltaic devices, and have received considerable attention over the past decade. The record of the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of QDSCs has been constantly updated recently. Nevertheless, the long-term performance and the practical application of the QDSCs, mostly based on liquid electrolytes, are seriously limited by the leakage and volatilization of electrolytes.

To overcome the limitation of conventional liquid electrolytes, solid or quasi-solid-state QDSCs, employing p/n-type inorganic semiconductors, organic hole transport materials, polymeric or gel materials incorporating S2−/Sn2− as a redox, were attempted. Restricted by the low ion mobility and poor filling into mesoporous TiO2 films, the PCE of solid or quasi-solid-state QDSCs is far from satisfactory compared with that of the ones based on liquid electrolytes.
As low cost natural-based polyelectrolytes, superabsorbent polyelectrolytes (SBPEs), sodium carboxymethylcellulose (CMC-Na) with good adhesion, high hygroscopicity, emulsification, and good film-forming ability, were widely used in the fields of food, paper, pharmaceuticals and cosmetics. CMC-Na hydrogels, bearing carboxylate and hydroxy groups on polymer chains and a three-dimensional network to reserve water, have super water-absorbing and excellent water-holding capacity as well as good stability in alkaline media. By these considerations, there is a good chance to prepare gel electrolytes by solidifying a large number of alkaline aqueous polysulfide electrolytes with only a small amount of CMC-Na. In addition, the carboxylate groups of CMC-Na may strongly coordinate with metal ions, facilitating close contact with the surfaces of mesoporous TiO2 films and QDs.
Herein, a photochemically and thermally stable polyelectrolyte, CMC-Na, was adopted to solidify the aqueous polysulfide solution for constructing quasi-solid-state QDSCs. The kinetic processes of electron transport and charge recombination, photovoltaic performance and light-soaking stability of these quasi-solid-state QDSCs were characterized in detail. It was found that the ionic conductivity of the CMC-Na based gel electrolyte is comparable to that of aqueous polysulfide electrolytes. A PCE up to 9.21% under one full sunlight was obtained for the CMC-Na gel based QDSCs (G-QDSCs) with CdSeTe QDs as sensitizers, which is to date the best PCE of the quasi-solid-state QDSCs reported and is similar to that of the corresponding QDSCs based on conventional liquid polysulfide electrolytes (L-QDSCs). Meanwhile, the stability of the liquid-junction QDSCs is improved substantially.

Oleylamine (OAm, 95%), selenium powder (200 mesh, 99.99%), and 1-octadecene (ODE, 90%), trioctylphosphine (TOP, 90%), cadmium oxide (CdO, 99.99%), selenium powder (200 mesh, 99.99%) and tellurium powder (200 mesh, 99.99%) were purchased from Aldrich. Diphenylphosphine (DPP, 98%) and zinc acetate (Zn(OAc)2, 99.99%) were purchased from J&K. Indium acetate (In(OAc)3, 99.99%), copper iodide (CuI, 99.998%), and oleic acid (90%), 3-mercaptopropionic acid (MPA, 98%) and thioglycolic acid (TGA, 97%) were obtained from Alfa Aesar. Sodium carboxymethylcellulose (CMC-Na, chemical grade) and paraffin liquid (chemical grade) were received from Shanghai Chemical Reagents Company. All reagents were used without any treatment.


To synthesize the oil-soluble OAm-capped CdSe0.65Te0.35 (CdSeTe) alloyed QDs, our reported method was adopted with minor modification. Briefly, Se stock solution was prepared by dissolving Se powder (0.031 g, 0.40 mmol) in 4.0 mL of TOP and paraffin liquid (v/v, 1:3); Te stock solution was prepared by dissolving Te powder (0.038 g, 0.30 mmol) in 3.0 mL of TOP and paraffin liquid (v/v, 1:3); Cd precursor solution was obtained by dissolving CdO (0.205 g, 0.16 mmol) in 16 mL of oleic acid and paraffin liquid (v/v, 1:3). A mixture of 0.7 mL of Se, 0.3 mL of Te and 5 mL of Cd precursor solutions was loaded in a three-neck flask. The above solution was then degassed at 100 °C for 10 min to remove moisture and oxygen and subsequently heated to 320 °C under a N2 atmosphere. After 10 min, the reaction temperature was lowered to 260 °C followed by adding 2.0 mL of OAm. The reaction system remained for 8 min at 260 °C before cooling to 60 °C. Finally, the obtained oil-soluble CdSeTe QDs were purified by centrifugation and decantation with the addition of methanol and then dispersed in 10 mL of dichloromethane.


The hydrophilic CdSeTe QDs were obtained via a ligand exchange method reported in our literature. Typically, 2.0 mmol of TGA was dissolved in 1.0 mL of methanol, and the pH value was adjusted to 10.0 by using 30% NaOH. 1.0 mL of the above TGA–methanol solution was added into the 10 mL of the prepared CdSeTe QD dichloromethane solution under stirring. After stirring for 10 min, 20 mL of deionized water was poured into the above solution and the water-soluble CdSeTe QDs capped with TGA were obtained by decantation with acetone and centrifugation. For further use, the water-soluble CdSeTe QDs were dissolved in 2.0 mL of deionized water with a pH value of 10.0 adjusted by adding 10% NaOH.


TiO2 mesoporous film electrodes with a thickness of 15.0 ± 1.0 μm (10.0 μm transparent layer and 5.0 μm light scattering layer) were prepared by a screen printing method. 45 μL of the above prepared TGA-capped CdSeTe QD aqueous dispersion was dropped onto the TiO2 mesoporous film and allowed to stand for 2 h to deposit the QDs. For further treatment, the CdSeTe sensitized photoanodes were immersed in the TiCl4 aqueous solution (containing 0.01 M TiCl4 and 0.01 M TGA) for 30 min at 40 °C to form a TiO2 passivation layer and then dipped alternately into 0.1 M Zn(OAc)2 methanol solution and 0.1 M Na2S aqueous solution for 1 min per dip to form 4 ZnS passivation layers. Subsequently, a SiO2 passivation layer was formed by immersing the above electrodes into the solution including 100 μL of TEOS, 45 μL of ammonium hydroxide, 2.0 mL of deionized water and 8.0 mL of ethanol for 30 min.

To prepare the gel electrolyte, a certain amount of CMC-Na was dissolved in 10 mL of polysulfide electrolyte (2.0 M Na2S and S aqueous solution) followed by stirring at room temperature for 5 min until a uniform gel solution was formed. The above gel solution was allowed to stand at room temperature for 2 h to accomplish the gelation process.
The counter electrode (CE) was prepared by electrodeposition according to our previous report. Typically, a cleaned FTO glass (8 K per square) was circled out a working area (0.8 × 0.8 cm2) with electrical tape. Then an electrochemical station was used to electrodeposit a Cu film on the FTO working area by a multipotential-step technique in a three electrode electrolytic cell, which consists of a saturated calomel electrode (SCE), a counter electrode and a copper foil as the reference. The electrolyte for Cu electrodeposition was an aqueous solution of 9.0 mM Cu2SO4 and 5.0 mM H2SO4. The multipotential-step technique was carried out for 10000 cycles with each cycle containing the first step at −2.0 V for 0.2 s and the second step at 0 V for 0.4 s. After depositing for 80 min, the FTO electrode was rinsed with deionized water and ethanol sequently, and then immersed in polysulfide methanol solution containing 1.0 M Na2S, 1.0 M S and 0.1 M KCl for 60 s to form the FTO/Cu2S CE.
The cell devices with a sandwich structure were assembled with the counter electrode, electrolyte and working electrode. First, the FTO/Cu2S CE was coated with the CMC-Na gel electrolyte and then sealed with QD-sensitized TiO2 photoanodes by using a Surlyn ring (DuPont) of 60 μm thickness. The reference liquid-junction QDSCs were also constructed by injecting the polysulfide electrolyte into the cells via pre-drilled holes on the CE. The hole was then sealed with adhesive. Five cells were prepared in parallel and analysed under each condition to ensure the reliability of the evaluation data.

The conductivity of the electrolytes was measured with a DDSJ-308A conductivity meter (Shanghai electronics science instrument Co., Ltd). Current–voltage curves (J–V curves) of the cells were obtained using a Keithley 2400 source meter under illumination of simulated AM 1.5 G solar light (Oriel, model no. 94022A) with an intensity of 100 mW cm−2 (1 full sun). Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and open circuit voltage decay (OCVD) measurements were carried out on an electrochemical workstation (Zahner, Zennium). EIS was measured under dark conditions at a given bias potential ranging from 0 to 0.65 V, applying a 20 mV AC sinusoidal signal over the constant applied bias with the frequency ranging from 0.1 Hz to 1 MHz. In the OCVD test, the solar devices were illuminated by using a white LED with an intensity of 100 mW cm−2, and then the dependence of photovoltage on time was recorded after switching off the light. The UV/vis absorption spectra were recorded using a UV-visible spectrophotometer (Shimadzu UV-3101 PC). X-ray diffraction (XRD) was performed on a Siemens D5005 X-ray powder diffractometer.


In QDSCs, the electrolyte plays a role in regenerating the sensitizer via redox couple shuttling between the photoanode and cathode. The regeneration rate of the sensitizer was influenced by the reducing capacity and transport ability of the redox couple in the electrolyte, which directly affect the efficient generation of electricity. Therefore, the electrolyte, responsible for the charge carrier transport, directly affects the photovoltaic performance of a cell device. Generally, the mobility of ions and their interaction with the solvent can be reflected by the conductivity and diffusivity of the electrolyte. To evaluate the performance of the gel electrolyte used in this study, its conductivity (σ) described by eqn (1) was investigated.

(1)
where
Zi, Ci and Di are the charge, concentration and diffusion coefficient of the conducting ions and T, kB and F are the absolute temperature, Boltzmann and Faraday constants, respectively. The conductivity of liquid and gel electrolytes containing different weight ratios of CMC-Na at room temperature (25 °C) is shown in Fig. 1a. It can be seen that the conductivity of the gel electrolyte exhibits a negligible decrease with the increase in the weight ratio of CMC-Na. The excellent conductivity of the obtained gel electrolyte should be ascribed to the three-dimensional porous structure of CMC-Na that could provide a channel for the free migration of ions. When the weight ratio of CMC-Na reaches 8%, a uniform gel electrolyte cannot be obtained as the CMC-Na cannot dissolve readily in the polysulfide solution. Despite this, the gel electrolyte with 8 wt% of CMC-Na presents a conductivity of up to 79.6 mS cm−1, just 6.9% lower than that of the reference liquid polysulfide electrolyte (85.5 mS cm−1). The slightly decreased conductivity may be attributed to the reduction of the volume ratio of polysulfide solution in the gel electrolyte and/or the reduction of the polysulfide ion mobility by high viscosity of the gel.

As conductivity–temperature behavior of a gel electrolyte can provide information on the ionic transport process, the temperature-dependent conductivity of liquid and gel electrolytes with different CMC-Na weight ratios was investigated. As can be seen from Fig. 1b, the Arrhenius equation cannot be used to describe the conductivity–temperature characteristics of liquid and gel electrolytes. A better fit to the data is obtained by the Vogel–Tammann–Fulcher (VTF) equation as shown in Fig. 1c.
σ(T) = AT−1/2exp[−Ea/(T − T0)]
(2)
where
σ is the specific conductivity, A is a pre-exponential factor proportional to T1/2, T is the absolute temperature, Ea is the activation energy, and T0 is the glass-transition temperature. The VTF parameters were extracted by a curve-fitting technique and the fitted results are listed in Table 1. The plots in Fig. 1c show good VTF-type dependence, indicating that the ion transport in the above electrolytes is dominated by the mobility of the solvent molecules and the conductivity relies on the free volume of the solvent. Notably, the superior water absorption and water-holding capability of CMC-Na exactly meet the sufficient free volume ratio of the solvent in the gel electrolyte. As expected, the gel electrolyte based on CMC-Na shows excellent conductivity as discussed above. Considering the high ion conductivity and good gel state, the gel electrolyte with 6 wt% of CMC-Na is confirmed as the optimum one to construct QDSCs.

The electrolytes
lnA (S cm−1) (T/K)1/2

T
0 (K)

E
a (kJ mol−1)
Liquid
2.36
233.44
128.10
Gel-2%
2.21
241.69
105.16
Gel-4%
2.10
245.00
94.15
Gel-6%
1.93
248.01
80.95

To evaluate the effect of gelation on the photovoltaic performance of the resultant device, both L-QDSCs and G-QDSCs were assembled using CdSeTe QDs as sensitizers. Fig. 2a shows the photocurrent–voltage (J–V) curves of the constructed QDSCs under illumination of simulated AM 1.5 G solar light with an intensity of 100 mW cm−2 (1 full sun). The relevant photovoltaic parameters are presented in Table 2. The G-QDSCs show slightly lower short-circuit current density (Jsc) and higher open-circuit voltage (Voc) than L-QDSCs. The variation of Jsc might arise from the high viscosity of the gel that slightly reduces the mobility of the Sn2− ions. This result is consistent with the slight decrease in the conductivity of the gel electrolyte compared to the liquid electrolyte. The increase in the Voc value can be ascribed to the strong coordination ability of carboxylate groups of CMC-Na to metal ions on the surfaces of both TiO2 and QDs. As a result, the CMC-Na gel, providing a protective layer over the photoanode surface by the steric hindrance effect, can suppress the unwanted charge recombination process between the photoanode and electrolyte. Additionally, due to the strong binding ability of the carboxylate group with the photoanode surface, the CMC-Na gel can permeate readily into the framework of mesoporous TiO2 films, leading to a slight improvement in the fill factor (FF).

Cells

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)

a Average parameters and standard deviation based on 5 solar cells in parallel. The numbers in parentheses represent the values obtained for the champion cells.

L-QDSCs
22.30(22.32)
0.652(0.655)
62.78(62.82)
9.13 ± 0.04(9.18)
G-QDSCs
21.94(21.89)
0.663(0.667)
63.04(63.06)
9.17 ± 0.03(9.21)

To obtain the dynamic information on charge recombination at TiO2/QDs/electrolyte interfaces, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was conducted under dark conditions. The experimental data were fitted by the equivalent circuit shown in the inset of Fig. 3c. The dependences of the extracted Cμ and Rrec on the applied forward bias are shown in Fig. 3a and b, respectively. It has been well established that the chemical capacitance Cμ reflects the change of electron density as a function of the Fermi level. The recombination resistance Rrec is inverse to the electron recombination rate between the photoanode and electrolyte interfaces. The nearly identical Cμ values of both cells in this study indicate that gelation of the liquid polysulfide electrolyte does not influence the conduction band edge or the density of states of TiO2. However, compared to those of L-QDSCs, the Rrec values of G-QDSCs show a slight increase under the whole applied bias. The results illustrate that the CMC-Na gel can effectively hinder the charge recombination at TiO2/QDs/electrolyte interfaces, consequently bringing the slight enhancement of Voc as described above. For clarity, the Nyquist plots of both G-QDSC and L-QDSC at a forward bias of −0.65 V, close to the Voc value of both cells, were fitted (Fig. 3c), and the relevant EIS parameters are listed in Table 3. As can be observed visually from Fig. 3c, the semicircle of G-QDSCs in the middle- and low-frequency, proportional to the recombination resistance at photoanode/electrolyte interfaces, is bigger than that of L-QDSCs, demonstrating the suppression effect of the CMC-Na gel on charge recombination.

Cells

R
s (Ω cm2)

R
CE (Ω cm2)

R
rec (Ω cm2)

C
μ (mF cm−2)
L-QDSCs
22.75
5.26
233
8.1
G-QDSCs
22.89
5.33
264
7.8

The charge recombination kinetics of L-QDSCs and G-QDSCs were further analyzed by the open-circuit voltage-decay (OCVD) measurement, which can provide information on the recombination of the photo-generated electrons with oxidized species in the electrolyte. And the electron lifetime (τn) can be calculated according to eqn (3):

τn = −(kBT/e)(dVoc/dt)−1
(3)
where
kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the absolute temperature, and e is the electronic charge. Both L-QDSC and G-QDSC devices were first irradiated to a steady state of Voc by a white LED of 100 mW cm−2. After switching off the illumination, the decays of Voc were then monitored continually. As shown in Fig. 4a and b, a higher steady Voc and slower decay rate as well as longer electron lifetime of the G-QDSCs can be observed than those of L-QDSCs. The results indicate that the CMC-Na gel used can form a blocking layer for the photoanode and inhibit the recombination of photo-generated electrons, which is in accordance with the EIS studies above.

To determine whether the prepared gel electrolyte is extendable to other QD sensitizers, ZCISe QDs were selected as photo-sensitizers to construct QDSCs. As expected, the ZCISe based G-QDSCs exhibit comparable PCE with L-QDSCs (Fig. S1–S3, Tables S1 and S2). The consistency of the results with CdSeTe based QDSCs illustrates that the prepared gel electrolyte is suitable for different types of QD sensitizers to fabricate quasi-solid-state QDSCs with a satisfactory PCE.

For DSCs, I−/I3− was generally used as the redox couple in the electrolyte, which is unfortunately corrosive for most QDs in QDSCs. Some other redox couples were attempted to be employed to construct QDSCs such as S2−/Sn2− and Co2+/Co3+. In comparison with the other mediators, the S2−/Sn2− redox was found to be a good candidate for the fabrication of QDSCs since it is relatively stable for QDs and the fabricated QDSCs show a relatively high PCE. Although S2−/Sn2− redox is most suitable for QDSCs until now, the instability of the polysulfide electrolyte itself caused by the oxidation has become a serious problem that may limit the long-term stability of the constructed QDSCs.

In this paper, CMC-Na was used to solidify liquid polysulfide solution in view of its superabsorbent ability and water-retaining capacity. More importantly, it exhibits a three dimension, which was expected to act as a support for the polysulfide electrolyte and also to provide a protection for polysulfide from oxidation. To explore the effect of gelation of CMC-Na on the stability of polysulfide solution, both gel and liquid polysulfide electrolytes were prepared, respectively, and loaded into screw-cap vials. Both vials were placed under room conditions. As shown in Fig. 5c, the color of liquid electrolyte solution faded gradually from brown to yellow within 15 days. After 30 days, the solution is colorless and a small amount of faint yellow precipitates appeared. The phenomena can be ascribed to the oxidation of polysulfide possessing high reactivity by oxygen, described by eqn (4):
Sn2− + 3/2O2 → S2O32− + (n − 2)S
(4)
Eventually, Sn2− in liquid polysulfide solution was oxidized to S2O32− and S. For verifying this conclusion, the UV-Vis absorption spectra of the supernatant of liquid polysulfide solution were tested after standing for 30 days. As shown in Fig. 5a, the supernatant exhibits an absorption peak at around 215 nm, identical to that of the Na2S2O3 solution prepared by directly dissolving Na2S2O3 in water. No absorption peak of the S2− and Sn2− was observed in the absorption spectra of the supernatant, demonstrating the complete oxidation of Sn2− in polysulfide solution. Meanwhile, the precipitates were confirmed to be sulfur by the powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD) spectra. The PXRD pattern of the precipitates agrees well with the simulated one of β-sulfur (Fig. 5b), indicating that the precipitate is β-sulfur. Comparably, the color of the gel electrolyte still shows no significant change after 30 days as shown in Fig. 5c. Therefore, the gelation of liquid polysulfide by the CMC-Na gel could obviously slow down the oxidation process of polysulfide, which can be attributed to the trapping and protection of the CMC-Na framework for liquid polysulfide solution.
The higher stability of the gel electrolyte should be beneficial for the better stability of the resultant quasi-solid-state QDSCs. To confirm this, CdSeTe sensitized L-QDSCs and G-QDSCs were sealed and tested under successive irradiation via an AM 1.5 G solar simulator with an intensity of 100 mW cm−2 at room temperature. Fig. 6a shows the normalized efficiency of CdSeTe based L-QDSCs and G-QDSCs. Under successive irradiation, the efficiency of L-QDSCs started to decline after 20 h, and degraded by nearly 60% of their initial efficiency after 50 h. As a sharp comparison, G-QDSCs retain their best efficiency for 70 h and still retained 80% of their initial value after 90 h. As shown in Fig. 6, the degradation of both L-QDSCs and G-QDSCs mainly results from the reduction of Jsc, while the Voc value shows a slight decrease and the FF remains almost constant with the extension of irradiation time. In particular, the Jsc of the L-QDSCs lost nearly 60% of its initial value after 50 h of successive irradiation, whereas the Jsc of the G-QDSCs has no obvious change with the same irradiation time and still maintains a relatively high level (80%) after 90 h. These results indicated that the quasi-solid-state QDSCs based on the CMC-Na gel electrolyte exhibit much better stability than the reference liquid-junction ones, which is ascribed to both the prevention of the permeation of the electrolyte from the sealed cell devices and the intrinsic protection of the CMC framework for polysulfide oxidation.

In this study, low-cost and natural-based CMC-Na, exhibiting superabsorbent and water-holding ability, was used to solidify aqueous polysulfide solution to prepare a new type of gel electrolyte. As expected, the obtained gel electrolyte shows a comparable conductivity with the liquid electrolyte, stemming from its three dimensional porous network that can provide channels for ion mobility. Benefitting from the high conductivity of the CMC-Na gel electrolyte and its perfect contact with surfaces of TiO2 films and QDs, both CdSeTe and ZCISe based quasi-solid-state QDSCs with the Cu2S counter electrode exhibit comparable PCE (9.21% and 9.19% respectively) with the reference liquid-junction QDSCs. Due to the excellent water-holding capacity of CMC-Na, the volatilization and leakage of liquid electrolytes were effectively improved, and the light-soaking stability of the constructed cell devices is thereby significantly improved.


We acknowledge the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21421004, 91433106 and 21301059), State Key Research Development Program of China (2016YFA0204200), the Open Project of State Key Laboratory of Chemical Engineering (SKL-ChE-14C04), and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities in China for financial support.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Preparation of ZCISe QDs and sensitized photoanodes; J–V curves of ZCISe sensitized solar cells based on liquid and gel electrolytes and the relevant photovoltaic parameters; EIS of ZCISe based L-QDSCs and G-QDSCs under a forward bias of −0.60 V and the corresponding simulated values; open circuit voltage decay (OCVD) measurements of ZCISe sensitized L-QDSCs and G-QDSCs. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta05894a
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016