 DOI: 10.1039/C6EE01987K
(Communication)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3424-3428


Zhengyang
Bin
,

Jiangwei
Li
,

Liduo
Wang
* and 

Lian
Duan
*

Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, P. R. China. E-mail: duanl@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn; chldwang@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Received
11th July 2016
, Accepted 29th September 2016
First published on 29th September 2016
N-type doping is an effective way to increase the short circuit current (Jsc) of perovskite solar cells (PSCs), thus enhancing their power conversion efficiency (PCE). However, the largely decreased open circuit voltage (Voc) and fill factor (FF) are always drawbacks in traditional n-type doping. Moreover, efficient n-type dopants are rare to date and it is therefore desirable and urgent to develop new n-type dopants with a better n-type doping ability for high performance PSCs. Here, a series of 1,3-dimethyl-2-phenyl-2,3-dihydro-1H-benzoimidazole derivatives have been designed and synthesized, which provides a successful case of tailoring the doping ability of n-type dopants. It has been demonstrated that with a stronger n-type dopant, an extremely low doping ratio would be sufficient to boost the Jsc, while enhancing the FF and minimizing the Voc loss. By using the strongest n-type dopant, a PCE of over 18% is achieved in an inverted PSC with a remarkably low doping ratio of 0.05% by weight.

Organic–inorganic halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have triggered a great deal of research on organic semiconductors due to their potential application as strong competitors in the photovoltaic field with low cost and high efficiencies. Although significant progress has been made in highly efficient PSCs with an inverted structure, the relatively low short circuit current (Jsc) remains a crucial problem because of the intrinsic low electron mobility and electrical conductivity of the prototype electron transporting material, phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM). Here, we show a successful case of designing and controlling the doping ability of n-type dopants, and used them to increase the conductivity and mobility of PCBM through n-type doping technology. Furthermore, we propose that by using a stronger n-dopant, an extremely low doping ratio is needed to achieve high performance PSCs with significantly increased Jsc. These results open the way for the progress of new organic n-type dopants, and provide high performance inverted perovskite solar cells.


The strikingly fast development of low-cost and highly efficient organic–inorganic halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) in recent years has made them strong competitors in the photovoltaic field. Since the excellent optoelectronic properties of the perovskite materials could guarantee efficient generation and transport of charge carriers through the polycrystalline perovskite thin films, the construction of adjacent contact layers becomes important in carrier extraction and collection.

In inverted planar heterojunction PSCs, phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) has been commonly used as an electron transporting material (ETM) because of its advantages such as excellent solution processibility, well-matched energy level and trap-passivating properties. However, the short circuit current (Jsc) of the inverted PSC thereof is often limited by the intrinsic low electron mobility and electrical conductivity of PCBM, even with state-of-art techniques. Therefore, it is urgent to increase its conductivity for high performance inverted PSCs. One way to solve this problem is to develop a new ETM with suitable energy alignment and high electron mobility, which is rather difficult with few reports published to date. In this regard, an alternative option of using a PCBM/C60 bilayer is provided by the Huang group, taking advantage of the good electron transport ability of C60 and, at the same time, avoiding the energy mismatch.
Another solution is to use an n-type doping technology, the electron transfer from the highly reactive n-type dopant to the ETM would then increase the free electron concentration. Compared with the widely used inorganic n-type dopants such as alkali metals or alkali salts, organic n-type dopants are more suitable for solution phase doping with fullerene derivatives, because they have better solubility in common organic solvents and could avoid atom diffusion. Among all the reported n-type dopants, 1H-benzoimidazole derivatives have received much attention and have been widely studied as n-type dopants in ETMs to increase electrical conductivities. For example, Bao's group reported that when (4-(1,3-dimethyl-2,3-dihydro-1H-benzoimidazol-2-yl)phenyl)dimethylamine is doped into a PCBM film, the conductivity of the film increased from 8.1 × 10−8 to 1.9 × 10−3 S cm−1 with a concentration of 20 mol%. Jen's group chemically doped the semiconducting polymer ETM with 1,3-dimethyl-2-phenyl-2,3-dihydro-1H-benzoimidazole (N-DMBI) and improved the PCE of polymer solar cells from 0.69% to 3.42%. It was also reported that 1H-benzoimidazole could improve the Jsc of PSCs, though at the cost of reduced Voc and FF. It is proposed that by using a stronger n-type dopant, the doping ratio could be largely reduced, so that we could use an extremely low doping ratio to achieve high performance PSCs with significantly increased Jsc. As efficient n-type dopants are currently rare, it is therefore desirable and urgent to develop new n-type dopants which are suitable for the PCBM type ETMs.
Here, a series of 1,3-dimethyl-2-phenyl-2,3-dihydro-1H-benzoimidazole (DMBI) derivatives have been designed and synthesized, which provide a successful case of tailoring the doping ability of n-type dopants. DMBI derivatives are known to be an ideal class of solution phase n-type dopants, as they could promote hydrogen transfer and readily form highly reactive organic radicals in solution, as can be seen in Fig. 1(a). Thus the electron-donating ability of the formed organic radical is the key point for n-type doping efficiency. We studied the relationship between the structure and reducibility of DMBI molecules according to theoretical calculations, and molecules with strong reducibility were chosen (Fig. S1, ESI). As you can see from Fig. 1(b), the singly occupied molecular orbital (SOMO) of a DMBI molecule is mainly located at the o- and p-positions of a benzene ring compared with its m-position. Thus introducing a strong electron-donating group of –methoxy (–MeO) in the o- and p-positions could largely increase its SOMO energy, and improve the reactivity of a DMBI radical. R1, R2 and R3, with the SOMO energies of −2.53, −2.29 and −2.10 eV, are chosen, while H1, H2 and H3, as the precursors of above organic radicals, are synthesized to be the n-type dopants in PCBM.
The high reactivity of H3 was firstly seen from the synthetic process, which showed that H3 was easily oxidized in solution upon heating, and could not be purified using the traditional methods. Thus different from H1 or H2 purified directly through recrystallization in ethyl alcohol, H3 was obtained through sublimation in a high vacuum (Fig. S2, ESI).
Subsequently, the doping efficiency was characterized via the electron spin resonance (ESR) and UV-vis-near IR absorbance spectra.
As can be seen from Fig. 2(a), except for the signal produced by the marker at the magnetic field of around 319.30 and 319.85 mT, undoped PCBM exhibited no appreciable radical signal in the ESR spectra. However, the mixture of Hx (H1, H2 or H3) and PCBM revealed a strong signal at the magnetic field of around 319.65 mT with a g value of 2.001, indicating the formation of an organic radical. The UV-vis-near IR spectra are used to further study the composition of the formed organic radical, as shown in Fig. 2(b). In the pure PCBM film, no significant absorption at 900 nm existed. But when Hx was added in PCBM solution, the formed PCBM films all showed an obvious absorption at 900 nm, which was reported as the absorption from PCBM˙−. Thus in the ESR spectra, double integration of a radical peak was used to estimate the spin concentration, which revealed that the ratios of spin concentration for H1, H2 and H3 doped PCBM solutions are 1, 2.7 and 5.6, respectively. And the higher spin concentration of H3 doped PCBM means more efficient electron transfer from H3 to PCBM than H1 or H2, which is consistent with the theoretical calculations above.
The current–voltage characteristics of the electron-only devices were used to evaluate the n-doping efficiency of the three dopant devices. The structures of the electron-only devices were FTO/TiO2/undoped PCBM and 0.05 wt% n-doped PCBM/BCP/Al and their performances are summarized in Fig. 3. In these devices, TiO2 and BCP (2,9-dimethyl-4,7-diphenyl-1,10-phenanthroline) were used as the hole blocking layers. Different from the undoped device which showed a non-linear increase of current density with applied voltages, all of the n-type doped devices showed a linear increase with the applied voltages. It demonstrates that after n-type doping, the semiconductive PCBM film is nearly changed to a conductor, implying a largely improved conductivity. Again, a stronger n-type dopant could lead to a more efficient electron-transfer, thus the H3-doped device has the highest current density compared with the H1 or H2-doped device. The influence of n-type doping on the conductivity of PCBM was also studied using conductive atomic force microscopy (c-AFM) measurements (Fig. S4, ESI). The c-AFM images clearly show different current levels and distributions between the PCBM and n-type PCBM films, indicating the largely increased film conductivity after doping.
The n-type dopants were then used in the inverted perovskite solar cells to enhance the device performances. The device structures are FTO/NiMgLiO/CH3NH3PbI3/undoped and 0.05 wt% n-doped PCBM/BCP/Ag, as can be seen in Fig. 4(a) and (b), and the device performances are summarized in Table 1.
ETMs

V
oc [V]

J
sc [mA cm−2]
FF [%]
PCE [%]
RS [Ohm cm2]
RSh [Ohm cm2]
μ [cm2 V−1 s−1]

a The mobility of ETMs was measured by using the SCLC technique (see Fig. S3, ESI).

PCBM
1.08
19.8
0.775
16.6
1.51
2252
4.6 × 10−3
H1:PCBM
1.07
20.6
0.776
17.1
1.43
1468
2.1 × 10−2
H2:PCBM
1.06
21.0
0.778
17.3
1.27
2931
7.1 × 10−2
H3:PCBM
1.06
21.5
0.793
18.1
1.23
4241
7.9 × 10−2
The J–V curves in Fig. 4(c) show an effectively increased Jsc of PSCs with all three n-type dopants, indicating a positive doping effect. Moreover, a stronger n-doping ability, from H1 to H3, contributed to a continued promotion of the photocurrent, demonstrating the importance of electron transport ability for the ETM. With the strongest H3 n-type dopant, the Jsc was largely increased from 19.8 to 21.5 mA cm−2, compared with the undoped devices. A stable power output of over 18% within 500 s was finally achieved for the H3-based PSCs under 100 mW cm−2 illumination. Further evidence of the external quantum efficiencies (EQE) and statistic PCEs can be found in Fig. S6 (ESI). The integrated photocurrent of the EQE spectra coincided with the Jsc. For the n-type doped devices, higher EQE values were found mainly in the long wavelength region, indicating an effectively reduced carrier recombination. Excitingly, the extremely low doping ratio of only 0.05 wt% strongly confirms the superior n-type doping ability of H3 and demonstrates the possibility of elevating Jsc using the n-type doping strategy.
In addition, the FF was improved with the introduction of a 0.05 wt% n-type dopant. Since the FF is strongly correlated with the degree of charge transfer at the perovskite/PCBM interface and the electron transport properties of PCBM, the time-resolved PL spectra, mobility and surface roughness of PCBM were measured. Upon n-type doping of H3, the mobility was largely increased from 4.6 × 10−3 to 7.9 × 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1, presumably due to the improved morphology and filled trap state by the generated free electrons in the PCBM film (Table 1). Moreover, as shown in Fig. 5(a), an n-type doped PCBM film could form a more smooth film than a pure PCBM film, which is attributed to the strong interaction between the n-type dopants and PCBM molecules. Thus combining the superior film quality and the improved electron transporting properties of the H3 doped PCBM film, the charge carrier transfer at the perovskite/PCBM interface is more efficient than the undoped one. Consequently, the charge carrier recombination is effectively suppressed and the charge generation and collection are enhanced. Thus, as we mentioned before, the conversion of light improved and the EQE values increased, especially in the long wavelength region with a higher recombination possibility. We further performed time-resolved PL spectra and used a bi-exponential decay model to fit the two time constants. As can be seen from Fig. 5(b), the average lifetime decreased from 2.31 to 1.69 ns upon n-type doping of H3, indicating an improved electron extraction and charge dissociation from the perovskite to the n-type PCBM layer. However, when a larger amount of n-type dopants were added, the aggregates of a less soluble electron transfer product caused increased surface roughness and led to bad interfacial contact, leading to a rapidly decreased FF (Fig. S7, ESI).
Although a remarkably high average Jsc and an enhanced FF factor of the n-doped device were received with an extremely low doping ratio, the generation of free electrons by n-type doping could inevitably cause a downward movement of the LUMO of the ETM, leading to a decreased Voc. Thus it is a disadvantage of n-type doping and can’t be eliminated. The decrease of Voc was observed for all three dopants, as shown in Fig. S9(a) (ESI). With increasing dopant concentration, the decrease of Voc for H3 doped devices was even faster than the others, indicating its strong doping ability. As can be seen from Fig. 6, the LUMO of the pure PCBM film located at 0.65 eV above EF, and decreased to 0.46 eV as 5 wt% H3 was added, which kept decreasing to reach EF when more H3 was added. But, as H3 is a strong n-type dopant, only a small dose of doping could lead to a high Jsc, so that the decrease of Voc could be minimized by utilizing negligible amounts of the n-type dopants. Hence, at an extremely low doping ratio of 0.05 wt%, n-type dopant H3 could undergo an efficient electron transfer with PCBM, leading to a largely increased Jsc, while such a negligible amount of the n-type dopants could enhance the FF and minimize the Voc loss.
We further tested the primary stability of the n-type doped devices by placing them in an ambient atmosphere without any encapsulation (temperature = ∼25 °C, relative humidity = ∼30%). All three n-type doped devices maintained >85% of their initial PCEs after 30 days of storage, while the PCE of the undoped device dropped by more than 30% (Fig. S10, ESI). Thus the ambient stability of the PSCs was improved after n-type doping of the ETMs, possibly owing to the following reasons: (1) for the n-type doping process, organic radicals could lead to a better air-stability of PCBM due to the compensatory effect of the dopant on the O2 electron traps. (2) The extremely low doping ratio and improved morphology could also contribute to the high stability of n-type doped PCBM films. (3) With respect to the devices, it was reported by Lee's group that the n-dopants could trap the mobile and corrosive iodide ions through a mutual ionic interaction during the aging process. Thus the improved device stability may come from the passivation effects of the corrosive iodide ions.

In summary, we have synthesized a series of new-solution-processable n-type dopants according to the electron-donating ability, and successfully used them to improve the Jsc of the inverted planar perovskite solar cells. The best-performing device, using an extremely low doping ratio of 0.05 wt% H3 as the n-type dopant in PCBM, achieved a PCE of 18.1% with a high Jsc of 21.5 mA cm−2 and an enhanced FF of 0.79, much higher than the control device without any n-type dopant or the previously reported n-type dopant.

This opens the way for the development of new organic n-type dopants utilizing theoretical calculations, and helps push the performance of the inverted planar perovskite solar cells to a higher level.

We would like to thank the National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars of China (Grant No. 51525304) and the National Key Basic Research, Development Program of China (Grant No. 2015CB655002), and the Open Fund of the State Key Laboratory on Integrated Optoelectronics (Grant No. IOSKL2015KF13) for the financial support.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Molecular design of new kinds of organic n-type dopants, experimental details of device fabrication and characterization, synthesis and characterization of the newly designed n-type dopants, and additional figures and data for the inverted planar perovskite solar cells. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ee01987k
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016