 DOI: 10.1039/C3TA12240A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 11735-11740

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms

Wenzhe Li,
Jiaoli Li,
Liduo Wang*,
Guangda Niu,
Rui Gao and 
Yong Qiu

Key Lab of Organic Optoelectronics & Molecular Engineering of Ministry of Education, Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China. E-mail: chldwang@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn; Fax: +86 10 62795137; Tel: +86 10 62788802

State Key Lab of Polymer Physics and Chemistry, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100190, P.R. China

Received
10th June 2013
, Accepted 25th July 2013
First published on 29th July 2013
The method of post-modification by aluminum oxide was successfully introduced into perovskite sensitized solar cells with a liquid electrolyte. Post-modification by Al2O3 could both protect the perovskite sensitizer from corrosion by electrolyte and effectively suppressed electron recombination. The UV-vis spectra revealed an enhanced absorption especially in the long wavelength range after modification. The XRD results showed a disappeared peak of PbI2, demonstrating that the modification could effectively protect the perovskite from dissolution in the electrolyte. Stability test showed that the remaining JSC improved from 10% to 50% at a given period of time. The EIS results and dark current curves illustrated that this modification increased the interface resistance in dark, confirming that the electron recombination process was effectively restrained. Finally, the corresponding efficiency was largely increased from 3.56 to 6.00% by 68%. The strategy using aluminium oxide to post-modify a perovskite sensitized solar cell was therefore proved to be a useful tool for the optimization of perovskite sensitized solar cells.

The CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite and its derivative nanocrystals are used as light harvesters for solar cells. These compounds have some physical properties such as 20 multiple roles of light-absorption, electroluminescence, organic-like mobility, magnetic properties, charge separation, transport of both holes and electrons in single material. In addition, the sensitized solar cells based on this kind of materials with the advantages of low-cost and high efficiency have the potential to be the ideal photoelectric conversion device.

The CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite solar cells were divided into two categories: all-solid-state solar cells and liquid state solar cells. It was reported that in the all-solid-state sub-micron thin film mesoscopic solar cells, the spiro-MeOTAD (2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis-(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′-spiro-bifluorene) was used as the hole transport material (HTM), and achieved a very high PCE of 12%. After the iodine in CH3NH3PbI3 was practically changed by chlorine, the device stability and incident-photon-to-carrier conversion-efficiency (IPCE) increased, the PCE improved to 12.3%. On the other hand Kojima used CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite as a sensitizer and the iodine redox as electrolytes fabricated liquid state perovskite sensitized solar cells, and the power conversion efficiency (PCE) was 3.81%. Then Im optimized the precursor concentration of CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite, the final PCE was boosted to 6.5%. The CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite nanoparticles are unstable in an iodide-contained liquid electrolyte due to rapid dissolution, the fast degradation of performance was often witnessed. The perovskite sensitizer was therefore hardly applied to the most efficient liquid-cell-structure.
post-modification focused on a sensitized TiO2/electrolytes interface was proposed by Grätzel in dye sensitized solar cells (DSCs). The 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP) was used as the modification agent so that the electron recombination from a conductive band of TiO2 to an electrolyte was retarded. The PCE improved from 3.7 to 8.5%. Due to the problem of organic modification agents that includes a low boiling point and solubility in electrolytes, the inorganic materials with a wide bandgap such as Al2O3 could also suppress electron recombination. In quantum dots sensitized solar cells (QDSCs) post-modification materials, for instance ZnS, tetrabutylammonium iodide (TBAI), halogen ions were also used to improve the photoelectric conversion efficiency and device stability. However, the post-modification in CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite solar cells has never been reported. Compared with all-solid-state solar cells, the liquid state solar cells were more sensitive to photovoltage performance through post-modification by Al2O3.
Here we report a useful strategy to stabilize perovskite in a liquid cell by the method of post-modification. It was found in our former work that the Al2O3 overlayer could act as an insulator barrier to retard recombination between the TiO2 and the dye/quasi-solid state electrolyte interface. A similar effect was observed in the perovskite sensitized liquid cell where the Al2O3 overlayer effectively improved the efficiency 1.71 times, and at the same time the stability from 10% remaining JSC to 50% at a given period of time. The paper systematically discussed the CH3NH3PbI3 post-modification and passivation, which potentially revealed a normally applied method for interface modification in all-solid-state perovskite solar cells.

CH3NH3I was synthesized and purified based on the method proposed by J. H. Im. To prepare perovskite CH3NH3PbI3, the synthesized CH3NH3I (0.395 g) and PbI2 (1.157 g, Aldrich) were mixed in γ-butyrolactone (2 mL, TCI) at 60 °C for 12 h with stirring. The nanocrystalline TiO2 colloid was synthesized with the hydrothermal method which was well documented in a previous report.


The cleaned FTO glasses were coated with 0.15 M titaniumdiisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate) (75% Aldrich) in 1-butanol (Aldrich) solution by the spin-coating method with 3000 rpm and 30 s, which was heated at 125 °C for 5 min, and then raised to 500 °C for 30 min. The nanocrystalline TiO2 paste was deposited on the pre-treated FTO substrate, which was followed by heating at 500 °C for 1 h. The thickness of the annealed TiO2 films was 5.4 μm, determined by SEM (JEOL JSM-7401F). The perovskite coating solution was spread on the annealed TiO2 film and spun for 60 s at a speed of 2000 rpm in air atmosphere. Then the films were heated at 100 °C for 15 min. The room temperature films were immersed into a 45 mM aluminium triethyl (Alfa, Al(C2H5)3 25% w/w in hexane) hexane solution for 30 s. The hydrolysis rate was very fast in the air. Aluminium triethyl is flammable, therefore it was reasonable to keep it in a glovebox. The redox electrolyte was prepared by dissolving 0.9 M LiI (Alfa), 0.45 M I2 (Alfa), 0.5 M N-methylbenzimidazole (Aldrich, NMBI), 0.05 M urea (Aldrich) in ethyl acetate (Alfa). Here the NMBI was used as electrolyte additives, considering the lower boiling point of the normally used 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP). Chemically platinized conductive glass was used as the counter electrode. When assembling the DSCs, the sensitized TiO2 electrode and a counter electrode were sandwiched using an adhesive tape with a thickness of 15 μm. Last, the electrolyte was introduced into the space of the sealed electrodes prior to measurement.


The UV-vis absorption spectra were used for testing the absorption of the perovskite sensitized TiO2 film with a Hitachi U-3010 spectroscope. X-Ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were obtained with Smart LAB instruments Cu Kα beam (λ = 1.54 Å). X-Ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was measured with a PHI 5300ESCA instrument. Photocurrent–voltage (J–V), incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) and electrochemical impedance spectros (EIS, ranged from 0.1 Hz to 105 Hz) were measured by a ZAHNER CIMPS electrochemical workstation, Germany.


To investigate the generated material after Al(C2H5)3 treatment, XPS was used to analyze the TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3 film before and after surface modification. All of the peaks were calibrated using C1s (284.8 eV) as the reference. The elements of the composite films could be identified in the XPS wide-scan survey spectrum, as shown in Fig. 1a. A detailed analysis of the XPS spectra presented a clear evidence that the films were chemically modified and confirmed by high resolution spectra of O 1s and Al 2p based on a Gaussian spectral deconvolution. Fig. 1b showed that after the modification the peak of Al was located at 74.5 eV. As shown in Fig. 1c, the O 1s spectrum for TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3 in line (A) could be partitioned to two peaks of TiO2. The large peak at 530.0 eV was assigned to lattice oxygen in anatase TiO2, whereas the other peak located at 531.5 eV could be attributed to the hydroxyl O atoms. After the modification, a new peak appeared at 531.9 eV shown in line (B), which was the binding energy of Al2O3. It was therefore proved that the Al2O3 layer was generated after the Al(C2H5)3 modification.


The liquid state perovskite solar cells were fabricated using CH3NH3PbI3 sensitized TiO2 films as a photoanode and the J–V curves were shown in Fig. 2a. For electrode without post-modification by Al2O3, the open circuit voltage (VOC) increased from 0.56 to 0.68 V. A similar phenomenon was observed in our former results about Al2O3 post-modification of a quasi-solid state solar cell, where a 0.13 V increase was acquired. The fill factor was relatively high, 0.68 in comparison with 0.53 before modification. The Al2O3 coating between the sensitized TiO2 film and the electrolyte served as an insulating barrier layer. The Al2O3 coating depressed the recombination between the injected electrons and the electrolytes. As a result, the overall efficiency of 6% was doubled for the device modified with Al2O3 layer. The post-modification thus proved to be an efficient method to improve the efficiency of the perovskite sensitized liquid perovskite solar cells.

The photocurrent response in monochromatic was also investigated by IPCE, and the results were shown in Fig. 2b. The narrow IPCE curve revealed a maximum efficiency of 58% at 500 nm, while having an efficiency above 50% in the range of 440–580 nm. After modification with Al2O3, the range was broadened from 140 to 210 nm, which was 530–740 nm in detail. This might be due to a more efficient incident photon absorption in the long wavelength range. However the photo-electron current response of TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/Al2O3 perovskite solar cells was 10% lower than that of the device before modification. In the testing process, TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite solar cells with lower stability would generate more PbI2 than the devices after modification, leading the higher photocurrent response at 500 nm wavelength which was attributed to absorption from PbI2. Even though the IPCE was lower in the range from 400 to 550 nm, the enhanced effect of Al2O3 layer in the range from 550 to 760 nm played a dominant role. The corresponding short circuit current exhibited an increase of 12% after modification under illumination of 1 sun, as shown in Fig. 2a.
The decay of the device performance was recorded by continually testing under 1 sun without the device packaged. The JSC decreased with time, as shown in Fig. 2c. The aging of the liquid cell happened very quickly, less than 10% values was remained after 15 min of illumination. In comparison, the modified cell maintained more than 50% values. The Al2O3 layer could perfectly protect the perovskite sensitizer from dissolution by the electrolyte and erosion by the moisture in air. Although the overall stability was not so far ideal as solid state perovskite solar cells, this work inspired a possible method for the development of liquid cells by using perovskite as a sensitizer and provided a feasible method to further improve the PCE of the solid state.

The CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite sensitized TiO2 film had a broad UV-vis spectrum until 775 nm, as shown in Fig. 3. This is comparable to the traditional successful black dye. However for a liquid cell, the electrolyte decomposed the perovskite easily, which made the cell unstable. It was clearly seen that after contact with the electrolyte, the spectrum of the sensitized TiO2 film without Al2O3 layers was strongly narrowed to 520 nm. Fortunately, the electrolyte decay could be effectively restrained by post-modification of the sensitized photoanode with Al2O3. The Al2O3 is traditionally formed by hydrolysis of aluminium isopropoxide. However in our experiment one of the hydrolysis products isopropanol also affected the stability of CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite. Here the Al(C2H5)3 was used as a modification agent whose hydrolysis products do not decompose the CH3NH3PbI3. The absorption spectrum of the corresponding film showed a slight blue shift, while retaining the enhanced absorption until 789 nm as before the erosion. This was probably because the Al2O3 overlayer blocked the water in air, so the erosion of the perovskite was effectively retarded. The Al2O3 overlayer could suppress both electrolytes and vapour in the air corrosion process. A similar phenomenon was observed in Luo's work, the cell with an insulating coating showed better stability under both low and high illumination.

The crystal structure changes in the corrosion process were further verified by a XRD experiment. Fig. 4 shows the crystal information existing in the photoanode. The peaks at 28.30 and 31.71° in curve B, corresponding to the (220) and (310) planes, confirmed the formation of a tetragonal perovskite structure with lattice parameters of a = b = 8.883 Å and c = 12.677 Å, which was well consistent with previous reports. Only the sensitized film without modification showed a typical 002 and 102 crystal face of PbI2 located in 25.8 and 34.2°, respectively, which was produced by the erosion procedure. The bandgap of bulk PbI2 is 2.57 eV with absorption at 482 nm wavelength which is similar to the ‘TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3 after the erosion curve in Fig. 3. That meant the CH3NH3PbI3 was dissolved and decomposed to PbI2 and CH3NH3I in electrolyte conditions. In comparison, the sensitized TiO2 film after modification maintained a similar spectrum both before and after erosion. This therefore proved the idea that the Al2O3 overlayer could effectively protect the perovskite sensitizer to obtain improved stability.

The chemical corrosion retarded by Al2O3 was revealed while the physical performance was also needed to be investigated. In order to reveal the role of Al2O3 for the improvement of the device, the EIS spectra were measured. Under full illumination, the Nyquist plot (Fig. 5a) showed typical semicircles in the measured frequency range of 0.1 Hz to 100 kHz. As reported in such perovskite solar cells, the resistance at the TiO2/sensitizer/electrolyte interface (the R2 in the equivalent circuit represented in Fig. 5a) can be determined by the middle frequency (10–100 Hz) semicircle in the Nyquist plots. The values of R2 are 192 Ω, and 225 Ω for TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3 and TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/Al2O3 device, respectively. The interface resistance slightly increased by 17%, reflecting that the forward electron transmission was impeded. In theory, the JSC would be decreased, which was contradicted with the increased JSC in the J–V curve (Fig. 2b). However, the Al2O3 in the devices protected CH3NH3PbI3 from corrosion by the electrolyte. The relatively stable CH3NH3PbI3 contributed the higher JSC in modified cells which had been illustrated above. The Nyquist plot of impedance spectra in the dark under 0.8 V bias voltage revealed an increased interface resistance at sensitized TiO2/electrolyte interface (Fig. 5b). The values changed from 50 Ω before modification to 125 Ω after modification 150% times. The interface resistance was reflected in the obstruction of electron transmission from TiO2 conductive band (CB) to electrolytes. Normally an increased resistance in the dark indicated restrained electron recombination. As shown in Scheme 1 the electron recombining process from TiO2 CB to the electrolyte was suppressed by the Al2O3 insulating layer. Considering both the interface resistance changes in the illustrated and dark conditions, the recombination resistance increased much more substantially than the resistance of the forward electron transport. Therefore the current density was enhances, also reflected in the J–V curves. In our case, this was verified by dark current measurements. The J–V curve was recorded using the fabricated device measured in the dark. As shown in Fig. 5c, 2.8 times dark current was found for the unmodified device in comparison with the modified one, for example at VOC = 0.6 V. The recombination of the separated excitons was thus effectively restrained. VOC could be determined using the formula below:

(1)
where
ISC is the short-circuit photocurrent, I0 is the dark current, m is the ideality factor, whose value is between 1 and 2 for perovskite solar cells, and R and F are the ideal gas and Faraday constants, respectively. The formula proved that VOC increased with decreasing I0. An increased photovoltage performance and decreased dark current suggested that the dark reaction at the interface of the sensitized-TiO2 electrode/electrolyte in perovskite solar cells was reduced after the modification of Al2O3 and that electron transfer from the conduction band of the TiO2 film to the triiodide ions was suppressed.


An efficient method both improved the photovoltaic performance of perovskite sensitized solar cells and developed the device stability. The Al2O3 overlayer could act as an insulator barrier to protect the easily dissolved perovskite sensitizer and retard the recombination between the sensitized TiO2/liquid state electrolyte interface. The corresponding efficiency was improved by 68%, and an overall efficiency of 6.00% was obtained. Moreover, the remaining JSC improved from 10% to 50% at a given period of time. At least two factors resulted in the improvement: one was the enhanced absorption in the long wavelength range, coming from the protected perovskite sensitizer. This was evidenced by the XRD, where a disappeared peak of PbI2 indicated that the modification could effectively protect the perovskite from dissolution in the electrolyte; another was the increased interface resistance in the dark, which afforded restrained electron recombination. This work thus supplied a normally applicable strategy for interface modification in liquid state perovskite solar cells, which could also be applied in solid state perovskite sensitized solar cells. This part of the work was underway in our lab.


This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant no. 51273104, the National Key Basic Research and Development Program of China under Grant no. 2009CB930602, and the Ministry of Science and Technology of China (no. 2012CB933200).


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013