 DOI: 10.1039/C3EE43761B
(Communication)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1397-1401


Hongmei
Qin
,

Lisheng
Li
,

Fangqing
Guo
,

Shijian
Su
,

Junbiao
Peng
,

Yong
Cao
 and 

Xiaobin
Peng
*

Institute of Polymer Optoelectronic Materials and Devices, State Key Laboratory of Luminescent Materials and Devices, South China University of Technology, 381 Wushan Road, Guangzhou 510640, China. E-mail: chxbpeng@scut.edu.cn; Fax: +86-20-87110606; Tel: +86-20-87114346

Received
16th November 2013
, Accepted 21st January 2014
First published on 22nd January 2014
A porphyrin small molecule with less bulky substituents at the porphyrin periphery has been synthesized as a donor material, which exhibits a power conversion efficiency of up to 7.23% under AM 1.5 G irradiation (100 mW cm−2) for the solution-processed bulk heterojunction solar cells with PC61BM as the acceptor material.

Solution processable small molecules processed in solution for bulk heterojunction (BHJ) organic solar cells (OSCs) are very attractive due to advantages such as their defined molecular structure and molecular weight, high purity, and having less batch-to-batch variations compared to their polymer counterparts. These advantages show potential for low-cost and large-scale OSC commercialization applications. In this study, a conjugated donor-acceptor porphyrin small molecule with less bulky substituents at the porphyrin periphery was designed and synthesized. It exhibits a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of up to 7.23% with an VOC of 0.71 V, a JSC of 16.0 mA cm−2 and a FF of 63.7% in the presence of 0.4% 1,8-diiodo-octane additive for the solution-processed BHJ OSCs based on this porphyrin as the donor material and PC61BM as the acceptor material. This is the highest PCE for solution-processed BHJ OSCs based on porphyrin derivatives and this porphyrin also ranks as one of the best small molecule donor materials to date along with two other groups of small molecules that show PCEs over 7% for solution-processed BHJ OSCs.


Solution-processed bulk heterojunction (BHJ) organic solar cells (OSCs) are drawing more and more attention because of their potential for the mass production of flexible, lightweight and cost-effective devices, and therefore have been the focus of considerable academic and industrial research. In recent years, significant improvements have been achieved in the development of BHJ solar cells through the combination of the molecular design of active materials and interface layers, morphology control, and fabricating techniques. Power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of over 9% have also been achieved.

Solution processable small molecules (SMs) for BHJ OSCs are very attractive due to advantages such as their defined molecular structure and molecular weight, high purity, and having less batch-to-batch variations which are superior compared to their polymer counterparts. These advantages show a promising future in low-cost and large-scale OSC commercialization applications. The performance of solution-processed SM BHJ solar cells has increased steadily over the past few years, which is closing the gap of obtaining the best polymer solar cells (PSCs). For example, Bazan and Heeger et al. first reported a PCE of 6.7% for the BHJ OSCs based on a small molecule with 3,3′-di-2-ethylhexylsilylene as the core unit. The PCE was further enhanced to 7.0% and 9.02% after the chemical structures and devices with a conventional architecture were optimized. On the other hand, Chen et al. synthesized a series of small molecules with a benzo[1,2b:4,5b′]dithiophene (BDT) unit as the central building block and the best PCE was first reported to be 5.44%. After optimizing the series of molecular structures, the PCE was then enhanced to 7.38%, and finally to 8.12%.
However, SM BHJ solar cells have not been investigated as intensively as PSCs, and their overall performance still remains below that of their polymer counterparts. To date, only two groups of SM donor materials, mentioned above, have been reported with PCEs over 7% when blended with fullerene derivatives in solution-processed BHJ solar cells. Therefore, the lessons learned from BHJ PSCs should be applied to the design of OSC materials and the device engineering to further improve the PCEs of SM-based BHJ OSCs. Currently, the active materials, especially the donor materials, are still the most important for high PCE OSCs. Therefore, more efforts should be devoted to the design and understanding of the structure–property–function relationships of the active materials.
Inspired by natural photosynthetic systems, which utilize chlorophylls to absorb light and carry out photochemical charge separation to store light energy, porphyrins and their derivatives have been explored as the active materials in initial OSC studies, but the PCEs of the solution-processed BHJ OSCs based on them were usually very low. In order to facilitate the intramolecular charge transport, recently we introduced ethynylene to conjugate a porphyrin core to different acceptor units, and high PCEs of 4–5% were achieved for the solution-processed BHJ OSCs by employing them as donor materials with [6,6]-phenyl C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PC61BM) and [6,6]-phenyl C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM) as the acceptors.
Though a high performance was obtained, better PCEs could be expected with a more delicate molecular design of the porphyrins. For example, we previously employed two bulky 3,5-di(dodecyloxy)-phenyl substituents to ensure the solubility of the porphyrins. However, the long chains of the dodecyloxy groups at the 3,5-positions of the phenyl ring protruded out of the porphyrin plane and in turn suppressed the intermolecular π–π stacking, and therefore may lead to a relatively poor photovoltaic performance. In this study, 4-octyloxy-phenyl groups are used in place of the 3,5-di(dodecyloxy)-phenyl groups and a new conjugated donor–acceptor porphyrin – 5,15-bis(2,5-bis-(2-ethyl-hexyl)-3,6-di-thienyl-2-yl-2,5-dihydro-pyrrolo[3,4-c]pyrrole-1,4-dione-5′-yl-ethynyl)-10,20-bis(4-octyloxy-phenyl)-porphyrin zinc (DPPEZnP-O, Scheme 1) is designed and synthesized. It also shows excellent solubility in organic solvents such as chloroform and toluene.
DPPEZnP-O was synthesized by the Sonogashira coupling reaction, with the reported procedures shown in ESI. As shown in Fig. 1, DPPEZnP-O exhibits a broad and strong optical absorption coverage in the visible and near infrared (NIR) region, both in solution and in thin film. In dichloromethane, the absorption peaks are observed at 459, 565 and 736 nm. Cast as a thin film, DPPEZnP-O exhibits absorption peaks at 462, 572, a very weak shoulder peak at 736 and a strong peak at 813 nm. The significant red-shift of nearly 80 nm (from 736 nm in solution to 813 nm in film) is attributed to the strong intermolecular π–π stacking in the condensed solid state, which could be beneficial for a higher hole mobility and photovoltaic performance of OSCs. Compared with the weak shoulder peak at 790 nm of DPPEZnP-DD (Scheme 1), the peak of DPPEZnP-O at 813 nm is red-shifted and its intensity is increased significantly, indicating that DPPEZnP-O exhibits stronger cofacial π–π stacking than that of DPPEZnP-DD in film. These optical behaviours confirm that the modification using less bulky substituents at the porphyrin periphery of DPPEZnP-O effectively promotes its intermolecular π–π interactions in the solid state.
In order to obtain the information of the frontier orbital energy levels of DPPEZnP-O, we investigated the redox behaviours of DPPEZnP-O by electrochemical cyclic voltammetry (CV) in acetonitrile containing 0.1 M Bu4NPF6 as the supporting electrolyte and a saturated calomel electrode as the reference electrode. The onset oxidation (Eox) and reduction (Ered) potentials of DPPEZnP-O were 0.67 and −0.80 V vs. saturated calomel electrode, respectively, from which the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energy levels were estimated to be −5.07 and −3.60 eV according to the empirical formula of EHOMO = −e(Eox + 4.40) (eV) and ELUMO = −e(Ered + 4.40) (eV), respectively. The band gap was 1.47 eV, which is similar to the optical band gap of 1.36 eV obtained from the onset of the absorption spectrum in film.
The BHJ OSCs were fabricated by solution processing with a general device structure of indium tin oxide (ITO)/poly(styrene sulfonate)-doped poly(ethylene-dioxythiophene) (PEDOT:PSS)/DPPEZnP-O:PC61BM/poly[(9,9-bis(3′-(N,N-dimethylamino)-propyl)-2,7-fluorene)]-alt-2,7-(9,9–dioctylfluorene (PFN)/Al) and were measured under AM 1.5 illumination, 100 mW cm−2. As shown in Fig. 2 and listed in Table 1, when processed without any additive, the best device provided a PCE of up to 5.83% with an open circuit voltage (VOC), a short circuit current (JSC) and a fill factor (FF) of 0.74 V, 14.97 mA cm−2, and 52.64%, respectively. The average PCE reached 5.62%, which is enhanced by 57% compared with that of the OSC devices based on DPPEZnP-DD.
Solvent

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)

a The best PCE.
b The average value of PCE ± standard deviation of ten devices.

W/O
14.97
0.74
52.64
5.83 (5.62 ± 0.15)
0.4% DIO
16.00
0.71
63.67
7.23 (6.83 ± 0.21)
Compared to DPPEZnP-DD, pyridine did not play a positive role in the performance of the OSCs based on DPPEZnP-O. However, when the widely-used additive 1,8-diiodo-octane (DIO) was employed, the performance of the OSCs based on DPPEZnP-O was enhanced significantly. The typical J–V characteristics and photovoltaic parameters of the OSCs containing 0.4% DIO as a processing additive during the spin-casting are also shown in Fig. 2 and listed in Table 1, respectively. The best device, which was processed with 0.4% DIO, provided a PCE of up to 7.23% (with VOC = 0.71 V, JSC = 16.0 mA cm−2, and FF = 63.67%), and the average PCE of ten devices was 6.83%. In comparison with the best devices based on DPPEZnP-DD, the photovoltaic parameters which changed significantly were JSC and FF, which increased from 11.88 to 16.00 mA cm−2 and from 50.2% to 63.67%, respectively, while the VOC only slightly decreased from 0.80 V to 0.71 V. Since the molecular structures of DPPEZnP-O and DPPEZnP-DD are quite similar, the significant enhancement of JSC and FF is ascribed due to the stronger intermolecular π–π stacking of DPPEZnP-O in film. To the best of our knowledge, this PCE is the highest of the solution-processed BHJ OSCs based on porphyrin derivatives, and DPPEZnP-O also ranks as one of the best small molecule donor materials, along with the two groups of small molecules that showed PCEs over 7% for solution-processed BHJ OSCs mentioned above.
We measured the external quantum efficiencies (EQEs) of the devices processed with and without DIO. As shown in Fig. 3, all of the devices processed with and without a DIO additive show a very wide range of photocurrent generation in the region of 380 to 900 nm, and the EQEs in the whole region increased when DIO was used. For example, the EQE values at 570 nm and 805 nm increase from 47% to 57% and from 52% to 58%, respectively, after the addition of 0.4% DIO.
The morphologies of the blend films processed with and without DIO were investigated by atomic force microscopy (AFM) to gain an insight into the performance enhancement upon the replacement of the substituents and the introduction of the DIO additive. As shown in Fig. 4, the AFM height and phase images show no apparent crystalline domains in all of the films with and without DIO. The root-mean-square (RMS) roughness values of the pristine film and the film processed with DIO are 0.857 nm (Fig. 4a) and 0.345 nm (Fig. 4b), respectively, which are much smaller than those of the blend films of DPPEZnP-DD/PC61BM. The lower RMS roughness of these blend films indicate that DPPEZnP-O shows better miscibility with PC61BM, and may form a finer interpenetrating network to facilitate both exciton separation and charge transport. The phase topography of the pristine film (Fig. 4c) exhibits microscale phase separation, which is also better than that of DPPEZnP-DD/PC61BM film. Furthermore, the film of DPPEZnP-O/PC61BM processed with DIO shows much smaller phase separation domains (Fig. 4d), which are very suitable for efficient exciton dissociation and charge transport and should lead to an increased JSC and FF for a corresponding solar cell.
To have a better understanding of the morphologies, we recorded transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of the blend films processed without and with 0.4% DIO (Fig. S1). Consistent with the AFM results, the TEM images also show that the blend films possess rather uniform and fine features, which can be ascribed to the good miscibility of DPPEZnP-O with PC61BM. With the addition of 0.4% DIO, the film forms more even, continuous interpenetrating networks, which ensure more D/A interfaces and thus lead to enhanced JSC and FF.
UV-vis-NIR absorption spectra of the blend films with PC61BM processed with and without DIO additive were also measured to extract more information from the BHJ layers. These films were spin-cast under identical conditions as the fabrication of the OSC devices and the absorption spectra were not normalized. As shown in Fig. 5, the NIR peak is red-shifted from 806 nm to 815 nm after addition of DIO, which is characteristic of films that yield higher-efficiency solar cells.
We fabricated hole-only devices with almost the same thickness as the solar cells by spin-casting DPPEZnP-O/PC61BM with and without DIO using MoO3 as the buffer layer at the cathode to block the injection of electrons. The hole mobilities were measured directly, and were obtained through the space charge limited current (SCLC) method, and the J–V curves for the hole-only devices are shown in Fig. 6. The hole mobility of the device fabricated without DIO was 2.38 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 S−1, and was enhanced to 4.68 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 S−1 for the device in the presence of 0.4% DIO additive. Both values are larger than the best value of 1.6 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 S−1 based on DPPEZnP-DD. Apparently, the replacement of 3,5-di(dodecyloxy)-phenyl groups by 4-octyloxy-phenyl groups in DPPEZnP-O and the addition of the DIO additive both improve the hole transmission performance of the devices. This enhancement is ascribed to more efficient intermolecular π–π stacking of DPPEZnP-O and more suitable surface morphology for OSCs in film.

In summary, a porphyrin small molecule with a narrow band gap and less bulky substituents at the porphyrin periphery was designed and synthesized to simultaneously facilitate intramolecular charge transport and increase the intermolecular π–π stacking in film. The solution-processed BHJ OSCs based on this porphyrin provided us with a power conversion efficiency up to 7.23%, which is the highest PCE of solution-processed BHJ solar cells based on porphyrins and their derivatives to date. It also ranks as one of the best small molecule donor materials along with two other groups of small molecules that showed PCEs over 7% for solution-processed BHJ OSCs. Since the properties of porphyrins can be easily tuned via synthetic modifications at the periphery, we speculate that there is still great room for designing more favourable porphyrin small molecules for higher performance solar cells. Our results also demonstrate that the performance of BHJ OSCs based on small molecules can be significantly enhanced through careful molecular designs and device optimizations.


This work was financially supported by grants from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51073060, 50990065, and 51010003), International Science & Technology Cooperation Program of China (2010DFA52150 and 2013DFG52740), and the Guangdong Natural Science Foundation (no. S2012030006232).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ee43761b
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014