 DOI: 10.1039/D2NJ01965E
(Paper)
New J. Chem., 2022, 46, 12767-12772


Liguo
Gao
*,

Cai
Xu
,

Zhen
He
,

Yingjie
Su
 and 

Tingli
Ma


State Key Laboratory of Fine Chemicals, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, 116023, China. E-mail: liguo.gao@dlut.edu.cn

College of Materials and Chemistry, China Jiliang University, Hangzhou, 310018, China

Graduate School of Life Science and Systems Engineering, Kyushu Institute of Technology, Kitakyushu, Fukuoka 808-0196, Japan

Received
22nd April 2022
, Accepted 1st June 2022
First published on 2nd June 2022
The elimination of electron transport layers (ETLs) to fabricate ETL-free perovskite solar cells (PSCs) could save manufacturing costs and time. However, compared with PSCs based on the traditional architecture, ETL-free PSCs suffered low efficiency due to the device shunting and large energy barriers for carriers. Herein, a bifunctional interfacial modification material, 3-aminopropyl trimethoxy silane (APS), is selected and in situ grown on a transparent conducting oxide (TCO). On the one hand, the increased hydrophobicity of APS modified indium tin oxide (ITO) could improve the crystal growth of perovskites, resulting in larger grain sizes and reduced surface defects. On the other hand, the APS modification could improve the energy level alignment of ITO and the perovskite, leading to enhanced electron extraction and hole blocking. The PCE of the ETL-free PSCs based on APS modified ITO reached 19.09%, which was over 60% higher than that of ETL-free PSCs based on ITO.

In recent years, perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have drawn much attention in the field of photovoltaic technology due to the excellent photoelectric properties of perovskite materials, such as high light absorption rate, excellent carrier mobility, and low cost. Over the past decade, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of PSCs has increased from 3.8% to 25.7%, close to the efficiency of silicon-based solar cells (26.7%).

Generally, the traditional structure of PSCs is the perovskite (PVK) sandwiched between electron transport layers (ETLs) and hole transport layers (HTLs) to ensure that the electrons and holes can be effectively extracted to the electrodes. Although a lot of highly efficient PSCs have been fabricated based on the traditional structure, ETL-free and HTL-free PSCs have become more popular due to their simple structure, low cost, and potential for large-scale commercialization. ETL-free and HTLs-free PSCs could efficiently work because of the ambipolar charge transport characteristics of the PVK, which could transport both electrons and holes.
The state-of-the-art PCE of ETL-free PSCs has reached 21.1%. But it is still lower than that of PSCs with the traditional structure. This is because of two reasons: on the one hand, the direct deposition of perovskite films on transparent conducting oxide (TCO) substrates usually results in poor surface coverage and low uniformity, which would cause device shunting or current leakage. To resolve this issue, a lot of studies have been reported to improve the quality of perovskite films and reduce the current leakage, such as increasing the concentration of precursors, using mixed cations or halogens, and preparing a maze-like perovskite film.
On the other hand, the mismatched energy levels of TCO and perovskite may cause significant recombination at the interface of TCO and perovskite, resulting in significant open-circuit voltage (Voc) loss. To solve this problem, many strategies have been developed. The surface properties (work function (WF) and wettability) and morphological characteristics (roughness and porosity) of TCO substrates are critical to determining the device performance of ETL-free PSCs. Therefore, ultraviolet ozone (UVO) treatment and electrochemical etching are commonly used to improve the interfacial contact of the perovskite and TCO. The interfacial energy level alignment could be optimized by the direct incorporation of electron transport materials into perovskite films to form a bulk heterojunction (BHJ) or by depositing an ultra-thin interface layer on TCO. PCBM, polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA)–fullerene, and C70 were added to the perovskite film to promote charge separation and suppress charge carrier recombination. Inorganic monomolecular materials, including Cs2CO3, hypophosphorous acid (H3PO2), tetramethylammonium (TMAH), methylammonium acetate (MAAc), and a-NbOH could adjust the WF of the TCO and optimize the interfacial energy level alignment. Polyethylenimine ethoxylated (PEIE), 1-[N-(2-hydroxyethyl)-4′-piperidyl]-3-(4′-piperidyl) propane (PPPDE), and 5-amino-valeric acid (5-AVA) were used as ultra-thin organic materials to form an interfacial dipole layer, which could mitigate the energy level mismatch.
Most of the ultra-thin layers deposited on the TCO surface were of a single function. They could improve the WF of TCO or obtain high-quality perovskite films. In addition, most of the ultra-thin layers were usually prepared by spin-coating, which could cause the uneven distribution of the thin layers and be not conducive to large-scale preparation. In our work, a bifunctional modification material, 3-aminopropyl trimethoxy silane (APS), is selected and in situ self-assembled on the TCO substrate at room temperature. APS could cross-link on the surface of hydroxyl-modified indium tin oxide (ITO) through the silanization process, giving rise to an upward-shifted WF of ITO. Meanwhile, the amino group in APS could also coordinate with the uncoordinated Pb2+ to passivate the surface defects, resulting in the improvement of the device efficiency. The PCE of the ETL-free PSCs based on APS modified ITO reached 19.09%, which was over 60% higher than that of ETL-free PSCs based on ITO.


In situ growth of APS on the ITO surface is shown in Fig. 1a. The UVO-treated ITO substrates were covered with hydroxyl groups, which allowed APS self-assembly by the silanization process. The typical peak of N 1s (398.7 eV) and Si 2p (100 eV) in X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) demonstrated that APS had been deposited on the ITO substrate, as shown in Fig. 1b and Fig. S1 (ESI). In addition, the binding energy shift of O 1s in XPS (from Sn–O (530.4 eV) to Sn–O–Si (532.5 eV)) and the appeared Si–O–Si peak (1110–1000 cm−1) in Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) both indicated that APS had been in situ grown and cross-linked on the ITO substrates (Fig. 1c and d). The perfect fitting ultraviolet-visible (UV-Vis) transmission spectra demonstrated that APS modification did not affect the transmittance of ITO, as shown in Fig. S2 (ESI).

Compared with the perovskite directly deposited on ITO, the perovskite films deposited on APS modified ITO had much larger grain sizes and fewer grain boundaries, as per the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images, as shown in Fig. 2a and b. The corresponding distribution histograms of the average grain size of perovskite films deposited on ITO (310 nm) and APS modified ITO (390 nm) are shown in Fig. S3 (ESI). The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns in Fig. 2c further confirmed that the perovskite deposited on APS modified ITO had better crystallinity. The high quality of perovskite deposited on APS modified ITO resulted from two reasons: on the one hand, ammonia could react with Pb2+, as the XPS results show in Fig. 2d. Compared with that directly deposited on ITO, the binding energies (Pb 4f7/2 and Pb 4f5/2) of the perovskite deposited on APS modified ITO decreased from 142.07 eV and 137.19 eV to 141.78 eV and 136.90 eV, respectively. The –NH2 in APS formed a coordination bond with the uncoordinated Pb2+ in the perovskite, which could effectively passivate the surface defects; on the other hand, as shown in Fig. S4 (ESI), the surface of APS modified ITO became more hydrophobic. The hydrophobicity of the substrate could significantly affect the crystallization of the perovskite. In general, the increased hydrophobicity could reduce the wettability of the perovskite precursors, resulting in more continuous perovskite films with larger grain sizes and fewer grain boundaries. The larger grain sizes and fewer grain boundaries of the perovskite on APS modified ITO could significantly enhance the absorption of visible light and lower the photoluminescence (PL), as per the UV-Vis spectroscopy and PL spectra, as shown in Fig. 2e and f.
The architecture of ETL-free PSCs based on APS modified ITO is shown in Fig. 3a (APS modified ITO/PVK (Cs0.05(FA0.83MA0.17)0.95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3)/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au). The PCEs of the champion devices based on ITO and APS modified ITO were 11.65% and 19.09%, respectively. Compared with the devices based on ITO, ETL-free PSCs based on APS modified ITO obtained 60% PCE improvement, as shown in Fig. 3b and Fig. S5 (ESI). The histogram of the PCE distribution of 30 cells of the ETL-free PSCs demonstrated the good reproducibility of the devices as shown in Fig. S6 (ESI). As shown in Table S1 (ESI), all the important parameters of ETL-free PSCs based on APS modified ITO, including short circuit current density (Jsc), Voc, and fill factor (FF), were better than those of ETL-free PSCs based on ITO. As shown in Fig. 3c, incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra of ETL-free PSCs based on different substrates were further used to confirm the accuracy of the J–V measurement. To further confirm the reliability of the devices based on ITO and APS modified ITO, the stabilized power outputs for ETL-free PSCs at the maximum power point were tested, as shown in Fig. S7 (ESI). The results demonstrated that the devices based on APS modified ITO were stable in maintaining steady-state output. The hysteresis factor (HF) of the ETL-free PSCs based on APS modified ITO was only 0.012, which was an order of magnitude lower than that of ETL-free PSCs based on ITO (0.11). The hysteresis is related to the charge transfer kinetics at the interface between PVK and ITO. The decreased HF indicated that the APS modification could improve the charge extraction and inhibit the recombination of carriers at the interface between ITO and PVK.
In order to explore the photophysical properties of ETL-free PSCs based on APS modified ITO, the space-charge-limited current (SCLC), transient photocurrent (TPC), transient photovoltage (TPV), and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) spectra were measured. The electron-only devices (ITO and APS modified ITO/PVK/PCBM/Au) were fabricated to evaluate the trap state densities (Nt) of perovskite films deposited on different substrates, as shown in Fig. 3d. At low bias voltages, the current signal increases linearly with voltage, corresponding to the ohmic region. At intermediate bias voltages, the current shows a sharp nonlinear rise, corresponding to the trap-filled limited (TFL) region. The Nt of the perovskite film is estimated by the trap-filled limit voltage (VTFL) via the following equation:
where
e is the electron charge, L is the thickness of the perovskite film, ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, and εr is the relative dielectric constant of the perovskite film (28.8). The trap state densities of the perovskite films deposited on ITO and APS modified ITO substrates were 3.98 × 1015 and 3.10 × 1015 cm−3, respectively. The decreased trap density was associated with the increased grain size of the perovskite and interfacial defect passivation. The dark J–V curve in Fig. S8 (ESI) demonstrated that the dark current density of the ETL-free PSCs based on APS modified ITO was lower than that of the ETL-free PSCs based on ITO, indicating that the APS modification could effectively suppress carrier recombination and current leakage.

The photocurrent decay time from TPC of the ETL-free PSCs based on APS modified ITO (8.33 μs) was shorter than that of ETL-free PSCs based on ITO (16.01 μs), as shown in Fig. 3e. The photovoltage decay time from TPV of ETL-free PSCs based on APS modified ITO (13.4 μs) was longer than that of ETL-free PSCs based on ITO (9.1 μs), as shown in Fig. S9a (ESI). Both the decay times demonstrated that ETL-free PSCs based on APS modified ITO had higher charge transport efficiency and weaker carrier recombination, giving rise to a higher Jsc and Voc. The reason for the enhanced Voc is related to the low recombination of interfacial charges. To explore the interfacial charge recombination in the devices, the relationship between Voc and light intensity was analyzed, as shown in Fig. 3f. The Voc had a linear relationship with light intensity on a logarithmic scale. The slope of the devices based on APS modified ITO (1.58 kT/q) was smaller than that of ETL-free PSCs based on ITO (1.72 kT/q). This indicated that the devices based on APS modified ITO had reduced interfacial charge recombination, resulting in the relevant higher Voc. The dependence of Jsc on the light intensity curve demonstrated that the carriers transferred more smoothly in the device based on APS modified ITO, as shown in Fig. S9b (ESI).
To further investigate the carrier transport dynamics, EIS was used to analyze the impedance changes associated with different interfaces, as shown in Fig. 3g. The spectra can be fitted using the equivalent circuit shown in the inset image. The value of the starting point at the real part is denoted by series resistance (Rs), which is related to the resistance of external wires and substrates. The large arc at low frequency was attributed to the recombination resistance (Rrec). Obviously, the Rrec value of ETL-free PSCs based on APS modified ITO (24.6 kΩ) was much larger than that of ETL-free PSCs based on ITO (10.5 kΩ), indicating that the carrier recombination was effectively inhibited. Therefore, the ETL-free PSCs based on APS modified ITO achieved better performance.
As shown in Fig. 3h, the long-term stability of ETL-free PSCs was tested under an ambient atmosphere. The results showed that ETL-free PSCs based on APS modified ITO could maintain 83% of the initial PCE after 1000 hours of storage at 25 °C (30% relative humidity (RH)), while ETL-free PSCs based on ITO only retained about 70% of the initial PCE. The enhanced stability could be attributed to the improved perovskite film quality, reduced trap state density, and favorable energy level alignment at the interface of APS modified ITO/PVK.
The APS modification could also change the energy level alignment of ITO and perovskite. Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) characterization demonstrated that the WF of ITO was up-shifted after APS modification (upward from −4.70 eV to −4.19 eV), as shown in Fig. S10 (ESI). While when PVK was deposited on ITO or APS modified ITO, a Schottky barrier associated with spontaneous band bending could be formed. The mismatched energy level of the ITO/PVK interface resulted in a large energy barrier for electrons (ΔEe) of 0.92 eV and a small hole blocking energy barrier (ΔEh) of 0.63 eV, which was not conducive to electron collection and hole blocking, as shown in Fig. 4c. For the APS modified ITO/PVK interface, due to the reduced WF of APS modified ITO, the ΔEe decreased from 0.92 eV to 0.41 eV, and the ΔEh increased from 0.63 eV to 1.14 eV, as shown in Fig. 4d. This meant that the electron extraction and hole blocking were enhanced. The ultra-thin APS insulating layer could also effectively prevent electron recombination at the ITO/PVK interface and transfer electrons through tunneling. This was consistent with the photophysical test results that the APS modification could passivate defects and reduce energy loss at the interface.

In summary, a bifunctional modification material, APS, has been successfully grown on ITO. The results demonstrated that the APS modified ITO became more hydrophobic, which could reduce the wettability of perovskite precursors, resulting in more continuous perovskite films with larger grain sizes and fewer grain boundaries. In addition, the –NH2 in the APS could form a coordination bond with the uncoordinated Pb2+ in the perovskite, which could effectively passivate the surface defects of the perovskite. The improved energy level alignment by APS modification on ITO was beneficial to extract electrons and block holes. Finally, the PCE of the ETL-free PSCs based on APS modified ITO reached 19.09%, which was over 60% higher than that of ETL-free PSCs based on ITO.


This manuscript is approved by all the authors for publication and has not been published by or submitted to other journals previously.


The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.


This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51772039 and 51972293). We extend our appreciation to the Supercomputing Center of Dalian University of Technology for providing access to the supercomputer.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2nj01965e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2022