 DOI: 10.1039/C4TA06004K
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 1910-1914


Huitao
Bai
,

Yifan
Wang
,

Pei
Cheng
,

Jiayu
Wang
,

Yao
Wu
,

Jianhui
Hou
 and 

Xiaowei
Zhan
*

Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, College of Engineering, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China. E-mail: xwzhan@pku.edu.cn

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China

Received
6th November 2014
, Accepted 15th December 2014
First published on 16th December 2014
A novel small molecule based on indacenodithiophene and 1,1-dicyanomethylene-3-indanone was synthesized and used as an electron acceptor in solution processed organic solar cells, which exhibited a power conversion efficiency as high as 3.93%.

Solution processed bulk heterojunction (BHJ) organic solar cells (OSCs) are considered promising alternatives to inorganic solar cells because of their low cost, light weight, and flexibility. Over the past decade, researchers have expended great effort to increase power conversion efficiencies (PCEs), and recently, OSCs based on low-bandgap polymers and fullerene derivatives have achieved encouraging PCEs of >11%. Compared with the significant advances achieved in organic donor materials, the development of novel electron acceptors has lagged behind. Fullerene derivatives, such as PC61BM and PC71BM, have been the dominant electron acceptors used owing to their high electron affinities, isotropic electron transporting properties, and capabilities to form favorable nanoscale morphologies when mixed with electron donors. However, fullerenes have some drawbacks, such as weak absorption in the visible region, restricted electronic tuning, and difficulty in purification. Thus, there remains an incentive to develop novel nonfullerene electron acceptor materials that possess strong and broad absorption and have appropriate energy levels that will not only enrich the number of known acceptor species but also provide the possibility of obtaining better PCEs. Recently, novel nonfullerene acceptors based on rylene diimides, diketopyrrolopyrrole, benzothiadiazole, and other electron-withdrawing building blocks have been reported. Most promising solution processable small molecule and polymer nonfullerene acceptors are based on rylene diimides, such as perylene diimide (PDI) and naphthalene diimide (NDI). However, PCEs reported so far for small molecular nonfullerene acceptor-based OSCs are still lower than those of fullerene based acceptors, and more novel non-fullerene acceptors should be explored.

Indaceno[2,1-b:6,5-b′]dithiophene (IDT)-based organic semiconductors are promising electron donors for OSCs owing to their excellent hole transport and light-absorbing properties. Benefiting from a rigid and coplanar structure, IDT-based copolymers exhibit high hole mobilities. In particular, IDT-based organic semiconductors generally show strong and broad absorption peaks with molar extinction coefficients on the order of 105 M−1 cm−1. The tetrahexylphenyl groups such as peripheral substituents of the coplanar backbones ensure the solution processability and reduce intermolecular interactions.
Due to the fact that the strong electron-withdrawing ability of 1,1-dicyanomethylene-3-indanone (DC) will lead to deep LUMO levels (−3.8 to −3.9 eV), a few molecules based on DC have been explored as donor materials for solution processed OSCs. However, there is no report on DC-based electron acceptors. Actually, the strong electron-withdrawing ability seems appropriate for DC to construct electron acceptor materials, because the LUMO level resulting from the DC unit can match with many classical donor materials like PBDTTT-C-T (Fig. S1, ESI).
Here, we report the synthesis of a novel acceptor DC-IDT2T based on IDT as a central building block, DC as electron-withdrawing end groups, and thiophene as π-bridges (Scheme 1), and its applications in solution processed OSCs. DC-IDT2T exhibited good thermal stability, appropriate energy levels, and strong absorption. Solution processed BHJ OSCs based on PBDTTT-C-T:DC-IDT2T showed a PCE as high as 3.93%.
DC-IDT2T was synthesized through a two-step reaction. Firstly, a new intermediate compound 2 was synthesized through the Stille coupling reaction between 5-bromothiophene-2-carbaldehyde and compound 1, employing Pd(PPh3)4 as a catalyst. The Knoevenagel condensation reaction of 1,1-dicyanomethylene-3-indanone with aldehyde compound 2 afforded the final product DC-IDT2T in high yield. The final product was fully characterized using 1H-NMR, 13C-NMR, MALDI-TOF, and elemental analysis techniques. Compound DC-IDT2T exhibited considerable solubility in common organic solvents, such as dichloromethane, chloroform, and o-dichlorobenzene (DCB), at room temperature. The thermal properties of DC-IDT2T were investigated by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) and differential scanning calorimetry (DSC). The compound exhibited good thermal stability with a decomposition temperature at 365 °C (5% weight loss) in a nitrogen atmosphere (Fig. S2, ESI). The DSC traces of DC-IDT2T showed no melting peaks from room temperature to 320 °C, suggesting that it could be amorphous (Fig. S3, ESI).

Fig. 1a shows the absorption spectra of DC-IDT2T in chloroform solution (10−6 M) and in thin solid film. DC-IDT2T in solution exhibited strong absorption with a high extinction coefficient of 1.4 × 105 M−1 cm−1 at 700 nm. In thin film, DC-IDT2T showed a broader and red-shifted absorption band relative to that in solution, and the optical bandgap estimated from the absorption edge (800 nm) of the thin film was 1.55 eV.
The electrochemical properties of DC-IDT2T were investigated using cyclic voltammetry (CV) with the film on a glassy-carbon working electrode in an acetonitrile solution containing 0.1 mol L−1 of Bu4NPF6 using a potential scan rate of 100 mV s−1. As shown in Fig. 1b, DC-IDT2T exhibited an irreversible reduction wave and quasireversible oxidation wave. The HOMO and LUMO levels of the compound were estimated to be −5.43 eV and −3.85 eV from the onset oxidation and reduction potentials, respectively, assuming the absolute energy level of FeCp2+/0 to be 4.8 eV below vacuum. The bandgap of DC-IDT2T estimated from the cyclic voltammetry data was 1.58 eV, and this is consistent with the value estimated from the optical absorption edge (1.55 eV). The HOMO and LUMO levels were respectively lower enough than those (−5.11 eV and −3.25 eV) of classical donor material PBDTTT-C-T to guarantee efficient exciton dissociation. The difference between the LUMO of DC-IDT2T and the HOMO of PBDTTT-C-T was as large as 1.26 eV, which could result in a high open circuit voltage (VOC) of solar cells.
Theoretical calculations were carried out on the molecular geometry and molecular frontier orbitals of DC-IDT2T. Computational details are described in the ESI. The optimized geometry and HOMO and LUMO of DC-IDT2T are shown in Fig. S4 in the ESI. The central IDT and terminal 1,1-dicyanomethylene-3-indanone moieties formed a nearly flat plane, while the phenyl groups on the IDT exhibited a dihedral angle of ca. 115° to the backbone plane. The coplanar conjugated backbones tended to be π–π stacked, which was favorable for high mobility. However, the parent IDT molecule possessed a high degree of planarity and had a strong intermolecular interaction, and tended to aggregate and undergo large-scale phase separation in BHJ films, leading to reduced exciton diffusion/separation efficiencies and low PCEs. The phenyl groups on the IDT molecule can restrict aggregation without breaking the backbone planarity and weakening the charge transport properties. The HOMO orbital was mainly distributed on IDT, thiophene, and the linked double bond, while the LUMO was delocalized across the entire molecule.
To demonstrate the potential applications of DC-IDT2T in OSCs, we fabricated BHJ OSCs with a structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PBDTTT-C-T:DC-IDT2T/Ca/Al. Binary solvents are widely used to modify or control the morphology of the active layer in devices. Here, we chose chloroform (15%, v/v) as a second solvent to mix with DCB since DC-IDT2T has much better solubility in chloroform (20 mg mL−1) than in DCB (8 mg mL−1). Adding chloroform can not only improve the solubility of DC-IDT2T, but also control the morphology of the active layer. Table S1 (ESI) summarizes the open circuit voltage (VOC), short circuit current density (JSC), fill factor (FF), and PCE of the devices at different PBDTTT-C-T:DC-IDT2T weight ratios. The best device based on the PBDTTT-C-T:DC-IDT2T (1.2:1, w/w) blend exhibited a VOC of 0.90 V, JSC of 8.33 mA cm−2, FF of 52.3%, and PCE of 3.93% without any post-treatment. The current density–voltage (J–V) curve of the OSC is shown in Fig. 2a. An average PCE of 3.72% was obtained from ca. 100 devices.
The incident photon to converted current efficiency (IPCE) spectrum of the blended film is shown in Fig. 2b. The OSC based on the blended film of PBDTTT-C-T:DC-IDT2T exhibited a broad photoresponse extending from 300 to 850 nm with a maximum IPCE value of >40%. The IPCE spectrum resembled the absorption profile of the blend (Fig. S5, ESI). The JSC value calculated from an integration of the IPCE spectrum with an AM 1.5 G reference spectrum was 8.32 mA cm−2, which is similar to that obtained from the J–V measurement (the error was <1%).
To understand the influence of the charge transport properties on the photovoltaic performance, the electron mobility of the neat DC-IDT2T film and the hole and electron mobilities of the blended film were measured using the space charge limited current (SCLC) method with the device structures of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/film/Au for the hole and Al/film/Al for the electron (Fig. S6, ESI). DC-IDT2T exhibited a moderate electron mobility of 3.3 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 which was lower than that of PC61BM measured using SCLC (2 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1), but is among the highest reported values for nonfullerene acceptors. The PBDTTT-C-T:DC-IDT2T blended film exhibited relatively high and balanced hole mobility (2.0 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1) and electron mobility (1.5 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1). The high mobility and the balanced charge transport were beneficial for the high JSC, FF, and PCE values of the PBDTTT-C-T:DC-IDT2T-based OSCs.
The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of neat and blended films of DC-IDT2T were observed to probe the influence of the blended film microstructure on the device performance (Fig. S7, ESI). Neat and blended films of DC-IDT2T showed no reflection peaks, indicating that both films were amorphous, which was consistent with the DSC result. Tapping-mode atomic force microscopy (AFM) height and phase images and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of PBDTTT-C-T:DC-IDT2T blended films were investigated (Fig. 3). The PBDTTT-C-T:DC-IDT2T film exhibited a relatively smooth morphology with a root mean square (RMS) roughness of 4.04 nm, and showed the presence of favorable interpenetrating networks with a suitable degree of phase separation within the whole film. This is beneficial for exciton diffusion and dissociation.
In summary, a novel nonfullerene acceptor DC-IDT2T based on IDT and DC units was synthesized. DC-IDT2T possessed good thermal stability, strong and broad absorption with a high extinction coefficient, and appropriate energy levels matching with PBDTTT-C-T. Without any post-treatment, BHJ OSCs based on the PBDTTT-C-T:DC-IDT2T blend yielded a PCE as high as 3.93%. This work demonstrates the great potential of the IDT and DC moieties for use as building blocks for constructing novel nonfullerene acceptors.

We wish to thank the NSFC (91433114, 21025418, 51261130582), the 973 Program (2011CB808401), and the Chinese Academy of Sciences for financial support. We also wish to thank the Supercomputing Center of the Chinese Academy of Sciences for the theoretical calculation service.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Synthesis, characterization and device fabrication details, computational details, OSC device data, chemical structure of PBDTTT-C-T, TGA figure, DSC figure, theoretically optimized geometries and molecular orbitals of DC-IDT2T, absorption spectra, SCLC figures and XRD pattern. See DOI: 10.1039/c4ta06004k
‡ Huitao Bai and Yifan Wang contributed equally.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015