 DOI: 10.1039/D0CS01316A
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 2696-2736


Ammarah
Kausar
,

Abdul
Sattar
,

Chenzhe
Xu
,

Suicai
Zhang
,

Zhuo
Kang
* and 

Yue
Zhang
*

Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Materials Genome Engineering, Beijing Key Laboratory for Advanced Energy Materials and Technologies, University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing 100083, P. R. China. E-mail: zhuokang@ustb.edu.cn; yuezhang@ustb.edu.cn

State Key Laboratory for Advanced Metals and Materials, School of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing 100083, P. R. China

Received
16th October 2020

First published on 7th January 2021
Metal–halide hybrid perovskites have prompted the prosperity of the sustainable energy field and simultaneously demonstrated their great potential in meeting both the growing consumption of energy and the increasing social development requirements. Their inimitable features such as strong absorption ability, direct photogeneration of free carriers, long carrier diffusion lengths, ease of fabrication, and low production cost triggered the development of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) at an incredible rate, which soon reached power conversion efficiencies up to the commercialized level. During their evolution process, it has been witnessed that alkali metal cations play a pivotal role in the crystal structure as well as intrinsic properties of hybrid perovskites, thus enabling the unique positioning of the correlated doping strategy in the development history of PSCs in the past decade. Herein, we summarize the growth and progress of the state-of-the-art alkali metal cation (Cs+, Rb+, K+, Na+, Li+) doping in the field of hybrid perovskite-based photovoltaics. To start with, the accurate identification of different alkali metal-occupied locations in the perovskite crystal lattice are discussed in detail with highlighted advanced characterization methods. Beyond that, the location-dependent functions induced by alkali metal doping are intensely focused upon and comprehensively assessed, indicating their versatile and special effects on perovskites in terms of bottleneck issues such as crystallinity modulation, crystal structure stabilization, defect passivation, and ion-migration inhibition. Thereafter, we are committed to analyze their responsible working mechanisms so as to unveil the relationship between occupied locations and crucial roles for each doped cation. The systematical overview and in-depth understanding of the superiorities of such strategies together with their future challenges and prospects would further boost the advancement of perovskite-related fields.

Ammarah Kausar

Ammarah Kausar is currently a PhD candidate in Prof. Yue Zhang's group at the School of Material Science and Engineering, University of Science and Technology Beijing (USTB). She received her Master's degree in Chemistry from Beijing Institute of Technology in 2017. Her current research interests mainly focus on the synthesis and characterization of doped perovskite materials and solar cells.

Abdul Sattar

Abdul Sattar is currently a PhD candidate under the supervision of Prof. Yue Zhang at the School of Material Science and Engineering, University of Science and Technology Beijing (USTB). He received his Master's degree in Chemistry from the University of Management and Technology Lahore, Pakistan in 2016. His current research interests focus on the fabrication of high-performance doped perovskite materials and stable perovskite solar cells.

Chenzhe Xu

Chenzhe Xu received his BS degree in 2018 from the School of Material Science and Engineering, University of Science and Technology Beijing (USTB), majoring in materials physics. Now, he is a PhD candidate under the supervision of Prof. Yue Zhang at the School of Material Science and Engineering, USTB. His current research interests mainly focus on the controllable fabrication of high-quality perovskite films and their application in photoelectric devices.

Suicai Zhang

Suicai Zhang is a PhD candidate in Prof. Yue Zhang's group at the School of Material Science and Engineering, University of Science and Technology Beijing (USTB). His research interests mainly focus on graphdiyne, perovskite materials, and their application in the field of energy conversion.

Zhuo Kang

Dr Zhuo Kang received BS degree from MSE school (2011) and PhD degree from Prof. Yue Zhang's group at the University of Science and Technology Beijing (USTB). He is currently a professor of Material Physics at USTB. His research interests include controllable synthesis and interface engineering of nanomaterials as well as their applications in energy conversion and catalysis, specifically focusing on the efficient modulation of charge behaviors under multi-field coupling condition and life-time dynamic structure–activity correlation of the catalyst under the service environment.

Yue Zhang

Dr Yue Zhang is currently a professor of Material Physics at University of Science and Technology Beijing (USTB), and is an academician of the Chinese Academy of Science. He is Fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry, Distinguished Young Scientist supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China, and the Chair Scientist of National Major Scientific Research Plan and Project. Prof. Yue Zhang has devoted his research life to low-dimensional functional materials as well as their service behaviors. He has published more than 400 scientific papers in peer-reviewed scientific journals with more than 10000 citations. He has been granted more than 50 patents, and has authored and published 11 monographs.

Organic–inorganic hybrid halide perovskite solar cells have shown incredible development in the past few years, which has rocketed their efficiencies towards the theoretical limit. The certified power conversion efficiency (PCE) of photovoltaic devices based on hybrid perovskite materials has reached over 25.5%, which is comparable to that of commercially available solar cells such as single crystal silicon solar cells (26.6%) and CdTe solar cells (22.1%). This is mainly because of the appealing optoelectronic properties including tuneable direct bandgap, high absorption coefficient, long carrier diffusion length, efficient charge transport, and low exciton binding energy. Besides, PSCs have attracted great attention in the industrial photovoltaic field due to the scalable solution fabrication process and low production cost. The superior features of perovskite materials make PSCs very promising for the large-scale industrialization and further application in tandem solar cells in the future. Nevertheless, it has been witnessed that alkali metal cations are crucial to the crystal structures as well as the intrinsic properties of hybrid perovskites, which has enabled the unique positioning of the corresponding doping strategy in the evolution history of PSCs in the past decade.

Despite the rapid improvement in photovoltaic performance, the issues of intrinsic instability are still the main drawbacks that further limit the commercial applications of PSCs. Because of the inherently ionic nature and soft structure, perovskite materials are sensitive to the surrounding environment and real operating conditions. Electric field, illumination, oxygen, heat, and humidity could cause the collapse of the perovskite crystal structure and undesired imperfections. Defects activated under environmental stress inevitably induce negative effects on perovskite thin films. On the one hand, the deep level traps induced by defects in perovskites are major charge recombination centres, bringing about non-radiative losses. On the other hand, the shallow level traps such as some charged point defects move easily in the perovskite lattice and lead to ion migration, which are accompanied by unsatisfactory photovoltaic performance and hysteresis phenomenon.
In this context, compositional engineering has been demonstrated to be an effective means for solving these issues fundamentally. Concretely, a variety of special molecule additive engineering, including Lewis bases, ionic liquid, and polymers, have been explored in the perovskite community in recent years. For example, functionalized small molecules such as caffeine and theophylline can interact with the surface defects, thus inhibiting deleterious ion migration and ensuring excellent long-term stability. In addition, ionic liquid additives such as BMIMBF4 and BMPBF4 have been revealed to immobilize the cations and anions within the perovskite lattice. Likewise, the under-coordinated Pb2+ defects could be healed by carbonyl groups on PMMA via molecular interactions so that the structural stability is efficiently improved. However, most of the approaches have been designed to solve a specific issue or suppress a certain type of defect. It has been reported that only series of alkali metal cation doping played a comprehensive passivation effect and completely dealt with the bottleneck problem. Compared with the possible lattice mismatch caused by the irregular diffusion of organic molecular additives in perovskite thin films, alkali metal cations are selectively distributed in the specific regions of the crystal structure, thus avoiding some adverse effects on the photoelectric properties. Considering the valence state and redox stability of hybrid perovskite materials, monovalent alkali metal cations are considered as ideal dopants. Actually, several important milestones have been achieved in improving the stability of perovskite materials and the corresponding device performance by doping alkali metal ions.
Throughout the development history of hybrid perovskite solar cells, it is found that the continuous development and progress of the alkali metal doping strategy has brought opportunities and discoveries to the whole field since the beginning (Scheme 1). Specifically, embedding a small amount of Cs+ into FAMA-based hybrid halide perovskites is capable of improving the thermal stability by suppressing non-photoactive yellow phase impurities and enhancing the robustness to subtle variations under operational conditions, thus facilitating the breakthrough of PSC performance and several efficiency records worldwide. It showed that oxidation-stable Rb+ was capable of being incorporated into a “cation cascade” so as to create perovskite materials with excellent material properties, achieving low-voltage-loss PSCs and long-term device stability at 85 °C for 500 h under full illumination. It must be mentioned that the high-quality formula has been used up to now, which ensures the preparation of high-reproducibility devices and promotes a great leap forward in the whole field. So far, in the current reports about high-performance PSCs, the mainstream components of perovskite materials are triple-/quadruple-cation system containing Cs+ or Rb+. Partial incorporation of smaller alkali cation K+ into the perovskite thin film has been anticipated as an effective route to eliminate the trapping defects and suppress mobile ion migration, resulting in great application prospect in the realization of hysteresis-free and stable PSCs. Small sized Na+ and Li+ are able to exist in the special positions of perovskite thin films, which play an unexpected subversive effect on the crystal growth, film morphology, and photoelectric properties. Several studies have demonstrated that alkali metal cation doping effectively improved the performance and stability of PSCs. It is necessary to further summarize the precise function of alkali metal cation doping and establish a relationship between the function and working mechanism so as to provide guidance for the fabrication of perovskite films with excellent photoelectric properties and operational stability.
In this review, a comprehensive summary of the recent advances in state-of-the-art alkali metal cation doping in PSCs is presented. We start with a detailed discussion about the occupied locations of different alkali metal cations in the perovskite crystal lattice. The commonly-used techniques for the characterization of cation distribution in perovskites are systemically summarized. Then, we assess the location-dependent function induced by alkali metal cation doping, highlighting the multiple effects on the crystal structure, device performance, and operational stability. Thereafter, we pay attention to discussing the corresponding working mechanism of different alkali metal cation doping. Based on such detailed analysis of the evolution of alkali metal cation-doped perovskites, some challenges and perspectives on the further development of high-quality perovskite thin films are proposed, which provide a theoretical basis and technical assistance for the implementation of other functional ion doping strategies and could be extended to other perovskite-based optoelectronic devices.

The perovskite material is composed of a structure with the formula ABX3, where the A atom is usually the organic cation (FA+, MA+), the B atom refers to divalent metal cation (Pb2+, Sn2+), and the X atom is the halogen ion (Cl−, Br−, I−). In an ideal perovskite structure, the B cation coordinates with six X anions to form a (BX6)4− octahedron and the B cation is located at the centre of the octahedron. The (BX6)4− octahedral periodic arrangement is composed of a three-dimensional spatial network. A cation embedded in the gap among the eight octahedrons contributes to a stable perovskite structure. The Goldschmidt tolerance factor (t) is wildly adopted to predict the type and stability of the crystal structure, which can be calculated by the following equation:
where
RA, RB, and RX are the ionic radius of A, B, and X ions, respectively. Metal halide perovskites with tolerance factors in the range of 0.8–1.0 could form the expected photo-active black phase with a cubic structure. Otherwise, the non-perovskite yellow phase with either a hexagonal or an orthorhombic structure should be formed if the tolerance factor is too high (t > 1) or too low (t < 0.8). As shown in Fig. 1a, FAPbI3 with a tolerance factor of 1.0 cannot exhibit a stable cubic perovskite structure at the room temperature due to the high energy required for phase transition. Although the tetragonal structure of MAPbI3 with a more appropriate tolerance factor (0.91 < t < 0.99) could transform to the cubic structure at 327.4 K, its structure is too sensitive to environmental conditions. It was evident that combing MA and FA cations was advantageous while avoiding the drawbacks. However, because MA+ (270 pm) is only slightly smaller than FA+ (279 pm), the yellow phase is segregated out of the MAFA mixed-cation perovskite. It is still challenging to obtain the FA perovskite with a cubic perovskite structure. In view this, Cs+ with an ionic radius of 167 pm was considered to substitute the A-site cations, which had a critical effect on the crystal structure. According to the calculated tolerance factor, there is no doubt that the Cs+ cations substitute the organic cations at the A-site in the perovskite crystal structure with a tolerance factor of 0.81 for the CsPbI3 perovskite (Fig. 1a), which has also been demonstrated through a decrease in the lattice parameter through X-ray diffraction (XRD) expreriments. Therefore, the hybridization of Cs+ and organic cation has been demonstrated as an effective method to optimize the size tolerance factor and to improve the structural stability, which will be discussed in the section of location-dependent function.

As the neighbouring alkali metal cation of Cs+, Rb+ with an ionic radius of 152 pm leads to a critical size tolerance factor of about 0.78. A little mismatch with the “established perovskite” range results in totally different crystallographic properties. As shown in Fig. 1b, it was difficult for RbPbI3 to form the black phase even though it was heated with an annealing temperature beyond 460 °C. Beyond that, owing to the critical ionic radius, whether the Rb+ cation enters the crystal lattice of the perovskite is still under debate. On the one hand, some researchers have suggested that Rb+ could occupy in the A-site of the perovskite crystal lattice. Specifically, aiming at revealing the size-dependent locations of alkali metal cations, density functional theory (DFT) calculations were conducted to elucidate the thermodynamic properties in order to theoretically predict the possible states of the dopants (Fig. 1d). Through the calculation of the formation energies for the incorporation of alkali metal cations into the A-site or the interstitial site of the FAPbI3 lattice at zero temperature, the possibilities of Rb+ in various positions have been compared (Fig. 1c). For each alkali metal cation, the formation energy of the interstitial site became larger on increasing the concentration from 0.5% to 6%, while the formation energy of the A-site changed slightly. Focusing on Rb+, it could be found that the interstitial occupancy of Rb+ was energetically more favourable than A-site substitution when the doping concentration was below 2%. In other cases, the substitution of Rb+ at the A-site became more competitive because of the lower formation energy. The location of Rb+ in the A-site has also been demonstrated through experiments. Through XRD characterization, the (110) peak of the perovskite underwent a distinct shift toward larger angles with the incorporation of Rb+. It strongly indicated that the lattice parameters were reduced due to the occupation of Rb+ with small ionic radius of the A-site. However, excess Rb+ doping induced the formation of the RbPbI3 phase, as evidenced by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). In addition, many reports directly point out that Rb+ was A-site doped or set Rb+ in the A-site when describing the perovskite components, without any experimental or theoretical evidence. On the other hand, some held the different opinion that extrinsic Rb+ mainly occupied the interstitial sites, as evidenced by the expanded lattice. In detail, if the A-site dominates the doping location, the lattice would shrink in local area because of the smaller size of the Rb+ cation compared to that of FA and MA. Through the characterization of the change in crystal lattice parameters via XRD, the (310) peaks of perovskite doped by the Rb+ cation gradually moved to the lower 2θ angle (Fig. 1e and f). It indicated that the corresponding crystal plane distance of Rb+-doped perovskites increased so that the interstitial occupancy was dominant. Meanwhile, some other studies drew different conclusions by means of other characterization methods. Utilizing solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) was an effective method to probe the elemental composition of the perovskite and obtain quantitative information as well as detect all the species of certain nucleus. The 87Rb NMR spectra of both the RbFA and RbFAMA perovskites showed only the matched signal with that of RbPbI3, which provided solid evidence that the only existing form of Rb+ in these perovskites was RbPbI3. Similar results reporting that the majority of Rb+ was contained in large, micro-sized crystals rich in rubidium and iodide have been published, as confirmed by cross-sectional scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM). It suggested that Rb+ cannot enter the perovskite lattice. Nevertheless, such a conclusion seemed to be inconsistent with some other experimental results, which point out that the second RbPbI3 phase separated out of the original perovskite film only when the doping concentration increased more than 10%. On the whole, to date, there is no definite and unified view on the occupied location of alkali metal Rb+ in the perovskite crystal lattice.
The K+ cation with an intermediate ionic radius (138 pm) is obviously outside of the range in which a stable perovskite can be formed, suggesting that it is hardly able to substitute the A-site cation into the perovskite structure. Similar to Rb+, whether the alkali metal K+ enters the perovskite crystal lattice is also controversial. Some studies have revealed that K+ mainly occupies the interstitial sites in the perovskite crystal structure. As a universal method to resolve the detailed information of the crystal structure, XRD characterization has been carried out to investigate the crystal structure of the perovskites with K+ of different concentrations (Fig. 2a). The (002) peaks shifted to a smaller angle as the concentration increased and the corresponding lattice constant derived according to the XRD results as a function of the doping concentration is presented in Fig. 2b. The gradually increased lattice constant indicated that K+ distributed uniformly within the crystal structure and was located at the interstitial sites. A similar inference that K+ showed a high tendency of interstitial occupancy has also been reported in another study. Besides, researchers have also investigated the occupied location of K+ in the perovskite lattice from the point view of DFT calculations. They illustrated that the K+ cation was more energetically favourable to occupy the interstitial sites than the A-sites because of the lower negative formation energy. Generally, the interstitial occupancy of K+ increased the ion migration barriers in the 3D perovskite film, thereby causing a substantial suppression of hysteresis in the whole devices, which we will discuss later. However, some researchers hold opposite viewpoints on the location of K+. It has been reported that K+ is enriched at the grain boundaries (GBs) and at the surfaces of the perovskite film. Grazing-incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) was conducted to find out the crystalline phase evolution of the perovskites upon the incorporation of K+. According to the corresponding azimuthally-integrated GIWAXS profile (Fig. 2c), a new diffraction peak at q = 0.7 Å−1 was gradually enhanced with the increase in the K+ content, suggesting that K+ existed as the formed non-perovskite potassium-rich phase. Meanwhile, as shown in Fig. 2d and e, the STEM spectra of the cross-sectional view of the K+-doped perovskites and the corresponding energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) elemental analysis were utilized to directly detect the distribution state of K+. The results demonstrated the presence of a K+-rich phase as the K–Br compounds at GBs and the surface of the perovskite films, which was consistent with the above GIWAXS results. This potassium halide layer was believed to suppress the non-radiative losses and photo-induced ion migration in the perovskites. In another study, the K-rich phase has also been detected in the GBs of the 3D perovskite film through GIWAXS; the difference is that the new phase was defined as 2D K2PbI4. In this case, the presence of K+ still played a positive role in passivating the GBs and the surface in the perovskite films. The same research group reported elsewhere that K+ could uniformly distribute across the entire perovskite layer when K+ was introduced into the 2D perovskite film. In addition, Kubicki et al. also proposed that K+ would not be incorporated into the perovskite lattice. Using K MAS NMR at 21.1 T, they found that K+ was observed to exist as a mixture of potassium-rich phases and unreacted KI. Indeed, the exact component of such a new K+-rich phase at the GBs or the surface and how it passivates the halide perovskite materials is still unclear. Beyond that, some studies have indicated that a part of the incorporated K+ may occupy interstitial sites in the perovskite lattice and part of the incorporated K+ existed in the form of the mixed K–Br phase simultaneously. By summarizing the above research results and considering the preferential interaction of K+ with halide ions such as Br− and the substrate, we recommend that the distribution of K+ in the perovskite film should be linked with the composition and dimension of the bulk perovskites, which urgently needs further exploration.
Compared with Cs+, Rb+ and K+, the radius of Na+ (102 pm) and Li+ (76 pm) is so small that it is difficult for them to occupy a fixed position in the perovskite crystal because of their low diffusion barriers. The location of Na+ in the perovskite thin films has been investigated by means of several methods and the consensus has been reached that easily-migrated Na+ could exist at the surface and the GBs. Specifically, NaF has been confirmed to be an effective additive to improve the thermal stability and carrier lifetime of mixed-cation perovskite films. To reveal the presence and location of Na+ in the perovskite films, time-of-flight secondary-ion mass spectrometry (ToF-SIMS) depth profile analysis, a powerful analytical technique sensitive to all components of perovskite solar cell materials, has been employed to probe the distribution of atomic species (Fig. 3a). The maximum signals of Na+ were observed at the perovskite/ITO interface, illustrating that Na+ is mainly located at the surface in the film. According to Kelvin Probe Force Microscopy (KPFM) characterization shown in Fig. 3b, the surface potential difference between GBs and the grain interior reduced from 40 mV in the pristine film to 20 mV in the Na+-doped film. Such reduced surface potential difference may facilitate hole extraction by decreasing the barriers at the GBs and reduces the probability of electron flow from the grain bulk to the GBs. The KPFM results also suggested a majority of Na+ concentrated and located at the surface. Similar characterization such as ToF-SIMS has also been conducted to study the location of Na+ in another work and similar results that Na+ mainly accumulated at the GBs and the material interface have been reported. Besides, some direct visualized evidence regarding the position of Na+ in the perovskite thin films has been provided (Fig. 3c). There was a stack of HAADF STEM cross-sectional images of the perovskite film coated with spiro-OMeTAD and platinum; the capping layer was aimed at preserving the perovskite layer during specimen preparation. According to the elemental maps for Na+ of the Na+-doped perovskite films, it has been indicated that Na+ is mostly located at the GBs across the entire sample area as well as the interface. For comparison, there was no detected EDX signal of the Na+ elements in the Ag-doped and Cu-doped samples. Also, DFT calculations have been utilized to analyze the chemical bonding of the perovskite with partial substitutions of Pb by the Na+ cation (Fig. 3d) and the incorporation of Na+ cation distributed in the interstitial sites (Fig. 3e). The estimated formation energies of the Na+-doped perovskite were relatively low in both the cases, indicating that Na+ was not able to bond to all the neighbouring atoms due to the ionic nature and small ionic radius. Therefore, it is inferred that the incorporation of Na+ cation into the perovskite crystal lattice either in the interstitials or the substitutional positions was difficult. Above all, based on theoretical calculation results and experimental evidences, the doped Na+ cations within the perovskite film migrate easily and are mainly accumulate at the GBs and the surfaces.
The well-known characteristic of Li+ is that it is easy to migrate elsewhere because the size of Li+ is too small that its ionic radius is only one third of MA+, leading to a tolerance factor of 0.62. Such a feature makes it possible to exist in every position within the perovskites except for the A-site of the crystal as the established structure can easily collapse. Specifically, there are two mainstream views on the occupied location of Li+ in the perovskite materials. Some consider that Li+ is mostly likely to stay and move at the interstitial sites in the perovskite. In the experiments, the crystal structure of the MAPbI3 perovskite doped by different concentrations of LiI from 1% to 10% was analyzed through XRD measurements (Fig. 3h). The typical diffraction peak at 14.2° corresponding to the (110) plane gradually shifted to a lower angle with an increase in the concentration. The expanded crystal lattice can be attributed to the interstitial doping effect of Li+. Another research also reported that Li+ entered the crystal lattice rather than the surface by demonstrating the doping effect of Li+, which was able to weaken the electron–phonon coupling and act as a donor in the perovskite. In addition, some suggested that Li+ migrated across the whole perovskite film under voltage bias and moved to the charge transport layers and interfaces. To detect the elements and molecular species in the entire device, ToF-SIMS characterization was used to obtain the depth profile of several key elements with the structure of FTO/TiO2/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Au. In order to rule out the influence of the TFSI group, two types of devices were designed and analysed. The Li+-containing device used Li+-doped pre-oxidized spiro-TFSI2 and another device employed only pre-oxidized spiro-TFSI2 as the HTL. As shown in Fig. 3f, strong Li+ signals were detected in the HTL layer, the perovskite film, and the TiO2 layers of the Li+-containing device, suggesting that Li+ migrated from the HTL to almost the entire device. By contrast, the signal of Li+ displayed in Fig. 3g was below to the instrument background. Interestingly, the concentration of detected Li+ across the device was inhomogeneous and the concentration in the electron transport layer (ETL) further away from HTL was higher than that in the perovskite layer. It suggested that this diffusion did not follow simple Fickian diffusion distribution and the higher affinity of Li+ to ETL than to the perovskite brought some peculiar effects in the PSCs.
Also, we list the state-of-the-art characterization techniques that are employed to detect the elemental distribution and molecular species in Table 1. We also summarize their application in the study of occupied locations of alkali metal cations in perovskites and compare the corresponding working mechanism and features. Among these techniques, XRD and GIWAXS are frequently used to study the changes in the lattice structure caused by alkali metal doping to determine whether the cations enter the lattice. NMR is an atomic-level method to quantitatively analyze the chemical composition and speciation of the doped samples, thereby estimating if there is a new-formatted non-perovskite phase induced by doping. In addition, KPFM is a non-contact technique for analyzing the presence of dopants on the perovskite surface through the measurement of surface potentials. ToF-SIMS and STEM-EDX possess the advantage of obtaining the elemental distribution of the spatial profile, providing direct visual evidence of the cations’ distribution. More importantly, comparing the formation energy of the alkali metal cations occupying each position via DFT calculations is a powerful approach to theoretically judge the distribution location in the perovskites. Indeed, the combination of theoretical calculation and experimental method has greatly promoted the study of the distribution of alkali metal cations in the perovskites.
Method
Mechanism
Function & features
Major conclusions
Ref.
NMR
Spin angular momentum of the nucleus releases radio frequency signals under the action of the external magnetic field
★ Studying chemical composition and speciation of the doped samples
Cs+ cannot be incorporated into the lattice

47

• Quantitative analysis
The only existing form of Rb+ in FA and FAMA perovskites is RbPbI3.

47

• Atomic-level microstructure study
K+ exists as a mixture of K-rich phases and unreacted KI.

53

• Detecting all species of a nucleus
• Crystalline and amorphous test
XRD
X-rays are incident on the lattice and undergo elastic scattering. Scattered waves interfere with each other and give rise to characteristic diffraction patterns
★ Analyzing varieties of lattice constant and phase composition caused by doping
Rb+, K+, Na+, and Li+ occupy the interstitial sites in the FAMA-perovskite.

45

• Both ex situ and in situ test
Cs+ substitutes the organic cations at the A-site in the crystal.

44

• Qualitative analysis
Rb+ occupies the MA-site in MAPbI3.

46

• Suitable for film and powder measurements
Li+ is mostly likely to stay at the interstitial sites in the perovskite.

61

K+ occupies the interstitial site of the MAPbI3 lattice.

49

GIWAXS
X-rays are grazing incident on the lattice. An area detector collects wide-angle scattering patterns.
★ Determining doping-induced changes in the phase composition and orientation
K+ exists as a K-rich phase.

16

• Ex situ and in situ mapping test
• Nanoscale depth determination
K+-Rich phase K2PbI4 is discovered at the interface.

51

• Suitable for detecting the information of both the surface and the bulk
DFT
Analysis of multi-electron systems based on quantum mechanics and computing technology.
★ Predicting the occupied position of doping cations
Rb+ may occupy both the A-site and the interstitial site.

45

• Approximate simulation
The incorporation of Na+ distributes in the interstitial sites.

60

• Establishment of the doped lattice model
K+ prefers to occupy the interstitial site rather than the substitute A-site.

45 and 50

• Diversity of computable parameters
STEM-EDX
Detecting elastically scattered electrons to obtain the atomic number contrast image.
★ Testing the morphology images and dopants distribution maps
The K+-rich phase exists at the GBs and the interface.

15, 39 and 63

• High resolution
Rb+ is contained in large, micro-sized crystals rich in rubidium and iodide.

39

Detecting the characteristic X-ray energy to determine the type of element.
• Interface and grain boundary is distinguishable
Na+ accumulates at the GBs and the interface.

59

• Elemental mapping and content traceability
TOF-SIMS
Analyzing secondary ions sputtered by a high-energy primary ion beam to obtain the sample composition information.
★ Detecting the depth profile gradient distribution of elements
K+ is located at the interface of SnO2 and the perovskite.

63

• High resolution of ppm magnitude
Li+ diffuses across the perovskite layer and accumulates in the ETL.

62

• Detection area at the micrometer scale
Na+ is mainly located at the interface and the GBs.

55 and 58

• Feasible for all elements
KPFM
Combining AFM and Kelvin method to achieve accurate measurement of contact potential difference (CPD).
★ Analyzing the presence of dopants on the perovskite surface by measuring the potential difference
Na+ is concentrated and located at the perovskite surface.

55

• Nanometer scale resolution
• In situ test
• Non-contact and no damage
As discussed before, alkali metal cations with different ionic radius are distributed at different target positions within the perovskite materials. Nevertheless, the precise distribution of alkali metal cations in perovskite photovoltaic devices is still a matter of debate. Whether Rb+ is located at the interstitial sites, A-sites, or in the form of RbPbI3 in the grain boundaries remains to be clarified. Whether K+ exist at the interstitials in the perovskite crystal lattice or in the form of K-rich phases such as K2PbI4 or KBr is also controversial. Due to the small ionic size of Na+ and Li+, it is not clear whether they exist in the interstitial sites of the perovskites or migrate throughout the photovoltaic device. In order to accurately identify the distribution form and the existence state of alkali metal cations in perovskite films, on the one hand, the complex influence of perovskite components, entire device structure, doping concentration, and other functional layers should be comprehensively considered, and on the other hand, more advanced characterization methods with higher resolution and higher sensitivity are worthy of further design and application.

As mentioned above, different alkali metal cations occupy different positions in the perovskite lattice. The functions of the alkali metal cations doped in the perovskite materials depend strongly on their respective target distributed positions. In this section, we will give a comprehensive overview of the location-dependent function with regard to each alkali metal cation, such as crystal structure stabilization, defect passivation, crystallization process manipulation, optical band alignment, and ion migration inhibition.


During the initial stage of perovskite-based photovoltaic field, perovskite materials composed of MAPbI3 were the mainstream and the corresponding device performance has been experienced a rapid revolutionary development. However, some shortcomings such as photo-instability and humidity sensitivity, resulting from the underlying weak interaction between the MA cations and the surrounding iodide ions, are gradually exposed as time goes on. In principle, using perovskites composed of FAPbI3 instead of MAPbI3 is advantageous due to the reduced band gap and extended absorption wavelength, which is closer to the single junction optimum and leads to higher solar light harvesting capability. However, only the black FAPbI3 phase (hexagonal α-phase) is photoactive; the yellow phase (orthorhombic δ-phase) has undesired large bandgap and poor charge transport properties. In fact, obtaining the α-phase of FAPbI3 usually requires a high temperature over 150 °C. The δ-phase is more thermodynamically favourable at the room temperature and the α-phase easily transforms to the δ-phase due to its sensitivity to solvents or humidity. The presence of δ-phase impurities in the bulk film seriously inhibits charge collection, thereby restricting further development of related photovoltaic devices.

Fortunately, the success of FA/Cs mixture compounds demonstrated that a small amount of Cs+ doping was already sufficient to effectively suppress the yellow phase impurities in the perovskites, indicating that Cs+ was thought of as a stabilizer of the black phase FAPbI3 perovskite. As displayed in Fig. 4a, the perovskite film with Cs+ doping showed a significant improvement in the absorbance at 630 nm, which can be attributed to the formation of the black perovskite phase. The colour of the pristine film without annealing treatment was opaque white while that of the Cs+-doped film was already dark brown; the change in the colour was also indicative of the crystallization of the black α-phase. Moreover, Cs+ doping also influenced the cubo-octahedral volume for the A-site cation surrounded by corner shared eight PbI6 octahedra and the lattice structure. According to X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements (Fig. 4b), the obvious right shift of the Pb 4f peaks in the Cs+-doped thin film indicated an increase in the cationic charge and the shrinkage of the lattice parameter. From the perspective of ionic size, a relatively small ionic radius of Cs+ compared with FA+ occupying the A-site was the origin of the reduction of the cubo-octahedral volume. Usually, the shrinkage of the cubo-octahedral volume for the A-site cation leads to enhanced interaction between the A-site cation and halides, resulting in changed optoelectronic properties of the perovskite films. Based on transient photovoltage (TPV) decay profiles and dark current measurements, it suggested that Cs+ doping simultaneously retarded the time constant of charge recombination, enhanced the shunt resistance, and reduced the saturation current density. Such improved optoelectronic properties were related to the reduced trap density resulting from Cs+ doping. Utilizing the admittance spectroscopy measurements (Fig. 4c), the estimated trap density of the Cs+-doped thin film showed a decline of nearly an order of magnitude than that of the pristine film. As a result, the open-circuit voltage (VOC) of the final device improved from 1.02 V to 1.07 V by Cs+ doping. Eventually, the incorporation of partial Cs+ in the A-site resulted in the contraction of the cubo-octahedral volume and stabilized the perovskite crystal structure, leading to suppressed charge recombination, reduced trap density, and improved structural stability.
In the following, we are focusing on discussing the corresponding inherent mechanism of perovskite structure stabilization through Cs+ doping from the perspective of Goldschmidt tolerance factor tuning. Firstly, the δ-to-α phase transition of the FAPbI3 and FA1−xCsxPbI3 perovskite film during the annealing process has been tracked by in situ XRD experiments and the transition temperature dropped from that for the pristine film (165 °C) to that for the Cs+-doped film (125 °C), suggesting that Cs+ considerably promoted the preferable crystallization and stabilized the structure of the α-phase perovskite. According to the predicted results by calculating the tolerance factor (Fig. 4d), FAPbI3 is stabilized to the hexagonal δ-phase because of its large tolerance factor and CsPbI3 is more stable in the orthorhombic structure at room temperature due to a small tolerance factor. Therefore, rationally designed perovskites with a balanced tolerance factor by alloying FAPbI3 with CsPbI3 could be a strategy to stabilize the desired perovskite structure. In order to further explain how reducing the tolerance factor of FAPbI3 by adding Cs+ cation was able to stabilize the α-phase perovskite structure, the corresponding formation energy difference of the hexagonal and orthorhombic phases to the cubic phase was estimated by first-principles calculations (Fig. 4e). Generally, the phase was more thermodynamically favourable and stable with lower formation energy. Therefore, pristine perovskites (large-tolerance factor FAPbI3) stabilized in the tendentious hexagonal phase and the small-tolerance factor CsPbI3 showed lower energy in the orthorhombic structure, which was consistent with the prediction according to the tolerance factor. The formation energy of the hexagonal phase increased and the formation energy of the orthorhombic phase decreased with the increase in the Cs+ ratio. The lowest formation energy from the α-phase to both the phases indicated that the α-phase in the perovskite film with 30% Cs+ doping was the most thermodynamically favourable, which resulted in reduced δ-to-α transition temperature. As a result, due to the balanced tolerance factor-enabled stabilized structure, the Cs+-doped FAPbI3 perovskite showed better device performance and long-term stability.
The effect of Cs+ doping on perovskite structure stabilization has also been explained by researchers, who have shown that Cs+ is effective in assisting entropic stabilization. In light of systematical theoretical computations, it has been revealed that the sum of the internal energy and the mixing entropy contribution in the δ-phase led to an increase in the free energy due to the mixing of the Cs+ cation and the FA+ cation. In contrast, the required internal energy input of the α-phase containing the same mixed cations could be completely compensated by mixing configurational entropy, resulting in an easier formation of their solid solution. Thus, CsPbI3 and FAPbI3 were miscible in the black α-phase. It indicated that the free energy of the α-phase was energetically highly favourable, contributing to the remarkable stabilization of the perovskite phase by Cs+ doping. The calculated temperature of δ-to-α transition reduced by 200–300 K with the incorporation of specific concentration of Cs+, which was consistent with previous discussions in the experiments. Besides, the reduced Pb–I–Pb angle caused by Cs+ doping led to the distortion of the lattice and suppressed antibonding overlap of the valence band maximum. The lattice distortion caused by Cs+ doping enhanced the average net atomic charges of the surrounding iodide ions, thereby improving the Coulomb interaction between the organic cations and the inorganic framework. In short, tuning the size tolerance factor toward a range of stable perovskite structures by replacing the A-site cation with the alkali metal Cs+ is a general strategy to reduce the δ-to-α transition energy barrier and stabilize the black perovskite phase.
In addition, several similar studies have confirmed the important role of Cs+ In stabilizing the perovskite structure. There were no characteristic perovskite absorption onset and no characteristic perovskite peak in the un-annealing sample without Cs+ doping. By contrast, the sample with Cs+ doping yielded a distinct perovskite cubic phase under the same conditions. Cs+ doping was profitable to suppress the impurity yellow perovskite phase, which led to enhanced thermal stability and humidity stability. Moreover, the doping of Cs+ induced perovskite seeds at room temperature, thus assisting in the crystallization of high-quality perovskite films with uniform grains. As a result, this doping strategy enabled reproducible device performance to reach a stabilized PCE up to 21% with a short-circuit current (JSC) of 23.2 mA cm−2, a VOC of 1.132 V, and a fill factor (FF) of 0.797 (Fig. 4f). More importantly, the Cs+-doped perovskites were more robust to the variations of environmental conditions, enabling a breakthrough in terms of the device stability and reproducibility simultaneously. In view of the above research findings, Cs+ has been thought as a “crystallizer” of the photoactive black FAPbI3 phase by tolerance factor tuning and entropy stabilization. On this basis, the working mechanism and function of Cs+ doping into the perovskite structure have been systematically discussed and summarized. From the view on the whole development process of PSCs, Cs+ doping effectively overcomes the bottleneck issues of FA+/MA+-based perovskite materials and leads to a thermodynamically stable structure. Since then, Cs+-containing perovskites have become the mainstream material in the field of PSCs.
Cs+ doping not only stabilized the perovskite phase but also played a favourable role in regulating the band gap of such semiconductor materials. According to the photographs of the fabricated samples of FAPb(I(1−x)Br(x))3 (Fig. 4g), yellow colour was observed in the films containing 0.3–0.6 bromide. On the contrary, there were a series of dark films with respect to the entire compositional range of Cs+-doped materials, which is an indicator of the improved structural stability. On the basis of ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) absorption spectra (Fig. 4h), Cs+-doped perovskite materials showed a sharp optical band edge over the entire iodide-to-bromide concentration while FAPb(I(1−x)Br(x))3 showed a weak absorption when x = 0.3–0.6. The relation between Cs+ doping and the band gap of the perovskite film has also been investigated through Tauc plots; the optimal band gap varied from 1.7 eV to 1.8 eV with the change in the Cs+ content. As Cs+ has a smaller size compared to FA+, the enhancement in the optimal band gap and a blue shift in the absorption onset could result from lattice contraction along with an increase in the octahedral tilting angles. More recent studies have indicated that the band-edge states of hybrid metal halide perovskites were related to the electron orbitals of the Pb atom and the halogen atom. Specifically, the conduction band minimum was governed by the Pb-6p orbital and the valence band maximum was governed by the hybridized Pb-6s and halide-5p orbitals. The substitution of the A-site by Cs+ changed the volume and orientation, thereby influencing the bandgap through the Jahn–Teller effect. Besides, the effect of Cs+ incorporation upon the crystallization of the perovskite and the crystal structure have been studied via XRD measurements (Fig. 4i). The main peak located at 14.2° confirmed that the Cs+-doped perovskite was still in the single cubic phase and Cs+ successfully occupied the A-site in the lattice structure throughout the entire composition range. Consequently, a high-quality solar cell absorber material with optimal Cs+ doping concentration achieved the desired band gap of 1.74 eV. The champion device with a planar heterojunction structure of SnO2/PC60BM/Cs+-doped perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag delivered a JSC of 19.4 mA cm−2, a VOC of 1.2 V, and a PCE of 17.1%; this performance was very competitive with that of the best PSCs with wider band gap reported at that time. Combining such wide-gap PSCs with silicon solar cells, the stabilized power output up to 25.2% has been also achieved. In summary, Cs+ doping in the lead mixed-halide perovskite absorber optimizes the optimal band gap and potentially boosts the development of tandem photovoltaics, which is the future trend of photovoltaic commercialization. In addition, this tunability of the band gap across the whole spectrum has a pivotal impact on the optimization of perovskite materials for light-emitting applications.
It is noteworthy that Cs+ doping also assists in obtaining a high-crystallinity film with reproducibility by improving the tolerance regarding environmental variations during processing. The fabrication of the FAMA-based perovskite film is sensitive to the processing ambient conditions such as temperature, solvent vapours, and humidity. Such susceptibility makes the fabrication of the high-reproducibility perovskite film difficult and restricts large-scale industrial production. Interestingly, the FAMA-based perovskite film cannot form a photoactive black phase even after annealing at 100 °C for 1 h when the processing temperature was 18 °C (Fig. 5a) but the Cs+-doped film formed a black perovskite phase intermediately without annealing at the same temperature. It could be inferred that the perovskite film with Cs+ doping showed robustness to subtle variations during the fabrication process. Cs+ doping has been demonstrated as an effective strategy, enabling a breakthrough in terms of the high performance and reproducibility on the road to the further commercialization of PSCs.
As the investigations on the perovskite crystallization kinetics became more detailed, the origin of Cs+ doping in altering the film formation process has been unveiled by synchrotron-based in situ GIWAXS measurements. According to the 2D GIWAXS patterns (Fig. 5b and c), three phase formation stages were clearly identified for the pristine film: (I) the dominant scattering ring at q = 0.5 Å−1 came from the perovskite precursors; (II) a sharp scattering ring at q = 0.84 Å−1 was indexed as the 2H hexagonal phase; (III) scattering rings originated from 4H (q = 0.83 and 0.93 Å−1), 6H hexagonal phase (q = 0.87 Å−1), intermediate phase with DMSO (q = 0.47, 0.51, and 0.65 Å−1) and perovskite phase (q = 1.0 Å−1). More differently, the Cs+-doped perovskite film showed a simple dynamic phase transformation process. The scattering ring of the precursor phases disappeared and the cubic perovskite phase formed intermediately after chlorobenzene (CB) dropping. The 2H hexagonal phase emerged at q = 0.84 Å−1 and showed a lower intensity than that of the pristine film. Also, there was no collected signal of the hexagonal polytypes 4H, 6H, and the MAI–PbI2–DMSO intermediate phases in the Cs+-doped perovskite film. In summary, the Cs+-doped film underwent two main formation stages: (I) the perovskite precursor solution; (II) the 2H hexagonal phase and the perovskite phase. The results indicated that Cs+ doping not only suppressed the formation of the complex phases but also facilitated transformation to the cubic perovskite phase, which was consistent with previous discussions from the point of view of formation energy and entropy calculations.
The annealing process is an essential procedure for improving the crystallinity of the perovskite crystal as well. The existence of an “annealing window” has been recognized by identifying different formation stages, which suggested that the as-cast film should be immediately annealed within the “annealing window” to achieve high-quality perovskite films. If the perovskite films are annealed over the window period, it would show distinct secondary complex phases including the 4H and 6H hexagonal polytypes. In fact, the annealing window was dramatically prolonged due to extended stage II with Cs+ doping; thus, the formation of the hexagonal polytypes could be avoided. Herein, the origin of the robustness of the Cs+-doped perovskite against the sensitivity to subtle variations during the fabrication process have been revealed. Thus, it demonstrated that Cs+ doping played an important role in altering the perovskite crystallization pathway including facilitating the formation of the perovskite phase and suppressing the formation of the secondary phases, thus providing underlying reasons of the time sensitivity of fabricating mixed-perovskite devices.
Cs+ has been extended to the fabrication of sequentially deposited films and acted as seeds to modulate perovskite crystallization. The perovskite seeds with Cs+ doping acted as the nuclei and induced a regulated nucleation process. Originating from such a regulated crystallization process, Cs+ doping led to the formation of perovskite films with larger grain size and lower trap density. The trap densities of the perovskite films estimated by thermal admittance spectroscopy (TAS) and space charge-limited current (SCLC) characterization reduced from 0.9 × 1017 cm−3 to 0.8 × 1016 cm−3 with Cs+ doping. The decrease in the trap density suppressed non-radiative recombination and accelerated charge transportation in the perovskite film. Thereby, the VOC improved by 60 mV and the PCE distribution was much narrow in Cs+-doped PSCs. Also, the integrated JSC values derived from the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra enhanced from 23.8 mA cm−2 to 24.2 mA cm−2. As for the stability, the devices retain over 60% of their original performance after 140 h tracking at maximum power. More recently, sequentially deposited films modulated by other Cs+ sources (CsCl or CsBr) also showed reduced GBs, less trap states, and longer carrier lifetime. The resulting devices exhibited a PCE exceeding 22% and retained 90% of the original efficiency after 4000 min under AM 1.5G illumination. The latest research indicated that the doping of Cs+ in the first step suppressed the hexagonal PbI2 phase and provided an energetically favourable crystallization pathway from CsPbI3 to the α-phase perovskite. The existence of Cs+ also induced sparse nucleation sites and promoted sufficient grain growth. Moreover, it has just been reported that the co-doping of Cs+ in the first step and benzylammonium (BA+) in the second step during the sequentially deposition process was an effective method to manipulate perovskite crystallization. Cs+ doping was favourable for BA+ additives to give full play to their role in perovskites. The increased surface binding strength between the perovskites and BA+ induced by Cs+ doping promoted the preferred orientation of the (100) facets and weakened growth along the adverse (111) facet. Therefore, a champion efficiency of 22.5% along with superior resistance to humidity and thermal stress have been achieved simultaneously. These studies highlighted the vital effect of Cs+-doping and the advantage of the sequentially deposited method, allowing the fabrication of the high-crystallinity film via the precise control of the seed-assisted crystallization kinetics.
Apart from the promotion of black phase crystallization, Cs+ doping was capable of adjusting the crystal stacking mode of certain crystallographic planes in the perovskite thin films, thereby facilitating photogenerated charge carrier transport. Two dimensional synchrotron-based GIWAXS measurements have been utilized to study the crystal structure and the facet orientation in mixed-cation perovskites. Hence, the GIWAXS patterns for perovskite films with different Cs+ concentration and the corresponding integrated intensity plots azimuthally along the (001) plane are presented in Fig. 6a–e. Remarkably, the orientation in the (001) crystal plane (qz = 0.16 Å−1) stacking became more preferred with Cs+ doping. As for the pristine perovskite film, the indistinct peaks at 25° and 49.44° indicated a relatively disordered distribution state. The diffraction mottling became more obvious and moved from the original azimuth angle of 49.44° towards 59.82° with proper concentration of the incorporated Cs+. Concomitantly, in addition to the deviation of the diffraction peaks at the azimuth, the relative intensity at the low azimuth angle of the Cs+-doped film became stronger and four splitting peaks arose. In the context of the above analyses, Cs+-doping is efficient in manipulating the preferential crystal orientation of the (001) planes, resulting in a high-order crystal structure. The manipulation of facet orientation in the hybrid perovskite polycrystalline films by Cs+ doping could be related to the crystal distortion and mismatch of the crystal lattice constant resulting from the different radii compared with the A-site cation. In addition, the change in the crystallographic plane stacking could be attributed to altered crystallization and the nucleation dynamic process. Therefore, Cs+ doping systematically adjusted the preferred crystal orientation in the polycrystalline perovskite film through microstructural arrangement.
To further study the carrier behaviour in the PSCs with the manipulation of facet orientation induced by Cs+ doping, a series of electrical characterizations have been conducted. TPV and transient photocurrent (TPC) measurements have been employed to probe the electron lifetime and decay time (Fig. 6f and g). Compared with the pristine sample, the device with 5% Cs+ doping exhibited a longer electron lifetime of 5.36 μs and a shorter photovoltage decay time of 1.33 μs. It could be attributed to reduced recombination states and ameliorative charge carriers transport enabled by preferred facet orientation. According to the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) results presented in Fig. 6h, the device with Cs+ doping showed the largest semi-circle, indicating substantial junction capacitance and recombination resistance. The smallest lifetime of Cs+-doped perovskites derived from intensity-modulated photocurrent spectroscopy (IMPS) measurement suggested the most efficient carrier extraction and transfer process. Also, the conductive atomic force microscopy (c-AFM) current of the sample with optimized Cs+ concentration was larger and more uniform than that of the pristine sample. A higher carrier mobility estimated from the SCLC measurements was observed in the perovskite sample with preferred facet orientation, indicating improved charge transportation in the whole device. All these characterizations demonstrated that the charge extraction and transfer dynamics were enhanced by Cs+ doping-enabled controllable crystal facet orientation. Thereby, Cs+ doping could be considered as a feasible method for achieving preferred crystallographic planes in the perovskite crystal, which provides a typical example for further explorations on perovskite materials and relevant optoelectronics.
Moreover, alkali metal Cs+ doping assisted in reducing light-induced halide segregation and homogenizing halide distribution in perovskite films. Light-induced phase segregation in case of mixed halide perovskites could bring photoinduced trap states, which leads to poor optoelectronic properties and substantial open-circuit voltage deficits. Upon light illumination, there was a red shift to lower energies resulting from the formation of iodine-rich domains in the pristine film wherein phase segregation existed. However, there was no shift in the photoluminescence (PL) emission for the Cs+-doped perovskite film under identical conditions. Furthermore, halide distribution in the perovskite film with Cs+ doping, either alone or with Rb+, has been studied by means of synchrotron-based nanoscale X-ray fluorescence (n-XRF) mapping techniques (Fig. 7a–m). It is noteworthy that the elemental detection mapping of the perovskites with all stoichiometric contents have been researched and the distribution of iodide was relatively homogeneous across different samples. All over-stoichiometric perovskites exhibited Br-poor regions while stoichiometric and sub-stoichiometric preparations showed Br-rich cluster areas. Such Br segregation phenomenon was unfavourable for photogenerated charge carrier dynamics of the perovskite films due to different bandgaps forming locally and misaligned bands. The corresponding quantitative analysis of n-XRF distributions have been conducted to illustrate the elemental heterogeneity in different samples (Fig. 7n–p). The over-stoichiometric pristine sample exhibited Br-poor cluster area ratios of 0.41 and the Br-poor area fraction was reduced to 0.29 upon Cs+ doping. In addition, the fraction of Br-rich clusters in the stoichiometric and sub-stoichiometric preparations reduced from 0.08, 0.13 to 0.01, 0.003 with Cs+ doping. These experiments provided powerful evidence of halide homogenization induced by Cs+ doping and suggested that Rb+ doping also played a similar role, which will be discussed in detail in the next section. The addition of small alkali metal cations led to a less strained lattice and the optimized distribution of the halide ions led to a more homogeneous d-spacing between the various lattice planes. Consequently, halide distribution became homogenized upon the addition of Cs+ cations, which was beneficial for reducing recombination-active centres and accelerating charge transportation, thereby resulting in long-lived charge carrier decays and high-performance photovoltaic devices.
More recently, the inhibition function of Cs+ on residual SnyPb(1−y)I2 within the low-band-gap perovskite thin films has been confirmed, resulting in volumetric growth and improved crystallinity of the perovskite absorber layer. Also, some researchers reported that the relaxation in the lattice strain and the passivation of halide vacancies by alkali metal cation doping can markedly elevate the carrier temperature and substantially enhance hot carrier transport. A 900 K increase in the effective carrier temperature at a carrier density of about 1018 cm−3 with an excitation of 1.45 eV above the bandgap and 100 ns improvement in the hot carrier transport have been achieved simultaneously. Combining modified hot carrier transport and the reduced threshold carrier density for phonon bottleneck demonstrated the potential for designing optimal hybrid perovskite structures for hot carrier solar cells.
To sum up, the incorporation of Cs+ located at the A-site effectively stabilized the cubic perovskite structure by tuning the tolerance factor and promoted phase transition to the photo-active α phase. Meanwhile, Cs+ doping manipulated the mixed-halide perovskite crystallization pathway by bypassing the complex phases including hexagonal polytypes and intermediate solvate phases and extending the annealing window during the crystal growth process. Apart from promoting the formation of the α-phase kinetically and thermodynamically, Cs+ doping greatly extended the annealing time window, greatly improved the feasibility of obtaining high-quality films, and evidently showed robustness to the time sensitivity of the fabrication process. Also, the Cs+ cation played a pivotal role in trap state passivation and energy band gap regulation in perovskite films. Cs+ doping was also considered to be an effective approach to manipulate the facet orientation within the hybrid perovskite polycrystalline films, which was beneficial for improving charge carrier transport, thereby enhancing the performance of photovoltaic devices. In addition, introducing appropriate concentration of Cs+ into the perovskites homogenized the halide distribution and improved both the efficiency and long-term stability of the PSCs. Thus, alkali metal Cs+ doping acted as a bridge to high efficiency, high reproducibility, and stable perovskite-based photovoltaics. Even though the underlying mechanism regarding Cs+ doping enabled the adjustment of the crystal stacking mode, the manipulation of the orientation of the specific crystal plane is unexpectedly missing. Also, the detailed information on phase transformation and structure evolution during the crystallization process of sequentially-deposited perovskite films modulated by CsCl and CsBr is still unknown. More theoretical calculations and advanced characterizations to visualize the full energy landscape change with Cs+ doping will boost further developments of Cs+-alloyed perovskite materials.

As a neighbouring alkali metal cation of Cs+, Rb+ with smaller size also joined into the procession of cation doping to promote the performance of perovskite-based devices. Considering the possibility of Rb+ in multiple locations in perovskites, it could be expected that Rb+ doping has a larger impact on the change in the structural and photoelectric properties of hybrid perovskite materials.

On the one hand, the A-site substitution of the Rb+ played a positive effect on the suppression of the non-perovskite δ-phase, thereby improving the structural stability. Due to the smaller ionic radius, Rb+ located at the A-site in the perovskite lattice has been considered as a candidate to prevent α-to-δ phase transition of FAPbI3 at less doping content compared with Cs+ (Fig. 8a). In light of the XRD patterns of perovskite films crystallized at different temperatures, the formation of the black α-phase of Rb+-doped FAPbI3 started at 120 °C, whereas that of pristine FAPbI3 started at nearly 140 °C and was completed at 150 °C (Fig. 8b and c). It indicated that the transition of the hexagonal yellow phase to the trigonal black phase was more favourable in Rb+-doped FAPbI3 compared with pristine FAPbI3. It was also observed that the Rb+-doped FAPbI3 completely changed into the black perovskite within 60 s, while pristine FAPbI3 took 4 min, indicating that the δ-to-α transition of the perovskite with Rb+ doping was faster than that in the pristine sample at the same temperature. By performing differential scanning calorimetry using the as-cast samples without heating, it was revealed that the partial doping of Rb+ into FAPbI3 effectively tuned the tolerance factor and reduced the formation energy of the black perovskite. As a result, the δ-FAPbI3 phase disappeared and the peaks of α-FAPbI3 became more shaper upon Rb+ doping. Therefore, the Rb+-doped perovskite film with improved crystallinity exhibited enhanced light absorbance, efficient charge transport, and prolonged carrier lifetime. In addition, the complete conversion and stabilization of black FAPbI3 derived by Rb+ incorporation resulted in high stability against moisture. According to the aging test under moisture environment (RH ∼ 55%, 25 °C) in dark shown in Fig. 8d and e, the remarkable stability of the Rb+-doped perovskite film has been demonstrated, which could be attributed to the contraction of the cubo-octahedral volume and strong chemical interaction between the FA cations and the iodide anions. Thus, PSCs based on the Rb+-doped perovskite film maintained 97% of the initial efficiency after 1000 h stability tests. In the meantime, stabilized efficiencies of up to 21.6% on small areas with an open-circuit voltage of 1.24 V at a band gap of 1.63 eV as well as an electroluminescence of 3.8% have been achieved by the incorporation of Rb+. It is worth mentioning that the incorporation of Rb+ located at the A-site could contribute to the contraction of the all-inorganic CsPbI2Br/CsPbI3 perovskite crystal, adjusting the tolerance factor effectively, which remarkably improved the structure stability. In principle, such fine thermodynamic stability of the Rb+-doped CsPbI3 perovskite at room temperature can be explained by the good miscibility of CsPbI3 and RbPbI3 due to the increase in the configurational entropy. Combined with the hot air-assisted method, the high-quality perovskite film and related photovoltaic devices with the highest PCE of 17.16% as well as attractive FF of 80.03% have been produced by Rb+ doping.
On the other hand, some studies highlighted the enhanced robustness against thermal stress of Rb+-doped perovskites because of the significant suppression of the PbI2 phase impurities. Although excess PbI2 enhanced the efficiency by inhibiting the interfacial non-radiative carrier recombination, it may act as a source of degradation under thermal stress. The balance between efficiency and thermal stability of the devices with excess PbI2 is difficult to perfectly control. Fortunately, this trade-off issue has been solved by the incorporation of the Rb+ cation. Apparently, devices without Rb+ doping showed poor stability in the case of excess PbI2. In contrast, the devices with Rb+ doping showed enhanced stability in both cases of stoichiometric PbI2 and excess PbI2 (Fig. 8g). From the results of XRD measurements presented in Fig. 8f, it is revealed that Rb+ doping was able to suppress the growth of PbI2 even under PbI2-rich conditions through the formation of RbPbI3. Even though the negative effect of thermal instability induced by PbI2 was eliminated through Rb+ doping, the device exhibited a non-negligible decrease in the performance. To further reveal the origin of the reduced efficiency after thermal stress testing, ToF-SIMS elemental mapping combined with SEM and EDX was used to detect any compositional changes in the depth and plane directions of the devices (Fig. 8h). In detail, the formation of the Rb–Br compounds under long-term operation may be the origin of performance degradation of the device. The phase-separated Rb–Br compounds may lead to direct contact between the perovskite and the Au electrodes, or act as deep-level defects, thereby increasing non-radiative recombination centres at the surface. It is indicated that devices with a lower Br ratio showed higher thermal stability than that of devices with a higher Br ratio. With an optimized perovskite composition of Rb0.05Cs0.05FA0.75MA0.15Pb(I0.95Br0.05)3, a PCE of 20.6% and 92% retention after the stress tests at 85 °C/85% RH for 1000 h have been achieved. In addition, researchers employed cathode luminescence (CL) test assisted with SEM to investigate the distribution of the PbI2 phase and revealed that Rb+ doping effectively inhibited the PbI2 phase even in the case of 10% excess Pb in the precursor solution, which aided in enhancing the thermal- and photo-stability of PSCs. Furthermore, it has been inferred that Rb+ widely existed in a depth range of 18 nm at the surface and effectively prevented the formation of PbI2 by studying the element distribution via hard XPS analysis, resulting in an improved VOC. Based on the above results, the careful design of Rb+ doping and Pb/Br contents in perovskite materials would be required.
The excellent effect of Cs+ and Rb+ doping on stabilizing the perovskite structure by balancing the tolerance factor inspired researchers to further study how co-doping improved the properties of perovskite materials. It was pointed out that the better reproducibility of PSCs was obtained based on RbCsFAMA-based multi-cation perovskites compared to FAMA-based samples according to numerous experiments. To explore the origin of improved reproducibility of quadruple-cation PSCs, UV-vis and PL tests were conducted on the as-cast films without being annealing in order to investigate the starting condition of the crystallization process (Fig. 9a). In the FAMA-based sample, several intermediates with non-perovskite structure were inferred from its non-convergent PL peak across a wide emission wavelength range. As for the film doped with Rb+ and Cs+, a narrow PL peak situated at 760 nm was observed, suggesting that the photoactive perovskite phase was formed immediately after the spin-coating process. The insets, which are the optical microscope photographs, visually displayed the surface morphology, showing a much more uniform film with alkali metal cation doping compared to the pristine film. Moreover, the PL spectra and XRD patterns of the annealed perovskite films revealed that alkali metal cation doping suppressed the impurity phases with a slight effect on the materials bandgap (Fig. 9b and c). These results are consistent with the high reproducibility and lack of yellow phases.
To understand the in-depth mechanism of co-doping of Rb+ and Cs+ on the optimization of perovskite properties, the detailed crystallization process and phase transformation evolution from the solution to solid has been carefully explored to identify the synergistic effect due to collective benefits of Rb+ and Cs+ doping. Dang and coworkers conducted time-evolved GIWAXS to reveal the evolution details during the spin-coating process of the one-step anti-solvent method (Fig. 9d). The so-called “disordered colloids” range could be attributed to the sol–gel solution. The diffraction peaks of the intermediates and the α-phase started to appear and evolve after dropping the CB anti-solvent, which have been identified in detail and qualitatively marked in the map as 2H, 4H, 6H, and 3C, demonstrating that serious inherent phase segregation occurred in the as-cast perovskite films. In pristine FAMA-based film, two competing phases were formed: the FA–Br-rich 6H hexagonal phase and the MA–I-rich solvated phase, along with the formation of the mixed-halide 4H phase (Fig. 9e). In this case, complex transition was necessary during the thermal annealing process and the incomplete transition process directly led to the segregation of the Br-rich phase and the I-rich phase, which acted as charge trap states and caused carrier recombination. Also, the impacts of Rb+ and/or Cs+ doping on crystalline phase formation and evolution were systemically investigated. As for the perovskite films with 5% Cs+ doping, the 3C α-phase was promoted and the formation of 6H δ-phase was suppressed but the solvate phase still appeared (Fig. 9f), which was in accordance with our discussion in Fig. 5. Upon the addition of 5% Rb+, the solvate phase was effectively inhibited, while the 6H δ-phase was still observed with sharper peaks (Fig. 9h). In the case of 3% Rb+ and 7% Cs+ co-doping, it was expected that the desired 3C α-phase gained a boost after CB dipping and almost all the intermediate phases (solvate phase and δ-phase) were apparently suppressed (Fig. 9i). It is suggested that Rb+ doping suppressed the solvent phase and Cs+ doping inhibited the hexagonal phase individually. Strikingly, the synergistic doping of Rb+ and Cs+ promoted the direct formation of the entire formulation into the 3C α-phase, which was free of other phases. Apart from the control of the phase formation during spin coating, alkali metal doping also affected the growth kinetics of the perovskite film. The co-doping of Rb+ and Cs+ was able to stabilize the as-cast precursor film and delay it from crystallizing. The control of both phase formation and growth kinetics may extend the processing window, which was the reason behind the better reproducibility of the PSCs based on RbCsFAMA-based multi-cation perovskites. With controllable phase formation pathway during spin coating, severe halide segregation existing in the mixed-halide perovskite due to the existence of the MA–FA–I-rich 2H phase, the FA–Br-rich 6H phase, and the MA–I-rich solvated phase has been minimized successfully. As depicted in Fig. 9g, the distribution of halide anions was detected with the assistance of ToF-SIMS mapping characterization. It demonstrated that the perovskite films fabricated from the optimal addition of Rb+ and Cs+ homogenized halide distribution and achieved halide management by suppressing the formation of the Br-rich phase (6H δ-phase) and I-rich phase (2H phase and solvate phase). In conclusion, the collective benefits of Rb+ doping and Cs+ doping on halide distribution homogenization by suppressing the inherent phase segregation and the formation of a single 3C phase by bypassing halide- and cation-segregating phases has been elucidated. The investigation of the special roles of Rb+ and Cs+ in the fabrication of perovskite films provided adequate insights into the crystallization process and motivated the researchers to develop universal strategies for high-performance perovskite-based devices. Actually, using a small amount of Rb+ in the precursor solution as the crystal growth modulator has been applied for the fabrication of Ruddlesden–Popper (PEA)2(MA)4Pb5I16 perovskite film without changing its dominating crystal orientation, thus significantly promoting the crystallinity and enhancing the photovoltaic performance.
In addition to promoting the formation of the desired photo-active phase and immobilizing the unwanted excess halides, Rb+ doping has been demonstrated to reduce non-radiative recombination through chemical passivation and eliminate hysteresis in PSCs. As shown in Fig. 10a–c, Rb+-doped PSCs with an n–i–p structure of FTO/SnO2/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Au yielded a champion PCE of 20.3% compared with 17.5% efficiency of the pristine device, which was mainly attributed to the obviously increased VOC. To make a more intuitive comparison, the average and maximum VOC of the devices are depicted in Fig. 10g; the average VOC of the Rb+-doped PSCs enhanced by about 50 mV compared to the control devices. Theoretically, the maximum VOC depends on the quasi-Fermi level splitting, which is given by the Shockley–Queisser thermodynamic limit. The main limiting factors for VOC are defect-induced non-radiative recombination losses. Time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) studies were performed to investigate the recombination dynamics through the lifetime of photoexcited carriers (Fig. 10d). A long exponential PL decay tail with time constants above 1 μs were observed in the Rb+-doped film while the pristine sample exhibited 0.55 μs, indicating that Rb+ doping prolonged the carrier lifetime. More intuitively, fluorescence lifetime image microscope (FLIM) on the perovskite film coated on glass could provide the distribution of carrier lifetime across the local area at a micro-meter scale (Fig. 10h and i). Compared with pristine FAPbI3, the whole polycrystalline film with Rb+ doping showed an increased charge carrier lifetime by a factor of 3, suggesting obviously reduced trap states. Through c-AFM and admittance spectroscopic analyses, it was revealed that Rb+ doping in the perovskite film reduced the deep-level trap density, leading to reduced saturated current density, increased shunt resistance, and enhanced electrical conductivity.
Concretely, the defect density of the Rb+-doped perovskite films has been estimated by means of several experimental approaches combined with theoretical calculations. In order to quantify the passivating effect of Rb+ doping, time-resolved microwave conductivity (TRMC) was used as a feasible method to calculate the trap density and the value was notably decreased from 2.5 × 1015 to 1.0 × 1015 cm−3 with Rb+ doping. The Mott–Schottky test was also conducted to qualify the doping density derived from defects such as Pb vacancies and I interstitials that acted as carrier recombination centres. It demonstrated that the incorporation of Rb+ reduced p-type doping level created by intrinsic defects, causing enlarged built-in potential and enhanced VOC value. Further study on charge carrier recombination dynamics revealed that Rb+ doping reduced first-order and retarded second-order charge recombination. According to Urbach energy measured by photothermal deflection spectroscopy and the Shockley–Read–Hall model, the reduced first-order recombination has been assigned to suppressed trap-assisted recombination of charges. The favourable effects of alkali Rb+ doping on the eliminating defects have been demonstrated through ab initio time-dependent DFT calculations and state-of-the-art non-adiabatic (NA) molecular dynamics (MD). It revealed that the incorporation of alkali metal cations including Rb+ increased the formation energy of the halide interstitial defect, leading to reduced defect concentration. Even if some defects were inevitable, alkali metal cations were capable of passivating them because of the strong interaction. Through chemically passivating the defect, the alkali metal cations changed the charge density distribution around the defect site, breaking electron–phonon coupling selection rules of the pristine perovskite and slowing down the quantum dynamics of non-radiative charge recombination. Likewise, the existence of Rb+ in the form of Rb-rich phase such as RbPbI3, mixture of rubidium halides, and various rubidium-lead bromides could also act as a passivation layer for the perovskite material.
Except for reduced non-radiative recombination, it suggested that Rb+ doping enormously diminished the J–V hysteresis of devices (Fig. 10b and c). J–V hysteresis is considered to be a result of the intrinsic iodine vacancy defects that tend to migrate and accumulate at the interface, showing negative effects on the screening electric field and reducing the collection efficiency of photo-generated carriers in PSCs. Considering this issue, the transient phenomena that define hysteresis were explored by IMPS. As presented in Fig. 10f, the low frequency range (0.1–100 Hz) was the response to ionic movement-related light modulation. Slower response of FAMA-based device caused insensitive changes and slower stabilization of the current during reverse and forward bias sweeps, thus showing obvious J–V hysteresis. On the other hand, the response of the Rb+-doped device was much faster, boosting the transients of current at each voltage step and explaining the weak hysteresis. Through a theoretical investigation by DFT calculation, the interstitial occupancy of Rb+ in the perovskite lattice dramatically improved the ion migration barrier. Meanwhile, low carrier mobility caused ionic defects to respond slowly to voltage changes and was believed to be responsible for the hysteresis. Through terahertz (THz) photoconductivity measurements (Fig. 10e), it demonstrated that the carrier mobility was enhanced by 25% after 5% Rb+ doping. Therefore, it indicated that the incorporation of Rb+ increased the charge carrier mobility and extraction to make it less sensitive to the electric field, and the final Rb+-doped devices reached equilibrium currents faster with higher values of stabilized power. Similar results that the carrier mobility increased from 42 to 50 cm2 V−1 s−1 after Rb+ doping elsewhere by TRMC tests have been also reported, thus leading to suppressed hysteresis as faster carrier collection than ion movement. The promoted carrier collection was also proved by the reduced series resistance and capacitance in the impedance spectrum test. The above results demonstrated that the inhibited ion migration and the increased carrier mobility induced by Rb+ doping were believed to be instrumental for the suppression of hysteresis. Moreover, it has been claimed that the accumulation of the Rb+ species at the TiO2 interface was possibly related to a reduction in the surface recombination near the electron transporting layer, which may be the reason of the changed hysteresis behaviour of the PSCs. Also, Rb+ doping has been successfully extended to the gas-quenching method to obtain perovskite films with high quality and to synthesize large-area (65 mm2) devices with negligible hysteresis, which showed great potential in fabricating high-performance optoelectronic devices with excellent phase stability and high temperature thermostability. Furthermore, the advantageous effect of Rb+ doping in improving the crystallinity and suppressing the defect migration in the 1.73 eV bandgap perovskite material has been manifested; thus, the resultant widegap PSCs with negligible hysteresis and steady efficiency showed enormous potential in high-performance fabrication of perovskite-silicon tandem devices.
All in all, the incorporation of alkali metal Rb+ improved the intrinsic structural stability and long-term operational stability under humidity and thermal stress by reducing the δ-FAPbI3 and PbI2 impurity phases. Beyond that, the individual effect of single Rb+ doping and the synergistic effect of Rb+ and Cs+ co-doping on the crystallization kinetics and phase transformation pathway has summarized that alkali metal doping promoted the formation of well-defined mixed-halide mixed-cation perovskite crystals with superior properties. Ultimately, the impacts of Rb+-doping on the carrier dynamics of the resultant films and devices have been comprehensively concluded and discussed. Through series of characterizations and calculations, the suppressed non-radiative recombination and eliminated hysteresis can be attributed to reduced defect density, improved carrier mobility, and inhibited ion migration. Such various functions of alkali metal Rb+ doping in forming the hybrid perovskite films inspire researchers to design and develop multi-component systems with controllable crystallization pathways towards high-performance perovskite-based devices. It is worth mentioning that the intrinsic role of Rb+ doping played in the fabrication process of Ruddlesden–Popper perovskite film should be further investigated and identified. Furthermore, due to the critical ionic radius of Rb+, it is very important to establish a relationship between the doping concentration and the occupied location, which is conducive to clarify the multiple functions of alkali metal Rb+ doping in perovskites, thereby further promoting the application of multi-cation cascade doping strategy in PSCs.

In recent years, although PSCs have made rapid progress in efficiency improvement, the intrinsic instability of the perovskite materials have seriously hindered the pace of their commercialization. Due to environmental stresses such as illumination, electric field, and high temperature under work condition, the internal perovskite phase structure would gradually decompose, leading to the deterioration of device performance and stability. Because of the low formation energy, ion migration in the halide perovskite material is one of the thermodynamic processes that are often associated with the instability of the crystal structure, such as photoinduced phase segregation and ion migration-induced degradation of the perovskites in the presence of oxygen and light. The anomalous behaviour restricts the accurate performance characterization and the long-term stability of the device. Therefore, on the premise of ensuring the efficiency, how to restrain the internal ion migration in the bulk to improve the phase structure stability of the perovskite materials is a urgent problem to be solved in the current PSCs system. A series of studies have confirmed that ion migration is closely related to crystal defects and interfaces. The existence of crystal defects provides a place for ion migration and serves as a main channel. From the point of view of defect and interface passivation, the introduction of the medium-sized K+ cation may have the advantages in both large-sized (Cs+, Rb+) and small-sized (Li+, Na+) ions at the same time, which makes it possible to passivate the defects, thereby minimizing ion migration.

Recently, the K+-rich phase at the GBs of the K+-doped perovskite film has been discovered and the inherent mechanism of the passivation effect derived from K+ doping has been unveiled simultaneously. Specifically, a new diffraction peak signal at about 9.42° has been observed in the K-doped perovskite film through XRD measurements (Fig. 11a). By comparing with the standard PDF card, the new peak was assigned to the K2PbI4 phase, wherein K+ acts as the spacer cation balancing the charge. The related calculated results also verified that the location of the K+ cation in the 3D perovskite film is in the form of the 2D K2PbI4 phase. According to the reported similar inorganic 2D Ruddlesden–Popper halide perovskites (Cs2PbI4, Rb2PbI4), the inorganic spacer cation could not negatively affect carrier charge transport. Besides, the discrepancy between the dielectric constant of the 3D perovskite film and the 2D K2PbI4 phase leads to enhanced dielectric confinement, which may enhance the radiative recombination ratio and influence the optical properties. Meanwhile, as shown in Fig. 11d, it is indicated that the 2D K2PbI4 phase is mainly distributed in the GBs of the perovskite film and played a passivating role on the defect states. To ensure the passivation effect by K+ doping, the SCLC method was performed to estimate the defect density by fabricating both electron-only and hole-only devices. As depicted in Fig. 11b and c, both the electron defect density and the hole defect density showed a downward trend after 5% K+ doping. In detail, the calculated electron defect density for the 5% K+-doped perovskite and the reference were 2.55 × 1015 cm−3 and 8.64 × 1015 cm−3, respectively. Also, the hole defect density was reduced from 4.25 × 1015 cm−3 of the reference sample to 2.41 × 1015 cm−3 of the K+-doped perovskite. As a result, the optimized PSCs via K+ doping achieved the champion PCE of 20.4% and maintained 90% of the original efficiency after 1000 h storage. Also, K+ has been incorporated into the wide-bandgap perovskite films with high Br content to play an analogous role, which passivated the defects at the GBs via the formation of the K2PbI4 phase. The effective function of K+ doping in suppressing the inhomogeneous distribution within the wide-band gap halide perovskites and enhancing the crystallinity has been demonstrated, delivering a champion PCE of 18.3% with negligible hysteresis.
The K+ cation cannot only passivate the GBs but also suppresses defects in the interface and reduces mobile halide ions under illumination conditions. A high PCE of 15.22% for flexible PSCs based on slot-die-coated method has been achieved through K+ doping. The addition of K+ in the interface formed KBr compounds that passivated the halide vacancies at the interface of the perovskite films, pursuing high performance and stable large-area PSCs. Through several micro-spectroscopic and optical techniques, in-depth insights into the K+ doping mechanism have been investigated and provided. In detail, FLIM characterization has been conducted in order to study the carrier dynamics in the perovskite films. Comparing Fig. 11e and f, the K+-doped perovskite film showed a longer carrier lifetime and higher PL intensity than the pristine film, indicating suppressed non-radiative defects in the K+-doped sample. The researchers also pointed out that the light-induced defect curing effect could dominate the light soaking process in the K+-doped perovskite film but illumination-activated mobile halide ions and the corresponding halide vacancies may lead to PL quenching in the pristine film under the same conditions. To analyse how the K+ cations played a defect-curing effect in perovskite materials, the cross-sectional elemental mapping presented in Fig. 11g gave the distribution information of I−, Br−, and K+. Apparently, the I ion was relatively homogeneous all over the film, and the K+ and Br− ions preferred to form a KBr compound at the GBs/surface under illumination, which is in good agreement with Strank's work mentioned before. It should be noted that such a formation of the KBr compounds induced by light could act as a stabilizer of photo-activated mobile halide ions and an inhibitor of non-radiative defects. Ultrafast transient absorption (TA) measurement has been conducted to further confirm the passivation effect of K+ doping. The pseudocolor representations of the TA spectra (ΔOD: pump-induced change of absorbance) as a function of pump–probe delay time and the probe wavelength before/after the doping of K+ are displayed in Fig. 11h and i, respectively. The peaks centered at 750 nm were attributed to the depletion of the valence band population and associated filling of the conduction band edge states by the photoexcited carriers. The longer wavelengths (>800 nm) corresponded to the filling of below-gap trap states. In this way, the bleaching decay profiles probed at 850 nm was chosen to estimate the lifetime of the carriers trapped in the trap states. The perovskite film with K+ doping displayed a much slower decay process than that of the reference sample. Fitting by a bi-exponential decay function, the calculated average decay time was 16.6 ± 1.3 ps for the K+ doping perovskite and 8.9 ± 0.7 ps for the reference film, suggesting decreased trap states of the K+-doped perovskite film. Herein, the passivation effect of K+ doping on the interface/surface trapping defect triggered by light illumination has been unambiguously demonstrated.
Likewise, K+-doping surface passivation method has been demonstrated as an effective approach to assist the fabrication of efficient and stable red light-emitting diodes based on inorganic perovskite nanocrystals. The researchers attributed such a passivation role to the KBr compounds formed by K–Br bonding in the surface. KBr not only immobilized the halide ions that may migrate under an electric field but also inhibited the halide vacancy defects in the perovskite nanocrystal film. Similarly, it indicated that doping potassium halide salts was a practical approach to impede the ionic segregation and immobilize the excess halide species of the triple-cation mixed-halide perovskite light-emitting diodes (PLED), thereby reducing the injection barrier for charge carriers and non-radiative recombination caused by the accumulation of ions. As a result, the K+-passivated PLED show significantly larger luminescence and substantially enhanced stability, paving the way for seeking optimized strategies to further stabilize the PLED operation and to achieve PLED commercialization.
Unlike the previous conclusion that the K+ cation played a passivating role at both the GBs and the interface, some studies showed that the K+ cation could occupy the perovskite crystal lattice and prefers the interstitial site, which inhibited the current–voltage hysteresis behaviour. On the one hand, the dramatically benign effect of K+ doping on the hysteresis has been systemically studied from the viewpoint of Frenkel defect passivation. By preparing and measuring the series of K+-doped PSCs with different components, it is suggested that K+ doping was an effective methodology to achieve hysteresis-free devices. The represented J–V curves of the PSCs based on (FAPbI3)0.875(CsPbBr3)0.125 doped with a tiny amount of the K+ cation are shown in Fig. 12a. As discussed before, the K+-induced crystal lattice expansion characterized by XRD indicated that K+ occupied the crystal and may be localized in the interstitial sites. To understand the atomistic origin of hysteresis elimination in K+-doped PSCs, theoretical calculation has been employed for MAPbI3 as a model structure. The schematic view of the perfect perovskite structure is shown in Fig. 12b and the corresponding structure with I_ Frenkel defects is shown in Fig. 12c. In more detail, the formation of I_ Frenkel defects includes two processes: the first is the rotation of the MA cation, which is able to open a space for I ion migration, and in the second, the I− ions migrate from the lattice to the interstitial sites. Normally, the I− ion migration process restricts the formation of Frenkel defects because it is difficult to stabilize the I− ions on the interstitial sites. However, photoexcited charge carriers will be transported to the opposite electrodes and the electrons accumulate near the cathode in the actual work conditions, the I vacancies trap the excess electrons and thereby show a negative charge state. Accordingly, negatively charged I vacancies attract nearby two Pb cations and form a Pb dimer (Pb–vacancy–Pb). Thus, the I_ Frenkel defect can be stabilized with excess electrons. The K+ cation occupied the interstitial sites in the perovskite crystal lattice so that I ion migration into the interstitial was completely prevented; therefore, the formation of the I_ Frenkel defect could be minimized. Also, the calculated formation energy of the K+ interstitial in different perovskite materials was all negative; thus, accommodating the K+ cation into the crystal lattice was easy. According to the above theoretical computation and experimental results, K+ doping into the perovskite crystal lattice has been demonstrated as a promising and facile method for defect engineering for ameliorating the hysteresis behaviour in PSCs.
On the other hand, it has been proven that the K+ cation located at the interstitial sites was able to increase the ion migration barrier, and inhibit the hysteresis and photoinduced phase separation, as evidenced by the DFT calculations and experimental characterizations. The K+ cation doping mechanism and occupation have been investigated by XRD measurements and energetic computation methods. Specifically, the observed lattice expansion in the K+-doped perovskites indicated that K+ tended to occupy the interstitial sites. According to the DFT calculation results, the interstitial occupancy of the K+ cation was thermodynamically favourable than both A-site occupancy and B-site occupancy. Such interstitial occupancy could lead to greatly improved ion migration barrier in the perovskite crystal, thereby regulating ion migration behaviour, as demonstrated by reduced calculated activation energy, reduced measured activation energy, and suppressed photoinduced phase separation. For the sake of calculating the activation energy of ion migration, the FAPbI3 structure was employed as an example model to obtain the vacancy-mediated I ion migration barrier before and after the introduction of the K+ cation. As shown in Fig. 12d, several migration pathways based on different distance (ab vs. ad), different orientation of the FA cations (ab vs. ac), or different direction (ab vs. ba) were systemically researched. The migration barrier of the I ion increased dramatically from 0.11 to 0.59 eV for all the diffusion paths (Fig. 12e), suggesting that the K+ cation sharply increased the I ion migration barrier. To measure the activation energy of ion migration in the experiment, a lateral conductor device structure was fabricated for temperature-dependent conductivity measurement. The conductivity values under various temperatures in the dark were fitted by the Nernst–Einstein equation to estimate the activation energy. There were two kinds of conduction mechanism that existed in both the control and K+-doped devices: electronic conduction and ionic conduction. Electronic conduction dominated the conductivity in the low-temperature range (200–260 K) because the halide ions were frozen or suppressed in the perovskite lattice. The halide ions would be activated by the external bias when the temperature exceeded 260 K; thus, the conductivity improvement reflected the degree of ion migration. According to the results shown in Fig. 12f, the activation energy of the halide ion was calculated to be 0.06 and 0.10 eV for the control device and the device with K+ doping, which is in line with the previous increased ion migration barrier calculated by DFT. It should be noted that the activation energy from the experimental measurements was smaller than that from the first principles calculation. The possible reasons for the difference in the activation energy included: on the one hand, the theoretical calculation mainly considered the activation energy of ion migration caused by the defects inside the crystal but in fact, the influence of the surface and grain boundary should also be considered; on the other hand, the ion migration will become more remarkable due to the excitation of light, heat, electric field, moisture, and other actual working conditions. Photo-induced phase segregation is another direct indicator of ion migration. Normalized PL (Fig. 12g and h) was performed to track the phase segregation in the perovskite before and after K+ doping. The PL peak of the control sample exhibited a red-shift as the exposure time increased, suggesting apparent phase segregation. On the contrary, unexpected phase segregation was suppressed dramatically upon K+ cation doping. Above all, through DFT calculations combined with experimental analysis, K+ doping mainly played pivotal roles in increasing the ion migration barrier by blocking the I− ion migration pathway, suppressing the formation of vacancies and altering the orientation of the organic amine cation. As a result, the stabilized PCE improved from 18% to 19% (Fig. 12i), which is associated with hysteresis-free PSCs assisted by K+ doping.
The energy barrier at the interface in the PSCs might hinder the carrier transportation process and cause charge carrier accumulation between the layer, which has been considered as another origin of hysteresis behaviour. As is well known, a large current–voltage hysteresis widely exists in the TiO2-based PSCs. Indeed, the mismatch of the conduction band minimum (CBM) between the perovskite film and TiO2 usually retards the electron collection rate and leads to charge accumulation at the interface. Excitingly, the incorporation of K+ into the perovskite film has been reported as an effective method to regulate the band alignment, improve charge carrier transport, eliminate hysteresis, and enhance the performance. As shown in Fig. 13a and b, the UV-vis absorption spectra and normalized PL spectra have been utilized to analyze the optical properties of K+-doped perovskites. The absorption edge shifted to a longer wavelength as the concentration of K+ increased, indicating a decrease in the band gap. Analogously, as the K+ ratio increases, the PL peak (Fig. 13b) also shifted to a longer wavelength because of the reduction in the band gap. Furthermore, ultra-violet photoelectron spectra (UPS) was conducted to investigate the VBM, CBM, and band gap of the perovskite film upon K+ doping. According to the detailed band positions shown in Fig. 13c, both the VBM and CBM of the K+-doped film shifted upward compared with the control perovskite film. The CBM shifted upward from −4.22 eV to −4.13 eV when K+ was incorporated into the perovskite film, suggesting that the energy barrier at the interface between the perovskite and ETL was immensely reduced. In this way, the transient current rise at the maximum power voltages of PSCs was employed to characterize the electron transportation of electrons at the interface. It revealed that the response rate of the devices with K+ cation doping was faster than that of the control sample (Fig. 13d). Briefly, the reduction of the energy barrier at the interface of the ETL and K+-doped perovskite absorber led to suppressed J–V hysteresis in the PSCs. As a result, the hysteresis factor, defined by (PCEReverse − PCEForward)/PCEReverse, reduced from 0.171 to 0.056 with K incorporation (Fig. 13e). Eventually, a PCE of 20.32% (Fig. 13f) with JSC of 22.99 mA cm−2, VOC of 1.167 V, and FF of 0.76 without hysteresis was achieved through the small amount of K+ incorporation. Tang et al. also pointed out that the energy band properties including the VBM, CBM, and bandgap of the perovskite were modulated by K+ cation doping, leading to the upshifting of VBM and CBM as well as minimized energy barrier between the perovskite and the ETL layer.
It is worth mentioning that some recent researches have shown that the doping effect using K+ on the perovskite film was highly dependent on the composition of the perovskite–ETL interface. The passivating effects of K+ in the perovskite films occurred predominantly at the perovskite–ETL interface and a small amount of K+ ions can lead to an increase in the perovskite crystallinity due to the altered kinetics of crystallization and growth, thereby improving the J–V metrics and eliminating the hysteresis. More specifically, for devices based on TiO2 ETL, K+ doping passivated the perovskite–ETL interface and enhanced the charge carrier extraction. However, the addition of K+ to the PSCs based on SnO2 ETL resulted in increased recombination and a reduction in the device performance due to the segregation of the K-rich phases such as KBr and the formation of other non-perovskite phases. Such a lack of improvement in the performance of SnO2-based solar cells doped with K+ may be assigned to the fact that the SnO2/perovskite interface was already partially passivated by the KOH stabiliser, which was present in the SnO2 colloidal dispersion. It suggested that the precise nature of the perovskite–ETL interface played a significant role in determining the actual effect of alkali metal K+ doping.
In additionally, the uniform distribution of K+ in the 2D perovskites is helpful to solve the bottleneck issues of random orientation and uneven phase distribution. On the one hand, the XRD results showed that the undoped film indicated a continuous diffraction ring, while the K+-doped film exhibited sharp and sporadic diffraction spots, demonstrating the vertically-oriented growth modulated by the incorporation of K+ (Fig. 13g and h). The reduced full width at half-maximum (FWHM) for the main (111) peak from 0.66 to 0.16 suggested that the average crystallite size and crystal quality was enhanced through K+ doping. By revealing the crystallization dynamics kinetics of the undoped and doped perovskite film during the spin-coating process by in situ grazing incident X-ray diffraction (GIXRD) characterization, K+ doping enabled the transformation from the solvate phase to the vertically-oriented 2D perovskite phase, bypassing an intermediate phase. Such direct transformation to the large crystalline size 2D perovskite might be related to the aggregated K+ that acted as the nucleation sites in the early stage of spin-coating, which induced heterogeneous crystallization in the vertical orientation. On the other hand, comparing the PL spectra detected from the surface of the perovskite film and the bottom of the substrate is a universal method to investigate phase distribution in the 2D perovskite film. The films without and with K+ doping exhibit an independent peak when detected from the surface of the perovskite film. However, there was conspicuous difference between the K+-doped and undoped film when detected from the bottom. As shown in Fig. 13i, there were obvious shoulder peaks at 577, 617, and 652 nm in the undoped perovskite film, representing different n-number phases, where n was the number of lead-iodine layers between the organic cation layers. On the contrary, there was still an independent peak for the perovskite film treated with the proper K+ amount. It indicated that K+ doping effectively reduced the distribution of the 2D perovskite phase, leading to suppressed defect density. As a result, the preferred vertically oriented 2D phase with excellent crystallinity and organized phase distribution via K+ doping promoted photo-generated charge transportation, which is favourable for optoelectronic device application. Moreover, it has been demonstrated that K+ doping could make flat cubic crystal stalks aligned normal to the film surface and increase the concentration of the low-n perovskite phases at the surface, forming 2D perovskites with a sandwich-type structure, which inhibited non-radiative recombination and improved the charge extraction efficiency. Therefore, it strongly recommended that alkali K+ cation doping paves the way for the further fabrication and optimization of 2D and 2D/3D perovskite devices.
Apart from passivating the trap states, suppressing ion migration, eliminating hysteresis, and manipulating the random orientation of the 2D perovskite, K+ cation doping also played many positive roles in other aspects. The incorporation of the K+ cation could enlarge the perovskite grain size over 1 μm, reduce the amount of the GBs, and decrease the trap density as well as suppress carrier recombination by decreasing the crystallization activation energy. Besides, doping K+ into the Sn–Pb mixed perovskite can effectively eliminate the bulk defects and greatly improve the perovskite film morphology, leading to better interfacial contact and expedites carrier extraction. Similar to Cs+ and Rb+, K+ doping also suppressed the formation of the photo-inactive δ-FAPbI3 yellow phase, leading to enhanced carrier lifetime and reduced trap-assisted recombination. It revealed that the chemical environmental change in the crystal structure induced by K+ interstitial occupation resulted in an immense rise in the conduction band minimum by 130 mV of the perovskite materials, which was favourable for energy alignment with the electron transport materials. In addition, it demonstrated that introducing the K-containing polymer for stabilizing the SnO2 colloid dispersion was able to strengthen the interfacial contact and induce vertically aligned crystal growth of hybrid perovskites. Beyond that, the K+ cations have been incorporated into inorganic cesium lead halide perovskite to shrink the lead iodine octahedron, thereby enhancing the phase stability and facilitating photogenerated charge carrier transportation.
In summary, regarding K+ doping, it has been claimed that K+ cations distributed at the interface or GBs in the form of K-rich compounds such as the K2PbI4 phase or the KBr phase play a passivating role on the trapping defects triggered by light illumination. By contrast, some have held the opinion that K+ occupied the perovskite crystal lattice and preferred the interstitial site, which inhibited the current–voltage hysteresis phenomenon by Frenkel defect passivation or iodide vacancy immobilization. In addition, chemical environmental change in the crystal structure induced by K+ interstitial occupation resulted in a notable rise in the conduction band minimum of perovskite materials, thus promoting energy band alignment with electron transport materials. Moreover, the uniform distribution of K+ in 2D perovskites possessed the ability of making flat cubic crystal stalks aligned normal to the film surface and increasing the concentration of the low-n perovskite phases at the surface, thus inducing the heterogeneous crystallization of the 2D perovskite in the vertical orientation. In order to maximize the positive role of K+ doping, the existing form and distribution state of K+ in the perovskite films, which directly determines whether they function, urgently needs to be identified and revealed. Meanwhile, the additional effects of the whole device structure and device type on ionic doping concentration should be fully considered. Due to the complexity of the perovskite material systems in question and the limited experimental characterization techniques present, the quantitative relationship between the electrons and ions, coupling mechanism, and the potential kinetic process of inhibited ion migration with K+ doping is still ambiguous. Also, the in-depth mechanism of the versatile effects induced by K+ doping discussed before and the interplay between K+ and mixed-halide perovskite is still a topic of debate, which should be solved to promote the fabrication of high-efficiency perovskite optoelectronic devices by the K+-doping methodology.

Some small alkali metal ions like Na+ and Li+ are not suitable for substituting in the perovskite crystal structure but they also influenced the crystal quality and film morphology. It has been investigated that Na+ located at the GBs and surface played a prominent role in reducing the defect state density, resulting in the acceleration of charge transportation and an enhancement in the performance of the PSCs.

For example, a spontaneous passivation of the perovskite film by Na+ cation diffused from the glass substrates has been reported. As depicted in Fig. 14a and b, the evolution of the trap density of states in the devices stored in both inert and ambient atmospheres has been analyzed by thermal admittance spectroscopy. The measured trap densities of the shallow trap region between 0.30 and 0.40 eV notably decreased after storage for three days under any atmospheric condition. It indicated that the diffusion of Na+ from the glass substrates during the storage period effectively passivated the shallow trap states located at the GBs of the perovskite films, which was helpful for inhibiting charge recombination and prolonging the carrier lifetime. Furthermore, alkali metal Na+ cations were intentionally introduced into the Si substrates to verify the passivation effect of Na+ on the perovskite films by monitoring the PL lifetime of the samples deposited on them (Fig. 14c). The corresponding TRPL results are in Fig. 14d and there was an increase to 212 ns and 150 ns for the perovskite films coated on 1 and 0.1 wt% Na+-incorporated Si substrates, respectively. By contrast, there was no change in the PL lifetime in the perovskite films that were coated on the unincorporated substrates. Therefore, it was deduced that Na+ cations may diffuse from underneath the substrates into the perovskite GBs and play a passivating role during the annealing process. A possible passivation mechanism that Na+ could substitute the MA+ vacancies that easily formed in the hybrid perovskite materials has been proposed. In addition, Na+ has been applied to decorate the PEDOT:PSS layer, acting as an HTL in the invert perovskite solar cells, to form better energy alignment with the perovskite absorber layer. Na+ doping not only enhanced hole extraction and suppressed non-radiative charge recombination but also significantly increased the grain size and crystallinity of the upper perovskite film, thus improving the photovoltaic performance from 18.07% to 19.41%. Such a study on the spontaneous passivation by Na+ cations contributed to the efficiency improvement and paved the way for the development of the passivation technique by using similar monovalent ions.
Besides, the direct introduction of the Na+ cation into the perovskite precursor solution during the crystallization process has also been proved as an effective method to achieve high-quality polycrystalline perovskite film. It demonstrated that Na+ doping induced the fabrication of the perovskite films with larger grain size, reduced trap state density, fewer GBs, and increased built-in voltage. Also, the accumulation of Na+ cation at the boundaries contributed to their passivation effect on the trap states. The Na+ located at the grain boundaries and the surface of the perovskite films can effectively passivate the defect states such as under-coordinated Pb2+ and significantly improved the resistance of the perovskites against water-induced degradation. Meanwhile, Na+ may regulate the crystallization and nucleation process due to stable chemical properties against oxidation and reduction. Furthermore, the introduction of Na+ into the perovskite film by post-treatment method effectively reduced the electron trap state densities, which resulted from the electrostatic interaction between the alkali metal ions with the halide anions of the perovskites.
In addition, NaCl has been applied as an interfacial additive between the electron transport layer and the perovskite layer in solar cells with planar structure. Na+ cations not only passivated the trap states existing in the ETL/perovskite interface layer but also substantially improved the electrical properties of the ETL layer. According to the measured VOC values as a function of light intensity (Fig. 14e), it could be found that the slopes of the pristine device and the Na+-doped device were 1.23kT/q and 1.14kT/q, respectively. The decrease in the slope was related to the reduced trap states at the interface between the Na+-doped film and the ETL, which resulted in suppressed charge recombination and enhanced electrical properties. Furthermore, the TPC (Fig. 14f) and TPV (Fig. 14g) measurements have been employed to investigate the charge transfer and charge recombination of pristine and Na+-doped PSCs. In detail, the transient TPC decay lifetime of the Na+-doped device showed a faster value of 0.51 μs than that of the pristine sample (1.08 μs), indicating a more efficient charge transfer and extraction process. Also, the TPV decay lifetime of the Na+-doped device exhibited a longer value of 24.67 μs than the pristine sample (20.83 μs), implying that Na+ doping effectively inhibited the charge recombination process. The faster charge transfer and suppressed charge recombination was able to attribute to improved contact properties between the perovskite and the Na+-doped ETL. Besides, Na+ doping enhanced the conductivity of ETL, thereby improving electron transfer. Similarly, NaCl assisted defect passivation in the bulk and the surface of ETL, thereby suppressing defect-induced non-radiative recombination and optimizing charge carrier transportation. Also, the function of improving interfacial charge dynamics at the ETL/perovskite interface by Na+ doping has been explained from the perspective of the filed effect. The additional internal electrical field induced by extrinsic alkali Na+ cations accumulated at the interface was favorable for electron extraction and injection, thus considerably improving the output performance.
It has also been reported that Na+ played a role in suppressing the diffusion of halide ions in the perovskite crystal by increasing the ionic charge on the nearby iodide ions. This effect may originate from the special location of small Na+ in the perovskite crystal. Using DFT calculation, the relative energy of incorporation of Na+ on the surfaces was lower than that in the bulk, suggesting that Na+ was more stable on the surfaces. On both FAI- and PbI2-terminated surfaces, Na+ preferred to occupy an interstitial site so as to passivate the anion vacancy defects in the perovskite thin films. To investigate the photovoltaic performance based on Na+-doped perovskite material, an n–i–p planar structure with ITO glass substrate, 50 nm-thick SnO2, 600 nm-thick perovskite film, 200 nm-thick spiro-OMeTAD, and an 80 nm-thick gold electrode (Fig. 14h) was fabricated. As shown in Fig. 14i, the Na+-doped solar cells yielded a champion PCE of 21.46% with negligible J–V hysteresis. In more detail, the value of FF improved from 74.77% up to 80.35% and the value of VOC improved from 1.095 V to 1.126 V. As for the stabilized PCE, pristine devices and Na+-doped solar cells showed a value of 19.37% and 20.96%, respectively (Fig. 14j). The passivation approach that made use of the small alkali metal Na+ was generally applicable for improving the performance of the PSCs by retarding the diffusion of halide ions and suppressing the formation of halide anion vacancies.
Above all, the easy-migrating Na+ could diffuse from underneath the substrates into the perovskite film and passivate the shallow trap states located at the GBs. High mobility made it possible for Na+ doping to play a potentially prominent role at the ETL/perovskite interface and the electrical properties of the ETL layer. If Na+ entered the perovskite lattice successfully, the interstitial location of Na+ in the perovskite crystal suppressed the diffusion of the halide ions in the perovskite crystal by increasing the ionic charge on the nearby iodide ions. Hence, if we can reasonably design and employ the Na+ doping strategies to make it accurately play the expected role in the target location within perovskite materials, the Na+ doping technique can be potentially extended to other optoelectronic devices that require perovskite films with longer carrier lifetime and lower traps density, such as ultrafast photodetectors, low-threshold lasers, and lower-driving voltage light emitting diodes.

Various Li+-containing compounds, such as LiBr and LiI, were utilized to directly dope the perovskite layers so as to improve the photoelectric properties and optimize the carrier behaviour. For instance, LiI has been incorporated into the MAPbI3 perovskites. Consequently, the resultant aggregation of Li+/I− tuned the energy level of the perovskites and induced n/p-type doping in MAPbI3, which made charge extraction from the perovskite to the charge transport layers (NiOx and PCBM) more efficient. Specifically, Li+, serving as the interstitial dopants, up-shifted the Fermi energy and formed n-type doping, while I−, acting as the substituted or interstitial dopant, down-shifted the Fermi energy and thus the p-type doping, which was suggested through surface potential measurement by KPFM. In addition, the n/p-type doping enlarged the Fermi energy level splitting of the devices and the Li+ doping effectively modulated the interface energy band alignment, thereby facilitating photoinduced charge transport, reducing the energy losses, and improving the photovoltage simultaneously. In another work, it was reported that KPFM was used to examine the surface potential of the perovskites with/without Li+ to compare the band alignment between TiO2 and the perovskite layer. It showed that the Li+-doped perovskites had much higher surface potential than the pristine sample, which enlarged the driving force of electron extraction from the bulk perovskite film to the TiO2 layers, thereby enhancing the resultant VOC. At the same time, the value of EQE increased from 70.97% to 89.39% after LiI doping, thus confirming improved electron extraction and transportation. Similarly, combining PL with UPS studies, researchers revealed that Li+ doping resulted in weakened electron–phonon coupling and n-type doping so as to create free electrons to fill the related trap states in the perovskite crystals, leading to enhanced PL intensity and prolonged PL lifetime. Therefore, such reduced non-radiative loss could be attributed to Li+ doping into the perovskite interstitial sites. Not only that, Li+ doping vastly reduced the turn-on voltage of the CsPbBr3 perovskite-based LEDs with improved conductivity and enhanced electron injection efficiency into the perovskite crystals, resulting from the n-type doping of the perovskites. Thus, we conclude that Li+ doping in the bulk perovskite thin films are beneficial for energy band alignment and carrier recombination dynamics. Likewise, the doping of lithium halides has been utilized to passivate the point vacancy defects and suppress the trap state density, thereby facilitating the fabrication of high-efficiency blue and red inorganic PLED.

Beyond that, Li-TFSI with Li+ has been widely applied as a dopant or a passivation layer to modulate both the transport layer and the interfaces. It has been demonstrated that Li+ doping allowed the preparation of the mesoporous TiO2 layer with excellent electron properties by inducing a partial reduction of Ti4+ to Ti3+ within the TiO2 lattice and passivating the electronic trap states, thus enabling faster photoinduced charge transport. As a result, enhanced VOC from 1.038 V to 1.114 V was obtained by the Li+-passivated devices, thus assisting the promotion of PCE from 17% to over 19%, which was comparable to the highest values reported at that time. Meanwhile, highly stable FAPbBr3 devices exhibiting a photovoltage as high as 1.53 V have been fabricated successfully with the assistance of Li+-doped TiO2. According to photothermal deflection absorption spectroscopy and transient photovoltage measurements, the lower sub-bandgap absorption level of Li+-doped and more efficient injection of electrons from the perovskites into Li+-doped TiO2 has been proven. Moreover, Li+-doped NiOx film with better electrical conductivity and hole mobility accelerated the hole extraction and transportation between the HTLs and perovskite films, indicating that the Li+-doped NiOx film was a very promising hole extraction material for high-performance inverted PSCs. Hence, the positive effect of proper ionic doping in charge transport layers is promising and important to design stable and efficient PSCs.
Similar to Na+ doping discussed previously, Li+ in the transport layers was capable of diffusing and migrating across the perovskite layer, thus remarkably influencing the properties of the whole photovoltaic device including charge extraction at the interface and the hysteresis phenomenon. To examine whether Li+ can diffuse across the active absorber layer, researchers monitored the depth profiles of Li+ in n–i–p PSCs with/without Li+-doped HTL by TOF-SIMS characterization. The results showed that there was a large amount of Li+ detected in both the perovskite and ETL (TiO2) in the Li+-doped PSCs. By contrast, the signal of Li+ probed in the control sample was below the instrument background. More interestingly, the detected Li+ concentration of TiO2 far away from the HTL was higher than that of the perovskite, indicating a higher affinity of Li+ to TiO2 than the perovskite. Hence, the TOF-SIMS results demonstrated that extrinsically doped Li+ showed a high diffusion tendency in the PSCs and migrated across the perovskite layer.
On the one hand, the role of Li+ diffusion on interfacial charge transportation has been investigated through TRPL measurements based on several devices with different structures (Fig. 15a). In detail, the PMMA layer was coated on the perovskite layer to avoid disturbance by the ambient conditions. Perovskite films deposited on the pristine TiO2 layer showed weak PL quenching, indicating that TiO2 alone cannot extract electrons from the perovskite layer effectively. More pronounced PL quenching was observed when the Li+ salt was intentionally doped into the perovskite layer or the top PMMA layer. Specifically, the fast carrier extraction of the TiO2/perovskite/PMMA + Li+ sample fully demonstrated that the diffusion of Li+ doped in HTL influenced the TiO2/perovskite interface and the accumulation of Li+ at the interface facilitated carrier charge transport. Likewise, the light soaking phenomenon of the PSCs before the J–V tests under the operational conditions can be well explained by Li+ diffusion across the entire perovskite layer under bias. The light soaking process produces a positive pre-bias so as to drive Li+ in the HTL to accumulate at the TiO2/perovskite interface, thus modifying the charge transportation process and affecting the final device performance.
On the other hand, two kind of cells shown in Fig. 15d have been fabricated to further study the relationship between extrinsic Li+ diffusion and hysteresis phenomenon in the PSCs. Cell 2 was designed to simulate the actual condition of Li+ diffusion from the HTL into the perovskite layer and eliminate the influence of other components in HTL on the hysteresis. Specifically, as depicted in Fig. 15b, photocurrent transition in Cell 2 was larger and faster than that in Cell 1, resulting in a larger hysteresis of Cell 2. More intuitively, Cell 2 possessed better FF and PCE as well as larger hysteresis than that of Cell 1, according to the measured J–V curves (Fig. 15c). Furthermore, the devices exhibited reverse hysteresis behaviour at different scanning rates. The hysteresis of Li+-doped devices was larger than that of the control devices with a higher scanning speed, while the hysteresis of the control devices was larger at low scan rates. Such a discrepancy implied that the main origin of the hysteresis phenomenon in the PSCs with and without Li+ would be different. Combined with the photocurrent transition kinetics analyzed before, the hysteresis of Li+-doped devices at high scan rates resulted from easy-migrating extrinsic Li+, while the intrinsic MA+ or I− may be the source of severe hysteresis of the control devices at low scan rates. In addition, the external addition of H+ and Li+ has also been proven to be able to diffuse through the perovskite films. Therefore, it is worth mentioning that external ion migration and its effect on the properties of the whole device should be fully considered to improve the performance of the PSCs.
More recently, the hidden doping effect of the Li+ in HTL on the perovskite absorber layer has been revealed by measuring the surface potential distribution via a non-contact KPFM technique (Fig. 15g). For two different perovskite systems (MAPbI3 and FACsPbI3), the KPFM results showed that Li+ doping enhanced the average surface potential of the entire perovskite films, leading to less p-type doping or more n-type doping (Fig. 15f and h). The n-type doping contributed to the low electronegativity and easily donated valence electrons of Li+. According to the line profiles of the surface potential before and after Li+ doping, a higher GBs potential was observed in the perovskite film after Li+ doping, which resulted from the trapping of positive Li+ at the GBs. The higher potential at the GBs was expected to induce downward band bending around the perovskite GBs, thus reducing non-radiative recombination by attracting photogenerated electrons and repelling the holes. The accumulation of Li+ at the GBs also successfully eliminated deep-level defects by chemical passivation. In general, extrinsic Li+ from the HTL migrated into the perovskite absorber layer and improved the corresponding electrical properties. This work pointed out the remarkable differences of the perovskite films in the original state and in the operational device caused by some easily overlooked factors. Such a deep understanding of the hidden doping effect of the Li+ in HTL on the perovskite absorber layer would deepen the understanding of the fundamental work mechanism of PSCs and boost the design of high-performance and high-stability photovoltaics.
In summary, the appropriate doping of alkali metal Li+ serving as the interstitial dopants could up-shift the Fermi energy and form n-type doping, leading to weakened electron–phonon coupling and inhibition of the related trap states in perovskite crystals by creating free electrons. However, as the alkali metal cation with the smallest ionic radius, Li+ is easy to migrate across the different layers in the PSCs due to the low migration barrier, which leads to the fact that Li+ doping becomes a double-edged sword of photovoltaic devices. The diffusion of doped Li+ in HTL affected both the ETL/perovskite interface and the bulk perovskite absorber layer. In a positive way, the accumulation of Li+ at the interface facilitates carrier transport and promotes the optimization of energy band alignment, and Li+ accumulated at the GBs successfully eliminates deep-level defects by chemical passivation. Negatively, excessive external Li+ movement under bias caused severe hysteresis in the PSCs at a high scanning rate. Therefore, how to treat the influence of alkali metal Li+ doping on perovskite materials dialectically and to extract its essence and discard its dross is crucial to further advance perovskite technology for various applications.

Since the recent development of perovskite materials and their application in photovoltaics, their ever-increasing efficiency, simple preparation process, and low raw materials cost demonstrates that PSCs are environmentally attractive and economically viable alternatives to commercial photovoltaic devices. Tracking the evolution and the major milestones in the field of PSCs over the past decade, it can be witnessed that alkali metal doping has played a pivotal role in the crystal structure as well as the intrinsic properties of hybrid perovskites, enabling the unique positioning of the correlated doping strategy in the development history of PSCs. To some extent, the development history of alkali metal doping strategy gives expression to the evolution process of perovskite materials and related optoelectronic devices.

Herein, the recent progress regarding the strategy of introducing alkali metal cations (Cs+, Rb+, K+, Na+, Li+) into halide perovskite materials has been thoroughly discussed. The reported results on whether alkali metal cations exist in the A-site/interstitial site within the crystal lattice or at the surface/grain boundary outside the crystal lattice have been systematically analyzed and summarized, hoping to solve the universally acknowledged problem of “how to accurately determine the distribution location of alkali metal cations”. Meanwhile, the advanced characterization techniques employed to identify the elemental distribution in perovskite thin films as well as their corresponding detection mechanism and special features have been highlighted in Table 1. In addition, the location-dependent function resulting from alkali metal doping has been intensely focused and comprehensively assessed. As a result, the versatile and special effects induced by doping on perovskite materials are mainly reflected in five aspects, including crystal structure stabilization, crystallization process manipulation, defect passivation, energy band optimization, and ion migration inhibition. More intuitively, the involved alkali metal doping strategies have been reclassified according to the different function and the detail information discussed before has been summarized, providing a horizontal comparison among different alkali metal doping strategies (Table 2). In a word, the incorporated alkali metal cations with gradient size separately occupy different positions in the perovskite crystals and possess the ability to drastically modify the properties of perovskite materials, allowing the realization of high-performance PSCs with record efficiency and stability.
Function
Dopant
Perovskite
Location
Mechanism

V
OC


J
SC

FF
PCE
Stability
Ref.
Crystal structure stabilization
CsI
FA0.9Cs0.1PbI3
A-site
Enhancing the interaction between FA+ and I− due to the contraction of the cubo-octahedral volume
1.06
23.5
0.66
16.5
35% PCE after 19 h (white light illumination)

80

CsI
FA0.85Cs0.15PbI3
A-site
Balancing the Goldschmidt tolerance factor through solid-state alloying
1.06
20.39
0.74
16.1
Almost PCE after 15 days of storage (15% RH)

83

CsI
FA0.8Cs0.2PbI2.84Br0.16
A-site
Leading to entropic gains and reducing the internal energy input required for the formation of the α-phase
1.07
21.9
0.74
17.35
No performance decrease within 1000 h (dark ambient conditions)

84

CsI
Csx(FA0.83MA0.17)1−xPbI2.49Br0.51
A-site
Inhibiting the yellow phase and promoting the formation of the black photoactive phase
1.147
23.5
0.78
21.17
Relatively stable for at least 250 h (operational conditions)

15

CsI
FA0.83Cs0.17PbI1.8Br1.2
A-site
Bringing lattice contraction along with an increase in the octahedral tilting angles
1.2
19.4
0.75
17.1
—

13

RbI
(CsFAMA)Pb(IBr)3
—
Enforcing the crystallization started with the photoactive perovskite phase
1.18
22.7
0.81
21.6
95% PCE after 500 h at 85 °C (illumination in N2)

44

RbI
(FAMA)Pb(IBr)3
—
Suppressing the yellow non-perovskite phase and re-distributing the PbI2 phase
1.123
22.86
0.69
17.68
20% PCE after 10 h (25 °C, RH = 40–50%)

117

RbI
FAPbI3
A-site
Tuning the tolerance factor and favoring the conversion from the hexagonal yellow phase to the trigonal black phase
1.07
23.93
0.67
17.16
97% PCE after 1000 h (average RH = 55% and 25 °C)

38

RbI
Cs0.05(MA0.03FA0.97)0.95Pb(I0.97Br0.03)3
—
Reducing the growth of PbI2 and preventing the generation of unwanted halogen aggregations
1.10
23.8
0.78
20.6
Encapsulated devices keep 92% PCE after 1000 h (85 °C/85% RH in dark)

116

RbI
(CsFAMA)Pb(IBr)3
—
Decreasing unreacted PbI2 phase in the final film
—
—
—
—
—

118

RbI
Rbx(FA0.83MA0.17)Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3
A-site
Suppressing the yellow-phase and excess PbI2 phase in the films
1.17
23.1
0.75
20.3
—

92

RbI
FAPbI3
A-site
Tightening the crystal lattice and promoting the black phase
1.03
23.8
0.65
16.2
90% PCE in ambient air for 4 weeks (dark)

132

RbI
Cs1−xRbxPbI2Br
A-site
Tuning the tolerance factor and contributing to a contraction of the perovskite crystal
1.32
16.25
0.80
17.16
90% PCE of the initial efficiency for 120 h (65 °C thermal stress)

111

RbI
Cs1−xRbxPbI2Br
A-site
Making the stable black phase by the increase in the configurational entropy
—
—
—
—
—

110

KI
Cs0.925K0.074PbI2Br
A-site
Shrinking the lead iodine octahedron, thereby enhancing the phase stability
1.16
11.6
0.73
10.0
—

162

Crystallization process manipulation
CsI
Csx(FA0.83MA0.17)1−xPbI2.49Br0.51
A-site
Bypassing the formation of the intermediate phases by promoting the formation of the α-phase and extending the annealing window
1.14
22.81
0.76
19.79
—

99

CsI
(Cs0.10FA0.78MA0.12)1−xPbI2.49Br0.51
A-site
Acting as nuclei to facilitate perovskite crystallization
1.13
24.1
0.81
21.7
60% of initial PCE after 140 h operation (one sun illumination)

100

CsCl
Csx(MA0.03FA0.97)1−xPb(I0.97Br0.03)3
A-site
Slowing down the nucleation process when reacting with FAI
1.12
24.3
0.81
22.1
Over 90% of initial PCE after 4000 min (MPP under one sun illumination)

102

CsBr
Cs0.05(MA0.14FA0.81Pb)(I0.85Br0.15)3
A-site
Inducing the perovskite film crystallization process as Br-rich seeds
1.12
24.2
0.80
21.6
Over 80% of initial PCE after 500 h tracking (MPP under 1 sun illumination)

104

CsI
Cs0.05(MA0.15FA0.85)0.95Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3
A-site
Adjusting the crystal stacking mode of certain crystallographic planes
1.154
21.93
0.77
18.24
—

107

CsI
(CsFABA)Pb(IBr)3
A-site
Strengthening the bonding between BA+ and perovskites and promoting the formation of highly oriented grains
1.16
24.66
0.78
22.5
95% initial efficiency after exposure to air for 2 months without any encapsulation

106

CsI
FA0.8MA0.2Sn0.5Pb0.5I3
A-site
Resulting in a volumetric growth and improved crystallinity of the perovskites
0.78
32.5
0.72
18.2
92% of initial power output after two hour under one sun illumination

108

RbI
FA0.87MA0.13PbI2.5Br0.5
—
Promoting the spontaneous formation of the desired α-phase by suppressing the solvate phase
—
—
—
20.1
—

120

RbI
(PEA)2(MA)4Pb5I16
—
Acting as the crystal growth inhibitor by retarding the absorption and diffusion of the constituent ions
1.22
15.77
0.76
14.6
—

122

KI
Cs0.05(FA0.85MA0.15)0.95Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3
—
Enhancing the grain size
1.132
22.95
0.79
20.56
No decrease in the PCE over 1000 h (ambient air)

159

KI
MAPbI3
Interstitial site
Enlarging the grain size
1.111
23.33
0.74
19.27
—

49

KCl
MAPbI3
—
Chelating with Pb2+ ions and promoting homogeneous nucleation
1.04
19.42
0.74
15.08
83.5% initial PCE over 50 days (dark)

40

KOH
Cs0.05(FA0.85MA0.15)0.95Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3
—
Facilitating the growth of the perovskite grains
1.148
22.60
0.79
20.50
No more than 5% decrease in the PCE after 30 days (dark)

145

KI
BA2MA3Pb4I13
Interstitial site
Acting as nucleation sites in the early stage of spin-coating and leading to direct conversion to vertically-oriented 2D perovskite phase
1.08
17.1
0.62
11.3
90% of the initial efficiency for 1000 h (30–50% RH in dark)

52

KI
BA2MA3Pb4I13
—
Promoting 2D crystals are enriched at both the top and the bottom interfaces
1.18
18.67
0.74
16.48
89% of initial efficiency for 34 days (with 55–60 RH%) and 91.6% of the initial efficiency for 34 days (85 °C)

158

NaI(AS)
MAPbI3
GBs and interface
Inducing the process of crystallization and nucleation
1.10
21.16
0.78
18.16
—

58

NaI
MAPbI3
GBs and interface
Regulating the crystal growth and structure
1.14
22.65
0.79
20.47
—

59

LiI, Li-TFSI
MAPbI3
—
Enlarging the grain size and reducing the PbI2 residue
1.10
23.36
0.66
17.01
60% decrease in the PCE after 70 days (air conditions)

171

Surfamic acid sodium
CsPbIBr2
Interface
Controlling the crystallization behaviour and optimizing morphology
1.21
12.27
0.71
10.57
70% of the initial efficiency after 216 days (RH of 35–37%)

169

LiI–LiBr
MAPbI3
A-site or interstitial site
Enhancing the crystallization and increasing the crystal size
0.97
20.1
0.73
14.2
—

61

Defect passivation
RbI
RbxM1−xAPbI3
A-site
Reducing the deep-level trap density and improving the electrical conductivity
1.02
22.8
0.81
18.8
10% PCE exposed to air in dark 25 days (RH ≈ 40%)

46

RbI
(CsFAMA)Pb(IBr)3
—
Lowering the trap-assisted charge-carrier recombination and reducing the series resistance
1.16
22.9
0.78
21.1
—

130

KI
FA0.87MA0.13Pb(I0.87Br0.13)3
GBs
Passivating the crystal boundaries and decreasing the trap states via the formation of the 2D K2PbI4 phase
1.15
23.5
0.75
20.4
90% initial efficiency after 1000 h (30 RH% at RT)

51

KI
Cs0.05FA0.79MA0.16Pb(I0.6Br0.4)3
GBs and interstitial site
Reducing the trap density located at the interstitials and GBs
1.26
19.19
0.76
18.38
94% of initial PCE after 2000 h (ambient atmosphere with 20 RH%)

142

KI
Cs0.05(FA0.85MA0.15)0.95Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3
GBs and interface
Acting as a stabilizer of photo-activated mobile halide ions and an inhibitor of non-radiative defects via the formation of a KBr compound
1.135
22.88
0.78
20.25
—

141

KI
Cs0.06MA0.15FA0.79Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3
GBs and interface
Manage halides and vacancies through the immobilization of unwanted excess halides
1.19
23.09
0.79
21.7
—

39

KI
(Cs0.06FA0.79MA0.15)Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3
GBs and interface
Decorating the surfaces and GBs with the KBr layers
1.17
23.2
0.79
21.5
Over 80% of the initial performance after 300 h (continuous operation at MPP)

16

NaCl
MAPbI3
GBs
Substituting the MA+ vacancies and reducing the shallow trap states
1.06
24.4
0.78
20.2
—

60

Sodium p-toluenesulfonate
Cs0.05MA0.12FA0.83PbI2.55Br0.45
—
Reducing the electron trap states by electrostatic interaction
1.139
23.52
0.74
20.05
89% PCE after 950 h (25 °C with 40–70 RH%)

167

Sodium dodecylbenzene sulfonate
MAPbI3
GBs and interface
Passivating under-coordinated Pb2+ and improving the resistance of perovskites against moisture
1.12
23.23
0.74
19.42
80% of the initial average PCE after 2112 h of storage under ambient conditions

166

LiI
MAPbI3
Interstitial
Weakening the electron–phonon coupling and acting as the donor in perovskites
—
—
—
—
—

172

Li-TFSI
MAPbI3
GBs
Inducing more n-type doping and eliminating deep-level defects by chemical passivation
1.091
22.02
0.81
19.46
≈90% initial PCE after 500 h (at RT at a RH of 5–10%)

179

Energy band optimization
KI
FA0.85MA0.15Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3
—
Minimizing the electron transfer barrier at the interface between ETL and the perovskite
1.167
22.99
0.76
20.32
More than 90% of its initial performance after 888 h (dark)

48

KI
MA0.17FA0.83PbI2.5Br0.5
Interstitial site
Leading to improved energy alignment between the perovskite and ETL
1.09
21.5
0.71
16.73
90% PCE retention after 21 days (air conditions)

50

heparin potassium
Cs0.05FA0.85MA0.10Pb(I0.97Br0.03)3
—
Regulating the arrangement of SnO2 nanocrystals and inducing vertically-aligned crystal growth of the perovskites
1.163
24.97
0.79
23.06
97% of initial PCE after 1000 h operation at their MPP under 1 sun illumination

144

NaCl
MA1−yFAyPbI3−xClx
Interface
Passivating the interface between the perovskite and ETL
1.05
23.8
0.73
18.3
79% PCE after 168 h (air conditions)

168

C6H5SO3Na
MA0.8FA0.2PbI3−xClx
Interface
Improving hole extraction capacity, suppressing charge recombination, and increasing the perovskite crystal quality
1.08
21.57
0.83
19.41
Over 90% of the initial PCE after 20 days storage in ambient conditions

164

LiI
MAPbI3
Interstitial site
Up-shifting the Fermi energy and forming n-type doping
1.08
22.8
0.73
18.1
—

170

Li-TFSI
MAPbI3
Interface
Inducing partial reduction of Ti4+ to Ti3+ with the ETL and exhibiting n-doping
1.114
23.0
0.74
19.3
—

176

Li-TFSI
MAPbI3
Interface
Tuning the carrier-extraction properties of ETL by diffusion across the entire perovskite film
1.09
20.6
0.75
17.0
—

62

Ion migration inhibition
CsI
FA0.75Cs0.25PbI2.4Br0.6
A-site
Homogenizing the halide distribution
1.217
20.18
0.83
20.32
90% of the initial PCE after 250 h (continuous operation at MPP)

14

RbI
FA0.87MA0.13PbI2.5Br0.5
—
Inducing halide distribution homogenization
—
—
—
20.1
—

120

RbI
Cs0.11FA0.74MA0.15PbI1.8Br1.2
Interstitial site
Blocking up I− diffusion pathways via interstitial occupancy
—
—
—
—
—

45

KI
(FAPbI3)0.875(CsPbBr3)0.125
Interstitial site
Immobilizing iodide vacancy by preventing the formation of Frenkel defects
—
—
—
—
—

35

KI
Cs0.11FA0.74MA0.15PbI2.249Br0.51
Interstitial site
Increasing ion migration barrier in the lattice
—
—
—
19.26
—

45

KI
FA0.8Cs0.2Pb(I0.7Br0.3)3
—
Suppressing photoinduced phase segregation and weakening the halide migration
1.185
19.6
0.79
18.3
98% of the initial efficiency after 400 h under 100 mW cm−2 white light illumination in nitrogen

143

NaF
(Cs0.05FA0.54MA0.41)Pb(I0.98Br0.02)3
Interface
Suppressing the diffusion of halide ions by increasing the ionic charge on the nearby iodide ions
1.13
24.23
0.80
21.92
90% of the original PCE after 1000 h (MPP operation conditions)

55


The tremendous role that alkali metal doping strategies have played in the recent advances in the performance and stability of perovskite photovoltaics is undeniable. Although the optimized roles of alkali metal doping on perovskite materials have been systematically studied, there is still a lack of explicit research on the detailed function mechanisms behind these advantageous effects. Besides, a complete understanding of accurate distribution location, especially for Rb+ and K+, has yet to be totally resolved, in part due to the overall complexity of the material systems in question, the sensitivity of perovskite structure to the electron beam, and the limited experimental characterization techniques present. Moving forward, there is still a great space to design and develop doped metal halide perovskites if the unclear issues mentioned before can be ascertained. Herein, we briefly propose a few research directions from different perspectives, which may serve as a potential toolbox for future exploration.

Given the sensitivity of perovskite materials, employing advanced low-damage characterization techniques (e.g., synchrotron-based nano-X-ray fluorescence, low-dose electron microscopy, and cryo-electron microscopy) combined with theoretical calculations based on optimized methods (e.g. ab initio, semi-empirical, and molecular mechanics) to trace the doping elements and analyze the crystal structure is expected to make a breakthrough on the unclear question regarding the cations’ distribution location. If researchers can answer the question “what are the exact locations of doping cations”, then researchers can know “how to give full play to the potential of doping strategies”. It should be noted that the occupied location is influenced by the doping concentration, the way of doping, and the perovskite material system. Therefore, the doping proportion of alkali metal cations as well as perovskite compositions needs to be further comprehensively considered to investigate the resulting alloying, doping, or passivation capabilities.
Alkali metal doping has been regarded as an effective approach to achieve the chemical modulation of defects but an in-depth understanding of the passivation mechanisms is still lacking. For the further development of defect passivation, the advantageous effect of alkali metal doping on inhibiting the defects needs to be identified and quantified by means of various approaches. More researches should be implemented to pin-point as to what kind of defects present are passivated, to quantify the concentration of reduced defects, and to elucidate the trap depth resulting from the defects. A better understanding of the passivation mechanism is conducive for guiding the design of multiple doping strategies and produce synergetic passivation systems.
It has been demonstrated that alkali metal doping strategies have played a positive role in the regulation of perovskite film growth but there is still a lack of detailed information about the specific stage that was modulated in the crystallization process. Therefore, monitoring the complicated perovskite crystal formation pathway by means of the emerging in situ synchrotron-based characterization techniques (GIWAXS, Grazing-Incidence Small-Angle X-ray Scattering, GIXRD, etc.), in situ electrical/optical methods (UV-vis, PL, etc.), and in situ probe technologies (KPFM, c-AFM, etc.) will offer the possibility to deeply excavate and investigate the corresponding missing information, which may be a possible avenue to realize the precise control of the kinetics of perovskite nucleation and growth. Continuing to manipulate the crystallization pathway of perovskite thin films could facilitate the improvement of both the efficiency and operational stability of PSCs.
The favourable effect of alkali metal doping on the suppression of ion migration has been proved through eliminated hysteresis behaviour and enhanced migration activation energy. However, the quantitative relationship between ion migration, charge movement, and device efficiency as well as the inhibition effect, mechanism, and potential kinetic process induced by alkali metal doping are still ambiguous. Due to the transient change in ion migration with the external environment, the reliability of many characterization methods based on steady-state bias voltage needs to be further studied. More importantly, it is of great significance to determine the activation energy of ion migration under the operational conditions for improving the stability of PSCs. Hence, future researches should focus on unveiling the quantitative relationship between electrons and ions, coupling mechanism and potential kinetic process of ion migration with the assistance of cathodoluminescence spectroscopy (CL), confocal laser scanning microscope system (CLSM), and time-resolved microwave conductivity (TRMC). It is worth mentioning that only when contemplating the ion migration issue from the system perspective by focusing on the different migration behaviour in each functional layer can we possibly find solutions to overcome the phase instabilities and operational stabilities caused by ion migration.
To fully play the potential of alkali metal cations doping strategies in the field of perovskite-based devices, the fundamental understanding on the issues discussed above including the exact locations of doped cations, the underlying mechanism of defect passivating role, the manipulated effect of alkali metal cations in crystallization, and the influence of doped cations in ion migration should be provided and improved. Beyond that, the empirical laws and methodologies obtained from the evolution process of alkali metal doping is beneficial to guide the incorporation of other metal cations such as transition metal cations (e.g., Mn2+, Cd2+, and Zn2+), main group metals (e.g., Sr2+, Al3+, and Bi3+), and rare earth metals (e.g., Ce4+, Yb3+, and Er2+), which may possess the potential ability in presenting an inclusive variety of striking properties to the perovskites. In the era of big data, more experimental researches should be incorporated with the machine learning techniques so that the high-throughput experimental data can be timely analyzed via the data-driven method to expedite the materials design process. Combining high-throughput computations, data mining, machine learning approaches, and experimental methods, researchers could rationally design multi-cation doping engineering, screen high-efficiency cascade doping methods, and give full play to the advantages of multiple cation collaborative doping strategies without trial-and-error exploration. In addition, the doping strategies may be extended to the large-scale industrial fabrication techniques such as slot-die coating, inkjet-printing, and aerosol-jet printing to obtain large-area perovskite devices with high performance. Apart from the application of photovoltaics, metal halide perovskites have aroused tremendous interest due to their promising applications in display and lighting. In the present, the alkali metal doping strategy has cut a brilliant figure in PLED and there is still a huge potential for improvement in the emission and electrical properties of perovskites. The simple doping technique can be potentially extended to other optoelectronic devices that require high-quality perovskite films with long carrier lifetime and low traps density, such as ultrafast photodetectors, single-photon sources, X-ray detectors, and low-threshold lasers. Future researches on different metal cations and various compositions will be critical to elucidate the mechanism for governing the perovskite features and ultimately design novel doped perovskite materials, and we believe that the dopants can drastically modify the original properties or even generate more exciting properties, leading to a bright future for photovoltaic and optoelectronic applications based on perovskites.

There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China (No. 2018YFA0703503 and 2016YFA0202701), Overseas Expertise Introduction Projects for Discipline Innovation (111 project, B14003), National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51991340, 51991342, 52072031, 51527802, 51702014, 51722203, 51672026), State Key Laboratory for Advanced Metals and Materials (No. 2018Z-03, 2019Z-04), Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (No. FRF-AS-17-002, FRF-TP-19-005A2, and FRF-TP-20-008A3), and the Natural Science Foundation of Beijing Municipality (No. Z180011).


† These authors contribute equally: Ammarah Kausar, Abdul Sattar and Chenzhe Xu.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021