 DOI: 10.1039/C3PY21113D
(Paper)
Polym. Chem., 2013, 4, 2480-2488

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Daijun
Zha
,

Lie
Chen
,

Feiyan
Wu
,

Hongming
Wang
 and 

Yiwang
Chen
*

Institute of Polymers/Department of Chemistry, Nanchang University, 999 Xuefu Avenue, Nanchang 330031, China. E-mail: ywchen@ncu.edu.cn; Fax: +86 791 83969561; Tel: +86 791 83969562

Jiangxi Provincial Key Laboratory of New Energy Chemistry, Nanchang University, 999 Xuefu Avenue, Nanchang 330031, China

Received
17th December 2012
, Accepted 5th February 2013
First published on 5th February 2013
Two novel conjugated copolymers PTBDTCBT and PDTSCBT are prepared by alternating copolymerzation of N-alkyl-carbazole[3,4-c:5,6-c]bis[1,2,5]thiadiazole (CBT) with alkylthienyl benzodithiophene (TBDT) and dithenosilole (DTS), respectively. The energy levels and molecular geometry of all of the CBT-based polymers are compared by theoretical calculation and experimental observation. It has been found that the band gap and energy levels of all of the CBT-based polymers are well modulated by various building blocks, and the molecular geometry of polymers varies with the block structures as well. Among these CBT-based polymers, PDTSCBT shows the lowest band gap (1.53 eV), which matches the solar flux well, but the low degree of crystallinity and absence of preferential alignment of the π–π stacking result in a relative low PCE of 1.52%. However, its 2-D structure endows PTBDTCBT with favorable molecular packing to achieve the PCE of 1.71% under illumination (AM 1.5G 100 mW cm−2) without considerable optimization, although its band gap is larger than PDTSCBT. These results indicate that a good balance between energy levels and molecular microstructure arrangement is crucial for the performance improvement of photovoltaic with CBT-based polymers.

In the past several decades, polymer solar cells (PSCs) have attracted intensive attention due to their potential value in the green energy market. Although the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of PSCs has lagged behind the conventional silicon-based inorganic photovoltaics until now, those sufficient advantages of low cost, light weight, ease of processing and mechanical flexibility tempt people to exploit it anyway. The emergence of the bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) concept has improved the PCEs to 5–6% in past years, and has been proven to be the most successful device structure for PSCs so far. Especially in the past two years, due to the exciting advances in the synthesis of novel low-band-gap polymers, PCEs over 7% have been widely reported, even PCEs of 8–9% have been published recently. The optimization of device structure or other morphology control advanced the development of PCEs, but the main driving force for the leap is attributed to the new excellent polymer materials which determine the band gap and energy levels, etc. Conjugated polymer is the crucial component in the active layers. To be an effective donor material in BHJ solar cells, a conjugated polymer should have (i) a narrow band gap, for matching the high photon flux region of the solar spectrum to ensure enough light-harvesting, which depends both on the absorption range and extinction coefficient; (ii) suitable energy levels, that is, a sufficient high LUMO level for efficient charge transfer to the acceptor materials (usually fullerene derivatives) and a relatively deep HOMO energy level for high open circuit voltage and stability; (iii) an optimal molecular structure for efficient hole transport. All these properties influence the performance of the photovoltaic devices, reflected in the short circuit current (Jsc), the open circuit voltage (Voc) and the fill factor (FF). Fortunately, the synthetic versatility of organic chemistry allows the optimization of low-band-gap polymers for new perfect materials to further improve the device performance. Therefore, tremendous efforts have been devoted to the molecular design for tuning the properties of active layer materials.

In the area of molecular design, one successful way to obtain effective polymers with low-band-gaps is to build a donor–acceptor (D–A) alternating structure, verified by many successful examples in the literature, such as the outstanding representatives PBDTDTffBT, and PDTSTPD. Another effective way to reduce the band gap is to introduce conjugating components with strong quinoid properties, such as the famous polymer PBDTTT. Some other new polymers, like DPP-based polymers, are designed to modify the molecular structure to improve charge/hole transport. Through these ways, the properties of polymers can be fine-tuned as we wish. Among these reported low-band-gap polymers, poly[N-9′′-hepta-decanyl-2,7-carbazole-alt-5,5-(4′,7′-di-2-thienyl-2′,1′,3′-benzothiadiazole)] (PCDTBT) is the pioneering and the most important D–A alternating polymer to achieve high PCE of 6.1% in 2009, where benzothiadiazole (BT) is used as the acceptor unit. Since then BT has been heavily investigated and even been modified to form several associated structures successively, see Scheme 1. Due to the high planarity, NT based on naphthalene reaches the highest PCE. Inspired by the excellence of PCDTBT and diverse reform of BT, a new building block N-alkyl-carbazole[3,4-c:5,6-c]bis[1,2,5]thiadiazole (CBT) where two 1,2,5-thiadiazole rings are fixed on carbazole in 3-, 4-, 5- and 6- positions symmetrically has been designed in our group. It is expected to adjust the molecular energy levels and conformation simultaneously, in particular, the large coplanar fused ring is favorable for a deep-lying HOMO level and effective charge/hole transport. In our previous work, it has been observed that the energy levels of CBT were controlled by the electron withdrawing segment of thiadiazole and the donating ability of the N atom through intramolecular charge transfer. Furthermore, both lamellar ordering and inter-chain π–π stacking were involved in copolymers PCBTT and PBDTCBT due to the high planarity of large fuse rings.
To further investigate the energy level and molecular geometry modulation of the CBT-based conjugated polymers, herein, the two most promising fused ring building blocks alkylthienyl benzodithiophene (TBDT) and dithienosilole (DTS) are chosen to copolymerize with CBT respectively, to afford two novel low band gap alternating copolymers PTBDTCBT and PDSTCBT (Scheme 2). TBDT is an 2-D conjugated structure developed by Hou's group, well-known for its broad absorption, low-lying HOMO level and high hole mobility.DTS has been proposed as an electron-rich unit for constructing low-band-gap polymers, meanwhile displaying excellent solubility and high hole mobility in copolymers containing DTS units. The energy levels and molecular geometry differences are compared between the new copolymers and previously synthesized CBT-based polymers PCBT, PCBTT and PBDTCBT, see Scheme 2, and the effects of energy level and structure modulation on the photovoltaic devices based on these copolymers are also investigated.

The chemical structures and synthetic process for the polymers PTBDTCBT and PDTSCBT are revealed in Scheme 3. The monomer CBT is prepared according to our previous work, and the copolymers PTBDTCBT and PDSTCBT are synthesized via Still cross-coupling polymerization using Pd(PPh3)4 catalyst. The polymer is end-capped with bromobenzene and phenylboronic acid, and branched alkyl chains are selected to enhance the solubility of the resulting polymers.

The resulting polymers after Soxhlet extraction can dissolve in organic solvents, such as chloroform, chlorobenzene and o-dichlorobenzene, and the solubility of the PDTSCBT is better than PTBDTCBT, which is consistent with many other reported polymers containing DTS. The molecular weight is determined by GPC in chloroform at 30 °C using polystyrene as a standard and the thermal properties are determined by TGA. The corresponding data are shown in Table 1. The number-average molecular weight (Mn) of PTBDTCBT and PDTSCBT is 18.9 and 29.3 kg mol−1 respectively, with polydispersity indices (PDIs) of 2.11 and 1.78. Seen from the curve plots of thermal analysis in Fig. 1, the decomposition temperature corresponding to 5% weight loss (Td) of PDTSCBT is 420 °C, displaying a very high thermal stability as a result of the rigid fused-ring structure, which is beneficial for photovoltaic applications. And the Td of PTBDTCBT is much higher than the previous analogue PBDTCBT and even reaches up to 439 °C, this is because the incorporation of alkylthienyl side chains is helpful to improve polymer thermal stability. There are neither endothermic nor exothermic processes observed in the range of 30–200 °C for both of them, shown in Fig. S3.
Polymer

M
n
 (kg mol−1)
PDI

T
d
 (°C)

a Determined by GPC in chloroform at 30 °C using polystyrene as standard.
b The decomposition temperature corresponding to a 5% weight loss determined by TGA at a heating rate of 10 °C min−1.


PTBDTCBT

18.9
2.11
439

PDTSCBT

29.3
1.78
420
The optical properties of the polymers are investigated by UV-vis absorption spectroscopy both in solution and as-cast thin films. Seen from Fig. 2, two strong absorption bands of PTBDTCBT are observed at 352 and 603 nm in chloroform solution (10−6 M). Different from PTBDTCBT, PDTSCBT solution shows two strong peaks at much longer wavelengths, 387 and 690 nm. The peak around 352–400 nm can be assigned to π–π* transition whereas the band around 600–700 nm results from intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) between donor and acceptor moieties, which means that the charge transfer in PDTSCBT is much affluent than PTBDTCBT. After spin-coating from the chlorobenzene solution, the maximum absorption band (λmax) of PTBDTCBT red-shifts about 10 nm, indicating a stronger molecular aggregation in the solid state. For the PDTSCBT, the λmax shifts from 689 nm in solution to 642 nm in film, however, the absorption edge is notably red-shifted about 50 nm. It can be deduced that the crystallinity is enhanced and the conjugation is strengthened in the solid state. Relevant data are summarized in Table 2.
Polymer
Absorption, λmax (nm)

E
HOMO (eV)

E
LUMO (eV)

λ
edge (nm)
Solution
Film

PDTSCBT

387, 689
356, 642
−5.20
−3.67
812

PTBDTCBT

352, 603
352, 613
−5.38
−3.55
677

PBDTCBT

364, 592
360, 592
−5.41
−3.62
663

PCBTT

352, 546
359, 601
−5.30
−3.65
752

PCBT

349, 422
361, 525
—
—
575
Comparing the polymers PTBDTCBT and PDTSCBT with previously synthesized CBT-based polymers PCBT, PCBTT and PBDTCBT, the difference in their absorption is distinct, as depicted in Fig. 3. From the absorption plots of films we can see that all of the polymers exhibit two absorption bands in the region 300–900 nm. Among these CBT-based polymers, homopolymer PCBT shows the shortest λmax locating at 525 nm, indicating the weakest ability for ICT. After copolymerizing with thiophene as π-bridge, the λmax of PCBTT red-shifts to ∼600 nm with a shoulder at 660 nm, and the absorption band even broadens to 752 nm, due to the enhanced electron transfer resulting from quinoid thiophene component. Upon further incorporation of BDT monomer as the donor block, the spectrum of PBDTCBT becomes narrower with the λmax emerging at ∼592 nm. The red-shift tendency gets more obvious for the new copolymers with the 2D-molecular TBDT and powerful donor block DTS. Exceptionally, the absorption of PDTSCBT has been fine-tuned to the range of 450–850 nm and exhibits the λmax absorption at ∼613 nm. The absorption edge shifts from 575 nm in PCBT to 812 nm in PDTSCBT, reflecting the narrowing of the optical band-gap in sequence, as shown in Table 2. These results suggest that the absorption of the polymers can be readily controlled to match the solar flux well by deliberately tailoring the structures of these CBT-based polymers.
Density functional theory (DFT) computation was also performed to give insight into the electronic structures and optical properties of the monomers and related polymers. Molecular simulation is carried out at the DFT B3LYP/6-31G(**) level with the Gaussian 09 package, and the monomer calculation is revealed in Fig. 4, the LUMO level of CBT (−2.12 eV) is the lowest one among all of the monomers, indicating that CBT acts as an acceptor in the copolymers due to the electron withdrawing segment of thiadiazole. DTS also has a low-lying HOMO level, 0.14 eV lower than TBDT, suggesting strong electron donating properties.
Molecular simulation of the polymers is carried out with one repeating unit (n = 1) as a representative molecule, shown in Fig. 5. As one of the important characters in molecular architecture impacting on conjugation, the energy-minimized dihedral angle between the planes of the donor and acceptor segment in each repeating unit is in the range of 1–25°. The biggest backbone torsion in homopolymer PCBT among these copolymers and the lack of a strong donor block account for the largest band gap and the weakest absorption in the red region. Insertion of thiophene as a π-bridge enables the dihedral angle decrease to 11.8°, and both HOMO and LUMO of PCBTT are delocalized along the entire backbone, revealing the enhanced conjugation between CBT and thiophene unit. The planar BDT unit further greatly decrease the dihedral angle to 1.3°, while the bulky 2-D BDT make this angle increase to 11.1°, suggesting a slight twist caused by the thiophene side chain. The HOMO of PBDTCBT and PTBDTCBT is completely localized on the whole molecules while the LUMO of them is principally localized on CBT segment. It should be noted that incorporation of the BDT and TBDT big fused ring can effectively reduce the band gap of the polymer, and simultaneously keep a low-lying HOMO level to meet the requirements for open circuit voltage and stability. The LUMO of PDTSCBT remains to some extent on the DTS part with the calculated bandgap decrease to 2.67 eV, thanks to the strong electron donating properties of DTS.
Electrochemical cyclic voltammetry (CV) is performed to evaluate molecular energy levels of polymers. Fig. 6 shows the CV plots of PTBDTCBT and PDTSCBT films measured under identical conditions. The onset points of p-doping process of PTBDTCBT and PDTSCBT are at 0.98 V and 0.80 V, respectively, corresponding to a HOMO level of −5.38 eV and −5.20 eV. Since it is very hard to get a sharp n-doping signal for these two polymers, the LUMO levels of the polymers are calculated by “LUMO = HOMO + Eoptg”, and the related data for energy potential presented in Table 2 are correlate well with values from molecular simulation. Both PTBDTCBT and PBDTCBT show a similar value of the HOMO level, which can be deduced that the 2-D conjugated structure of TBDT has nearly no negative effect on the Voc of PSCs, because the Voc of bulk heterojunction PSCs is directly proportional to the offset between the HOMO level of the donor and LUMO level of the acceptor. The strong donor DTS endows PDTSCBT with the narrowest band gap of 1.53 eV while its HOMO level remains low-lying.
The solid-state molecular organization of the polymers is investigated by X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis on thin films drop-cast from o-dichlorobenzene solution onto a glass substrate. The annealed films are thermally processed at 140 °C for 8 minutes and then dried in nitrogen atmosphere for 2 h. The XRD spectra of the polymers are shown in Fig. 7. The polymer PTBDTCBT shows two reflection peaks, a sharp one at the low angle 2θ = 4.48° and another one at the high angle 2θ = 24.00° (Fig. 7a), corresponding to a lamellar ordering with d-spacing of 19.69 nm and a π-stacking with d-spacing of 3.70 nm, respectively. As for the PDTSCBT, only one low-intensity reflection peak is observed at 2θ = 5.19° with d-spacing of 17.00 nm (Fig. 7b), and no obvious π-stacking diffraction peak arises at high angle, due to the less planar structure of DTS with two bulky branched hydrocarbon chains than that of TBDT, which hinder the conjugated backbone from packing into fact-to-face fashion. Similar to most conjugated polymers, thermal annealing leads to a more ordered molecular arrangement with the enhanced reflection peak in polymer PDTSCBT. On the contrary, the crystallinity is partly destroyed in PTBDTCBT film after thermal treatment, confirmed by the depressed intensity of the peak at the low angle.
The photovoltaic performance of the present polymers is investigated by fabricating bulk heterojunction solar cells with a general device structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/polymer:PC61BM/LiF/Al. Chlorobenzene (CB) or o-dichlorobenzene (DCB) is chosen as the processing solvent due to their good solvent properties and low evaporation rates, and the weight ratios of copolymer and PC61BM are varied to balance the absorbance and the charge transporting network of the photoactive layer. Common procedures like spinning rates (film thickness) and annealing are investigated. Fig. 8 shows the current–voltage curves (I–V curves) of the optimization process of PTBDTCBT and PDTSCBT based devices under illumination (AM 1.5G 100 mW cm−2). The PSC based on PTBDTCBT demonstrates a best PCE of 1.71% with a Jsc of 7.22 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.74 V and a low FF of 31% under 1:1 polymer/PC61BM weight ratio without thermal annealing. The thermal annealing is found to be detrimental to the device performance, which is in good agreement with the depressed crystallinity after annealing obtained from XRD analysis. The optimal PCE of the PDTSCBT:PC61BM (1:1)-based device is 1.52% with a Jsc of 5.71 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.63 V and a FF of 43% with thermal annealing. Compared with the PTBDTCBT, PDTSCBT shows worse performance, even if it has an amazing absorption band. Thus, the performance difference between PTBDTCBT and PDTSCBT should be related to the difference of molecular packing in the polymer, which is a critical factor for device efficiency. The charge transportation in materials mainly relies on the exciton hopping in the direction of intra-chain or inter-chain, emphasizing the orderly arrangement to improving macroscopic charge transport properties. The low degree of crystallinity and absence of preferential alignment of the π–π stacking in PDTSCBT induce adverse impact on mobility, subsequently result in the low PCE. Moreover, the relatively low Voc is also one of the reasons for the unsatisfactory PCE. It can be seen that the performance of the polymer device depends on the combined effects of many factors as mentioned above, therefore, only when balancing these factors, such as suitable energy level and good molecular microstructure arrangement, could the improvement in power conversion efficiency be fully realized.
The related performance data for all CBT-based polymers is shown in Table 3, excluding homopolymer PCBT for its low solubility. The device performance of CBT-based polymers strongly depends on the copolymerization monomers, evidence for which is provided by the PCE value varying from 0.48% for PCBTT to 2.0% for PBDTCBT. In comparison with PBDTCBT, the introduction of 2-D structure TBDT in polymer PTBDTCBT brings about a dramatic improvement in Jsc for its broaden absorption, while maintain the Voc nearly the same value. PDTSCBT shows the lowest Voc due to its highest HOMO level. However, FF of PTBDTCBT is extremely low, even much lower than that of PDTSCBT with less ordered packing. The low FF can be explained by the unfavorable morphology of the PTBDTCBT:PCBM blend film investigated by atomic force microscopy (AFM). From the height images of polymer/PC61BM films in Fig. 9, the surface roughness rms (root mean square roughness) is 0.43 nm for PTBDTCBT:PCBM and 0.49 nm for PDTSCBT:PCBM. Although the two kinds of polymer/PC61BM films show a similar surface roughness, in comparison with the uniform interpenetrating nanoscale morphology of PDTSCBT, the thermally annealed blend film with domain size of ∼20 nm, the PTBDTCBT:PCBM blend film exhibits many more aggregate domains and uncontinuous phases which should be the reason behind the low FF. The non-uniform large phase separation may be related to the geometry of polymer PTBDTCBT, the lateral thiophenyl decreases the polymer solubility as well as the miscibility with PC61BM, although the torsion angle in the backbone is almost the same value as that in PDTSCBT. It should be pointed out that the PTBDTCBT:PCBM film is just obtained by spinning-coating on the substrate without any optimization, because thermal annealing is not favorable for molecular stacking. So, we believe that further device engineering such as solvent annealing or use of additives can be expected to optimize the morphology of PTBDTCBT blend film and improve the PCE, which has been demonstrated in the literature.
Polymer
Annealing
D/A ratio

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)

a Annealing at 140 °C for 8 minutes.
b It is the average PCE.


PCBTT

yes
1:2
0.67
2.69
27
0.48

PBDTCBT

no
1:0.8
0.77
4.99
52
2.00

PTBDTCBT

no
1:1
0.74
7.22
31
1.71

PDTSCBT

yes
1:1
0.63
5.71
43
1.52


o-Phenylenediamine, n-butyl lithium, Al (99.998%), LiF (99.99%), sodium hydride, tetrakis(triphenylphosphine)palladium, bromododecane, PC61BM (99.9%) and other materials are purchased from Alfa, or Aldrich and without further purification. Other chemicals are obtained from Shanghai Reagent Co., Ltd and used as received. Indium-tin oxide (ITO) glass is purchased from Delta Technologies Limited, whereas PEDOT:PSS (Baytron PAl4083) is obtained from Bayer Inc.

The compound N-dodecyl-2,7-dibromo-dithiadiazole[3,4-b:7,8-b′]carbazole (CBT) is synthesized according to references from our group. The monomers alkylthienyl substituent benzodithiophene (TBDT) and dithienosilole (DTS) are provided by Solarmar Materials Inc.


1H NMR and 13C NMR spectra are recorded in deuterated solvents on a Bruker ADVANCE 400 NMR Spectrometer. Molecular weights of the polymers are determined using a Waters 2410 gel permeation chromatograph (GPC) with a refractive index detector in tetrahydrofuran (THF) using a calibration curve of polystyrene standards. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) is performed on a TA-600 for thermal analysis at a heating rate of 10 °C min−1 under nitrogen with a sample weight of 8–10 mg. Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) is performed on Shimadzu DSC-60. UV-vis absorption spectra are measured with Hitachi (model U-3010) UV-Vis spectrophotometer. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) is performed with a Zahner IM6e electrochemical workstation. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) study of the samples is carried out on a Bruker D8 Focus X-ray diffractometer operating at 30 kV and 20 mA with a copper target (λ = 1.54 Å) and at a scanning rate of 1° min−1. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) images are measured on a Nanoscope III A (Digital Instruments) scanning probe microscope using the tapping mode. Current–voltage (J–V) characteristics are recorded using a Keithley 2400 Source Meter under 100 mW cm−2 simulated AM 1.5 G irradiation (Sciencetech SS-0.5K Solar Simulator).


Monomers N-dodecyl-carbazole[3,4-c:5,6-c]bis[1,2,5]thiadiazole (CBT) (621 mg, 0.5 mmol) and distannylated alkylthienyl benzodithiophene (TBDT) (452 mg, 0.5 mmol) are added to 15 mL of dry toluene in a flask under argon. The reaction mixture is purged with argon for 15 minutes. The catalyst Pd(PPh3)4 (32 mg, 3%) is added quickly under a stream of argon, and then the reaction mixture is purged with argon again for 15 minutes. Subsequently, the reaction mixture is heated to reflux for 48 hours with stirring. Then phenylboronic acid (0.6 g, 5 mmol) is added and stirred at reflux for 3 h. Bromobenzene (5 mL) is then added under nitrogen, and the mixture is stirred for another 3 h. Next, the reaction mixture is cooled to ambient temperature and dropped into methanol. The polymer is precipitated and then collected by filtration. The crude polymer is then extracted subsequently with methanol, ethyl acetate, hexane and CHCl3 in a Soxhlet's extractor. The residue after extracting with CHCl3 is collected and dried under reduced pressure and to give the polymer PTBDTCBT (357 mg, 70%) as a dark brown solid. The analogue polymer PDTSCBT is obtained with the same method as for PTBDTCBT, except that monomer DTS is used instead of monomer TBDT. And the yield of the polymerization reaction is about 75%. The detailed information on the polymers (Fig. S1 and 2) is contained in the ESI.


Two new CBT-based polymers, PTBDTCBT and PDTSCBT, are synthesized via Stille coupling for implementation in BHJ polymer solar cells. The polymers exhibit good solubility in common organic solvent and excellent thermal stability. By comparing to polymers PCBT, PCBTT, PBDTCBT, the band gap and energy levels of the CBT-based polymers is well modulated along with the replacement of donor unit, displaying the band gap varied from 2.16 eV in PCBT to 1.53 eV in PDTSCBT. At the same time, the polymer geometry is also modified by these building blocks. Strong lamellar ordering and helpful π–π stacking exist in all the CBT-based polymers, except for PDTSCBT. Despite the suitable band gap of PDTSCBT, the low degree of crystallinity and absence of preferential molecular alignment induce adverse impact on PCE. In contrast, PTBDTCBT provides good absorption from the 2-D structure and favorable microstructure with π–π stacking, subsequently achieving the PCE of 1.71% under illumination (AM 1.5G 100 mW cm−2) without considerable optimization. By the molecular modulation, the device performance of CBT-based polymers is increased from 0.48 to 2.00%, however, the highest Jsc, Voc and FF emerged in different polymers. Further molecular design or device engineering should be carried out to the balance energy levels and molecular microstructure arrangement to obtain higher Jsc, Voc and FF simultaneously, for the purpose of fully realizing the power conversion efficiency improvement. It is encouraging to believe that there is still large growth space for the CBT-based polymers to be exploited by intensive investigation.


This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51273088 and 51263016).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c3py21113d
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013