 DOI: 10.1039/D1TA01038G
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 11741-11752


Jianghu
Liang
,

Zhanfei
Zhang
,

Yiting
Zheng
,

Xueyun
Wu
,

Jianli
Wang
,

Zhuang
Zhou
,

Yajuan
Yang
,

Ying
Huang
,

Zhenhua
Chen
 and 

Chun-Chao
Chen
*

School of Materials Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, P. R. China. E-mail: c3chen@sjtu.edu.cn

Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility (SSRF), Shanghai Advanced Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 201800, P. R. China

Received
3rd February 2021
, Accepted 14th April 2021
First published on 15th April 2021
Quasi two-dimensional (2D) Ruddlesden–Popper perovskites films fabricated by a solution process are composed of multiple 2D perovskite phases, and carrier transportation is limited by low-n-value 2D perovskite phases (n = 1 and n = 2). Systematic characterization shows that BA based 2D perovskites do not form low-n-value phases, while PEA and FPEA based 2D perovskites have strong n = 1, 2 signals when excited from the bottom of the perovskite films. To solve this problem, a lamellar nickel oxide substrate (lamellar-NiOx) fabricated by the hydrothermal method is employed as a hole transporting layer, forming a vertical charge transport pathway at the bottom of perovskite films, thus bypassing the charge trapping and recombination centers of the low-n-value regions of PEA and FPEA based 2D perovskites. As a result, both fill factor and open-circuit voltage are greatly enhanced for PEA and FPEA based 2D perovskite solar cells and a champion power conversion efficiency of 15.2% is achieved with a composition of FPEA2MA3Pb4I13. Furthermore, 2D perovskite films on lamellar-NiOx show enlarged grain size, improved out-of-plane orientation, and enhanced carrier transport efficiency between different n-value 2D perovskite phases. These findings suggest that lamellar-NiOx is an ideal substrate candidate to help overcome the carrier transport limitation of low-n-value 2D perovskite phases near the bottom of perovskite films.

Quasi two-dimensional (2D) perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have attracted intense attention since Mohite et al. acquired a photoelectric conversion efficiency (PCE) of 12.5% via the hot-casting method, which delivers perpendicularly oriented 2D perovskite inorganic planes. To achieve 2D perovskites, large organic cations (ionic radius >2.6 Å) are needed to incise the three-dimensional (3D) perovskite lattice, and then acted as spacer molecules between inorganic [PbI6]4− slabs. One of the most intensively studied type of 2D perovskite is the Ruddlesden–Popper perovskite (RPP), whose 2D perovskite slabs are stacked together by van der Waals forces between the large organic cations. The insulating property of bulky organic cations hinders carrier transportation in 2D perovskite films, which degrades the photovoltaic performance 2D PSCs dramatically. However, the hydrophobicity of bulky organic cations slows down the permeation process of water molecules, resulting in better moisture stability for 2D perovskites when compared with 3D perovskites. The superior moisture stability of 2D perovskites enables 2D perovskites to be a promising alternative material to 3D PSCs.

Typical RPPs take the structural formula of R2MAn−1PbnI3n+1, where R is the bulky organic cation (spacer cation) such as butylammonium (BA), phenylethylammonium (PEA), or MA is methylammonium (MA), and the n-value is equal to the number of inorganic [PbI6]4− octahedral layers sandwiched by the bulky organic cation layers. Is a 2D perovskite film composed of a single n-value 2D perovskite phase? More and more research studies show that 2D perovskite films are composed of n = 1, n = 2, and n = 3 until n = ∞ 2D perovskite “phases”, especially when the film is prepared by the hot-casting method. Specifically, low-n-value (n = 1 and n = 2) 2D perovskite phases (low-n-value phases) are aggregated at the bottom of 2D perovskite films, while the top of 2D perovskite films are enriched with high-n-value (n ≥ 3) 2D perovskite phases (high-n-value phases) or 3D-like perovskite phases (n > 7). More recent research studies point out that the inorganic planes of low-n-value phases at the film bottom tend to be parallel to the substrate, which means electrons and holes have to cross through the insulating organic layers to reach the bottom electrode. Besides, the exciton binding energies of low-n-value phases (283 meV for n = 1, 251 meV for n = 2) are much larger than those of high-n-value phases (15–40 meV for n = ∞). Strong exciton binding energy domains are undesirable for solar cells and are the reason for carrier recombination.
To solve this problem, Wang et al. reduced the amount of low-n-value phases by using additives which are less volatile and highly soluble as large organic cations. Yuan et al. eliminated the n = 1 and n = 2 phases in the 2D perovskite film by using acidic additives, such as 2-aminophenol-4-sulfonic acid. They believe that suppressing the formation of colloids is the key to suppress n = 1 and n = 2 phases. Antonietta Loi et al. eliminated n = 1 and n = 2 domains by the vacuum-assisted method, and PCE was increased from 3.6% to 14.1%. However, new problems arose in these examples, such as the introduction of impurities and the complicated fabrication process. In fact, it is quite challenging to eliminate low-n-value phases in 2D perovskite films. Thus, many researchers try to improve the charge carrier transportation efficiency of low-n-value phases directly. For example, Zhu et al. have acquired the best 2D PSCs among n = 1 series (PCE = 1.9%) with the introduction of a new spacer cation: 4-fluorophenethylammonium (FPEA). They found that the more efficient molecular stacking pattern of FPEA than that of PEA increased the out-of-plane carrier mobility of FPEA2PbI4 by 7 fold, which was the reason for the superior performance of FPEA based 2D PSCs. Other cations reported such as iso-butylammonium (iso-BA), 2-(methylthio)ethylammonium (MTEA), and 2-thiophenemethylammonium (ThMA) are also known to improve the charge transport efficiency of 2D perovskite films between the top and bottom electrodes. Solvent engineering and additive engineering have also proved useful to obtain efficient 2D perovskite films. Though the problem of carrier transportation concerning the intrinsic property of 2D perovskite films has been solved to some extent by the above mentioned methods, the improvement of carrier transport efficiency through mesoscopic device structures has been ignored for a long time.
Mesoporous substrates are known to improve the carrier collection efficiency through the enlarged contact area between the carrier transporting layer and the active layer. Since low-n-value 2D perovskites tend to attach themselves to the substrate and cause serious carrier recombination, it is reasonable to fabricate vertical structured substrates as templates for n = 1 and n = 2 2D perovskite phases to assist them to stand vertically, instead of being parallel to the substrate. Taking advantage of the electrical anisotropy of 2D perovskites—the in-plane carrier transportation is much faster than the out-of-plane carrier transportation. At least, with the help of the vertically oriented substrate, photo generated carriers do not have to cross through the insulating large organic layers to reach the bottom electrode anymore. On the other hand, an inverted device structure (p-i-n) is proved to be the only choice for 2D PSCs prepared by the hot-casting method due to the fact that electrons flow from low-n-value domains located at the bottom of the film to high-n-value domains located at the top of the film uniaxially. Compared with organic hole transporting layers, such as poly[bis(4-phenyl)(2,4,6-trimethylphenyl)amine] (PTAA) and poly(3,4-ethylene dioxythiophene):poly(4-styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS), it is more convenient to fabricate vertically structured substrates using the inorganic hole transporting layer, nickel oxide (NiOx). Huang et al. fabricated a NiOx nanopillar via vapor deposition. Seok et al. fabricated nanostructured NiOxvia pulsed laser deposition. Ko et al. fabricated a NiOx nanowall via a hydrothermal process and a NiOx nanoforest via the combination of the hydrothermal and template methods. All these nanostructured NiOx substrates possess vertically oriented planes and show superior carrier extraction ability, which are applicable in our 2D PSC systems. What's more, Hongzheng Chen and Gang Chen have demonstrated that NiOx is suitable for 2D PSCs and have achieved a PCE of 12.1% and 13.9%, respectively. However, only the planar NiOx substrate was explored by them.
In this work, we have prepared 2D PSCs (average n-value is 4) on a vertically oriented lamellar nickel oxide substrate (lamellar-NiOx) with BA, PEA, and FPEA as large organic cations respectively. The photovoltaic performance of all of these 2D PSCs was improved compared with that of 2D PSCs on the planar-NiOx substrate. The highest PCE of 15.2% was obtained from FPEA based 2D perovskites on the lamellar-NiOx substrate, which is the highest value reported for 2D PSCs on a NiOx substrate. From the UV-vis and transient absorption (TA) spectra, we found that PEA and FPEA based 2D perovskite films are enriched with n = 1 and n = 2 2D perovskite phases at the film bottom, while BA based 2D perovskite films are composed of n ≥ 3 phases. Besides, in 2D perovskite films on the lamellar-NiOx substrate, photo-induced electrons flow from low-n-value phases to high-n-value phases much faster than those on the planar NiOx substrate. This is the first report about improving carrier transport efficiency and photovoltaic performance of 2D PSCs through a nanostructured substrate. We believe that overcoming the carrier transport limitation in 2D perovskite films by using lamellar-NiOx substrates is the origin of their better photovoltaic performance.

2D perovskite films fabricated by the hot-casting method are composed of multiple n-value phases with low-n-value phases concentrated at the bottom of the films, as shown in Fig. 1j and k. The parallel orientation of inorganic slabs of n = 1 and n = 2 2D perovskite phases hinders carrier transport to the bottom electrode. Hence, we try to overcome this limitation by using a vertical nanostructured substrate, shown in Fig. 1k, which has shown extraordinary carrier extraction ability in 3D perovskite solar cells.

To obtain this substrate, we grew vertically oriented lamellar-NiOx on a compact NiOx layer, combining the template and hydrothermal methods. The whole process is shown in Fig. S1.Fig. 1b and f show the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the surface and cross-section of the as-prepared lamellar-NiOx. The height of lamellar-NiOx is around 130 nm and the diameter of pores is around 150 nm. In order to obtain this vertical lamellar-NiOx film, we first grew zinc oxide (ZnO) nanorods on the compact NiOx layer. Next, we covered the ZnO nanorods with a NiOx layer, and then removed ZnO by chemical etching. The height of lamellar-NiOx was readily tuned by adjusting the height of the ZnO nanorod template, and 100, 200, and 300 nm long ZnO nanorods were obtained by varying the hydrothermal duration time, as shown in Fig. S2. In this way, lamellar-NiOx substrates with heights of 70, 130, and 210 nm were prepared on the basis of prefabricated ZnO nanorods, shown in Fig. 1a, b, and c respectively. The height of lamellar-NiOx determines the photovoltaic performance of 2D PSCs. Through preliminary 2D PSC device experiments, we found that the highest PCE of 2D PSCs came from the 130 nm high lamellar-NiOx substrate, shown in Fig. S3 and Table S1. Very short lamellar-NiOx (lamellar-NiOx-70) slightly enhances PCE, while very long lamellar-NiOx (lamellar-NiOx-210) deteriorates the photovoltaic performance of 2D PSCs. So, the lamellar-NiOx substrate with a height of 130 nm (lamellar-NiOx-130) was chosen as the experiment group (lamellar-NiOx), and the compact NiOx substrate (planar-NiOx) was employed as the control group for the following study. Besides, we prepared a 130 nm high lamellar-NiOx layer on single crystal silicon for grazing incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) measurements, shown in Fig. S1e and f. To make it clear, 2D PSCs or 2D perovskite films of the FPEA spacer cation on the lamellar-NiOx substrate and planar-NiOx substrate are abbreviated as FPEA-lamellar and FPEA-planar respectively; corresponding abbreviations for BA and PEA cations are BA-lamellar, BA-planar, PEA-lamellar, and PEA-planar.
Firstly, we performed GIWAXS measurements to study the influence of the lamellar-NiOx substrate on the crystallographic orientation of 2D perovskite phases. The composition of a 2D perovskite film is R:methylammonium iodide (MAI):lead iodide (PbI2) = 2:3:4, where R is BA, PEA, or FPEA. The 2D perovskite film was fabricated by the hot-casting method; the method is detailed in the experiment part. As shown in Fig. 1g, h, and S4, all systems show an intense Bragg spot at qz = 10 nm−1, which means that the (111) facet of 2D perovskite phases are stacked horizontally on the substrate, so the inorganic slabs are perpendicular to the substrate. The GIWAXS patterns matched well with the results of the published work, and 2D perovskite films on the lamellar-NiOx substrate exhibit stronger, sharper and narrower Bragg spots than those on planar-NiOx. Specifically, we extracted the line-cut profile curves of the (111) facet along the out-of-plane direction (qz), and converted the 2θ angle of GIWAXS to the normal 2θ angle of X-ray diffraction (XRD), as shown in Fig. 1i. The diffraction intensity of the (111) facet along the qz direction of FPEA-lamellar is stronger than the intensity of FPEA-planar. This suggests that 2D perovskite films on the lamellar-NiOx substrate are composed of highly out-of-plane oriented inorganic slabs. Thus, a barrier-free channel is formed, as shown in Fig. 1k. Photo-induced electrons and holes are free to pass through the 2D perovskite films without needing to pass through the insulating large organic cation layers any more. These channels are particularly vital for n = 1 and n = 2 phases, because their high exciton binding energy, wide bandgap, and parallelly oriented inorganic slabs are adverse to the carrier transport process, shown in Fig. 1j. Though we cannot determine whether low-n-value phases near the bottom of the film are vertically oriented with the help of the lamellar-NiOx substrate due to the limited detection depth of X-rays with an incident angle of 1°, the vertically oriented lamellar-NiOx substrate stretched into 2D perovskite films improves carrier transport efficiency to some extent. In addition, two Bragg reflection arcs along qz < 10 nm−1 in BA-planar, which come from discernible amounts of the (0k0) facet of 2D perovskite phases, and perhaps n = 3, n = 4, and n = 5 phases, are weakened in BA-lamellar, as shown in Fig. S4. This suggests that lamellar-NiOx contributes to highly vertical orientation of 2D perovskite phases in the BA system.

We tested the photovoltaic performance of the lamellar-NiOx substrate on BA, PEA, and FPEA based 2D PSCs systems, respectively. The device structure of 2D PSCs is fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO)/NiOx/perovskite/[6,6]-phenyl C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM)/bathocuproine (BCP)/Ag, where NiOx is lamellar-NiOx or planar-NiOx. The structure diagram of a PSC device is shown in Fig. S5, and corresponding cross-sectional SEM images are shown in Fig. 1d, e, and S6. Their photovoltaic performance parameters are listed in Table 1. Obviously, 2D PSCs on the lamellar-NiOx substrate deliver higher PCE than those on planar-NiOx. The open-circuit voltage (Voc), short-circuit current density (Jsc), and fill factor (FF) are all increased to some extent. Interestingly, the PCE increments of PEA and FPEA based 2D PSCs are 19.5% and 25.2%, which are much higher than that of BA (8.6%). Meanwhile, FPEA-lamellar delivers the highest PCE of 15.2%, which is the highest value among 2D PSCs on a NiOx substrate. This PCE is also impressive among 2D PSCs with an average n-value of 4.

2D PSCs

V
oc (V)
FF

Jsc (mA cm−2)

Jsc(EQE) (mA cm−2)
PCE (%)
BA-planar
1.01
0.74
13.9
13.7
10.4
BA-lamellar
1.03
0.77
14.3
14.0
11.3
PEA-planar
1.05
0.71
15.1
14.8
11.3
PEA-lamellar
1.13
0.77
15.5
15.2
13.5
FPEA-planar
1.02
0.72
16.6
16.3
12.3
FPEA-lamellar
1.08
0.80
17.5
17.0
15.2
We studied their current density–voltage (J–V) curves, external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra, and stability against moisture in detail. In Fig. 2a and S7a, 2D PSCs on lamellar-NiOx possess higher FF values than those on planar-NiOx, which means that the series resistances of 2D perovskite films on lamellar-NiOx are smaller than those of 2D perovskite films on planar-NiOx. Perhaps, the vertical morphology of lamellar-NiOx reduces the series resistance from small n-value domains as expected. Besides, the hysteresis index is smaller in FPEA-lamellar (5.8%, calculated through (PCEreverse − PCEforward)/PCEreverse) than in FPEA-planar (11.3%), which means that charge carriers generated in the perovskite films of FPEA-lamellar can be efficiently transported to electrodes without accumulation at the interface. We measured the EQE spectra of 2D PSCs to verify the reliability of the J–V curves and to show the origin of photocurrent. FPEA-lamellar and FPEA-planar show a high EQE value of 80% at a wavelength between 450–630 nm, as shown in Fig. 2b and S7b. The EQE value of FPEA-lamellar at a wavelength between 630 and 780 nm is apparently larger than that of FPEA-planar. The photocurrent beyond 630 nm originates from 3D-like perovskite phases located at the top portion of the films. Photogenerated holes in 3D-like perovskite phases have to travel a long way to reach the bottom electrode. Besides, the resistive property of low-n-value phases at the bottom of the films makes it more difficult for photogenerated holes in 3D-like perovskite phases to reach the bottom electrode. Thus, the EQE value at a wavelength beyond 630 nm is commonly low in conventional quasi-2D perovskite solar cells. Nevertheless, when charge carrier transport efficiency of low-n-value phases is improved by the lamellar-NiOx substrate, holes generated in 3D-like perovskite phases can be efficiently collected at the bottom electrode. Therefore, the EQE value at 630 to 780 nm is higher in FPEA-lamellar than in FPEA-planar. The integrated Jsc of FPEA-lamellar and FPEA-planar from the EQE curves are 17.0 and 16.3 mA cm−2 respectively, as shown in Fig. 2d, which match well with their J–V curves. Then, we measured the photocurrent at a fixed maximum power point voltage to compare their steady-state power output ability. As shown in Fig. 2d, FPEA-lamellar reaches a stabilized output current density of 16.5 mA cm−2 at 0.9 V, corresponding to a stabilized PCE of 14.8%, while the stabilized output current density is 14.5 mA cm−2 for FPEA-planar at 0.8 V (11.6%). We fabricated 40 devices to show the excellent reproducibility of our results, presented in Fig. 2c and S8. We find that all photovoltaic parameters are enhanced, especially FF and Voc, when applying the lamellar-NiOx substrate as a hole transporting layer.
We measured the moisture stability of FPEA-lamellar and FPEA-planar. When unencapsulated devices are stored in a dark environment with 30 ± 5% relative humidity, the PCE of FPEA-lamellar degrades to 83% after 1510 h and 79% for FPEA-planar, as shown in Fig. 2e. Further, under harsh conditions with 85% relative humidity, the PCE of FPEA-lamellar remains at 67% after 530 h, shown in Fig. 2f, while this value is 51% for FPEA-planar. The higher moisture stability of FPEA-lamellar may be attributed to the higher crystallinity of 2D perovskites grown on the lamellar-NiOx substrate.

To unveil the photovoltaic performance differences between lamellar-NiOx and planar-NiOx and to find out the underlying mechanisms of the lower photovoltaic performance increment of BA based 2D PSCs compared with PEA and FPEA based ones, we examined their photoelectric properties carefully. Firstly, from the UV-vis absorption spectra shown in Fig. 3a and S9, we find that all curves show excitonic absorption peaks between 500 and 650 nm. However, we cannot distinguish the n = 1 and n = 2 phases with excitonic absorption peaks at 517 nm and 569 nm in BA-lamellar and BA-planar, which are discernible in the FPEA and PEA systems. Besides, the strongest excitonic absorption peak of BA-lamellar and BA-planar is located at 606 nm (n = 3), while the strongest excitonic absorption peaks of the PEA and FPEA systems are located at 569 nm (n = 2). These results indicate that the majority of low-n-value phases in BA-lamellar and BA-planar perovskite films are of n = 3, while the majority of low-n-value phases are of n = 2 in PEA and FPEA based 2D perovskite films, when assuming that the extinction coefficients of different n-value phases are the same. Nonetheless, the absorption edges of these 2D perovskite films are almost the same, indicating that they have the same bandgap, while the diversity of Voc and Jsc arises due to other reasons.

Then, we employed photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy to disclose the distribution of n-value phases along the vertical direction of films. As shown in Fig. 3c and S10a, when excited from the bottom of the films (the back), the excitonic peaks of low-n-value phases (<700 nm) and 3D-like perovskite phases (>700 nm) appear simultaneously. However, only 3D-like perovskite phases exist when a laser beam with 470 nm wavelength is directed at the top of the films (the front), as shown in Fig. 3d and S10b. This contrast confirms that low-n-value phases are aggregated at the bottom of the films, and 3D-like perovskite phases are located at the film surface. Again, the intensity distribution of PL peaks at 520 nm (n = 1), 577 nm (n = 2), 617 nm (n = 3), and 650 nm (n = 4) are different in these systems. PEA and FPEA based 2D perovskite films are mainly composed of n = 1 and n = 2 2D perovskite phases, whereas low-n-value phases in films of BA-lamellar and BA-planar start from n = 3. More interestingly, the emission peak of 3D-like perovskite phases is located at 750 nm in the BA system, 761 nm in the FPEA system, and 765 nm in the PEA system. The longer the PL wavelength is, the closer the 3D-like perovskite phases are to 3D perovskites, and the PL peak of the 3D perovskite (MAPbI3) is located at 768 nm. These suggest that the PEA and FPEA systems are enriched with n = 1 and n = 2 2D perovskite phases at the bottom of the films, while their surface contains more 3D-like perovskite phases than the surface of the BA system. To eliminate the influence of composition on the accuracy of analysis, we integrated the characteristic proton peaks in the 1H NMR spectra of FPEA-planar and FPEA-lamellar respectively, as shown in Fig. S11. The ratio of FPEA to MA in FPEA-planar and FPEA-lamellar is 2:2.88 and 2:2.78 respectively, which is very close to the ratio of the raw materials (2:3). Therefore, we can safely conclude that the difference of the BA, PEA, and FPEA systems in UV and PL results comes from the n-value distribution among the films.
What's more, fluorescence quenching efficiency for the three types of cations is distinct from each other. Higher fluorescence quenching efficiency in PEA-lamellar and FPEA-lamellar than that in PEA-planar and FPEA-planar suggests better hole extraction ability of lamellar-NiOx than that of planar-NiOx. However, the difference of fluorescence quenching efficiency between BA-planar and BA-lamellar can be ignored, as shown in Fig. 3c and d. We performed time resolved PL (TRPL) spectroscopy to further compare the carrier transport ability of planar-NiOx and lamellar-NiOx for these three cations, shown in Fig. 3b and S10c. We employed biexponential functions to fit the curves, shown in Table S2, where the short lifetime τ1 originates from hole extraction to the NiOx substrate and the long lifetime τ2 comes from bulk recombination. Shorter carrier lifetimes on lamellar-NiOx than that on planar-NiOx suggest that carriers generated in 2D perovskite films are prone to be transported to the lamellar-NiOx hole transporting layer. Besides, the proportion of short lifetimes τ1 (A1) of 2D perovskite films on lamellar-NiOx (about 90%) is higher than that on planar-NiOx (about 80%), which suggests that a higher proportion of carriers are decayed by the interface extraction process. The above facts suggest that the carrier transportation efficiency is higher in lamellar-NiOx than in planar-NiOx. However, such a difference is much smaller between BA-planar and BA-lamellar.
We further employed transient absorption (TA) spectroscopy to study the carrier transportation processes in the films. Fig. 4a and d show the representative TA spectra of FPEA-planar and FPEA-lamellar excited from the back at different delay times. The ground-state bleaching (GSB) signals at 569 nm, 611 nm, and 646 nm are assigned to n = 2, n = 3, and n = 4 2D perovskite phases respectively. When excited from the front of FPEA-planar and FPEA-lamellar, the dominant GSB signals around 700 nm are originate from 3D-like perovskite phases, shown in Fig. 4b and e. The sharp contrast of the TA spectra between back excitation and front excitation suggests that low-n-value phases are mainly distributed at the film bottom and 3D-like perovskite phases, at the film surface, in agreement with the PL results and the results of published work. Interestingly, there are apparent GSB signals of low-n-value phases under front excitation, while only the PL peaks of 3D-like perovskite phases exist under front excitation in the PL spectra. We attribute this to hole transfer from 3D-like perovskite phases at the film surface to low-n-value phases at the film bottom causing exciton resonance absorption here. Most importantly, the GSB signal attenuation of low-n-value phases is accompanied by the GSB signal enhancement of 3D-like perovskite phases at 740 nm, which red shifts to 753 nm finally. This indicates that photo-excited electrons are flowing from low-n-value phases to 3D-like perovskite phases. We determined photoexcitation carrier transport kinetics from the TA spectra of FPEA-planar and FPEA-lamellar (back excitation) to compare their carrier transport efficiency, shown in Fig. 4c and f. The decay processes of low-n-value phases and the rising process of 3D-like perovskite phases are fitted by multiexponential functions, and the fitting parameters are summarized in Table S3. The short decay lifetimes τ1 of n = 2, n = 3 and n = 4 2D perovskite phases in FPEA-lamellar are 0.8 ± 0.05, 3.2 ± 0.10, and 5.1 ± 0.21 ps respectively, arising from carrier transportation between different n-value phases and carrier extraction by the substrate, whereas corresponding τ1 in FPEA-planar are 1.0 ± 0.07, 6.1 ± 0.24, and 8.0 ± 0.34 ps. The shorter decay lifetime τ1 in FPEA-lamellar suggests that photo-induced carriers in low-n-value phases are transferred more rapidly to high-n-value phases and substrates than that in FPEA-planar. The GSB signal of the n = 3 phase of FPEA-lamellar drops twice as fast as that of FPEA-planar. The rising time τet of 3D-like perovskite phases in FPEA-lamellar is 1.1 ± 0.05 ps, shorter than that in FPEA-planar (2.4 ± 0.13 ps). Besides, the rising times of 3D-like perovskite phases are much shorter than published values (6–480 ps). This may come from the superior hole extraction ability of the NiOx substrate, which speeds up the electron accumulation process in 3D-like phases in the opposite direction. Nevertheless, a shorter populating time τet of 3D-like perovskite phases suggests a more efficient carrier transport process in FPEA-lamellar than in FPEA-planar, which is conducive to the superior photovoltaic performance of FPEA-lamellar.
Similarly, we recorded the TA spectra and TA kinetics in the BA and PEA systems. In the BA system, the GSB signals start from 606 nm (n = 3), shown in Fig. S12. This is different from the FPEA and PEA systems, whose GSB signals start from 569 nm (n = 2). According to the results of TA, UV-vis absorption, and PL spectroscopy, n = 1 and n = 2 2D perovskite phases are indeed absent in the BA system, whereas n = 1 and n = 2 2D perovskite phases are popular among the PEA and FPEA systems. All films show high concentration of low-n-value phases at the film bottom and high-n-value phases at the film surface. Meanwhile, electrons are transferred from low-n-value phases to high-n-value phases promptly (within 10 ps). However, 3D-like perovskite phases show a GSB signal peak at 733 nm, 746 nm, and 750 nm in the end in the BA system, FPEA system, and PEA system respectively. These peaks are well matched with PL results, though a small Stokes shift is shown. Then, for TA kinetic analysis, fitting parameters are summarized in Tables S4, and S5; we find that both carrier decay time τ1 of low-n-value phases and carrier populating time τet of 3D-like perovskite phases are much shorter on the lamellar-NiOx substrate than on the planar-NiOx substrate, regardless of the type of cations employed. These results prove that lamellar-NiOx is an ideal substrate for 2D PSCs, according to their extraordinary carrier transport properties between different n-value phases. The vertical morphology and enlarged contact area can translate into higher carrier collection efficiency of the lamellar-NiOx substrate.

We attribute the gradient n-value distribution along the vertical direction and the different PL and GSB peaks of 3D-like perovskites to the different consumption rates of large cations. When checking the structural formula of RPPs carefully, we find that the proportion of large cations is much higher in low-n-value phases than in high-n-value phases. Specifically, the ratio of large cations to small cations is ∞ in the n = 1 phase. This ratio is 2 for the n = 2 phase, 1 for the n = 3 phase, 0.67 for the n = 4 phase, 0.5 for the n = 5 phase, and 0 for the 3D perovskite. The larger the n-value of 2D perovskite phases is, the fewer large cations are required to maintain the structural integrity. Nucleation sites are mainly generated at the gas–liquid interface for films prepared by the hot-casting method. The simple structure of BA cations enables more BA cations to participate in the formation of 2D perovskites in the initial step at the film surface than PEA and FPEA cations, which consist of bulky benzene rings, as shown in Fig. 5a and c. The smoother and shinier film surface of BA based 2D perovskite films than those of PEA and FPEA also verifies this idea, as shown in Fig. S13. Large cations facilitate the nucleation and growth process of 2D perovskite phases, and a dense crystal nucleus means a compacted and shiny film surface. Contrastingly, 3D perovskite films, fabricated by the same process but without large organic cations, end up with rough, whitish, and uncompacted film surfaces. Then, the more BA cations are consumed at the top of the films to form 2D perovskites there, the fewer BA cations are reserved in the interior wet films. The deficiency of BA cations in the inner films leads to the absence of absorption and emission peaks of n = 1 and n = 2 phases in BA based 2D perovskite films, as shown in Fig. 5b. In contrast, for PEA and FPEA systems, most of the small cations (MA) and a small number of large cations (PEA or FPEA) are consumed at the top of the films, which means that the composition of the top of PEA and FPEA based 2D perovskite films is closer to that of the 3D perovskite than that of BA based ones. As a result, the absorption and emission peaks of the PEA and FPEA systems are redder than those of the BA system. Meanwhile, low-n-value phases (n = 1 and n = 2 phases) will be formed at the bottom of the films, as shown in Fig. 5d. Although the n-value phase distribution of the BA system is more concentrated than that of the PEA and FPEA systems due to the absence of n = 1 and n = 2 phases in the BA system, it does not mean that the photovoltaic performance of the BA system is higher than those of the PEA and FPEA systems. Since the highest PCE is derived from FPEA-lamellar, we studied the film surface of FPEA-lamellar and FPEA-planar by atomic force microscopy (AFM) and SEM, results of which are shown in Fig. S14. The root-mean-square (RMS) roughness of FPEA-planar and FPEA-lamellar is 3.2 nm and 1.7 nm respectively, suggesting that the surface of the film is extremely flat. Meanwhile, the nanostructure of the lamellar-NiOx substrate has no obvious influence on the morphology of the film surface of 2D perovskite films. The SEM images also show dense and smooth surfaces of both FPEA-planar and FPEA-lamellar.

This growth mechanism is further supported by density functional theory (DFT) calculations. The 2D perovskite structure in our calculation is presented as R2PbI4, where R represents the large cations. The single layer inorganic unit ([PbI6]4−) is sandwiched by two layers of organic cations, presenting a pure 2D perovskite structure. For R2PbI4 (R = PEA, FPEA, or BA) structural optimization, all ions were allowed to relax. The optimized structures are shown in Fig. 5, and their lattice constant parameters for three types of 2D perovskites are listed in Table S6. To gain insight into the growth process of 2D perovskite films, we calculated the formation energy of 2D perovskites using the expression:
2RI + PbI2 → R2PbI4
where R is PEA, FPEA or BA. The formation energy is defined as the energy difference between the formed 2D perovskites and their corresponding precursors. The formation energies of BA, PEA, and FPEA based 2D perovskites are −2.92 eV, −2.27 eV and −2.36 eV, respectively, indicating that it is easier to construct BA based 2D perovskites than PEA and FPEA based ones, which is in consistent with the above observations. Due to the large formation energy of PEA and FPEA based 2D perovskites, PEA and FPEA cations are hardly consumed at the surface of the film. Hence, the surfaces of PEA and FPEA based 2D perovskite films are full of 3D-like perovskites, and low-
n-value phases are generated at the bottom of the films due to enrichment with PEA and FPEA cations. This observation is not seen in the BA system due to the low formation energy of BA based 2D perovskites. The n-value phases in the BA based 2D perovskite are uniformly distributed in the film.


To shed light on the improved carrier mobility of 2D perovskites on lamellar-NiOx from an electrical point of view, we analyzed the space-charge limited currents (SCLC) of FPEA-planar and FPEA-lamellar. Hole-only semiconductor devices were fabricated with an architecture of FTO/NiOx/FPEA2MA3Pb4I13/PTAA/Ag, where NiOx is planar-NiOx or lamellar-NiOx. The dark J–V curves shown in Fig. S15, show that the hole mobility of FPEA-lamellar was improved by 4.3 fold compared with FPEA-planar. The higher hole mobility of FPEA-lamellar than that of FPEA-planar suggests that the lamellar-NiOx substrate indeed improved the carrier transport efficiency, which is consistent with TA, PL, and TRPL results. Besides, the smaller onset voltage of the trap-filled limit region (VTFL) of FPEA-lamellar than that of FPEA-planar suggests the lower trap-state density in FPEA-lamellar, which is conducive to carrier transport and photovoltaic performance too.

To probe the crystal orientation, we studied their XRD patterns, shown in Fig. S16 and Table S7. Only diffraction angles (2θ) of 14.28° and 28.55° corresponding to the (111) and (202) facets are observed in all six systems, indicating the preferred out-of-plane orientation of 2D perovskites. The diffraction angle of the (111) facet (14.28°) is pretty close to the corresponding angle obtained from GIWAXS measurements (14.16°). Since the (111) facet comes from the tilted out-of-plane orientation and the (202) facet comes from the perfect out-of-plane orientation of 2D perovskite inorganic slabs. The intensity ratio of the (202) peak to the (111) peak (I(202)/I(111)) can be used to evaluate the perfectness of the orientation of the inorganic planes. We find that 2D perovskite films based on the lamellar-NiOx substrate possess a larger I(202)/I(111) value and narrower full width at half-maximum (FWHM) than planar-NiOx, no matter what kind of large cations are employed. In other words, the lamellar-NiOx substrate is conducive to achieve highly out-of-plane crystal orientation and big crystal size, which is in agreement with the GIWAXS patterns. This is beneficial to carrier transportation between the top and bottom electrodes. We believe that the vertical NiOx structure of the lamellar-NiOx substrate provides a scaffold for the growth of 2D perovskite phases, leading to big grain size and highly out-of-plane orientation. Therefore, the photovoltaic performance of 2D PSCs is improved on the lamellar-NiOx substrate compared with that on the planar-NiOx substrate.

In conclusion, we fabricated a lamellar-NiOx substrate with vertical and plate-like morphology to be used as a hole transporting layer for 2D PSCs. 2D PSCs based on BA, PEA, and FPEA spacer cations show better photovoltaic performance on the lamellar-NiOx substrate than on the planar-NiOx substrate; FF and Voc, especially, are enhanced. 2D perovskite films on lamellar-NiOx present bigger crystal size and higher out-of-plane orientation than those on planar-NiOx. The bottom of PEA and FPEA based films are filled with n = 1 and n = 2 2D perovskite phases, while these phases are absent in the BA system. The lamellar-NiOx substrate improves the carrier transport efficiency and enables ultra-fast transfer of electrons from low-n-value phases at the bottom of the film to 3D-like phases at the film surface. Our work confirms that overcoming the carrier transport limitation at the bottom of 2D perovskite films is essential to achieve higher photovoltaic performance, particularly for 2D PSCs enriched with n = 1 and n = 2 2D perovskite phases at the bottom of the film.


FTO glasses were customized by Liaoning Huite Optoelectronics Technology Co., Ltd MAI, BAI, PEAI, and FPEAI were obtained from Dyesol. BCP and PbI2 were purchased from Xi'an Polymer Light Technology. Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO 99.8%), N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF, 99.8%), chloroform, and isopropanol were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich. PCBM was purchased from Lumtec, Taiwan. Other chemicals were obtained from Shanghai Aladdin Biochemical Technology Co., Ltd or Shanghai Macklin Biochemical Co., Ltd and used directly without further purification.


A lamellar-NiOx substrate was fabricated according to previously published work with a slight modification.

Step 1: FTO glass was coated with a compact NiOx layer via the combustion method. First, nickel nitrate hexahydrate (Ni(NO3)2·6H2O, 290.8 mg) was dissolved in 5 mL 2-methoxyethanol. Then, 200 μL acetylacetone and 100 μL aqua ammonia (14.5 M) were added into the above solution successively. This solution was spin-coated onto UV-O3 treated FTO at 4000 rpm for 30 s and then annealed at 250 °C for 30 min under 25–40% relative humidity. This compact NiOx substrate was also used as the control group and abbreviated as planar-NiOx.
Step 2: A mixed 2-methoxyethanol solution (5 mL) containing equal molar quantities of zinc acetate dihydrate (Zn(CH3COO)2·2H2O, 329.3 mg), ethanolamine (90 μL), and deionized water (54 μL) was stirred at 60 °C for 3 h. This solution was spin-coated onto planar-NiOx substrate at 4000 rpm for 30 s, and then annealed at 350 °C for 1 h to obtain the ZnO seed layer.
Step 3: The ZnO seeded substrate was immersed in an aqueous solution containing zinc nitrate hexahydrate (Zn(NO3)2·6H2O, 892.5 mg), hexamethylenetetramine (420.5 mg), and deionized water (150 mL). The solution was then heated to 90 °C for 20 min, 40 min, and 60 min to obtain ZnO nanorods of 100 nm, 200 nm, and 300 nm respectively.
Step 4: The ZnO nanorod substrate was immersed in an aqueous solution containing nickel chloride hexahydrate (NiCl2·6H2O, 1426.2 mg), potassium persulfate (K2S2O8, 162.2 mg), and deionized water (150 mL). The solution was heated to 65 °C for 20 min, and then a NiOx layer covered substrate was obtained.
Step 5: The NiOx layer covered substrate was immersed in 0.5 M sodium hydroxide aqueous solution for 30 min to remove the ZnO template, and then the obtained substrate was rinsed with deionized water carefully. After blow drying with nitrogen and annealing at 350 °C for 1 h, the lamellar-NiOx substrate was obtained.

A 2D perovskite layer was spin-coated onto a lamellar-NiOx or planar-NiOx substrate by the hot-casting method. Specifically, perovskite solution was prepared by dissolving 100.6 mg BAI, (124.5 mg for PEAI, 133.5 mg for FPEA) 119.3 mg MAI, and 461 mg PbI2 in a 1 mL DMF/DMSO (95/5) mixed solvent. Then, the NiOx substrate was heated to 80 °C and swiftly transferred onto a tailor-made Teflon nozzle, 70 μL hot perovskite solution (80 °C) was dropped onto the center of the substrate and spin-coated immediately at 7000 rpm (acceleration 7000 rpm per s) for 20 s. The as prepared perovskite film was then annealed at 100 °C for 10 min. 60 μL PCBM solution (7 mg mL−1 in chloroform) was spin-coated at 3000 rpm for 30 s to obtain the electron transporting layer. Then, 100 μL saturated BCP supernatant solution (2.5 mg mL−1 in isopropanol) was dropped onto the PCBM layer while spinning at 5000 rpm. Finally, 100 nm Ag was deposited by thermal evaporation to obtain the electrode.


SEM images were obtained using a TESCAN MIRA3. UV-vis absorption spectra were obtained using a PerkinElmer Lambda 35 UV-vis spectrometer. PL and TRPL spectroscopy were measured using a FLS1000 photoluminescence spectrometer with excitation at a wavelength of 470 nm. X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were obtained using a Bruker D8 ADVANCE Da Vinci diffractometer and a Cu Ka radiation source as the X-ray source. AFM data were obtained using a Dimension Icon & FastScan Bio Microscope. EQE spectra were recorded using an Enlitech LQE-50-FL IPCE measurement system. 1H NMR spectra were acquired using a Bruker AVANCE III HD 400 with DMSO-d6 as the solvent. The sample was prepared by scraping the 2D perovskite films of FPEA-planar and FPEA-lamellar from the corresponding substrates.



J–V curves were measured under AM 1.5G illumination at 100 mW cm−2 using an Abet Technologies Sun 2000 solar simulator, calibrated with a standard VLSI Si reference solar cell (SRC-1000 TC-K-QZ). J–V curves were measured in ambient air (∼30% humidity) without encapsulation. J–V curves were recorded by a Keithley 2400 source meter including reverse (1.2 → −0.1 V) and forward (−0.1 →1.2 V) scans with a step of 50 mV s−1. During the measurement process, the cell was covered with a mask having an aperture of 0.1 cm2.


A Yb:KGW amplifier (PHAROS, Light Conversion) supplied laser beams centered at 1030 nm with a pulse duration of ∼180 fs, a pulse repetition rate of 33 kHz, and a maximum pulse energy of 0.3 mJ. The output of the amplifier was split into two streams of pulses. One was used to drive an optical parametric amplifier (ORPHEUS-HP, Light Conversion) to obtain the pump beam. The residual stream was directed into an ultrafast spectroscopic system (HARPIA-TA, Light Conversion) to generate the white light continuum probe beam. In the spectrometer, the pump chopped at 150 Hz frequency was spatially and temporally overlapped with the probe beam on the sample. A pump pulse (430 nm, 5.88 mW, the size of the laser spot was about 150 μm) was used to excite the perovskite films from the front and back respectively; the range of the probe beam (0.27 mW) was 470 nm to 890 nm.


GIWAXS experiments were performed at beamline BL16B in the Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility (SSRF) with an X-ray wavelength of 0.124 nm. GIWAXS patterns were acquired using a 2D Dectris Pilatus 2 M CCD detector (172 μm × 172 μm pixel size) with a grazing incidence angle αi of 1° and exposure time of 30 s. The diffraction angle (θ) of GIWAXS and XRD is converted by using eqn (1).

(1)

θGIWAXS is the diffraction angle of GIWAXS; θXRD is the diffraction angle of XRD; λGIWAXS is the X-ray wavelength used in the GIWAXS measurements; λXRD is the X-ray wavelength used in the XRD measurements.

The X-ray penetration depth with a grazing incident angle of 1° is calculated using eqn (2) (in the case of αi > αc). The X-ray penetration depth depends on the X-ray energy (λ = 0.124 nm in this study), the X-ray absorption coefficient (μ) of films, the critical angle of total reflection (αi), and the incident angle (αc).
(2)

The fabrication process of hole-only devices is almost the same as that of PSCs except that PCBM and BCP layers are replaced by PTAA layers. The PTAA layer was fabricated by spin coating PTAA solution (2.5 mg mL−1 in chlorobenzene) on a perovskite at 2000 rpm for 30 s. The dark current–voltage curves of hole-only devices are measured under ambient air conditions, with a scan step 0.01 V. In the space-charge limited currents (SCLC) regime (blue region in Fig. S11), hole mobilities can be estimated via the Mott–Gurney law:
where
J is the current density, L is the film thickness of the perovskite layer, μ0 is the hole mobility, εr is the relative dielectric constant of the perovskite (r = 25), ε0 is the permittivity of free space (8.85 × 10−12 F m−1), and V is the internal voltage in the device.


We performed density functional theory (DFT) based first principles calculations. We implemented the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) code by the projector-augmented wave (PAW) method. We adopted the Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof (PBE) exchange correlation functional within the generalized gradient approximation (GGA). The DFT-D3 method of Grimme is also applied to correct for van der Waals interactions. The cut-off energy for the plane-wave is set to 500 eV. A 4 × 4 × 3 k-point mesh is used for all three 2D perovskite films. They are generated by the Gamma scheme. The convergence standard is set at 0.02 eV Å−1 for the total force of each atom, and the convergence threshold of energy for each atom is less than 1 × 10−5 eV.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This study was funded by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51950410581), and Shanghai Pujiang Program.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ta01038g
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021