 DOI: 10.1039/C3RA40865E
(Communication)
RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 25707-25710


Lijun
Yang
 and 

Wallace Woon-Fong
Leung
*

Department of Mechanical Engineering, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Hong Kong. E-mail: mmwleung@polyu.edu.hk; Fax: +852 2364-7183; Tel: +852 2766-6670

Received
20th February 2013
, Accepted 25th October 2013
First published on 28th October 2013
Polydispersed-size nanocrystallite titanium dioxide (TiO2) with a large surface area is fabricated by nozzle-less electrospraying using titanium isopropoxide (TIP)/polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) ethanol solution. The polydispersed TiO2 nanoparticles are applied to dye sensitized solar cells as a novel scattering layer, which balances both dye loading and light trapping. An optimal high efficiency of 8.71% is achieved with the polydispersed-size TiO2 nanoparticles as the scattering layer when compared with an efficiency of 7.17% obtained for the photoanode with the traditional scattering layer made of 200 nm monodispersed TiO2 nanoparticles, which represents a 22% increase.

The dye sensitized solar cell (DSSC), based on wide band-gap semiconductor and a suitable dye, is a promising device for inexpensive, large-scale, efficient solar energy conversion. The key component of this device is the wide band-gap semiconductor with large surface area for dye adsorption. Anatase nanocrystalline TiO2 has been intensively investigated as the construction material for DSSC photoanodes. However, electron transport in nanoparticle-based photoanodes relies primarily on the trap-limited diffusion process, which is the major factor that limits the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the device. One promising approach is to provide a more direct pathway for electron transport by replacing the nanoparticles with one-dimensional (1D) nanomaterials, such as nanorods, nanotubes, or nanofibers. Unfortunately, the PCE of the devices using these 1D nanomaterials is still inferior when compared to those using TiO2 nanoparticles due to their limited surface area. Alternative approaches are to improve the light harvesting efficiency of the device, such as developing novel sensitizers with broad absorption spectrum and high molar extinction coefficients, or to add scattering layers to the photoanode thereby extending the light path in the device. Extensive research have been made to understand the scattering effect based on Mie and Lorentz theory, and the results reveal that an effective scattering layer is usually composed of larger size (>100 nm) nanoparticles. However, this approach sacrifices the dye-loading capacity of the photoanode, thereby limiting the performance of the device. Here, we report an innovative scattering layer for the DSSC photoanode that is made of polydispersed electrosprayed nanocrystallite TiO2. Comparing with the traditional scattering layer, the present electrosprayed scattering layer has several advantages. First, the electrosprayed TiO2 nanoparticles are composed of nanocrystallites with diameter approximately 10 nm that do not sacrifice the dye-loading capacity of the photoanode. Second, the diameter of the electrosprayed TiO2 nanoparticle is polydispersed resulting in much lower porosity in the scattering layer, thereby improving effectively the light harvesting property of the device (Fig. 1a). Third, the size and distribution of the nanoparticles in the scattering layer can be engineered and fine-tuned easily by changing the operating parameter of electrospraying, such as applied voltage.


Fig. 1a shows the scheme of photoanode with the traditional and the electrosprayed scattering layer, respectively. Comparing with the traditional scattering layer, the scattering layer composed of polydispersed nanoparticle exhibits lower pore volume (i.e. more particle surface area/volume) that traps more light in the dye absorption layer. Fig. 1b–d shows the morphology of electrosprayed TiO2 nanoparticles. Fig. 1b is a SEM image of TiO2 nanofibers deposited with electrospray polydispersed nanoparticles (at 60 kV). The nanofibers have average diameter of approximately 60 nm and a length (i.e. layer thickness) of at least 10 μm presenting a large length-to-diameter aspect ratio for the device. It is worthy to note that the nanoparticle layer shown in Fig. 1b was much thinner than what was typically adopted in our device to enable observation of the randomly distributed nanoparticles deposited on the surface of the nanofiber layers in the background. The XRD patterns of electrospun TiO2 before and after calcination are shown in Fig. S1. It can be seen that there is no sharp peak appeared before calcination due to its amorphous structure; and after calcination at 450 °C for 2 hours, both anatase and rutile phases are present. Fig. 1c and d are, respectively, the TEM and high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) images of the electrosprayed TiO2 nanoparticles. These images indicate that the electrospray nanoparticles were polycrystalline and each nanoparticle was made up of TiO2 crystallites with size about 10 nm, revealing an interesting benefit that the electrosprayed nanoparticles have large surface-to-volume ratio. Comparing with the traditional nanoparticles (diameter > 100 nm) as a scattering layer, it is of great advantage for the electrosprayed nanoparticles to serve also as dye loading function in the photoanode.
It is well-known that the morphology/diameter of electrospray nanoparticle depends on the operating parameters of the electrospraying, such as applied voltage, distance between electrode and collector, and the angular speed of the rotating electrode. Here, the effect of applied voltage on the morphology of electrospray nanoparticles was investigated. The applied voltage of 50, 60 and 70 kV were adopted, while the distance between the rotating electrode and collector remained fixed at 19 cm. Fig. 2 exhibits the measured diameter distribution of the electrosprayed TiO2 nanoparticles at different electrospraying conditions. Of significance is that the electrosprayed particles obtained ranging in size between 150 and 1000 nm have diameter that follows approximately a Gaussian distribution. The average diameter of the electrosprayed particles is determined by a balance of the surface tension force which provides particle cohesion and the electric force which breaks up to finer particles creating larger surface area. Thus, the particles became larger when the applied voltage, thus the applied electric field, is reduced. As is well known, scattering layer consisting of larger particles can effectively reflect the incident light, resulting in improved light harvesting of the solar cell. In these three cases, more than 40% nanoparticles have diameter larger than 400 nm for effective light scattering. The remaining nanoparticles were smaller in size yet they have large surface-to-volume ratio, which enabled them as good absorbent for the small dye molecules.
The amount of the dye adsorbed respectively in different electrosprayed scattering layers and the traditional scattering layer (200 nm nanoparticles) were measured. Dye loading on these scattering layers was quantified by desorbing the dye from the layers in 0.1 M NaOH solution (water–ethanol = 1:1) and subsequently the absorption spectra of the solutions were measured. The amount of dye adsorbed on the electrosprayed scattering layer at 70, 60 and 50 kV was determined to be 7.3 × 10−4, 5.1 × 10−4 and 4.6 × 10−4 mol cm−3, respectively; while the amount of dye adsorbed in the traditional scattering layer was much lower at 2.9 × 10−4 mol cm−3. It can be seen that the electrosprayed scattering layer can absorbed at least 1.5 times to as much as 2.5 times of dye molecules than that of the conventional scattering layer. This indeed confirms that the scattering layer, superficially packed with large quantities of nanosized crystallites, have higher dye-loading capacity. Therefore, the electrosprayed scattering layer composed of polydispersed particles can function both as a light scattering layer as well as an effective dye-loading layer.
The light scattering/trapping effect of different scattering layer, prepared at different applied voltages during electrospray, can be compared based on their reflection properties. Fig. 3 shows that the reflectance of incident light with wavelength in the range from 300 to 800 nm for different scattering layers for the same thickness prior to sensitizing with the N719 dye. From the reflection spectrum depicted in Fig. 3, the scattering layer electrosprayed at 60 kV shows the strongest reflectance in the UV, or near UV region, with wave length between 300 and 400 nm; while the traditional scattering layer made up of 200 nm nanoparticles shows the weakest reflectance in the same wavelength range. In the visible-light wavelength between 400 and 800 nm, the electrospray scattering layer exhibits stronger light scattering property than that of traditional scattering layer. Among the three electrospray scattering-layer configurations, the one electrosprayed at 50 kV has the best performance followed closely by the one at 60 kV. It is to be noted that the traditional scattering layer shows better light trapping property than that of nanofiber alone without a scattering layer, which also can be seen in the normalized EQE spectrum (Fig. S2). This confirms the effectiveness of light trapping with a scattering layer resulting in improved light utilization in the DSSC device.

Fig. 4 shows the photocurrent density voltage (J–V) characteristics of DSSC with and without electrosprayed scattering layer. The J–V curve reveals that the photoanode with the scattering layer achieves higher photocurrent when compared with photoanode without a scattering layer. The enhanced photocurrent is mainly due to the enhanced light harvesting capability by including the light scattering layer. Table 1 shows the photovoltaic performances of DSSC with and without the electrosprayed scattering layer. The open-circuit voltage (Voc) and fill factor (FF) were almost the same for all the configurations of the photoanode devices, indicating the scattering layer and configuration of the scattering layer has insignificant effect on the Voc and FF of the device. The short-circuit current density (Jsc) was improved by introducing a scattering layer in the photoanode. The Jsc increased from 13.70 to 14.96 mA cm−2, a 9% increase, through introducing the traditional mono-dispersed nanoparticles as the scattering layer for the DSSC device. On the other hand, the electrosprayed polydispersed nanoparticle scattering layer showed a significant improvement with Jsc ramping up to 17.84 mA cm−2 and the corresponding PCE increasing to 8.71% when a scattering layer prepared by 60 kV electrospraying was incorporated in the photoanode. These represent a significant 30% and 31% improvement in Jsc and PCE, respectively, when compared to the case without a scattering layer. When incorporating the 50 kV and 70 kV electrospray scattering layer, the improvement in Jsc was about 20% and 14%, respectively. Therefore, the 60 kV electrospray scattering layer was the optimal reflector for the nanofiber photoanode. Comparing with the 50 kV electrosprayed layer, the 60 kV configuration showed higher dye-loading capacity given the particle size distribution was slightly finer (see Fig. 2). On the other hand, comparing with the 70 kV electrosprayed layer, the 60 kV configuration exhibited stronger light-scattering property (see Fig. 3) as it has coarser particle size distribution (see Fig. 2). Therefore, the dye-loading capacity and light-trapping ability was well balanced with the 60 kV electrosprayed scattering layer. The improvement over single nanofiber layer is well beyond that achieved with the traditional scattering layer as seen in Table 1. It is obvious that the present novel electrosprayed scattering layer with polydispersed TiO2 nanoparticles outperforms the traditional scattering layer using monodispersed 200 nm nanoparticles in DSSC.

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Without scattering layer
13.70
0.72
67
6.64
With traditional scattering layer (200 nm)
14.96
0.76
63
7.17
With 50 kV electrosprayed scattering layer
16.50
0.73
66
7.94
With 60 kV electrosprayed scattering layer
17.84
0.75
65
8.71
With 70 kV electrosprayed scattering layer
15.58
0.74
65
7.52

In summary, electrosprayed TiO2 nanoparticles can be applied as an effective scattering layer in DSSC to improve the performance of the device. Comparing with the traditional scattering layer, the electrosprayed scattering layer consisted of numerous nano-crystallites (10 nm size) packed on the nanoparticles. This provides the scattering layer with an added advantage of high dye-loading capacity. Due to the polydispersed distribution for the particle diameters the porosity of the scattering layer is reduced with more particle surface area/volume, thereby trapping more incident light in the device. Thus, our unique scattering layer configuration with polydispersed nanoparticles with each particle composed of polycrystallines of 10 nm size can extend the light path in the device without compromising the dye loading ability. A high efficiency of 8.71% can be achieved with the scattering layer, composed of polydispersed nanoparticles, which is 22% greater than a device with the traditional monodispersed 200 nm nanoparticles scattering layer having only 7.17% efficiency.


Lijun Yang acknowledges her PhD studentship from The Hong Kong Polytechnic University.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details, including preparation and characterization of the electrosprayed scattering layer, fabrication and testing photovoltaic properties of the DSSC devices. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ra40865e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013