 DOI: 10.1039/C9TA05556H
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 20390-20397


Zhen
Wang
,

Ajay K.
Baranwal
,

Muhammad Akmal
Kamarudin
,

Yusuke
Kamata
,

Chi Huey
Ng
,

Manish
Pandey
,

Tingli
Ma
* and 

Shuzi
Hayase
*

Department of Life Science and Systems Engineering, Kyushu Institute of Technology, 2-4 Hibikino, Wakamatsu-ku, Kitakyushu, Fukuoka 808-0196, Japan. E-mail: tinglima@life.kyutech.ac.jp; hayase@uec.ac.jp

Received
25th May 2019
, Accepted 8th August 2019
First published on 12th August 2019
All-inorganic perovskites suffer from a phase transition from a cubic α-phase to a tetragonal δ-phase in the ambient atmosphere, although they have the advantage of higher thermal stability. Here, we demonstrated that yttrium-induced perovskite crystallization results in significantly improved phase stability of perovskite even under humid air conditions. Yttrium in precursors was found to impede the crystal growth of perovskite film to stabilize the α-phase of a CsPbI2Br phase and was finally incorporated into the CsPbI2Br perovskite lattice. This structural crystallization process induced by yttrium incorporation gave rise to denser compact films with small grains and host lattice rearrangement by partial substitution for Pb. As a result, a 360-fold phase stability improvement was achieved in humid air with 65% RH compared with the reference film. The favorable electronic structure for efficient electron–hole dissociation and carrier transport to the cathode led to a much-enhanced power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 13.25% after yttrium incorporation compared with only 8.46% for the reference cells in humid air. Moreover, yttrium-incorporated perovskite solar cells (PSCs) without encapsulation exhibited superior long-term stability when stored in ambient air with 65% RH, showing nearly no degradation over 14 h.

The past several years have witnessed the rapid development of perovskites due to their low fabrication cost and excellent optoelectronic properties. Among them, all-inorganic cesium lead halide perovskites have drawn tremendous interest quite recently due to the higher thermal stability compared with traditional organic–inorganic perovskites with volatile organic components. More efforts are being directed to the development of high performance CsPbI3 and CsPbI2Br based perovskite solar cells (PSCs), which have achieved more than 12% efficiency through surface or boundary passivation. However, a room-temperature phase transition from a cubic perovskite phase (α-phase) to a non-perovskite orthorhombic phase (δ-phase) leads to an obvious change of optoelectronic properties and then degeneration of PSCs rapidly, which is detrimental to photoenergy conversion. This phase instability initiated by external stimuli including oxygen and moisture is essentially caused by the fact that Cs+ is too small to hold together the PbX6 octahedra (X = I or Br). Effective strategies have been used to stabilize the cubic perovskite phase. First, surface functionalization by organic cation termination could significantly reduce surface energy and further stabilize the perovskite phase. Second, quantum dots (QDs) with high surface energy were incorporated into perovskite crystals, which was favorable for improving the cubic perovskite phase stability. Third, doping engineering with partial ion substitution for Pb2+ in the ABX3 perovskite structure was applied to obtain the desired Goldschmidt tolerance factor (t), including substituting Sr2+, Sn2+ and Mn2+ with smaller ion radii, which in turn is expected to stabilize the cubic phase with a crystallographic structure. Nonetheless, the partial substitution is limited by another empirical parameter, μ = rB/rX, to estimate whether the B atoms can favor octahedral coordination with X atoms preferentially. Therefore, suitable B-site substitution presumably led to structural reorganization at the microscopic level towards high performance of PSCs.

The past two years have witnessed a rapid performance improvement of all-inorganic PSCs including efficiency and phase stability improvements. It is reported that small-grained crystal structures with close packed atomic arrangements favored the stability of the α-phase crystallography at relatively low temperature, and all-inorganic perovskite quantum dots could stabilize the cubic phase, but ligand exchange and multiple-step spin-coating result in a complicated fabrication process of quantum dot solar cells. Therefore, ethylenediamine cations were introduced into CsPbI3 perovskite to cross-link the crystal units, finally forming a 2D/3D structure with smaller grain size, which exhibited much-enhanced stability against moisture in the ambient atmosphere. This is because smaller grain size can induce lattice strain which is opposite to the behavior of organic–inorganic perovskites. However, the grain boundaries as one of the nonradiative recombination centers are expected to induce carrier recombination. Additionally, a faster crystallization process may lead to formation of pinholes and larger grain size which are not beneficial for all-inorganic cubic phase stability. As a result, we need to stabilize the cubic phase of all-organic perovskites with host lattice rearrangement through crystallization engineering.
In this report, we introduced innovative trivalent yttrium ions in CsPbI2Br perovskite to stabilize the host perovskite lattice. Yttrium was found to effectively retard the fast perovskite crystallization through the prevention of the reaction between PbI2 and CsBr. Furthermore, yttrium ions with a smaller radius (0.9 Å) for Pb-site substitution partially enable a more suitable Goldschmidt tolerance factor, allowing for a relatively small-grained film and 360-fold improvement of perovskite phase stability in ambient air at 65% relative humidity (RH). The effect of yttrium incorporation on the electronic landscape was investigated through thermally stimulated current (TSC) analysis, which demonstrated that trap sites were efficiently passivated by means of yttrium incorporation. We varied the stoichiometric yttrium iodide incorporation in the CsPbI2Br host lattice to form CsPb1−xYxI2Br films. The as-prepared all-inorganic perovskite devices in humid air (65% RH) exhibited a much higher efficiency of 13.25% with an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.232 V compared with 8.46% efficiency of the reference PSCs. In addition, almost no decay of PSC performance over 14 h in humid air with 65% RH was achieved upon yttrium incorporation.

During the fabrication of the CsPbX3 (X = I or Br) photoactive absorber, it was found that heating the spin-coated CsPbI2Br film firstly at 45 °C for 5 min to get the transition film, and then heating at 160 °C immediately to obtain the ideal dark-brown perovskite film resulted in higher absorbance than when the sample was directly heated at 160 °C. The gradient thermal annealing process helped to improve the perovskite crystallinity as observed from the UV-vis spectra (Fig. S1). In this study, we found that the anti-solvent step was necessary to accelerate the nucleation and prevent moisture invasion during spin-coating in a humid atmosphere. When we prepared CsPb1−xYxI2Br using ethyl acetate as an anti-solvent in ambient air with 65% RH (Fig. S2), freshly coated CsPbI2Br films turned to a light brown color immediately in ambient air with 65% RH upon antisolvent dropping due to fast crystallization of the perovskite. However, under the same conditions, a freshly coated CsPb0.97Y0.03I2Br film was transparent (Fig. S3). This suggests that yttrium incorporation in all-inorganic perovskites could influence the crystallization process and crystalline quality. Interestingly, when we stored these films in the ambient atmosphere at room temperature, the color of the control film changed to dark brown after 2 min. In contrast, the CsPb0.97Y0.03I2Br film was still transparent after 5 h of storage at room temperature and turned light brown after 10 h. The color of this film finally changed to black completely after 26 h of storage. Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR) demonstrated that the content of DMSO solvent is obviously higher for the yttrium-incorporated freshly coated film compared with the freshly coated reference film (Fig. S4). Meanwhile, a significant peak shift of the SO vibration from 1025 cm−1 to 1045 cm−1 was observed upon yttrium incorporation. This could be attributed to interaction between yttrium ions and DMSO, preventing the fast evaporation of DMSO molecules. When we performed X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) of the freshly coated yttrium-incorporated perovskite film, we found that the Pb peak shifted to higher binding energy whereas no Cs peak shift was observed (Fig. 1a). We considered this freshly coated film as an intermediate phase that can be formed by intercalation of yttrium–DMSO between two PbI2 planes without showing any interaction with Cs outside the interlayers. This demonstrates that interlayer spaces can allow rapid intercalation of smaller yttrium ions (0.9 Å) compared to cesium ions (1.67 Å) between two PbI2 planes. A similar phenomenon was also found in HPbIx and PbI2(DMSO) complexes.

In order to further verify this, the PbI2–YI3 films were analyzed by X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurement to compare the structure of PbI2 (Fig. 1b). The XRD peak of PbI2 was located at 12.7°, whereas after the introduction of YI3 in PbI2, a similar XRD pattern was observed, although the peak shifted to a lower angle, implying the expansion of the PbI2 interlayer arising from yttrium ion intercalation. No obvious peak shift was observed when 1 mol% YI3 was introduced, which could be ascribed to the possibility that there was no obvious increase in interlayer spacing due to the very small amount of yttrium. Based on the above analysis, it can be concluded that DMSO molecules are intercalated into PbI2 planes as a result of interaction between yttrium ions and DMSO, which can suppress DMSO evaporation and retard the rapid reaction of PbI2 and CsBr upon yttrium incorporation. This further impedes CsPbI2Br crystallization to form a stabilized cubic perovskite structure (Fig. 1d), which is favorable for achieving better quality perovskites and higher performance PSCs. Comparatively, for the reference CsPbI2Br film, cesium ions can easily intercalate into [PbI6] octahedral layers, directly converting to the CsPbI2Br cubic phase during the crystal growth (Fig. 1c). This exceptional interaction between yttrium and DMSO is expected to form a more stable cubic phase, which is different from those resulting from Eu3+ or Bi3+ doping.

Fig. 2a shows the UV-vis measurement results, which reveal that there is no shift in the absorbance onset upon yttrium incorporation, although the absorbance intensities of CsPb1−xYxI2Br (x = 0–0.05) films increased as compared to that of the reference film. This should be correlated with the more excellent crystallinity of CsPb1−xYxI2Br films. We found that the addition of yttrium in CsPbI2Br has an influence on the crystal structure as measured by X-ray diffraction (XRD). The XRD peaks located at 14.6° and 29.5° correspond to the (100) and (200) planes of the α-CsPbI2Br phase (Fig. S5). The intensities of peaks of the cubic phase were reduced gradually with an increase of the Y3+ component in films, which can be attributed to the resulting smaller perovskite grains upon yttrium incorporation, which is consistent with results from other metal doping methods. Furthermore, a close examination of the (100) peak at 14.76° reveals that the XRD peaks of the various yttrium-incorporated perovskite films shift to higher 2θ, an indication of partial substitution of smaller yttrium for Pb in the host lattice. XPS spectra also show that the peaks of Cs3d, I3d and Pb4f shift slightly to higher binding energy for the yttrium-incorporated perovskite films, confirming the strong interaction between yttrium and other elements in the perovskite structure (Fig. 2b–d). Meanwhile, energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) mapping shows that yttrium was distributed homogeneously on the surface of the perovskite film and did not negatively influence the halide distribution in the perovskite lattice (Fig. 2e). We etched the perovskite films with argon to compare the ratio of Pb4f to Y3d on the surface and inside the bulk. XPS spectra cannot exactly determine the atomic ratio by quantitative analysis. As shown in Fig. S6, the respective area of Pb4f and Y3d on the surface and at a depth of 5 nm did not change obviously, demonstrating that yttrium was distributed homogeneously throughout the film (Table S1). This further supports the hypothesis that yttrium substituted Pb partially to form a CsPb1−xYxI2Br perovskite host lattice.
We subsequently examined their microstructure upon yttrium incorporation using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and atomic force microscopy (AFM). Fig. 3a shows larger grain size with an average size of ∼300 nm, which may be related with the rapid crystallization of the CsPbI2Br film. In striking contrast, the 3 mol% yttrium-incorporated perovskite contained smaller grains with an average size of ∼50 nm (Fig. 3b), in accordance with the XRD results and a previous report using a Eu3+ doping approach. However, 5 mol% yttrium addition induced more voids during the crystal growth, causing the quality of the CsPbI2Br film to deteriorate (Fig. S7). The electrostatic interaction between yttrium ions and PbI2 planes was expected to break the layered structure of colloids to decrease the grain size. The smaller grains might have the ideal morphology to stabilize the α-phase because of the higher surface/volume ratio, contributing to the surface energy and hence to total Gibbs energy. In addition, partial incorporation of smaller yttrium ions into the perovskite lattice can result in the desired tolerance factor for high phase stability. Furthermore, AFM measurement demonstrates that the roughness decreased significantly from 47.9 nm for the reference sample to 5.64 nm upon 3 mol% yttrium incorporation, which is expected to be beneficial for reduced interfacial recombination and ionic charge accumulation, contributing to the suppressed hysteresis phenomenon discussed below. 1 mol%, 2 mol% and 5 mol% yttrium incorporation also induced smoother CsPbI2Br morphology (Fig. S8). The resultant morphology of the yttrium-incorporated perovskite becomes more compact and grain boundaries seemed to be fused with each other. This prevents the invasion of moisture, which would otherwise tend to cause rapid degradation along boundaries and result in reduced trap densities (Fig. 3d).
In order to quantify the trap density and probe the trap distribution in perovskites, we used thermally stimulated current (TSC) measurement for trap state investigation. Generally, trap evaluations are initiated by filling trap sites with carriers at low temperature below the activation energy of electronic trap states, and carriers in traps are released as the temperature is increased at a constant rate. Electrical current is generally generated inside CsPbI2Br perovskite films, and is plotted as a function of temperature as shown in Fig. 4a and b. The traps (Nt) should be equal to the integration of current assuming that carriers in the perovskite occupy all traps for simplification as demonstrated in eqn (1) below.
(1)
where
q denotes the elementary charge and I is the electrical current generated in all-inorganic perovskites. It can be found from the lowered overall TSC signal that the trap densities were reduced dramatically upon 3 mol% yttrium incorporation in the perovskite. Thus, this confirms that the formation of extremely dense compact polycrystalline films with intimately connected and fused grain boundaries could eliminate overall trap densities in perovskites. Fig. S9 portrays the relationship between trap depth and trap density inside the perovskite films. It can be noted that the reference perovskite film shows severe trap state distribution. The yttrium incorporated film exhibited a fewer number of trap densities in the range of 1011 to 1015 cm−3 in comparison with the reference perovskite, implying the efficient passivation of traps in polycrystalline films arising for yttrium incorporation. This is expected to have a beneficial effect on the phase stability of yttrium incorporated films in humid air due to the compact film with remarkably reduced charge recombination. Addition of yttrium iodides significantly reduced the overall signal intensity along the trap depth, highlighting the benefit of yttrium in perovskites. To investigate the effect of yttrium on the perovskite stability, we performed UV-vis measurement as a function of time for the control CsPbI2Br and CsPb0.97Y0.03I2Br perovskite films in the ambient atmosphere with 65% RH. The control CsPbI2Br film absorbed the moisture present in air and degraded quickly from the perovskite phase to a non-perovskite phase completely within 10 minutes (Fig. 4c). In contrast, the absorbance onset of the CsPb0.97Y0.03I2Br perovskite film remained almost the same even after 54 h possibly due to the stabilization of the perovskite phase by yttrium incorporation (detailed absorbance results are given in Fig. S10). For the CsPb0.95Y0.05I2Br perovskite film, the absorbance began to degrade after 30 h of storage in humid air with 65% RH. This is due to the formation of voids with excess yttrium incorporation, which allows moisture to permeate within the perovskite more easily and degrades the film rapidly compared with the 3 mol% yttrium dopant as shown in the SEM image.

All-inorganic perovskite solar cells based on the regular planar architecture indium tin oxide (ITO)/SnO2/CsPb1−xYxI2Br/P3HT were fabricated in the ambient atmosphere with 65% RH. Fig. 5a depicts the J–V characteristics of the CsPb1−xYxI2Br PSCs, and the corresponding photovoltaic parameters are listed in Table 1. The reference device achieves a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 8.46%, an open circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.065 V, a short circuit current density (Jsc) of 12.11 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 65.89%. The Voc, Jsc and FF improved as the yttrium content was increased, and the device performance metrics improved markedly to a PCE of 13.25%, Voc of 1.232 V, Jsc of 14.49 mA cm−2, and FF of 74.23% when CsPb0.97Y0.03I2Br was used as the absorber layer. The higher absorbance intensity and compact film with better crystallinity contributed to the higher light harvesting ability, leading to the higher Jsc, in agreement with the integrated current density of CsPb0.97Y0.03I2Br PSCs (14.29 mA cm−2) (Fig. 5b). The EQE spectra of 1 mol%, 2 mol% and 5 mol% yttrium-incorporated PSCs are shown in Fig. S11. Moreover, excellent crystallization reflects decreased defects and reduced nonradiative energy loss channels. We further performed photoelectron yield spectroscopy (PYS) to monitor the photoelectron current of perovskite films excited from the valence band maximum (VBM) when the incident photon energy increased. As shown in Fig. S12a, from the PYS spectra, the VBM of the control perovskite film was determined to be 5.97 eV and slightly deeper VBMs were obtained upon yttrium incorporation (6.05, 6.04, 6.04 and 6.07 eV for 1%, 2%, 3% and 5% yttrium-incorporated perovskites, respectively). The band alignment diagram demonstrated that the negligible energy level change upon yttrium incorporation did not influence carrier transport and transfer between the absorber layer and charge selective layer (Fig. S12b). These results led to minimized energy loss (Eloss) and higher Voc. When the YI3 concentration was further increased to 5 mol%, the corresponding performance dropped dramatically to 10.80% due to inferior crystallization with formation of voids as observed from the SEM image. The statistical efficiency for each case with 45 cells is summarized in Fig. S13. 3 mol% yttrium-incorporated PSCs exhibited superior reproducibility and the highest average efficiency among the five types of devices, showing superior reproducibility with small deviations in the value (statistical Jsc, Voc and FF are shown in Fig. S13).
PSCs

J
sc (mA cm−2)

J
sc
 (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)

a Calculated Jsc from the IPCE spectrum.

CsPbI2Br
12.11
12.04
1.065
65.89
8.46
CsPb0.99Y0.01I2Br
13.75
13.45
1.166
70.06
11.23
CsPb0.98Y0.02I2Br
14.08
13.92
1.211
71.17
12.12
CsPb0.97Y0.03I2Br
14.49
14.29
1.232
74.23
13.25
CsPb0.95Y0.05I2Br
13.57
13.11
1.154
68.94
10.80

Fig. 5c depicts the J–V characteristics of PSCs at forward and reverse scan directions. The phase segregation under illumination and inferior perovskite morphology should be responsible for the serious hysteresis for the reference PSCs. The hysteresis index of 20% for the reference PSCs is defined according eqn (2).
(2)
The ion migration at the interface or grain boundaries is responsible for phase segregation. In comparison, the hysteresis index was increased to 4% upon 3 mol% yttrium incorporation due to the reduced nonradiative recombination in the bulk and smooth morphology compared with the reference device (Table S2). To ensure the reliability of the perovskite performance, we evaluated the stabilized power output (SPO) of PSCs with and without yttrium incorporation (Fig. 5d). The reference and yttrium incorporated PSCs were biased at their respective maximum power output (VMP values are 0.83 V and 1.01 V, respectively). The efficiency of 3 mol% incorporated yttrium CsPbI2Br PSCs was obtained, and it is close to that obtained from the J–V curves.
We further investigated the photoluminescence (PL) and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) of the reference CsPbI2Br and CsPb0.97Y0.03I2Br perovskite films on pure glass, and the resulting spectra are shown in Fig. 6a. The CsPbI2Br and CsPb0.97Y0.03I2Br films exhibited a broad emission at ∼650 nm and the PL intensity of the CsPb0.97Y0.03I2Br films is much higher than that of the reference film, indicating significantly reduced nonradiative recombination centers. The TRPL decay curves were fitted by a double exponential decay function (Table S3). Yttrium-incorporated CsPbI2Br exhibited a longer decay lifetime than the reference film. The slow decay component (τ2) is mainly correlated with radiative recombination of carriers. In this case, τ2 is increased from 0.81 ns for the reference film to 7.85 ns for the 3 mol% yttrium incorporated perovskite film, which can be ascribed to the excellent crystallinity and reduced compositional defects. Furthermore, the density of states (DOS) distributions of the reference and yttrium-incorporated perovskite films were determined by PYS analysis. Fig. 6b shows lower DOS for perovskite films incorporating various contents of yttrium compared with the reference film, indicating the fewer number of occupied states for carriers. These results demonstrated that yttrium incorporation into the perovskite host structure can passivate the trap states, which in turn induces lower DOS. Their corresponding dark J–V curves are compared in Fig. S14, which shows lower leakage current at low bias voltages in comparison with the reference PSCs. This superior characteristic is beneficial to minimize the nonradiative energy loss leading to higher Voc. Fig. S15 shows the density of states (DOS) of the CsPbI2Br and CsPb0.875Y0.125I2Br perovskites, revealing the electronic structure of perovskites. For the control CsPbI2Br, I-p and Pb-s states contribute to the majority of the valence band maximum (VBM), and the conduction band minimum (CBM) mainly consists of Pb-p states. For the CsPb0.875Y0.125I2Br perovskite, the VBM of perovskites are composed of Pb-s orbitals. It should be noted that Pb-p and Y-d orbitals contribute to the CBM of perovskites, which did not have an impact on the conduction band edge. In addition, yttrium incorporation did not influence the direct band gap, which agrees well with experimental results.
We then performed capacitance–voltage (C–V) measurement to analyze and understand the mechanism of charge recombination and improvement in Voc. As shown in Fig. 6c, the built-in potential (Vbi) can be estimated from the X-intercept according to the following eqn (3).
(3)
where
C denotes the capacitance under applied voltage, ε and ε0 represent the relative permittivity and the vacuum permittivity, respectively, and NA is the carrier concentration. The Vbi in the perovskite device was enlarged significantly from 0.91 V for the control device to 1.18 V for the yttrium-incorporated perovskite device. This enhanced Vbi in turn provides a larger driving force for extracting photoinduced carriers to the anode or cathode, respectively. In principle, the trap-induced recombination is associated with the spatial variation of the quasi Fermi level in perovskites, which results in a lowered energetic offset between the quasi Fermi level of the ETL/cathode contact and perovskite. Thus we observed higher flat-band potentials in the yttrium-incorporated perovskite device, indicating suppressed carrier recombination compared with the reference perovskite device, which is consistent with the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) results that exhibited higher carrier recombination resistance extracted from the equivalent circuit model (Fig. 6d). The recombination resistance (Rrec) and series resistance (Rs) were extracted respectively from the Nyquist plots based on the equivalent circuit model (insets in Fig. 6d). The Rrec improved remarkably from 2645 Ω for the reference perovskite device to 44790 Ω for the 3 mol% yttrium-incorporated perovskite device, suggesting an effective suppression of charge recombination.

To further investigate the charge recombination within the perovskite devices, we measured the Voc under various light densities. Fig. 6e shows the dependence of the open circuit voltage (Vλ) on light density (Pλ). The relationship of Vλ and Pλ can be understood from the equation Vλ–Vs = (nkBT/q)ln(Pλ/Ps), where Ps and Vs represent the open-circuit voltage at standard light density and the corresponding voltage under standard light intensity, respectively, kB is the Boltzmann constant and n is the ideal factor. We can clearly observe higher Voc at various light densities upon yttrium incorporation compared with the reference PSCs, indicating minimized energy loss. A smaller n value of 1.24 was obtained for the CsPb0.97Y0.03I2Br-based PSCs compared with an n value of 2.59 obtained by linear fitting of Vocversus light density. Ideally, the n value should be 1 in the absence of trap-assisted recombination. This reduced n upon yttrium incorporation confirms that the charge recombination was effectively suppressed, consistent with C–V characterization and EIS results.
As discussed above, yttrium can impede the crystallization and efficiently stabilize the α-phase of CsPbI2Br through incorporation of yttrium into the crystal lattice. In this study, the stability of the reference and 3 mol% yttrium-incorporated CsPbI2Br PSCs was investigated in humid air at 65% RH. As shown in Fig. 6f, the unencapsulated reference PSCs exhibited fast degradation within 40 min in humid air. Comparatively, yttrium-incorporated PSCs were examined every hour and negligible efficiency loss was observed even after aging for 14 h under exposure to humid air. Fig. S16a and b show that the fast decline of Jsc and Voc is the main culprit for the degradation for the control device. The inset images show the reference and yttrium-incorporated PSCs after 14 h of storage in humid air with 65% RH. It can be noted that the reference PSC was prone to complete degradation in humid air, making it transparent, while the yttrium-incorporated PSC was preserved due to the yttrium-assisted superior phase stability. These results further demonstrated that yttrium could assist in the formation of a denser compact perovskite film and effectively stabilize the α-phase of CsPbI2Br perovskite.

In summary, we incorporated yttrium in the CsPbI2Br structure by partial substitution for Pb. During the crystal growth, yttrium ions interact with DMSO solvent in PbI2 planes, decelerating CsPbI2Br crystallization to form denser compact perovskite films with smaller grain size. Finally, yttrium substituted Pb partially to stabilize the α-phase perovskite host lattice by increasing the tolerance factor with smaller grains. Nonradiative recombination centers were significantly suppressed as evidenced by TSC measurement. A 360-fold stability improvement of CsPbI2Br films upon yttrium incorporation was achieved in the ambient atmosphere at 65% RH. The yttrium-incorporated CsPbI2Br PSCs fabricated in humid air with 65% RH exhibited a much-enhanced efficiency of 13.25% with a record open-circuit voltage of 1.232 V compared with only 8.46% for the reference PSCs, which can be ascribed to better crystalline quality with effective passivation induced by yttrium incorporation. Furthermore, the yttrium-incorporated PSCs showed a tremendous stability improvement, and negligible efficiency loss was observed after 14 h of storage in humid air with 65% RH. This study demonstrates an effective way to design high quality perovskite films through crystallization engineering induced by yttrium and to achieve higher performance photovoltaic all-inorganic perovskite devices with superior stability.


Lead iodide (PbI2, TCI), cesium bromide (CsBr, TCI), anhydrous N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF, 99.99%, Sigma-Aldrich), yttrium iodide (YI3, 99.99%, Sigma), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO, 99.99%, Sigma-Aldrich), poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl) (P3HT), ITO glass, SnO2 nanoparticles (15% dispersed in H2O), and tin(II) chloride (SnCl2) were purchased and used without any further purification.


ITO glasses were sonicated with distilled water, acetone and isopropanol sequentially for 15 min in each solvent, and a 15 min UV–O3 treatment was further conducted on ITO substrates prior to the deposition of the SnO2 compact layer. Diluted SnO2 colloidal solution (2.67% in water) was spin-coated on ITO substrates at 2000 rpm for 30 s and then annealed at 150 °C for 30 min. Then SnCl2 solution (0.1 M in ethanol) was spin-coated on the SnO2 compact layer at 6000 rpm for 30 s and annealed at 180 °C for 1 h. CsPbI2Br perovskite precursor solution was prepared through mixing CsBr (1.35 M) and PbI2 (1.35 M) in DMSO:DMF mixed solvent (9:1). For yttrium incorporation in the perovskite solution, 1%, 2%, 3% and 5% M/M YI3 were dissolved in the CsPbI2Br precursor, respectively. All-inorganic perovskite film was fabricated by spin-coating 75 μl perovskite precursor solution at 1000 rpm for 20 s and 3000 rpm for 30 s. 500 μl ethyl acetate was dropped quickly onto the film over the last 10 s during the second step. Then the film was first annealed on a hotplate at 45 °C for 4–6 min, and then annealed on the hotplate at 160 °C for 10 min. After cooling down to room temperature, P3HT solution (10 mg ml−1 in chlorobenzene) was spin-coated at 3000 rpm for 30 s and annealed at 140 °C for 10 min. Finally, 80 nm gold was evaporated as the electrode under high vacuum (<4 × 10−3 Pa).


The density of states (DOS) was determined by photoelectron yield spectroscopy (PYS) using a Bunkoukeiki KV 205-HK ionization energy system with photon energy from 4.5 eV to 6.7 eV. Examination of the perovskite film morphology was performed by SEM (HITACHI S4800). Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) measurement was performed in ATR PRO400-S mode. XRD patterns were obtained with a D8 X-ray diffractometer, using Cu Kα radiation. The steady-state photoluminescence (PL) and time-resolved PL measurements were performed using a Fluorolog-3-p spectrophotometer with excitation light. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was conducted using a system from Thermo Scientific with a C1s binding energy of 284.8 eV as the reference. An ESCALAB 250Xi was used to measure the binding energy of Pb4f, Cs3d, Br3d and I3d elements. Electrochemical impedance spectra were measured using an electrochemical workstation (Parstat 2273, Princeton) under a 0.6 V positive bias. A TS-FETT electron trapping measuring system (Rigaku) was used in thermally stimulated current (TSC) analysis.

Atomic force microscopy (AFM) images of the perovskite samples were recorded using a NanoScope IV (Bruker) to examine the morphology of the perovskite films on substrates.
The current density–voltage characteristics of the solar cells were investigated under AM 1.5G simulated solar illumination. The active area of each solar cell was fixed at 0.10 cm2 during the performance test. Forward and reverse scans of the PSCs were performed at a scanning speed of 0.1 V s−1. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) was measured under monochromatic light from 850 nm to 300 nm (300 W xenon lamp with a monochromator, Newport 74010).

There are no conflicts to declare.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta05556h
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019