 DOI: 10.1039/C3TA10520B
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 6342-6349

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Yan
Li
,

Quanyou
Feng
,

Hong
Wang
,

Gang
Zhou
 and 

Zhong-Sheng
Wang
*

Department of Chemistry, Lab of Advanced Materials, Fudan University, 2205 Songhu Road, Shanghai 200438, P. R. China. E-mail: zs.wang@fudan.edu.cn

Received
4th February 2013
, Accepted 20th March 2013
First published on 21st March 2013
Polypyridine complexes of Co(II)/Co(III) coupled with donor–π bridge–acceptor structured organic dyes are by far the most promising route to boost the efficiency of dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). We report herein the first investigation of Ta3N5 nanorods incorporated on reduced graphene oxide (RGO) sheets as a counter electrode for application in Co(bpy)33+/2+ (bpy = 2,2′-bipyridine) mediated DSSCs. RGO–Ta3N5 composite was fabricated by mixing graphene oxide (GO) with pre-synthesized Ta3N5 nanorods (aspect ratio of ∼3) followed by facile hydrazine hydrate reduction. The composite film on conductive glass was prepared by a drop-casting process at room temperature without heat treatment. Compared with a Pt cathode with a power conversion efficiency of 7.59%, RGO–Ta3N5 exhibited comparable electrocatalytic performance for the reduction of Co(bpy)33+ species and better electrocatalytic stability in Co(bpy)33+/2+ acetonitrile solution, which was attributed to the synergetic catalytic effect of RGO and Ta3N5 nanorods and the high electrical conductivity derived from the RGO network, resulting in a power conversion efficiency of 7.85%. The present result is expected to lead to a family of composites for highly efficient cathode materials.

Solar energy, the largest single source of clean energy, is of great potential to replace fossil fuels in the future. Since a prototype for dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) was reported in 1991 by O'Regan and Grätzel, DSSCs have aroused an intense interest and currently represent the cutting edge of photovoltaic technologies with a high efficiency and low production cost. A typical DSSC consists of three key components: a dye-sensitized nanocrystalline TiO2 photoanode, an electrolyte with a redox mediator, and a counter electrode (CE). Commonly, the latter is conducting glass coated with platinum film (Pt-FTO) and the former is an iodide/triiodide (I−/I3−) redox couple in an aprotic medium.

Considering the practical application of the DSSC technology, photovoltage is an important photovoltaic parameter. For the standard I−/I3− redox couple, the mismatch between its redox potential (ca. 0.35 V vs. NHE) and the typical oxidation potential of the dye (ca. 1.0 V vs. NHE) sacrifices a lot of energy for dye regeneration and thus prevents the DSSC from reaching large values of photopotential. To overpass this drawback and hence improve the power conversion efficiency (PCE), research progress in the field of DSSCs highlights replacing the traditional I−/I3− mediator by various organic or organometallic redox couples with more positive redox potentials. Recently, polypyridine complexes of Co(II)/Co(III) coupled with donor (D)–π bridge–acceptor (A) structured organic dyes has turned out to be a particularly promising route to achieve high photovoltage and boost the PCE of DSSCs. Based on this concept, Yella et al. made a new record efficiency of 12.3% by using a Co(II/III)tris(bipyridyl)-based redox electrolyte in conjunction with a D–π-bridge–A zinc porphyrin dye as sensitizer and Pt as the CE.
Apart from the electrolyte, a good CE that possesses both high electrical conductivity and excellent catalytic activity is also essential for high performance of DSSCs. Although Pt is really outstanding, its low abundance ratio has stimulated great efforts to develop alternative materials capable of replacing Pt as electrocatalysts, such as inorganic compounds, carbon materials, conducting polymers, and some composite materials. Amidst the reported carbon materials, graphene has emerged as a fascinating material for CE studies in DSSCs, which is usually prepared from the chemical or thermal reduction of graphene oxide (GO). Reduced graphene oxide (RGO), the intermediate state between GO and graphene, possesses several types of oxygen-containing functional groups (–OH, O, –COOH), which are capable of interacting with metal nanoparticles, oxides or nitrides, and lattice surface defects that are required for electrocatalysis. For this reason, RGO is favored for CE material as compared to the perfect, fully reduced and defect-free graphene.
Metal nitrides containing Ta5+, such as Ta3N5, demonstrate noble-metal-like electron features. A DSSC composed of them should show similar performance to a typical Pt counter electrode. However, the electrode has very low catalytic efficiency for the reduction of I3−. Herein, using a D–π–A structured organic dye (FNE29, Fig. S1) as sensitizer and a Co(bpy)33+/2+ redox couple (Fig. S2) in acetonitrile as the electrolyte, we demonstrate that low-cost RGO–Ta3N5 composite, fabricated by incorporating Ta3N5 nanorods (NRs) to the RGO networks, can exhibit comparable catalytic activity for the reduction of Co(bpy)33+ species to that of Pt and better electrochemical stability than Pt, although a Ta3N5 NRs electrode alone has lower electrocatalytic performance.

Ta3N5 NRs were fabricated through a modified SiO2-surface-assisted method presented by Gao et al. Briefly, 0.5 g of TaCl5 powder and 1.5 g urea were successively dissolved in 2 mL of methanol, to which 0.14 g SiO2 nanoparticles (10–15 nm in diameter, Strem Chemicals, Inc.) was added. The solution was dried under stirring until a gel was formed. After calcination in pure N2 under 140 Pa at 780 °C for 6 h, the resulting solid powders were treated with 1 M NaOH for 2 days to remove SiO2 and washed repeatedly with deionized water, and then the Ta3N5 NRs were obtained, which were ultrasonically dispersed in ethanol with a concentration of 0.2 mg mL−1.


GO was synthesized from purified natural graphite (Alading Reagent Inc.) by a modified Hummers method. The RGO suspension was directly prepared by a hydrazine hydrate (N2H4·H2O, 10 wt%, Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd.) reduction of 0.25 mg mL−1 exfoliated GO suspension in mixed ethanol/water solvents (1:1, v/v), which was obtained by ultrasonication for 0.5 h, according to a previous publication. For the synthesis of RGO–Ta3N5 composite, a certain amount of Ta3N5 suspension was dropwise added into 10 mL GO solution under ultrasonic condition and a transparent suspension without any macroscopic precipitates was obtained. After 25 μL hydrazine hydrate was added, the solution was heated in an oil bath at 98 °C for 4 h to form the RGO–Ta3N5 composite suspension. Samples with different Ta3N5/GO ratios of 0.5/1, 1/1, 1.5/1, 2/1, 2.5/1 and 3/1 were prepared, but the ratio of 2/1 produced the best electrocatalytic performance and was selected to conduct the present research.


The CEs of RGO and RGO–Ta3N5 were fabricated by a drop-casting method. A certain amount of RGO or RGO–Ta3N5 suspension was drop-casted onto the surface of a drilled FTO substrate (fluorine-doped SnO2, 7 Ω sq−1, transmittance 80%, Nippon Sheet Glass Co., Ltd.), which was masked by 3M scotch tape with an aperture area of 0.6 × 0.6 cm2, and dried at room temperature. Pure Ta3N5 CEs were prepared via the same method as that for RGO and RGO–Ta3N5, but annealed in Ar atmosphere at 400 °C for 1 h to improve the contact between Ta3N5 and FTO. For comparison, catalyst layers on FTO were controlled by the same amount of catalytic materials used by repeating the drop-casting deposition. These RGO based films on FTO were firm enough for fabricating DSSCs. As a reference, a pyrolytic Pt CE was also prepared by the deposition of 20 μL of H2PtCl6 in ethanol (5 mM) on a 1.5 × 1.5 cm2 FTO glass followed by heat treatment at 380 °C for 30 min.

TiO2 based photoanodes containing transparent (∼5 μm) and scattering (∼3 μm) layers were prepared by a screen-printing method on FTO glass according to a previous report, and were sensitized with a D–π–A structured metal-free organic dye (FNE29, Fig. S1). The dye-sensitized TiO2 photoanode and the CE were separated by a hot-melt Surlyn film (30 μm) and sealed through hot-pressing. Then the electrolyte of the Co(bpy)33+/2+ redox couple (Fig. S2) in acetonitrile was injected into the interspace between the anode and CE. Finally, the holes on the back of the CE were sealed with Surlyn films covered with a thin glass slide under heat. The active area of the DSSCs was 0.2304 cm2. Symmetric dummy cells with an active area of 0.36 cm2 were assembled with two identical CEs filled with the electrolyte. The synthesis of FNE29 and the Co(bpy)33+/2+ redox couple are detailed in the ESI. Moreover, DSSCs with N719 (cis-di(isothiocyanato)-bis-(2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylato)ruthenium-(II) bis-tetrabutylammonium) sensitizer and I−/I3− redox electrolyte (0.1 M LiI, 0.05 M I2, 0.6 M 1,2-dimethyl-3-n-propylimidazolium iodide, and 0.5 M 4-tert-butylpyridine in anhydrous acetonitrile) were also fabricated for comparison.

The structural properties of Ta3N5 NRs, RGO and RGO–Ta3N5 composite were identified by field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM, S-4800, Hitachi) and high resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM, JEM-2100F, JEOL). X-Ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were recorded on an X-ray powder diffractometer (D8 Advance, Bruker) with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 0.154 nm). The Raman scattering measurements were performed at 25 °C with 633 nm excitation on a Renishaw spectrometer using a 100× objective. The Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) specific surface areas were analyzed by the BET equation using a surface area analyzer (ASAP 2020, Micromeritics). The thickness of the CEs was determined with a surface profiler (Dektak 150, Veeco). Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and Tafel polarization curves were performed on an electrochemical workstation (ZAHNER ZENNIUM CIMPS-1, Germany). The photocurrent density–voltage curves of DSSCs were recorded on a Keithley 2400 source meter under the illumination of AM1.5G simulated solar light coming from an AAA solar simulator (Newport-94043A) equipped with a Xe lamp (450 W) and an AM1.5G filter. The light intensity was calibrated using a reference Si solar cell (Newport-91150) equipped with a KG-5 filter (Schott). A black mask with an aperture area of 0.2304 cm2 was applied on the surface of the DSSCs to avoid stray light completely. Action spectra of incident monochromatic photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) for the solar cells were obtained with an Oriel-74125 system (Oriel Instruments). The intensity of monochromatic light was measured with a Si detector (Oriel-71640).


A typical TEM image (Fig. 1a) shows that the as-synthesized Ta3N5 is NRs in shape with the aspect ratio of ∼3 (28.3 nm in length to 8.8 nm in diameter in average), which can be easily dispersed in ethanol by ultrasonic agitation (inset in Fig. 1a). The HRTEM image (Fig. 1b) confirms that Ta3N5 NRs have a relatively high crystallinity. The clear lattice fringes of 0.36, 0.28 and 0.25 nm can be indexed as (110), (203) and (113) crystal planes, respectively, in good agreement with the structure of the Ta3N5 phase in X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns (Fig. 2a). A TEM image of the RGO–Ta3N5 composite (Fig. 1c) reveals the Ta3N5 NRs are loaded with an unchanged structure on the RGO sheets in a slightly aggregated form. Fig. 1d–f give the top views of the drop-casted Ta3N5, RGO and RGO–Ta3N5 films on FTO substrates, which served as the CEs in DSSCs. The surface of the Ta3N5 NRs film is rough with rich internal porous structure. The RGO CE shows a relatively homogeneous and smooth morphology with nearly no shrinkage and folds. By contrast, the RGO sheets in RGO–Ta3N5 composite become rough and more corrugated with Ta3N5 NRs embedded in the RGO sheets although a few Ta3N5 particles aggregate on the surface of RGO.

The BET surface areas of the Ta3N5 NRs, RGO and RGO–Ta3N5 composite in this work were determined as 39.8, 12.3 and 57.6 m2 g−1, respectively. As compared to the bare Ta3N5, the size of Ta3N5 in the composite was not changed significantly as revealed by HRTEM. However, it is interesting that the BET surface area increased significantly from bare Ta3N5 or RGO to the RGO–Ta3N5 composite. The incorporation of Ta3N5 NRs on the surface of GO followed by reduction can inhibit aggregation of the formed RGO, resulting in more RGO surface being available. The specific surface area of RGO in the RGO–Ta3N5 composite is calculated of 93.2 m2 g−1 by subtracting the contribution from the Ta3N5 NRs, which is much higher than that for the bare RGO sample. Therefore, the BET surface area for the composite is larger than that of bare Ta3N5 or RGO. Apparently, the RGO–Ta3N5 composite can be expected as an effective electron transport network that facilitates the collection and transfer of electrons from the external circuit and subsequent regeneration of the redox couple. In addition, the network is also favorable for the mass transport of the redox couple in the CE film.
The identity and structure of the samples were further characterized by XRD measurements. All the diffraction peaks in the XRD pattern of Ta3N5 NRs can be indexed to the Ta3N5 phase based on the reference spectrum (PDF card no. 89-5200), whilst no peaks of other tantalum species are observed. The typical XRD pattern of RGO in the middle of Fig. 2a shows a broad peak centered at 2θ = 24.9°, which is attributed to the crystallographic plane of (002) in the graphitic structure. Compared with the XRD pattern of GO (2θ = 10.5°) shown in Fig. S3, the peak shift to a higher 2θ angle suggests that the interlayer distance is reduced due to the removal of most oxygen-containing functional groups of GO. For RGO–Ta3N5 composite, except for the broad peak originating from RGO, diffraction peaks of Ta3N5 crystal are simultaneously observed, revealing the presence of RGO and Ta3N5 in the RGO–Ta3N5 composite.
Raman spectroscopy is a powerful nondestructive tool to investigate structural variations.Fig. 2b shows the Raman spectra of the as-prepared RGO and RGO–Ta3N5 composite. Two prominent peaks at around 1329 and 1597 cm−1 correspond to the typical D and G bands of graphene sheets, respectively. The D band is due to the breathing mode of aromatic rings and requires a defect for its activation. The G band corresponds to optical E2g phonons at the Brillouin zone center and is due to bond stretching of sp2 carbon pairs in both rings and chains. The D-band intensity is also often used as a measure for the degree of disorder. The intensity ratio of the D-band and G-band (D/G) indicates the amount of structurally ordered graphite crystallites in the carbonaceous materials. For RGO–Ta3N5 composite, the increase in the D band intensity manifests the prevailing heterogeneous superstructure at the interface of RGO and Ta3N5, and the higher intensity ratio of D/G to that of RGO indicates the high density of the defects on the structure of the graphene, which is attributed to the formation of incoherent interfaces between Ta3N5 NRs and RGO sheets. Furthermore, from pure RGO to RGO–Ta3N5 composite, the G-band shifts to the lower wavenumber by nearly 15 cm−1. This shift indicates that Ta3N5 NRs are mainly chemically absorbed on the surface of RGO sheets, which is likely to originate from the interaction between hydroxyl groups on GO and the tantalum nitride before the hydrothermal reduction process. This interaction could cause the Ta3N5 NRs to be loaded on RGO sheets, and the electron transport between Ta3N5 and RGO occurs easily. In addition, a simple blending composite of RGO and Ta3N5 (denoted as RGOT) is also prepared by directly blending the RGO and Ta3N5 NRs suspension together under ultrasonic condition for comparison. The Raman spectrum (Fig. S4) of the RGOT composite shows unchanged peak positions and also the D/G ratio compared to RGO, indicating that Ta3N5 is physically mixed with RGO in this case.

Fig. 3a compares the photovoltaic properties of the DSSCs using RGO–Ta3N5, RGO, Ta3N5 NRs, and Pt as counter electrodes. The detailed photovoltaic parameters from the photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) curves are summarized in Table 1. It is seen that the open-circuit voltage (Voc) and the short-circuit current density (Jsc) of Ta3N5 NRs or RGO electrode are high, but their fill factors (FF) are pretty low. When the as-prepared RGO–Ta3N5 composites are used as the CE, the photovoltaic parameters are Voc = 837 mV, Jsc = 13.53 mA cm−2, FF = 0.69, and η = 7.85%. Obviously, all the photovoltaic parameters are higher than those of the DSSCs using RGO or Ta3N5 NRs. The improved FF (0.69) compared to that using RGO (0.45) or Ta3N5 NRs (0.32) alone highlights the predominant synergic effect of RGO and Ta3N5 NRs in RGO–Ta3N5 composite. More significantly, the performance of the cell with the RGO–Ta3N5 CE is comparable with that of the typical Pt CE (Voc = 828 mV, Jsc = 13.38 mA cm−2, FF = 0.68, and η = 7.59%). The corresponding IPCE spectra of the DSSCs are presented in Fig. 3b. The IPCEs between 350 and 650 nm increase in the order of Ta3N5 < RGO < Pt < RGO–Ta3N5, being consistent with the Jsc trend in Fig. 3a. Further improvements can be expected by fully optimizing fabrication conditions and device configuration, such as increasing dye loading with thicker anodes. Therefore, the RGO–Ta3N5, fabricated by loading Ta3N5 NRs on RGO sheets, may be a promising alternative to the conventional Pt electrode in Co(bpy)33+/2+ mediated organic DSSCs.
Counter electrode

V
oc/mV

J
sc/mA cm−2
FF

η/%

R
s/Ω cm2

R
ct/Ω cm2

Z
n/Ω cm2
Ta3N5 NRs
783
11.69
31.6
2.89
1.39
45.14
8.42
RGO
819
12.41
44.8
4.55
1.94
7.11
7.83
RGO–Ta3N5
837
13.53
69.3
7.85
2.09
1.39
2.54
Pt
828
13.38
68.5
7.59
1.69
1.80
2.78
To elucidate the differences of Jsc and FF for various cathodes, it is necessary to investigate the electrochemical catalytic activity of different CEs on the reduction of Co(bpy)33+ species. EIS analysis was carried out in a symmetric configuration, in which a thin layer of redox electrolyte solution (the same as the electrolyte used in DSSCs) was sandwiched between two identical electrodes (CE/electrolyte/CE), and the results are shown in the form of a Nyquist plot (Fig. 4). Two semicircles are observed in the measured frequency range of 5 × 10−2 to 1 × 106 Hz for all CE/electrolyte/CE dummy cells. As a third semicircle in the high-frequency region, which manifests the Nernst diffusion impedance (Zpore) in the electrode pores, did not appear at tested bias voltages (Fig. S5), Zpore can be omitted in our case due to the small amount of catalyst on FTO. Therefore, the Randles-type equivalent circuit diagram (inset of Fig. 4a) was selected and used to fit the impedance spectra, in which the constant phase element (CPE) describes the deviation from the ideal capacitance due to the roughness of the electrodes. Table 1 lists the values of impedance parameters, which are determined by fitting the impedance spectra using the Z-view software. As electrocatalytic performance is related with the total surface area of the catalyst, we used the resistance normalized to the total surface area for direct comparison. The total surface areas obtained by the product of specific surface area, loading amount per area and the active apparent area (0.36 cm2) of the electrodes is 0.57, 0.18, 0.83 and 0.48 cm2 for Ta3N5, RGO, RGO–Ta3N5 and Pt, respectively. In this way, electrocatalytic performance can be compared more accurately.
In Fig. 4, the high-frequency intercept on the real axis represents the ohmic series resistance (Rs) of the device. The quite similar absolute Rs values of the four CEs indicates the effect of various CEs caused by Rs on photovoltaic performance can be omitted. The charge-transfer resistance (Rct) at the CE/electrolyte interface is determined by the high-frequency semicircle (left). The lower Rct means there are fewer losses for electron transfer at the CE/electrolyte interface, giving a better FF and higher η in solar cell operation. The use of Ta3N5 NRs alone, by contrast, shows the largest Rct (45.14 Ω cm2), indicating its relatively low catalytic activity. Rct for the RGO CE is about 7.11 Ω cm2. Quite unexpectedly, when Ta3N5 NRs are embedded in the RGO network, Rct significantly reduced to 1.39 Ω cm2, being close to that of Pt (1.80 Ω cm2). This reflects that the incorporation of RGO and Ta3N5 accelerates the electron transfer process at the RGO–Ta3N5 CE/electrolyte interface effectively, and, of course, the electron transport efficiency across the Ta3N5 particles is also improved with the assistance of RGO sheets. The reduction degree of GO also influences the catalytic performance. Although we could not determine the oxygen level in RGO for each sample, it is reasonable to assume that the reduction degree of GO was similar in the bare RGO and RGO–Ta3N5 samples because the preparations were controlled at the same conditions.
Furthermore, the Ta3N5 NRs in the RGO network could increase the electrode/electrolyte contact area which is known as triple junction catalytic effect and hence improve the electron transfer kinetics at the electrode/electrolyte interfaces. On the other hand, besides the individual catalytic effect from RGO and Ta3N5 NRs alone, the synergetic coupling effects of the catalytic activities between RGO and Ta3N5 NRs might well be the appropriate response for the enhanced electrocatalytic activity of RGO–Ta3N5 composite. It is noted that simple heat treatment of the samples during the fabricating process can also provide more active sites to catalyze the reduction of Co(bpy)33+ to Co(bpy)32+ as detailed in the report by Kavan et al. The semicircle in the low-frequency region (right) is assigned to the Nernst diffusion process of Co(bpy)33+ species. If the electrode is active enough, Zn should be invariant of the electrode. However, for various cathodes with different electrocatalytic activity, Zn depends not only on the ionic transport in electrolyte solution but also on the catalytic performance of the electrode. This is why we observe different Warburg impedances for different cathode materials, and the Warburg impedance increases with decreasing the catalytic activity of the electrode. As a comprehensive result, the overall impedance of the RGO–Ta3N5 is very close to that of the Pt electrode.
To further testify the substantial electrocatalytic activity of RGO–Ta3N5, Tafel polarization curves were measured on the same symmetrical cells used in the EIS experiments and are shown in Fig. 5a. The slope for the anodic or cathodic branch in the Tafel polarization curve estimates the exchange current density (J0) at the CE. A sharp increase is observed in the slope of the RGO–Ta3N5 CE, and it is similar to that of the Pt CE, showing that RGO–Ta3N5 has a similar electrocatalytic function to the Pt electrode. And the slope of the CEs changes in the order of RGO–Ta3N5 > Pt > RGO > Ta3N5. As J0 has a relationship with Rct that is expressed by eqn (1)
(1)
where
R is the universal gas constant, T is the absolute temperature, F is the Faraday constant and n is the stoichiometric number of electrons involved in a reaction, therefore we can calculate the J0 from Rct in the EIS spectra. Apparently, the sequence of the calculated J0 is identical in order of the slope, and also the same as the changing order of Jsc in Fig. 4a.

The Tafel polarization curves also show that the limiting current density, Jlim, changes in the order of RGO–Ta3N5 > Pt > RGO > Ta3N5, which can be calculated by
(2)
where
D is the diffusion coefficient, n is the stoichiometric number of electrons involved in electrochemical reduction of Co(bpy)33+, NA is the Avogadro constant, l is the spacer thickness, e0 is the elementary charge, c is the concentration of Co(bpy)33+ species. It shows that Jlim is proportional to D, implying the D should vary in the order of RGO–Ta3N5 > Pt > RGO > Ta3N5.

On the other hand, Zn in the EIS spectra can be judged from
(3)
in which
k is the Boltzmann constant, A is the electrode area, ω is the angular frequency, δ is the thickness of the diffusion layer, and the others are the same as in the above definition. From Table 1, it is found the change of Jlim obtained in Tafel polarization curves is fairly consistent with the EIS analysis about Zn and D. Consequently, from the EIS and electrochemical analysis, it can be concluded that RGO–Ta3N5 composite has a comparable electrocatalytic activity to the Pt electrode, resulting in a superior photovoltaic performance.

Furthermore, cyclic voltammetry of the dummy cells with Co(bpy)33+/2+ in acetonitrile as the electrolyte based on Pt, RGO–Ta3N5, RGO and Ta3N5 CEs was also carried out. In Fig. 5b, a higher plateau of limiting current in CV curves, which depends on the electron transfer rate at the CE/electrolyte interfaces for a redox electrolyte with fixed concentration, signifies a higher catalytic activity of the CE. The RGO–Ta3N5 shows a slightly higher current than Pt, suggesting that RGO–Ta3N5 has a similar electrocatalytic activity to the Pt electrode, and a larger active surface as well. However, the reduction reaction of Co(bpy)33+ on the RGO is obviously slower. Thus, the introduction of Ta3N5 NRs in the RGO network leads to an obvious enhancement in the Co(bpy)33+ reduction kinetics at the interface of the RGO–Ta3N5 CE.
The electrochemical stabilities of the RGO–Ta3N5 composite and Pt CEs were examined by repeated EIS measurements of the dummy cells, which were pre-treated by cyclic voltammetry (CV) scanning before each EIS test. Fig. 6 shows the evolution of impedance spectra for the dummy cell subjected to sequential scans of CV and EIS for 10 cycles. After 10 CV/EIS cycling tests, Rs and Zn remain roughly the same, indicating that the potential cycling does not affect the series ohmic resistance and the mass transport in the redox electrolyte. However, Rct increased from 1.80 to 12.53 Ω cm2 for Pt and from 1.39 to 3.85 Ω cm2 for RGO–Ta3N5. This reveals that the RGO–Ta3N5 composite has better electrochemical stability than the Pt electrode against potential cycling. The Nyquist plots of the EIS measurement in Fig. S6 show the good electrochemical stability of the RGO CE. The cycling stability of Pt and graphene-based cathodes (Fig. 6) is consistent with the earlier data reported by Kavan et al.
Superior electrocatalytic activity together with high electrical conductivity is important to fabricate highly efficient counter electrodes for DSSCs. As mentioned above, in the RGO–Ta3N5 composite, its superior electrocatalytic activity is undoubtedly the driving force for the high photovoltaic performance. The incorporation of Ta3N5 NRs in RGO decreases both the charge-transfer resistance at the CE/electrolyte interface and the diffusion impedance of Co(bpy)33+ species effectively, but the synergetic catalytic effect of Ta3N5 NRs and RGO also has an active effect on improving the electrocatalytic activity, leading to the high Jsc and FF for DSSCs with a D–π–A structured organic dye as sensitizer and a Co(bpy)33+/2+ as the redox couple. The clarification of the synergetic effect will be the focus of our future study. The J–V curve of the DSSC using RGOT as the CE is shown in Fig. S7, and its photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table S1. Compared with the RGO–Ta3N5 composite, the lower FF and η for the RGOT CE highlight the drawback of a simple mixture of Ta3N5 NRs and RGO sheets. As discussed in the Raman spectra (Fig. 2b and S4), the tight chemical interactions between RGO and Ta3N5 in the composite are favorable for efficient charge transport and responsible for its good property as a CE, while the absence of the tight chemical interactions between RGO and Ta3N5 in the physical mixture is responsible for its poor property when applied as the CE. Furthermore, the electron-transfer network formed by RGO sheets also plays an indispensable role in enhancing the photovoltaic performance. As seen in Table 1, Ta3N5 alone exhibits a low FF and a poor η because of its relatively low catalytic activity and more importantly the poor electron transport efficiency across the NRs.
For the above different CEs, they are also used in DSSCs with the famous N719 dye as sensitizer and I3−/I− redox couple in acetonitrile as electrolyte, and the J–V properties are shown in Fig. S8. From the photovoltaic parameters summarized in Table S2, it is clear that the RGO–Ta3N5 composite is not appropriate for the reduction of I3− owing to its low electrocatalytic activity in the electrolyte containing the I3−/I− redox couple.

In summary, RGO–Ta3N5 composite was fabricated by hydrothermal reduction of Ta3N5 NRs on GO sheets, in which Ta3N5 NRs with the aspect ratio of ∼3 are loaded on RGO sheets, and was securely affixed on FTO surface by an easy drop-casting method at room temperature in air. For DSSCs with D–π–A structured organic dye and a Co(bpy)33+/2+ redox couple, RGO–Ta3N5, as a new type and low-cost counter electrode material, shows not only a comparable photovoltaic performance with the conventional Pt electrode, which is attributed to its high electrocatalytic activity for the reduction of Co(bpy)33+ and the high electrical conductivity derived from the RGO network, but also a superior electrochemical stability than Pt. The striking result of this combination strategy is promising for fabricating highly efficient and cost-effective iodine-free DSSCs.


This work is financially supported by the National Basic Research Program (no. 2011CB933302) of China, the National Natural Science Foundation of China (90922004 and 50903020), STCSM (12JC1401500), the Shanghai Pujiang Program (11PJ1401700), the Jiangsu Major Program (BY2010147), the Shanghai Leading Academic Discipline Project (B108).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ta10520b
‡ Present address: Key Laboratory of Atomic and Molecular Physics & Functional Materials of Gansu Province, College of Physics and Electronic Engineering, Northwest Normal University, 967 Anning East Road, Lanzhou 730070, P. R. China.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013