 DOI: 10.1039/C5NR06558E
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 20725-20733


Min-cheol
Kim
,

Byeong Jo
Kim
,

Jungjin
Yoon
,

Jin-wook
Lee
,

Dongchul
Suh
,

Nam-gyu
Park
,

Mansoo
Choi
* and 

Hyun Suk
Jung
*

Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea. E-mail: mchoi@snu.ac.kr

Global Frontier Center for Multiscale Energy Systems, Seoul, Republic of Korea

School of Advanced Materials Science and Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, Republic of Korea. E-mail: hsjung1@skku.edu

School of Chemical Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, Republic of Korea

Department of Chemical Engineering, Hoseo University, Asan, Republic of Korea

Received
23rd September 2015
, Accepted 13th November 2015
First published on 16th November 2015
The spin-coating method, which is widely used for thin film device fabrication, is incapable of large-area deposition or being performed continuously. In perovskite hybrid solar cells using CH3NH3PbI3 (MAPbI3), large-area deposition is essential for their potential use in mass production. Prior to replacing all the spin-coating process for fabrication of perovskite solar cells, herein, a mesoporous TiO2 electron-collection layer is fabricated by using the electro-spray deposition (ESD) system. Moreover, impedance spectroscopy and transient photocurrent and photovoltage measurements reveal that the electro-sprayed mesoscopic TiO2 film facilitates charge collection from the perovskite. The series resistance of the perovskite solar cell is also reduced owing to the highly porous nature of, and the low density of point defects in, the film. An optimized power conversion efficiency of 15.11% is achieved under an illumination of 1 sun; this efficiency is higher than that (13.67%) of the perovskite solar cell with the conventional spin-coated TiO2 films. Furthermore, the large-area coating capability of the ESD process is verified through the coating of uniform 10 × 10 cm2 TiO2 films. This study clearly shows that ESD constitutes therefore a viable alternative for the fabrication of high-throughput, large-area perovskite solar cells.

Owing to the limited source of power and concerns about the environment, fossil fuels have been gradually superseded by alternative renewable energies, such as fuel cells, bio-mass energy, or solar energy. Extensive research has been conducted on developing alternative sources of energy which are environmentally friendly, renewable, and abundant. However, the high cost of producing solar cell modules for generating electric power has prevented solar energy from becoming a primary energy source. The use of low-cost organic or polymer solar cells has led to reduced costs associated with this power conversion. The corresponding low power conversion efficiency (PCE) has, however, stymied their commercialization. Recently, high-efficiency ultrathin perovskite solar cells using an organic–inorganic hybrid light-absorbent material have been extensively investigated as possible alternatives to organic or polymer solar cells. The PCE of these cells has increased significantly, from an initial value of 3.8% in 2009, to over 20% in the most recent studies where high-efficiency perovskite solar cells with performance equivalent to silicon solar cells can be achieved.

Highly crystalline CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite materials exhibit an electron diffusion length on the order of microns. However, thin perovskite films for solar cells show a relatively low quality of crystallinity and a short electron diffusion length. On account of the relatively short electron diffusion length (∼120 nm) for the CH3NH3PbI3 thin film, mesoscopic semi-conducting oxide charge-collection layers that are ∼200 nm-thick could be employed for rapid electron collection. Mesoporous TiO2 nanocrystal layers have typically been used as charge-collection layers, which play an important role in the extraction of charges from the light-absorbent perovskite layer. To obtain high-efficiency perovskite solar cells, the thickness of the TiO2 layer, perovskite light absorber, and hole transfer layer should be optimized in order to balance electron and hole transport. In addition, the filling of the perovskite into the mesoporous TiO2 film needs to be optimized in order to achieve a high level of efficiency. The pore size of the mesoporous layer is a decisive factor for filling the pores with light absorbing perovskite materials. Also, the reduction of surface defects such as Ti3+ ions is of great importance to achieve a high efficiency.
Continuous and high-throughput production of solar cell devices is required for low-cost mass production. However, spin-coating, which is the most established fabrication process for electronic devices such as perovskite solar cells, is ill-suited for commercialization. Spin-coating is not easily applied to large-area substrates with diameters exceeding several inches and hence, large-scale and high-throughput roll-to-roll processes have been evaluated as possible alternatives for commercial application. Among these alternatives, a spraying system has significant potential for use in roll-to-roll processes. Large-area and high-throughput manufacturing processes for the production of organic and perovskite solar cells that apply slot-die casting, ultrasonic spray for planar structures, have been developed by some research groups. However, a mesoscopic structure, combined with the charge separation and extraction capability, is essential to achieve high-efficiency perovskite solar cells.
Among these large-area and high-throughput processes, the electro-spray deposition (ESD) system has great potential for replacing the spin-coating method. Electro-spraying is a method of liquid atomization by applying high voltage to the metal capillary containing precursor to spray. The droplets obtained by ESD are extremely small down to tens of nanometers and highly charged up to the Rayleigh limit, the maximum charge that liquid droplets could have. Therefore, a uniform thin film could be deposited by electro-spraying charged droplets that repel each other. Moreover, with the ESD system, we could achieve large-area deposition as well as produce films that have large pore sizes and low densities of defects due to its high applied voltage. As such, in this work, we report high-efficiency (i.e., PCE > 15%) perovskite solar cells, which consist of an electro-sprayed TiO2 mesoporous (mp-TiO2) layer that was fabricated by using the ESD system; owing to their low density of surface defects, higher porosity, and superior electronic properties, these cells have higher efficiency than those consisting of a spin-coated mp-TiO2 layer. With the same TiO2 solution, the photovoltaic properties of the cells are improved and their large-scale production is enabled by simply changing the method of mp-TiO2 deposition from spin-coating to ESD.

The schematic in Fig. 1a shows the ESD system setup for TiO2 thin films and the five-stage fabrication process of the optimized perovskite solar cells. The dense TiO2 layer, referred to as the hole blocking layer, was prepared on transparent fluorine-doped tin oxide/glass using a butanol-based sol–gel method. Mesoporous TiO2 thin films to be used as the electron-collection layer of the perovskite-based solar cell were subsequently deposited on the hole blocking layer using ESD or a spin-coating method. A 180 nm-thick electro-sprayed mesoporous TiO2 layer was fabricated by applying a high voltage to the syringe containing the TiO2 precursor. The spin-coated mesoporous TiO2 layer was also fabricated with the same thickness by spin-coating the TiO2 precursor. Once deposited, a light-absorbent perovskite material, CH3NH3PbI3, was spin-coated on this mesoporous layer via the solvent engineering method described by Seok et al. The device was completed by depositing a hole transfer material and Au (as the metal counter electrode) via spin-coating and the evaporation deposition system, respectively. Details of fabrication processes are well explained in the Experimental section.

Moreover, images (Fig. 1b and c) obtained from focused ion beam (FIB)-assisted cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) revealed that each of the electro-sprayed and spin-coated TiO2 thin films was ∼180 nm thick. The former was, however, more porous than the latter, although the films had almost identical surface morphologies (Fig. 1d and e). Fig. 1f shows glazing incidence X-ray diffraction (GI-XRD) patterns obtained from the films annealed at 500 °C. As the figure shows, the anatase phase occurs at similar peak positions (i.e., 2θ angles) and with similar intensities in both films. XRD patterns of the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite thin films fabricated on electro-sprayed and spin-coated TiO2 layers also show identical crystallinity in Fig. S6. These indicate that electro-spraying did not influence the crystallinity of the TiO2 nanoparticles and the perovskite thin film produced on the TiO2 film. The corresponding X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) data are shown in Fig. 1g and h. The spectrum corresponding to Ti 2p1/2 and 2p3/2 indicates that non-stoichiometric point defects such as Ti3+ ions are present in the spin-coated TiO2 layer but are absent in the electro-sprayed film. These data imply that point defects are annihilated when the electro-spray process is performed at high voltages (over 10 kV). A study aimed at identifying the mechanism governing this annihilation is currently underway.
Such differences in terms of defect annihilation and porosity gave us motivation for applying various voltages so as to investigate the correlation between the applied voltage and device performances. Electro-spray has various parameters such as bias voltage, flow rate, syringe needle diameter, and the distance between the tip and substrate. One of the most influential parameters for thin film properties via ESD systems is the voltage we apply for the cone-jet spraying mode. The equation of relationship with the applied voltage and the charged droplet size could be described as follows.
(1)

Eqn (1) describes that the increase in current (I) would make the droplet size (rj) of the precursor solution smaller. The current (I) is dependent on the applied voltage if other parameters are constant. In addition, as the voltage increases, the total amount of charge in the spray is also enlarged. When the droplets have high positive charge, the deposition of droplets would form more porous structures due to high repulsive force with a large spray angle which is observed in a magnified form in Fig. S1. Thus, we expect that the applied voltage affects the perovskite solar cell performance on account of the uniformity and the porosity change.
The photovoltaic performance of perovskite solar cells based on the electro-sprayed TiO2 films fabricated at various applied voltages was characterized. Fig. 2a shows the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of each perovskite device and Table 1 lists the performance parameters of the device as expected. The current density (Jsc) changes only slightly with the applied voltage. However, the open circuit voltage (Voc) and fill factor (FF) exhibit similar trends to the PCE; i.e., owing to the higher Voc and FF, the perovskite solar cells based on the TiO2 films electro-sprayed at voltages of 9.6 kV and 10.8 kV exhibit higher PCE than their spin-coated counterpart. However, the Jsc of the latter is higher than that of the former, which concurs with the IPCE data presented in ESI Fig. S2a. These differences stem from the higher optical transparency of the spin-coated films compared with that of the electro-sprayed film, as shown in ESI Fig. S2b.

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF
PCE (%)

R
s (Ω)
ESD (10.8 kV)
17.87 ± 0.50
1.04 ± 0.04
0.71 ± 0.03
13.25 ± 0.86
44.26
ESD (9.6 kV)
17.77 ± 0.67
1.01 ± 0.02
0.72 ± 0.02
12.89 ± 0.36
63.69
ESD (7.6 kV)
17.29 ± 0.69
0.97 ± 0.01
0.72 ± 0.03
12.16 ± 0.98
70.00
ESD (6.0 kV)
17.96 ± 0.36
0.96 ± 0.02
0.67 ± 0.03
11.44 ± 0.72
91.37
Spin-coating
18.20 ± 0.45
0.99 ± 0.02
0.69 ± 0.02
12.41 ± 0.46
69.02

Fig. 2b and c show the FIB-assisted cross-sectional SEM images of the perovskite solar cells based on each film and the reason for the differences. These images were obtained by using an energy selective backscattered (ESB) detector to distinguish the pore-filling capacity of each film. The white and black regions are associated with the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite and the mesoporous TiO2 layers, respectively. Fig. 2b and c clearly show that the perovskite light absorber was well infiltrated into the electro-sprayed TiO2 film compared to the spin-coated film which is in accordance with the more porous structure of the electro-sprayed TiO2 film (Fig. 1b and c). The highly porous structure is conducive to infiltration by the light absorber, which in turn leads to an increase in the junction area between the film and the perovskite interface. This increased area results in a decrease in the series resistance and facilitates charge collection, thereby yielding high FF and Voc values (Table 1). For the cells based on the electro-sprayed films, the increase in the Voc and FF with increasing cone-jet voltage results from the correlation between the voltage and the porous structure of the film. The trends of Voc and PCE are visualized from a graph in Fig. S3.

Fig. 3a and b show the Nyquist plots obtained by alternating current (AC) impedance spectroscopy of the perovskite devices under an illumination of 1 sun and forward bias voltages of 0 V, 0.8 V, and Voc. Impedance spectroscopy measurements yield information on the total ohmic resistance which is associated with the series resistance. The semi-circles corresponding to the device based on the electro-sprayed film are smaller than those of the device that uses the spin-coated film; this results from the lower internal resistance stemming from the lower series resistance and better charge injection at the interface between the porous TiO2 and the perovskite material. These data support the higher FF of the perovskite solar cell using the electro-sprayed TiO2 film having the porous nature.Fig. 3c and d show diffusion coefficients and electron recombination times, respectively. These are outcomes from transient photocurrent and voltage experiments which are associated with the charge injection characteristics. In Fig. 3c, diffusion coefficients of the electro-sprayed TiO2 based device are higher than those of the spin-coated TiO2 based device. Moreover, in Fig. 3d, the perovskite solar cell with electro-sprayed TiO2 exhibits a longer electron lifetime which is responsible for the higher Voc of the electro-sprayed TiO2 based device. The higher Voc originates from the better charge-collection capacity and the low density of point defects of the electro-sprayed TiO2 film. We can conclude that electro-sprayed TiO2 shows improved diffusion of electrons with a longer lifetime so that a higher fill-factor could be achieved due to enhanced charge collection. The higher open circuit voltage could also be explained with higher diffusion coefficients. A large value of diffusion coefficients proposes indirectly that electrons are injected into TiO2 particles better if other parts of devices are composed of the same structure. Effectively separated electron–hole pairs at the surface between the TiO2 layer and the perovskite layer may be attributed to the lower recombination rate, which may induce a longer electron lifetime. If electrons are injected efficiently into TiO2 particles, the quasi-Fermi energy of the TiO2 layer could be higher, which leads to a higher open circuit voltage.
The cell data obtained at an optimized thickness of the perovskite layer are shown in Fig. 4a. The optimized perovskite solar cell device with the electro-sprayed TiO2 layer exhibited a PCE of 15.11% for a short-circuit current density (Jsc), open circuit voltage (Voc), and fill factor (FF) of 19.37 mA cm−2, 1.05 V, and 0.74, respectively; the optimized device with the spin-coated TiO2 layer exhibited the corresponding respective values of 13.67%, 19.47 mA cm−2, 1.02 V, and 0.69. Although the Jsc of the former was slightly lower than that of the latter, the Voc and FF were significantly higher, thereby resulting in a higher overall PCE. Fig. 4b–d show the plots of the Jsc, Voc and FF of the optimized perovskite solar cells. The lower Jsc and higher Voc and FF of the device with the electro-sprayed layer, compared to those of the device with the spin-coated layer, indicate that the electro-spray process leads to highly efficient cells. In addition, 100 cells of perovskite devices with electro-sprayed and spin-coated TiO2 layers were fabricated in order to confirm the higher PCEs of the cells fabricated via the electro-spray process (Fig. S4). Both perovskite devices with electro-sprayed or spin-coated TiO2 show some hysteresis characteristics (Fig. S7).
The ESD, which enables the fabrication of mesoporous TiO2 layers, is one of the most efficient high-throughput continuous deposition systems. Fig. 5a shows a photo of our ESD system during deposition on the large-area substrate. The spray radius is large enough to cover the substrate completely. A large 10 × 10 cm2 FTO/glass substrate was coated with a blocking layer in order to confirm the applicability of this method for large-area deposition (Fig. 5b). To verify the uniformity of the TiO2 film, the large coated substrate was cut into 25 small (i.e., 2 × 2 cm2) cells, from which perovskite devices were fabricated. Fig. 5c shows the histogram of 23 cells, i.e. those that exhibited the best and worst efficiency were excluded. Performances of entire 23 cells are indicated in Table S1 and the position of each cell is expressed in Fig. S5. These results reveal the consistency of the device that uses the large-area mesoporous TiO2 layer. Fig. 5d shows the cross-sectional SEM images of three separate regions, whose locations are indicated in the photo of the TiO2-coated large-area substrate in Fig. 5b. The thickness and morphology of the TiO2 layer in each region confirm that the ESD method is suitable for the fabrication of large-area perovskite solar modules.

In the present study, we obtained the first-ever ESD-produced, highly porous, uniform, low-defect mesoporous TiO2 electron-collection layers for high-efficiency perovskite solar cells. Under controlled fabrication conditions, the electro-sprayed TiO2 layer exhibits better performance, with a PCE of over 15%, and a higher Voc and FF than its spin-coated counterparts; this better performance is attributed to the more porous structure of and low density of point defects in the latter compared to those of the former. Measurements of the impedance and transient photocurrent revealed the lower series resistance and superior charge-collection properties, which lead to both higher FF and Voc, of the electro-sprayed films compared to those of the spin-coated films. Uniformly thick large-area TiO2 films were fabricated by using the ESD process. Our study clearly demonstrates that this process is capable of controlling the mesoporous structure and is therefore suitable for the fabrication of high-throughput large-area perovskite solar modules.


Ethanol and 1-butanol were purchased from Dychemi and Tokyo Chemical Industry. Spiro-MeOTAD and PbI2 were obtained from the Luminescence Technology Corp. and Fisher Scientific, respectively. In addition, the TiO2 paste was purchased from Dyesol and diluted with ethanol before use. All other materials were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and were used in the as received condition. Furthermore, CH3NH3I (MAI) was synthesized via a previously described method.


Anatase TiO2 nanoparticles were purchased as TiO2 paste (18NR-T, average size ∼20 nm) from Dyesol. The spray solution was prepared in the same manner as the spin-coating precursor. The TiO2 paste was mixed with anhydrous ethanol to form a 1:5.5 wt% mixture. In addition, a syringe pump was used to inject the precursor solution into a 25 gauge nozzle at flow rates ranging from 0.1 mL h−1 to 0.5 mL h−1. A high voltage (6–10 kV) was applied between the needle tip and the plate by using a direct current (dc) power supply; the distance between the needle tip and the plate was fixed at 5 cm.


The solar cells were fabricated on glass/FTO substrates (Pilkington, TEC8), which were washed for 10 min each with acetone, ethyl alcohol, and deionized water, in an ultrasonic bath. Furthermore, perovskite solar cells were prepared via the solvent engineering method. This was done by first spin-coating a dense, hole blocking layer of TiO2 (bl-TiO2, ∼80 nm-thick) from 0.15 M and 0.3 M titanium diisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate) in 1-butanol solution, which was heated at 125 °C for 5 min. Moreover, mesoporous TiO2 (mp-TiO2, ∼200 nm-thick) was prepared by the spin-coating or spraying of the diluted TiO2 paste in ethanol, and heating at 80 °C for 10 min. The substrates were then annealed at 500 °C for 1 h. A portion (46 wt%) of methylammonium lead tri-iodide (CH3NH3PbI3) solution was prepared by mixing a 1:1 molar ratio of MAI and PbI2 powder into a mixture of GBL and DMSO (7:3 v/v). The resulting mixture solution was stirred at 70 °C for 1 h, and then spin-coated onto the mp-TiO2/bl-TiO2/FTO substrate via the, previously mentioned, solvent engineering method. A smooth and uniform 200–300 nm CH3NH3PbI3 light-absorbent layer was fabricated in a two-step spin-coating process performed at 1000 and 5000 rpm for 10 and 20 s, respectively; toluene was dripped during the second step. After drying at 100 °C for 10 min, 25 µL of the hole transport layer (72 mg of 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenyl-amine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene) (Spiro-MeOTAD), 28.8 µL of 4-tert-butylpyridine, and 17.2 µL of bis(trifluoromethane)sulfonamide lithium salt (Li-TFSI) solution (720 mg mL−1 in acetonitrile) (the entire mixture was dissolved in 1 mL of chlorobenzene) were formed after spin coating at 3000 rpm for 30 s. The processes were all conducted inside a glovebox (Korea Kiyeon), under controlled atmospheric conditions and at a humidity of <0.5 ppm. Moreover, a 50 nm-thick Au electrode was deposited at ∼10−6 bar via thermal evaporation.


Planar SEM and cross-sectional images of the perovskite solar cell structure were obtained via field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM, AURIGA, Carl Zeiss), combined with a focused ion beam system (FIB system, AURIGA, Carl Zeiss). XRD spectra of the mesoporous TiO2 layer prepared by ESD and spin-coating were recorded by using a glazing incidence X-ray diffractometer (New D8 advance, Bruker). The current–voltage characteristics were determined and impedance spectroscopy measurements of the solar cells were performed using a solar simulator (Newport Oriel Solar 3A Class AAA, 64023A) and a potentiostat (CHI 600D, CH instruments); the measurements were conducted under an illumination of AM 1.5G sun (100 mA cm−2), and the potentiostat was calibrated using a standard Si-solar cell (Oriel, VLSI standards) and a light sensor current controller (Newport Oriel digital exposure controller, Model 68945). All devices were measured by masking the active area with a thin mask (0.14 cm2) to reduce the scattered light. J–V characteristics for all devices were measured at a voltage scan rate of 0.05 V s−1.


This work was supported by the Global Frontier R&D Program on Center for Multiscale Energy System funded by the National Research Foundation under the Ministry of Science, ICT & Future Planning, Korea (under contact No. NRF-2012M3A6A7054855). This work was also supported by National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grants funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT & Future Planning (MSIP) of Korea under contract no. NRF-2014R1A2A2A01007722.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5nr06558e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015