 DOI: 10.1039/C5TA09306F
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 877-886


Jin
Wang
,

Yan
Li
,

Qing
Shen
,

Takuya
Izuishi
,

Zhenxiao
Pan
,

Ke
Zhao
 and 

Xinhua
Zhong
*

Key Laboratory for Advanced Materials, Institute of Applied Chemistry, East China University of Science and Technology, Shanghai 200237, China. E-mail: zhongxh@ecust.edu.cn; Fax: +86 21 6425 0281; Tel: +86 21 6425 0281

Department of Engineering Science, The University of Electro-Communications, 1-4-1 Chofugaoka, Chofu, Tokyo 182-8585, Japan

Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST), 4-1-8 Honcho Kawaguchi, Saitama 332-0012, Japan

Received
17th November 2015
, Accepted 1st December 2015
First published on 2nd December 2015
Transition metal ion (especially Mn2+) doping has been proven to be an effective approach to modify the intrinsic photo-electronic properties of semiconductor quantum dots (QDs). However, previous works to directly grow Mn doped QDs on TiO2 film electrodes at room temperature resulted in the potential of the Mn dopant not being fully demonstrated in quantum dot sensitized solar cells (QDSCs). Herein, Mn doped CdSe0.65Te0.35 QDs (simplified as Mn:QD) were pre-synthesized via a “growth doping” strategy at high temperature. A QD-sensitized photoanode with the configuration TiO2/Mn:QD/Mn:ZnS/SiO2 was prepared and corresponding cell devices were constructed using Cu2S/brass counter electrodes and polysulfide electrolyte, together with reference cells with the photoanode configurations TiO2/Mn:QD/ZnS/SiO2, TiO2/QD/Mn:ZnS/SiO2, and TiO2/QD/ZnS/SiO2. The photovoltaic performance results indicate that TiO2/Mn:QD/Mn:ZnS/SiO2 cells exhibit the best photovoltaic performance among all the studied cell devices with a power conversion efficiency (PCE) for the champion cell of 9.40% (Jsc = 20.87 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.688 V, FF = 0.655) under AM 1.5 G one full sun illumination, which is among the best results for QDSCs. The open circuit voltage decay (OCVD), impedance spectroscopy (IS) and transient absorption (TA) measurements confirm that the Mn2+ dopant can suppress charge recombination and improve the photovoltage and PCE of the resulting cells.

Increasing demand for energy and depletion of fossil fuels have forced the exploration of alternative clean regenerative energy. The development of photovoltaic devices has opened up new opportunities for utilizing solar energy. In recent years, quantum dot sensitized solar cells (QDSCs) have emerged and are perceived as one of the most promising candidates for low-cost third-generation solar cells. Compared with other photovoltaic techniques, QDSCs exhibit various intrinsic advantages, such as solution processability, a high absorption coefficient and tunable band-gap. Furthermore, the possibility of multiple exciton generation means that the theoretical power conversion efficiency (PCE) of QDSCs has the potential to go beyond the Shockley–Queisser limit of 32%. However, despite many efforts, QDSCs still suffer from moderate PCEs of less than 10%. An important reason for this moderate efficiency is the inferior optoelectronic properties of QD sensitizers.

A promising strategy to modify the intrinsic properties of QDs is to introduce transition metal ion dopants such as Mn2+. The dopant creates new electronic states in the host material, thus altering the charge separation and recombination dynamics. In addition, this dopant is both spin and orbital forbidden resulting in a long lifetime in the range of microseconds to milliseconds, which facilitates long-lived photo-generated carriers. In 2012, Kamat and co-workers pioneered the concept of Mn-doped CdS/CdSe QDSCs and pushed the PCE of QDSCs beyond 5% for the first time. Since then, extensive efforts have been made to introduce Mn dopant into QD sensitizers, and/or into the passivation/barrier layers on sensitized photoanodes to improve the performance of QDSCs. For example, Meng et al. designed CuInS2/Mn-doped CdS QDSCs and obtained a PCE of 5.38%; Cao et al. explored Mn-doped CdSe QDSCs and achieved a PCE of 6.33%; Kim et al. developed CdS/CdSe/Mn-doped ZnSe QDSCs with a PCE of 5.67%. It is noted that in these works, the dopant Mn2+ is generally introduced in the QD sensitizers by mixing Mn2+ with the corresponding cation aqueous solution constituting the target QD in the process of successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR) or chemical bath deposition (CBD) for the direct growth of QD sensitizers on TiO2 film electrodes at room temperature. While the adopted SILAR or CBD technique for loading QD sensitizers suffers from the disadvantages of broad size distribution and undesired surface defects, compared with the SILAR or CBD deposition approaches, a postsynthesis assembly route has been confirmed to be a promising method to attain monodispersed QDs with higher crystallinity, narrower size distribution, and tailored surface states.
Regretfully, few works have been taken to utilize pre-prepared Mn-doped QDs in the construction of QDSCs. Very recently, Bhattacharyya et al. successfully adopted pre-synthesized Mn-doped CdS in the construction of QDSCs. The limited light harvesting range of the CdS host material together with an improper QD deposition approach in that work lead to a rather low PCE of 2.1%. Hence, the development of a host material with near-infrared absorption is necessary to achieve high efficiency in QDSCs. Among various QDs, CdSe0.65Te0.35 QDSCs with ZnS/SiO2 barrier layers have achieved a PCE as high as 8.55%. Hence, CdSe0.65Te0.35 QDs could be an ideal host material for Mn dopant to construct high efficiency QDSCs. In contrast to the Mn doped CdS QD system, where Mn2+ excited states are lowest in energy and lie in the band gap of the host QDs, for the Mn doped CdSeTe QD system, the Mn excited states lie outside the band gap of the CdSeTe QDs. In this system, the Mn impurities act as electron trap centers in doped CdSeTe QDs for photoexcited electrons. The long-lived high-energy doping levels of Mn impurities thus provide the advantage of retarding charge recombination and result in an improved performance of the cell devices. Previous experimental results confirmed that the charge recombination dynamics was found to be much slower in the Mn doped CdSe QD system compared with that in the undoped system.
Herein, we report the construction of high efficiency QDSCs using pre-prepared high-quality Mn-doped CdSe0.65Te0.35 (noted as Mn:CdSeTe henceforth) colloidal QDs, which were tethered onto TiO2 film electrodes using the recently reported capping ligand-induced self-assembly technique. Colloidal Mn:CdSeTe QDs with near-infrared absorption were prepared through a “growth doping” strategy at high temperature. After deposition of the Mn:CdSeTe QDs on the TiO2 film electrode, Mn-doped ZnS/SiO2 passivation layers were sequentially overcoated around the QD sensitized photoanode. For comparison, QDSCs based on plain CdSeTe QD sensitizers and plain ZnS passivation layers were also constructed. The Mn dopant in both the QD sensitizer and ZnS passivation layer favors the enhancement of photocurrent, photovoltage, and consequently the PCE of the resultant cell devices. The champion QDSC based on the Mn:CdSeTe QD sensitizer and Mn:ZnS passivation layer exhibits a PCE of 9.40% (with Jsc = 20.87 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.688 V, FF = 0.655) under AM 1.5 G one full sun illumination, which is among the best performances of QDSCs.

Cadmium oxide (99.99%), manganese acetate tetrahydrate (Mn(OAc)2·4H2O, 98%), selenium powder (200 mesh, 99.99%), tellurium powder (200 mesh, 99.99%), oleylamine (OAm, 97%), and trioctylphosphine (TOP, 90%) were purchased from Aldrich. Thioglycolic acid (TGA, 97%) and oleic acid (OA, 90%) were obtained from Alfa. Paraffin liquid (chemical grade) was purchased from Shanghai chemical reagents company, China. All reagents were used without further purification.


The oil-soluble Mn:CdSeTe QDs were synthesized according to the literature method with a slight modification. In a typical procedure, 0.35 mL of 0.1 M Te and 0.65 mL of 0.1 M Se precursor solutions, obtained by dissolving Te or Se in paraffin and TOP (v/v, 3:1) at 300 or 200 °C under N2, were loaded in a 50 mL round-bottom flask. Then 5.0 mL of 0.1 M Cd(OA)2 stock solution, obtained by dissolving CdO in oleic acid and paraffin (v/v, 1:3) at 250 °C under N2, was added with stirring. Afterwards, the resulting reaction mixture was degassed under vacuum at 110 °C for 10 min to form an orange solution. The reaction system was further heated to 200 °C. At this temperature, 0.5 mL of 0.01 M Mn(OA)2 precursor solution, obtained by dissolving Mn(OAc)2·4H2O in oleic acid and paraffin (v/v, 1:4) at 150 °C under N2, was injected into the flask with stirring, and the reaction temperature was further heated to 320 °C and maintained at this temperature for 20 min. Then, the reaction temperature was lowered to 260 °C, and 2.0 mL of OAm was added into the reaction system and maintained for another 6 min before removing the heater and cooling to 60 °C. Then 10.0 mL of hexane–methanol (v/v, 1:1) was used as the extraction solvent to separate the formed QDs from any byproducts and unreacted precursors present. The Mn content in the resulting CdSeTe QDs is 0.56% relative to Cd. For simplicity, both Mn:CdSeTe and Mn:QD refer to this composition henceforth. By varying the nominal amount of Mn precursor in the synthesis, the Mn content in the obtained QDs can be tuned accordingly. Detailed results for the Mn content in the obtained Mn:QD samples determined using ICP-AES (Inductively Coupled Plasma-Atomic Emission Spectrometry) corresponding to the nominal Mn content used in the syntheses are shown in Table S1 of the ESI.

The process of preparing the CdSe0.65Te0.35 QDs is identical to that for Mn:CdSeTe mentioned above but without the injection step of the Mn stock solution. A standard literature method was adopted for the water-solubilization of the initially oil-soluble Mn:CdSeTe and CdSeTe QDs using thiolglycolic acid (TGA) as a phase transfer agent. Experimental details are available in the ESI.

TiO2 mesoporous film electrodes with a thickness of 15.0 ± 0.5 μm (9.0 μm transparent layer combined with a 6.0 μm light scattering layer) were prepared according to the literature method. To deposit the Mn:CdSeTe (or CdSeTe) QDs onto the TiO2 film electrode, TGA-capped QD aqueous dispersions were pipetted onto the electrodes and left for 6 h. The QD-sensitized photoanodes were then overcoated with Mn:ZnS (or ZnS)/SiO2 double passivation layers according to previous reports. To be specific, the Mn:ZnS passivation layer was overcoated by immersing the QD-sensitized photoanodes into a methanol solution containing 0.1 M Zn(OAc)2 and 0.01 M Mn(OAc)2, and 0.1 M Na2S aqueous solution for 1 min/dip alternately for four cycles, and then coated sequentially with a SiO2 passivation layer by soaking the electrodes in 0.01 M tetraethyl orthosilicate ethanol solution for 2 h. The counter electrodes were fabricated by immersing brass in HCl solution at 70 °C for 30 min, then washed with deionized water and dried. The liquid electrolyte was prepared by dissolving 2.0 M Na2S and 2.0 M S in deionized water. The devices were constructed by assembling the counter electrodes and working electrodes in a sandwich structure and separated with a 50 μm thickness scotch spacer. In order to ensure the reliability of the evaluation data, five cells were prepared and measured in parallel under each condition.


The composition of the Mn:QD was measured using ICP-AES (Thermo Elemental IRIS 1000) (dissolved with HCl–HNO3). The electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectra were recorded using a Bruker EMX-10/12 X-band digital EPR spectrometer. J–V curves of the devices were measured under an AM 1.5 G solar simulator with an intensity of 100 mW cm−2 and a sweep rate of 60 mV s−1. Before each test, calibration was carried out using a NREL standard Si solar cell. The active area of the cells was 0.2354 cm2, which was defined by a black metallic mask. The spectra of the IPCE were recorded using a Keithley 2000 multimeter. Impedance spectroscopy (IS) were conducted on an impedance analyzer (Zahner, Zennium) in dark conditions at a forward bias ranging from 0 to −0.6 V, applying a 20 mV AC sinusoidal signal over the constant applied bias with a frequency range of 1 MHz to 0.1 Hz. Open circuit voltage decay (OCVD) studies were performed on the same Zahner workstation and the cells were illuminated with a white LED with an intensity of 100 mW cm−2, then the voltage signal was recorded after switching off the light. X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) was conducted using an ESCALAB 250Xi spectrometer, using focused monochromatized Al Kα radiation (hν = 1486.7 eV). A transient absorption (TA) setup was used to characterize the samples in the femtosecond (fs) time range. The laser source was a titanium/sapphire laser (CPA-2010, Clark-MXR Inc.) with a wavelength of 775 nm, a repetition rate of 1 kHz, and a pulse width of 150 fs. The light was separated into two parts: one as a probe pulse, the other as a pump light to pump an optical parametric amplifier (OPA) (a TOAPS from Quantronix) to generate light pulses with a wavelength tunable from 290 nm to 3 μm. In this study, a pump light wavelength of 470 nm and a probe beam wavelength of 580 nm were used.


CdSe0.65Te0.35 QDs were chosen as the model sensitizer due to the high PCE of 8.5% obtained from this QD sensitizer based QDSC. For the synthesis of the Mn:CdSeTe QDs, a modified “growth doping” strategy was adopted. In this strategy, small sized CdSeTe QD hosts were primarily formed below 200 °C, then the Mn2+ dopant precursor (Mn(OA)2) was introduced and doping occurred through surface binding. On increasing the reaction temperature and the continuous growth of the QD host, the adsorbed Mn dopant was encapsulated by further epitaxial growth of CdSeTe. The successful doping of Mn into the CdSeTe QD host was confirmed with ICP-AES measurements, which gave a Mn content of 0.56% relative to Cd under the nominal Mn/Cd ratio of 5% used in the synthesis. Experimental results indicate that the Mn content in the resulting Mn:CdSeTe QDs is dependent on the initial Mn amount used in the synthesis (detailed results are shown in Table S1). The observed lower Mn content in the formed product should be ascribed to the “self-purification” mechanism where the energetically unfavorable Mn impurity inside the QD lattice is prone to being ejected out from the host QDs. The photovoltaic measurement results indicate that the Mn:CdSeTe QDs with 0.56% Mn/Cd ratio gives the best performance for the resulting cell devices as discussed below. When the nominal Mn content is greater than 5%, the device performance decreases gradually. The PL spectra corresponding to different Mn content in the obtained QD products as well as the average photovoltaic performances of the corresponding cell devices are shown in Fig. S1 and Table S2. For convenience, the Mn:CdSeTe QD referred to specially is the Mn content of 0.56% in this work. The UV/Vis absorption spectrum of a TGA-capped CdSeTe QD aqueous solution is also shown in Fig. S1, which shows no significant change before and after phase transfer. The incorporation of Mn dopant in CdSeTe QDs was further confirmed using electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) characterization and the corresponding spectrum is shown in Fig. S2. A relatively large splitting constant (A) value of 87.6 Gauss was observed for the obtained Mn:CdSeTe QD sample. This result suggests that Mn2+ is located close to the surface of the host QDs rather than in the internal lattice sites of the host QDs.

The absorption spectrum of the Mn:CdSeTe QD dispersion (Fig. 1a) in toluene shows nearly an identical spectral profile to that of the un-doped CdSeTe QD solution with an absorption edge extending to the near infrared region at about 820 nm. The identical spectral profile indicates that the Mn dopant does not change the electronic structure of the host QDs. The intensity of the photoluminescence (PL) emission peak (Fig. 1a) from Mn:CdSeTe is significantly stronger than that from the CdSeTe QDs. The increased PL emission indicates a better suppression of non-radiative recombination in the Mn-doped QDs in comparison with the plain CdSeTe QDs, and this is favorable for the photovoltaic performance of the resulting cell devices as discussed below. These results indicate clearly that the capping ligand protects the QDs better in the system of Mn:CdSeTe QDs, and therefore results in a lower density of surface trap defects and a higher PL QY. The better capping ligand protection may be derived from the crystal growth control from the Mn impurity. The intrinsic mechanism for the influence of the Mn impurity on the capping ligand protection effect in the QD growth process is unclear currently, and further explorations are needed. The observed sole PL emission peak located at 840 nm should be derived from the host CdSeTe as the Mn d-electron emission should be located at the yellow-orange spectral window of 580–600 nm. The absence of the Mn dopant emission is reasonable since the Mn 3d-orbital energy level is located outside the band gap of the CdSeTe host QDs. The TEM images (Fig. 1d and e) together with the representative HRTEM images in the insets show a nearly identical average particle size of 5.6 nm for both the Mn:CdSeTe and CdSeTe QDs, but the size distribution of the Mn:CdSeTe QDs is more narrow than that of the CdSeTe QDs (with a relative standard deviation of 4% vs. 8%). This finding indicates that the Mn impurity could effectively narrow the size distribution since the impurities can interfere with the ongoing crystal growth process and assist the formation of the structural architecture.

It is well accepted that the stability of a QDSC device is strongly dependent on the QDs' stability. QDs containing Te are sensitive to oxygen. This leads to an unpredictable change in the electronic and optical properties. Surprisingly and importantly, the Mn:CdSeTe QDs show a significantly improved stability compared to that of plain CdSeTe QDs. Experimental results indicate that the TGA-capped Mn:CdSeTe QD aqueous solution remained clear for 30 days storage in ambient conditions and no observable variation was observed in the absorption spectra as shown in Fig. 1b. However, agglomeration and precipitation occurred in the counterpart CdSeTe QD aqueous solution after storage for 10 days (as shown in the inset of Fig. 1b). All these results imply that the Mn:CdSeTe QDs show a superior chemical stability to that of CdSeTe QDs. The observed higher stability of the Mn:CdSeTe QDs in comparison to plain CdSeTe QDs should be ascribed to the better capping ligand encapsulating effect. The better capping ligand encapsulation may be derived from the crystal growth control from the Mn impurity. Regrettably, the intrinsic mechanism for the dependence of the crystal growth on the Mn impurity is unclear currently, and this needs further exploration. The enhanced chemical stability of the obtained Mn:CdSeTe QDs paves a way for the construction of QDSCs with an extended performance lifetime. As expected, the Mn:QD/Mn:ZnS based QDSCs showed better stability in comparison with the QD/ZnS based ones. Experimental results (Fig. S4) indicate that the PCE values for the QD/ZnS cells start to decline gradually after 24 h, and reach about 70% of their initial values over the course of 36 h irradiation by one full sun intensity; the Mn:QD/Mn:ZnS cells maintain nearly the best performance in the whole period. It is noted that the Cu2S/FTO counter electrodes, made by depositing Cu2S nanocrystal paste on FTO, were used in the performance stability tests.


For sensitization of the TiO2 film electrodes by the QDs, the initial OAm-capped oil-soluble Mn:CdSeTe QDs were transferred into bifunctional linker molecule TGA-capped water-soluble QDs through a phase transfer process. Then the QD-sensitized electrodes were obtained via a capping ligand-induced self-assembly process by pipetting the obtained TGA-capped QD aqueous solution onto the TiO2 film electrode and left for 6 h. This sensitization approach can offer a dense coverage of QDs on the TiO2 film electrode, as proven in previous reports. For comparison, CdSeTe QD sensitized TiO2 film electrodes were also prepared using an identical procedure. In order to reduce the charge recombination at the photoanode/electrolyte interface, thin ZnS/SiO2 passivation layers were sequentially overcoated around the QD-sensitized TiO2 film electrode according to the standard literature method. In replacing the ZnS layer, a Mn:ZnS layer was overcoated around the sensitized electrode by mixing Mn2+ with a Zn2+ aqueous solution under the optimized Mn/Zn ratio of 1:10 in the process of overcoating the ZnS layer. Meanwhile, different Mn/Zn ratios were investigated in the overcoating of the Mn:ZnS layer, and the influence on the photovoltaic performance is given in Table S3 of the ESI. Following the ZnS or Mn:ZnS overcoating layer, a SiO2 layer was overcoated sequentially according to the literature method. Overall, four types of photoanode corresponding to four types of QDSC were prepared, which include: a Mn:CdSeTe sensitized photoanode with a ZnS/SiO2 passivation layer (simplified as Mn:QD/ZnS); a Mn:CdSeTe sensitized photoanode with a Mn:ZnS/SiO2 passivation layer (simplified as Mn:QD/Mn:ZnS); a CdSeTe sensitized photoanode with a ZnS/SiO2 passivation layer (simplified as QD/ZnS); and a CdSeTe sensitized photoanode with a Mn:ZnS/SiO2 passivation layer (simplified as QD/Mn:ZnS). It is noted that in these abbreviations, the composition of the QDs is CdSe0.65Te0.35; the Mn content in Mn:QD is 0.56%; the Mn/Zn ratio in Mn:ZnS layer is 1:10; and the SiO2 layer is omitted, but it is present in all these samples.

UV/Vis absorption spectra (Fig. 1c) of the prepared QD-sensitized TiO2 film electrodes (comprising a 6.0 μm transparent layer without scattering layers) were measured. The absorption edge of the QD-sensitized TiO2 photoanode is consistent with that of the QD dispersion in water. It is found that the Mn:QD/Mn:ZnS photoanode film shows the greatest absorbance, while the QD/ZnS shows the least absorbance. This indicates that a greater loading amount was achieved in the Mn:QD sensitized photoanode. The cause may be derived from the improved monodispersity of the Mn:CdSeTe QDs related to CdSeTe as discussed above. The improved monodispersity favors the penetration of QD particles into the mesoporous channels of the TiO2 substrate. The improved loading amount of the QD sensitizers in the case of the Mn doped QDs means a greater light harvesting capability and a higher photocurrent in the cell devices. This would be verified by the photovoltaic results as discussed below. Furthermore, the Mn dopant in the ZnS layer also has a slight effect on the enhancement of light harvesting in comparison with the plain ZnS layer. These results reveal that the construction of Mn:QD/Mn:ZnS photoanodes has the potential to improve light harvesting capability and achieve higher photocurrents in the resulting cell devices.
In the overcoating of the Mn:ZnS layer around the QD sensitized photoanodes, a Mn2+ and Zn2+ ion mixture aqueous solution was employed. The existence and valance states of Mn in the photoanode were characterized using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). It is noted that in order to eliminate the interference of Mn in the CdSeTe QDs, plain CdSeTe QDs were used in the preparation of samples for XPS measurement. Fig. 2 displays the XPS spectra of the CdSeTe QDs sensitized photoanode coated with Mn:ZnS and its uncoated counterpart. Compared with the XPS spectrum of the reference TiO2/QD sample, the two binding energy peaks at 641 eV and 653 eV appear in that of the TiO2/QD/Mn:ZnS sample, which indicates the presence of Mn2+; furthermore, two peaks at 1020 eV and 1043 eV were observed for the TiO2/QD/Mn:ZnS sample which are assigned to the Zn 2p binding energy, verifying the presence of the Zn2+ expected for Mn:ZnS. These results indicate that a Mn:ZnS passivation layer has been formed during the SILAR process.

To examine the influence of Mn dopant on the electron injection rate from the QD sensitizer to the TiO2 substrate, a femtosecond (fs) transient absorption (TA) technique was employed. In the TA measurements, QD sensitizers with different configurations, including QD/ZnS, QD/Mn:ZnS, Mn:QD/ZnS, Mn:QD/Mn:ZnS, were deposited on insulating SiO2 or TiO2 substrates using an identical procedure for the sensitization of the photoanodes. After excitation by the pump light, the QDs undergo charge separation, and the transient bleaching signal is recorded simultaneously. Fig. 3 shows the TA decay curves of the four types of QD sensitizers deposited on TiO2 or SiO2 substrates, which correspond to kinetic traces of the charge carrier decay for the samples. It is observed that for all the studied QD sensitizers on the insulating SiO2 substrate, the recovery rate of the bleaching is rather slow. This is because the insulating properties of SiO2 prevent the injection of photo-generate electrons from QDs to the SiO2 substrate, and therefore the charge recombination in the QDs is dominated by the internal recombination including excitonic states and defect states. However, the recovery rate of bleaching for the QDs on the TiO2 substrate is much faster since an additional fast electron-transfer route from the QDs to the TiO2 substrate exists in this case. The TA kinetics can be fitted well using a biexponential function, and the average lifetimes (listed in Table 1) of the photoexcited carriers can be obtained according to eqn (1)

τav = (A1τ12 + A2τ22)/(A1τ1 + A2τ2)
(1)
where
τ1 and τ2 are the lifetimes, and A1 and A2 are the relative weights of the two decay components. It can be found that τav values increased remarkably when Mn dopant is present in the CdSeTe QDs or ZnS passivation layer. These results reveal that the Mn dopant can reduce the intrinsic defects of CdSeTe QDs. These observations are also in good agreement with the PL properties mentioned above. The electron injection rate constant ket can be obtained from eqn (2).

ket = 1/τav(QD/TiO2) − 1/τav(QD/SiO2)
(2)
Samples

τ
1 (ps)

τ
2 (ps)

A
1


A
2


τ
av (ps)

k
et (×1010 s−1)
SiO2/QD/ZnS
16.30
118.16
0.52
0.40
102.48
SiO2/QD/Mn:ZnS
16.39
195.45
0.46
0.46
181.70
SiO2/Mn:QD/ZnS
12.26
230.92
0.36
0.41
218.43
SiO2/Mn:QD/Mn:ZnS
36.49
316.44
0.30
0.46
274.42
TiO2/QD/ZnS
3.23
18.64
0.85
0.29
13.41
6.48
TiO2/QD/Mn:ZnS
5.75
29.15
0.83
0.34
21.60
4.08
TiO2/Mn:QD/ZnS
6.97
34.37
0.67
0.39
27.25
3.21
TiO2/Mn:QD/Mn:ZnS
4.43
55.85
0.62
0.45
50.79
1.60
As listed in Table 1, ket decreases slightly with the presence of Mn dopant in the sensitizer system. In this sense, the Mn dopant has a trade-off effect, on the one hand reducing internal recombination, and on the other hand retarding the electron injection rate. It is noted that the ket of 1.6 × 1010 s−1 for the TiO2/Mn:QD/Mn:ZnS system is fast enough for efficient electron injection into the TiO2 substrate since the competing recombination rates are usually less than 109 s−1.

The solar cells were fabricated by assembling the sensitized photoanodes and Cu2S/brass counter electrode with use of a polysulfide electrolyte. The current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the champion cells for the four types of QDSC are presented in Fig. 4a, and the average photovoltaic parameters of all the cells are summarized in Table 2 (detailed parameters for each device are shown in Table S4 and Fig. S3), together with the results for the champion cells of each type of cell. As expected, the average short-circuit current (Jsc) for the cells with Mn dopant is higher than those without Mn dopant, and the Mn:QD/Mn:ZnS cells exhibit the highest Jsc (20.83 mA cm−2) among all four types of cell studied (20.43–20.72 mA cm−2 for the other cells). The higher Jsc of the Mn:QD/Mn:ZnS cells benefits from the greater light harvesting capacity, as indicated by the absorption spectra of the sensitized film electrodes in Fig. 1c. Meanwhile, the absorbance ratios among the different sensitized photoanodes are consistent with the corresponding Jsc ratios. The obtained Jsc from the J–V measurement is very close to the integrated Jsc according to the incident-photon to conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra, as shown in Fig. 4b, with corresponding values in the range of 19.68 to 20.48 mA cm−2. Besides the enhancement of Jsc, a distinct improvement in the open circuit voltage (Voc) was also observed for the cell devices with Mn dopant. This clearly strengthens the advantages of the adopted post-synthesis assembly route for QD deposition. Similarly, the Mn:QD/Mn:ZnS cells exhibit the highest Voc value (0.685 V) among all the studied cells (0.652–0.670 V for other cells), while the Mn dopant has no significant influence on the fill factor (FF) of the corresponding cell devices. Benefiting from the enhanced Jsc and Voc, the solar cells with Mn dopant in either the QD sensitizer or ZnS passivation layer show higher PCEs. Furthermore, the contribution by the Mn dopant in the QD sensitizer to the PCE enhancement is about two times greater than that by the Mn dopant in the ZnS layer (increase of 5.1% vs. 2.8%). The champion Mn:QD/Mn:ZnS cell exhibits a PCE of 9.40% (with Voc = 0.687 V, Jsc = 20.88 mA cm−2, and FF = 65.5%), which is one of the highest efficiencies of QDSCs reported to date. It is noted that the QD/ZnS cells show an average PCE of 8.44%, which is close to previous results with the same configuration.

QDSCs

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
QD/ZnS
20.43(20.46)
0.652(0.654)
63.3(63.9)
8.44 ± 0.07(8.55)
QD/Mn:ZnS
20.57(20.60)
0.666(0.668)
63.7(64.1)
8.72 ± 0.06(8.82)
Mn:QD/ZnS
20.72(20.79)
0.670(0.674)
64.2(64.5)
8.91 ± 0.09(9.04)
Mn:QD/Mn:ZnS
20.83(20.88)
0.685(0.687)
64.7(65.5)
9.23 ± 0.11(9.40)

In order to examine the effect of the Mn dopant in improving the performance of the resulting cell devices, open circuit voltage decay (OCVD) and impedance spectroscopy measurement were conducted. An OCVD technique can provide information about the electron recombination processes, i.e. photo-generated electron recombination with oxidized species in the redox couple in electrolyte media. The measured voltage decay signals for the studied cell devices after switching off the illumination are shown in Fig. 5a. From it, we can find that the solar cells based on Mn:CdSeTe QDs (i.e. Mn:QD/Mn:ZnS and Mn:QD/ZnS cells) exhibited a slower decay rate than cells based on plain CdSeTe QDs (i.e. QD/Mn:ZnS and QD/ZnS cells). It has been established that the Voc decay rate can be translated into the electron lifetime (τn) under open circuit conditiond (Fig. 5b) according to eqn (3), and the obtained τn can directly reflect the charge recombination inside devices.

τn = −(kBT/e) (dVoc/dt)−1
(3)
From Fig. 5b, a linear decrease in τn is observed with the increase in voltage for all the cell devices under open-circuit conditions. Furthermore, the τn values for Mn:CdSeTe QD sensitized cells are greater than those for the plain CdSeTe QD sensitized ones. The variation trend of the τn values in the different cell devices is in accordance with that of the Voc and PCE as discussed above. Among the investigated cell samples, the τn value for the Mn:QD/Mn:ZnS device is the greatest one, and is about four times higher than that for the QD/ZnS cells. These results demonstrate the effectiveness of Mn dopant in QD sensitizers in suppressing recombination.

To further clarify the effect of the Mn dopant in improving the performance of the resulting photovoltaic devices, impedance spectroscopy (IS) measurements were performed to obtain the electrical resistance and recombination dynamics of various devices. IS measurements were performed in dark conditions at a forward bias ranging from 0 V to a bias voltage higher than the Voc in the frequency range of 1 MHz to 0.1 Hz. The detailed Nyquist plots for all cells under different bias are given in Fig. S5. Standard fitting models and equivalent circuits were used to analyze the obtained IS data. The extracted chemical capacitance Cμ, and recombination resistance Rrec from the obtained IS measurement data are shown in Fig. 6a and b, respectively. The similar Cμ values observed for all cell devices imply that the dopant in either the QD sensitizers or in the ZnS passivation layer does not alter the conduction band edge of the TiO2 electron collector. However, the difference in the recombination resistance Rrec is distinct for cells with or without Mn dopant (Fig. 6b). Similar to the variation trend of τn, it is observed that the Rrec values for Mn:CdSeTe QD sensitized cells are greater than those for plain CdSeTe QD sensitized ones, and the Rrec value for the Mn:QD/Mn:ZnS device is the greatest one (about 3 times greater than that of QD/ZnS cells). The greater Rrec value in the cells corresponds to a reduced charge recombination rate in the cells since Rrec is inversely proportional to the recombination rate. Moreover, the calculated electron lifetime τn from the IS results (τn = Rrec × Cμ) also exhibits a relatively higher value for the cells with Mn dopant than those without Mn dopant (1.46 s vs. 0.45 s). In addition, the trend of the τn results extracted from IS measurements are consistent with that from the OCVD measurements. To distinguish the recombination difference among the different cell devices, Nyquist plots of various solar cells at a forward bias of −0.60 V, which is close to the Voc of the cell devices, are shown in Fig. 6d, and the extracted IS parameters using the equivalent circuit shown in the inset of Fig. 6d are presented in Table S5. It is found that the transport resistance (Rw) is increased slightly on doping Mn in both the QD sensitizer (26.89 vs. 29.51 Ω) and the ZnS passivation layer (26.89 vs. 33.15 Ω). This increase indicates that the electron transport rate in the TiO2 film electrode is reduced by Mn doping, while the ratio of Rct/Rw increases with Mn doping (increasing from 3.8 to 8.0), especially for the case of Mn doping in the QD sensitizer. This demonstrates that both Mn doping in the ZnS barrier layer and in the QD sensitizer restrains the recombination reaction rate at the photoanode/electrolyte interface, and results in better charge collection efficiency in the photoanode. It is clear that the Mn:QD/Mn:ZnS cells exhibit the greatest Rct/Rw value (8.0) among all the investigated cell devices, and therefore has the best performance.


In summary, a new route for Mn-doped QDSCs has been designed and developed, and a PCE of 9.40% has been achieved from the champion Mn:QD/Mn:ZnS cell device. Experimental results indicate that in the crystal growth process, the presence of Mn dopant can narrow the size distribution of the host QDs, and the enhanced monodispersity is favorable for improving the loading amount of QDs on the TiO2 film electrode, and therefore brings a higher photocurrent to the resultant cell device. All the optical spectra, TA, OCVD, and IS measurement results confirm that the presence of Mn dopant can reduce trap states in QD sensitizers, and can consequently suppress charge recombination and improve the photovoltage and PCE of the resulting cell devices. In addition, the contribution to performance improvement from the Mn dopant in the QD sensitizer is more significant than that from the Mn dopant in the ZnS passivation layer. All these features reveal that the Mn-doped QD sensitizer is one of promising candidates for the construction of high efficiency QDSCs.


This research is supported by the Natural Science Foundation of China (nos 21421004, 91433106), the Open Project of State Key Laboratory of Chemical Engineering (SKL-ChE-14C04), and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities in China.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Ligand exchange with water-soluble TGA. Average photovoltaic parameters of 5 cells in parallel for Mn:CdSeTe/ZnS based QDSCs corresponding to different mole ratios of Mn in QDs. The dependence of the photovoltaic performance of Mn:QD/Mn:ZnS QDSCs on the nominal Mn/Zn ratio in the ZnS passivation layer. J–V curves and the corresponding parameters of the various types of devices (each group has 5 devices in parallel). Nyquist curves under different bias voltages and impedance values at a −0.6 V forward bias for all the kinds of solar cells. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta09306f
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016