 DOI: 10.1039/C8TC03944E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 11045-11051


Chunyu
Liu
,

Dezhong
Zhang
,

Mingrui
Tan
,

Xinyuan
Zhang
,

Zhiqi
Li
,

Yue
Zhou
,

Liang
Shen
,

Shengping
Ruan
 and 

Wenbin
Guo
*

State Key Laboratory of Integrated Optoelectronics, College of Electronic Science and Engineering, Jilin University, 2699 Qianjin Street, Changchun 130012, People's Republic of China. E-mail: guowb@jlu.edu.cn

Key Laboratory of Physics and Technology for Advanced Batteries (Ministry of Education), College of Physics, Jilin University, Changchun 130012, People's Republic of China

Received
8th August 2018
, Accepted 11th September 2018
First published on 13th September 2018
It is necessary to carefully adjust the interface characteristics between the interlayer and active layer in order to facilitate charge extraction and transfer. Here, a post-annealing treatment on the completed device with a Ag electrode is used to optimize the interface contact characteristics between WO3 and the active layer due to the inter-diffusion of the WO3 hole-extraction interface. The strengthened interface contact between them can improve the charge extraction and transfer across the active layer/WO3 interface. Furthermore, a thinner WO3 interlayer (75 Å) is shown to qualify as an anode interlayer with excellent charge selection, extraction and transport capacities after the post-annealing treatment, which is beneficial for reducing the resistance loss introduced by the too thick WO3 layer and enhancing device performance. As a result, the device with the 75 Å WO3 layer and 60 °C post-annealing treatment provides a higher fill factor of 74.5% and an optimal device performance of 9.66%. This work reveals a simple and universal method to modulate the interface contact characteristics between an evaporated transition metal oxide interlayer and an active layer, thus improving the device performance.

The interlayers between the active layer and electrodes have significant effects on adjusting the energy level alignment of a device, improving the charge selectivity of electrodes and enhancing interfacial stability, which strongly determine the performance of polymer solar cells (PSCs), especially the open-circuit voltage (Voc). Considering materials selection, the impacts of interlayers with different work functions (WFs) on device performance have been explored and the results demonstrate a similar mechanism in both PSCs and perovskite solar cells. The cathode interlayer possessing a low enough WF to form a good ohmic contact with the active layer is beneficial for improved electron selection, extraction and transport. Similarly, an anode interlayer with a higher WF is advantageous to suppress undesired interfacial exciton quenching and charge recombination, thus obtaining a higher Voc. And, it has been adequately proved that the introduction of a suitable anode interfacial layer can overcome the limitation from the WF of an electrode on the Voc.

Meanwhile, good interface characteristics between the active layer and interlayer can apparently improve the interfacial charge selectivity and extraction efficiency. The sufficient thickness of an interlayer is an important factor that needs to be carefully noticed to form a uniform contact with the active layer, minimizing the charge leakage loss and reducing the voltage drop across the interface. However, a too thick interlayer will increase the series resistance (Rs) of a device, which will aggravate the resistance loss introduced from the interlayer, leading to a lower fill factor (FF) and short-circuit current density (Jsc). Therefore, to overcome the drawbacks from the thicker interlayer, some necessary methods should also be applied to improve the interface contact characteristics, such as surface pretreatment and post-annealing treatment. Surface pretreatment has been extensively employed to optimize the interface contact and strengthen the interface adhesion, which contribute to the charge extraction. Our group improved the interface contact between an active layer and a phosphomolybdic acid anode interlayer. We prevented S-curves from occurring in the device by using isopropyl alcohol to pre-treat the surface of the active layer, enabling a lowered Rs and effective hole extraction. However, this method is only commonly useful for films prepared by a solution-process, which extremely limits its application and makes hard to accomplish for large-scale device preparation. In contrast, the post-annealing treatment has more extensive potential to improve the mechanical adhesion between the adjacent layers due to the inter-diffusion.
In this work, we employed an evaporated WO3 interlayer that possesses a higher WF as the anode interlayer. It has been proved that the device with WO3/Ag has better stability than the device with MoO3/Ag. And, the interface characteristics between the active layer and the evaporated WO3 interlayer are improved by optimizing the WO3 thickness and post-annealing the completely prepared device, which result in a trade-off between enhanced charge extraction/transport capacities and aggravated resistance loss introduced by the WO3 interlayer. The devices with different thicknesses of the WO3 layer were firstly fabricated, and the optimal thickness of the WO3 interlayer was found to be 100 Å to achieve effective charge extraction and transport properties. This result sufficiently proves that the device performance is strongly related to the interface contact characteristics. Meanwhile, the post-annealing treatment for the completely prepared device can enhance the power conversion efficiency (PCE) by further optimizing the interface contact characteristics between the active layer and the WO3 interlayer due to the inter-diffusion of the WO3 hole-extraction interface. In particular, the Voc is obviously improved after the post-annealing treatment. Ultimately, an optimal device performance of 9.66% is realized with a relatively thinner WO3 interlayer (75 Å) after a 60 °C post-annealing treatment. This indicates that the post-annealing treatment can improve interface contact characteristics and charge extraction capacity, while simultaneously minimizing the necessary thickness of the WO3 interlayer and resistance loss. More importantly, this method is similarly applicable to a MoO3 interlayer in PTB7:PC71BM and PCDTBT:PC71BM based devices, which has been proved in our previous report, suggesting that this method possesses great potential to enhance the device performance for a wider range of optoelectronic devices.

Indium tin oxide (ITO) substrates were cleaned with acetone, ethanol and deionized water, respectively. ZnO solution synthesized according to previous reports was spin-coated onto the ITO substrates without thermal annealing treatment at 4000 rpm for 40 s, naturally drying for 30 min. Then, the pre-prepared active layer solution consisting of 10 mg of PTB7 and 15 mg of PC71BM was subsequently spin-coated on the ZnO layer. The devices were completed by thermally evaporating the WO3 (50, 75, 100 and 125 Å) and Ag electrodes continuously. Finally, the fabricated devices were post-annealed at 50, 60, 70 and 80 °C, respectively. Some other experiments were carried out and proved that the post-annealing treatment at 40 °C does not work for the improvement of device performance. The devices were also fabricated by respectively annealing the prepared ZnO layer, active layer and WO3 interlayer. The same enhancements of device performance can just be obtained by post-annealing the thermally evaporated WO3 interlayer, which directly proves that the post-annealing treatment improves the interface characteristics between the active layer and WO3 interlayer. While considering the simplicity of the device preparation process, the devices were ultimately fabricated by post-annealing the complete device with a Ag electrode. The device with the highest efficiency was fabricated with a 75 Å WO3 cathode layer and thermally annealed at 60 °C. The effective area of the device was ca. 0.044 cm2.


X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was performed using an ESCALAB 250 spectrometer. Current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics were recorded using a Keithley 2601 source meter under one sun illumination with an Oriel 300 W solar simulator intensity of ∼100 mW cm2. Incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) was recorded using a Crowntech QTest Station 1000 AD. Surface morphology was analysed using a Bruker Dimension Icon Atomic Force Microscope (AFM). The photoluminescence (PL) spectra were recorded by using a Shimadzu RF 5301 fluorescence spectrophotometer. Impedance was measured by using a Precision Impedance Analyzer 6500B Series of Wayne Kerr Electronics.



Fig. 1a shows the fabricated device structure, and the diagrams of the active layer and the WO3 interlayer without and with post-annealing treatment exhibit the changed interfacial contact characteristics. After post-annealing treatment, the contact interface of the anode interlayer will diffuse towards the active layer, further increasing the contact between the active layer and WO3, which is beneficial for the hole transfer between them. To prove that the post-annealing treatment can cause the inter-diffusion of the WO3 hole-extraction interface, the XPS spectra of W 4f and S 2p were recorded and they are shown in Fig. 1b–e. Here, the hole extraction process occurs from PTB7 to WO3, thus only the ratio between WO3 and PTB7 was considered. It can be obtained roughly by calculating the atomic ratio between W and S, because W and S are the characteristic elements of WO3 and PTB7, respectively. As expected, the content of W decreased while the content of S increased on the top surface after the post-annealing treatment, implying the inter-diffusion and more sufficient contact between them.

The J–V characteristics and detailed photovoltaic parameters of all the fabricated devices with different WO3 thicknesses and post-annealing temperatures are given in Fig. S1 and Table S1 (ESI). To intuitively compare the device performance after post-annealing treatment, the Voc and PCE of devices with different thickness of the WO3 interlayer as a function of post-annealing temperature are plotted in Fig. 2a and b. Without post-annealing treatment, the Voc of the devices displays a thickness dependence, and the device with the 100 Å WO3 layer demonstrates the highest PCE. With an increase of the WO3 thickness, the interface contact characteristics with the active layer are gradually improved, while a too thick WO3 interlayer will enlarge the Rs of the whole device and aggravate the resistance loss. Thus, a too thick WO3 interlayer will lead to decreased device performance. After post-annealing treatment for the completed devices, the Voc increases rapidly and then tends to saturate with the increase of temperature, and the enhancement effect is more obvious for the devices with thinner WO3 layers. The enhanced Voc after the post-annealing treatment can primarily be attributed to the further optimized interface contact characteristics due to the inter-diffusion of the WO3 hole-extraction interface, minimizing the interface charge loss owing to the enhanced charge extraction capacity. It was noticed that a larger thickness of the interlayer can partly improve the Voc, therefore the effect of the post-annealing treatment on Voc became relatively weaker. Meanwhile, though the post-annealing treatment can improve the interface contact between the active layer and WO3 layer and enhance the Voc of devices, hole extraction and transport are still limited by the thickness of WO3. Thus, the Voc cannot be continuously and rapidly increased. The PCE then decreases after an improvement with the increase of the annealing temperature, due to the damaged Jsc and FF due to the negative effect of high temperature on the active layer. The changes of Jsc and FF are given in Fig. S2 (ESI).

Fig. 3a shows the J–V characteristics of devices fabricated by evaporating 100 Å of WO3 without and with the 60 °C post-annealing treatment. After the post-annealing treatment, Voc, Jsc and FF were simultaneously enhanced, which is mainly attributed to the improved interface contact due to the inter-diffusion of the WO3 hole-extraction interface, leading to the improved hole extraction capacity and decreased interfacial charge loss. Fig. 3b shows the J–V characteristics measured in the dark. Under a negative bias, the devices after the post-annealing treatment demonstrate a lower leakage current due to the good interface contact, contributing to the increase of photocurrent. Furthermore, the reduced leakage current and decreased interface charge loss will inevitably lead to an improved Voc. Under a positive bias, the turn-on voltage is significantly enlarged due to the post-annealing treatment, which suggests an increased built-in potential (Vbi) across the device and finally an improved Voc.Fig. 3c shows the corresponding IPCE spectra and integrated Jsc, plotting a clear enhancement for Jsc after the post-annealing treatment. The IPCE peak value of the annealed device reaches 79% at 620 nm, and the photon utilization was apparently improved over a wide spectral range from 340 to 680 nm.
The AFM measurements of ITO/ZnO/PTB7:PC71BM coated by 100 Å of WO3 without and with post-annealing treatment at 60 °C were carried out and they are shown in Fig. 4. It was noticed that the post-annealing treatment slightly decreases the root-mean-square (RMS) roughness from 1.45 to 1.36 nm. This indicates that the post-annealing treatment has a certain effect on the distribution of WO3 and leads to a varied surface morphology. Meanwhile, the surface morphologies of bare PTB7:PC71BM without and with the same post-annealing treatment are shown in Fig. S3 (ESI). The surface morphology was not damaged by the post-annealing treatment at 60 °C, and the normal working state of the active layer was not affected.
It has been suggested that the improved device performance is due to the enhanced charge selection and extraction capacities as a result of the improved interface contact characteristics. To sufficiently prove this, the PL spectra were measured and they are displayed in Fig. 5a. It was found that the post-annealing treatment leads to more efficient PL quenching than that of the annealing-free device, with a quenching efficiency of 42%. This suggests that the hole selection and extraction from PTB7 to the WO3 anode interlayer are obviously enhanced.Fig. 5b shows the time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) spectra for the device without and with post-annealing treatment at 60 °C. It should be noted that the PL quenching is much faster after post-annealing treatment, indicating that the charge transfer from PTB7 to WO3 is facilitated.
To further verify the facilitated charge extraction capacity in the whole device, the method of injected charge extraction by linearly increasing voltage (i-CELIV) was used. The schematic of the equivalent i-CELIV experimental setup and the working mechanism are shown in the ESI.Fig. 6a and b show the i-CELIV current transients with a small offset voltage (Uoff) of −0.3 V at different reverse bias voltage (Umax) values from 0.5 to 4 V. By increasing the Umax, the extraction current density increases from the displacement current j0 to a maximum (jmax) when the majority of injected charge carriers reach the opposite electrode. And, it subsequently decreases due to the drop in free charge carrier concentration during the extraction. As can be seen in Fig. 6c, Tmax, defined as the time to reach the jmax, can be treated as a standard to measure the charge extraction and transport in the whole device, and it gradually decreases with the increase of Umax. The smooth charge extraction and transport can accelerate the time to reach the jmax. After post-annealing treatment, the Tmax values at different Umax were all shortened, implying that the charge extraction and transport capacities are significantly strengthened.
It is worth noting that a maximum PCE of 9.66% is obtained from the device with the 75 Å WO3 interlayer after 60 °C post-annealing treatment, which is higher than that of the annealed device with the 100 Å WO3 interlayer. The corresponding J–V curve is plotted in Fig. 7a, demonstrating a Voc of 0.751 V, a Jsc of 17.27 mA cm−2 and a FF of 74.5%. After post-annealing treatment, the interface contact characteristics are improved, synchronously minimizing the necessary thickness of WO3, which is beneficial for the reduced charge recombination loss across the interface caused by excess WO3 interlayer. And, the corresponding IPCE spectrum is shown in Fig. 7b. The integrated Jsc from the IPCE spectrum agrees with the value extracted from the J–V curve.

Fig. 8 shows the Nyquist plots of the EIS spectra for the devices with 75 and 100 Å WO3 interlayers after post-annealing treatment under dark conditions. The Rs in the higher frequency range is related to the charge transport resistance across the interface between the active layer and the WO3 cathode interlayer. The Rs of the device with the 75 Å WO3 interlayer is smaller than that of the device with the 100 Å WO3 interlayer. The smaller Rs is beneficial for charge transfer at the interface of the active layer/WO3 hole transport layer and reduces the interfacial charge loss due to the minimized WO3 interlayer. Therefore, it can be concluded that the higher Jsc and FF of the device are mainly caused by the facilitated charge transfer and reduced charge loss at the interface of the active layer/WO3 interlayer.
To verify the decreased charge loss in the device with a thinner WO3 interlayer, the i-CELIV current transients under different Uoffset values from −0.1 to −1.0 V are also shown in Fig. 9. The Uoffset is used to drive the charge carrier toward the device, and then the injected charge will be extracted by a Umax of 2 V and form an effective current, excluding the charge loss due to the recombination and trapping. It should be noted that the device with the 75 Å WO3 interlayer possesses a higher extraction current, which indicates that the thinner WO3 layer can reduce the charge loss. At the same time, the time to reach the peak value is much shorter than that of the device with the 100 Å WO3 interlayer, which is mainly attributed to the reduced charge recombination process.

In summary, a higher PCE of 9.66% is demonstrated by minimizing the necessary thickness of the WO3 interlayer and post-annealing the whole device with a Ag electrode at 60 °C. The post-annealing treatment can increase the interface contact between WO3 and the active layer due to the inter-diffusion of the WO3 hole-extraction interface, which effectively enhances the Jsc, Voc and FF of devices owing to the improved charge extraction/transfer capacity and reduced interface charge loss. In particular, this method is also applicable for devices with a MoO3 anode interlayer. Moreover, the modulated interface contact characteristics can simultaneously decrease the evaporated WO3 thickness, lowering the Rs of the device, which is beneficial for the facilitated charge transfer across the interface of the active layer/WO3 and reduces the resistance loss. Our results indicate that the post-annealing treatment can modulate the interface characteristics between two adjacent layers, which endows it with great potential to be applied in other fields such as photodetectors and light-emitting diodes.


The authors declare no competing financial interest.


The authors are grateful to the Special Project of the Province-University Co-constructing Program of Jilin Province (SXGJXX2017-3), the Science and Technology Innovation Leading Talent and Team Project of Jilin Province (20170519010JH), and the International Cooperation and Exchange Project of Jilin Province (20170414002GH, 20180414001GH) for the support of the work.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: The J–V characteristics of all fabricated devices, Jsc and FF of devices with different WO3 thicknesses, AFM images of bare PTB7:PC71BM films without and with post-annealing treatment, the description and schematics of experimental setups for the i-CELIV technique, and the detailed photovoltaic parameters of all devices. See DOI: 10.1039/c8tc03944e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018