 DOI: 10.1039/D3TC01289A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2023, 11, 8553-8563


Weitao
Ye
,

Zhentao
Du
*,

Deliu
Ou
,

Jielei
Tu
,

Ming-Hui
Shang
,

Jiahui
Zhou
,

Lin
Wang
,

Weiyou
Yang
 and 

Zuobao
Yang
*

School of Resources, Environment and Materials, State Key Laboratory of Featured Metal Materials and Life-cycle Safety for Composite Structures, Guangxi University, Nanning, 530004, P. R. China. E-mail: zhentaodu@126.com

Institute of Micro/Nano Materials and Devices, Ningbo University of Technology, Ningbo, 315211, P. R. China. E-mail: hokepoly@nbut.edu.cn

Yunnan Provincial Rural Energy Engineering Key Laboratory, Yunnan Normal University, Kunming, 650500, P. R. China

Received
12th April 2023
, Accepted 17th May 2023
First published on 17th May 2023
Planar-structured metal halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have received considerable attention thanks to their superior optoelectronic properties with a record power conversion efficiency (PCE) of over 25%. However, further improvements in the PCE of these devices are still limited fundamentally by excessive charge carrier recombination, due to the prevailing defects in perovskites and their adjacent interfaces to the charge transport layer (CTL). Herein, we report an efficient dual-interface modification strategy to improve the charge carrier management in both perovskites and perovskite/CTL interfaces by post-treatment of perovskite surfaces with GABr and introducing NH4F-treated SnO2 as an electron transport layer, respectively. Accordingly, suppressed structural defects, improved crystallinity of the perovskite, and reduced interfacial defects have been achieved simultaneously, thus facilitating the carrier transport and extraction. As a result, the target PSCs attain a decent PCE of 19.61% with a remarkably enhanced fill factor of 78.34%. Moreover, the underlying mechanism concerning these improvements has been proposed. The present findings might provide some meaningful insights into exploring high-performance PSCs toward theoretically limited efficiency.

Metal halide perovskites have been receiving tremendous attention both from academia and industry for the photovoltaic application owing to their inherent excellent physical and chemical properties such as high absorption coefficients, large carrier mobility, tunable bandgaps, and long carrier diffusion length. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of corresponding perovskite solar cells (PSCs) has surged from the original 3.8% to the current certified 25.7% over the past decade, which presents great potential to rival that of the commercialized silicon solar cells. However, the record PCE of these devices is still far below the limit of the theoretical prediction for single junction solar cells, where the relatively low fill factor (FF) is one of the most important reasons. The FF is closely related to the charge carrier generation, transport and extraction and will be reduced by excessive charge carrier recombination. To this end, improvements in charge carrier management would be vital to increase the performance of the PSCs toward the limit.

In a typical regular planar-type PSC configuration, a polycrystalline perovskite is sandwiched between the electron- and hole-transporting layers (ETL and HTL). Under illumination, the photogenerated electron–hole pairs would be separated within the perovskite and corresponding electrons or holes will undergo charge carrier extraction and transport in the ETL or HTL before being collected by negative or positive electrodes, respectively. In fact, the performance of the PSCs is crucially influenced by an unintended recombination during the accompanying charge carrier behaviors due to the prevailing defects in the perovskite layer (either inside the grain or at the grain boundary) and the interfaces in these devices. To address the defect issues in the perovskite layer, it might be an effective method to improve the quality of the perovskite films. Therefore, various strategies, such as solvent engineering, compositional engineering, additive routes and so on, have been developed to mitigate this issue so as to obtain a large carrier lifetime. Despite these efforts, the total carrier lifetime is still far below the anticipated level, which can be attributed to the truth that the defects on the surface or at the interface of the devices are several folds of those in the bulk perovskites. In this regard, the charge carrier managements at the surface or interface are more important than in the perovskites. Surface modification with organic cations including ethyl ammonium (EA+),n-butylammonium ammonium (BA+), guanidinium (Gua+), phenethylammonium (PEA+)etc. has been demonstrated to be a promising method to passivate the surface perovskite films. In particular, guanidinium ions have been widely acknowledged to suppress nonradiative recombination in hybrid perovskites so as to result in a remarkable enhancement in carrier lifetime. On the other hand, interfacial modification especially for ETL/perovskite is of equal importance to optimize the carrier management in PSCs. As a popular wide-bandgap ETL, SnO2 should have enhanced the carrier extraction from the ETL to perovskite in the PSCs due to the higher photostability against ultraviolet and carrier mobility than traditional TiO2. However, SnO2-based PSCs still suffer from poor performance and instability due to the imbalanced charge transport at the ETL/perovskite interface originating from high surface defect densities and poor contact between the SnO2 and perovskite. Accordingly, different types of methods including organic functional materials, inorganic salts, low dimensional materials,etc. have been adopted to suppress the defects and optimize the interface, among which halide salt treatment has been proven to be an efficient strategy to heal the defects at the SnO2/perovskite interface. For instance, Li's group reported a route to suppress the deep-level defects by incorporation of NH4Cl into SnO2 thus improving the PCE up to 21.38% from 18.71%. An enhanced electron extraction has been demonstrated by introducing biguanide hydrochloride between SnO2 and perovskite, thus yielding an impressive certified PCE of 24.4%. Despite the remarkable progress in the performance of the PSCs, most research efforts have focused either on the ETL/perovskite interface or within the bulk perovskite to date. It is still highly desirable to develop an effective strategy to mitigate the different defects both in the perovskite and charge transport layer/perovskite interface simultaneously, thereby attaining effective charge carrier management for efficient PSCs.
Herein, we report a dual-interface modification at both ETL/perovskite and perovskite/HTL interfaces by introducing NH4F and GABr treatment, respectively. A synergistic improvement in the quality of the perovskite film and ETL/perovskite interface has been achieved by introducing F ions into SnO2, which facilitates carrier extraction and suppresses carrier recombination simultaneously. Furthermore, the GABr post-treatment may reduce the density of the structural defects and radiative recombination in the perovskite, thus suppressing the trap-assisted recombination and being beneficial to carrier transport inside the perovskite films. This multifunctional modification strategy boosted the FF from the pristine 64.60% to the target 78.34% of the PSCs. Accompanied by the slightly improved open-circuit voltage and short-circuit current density, a champion PCE of 19.61% has been achieved in comparison to that (15.64%) of the control one. We speculate that the findings in this work may provide a novel route to further improve the performance of the PSCs as well as those perovskite-activated optoelectronic devices.

Unless stated specifically, all materials in this work are used without further purification.

The SnO2 aqueous colloidal dispersion (15 wt%) was provided by Alfa Aesar. Lead(II)iodide (PbI2, 99.99%) was purchased from TCI chemicals. 4-tert-Butylpyridine (4-TBP, 98%), lead(II)chloride (PbCl2, 98%), N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF, anhydrous 99.8%), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO, anhydrous 99.9%), toluene (TOL, anhydrous 99.8%), isopropanol (IPA, anhydrous 99.5%) and chlorobenzene (CB, anhydrous 99.8%) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Methylammonium iodide (MAI, 99.5%), guanidinium bromide (GABr, 99.5%), lithium bis-trifluorosulfonyl imide (Li-TFSI, 99%) and cobalt(III) TFSI salt (FK209, 99%) were purchased from Xi’an Polymer Light Technology Corp. 2,2′,7,7′-Tetrakis [N,N-di(4-methoxyphenyl)amino]-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD, 99.86%) was purchased from Advanced Election Technology Corp. Ammonium fluoride (NH4F, 99.99%) and acetone (ACS reagent) were purchased from Aladdin.

Indium-doped tin oxide (ITO) glass substrates (1.5 cm × 1.5 cm) were ultrasonically washed with soap, deionized (DI) water, acetone and isopropanol for 20 minutes, sequentially. ITO substrates were further treated with plasma for 15 minutes after drying. In the case of the SnO2-based ETL, a diluted SnO2 precursor solution (commercial SnO2 colloidal dispersion: DI water = 1:5 in volume ratio) was spin-coated on the cleaned substrates at 4000 rpm for 30 s, followed by baking at 150 °C for 30 min on a hotplate. In the case of a NH4F-treated SnO2-based ETL, NH4F aqueous solution (1–4 mg mL−1 in DI water) was used to dilute commercial SnO2 colloidal dispersion (5:1 in volume ratio) and then the mixed solution was deposited on the cleaned ITO substrates with the same procedure as that of the SnO2-based ETL. All these substrates were immediately treated with UV–ozone for 10 min after cooling to room temperature. The substrates were then transferred into a nitrogen-filled glovebox for perovskite film deposition. A perovskite precursor solution, which was prepared by dissolving 539.4 mg PbI2, 36.2 mg PbCl2 and 206.7 mg MAI in 1 mL mixed solvent (DMF:DMSO = 9:1 in volume ratio), was spun at 1000 rpm and 6000 rpm for a duration of 10 s and 30 s, respectively. At the 20 s before the end of spin-coating, 200 μL of toluene was poured onto the substrates. Then the substrates were put on a hotplate at 100 °C for 15 min. For dual-interface modification, an extra GABr treatment step will be done prior to hole transport layer deposition. Different concentrations of GABr solution (0.5–2.0 mg mL−1 in IPA) were spun on the substrates at 5000 rpm for 30 s and these substrates were annealed at 100 °C for 3 min. For hole transport layer deposition, a spiro-OMeTAD precursor solution was prepared by dissolving 72.3 mg of spiro-OMeTAD, 28.8 μL of 4-TBP, 17.5 μL of Li-TFSI solution (520 mg mL−1 in acetonitrile) and 20 μL of FK209 solution (300 mg mL−1 in acetonitrile) in 1 mL of chlorobenzene and spin-coated on the substrates at 3000 rpm for 30 s. The fabrication process of the devices were finished after evaporation of ∼100 nm silver electrode under the vacuum of ∼ 5 × 10−4 Pa.


X-Ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis was performed using an XPS system (ESCALAB 250Xi, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). PL spectra were measured using a fluorescence spectrometer (Fluromax-4P, Horiba Jobin Yvon, France). X-Ray diffraction (XRD, D8 Advance, Bruker, Germany) patterns were recorded with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.5406 Å). TR-PL was performed using a spectrometer with a time correlated single-photon counting system (Fluorolog-3, Horiba Jobin Yvon, France). UV-visible absorption was measured with an AvaSpec-ULS2048XL-EVO and AvaSoft 8. The structure and morphology of the films were obtained by field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM, S-4800, Hitachi, Japan). Transmission electron microscopy (TEM), high-resolution TEM (HR-TEM) and selective area electron diffraction (SAED) were used to analyze the microstructure of the films using JEM-2100F (JEOL, Japan). The J–V curves and steady-state power output of perovskite solar cells were measured under the illumination of AM 1.5G simulated sunlight of 100 mW cm−2 using a programmable Keithley 2400 source meter. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) measurements were obtained from a Newport IPCE measurement system.


The PSCs based on both control and interfacial modified films are fabricated with regular architecture with the configuration of ITO/SnO2/perovskite/Spiro-OMeTAD/Ag. Fig. 1a shows the corresponding schematic illustration and cross-sectional SEM image of the device. Every functional layer from bottom (ITO) to up (Ag) can be clearly recognized and the thickness of the photoactive (perovskite) layer is estimated to be ∼570 nm which is very close to the value measured by a profiler as shown in Fig. S1 (ESI). To optimize the effect of the interfacial modification, we investigated the performance of PSCs with various ratios of NH4F and GABr additives on ETL/perovskite and HTL/perovskite interfaces, respectively. In the case of the ETL/perovskite interface, NH4F additives with concentrations between 1 and 4 mg mL−1 were introduced into the SnO2 solution to construct PSCs. In Fig. S2 (ESI), we show the performance of the ETL/perovskite interface modified PSCs with different amounts of NH4F. We found that the PCEs of all the modified PSCs are larger than those of the control samples, which is mainly attributed to the enhancement in the fill factor of the devices. Notably, NH4F with a concentration of 3 mg mL−1 provided the optimal PCE (17.20%) and that is why we use it for the ETL/perovskite interfacial modified devices throughout the work. Based on this optimal ETL layer, we fabricated dual-interface modified PSCs via post-treatment of the perovskite layer with varying concentration of GABr (0.5, 1.0 and 2.0 mg mL−1 in IPA) as shown in Fig. S3 (ESI). In comparison with the devices with single-interface modification, the PCEs of the devices with dual-interface modification improved substantially, in which the optimal device with 1.0 mg mL−1 GABr displayed a champion PCE of 19.61%. Fig. 1b shows the overall performance distribution for the devices based on control, optimized single-interface modified and dual-interface modified films, which will be denoted as control, OSIM and ODIM (target) samples hereafter, respectively. It has been shown that the average PCE improves from 14.75% for control samples to 15.83% for OSIM samples, which is attributed to the improvement in the FF with negligible effect on the Jsc and Voc. In contrast, target devices present simultaneous enhancement in both Jsc and Voc as well as a decent FF and exhibit an average PCE of 18.19%. The J–V curves of the best-performing devices based on the control, OSIM and target films are shown in Fig. 1c and corresponding photovoltaic parameters are given in Table 1. After single- and dual-interface modification, the devices attain an enhancement of ∼110% and ∼125% compared to that of the control one, suggesting that the interfacial modification strategy in this work is an effective route to perovskite solar cells.


J
sc (mA cm−2)
PCE (%)

V
oc (V)
FF (%)
Control
22.84
15.64
1.06
64.60
OSIM
22.93
17.20
1.09
68.80
ODIM (target)
23.17
19.61
1.08
78.34
The external quantum efficiency (EQE) comparison of the control, OSIM and target devices is plotted in Fig. 1d. Both control and OSIM devices display almost identical cut-off range of absorption wavelengths while the target device presents a cut-off with a slight blueshift compared to the previous two, implying that the dual-interface modification is one of the factors that can change the bandgap of the perovskites. Regardless of the blueshift behavior, the target device shows an enhanced EQE that might benefit from the enhanced spectral response in the wavelength range from 400 to 650 nm and contribute to the PCE improvement. The steady-state photocurrent and power output at the maximum power point over 200 s are depicted in Fig. 1e. All the devices with interfacial modification present good stability compared to that of the control. The target and OSIM devices yield a stabilized PCE of 16.86% at 0.89 V and 13.46% at 0.84 V, respectively, while the control one delivers a stabilized PCE of 11.03%. Besides, 20 individual perovskite solar cells were fabricated to access the reproducibility of the devices. From the histogram of efficiency distribution in Fig. 1f, we can observe that the target devices show an average PCE of 18.20%, which is much higher than those of OSIM (15.83%) and control (14.75%) devices.
To explore the possible origin of the PCE enhancement of the devices, we investigate the influence of interfacial modification on the surface morphology of the ETLs and perovskites. Fig. 2a and b show the top-view SEM images of the annealed ETL films onto ITO substrates without and with NH4F modification, which were deposited by spin-coating the diluted commercial SnO2 colloid dispersion without and with NH4F solution (3 mg mL−1 in DI water), respectively. Clearly, we can observe that the SnO2-film exhibits a relatively rough surface with some irregular islands while the NH4F–SnO2 film shows a fairly smooth surface. The rough surface of the pristine film, attributed to the presence of an ultrathin layer of small-sized SnO2 nanoparticles, can lead to structural defects and increased contact between the perovskite and ITO layers. These factors can potentially result in decreased device performance, specifically increased charge carrier recombination. The risk will be greatly reduced for the NH4F-treated smooth film, in which a slight etching/deposition behavior of NH4F might be responsible for the smoothening action in a way of etching off SnO2 grains on tops and filling up the valleys of the islands of the ITO. The reshaping of the surface of the ETL is helpful for the deposition of the perovskites on it. Fig. 2c–e show top-view SEM images of control, OSIM and target perovskite films. All the perovskite films present a typical microstructure for the MAPbI3 perovskite with grains in the range of several hundreds of nanometers while the perovskites with either single or dual interfacial modification display enlarged grain size compared to that of the control sample. Moreover, a small amount of excess lead iodide and pinholes are clearly observed for the control perovskite, which are marked with yellow squares and red circles in Fig. 2c, respectively. However, both OSIM and target perovskite films display an excellent compact layer without visible nanostructured pinholes which might be associated with fast deposition of perovskites because of enhanced interfacial contact on the buried NH4F-treated ETL interface. Notably, we carefully examined the surface of the perovskite films and the corresponding distribution of the grain size of the perovskites are provided in the insets of Fig. 2. The control perovskite film presents an average grain size of 340 nm while both OSIM and target perovskite films show slightly larger average grain sizes, which are 380 nm and 440 nm, respectively. The increase in grain size with interfacial modification may be attributed to F ion migration from the NH4F–SnO2 films during perovskite film formation for the OSIM film and extra GABr induced secondary crystallization process of the perovskite film for the target film. As a result, fewer grain boundaries will be obtained which is helpful for charge transport in the devices. With optimized interface, the efficiency of the interfacial charge extraction and transport as well as the shunt resistance are expected to be improved greatly for the target perovskite.
To testify our hypothesis, we performed space charge-limited current (SCLC) measurements for both control- and target-perovskite based electron-only devices with the architecture of ITO/ETL/perovskite/PCBM/Ag. The trap filling limit voltage (VTFL) can be extracted from the dark current–voltage curves of the electron-only devices and used to calculate corresponding trap-state densities (Nt) of the perovskite films according to formula (1):
(1)
where
ε0, εr, q and L denote the vacuum permittivity, a relative dielectric constant of perovskite films, electron charge and the thickness of the perovskite film, respectively. As shown in Fig. 3a, the target device exhibits a lower VTFL (0.071 V) compared to that of the control device (0.110 V). With the relative dielectric constant of the MAPbI3 perovskite (εr = 32) and the thickness of the perovskite films (L = 572 nm, Fig. S1, ESI), the trap-state density (Nt) of the target sample is calculated to be 7.68 × 1014 cm−3, which is much lower than that of the control sample (1.19 × 1015 cm−3). The lower trap-state density demonstrates an enhanced charge extraction due to high quality perovskite films with dual-interfacial modification, which is also beneficial for charge transport in perovskite solar cells. We further measured dark current–voltage curves of the perovskite solar cells with control and target films. As shown in Fig. 3b, it is clearly observed that the leak current density in the target device is lower than that in the control device. The lower leak current density indicates that suppressed charge recombination and enhanced charge transport have been achieved with the present dual-interface modification strategy, which also supports the SCLC results and is associated with the enhanced FF of the target devices (Fig. 1b).

To probe more deep insights into the interfacial modification, we investigated the steady-state PL spectra and time-resolved PL decay curves of the control, OSIM and target perovskite films. Fig. 4a shows the steady-state PL spectra of these films deposited on ITO substrates, in which a single characteristic PL peak is observed for each film. Note that the control and OSIM films exhibit almost identical PL peaks located around 755 nm while the target sample displays a PL peak with a slight blueshift of 3 nm. One of the possible origins of this blueshift is the secondary crystallization of the perovskite by introducing a layer of GABr for the target sample. Besides, the perovskite films with both single-interface or dual-interface modification exhibit substantially lower PL intensities than the control sample, and the target sample shows the lowest value. The reduction in PL intensity suggests an increased interfacial non-radiative recombination induced by NH4F-treated SnO2 and a decreased radiative recombination because of GABr passivation, which facilitates photo-generated charge carrier transfer to ETLs through non-radiative recombination channels. The charge recombination was further discussed with time-resolved PL (TRPL) for the control, OSIM and target films as shown in Fig. 4b. A bi-exponential rate law was used to fit the PL decay curves with eqn (2):
(2)
where
A1 and A2 are the relative amplitudes; τ1 and τ2 are the fast and slow decay lifetimes, which can be associated with the trap-assisted carrier recombination at the interface and radiative carrier recombination inside the grains, respectively. Corresponding fitting parameters are summarized in Table S1 (ESI). It can be observed that the fast decay lifetime τ1 is 8.01, 5.63 and 3.76 ns for control, OSIM and target samples, respectively, which is comparable to that of MoS2–interface modified perovskite films. The shortened τ1 indicates an increased trap-assisted carrier recombination at the interface, suggesting a faster charge extraction rate from perovskite to ETLs by interfacial modification. The second slow decay lifetime, τ2, however, increased from 180.51 (single-interface) to 187.58 ns (target) in comparison with 166.34 ns in the control sample. The increase in the τ2 means suppressing radiative carrier recombination in perovskites, being consistent with the high-quality perovskite films after interfacial modification.


Fig. 4c compares the UV-vis absorption spectra of control, OSIM and target perovskite films. Interestingly, it is found that both control and OSIM films show similar absorption spectra from 650 to 760 nm with a nearly identical absorption onset at 755 nm, whereas the target sample presents an absorption onset of ∼752 nm. This blueshift indicates that the introduction of GABr in the perovskite film leads to a slight change in the bandgap and crystal structure of the target film, which agrees well with the PL results shown in Fig. 4a. Crystal structures of the samples were then examined with X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements as shown in Fig. 4d. Clearly, all the samples exhibit two dominant peaks at ∼14.1 and 28.5°, which can be tracked back to the (110) and (220) facets of the typical MAPbI3 tetragonal phase, respectively. Except for one diffraction peak at 12.6° from PbI2 (marked with a triangle symbol) and two peaks from the ITO substrate (marked with asterisk symbols), the others can also be indexed to the corresponding facets of the MAPbI3 tetragonal perovskite. Most notably, no obvious diffraction reflections are associated with a 2D perovskite in the target sample, implying that there were no 2D perovskite layers formed after GABr introduction or the quantity of the resulting 2D perovskite is too low to be detected by XRD. Accordingly, further characterization should be needed to clarify the observed blueshifts in PL and UV-vis absorption for the target sample.
Here, we use transmission electron microscopy (TEM) to analyze the microstructure of the perovskite by carefully scraping the film from the target sample. As for comparison, the TEM characterization of the control sample was also provided. The target perovskite film exhibits a slightly larger grain (Fig. 5d) than that of the control one (Fig. 5a); in addition, it presents smooth and compact layer in contrast to the existing voids between the grains for the latter, which are consistent with the results observed in SEM images shown in Fig. 2e and c. The corresponding representative SAED patterns for both target and control sample are displayed in Fig. 5e and b, respectively. Both samples show similar polycrystalline diffraction rings, in which the outlined circles from inner to outer can be indexed to the typical (101), (120), (220), (221), (330) and (404) facets of the tetragonal MAPbI3 perovskite. It seems that a similar crystal structure has been attained no matter whether the perovskite films are treated with interfacial modification or not, which is similar to that of the XRD analysis (Fig. 4d). Considering the low concentration of the GABr for interfacial modification, we then carefully checked the micro area of the perovskite films with HRTEM for both samples. For the control sample, well-defined lattice spacing fringes (Fig. 5c) with an interplanar spacing of around 3.1 Å (red square area in Fig. 5c) can be assigned to the (220) plane of the 3D MAPbI3 perovskite, in accordance with the XRD peak at 28.5° as shown in Fig. 4d, and corresponding fast Fourier transform (FFT) (inset with yellow rectangle in Fig. 5c) depicts highly crystalline single grains. Similar evidence of the 3D perovskite can be found for the target sample and notably, a perovskite phase with a larger lattice spacing of around 7.0 Å was also detected (Fig. 5f), which can be associated with the GA-incorporated 2D perovskite. This direct evidence of atomic scale observation allows us preferentially to believe that the quantity of the 2D perovskites formed in the target sample is just below the level of the XRD detection rather than absent 2D perovskites in the target sample, which might be a possible reason for the observed blueshift in the UV-vis and PL spectra.
The aforementioned results demonstrated that the enhancement of PCE of the target sample mainly benefits from the synergistic effects both on charge carrier extraction and the charge transport caused by dual-interfacial modification. To explore the possible mechanism of these effects, we further carried out XPS measurements on the dual-interface modified films of the target sample and used the control one as a reference. Both samples exhibit similar I 3d5/2 and 3d3/2 peaks centering at 619.35 and 630.88 eV (Fig. 6a), respectively, which are ascribed to Pb–I species. XPS spectra of Pb 4f present two contributions of 4f7/2 (138.58 eV) and 4f5/2 (143.38 eV) for the control perovskite film (Fig. 6b), while these peaks slightly shift to higher binding energy for the target sample, which might be attributed to the stronger bonding between [PbI6]4− octahedra and the organic cations (GA) because of more hydrogen bonds in the target film than those (MA) in the control one.Fig. 6c and d show the N1s core spectra of the control and target perovskite films, respectively. The N1s of the control sample presents one NH3+ group in MA (402.38 eV) while it can be deconvoluted into two peaks associating with the NH3+ group in MA and the NH2+ in GA (400.38 eV) for the target sample. The unsaturated NH2+ in the target sample can serve as an effective passivation center by coordinating with the uncoordinated Pb2+ defects, which are expected to reduce the radiative recombination in the perovskite films. This interaction via hydrogen bonds is verified by 1H nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (1H NMR) as shown in Fig. S4 (ESI). The 1H NMR spectra of the pristine and GABr modified perovskite films are provided in Fig. S4a (ESI), which are denoted PVK and PVK/GABr, respectively. It is observed that both samples exhibit two dominant peaks at 2.38 (marked with 1) and 7.48 ppm (marked with 2) corresponding to protons near the carbon and nitrogen atoms of MA from the perovskite. Moreover, an extra peak at 6.90 ppm (marked with 3) is found for PVK/GABr while it is absent for the PVK sample (Fig. S4b, ESI), which displays a downshift of 0.1 ppm with a resonance peak (marked with 3) of the hydrogen bond from the raw material of GABr, implying the formation of the interaction via hydrogen bonds between GA+ and perovskite. As to the ETL/perovskite interface, a SnO2 and a NH4F–SnO2 ETL layer are provided for XPS analysis. It is found that the F 1s peak (684.18 eV) only existed in the NH4F-treated SnO2 (Fig. 6e), demonstrating the successful chemical doping of the F ions. NH4F–SnO2 exhibits two Sn 3d 5/2 and 3d 3/2 peaks at 487.18 eV and 495.58 eV while the pristine SnO2 displays peaks at 486.88 eV and 495.28 eV, respectively, thus leading to a 0.30 eV shift toward high energy as a result of the formation of Sn–F bonds, which might increase the electron cloud around the tin atom's density. To investigate the influence of the F ions on the SnO2, we further performed core level O 1s XPS of the pristine and NH4F-treated SnO2 as shown in Fig. 6g and f, respectively. The O 1s for both samples can be fitted to a peak from lattice oxygen (OSn) in the crystal and a peak from the hydroxyl group (OH) on the surface of the SnO2. The OH/(OSn + OH) ratio can be estimated by extracting the integrated area of the corresponding peaks and we found that this ratio decreases greatly from 60.2% to 37.7% after NH4F treatment, suggesting that the surface defects are greatly reduced with the present ETL interface strategy, which facilitates the charge carrier transport with reduced non-radiative recombination.
Based on these results, we propose a plausible mechanism for the present dual-interface modification strategy as shown in Fig. 7. As to the ETL/perovskite interface, the dangling bonds in the control sample, whatever bridging oxygen or 5-fold-coordinated Sn, are prone to interact with vapor in the ambient atmosphere to form lots of hydroxyl groups on the surface of the ETL (left column in Fig. 7). In the target sample, these hydroxyl groups are greatly reduced by interaction with ammonium anions from NH4F to form NH3 and water vapor (right column in Fig. 7), and partially substituted by F ions to provide an effective chemical doping, which might increase the electron cloud density and reduce the surface defects of the interface, respectively. As a result, the trap-assisted recombination at the ETL/perovskite interface will reduce undoubtedly, thus leading to efficient charge carrier transport in the devices. For the GABr-treated perovskite interface, the ammonium group (NH3+) binds to the [PbI6]4− octahedra of the perovskite films and the unsaturated amine group (NH2+) coordinated with the dangling Pb2+ defects, which reduce the density of structural defects and the radiative recombination in the perovskite films, respectively. These improvements either in structural defects or in the radiative recombination may, on the one side, accelerate the photogenerated charge carrier transport and on the other side, facilitate the electron extraction in the perovskite films, which is why the larger current density has been obtained in the target sample than in the control one.

In summary, we demonstrated a feasible dual-interface modification strategy to regulate the charge carrier extraction and transport by incorporation of GABr at the HTL/perovskite interface and NH4F at the ETL/perovskite interface. Our results indicate that the radiative recombination in the perovskite is greatly suppressed by GABr treatment and the non-radiative recombination and trap-assisted recombination are reduced by incorporation of the NH4F in the ETL. As a result, significant improvements in FF and PCE have been achieved and we attained a champion PCE of 19.61% for the target sample, which shows an enhancement of over 25% to that for the control one. Although this efficiency is not so high to rival with the state-of-the-art devices, the remarkable improvement through dual-interface modification might be used as an alternative route to boost the performance of the devices with low defects. We believe that further development of the strategy might pave the way to attain highly efficient optoelectronic devices in the future.


Z. Du and Z. Yang designed and supervised the project. J. Tu, M. Shang and W. Yang advised on the research. W. Ye, D. Ou, J. Zhou and L. Wang studied and constructed the concept and analyzed the experimental data. W. Ye, D. Ou, W. Yang and Z. Yang wrote and revised the manuscript. All authors contributed to the discussions about the manuscript and the reviewers’ comments.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work is supported by Ningbo Natural Science Foundation, China (grant no. 2021J138), Yunnan Provincial Rural Energy Engineering Key Laboratory of China (grant no. 2022KF008), National Training Program of Innovation and Entrepreneurship for Undergraduates of China (grant no. 202111058015), Technical Foundation of Institute of Sanmen of Zhejiang, China (grant no. TN2021.1) and Scientific and Technological Bases and Talents of Guangxi, China (Guike AD21075051).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d3tc01289a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023