 DOI: 10.1039/C5RA18313H
(Paper)
RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 90705-90711

Xing-jin She,
Qiang Zhang,
Cai-Feng Wang and 
Su Chen*

State Key Laboratory of Materials-Oriented Chemical Engineering, College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Nanjing Tech University (former: Nanjing University of Technology), Nanjing 210009, P. R. China. E-mail: chensu@njtech.edu.cn

Received
8th September 2015
, Accepted 15th October 2015
First published on 15th October 2015
In this work, we first demonstrate a liquid–liquid interfacial strategy to prepare ultra small colloidal Cu2−xSe NCs with blue fluorescence (<5 nm) under moderate conditions. Specifically, preparation of Cu2−xSe NCs proceeds via a reaction of copper(II) stearate [Cu(SA)2] with NaHSe in the presence of phosphine-free oleic acid (OA) or oleylamine (OAm) as capping ligands at 95 °C at the toluene/water interface. The as-prepared NCs display a narrow size distribution compared with traditional high-temperature organic methods. Furthermore, a non-caustic and environmentally friendly ammonium thiocyanate (NH4SCN) as a useful agent was introduced to replace the long-chain organic ligands for fabrication of NC-sensitized solar cells. The results indicate that the Cu2−xSe NCs have potential applications in future optoelectronic devices.

Colloidal semiconductor nanocrystals (NCs) with unique optical and electronic properties are receiving intense attention in the fields of both fundamental science and technological applications. As a kind of binary compound, copper selenide can form in a wide range of stoichiometric compositions (CuSe, Cu2Se, CuSe2, Cu3Se2, Cu5Se4, Cu7Se4, etc.) and non-stoichiometric compositions (Cu2−xSe), and can be constructed into several crystallographic forms (monoclinic, cubic, tetragonal, hexagonal, etc.). Among them, Cu2−xSe, with a direct band gap of 2.2 eV and indirect band gap of 1.4 eV at room temperature, is an attractive semiconductor for optoelectronic and biomedical applications, such as photovoltaics, optical filters, dry galvanic cells, gas sensors and cancer therapy. Specifically, Cu2−xSe is a desirable photovoltaic material due to avoiding the use of toxic heavy-metal ions, compared to other semiconductors including cadmium chalcogenides and lead chalcogenides. To date, various typical methods for fabricating Cu2−xSe NCs have been widely investigated, such as hot-injection, template-assisted, sonochemical, solvothermal and microwave-assisted heating approaches. Most recently, Deka et al. reported the synthesis of colloidal Cu2−xSe NCs in hot coordinating solvents, using noncoordinating 1-octadecene (ODE) as solvent and oleylamine as both the reductant and the ligand. Hessel et al. successfully fabricated the amphiphilic polymer-coated Cu2−xSe NCs (∼16 nm) by a colloidal hot injection method. Nonetheless, these techniques failed to obtain ultra small-size Cu2−xSe NCs (<5 nm) exhibiting quantum confinement effects and photoluminescence (PL).

Recently, a liquid–liquid interface method has been illustrated as a beneficial alternative route to traditional homogeneous synthesis. As early as 1994, Brust et al. first developed the liquid–liquid interface approach to synthesize gold nanoparticles in an open system below 100 °C. A modified liquid–liquid interface thermal approach (i.e., a liquid–liquid interface reaction in an autoclave, generally with the temperature above 100 °C) was further extended to synthesize II–VI semiconductor NCs (CdS, CdSe, ZnS, CdSe/CdS, etc.) and some metal oxide NCs (TiO2, ZrO2, Mn3O4, Co3O4, etc.) by an and colleagues. Moreover, the liquid–liquid interfacial platform can be utilized to fabricate ordered architecture towards multifunctional performance. Russell and co-workers explored ultrathin membranes and capsules of NCs stabilized by cross-linked polymers at the toluene/water interface. Taking advantage of the interface-directed synthetic pathway, our group developed one-dimensional ordered fluorescent microfibers and multiple structures, such as belt-like, sheet-like, petal-like microstructures and etc. Most recently, we first reported a toluene/water interfacial synthesis of single-crystalline ZnTe nanorods with high blue fluorescence for applications in LEDs. Compared with traditional hot-injection methods, the creative interfacial method features obvious advantages: (1) the whole processes can be achieved under a moderate temperature of ∼90 °C in most cases; (2) the limited reaction area enables a slow nucleation and growth period resulting in smaller particle sizes; (3) the liquid–liquid interface method provides a favorable opportunity to construct multifunctional ordered architectures.
Herein, we demonstrate the first phosphine-free synthesis of Cu2−xSe NCs with blue PL emission via a liquid–liquid interfacial strategy though there have been reports of the phosphine-free synthesis of copper-based selenide nanocrystals. This work devotes an available low-temperature synthetic approach to achieving high-quality Cu2−xSe NCs with quantum confinement effects. Preparation of Cu2−xSe NCs proceeds via reaction of copper(II) stearate [Cu(SA)2] with NaHSe in the presence of oleic acid (OA) or oleylamine (OAm) as capping ligands under 95 °C at the toluene/water interface. OA was added dropwise into toluene containing Cu(SA)2 dissolved in toluene under vigorously stirring, followed by the addition of isometric water to form liquid–liquid biphase system degassed with N2. Afterwards, aqueous solution of fresh NaHSe was injected dropwise into the above N2-saturated biphase solution, and the reaction occurred at toluene/water interface. It turned out that the as-prepared Cu2−xSe NCs can be grown into relatively monodispersed system by controlling variations in the reaction conditions and the size of which is very small with ∼4 nm in diameter. We further attempted to investigate the potential photovoltaic properties of the original Cu2−xSe NCs by fabricating NC-sensitized TiO2 solar cells, which showed a high fill factor indicating their potential application in photovoltaic devices (Scheme 1).

Copper(II) stearate (Cu(SA)2, 99%), elemental selenium (Se, 99.99%), sodium borohydride (NaBH4), oleylamine (OAm, 90%), oleic acid (OA, 99%), 1-octadecene (ODE, 90%) and ammonium thiocyanate (NH4SCN, 99.99%) were purchased from Aldrich and used as received. Reagent-grade toluene, methanol, and acetone were supplied by Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China) and used as purchased without further purification. High-purity water with the resistivity of greater than 18 MΩ cm−1 was used in the experiments.


In a typical procedure, 1.2 mmol (0.0454 g) NaBH4 was transferred to a small flask, and then 1.5 mL of ultrapure water was added. After 0.5 mmol (0.0395 g) of selenium powder was added, the reaction flask was cooled by ice. During the reaction, a small outlet connected to the flask was kept open to discharge the pressure from the resulting hydrogen. After several hours, the black selenium powder disappeared and white sodium tetraborate precipitate appeared on the bottom of the flask instead.


Typically, Cu(SA)2 (0.6300 g, 1.0 mmol) and 2.0 mL OA (1.7870 g, 6.0 mmol) or 2.0 mL OAm (1.4830 g, 5.0 mmol) were first dissolved in toluene (50 mL), then 50 mL deionized water was added closely followed by the vigorously stirring for 1 h, and such mixed solution was degassed with N2 for 30 min. After that, the fresh oxygen-free NaHSe was added dropwise into the above N2-saturated solution under stirring. Finally, the mixture was heated at 95 °C for 4 h to obtain Cu2−xSe NCs. After cooling to a room temperature, the NCs were achieved by adding an excess amount of the absolute ethanol into the reacted solution. The as-formed NCs were easily dissolved in various apolar organic solvents (e.g. cyclohexane).


A sandwich solar cell was fabricated from the as-prepared Cu2−xSe NCs with a Pt–FTO electrode (Rainbow Solar Technology) as the counter electrode. Firstly, the TiO2–FTO electrodes (Rainbow Solar Technology) were immersed in the concentrated toluene solution of Cu2−xSe colloidal NCs for 48 h in the dark and then dried under vacuum. To remove the long capping group, the NCs film was then exchanged for ammonium thiocyanate (NH4SCN) by immersing the substrate in 130 mM (1% weight/volume) ammonium thiocyanate in acetone for 30 s, followed by immersing in pure acetone for two minutes, and drying, all under nitrogen. The electrodes were sealed with a polymer gasket (Surlyn) and several drops of electrolyte (acetonitrile solution containing I−/I3− redox couple, Rainbow Solar Technology) were infiltrated to the sealed electrodes through the hole on the work electrode. All the tests of the devices were processed in the glove box.

To further investigate the optical properties and ligand chemical structure of the as-prepared Cu2−xSe NCs, Fourier-transform infrared (FT-IR) analysis was performed using a Nicolet-6700 spectrometer from Thermo Electron at room temperature. Ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) absorption spectra were taken with a Perkin-Elmer Lambda 900 UV-vis spectrometer with the scan rang 290–1000 nm. Photoluminescence (PL) spectra were measured on a Cary Eclipse fluorescence spectrophotometer at room temperature operating with a 350 nm laser beam as a light source and Xe lamp as excited source; the excitation and emission slits were 5 nm.
Low-resolution Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) images were recorded on a JEOL JEM 1011 microscope operating at 100 kV. The high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) observations and the selected area electron diffraction (SAED) were performed on a JEOL JEM-2010UHR instrument at an acceleration voltage of 200 kV. The samples for TEM analysis were prepared in a glove box by depositing a few drops of a dilute solution of nanocrystals onto carbon-coated Cu grids. The latter were then transferred immediately into the microscope. The particle diameter was estimated by using ImageJ software analysis of the TEM micrographs.
XRD was performed on a ARL X'TRA powder X-ray diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation source (λ = 0.15406 nm) at a scanning speed of 5° per min with 2θ range from 20° to 80°.
To investigate the valence state of copper in the as-prepared Cu2−xSe NCs, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy measurements were carried out on a Thermo Scientific Escalab 250Xi spectrometer (USA). A thick film of nanocrystals was prepared on a Si-substrate by dropcasting.
Photocurrent–voltage measurements were performed using a Keithley 2420 source meter (Keithley, USA). A 450 W xenon lamp (Oriel, USA) was used as the light source and the light intensity was AM1.5G one sun (100 mW cm−2) calibrated with a standard Si solar cell. The active area of the tested solar cells was 0.36 cm2.

The liquid–liquid interfacial synthetic strategy permits the fabrication of high-quality blue fluorescent Cu2−xSe NCs. Fig. 1a and b show photographs of the toluene/water interface before and after the generation of the Cu2−xSe NCs capped with OA, respectively. TEM images of the as-synthesized Cu2−xSe NCs using OA as the stabilizing ligands are shown in Fig. 1c and d. The NCs are nearly monodisperse and spherical, and the histogram of the size distribution shown in the inset of Fig. 1c indicates an average particle diameter of 4.6 nm with a relatively narrow size distribution. Fig. 1f illustrates the HRTEM image of an individual NC with clearly visible atomic lattice fringes, which demonstrate the highly crystalline nature of the Cu2−xSe NCs. The lattice fringes are separated by distances of 0.20 nm, which matches well with the expected lattice spacing of the (220) cubic Cu2−xSe crystal. The clear diffuse rings in the selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern also manifest excellent monodispersion and finely preserved crystalline structure of NCs in nature (Fig. 1e). The SAED data correspond to the cubic structure of Cu2−xSe NCs. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis further verifies the cubic structure of Cu2−xSe (JCPDS card no. 06-0680). As revealed from the Fig. 2b, the four diffraction peaks can be indexed to the (111), (220), (311), and (400) diffraction of face centered cubic (fcc) Cu2−xSe (JCPDS card file, 6-680).

Moreover, in order to investigate the influence of ligand type (fatty amines) on the morphology of the NCs, OAm capped Cu2−xSe NCs was also studied. As shown in Fig. 2a, the as-synthesized Cu2−xSe NCs capped with OAm have also a narrow size distribution with an average size of 4.7 nm (Fig. 2a), and the resulting NCs modified with OAm ligands are approximately spherical in shape.

To investigate the valence state of copper in the as-prepared Cu2−xSe NCs, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was further presented (Fig. 3a–c). As shown in Fig. 3a, there existed C, O, Cu and Se peaks observed showing samples with high purity. Fig. 3b manifested that the Cu 2p3/2 peak at 935.6 eV and the Cu 2p1/2 peak at 955.2 eV implied that the oxidation state of the copper species corresponded to Cu(I). In addition, the Cu 2p3/2,sat peak, a satellite line of Cu 2p at 940–945 eV, indicated the presence of Cu(II) in Cu2−xSe. A small peak at 58–60 eV in Fig. 3c showed a high oxidation state of Se, which may be originated from the contamination before XPS test.

The FT-IR spectrum of Cu2−xSe NCs stabilized with OA and OAm are presented in Fig. 4. In detail, the presence of strong stretching at 2930 and 2860 cm−1 in both samples was respectively assigned to the asymmetric and symmetric stretching vibrations of methylene (–CH2) in the long alkyl chain. Broad peaks at 1592 cm−1 and 1405 cm−1 revealed the existence of the alkaline carboxyl groups on the surfaces of Cu2−xSe NCs. Additionally, the three sharp peaks at 1150, 1035 and 850 cm−1 in the IR spectrum of Cu2−xSe–OAm NCs were indexed to C–N stretch of OAm. Based on the FT-IR analysis of Cu2−xSe NCs, it is confirmed that these as-obtained Cu2−xSe NCs are possibly coated by octadecylamine and oleic acid, respectively.

To acquire insight into the synthesis of NCs at the liquid–liquid interface, the influence of the reaction parameters on the formation and the PL properties of Cu2−xSe NCs were systematically investigated. In order to avoid the oxidation of Cu2−xSe into the Se phase when injecting NaHSe solution at 95 °C. In this case, we alternatively injected the fresh oxygen-free NaHSe solution into the precursor solution at room temperature, and the mixture was then heated at 95 °C. Fig. 5a shows the PL spectra of Cu2−xSe–OA NCs taken at different injecting timing intervals during a reaction at 95 °C. It indicated that PL properties was obviously improved with the extended reaction time.


Notably, to the best of our knowledge, this is the first synthesis of fluorescent Cu2−xSe NCs with such a small size. The as-prepared Cu2−xSe NCs could be stably dispersed in organic solvents (toluene, n-hexane or hexamethylene) for a few months without any precipitation. Fig. 6 illustrates a proposed mechanism for formation of Cu2−xSe NCs at a toluene/water interface by using Cu(SA)2 as copper precursor and water soluble NaHSe as selenium precursor, respectively. In order to further slow the reaction rate, the biphase interfacial method involves reaction of two kinds of molecular precursors spatially separated in the toluene and aqueous phases, and the nucleation and growth of NCs only occur at the liquid–liquid interface, which experiences a much longer nucleation stage overlapped with the growth stage comparing with the one-phase system, and the formed NCs show extremely narrow size distributions. The size distribution can be focused during the diffusion-controlled growth process. The diffusion-controlled growth rate (dr/dt) of particles is dependent on particle size according to Reiss' theoretical calculation.


dr/dt = DVm(Cb − Cr)/r

(1)
where
D is the diffusion coefficient, r is the particle radius, Vm is the molar volume of the materials, Cr and Cb are the solubility of the NCs and corresponding bulk solid, which could be concluded from the Gibbs–Thomson equation.


Cr = Cbexp(2σVm/rRT)

(2)
where
σ is the specific surface energy, R is the gas constant, and T is the temperature. Therefore, the growth rate dr/dt can also be deduced from eqn (1) and (2) as:


dr/dt = DVmCb[1 − exp(2σVm/rRT)]/r

(3)
This equation means that the growth rate dr/dt is lowered with increasing particle radius r. In other words, the smaller particles have a faster growth rate than the larger ones, so the smaller particles can always catch up with the larger ones with increasing reaction time and their size distribution can narrow with the growth of nanocrystals. Therefore, a lengthy growth process is very important to the size distribution of NCs. In this toluene/water interface system, when the nuclei and NCs form, they will go into toluene, and then go back to the toluene/water interface to continue growth, which can further slow the rate of growth of Cu2−xSe NCs, favouring the formation of monodisperse and ultrasmall NCs. The formed nuclei and NCs, capped by long-chain ligands (OA or OAm), can be well dispersed in toluene. Cu2−xSe NCs have a long nucleation and growth period compared with those made by the hot-injection approach (15 minutes), but the final NCs still exhibit an extremely narrow size distribution.

To make the best use of these Cu2−xSe NCs with high-quality and low toxicity, we fabricated solar cells with a sandwiched structure based on the as-synthesized Cu2−xSe NCs. As shown in Fig. 7a, the photoelectrode was firstly fabricated by direct absorption of Cu2−xSe NCs onto a TiO2 film residing on a FTO transparent substrate. Fig. 7b showed the SEM images of TiO2 film (left) and QDs/TiO2 film (right). Generally, the efficiency of moving charges in and out of NCs strongly depends on the NC environment. However, the presence of large, bulky ligands on the surface of as-prepared Cu2−xSe NCs creates an insulating barrier around each NC and suppresses interparticle charge transport, a limitation for device integration. To address these problems, several approaches including thermal decomposition of the original ligand, or ligand-exchange process have been explored. 1,2-Ethanedithiol and hydrazine have been used to exchange the longer ligands used in NC synthesis and assembly to increase film conductivity and fabricate solar cells and QD FETs. Recently, the development of novel and short inorganic ligands serving as useful agents for ligand-exchange has become a hot research topic. Murray and co-workers employed nitrosonium tetrafluoroborate (NOBF4) as a new inorganic ligand to replace the long-chain original ligands of various NCs (metal oxides, metals, semiconductors, and dielectrics) of different sizes and shapes. More interestingly, the hydrophilic NCs acquired by NOBF4 treatment can readily experience further surface modification, because there exist the weak binding affinity between BF4− anions and the NC surface. Talapin et al. used highly nucleophilic metal chalcogenide complexes (MCCs), such as Sn2S64− and In2Se42− for ligand exchange, allowing phase transfer of NCs from a hydrophobic solvent to various hydrophilic media. The reduced interparticle spacing that results from the exchange of long hydrocarbon molecules with the much smaller MCC clusters enables strong electronic coupling between neighboring NCs, yielding highly conductive NC films. However, the expensive NOBF4, the high reactivity of hydrazine and the high toxic MCCs, such that the ligand-exchange reactions must be performed with great caution under inert environment, limited the further wide application of these approaches. In addition, they most recently explored the simplest and cheapest metal-free inorganic ligands, such as S2−, HS−, Se2−, HSe−, Te2−, HTe−, TeS32−, OH− and NH2− to obtain all-inorganic colloidal NCs towards FETs. Herein, we first introduced a noncaustic and environmentally friendly NH4SCN, which present attractive applications in nanodevices, to replace the long, insulating ligands for fabrication of NC solar cells. Typically, the TiO2–FTO photoanode (Rainbow Solar Technology) was immersed in Cu2−xSe colloidal solutions for 48 h in the dark and then dried under vacuum. Then the NCs sensitized TiO2 photoanode was dipped into a 130 mM (1% weight/volume) NH4SCN in acetone for 30 s, followed by washing in pure acetone for 30 s, to remove any NH4SCN and the replaced organic ligand residues. The detailed preparation of the NC sensitized TiO2 photoanode and the mechanism of ligand-exchange are presented in Fig. 7a–c. Fig. 7d showed the TEM images of Cu2−xSe capped with OA (left) and Cu2−xSe capped with SCN− (right). Afterwards, a platinum-coated FTO substrate (Rainbow Solar Technology) was used as the counter electrode. The electrodes were sealed with a polymer gasket (Surlyn) and several drops of electrolyte (acetonitrile solution containing I−/I3− redox couple, Rainbow Solar Technology) were infiltrated to the sealed electrodes through the hole on the work electrode. Finally a sandwich solar cell was successfully fabricated as shown in Fig. 8a.

For comparison, another TiO2 photoanode without NH4SCN treatment was also made under the same sensitization time of about 48 h and its photovoltaic properties were also tested in parallel. The measurement was performed in a standard AM1.5G irradiation and the J–V characteristics of as-prepared Cu2−xSe–OA NCSSC are shown in Fig. 8b. The detailed data of the short-circuit current density (Jsc), open circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (FF) and power conversion efficiency (PCE) are listed in the Table 1. Interestingly, it could be seen that cell with NH4SCN treatment exhibits higher η and FF compared with the cell without NH4SCN treatment. Though the PCE is relatively low compared with other NCs sensitized solar cells such as PbS and CdS, the high FF offers promising opportunities for further development of Cu2−xSe NCs. In addition, further study of photoresponse characteristics of the device shown in Fig. 9 reveals that the device can follow the fast-varying optical signal with good stability and reproducibility.
Sample
Jsc (mA cm−2)
Voc (V)
FF (%)
Eff (%)
Cell area (cm2)
a Short-circuit current density.b Open circuit voltage.c Fill factor.d Light-electron conversion efficiency.
QDSSC-1
0.162
0.657
62.7
0.071
0.36
QDSSC-2
0.289
0.552
56.0
0.111
0.36

In summary, we first present a liquid–liquid interfacial strategy to prepare monodispersed colloidal Cu2−xSe NCs (<5 nm) under mild conditions. Encouragingly, this approach shows the unique advance in that the as-prepared NCs have a narrow size distribution compared with traditional high-temperature organic methods. The obtained Cu2−xSe NCs exhibit bright blue fluorescence due to the quantum confinement. In order to develop it in the photovoltaic application, we introduced a noncaustic and environmentally friendly NH4SCN as useful agents to replace the long-chain organic ligands for fabrication of NCSSC. We further attempted to investigate the photovoltaic properties of the original Cu2−xSe NC-based solar cells, which showed a high fill factor indicating their potential application in photovoltaic devices.


This work was supported by the National High Technology Research and Development Program of China (863 Program) (2012AA030313), National Natural Science Foundation of China (21006046 and 21474052), Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (BK20131408), and Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions (PAPD).


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015