 DOI: 10.1039/C2JM16148F
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 7910-7918


Jin-Yun
Liao
,

Jun-Wen
He
,

Huiying
Xu
,

Dai-Bin
Kuang
* and 

Cheng-Yong
Su


MOE Key Laboratory of Bioinorganic and Synthetic Chemistry, KLGHEI of Environment and Energy Chemistry, State Key Laboratory of Optoelectronic Materials and Technologies, School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510275, P. R. China. E-mail: kuangdb@mail.sysu.edu.cn; Fax: +86-20-84113015; Tel: +86-20-84113015

Received
25th November 2011
, Accepted 22nd February 2012
First published on 13th March 2012
Different morphologies of anatase TiO2 from nanoparticles, nanofibers, and hierarchical spheres to ellipsoid spheres are successfully fabricated via solvothermal reactions of titanium n-butoxide and acetic acid. The variations of morphology, size and crystal phase of TiO2 micro-/nanostructures are investigated in detail by XRD, FTIR, SEM and TEM. Effects of different TiO2 morphologies on the photovoltaic performance of dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) are also discussed based on I–V, IPCE, IMPS, IMVS and UV-vis absorption and diffuse spectra. The DSSC based on the hierarchical anatase TiO2 sphere photoelectrode shows an overall light-to-electricity conversion efficiency of 9.35% accompanying a short-circuit current density of 17.94 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage of 803 mV and fill factor of 0.65, which is much higher than that of nanoparticles (7.37%), nanofibers (8.15%) and ellipsoid TiO2 spheres (7.93%). The significant enhancement of short-circuit current density and power conversion efficiency for the hierarchical sphere-based DSSC compared to other nanostructures is mainly attributed to the larger dye loading, superior light scattering ability, and/or faster electron transport and longer electron lifetime.

In the past two decades, dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) have been considered as one of the promising alternatives to p–n junction solar cells for transferring clean and inexhaustible sunlight into electricity due to their low-cost fabrication process and efficient solar energy conversion. In DSSCs, light is absorbed by dye molecules attached to the surface of a wide-band gap metal oxide (e.g. TiO2). Following light absorption, the excited dye rapidly injects an electron into the conduction band of the wide-band gap metal oxide, then the injected electron diffuses through the metal oxide film and transports to external loads (collected by TCO substrate), while the oxide dye is regenerated via reduction by a redox shuttle of I3−/I−. The oxidized form of the shuttle, finally, diffuses to the counter electrode and completes the circuit to generate a photocurrent.

As the key part of a DSSC, the wide-band gap semiconductor metal oxide plays two important roles as a carrier for dye molecules and a transporter for the injected electrons. The photovoltaic performance of a DSSC was found to strongly depend on the photoanode material since it influences both the photocurrent and photovoltage. Among the various reported metal oxide (TiO2, ZnO, SnO2,etc.) photoanode materials, TiO2 is found to exhibit the highest power conversion efficiency owing to its unique optoelectronic properties. Up to now, TiO2 nanoparticles have been the subject of intensive research as photoanode materials for DSSCs because of their larger surface areas to adsorb more dye molecules to utilize solar light efficiently. However, many recent reports have shown that electron transport in the nanoparticle film is via a random route with multiple trapping and detrapping events. This hopping mechanism seriously limits the electron diffusion coefficient and the electron collection time. On the other hand, the small-sized particles show inefficient light scattering ability which hence results in poorer light-harvesting efficiency. Considering the competition between the photoinjected electron transportation through the photoanode film and recombination with electrolyte, a photoanode with a fast transport pathway is highly desirable to improve the performance of DSSCs. One effective solution is to use one-dimensional (1D) nanostructures, which can provide a direct channel for the rapid collection of photogenerated electrons and reduce the charge recombination. Recently, quasi-1D and 1D nanostructures have attracted much attention in DSSCs owing to the improvement of the charge-collection efficiency which ascribes to a faster electron transport and slower recombination rate. However, the low surface area of 1D nanostructures hinders significant improvement of the photovoltaic performance owing to less dye loading compared to nanoparticles. For better balancing of those three factors (surface area, light-scattering and electron transport), bi-/trifunctional hierarchical structured materials consisting of nanoparticles/nanorods have been widely investigated as photoanodes for DSSCs and have exhibited enhanced photovoltaic performance due to their superior dye-adsorption properties, light-scattering ability and faster electron transport compared to the traditional nanoparticle-based DSSCs.
In this work, different morphologies of TiO2 nanostructures from 0D (nanoparticles), 1D nanostructures (nanofibers) to 3D hierarchical structures (hierarchical spheres and ellipsoid spheres) have been successfully synthesized via solvothermal methods using titanium n-butoxide (TBT) and acetic acid (AcOH) as reactants. In addition, four different morphologies of TiO2 nanostructures (nanoparticles: NP, nanofibers: NF, hierarchical TiO2 spheres: HTS and ellipsoid TiO2 spheres: ETS) were selected as the photoanode materials for DSSC application. The DSSC based on the HTS photoelectrode exhibits an overall light conversion efficiency of 9.35%, which is much higher than those of the other three photoanode material based cells (7.37% for NP, 8.15% for NF and 7.93% for ETS).

The materials were prepared via very simple solvothermal processes involving titanium n-butoxide (TBT) and acetic acid (AcOH). Firstly, 0.5–2.5 mL TBT was added to 30 mL AcOH with stirring. After a few minutes, the mixture solution of TBT and AcOH was transferred into a 50 mL Teflon-lined stainless steel autoclave. Subsequently, the autoclave was sealed and put into an electronic oven and maintained at 120–180 °C for 1–24 h. The as-prepared powder samples were washed extensively with deionized water and ethanol, and finally dried in air at 70 °C. To obtain pure anatase TiO2 phase, the as-prepared powder samples were calcined at 500 °C for 3 h with a ramping rate of 2 °C min−1 in a muffle furnace. The morphology and structure of as-prepared and calcined samples were examined by powder X-ray diffractometry (XRD, Bruker D8 Advance), field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM, JSM-6330F), transmission electron microscopy (TEM, JEOL-2010 HR) and high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM). Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) studies on solid samples were carried out on a Varian 7000 FTIR at a resolution of 4 cm−1.


Firstly, the transparent anatase TiO2 colloidal (3–5 nm in particle size) solution was prepared via heating the precursors containing titanium n-butoxide (Ti(OBu)4, 34.2 mL), acetylacetone (10.2 mL), n-butanol (37.6 mL), p-toluenesulfonic acid (3.8 g) and H2O (18.0 mL) at 60 °C over night, which has been reported before. The anatase TiO2 colloidal solution was spin-coated on the clean FTO glass (15 Ω/square, Nippon Sheet Glass, Japan) to form a compact layer on clean FTO glass with a thickness of about 150 nm. Secondly, the TiO2 paste was screen-printed on a compact layer coated FTO glass. The paste fabrication process is similar to that in our previous paper. Briefly, TiO2 powder (nanoparticles, nanofibers, hierarchical spheres or ellipsoid spheres) (0.5 g) was added into a mixture of ethanol (6.0 mL), acetic acid (0.1 mL), terpineol (1.5 g) and ethyl cellulose (0.25 g) to form a slurry, and then the slurry was sonicated for 15 min in an ultrasonic bath, finally to form a viscous white TiO2 paste. The thickness of films can be easily controlled through repeating screen-printing times. After a stepwise heating process (325 °C for 5 min, at 375 °C for 5 min, at 450 °C for 15 min, and then at 500 °C for 15 min) to remove the organic substances, the TiO2 films were soaked in 0.04 M TiCl4 aqueous solution for 30 min at 70 °C to improve the photocurrent and photovoltaic performance. After sintering at 520 °C for 30 min, the TiO2 electrode films were immersed into 0.5 mM N719 dye (Solaronix Co.) in acetonitrile/tert-butanol (volume ratio 1:1), and sensitized for about 16 h at room temperature. Afterwards, these films were rinsed with acetonitrile in order to remove physisorbed N719 dye molecules. To evaluate their photovoltaic performance, the dye-sensitized TiO2/FTO glass films were sandwiched together with Pt coated FTO glass which was used as the counter electrode. Platinized counter electrodes were fabricated by thermal-deposition of H2PtCl6 solution (5 mM in isopropanol) onto FTO glass. Then the counter electrode was placed directly on top of the dye-sensitized TiO2 film sealed with thermal adhesive film (∼30 μm). The electrolyte (0.6 M 1-methyl-3-propylimidazolium iodide (PMII), 0.10 M guanidinium thiocyanate, 0.03 M I2, 0.5 M tert-butylpyridine in acetonitrile and valeronitrile (85:15)) was injected from a hole made on the counter electrode into the space between the sandwiched cells. The current–voltage characteristics of the cell measured under these conditions were obtained by applying external potential bias to the cell and the generated photocurrent was recorded using a Keithley model 2400 digital source meter under one sun AM 1.5 G (100 mW cm−2) illumination with a solar light simulator (Oriel, Model: 91192). A 1000 W Xenon arc lamp (Oriel, Model: 6271) served as a light source and its incident light intensity was calibrated with a NREL-calibrated Si solar cell equipped with an optical filter to approximate AM 1.5 G one sun light intensity before each measurement. The incident-photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) spectra were measured as a function of wavelength from 400 to 800 nm on the basis of a Spectral Products DK240 monochromator. Intensity-modulated photovoltage spectroscopy (IMVS) and intensity-modulated photocurrent spectroscopy (IMPS) were characterized on the electrochemical workstation (Zahner, Zennium) with a frequency response analyzer under a modulated blue light emitting diode (457 nm) driven by a Zahner (PP211) source supply. The modulated light intensity was 10% or less than the base light intensity. The frequency range was set from 100 kHz to 0.1 Hz. UV-vis diffuse reflectance and absorption spectroscopy were carried out with a UV-vis-NIR spectrophotometer (UV, Shimadzu UV-3150) to analyze the diffuse reflectance of the films and dye amounts detached from films, respectively. The thickness of the TiO2 films was easily controlled by a profilometer (Ambios, XP-1). The surface active layer is 0.16 cm2.



Fig. 1 shows scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the samples prepared at various reaction temperatures (120–180 °C) for 12 h using 1 mL TBT and 30 mL AcOH. The hierarchical Ti-complex spheres (2.1 μm in size) consisting of nanoribbons can be easily prepared at 140 °C (Fig. 1b). However, only nanoparticles could be obtained when the temperature was set at a lower reaction temperature of 120 °C (Fig. 1a). On further increasing the solvothermal temperature (150 °C), the overall spherical structures can be generally retained, although the diameter of the hierarchical spheres enlarges from around 2.1 to 4.1 μm (Fig. 1c). When the synthesis reaction was conducted at 160 °C (Fig. 1d), two different morphologies (hierarchical spheres and ellipsoid spheres) were obtained simultaneously. The diameter of the hierarchical spheres decreases to around 3.5 μm, and ellipsoid spheres have diameters ranging from 400 to 500 nm in length. Fig. 1e shows that more and more hierarchical spheres are changed to ellipsoid spheres at a higher reaction temperature of 170 °C. Finally, hierarchical spheres turn into ellipsoid spheres completely with a size of around 350–400 nm in length when the reaction temperature is 180 °C (Fig. 1f).

The powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the samples prepared at different reaction temperatures are shown in Fig. 2. No obvious diffraction peaks are observed in the XRD pattern, suggesting that the nanoparticles prepared at 120 °C adopt an amorphous phase. When the reaction temperature was increased to 140 and 150 °C, the XRD patterns suggest that the hierarchical spheres adopt an unknown crystalline phase (Ti-complex). The unknown Ti-complex and anatase TiO2 are found to coexist in the samples prepared at 160 and 170 °C. (Fig. 2). However, only anatase TiO2 can be observed for the sample prepared at 180 °C. A TEM image (Fig. S1) shows that the ellipsoid spheres consist of nanosized subunits and a HRTEM image (Fig. S1b) further displays the clear lattice fringes which can be well assigned to the (101) and (002) spacings of anatase TiO2, which is in good agreement with the XRD pattern above. Combining the XRD, SEM and TEM results, it can be deduced that the nanoparticles (120 °C) are amorphous phase, and the hierarchical spheres (140–150 °C) are of an unknown crystal phase (Ti-complex). Ellipsoid spheres consisting of nanosized subunits obtained at higher reaction temperature (160–180 °C) exhibit an anatase TiO2 phase. Hence, the reaction temperature of 160 °C could be suggested to be the phase transfer temperature in these present experimental conditions.
To shed light on the formation mechanism of various morphologies, the growth process was monitored by examining the products prepared at different reaction times (1–24 h) while maintaining the other conditions fixed (160 °C, 1 mL TBT, 30 mL AcOH). Fig. 3 and Fig. 4a show SEM images and XRD patterns of as-prepared samples at different reaction times between 1 and 24 h. The sample prepared after 1 h of solvothermal reaction is amorphous nanoparticles (Fig. 3a and 4a). Furthermore, according to the FTIR measurements (Fig. 4b), there are no vibration signals (1700 cm−1) and symmetric stretching vibrations of the carboxylic group centered at around 1420 cm−1 which reveals that AcOH has not fully reacted with TBT during the very short reaction time of 1 h. Another one hour later, nanofiber bundles with an interlaced structure became the dominant product (Fig. 3b). As shown in the FTIR spectrum, the emergence of asymmetric and symmetric stretching vibrations of the carboxylic group centered at 1540, 1452, and 1421 cm−1 reveal the coordination between AcOH and titanium centers, indicating the formation of a titanium-containing complex. However, a small difference (∼100 cm−1) in the two modes (1540 and 1452 cm−1) rules out the presence of unidentate ester linkage for the present sample, but suggests a mode of bidentate bridging, which could provide evidence for the formation of the Ti-carboxylate complex intermediate (Ti6O6(AcO)6(OBu)6) (Fig. S2). The XRD pattern (Fig. 4a) also depicts the variation from amorphous to an unknown crystalline phase when the reaction time varied from 1 h to 2 h. With the condensation processes continuing (e.g. 6 h), 3D hierarchical spheres (Fig. 3c) emerge at the expense of the 1D nanofibers through an assembly process. However, XRD patterns and FTIR spectra show that the crystalline phase and vibration modes of the nanofibers and 3D hierarchical spheres do not change, suggesting the same molecular structure and crystal phase for these two samples, respectively. On further increasing the reaction time, the 3D hierarchical spheres would then act as a reservoir to gradually release soluble titanium-containing species for the nucleation and growth of anatase TiO2 ellipsoid spheres in the solution (12 h, Fig. 1d; 24 h, Fig. 3d). Furthermore, the bands at around 3426 and 1634 cm−1 are observed in all samples at different stages, which can be ascribed to stretching and bending vibrations of OH− groups in water molecules, respectively, adsorbed on samples. It is worth noting that, after 24 h of reaction, the XRD pattern displays only anatase crystal diffraction peaks, whereas the FTIR spectrum still shows the presence of absorption bands centered at 1526 and 1421 cm−1 compared to the pure anatase TiO2 (Fig. S3). A possible explanation could be supposed that the chelating acetate ligands could be broadly and strongly adsorbed on anatase TiO2 ellipsoid particles. The signal at ∼475 cm−1 is assigned to the Ti–O–Ti moiety of anatase TiO2.
In the binary TBT–AcOH system, the AcOH molecule plays a very important role during the non-hydrolytic processing of the Ti-complex: (i) it acts as the chemical modifier of TBT to lower its reactivity; (ii) it reacts with TBT to form a Ti-complex intermediate precursor for slow release of soluble titanium-species for further formation of other products. In the present system, acetic acid can serve to generate BuOH upon modification of Ti(OBu)4, which, in turn, triggers the formation of H2O upon esterification with AcOH. However, superfluous AcOH would result in the coordination (AcOH) to titanium centers to form unstable titanium acetate complex Ti6O6(AcO)6(OBu)6 by ligand exchange/substitution, concomitant with the release of BuOH. According to the results reported by Sui and co-workers, the system of TBT–AcOH will produce a significant number of intermediates (IM) in solution.
Modification:
6Ti(OBu)4 + 18AcOH → Ti6O6(OAc)6(OBu)6 + 6BuOH + 12BuOAc + 6H2O
(R1)
Esterification:
BuOH + AcOH → BuOAc + H2O
(R2)
Hydrolysis:
Ti6O6(OAc)6(OBu)6 + nH2O → Ti6O6(OAc)6(OBu)6−n(OH)n + nBuOH → Ti6O6(OAc)6(OH)6
(R3)
Condensation:
mTi6O6(OAc)6(OH)6 → [Ti6O9(OAc)6]m + 3mH2O
(R4)
According to R1, the reaction of TBT with AcOH could proceed through two major reaction pathways: (i) hydrolysis of the hexanuclear titanium-acetate complex, Ti6O6(OAc)6(OBu)6 (IM1, R1), to form substitution intermediates formulated as Ti6O6(AcO)6(OBu)6−n(OH)n (0 < n < 6, IM2, R3); (ii) intermolecular condensation of the IM2 clusters to form the linear macromolecules ([Ti6O9(OAc)6]m, IM3, R4). Because the reactions are carried out in pure organic solvents, the subsequent hydrolysis and condensation steps with the metal species are dictated by the rate and quantity of water released during this esterification process. As shown in Scheme 1, the axial n-OBu− ligands of IM1 can be fully displaced by OH− groups because of excessive AcOH (R3). The subsequent condensation of these clusters can then occur at all three axial sites on each face of the cluster, a scenario that would facilitate the growth of 1D macromolecules (IM3, R4). On the basis of the foregoing discussions, a formation mechanism of 1D macromolecules is proposed to illustrate the role of H2O, produced from the esterification process between AcOH and BuOH, as a structure-direction agent affecting the 1 D morphology in the solvothermal synthesis (Scheme 1).
The effects of TBT concentration on the morphology and size were further investigated. Fig. 5a–d show typical SEM images of samples prepared using different amounts of TBT from 0.5 to 2.5 mL (fixing 160 °C, 12 h, and 30 mL AcOH), respectively. Only hierarchical spheres with a diameter of around 5 μm could be obtained when 0.5 mL TBT was added into 30 mL AcOH. However, the hierarchical spheres with 3.5 μm diameter (Fig. 1d) and ellipsoid spheres with a size of 200–350 nm in length were observed when the TBT amount increased to 1 mL and 1.5 mL, respectively. Similarly, the size of the ellipsoid spheres further decreased from 120–150 to 80–100 nm in length when the TBT amount increased from 2.0 to 2.5 mL, respectively. These results suggest that the morphology and tunable sizes of single-crystal-like ellipsoid spheres can be readily prepared by changing the TBT concentration in the TBT–AcOH system. As shown in Fig. S4 and S5, the XRD patterns and FTIR spectra of the as-prepared samples obtained with different amounts of TBT also show that hierarchical spheres (Fig. 5a) are an unknown crystal phase (Ti-complex), and ellipsoid spheres (Fig. 5b–d) obtained at higher TBT concentration are anatase TiO2 phase.
In order to investigate the effects of the morphologies on the photovoltaic properties of DSSCs, four typical samples with morphologies of nanoparticles (Fig. 3a), nanofibers (Fig. 3b), hierarchical spheres (Fig. 1c) and ellipsoid spheres (Fig. 5c) were selected and used as photoanode materials in DSSCs. These four as-prepared samples can be easily crystallized into pure anatase titania materials after calcination at 500 °C for 3 h in air.
The FTIR spectrum of annealed hierarchical spheres is shown in Fig. S3. The bidentate acetates as well as the ending and bridging butoxyl groups disappeared, indicating the organic groups are removed upon heating. The XRD patterns of these four calcined samples are shown in Fig. S6; all diffraction peaks are in good agreement with the anatase phase TiO2 (JCPDS No. 65-2900, a = 3.785, b = 3.785, c = 9.514). Fig. 6a–c indicate that the nanoparticles (NP) have an average size of around 30 nm in diameter. Fig. 6d (SEM image of calcined nanofibers) shows that the higher-density cluster is composed of nanoparticles with a uniform size of around 20 nm. The SAED pattern (inset in Fig. 6e) and HRTEM image (Fig. 6f) show that the building units of TiO2 nanofibers (NF) are single crystalline nanoparticles. The hierarchical spheres prepared at 150 °C for 12 h with 1.0 mL TBT and 30 mL AcOH have an average diameter of around 4.1 μm consisting of nanoribbons (Fig. S7a–b), which are larger than that (2.1 μm) of the sample prepared at 140 °C. Careful observations of the as-prepared (150 °C, Fig. S7a–b, SEM) and calcined samples (150 °C, Fig. S7c–d, and Fig. 6h–i) clearly reveal that the building units of hierarchical TiO2 spheres (HTS) changed from nanoribbons (Fig. S7b) to nanosheets (Fig. S7d) due to the decomposition of Ti-complex intermediates to TiO2, CO2 and H2O. There is an obvious difference comparing the present sample (150 °C) with the 140 °C sample, which was composed of nanorods and nanoparticles (Fig. S7e–f). This dissimilarity could be ascribed to the much larger size of present hierarchical spheres (4.1 μm, 150 °C) consisting of much wider and longer nanoribbons, which prefers to form nanosheets rather than nanorods and nanoparticles during heat treatment. Fig. 6j shows a low-magnification SEM image of the calcined sample (2 mL TBT, 30 mL AcOH, 160 °C, 12 h), which suggests the submicron-size ellipsoid spheres are predominantly 200–250 nm in length and 100–150 nm in diameter. A typical TEM image (Fig. 6k) shows the ellipsoid TiO2 spheres (ETS) consist of nanosized subunits. The corresponding selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern exhibits diffraction spots corresponding to the [010] zone axis of the anatase phase, indicating that the whole ellipsoid sphere has a “single-crystal-like” structure, which is further proved by HRTEM image (Fig. 6l). The clear lattice fringes are well assigned to the (001) spacings of anatase TiO2, which is in good agreement with the SAED pattern.
For comparison, four kinds of films based on different morphology TiO2 with similar thickness were screen-printed onto cleaned FTO glass with a pre-coated TiO2 compact layer (Scheme 2). The cross-sectional SEM images (Fig. S8) clearly show that the four samples have similar thicknesses of ∼15 μm. Fig. 7 shows typical current density versus voltage (J–V) curves of the four TiO2 sample based DSSCs irradiated by AM 1.5 G simulated sunlight (100 mW cm−2). Table 1 summarizes the detailed parameters of short-circuit current density (Jsc), open-circuit voltage (Voc), fill factors (FF) and the overall energy conversion efficiencies (η) for all four sample based cells. The four DSSCs possess the same fill factor of 0.65, however, the Voc increases gradually from NP, NF, HTS to ETS-based cells and the Jsc varies significantly from 14.71 for the NP sample, 15.04 for ETS, 16.00 for NF, to 17.94 mA cm−2 for the HTS cell. As a result, η varies systematically from 7.37% for the NP sample, 8.15% for the NF sample to 7.93% for the ETS cell and 9.35% for the HTS cell.
Cell

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (mV)
FF

η (%)
Dye adsorption (nmol cm−2)
NP
14.71
771
0.65
7.37
104.4
NF
16.00
784
0.65
8.15
90.3
HTS
17.94
803
0.65
9.35
142.3
ETS
15.04
812
0.65
7.93
129.6
It is well known that the short-circuit current density is mainly determined by the initial number of photogenerated electrons. Here, the initial number of photogenerated electrons could be significantly affected by the different structured films. The amounts of dyes adsorbed on the films were obtained by measuring the UV-vis absorption spectra of solutions containing dyes detached from the films in H2O (3 mL) with 0.1 M NaOH. It was found that the dye amount on a film of HTS is higher than those on the other films shown in Table 1, which leads to more photogenerated electrons and higher photocurrents for the former. On the other hand, higher light scattering ability is another way to improve the light harvesting efficiency. As shown in Fig. 8a, the reflectance spectrum of the HTS film is much higher than those of the NP, NF and ETS films, indicating that the HTS film has a higher light scattering ability than the other three TiO2 samples in the entire UV-vis range (400–800 nm), which can maximize the use of solar light to improve the light harvesting efficiency and Jsc. The reflectance of the NF film is about more than 50% in the range of 400–800 nm, which is a little higher than that of the ETS film due to the micron-size of the NF sample. The NP film shows the lowest reflectance owing to its nanosized particles, which are usually transparent or semi-transparent resulting in the transmittance of a significant portion of the visible light.
In order to better understand the different photovoltaic performances of the four DSSCs, incident-photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) spectra as a function of wavelength from 400 to 800 nm were collected and are shown in Fig. 8b. The quantum efficiencies of the four cells with N719 dye are maximized at about 520 nm. The TiO2 electrode fabricated from the HTS displays the highest IPCE value over a wide range from 400 to 750 nm among these four cells. The increase in the IPCE values for the HTS based DSSC at shorter wavelengths (400–600 nm) can be mainly attributed to its largest amount of dye adsorption (Table 1). On the other hand, the increased IPCE values from NP, ETS, NF to HTS photoelectrodes in the longer range of 600–750 nm can be attributed to the larger size of HTS (4.1 μm) which is much larger than that of NP (30 nm), ETS (200 nm) and NF (2 μm), and thus results in its superior light scattering ability. As a result, the highest IPCE value of the hierarchical TiO2 sphere based DSSC can indicate maximized use of solar light, which further enhances the light harvesting efficiency (ηlh) and improves the Jsc.
To gauge the dynamics of electron transport and charge recombination of the four DSSCs, intensity-modulated photocurrent spectroscopy (IMPS) and intensity-modulated photovoltage spectroscopy (IMVS) are further measured under the illumination of a LED light source (λ = 457 nm) with different light intensities from 30 to 150 W m−2. Lifetime (τr) and transport time (τd) curves as a function of light intensity derived from IMVS and IMPS measurements are shown in Fig. 9a and b, respectively. The transport time (recombination time) can be calculated from the expression τd = 1/2πfd (τr = 1/2πfr), where fd (fr) is the characteristic frequency minimum of the IMPS (IMVS) imaginary component. Notably, τr and τd depend largely on the morphology/size of the photoanode materials (Fig. 9). The longest electron transport time in the NP film means the slowest electron transport rate due to a random route with multiple trapping and detrapping events for the electron transport through the TiO2 nanoparticle film. Compared with the NP based cell, the DSSC based on NF shows a faster electron transport rate, which can be accounted for by the fast electron transport path for the latter. For the hierarchical TiO2 microsphere film, the τd curve lies even lower, hinting at its excellent electron transport properties. This can be accounted for by the large sized spheres consisting of nanosheets which could afford direct electron transport channels to facilitate electron transport and collection. The τd curve of the ETS-derived DSSC lies lower than those of other three cells, indicating the fastest electron transport of the former. This significant improvement of electron transport could be understood by the basic cause of the “single-crystal-like” TiO2 ellipsoid already divulged above by SEM and TEM, HRTEM and SAED, which would boost the interior conductivity by building a sort of highway to facilitate electron transport. The τr curves show the DSSC based on the ETS photoelectrode has a longer electron lifetime than the other three cells based on NP, NF and HTS, which can also be ascribed to the high crystallinity of the ETS. In general, the Voc value is quite sensitive to the electron lifetime in the conduction band of semiconductors. The IMVS shows the lifetime or recombination time (τr) gradually increased from NP, NF, HTS to ETS-based cells, which is allusive of the gradually enhanced open-circuit photovoltage.
The electron diffusion coefficient (Dn) in TiO2 films can be obtained by fitting the frequency-dependent response using the analytical expression (Dn = d2/(4 × td), d is film thickness) from the IMPS measurements. Fig. S9 represents the results in the form of the electron diffusion coefficient as a function of light intensity. At lower light intensities, electrons are exchanged between deep traps and the conduction band, so the transport is slow. At higher light intensities, deep traps are filled and electron trapping/detrapping involves shallower levels resulting in a faster electron transport. The analysis shows that the intensity dependence is related to the energy dependence of the trap density. The highest Dn value of the ETS based DSSC indicating the lowest trap density among these four samples could be attributed to its “single-crystal-like” high crystallinity. To weigh the electron transport and recombination properties, charge-collection efficiency (ηcc) and electron diffusion length (Ln=(Dnτr)1/2) derived from IMPS and IMVS measurements were apparently considered as meaningful parameters. In sensitized solar cells, ηcc can be calculated by expression: ηcc = 1 − τd/τr. Here the ηcc results under different light intensities of these four DSSCs are displayed in Fig. S10. According to the expression of Jsc = qηlhηinjηccI0,ηcc is in direct proportion to the Jsc of the sensitized solar cells. Although the ηcc of the HTS cell (∼98%) and ETS cell (∼99%) are comparable, the higher Jsc of the HTS based DSSC can be attributed to the larger ηlh coming from larger dye loading and superior light scattering ability. The calculated electron diffusion lengths derived from IMPS/IMVS measurements for these four photoanodes are depicted in Fig. S11 as a function of light intensity. The Ln for the ETS cell (around 80 μm) is obviously superior to those of the other cells (NP: 27 μm, NF: 38 μm and HTS: 54 μm) under illumination at 30 to 150 W m−2. It reveals that the ETS film can be much thicker than other films for a given recombination loss.

In summary, different morphologies of anatase TiO2 from nanoparticles, 1D nanofibers and hierarchical spheres to ellipsoid spheres were successfully fabricated via solvothermal methods in the presence of TBT and AcOH. Systematic investigations of different solvothermal reaction conditions revealed the variations of morphology from nanoparticles, nanofibers, hierarchical spheres and ellipsoid spheres, and crystal phase from amorphous, unknown Ti-containing complex and anatase TiO2, respectively, which were characterized by XRD, FTIR, SEM and TEM in detail. DSSC studies showed the morphology/size of the photoanode material has a significant effect on the photovoltaic performance. The Voc were gradually enhanced from 771 mV for NP, 784 mV for NF, 803 mV for HTS to 812 mV for ETS based cells due to the increasing electron lifetime according to IMVS measurements. However, the Jsc varied from 14.71, 16.00, 17.94 mA cm−2 to 15.04 mA cm−2 for DSSCs based on NP, NF, HTS to ETS photoelectrodes. The increasing Jsc from NP, NF cells to the HTS cell could be ascribed to the enhancement of light harvesting efficiency (more dye loading and superior light scattering) and charge collection efficiency (faster electron transport and slower charge recombination). A 20% enrichment of the Jsc is achieved in the HTS DSSC compared to the ETS cell despite the comparable ηcc for both cells, which is mainly attributed to the larger surface area to adsorb more dye molecules and superior light scattering ability of the HTS anode to enhance the light harvesting efficiency and consequently the Jsc. The power conversion efficiencies of DSSCs based on nanoparticle, nanofiber, ellipsoid sphere and hierarchical sphere photoelectrodes are 7.37%, 8.15%, 7.93, and 9.35%, respectively.


The authors acknowledge financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (20873183, 21073239, U0934003), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities, the Research Fund for the Doctoral Program of Higher Education (20100171110014), and the Open Project Program of Key Laboratory of Photochemical Conversion and Optoelectronic materials (Technical Institute of Physics and Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Science).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: SEM and TEM images; FTIR spectrum; XRD patterns; molecular structure and photoelectrochemical measurements of cells. See DOI: 10.1039/c2jm16148f
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012