 DOI: 10.1039/C3TC32071E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 1018-1027


Kai
Yuan
,

Lie
Chen
,

Fan
Li
 and 

Yiwang
Chen
*

Institute of Polymers/Department of Chemistry, Nanchang University, 999 Xuefu Avenue, Nanchang 330031, China. E-mail: ywchen@ncu.edu.cn; Fax: +86 791 83969561; Tel: +86 791 83969562

Jiangxi Provincial Key Laboratory of New Energy Chemistry, Nanchang University, 999 Xuefu Avenue, Nanchang 330031, China

Received
19th October 2013
, Accepted 8th November 2013
First published on 8th November 2013
Nanostructured three-dimensional hybrid ZnO@CdS (ZOCS) nanowalls fabricated on indium tin oxide (ITO) glass by in situ growth were explored as an electron transport layer (ETL) for inverted polymer solar cells (PSCs). Photoluminescence (PL), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and space charge limited current (SCLC) analysis show that the in situ growth of CdS on the surface of ZnO can not only passivate and repair the surface defects of ZnO to offer close contact and an efficient path for electron transport, but also act as a bridge for interfacial charge transfer to enhance the electron selectivity and reduce the recombination probability of electrons and holes, which is favorable for improving the Jsc and FF of a device. At the same time, compared to the bare ZnO, the hybrid ZOCS nanowalls show reduced work function and can spread the sunlight inside the active layer to improve the capturing efficiency of photons. The photophysics and electronic properties of the hybrid ZOCS nanowalls strongly depend on the thickness of the CdS layer, and a suitable thickness of the CdS layer improves the power conversion efficiency of inverted PSCs based on P3HT:PCBM from 3.18% for bare ZnO to 4.07% for ZOCS with enhanced Jsc and FF. Moreover, the close contact can also prevent oxygen and moisture diffusing into the active layers, which dramatically enhances the environmental stability.

Organic photovoltaics (OPVs) have gained considerable attention, which is attributed to their potential for environmentally friendliness, low-cost energy harvesting, solution processability and printable, portable and renewable energy sources. The rapid development of polymer solar cells (PSCs) has recently resulted in state-of-the-art of power conversion efficiencies (PCE) of 8–10% by exploiting low-band-gap conjugated polymers, novel acceptors, new-style device structures and buffer layers for interface engineering, etc. Nonetheless, to meet the demands of commercialization, the acquisition of a competitive PCE with long-term air stability of PSCs is still a major challenge.

The geometry of the conventional PSC device is composed of an anode, such as poly(3,4-ethylenedioxylenethiophene):polystyrene sulfonic acid (PEDOT:PSS, interfacial layer) modified indium tin oxide (ITO) glass, a photosensitive layer which consists of a conjugated polymer donor and a fullerene derivative acceptor, and a low work function (WF) metal (such as Ca, Al) as a cathode. However, the hygroscopicity and acidity of PEDOT:PSS always results in the fast corrosion of the ITO and degradation of the active layer, subsequently degrading the PSC performance rapidly. At the same time, most metal cathodes are susceptible to high rates of oxidation and can be degraded by ambient oxygen and water vapor. Therefore, the low environmental stability prevents PSCs from being used in practical applications.
For the sake of steering clear of these problems, an alternative to traditional PSCs is to employ the inverted configuration in the device. In an inverted structure, the metal electrode can be replaced by high WF Au or Ag as the anode to collect holes, and air stable and transparent metal oxides (such as ZnO, Cs2CO3, TiOx), and ultrathin interlayers of a conjugated polyelectrolyte coated ITO are used as the electron-collecting layer (ECL, cathode). By such an inverted configuration, the stability and lifetime of PSCs have been improved significantly. Moreover, the metal oxides and the high WF metal electrode (such as Ag) can be fabricated by screen-printing for roll-to-roll (R2R) solution processing, which can dramatically lower the cost of commercialization.
In particular, due to the environmental stability and friendliness, high electron mobility, ease of synthesis and nanostructuring, along with optical transparency of ZnO enable it to be a promising candidate for the electron transport layer (ETL). To improve the performance of inverted PSCs, a variety of three-dimensional (3D) ZnO nanostructures, such as ZnO nanorods, wires, and ripples were prepared. Compared to the 2D ZnO structures, the contact area between the photoactive layer and ZnO can be extended in the 3D counterpart, in favor of electron and hole separation, improving the electron collection efficiency from the photoactive layer. However, the major drawback of 3D ZnO nanostructures is the surface defects (such as oxygen vacancies) of ZnO with adsorbed oxygen. The surface defects of ZnO will promote the recombination of electrons and holes at the interface of ZnO and the photoactive layer, which will decrease the efficiency of exciton separation and charge collection. In addition, such surface defects can also degrade the photoactive layer at the surface of the ZnO.
To decrease the number of surface defects of ZnO, herein, we reported an in situ method to fabricate 3D hybrid ZnO@CdS (ZOCS) nanowalls with different thicknesses as the ETL, in which the CdS precursor was spin-coated on the surface of the ZnO, followed by thermal decomposition. Such in situ growth of the CdS layer can passivate and repair the surface defects of the ZnO to boost the electron transport, collection and device protection against oxygen and moisture. On the other hand, the higher conduction band of CdS compared to ZnO makes the CdS lay act as a bridge for more efficient interfacial charge transfer. Consequently, the mobility of the hybrid ZOCS with a suitable thickness of CdS (∼2 nm) increased about six-fold in comparison with the bare ZnO. As expected, the PCE and environmental stability of the devices, together with the light response, were remarkably improved.

The ZnO nanowalls were fabricated through a simple in situ sol–gel process. First, a ZnO precursor was spin coated onto indium tin oxide (ITO) substrates to prepare ZnO nanowalls, and the ZnO sol–gel precursor solution was prepared in accordance with the previously described strategy. Zinc acetate dihydrate (Zn(CH3COO)2·2H2O, 1 g, Aldrich, 99.9%) and ethanolamine (NH2CH2CH2OH, 0.28 g, Aldrich, 99.5%) were dissolved in 2-methoxyethanol (CH3OCH2CH2OH, 10 mL, Aldrich, 99.8%) under vigorous stirring overnight for the hydrolysis reaction in air. Subsequently, the substrates were treated with O2 plasma for 10 minutes to form a ZnO nanoparticle layer on the substrate surface, which provided the seeds for the formation of ZnO nanowalls during heating. Afterwards, the substrate was transferred onto a hot plate and heated at 240 °C for 1 h in air to obtain the nanowall structured ZnO films.


The hybrid structural ZOCS nanowalls were prepared by spin coating a metal xanthate precursor Cd(S2COEt)2(C5H4N)2 solution (20 mg mL−1) onto the ZnO nanowalls for the in situ growth of CdS. Upon heating, the metal xanthate precursor decomposed into C2H4, COS (carbonyl sulfide), and H2S, none of which should be retained except CdS. The thickness of the CdS films could be controlled by tuning the spin coating speed. In the present work, 2000, 4000 and 6000 rpm were employed to achieve different thicknesses of CdS films, referred as ZOCS-1, ZOCS-2, and ZOCS-3 with average thicknesses of about 4, 2, and 1 nm, respectively.


P3HT (20 mg, purchased from Rieke Metals, used as received) and PC61BM (20 mg, purchased from Nano-C, used as received) were dissolved in 1 mL 1,2-dichlorobenzene to obtain P3HT:PC61BM (1:1 w/w) solution. After stirring at 50 °C in a nitrogen-filled glovebox overnight, the P3HT:PC61BM (1:1 w/w) solution was spin-coated onto the bare ZnO nanowalls or hybrid ZOCS nanowalls at 800 rpm for 30 s in a glovebox to form the active layer. After drying, the samples were thermally annealed at 120 °C for 10 min. Then 6 nm MoO3 was deposited under vacuum on the top of the active layer. Finally, 100 nm Ag was deposited as the top electrode in a vacuum. The final device structure was glass/ITO/ZnO or ZOCS/P3HT:PCBM/MoO3/Ag. The effective active device area was 4 mm2. The testing of the current–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the devices under illumination and in the dark were done using a Keithley 2400 Source Meter. The light intensity of the simulated AM 1.5G illumination (Abet Solar Simulator Sun2000) was 100 mW cm−2. The incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) of each device was detected by using an Oriel Cornerstone 260 1/4 m monochromator equipped with an Oriel 70613NS QTH lamp, and the incident light was calibrated with a monocrystalline Si solar cell.


Transmittance spectroscopy, UV-vis-NIR spectroscopy, diffuse reflectance spectroscopy (performed by Perkin-Elmer Lambda 750 with integrating sphere) and photoluminescence spectroscopy (Hitachi F-7000) were employed to shed light on the photophysics and electronic properties of the bare ZnO nanowalls and hybrid ZOCS nanowalls with various CdS-layer thicknesses. Time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL, Edinburgh Instrument FLS920) was employed to determine the photoluminescence decay with an H2 gas lamp as the light source. The nanostructures of the bare ZnO nanowall and hybrid ZOCS nanowalls were confirmed by atomic force microscopy (AFM, Digital Instrumental Nanoscope 31) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM, FEI Quanta 200F). The water contact angle characterization of the nanowalls was performed on a JC2000A contact angle instrument. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was carried out by using a Kratos AXIS Ultra, performed at 15 kV and 15 mA with a monochromatic Al Kα source (hν = 1486.71 eV). Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) was used for the same sample with XPS measurements using an AXIS-ULTRA DLD spectrometer (Kratos Analytical Ltd.). For the UPS, the photon energy of the He I lamp was 21.21 eV, and the spectra were collected with a pass energy of 5 eV.


The morphology of the nanostructured ZnO nanowalls and hybrid ZnO@CdS (ZOCS) nanowalls were investigated by atomic force microscopy (AFM), and Fig. 1 shows the AFM images of the ZnO and ZOCS nanowalls. There was no significantly morphology change between the AFM images for all the samples. These results indicated that CdS could be homogeneously coated on the surface of the ZnO nanowalls, therefore the surface profile could not be changed by in situ growth of CdS. According to a previous report, the growth mechanism of thin films depends on the substrate structure and the interaction between the substrate and precursor. Based on the Volmer–Weber growth mechanism, on heterogeneous ZnO nanowall surfaces, CdS can preferentially nucleate at oxygen vacancies or grain boundaries of the ZnO nanowalls. Water contact angle measurements and scanning electron microscopy (see ESI, Fig. S1 and 2) were also employed to study the surface properties of the ZnO and ZOCS nanowalls. The water contact angles could be tuned from 60° for the bare ZnO surface to 73° for the ZOCS-1 surface, suggesting the decreased surface energy of the CdS modified layer. The enhanced hydrophobic surface with a lower surface energy would favor the better morphology of the upper active layer with closer contact.

The inverted architecture of the polymer solar cell was glass/ITO/ZnO or ZOCS/P3HT:PCBM/MoO3/Ag (Fig. 2a). Fig. 2b compares the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the devices based on ZnO nanowalls and hybrid ZOCS nanowalls, and the detailed photovoltaic characteristics of the inverted devices are summarized in Table 1. The device with the ZnO nanowalls shows a short-circuit current (Jsc) of 9.92 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.61 V, a fill factor (FF) of 52.5% and a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 3.18%. After incorporation of a layer of CdS onto the ZnO, the device efficiency can be greatly improved, and the device based on hybrid ZOCS-2 with a CdS thickness of ∼2 nm shows the best performance, with Jsc of 10.45 mA cm−2, Voc of 0.62 V, FF of 62.8% and PCE of 4.07%. We have calculated the Jsc from IPCE spectra to ascertain the accuracy of the measurements. It was found that the measured Jsc was within 5% error. For example, for a device based on ZOCS-2, a calculated Jsc of 10.17 mA cm−2 is slightly lower than the measured value of 10.45 mA cm−2, resulting in a calculated PCE of 3.96%. Compared with the device based on ZOCS-2, the ones with ZOCS-1 and ZOCS-3 show a worse performance, exhibiting the thickness dependence of the ZOCS nanowalls. The improvement in the PCE of the devices with hybrid ZOCS mainly comes from the increased Jsc and FF. From Table 1 we can see that the series resistance (Rs) of the device decreases from 3.14 for bare ZnO to 1.86 Ω cm2 for ZOCS-2, while the value of the shunt resistance (Rsh) increases from 390.4 to 946.8 Ω cm2. Therefore, the reduction of Rs and increase of Rsh for the devices with hybrid ETLs can reduce the charge transport barrier and suppress the charge recombination, resulting in the enhanced Jsc and FF. In addition, the dark J–V characteristics of all the devices based on hybrid ZOCS nanowalls (Fig. 2c) show lower leakage and higher forward bias current with respect to the device with bare ZnO, indicating that the hybrid ZOCS nanowalls possess better charge selectivity over the ZnO nanowalls. To further understand the increase in Jsc and PCE, incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) measurements of the solar cells were employed. The IPCE measurements of each device are shown in Fig. 2d, and the improvement of the PCE can be ascribed to the enhanced Jsc caused by the increased IPCE across the wavelength range 350–600 nm. The enhancement in the IPCE (ΔIPCE) was also in good agreement with the improved Jsc (Fig. 2e and S3). More insight into the improvement of Jsc, FF and PCE was studied in detail (vide infra).
Device

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
IPCE (%)

R
s (Ω cm2)

R
sh (Ω cm2)
ZnO
9.92 ± 0.2
0.61 ± 0.01
52.5 ± 1
3.18 ± 0.1
69.2 ± 1
3.14
390.4
ZOCS-1
10.32 ± 0.2
0.60 ± 0.01
53.7 ± 1
3.34 ± 0.1
72.0 ± 1
1.75
457.7
ZOCS-2
10.45 ± 0.3
0.62 ± 0.01
62.8 ± 1
4.07 ± 0.1
75.6 ± 1
1.86
946.8
ZOCS-3
10.26 ± 0.3
0.61 ± 0.01
56.6 ± 1
3.48 ± 0.1
69.5 ± 1
1.88
647.3
Since the performance of invented polymer solar cells can be dramatically affected by the optical transmittance of the buffer layer, the optical transmittance spectra of ZnO and hybrid ZOCS nanowalls in the UV-vis-NIR wavelength range (300–1200 nm) were investigated, as shown in Fig. 3a. All of the nanowalls show good transmittance in the solar spectrum with the average transmittance values about 90%. To understand the light response, the diffuse reflectance spectra of the ITO/ZnO nanowalls, hybrid ITO/ZOCS nanowalls with various CdS-layer thicknesses and their real devices were also measured (Fig. S4 and 3b). Both the hybrid ITO/ZOCS nanowalls and their corresponding devices show lower reflectance intensities in a wide range of spectra compared to the ITO/ZnO counterpart, which can enhance optical absorption. The better utilization of incident photons also can be supported by the improved absorption of the P3HT:PCBM active layer (Fig. S5). The enhancement in the absorption Δα (Fig. 3c) was evaluated from the diffuse reflectance spectra by the following equation:
Δα = −ln(RZOCS/RZnO)
where
RZOCS is the reflected light intensity from the device based on hybrid ZOCS nanowalls and RZnO is that from the ZnO nanowall based device. The shape of the enhancement in the absorption Δα is consistent with the ΔIPCE spectrum. Therefore, the increased absorption is in favor of the enhancement of the photocurrent in the hybrid ZOCS nanowall based devices.

To investigate how the hybrid ZOCS nanowalls passivate and repair the defects in ZnO to improve the photovoltaic performance of the devices, the photophysical and electronic properties of the ZnO and hybrid ZOCS nanowalls were measured. Fig. 4a depicts the photoluminescence (PL) blue emission at ∼418 and 440 nm caused by surface defects (the singly ionized oxygen vacancies) or surface states. Contrasted with the bare ZnO nanowalls, the PL intensity of blue emission at ∼418 and 440 nm significantly decreases with the increase of the CdS layer on the ZnO, implying a reduced number of surface defects. Since the chemical properties of sulfur are similar to those of oxygen, with the decomposition of the CdS precursor, the generated CdS would be captured by the oxygen vacancies of the ZnO nanowall surfaces. Therefore, it is comprehensible that with the growth of the CdS layer, the CdS could gradually change the surface structures of the ZnO nanowalls by passivating surface defects or surface states, which guarantees the close contact between the ZnO and CdS.
Time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) was used to obtain possible charge transfer dynamic information for P3HT:PCBM active layers on bare ZnO and hybrid ZOCS nanowalls (Fig. 4b). The fitted PL lifetimes (τ) were 990, 630, 460 and 810 ps for P3HT:PCBM on bare ZnO, hybrid ZOCS-1, ZOCS-2 and ZOCS-3, respectively. It is well known that a short PL lifetime indicates efficient charge transfer for devices. The reduced PL lifetimes of P3HT:PCBM on the ZOCS buffer layer confirms that the close contact between CdS and ZnO enhanced the photogenerated charge carrier transfer and transport by repairing the surface defects or surface states of the ZnO. In addition, due to the higher conducting band of CdS than that of ZnO, excited by the photon energy, the photogenerated electrons in the active layer should migrate from the photoactive layer to CdS first, where the holes accumulate, then transfer to ZnO. Such interfacial charge transfer can enhance the electron selectivity and block the recombination of electrons and holes. P3HT:PCBM on ZOCS-2 shows the shortest lifetime among those on the hybrid layers. A possible reason is that too thin a CdS layer may not fully cover the surface defects of ZnO, while too thick a CdS layer will create an extra barrier between the active layer and ZnO to lower the electron–hole pair separation and electron collecting efficiency. These results are in accordance with the device performance.
The efficient charge transfer for devices based on hybrid ZOCS nanowalls was also supported by the static PL of the P3HT:PCBM active layers (Fig. S6). The PL spectral intensities of the active layers on hybrid ZOCS nanowalls were significantly decreased compared with the one with the ZnO nanowalls, especially for the one on the ZOCS-2, presumably due to the efficient nonradiative channel for charge transfer. The decreased PL lifetime and enhanced PL quenching ultimately resulted in enhanced Jsc and PCE of the devices based on hybrid ZOCS nanowalls.
To gain insight into the defect repair and composition of the ZOCS nanowalls, we carried out X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). XPS survey scans were recorded for the entire range of binding energies of the atomic core levels of the ZnO and ZOCS nanowalls to evaluate the overall composition of the nanowalls. Fig. 5 shows the core levels of Zn 2p, O 1s, Cd 3d and S 2p of the ZnO and ZOCS nanowalls with various thicknesses of CdS layers. The peak position at 1021.3 eV (Fig. 5a) corresponds to Zn 2p 3/2 for Zn–O bonds in the nanowalls, and the binding energy for the O 1s XPS spectra displays an asymmetric line shape, as shown in Fig. 5b. The binding energy at 530.1 eV (low-binding-energy) is attributed to the O 1s level in the stoichiometric ZnO structure, bonding to Zn atoms. The binding energy at 531.7 eV (high-binding-energy) is associated with the surface being deficient in O 1s, such as the O 1s in zinc hydroxide, Zn(OH)2, or the oxygen species adsorbed by the surface hydroxyl groups. From the XPS spectra for the O 1s core level line we can infer that the oxygen-deficient component decreases with the increased thickness of the CdS layer. The concentrations of the low-binding-energy and high-binding-energy oxygen atoms in the ZnO and ZOCS nanowalls are summarized in Fig. 5c. The concentration of the high-binding-energy oxygen atoms is significantly reduced from 63% (ZnO nanowall) to 53% (ZOCS-1), indicating that the in situ growth of the CdS layer can passivate the oxygen-deficiency. The core level line of Cd 3d shows two typical peaks located at 405.2 and 411.9 eV (Fig. S7), corresponding to the binding energies of Cd 3d 5/2 and Cd 3d 3/2 electrons in CdS, respectively. Fig. S8 shows the XPS spectra of S 2p, where the peak located at 161.8 eV is assigned to the binding energy of S 2p in CdS. The peak intensities of Cd 3d and S 2p show a superlinear increase attributed to the improved Cd and S-containing component with the increased thickness of the CdS layers.
The electron transport characteristics were measured by the space charge limited current (SCLC) of bare ZnO and hybrid ZOCS nanowalls, and the corresponding electron-only devices with P3HT:PCBM as active layers are presented in Fig. 6. Fig. 6a and b show logJ vs. logV plotted for Mott–Gurney SCLC fitting of electron-only devices ITO/ZnO or ZOCS/Al and ITO/ZnO or ZOCS/P3HT:PCBM/LiF/Al, respectively, measured at ambient temperature. The hole can be effectively blocked due to the mismatched energy levels of the valence band of ZnO and the work function of Al in these devices. The electron mobility can be characterized by the Mott–Gurney SCLC formula:
J = (9/8)µeε0εr(V2/L3)
where
J is the current density, µe is the electron mobility, ε0 is the dielectric constant of free space (ε0 = 8.85 × 10−12 F m−1), εr is the permittivity of the active layer, V is the internal voltage in the device and L is the thickness of the active layer. The electron mobility for the bare ZnO nanowall is only 1.66 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, while that of ZOCS-2 is remarkably enhanced to 9.65 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, with about a six-fold increase. The electron mobilities of ZOCS-1 and ZOCS-3 are 4.67 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 2.78 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively, which are lower than that of ZOCS-2. These results are in accordance with the aforementioned observations. Consequently, the electron mobility of the corresponding devices based on the nanowalls with P3HT:PCBM as active layers shows a similar tendency, as presented in Table 2. The electron mobility of the inverted device increases from 1.48 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1 for bare ZnO to 8.54 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1 for ZOCS-2.

Devices
ZnO
ZOCS-1
ZOCS-2
ZOCS-3

µ
e (cm2 V−1 s−1)
1.66 × 10−4
4.67 × 10−4
9.65 × 10−4
2.78 × 10−4

Devices


ZnO/P3HT:PCBM


ZOCS-1/P3HT:PCBM


ZOCS-2/P3HT:PCBM


ZOCS-3/P3HT:PCBM


µ
e (cm2 V−1 s−1)
1.48 × 10−5
5.73 × 10−5
8.54 × 10−5
2.87 × 10−5
The surface electron structures together with the work functions (WFs) of the bare ZnO and hybrid ZOCS nanowalls were measured by ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS). Fig. 7a presents the normalized secondary electron cutoff (Ecutoff, left panel) and valence region (EHOME, right panel) of the devices. Work functions are indicated at the left of each spectrum, and valence band maximums (VBMs) are indicated at the right side. From the secondary electron cutoff of the UPS spectrum, the bare ZnO nanowalls WF is estimated to be 4.0 eV, while all of the hybrid ZOCS nanowalls with different thicknesses of the CdS layers show reduced WFs, making the nanowalls more facile for the extraction of electrons from PCBM. The decreases in the WFs are most likely attributed to the strong charge transfer from CdS to ZnO to create interface dipoles originating from exchange like effects. The surface WF of the nanowalls also depends on the defect density and distribution on the surfaces. Thus, the WFs can be altered by altering the thickness of the CdS layer. Among the three hybrid ZOCS nanowalls, the ZOCS-1 shows the lowest WF of 3.76 eV. Meanwhile, the VBMs shift toward higher binding energies as the thicknesses of CdS layers increase. The shift is 0.14 eV for ZOCS-1 and 0.1 eV for ZOCS-3. Fig. 7b plots the ionization energies (Eion = WF + VBM) and WFs of the nanowalls. The Eion decreases from 7.55 eV (ZnO nanowalls) to 7.45 eV (ZOCS-1), demonstrating the good electron-transporting properties of the ZOCS. Moreover, Eion is inversely proportion to the thickness of the CdS layer, which is related to the difference of the electronic structures between the ZnO and ZOCS nanowalls. The work function determined using a Kelvin probe (Fig. 7c) shows the same variation as the data obtained from UPS.
The optical band gaps (Eg) of the ZnO nanowalls and hybrid ZOCS nanowalls were calculated using the following formula:
(αhν)2 = A(hν − Eg)
where
A is a constant and the optical absorption coefficient α is obtained through the following equation:
α = 1/tln[(1 − Rλ)2/Tλ]
where
t is the thickness of the film, Tλ is the spectral transmittance and the Rλ is the reflectance.


Fig. 7d plots (αhν)2versus hν for the ZnO and ZOCS nanowalls. Eg is determined by extending the linear region of (αhν)2versus hν and taking the point of intersection on the hν-axis. The direct Eg is 3.31 eV for the ZnO nanowalls, and 3.26, 3.28, and 3.29 eV for hybrid ZOCS-1, ZOCS-2, and ZOCS-3, respectively. The lowest unoccupied molecule orbital (LUMO) energy levels of the ZnO and ZOCS nanowalls can be estimated from the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) energy levels and optical band gap. The HOMO energy levels are calculated from the UPS data using the following formula:
HOMO = hν − (Ecutoff − EHOME)
where
hν (21.21 eV) is the incident photon energy, and EHOMO is the onset relative to the Fermi level (EF) of Au (at 0 eV), where EF is determined from the Au substrate.

The HOMO energy levels for the ZnO, ZOCS-1, ZOCS-2 and ZOCS-3 nanowalls are 7.55, 7.45, 7.49 and 7.53 eV, respectively. Therefore, the corresponding LUMO energy levels are 4.24, 4.19, 4.21 and 4.24 eV. The electron structures of the component materials used in the inverted polymer solar cells are shown in Fig. 7e. The energy levels and work functions of the ZnO and ZOCS nanowalls are summarized in Table 3.
Electrodes

E
g (UV-vis) (eV)
HOMO (UPS) (eV)
LUMO (Eg) (eV)
Work function (eV)
Kelvin probe
UPS
ZnO
3.31
7.55
4.24
4.32
4.00
ZOCS-1
3.26
7.45
4.19
3.95
3.76
ZOCS-2
3.28
7.49
4.21
4.08
3.84
ZOCS-3
3.29
7.53
4.24
4.12
3.88
From the results we can see that the in situ growth of the CdS layer on the ZnO nanowalls can passivate and repair the surface defects of the ZnO, and thus it is inferred that the close contact can also prevent oxygen and moisture from diffusing into the active layers. The stability of the devices based on ZnO and ZOCS nanowalls are shown in Fig. 8. The unencapsulated devices based on ZOCS nanowalls displays better air stability than those based on bare ZnO nanowalls, especially those with ZOCS-1 and ZOCS-2. The devices with bare ZnO remain at about 60% of the original PCE while the devices with ZOCS-1 and ZOCS-2 remain at about 80%. The remarkably reduced number of surface defects of ZnO and close interfacial contact should be responsible for the improved stability of the devices.

Nanostructured 3D hybrid ZnO@CdS (ZOCS) nanowalls fabricated by in situ growth were successfully explored as an electron transport layer (ETL) for inverted PSCs. The defects of ZnO can be effectively filled and repaired by the in situ growth of CdS on the surface of the ZnO. The charge selectivity, transfer, and transportation of the ZOCS nanowalls are found to be greatly improved. The incorporation of ZOCS nanowalls with tunable photophysical and electronic properties as an ETL into inverted PSCs based on P3HT:PCBM resulted in the PCE being improved from 3.18% for bare ZnO to 4.07% for ZOCS-2 with a thickness of ∼2 nm of Cd. Furthermore, the repaired surface results in close contact to enhance the stability of the device. Consequently, the in situ fabrication of 3D hybrid ZOCS nanowalls has potential for high-efficiency and stability PSCs.


This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51273088, 51263016, and 51172103).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c3tc32071e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014