 DOI: 10.1039/C9TC06862G
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 5321-5334


Meidan
Que
,

Liangliang
Zhu
,

Yuxiao
Guo
,

Wenxiu
Que
* and 

Sining
Yun
*

Functional Materials Laboratory, College of Materials Science and Engineering, Xi'an University of Architecture and Technology, Xi'an 710055, Shaanxi, China. E-mail: yunsining@xauat.edu.cn

School of Chemical Engineering, Northwest University, Xi'an 710069, Shaanxi, China

Key Laboratory of the Ministry of Education, International Center for Dielectric Research, School of Electronic Science and Engineering, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710049, Shaanxi, China. E-mail: wxque@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Received
16th December 2019
, Accepted 10th March 2020
First published on 17th March 2020
With the flourishing development of perovskite nanocrystals (NCs), there has been a significant increase in the photoelectric conversion efficiency of perovskite nanocrystalline solar cells over the last five years. The variable band gap and superior phase stability of perovskite NCs are desirable for photovoltaic applications. A well-performing open-circuit voltage of these devices has been reported, approaching 85% of their theoretical limits. However, the short carrier lifetime and high interface recombination jointly limit the short-circuit currents and fill factors of the devices. This review aims at presenting a description of the fundamentals, recent progress and perspectives of perovskite nanocrystalline solar cells, with a focus on improving the stability of high-performance devices. Challenges and strategies concerning the surface passivation of perovskite NCs and films are discussed. In addition, we provide an extensive overview of the latest cutting-edge research to promote charge transport and extraction, focusing on the energy band alignment of the perovskite absorber, charge transport layer and the interface layer. Device architectures for improving the device performance are described, including tandem solar cells and gradient-bandgap multilayer solar cells. Finally, perspectives and undergoing efforts for the further development of perovskite nanocrystalline solar cells are presented.
Meidan Que is currently working as an associate professor at Xi'an University of Architecture and Technology in China. She gained her PhD degree at Xi'an Jiaotong University in 2018 working on optical materials for perovskite solar cells. From Sep. 2017 to Sep. 2018, she studied as a visiting scholar at Brown University. Currently, her research interests focus on semiconductor quantum dots for photovoltaic systems, and nanocomposites for photocatalyst applications.
Liangliang Zhu has worked at the School of Chemical Engineering of Northwest University as an associate professor since 2018. He gained his PhD degree from Xi'an Jiaotong University in 2018. His research interest is in nanomaterials and multi-scale mechanics for flexible electronics, energy conversion, and carbon capture and utilization.
Yuxiao Guo is a PhD candidate in Electronic and Information Engineering, Xi'an Jiaotong University in China. He received his BSc degree in Electronics Science and Technology from Xi'an Jiaotong University in 2016. He is interested in mixed-halide CsPbX3 perovskites, and now focuses on exploring new strategies toward high-quality CsPbX3 perovskites.
Wenxiu Que received his PhD degree from Xi'an Jiaotong University, China, in 1995. He has been a professor at the School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Xi'an Jiaotong University, since 2006. His present research interests focus on nanocomposite materials for energy conversion and storage applications, including lead halide perovskite solar cells, photocatalytic water splitting, and seawater desalination.
Sining Yun received his PhD in 2007 working on perovskite oxides at Xi'an Jiaotong University, China. He joined Xi'an University of Architecture and Technology in 2007 as an assistant professor. After a postdoctoral program (2008–2009) working on dye-sensitized solar cells at Yonsei University (Korea), he has been an associate professor in 2010 and a professor in 2014. His research interests lie in the processing and application of renewable energy materials.

Metal halide perovskite materials applied in photovoltaic fields are mainly in the form of an ABX3 structure, wherein A+ represents organic CH3NH2+ (MA+), CH(NH2)2+ (FA+), inorganic Cs+ or their mixtures; B2+ stands for Pb2+, Sn2+ or Ge2+; and X− is a halide anion (i.e., Cl−, Br−, I−), as shown in Fig. 1. Each B is coordinated by six X atoms forming a [BX6]− octahedral framework, and each A is located at the center of the octahedral framework. ABX3 perovskites poss several crystal systems, including orthorhombic, tetragonal and cubic. To ensure structural stability, perovskite should follow the Goldsmith criterion; i.e., the tolerance factor is in the range from 0.8 to 1.0, and the octahedral factor (μ, μ = (rB + rX)) is in the range from 0.44 to 0.9, where r is the ionic radius. The perovskite crystal adopts a cubic structure as t approaches 1.0. If t is lower than 1.0, the perovskite crystal is less symmetric and becomes tetragonal or orthorhombic in structure. The structure and dimensionality of perovskites usually depend on A-site cations, which is closely related to the optical characterization and stability of perovskite materials. Structural distortions caused by the radii difference of X anions have significant influences on the bandgap and perovskite structure. B–X bond distances and BX6 octahedral units mainly affect the photoluminescence (PL) emission of perovskite materials.

The optimum efficiency of perovskite solar cells has increased from 3.9% to 25.2% within the last decade. However, perovskite polycrystalline solar cells (PSCs) profoundly suffer from low intrinsic and thermodynamic instability due to the volatility of organic cations. These issues seriously hinder the future commercialization of perovskite polycrystalline film solar cells. Recently, all-inorganic perovskite polycrystalline film solar cells, such as CsPbIxBr3−x (0 ≤ x ≤ 3), have shown a dramatic increase in efficiency. However, the photo-induced phase segregation of perovskites with Br content still hampers the goal of achieving theoretical efficiencies.
In parallel with the surging development of perovskite polycrystalline film solar cells, interest in the study of perovskite nanocrystals (NCs) has been growing rapidly since their first availability in 2014. NCs have a quantum-confinement effect that is absent in their bulk counterparts. Nanocrystals, as particles with one or more dimensions less than 100 nanometers (nm) in size, can be generally divided into quantum dots (QDs), nanocubes (NBs), nanowires (NWs), nanorods (NRs), nanoplates (NPs), nanosheets (NSs), and nanoplatelets (NPLs) based on their different shapes. The physical properties of these nanoparticles are sensitive to their sizes and shapes. Among the various NCs, QDs, in particular, are the smallest semiconductor nanoparticles, with a diameter of only a few nanometers. Their unique optical and electronic properties are distinct from those of large NC particles, thanks to quantum mechanics. When illuminated under ultraviolet light, the emission spectra of QDs depend on their bandgap as a function of both size and shape.
Perovskite NCs were first discovered as a visible-light sensitizer for dye-sensitized solar cells in 2009, and the potential photovoltaic applications of perovskite NCs subsequently emerged. In comparison with conventional semiconductor NCs, perovskite NCs show superior optical features, including a high photoluminescence quantum yield (PLQY) of around 100%, narrow emission profiles, and precise and facile tunable luminescence over the entire visible spectrum. Moreover, the high conductivity, wide-range absorbing spectrum, variable bandgap, and architecture compatibility of perovskite NCs make them ideal candidates for next-generation photovoltaic applications. Compared with perovskite polycrystalline film solar cells, which have undergone over a decade of research before their practical applications emerged, the study of perovskite nanocrystalline solar cells (which have shown some particular advantages, such as nanoscale phase stabilization and low voltage loss), is still in its infancy.
In this review, we focus on the significant progresses of perovskite nanocrystalline solar cells made in recent years, including developments in colloidal synthetic methods for ABX3 NCs, and new strategies for perfecting both materials and device structures. The following content is mainly composed of three sections. (i) An exhaustive description of the preparation of APbX3 NCs is given, which concentrates on their methods of synthesis and postsynthetic treatments. (ii) Optical properties of ABX3 NCs and their photovoltaic applications in solar cells, as along with a discussion of the most recent advances and trends in this area. (iii) Starting from materials innovation and the structural design of perovskite nanocrystalline films, an extensive overview of the advanced developments of surface passivation, interfacial engineering, and device architectures are presented. (iv) Finally, challenges and potentials of perovskite nanocrystalline solar cells are concluded in the last section.

Perovskite NCs can be synthesized via a variety of methods, including hot injection (HI), ligand-assisted reprecipitation (LARP), microfluidic reactions, low-temperature methods, micelle methods, and using ultrasonication or microwave irradiation. Among them, HI and LARP are the most commonly used liquid-phase methods. The HI strategy is performed with a rapid injection of precursors into a high-temperature solution of the crude precursors, ligands, and a reacted solvent. This approach requires a high temperature and an inert atmosphere. It enables the as-prepared NCs to have a restricted size distribution through the segregation between the nucleation and growth processes. The LARP method is a supersaturated recrystallization process. The main compositions of desired precursor salts (e.g., MX2 or AX, where M = Pb2+, Sn2+, etc. A = Cs+, MA+, FA+, etc. and X = Cl−, Br−, I−) are dissolved in a strong polar solvent (e.g., dimethylformamide (DMF) or dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO)). Afterwards, this solution is added dropwise into a poor solvent (e.g., toluene). The low solubility of ions in polar solvents can induce quick nucleation and growth of perovskite NCs, during which the ligand additives control their sizes and shapes. The LARP method can be conducted in an ambient atmosphere to obtain high-quality perovskite NCs. While both HI and LARP methods can synthesize perovskite NCs with high emission, they are restricted by inferior thermostability and poor scalability. To this end, the microfluidic reaction system and low-temperature synthesis method have been developed to synthesize APbX3 perovskite NCs using flow reactors, which can alleviate mass/heat transfer and reproducibility issues. Flow systems have also been employed to synthesize other nanomaterials for different applications.


To pursue the optimal optical properties and concisely control the morphology of perovskite NCs, key synthesis parameters have to be carefully controlled, including the ratio of surfactants to precursors, the injection temperature of precursors, the reaction time, and the precursor concentrations. Apart from above-mentioned chemical methods, pressure inducing is considered to be an effective approach to change the shape of perovskite NCs and accelerate the phase transformation and PL of perovskite NCs. Meanwhile, to precisely tune the compound and morphology of colloidal NCs, further efforts in synthesis methods are still in demand.


Perovskite NCs with ultrahigh PLQYs depend strongly on the surface ligands, which, however, are insulating and impede the charge injection and charge transport on the surface of perovskite NCs. Therefore, how to balance between surface passivation and charge injection is an urgent issue to be resolved for further photoelectric applications. Indeed, these ligand groups (i.e., aliphatic hydrocarbon chains, carboxylic acid (–COOH) and amine (–NH2)) derived from precursors and additives (i.e., 1-octadecene, oleic acid, and oleyl amine), play an essential role in the nucleation-growth procedure and the NC stability. To enhance the electronic properties and stability under ambient conditions, several ligand engineering procedures have been proposed. (i) A centrifuge procedure of the perovskite NCs over multiple times facilitates the removal of remnant precursors. (ii) The perovskite NCs go through a purification process with polar solvents, including ethanol, ethyl acetate, methyl acetate, and acetonitrile. The quantities of polar solvents must be strictly controlled and calibrated during purification, as the attached hydrophobic ligands may lead to damage or aggregate the perovskite NCs, or even the loss of a confinement effect. (iii) Superior charge transport capability on the surface of NCs can be realized through an efficient injection of short-capped ligands.


The last decade has seen a steep rise in research in perovskite NCs due to their adjustable bandgaps and functionalized characteristics. When the perovskite NC sizes are under their Bohr radius, their quantum-confinement effect would arouse a quasi-continuous electron energy level around the Fermi level. The state of the valence band of perovskite NCs becomes discrete and their band gap is broadened. In addition, multi-excitons in perovskite NCs are capable of prompting high-energy photons into low-energy photons to match photovoltaic devices, thus avoiding spectral loss and improving the photovoltaic performance. Thanks to these effects, perovskite NC-based solar cells have opened up a new area of material research in the field of solar cells.


Protesescu et al. first synthesized all-inorganic perovskite-based colloidal QDs, CsPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, I, or halide mixtures), with high luminescence in 2005. PL emission profiles of the as-synthesized CsPbX3 NCs can cover over the entire visible spectral region through changing composition and size, as shown in Fig. 2a–c. Then, MA1−xFAxPbI3 NCs, Cs1−mFAmPbX3 NCs, and APbX3 NCs (A = Cs, MA, FA, and X = Cl, Br, I) were synthesized, and their emissions were found to span the visible light region. Besides this, Milstein et al. reported that the as-synthesized Yb3+:CsPbCl3 NCs can yield a near-infrared PLQY of up to ∼170% by sensitizing Yb3+ 2F5/2–2F7/2 luminescence, as shown in Fig. 2d. Song et al. utilized the quantum cutting effect to promote the luminescent quantum yield, where a novel type of quantum cutting material CsPbCl1.5Br1.5:Yb3+/Ce3+ NCs was fabricated. The material has a large absorption range, weak electron–phonon coupling, and high inner luminescent quantum yield (∼146%). Multiple carrier generation is of significant potentiality to be applied in the photovoltaic fields, as it is promising to break through the Shockley–Queisser limit.

Perovskite NCs can be precisely controlled to match practical applications through adjusting their morphologies and regulating energy band structure. Various methods have been developed to obtain different morphologies and microstructures of APbX3 perovskite materials, as shown in Fig. 2e–l, observed by scanning electron microscope (SEM) and transmission electron microscope (TEM). Kovalenko et al. reported a fast anion-exchange method for synthesizing CsPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, I) with high luminescence through the hydroiodic acid and fine-tuning of the spectral region (410–700 nm). The quantum yields were in the range of 20–80% (Fig. 2e). A LARP method to synthesize luminescent and color-tunable colloidal MAPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, I) QDs was developed with an absolute quantum yield up to 70% (Fig. 2f). By controlling the reaction time, 1D CsPbBr3 NWs with high uniformity were synthesized by Chen et al. with the length from tens of nanometers to tens of microns and a width from ∼2.5 to ∼32 nm (Fig. 2g). Fu et al. combined the “top-down” fabricated polydimethylsiloxane rectangular groove template with the “bottom-up” solution self-assembly to produce large-scale MAPbX3 (Cl, Br, I) NW arrays, where both the individual dimensions of NWs (i.e., width, height and length) and their interval distances can be precisely controlled (Fig. 2h). A vapor-phase deposition method was employed to grow CsPbX3 (Cl, Br, I) micro/nanorods with complete luminescent spectra from 415 to 673 nm by varying the halide composition (Fig. 2i). Yang et al. demonstrated the successful room-temperature growth of MAPbX3 (X = Br, I) NR array via anion exchange for LED applications (Fig. 2j). Through a simple one-pot colloidal approach, ultrathin CsPbBr3 NPLs were synthesized by Lee et al. with precisely tunable edge length and thickness (Fig. 2k). Chen et al. developed a 2-methyl-1-pentanaol-assisted hot-injection method for the synthesis of two-dimensional (2D) FPbBr3 NPs with high exciton binding energy and stability for LED applications (Fig. 2l).

Perovskite NCs incorporated into photovoltaic devices have attracted tremendous interest in recent years. Kojima et al. firstly used the perovskite material (MAPbI3) in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) as a quantum dot sensitizer in 2009. The as-fabricated device obtained a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of only ∼4%, and MAPbI3 QDs were rapidly dissolved in electrolyte solution. Up to 2014, Luther and colleagues first employed CsPbI3 QDs (Eg = 1.73 eV) as an absorber to assemble solar cells, and got a high open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 1.23 V (around 85% of the Shockley–Queisser theoretical limit), which exceeded those of conventional perovskite polycrystalline film solar cells with a short-circuit current (JSC) of 13.4 mA cm−2 and final PCE over 10%. Since then, this group has been committed to improving the PCEs of perovskite nanocrystalline solar cells through cation or anion exchange, quantum dot film post-treatment, component engineering, and so on. Up to now, the highest PCE reached is 16.6%. Despite these endeavors, there is still a considerable gap between the PCE of perovskite nanocrystalline solar cells and the highest certified PCE (25.2%) of perovskite PSCs. The primary reason for this is that the surfaces of perovskite nanocrystals are covered with massive insulating ligands; e.g., oleic acid and oleylamine, which are introduced during the synthetic process. These insulating carbon ligands severely hamper the separation and transportation of photogenerated-charges, resulting in a decreased extraction efficiency of photogenerated-charges and inferior PCE of perovskite nanocrystalline solar cells. Therefore, suppressing their recombination has become a bottleneck in further enhancing the PCE of perovskite nanocrystalline solar cells. Considering these issues, considerable effort has been invested in the following three aspects (Fig. 3).


Controlling the types and numbers of surface ligands can not only adjust the NC dispensability, but also reduce the defects and enhance the transportation efficiency of photogenerated carriers. For example, Manna et al. used a short-ligand solvent with a lower boiling point to prepare CsPbBr3 NCs, avoiding the wash procedure by using a solution of lead nitrate in methyl acetate. The VOC and JSC values of the assembled devices reached up to 1.5 V and 5.6 mA cm−2, respectively. Liu and Zhang et al. developed two short-chain ligands (octanoic acid/octylamine) to passivate α-CsPbI3 as the photo-absorber in solar cells. The resulting PCEs were increased from 7.76% to 11.87%, and the VOC and JSC values of the assembled devices were 1.04 V and 16.98 mA cm−2, respectively. Yang et al. effectively controlled the surface ligand density by adjusting the polarity of the washing solution, and obtained a PCE of 8.38%.


A-site cation compounds (AX), utilized to modify and cover the surface of nanocrystalline films, can enhance the electronic coupling and wave-function between NCs, improving the density and conductivity of nanocrystalline films. For example, CsPbI3 nanocrystalline films modified with formamidine iodide resulted in the increased photogenerated-carrier mobility, lifetime, and diffusion length of the photogenerated carriers. Tian et al. developed a technique that combines a layer-by-layer deposition method and a washing process, which simultaneously replaces the long-chain ligands with phenyltrimethylammonium bromide. This technique was able to minimize the residual ligands and passivate the surface defects on nanocrystalline films.


As is commonly known, VOC loss is closely associated with the energy-level structure of photoactive layers. A gradient arrangement of the energy-level structure can be realized by modulating the energy level between the nanocrystalline film and the charge transport layers. An energy alignment is supposed to facilitate the charge extraction and decrease the nonradiative charge recombination, thus minimizing VOC loss. Luther et al. prepared Cs1−xFAxPbI3 QD alloys as absorbers via cation exchange, and obtained a bandgap between 1.42 eV and 1.75 eV, leading to device efficiencies in the range of 8.8%~12.37%. Through a layer-by-layer method, Zhang and Li et al. fabricated a perovskite absorber composed of several nanocrystalline films with various components, which significantly promoted the separation and transportation of photogenerated carriers, giving a best efficiency of 15.4%. Wang et al. introduced FA+ into CsPbI3 NCs to adjust the energy-level structure, so as to improve the extraction efficiency of photogenerated carriers and augment the photovoltaic performance. Photovoltaic parameters of recent perovskite nanocrystalline solar cells are summarized in Table 1.

Perovskite recipe
Device structure

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)

η (%)
Ref. [year, journal]
CsPbI3 QDs
FTO/TiO2/CsPbI3 QDs/Spiro-OMeTAD/MoOx/Al
1.23
13.47
65.0
10.8
2016, Science
CsPbBr3 NCs
FTO/TiO2/CsPbBr3 NCs/Spiro-MeTAD/Au
1.50
5.60
62.0
5.4
2016, Nat. Energy
AX coated CsPbI3 QDs
FTO/TiO2/AX-coated CsPbI3 QDs/Spiro-OMeTAD/MoOx/Al
1.16
15.25
76.6
13.4
2017, Sci. Adv.
Ligand solution treated CsPbBr3 QDs
FTO/ZnO/CsPbBr3–CsPb2Br5/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au
1.43
6.17
77.2
6.8
2018, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces
μ-Graphene crosslinked CsPbI3 QDs
FTO/TiO2/μGR/CsPbI3 QDs/PTAA/Au
1.18
13.59
72.6
11.6
2018, Adv. Energy Mater.
Surface ligand-exchange of CsPbI3 QDs
—
1.20
—
—
12.0
2018, J. Am. Chem. Soc.
Cs1−xFAxPbI3 QDs
FTO/TiO2/Cs1−xFAxPbI3 QDs/Spiro-OMeTAD/Metal
1.18
15.50
73.0
13.5
2018, ACS Nano
FAPbI3 surface treatment
ITO/SnO2/FAPbI3 QDs/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au
1.10
11.83
64.4
8.4
2018, Joule
CsPbX3
FTO/TiO2/CsPbX3/Spiro-OMeTAD/MoO3/Ag
1.06
12.24
73.0
9.5
2018, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells
GeI2 additive for CsPbI3 QDs
FTO/TiO2/CsPbI3 QDs/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au
1.11
14.80
74.0
12.2
2019, Chem. Mater.
FAPbI3 QDs
ITO/SnO2/FAPbI3 QDs/Spiro-OMeTAD/Ag
1.10
15.4
74.8
13.0
2019, Adv. Mater.
Cs1−xFAxPbI3 QDs
ITO/TiO2/Cs1−xFAxPbI3 QDs/Spiro-OMeTAD/MoOxAl
1.20
18.9
76.0
17.4
2019, Nat. Commun.
Cs1−xFAxPbI3 QDs
ITO/SnO2/Cs1−xFAxPbI3 QDs/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au
1.17
18.3
78.3
16.6
2020, Nat. Energy
Certified efficiencies of state-of-the-art and published perovskite polycrystalline/nanocrystalline solar cells reach optimal levels of 25.2% and 16.6%, respectively. Compared with perovskite polycrystalline solar cells, there is still a certain disparity in efficiency for perovskite nanocrystalline solar cells, despite the rapid rising trend in efficiency.

Although numerous innovations have been proposed in terms of materials, structural design of perovskite nanocrystalline films, and device architectures, the photovoltaic performances of perovskite nanocrystalline solar cells remain unsatisfactory in despite of the rapid advances in materials syntheses and device applications. Further development of surface passivation, interfacial engineering, and device architecture are required. In the following section, strategies toward obtaining high-performance perovskite nanocrystalline solar cells are discussed.


Perovskite NCs have shown great potential in the field of photovoltaics because of their facile bandgap tunability, facile fabrication, and postsynthetic treatment. However, instability of perovskite NCs poses a major challenge for the development of perovskite solar cells. Perovskite NCs are prone to degrade once exposed to ultraviolet (UV) light, high temperature, oxygen, or moisture. For organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite NCs, organic cations are very sensitive and may easily decompose due to the presence of water molecules. In comparison, inorganic perovskite NCs, such as CsPbBr3 NCs, have higher luminescence upon irradiation, owing to the irradiation-induced reconstruction of surface atoms and surface ligands, which can reduce surface defects and increase the PLQY. However, the size of CsPbBr3 NCs increases after illumination for a long period, which causes a decline in PLQY because of the impaired quantum-confinement effect and surface trap states. Furthermore, the PL emission intensities of perovskite NCs are also damaged after being heated. Temporary trap states generated by heat originating from trap emission or nonradiative quenching lead to a reversible PL quenching. Repeated heating and cooling also causes irreversible degradation. In general, the thermal stability of inorganic perovskite is superior to that of organic–inorganic counterparts. Perovskite NCs with organic molecules decompose below 200 °C, while the crystal size of inorganic perovskite NCs increases under the same conditions.

In addition, oxygen and moisture also accelerate the degradation of perovskite NCs. Oxygen molecules react with the unstable nuclei, resulting in the formation of large crystals. Dissociated ions from perovskite NCs continue to stimulate crystal growth thanks to Ostwald ripening. Meanwhile, moisture can merge surface grains and increase ion diffusion length, thus promoting crystal growth. To address the stability issues of perovskite NCs, many studies focused on designing ligands and overcoating to protect perovskite NCs from oxygen, moisture and reinforce photo-/thermal-/chemical-stabilities.
(i) Surface binding ligands of perovskite NCs with various chemical anchor groups were able to effectively reduce the density of surface trap states and suppress surface decomposition, thus enhancing the stability of perovskite NCs. For instance, Huang et al. showed that thiol-functional polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxane (POSS)-capped CsPbBr3 NCs can improve moisture resistance, because of the chemical stability and high optical transparency of POSS under solar light. Pan et al. reported that an inorganic–organic hybrid ion pair (i.e., S2−DDA+)-capped CsPbBr3 NCs exhibited higher PLQY and photostability due to lower surface defect loss. Moreover, the PLQY and stability of CsPbBr3 NCs were also increased to a new level after thiocyanate salt treatment (e.g., ammonium thiocyanate and sodium thiocyanate), resulting from the fact that thiocyanate salts can repair the excess damage of lead surfaces and shorten the nonradiative pathway.
(ii) Another approach, which can protect perovskite NCs from oxygen, moisture, high-energy photons, and temperature, is overcoating. Coating with transparent materials, such as SiO2, can greatly enhance stability without influencing the optical properties. Huang et al. and Sun et al. showed that MAPbBr3 and CsPbBr3 NCs with tetramethyl orthosilicate and (3-aminopropyl)triethoxysilane coating increased PLQY and photostability of NCs. Adam et al. and Yang et al. used the transparent and nontoxic NaNO3 to synthesize an MAPbBr3/NaNO3 composite, achieving superior photo and thermal tolerance compared with pristine MAPbBr3 NCs. Raja et al. achieved the new properties of polarization and color tunability by varying the shape and components of CsPbBr3 NCs. The long-term ambient stability of NCs was also improved after three macroscale polymer encapsulations of polystyrene, poly(styrene–ethylene–butylene–styrene), and poly(lauryl methacrylate), respectively.
(iii) The nanocrystalline films are composed of nanocrystals and polymers, or incorporated between two barrier layers, which can protect NCs in polymer matrixes from oxygen and moisture. Sun et al. showed that, after being chemically treated through thermally-induced crosslinking or radical-induced polymerization, the PLQY of MAPbBr3 NCs shielded by a thin polymer was enhanced due to the removal of surface trap states. Wang et al. reported a swelling–deswelling microencapsulation strategy to passivate MAPbBr3 NCs inside polymer matrixes, and the resulting MAPbBr3–polymer composite films showed higher PLQY, as well as better color purity and stability under thermal and water exposure. Furthermore, polymer-assisted perovskite films with enhanced quality were also obtained, leading to considerable improvement of stability of the as-fabricated devices under humid conditions. Wang et al. indicated that μ-graphene (μGR) can cross-link CsPbI3 QDs to form a μGR/CsPbI3 composite film, with the resultant composite film exhibiting not only increased conductivity but also a high stability against temperature and moisture.
Collectively, these studies demonstrate that surface passivation of perovskite NCs and films is an effective method for improving perovskite NC stabilities. Surface binding ligands and overcoating can not only reduce the surface defects, but also suppress the decomposition of NCs.

Perovskite nanocrystal films with an adjustable bandgap can be precisely controlled to form a bandgap gradient at the maximum of the valence band (VB) via changing the composition and shape of each nanocrystal layer. Cha et al. used as-prepared MAPbBr3−xIx QDs with a tunable band-edge position by adjusting the ratio of Br:I deposited on an MAPbI3 film. Experimental results indicated that, when the VB edge of MAPbBr3−xIx QDs is located between the MAPbI3 film and the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of the hole transport material (HTM) layer, the hole transfer from the MAPbI3 film to the HTM layer becomes more accessible, resulting in a fair improvement in photovoltaic properties. Cs1−xFAxPbI3 NCs with the complete range of compositions and activation energy (∼0.65 eV) between Cs+ and FA+ were synthesized for photovoltaic devices, exhibiting a high VOC, as shown in Fig. 4a and b. Another reported approach to change the bandgap of perovskite NCs is to coat a thick shell with a composition gradient, which is also an effective way to improve the stability of NCs. In fact, the gradient shell can effectively reduce the interfacial strain originating from the relative lattice mismatch between the core and the shell, resulting in an increased charge-transfer efficiency and stability. Sargent and co-workers developed a ‘lattice-anchored’ hybrid material by combining CsPb(Br1−xIx)3 NCs with lead chalcogenide colloidal QDs, as shown in Fig. 4c. The well-matched lattice between these two materials can prevent perovskite NCs from phase transition and increase the resistance against oxygen and moisture. Thus, controlling the top of the VB will be able to facilitate charge transport and enhance the PCE of devices.

Apart from above-mentioned studies, confined photogenerated carriers are able to promote their radiative recombination to achieve high-efficiency solar cells with proper structures, such as the quantum-well structure. Two-dimensional perovskite NCs have gained a great deal of attention because of their multi-quantum-well structure, which is comprised of inorganic semiconductor layers and insulating organic layers, arousing electron confinement and exciton generation. Furthermore, it was also found that a decrease in grain size favored exciton confinement in nanoparticles, and increased the ratio of radiative recombination. The long-chain cations can prompt the crystal growth in a dimension, forming films constituted by nanoscale crystallites, which is conducive to the quantum-confinement effect of injected charges, and simultaneously enhances radiative recombination.

Separated electrons and holes are injected into both electrodes after exciton. Therefore, charge balance is a key element that impacts on the device efficiency. The imbalance of photocarrier transport causes gathering charges on both electrodes because of the excessive charges and Auger recombination. Supposing that electrons do not recombine with holes in the perovskite layer, they would transfer to the HTMs to degrade HTMs substantially, which may be further accelerated by the heat generated by Joule heating and nonradiative processes. The charge injection efficiency in PSCs is determined by the energy-level barrier between the charge-transfer layers and the perovskite layer. The energy-level diagrams of the charge-transfer layers are schematically illustrated in Fig. 5. Yan et al. fabricated an SnO2/ZnO bilayer as the electron transport layer to form a cascade energy band between the electron transporting layer (ETL) and CsPbI2Br, which enables a more efficient extraction and suppresses interfacial trap-assisted recombination, as shown in Fig. 5a. Composite materials, including a TiO2/SnO2 bilayer film, In2O3/TiOx bilayer photoanode (Fig. 5b), homogeneous crystalline SnO2 nanoparticle, and Al:SnO2 nanoparticle, have also been employed to match the energy alignment in practical application.

Seo et al. and Noh et al. utilized an alternative poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl) to react with n-hexyl trimethyl ammonium bromide on the perovskite surface, as shown in Fig. 5c. The certified PCE of PSCs was up to 22.7%, and the corresponding PSCs exhibited a humidity stability without encapsulation, and a long-term operational stability upon encapsulation. Tetraceance and 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis[N,N-di(4-methoxyphenyl)amino]-9,9′-spiro-bifluorene (Spiro-OMeTAD) were used for a graded hole transport layer (HTL) to accelerate the injection of holes from perovskite to metal electrodes, as shown in Fig. 5d. The resulting PSCs achieved a best PCE of 21.6%, with a long-term stability under illumination. Luther et al. demonstrated that a triarylamine-based organic HTM doped with its oxidized salt analog has a superior stability against temperature and illumination compared with that of both EH44/EH44-ox and Li+-doped Spiro-OMeTAD. However, poly[bis(4-phenyl)(2,4,6-trimethylphenyl)amine] (PTAA) and Spiro-OMeTAD, as common HTMs, require the introduction of hygroscopic dopants to trigger degradation of the perovskite layer, thus the commercialization of these HTMs is limited by their deposition process.

Interface engineering is very important to obtain high-performance PSCs by controlling the interfacial charge transfer in PSC. Perovskite NC, as one of the key interface engineering materials, can increase the efficiency and stability of perovskite solar cells. For example, Cha et al. incorporated MAPbBr3−xIx QDs into the interface between perovskite film and the HTM layer. By adjusting the Br:I ratio, the as-prepared MAPbBr3−xIx QDs showed tunable photoluminescence and band-edge positions. The VB edge of MAPbBr3−xIx QDs was located between the VB edge of MAPbI3 perovskite film and the HOMO of the HTM layer, which assists the hole transfer from the MAPbI3 film to HTM layer, as shown in Fig. 6a. Two shapes of CsPbBr3 NCs (i.e. NB and NW) were prepared, which were used to modify the surface electronic states of MAPbI3 films to form a compositionally-graded heterojunction at the perovskite/HTM layer interface of PSCs. TEM images of CsPbBr3 NCs and the fabricated schematic diagram are displayed in Fig. 6b. The CsPbBr3 NW modified perovskite films outperformed a superior PCE (21.4%) compared with that of the PSC fabricated by CsPbBr3 NB modification. Que et al. deposited Cs1−xFAxPbI3 QDs with a high content of Cs+ onto a Cs-lean FAPbI3 thin film, demonstrating that a Cs-rich QD surface layer can protect the perovskite thin film and device from moisture. The device architecture is shown in Fig. 6c. Liu et al. reported that the performance and stability of perovskite polycrystalline film solar cells could be improved by incorporating CsPbI3 QDs into the interface between the MAPbI3 film and the HTM film as an interface layer, resulting in an increase of PCE from 15.17% to 18.56%. The higher moisture tolerance of PSCs can be ascribed to the CsPbI3 QD interfacial layer. Zheng et al. employed a passivation strategy to disperse inorganic perovskite QDs with ligands onto the MAPbI3 film, leading to low voltage losses and PCE enhancements. The hydrophobic-inhabiting moisture penetration of the perovskite film surface was increased, as well as the thermal stability of the devices. Bian et al. designed high-performance graded bandgap structural solar cells comprised of a CsPbI2Br film-based bottom cell and a CsPbI3 QD-based top cell. The as-fabricated devices showed a wide photo-response, high carrier mobility, and well-matched energy levels, which afforded a PCE of 14.15% and a high JSC of 15.25 mA cm−2. Furthermore, some non-perovskite materials are used as interfacial modifications. Xiao et al. employed CdTe QDs to improve the contact between the perovskite layer and HTL accelerate the hole extraction at the interface. The photovoltaic performance of some recent perovskite NC modifying solar cells is presented in Table 2.

Perovskite recipe
Device structure

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)

η (%)
Ref. [year, journal]
Cs1−xFAxPbI3 QDs deposited on FAPbI3 film
FTO/SnO2/FAxPbI3 film/Cs1−xFAxPbI3 QDs/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au
1.12
24.4
0.76
20.8
2019, ACS Energy Lett.
MAPbBr3−xIx QDs as interfacial engineering layer
FTO/TiO2/MAPbI3 film/MAPbBr1−xBrx QD/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au
0.95
19.51
72.0
13.0
2016, J. Am. Chem. Soc.
CsPbX3 QDs as interfacial engineering layer
FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/FAMAPbI3 film/CsPbX3 QDs/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au
1.06
24.30
67.3
17.3
2018, NPG Asia Mater.
CsPbI2Br QDs deposited on film
FTO/TiO2/CsPbI2Br film/CsPbI3 QDs/PTAA/Au
1.20
15.25
78.7
14.5
2018, Joule
CsPbBr3 NCs or NWs deposited on MA0.3FA0.7PbI3 film
FTO/TiO2/MA0.3FA0.7PbI3 film/CsPbBr3 NCs or NWs/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au
1.12
24.1
79.1
21.4
2019, Adv. Energy Mater.
CdTe QDs deposited on MAPbI3 film
ITO/SnO2/MAPbI3 film/CdTe QDs/Spiro-OMeTAD/Ag
1.10
22.4
77.7
19.2
2018, Nano Energy

Considerable efforts have also been made to reduce nonradiative recombination losses in single-junction PSC by passivizing the surface and bulk, enlarging grains, and engineering the contacts or heterojunction interface. Two major issues are inevitable; i.e., sub-band gap transmission and hot carrier thermalization. Several cutting-edge approaches were implemented to tailor the spectra of absorption layers, including multiple exciton generation, hot carriers and tandem designs. Tandem solar cells can combine two or more sub-cells to minimize sunlight spectral losses, and thus raise the optoelectric conversion efficiency. The solution processability of perovskites precursors and the tuning ability of their bandgaps (1.2~3.2 eV) by compositional change of the APbX3 perovskite structure make them attractive candidates for exploring multijunction solar cells. The latest upsurge of stacking solar cells with various bandgaps significantly enhanced the overall performance of tandem devices. Optimization of the bandgap of stacking cells has a significant influence on the improvement of PCEs. Such a procedure separates the absorption of incident light through the perovskite materials, which are placed in tandem devices with gradient bandgaps. The typical architecture is shown Fig. 7a. Yan and co-workers reported a series of mixed tin-lead iodide as a low-bandgap (∼1.25 eV) perovskite absorber. A certified efficiency of 17.01% was achieved for single-junction perovskite solar cells. When a mechanically stacked perovskite absorber with ∼1.58 eV bandgap was used as the top cell, the resulting 4-terminal all-perovskite tandem solar cell showed a steady-state efficiency of 21.0%. As a strategy for improving the low-bandgap perovskite absorption layer, a bulk-passivation approach via the introduction of chlorine was developed. When low-bandgap perovskites with (FASnI3)0.6(MAPbI3)0.4:Cl as the absorption layers (∼1.25 eV) were stacked with sub-bandgap perovskite with an (FA0.8Cs0.2)Pb(I0.7Br0.3)3 absorption layer (∼1.75 eV), the as-fabricated two-terminal all-perovskite tandem solar cells obtained an optimized efficiency of 21%, as shown in Fig. 7c.

An alternative approach to further strengthen the utilization of the solar spectrum is the fabrication of a graded bandgap. In contrast to the preparation of single polycrystalline perovskite films, nanocrystalline films are stacked in an orderly manner by nanocrystalline multi-layers and assembled to form the gradient-bandgap multilayer solar cells, which can make full use of the sunlight and thus increase the PCE of devices. Ergen et al. designed a structure of two perovskite layers (MASnI3 and MAPbI3−xBrx) to assemble the solar cell. The as-fabricated PSC with a graded bandgap achieved a champion PCE of 21.7%, as shown in Fig. 7b. Fu et al. developed a facile ion-exchange approach to achieve a compositionally-graded perovskite absorption layer to improve the charge-collection efficiency and suppress interface recombination, and the as-fabricated PSC had a best PCE of 16.8%. Finally, Cho et al. deposited the formamidine bromide precursor on the as-fabricated (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15 film to remove excess PbI2. The additional FAPbBr3−xIx layer formed a compositional gradient on the top of the primary perovskite film and functioned as an electron-blocking layer, resulting in an optimal PCE up to 21.3%.

Encouraged by the excellent optoelectrical properties of perovskite NCs, considerable effort has been made to explore and improve the corresponding synthetic approach, composition design, device fabrication, and photovoltaic applications. Perovskite nanocrystalline solar cells have achieved unprecedented progress over the past few years. However, the limited ambient-/thermal-stabilities and premature surface passivation of perovskite NCs still inhibit their widespread applications in optoelectronic fields. In this review, we focus on the strategies to push forward the development of high-performance perovskite nanocrystalline solar cells by adjusting material synthesis, optical properties, surface passivation, and device optimization. Considerable attempts for interface engineering, compositional gradient, and device optimization have been emphasized.

An efficiency of 16.6% for the perovskite nanocrystalline solar cells has been achieved, but this is far behind the Shockley–Queisser limited photoelectrical conversion efficiency. The inferior charge separation and transport efficiency in perovskites is the principle reason for this observation. Organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites are ionic crystals with imperfect and “soft” crystals, which are prone to ion migration under an external environment. This gives rise to vacancy defects, inducing lattice collapse and decomposition of the crystal, thus imposing a negative shock on the photoelectric conversion efficiency. In addition, numerous trap states on the surface of perovskite NCs develop into irradiative recombination, which severely reduces the efficiency of charge transport. For the approaches to address this issue, the following means are suggested. First, prepare a high-quality crystal structure of perovskite NCs, including the development of multidimensional perovskite NCs, superlattices as well as heterojunctions. Second, construct smooth surfaces by employing ligand-assisted methods or conducting polymers, fabricate the underlying film by crosslinking methods, and implement defect passivation via a functional interlayer.
Despite the difficulties in improving device efficiencies, the stability and lifetime improvement of the perovskite nanocrystalline solar cells remains a great challenge, hindering commercial development. Efforts directing toward enhancing the stability of solar cells include the mixture of A-site cations, the introduction of surface short ligands, and the encapsulation of devices. Although challenges with perovskite nanocrystalline solar cells remain to be completely solved, we expect the prospective strategies to be effective in the near future.

The authors declare no competing financial interests. Further permissions relating to the material excerpted from ref. 34 and 40 should be directed to the ACS.


This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (61774122 and 51672208).


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020