 DOI: 10.1039/C4TA03432E
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 20474-20480


Cheng Jin
An
,

Seon Joon
Kim
,

Hyung Ouk
Choi
,

Dae Woo
Kim
,

Sung Woo
Jang
,

Ming Liang
Jin
,

Jong-Min
Park
,

Jong Kil
Choi
 and 

Hee-Tae
Jung
*

National Research Lab for Organic Opto-Electronic Materials, Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Eng. (BK-21), Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon 305-701, Korea. E-mail: heetae@kaist.ac.kr; Fax: +82 42 350 3910; Tel: +82 42 350 3931

Received
5th July 2014
, Accepted 22nd October 2014
First published on 23rd October 2014
We demonstrate a PMMA reverse transfer method, where a PMMA/graphene bilayer was reversely transferred onto target substrates, to better control both contamination and crack formation relative to conventional approaches. Based on this novel transfer process, the graphene sheet resistance was greatly reduced by about 50% at the same transmittance, exhibiting ∼200% higher efficiency when applied in a solar cell as the anode.

Since the first graphene patchwork was experimentally achieved by mechanical exfoliation from graphite, intensive research efforts have been directed to the development of synthetic methods for fabricating large-area graphene, in order to improve the yield and increase the throughput of graphene fabrication. Recently, the chemical vapor deposition (CVD) method for synthesizing graphene has attracted a considerable amount of attention due to its high quality, large area growth, and full coverage on catalytic metal substrates. However, following this significant achievement, a key challenge emerged; the challenge is to develop reliable methods for the transfer of graphene from its growth substrate to the target substrate without damaging the fragile one atom thick graphene sheet or leaving undesired residues on the graphene surface.

To date, the most common method for transferring graphene from a transition metal growth substrate is the “PMMA-mediated” approach. According to this method, a layer of poly(methyl-methacrylate) (PMMA) is coated onto the graphene, and the metal underneath the graphene is completely etched away by using a suitable etchant. The PMMA/graphene stack is then transferred onto the target substrate, and the PMMA is removed using selective solvents. This approach is a relatively simple and popular transfer method. However, this method suffers from PMMA residues being left on the graphene surface. In addition, the solvent rinsing process also causes graphene-surface tearing, which can introduce structural discontinuities such as defects and cracks in the film. The insulating PMMA also prevents charge carriers from reaching/escaping from the graphene electrode in optoelectronic devices, and the large chunks of PMMA (>100 nm) create a rough surface which could be detrimental to the device, as each layer in the device is only tens of nanometers thick. Lastly, but most importantly, PMMA residues appear to further worsen the wetting of the interlayer, such as PEDOT:PSS, on the graphene surface, causing device failure.
Among the various post-treatments to remove the residual PMMA, cleaning graphene in heated acetone and subsequent thermal annealing at ∼400 °C have been demonstrated to be effective in removing the PMMA residue from graphene. However, the resulting cleaned graphene is incompatible with the inexpensive plastic substrates in flexible device applications, due to their low melting points. In alternative methods, acetone vapor has been used to remove the PMMA residue through a complex and time-consuming process, and gentle oxygen plasma treatment has also been utilized to remove the PMMA residue, at the cost of increasing graphene sheet resistance. Recently, thermal release tape (TRT) has been used instead of PMMA. Although the TRT-assisted method might be easier to scale up to very large areas, it inevitably contaminates the transferred graphene surface with adhesive from the TRT. These residues are difficult to clean and adversely affect the performance of devices fabricated from graphene transferred in this manner. In addition, the graphene transferred using TRT is unlikely to be continuous, providing only ∼70% coverage with low residue. Therefore, it is necessary to develop a new transfer method that provides an ultraclean platform for the graphene electrode with a continuous and uniform surface, allowing charge carriers to be effectively collected by/injected from the graphene electrodes.
Here, we present a very simple and effective graphene transfer method, where the PMMA/graphene bilayer is transferred in a reversed manner onto target substrates, in order to better control both contamination and crack formation relative to conventional approaches. This method does not significantly degrade the electrical quality of the transferred graphene, and improves the adhesion of graphene onto plastic substrates. To prepare graphenes with high conductivity, multilayer graphene was subsequently fabricated via the layer by layer (LBL) assembly method. Sheet resistance was significantly reduced without the PMMA residue between each layer. On the basis of the novel transfer process, the graphene sheet resistance was greatly reduced by about 50% at the same transmittance, regardless of the thickness. To demonstrate the novelty and reliability of our PMMA reverse transfer method, we fabricated flexible organic photovoltaic cells (OPVs) using graphene as a transparent conductive electrode. The OPVs exhibited excellent electrical characteristics with a high fill factor (FF), open-circuit voltage (Voc), and power conversion efficiency (PCE) of up to 3.32%.

Fig. 1 shows the overall scheme for the fabrication of graphene via the new graphene transfer method, without damaging the fragile one atom thick graphene sheet and without leaving undesired PMMA residues on the graphene surface. According to this method, PMMA was spin coated onto highly uniform graphene prepared by CVD (Fig. 1a), and the metal underneath the graphene was completely etched away by using an FeCl3 etchant, resulting in the PMMA/graphene bilayer floating above the solution (Fig. 1b). After cleaning with pure water, the PMMA-coated graphene was transferred in a reversed manner onto the target substrate by placing the target substrate against the side of the PMMA so as to foster a strong interaction between them, and then dipping them vertically, thereby allowing the exposed side of the PMMA to directly attach to the target substrate (Fig. 1c). The resulting layers are stacked in the order graphene–PMMA–target substrate, from top to bottom (Fig. 1d), in contrast to the conventional stacking order of PMMA–graphene–target substrate. As a result, the PMMA reverse transfer method does not require an additional process to remove the PMMA layer, providing an ultraclean surface by hiding the PMMA film behind graphene. In addition, the PMMA inserted between the flexible polyethylene terephthalate (PET) substrate and the graphene film improves the adhesion of graphene onto the substrate, which preserves the high quality of the aforementioned graphene films with a negligible transmittance loss. Here, the LBL assembly method was adapted for fabricating multilayer graphene (Fig. 1e), before transferring the multilayer graphene in a reversed manner onto flexible substrates. The LBL assembly method is an efficient way to prevent PMMA residue accumulation between graphene layers, which reduces carrier mobility and significantly increases sheet resistance. Therefore, the PMMA reverse transfer method not only avoids PMMA residue accumulation between the graphene layers, but also provides an ultra-clean top surface in the final multilayered graphene.
We found that the remaining PMMA thin film under the graphene multilayer did not significantly influence the transmittance and conducting performance of the graphene multilayer on the substrate (PET). To arrive at this conclusion, we compared the transmittance of the graphene prepared by our transfer method with that of multilayer graphene prepared by the conventional wet transfer method, in which the PMMA supporting layer is removed using an acetone solution. Transmittance results show that the graphene prepared by the PMMA reverse transfer method is almost identical to the graphene from the conventional wet transfer method (Fig. 2a). The transmittance of the graphene film decreases with an increasing number of graphene layers, as is expected. The transmittance of 1L (monolayer) graphene made by the reverse transfer method was 84.7% at 500 nm, which is similar to the transmittance (84.9%) of monolayer graphene prepared by the conventional wet transfer method. The reduction in transmittance for both two and three layers was about 0.5%, which is within the error range, but it increased to 3% for the 4 layer graphene, probably due to significant fluctuation in transmittance depending on the wavelength. Changes in the transmittance of graphene as a function of the number of graphene layers (1–4 layers) are also clearly visible in photographs (the inset of Fig. 2a).
Finite difference time domain (FDTD) simulation further supports the finding that an additional PMMA layer leads to a negligible loss in the transmittance of graphene layers. For the FDTD simulation, the cavity effect of the PMMA layer and the absorption/reflection at the interface were considered. The thicknesses of PMMA and graphene were assumed to be 500 nm and 1 nm, respectively. The optical constants were obtained from the literature or provided by Lumerical's Material Database, except for the critical refractive index of PMMA, which was measured using ellipsometry (Fig. S1). The optical properties were tracked using one monitor located within the PET substrates for detecting the transmittance, and another placed above graphene for monitoring the reflected light. The FDTD simulation result shows that the transmittance of the graphene/PMMA bilayer transferred by the PMMA reverse transfer method is almost identical to that of the graphene prepared by the conventional wet transfer method (Fig. 2b). This might be a consequence of the fact that the additional PMMA film alleviates the reflectance at the PMMA/PET interface with an appropriate reflective index, as well as the negligible absorption of PMMA over a wide spectral region.
With a negligible loss in the transmittance of graphene, it is of great interest that the electrical conducting performance was significantly improved in the reversely transferred graphene films. For the purpose of statistical analysis, 40 graphene samples having four different numbers of layers were fabricated by preparing graphene according to two different transfer methods. Thus, the electrical responses from each graphene layer number are the averages of 5 different circuits. As shown in Fig. 3a, the sheet resistances of the graphene films prepared by the conventional wet transfer method and the PMMA reverse transfer method decreased with an increasing number of layers. However, the sheet resistance of graphene made by the PMMA reverse transfer method was significantly lower than that of graphene made by the conventional wet transfer method. In the case of monolayer graphene, the sheet resistance (476.60 Ω □−1) of the reversely transferred graphene was half that (921 Ω □−1) of the graphene transferred using the conventional approach. The multilayer graphenes also displayed dramatically lower sheet resistance in the graphenes transferred using the PMMA reverse transfer method. Since our transfer method can be applied to flexible substrates such as PET, we further tested changes in the sheet resistance as a function of the bending cycle. While the electrical resistance of conventional ITO increased from 60 Ω □−1 to 8750 Ω □−1 after 30 cycles, that of the reversely transferred monolayer graphene did not significantly change for up to 30 cycles at a curvature radius of 6 mm (the inset of Fig. 3a), possibly due to the relatively high adhesion between PMMA and PET.
The better electrical performance in reversely transferred graphene films might be due to the clean graphene films resulting from this nondestructive transfer technique, which are without the PMMA residue and tears. Fig. 3b shows typical Raman spectra of a pure PMMA film as a reference (black), and monolayer graphenes prepared by the conventional wet transfer (red) and our transfer (blue) methods. The spectrum of graphene reveals two scattering peaks in the 2D-band and G-band located at ∼2685 and ∼1590 cm−1, respectively. In our transfer approach, although the G-band feature appears as a small perturbation in the substrate spectrum, the 2D-band peak appears quite prominently, which satisfactorily guarantees the presence of the graphene sheet on the PMMA film. Moreover, disorder in a graphene monolayer can be quantified by analyzing the intensity ratio between the disorder-induced D band and the Raman allowed G band (ID/IG). The D band at ∼1340 cm−1 is very weak, confirming the high quality of the graphene, since a larger ID/IG value indicates more graphene defects. Thus, compared to the graphene obtained with the widely used wet transfer process, our PMMA reverse transfer method does not introduce any internal structural defects, such as breaking of sp2 bonding or substitution of carbon atoms with impurities.
Highly clean and uniform graphene in the reversely transferred graphene was further confirmed by optical microscopy (OM) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). OM was conducted in the transparent mode, due to the transparent PET substrates. Samples prepared by the conventional transfer method show graphene tears and folds, as indicated by yellow circles, where residual PMMA drags on the surrounding graphene film at the end of the cleaning step (Fig. 4a). This is in contrast to the sample fabricated by the PMMA reverse transfer method (Fig. 4b). The SEM images were taken on the relatively clear surface without tears. Although the graphene film made by the conventional wet transfer method appeared to be superficially clean under moderate magnification, many large glue- and particle-like residues were observed in higher magnification SEM images (the inset of Fig. 4a). These PMMA residues were barely removed by any additional treatments, including high temperature annealing. The PMMA residue would give rise to extremely detrimental effects in high performance optoelectronic devices. However, tears and voids were barely found in the graphene film prepared by the newly developed transfer method (the inset of Fig. 4b), providing higher level pathways for carriers without any obstacles.
To demonstrate the novelty of our transfer method, graphene based OPVs were fabricated to investigate the photovoltaic properties of the graphene electrode prepared by the PMMA reverse transfer method, according to the device configuration in Fig. 5a, where double interfacial layers of MoO3 + PEDOT:PSS, PCDTBT:PC70BM, and Ca + Al were used as the hole transporting layer, photoactive layer, and cathode, respectively. As mentioned previously, while the sheet resistance of the multilayer graphene electrode decreases with an increase in the number of layers, more graphene layers imply a lower transmittance of electrodes and smaller short circuit currents (Jsc) in OPVs. Therefore, the optimum number of layers should be determined, while considering the trade-off between the conductance and the transmittance of the graphene film. Consequently, the optimal conductance and transparency of graphene were obtained for flexible OPVs with the tri-layer graphene electrode. The best performing device had a PCE of 3.32%, as shown in Fig. 5b and Table 1. As far as we are aware, the 3.32% efficiency of the OPVs with the graphene electrode is one of the best cell performances among graphene based OPVs reported in the literature thus far. To investigate the adverse effect of residual PMMA on the performance of OPVs, the device performance of tri-layer graphene made by the conventional wet transfer method was compared with that of reversely transferred tri-layer graphene, with the former exhibiting a significantly poorer performance of 1.07% (Fig. 5c). The lower Jsc and FF originate from the relatively high serial resistance (Rs) of 137.05 Ω cm2 and the lower parallel resistance (Rp) of 173.78 Ω cm2, probably due to PMMA residues at the interfaces. In particular, the lower Rp values arise from the loss of charge carriers through leakage paths and the recombination and trapping of the carriers during their transit through the cell, leading to a decrease in the device performance.
Anode

V
oc [V]

J
sc [mA cm−2]
FF
PCE [%]

R
p [Ω cm2]

R
s [Ω cm2]
1 layer (reverse transfer)
0.83
8.49
0.38
2.68
—
—
2 layer (reverse transfer)
0.84
8.67
0.40
2.91
—
—
3 layer (reverse transfer)
0.83
8.88
0.45
3.32
258.5
20.75
4 layer (reverse transfer)
0.84
8.74
0.45
3.30
—
—
3 layer (wet transfer)
0.65
6.6
0.27
1.07
173.78
137.05
Flexible ITO
0.8
9.49
0.54
4.1
819.96
9.9
The PCE of OPVs with the reversely transferred tri-layer graphene was also compared with that of a typical device constructed with commercial ITO (100 nm) coated PET substrates. The PCE of the OPV utilizing the graphene electrodes is about 81% of the ITO reference device. The relatively low PCE of the graphene electrode compared to the conventional ITO electrode might be attributed to a lower Jsc, due to lower sheet resistance as compared to 60 Ω □−1 for ITO. Notably, this device performance was achieved with an ‘undoped’ graphene electrode consisting of only three stacked layers, suggesting the potential for further improvements. To confirm the extraction barrier in the graphene based OPVs, the diode properties were measured from the dark J–V characteristics of devices with different transparent electrodes (Fig. 5d). Samples based on tri-layer graphene prepared by the PMMA reverse transfer method exhibited a low current in the negative quadrant and a high current in the positive quadrant with a high rectification ratio, which is a similar response to that of the flexible ITO substrates. However, for the sample of graphene prepared by the conventional wet transfer method, the OPV device showed a higher reverse bias current and a lower forward bias current with a much reduced rectification ratio. This low rectification ratio was induced by the gentle slope in the region between 0.8 and 1.2 V. The linearity of this region, indicating an exponential correlation between the current density and the voltage, is primarily determined by the diode ideality factor and reverse saturation current. The ideality factor gives information about the recombination and diode behavior with the applied voltage; i.e. whether recombination occurs at an internal interface or at the interface between the electrode and the active layer. Therefore, the poor diode behavior of graphene prepared by the conventional method may be attributed to increased recombination at the anode, which arises from the PMMA residues located at the graphene surface. In conclusion, we developed a very simple method of graphene transfer from growth substrates to target substrates without any PMMA residues on the top surface of graphene. The ultraclean graphene not only possessed double the electrical conductivity with a negligible transmittance loss, but also exhibited excellent bending stability as compared to the commercial flexible ITO electrode. By taking advantage of the clean graphene films, flexible OPV devices were successfully constructed on a PET substrate. Notably, the devices exhibited a much higher Jsc, FF, and Voc compared to counterparts fabricated from conventional wet transferred graphene. Therefore, the new PMMA reverse transfer process is a step forward in the realization of graphene as a viable replacement or an alternative to ITO for various flexible optoelectronic device applications.

Monolayer graphene was synthesized on copper foils by CVD. A thin layer (500 nm) of poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) was spin coated onto graphene and then annealed at 180 °C for about 3 min. It was then immersed in an aqueous solution of iron chloride for several hours to etch the Cu foil. The PMMA/graphene film was then washed with distilled water and reversely transferred onto a target substrate. In order to produce multilayer graphene films, the PMMA/graphene film was stacked onto another graphene film on a Cu foil, followed by etching the Cu in the iron chloride solution. The process was repeated several times to obtain the required number of graphene layers. In the end, one or several layers of graphene on the surface of the PMMA film were obtained for subsequent experiments.


Lumerical's FDTD simulation was used to calculate the interference of reflected and transmitted light waves at each interface in the stack. The complex refractive index (n = η + iκ) of PMMA was measured by variable angle spectroscopic ellipsometry (VASE). These values for the PET substrate and graphene were obtained from the literature and the material database included in the FDTD simulation tool, respectively.


2 nm thick MoO3 was deposited on graphene electrodes made by the PMMA reverse transfer method and conventional wet transfer method, as well as the ITO electrode. The poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) film was first spin coated on top of the anode (∼60 Ω sq−1 ITO or MoO3-coated graphene) and dried at 100 °C for 15 min. An active layer consisting of a 60 nm-thick PCDTBT:PC70BM blend layer (1:4 w/w, 35 mg mL−1) was then spin-coated from dichlorobenzene onto the PEDOT:PSS layer. Finally, calcium (20 nm) and Al metal (100 nm) were thermally evaporated through a shadow mask to give an active device area of 0.1 cm2.


The J–V characteristics of the solar cells were tested in air using a Keithley 2400 source measurement unit, and a 150 W solar simulator with an AM 1.5G filter from Newport Corporation at an intensity of 100 mW cm−2. The series and parallel resistances were calculated from the inverse of the slope in the J–V curve at 0.8 V and 0 V, respectively.


This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology, Korea (MEST) (no. 2012R1A2A1A01003537). This research was also supported by the Global Frontier Research Center for Advanced Soft Electronics (no. 2011-0032062, MEST).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c4ta03432e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014