 DOI: 10.1039/C8EE03672A
(Communication)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 958-964


Seong Sik
Shin
,

Jae Ho
Suk
,

Bong Joo
Kang
,

Wenping
Yin
,

Seon Joo
Lee
,

Jun Hong
Noh
,

Tae Kyu
Ahn
,

Fabian
Rotermund
,

In Sun
Cho
* and 

Sang Il
Seok
*

Division of Advanced Materials, Korea Research Institute of Chemical Technology, 141 Gajeong-Ro, Yuseong-Gu, Daejeon 34114, Republic of Korea

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul, 151-744, Republic of Korea

Department of Physics, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), 291, Daehak-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, 34141, South Korea

Materials Science and Engineering, Monash University & ARC Centre of Excellence in Exciton Science (ACEx), Clayton VIC 3800, Australia

School of Civil, Environmental and Architectural Engineering, Korea University, 145 Anam-ro, Seongbuk-gu, Seoul 02841, Republic of Korea

Department of Energy Science, Sungkyunkwan University, 2066 Seobu-ro, Jangan-gu, Suwon 16419, Korea

Department of Materials Science & Engineering and Energy Systems Research, Ajou University, 206 Worldcup-ro, Yeongtong-gu, Suwon, Gyeonggi-do 16499, South Korea. E-mail: insuncho@ajou.ac.kr

School of Energy and Chemical Engineering, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology, 50 UNIST-gil, Eonyang-eup, Ulju-gun, Ulsan 44919, Republic of Korea. E-mail: seoksi@unist.ac.kr

Received
18th December 2018
, Accepted 15th February 2019
First published on 16th February 2019
Next-generation solar cells, such as dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) and perovskite solar cells (PSCs), are fabricated in a configuration where light absorbers are located between the electron transporting layer (ETL) and the hole transporting layer (HTM). Although the most efficient DSSCs and PSCs have been fabricated using TiO2 as the ETL, TiO2 exhibits inherently low electron mobility with difficulty controlling the energy levels (i.e., conduction and valence bands) as it possesses a single phase of two components. Here, we report the synthesis of Sr-substituted BaSnO3 (BSSO) by a low-temperature solution process as a new alternative to TiO2 for both PSCs and DSSCs. The energy-level tailoring by Sr incorporation into BaSnO3 minimizes the open-circuit voltage (VOC) loss at the interfaces of ETL/perovskite and ETL/electrolyte in the PSCs and DSSCs, thereby leading to an improved VOC from 0.65 to 0.72 V in DSSC and 1.07 to 1.13 V in PSCs. Additionally, the BSSO ETL-based PSC shows improved photostability compared to the TiO2 analog. Our results show that energy-level tuned BSSO can be applied as a universal ETL for improving efficiency in both PSCs and DSSCs.

Perovskite solar cells (PSCs), including dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), have been actively studied to produce solution-processed, low-cost, lightweight and high-efficiency solar cells with properties that are difficult to achieve with conventional solar cell technology. In particular, the PSC has already reached a level where it can compete with conventional silicon solar cells in terms of efficiency, with the latest cells exceeding 23%. PSC and DSSCs have a configuration in which light absorbers are located between the electron transporting layer (ETL) and the hole transporting layer (HTL) (or a liquid electrolyte for DSSCs). Under light illumination, the photo-generated charge carriers in the perovskite absorbers or organic dyes are transferred into the ETL and HTL (or a liquid electrolyte for DSSCs), and are subsequently collected as photocurrent through the upper and lower electrodes. In both DSSCs and PSCs, TiO2 is typically utilized as an ETL, which has a direct impact on photovoltaic performance because it plays a crucial role in transporting/collecting photogenerated electrons.

In general, it is necessary to increase the open-circuit voltage (VOC), short-circuit current (JSC) and fill factor (FF) to fabricate high-efficiency solar cells. The VOC, JSC, and FF, are usually largely dependent on the electronic and electrical properties of the materials used to fabricate the ETL. In particular, VOC in the DSSCs and PSCs is predominantly determined by energy level differences in the junction between the Ef in ETL/redox potential (I−/I3−) in the electrolyte and the Ef in the ETL/perovskite absorber, respectively. Furthermore, interfacial recombination and band offset (i.e., band gap differences in the perovskite/HTL) also affects the output photovoltage. Therefore, controlling the energy level of the ETL and the interface will enable improvement of VOC and eventually lead to an enhanced photovoltaic performance. However, TiO2 used in DSSCs and PSCs exhibits inherently low electron mobility (<1 cm2 V−1 s−1) and difficultly in the control of the energy levels by doping/alloying because of its two-component nature (consisting of only Ti and O). Besides TiO2, several metal oxides including ZnO, SnO2, ZrO2, Al2O3, SrTiO3, Zn2SnO4, BaTiO3, and BaSnO3 have been studied for use as an ETL for PSCs and DSSCs. Among them, BaSnO3 (BSO) is the most attractive candidate because of its low photocatalytic activity, high electron mobility (∼320 cm2 V−1 s−1), similar band gap and positions as TiO2, and because even its optical and electronic properties can be easily tailored by doping/alloying. Recently, we reported a La-doped BSO synthesized by a low-temperature solution process and applied it to a ETL for a PSC, resulting in a high efficiency over 20%. The La-doped BSO, however, has little change in energy levels even if the amount of doping is adjusted, which makes it difficult to increase VOC by controlling the energy level of the ETL. Theoretical and experimental studies on Sr incorporation into the BSO have shown that the band gap and energy level of the BSO can be tailored by the Sr substitution into the BSO, i.e., by forming (Ba,Sr)SnO3 solid-solution compounds (BSSO). The Sr substitution raises the conduction band edge due to the change in crystal and electronic band structures.
In this study, we report a versatile and solution-processable BSSO-based ETL for DSSCs and PSCs. The BSSO nanoparticles are prepared by a facile superoxide-molecular cluster route. Importantly, energy band structure of BSSO is manipulated by controlling the amount of the Sr substitution into the Ba sites to tune the band offset at the interface of ETL/electrolyte or ETL/perovskite absorber, leading to an improved VOC from 0.65 to 0.72 V in DSSC and 1.07 to 1.13 V in PSCs. Moreover, the BSSO ETL-based PSC exhibits better photostability than the TiO2 analog under full-Sun illumination including UV radiation.


Fig. 1a–c schematically shows crystal and energy band structures of BaxSr1−xSnO3 perovskites (x = 0, 0.2, and 1). The BaSnO3 has an ideal cubic perovskite structure (space group Pm3m), in which Ba2+ ions occupy the body-center and are surrounded by eight of SnO6 octahedra (Fig. 1a). When substituting the Ba2+ ions (ionic radius = 1.61 Å) with Sr2+ ions (ionic radius = 1.44 Å) (x < ∼0.3), the cubic perovskite structure is retained but the unit cell volume decreases due to the smaller ionic radius of the Sr2+ ions. With larger contents of Sr (x > 0.5, e.g., SrSnO3), the cubic structure is changed into an orthorhombic structure (space group Pbnm) due to a large octahedral tilting distortion (Fig. 1c).23 According to previous reports, the electronic band structure of ASnO3 (A = Ca, Sr, and Ba) is affected by Sn–O bond hybridization. The conduction band minimum (CBM) is dominated by Sn 5s/5p orbitals, while the valence band maximum (VBM) is dominated by the O 2p orbital. As schematically shown in Fig. 1d, the CBM and VBM of TiO2 is dominated by Ti 3d and O 2p orbitals, respectively. For BaSnO3, the CBM and VBM are mainly composed of Sn 5s/5p and O 2p orbitals, respectively and the CBM is located at similar energy level to that of TiO2. When Sr2+ ions are incorporated into the Ba2+ sites, i.e., forming (Ba,Sr)SnO3, it reduces the unit cell volume and the average bond length of Sn–O bonds, thereby increasing the strength of the Sn–O bond hybridization. The larger strength of Sn–O bond hybridization induces larger crystal field splitting, which in turn results in upward shift of the CBM and an increase of band gap in (Ba,Sr)SnO3. As a result, the energy band positions and band gap can be tailored effectively by incorporating the Sr into BaSnO3, thereby enabling optimization of the band offset between the organic dye/ETL and the perovskite absorber/ETL for DSSCs and PSCs.

The Ba1−xSrxSnO3 (x = 0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, and 0.5) solid-solutions were obtained via a simple wet chemical approach with a post heat treatment (See the Methods section). The Sr content in the products was measured by an inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry (ICP-MS), which shows that our wet chemical route successively incorporates the Sr into the compounds to form a (Ba,Sr)SnO3 perovskite solid-solution (Fig. S1, ESI). Additionally, as shown in the X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) spectra of Sn 3d and Sr 3d (Fig. S2, ESI), the Sn 3d peak is shifted toward higher binding energy with the substitution of the Sr. Moreover, the intensity of the Sr 3d peaks increases with the Sr substitution. Considering the shift of the Sn 3d peaks with increased Sr content, it is clear that the Sr was successfully incorporated in the Ba-site of BaSnO3, which leads to a change in the Sn–O bond environment in the Ba1−xSrxSnO3.Fig. 2a shows X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the synthesized Ba1−xSrxSnO3 compounds. The results show that phase-pure Ba1−xSrxSnO3 solid solution compounds were synthesized without any impurities. Crystallinity remains almost unchanged until x = 0.2, but decreases at x = 0.3 and increases again at 0.5. This, as will be explained later, seems to be related to the structural change due to an increase in the amount of Sr ions. Obviously, the (110) diffraction peaks of the BaSnO3 gradually shifted toward a higher angle by increasing x in Ba1−xSrxSnO3 from 0 to 0.5. The shift in the XRD patterns indicate that the products are a group of continuous solid-solutions. The structural changes of Ba1-xSrxSnO3 solid-solution were quantified by calculating a tolerance factor (t) that provides information on structural stability and modification such as distortion, rotation, and tilt of the octahedral (Fig. 2b). Generally, the perovskite structure is stable in the region 0.88 < t < 1.090, and the structural symmetry is higher when the t is close to 1, i.e., cubic. As shown in Fig. 2b, all t values are in the region 0.85 < t <0.95, which indicates that Ba1−xSrxSnO3 (0 ≤ x ≤ 1) maintains perovskite structure regardless of Sr content. With increasing Sr content in Ba1−xSrxSnO3 (i.e. decreasing the size of the A-site ion in the ABO3 perovskite structure), the t values are monotonically decreased, suggesting that structural symmetry also is decreased, which can lead to a series of structural transitions with octahedral tilting from cubic to tetragonal to orthorhombic. These structure transitions would affect the electrical, electronic and optical properties of Ba1−xSrxSnO3. Therefore, we expect that an optimized ETL can be obtained by controlling the Sr content in Ba1−xSrxSnO3 solid-solutions compounds. Next, the crystal structure analysis of the products was performed using a Rietveld refinement based on the XRD data (Fig. 2c and Table S1, ESI). As shown in Fig. 2c, upon substituting Sr into Ba sites from x = 0 to 0.3, all products have a homogeneous cubic perovskite structure with space group Pm3m, monotonically decreasing lattice parameter and unit cell volume. In contrast, the sample at x = 0.5 abruptly increases the lattice parameter and unit cell volume, i.e. forming tetragonal perovskite structure due to a large octahedral tilting distorsion.
Next, the shape and size of the synthesized Ba1−xSrxSnO3 (x = 0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, and 0.5) particles were observed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). As revealed by the SEM images (Fig. S3, ESI), the products from x = 0 to 0.2 exhibit similar particle shapes and sizes, but the particles at x = 0.3, and 0.5 have smaller or larger than particles at x = 0–0.2, and is in good agreement with XRD results. Fig. 2d shows a representative transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image of the Ba0.8Sr0.2SnO3. The obtained nanoparticles (NPs) appear to be a cubic morphology and have an average particle size of ∼25 nm. Additionally, the selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern of the Ba0.8Sr0.2SnO3 are matched to a single phase of BaSnO3 (Fig. S4, ESI). More importantly, the high-resolution TEM image (inset in Fig. 2d) reveals that the Ba0.8Sr0.2SnO3 NPs have a single-crystalline structure with no apparent defects or dislocations and have lattice fringe spacing of 0.291 and 0.491 nm corresponding to the interlayer spacing of the (110) and (100) planes of BaSnO3, respectively. Moreover, the energy-dispersive X-ray spectrometer mapping (EDS) analysis results show a homogeneous distribution of Sr elements over the entire cubic Ba0.8Sr0.2SnO3 NPs (Fig. 2e). As a result, phase-pure Ba0.8Sr0.2SnO3 NPs are successfully synthesized by the wet-chemical method.
Next, the impacts of the Sr substitution in the BaSnO3 compounds on the band gap and energy band positions were investigated by a UV-Vis spectroscopy and Mott–Schottky measurements, respectively. Fig. 3a shows the UV-Vis spectroscopy analysis of the Ba1−xSrxSnO3 products. A gradual blue shift of the absorption edge is observed with increasing Sr content, indicating the change of optical band gap and band structure caused by the Sr substitution, which is attributed to the increase in the Sn–O bond hybridization as discussed above. Moreover, the band gap of each product was calculated based on the UV-Vis absorption spectra and the equation (αhν)2 = A(hν − E) (inset in Fig. 3a). As the Sr content increases from 0 to 0.3, the band gap widened from 2.9 to 3.1 eV. At x = 0.5, the band gap increase is especially large. This increase is related to the abrupt structural change from a cubic to tetragonal perovskite structure triggered by the large amount of the Sr substitution. As shown in Fig. 1d, the VBM for BaSnO3, and (Ba,Sr)SnO3 solid solution is dominated by the contribution of the O 2p orbital, while the CBM is dominated by the Sn 5s/5p orbitals, indicating that the energy band structure and band gaps are significantly affected by the hybridization of the Sn–O bonds in the structure. As the Sr content increases, the Sn–O bond lengths are reduced (see Fig. 2c) and the hybridization of Sn–O bonds increases, resulting in a change in the energy band structure. Therefore, the band gap widening with the Sr substitution can be attributed to a movement of CBM toward higher energy levels.
The CBM positions of Ba1−xSrxSnO3 products were estimated from the Mott–Schottky measurements based on eqn (1):
1/C2 = (2/ε0εsND)[V − Vfb − (kBT/q)]
(1)
where
C is the space charge capacitance, ε0 andεs are the dielectric constants of free space and the film electrode, respectively, q is the electronic charge, Vfb is the flat band potential, T is the temperature in Kelvin, ND is the donor density, V is the applied potential, and kB is Boltzmann's constant. The Vfb value can be determined by extrapolation to the x-intercept. As shown in Fig. 3b, an increase in the Sr content leads to a gradual upward shift in the flat-band potential (Vfb) from 0.55 to 1.09 eV where the Vfb can be regarded as an approximation of the CBM. Generally, a negative shift in the CBM accompanies an Fermi-level (Ef) shift to a more negative potential. These results indicate that energy levels can be tailored by forming Ba1−xSrxSnO3 solid-solution, causing a shift in Ef towards a more negative potential, which is beneficial to the output voltage in photovoltaic devices because it can reduce the band offset between the ETL and light absorber. Assuming that the CBM is close to the Vfb for n-type semiconductors, the relative energy band diagram of Ba1−xSrxSnO3 (x = 0–0.5) was constructed from the calculated band gap and Vfb, and schematically depicted in Fig. 3c.

To demonstrate the potential of the Ba1−xSrxSnO3 perovskite solid-solution as an ETL for photovoltaics, DSSCs were first tested as a model device (Fig. S5, ESI). The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the DSSC was improved with Sr substitution (Ba1−xSrxSnO3, x = 0.1 and 0.2), while further increase in Sr substitution (x = 0.5) resulted in decreased performances (Fig. S6, ESI). This decrease may be ascribed to (1) a reduction in injection efficiency from the dye to ETL due to the higher CBMs of the ETLs at x = 0.5, and (2) reduction of an amount of adsorbed dye by reduced surface area at x = 0.5, although further works are needed. Therefore, we compared the characteristics of DSSCs fabricated using ETLs of two typical compositions (BaSnO3 and Ba0.8Sr0.2SnO3) that can only take energy level differences into consideration. Fig. 4a shows the photocurrent–voltage (J–V) curves of the optimized devices with BaSnO3 and Ba0.8Sr0.2SnO3 measured under simulated solar illumination (100 mW cm−2, AM 1.5 G). The PCE of the Ba0.8Sr0.2SnO3-based DSSC increased from 6.58% to 7.74%. Obviously, the enhancement in PCE comes mainly from the increase in VOC from average 0.65 to 0.72 V (Fig. S7, ESI), (slightly increase of FF: 67.0% to 70.7%), while the JSC remained constant at ∼15 mA cm−2. Generally, in DSSCs, the VOC is determined by the difference between Ef in the ETL and the redox potentials of I−/I3−. Thus, the upward shift of the Ef in Ba0.8Sr0.2SnO3 (Fig. 3b) can lead to the increase in VOC, which is nearly in agreement with the difference in the Ef (i.e., CBM) between BaSnO3 and Ba0.8Sr0.2SnO3. Additionally, the dark J–V curves (Fig. S8, ESI) reveal that the Sr substitution suppress the dark current, shifting its onset toward a higher forward bias, which is expected to contribute the increase in FF. For the DSSCs, we extracted the charge transport time constant (τt) using intensity-modulated photocurrent spectroscopy (IMPS) to examine the effect of the Sr substitution on the electron dynamics in the devices. As shown in Fig. 4b, Sr substitution yields nearly identical electron transport time constants. In general, charge transport in DSSCs is limited by total density of the transport-limiting traps in oxide electrodes (e.g., TiO2 and BaSnO3). Given that the transport-limiting traps depends on the extent of crystallinity, crystal phase, and the morphology of the oxides, the Sr substitution has little impact on the trap density because the crystallinity, phase and particle size is nearly identical in both BaSnO3 and Ba0.8Sr0.2SnO3. To directly compare electron conduction in the isolated materials, we performed the time-resolved terahertz-pump optical-probe photoconductivity spectroscopic (OPTP) analysis (Fig. 4c) using dye-absorbed Ba1−xSrxSnO3 (x = 0 and 0.2) films. In the photoexcitation system, the magnitude of the change in transmission of the terahertz pulse is proportional to the photoinduced change in conductivity (Δδ). The representative of the number of free carriers injected into the conduction band (CB) of the Ba1−xSrxSnO3 was determined by Δδ = eΔnμ, where e is the charge of an electron, Δn is free carrier density in CB, and μ is its mobility. The normalized Δδ in Fig. 4c demonstrates that the Sr substitution does not have a significant effect on the conductivity because the substitution of identical oxidation states, from Ba2+ to Sr2+, cannot generate excess free carriers. Based on these results, we can conclude that the enhancement of the PCE for the Ba0.8Sr0.2SnO3 based DSSCs is mainly originates from the shift of the CBM by the Sr substitution. As can be seen in Fig. S9 (ESI), the VOC of the ss-DSSC (dye-sensitized solar cell using solid-state hole conductor) also depends on the energy level of the ETL, and the improvement in efficiency is similar to that of the DSSC.
In the DSSC, the excitons generated by light absorption of dyes are separated by the injection of electrons into the conduction band of the ETL, thereby operating as solar cells. On the other hand, charge separation in PSCs occurs by Vbi formed by the junction of ETL and perovskite. Thus, the VOC of the PSCs depend on the carrier concentration of the ETL, but if the carrier concentration is similar, the energy level of the conduction band will affect the VOC like DSSC. Fig. 4d and Fig. S10 (ESI) compares J–V curves and stabilized PCEs for BaSnO3 and Ba0.8Sr0.2SnO3-based PSCs, and statistics for the PCEs of PSCs fabricated as a function of x in Ba1−xSrxSnO3 are shown in Fig. S11 (ESI). As can be seen in the J–V curves, the VOC of the Ba0.8Sr0.2SnO3 was noticeably improved from 1.07 V in BaSnO3 to 1.13 V with increase of FF from 77.9% to 81% (reproducibility for VOC rise is given in Fig. S12, ESI) by the Sr substitution, while the JSC remained constant at ∼23 mA cm−2. The enhancement of VOC and FF by Sr substitution increases PCE from 19.4 to 21.0% with increase of stabilized PCE from 18.9% to 20.7%. Generally, the VOC in PSCs is affected by the built-in potential (Vbi) between the ETL and perovskite. In fact, the increase of Vbi in Sr-substituted ETL was confirmed by the measurement of Mott–Schtttky (Fig. S13, ESI). Therefore, the increase in the Vbi with the Sr substitution is likely to be the cause of improved output voltage in PSCs. Additionally, we measured transient photovoltage decay to compare recombination lifetimes in both PSCs (Fig. 4e). The PSC based on the Ba0.8Sr0.2SnO3 exhibits a longer recombination lifetime than the BaSnO3-based PSC, which indicates that the PSC based on Ba0.8Sr0.2SnO3 has a slower recombination rate. Since identical hole transporting material and perovskite were employed for both PSCs, and the conductivities of both BaSnO3 and Ba0.8Sr0.2SnO3 are almost same, we can conclude that main reason for the longer lifetime of the Ba0.8Sr0.2SnO3-based PSC is due to the reduction of interfacial recombination at the ETL/perovskite interface. The enhanced Vbi can suppress recombination at the ETL/perovskite interface, which can result in improvement of output voltages in PSCs. Furthermore, the dark J–V curves reveal that the Ba0.8Sr0.2SnO3-based PSC suppresses dark current, shifting its onset toward a higher forward bias, which can contribute to the improved FF (Fig. S14, ESI). By employing Ba1−xSrxSnO3 solid solutions as ETLs in DSSCs and PSCs, we confirmed that trend in PSC performance is similar to that of DSSCs. Although the working mechanism and junctions (ETL//perovskite and ETL//electrolyte) generated in PSCs and DSSCs are different, it is clear that the shift of the CBM level in the BSSO ETL creates VOC gain in both DSSCs and PSCs, and thereby an increase in PCE. The hysteresis of the PSC improved in VOC was investigated. As shown in Fig. S15 (ESI), the efficiency of reverse scan and forward scan is different, which means some hysteresis. However, there is little change in efficiency due to the difference in delay time during measurement, and the efficiency measured by steady-state mode converges to the value measured in reverse scan. Additionally, the JSC estimated from J–V curve accords with the JSC calculated from EQE, which further supports reliable performance estimation for our devices (Fig. S16, ESI).
Since stability is the main issue with PSCs, we further examined the photostability of the Ba0.8Sr0.2SnO3-based PSC and compared it to a conventional TiO2-based PSCs. Fig. 4f shows the PCEs of the unencapsulated FTO/Ba0.8Sr0.2SnO3/MAPbI3/PTAA/Au and FTO/TiO2/MAPbI3/PTAA/Au devices in a nitrogen-filled chamber with a constant device temperature of 25 °C and constant AM 1.5G illumination using a xenon lamp (including UV) for 100 h. The Ba0.8Sr0.2SnO3 cell shows much better photostability than the TiO2 cell, which is comparable with the La-doped BaSnO3 (Fig. S17, ESI). Although the exact mechanism of the photo-degradation of PSCs remains controversial, the inferior photocatalytic activity of BaSnO3 under UV illumination may be one of the reasons for the improved photostability. Considering the improved VOC and PCE of the Ba0.8Sr0.2SnO3 ETL based DSSCs and PSCs, we believe that our (Ba,Sr)SnO3 solid-solution compounds synthesized by a wet-chemical method can provide a great alternative to TiO2 ETLs in photovoltaics such as DSSCs and PSCs.

In summary, we demonstrated the use of novel (Ba,Sr)SnO3 perovskite solid-solution ETL for both PSCs and DSSCs including ss-DSSCs. The Sr substitution enables to control the energy level of the (Ba,Sr)SnO3 electron transporting layer, which increases VOC and PCE for both DSSCs and PSCs. Our study proposes that the (Ba,Sr)SnO3 perovskite solid-solution can be used as ETL for fabrication of efficient PSCs and DSSCs and offers a versatile approach to develop high performance photovoltaics for their practical applications.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIT) (2011-0031565, 2015M1A2A2056542, 2015R1C1A1A01053785, and 2018R1A3B1052820). SSS acknowledges the support from the Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning (KETEP) and the Ministry of Trade Industry & Energy (MOTIE) of the Republic of Korea (No. 20183010014470).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ee03672a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019