 DOI: 10.1039/C2JM35348B
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 22155-22159

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Yudi
Wang
,

Chunyu
Zhao
,

Da
Qin
,

Mingxing
Wu
,

Wei
Liu
 and 

Tingli
Ma
*

School of Chemical Engineering, State Key Laboratory of Fine Chemicals, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, China. E-mail: tinglima@dlut.edu.cn; Fax: +86-411-84986230; Tel: +86-411-84986237

College of Chemistry & Materials Science, Hebei Normal University, Shijiazhuang City, Hebei Province, China

School of Chemical Engineering, Department of Chemical Engineering, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, China

Received
27th June 2012
, Accepted 20th August 2012
First published on 20th August 2012
A transparent flexible Pt counter electrode (CE) was prepared on indium tin oxide–polyethylene naphthalate film using a simple dip coating method for dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs), and a high catalytic activity was achieved. The DSC using this transparent flexible CE gave a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 6.95% with front illumination, and a PCE of 5.18% with rear illumination.

Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) have attracted much attention since reported by Grätzel et al. It is widely considered as a potential photovoltaic device due to its good plasticity, low cost of production, environmental friendliness and simple fabrication procedure. Typically, a DSC consists of a dye-sensitized porous thin film of TiO2 as the photoanode, a counter electrode (CE), and an electrolyte containing the iodide–triiodide redox couple. Acting as a catalyst, Pt was always used in CEs to catalyze the reduction of triiodide to iodide in the electrolyte. Besides Pt, several kinds of catalytic materials have been exploited to fabricate CEs, such as carbon materials, conductive organic polymers, and inorganic materials. However, the best candidate for CE catalyst is Pt due to its superior catalytic activity toward triiodide reduction and high stability.

In order to apply DSCs to portable devices, lightweight and bendable DSCs require flexible and high performance CEs. Chemical reduction (CR) of H2PtCl6 is the method commonly used to prepare flexible Pt CEs on conductive plastic Indium Tin Oxide–Polyethylene Naphthalate (ITO–PEN) film. Compared with the one prepared by sputtering method, the flexible Pt CE obtained with CR method demonstrates a higher stability, higher catalytic activity, and lower Pt quantity. However, this CR method has the weaknesses of a complex procedure and uneven distribution of Pt nanoclusters, on the account of the bubbles generated from the reduction of Pt4+ on ITO–PEN film in NaBH4 solution. Wei et al. introduced a simple two-step wet process to manufacture a rigid Pt CE. PVP-capped Pt nanoclusters were used and a uniform Pt CE was obtained, achieving high performance. However, this method requires a high temperature up to 300 °C, which is intolerable for the ITO–PEN film. Unfortunately, to date, there is no simple method to produce Pt CEs on flexible conductive plastic substrate with good homogeneity, transparency, and that is suitable for mass production.
In this paper, we developed a dip coating method to prepare transparent flexible Pt CE named dipping-Pt. p-Octyl polyethylene glycol phenyl ether (Triton X-100) was used to form Triton-capped Pt nanoclusters. CR-Pt CE was also prepared to make a comparative study. Cyclic voltammetry (CV), electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and Tafel-polarization curves were carried out to compare the catalytic activity of the Pt CEs for the reduction of triiodide to iodide. Considering the photoanode using lightproof substrates such as Ti foil, the performance of the Pt CEs with rear illumination was also investigated.

Triton was dissolved in 36 ml deionized water, followed by adding 4 ml H2PtCl6 solution (19 mM). Then 23 mg NaBH4 was added slowly to the solution above, whose colour changed from yellowish to black with stirring, indicating the formation of Pt nanoparticles. After 30 min reaction at room temperature, the Triton-capped Pt ink was obtained.


The cleaned ITO–PEN film was first dipped in an aqueous solution containing 4% conditioner (ML-371, Rockwood Electrochemicals Asia Ltd.) at 60 °C for 5 min, followed by immersion into the Triton-capped Pt ink for 5 min at room temperature after rinsing with deionized water. Finally, it was dried at 130 °C for 30 min and the dipping-Pt CE was prepared. The whole procedure is schematized in Fig. 1. The CR-Pt CE was prepared as follows: 1 g H2PtCl6 was dissolved in 100 ml isopropanol to obtain the H2PtCl6 solution. The solution was sprayed on an ITO–PEN film (Peccel, Japan) with an airbrush connected with a mini compressor, followed by drying at 120 °C for 30 min. Then the ITO–PEN film was immersed in the solution containing 112 mg NaBH4, 8 ml deionized water and 20 ml ethanol for 15 min to reduce the Pt4+. After rinsing with ethanol, the film was dried at 120 °C for 30 min, obtaining the CR-Pt CE.


A semiconducting TiO2 (Degussa, Germany) film coated on an ultrasonically cleaned FTO glass (Asahi Glass, type-U, 25 Ω □−1, Japan) was fabricated by the screen-printing technique. The TiO2 film with 12 μm thickness was sintered at 500 °C for 30 min. Then the TiO2 film was cooled to 80 °C, and subsequently immersed into a 5 × 10−4 M solution of N719 dye (Solaronix SA, Switzerland) in acetonitrile–tert-butanol (volume ratio 1:1) for 22 h.


The surface morphologies of the two Pt electrodes were observed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, QUANTA450). The transmission spectrum measurement was taken on a UV spectrophotometer (HP8453, America). Cyclic voltammetry (CV) was carried out in a three-electrode system in an acetonitrile solution containing 0.1 M LiClO4, 10 mM LiI, and 1 mM I2 at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1, with a counter electrode of Pt and a Ag/Ag+ reference electrode. A DSC with active area of 0.16 cm2 used for the photovoltaic performance test was fabricated with a photoanode, a counter electrode, and an electrolyte containing 0.06 M of LiI, 0.6 M 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium iodide, 0.03 M I2, 0.5 M 4-tert-butyl pyridine, and 0.1 M guanidinium thiocyanate in acetonitrile. Finally, the two electrodes were sealed with double-faced insulating adhesive tape. The current density–voltage (I–V) characteristics of the DSCs were measured in simulated AM 1.5 illumination (100 mW cm−2, PEC-L15, Peccell, Japan) with a Keithley digital source meter (Keithley 2601, USA).

The symmetrical dummy cell with active area of 0.64 cm2, used in electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) experiments and Tafel-polarization tests, was assembled by stacking two identical electrodes facing each other filling the electrolyte similar to that described above, then sealed with double-faced insulating adhesive tape of 60 μm thickness.
EIS measurements were carried out in the dark at room temperature using a computer-controlled potentiostat (Zennium Zahner, Germany), over the frequency range from 100 mHz to 1 MHz, setting the AC amplitude at 10 mV and the bias was set at −0.75 V. The EIS spectra were fitted by Zview software. Tafel-polarization curves were measured with an electrochemical work station system (LK-9805, Tian Jin, Lanli Inc.) at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1.

The surface morphologies of the Pt/ITO–PEN electrodes prepared using dip coating method and CR method are shown in Fig. 2. For the dipping-Pt CE, Pt nanoparticles around 100 nm were distributed homogeneously on the ITO–PEN film, while for the CR-Pt CE, nanoclusters spread unevenly and aggregated seriously.

To assess the catalytic activity of the Pt CEs for triiodide reduction, cyclic voltammetry (CV) was carried out in a three-electrode system at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. Fig. 3 shows the cyclic voltammograms. Two typical pairs of reversible redox peaks were observed for both Pt electrodes, the relatively negative pair of redox peaks can be attributed to the redox reaction of eqn (1), while the relatively positive pair can be attributed to the redox reaction of eqn (2). The peak potentials of the two electrodes were the same with variations in peak current densities. The dipping-Pt electrode presented higher peak current densities, indicating a faster charge transfer process and a higher catalytic activity toward triiodide–iodide redox reaction than those of the CR-Pt electrode.
I−3 + 2e− ⇌ 3I−
(1)
3I2 + 2e− ⇌ 2I−3
(2)
Subsequently, DSCs were fabricated using the two Pt CEs. The current density–voltage (I–V) curves are shown in Fig. 4, and the corresponding photovoltaic parameters are collated in Table 1. The DSC using dipping-Pt as CE yielded an open circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.76 V, short circuit current density (Jsc) of 14.23 mA cm−2, fill factor (FF) of 0.64, and power conversion efficiency (η) of 6.95%. Compared to the DSC using conventional CR-Pt as CE, its Jsc and FF were both higher, resulting in a higher η. I–V behavior proved clearly a higher catalytic activity for dipping-Pt CE compared to CR-Pt CE. The photovoltaic performance of the DSCs using the two Pt CEs were in good agreement with the CV results.
CEs

V
oc/V

J
sc/mA cm−2
FF

η/%

R
s/Ω

R
ct/Ω

Z
N/Ω
Dipping-Pt
0.76
14.23
0.64
6.95
24.26
5.05
1.12
CR-Pt
0.75
14.15
0.62
6.64
22.70
7.99
1.13
To interpret the Pt electrodes' electrochemical process, which has a close relationship with the catalytic activity, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was conducted with symmetrical dummy cells fabricated with two identical CEs. Fig. 5a shows the Nyquist plots fitted with Zview software based on an equivalent circuit model, as shown in Fig. 5b. The high frequency intercept on the real axis corresponds to the series resistance (Rs). The left semicircle at the high-frequency region arises from the charge transfer property (Rct) at the electrode/electrolyte interface, whereas the other semicircle at the low-frequency region arises from the Nernst diffusion impedance (ZN) of the triiodide–iodide in the electrolyte. The corresponding EIS parameters are summarized in Table 1. The two Pt electrodes displayed similar ZN, with differences in Rs and Rct. Compared to CR-Pt, dipping-Pt exhibited a lower Rct of 5.05 Ω, implying an acceleration of the triiodide reduction rate that was attributed to a higher catalytic activity. For the dipping-Pt electrode, the slightly larger Rs may be due to an ultrathin layer consisting of conditioner between Pt and ITO–PEN film. This phenomenon was also observed in previous research. The lower Rct of dipping-Pt can generate a higher Jsc and FF, leading to a better photovoltaic performance.
Tafel polarization curves, a powerful electrochemical characterization measurement, were also performed with the dummy cells similar to those used in EIS measurements to verify the electrochemical catalytic activities of the two Pt electrodes. Fig. 6 shows the Tafel curves of the two Pt electrodes. Theoretically, according to our previous report, the Tafel curve can be divided into three zones. The curve at very high potential is attributed to the limiting diffusion zone, which depends on the transport of triiodide and iodide in the electrolyte, where the voltage (E) is a linear function of the logarithmic current density (lg I) according to eqn (3). In this region in terms of eqn (3), we can acquire information about the exchange current density (I0) by extending the line to the voltage as zero, receiving the current density (I) from there. The curve at very low potential arises from the electrochemical reaction, the polarization zone, where voltage (E) is a linear function of current density (I). The slope of this region can represent the charge transfer resistance (Rct), which is inversely proportional to I0 based on eqn (4).
(3)
(4)
where
R is the gas constant, T is the temperature, α is the distribution coefficient, F is Faraday's constant, and n is the number of electrons involved in the reaction at the electrode.

In the Tafel zone in Fig. 6, I01 represents the exchange current density of dipping-Pt electrode; it is slightly larger than I02, which represents the exchange current density of CR-Pt electrode. It shows clearly that the dipping-Pt electrode holds a relatively large exchange current density (I0) and a small Rct. The Tafel results can also be interpreted that the dipping-Pt has a higher catalytic activity compared with CR-Pt, which is consistent with the EIS and the I–V results.
Taking a photoanode using lightproof substrate such as Ti foil into consideration, illumination should pass through the Pt CE, which may cause absorption and loss of light, thus the good light transmittance of the Pt CE should be in favor of obtaining high performance of such a flexible DSC. Fig. 7 exhibits the transmission spectra of the two Pt electrodes, as well as the ITO–PEN film. The light transmittance for the dipping-Pt electrode is around 75%, higher than that of the CR-Pt electrode (70%). This trend is in accordance with the colors presented by the two Pt CEs; the CR-Pt electrode's color was darker than the dipping-Pt electrode's.
The I–V curves of the DSCs with rear illumination (from the CE side) are presented in Fig. 8, and the corresponding photovoltaic parameters are listed in Table 2. On account of the low Rct and high light transmittance, the DSC using dipping-Pt CE achieved a high power conversion efficiency of 5.18%, giving a high Jsc of 9.69 mA cm−2 and a large FF of 0.70. In contrast, the DSC using CR-Pt CE presented relatively low η of 4.52%, Jsc of 8.93 mA cm−2, and FF of 0.67, which was mainly due to absorption of illumination by the dark CE. This result elucidates that the dip coating method is a highly suitable technique to prepare flexible Pt CEs with high transparency and high performance regardless of the direction of illumination, either from the photoanode or CE side.
CEs

V
oc/V

J
sc/mA cm−2
FF

η/%
Dipping-Pt
0.77
9.69
0.70
5.18
CR-Pt
0.75
8.93
0.67
4.52

In summary, under ambient conditions, a simple dip coating method was employed in preparing a flexible Pt CE on conductive plastic substrate for a DSC, with advantages such as transparency, low cost of production, good homogeneity, high catalytic activity, and simple procedure free from size restrictions of preparation equipment. Our group is making efforts to fabricate large area flexible Pt counter electrodes, in which this dip coating method is applied. Good results have been obtained, and there will be a further report. This research opens a gateway to mass production of flexible DSCs, which will make the DSC more competitive for various photovoltaic devices.


This research was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant no. 50773008). It was also supported by the National High Technology Research and Development Program for Advanced Materials of China (Grant no. 2009AA03Z220).


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012