 DOI: 10.1039/C9TC01214A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 10111-10118


Wei
Gao
,

Miao
Zhang
,

Zhanxiang
Chen
,

Xiaohui
Liu
,

Kailu
Zheng
,

Cheng
Zhong
,

Fujun
Zhang
* and 

Chuluo
Yang
*

Department of Chemistry and Hubei Key Lab on Organic and Polymeric Optoelectronic Materials, Wuhan University, Wuhan, 430072, People's Republic of China. E-mail: clyang@whu.edu.cn

Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Polymer Science and Technology, College of Materials Science and Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, China

Key Laboratory of Luminescence and Optical Information, Ministry of Education, Beijing Jiao tong University, Beijing, 100044, People's Republic of China. E-mail: fjzhang@bjtu.edu.cn

Received
4th March 2019
, Accepted 19th July 2019
First published on 22nd July 2019
For acceptor–donor–acceptor (A–D–A) type non-fullerene small molecule acceptors (NF-SMAs), the electron-deficient active methylene end groups are pivotal for adjusting their properties and photovoltaic performances. However, a limited variety of end groups is not conducive to the full development of organic solar cells (OSCs) based on NF-SMAs. Herein, we developed a novel 9H-indeno[1,2-b]pyrazine-2,3-dicarbonitrile (IPC) end group and applied it into the design and synthesis of NF-SMAs called BTOIPC. BTOIPC with potential intramolecular CN⋯S interactions showed a planar conformation and small torsion angle. The strong electron-withdrawing ability of IPC endowed BTOIPC with a low optical bandgap (Eoptg of 1.45 eV) and suitable HOMO and LUMO energy levels, similar to those of BT-IC. OSCs based on PBDB-T:BTOIPC achieved a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 9.31% with a fill factor (FF) close to 70% and an energy loss (Eloss) of 0.57 eV, which are comparable with those of the reported BT-IC. The advantageous features of the PBDB-T:BTOIPC bulk-heterojunction layer, such as high and balanced carrier mobility, good exciton dissociation, minor charge recombination and uniform morphology, contributed together to the good performance of IPC-based SMA. These results implied that IPC is a potential end group for NF-SMAs, and the modifiable structure of IPC gives IPC-based SMAs an ability to realize higher PCE in OSCs.

Owing to the advantages of low-cost, large-area and flexibility to fabricate devices, organic solar cells (OSCs) have shown great application prospects and attracted considerable attention in the field of photovoltaics. For OSCs, the photoactive layer is a key component, which is usually composed of a p-type polymer donor and a n-type electron acceptor. The basic properties of these two investigated materials, such as optical bandgaps, highest occupied molecular orbital/lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (HOMO/LUMO) energy levels and crystallinity/aggregation behaviors as well as the micromorphology of their blend films have great influence on the photovoltaic performance of OSCs. Developing donor and acceptor materials to adjust these aforementioned properties is a major research topic for advancing the power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of OSCs. In the early days, fullerene derivatives, such as [6,6]-phenyl-C61/C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC61BM and PC71BM) were the dominant electron acceptors for the OCS devices due to their appropriate frontier molecular orbital (FMO) energy levels, high electron mobility and affinity and excellent morphology compatibility. Therefore, designing and synthesizing novel polymer donors with various characteristics are effective approaches to achieve the PCE breakthroughs in fullerene-based OSCs. Impressively, the past two decades have witnessed a rapid PCE growth: from less than 1% PCE in the beginning to more than 11% PCE today. Although many fundamental theories and optimization methods have been established based on polymer:fullerene systems, the inherent drawbacks and difficulty in modifying the structure of fullerene seriously impede the further development of OSCs. Thus, finding new electron acceptors is a possible way out for this issue.

In 2015, Zhan et al. reported a famous non-fullerene small molecule acceptor (NF-SMAs), namely 3,9-bis(2-methylene-(3-(1,1-dicyanomethylene)-indanone))-5,5,11,11-tetrakis(4-hexylphenyl)-dithieno[2,3-d:2′,3′-d′]-s-indaceno[1,2-b:5,6-b′]-dithiophene (ITIC), featuring an acceptor–donor–acceptor (A–D–A) structure. ITIC-like SMAs can be regarded as a perfect combination of electron-deficient end groups, fused-ring electron-rich core and outstretched side chains. The merits of such kind of SMAs lie in their modifiable structures, which allow the precise optimization of the absorption, HOMO/LUMO energy levels, and crystallization/aggregation properties. A general method for synthesizing this kind of SMAs is to conduct a Knoevenagel condensation reaction between the bialdehyde compound of the core and active methylene end groups. The strong intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) state from the central core to bilateral end groups endows ITIC-like SMAs with a wide absorption range in the visible and near-infrared regions. Theoretical calculations revealed that the LUMO of SMA is distributed on both end groups and donor core moieties, suggesting that the end groups play an important role in regulating molecular energy levels. Moreover, the end groups also have an impact on the bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) morphology of active layers, considering that the end group act as the main stacking units in dimer molecules. Thus, it can be safely concluded that the end groups are a crucial factor for OSCs based on NF-SMAs. However, up to now, there are only two types of active methylene end groups, e.g., 2-(3-oxo-2,3-dihydro-1H-inden-1-ylidene)malononitrile (INIC) and 2-(6-oxo-5,6-dihydro-4H-cyclopenta[c]thiophen-4-ylidene)malononitrile (CPTCN), which can serve as effective end groups to create high-performance NF-SMAs (Scheme 1). Numerous endeavors have been devoted to their derivatization by adding electron-donating units or halogen atoms, isomerizing or enlarging the rings. Those modifications enabled OSCs based on NF-SMAs to achieve 13–16% PCEs. However, the finite number of active methylene end groups hinders the development of NF OSCs; thus, exploring the end groups with novel structures is becoming increasingly important.
In this study, a novel 9H-indeno[1,2-b]pyrazine-2,3-dicarbonitrile end group was designed and synthesized, whose structure differs from the ones reported previously (INIC, CPTCN and their derivatives). Two cyano groups combined with pyrazine structure ensured a strong electron-withdrawing ability of IPC. The synthesis of IPC was more efficient as compared to that of INIC- or CPTCN-like end groups via a simple condensation reaction between 1H-indene-1,2(3H)-dione and 2,3-diaminomaleonitrile with a high yield. It should be noted that IPC has many modification sites, which allow IPC families-based OSCs to achieve high PCEs. The corresponding SMA based on IPC as an end group, namely BTOIPC, was synthesized. Six long alkyl chains on the donor core (BTO) guaranteed the good solubility of BTOIPC in commonly used solvents. BTOIPC showed a wide and strong absorption with an optical bandgap (Eoptg) of 1.45 eV and a maximum extinction coefficient (εmax) of 1.58 × 105 M−1 cm−1, which are comparable with those of BT-IC. The LUMO and HOMO energy levels of BTOIPC were −3.79 eV and −5.47 eV, respectively, which are close to those of BT-IC, indicating that IPC has a similar electron-withdrawing ability to INIC. OSCs based on PBDB-T:BTOIPC achieved a PCE of 9.31% produced from an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.88 eV, a short-circuit current (Jsc) of 15.24 mA cm−2 and a FF of 69.5%. In addition, a low energy loss (Eloss) of 0.57 eV could be obtained in PBDB-T:BTOIPC-based OSCs. Device characterizations revealed that high and balanced electron and hole mobility, good exciton dissociation and collection efficiencies and low recombination occurred in the active layer of OSCs based on PBDB-T:BTOIPC. In addition, atomic force microscope (AFM) and transmission electron microscope (TEM) observations displayed a smooth and uniform morphology of a PBDB-T:BTOIPC blended film with a good phase separation and interpenetrating nanofiber network structure. The high FF and low Eloss of OSCs based on PBDB-T:BTOIPC suggested that IPC is a promising end group with simple synthesis and many modification sites.

The synthesis routes of IPC and BTOIPC are presented in Scheme 2. The end groups of IPC were synthesized via a one-step condensation reaction between 1H-indene-1,2(3H)-dione and 2,3-diaminomaleonitrile with a high yield of over 80%. Compound BTO-CHO was synthesized according to the reported method and chosen as the fused-ring donor to ensure a good solubility of BTOIPC. Target SMA BTOIPC was obtained by conducting an efficient Knoevenagel condensation reaction between BTO-CHO and IPC with piperidine as the base. The control SMA BT-IC was also synthesized using the same method with pyridine as the base and was compared with BTOIPC in basic properties and photovoltaic performance. The chemical structures of IPC and BTOIPC were characterized by 1H NMR (the trans or cis configuration of the double bond and the relative position between a donor core and end group could not be distinguished), 13C NMR and MS techniques. Six long alkyl chains in the donor core (BTO) guaranteed a good solubility for BTOIPC in commonly-used organic solvents, such as dichloromethane (DCM), chloroform and ortho-dichlorobenzene (o-DCB) at room temperature, which meets the essential requirements for the solution process.

The UV-Vis absorption of BTOIPC and BT-IC in solution and neat films were measured, and the corresponding normalized spectra are shown in Fig. 1a. In dilute (10−6 M) chloroform solution, BTOIPC and BT-IC exhibit a wide and strong absorption with the maximum absorption peaks (λmax) located at 708 nm and 719 nm, and maximum extinction coefficients (εmax) being 1.58 × 105 M−1 cm−1 and 1.15 × 105 M−1 cm−1, respectively (Table 1). From solution to the film state, red-shifts over 40 nm and strong electron vibration shoulder peaks can be observed, suggesting that an intense intermolecular packing exists in both BTOIPC and BT-IC neat films. The λmaxs and the absorption onsets (λonset) are 750 nm and 856 nm for BTOIPC, and 767 nm and 867 for BT-IC, respectively (Table 1). The optical bandgaps (Eoptgs) of BTOIPC and BT-IC were estimated as 1.45 eV and 1.43 eV, respectively, according to the empirical formula: Eoptg = 1240/λonset. In order to accurately obtain the Eg of BTOIPC, we carried out the emission spectrum measurement of BTOIPC in a neat film (Fig. 1a). The intersection point between absorption and emission spectra of BTOIPC was found to be 790 nm, corresponding to the Eg of 1.57 eV, which is significantly larger than the value of 1.45 eV obtained on drawing a tangent to the absorption spectrum (Table 1). The cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurements of BTOIPC and BT-IC thin films were performed in acetonitrile using a conventional three electrode system (Ag/AgCl as the reference electrode), and the CV curves are shown in Fig. 1b. The measured energy level of Fc/Fc+ was 0.486 eV; the HOMO and LUMO energy levels were evaluated as −5.47 eV and −3.79 eV for BTOIPC, and −5.39 eV and −3.87 eV for BT-IC, respectively (Table 1). The slightly blue-shifted absorption combined with the elevated LUMO energy level of BTOIPC compared to those of BT-IC indicates a slightly weaker electron-withdrawing ability of IPC than that of INIC.
Acceptor

λ
max
 (nm)

λ
onset
 (nm)

ε
max
 (M−1 cm−1)

λ
max
 (nm)

λ
onset
 (nm)

E
optg (eV)

E
g
 (eV)
HOMO (eV)

a In chloroform solution.
b In a neat film.
c Calculated from the empirical formula: Eoptg = 1240/λonset.
d Calculated from the intersection point between absorption and emission spectra.
e Obtained from the CV method by measuring films in acetonitrile.

BTOIPC
708
777
1.58 × 105
750
856
1.45
1.57
−5.47
BT-IC
719
779
1.15 × 105
767
867
1.43
—
−5.39

Previous studies have proved that the most stable conformation for ITIC-like SMAs is two flanked end groups symmetrically distributed on the both sides of the long axis of SMAs with intramolecular C–O⋯S non-covalent interactions. To establish the optimal confirmation of BTOIPC (BTOIPC owns complicated cis-/trans-isomers and conformation isomers, see Fig. S1, ESI) and HOMO/LUMO distributions, the density functional theory (DFT) simulations were carried out where the long alkyl chains were simplified as methyl groups, and the calculation results are displayed in Fig. 2 (the detailed theoretical calculation method is described in ESI). In order to infer the most probable trans or cis configuration of the double bond and the relative position between the donor core and end group according to the minimum energy principle, we scanned the rotation energies every 10 degrees from Trans 1 to Trans 2 or from Cis 1 to Cis 2. From the rotation curve of the trans conformation (Fig. 2a), the relative rotation energy of Trans 2 is lower than that of Trans 1. In addition, considering the presence of CN⋯S (spatial distance of about 280 pm) intramolecular interactions in Trans 2, the Trans 2 is probably more stable conformation for the trans BTOIPC. Similarly, for the cis conformation, Cis 2 shows a lower energy than that of Cis 1 (Fig. 2b), indicating that Cis 2 is the stable conformation for cis double bond. It should be noted that the conformational switching is very hard from Trans 2 to Trans 1 or from Cis 2 to Cis 1 because the energy barrier is as high as 1.70 eV. The calculated energies of Trans 1 and Trans 2 are lower than those of Cis 1 and Cis 2 by 0.04 eV (4 kJ mol−1) and 0.11 eV (11 kJ mol−1), respectively. Moreover, Trans 1 and Trans 2 own a more planar backbone with the small dihedral angles of 0.3 degree than those of Cis 1 and Cis 2 (dihedral angles of 12.2 degree). From these results, we deduced that Trans 2 is the optimal conformation with trans double bond and intramolecular CN⋯S interactions. The HOMO of BTOIPC (Trans 2) is mainly located at the core of BTO, and the LUMO is evenly distributed throughout the whole molecular skeleton (Fig. 2c). This is beneficial to the intramolecular charge transport and implies that modifying IPC can fine-tune the LUMO and HOMO energy levels of IPC-based SMAs. The calculated HOMO and LUMO energy levels of BTOIPC are −5.33 eV and −3.40 eV, respectively. The plane molecular conformation of BTOIPC is beneficial to achieve good photovoltaic performance in OSCs.


OSC devices with a conventional structure of indium tin oxide (ITO)/poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS)/active layer/PDIN/Al were fabricated to investigate the photovoltaic performance of BTOIPC and BT-IC, where ITO and Al work as anode and cathode, respectively; PEDOT:PSS and PDIN are electron transport layer (ETL) and cathode interlayer (CIL), respectively (PDIN is a perylene diimide compound with N-alkyl chain, which lowers the work function of the Al); PBDB-T serves as the electron donor attributed to its complementary absorption range and matched the HUMO/LUMO levels with those of BTOIPC and BT-IC. The fabrication conditions for two OSCs were as follows: the donor and acceptor with a weight ratio of 1:1 were dissolved in chlorobenzene (CB) with 0.8% (vol:vol) 1,8-diiodooctane (DIO). The mixed solution with a total concentration of 18 mg mL−1 was spin-coated at 2000 round per minute (rpm) to form the active layer, and then thermal annealed at 100 °C for 5 minutes. The characteristic current density–voltage (J–V) curves of two OSCs were measured under the illumination of AM 1.5 G at 100 mW cm−2 (Fig. 3b) and their key photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table 2. The best-performing OSCs based on PBDB-T:BTOIPC achieved a Voc of 0.88 V, a Jsc of 15.24 mA cm−2 and an FF of 69.5%, producing a PCE of 9.31% with an Eloss of 0.57 eV. The control devices based on PBDB-T:BT-IC obtained a Voc of 0.85 V, a Jsc of 18.05 mA cm−2, an FF of 70.1% and a PCE of 10.76% with an Eloss of 0.58 eV. When compared with BT-IC-based OSCs, BTOIPC-based OSCs could obtain a higher Voc, a close FF and a slightly lower PCE due to the lower Jsc.

Active layer

V
oc (V)

J
sc
 (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)

a The area of the active layer is 3.8 mm2.
b The value in bracket is the integrated Jsc from EQE spectrum.
c The values in brackets are the average values and mean square errors calculated from 10 devices.

PBDB-T:BTOIPC
0.88
15.24 (14.83)
69.5
9.31 (9.00 ± 0.27)
PBDB-T:BT-IC
0.85
18.05 (17.72)
70.1
10.76 (10.63 ± 0.10)
The external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectrum was measured and shown in Fig. 3c. PBDB-T:BTOIPC-based OSCs exhibit a wide and intense response to solar energy in range from 300 nm to 850 nm with maximal EQE value over 60% (lower than that of PBDB-T:BT-IC-based OSCs in range from 450 nm to 850 nm, lowering Jsc of OSCs based on PBDB-T:BTOIPC), suggesting the effective photophysical processes (exciton generation, exciton transport, exciton dissociation, charge transport and collection) in BHJ layer. The average PCE and mean square error deduced from 10 devices in one batch for PBDB-T:BTOIPC-based OSCs are (9.00 ± 0.27)% (Table 2), indicating good device repeatability. The detailed photovoltaic parameters of the 10 samples are shown in Table S1 (ESI). The EQE-integrated Jsc is 14.83 mA cm−2 for PBDB-T:BTOIPC-based OSCs, which is consistent with the measured Jsc within an error of 3%.

According to Eloss = Eoptg − eVoc, we compared the Eloss value of PBDB-T:BTOIPC-based OSCs with other devices using PBDB-T as a polymer donor by summarizing the Eloss values of reported devices with PCE higher than 9%. The scatter plot of PCE versus Eloss is shown in Fig. S2a (ESI), and the detailed data are listed in Table S2 (ESI). From this comparison, it can be clearly observed that OSCs based on the PBDB-T donor usually exhibit Eloss higher than typical 0.6 eV. OSCs based on PBDB-T:BTOIPC show a relatively low Eloss among OSCs with PBDB-T as the donor, which is also 0.01 eV lower than that of control OSCs based on PBDB-T:BT-IC, indicating a comparable ability of IPC and INIC in reducing Eloss. To take a further comparison, we summarized more devices with different donors (Fig. S2b, ESI). As shown, although the PCE of BTOIPC-based OSCs is moderate, it surpasses many other devices in the terms of Eloss.


To understand the superior photovoltaic performance of PBDB-T:BTOIPC-based OSCs, the device characterizations including carriers mobility, exciton dissociation and collection efficiencies and charge recombination behaviors were performed. Space charge limited current (SCLC) measurements were employed to investigate the hole (μh) and electron (μe) mobilities by fabricating the hole-only (with a structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PBDB-T:BTOIPC/MoOx/Ag) and electron-only diodes (with a structure of ITO/ZnO/PBDB-T:BTOIPC/PFN (poly[(9,9-bis(3-(N,N-dimethylamino)propyl)-2,7-fluorene)-alt-2,7-(9,9-dioctylfluorene)])/Al). By fitting the data (Fig. S3, ESI), the hole and electron mobilities of the PBDB-T:BTOIPC blended film were found to be 7.12 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 5.20 × 10-4 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively, with a ratio value of μe/μh being 1.37. The high and balanced hole and electron mobilities are beneficial to the large Jsc and FF.

Exciton dissociation and charge collection are two pivotal processes in determining the efficiency of OSCs, which can be studied by measuring the photocurrent density (Jph) versus effective applied voltage (Veff). Herein, Jph can be calculated by Jph = JL − JD, where JL and JD represent the current densities measured under one standard sun illumination and in dark, respectively. Veff is calculated by Veff = V0 − Vbias, where V0 corresponds to the voltage when Jph = 0 and Vbias is the applied voltage. In general, if the Veff is high enough, the bound excitons can be fully dissociated into free charge, and then efficiently collected by an individual electrode. Thus, the probabilities of exciton dissociation (Pdiss) and charge collection (Pcoll) can be evaluated by the Jph/Jsat values under short-circuit and maximum power output conditions, respectively. The Jphversus Veff plot of PBDB-T:BTOIPC-based OSCs is displayed in Fig. 4a. As shown, Jph can quickly saturate (Jsat) at a low reverse voltage of 0.5 V. The Jsat is 16.18 mA cm−2 and the Jphs under short-circuit and maximum power output are 15.17 mA cm−2 and 12.71 mA cm−2, corresponding to Pdiss of 93.8% and Pcoll of 78.6% for PBDB-T:BTOIPC-based OSCs, respectively. The high Pdiss and Pcoll implied an effective exciton dissociation and charge collection processes existing in PBDB-T:BTOIPC-based OSCs.
The monomolecular and bimolecular recombination behaviors of the PBDB-T:BTOIPC layer was also investigated by measuring the J–V curves under different light intensities (Ps) from 2.25 mW cm−2 to 100 mW cm−2 (Fig. S4, ESI). A power-law dependence of Jsc upon P can be described as Jsc ∝ PS, where S close to 1 reflects more free charges that can be swept out and effectively collected in an individual electrode prior to recombination. It can be observed from Fig. 4b that lgJsc is highly linear and correlated to lgP for PBDB-T:BTOIPC-based OSCs with a large slope (S) of 0.93, indicating that a small bimolecular recombination occurs in the PBDB-T:BTOIPC active layer. Under the condition of only bimolecular combination, the Voc of a solar cell is primarily ruled by the following equation:
where
Egap is the energy downshift between LUMO of the acceptor and HOMO of the donor; T is absolute temperature; k is Boltzmann constant; G refers to the generation rate of electron–hole pairs; PD is the dissociation probability of electron–hole pairs; γ is the Langevin recombination constant and Nc is defined as an effective density of states. Among them, PD and Nc are independent of P, while G is positively related to it. In principle, the slope (S) should be equal to kT/q for Vocversus the lnP curve when bimolecular recombination is the unique loss mechanism. When Shockley–Read–Hall (SRH) recombination, namely a trap-assisted recombination induced by the interfacial defects and/or impurities of materials, was involved, the Voc dependence on lnP exhibits S larger than kT/q but smaller than 2kT/q. If the S is close to 2kT/q, the monomolecular recombination will occur as the dominating recombination mechanism. Fig. 4c clearly shows a linear dependence of Voc on lnP with a small S (1.11kT/q) close to kT/q, indicating that the bimolecular recombination is the major recombination mechanism for OSCs based on PBDB-T:BTOIPC.


The BHJ morphology of PBDB-T:BTOIPC was studied via atomic force microscopy (AFM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM), as shown in Fig. 5. The AFM height image of the PBDB-T:BTOIPC blended film exhibits a smooth surface with a small root-mean-square (RMS) roughness of 2.54 nm. In addition, the AFM 3D image displays a uniform morphology of the PBDB-T:BTOIPC blended film with the embossment in close height distributed evenly, which is beneficial to be covered by the interface layer and contact well with the top electrode. A good phase separation of the PBDB-T:BTOIPC blended film can be clearly observed in the AFM phase image (Fig. 5b) and TEM image (Fig. 5d), which contributes to the high exciton dissociation efficiency of the studied OSC.

Moreover, the capillary structures in the TEM image may reveal that a continuous interpenetrating network is well-developed in the BHJ layer, which is in favour of the efficient charge transport for achieving large Jsc and FF in PBDB-T:BTOIPC-fabricated OSCs.

In summary, a novel active methylene end group with a structure of 9H-indeno[1,2-b]pyrazine-2,3-dicarbonitrile (IPC) was developed, which could be simply synthesized through an effective condensation reaction. Its NF-SMA named BTOIPC was rationally designed and synthesized to investigate the photovoltaic performance of the IPC end group. The DFT calculations revealed that the optimal conformation of BTOIPC was the trans double bond together with intramolecular CN⋯S interactions between the IPC end group and BTO core, which helps BTOIPC to keep a planar backbone. BTOIPC exhibited a wide absorption range with a low Eoptg of 1.45 eV, and suitable HOMO and LUMO energy levels, which were close to those of BT-IC, indicating that IPC had similar electron-withdrawing ability with INIC. PBDB-T:BTOIPC-based OSCs achieved a Voc of 0.88 V, a Jsc of 15.24 mA cm−2 and an FF of 69.5%, producing a PCE of 9.31% with a relative low Eloss of 0.57 eV, indicating the potential of the IPC end group. The device characterization and morphology studies suggested that superior carrier mobility, exciton dissociation, charge recombination and morphology exist in the PBDB-T:BTOIPC active layer. In a word, this study provided a new type of end group for constructing NF-SMAs, and the high FF and low Eloss proves the effectiveness of IPC working as an end group.


There are no conflicts to declare.


W. Gao and M. Zhang contributed equally to this work. This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21572171 and 61675017), the Key Technological Innovation Program of Hubei Province (2018AAA013), and the Project funded by China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (No. 2018M630983 and 2019T120750).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Materials synthesis; devices fabrications; SCLC measurements; AFM and 1H and 13C NMR spectra. See DOI: 10.1039/c9tc01214a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019