 DOI: 10.1039/C5CC04607F
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 14076-14079


Xueping
Zong
,

Zhe
Sun
*,

Hui
Wang
,

Jiang
Wang
,

Mao
Liang
 and 

Song
Xue
*

Tianjin Key Laboratory of Organic Solar Cells and Photochemical Conversion, School of Chemistry & Chemical Engineering, Tianjin University of Technology, Tianjin 300384, P. R. China. E-mail: zhesun@tjut.edu.cn; xuesong@ustc.edu.cn; Fax: +86-22-60214252; Tel: +86-22-60214250

School of Materials Science and Engineering, Tianjin University of Technology, Tianjin 300384, P. R. China

Received
4th June 2015
, Accepted 3rd August 2015
First published on 3rd August 2015
Organolead iodide perovskite showing tubular morphology was fabricated on mesoporous TiO2 film via a one-step spin-coating procedure. These perovskite tubes with the external diameter of 1 μm were found to facilitate the charge separation at perovskite/hole-transport material (HTM) interfaces. This engenders a tubular perovskite device showing a higher fill factor over the device with planar perovskite, and improves power conversion efficiency accordingly.

In the last two years, the advent of organometal halide perovskite solar cells (PeSCs) has drawn worldwide attention because of their low cost, easy-fabrication, and excellent power conversion efficiency reaching 17.9%. Since the seminal work by Kim et al., the all-solid-state PeSC is typically fabricated as p–i–n architecture in which a mesoporous or planar metal oxide layer, e.g. TiO2, Al2O3 and ZnO, and a hole transport layer (HTL) are employed for extracting photo-generated electrons and the separated holes, respectively. Between the two charge-collecting layers, the methylammonium lead iodide CH3NH3PbI3 layer with the thickness of several hundreds of nanometers is deposited, which serves as not only a light-harvesting component but also a conductor for transporting a part of the separated excitons. Recent investigations have shown the vital importance of controlling the metal oxide/perovskite and perovskite/HTL interfaces for impeding charge recombination. In this regard, diverse experimental protocols, including one or two-step deposition, vapor-assisted solution processing, and surface modification by amino acids, have been developed for tailoring the morphology of the perovskite layer and improving its contact to metal oxide surfaces. CH3NH3PbI3 crystal films appearing as nanorod clusters have been fabricated on the top surfaces of ZnO mesoporous layer as well as poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene): poly(styrene sulfonic acid) (PEDOT:PSS). It was shown that the presence of nanorods results in the pin-holes in perovskite film. As a consequence, light absorbance of the nanorods is inferior to that of planar film due to its incomplete surface coverage. Very recently, Im et al. have shown the advantages of non-planar perovskite nanowires in accelerating the rate of charge separation at the perovskite/HTL interfaces. However, the length of the prepared nanowires is several ten microns. This probably affects the electron transport along the nanowires. In this paper, we report the fabrication of CH3NH3PbI3 tubes with the diameter of several hundreds of nanometers and the height of several microns. These tubes grown above the mesoporous TiO2 layer were shown to enhance the electron lifetime by five times and hence improve the cell parameters of the perovskite cells.

A tubular perovskite layer was attained by spin-coating CH3NH3PbI3/dimethylformamide (DMF) solution with the concentration of 19 wt% onto a mesoporous TiO2 scaffold. For comparison, a planar perovskite layer was also fabricated using a 40 wt% perovskite precursor in which a mixture of γ-butyrolactone (GBL) and dimethyl sulphoxide (DMSO) (7:3 v/v) was used as solvent. The cell fabrication details are described in the ESI. Note that the solution recipes employed here were in line with the CH3NH3PbI3 precursors in the preparation of quantum dot dye-sensitized solar cells. We found that the variation of solvent engenders a substantial change in perovskite morphology. As indicated in Fig. 1(a), the use of DMF results in the formation of perovskite tubes on the top surface of the TiO2 layer. And Fig. 1(b) shows that spiro-OMeTAD can be readily deposited into the perovskite forest, forming a continuous hole-transport phase. The cross-section of perovskite tubes shown in Fig. 1(c) shows that the length of the tubes is about several microns, shorter than the reported nanowires by one order of magnitude. Therefore, a lower resistance of electron transport in our perovskite tubes is expected. Moreover, we found that these tubes are hexagonal rather than circular, and are made of CH3NH3PbI3 crystals with the size of 100 nm. These are shown in Fig. S1(a) and (b) of the ESI. By using the solvent of the GBL/DMSO mixture, a compact perovskite slab was fabricated (see Fig. S1(c), ESI). XRD spectra (Fig. 1(d)) indicate that both the perovskite tube and slab display the same space group of I4/mcm, implying tetragonal CH3NH3PbI3 structure. Besides that, the tube shows a weaker (220) peak relative to the slab sample. This is in agreement with the results of perovskite nanowires, which is related to their difference in mesoscopic morphology. The variation of CH3NH3PbI3 morphology is probably dependent on precursor concentration and the rate of solvent evaporation. For the tubular sample, CH3NH3PbI3 precursor concentration is about half of that for preparing the perovskite slab. And DMF is relatively volatile compared with the GBL/DMSO mixture. For these reasons, the evaporation of the CH3NH3PbI3/DMF precursor leads to lower nucleation density and a larger critical nucleus radius. As a consequence, CH3NH3PbI3 crystals tend to assemble into mesoscopic tubes for decreasing Gibbs free energy. For the GBL/DMSO based precursor, higher CH3NH3PbI3 concentration leads to larger nucleation density, and helps to form a planar layer.
To elucidate the effects of perovskite morphology on charge separation characteristics, we determined IMPS and IMVS response curves for both tubular and planar CH3NH3PbI3 based PeSCs. Typical curves are displayed in Fig. S2 of the ESI. Time constants of electron transport (τtr) and recombination (τn) were obtained from the characteristic frequency at the minimum imaginary component of IMPS and IMVS, respectively. As depicted in Fig. 2(a), the recombination time constant τn for perovskite tube based devices is higher than that of the planar ones by about 2–4 fold. Accordingly, tubular PeSCs show a higher electron density. This result reflects the decreased recombination rate by using a tubular perovskite component. It is known that the conductivity of CH3NH3PbI3 renders the recombination of PeSCs occurring at perovskite/HTL and TiO2/perovskite interfaces simultaneously. Therefore, the retarded recombination could be attributed to the tubular perovskite frame because the tube forest leads to a larger surface for the interfacial charge separation between perovskite and spiro-OMeTAD. In contrast to the decreased recombination rate, electron transport time for tubular PeSCs, as indicated in Fig. 2(b), is nearly equivalent to that of the planar devices. This means that tubular morphology has no apparent influence on the charge carrier transport in the CH3NH3PbI3 phase. This is consistent with the fact that perovskite tubes have a crystalline structure similar to the planar ones. Besides this, the length of the tubes, as mentioned above, is ∼1 μm, much shorter than the nanowires. Moreover, the plots of open circuit voltage (Voc) against photon flux (I0) for tubular and planar PeSCs display a semi-logarithm relationship. From these curves, the ideality factor (m) can be estimated by using the following expression,
(1)
where
q is the elementary charge, kB is the Boltzmann constant, and T is the absolute temperature. It is found that ideality factors for tubular and planar PeSCs are 1.87 and 1.95, respectively. These values are roughly equal since the CH3NH3PbI3 tubes and slabs in this work are constituted of nearly identical perovskite nanocrystals, which leads to a similar distribution of the surface states. Interestingly, the photoluminescence spectra of the two CH3NH3PbI3 films almost coincide (see Fig. S4 of the ESI). This further indicates the likeness of the surface state profiles of the tube and the slab. Moreover, those ideality factors are also shown to deviate from unity, implying the importance of the recombination reaction via the surface states to energy loss. Additionally, sluggish recombination in tubular perovskite based devices was also shown by the photovoltage decay technique. In Fig. 2(d), the evolution of electron lifetime in the dark (τocvd, inversely proportional to the charge recombination rate) indicates that perovskite tubes not only serve as light-collectors but also play a role in slowing down the recombination rate by about 20-fold. This result further implies that the tubular perovskite frame primarily decreases the recombination of the holes in the HTL with the electrons injected in the TiO2 matrix rather than those localized in the CH3NH3PbI3 layer. The reason is that perovskite tubes are expected to accelerate the rate of back reaction with the free electrons inside the perovskite forest due to its larger surface area. Our observations, however, do not support this hypothesis. Furthermore, the primary pathway for charge recombination as depicted in Fig. 3 could be the reduction of the holes by the electrons in TiO2 film diffusing across the perovskite tubes (Path I). Direct recombination at TiO2/HTL interfaces (Path II) is less important. This assumption is based upon that fact that CH3NH3PbI3 is more conductive relative to spiro-OMeTAD by two orders. Therefore, incomplete coverage of the tubes over the TiO2 layer limits the back reaction of the electrons crossing the CH3NH3PbI3 layer. By contrast, the TiO2 layer in the planar devices is fully covered by the CH3NH3PbI3 slab. The enlarged perovskite region implies a stronger recombination.

The curves of incident power conversion efficiency (IPCE) for tubular and planar perovskite based devices are displayed in Fig. 4(a). We observed that planar perovskite cells yield an IPCE slightly over the tubular ones. This is consistent with the results of short circuit current density (Jsc) as indicated in Fig. 4(d). However, Fig. 4(b) shows that the planar cells show a higher light-harvesting efficiency (ηLH) in the wavelength range from 400 to 750 nm for more loading amounts of CH3NH3PbI3 in those cells. According to the data of IPCE and ηLH, we obtained charge collection efficiency (ηCOL) by using the expression of ηCOL = IPCE/ηLH. And ηCOL is plotted as a function of wavelength in Fig. 3(c). We can see the tubular cells yield a higher ηCOL over the planar counterparts. It supports our conclusion that the usage of the tubular perovskite frame leads to a limited interfacial recombination and more efficient charge collection in turn. Moreover, J–V characteristics of the tubular and planar cells are depicted in Fig. 4(d). The corresponding photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table 1. We found that cell efficiency (PCE) of tubular cell reaches 7.4%, which is 1.7 times higher than the planar ones. The improved PCE is partly related to the Voc of tubular cells, which is 42 mV higher than the planar ones. More importantly, the fill factor is improved greatly by using the tubular perovskite frame, and series resistance is reduced accordingly. Certainly, this is due to the tubular structure of CH3NH3PbI3, which decreases the effective area of perovskite for charge recombination.
PeSC

V
oc/mV

J
sc/mA cm−2
FF
PCE/%

R
s/Ω cm2

R
sh/Ω cm2

a All cells were irradiated under the illumination intensity of 100 mW cm−2.

Tube
841
17.6
0.50
7.4
9.67
154.2
Slab
799
18.3
0.30
4.3
25.3
47.4
In summary, we have prepared organometal halide perovskite solar cells in which mesoscopic CH3NH3PbI3 tubes, serving as a light-absorbing layer, were deposited successfully onto the top surface of TiO2 film. Compared with the traditional planar perovskite layer, the tube-like perovskite frame is shown to promote charge separation at CH3NH3PbI3/HTL interfaces, but does not affect the rate of charge transport. As a result, tubular perovskite cells display higher open circuit voltage. However, this is not merely attributed to the enlarged contact area between CH3NH3PbI3 and Spiro-OMeTAD. More importantly, perovskite tubes are found to decrease the charge recombination rate. According to photovoltage decay measurements, tubular perovskite based devices display the recombination slower than the planar counterpart by 20-fold. The retarded recombination cannot be attributed to the variation of the surface states of CH3NH3PbI3 nanocrystals. Instead, it likely originates from the tube-like morphology. Certainly, the presence of CH3NH3PbI3 tubes results in the loss of light-harvesting efficiency. However, the improved charge collecting efficiency offsets this energy loss and leads to a much higher fill factor. Therefore, the fabrication of perovskite tubes with larger loading density in the future work is expected to enhance spectral responses and maintain sluggish recombination simultaneously.
The support from the National Nature Science Foundation of China (21103123) and Tianjin Natural Science Foundation (13JCZDJC32400) is gratefully acknowledged.
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details, additional morphologies of the perovskite tube and slab, Nyquist plots of IMPS/IMVS, UV-Vis spectra, and normalized fluorescence spectra. See DOI: 10.1039/c5cc04607f
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015