 DOI: 10.1039/C9TC02744K
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 10247-10256


Wei-Hsiang
Chen
,

Linlin
Qiu
,

Pengyun
Zhang
,

Pei-Cheng
Jiang
,

Pingfan
Du
,

Lixin
Song
*,

Jie
Xiong
* and 

Frank
Ko


Key Laboratory of Advanced Textile Materials and Manufacturing Technology, Ministry of Education, Hangzhou 310018, P. R. China

Silk Institute, College of Materials and Textiles, Zhejiang Sci-Tech University, Hangzhou 310018, P. R. China. E-mail: lxsong12@zstu.edu.cn; jxiong@zstu.edu.cn; Fax: +86 571 86843603; Tel: +86 571 86843586

Institute of Physics, Academia Sinica, Taipei 11529, Taiwan

Department of Materials Engineering, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada

Received
23rd May 2019
, Accepted 30th July 2019
First published on 1st August 2019
To significantly increase the applicability of inverted-planar flexible perovskite solar cells (PSCs), the achievement of high electrical conductivity, excellent moisture resistance and reproducibility of a poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) hole transport layer with simple fabrication (low cost and ease of mass manufacture) during spin-coating is the goal pursued by researchers. Herein, for the first time, we propose a facile strategy of cryo-controlled quasi-congealing spin-coating to improve the PEDOT:PSS quality to a new extent. The congealed surface and strengthened hydrogen-bonds between solvent and PSS chains can effectively suppress the moisture corrosion during spin-coating. In addition, the electrical conductivity of PEDOT:PSS can be further enhanced owing to the uniformity of PEDOT:PSS grains and a greater co-solvent effect facilitated by induced Young's modulus during spin-coating. A considerably smooth and uniform film with improved conductivity can be achieved even when fabricated in a high humidity environment. Furthermore, this smooth and passivated PEDOT:PSS can facilitate highly crystalline perovskite and better interfacial contact between them, which not only enhances the efficiency, but also greatly improves repeated mechanical deformation stability of PSCs. As a result, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of rigid and flexible PSCs can be improved to 17.65% and 15.13%, respectively. Both devices show about 14% enhancement in PCE compared to the conventional one.

Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have attracted tremendous research interests owing to their promising characteristics such as broadband absorption, high charge mobility, low cost, flexible device design and solution-processable fabrication. Just within a short time span, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of PSCs has been optimized amazingly from 3.8% to 24.2%. Recently, inverted-planar p–i–n heterojunction PSCs with the structure of ITO/hole transport layer (HTL)/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/cathode have attracted significant attention because of their simple processing procedure, little hysteresis and high efficiency flexible device design. This promising configuration is convinced to be more close to commercialization compared with the mesoporous architecture.

For inverted-planar PSC devices, the HTL usually plays an indispensable role in effectively blocking electrons and transporting holes at the same time. In addition, it also impacts the quality of the upper perovskite layer. Among numerous types of flexible perovskite solar cells (PSCs), poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulphonic acid) (PEDOT:PSS) is the most popular HTL owing to its high mechanical flexibility, hole affinity, and transparency. However, the drawback of low electrical conductivity may seriously hinder the photovoltaic performance and applicability of the PSCs. To deal with this issue, several approaches have been performed including co-solvent incorporation, dopamine-copolymerization, and post-treatment of PEDOT:PSS with water-containing methanol and other dopants, composites, or surfactants. Among the above methods, introducing organic co-solvents into PEDOT:PSS is the most effective and common way to improve the electrical conductivity. However, the co-solvent effects are still limited due to the easy saturation of all the available bonding sites. Therefore, strengthening the hydrogen-bonds between the co-solvent and PSS chains might be a possibility to further improve the conductivity.
In addition to the electrical conductivity, poor moisture resistance and high chemical-activity of PEDOT:PSS are other bothering issues for scientists, which may significantly hamper its applicability, leading to poor stability and reproducibility of the related PSCs. As is known, the fabrication conditions of PEDOT:PSS were commonly restricted to a lower humidity environment (<40%) to avoid moisture corrosion during spin-coating. Some researchers even tried to introduce dopants into PEDOT:PSS, reduce the PSS ratio or apply other post-treatments to enhance the moisture resistance. However, moisture corrosion can still have a non-ignorable impact on PEDOT:PSS film formation during spin-coating. Moreover, air flow (or collision) during spin-coating can also cause serious adverse effects on the uniformity and stability of the thin film especially for chemically active PEDOT:PSS, which might lead to lower conductivity and back-recombination of the carriers. Fabricating the PEDOT:PSS film in a glove box is considered the most promising option, however, with the significant increases of fabrication difficulties and the cost. To advance its applicability, a new strategy for fabricating the PEDOT:PSS film that simultaneously exhibits excellent conductivity, high moisture resistance and low chemical-activity during spin-coating and simple (low cost) fabrication design is advantageous.
In this study, we developed a simple strategy of cryo-controlled quasi-congealing spin-coating to simultaneously enhance the electrical conductivity and moisture resistance and passivate the PEDOT:PSS surface during high-speed spin-coating. The quasi-congealing of the PEDOT:PSS film can restrict the random, disordered sliding and agglomeration of the PEDOT:PSS grains among each other upon spin-coating. In addition, the congealed surface and strengthened hydrogen-bonds between solvent and PSS chains can work as protection layers to suppress the moisture corrosion and air collision. A considerably smooth, uniform and leakage-free PEDOT:PSS film could be obtained even when spin-coating under high humidity conditions (RH ∼ 70%). In addition, the electrical conductivity of the well-treated (by co-solvent) PEDOT:PSS can be further enhanced owing to the uniformity of the PEDOT:PSS grains and a greater co-solvent effect facilitated by the enhanced Young's modulus of the film during spin-coating. Flexible PEDOT:PSS-based PSCs with high efficiency and reproducibility can be achieved without the use of a glove box (even in a high humid environment), which is beneficial for mass manufacture and wearable device application. Moreover, a smoother and passivated PEDOT:PSS film facilitated by quasi-congealing can lead to highly crystalline perovskite formation, which greatly enhances the photovoltaic performance and repeated mechanical deformation stability of PSCs. The best rigid and flexible device based on cryo-controlled quasi-congealing spin-coating can have efficiency as high as 17.65% and 15.13% in ambient air fabrication (RH ∼ 40%), compared to 15.60% and 13.37% of the conventional device, and with a small reduction even when PEDOT:PSS is fabricated in a high humidity environment.

Glass/ITO and PET/ITO substrates were purchased from Advanced Electronic Technology Co., Ltd. Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS), phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PC61BM), and 4-tert-butylpyridine (tBP) were supplied by Xi’an Polymer Light Technology Corporation. CH3NH3I (MAI) and PbI2 were purchased from Kunshan Sunlaite New Energy Technology Co., Ltd. Other materials were purchased from Aladdin.


Inverted-planar p–i–n perovskite solar cells (PSCs) were fabricated on laser-patterned, indium tin oxide (ITO) coated glass (rigid) and PET (flexible) (10 Ω sq−1) substrates, respectively. Both of them were sequentially cleaned by ultra-sonication with deionised water, acetone, ethyl alcohol, and isopropyl alcohol (IPA) for about 15 min and then dried at high-temperature with clean dry nitrogen. After cleaning, the substrates were treated with ultraviolet (UV) ozone for 20 min to enhance the surface wettability. For the proposed cryo-controlled quasi-congealing spin-coating, low temperature (∼5 °C) PEDOT:PSS aqueous solution (with small amounts of DMSO) was spin-coated on the clean substrate at 0 °C at 5000 rpm for 30 s, and then annealed at 120 °C for 1 h. Detailed illustrations and mechanism of this technique are clearly described in the following section. The moisture-resistant CH3NH3PbI3·xtBP was produced by two-step spin-coating. Firstly, the PbI2 precursor (1.2 M, dissolved in DMF and stirred for 1 h at 70 °C) with 40 μL mL−1 of tBP was spin-coated on the PEDOT:PSS substrate at 4500 rpm for 30 s and dried at 70 °C for 15 min. After the formation of PbI2·xtBP, CH3NH3I (12 mg mL−1, dissolved in the IPA solvent) was continuously spin-coated at 4000 rpm for 30 s to form CH3NH3PbI3·xtBP and annealed at 100 °C for 1 h. For the electron-transport layer (ETL), PC61BM (20 mg mL−1 in chlorobenzene) was spin-coated on top of the perovskite layer at 2000 rpm for 30 s and annealed at 80 °C for 1 h. The fabrication was completed by thermal evaporation of Ag as an electrode with a thickness of approximately 100 nm and an effective area of 0.06 cm2. The whole fabrication could be performed well in a high humidity environment (RH > 40%), which shows that the use of a glove box is not necessary. The fabrication process is illustrated in Fig. S1 (ESI).


The photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the cells were measured using a Keithley 2400-SCS source meter under AM 1.5 illumination with an intensity of 100 mW cm−2. The crystal structures of PbI2 and MAPbI3 were analysed by X-ray diffraction (XRD, Thermo ARL-X’TRA, America) with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.5418 Å). Field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM, Ultra55, ZEISS, Germany) and atomic force microscopy (AFM, XEI-100E) were employed to analyse the morphologies. The incident photon-to-current conversion efficiencies (IPCEs) of the cells were measured with a quantum-efficiency (QE)/IPCE test system (Solar Cell Scan100/Zolix). Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were carried out using an electrochemical workstation (Zennium Pro, Germany). The steady-state and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) spectra were measured by using a PG2000-Pro-EX spectrophotometer (Shanghai Ideaoptics Corporation) and a transient fluorescence spectrometer (FLS980, Edinburgh Instruments, EI), respectively. The contact properties were characterised using a contact-angle instrument (Krüss Optronic, Germany). The UV-visible (UV-vis) absorption was measured using a UV-vis spectrophotometer (Lambda 900, America).


Cryo-controlled quasi-congealing spin-coating was performed to improve the PEDOT:PSS film quality, leading to excellent photovoltaic performance of the perovskite solar cells (PSCs). Fig. 1 demonstrates the discrepancy between the conventional and proposed cryo-controlled quasi-congealing spin-coating of the PEDOT:PSS (QC-PEDOT:PSS) film. For conventional spin-coating, a non-uniform film with poor morphology usually appears owing to the poor moisture resistance of PEDOT:PSS, which indicates that moisture corrosion during spin-coating might significantly worsen the film formation, leading to a non-ideal and defect-rich PEDOT:PSS film as shown in Fig. 1a. In addition, air flow (or collision) during spin-coating can also cause damage and negative chemical reactions to the PEDOT:PSS film. The above factors may lead to poor stability and reproducibility of the PEDOT:PSS-based PSCs. However, with cryo-controlled quasi-congealing spin-coating, a considerably smooth and uniform PEDOT:PSS film can be obtained even when fabricated under high humidity conditions (RH ∼ 70%) as shown in Fig. 1b. To perform this novel cryo-controlled quasi-congealing technique, we cooled down the substrate to 0 °C and spin-coated low temperature (∼5 °C) PEDOT:PSS on it. Since the PEDOT:PSS precursor contained lots of water, the film became quasi-congealing after uniform spreading during high-speed spin-coating. The Young's modulus of the film would largely enhance, which indicates that the hydrogen-bonds between water molecules and PSS chains are greatly strengthened. The easy, disordered sliding and agglomeration of PEDOT:PSS grains among each other upon spin-coating can hence be restricted as they are weakly connected at room temperature. In addition, the congealed surface and strengthened hydrogen-bonds between solvent and the PSS chains can both work as protection layers to effectively suppress the moisture corrosion and passivate the chemically active PEDOT:PSS surface with air collision. The water-contact-angle experimental results in Fig. S2 (ESI) show the increase of water contact angle from 10.5° to 20.6° for the PEDOT:PSS film upon cryo-controlled quasi-congealing spin-coating, which implies a higher moisture resistance of QC-PEDOT:PSS films. Fig. 1b demonstrates the schematics of the operation principle and SEM top-view image of the QC-PEDOT:PSS film. The passivated and congealed surface of PEDOT:PSS can greatly eliminate the negative impacts of moisture corrosion on film formation. A smooth, uniform and defect-free PEDOT:PSS film can be obtained even when spin-coated in a high humidity environment (∼70%), which largely enhances the photovoltaic performance and reproducibility of the PSCs.

Typically, the spin-coating condition of the PEDOT:PSS film is restricted to 15–40% humidity to ensure its performance. However, with cryo-controlled quasi-congealing spin-coating, humidity restriction is no longer an issue. In order to test the moisture resistance and investigate the micro-structure of conventional and QC-PEDOT:PSS films when fabricated under different RH conditions, we have carried out AFM studies. Highly smooth surfaces for all the ITO/PEDOT:PSS samples are observed. For the conventional spin-coating process in a typical humidity environment (RH ∼ 30%), some disordered cluster agglomeration with oblate ellipsoidal shape can be observed on the surface (marked by circles in Fig. 2a). The formation of the cluster agglomeration can be due to the disordered sliding of PEDOT:PSS grains and chemical reactions at the chemically active surface by air flowing (or collision) and moisture corrosion during spin-coating. The films became more agglomerative and full of defects when spin-coating in a high humidity environment (RH ∼ 70%) as shown in Fig. 2b. The huge-size non-uniform cluster agglomeration and defects on the surface would seriously reduce the conductivity and cause carrier recombination issues, leading to poor photovoltaic performance of the PSCs. For the QC-PEDOT:PSS film, a very compact, uniform and defect-free morphology could be obtained. In addition, no obvious morphology change and agglomeration occurred even when fabricated in a high humidity environment as shown in Fig. 2c and d. This indicates excellent defect passivation and moisture resistance for QC-PEDOT:PSS during spin-coating. Fig. 2e and f shows the 3D AFM images of both conventional and QC-PEDOT:PSS films fabricated under high humidity conditions (RH ∼ 70%). The surface roughness decreased from 3.5 nm for the conventional PEDOT:PSS to 1.0 nm for the QC-PEDOT:PSS film, which clearly implies that a smooth, uniformly distributed and leakage-free PEDOT:PSS film can be achieved by cryo-controlled quasi-congealing spin-coating. Fig. 2g demonstrates the trends of surface roughness versus humidity conditions for fabrication of both conventional and QC-PEDOT:PSS films. The experimental results imply that the QC-PEDOT:PSS film can exhibit a smoother surface, which is independent of fabrication humidity.
Next we investigated the effect of the cryo-controlled quasi-congealing spin-coating on the electrical conductivity of PEDOT:PSS films. To measure the film conductivity, the four point probe (4PP) method was performed. As demonstrated in Fig. 3a, a good electrical conductivity of about 412 S cm−1 could be observed for the conventional PEDOT:PSS film spin-coated under standard humidity conditions (RH ∼ 30%), which is owing to the proper addition of co-solvent into PEDOT:PSS in this work. As the fabrication humidity was increased, a serious deterioration in conductivity would be detected especially when the humidity is more than 60%, which is owing to the leakages and disordered agglomeration at the surface caused by moisture corrosion. For PEDOT:PSS with cryo-controlled quasi-congealing spin-coating, a significant enhancement of the electrical conductivity of about 1012 S cm−1 can be observed. This improvement can be attributed to the uniformity of PEDOT:PSS grains and a greater co-solvent effect facilitated by enhanced Young's modulus of the film. The enhancement of the Young's modulus of the film during spin-coating can induce the interaction between the co-solvent and PEDOT chains, which is the main driving force for conformational change of the PEDOT chains. This conformational change may lead to an increase in charge-carrier mobility, the main reason for the conductivity enhancement.Fig. 3b shows a schematic of the operation principle. With conventional spin-coating, the non-uniformity, disordered sliding and cluster agglomeration of the PEDOT:PSS grains caused by moisture corrosion and air collision may negatively reduce the ordering of PEDOT nanocrystals and PSS chains, which would seriously limit the co-solvent effect and reduce the conductivity. In contrast, the enhanced Young's modulus of the film by cryo-controlled quasi-congealing treatment during spin-coating can effectively restrict the random, disordered sliding of the PEDOT:PSS grains and PSS chains. The ordered and uniform arrangement of the PEDOT:PSS grains can facilitate the co-solvent effect on rearranging the PSS chain network to form closely packed and higher order domains of PEDOT nanocrystals, which can suppress defect generation at the interface. The strengthened hydrogen-bonds between the co-solvent and the PSS chains can have a significant impact on the dipole–dipole interaction between the polar group of co-solvent and PEDOT chain, resulting in higher electrical conductivity. For this QC-PEDOT:PSS film, in addition, there is almost no reduction in electrical conductivity even when spin-coated in a high humidity environment. This can be attributed to the film passivation facilitated by quasi-congealing treatment as demonstrated in Fig. 1b and 2d. The experimental results imply not only higher electrical conductivity, but also excellent moisture resistance for the QC-PEDOT:PSS film during spin-coating.
For inverted-planar PSCs, the hole transport layer (HTL) usually plays a key role in effectively blocking the electron recombination and transporting holes. In addition, it also impacts the quality of the upper perovskite layer. To advance applicability, we herein fabricated a moisture-resistant CH3NH3PbI3–tBP film (this device can be fabricated without a glove box, RH > 40%) instead of typical CH3NH3PbI3 and then investigated the film quality of this moisture-resistant perovskite on the conventional and proposed QC-PEDOT:PSS films by SEM, XRD, and UV-vis. In the following, we labeled conventional PEDOT:PSS and QC-PEDOT:PSS fabricated at RH = 30% and 70% as C-PEDOT:PSS-RH30,70 and QC-PEDOT:PSS-RH30,70, respectively. The surface morphology determined via SEM is shown in Fig. 4a–d. The morphology of the perovskite film grown on C-PEDOT:PSS-RH30 shows a flat surface with big size grains (∼900 nm). However, when grown on C-PEDOT:PSS-RH70, smaller size grains with lots of obvious leakage and defects would appear owing to the underneath agglomerative and defect-rich PEDOT:PSS film as depicted in Fig. 4b. This non-ideal morphology of perovskite may seriously reduce the stability and photovoltaic performance of PSCs. In contrast, the perovskite films grown on both QC-PEDOT:PSS-RH30,70 devices are considerably compact and pinhole-free with larger grain sizes (∼1.3 μm) as demonstrated in Fig. 4c and d. This is owing to the higher order domains of the PSS chains and PEDOT nanocrystals of QC-PEDOT:PSS, which can strengthen the chemical oxidation to the upper perovskite, leading to higher coordination (morphology-modification) between tBP and CH3NH3PbI3. Fig. 4e demonstrates the theoretical models of CH3NH3PbI3–tBP grown on C-PEDOT:PSS and QC-PEDOT:PSS films, respectively. Stronger coordination between tBP and CH3NH3PbI3 caused by higher order and smooth QC-PEDOT:PSS would lead to greater-size grains of the perovskite. In addition, it can strengthen the interaction between the nitrogen atom at the end of tBP and Pb2+ in CH3NH3PbI3, leading to a greater surrounding hydrophobic tertiary butyl group of tBP (as shown in Fig. 4f) and further increasing the moisture resistance.Fig. 5a shows the XRD analysis; the peak-height intensity of characteristic X-ray diffraction peaks for perovskite grown on both QC-PEDOT:PSS-RH30, 70 devices is about 45% higher than on C-PEDOT:PSS-RH30, which indicates an improved crystallization. The UV-vis spectra shown in Fig. 5b exhibited similar absorption intensity from UV down to the near-infrared range for both QC-PEDOT:PSS-RH30, 70-based devices. For conventional devices, however, a deterioration in absorption intensity especially for the C-PEDOT:PSS-RH70 device is observed, which was consistent with the SEM and XRD results.
The PL quenching efficiency of perovskite onto different PEDOT:PSS films was also investigated to evaluate the charge-transfer efficiency between them. As demonstrated in Fig. 6a, the QC-PEDOT:PSS-based device shows higher quenching efficiency than the conventional PEDOT:PSS-based device especially for high humidity conditions for fabrication; this implies better hole transfer in the QC-PEDOT:PSS-based devices. To further investigate the film quality and interface, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was carried out to measure electron–hole recombination for both conventional and QC-PEDOT:PSS-based PSCs. Fig. 6b shows the characteristic Nyquist patterns and fitting model of the fabricated PSCs with different PEDOT:PSS-based PSCs. The fitting internal series resistance (Rs) and electron–hole recombination resistance (Rct) for different PEDOT:PSS-based PSCs are provided in Table 1. The main arcs in the low-frequency region represent the electron–hole recombination resistance (Rct), which was increased from 1456.2 Ω to 1577.5 Ω in the PSCs with QC-PEDOT:PSS-RH30. For QC-PEDOT:PSS-RH70-based PSCs, high electron–hole recombination resistance still maintains (1588.6 Ω), while the C-PEDOT:PSS-RH70-based one shows poor resistance (895.4 Ω) as demonstrated in Fig. 6c. This further confirms that the quasi-congealing of the PEDOT:PSS film could work as a protection layer to effectively suppress the moisture corrosion and block the negative effect of electron–hole recombination. Time resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) measurements were also performed, and the obtained results are shown in Fig. 6d. All experimental data can be well-fitted to biexponential decay function I(t) = I0 + A1exp(−t−t0/τ1) + A2exp(−t−t0/τ2). Generally, the fast decay constant τ1 contributes to the free carrier quenching at the interface, while the slow decay constant τ2 presents radiative recombination of the carrier. The average decay lifetime can be obtained by the following equation , and detailed parameters are all listed in Table 2. The experimental results indicate that QC-PEDOT:PSS-RH30-based PSCs result in reduced average decay lifetimes from 23.07 ns to 14.81 ns and with no significant enhancement in average decay lifetime (16.39 ns) for QC-PEDOT:PSS fabrication RH increased to 70%. This result is consistent with the expected larger grain size, lower traps and defects of the perovskite on the QC-PEDOT:PSS film. A reduced decay lifetime clearly indicates the reduction in carrier recombination in the perovskite films, which is beneficial for photovoltaic performance.
Sample

R
s (Ω)

R
ct (Ω)
C-PEDOT:PSS-RH30
20.1
1456.2
C-PEDOT:PSS-RH70
30.0
895.4
QC-PEDOT:PSS-RH30
15.1
1577.5
QC-PEDOT:PSS-RH70
15.3
1588.6
Sample

A
1 (%)

τ
1 (ns)

A
2 (%)

τ
2 (ns)

τ
avg (ns)
C-PEDOT:PSS-RH30
47
7.97
53
36.46
23.07
QC-PEDOT:PSS-RH30
58
4.56
42
28.95
14.81
QC-PEDOT:PSS-RH70
55
4.91
45
30.42
16.39
The photovoltaic performances of the inverted-planar PSCs with an identical structure of glass/ITO/HTL/CH3NH3PbI3–tBP/PC61BM/Ag with different HTLs (conventional and QC-PEDOT:PSS film) were investigated. Fig. 7a shows J–V curves of the different types of inverted-planar PEDOT:PSS-based PSCs. Both C-PEDOT:PSS-RH30 and QC-PEDOT:PSS-RH30-based PSCs show excellent photovoltaic performances. However, the QC-PEDOT:PSS-based one shows greater PCE than the conventional one, with Voc = 1.02 V, Jsc = 21.13 mA cm−2, FF = 0.82, and PCE = 17.67%. The enhancement in PCE can be contributed to better crystallization of the perovskite and increased conductivity of the passivated QC-PEDOT:PSS film. The detail information about short-circuit current density, open-circuit voltage and fill factor of each PSC are all listed in Table 3. Fig. 7b demonstrates the trends of PCEs for both conventional and QC-PEDOT:PSS-based PSCs versus (PEDOT:PSS) fabrication humidity conditions. For fabrication performed at higher humidity, the PSCs with C-PEDOT:PSS exhibited a rapid deterioration in performance; the PCE decreased to 8.44% for the C-PEDOT:PSS-RH70-based device. In contrast, the PSC with QC-PEDOT:PSS-based showed no obvious deterioration when fabricated in the high RH ranges. The J–V curves and detailed information on the PSCs with both conventional and QC-PEDOT:PSS films fabricated in different humidity environments are demonstrated in Fig. S3 and Tables S1, S2 (ESI). The experimental results indicate excellent moisture resistance and superior film quality for the PEDOT:PSS film after cryo-controlled quasi-congealing treatment, which largely improves the photovoltaic performance of the PSC. Fig. 7c shows the J–V curves of the inverted-planar PSCs with C-PEDOT:PSS-RH70 and QC-PEDOT:PSS-RH70 films; no obvious hysteresis of the photocurrent could be observed for the QC-PEDOT:PSS-RH70-based PSC with the changes in the sweep direction or the rate. This presents the absence of traps and defects (by moisture corrosion) in this device, which are the main origins of photocurrent hysteresis. A better interfacial contact between the perovskite and compact, passivated QC-PEDOT:PSS film is hence crucial for enhancing hole transfer at the interface and reducing the hysteresis of the device. The corresponding IPCE spectra in Fig. 7d demonstrate the increases in external IPCE for QC-PEDOT:PSS-based PSCs, which is in accordance with previous results. The statistical device PCEs of 3 sets of 20 PSC devices each with conventional and QC-PEDOT:PSS films were also investigated and are shown in Fig. 7e. The experimental results demonstrate that QC-PEDOT:PSS-based (both QC-PEDOT:PSS-RH30, 70) PSCs exhibit not only higher efficiency, but also better reproducibility, which significantly overcome the reproducibility issue for PEDOT:PSS-based PSCs.
RH ≈ 30%

J (mA cm−2)

V (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
QC-PEDOT
21.13
1.02
82
17.67
C-PEDOT
20.47
0.97
80
15.90
In addition to high PCEs and reproducibility, excellent mechanical flexibility is also a big issue for PSC applicability, especially for wearable devices. The photovoltaic performance, J–V curves and detailed information of the flexible C-PEDOT:PSS-RH30-based and QC-PEDOT:PSS-RH30-based PSCs after mechanical bending were evaluated and are presented in Fig. 8a and Fig. S4, Tables S3, S4 (ESI) along with a photograph of the flexible PSC without encapsulation. QC-PEDOT:PSS-RH30-based PSCs can maintain better PCE than conventional devices after the mechanical bending up to 20 cycles. For both C-PEDOT:PSS-RH70 and QC-PEDOT:PSS-RH70-baesd PSCs as shown in Fig. 8b and Fig. S4, Tables S5, S6 (ESI), conventional devices show serious decay in PCE after several times of mechanical bending. In contrast, good PCE was still maintained after 20 times of mechanical bending for QC-PEDOT:PSS-RH70-based PSCs. The inset in Fig. 8b shows a schematic of the operation principle of conventional and QC-PEDOT:PSS-based devices before and after mechanical bending. For conventional PEDOT:PSS, leakage and defects on the film caused by moisture corrosion usually make the upper perovskite film non-flat and defect-rich. This non-ideal perovskite and PEDOT:PSS film is easily damaged after several times of bending, which leads to severe charge recombination and very poor photovoltaic performance. However, the QC-PEDOT:PSS film could significantly overcome the moisture corrosion and have a good defect passivation at the surface, which ensures better crystallization of the upper perovskite and excellent interfacial contact between them. This well-treated device hence could greatly tolerate repeated mechanical deformation, which advances the potential for its wearable applicability and commercialization in the future.

In summary, we show herein a simple strategy of cryo-controlled quasi-congealing spin-coating to intrinsically enhance the PEDOT:PSS film quality and improve the photovoltaic performance of the related PSCs. The quasi-congealing of the PEDOT:PSS film at low temperature can greatly strengthen the hydrogen-bonds between solvent and PSS chains, which effectively passivate the chemically active surface from air collision and work as a protection layer to suppress the moisture corrosion during film formation. In addition, the enhancement of the Young's modulus of the film by quasi-congealing treatment can induce the interaction between the co-solvent and PEDOT chains, leading to higher electrical conductivity. A considerably smooth, uniformly distributed and defect-free PEDOT:PSS film with improved conductivity can be obtained independent of humidity conditions (without the use of a glove box). In addition, highly crystalline perovskite can be facilitated by this passivated PEDOT:PSS. The best rigid and flexible device based on cryo-controlled quasi-congealing spin-coating can have efficiency as high as 17.65% and 15.13%, respectively, in ambient air fabrication (RH ∼ 40%), which shows about 14% enhancement in PCE compared to the conventional device. Moreover, the PEDOT:PSS-based PSCs with cryo-controlled quasi-congealing can better afford repeated mechanical deformation, which greatly advances the wearable device application and commercialization.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the Zhejiang Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China (LQ19E030020 and LY18F050011), the Applied Basic Research Project of China National Textile and Apparel Council (J201801), the Fundamental Research Funds of Zhejiang Sci-Tech University (2019Q011), the Science Foundation (17012144-Y) and the Program of Key Laboratory of Advanced Textile Materials and Manufacturing Technology, Ministry of Education (2017QN02) of Zhejiang Sci-Tech University.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9tc02744k
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019