 DOI: 10.1039/D2TC00045H
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 6710-6716


Zhenye
Li
,

Feng
Peng
*,

Xitang
Qian
,

Jingwen
Li
,

Zhiming
Zhong
,

Lei
Ying
*,

Hongbin
Wu
,

Fei
Huang
 and 

Yong
Cao


Institute of Polymer Optoelectronic Materials and Devices, State Key Laboratory of Luminescent Materials and Devices, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510640, China. E-mail: pengfeng2012@163.com; msleiying@scut.edu.cn

College of Mechanical Engineering, University of South China, Hengyang 421001, China

South China Institute of Collaborative Innovation, Dongguan 523808, China

Received
4th January 2022
, Accepted 24th March 2022
First published on 30th March 2022
The progress in all-polymer solar cells (all-PSCs) is often accompanied with morphology evolution of the light-harvesting layer. However, the regulation of the bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) morphology of the active layer often encounters obstacles, mainly because of the undesired miscibility of the polymer donor and acceptor. Here, we regulated the BHJ morphology of all-PSCs based on an electron-donating PBDB-T (poly[(2,6-(4,8-bis(5-(2-ethylhexyl)thiophen-2-yl)-benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithio-phene))-alt-(5,5-(1′,3′-di-2-thienyl-5′,7′-bis(2-ethylhexyl)benzo[1′,2′-c:4′,5′-c′]dithiophene-4,8-dione)]) and an electron-accepting polymer PFA1 via selection of solvents, and found that the PBDB-T:PFA1 film processed with chlorobenzene revealed a smaller phase separation scale than the chloroform processed film, mainly because of the significantly improved miscibility in the PBDB-T:PFA1 blend. Benefitting from the optimized BHJ morphology, the PBDB-T:PFA1 device processed by chlorobenzene achieved a satisfactory power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 15%, obviously higher than that of 12.25% for the chloroform processed device. Meanwhile, the voltage loss of the chlorobenzene processed device is well suppressed comparing with the chloroform processed device, demonstrating unexpected advances of morphology evolution for all-PSCs.

Polymer solar cells (PSCs) have a lot of advantages in terms of molecular structure design, continuous solution processability by using the roll-to-roll technique, and so forth, enabling their great potential for application in renewable energy, portable electronics, and other fields. Recently, the emergence of non-fullerene acceptors (NFA) significantly promoted the progress in PSCs because of the dramatically improved capability of harvesting solar photons. Among so far developed PSCs, all-polymer solar cells (all-PSCs) that consist of an electron-donating conjugated polymer as the donor and an electron-deficient polymer as the acceptor have received a lot of attention because of their excellent stability in the active layer. However, all-PSCs have many limitations, such as the low charge mobility of the polymer acceptor and the undesirable film morphology of the bulk-heterojunction light-harvesting layer, inducing lower photovoltaic performance compared to devices consisting of non-fullerene small molecules as acceptors.

The active layer of all-PSCs is composed of multi-phase components, including relatively pure polymer donor phase, polymer acceptor phase, and intermixed amorphous donor/acceptor phase regions. The crystal orientation in the polymer donor and polymer acceptor, nanoscale phase separation, phase purity, and the degree of mixing strongly affect the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of all-PSCs. In particular, when considering the short exciton diffusion length of π-conjugated organic semiconductors, the nanoscale phase separation of the polymer donor and polymer acceptor is one of the most critical factors that should be optimized when manufacturing high-efficiency devices. All-PSCs composed of two different polymers in the active layer often involve large-scale phase separation of two such components due to the fact that blending two different polymers is thermodynamically non-spontaneous. Generally, small-scale phase separation behavior occurs as the solution dynamically freezes from a thermodynamically stable blend film during the rapid evaporation of the solvent. Therefore, various processing techniques, such as annealing of the prefabricated films at certain temperatures, exposing the BHJ film to solvent vapor, and processing with rationally selected solvents and additives, are used to obtain the optimal morphology. However, such morphological control strategies (such as solvent vacuum annealing and thermal annealing) still need to be optimized toward future large-scale manufacturing.
Among the above-mentioned strategies, rational selection of solvents is an effective and straightforward approach to manage the drying kinetics and fine-tune the morphology of all-PSCs. In this respect, we regulated the BHJ morphology of all-PSCs based on PBDB-T (poly[(2,6-(4,8-bis(5-(2-ethylhexyl)thiophen-2-yl)-benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithio-phene))-alt-(5,5-(1′,3′-di-2-thienyl-5′,7′-bis(2-ethylhexyl)benzo[1′,2′-c:4′,5′-c′]dithiophene-4,8-dione)]) and PFA1 via rational solvent selection, and found that the PBDB-T:PFA1 film processed by chlorobenzene (CB) exhibited a smaller phase separation scale than the chloroform (CF)-processed film, primarily because of the significantly improved miscibility of PBDB-T/PFA1 in the PBDB-T:PFA1 film. Benefitting from the optimized BHJ morphology, the PBDB-T:PFA1 device processed by CB achieved a PCE of >15%, significantly higher than 12.25% for the CF-processed device. Meanwhile, the voltage loss of the CB-processed device is well suppressed comparing to the CF-processed device, demonstrating unexpected advances of morphology evolution for all-PSCs.

The chemical structures of PBDB-T and the recently developed electron-accepting polymer PFA1 are presented in Fig. 1a. The weight average molecular weight (Mw) and polydispersity indexes (PDIs) of PFA1 were determined to be 31.4 kg mol−1 and 2.34, respectively (Table S1 in the ESI). The highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energy levels of PFA1 were determined to be −5.74 and −3.84 eV, respectively (Table S1, ESI). The absorption of the CB-processed PBDB-T:PFA1 film slightly red-shifted by 2–4 nm than that of the CF- processed PBDB-T:PFA1 film, implying that CB can enhance the aggregation of PBDB-T and PFA1 (Fig. S1, ESI). To verify the regulatory effect of CB on polymer aggregation, we evaluated the solubility of PBDB-T and PYFT in CB and CF (Table S2, ESI) and found that the solubility of PBDB-T and PFA1 in CB is obviously worse than that in CF, which means a stronger aggregation of these two polymers in CB.

The photovoltaic performances of the PBDB-T:PFA1 device processed with CB and CF were evaluated by fabricating the conventional device: indium tin oxide (ITO)/poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS)/PBDB-T:PFA1/poly[(9,9-bis(3′-((N,N-dimethyl)-N-ethylammonium)-propyl)-2,7-fluorene)-alt-2,7-(9,9-dioctylfluorene)] (PFN-Br)/Ag. The weight ratio of PBDB-T:PFA1 was optimized to be 1:1, and the PBDB-T:PFA1 film was processed by CF or CB (with 1 vol% 1-chloronaphthalene, CN), followed by thermally annealing at 100 °C for 10 min. The J–V characteristics and error bar box estimated from 20 individual devices of photovoltaic parameters (open-circuit voltage, VOC; short-circuit current density, JSC; and fill factor, FF) of all-PSCs are illustrated in Fig. 1b and c, respectively, and the corresponding photovoltaic parameters and VOC loss are summarised in Table 1 (measured under AM 1.5 G simulated solar light at 100 mW cm−2).
Solvent

V
OC (V)

J
SC
 (mA cm−2)

J
SC,EQE
 (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCEavg (%)
PCEmax (%)

V
OC loss (eV)

a Processed with CF or CB (containing 1 vol% CN).
b Estimated from the J–V curves.
c Estimated from EQE measurements.
d Estimated from 20 individual devices.

CF
0.80
22.92 ± 0.43
22.48
65.75 ± 0.86
11.87 ± 0.37
12.25
0.66
CB
0.85
24.01 ± 0.51
23.22
72.93 ± 0.94
14.73 ± 0.29
15.02
0.61
The PBDB-T:PFA1 devices processed by CF presented a moderate PCE of 12.25% (VOC = 0.80 V, JSC = 22.92 ± 0.43 mA cm−2, and FF = 65.75 ± 0.86%). An apparently enhanced PCE of 15.02% with concurrently boosted photovoltaic parameters (VOC = 0.85 V, JSC = 24.01 ± 0.51 mA cm−2, and FF = 72.93 ± 0.94%) was realized by processing the bulk-heterojunction PBDB-T and PFA1 layer using CB. Note that a PCE of 12.1% of the CB-processed device is achieved at a relatively high thickness of 320 nm, while the CF-processed device delivers a moderate PCE of 8.7% at this thickness (Fig. S2a, ESI). We have also used other halogenated and nonhalogenated solvents, such as 1,2-dichlorobenzene (DCB), tetrahydrofuran (THF) and toluene, to process PBDB-T:PFA1 devices (Table S3, ESI), and found that the toluene-processed device delivers a PCE of 12.25%, indicating the potential of the system towards roll-to-roll green solvent processing. We also noted that the CB-processed device maintained 99% of its initial PCE (Fig. S2b, ESI) upon continuous annealing of the PBDB-T:PFA1 film at a moderate temperature of 75 °C in a nitrogen-filled glove box for 2000 h, mainly because of the stable BHJ morphology (Fig. S3, ESI). However, the CF-processed device exhibited an obvious PCE attenuation in the initial 200 h and retained ∼95% of the initial PCE after 2000 h thermal-aging under the same conditions because of the unstable BHJ morphology (Fig. S3, ESI). These features highlighted the importance of choosing an appropriate solvent for constructing thick-film and high-stability all-PSCs. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra confirmed the accuracy of the obtained JSC values, with a deviation less than 4% (Fig. 1d). Similar to the internal quantum efficiency (IQE) spectrum, the CB-processed device showed slightly higher EQE values than the CF-processed device from 500 to 800 nm. These features may be attributed to the more favorable film morphology of the PBDB-T:PFA1 film when processing with CB.
Note that the VOC values of CF- and CB-processed devices are different, and thus we studied the solvent effect on the voltage loss (Vloss) by the combination of the Fourier-transform photocurrent spectroscopy external quantum efficiency (FTPS-EQE) curve with the electroluminescence spectroscopy external quantum efficiency (EQEEL) curve (Fig. 2). The Vloss is the sum of three parameters ΔV1, ΔV2, and ΔV3. Here ΔV1 (Eg/q − VOCSQ) represents the radiation recombination loss (>Eg, optical bandgap), ΔV2 (VSQOC − VradOC) represents the radiation recombination loss originating from absorption below the bandgap, and ΔV3 (VradOC − VmeasOC) represents the non-radiative loss. The bandgap (Eg) of the PBDB-T:PFA1 film is estimated by the intersection of the EQE profile's edge tangent line and the edge maximum EQE profile's extension line.
According to the Shockley–Queisser (SQ) theory, the ΔV1 values of CF- and CB-processed devices were determined to be about 0.26 eV (Table 2). In combination with the FTPS-EQE and EQEEL curves, the CB-processed devices exhibited a ΔV2 of 0.05 V, which is obviously lower than that of the CF-processed devices (0.09 V). The calculation of ΔV3 is according to the equation, ΔV3 = − ln(EQEEL) kT/q, in which k represents the Boltzmann constant, T represents the temperature, and EQEEL represents the electroluminescence (EL) external quantum efficiency. The ΔV3 values of CF- and CB-processed devices were estimated to be 0.31 V and 0.30 V, respectively, which indicate the slightly suppressed non-radiative recombination loss of the latter. Detailed parameters are summarized in Table 2.
Solvent

E
g (eV)

V
SQOC (V)
ΔV1 (V)
ΔV2 (V)
ΔV3 (V)

V
measOC (V)

V
loss (V)
CF
1.46
1.20
0.26
0.09
0.31
0.80
0.66
CB
1.46
1.20
0.26
0.05
0.30
0.85
0.61

The exciton generation and dissociation efficiency of CF- and CB-processed devices can be reflected by the photocurrent density (Jph)–effective voltage (Veff) curve (Fig. S4, ESI). Here Jph can be calculated as the difference in the current density upon illumination (JL) and under dark conditions (JD). The calculation of Veff is based on the equation of Veff = V0 − Va. The voltage where JL = JD is defined as V0, and the applied bias during the measurement is defined as Va. In addition, the maximum exciton generation rate (Gmax) of CF- and CB-processed devices can be calculated using the equation Gmax = Jsat/(qL), where the saturation current density (Jsat) corresponds to the maximal Jph that tends to saturation, q represents the element charge, and L is the thickness of the PBDB-T:PFA1 blend film. Moreover, the exciton dissociation efficiency, P(E,T), is estimated on the basis of the equation P(E,T) = Jph/Jsat. As shown in Table S4 (ESI), the calculated Gmax of CB-processed devices is slightly higher than that of CF-processed devices, indicating a more effective exciton generation in the former.

We also evaluated the hole mobility (μh) and electron mobility (μe) of neat PBDB-T, neat PFA1 and PBDB-T:PFA1 blend films processed by CF and CB by employing the space charge limited current (SCLC) method (Table S5 and Fig. S5, ESI). Both the μh of the neat PBDB-T film and the μe of the neat PFA1 film are not so sensitive to processing solvents; however, the trend of μh of the neat PBDB-T film can be extended to the PBDB-T:PFA1 films, while the trend of μe of the neat PFA1 film is completely different from that in the PBDB-T:PFA1 blend films. The μh and μe of the PBDB-T:PFA1 film processed by CF are 3.12 × 10−4 and 1.48 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively; replacing CF with CB, the μh only slightly increased to 3.92 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, while μe significantly increased to 3.62 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1. The significantly enhanced μe and more balanced μh/μe are beneficial to suppressing the carrier recombination.
To evaluate the charge extraction and recombination behavior of the CF- and CB-processed devices, we measured the transient photocurrent (TPC) and transient photovoltage (TPV) characteristics. It is noted that the CF-processed device showed a slightly longer extraction time of 1.89 μs compared to that of 1.20 μs for the CB-processed device, which indicates the more effective charge extraction rate in the CB-processed device. By fitting the TPV signal by the equation y = Aexp(−x/τ) (Fig. 3b), the carrier lifetime (τ) of the CF-processed device is calculated to be 8.45 μs, which is slightly shorter than that of 9.87 μs for the CB-processed device, which means the more effective inhibited charge recombination of the CB-processed device. These findings agree with the observed improved photovoltaic parameters of the CB-processed device.
The charge recombination kinetics of CF- and CB-processed devices were evaluated by VOC and JSC as a function of light intensity (Plight) (Fig. 3c and d). The slope of VOC − Plight close to kT/q (k: Boltzmann's constant; T: temperature, q: elementary charge) stands for bimolecular recombination, and that close to 2kT/q stands for single-molecule recombination. From the VOCversus Plight natural logarithmic curve (Fig. 3c), the CF-processed device exhibited a slope of 1.97 kT/q, and the CB-processed device exhibited a slope of 1.78 kT/q. This finding indicates that the single-molecule recombination can be more effectively inhibited upon processing with CB. Moreover, we also evaluated the dependence of JSC on Plight by using the characteristics of JSC∝(Plight)S, where S close to 1 means weak bimolecular recombination in the device. The fitted S value of the CF-processed devices is 0.92, whereas that of CB-processed devices is 0.98 (Fig. 3d), indicating a weaker bimolecular recombination in CB-processed devices than that in CF-processed devices.
Under the conditions of biased light and non-biased light, measuring the average EQE at different wavelengths can mirror the bimolecular recombination loss in CF- and CB-processed devices (Fig. S6, ESI). The bimolecular recombination efficiency, denoted as ηBR, was evaluated based on the equation of ηBR = EQEnobias/EQEbias − 1, in which a lower bimolecular recombination corresponds to a smaller ηBR value. In our current case, the average ηBR values of CF- and CB-processed devices are estimated to be 2.13% and 1.46% (Fig. 3e and Table S6, ESI), respectively, which means that the bimolecular recombination can be more effectively suppressed by processing with CB. Using a one-diode equivalent circuit, the diode ideality factor, denoted as n, was fitted to be 1.85 for CF-processed devices and 1.72 for CB-processed devices (Fig. 3f and Table S7, ESI). The lower n value of CB-processed devices suggests a weaker defect-state-induced recombination. Furthermore, using the equivalent circuit model, the ideal FFSP was calculated to be 66.24% and 73.02% for CF- and CB-processed devices, respectively (Table S8, ESI), which is also consistent with the observed slightly higher FF of the CB-processed device.

Atomic force microscopy (AFM, Fig. 4a and b) was employed to investigate the influence of solvent optimization on the surface topography of PBDB-T:PFA1 films. One can clearly note that the CB-processed film presented a more pronounced bi-continuous interpenetrating network than the CF-processed film, while the root-mean-square roughness (RMS) value of 2.44 nm for the CB-processed is also slightly higher than that of 1.36 nm for the CF-processed film. From the transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images, one can note that the CF-processed films showed some fibrillar aggregates with randomly aligned domains (Fig. 4c and d). However, one can only observe the bi-continuous interpenetrating network, while such fibrillary aggregates disappeared in the PBDB-T:PFA1 blend film processed with CB, which agrees with the weaker carrier recombination in the CB-processed device. Photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy was further employed to infer the phase separation of PBDB-T:PFA1 blends processed by CF and CB (Fig. S7, ESI). The insufficient emission quenching of PBDB-T (excited at 550 nm) and PFA1 (excited at 810 nm) in PBDB-T:PFA1 blends processed by CF was consistent with the large domain size of PBDB-T:PFA1 blends processed by CF. Due to the limited exciton diffusion length, efficient PL quenching in the CB-processed all-PSCs also implies that the donor (PBDB-T) and acceptor polymers (PFA1) are mixed on the sub-10 nm length scale.

To identify the orientation of molecular chains in the BHJ films, we measured the grazing-incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) patterns (Fig. 5). The PBDB-T:PFA1 film processed by CF shows a broad (010) peak in the out-of-plane (OOP) direction at 1.68 Å−1 (d = 3.74 Å), and a (100) peak in the in-plane (IP) direction at 0.29 Å−1. Based on the Scherrer equation, CCL = 2πK/Δq (K stands for a shape factor and Δq stands for the full width at half-maximum of the diffraction peak), the crystal coherence length (CCL) was estimated to be 1.25 nm and 4.20 nm for the OOP and IP directions, respectively (Table S9, ESI). In contrast, the PBDB-T:PFA1 film processed with CB presents a sharper (010) peak in the OOP direction at 1.72 Å−1 (d = 3.65 Å) and a sharper (100) peak in the IP direction at 0.29 Å−1. The CB-processed film showed a larger (010) CCL of 1.50 nm in the OOP direction, as well as a larger (100) CCL of 13.99 nm in the IP direction. The improved π–π stacking and crystal size in the CB-processed film agree with the enhanced photovoltaic performance. To distinguish the effect of the solvent on the molecular orientation of PBDB-T and PFA1, we also measured the GIWAXS patterns of neat PBDB-T and PFA1 films processed by CF or CB, respectively (Fig. S8, ESI). The CB solvent promoted more tight and stronger π–π stacking of PBDB-T instead of PFA1, as indicated by the enlarged (010) crystal coherence length, (100) CCL and tighter π–π stacking (Table S10, ESI). Considering the boiling point of the used solvent, we analyzed the direct influence of the boiling point and volatility on the established crystalline structure. The low boiling point (61 °C) of CF leads to a rapid CF evaporation during spin-coating, and thus the molecular stacking structure of the CF-processed film is more disordered. On the contrary, the high boiling point (132 °C) leads to a slow solvent evaporation rate of CB during spin-coating, and thus the molecular stacking structure of the CB-processed film exhibits an enhanced ordering and larger polymer crystallites.

In summary, we regulated the BHJ morphology of all-PSCs based on PBDB-T:PFA1 via selection of solvents, and found that the PBDB-T:PFA1 film processed with chlorobenzene (CB) revealed a smaller phase separation scale than that processed by chloroform (CF), with significantly improved miscibility between PBDB-T and PFA1. Due to the optimized BHJ morphology, the PBDB-T:PFA1 device processed by CB achieved an efficiency over 15%, much higher than that of 12.25% for the CF-processed device. Meanwhile, the voltage loss of the device processed by CB is suppressed comparing with the device processed by CF, demonstrating unexpected advances of morphology evolution for all-PSCs. These observations provide a great opportunity for understanding the mechanisms of how the phase separation structure was affected by different solvents in all-polymer solar cells.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (22005102), the Natural Science Foundation of Guangdong Province (No. 2021A1515010258), the Program for Science and Technology Development of Dongguan (No. 2019622163009), the Dongguan Innovative Research Team Program (No. 2018607201002), and the Fund of University of South China (No. 210XQD018).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See https://doi.org/10.1039/d2tc00045h
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022