 DOI: 10.1039/C4NJ00729H
(Paper)
New J. Chem., 2014, 38, 4465-4470


Caiyun
Chen
,

Yafeng
Li
*,

Xun
Sun
,

Fengyan
Xie
 and 

Mingdeng
Wei
*

State Key Laboratory of Photocatalysis on Energy and Environment, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou, Fujian 350002, China. E-mail: wei-mingdeng@fzu.edu.cn; liyf@fzu.edu.cn; Tel: +86-591-83753180

Institute of Advanced Energy Materials, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou, Fujian 350002, China

State Key Laboratory of Structural Chemistry, Fujian Institute of Research on the Structure of Matter, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Fuzhou, Fujian 350002, China

Received
(in Montpellier, France)
6th May 2014
, Accepted 24th June 2014
First published on 24th June 2014
The surface treatment of zinc stannate (Zn2SnO4) film for use in dye-sensitized solar cells has been carried out with zinc tin oxide precursor solutions through chemical-bath deposition (CBD). Mott–Schottky measurements demonstrate that the flat band of Zn2SnO4 has a moderate positive shift owing to the surface treatment, which leads to a slightly decreased Voc. Although UV-vis spectroscopy reveals that the adsorption amounts of N719 and D131 dyes are decreased, EIS results and OCVD data suggest that the decreased charge recombination rate and prolonged electron lifetime give rise to an apparently improved efficiency of cells. Consequently, an enhancement of 13.5% is obtained after CBD surface treatment under the illumination of one sun (AM 1.5, 100 mW cm−2).

The dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) have been researched extensively since the milestone in 1991 owing to their low fabrication cost and remarkable conversion efficiency. The typical DSSCs comprise a dye-sensitized nanostructured TiO2 film printed on FTO glass as a working electrode, a liquid electrolyte containing an I−/I3− redox couple, and a Pt counter electrode. Among them, the electron-transporting phase, mostly the electrode consisting of wide band-gap nanoparticles, is one of the key components governing the device performance, as it directly influences several working mechanisms of the DSSCs including dye adsorption, photoelectron injection, light scattering, and electron transport/recombination. Up to now, many semiconductors have been applied as electrode materials for DSSCs, such as TiO2, ZnO, Nb2O5, SnO2, WO3 and so on. Nanocrystalline TiO2 is found to be the most excellent material owing to its high performance in DSSCs among them. Besides these binary oxides, special attention has been paid to ternary oxides, which provide more freedom to modify their chemical properties and band structure.

Despite the high efficiency of DSSCs, the severe charge recombination hinders further improvement of cell performances. The electronic states below the CB edge, located at the photoanode nanocrystal surface, act as recombination centers and traps, which slow down electron transport. Therefore, suppressing electron recombination from the photoanode into the redox electrolyte is a major challenge in DSSCs because of the large microscopic interface area in electrodes. Surface treatments of photoanode film for controlling the electronic properties at the interface of a photoanode/electrolyte have been a subject of great interest. In fact, the surface treatment plays an effective role in enhancing photovoltaic performances, which can reduce the density of surface traps, create an energy barrier for suppressing electron transfer to the electrolyte, and generate an interface dipole that shifts the semiconductor energy levels with respect to the redox potential. An improvement of the photovoltaic performance was observed in DSSCs based on TiO2 photoanodes coated with Al2O3, SiO2, ZrO2, MgO, Nb2O5 and CaCO3 by forming a core–shell nanostructure. Furthermore, a TiCl4 surface treatment of nanocrystalline TiO2 is frequently applied to improve the performance of DSSCs. However, the surface treatment in ternary oxide semiconductors has not been investigated intensively, and only a few examples have been demonstrated. For example, the effect of a TiCl4 treatment on the physical and chemical properties of the BaSnO3 electrode has been reported. Our previous study also found a surface treatment with Al3+ for improving the efficiency of dye-sensitized Zn2SnO4 solar cells. On the other hand, the ternary oxides that can be used in surface treatment are relatively few. We presented an example that the efficiency of dye-sensitized SrSnO3 solar cells could be greatly enhanced by introducing SrSnO3 nanoparticles through the surface treatment. Nevertheless, it is still a challenge to find other ternary oxides that can be applied to promote the performance of DSSCs through surface treatment.
In this paper, the surface treatment of zinc tin oxide precursor solutions with a facile chemical-bath deposition (CBD) method is firstly employed to enhance the performance of dye-sensitized Zn2SnO4 solar cells. The effect of the CBD surface treatment on the physical and chemical properties of the Zn2SnO4 electrode is investigated completely by means of electrochemical characterization tools. The surface state of the Zn2SnO4 film is obviously promoted after the surface treatment, which jointly leads to an enhancement of 13.5% in the performance of Zn2SnO4 solar cells.

All reagents were of analytical grade and were used without further purification. The preparation of Zn2SnO4 nanoparticles with a size of 30–50 nm and the procedure used to prepare Zn2SnO4 paste can be found in our previous paper. In a typical process, the paste of Zn2SnO4 was prepared using the following materials: Zn2SnO4 nanoparticles powder, ethyl cellulose (10 wt%, Wako Co.) as a binder, α-terpineol (Alfa Co.) as a solvent, and ethanol (99.8%, Alfa Co.). The mixture of these components was suitably dispersed using a homogenizer (Ultra-turrax T25) to obtain a homogeneous paste. The paste was concentrated using an evaporator to a final concentration of 20 wt%. The paste was printed on FTO glass (8–10 Ω □−1, Nippon sheet glass) using a screen printer (Mitani Electronics) and then sintered at 525 °C for 2 h. The thickness of Zn2SnO4 film was about 10 μm.

Surface treatment of the Zn2SnO4 photoanode was performed by means of a CBD approach. Typically, the electrodes were dipped into the 0.1 M aqueous solutions of Zn(NO3)2·6H2O and Na2SnO3·4H2O in sequence for 3 min at room temperature, and this two-step dipping procedure was defined as one CBD cycle. After the CBD procedure, the electrode was sintered at 450 °C for 30 min. The influence of the CBD cycle number was studied to achieve the best improvement in the performance of DSSCs, and the electrode was expressed as Zn2SnO4–Cn, in which n stands for the cycle time of the CBD procedure.
For the sensitization of Zn2SnO4 film, the Zn2SnO4 electrode was immersed into the 0.3 mM solution of the dye in ethanol for 6 h, and then was incorporated into a thin-layer, sandwiched solar cell with an active area of 0.25 cm2. The Pt-coated FTO glass as a counter electrode was prepared by dropping H2PtCl6 (5 mM) solution on the FTO glass followed by heating at 450 °C for 30 min in air. A polyethylene spacer with a thickness of 38 μm was placed between the working electrode and the counter electrode to prevent the cell from short-circuiting. The electrolyte consisted of 0.6 M 1,2-dimethyl-3-n-propylimidazolium iodide, 0.1 M LiI, and 0.05 M I2 in acetonitrile with 0.5 M 4-tert-butylpyridine. The photovoltaic performance of the solar cells was measured using a source meter (Keithley 2400). A PEC-L11 AM 1.5 solar simulator (Peccell, with a 1000 W Xe lamp and an AM 1.5 filter) was used as the light source (100 mW cm−2). Action spectra of the monochromatic IPCE were recorded using a PEC-S20 (Peccell). The incident light intensity was calibrated according to a standard amorphous silicon solar cell that was produced by the Japan Quality Assurance Organization.
To compare the dye adsorption amount, the dye was desorbed by immersing the films into a 0.1 M NaOH solution. The solvents were composed of water and ethanol in a 1:1 volume ratio.
UV-vis spectra were investigated using a Lambda-950 (Perkin-Elmer). The thickness of the film was determined using a Surfcom 130A (Tokyo Seimitsu). Electrochemical analysis was performed on an IM6 (Zahner). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was measured on MUTILLAB 2000. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images were taken from S4800 (Hitachi) with an accelerated voltage of 10 kV.

The photovoltaic performance of the dye-sensitized Zn2SnO4 solar cells before and after surface treatments is investigated. The I–V curves of the cells with different CBD cycles are plotted in Fig. 1, and the corresponding parameters are listed in Table 1. The results indicate that the short circuit current (Jsc) increases remarkably after the chemical-bath deposition together with a slight reduction of open circuit voltage (Voc) and a stable fill factor (FF). Although Voc decreases after the surface treatment, the increase in the Jsc surpasses the faults caused by Voc, resulting in the obvious enhancement of the efficiency. The cycles of the chemical-bath deposition are optimized. As can be seen in Table 1, Jsc increases from 6.88 to 7.96 mA cm−2 dramatically and the power conversion efficiency (η) increases by a factor of 13.5% from 3.04% to 3.45% with 2 cycles of CBD. The notable improvement in Jsc and η demonstrates that this facile surface treatment approach provides an efficient route for enhancing performances of dye-sensitized Zn2SnO4 solar cells. Voc has a further decrease and Jsc begins to decline when the additional CBD cycle is employed, resulting in the reduction of efficiency from 3.45% to 3.21%. Thus, two cycles of CBD for the surface treatment is sufficient for the enhancement of the cell performances. The incident-photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE), defined as the number of electrons generated by light in the external circuit divided by the number of incident photons, is plotted as a function of excitation wavelength in Fig. 2, which illustrates that the Zn2SnO4–C2 electrode shows a maximum IPCE of 53% at 530 nm, while the Zn2SnO4 electrode just gives an IPCE of 35% at nearly the same wavelength. This trend is consistent with the variance of Jsc and η.

CBD cycles

J
sc/mA cm−2

V
oc/mV
FF
Efficiency/%
0
6.88
634.59
0.70
3.04
1
7.29
620.07
0.71
3.22
2
7.96
613.95
0.71
3.45
3
7.47
612.37
0.70
3.21
To explore the reasons for the improved performance, SEM and XPS measurements were performed to investigate the change in surface chemistry after the surface treatment. Zn2SnO4 quantum dots are expected to deposit on the film, as revealed by our previous report. However, there is no obvious difference that can be detected from SEM images, as illustrated in Fig. S1 (ESI). Furthermore, XPS was utilized to explore the surface state of ZTO films. As shown in Fig. S2 (ESI), both Zn2SnO4 and Zn2SnO4–C2 gave the same peaks at 1044.0, 1021.0, 494.7 and 486.3 eV, which could be ascribed to Zn 2p1/2, Zn 2p3/2, Sn 3d3/2 and Sn 3d5/2, respectively. Therefore, the surface treatment did not lead to the obvious change in surface chemistry for the CBD approach.

V
oc of a cell is determined by the quasi-Fermi level of the semiconductor and the potential of the redox couple in the electrolyte. The severe charge recombination that occurs at the Zn2SnO4/dye/electrolyte interface could decrease Voc, whereas the variance of the conduction-band edge of Zn2SnO4 could also change Voc. To classify the possible reasons for the decreased Voc, the conduction band edge of Zn2SnO4 was determined according to the Mott–Schottky measurement. For n-type Zn2SnO4, the Mott–Schottky equation is given as follows:
(1)
where
C is the interfacial capacitance, ε is the dielectric constant of the semiconductor, ε0 is the permittivity of free space, A is the electrode area, ND is the number of donors, V is the applied voltage, kB is Boltzmann's constant, T is the absolute temperature, and e is the electronic charge. Therefore, by plotting of C−2 against V, the flat band can be determined from the intercept on the V axis. As shown in Fig. 3, the flat-band potentials of Zn2SnO4 with and without CBD surface treatment were determined to be about −0.58 V and −0.67 V (vs. I−/I3−), respectively. The positive movement of the flat-band edge of Zn2SnO4–C2 can be ascribed to the decrease of the conduction band edge of Zn2SnO4. For Zn2SnO4–C2, the energy difference between the least unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of dye and the conduction band edge is greater than that of Zn2SnO4. Hence, the partially increased Jsc and η of the solar cell can be ascribed to the decreased conduction band edge of Zn2SnO4 after CBD surface treatment. Although the flat band potential shifts positively by 0.09 V, the decrease of Voc is much lower. We suppose that the less variance of Voc is caused by the increased electron concentration, which improves the Fermi level in return.

For DSSCs, the Jsc could be expressed as follows:
Jsc = qηlhηinjηccI0
(2)
where
I0 is the incident photon flux, q is the elementary charge, ηlh is the light harvesting efficiency, ηinj is the electron injection efficiency, and ηcc is the charge collection efficiency. The light harvesting efficiency (ηlh) is determined by the amount of dye present and the degree to which light absorption is increased by light scattering or other factors. To classify the influence of these factors, the adsorbed amounts of N719 and D131 dyes are measured using a UV-vis spectrometer, and the spectra are shown in Fig. 4. The results indicate that the Zn2SnO4 film absorbs less dye after CBD surface treatment, which should be affected by the changed surface state. CBD surface treatment neither increases the amount of dye present nor enhances the light-scattering ability. Hence, the light harvesting efficiency (ηlh) does not contribute to the enhanced photocurrent, and the increased photocurrent must then stem from improvements in either electron injection efficiency (ηinj) or charge collection efficiency (ηcc). The mild improvement in electron injection efficiency (ηinj) should be derived from the enhanced driving force, which is caused by the lowered conduction band edge of Zn2SnO4, as discussed earlier. So the enhancement of electron injection efficiency (ηinj) could partially contribute to the increased photocurrent. Charge collection efficiency (ηcc) can be estimated by comparing the charge transport and recombination time constants, and calculated by the expression:

ηcc = 1 − τd/τn
(3)
where
τd is the electron transit time and τn is the electron lifetime. The electrochemical impedance spectrum (EIS) was used to investigate the interfacial electron transport properties of the cells. Fig. 5a shows the impedance spectra of the DSSCs based on Zn2SnO4 and Zn2SnO4–C2 electrodes. The equivalent circuit is shown in the inset of Fig. 5a. In general, the impedance spectra of a DSSC show three semicircles in the frequency range of 10 mHz to 65 kHz, corresponding to the charge-transfer resistances at the counter electrode (Rct1), at the Zn2SnO4/dye/electrolyte interface (Rct2) and the Warburg diffusion process of I−/I3− in the electrolyte (Rdiff), respectively. As shown in Fig. 5a, Rct1 and Rdiff of the two electrodes show no obvious difference but the fitting values of Rct2 corresponding to Zn2SnO4 and Zn2SnO4–C2 electrodes are 16.7 and 8.8 Ω, respectively. This result demonstrates that the transport of charge carriers in Zn2SnO4–C2 is more facile than that within the Zn2SnO4, which can qualitatively estimate that τd in DSSCs is in the order of Zn2SnO4 > Zn2SnO4–C2. It is known that the frequency is related to the charge-recombination rate and the electron lifetime (τn), which can be estimated by using the relation:

τn = 1/2πfmax
(4)
where
fmax is the frequency at which the low frequency peak appears in the Bode plot. As can be seen in Fig. 5b, the fmax values of Zn2SnO4 and Zn2SnO4–C2 are 245 and 43 Hz, and the electron lifetime (τn) values are estimated to be 0.65 and 3.69 ms, respectively. The longer electron lifetime (τn) in the Zn2SnO4–C2 cell means an effectively suppressed electron–hole recombination. Because τd of Zn2SnO4 is larger than that of Zn2SnO4–C2, and the former has a less τn, the charge collection efficiency ηcc of Zn2SnO4 is improved after the CBD treatment according to eqn (3), and the enhanced Jsc could be anticipated on the basis of eqn (2).

The open-circuit photovoltage decay (OCVD) measurement is further utilized to investigate the causes of the enhanced η. Fig. 6a shows the curves of the OCVD results of the cells composed of Zn2SnO4 and Zn2SnO4–C2 electrodes. The interfacial charge recombination processes between the photoexcited electrons and the electrolyte can be evaluated from the OCVD curves. Under open-circuit conditions, the equilibrium between electron accumulation and electron loss is established when illuminated, and the electron concentration achieves a steady state. If the illumination is turned off, Voc begins to decay due to charge recombination and the decrease of electron concentration. Therefore, the interfacial charge recombination of electrons can be evaluated from the OCVD spectrum. The plots in Fig. 6a indicate that the cell composed of Zn2SnO4–C2 had a slower Voc decay rate in comparison to the cell based on Zn2SnO4. Consequently, the former has a lower charge recombination rate. The electron lifetimes (τn) at different potentials can be determined from the Voc decay spectra according to the following eqn (5):
(5)
where
kB is Boltzmann's constant, T is the absolute temperature, and e is the electronic charge. The relationship between τn and Voc is plotted in Fig. 6b. These results reveal that the electrons accumulated in the Zn2SnO4–C2 photoanode exhibit longer electron lifetime than those in the Zn2SnO4 film, which agrees well with the EIS outcomes. Hence, the greatly increased Jsc and η after the surface treatment with CBD can be mainly ascribed to decreased charge recombination and prolonged electron lifetime.


In summary, the performance of dye-sensitized Zn2SnO4 solar cells is significantly improved by the surface treatment with a facile chemical-bath deposition method. After the treatment, the adsorption amounts of N719 and D131 dyes are slightly decreased. However, the decreased charge recombination rate and prolonged electron lifetime lead to an obvious enhanced performance of cells. Moreover, the slightly decreased conduction band edge of Zn2SnO4 provides an enhanced driving force for electron injection, which also has some effect on the increased Jsc and η. By optimizing the CBD cycle number, a maximum enhancement of 13.5% is achieved at the second cycle. This surface treatment approach by means of chemical-bath deposition is facile and can be easily utilized in other ternary oxide systems.


This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21073039, 21303020), the Research Fund for the Doctoral Program of Higher Education of China (20123514120004, 20133514110002), the State Key Laboratory of Structural Chemistry (20120001), the Fuzhou University Fund (2012-XQ-13) and the Key Laboratory of Novel Thin Film Solar Cells, CAS.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: SEM images and XPS spectra of samples. See DOI: 10.1039/c4nj00729h
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2014