 DOI: 10.1039/C9TA00654K
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 9510-9516


Xingdong
Ding
,

Cheng
Chen
*,

Linghao
Sun
,

Hongping
Li
,

Hong
Chen
,

Jie
Su
,

Huaming
Li
*,

Henan
Li
,

Li
Xu
 and 

Ming
Cheng
*

Institute for Energy Research, Key Laboratory of Zhenjiang, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang 212013, P. R. China. E-mail: chencheng@ujs.edu.cn; lihm@ujs.edu.cn; mingcheng@ujs.edu.cn

School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang 212013, P. R. China

School of Environmental Science and Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen 518055, P. R. China

College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Peking University, Beijing 100871, P. R. China

Received
18th January 2019
, Accepted 22nd March 2019
First published on 25th March 2019
Two novel phenothiazine 5,5-dioxide (PDO) core building block-based hole transport materials (HTMs), termed PDO1 and PDO2, were designed and synthesized. The introduction of a sulfuryl group in a core unit can deeply influence the energy levels and charge carrier mobilities of relative HTMs. The combined suitable energy level alignment, higher hole mobility and conductivity, as well as highly efficient hole transfer of PDO2 enable the perovskite solar cell (PSC) to achieve an impressive power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 20.2% and good stability when aged under ambient conditions. These results demonstrate the potential versatility of the PDO building block for further development of cost-effective and highly efficient HTMs for PSCs.

In the past few years, the power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of PSCs have been rapidly boosted from the initial 3.8% in 2009 to over 23%. Such a large increase in PCEs is inseparable from the excellent hole transport properties and the effective suppression of charge recombination of hole transport materials (HTMs) in PSCs. At present, the most commonly used HTMs are 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis-(N,N-di-4-methoxy-phenylamino)-9,9′-spiro bifluorene (Spiro-OMeTAD) and poly(triarylamine) (PTAA). However, because of the complicated synthetic routes to Spiro-OMeTAD and PTAA, their synthesis costs are prohibitively high, limiting their large-scale application in future commercialization. Therefore, it is highly necessary to develop or search for low-cost and highly efficient alternatives to Spiro-OMeTAD and PTAA, aimed at achieving state-of-the-art photovoltaic performance. Phenothiazine 5,5-dioxide (PDO) is a heterocyclic conjugated unit, which can be easily obtained by one step oxidation of phenothiazine (PTZ) (6$ per kg). The 3-, 7- and N-position of the PDO monomer can be easily tailored, providing easy access to a wide library of HTMs. Oxidizing PTZ to PDO could also have a significant impact on molecular conformation, which will in turn affect the HTM stacking behavior in the film state and charge carrier transport properties. Furthermore, the conversion of an electron-donating sulfur atom to an electron-withdrawing sulfone group could change the charge affinity of the core unit. To the best of our knowledge, HTMs incorporating PDO core units have not been reported. The possible impact of the sulfone group on charge carrier transport properties and photovoltaic performance is very intriguing to us and thus motivated our study.

Based on these concerns, herein we report two facilely synthesized PDO core building block based HTMs (see Fig. 1). PDO has a symmetrical nonplanar structure. Substituting its 3- and 7-positions with 4,4′-dimethoxydiphenylamine, and substituting the N-position with anisole or 4,4′-dimethoxytriphenylamine as the peripheral group afforded the HTMs PDO1 and PDO2, respectively. With the conversion of the electron-donating sulfur atom to the electron-withdrawing sulfone group (from PTZ to PDO), the charge affinity of the core unit is increased, enabling the designed HTMs PDO1 and PDO2 to possess a donor–acceptor–donor (D–A–D) structure. According to molecular orbital hybridization theory, the formation of a D–A–D structure can rationally decrease the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) energy level and improve the intrinsic charge carrier transport properties. The introduction of two 4,4′-dimethoxydiphenylamine groups in a PDO unit is supposed to further adjust the energy level and charge carrier mobility, while the N-substitutions tune the spatial configuration of HTMs. The specific impact of the sulfone group and different N-substituent groups on the materials properties and photovoltaic performance was systematically studied. These two PDO-based HTMs show high hole mobility, high conductivity and suitable HOMO and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) levels. Through optimization, the PSCs employing PDO2 as the HTM show PCEs up to 20.2%, and good stability when aged under ambient conditions in the dark for 500 h.

PDO1 and PDO2 were facilely synthesized through four steps, involving Buchwald–Hartwig reaction (the first and the last step, respectively), radical substitution, and an oxidation reaction. The detailed synthetic routes to PDO1 and PDO2 are depicted in the ESI. The synthesis costs of PDO1 and PDO2 are calculated to be 62.1791$ per g and 61.2761$ per g, respectively, which are much lower than that of Spiro-OMeTAD. The synthesized HTMs were fully characterized by nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), high-resolution mass spectrometry (HRMS) and single crystal X-ray diffraction technologies.
From the crystal structures of PDO1 and PDO2, significant geometry differences can be observed on the configuration of the PDO core unit in PDO1 and PDO2. The PDO unit in PDO1 has a twisted butterfly configuration, while it becomes more planar in PDO2 (see Fig. 2a and S7). PDO1 crystallizes in the monoclinic space group of C2/c with four crystallographic independent molecules in the unit cell. The PDO1 molecules form alternating zig-zag chains along the crystallographic c axis through π–π stacking interactions (see Fig. 2b). In contrast, PDO2 crystallizes in the monoclinic space group I2/a. As shown in Fig. 2d, different from PDO1 because of the more planar configuration of the PDO core unit in PDO2, two adjacent molecules are tightly packed together due to a mirror operation or inversion center because of the strong steric-hindrance effect of N-substitution. This tight packing behavior is beneficial for intermolecular hole hopping. For both PDO1 and PDO2, each molecule has multiple short contacts with adjacent molecules from the same and surrounding unit cells including CH/π hydrogen bonds and oxygen–carbon contacts, providing paths for hole hopping.
To evaluate whether these two new HTMs possess appropriate energy levels for application in PSCs, UV-vis absorption tests and cyclic voltammetry (CV) are performed in chloroform solution. The test results are shown in Fig. 3a and b. The energy-levels of the main device components used in this study are illustrated in Fig. 3c. The HOMO energy levels of PDO1 and PDO2 are calculated to be −5.25 and −5.24 eV vs. vacuum, respectively, which are much more positive than the valence band (VB) of the mixed perovskite used here, suggesting that hole extraction is favorable from the energy level point of view. Obviously, the almost invariable HOMO energy levels of PDO1 and PDO2 indicate that N-substitution has negligible influence on HOMO levels. Compared with HTM PTZ1 (−4.77 eV) with PTZ as the core building block reported by Grisorio, the oxidation of the sulfur atom to sulfuryl in our case renders more negative HOMO levels, which is particularly appropriate for application in PSCs. By combining the CV and the UV-vis absorption test data, the LUMO energy levels of PDO1 and PDO2 are roughly estimated to be −2.67 and −2.35 eV vs. vacuum, respectively, which are high enough for electron blocking.
Density functional theory (DFT) calculations are performed by using the Gaussian program at the B3LYP/6-31G(+d) level to gain insight into the charge distribution of PDO1 and PDO2. The calculated results are shown in Fig. 4. The optimized molecular structures are well-consistent with the crystal structures. From the results we can find that the N-substitution has nearly no effect on charge distribution, which agrees well with those from CV measurements. For PDO1 and PDO2, the HOMO delocalizes on the whole molecular backbone, while the LUMO levels shift to the PDO core unit. The overlaps between HOMO and LUMO suggest the existence of strong coulombic interactions, which are beneficial for hole extraction and transport. The calculated hole reorganization energies of PDO1 and PDO2 are 172 and 126 meV, respectively. The smaller reorganization energy suggests that PDO2 may have a higher hole mobility than PDO1. The hole mobilities of the HTMs PDO1 and PDO2 are calculated to be 1.76 × 10−4 and 5.93 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 (see Fig. S8a), respectively, by using the space-charge-limited current (SCLC) model. These results are exactly consistent with the DFT calculation results.
We proceeded to test the synthesized HTMs in state-of-the-art planar PSCs with a detailed device structure of FTO/c-TiO2/SnO2/perovskite/HTM/Au (see Fig. 3d), and mixed halide perovskite (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15 was employed as the light-harvesting material. Fig. 5a–c display the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristic curves of the PSCs containing PDO1, PDO2 and Spiro-OMeTAD as HTMs. The devices were measured under simulated AM 1.5 G (100 MW cm−2) sunlight with a slow scan rate of 10 mV s−1. The detailed parameters are shown in Table 1. The PDO1- and PDO2-based devices show the best PCEs of 16.7% and 20.2%, respectively, and PDO2 even achieved a higher champion PCE than the reference HTM Spiro-OMeTAD (19.8%). From the IPCE spectra (Fig. 5d), the estimated integrated current densities are 22.0, 23.4 and 23.5 mA cm−2 for PDO1, PDO2 and Spiro-OMeTAD, respectively, which agree well with the Jsc values acquired from the J–V curves (error values lower than 5%). The stabilized power outputs at the maximum point for PDO1- and PDO2-based devices are 16.4% and 19.5% (see Fig. 5e), respectively, consistent with the J–V measurements. The hysteresis indices (HI) were calculated to be 0.025, 0.016 and 0.020 for PDO1-, PDO2- and Spiro-OMeTAD-based PSCs, respectively. The negligible hysteresis behavior indicates highly efficient charge carrier transport at the interfaces with the electron and hole-selective contacts. Compared with PDO1-based devices, the PSCs based on PDO2 exhibited higher open-circuit voltages (Voc), short-circuit current densities (Jsc), and fill factors (FF). As is well known, the Jsc is closely related to light-harvesting efficiency, charge separation efficiency and charge collection efficiency. Considering that they use the same fabrication process and components except for the HTM, the higher Jsc for PDO2-based PSCs should mainly result from the higher hole extraction efficiency, which is confirmed by PL decay results. As shown in Fig. S9, the steady-state and time-resolved PL decay measurements indicate that the perovskite/PDO2 system showed a much higher hole extraction efficiency and hole extraction rate than the PDO1-based one, indicating that hole transport in PDO2 based PSCs is more efficient. This is consistent with the higher PCE for PDO2 based devices. The similar PL decay behavior of PDO2- and Spiro-OMeTAD-based systems suggests that the hole transport properties of PDO2 and Spiro-OMeTAD are comparable with each other. The higher IPCE values in the entire response region for PDO2-based PSCs also agreed perfectly with the J–V and steady-state PL decay measurements discussed above. The improved FF can mainly be ascribed to the higher conductivity of the PDO2-based hole transport layer (HTL) (see Fig. S8b). To obtain further explanations of the higher Voc for PDO2-based PSCs, the light intensity dependence of Jsc and Voc were tested, as shown in Fig. 6. It is worth noting that, compared with PDO1-based PSCs, the Jsc of PDO2-based devices exhibit a stronger dependence (α = 0.905) on light intensity, and a weaker dependence of Voc on light intensity (1.23kT/q). These results indicate that the improved Voc mainly arises from highly restricted Shockley–Read–Hall (SRH) recombination during the working process. As shown in Fig. 5f, PDO1- and PDO2-based PSCs also show excellent reproducibility with average PCEs of 15.3 ± 0.79 and 19.3 ± 0.62, respectively, and the majority of devices obtained above-average PCEs. To better demonstrate the important effects of the sulfuryl group, PTZ1 based PSCs were also evaluated for comparison. As expected, PDO1-based PSCs exhibit better photovoltaic performance (see Fig. S10). The test results clearly show that except for the peripheral group adjustments, the oxidation of the sulfur atom to sulfone is also an effective molecular engineering technique to enhance the charge carrier mobility and photovoltaic performance.
HTM
Scan direction

V
oc/V

J
sc/mA cm−2
FF/%
PCE/%
Hysteresis index/%

a Forward scan : from open circuit (OC) to short circuit (SC); backward scan: from short circuit (SC) to open circuit (OC).


PDO1

From OC to SC
1.08
22.6
68.3
16.7
0.025
From SC to OC
1.07
22.7
67.7
16.4

PDO2

From OC to SC
1.15
23.9
73.6
20.2
0.016
From SC to OC
1.15
23.9
72.1
19.8
Spiro-OMeTAD
From OC to SC
1.14
24.2
71.1
19.8
0.020
From SC to OC
1.14
24.1
69.0
19.3

Fig. 7a–d show the stability test results of the corresponding PSCs in air(relative humidity of 30–45%, room temperature) without encapsulation. The PDO1-, PDO2- and Spiro-OMeTAD-based PSCs retained 84.6%, 84.7% and 80.1% of the initial PCEs after 480 hours of aging. The thermogravimetric analysis results (see Fig. S11) show that PDO1 and PDO2 begin to decompose at 420 °C. Considering the good thermal stability of PDO1 and PDO2, the PCE decay might mainly be caused by the dopants in the HTL and the degradation of the perovskite film. Therefore, our further research will focus on developing PDO core unit-based dopant-free HTMs.
In conclusion, we demonstrated that the oxidation of the sulfur atom to sulfuryl and molecular engineering by N-substitution dramatically influenced the molecular configuration and photovoltaic performance of the HTMs PDO1 and PDO2. Through the introduction of a sulfuryl group on the core building block, the electron density distribution, as well as HOMO levels, can be effectively adjusted. Importantly, PDO1 and PDO2 with the introduction of sulfuryl possess a particularly appropriate energy level alignment, excellent charge carrier mobility and dramatically improved photovoltaic performance, in comparison with previously reported PTZ1. A PCE as high as 20.2% was achieved with the PDO2-based PSC, which can be mainly attributed to the more planar geometry of the PDO core unit and much stronger molecular stacking behavior. PDO2 is among the very few HTMs that can compete with Spiro-OMeTAD. This work reveals the great potential of the PDO building blocks for further development of low-cost and highly efficient HTMs for PSCs.

There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was financially supported by the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (BK20180867 and BK20180869), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant 21805114), the Jiangsu University Foundation (17JDG032 and 17JDG031), the High-tech Research Key Laboratory of Zhenjiang (SS2018002), the High-Performance Computing Platform of Jiangsu University, and the Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details, characterization of HTMs, hole mobility and conductivity of HTMs, PL decay and thermogravimetric analysis results. CCDC 1891698 and 1891699. For ESI and crystallographic data in CIF or other electronic format see DOI: 10.1039/c9ta00654k
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019