 DOI: 10.1039/D3DT00169E
(Paper)
Dalton Trans., 2023, 52, 4038-4043


Jin
Tan
,

Jie
Dou
*,

Jialong
Duan
,

Yuanyuan
Zhao
,

Benlin
He
 and 

Qunwei
Tang


Institute of Carton Neutrality, College of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Shandong University of Science and Technology, Qingdao 266590, PR China

School of Materials Science and Engineering, Ocean University of China, Qingdao 266100, PR China. E-mail: doujiefzu@163.com

Received
18th January 2023
, Accepted 17th February 2023
First published on 17th February 2023
Carbon-based all-inorganic perovskite solar cells have attracted growing interest owing to their simple fabrication process, low cost, and high stability in air. On account of the large interfacial energy barriers and polycrystalline features of perovskite films, the carrier interface recombination and inherent defects in the perovskite layer are still great challenges in further increasing the power conversion efficiency and stability of carbon-based PSCs. We present here a trifunctional polyethylene oxide buffer layer at the perovskite/carbon interface to promote the PCE and stability of carbon-based all-inorganic CsPbBr3 PSCs: (i) the PEO layer increases the crystallinity of inorganic CsPbBr3 grains for low defect state density; (ii) the oxygenic groups in PEO chains passivate the defects on the perovskite surface; and (iii) the long hydrophobic alkyl chains improve the stability in moisture. The best encapsulated PSC achieves a PCE of 8.84% and maintains 84.8% of its initial efficiency in air with 80% RH over 30 days.

Since 2009, perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have attracted tremendous attention in both scientific and industrial communities owing to their impressive power conversion efficiency (PCE), low manufacturing cost, and scalable preparation process. Among them, the carbon-based hole-transporting layer (HTL)-free PSCs are at the cutting-edge of the photovoltaic field due to their excellent stability under ambient air conditions and cost-effectiveness. The high stability originates from either the good hydrophobicity of the carbon electrode or the chemical stability of perovskite halides. The inorganic halide CsPbBr3 is regarded as the most stable perovskite material and it is extensively used in semitransparent and/or tandem photovoltaics, but the efficiency of CsPbBr3 PSCs is far lower than that of organic–inorganic hybrid solar cells. There are two primary reasons for limited efficiency improvements. One is the wide band gap (2.3 eV) and narrow absorption range (λ < 540 nm). By substituting a bromine ion (Br−) for an iodine ion (I−) to form mixed perovskites, the band gap and energy difference at interfaces can be decreased, but the tolerance of the mixed-halide PSCs toward moisture, heat, oxygen and/or light undoubtedly has a significant reduction. The other is the high defect state density in perovskite films formed during the preparation processes. These defects act as charge carrier recombination centers and therefore drag down the device's efficiency and stability.

To date, interfacial modification by functional polymers has been considered as a promising solution to further increase the PCE and stability in many aspects. Because of the ultralow thickness of these polymer films, the electron–hole pairs are rapidly separated and transported to the electron/hole-transporting layer by the tunneling effect instead of matching the energy level with perovskite halides, respectively. Differing from inorganic interfacial modifiers, the polymers can be decorated with high-density groups containing S, N and O atoms with lone pair electrons, which effectively improves the quality of perovskite films. For example, Liu et al. applied 2,5-thiophenedimethylammonium (ThDMA) to two-dimensional (2D) Dion–Jacobson (DJ) perovskites and achieved a PCE of 15.75%. ThDMA could separate the adjacent lead halide octahedron layers to improve the orientation of crystals, which are vertically orientated in high-quality perovskite films. Peng et al. improved the photovoltaic properties of PSCs by using an ultrathin film consisting of a PMMA:PCBM mixture, which passivated the defects at the perovskite/TiO2 interface and suppressed the nonradiative recombination. Li et al. improved the efficiency and stability of PSCs by adding the polymerizable additive of ethyl 2-cyanoacrylate (E2CA). Meanwhile, the defects at grain boundaries (GBs) were passivated. Among numerous functional polymers, polyethylene oxide (PEO) is well known for its high ionic conductivity, good water solubility and strong flexibility, and it has an oxygenic ether group in each repeat unit. These unique properties demonstrate PEO to be a useful buffering material in light-emitting devices, sensors, detectors, and so on. The use of PEO film as a buffer layer in carbon-based HTL-free PSCs has not been studied yet.
In this work, we designed a PEO buffer layer at the CsPbBr3/carbon interface and systematically investigated its impact on the crystallinity of perovskite films, charge carrier transport behavior, and passivation toward defects. As a result, the optimum all-inorganic CsPbBr3 PSC free of encapsulation achieved an efficiency of 8.84% and this maintained 84% PCE in 80% RH air for 30 days.

All the materials and reagents were commercially purchased and applied in PSCs directly without any purification, including CsBr (99.999%, Sigma-Aldrich), PbBr2 (99.999%, Xi'an Baote Electronic Technology Co., Ltd), hydrochloric acid (37%, Aladdin), zinc powders (99%, Aladdin), graphite powders (99.95%, Aladdin), Ni(NO3)6·6H2O (99.99%, Aladdin), urea (99.5%, Aladdin), anhydrous ethyl alcohol (99.5%, Aladdin), anhydrous methyl alcohol (99.9%, Aladdin), N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF, anhydrous, 99.95%, Sigma-Aldrich), TiCl4 (99.99%, Aladdin), titanium isopropoxide (99.9%, Aladdin), and carbon paste (Shanghai MaterWin New Materials Co., Ltd).


Before the solar cell preparation, FTO was thoroughly rinsed with ultrapure water, ethanol, and isopropyl alcohol in turn. Firstly, the compact layer was obtained via spin-coating on FTO glass with the mixed solution (0.5 M diethanolamine and 0.5 M titanium isopropoxide in ethanol) at 7000 rpm for 30 s and annealed at 500 °C for 2 h. Secondly, the mesoporous layer was spin-casted with TiO2 paste, which was applied to the compact layer at 2000 rpm for 30 s and heated at 450 °C for 30 min. Thirdly, the above substrate was soaked in an aqueous solution of 0.04 M TiCl4 at 75 °C for 30 min and calcined at 450 °C for 30 min. The above operations were performed in an air environment.

In an ambient air atmosphere (25 °C, 25% RH), 1 M PbBr2 was added to DMF and spin-coated on the TiO2 film at 2000 rpm for 30 s and then calcined at 90 °C for 30 min. Then, 0.07 M CsBr in methanol was spin-coated on the PbBr2 layer at 2000 rpm for 30 s and heated at 250 °C for 5 min. The deposition step for CsBr was repeated four times to obtain high-purity CsPbBr3 films. The PEO in chlorobenzene solution was spin-coated on the perovskite film at 2000 rpm for 30 s and then annealed at 250 °C for 15 min. The PEO concentrations were fixed at 0.05, 0.1, and 0.5 mg mL−1, and the resultant perovskite films were designated as PEO-0.05, PEO-0.1, and PEO-0.5, respectively. Finally, through the doctor-blade method, a carbon layer was applied by coating the paste on the perovskite film. Upon drying at 60 °C in a vacuum, the carbon electrode was obtained.

Photovoltaic characterization was performed under ambient air conditions (30–60% RH, 25 °C) and AM 1.5G illumination using a solar simulator (Newport, SOL-UV) with a source meter (Keithley 2420). For the stability test, all devices were removed from the aging oven and tested at different time intervals under a separate solar simulator (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2) for J–V characterization by reverse scanning from 1.6 to 0 V at a scanning speed of 1 mV s−1. The active area of 0.08 cm2 was controlled by a black mask. The component test was carried out by X-ray powder diffraction (Rigaku, Cu-Kα radiation, λ = 0.15418 nm) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, PerkinElmer, Mg Kα). The microscopic morphologies were characterized via scanning electron microscopy (SEM, S4800, Hitachi). The carrier dynamics results were obtained through electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS, Zahner, IM6), steady-state photoluminescence spectroscopy (PL, Jobin Yvon), and time-resolved photoluminescence spectroscopy (TRPL, Jobin Yvon). The excitation wavelength was 510 nm. UV-vis absorption was performed by using an ultraviolet-visible spectrophotometer (Meipuda UV-3200). The contact angles of water were determined by using a drop shape analyzer (KRüSS, DSA25, Germany).


As shown in Fig. 1a–d and Fig. S1, the perovskite films prepared with different concentrations of PEO solution present a uniform morphology. Compared to the pristine CsPbBr3 film, the PEO-tailored perovskite films have more ambiguous grain boundaries and larger grains. For example, the largest percentage of grain sizes is around 200–600 nm for the pristine CsPbBr3 film, but it increases to 0.4–1 μm in respect of PEO-tailored films. The increased grain size in the CsPbBr3 layer is caused by the recrystallization and re-coalescence of smaller crystals in the modification process, leading to a reduced grain boundary density with improved charge transport kinetics. Meanwhile, the O atoms in PEO with lone pair electrons interact with the uncoordinated Pb2+ and the Cs+ ions leading to imperfections at the CsPbBr3 surface. The sectional schematic and SEM image of an all-inorganic CsPbBr3 PSC with PEO treatment are illustrated in Fig. 1e. The thickness of the CsPbBr3 perovskite film is approximately 400 nm, and some grains are grown vertically across the top and bottom surfaces. The grains of the perovskite film are related directly to the GBs, which consist of structural defects. The defects at the GB can act as recombination and trap-state centers of minority carriers. These are beneficial for shortening the carrier transport path. Hence, their alignment minimizes the charge carrier transport length and therefore maximizes the carrier transport efficiency. Fig. 1f shows the XRD patterns of the CsPbBr3 films with and without PEO modification, where the characteristic diffraction peaks at 2θ = 15.2°, 21.4° and 30.6° correspond to the (100), (110) and (200) planes of the cubic CsPbBr3 perovskite, respectively. The peak intensity gradually increases when changing the PEO solution concentration from 0 to 0.1 mg mL−1, which means that the crystallinity of the CsPbBr3 film is enhanced by applying a PEO buffer layer. However, PEO at higher concentrations, such as 0.5 mg mL−1, inhibits the crystallization of the CsPbBr3 layer. As a result, we obtain a high-quality perovskite film with a low grain boundary density and high crystallinity by coating 0.1 mg mL−1 PEO at the perovskite surface.


Fig. 2a displays the UV-vis absorption spectra of pure CsPbBr3 and PEO-tailored CsPbBr3 films. The PEO-modified CsPbBr3 films have a higher absorption intensity in the wavelength range of 450–700 nm, which is caused by the increased crystallinity of CsPbBr3. This indicates that the light absorption capacity of CsPbBr3 perovskite films is significantly improved by PEO modification. In order to study in-depth the effect of PEO interface modification on the perovskite layer, FTIR measurements have been performed to characterize the PEO, CsBr/PEO and PbBr2/PEO films (Fig. 2b). The fingerprint regions of C–O–C functional group stretching vibrations (νC–O–C) at 1641.422 cm−1 are from the pristine PEO. This fingerprint peak for the CsBr/PEO and PbBr2/PEO films slightly shifts to a lower wavenumber in contrast to that of the pristine PEO. This suggests that the C–O–C bond strength becomes weaker, which is a result of the interaction between the oxygenic groups in PEO and uncoordinated Pb2+ ions. The oxygen atoms in the oxygenic ether (C–O–C) and hydroxyl (–OH) groups have lone pair electrons and share them with the uncoordinated Pb2+ to passivate the perovskite defects. The high crystallinity means an organized array of all the chemical elements, which is not conducive to producing the defects. It is well known that the defects act as recombination centers, where the degradation of CsPbBr3 to PbBr2 starts. Therefore, the defect passivation by PEO molecules undoubtedly enhances the efficiency and stability. As shown in Fig. 2c and d, the XPS peaks of Pb 4f and Cs 3d shift to lower binding energies after modification with a PEO buffer layer on the CsPbBr3 film surface compared to the pristine ones, which is consistent with the above speculation.
Furthermore, the surface hydrophobicity of the perovskite films is examined by contact angle testing, as shown in Fig. 2e–h. The contact angle of the pristine CsPbBr3 film is 52.90°, while it increases to a maximal 81.56° in terms of the perovskite film tailored by 0.1 mg mL−1 PEO. The PEO molecule has a long hydrophobic chain and a hydrophilic hydroxyl group. It has been previously mentioned that the hydroxyl groups bond to the perovskite film, leaving the long hydrophobic chains extending outward into the carbon electrode. This well-aligned PEO molecule pattern promotes the hydrophobicity and therefore the humidity resistance of the solar cell. However, the PEO molecule alignment becomes disordered at higher PEO concentrations (such as 0.5 mg mL−1), which decreases the contact angle of water on the resultant perovskite film to 73.52°.

Fig. 3a exhibits the photocurrent–voltage (J–V) curves of carbon-based all-inorganic CsPbBr3 solar cells allowing study of their photovoltaic performances, and the photovoltaic data, including PCE, short-circuit current density (Jsc), open-circuit voltage (Voc), and fill factor (FF) are summarized in Table S1. The pristine carbon-based HTL-free all-inorganic CsPbBr3 PSC delivers a PCE of 6.25% (a Jsc value of 5.73 mA cm−2, a Voc value of 1.429 V, and an FF value of 76.33%). All the photovoltaic data are improved by covering the perovskite film with a PEO buffer layer, and the PEO-0.1 PSC shows the best PCE of 8.84% with a Jsc value of 7.80 mA cm−2, a Voc value of 1.495 V and an FF value of 75.81%. Due to the hydrophobic effect, the device efficiency is reduced with PEO-0.5 treatment. The data obtained in this work are comparable to those of the state-of-the-art devices listed in Table S2. In comparison with the pristine CsPbBr3 PSC, all data for the PEO-0.1 solar cell have good reproducibility because of the narrow data distribution as shown in Fig. S2. By maintaining the bias near the maximum power point, the stabilized photoelectric parameter has good consistency with the Jsc value derived from the J–V measurement, verifying the reliability of the performance enhancement of the modified device (Fig. 3b). To evaluate the stability of CsPbBr3 solar cells, the aging test on the pristine and PEO-0.1-modified solar cells is conducted in an air environment with 80% RH at 25 °C. The unencapsulated device with PEO-0.1 retains 84.84% of its initial PCE after 30 days (Fig. 3c), which is higher than that of the pristine cell. The improved tolerance to high humidity is caused by the increased perovskite crystallinity and reduced defect density along with a high hydrophobicity of the perovskite film.
To understand in depth the changes in photovoltaic properties, we studied the carrier transport behavior using steady-state PL and TRPL measurements, and the results are shown in Fig. 4a and b. In terms of glass/CsPbBr3 and glass/CsPbBr3/PEO devices, the modified films present an obvious blue-shift PL peak compared with that of the pristine sample, which is influenced by the energy band structures. Meanwhile, the enhanced PL intensity corresponds to a reduced defect density. The TRPL spectra are fitted by the equation I = Ae−(t−t0)/τ1 + Be−(t−t0)/τ2, where A and B are constants for the baseline offset, τ1 is related to the nonradiative-recombination of defects, and τ2 refers to the radiative recombination of electron–hole separation. The device modified with PEO-0.1 shows the smallest τ1 and largest τ2 values (τ1 = 0.087 ns, τ2 = 2.783 ns) in comparison with the τ1 value of 0.195 ns and τ2 of 2.37 ns for a pristine solar cell (Table S3). This result demonstrates that the nonradiative-recombination in the carbon-based all-inorganic CsPbBr3 PSC is dramatically inhibited by using the PEO modification, originating from the reduced defect density caused by the defect passivation of oxygenic ether and hydroxyl groups.
We also fabricated FTO/NiO/perovskite/PEO/carbon and performed its space-charge-limited current (SCLC) measurement in the dark, as shown in Fig. 4c. The trap density nt is obtained through the following equation:VTFL = qntL2/2εε0, where q is the charge of the electron, L is the thickness of the perovskite film, and ε and ε0 are the dielectric constant and the vacuum permittivity of CsPbBr3. With the 460 nm thickness of the perovskite film, the trap density for the PEO-0.1 PSC is calculated as 4.64 × 1015 cm−3, which is much lower than 5.79 × 1015 cm−3 for the pristine device. This further verifies the accuracy of defect data. Fig. 4d displays the J–V curves in the dark; the PEO-0.1-modified PSC has the lowest leakage current in contrast to the other cells. The leakage current of the pure CsPbBr3 PSC is very high, which is equivalent to the triple minimum leakage current value. The reduced leakage current is caused by the passivation effect of PEO toward perovskite defects. We also studied the charge recombination dynamics by plotting Jsc and Voc as functions of light intensity, as shown in Fig. S3 and Fig. 4e. The relationship between Jsc or Voc and light intensity (I) could be obtained using the following formula:Voc = εkTln(I)/q + constant, Jsc ∝ Iα (α ≤ 1), where T refers to the absolute temperature, k and q represent the Boltzmann's constant and the charge constant, and α and ε represent the ideal factors associated with the recombination reaction. The decreased ε value confirms that the PEO buffer layer effectively suppresses the trap-assisted Shockley–Read–Hall (SRH) recombination. The α value for PEO-0.1 PSC is closer to 1, meaning a smaller mitigated bimolecular recombination rate and an enhanced charge extraction efficiency. All the aforementioned characterization studies demonstrate that the non-radiative recombination has been obviously diminished by the PEO buffer layer.
In a PSC device, the photoinduced electrons transfer from the perovskite active film to the electron-transporting layer, leaving the holes to transfer toward the back electrode. Therefore, an efficient carrier transport directly influences the photovoltaic performance of a PSC. We carried out the EIS measurements to investigate in depth the reactions experienced by light-excited electrons at the interface. Fig. 4f shows the Nyquist plots, and the electrochemical parameters are summarized in Table S4, where Rs refers to the series resistor, Rrec represents the recombination resistance, and CPE is related to the ideal capacitor. Compared to the pristine CsPbBr3 device, the PEO-0.1 PSC has the smallest Rs and the largest Rrec values. As a result, the carrier migration is facilitated and the photoinduced electron–hole recombination is effectively inhibited. Beyond this, the smaller CPE value for the PEO-0.1-tailored PSC indicates less charge accumulation at the interface in comparison with that of the pristine PSC, which is beneficial for carrier extraction and electron–hole separation.

In summary, we have demonstrated the practicability of coating a PEO buffer layer at the perovskite/carbon interface of a carbon-based, HTL-free, all-inorganic CsPbBr3 PSC. The results indicate that the crystallinity of the inorganic CsPbBr3 film is increased and the defects at the perovskite surface are passivated by the oxygenic groups (C–O–C, –OH) of PEO. Moreover, the well-aligned pattern of the PEO molecules with long hydrophobic chains facing outward provides the PSC with good humidity resistance. The all-inorganic CsPbBr3 PSC tailored by 0.1 mg mL−1 PEO achieves the highest PCE of 8.84% versus 6.25% for the PEO-free device and exhibits excellent stability in 80% RH air.


J. Tan performed the tests and characterization; J. Dou designed the experiments; B. L. He, Y. Y. Zhao, J. L. Duan and Q. W. Tang discussed the results and revised the manuscript.


There are no conflicts to declare.


The authors gratefully acknowledged financial support provided by the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2021YFE0111000) and National Natural Science Foundation of China (22109053 and 22179051).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d3dt00169e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023