 DOI: 10.1039/C8TA12481G
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 7760-7765


Huanxiang
Jiang
,

Xiaoming
Li
,

Zezhou
Liang
,

Gongyue
Huang
,

Weichao
Chen
*,

Nan
Zheng
* and 

Renqiang
Yang
*

CAS Key Laboratory of Bio-based Materials, Qingdao Institute of Bioenergy and Bioprocess Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Qingdao 266101, China. E-mail: yangrq@qibebt.ac.cn

College of Textiles & Clothing, State Key Laboratory of Bio-fibers and Eco-textiles, Collaborative Innovation Center for Eco-Textiles of Shandong Province, Qingdao University, Qingdao 266071, China. E-mail: chenwc@qdu.edu.cn

Institute of Polymer Optoelectronic Materials and Devices, State Key Laboratory of Luminescent Materials and Devices, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510640, China. E-mail: zhengn@scut.edu.cn

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China

Received
28th December 2018
, Accepted 28th February 2019
First published on 4th March 2019
Two structurally similar acceptors ITIC and IT-4F with complementary absorption spectra were employed to construct high-performance ternary blend polymer solar cells (PSCs) by combining a new polymer donor PBTA-PS. The ternary blend solar cell exhibits an outstanding power conversion efficiency of 13.27% with an enhanced short circuit current density (JSC) of 19.60 mA cm−2 and an excellent fill factor of 74.45%, which is higher than that of PBTA-PS:ITIC (IT-4F) binary solar cells. A wide photoresponse resulting in large JSC, and good miscibility and compatibility of the three components guarantee the desired morphology and molecular packing in the ternary blend film, which improved the charge transport properties. Our results demonstrated that employing structurally similar acceptors is a promising strategy to enhance the molecular packing and realize high-performance ternary solar cells.

Polymer solar cells (PSCs) have attracted tremendous attention around the world on account of their solution processability, flexibility and light weight, which make them a potential technology to utilize the solar energy. The past decade has witnessed the rapid progress of the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of PSCs. To date, the PCEs of single junction bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) PSCs have exceeded 14% by designing novel conjugated polymers and non-fullerene acceptors (NFAs) as well as interface engineering. Moreover, the development of device structures and processing methods also promotes the performance of PSCs. However, the narrow absorption band of organic semiconductor materials makes it hard to harvest photons in a wide range. Therefore, it's essential to enhance the light harvesting ability of PSCs by employing multiple donors and acceptors with complementary absorption and thereby improve the photocurrent.

One strategy is combining three photovoltaic materials (two donors with one acceptor or one donor with two acceptors) with complementary absorption to fabricate single junction solar cells, known as ternary solar cells. This method could broaden the absorption range of the PSCs while retaining the simple fabricating process of single junction devices. As for ternary solar cells, a bicontinuous interpenetrating network is required for efficient exciton dissociation and charge transport. As a consequence, the morphology of active layers is of vital importance. In many cases, the incorporation of a third component in the active layer will disturb the phase separation and molecular orientation of the binary blend. Particularly in ternary systems containing two donor polymers, the poor miscibility of polymers remains an obstacle in achieving the ideal morphology. Therefore, with the rapid development of NFAs, more and more research efforts have been devoted to ternary systems based on two acceptors, either one fullerene derivative combined with one NFA or two NFAs. A PCE of over 13% has been obtained for ternary systems based on one fullerene derivative and one NFA. As for the ternary system based on two NFAs, many studies have also been carried out. For instance, Sun and co-workers first fabricated a ternary PSC based on two NFAs (SdiPBI-Se and ITIC-Th) with a high PCE exceeding 10%. Hou and co-workers fabricated a ternary PSC using IT-M and IEICO as acceptors, which delivered a high PCE of 11.1%. Chen and co-workers used NNBDT and FDNCTF as acceptors to fabricate a ternary PSC which exhibited high performance with a PCE of 12.8%. Zhang and co-workers fabricated a high performance ternary PSC with a PCE of 13.7% utilizing INPIC and MeICl as acceptors. As a consequence, these results guarantee a promising future for non-fullerene ternary PSCs.
In this contribution, high efficiency ternary blend PSCs were fabricated by combining a new medium bandgap polymer PBTA-PS and two structurally similar NFAs (ITIC and IT-4F). The binary devices based on the polymer deliver PCEs of 11.83% and 9.55% for ITIC and IT-4F as acceptors, respectively. The PBTA-PS:ITIC binary device showed higher open circuit voltage (VOC) and fill factor (FF), but lower short circuit current density (JSC) than the PBTA-PS:IT-4F device. After adding a small amount of IT-4F into the PBTA-PS:ITIC system, the JSC and FF increased simultaneously, while the VOC decreased slightly. Hence, the ternary PSC displayed a high PCE of 13.27% with a JSC of 19.60 mA cm−2, a relatively high VOC of 0.91 V and a superior FF of 74.45%. The enhanced JSC and FF could be attributed to the complementary absorption and improved crystallinity because of the similar chemical structure between ITIC and IT-4F, endowing them with good miscibility and compatibility in the ternary blend. As a consequence, IT-4F could act as a crystalline modulator to enhance the molecular packing. In addition, efficient energy transfer was observed from ITIC to IT-4F, which could promote the exciton dissociation efficiency. Our results demonstrated that choosing structurally similar acceptors is a promising approach to enhance the crystallinity of polymers and enable efficient energy transfer synergistically for realizing high-efficiency ternary PSCs.

The chemical structures of PBTA-PS, ITIC and IT-4F are shown in Fig. 1a. The synthesis procedure and characterization of PBTA-PS are depicted in the ESI. The polymer PBTA-PS was obtained through Stille polymerization using Pd2(dba)3 and P(o-tol)3 as catalysts. The polymer could be dissolved in chloroform (CF), chlorobenzene (CB) and o-dichlorobenzene (o-DCB). The thermal stability of the polymer was tested by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA). PBTA-PS has high thermal stability with an onset decomposition temperature (Td) of 334 °C with 5% weight loss (Fig. S2). Demonstrating the thermal stability of PBTA-PS is important for PSC fabrication. The two acceptors shared the same core IDTT, the only difference between them is that IT-4F has a fluorine substituted end group. This could guarantee good miscibility and compatibility. Fluorine atoms could help lower the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO), and cause a little red-shift in the absorption. Thus, the two acceptors exhibit complementary absorption, as shown in Fig. 1b. The energy level alignment of PBTA-PS, ITIC and IT-4F is depicted in Fig. 1d. The ternary system possesses a cascade energy level alignment. The HOMOs of PBTA-PS, ITIC and IT-4F are −5.34 eV, −5.50 eV, and 5.66 eV, respectively. The LUMOs of PBTA-PS, ITIC and IT-4F are −3.40 eV, −3.89 eV and −4.14 eV, respectively. The LUMO and HOMO offset between PBTA-PS and acceptors is sufficient for exciton dissociation and charge transport. As shown in Fig. 1c, the binary and ternary blend PSCs were fabricated with a conventional device structure of indium tin oxide (ITO) glass/poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiopene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS)/PBTA-PS:acceptors/perylene diimide functionalized with amino N-oxide (PDINO)/Al. The best weight ratio between PBTA-PS and ITIC is 1:1.2 (ESI). Ternary PSCs were fabricated by varying the amount of IT-4F. PBTA-PS:ITIC and PBTA-PS:IT-4F binary PSCs were also fabricated for comparison. The device fabrication and optimization process are depicted in the ESI.

The optimal current density–voltage (J–V) curves of binary PSCs are shown in Fig. 2a. The detailed photovoltaic parameters are listed in Table 1. The PBTA-PS:ITIC binary PSCs delivered a moderate PCE of 11.83% with a high VOC of 0.95 V, a JSC of 17.90 mA cm−2 and a fill factor of 69.59%. The PBTA-PS:IT-4F PSCs exhibit an inferior PCE of 9.55% with a VOC of 0.77 V, a JSC of 18.31 mA cm−2 and a fill factor of 67.62%. The large JSC of PBTA-PS:IT-4F PSCs benefits from the broad photoresponse of IT-4F. Therefore, IT-4F could be used as the third component to broaden the photoresponse range of PBTA-PS:ITIC binary PSCs for further improvement of PCE. Ternary PSCs were fabricated by introducing different amounts of IT-4F to the PBTA-PS:ITIC binary system. The weight ratio between PBTA-PS and ITIC was fixed at 1:1.2 (Fig. S4). The corresponding photovoltaic parameters are listed in Table S2. When the weight ratio of PBTA-PS:ITIC:IT-4F was 1:1.2:0.2, the ternary PSCs delivered a high PCE of 13.27% with a relatively high VOC of 0.91 V, an enhanced JSC of 19.60 mA cm−2 and a markedly improved FF of 74.45%. The corresponding J–V curve is shown in Fig. 2a. The enhanced PCE mainly benefits from the simultaneously increased JSC and FF, which could be attributed to the superior light harvesting and optimized charge transport. It is worth noting that the VOC of ternary PSCs was not pinned at the smaller VOC of the binary PSCs, it varies along with the change of the content of IT-4F. As the content of IT-4F increases, the VOC decreases. A similar variation trend of VOC was observed in some other ternary PSC studies, which could be well explained by the alloy model.
Active layers

V
OC [V]

J
SC [mA cm−2]
FF [%]
PCE [%]
PBTA-PS:ITIC
0.95 (0.95 ± 0.01)
17.90 (17.70 ± 0.23)
69.59 (68.87 ± 1.32)
11.83 (11.46 ± 0.39)
PBTA-PS:IT-4F
0.77 (0.77 ± 0.01)
18.31 (17.92 ± 0.52)
67.62 (65.48 ± 3.67)
9.55 (9.23 ± 0.25)
Ternary blend
0.91 (0.91 ± 0.01)
19.60 (19.28 ± 0.37)
74.45 (73.20 ± 1.54)
13.27 (13.09 ± 0.19)
To further investigate the photoresponse of PSCs, external quantum efficiencies (EQEs) were calculated. As shown in Fig. 2b the ternary PSC exhibits a wider photo-response range than the PBTA-PS:ITIC device due to the introduction of IT-4F. Meanwhile, high EQE values were achieved for the ternary devices with the maximum EQE approaching 80%. This indicates that the introduction of IT-4F did not disrupt the exciton dissociation process but realizes a broad photoresponse range. The JSC values of PBTA-PS:ITIC, PBTA-PS:IT-4F and ternary PSCs calculated from the EQE spectra are 17.67, 18.60 and 19.28 mA cm−2, respectively, which are consistent with the measured JSCs with little error (<5%).
The exciton dissociation and charge collection processes in binary and ternary devices are further investigated by plotting the photocurrent (Jph = JL − JD) versus the effective applied voltage (Veff = V0 − V), where JL and JD represent the current density under AM 1.5G illumination and in the dark state, respectively. V0 is the voltage when JL = JD. V is the applied voltage on the devices. As shown in Fig. 3a, when Veff exceeds 1 V, the Jph values of binary and ternary devices tend to reach the saturation value (Jsat), indicating little charge recombination at high bias voltage. The ratio of Jph/Jsat under short circuit conditions can be calculated to estimate the overall charge dissociation probability. The Jsat values of PBTA-PS:ITIC, PBTA-PS:IT-4F and ternary devices are 18.46 mA cm−2, 19.29 mA cm−2 and 20.20 mA cm−2, respectively. Correspondingly, the Jph/Jsat values of PBTA-PS:ITIC, PBTA-PS:IT-4F and ternary devices are 96%, 94% and 97%, respectively. The ternary PSCs exhibit higher Jsat and Jph/Jsat, illustrating that incorporation of IT-4F into PBTA-PS:ITIC could facilitate the exciton generation as well as the exciton dissociation process, resulting in more charges being collected by electrodes with little recombination. For more insight into the recombination behavior in the binary and ternary PSCs, the photocurrent Jph as a function of light intensity (Plight) was plotted. The relationship between Jph and Plight can be described with the power-law JSC ∝ Pα, where α approaching 1 indicates negligible recombination. As shown in Fig. 3b, the α of ternary PSCs is 0.99, which is slightly higher than that of the binary PSCs, manifesting that adding small amounts of IT-4F into the PBTA-PS:ITIC system could effectively suppress charge recombination, supporting the high JSC and FF of ternary PSCs.
To further investigate the charge transport properties of binary and ternary PSCs, the electron and hole mobility was characterized by the space-charge-limited-current (SCLC) method. Electron-only and hole-only diodes were fabricated using the configuration of ITO glass/ZnO/active layer/PDINO/Al and ITO glass/PEDOT:PSS/active layer/Au, respectively. The corresponding J–V curves are shown in Fig. S5. The electron mobility (μe) and hole mobility (μh) values are listed in Table 2. The electron and hole mobilities of PBTA-PS:ITIC are 1.85 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 2.86 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively, which are slightly higher than those of the PBTA-PS:IT-4F counterpart. After incorporating 20% (wt%) IT-4F into the PBTA-PS:ITIC system, the ternary system exhibits simultaneously increased electron and hole mobilities. The μe/μh became closer to 1, indicating a more balanced charge transport. Moreover, the balanced charge transport could effectively suppress the recombination and space-charge effect, leading to an excellent FF up to 74.45%.
Active layers

μ
e [cm2 V−1 s−1]

μ
h [cm2 V−1 s−1]

μ
e/μh
PBTA-PS:ITIC
1.85 × 10−4
2.86 × 10−4
0.64
PBTA-PS:IT-4F
3.42 × 10−4
6.76 × 10−5
5.05
Ternary blend
4.24 × 10−4
3.86 × 10−4
1.09
Photoluminescence (PL) studies were performed to gain insight into the energy transfer and charge transfer process. As shown in Fig. S6a, the neat ITIC film shows a strong PL emission peak at 755 nm while the neat IT-4F film presents a relatively weak PL emission peak at 780 nm. After blending IT-4F with ITIC, the blend film exhibits only one emission peak at 780 nm, which is identical with that of IT-4F. The characteristic peak of ITIC completely disappeared while the emission intensity of the ternary blend film increased remarkably. Since the absorption spectrum of IT-4F obviously overlaps with the PL emission spectrum, it can be concluded that efficient energy transfer from ITIC to IT-4F exists in the ternary system. Therefore, another possible channel to generate charges of ITIC excitons can be formed via such an energy transfer to IT-4F. The PL quenching in the blend films was also investigated. As displayed in Fig. S6b, the neat PBTA-PS film exhibits an intense PL emission in the spectrum and it could be effectively quenched in both PBTA-PS:ITIC and PBTA-PS:IT-4F films, demonstrating an effective exciton dissociation between PBTA-PS and acceptors. After adding IT-4F into the PBTA-PS:ITIC blend, the PL emission was further quenched, which is because of the effective exciton dissociation between PBTA-PS and acceptors combined with an efficient energy transfer from ITIC to IT-4F. To further investigate the charge transport in the ternary system, the JSC values of acceptor-only organic solar cells (OSCs) were measured and the corresponding J–V curves are shown in Fig. S7. The JSC values of OSCs based on ITIC and IT-4F neat films are 0.11 and 0.15 mA cm−2, respectively. The ITIC:IT-4F device showed a JSC of 0.21 mA cm−2, which is comparable to that of the devices based on neat acceptors, revealing negligible transfer between ITIC and IT-4F. As a consequence, after the exciton dissociation, the electrons could transport to ITIC and IT-4F individually and then be collected by the electrodes. Besides, the energy transfer from ITIC to IT-4F could help to enhance the exciton harvesting and dissociation between PBTA-PS and IT-4F. The superior exciton dissociation in the ternary system could guarantee high FF and PCE.
The surface and bulk morphology of binary and ternary blend films were characterized by atomic force microscopy (AFM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). As shown in Fig. 4a and b, both PBTA-PS:ITIC and PBTA-PS:IT-4F blend films exhibit smooth surfaces, with a root-mean-square (RMS) roughness of 1.77 and 1.12 nm, respectively. When 20% IT-4F was incorporated, the ternary blend films still exhibit a uniform surface with a moderate RMS roughness of 1.20 nm (Fig. 4c), which is between that of the PBTA-PS:ITIC and PBTA-PS:IT-4F binary films. Large grains are not observed, demonstrating a uniform nanoscale morphology. Meanwhile, as shown in TEM images, after incorporating IT-4F, the ternary blend film exhibits a homogeneous morphology and no large phase separation was observed (Fig. 4d–f). This should be attributed to the good miscibility of the two acceptors. The appropriate morphologies are beneficial for exciton dissociation and charge transport, leading to high JSC and FF.
Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) measurement is conducted to further investigate the miscibility of acceptors in the blend film. As shown in Fig. S8, there is no obvious thermal transition in the neat ITIC, IT-4F and their blend film, indicating that the miscibility of ITIC and IT-4F should be appropriate for constructing ternary blend PSCs.
The molecular packing and orientation of binary and ternary blend films are characterized by two-dimensional grazing-incidence wide-angle scattering (2D GIWAXS) measurement. The 2D GIWAXS patterns and the corresponding in-plane (IP) and out-of-plane (OOP) line cut profiles are shown in Fig. 5. The (100) lamellar diffraction peaks of PBTA-PS were observed for the binary and ternary blend films along the IP direction. Besides, PBTA-PS also exhibits (010) π–π stacking diffraction peaks along the OOP direction, indicative of preferential face-on orientation for PBTA-PS in the binary and ternary blend films. It is noteworthy that the ternary film shows obviously enhanced (100) and (010) peaks of PBTA-PS compared to binary films, indicative of a more ordered molecular packing of PBTA-PS in the ternary film. This might profit the vertical charge transport and mitigation of carrier recombination, thus accounting for the high FF obtained in the ternary device. All these results prove that incorporating IT-4F into PBTA-PS:ITIC will not devastate the original molecular packing and orientation in the PBTA-PS:ITIC film. More importantly, IT-4F could work as a crystalline modulator, making the stacking of PBTA-PS more compact and more uniform in the ternary system.

A series of high efficiency PSCs were fabricated by using PBTA-PS as the donor and two small molecules, ITIC and IT-4F, as acceptors. The ITIC and IT-4F based binary devices delivered PCEs of 11.83% and 9.55%, respectively. After incorporating IT-4F into the PBTA-PS:ITIC system, the optimal ternary PSCs delivered superior PCEs of 13.27% with a high JSC of 19.60 mA cm−2 and an outstanding FF of 74.45%. The improved overall performance could be attributed to the good compatibility of the acceptors, enhanced light harvesting, more compact molecular stacking, more balanced charge transport and the efficient energy transfer between acceptors in the ternary blend films. Our result demonstrates that using a structurally similar acceptor as a crystalline modulator is a promising approach to enhance the molecular packing and realize highly efficient ternary PSCs.


There are no conflicts to declare.


The authors thank the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51773220, 51573205 and 61405209), the Shandong Provincial Natural Science Foundation (ZR2017ZB0314), DICP & QIBEBT (DICP&QIBEBT UN201709), and Dalian National Laboratory for Clean Energy (DNL) CAS for the financial support.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta12481g
‡ Huanxiang Jiang and Xiaoming Li contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019