 DOI: 10.1039/C5TA01129A
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9116-9122


Kun
Cao
,

Jin
Cui
,

Hua
Zhang
,

Hao
Li
,

Jinkui
Song
,

Yan
Shen
,

Yibing
Cheng
 and 

Mingkui
Wang
*

Grätzel Center for Mesoscopic Solar Cells, Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Luoyu Road 1037, Wuhan 430074, P. R. China. E-mail: mingkui.wang@mail.hust.edu.cn

Department of Materials Engineering, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia

Received
11th February 2015
, Accepted 3rd March 2015
First published on 3rd March 2015
Efficient mesoscopic CH3NH3PbI2Br perovskite solar cells have been prepared based on the TiO2/Al2O3/carbon architecture. An appreciable power conversion efficiency of 11.03% was achieved under AM 1.5G illumination. This system combines the superior stability of MAPbI2Br and no requirement of a hole conductor layer.

Hybrid lead-halide perovskite solar cells have been demonstrated to be one of the most promising and fastest growing photovoltaic technologies. Since the first introduction in 2009, solar cells using these materials have evolved rapidly to yield unprecedented overall power conversion efficiency (PCE) of over 20%. The most commonly used perovskite is CH3NH3PbI3 (CH3NH3 abbreviated as MA hereafter). However, the mixed halide MAPb(I1−xClx)3 and MAPb(I1−xBrx)3 analogues by partial substitution with chlorine and bromine have been widely investigated, which are supposed to be chemically stable in conjunction with humidity resistance. It is found that the optical band gap of halide perovskites can be tuned from about 1.5 to 2.2 eV by varying the halide composition between iodide and bromide in this material. Seok et al. demonstrated for the first time the deposition of MAPb(I1−xBrx)3 (especially for the composition where x = 0–0.2) in mesoporous TiO2 films with reasonable device performance. Their work showed an improved stability of the MAPb(I1−xBrx)3 (x ≥ 0.2) device compared to that of MAPbI3 under the same humidity conditions. It was ascribed to the substitution of larger I atoms with smaller Br atoms in MAPb(I1−xBrx)3, leading to the reduction of the lattice constant and a transition to a cubic phase. Among these perovskites, MAPbI2Br has a high absorption coefficient in the visible light region (400–700 nm) together with its prolonged charge carrier lifetime, which makes it a promising candidate for developing stable perovskite solar cells with high-efficiency. Moreover, MAPbI2Br has also been found to have an upper conduction band (CB) position, enabling a greater driving force to inject electrons into the CB of the TiO2. However, so far only a few papers have reported on mesoporous perovskite solar cells based on MAPbI2Br. Qiu et al. reported a perovskite device with a PCE of 5% by using TiO2 NWAs as an electron transport material (ETM) and MAPbI2Br as an absorber. A higher VOC could be achieved with this device than that based on the analogue MAPbI3. Very recently, Zhang and co-workers reported a perovskite device with 6.64% PCE using MAPbI2Br as a light absorber and poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) as a hole-transport layer. It is found in these cells the photovoltage is usually limited to ∼0.8 V, which is not in accordance with the expectation that larger open-circuit voltages could be achieved by using the mixed-halide perovskites with large bandgaps. This may be attributed to the factor related to the deposition of high-quality MAPbI2Br perovskites, resulting in the probability of recombination at the interfaces between the electron conductor and perovskite as well as hole conductor and perovskite. Recently, Zhao et al. reported a planar MAPbI2Br-based perovskite device with spiro-MeOTAD as a hole extraction layer, showing ∼10% efficiency. A uniform compact perovskite layer was fabricated with thermal decomposition from a precursor containing MACl as a glue or soft template.

Perovskite crystallization from solution produces large morphological variations and incomplete filling of the mesoporous oxide scaffold, which results in an unwanted spread of the photovoltaic performance of the resulting devices. For instance, the charge recombination occurred at the interfaces between perovskite/selective contact materials, as well as the charge transfer between the ETM and the back contact in these typical device structures is the main reason which restricts the efficiency of MAPbI2Br-based perovskite solar cell devices.
In this communication, we present mesoscopic perovskite devices using MAPbI2Br light absorber. The metal halide perovskite is infiltrated into the mesoporous oxide scaffold by drop-coating deposition through the porous carbon layer. Compared to the planar structure devices the crystallization of the perovskite is constrained within the mesopores in the oxide scaffold. Photo-generated holes transport directly to the counter electrode since metal halide perovskites can act as a hole conductor as well. When a triple-layer of mesoscopic TiO2/Al2O3/carbon is employed as a scaffold and infiltrated with MAPbI2Br, an overall energy conversion of 11.03% with an impressive photovoltage over 1.10 V was achieved under standard AM 1.5 illumination at 100 mW cm−2. This system combines the superior stability of MAPbI2Br and no requirement of high-cost HTMs and a very simple manufacture process.

CH3NH3I and CH3NH3Br were synthesized by reacting 30 mL of methylamine (40% in methanol, TCI) and 32.3 mL of hydroiodic acid (57 wt% in water, Aldrich) or 23.32 mL of hydrobromic acid (48 wt% in water, Aldrich) in a 250 mL round bottom flask at 0 °C for 2 h with stirring. The precipitate was recovered by putting the solution on a rotavap and carefully removing the solvents at 50 °C. The product of methylammonium iodide (CH3NH3I) or methylammonium bromide (CH3NH3Br) was washed with ethanol by stirring the mixture for 30 min. Then, the mixture was filtered and washed three times with diethyl ether. After filtration, the solid was collected and dried at 70 °C in a vacuum oven for 40 h.


Devices were fabricated on fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) coated glass serving as a transparent electrode and substrate, respectively. A compact layer of TiO2 was deposited on the cleaned FTO glass by spray pyrolysis deposition with di-isopropoxytitanium bis(acetyl acetonate) solution at 450 °C. Al2O3 paste used for screen printing was prepared by mixing 3 g of Al2O3 nanopowder (Aladdin, 20 nm) in 80 mL ethanol and subsequently adding with 15 g of 10 wt% ethyl cellulose (in EtOH) and 10 g of terpineol. 400 nm thick mesoporous TiO2 films based on commercially available precursor pastes (DSL. 18NR-T, 20 nm, Dyesol, Australia, diluted at 1/3.5 mass ratio of paste/terpilenol), a 600 nm thick Al2O3 and a 10 μm thick carbon black/graphite layer were subsequently prepared by screen printing onto an FTO conducting glass layer by layer, which were sintered at 500 °C for 30 min. The thickness of each layer was measured using a profile-system (DEKTAK, VEECCO, Bruker). The device structure was sintered at 400 °C for 30 min and then cooled to room temperature. After that, the resulting films were infiltrated with PbI2 by dropping a PbI2 solution in DMF (500 mg mL−1) that was kept at 70 °C. After drying, the films were dipped into methylammonium solution (10 mg mL−1) and the color of the films changed from light yellow to black during the dipping process, indicating the process, indicating formation of perovskite.


Film cross-sections were obtained using an FEI Magellan-400 field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM). The time-resolved luminescence decays were recorded with Time-correlated single photo counting system (PicoHarp 300, PicoQuant GmbH). The excitation light source was Ti: Sapphire laser (Mira 900, Coherent; 76 MHz, 130 fs). A xenon light source solar simulator (450 W, Oriel, model 9119) with an AM 1.5G filter (Oriel, model 91192) was used to give an irradiance of 100 mW cm−2 at the surface of the solar cells. Various irradiance intensities from 0.01 to 1.0 sun can be provided with neutral wire mesh attenuators, and the light intensity was calibrated with a standard silicon solar cell. The current–voltage characteristics of the devices under these conditions were obtained by applying external potential bias to the devices and measuring the generated photocurrent with a Keithley model 2400 digital source meter. A similar data acquisition system was used to control the incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) measurement. The devices were tested using a metal mask with an aperture area of 0.16 cm2 to prevent the scattering light.


The XRD patterns of MAPbI2Br and MAPbI3 films are shown in Fig. 1a. This result indicates that both materials have a similar crystalline structure assignable to the perovskite system. Compared to MAPbI3, the diffraction peaks of MAPbI2Br are shifted uniformly to higher angles, which can be rationalized by the shrunken crystalline lattice wholly caused by the single-atom replacement of I with Br. The single peak at 28.88° (Fig. S1) is a key indication of a cubic perovskite phase as previously reported. These atomic to structural changes in the material result in important variations in its optical and electronic properties, thereby offering a handle to modulate the photovoltaic operation of the perovskite devices. The UV/Vis absorbance spectrum can tell us the light absorbing properties of the perovskite. As shown in Fig. 1b, the MAPbI2Br film exhibits an onset absorption band at around 700 nm, while the MAPbI3 absorbs light in a longer wavelength region up to ∼800 nm. The different absorption ranges can be easily ascribed to the variation of the energy band gaps (Eg) of those two semiconductor absorbers, arising from the Br-replacement induced structural modifications. It is reported that the MAPbI2Br perovskite with a wider band gap (∼1.77 eV) than MAPbI3 (∼1.55 eV), which is in accordance with the absorption spectrum. The corresponding PL spectrum of the MAPbI2Br film is shown in Fig. S2. An obvious emission peak of MAPbI2Br at around 700 nm is observed, showing a little Stocks shift in comparison with the absorbance spectrum.

The schematic structure of a typical mesoscopic perovskite solar cell is shown in Fig. 2a. All the films including the mesoporous layers of TiO2 and Al2O3 with a total thickness of ∼1 μm are demonstrated in the cross-section SEM image of the device as given in Fig. 2a. The mesoscopic carbon CE with a thickness of ∼10 μm was screen-printed onto mesoscopic oxide layers. In this study, the mesoporous layers were infiltrated with MAPbI2Br by the drop-coating method combined with a sequential deposition technique, which is proved successful in producing mixed Br/I perovskites. The PbI2 was first deposited by drop-casting from solution through a mesoporous carbon layer and subsequently transformed into the perovskite by exposing the whole device to a solution of CH3NH3Br (see Experimental section for details). The perovskites are partially filled in the carbon electrode as observed in the SEM image in Fig. 2a, which yields an interpenetrating interface between the perovskites and the counter electrode. Therefore, a low contact resistance would be expected for this optimized interface, which might result in a high photovoltaic performance compared with the system having the perovskites only in the oxide layers. The energy level in Fig. 2b allows electron extraction from MAPbI2Br (−3.6 eV) to TiO2 (−3.9 eV) conduction bands, and hole collection from the MAPbI2Br valence band (−5.4 eV) to carbon CE (−5.0 eV). The PL quenching effect of TiO2 can be observed in the time-resolved PL decay plot as shown in Fig. 2c. The presence of the TiO2 layer dramatically accelerates the PL decay process. It elucidates an efficient charge transfer of the MAPbI2Br/TiO2 interface. Meanwhile, MAPbI2Br presents a prolonged charge carrier lifetime compared to MAPbI3 as shown in Fig. 2c, indicating improved charge carrier transport properties of MAPbI2Br. The improvement might be associated with its highly ordered cubic structure, whereas, in comparison, the tetragonal structure of MAPbI3 is less ordered.

Fig. 3a shows the photocurrent density–photovoltage (J–V) curves of the mesoscopic perovskite devices under standard AM 1.5G illumination at 100 mW cm−2. The photovoltaic parameters, open circuit voltage (VOC), fill factor (FF), short circuit current density (JSC) and PCE, are tabulated in Table 1. Encouragingly, the MAPbI2Br-based device displayed a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 15.37 mA cm−2, a fill factor (FF) of 0.69, and an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 1.04 V, amounting to a PCE of 11.03%, which is the highest value observed for MAPbI2Br-based devices to date. For comparison, the device based on MAPbI3 was also fabricated under the same conditions and showed a power conversion efficiency of 10.51% with a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 17.36 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 0.904 V and a fill factor (FF) of 0.67. Comparison of the VOC value of the MAPbI3-based device with that of the MAPbI2Br-based device shows that the photovoltage can be increased from 0.904 V to 1.04 V simply by changing the perovskite material from MAPbI3 to MAPbI2Br in the same device structure. To further check the reproducibility of device performance, Fig. S3 shows the statistic of the VOC for a batch of 15 devices based on MAPbI2Br and MAPbI3. Obviously, the average VOC value for the devices with MAPbI2Br is 1.03 V, which is much higher than that of the MAPbI3 one at 0.903 V. MAPbI2Br, with a wider band gap (∼1.77 eV) than MAPbI3 (1.55 eV), has a higher conduction band edge (CB, −3.6 eV) as compared to MAPbI3 (CB, −3.9 eV). The origin of VOC in perovskite solar cells is typically described by the difference between the conduction band minimum of the perovskite and the HOMO of the HTM, or by the potential difference between the quasi-Fermi level of the electron (Efn) at the electron extraction layer/anode interface and the quasi-Fermi level of the hole (Efp) at the hole extraction layer/cathode interface under illumination, assuming that recombination within the device can be ignored. Therefore, when Efn and Efp are built up within the device under light illumination, MAPbI2Br might lead to a larger difference between Efn and Efp as compared to MAPbI3, in spite of using the same electron (TiO2) extraction layer, thus resulting in a higher VOC. This result is in accordance with the reports that the perovskite materials contribute to Efn and Efp within the device. In addition, it is noted that the VOC (around 1.1 V) of this device is almost equal to the energy gap (around 1.1 eV) between the TiO2 CB (∼−3.9 eV) and the work function of carbon CE (∼−5.0 eV), indicating that an ohmic contact is formed between the counter electrode with the perovskite layer in this architecture. Thus the VOC is mainly determined by the potential difference between the quasi-Fermi level of the electron (Efn) at the electron extraction layer/anode interface and the quasi-Fermi level of the hole (Efp) at the hole extraction layer/cathode interface under illumination as described before.
Device

J
SC [mA cm−2]

V
OC [V]
FF
PCE [%]
TiO2/Al2O3/C (MAPbI2Br)
15.37
1.04
0.69
11.03
TiO2/Al2O3/C (MAPbI3)
17.36
0.904
0.67
10.51
The reduction of JSC with the MAPbI2Br perovskite is directly related to the blue shift of the absorption onset, as indicated from the IPCE spectra in Fig. 3b. Consistent with the larger bandgap, the onset of the IPCE spectra blue shifted from 800 nm for the MAPbI3 to ∼700 nm for the MAPbI2Br. As shown in Fig. 3b, the MAPbI2Br-based device shows a wide range photocurrent response with IPCE over 60% from 350 nm to 600 nm and a maximum IPCE approaching 80% around 400 nm to 500 nm. The IPCE value shown in the spectra is in good agreement with the absorption spectra of MAPbI2Br as shown in Fig. 1b. It is noted that the MAPbI2Br-based photovoltaic cell gives higher incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) values at 400–600 nm than those of MAPbI3 as can be seen from Fig. 3b, although the MAPbI3-based device presents a good IPCE performance in a wider range from 400 nm to 800 nm. This superior performance of MAPbI2Br is considered to stem from the high absorption coefficient in the visible light region together with its prolonged charge carrier lifetime. Here it is observed that the improvement in the short-circuit current for the MAPbI3-based device is accompanied by a larger open-circuit voltage relative to the MAPbI2Br-based device. In addition, as demonstrated by the dark current–voltage curves in Fig. S4, devices based on MAPbI2Br showed a much higher dark current onset as compared to the devices fabricated with MAPbI3. This is indicative of an effectively inhibited charge recombination in the former case.
As shown in Fig. 4a, the relationship between the JSC of the solar cell based on MAPbI2Br and different light intensities was investigated. Obviously, good linearity is observed for the MAPbI2Br-based device, indicating that the charge collection is independent of the light density. In Fig. 4b, the open circuit voltage as a function of ln(I) is plotted where I is the incident light intensity. From the relationship between δVOC and ln(I), the slope of the fitting curve is 0.054, close to 0.052 (2κT/q), κ is the Boltzmann coefficient and T is the absolute temperature, indicating that the main recombination mechanism in the device is free carrier recombination. According to previous investigations, it is supposed that there is no obvious space-charge limit in the TiO2/Al2O3/carbon (perovskite) junction due to the small difference in the mobility between electrons and holes. Fig. S5 illustrates the current–voltage (J–V) characteristics of a typical TiO2/Al2O3/carbon (MAPbI2Br) cell measured under light intensities of 96.6, 69.2, 43.5 and 24.7 mW cm−2. The short-circuit current density (JSC), open-circuit voltage (VOC) and fill factor (FF) are 15.01 mA cm−2, 1.08 V and 0.66, respectively, which lead to a power-conversion efficiency of 10.74% measured at 96.6 mW cm−2. At 69.2, 43.5 and 24.7 mW cm−2 the device exhibited very similar efficiencies, 10.72%, 10.69% and 10.71%, respectively.
An anomalous hysteresis in the J–V curves of perovskite solar cells has been widely observed, which predominantly arises from the presence of the perovskite absorber and is dependent on the device architecture. We therefore recorded the J–V curves of TiO2/Al2O3/carbon (MAPbI2Br) cells with different scanning directions (Fig. 5). For such devices, there is only a small change in the relative scale of the hysteresis with changing scan rate from 0.03 to 0.5 V s−1, revealing a weak scan-rate dependence of the hysteresis effect. We conclude that a minor hysteresis exists in the J–V curves of the TiO2/Al2O3/carbon (MAPbI2Br) cell, which is ascribed to the complicated reasons that the contact interfaces in the device structure and chemical or structural changes in the perovskite are assumed to have a big effect on the extent of hysteresis.
In addition, measuring the steady-state power output directly at a given forward bias is also a feasible means to estimate the power conversion efficiency. As shown in Fig. 6, we recorded the photocurrent density of the MAPbI2Br-based device held at a forward bias of 0.76 V near its maximum output power point as a function of time to monitor the stabilized power output under working conditions. For the MAPbI2Br-based device, the photocurrent density stabilizes within seconds to approximately 14.3 mA cm−2, yielding the stabilized power conversion efficiency around 10.9% measured after 300 s. This indicates that the test conditions (from forward bias to short circuit scans with a scanning rate of 0.07 V s−1) provide an accurate representation of the cells' photovoltaic performance.
The issue of stability is another critical concern for perovskite photovoltaic devices. The major factor affecting the stability of perovskite solar cells may be largely attributed to the decomposition of the perovskite when exposed to moisture. Under ambient air conditions with a regular humidity of 50%, MAPbI2Br is much more stable than MAPbI3, which we can also easily identify by the colour change of the films in Fig. S6. Thus, the MAPbI2Br devices are expected to have better stability than those of MAPbI3. Here, the stability test of the MAPbI2Br devices was carried out in an ambient atmosphere at room temperature, that is, the unsealed devices were subjected to constant light soaking at a relatively low light intensity of about 25 mW cm−2 using white light emitting diodes. As shown in Fig. 7, the stability test indicates that the efficiency of the MAPbI2Br devices is well retained after exposing for 300 h to air without any encapsulation. The JSC has shown an initial value at nearly 14.5 mA cm−2 and been stabilized at 15.0 mA cm−2. During the stability test, the VOC is a little increased to 1.05 V, while the FF remained similar at around 0.67. Therefore, the stability performance of these devices is considered to be fairly good in practical consideration. Moreover, the results show the PCE improvement of the perovskite solar cells with time in the first several days after fabrication, which demonstrates high stability and is in good agreement with the literature. The possible reason may be associated with the interface state between the perovskite layer and carbon CE. However, the detailed mechanism is still not clear and needs to be further investigated.

In summary, we have successfully fabricated HTM-free mesoscopic perovskite devices using CH3NH3PbI2Br as light absorber and hole conductor. The optimized device has achieved a power conversion efficiency of 11.03% with a VOC of 1.04 V and FF of 0.69. Compared to CH3NH3PbI3, the incorporation of bromine in mixed halide perovskites led to a phase transition with a larger bandgap and longer charge carrier lifetime, which is beneficial to the enhancement of VOC and the stability against humidity in air. This cell architecture is constructed with inorganic metal oxides in combination with carbon CE by full printable techniques. Therefore, this work paves the way for the realization of low cost, large-scale, and highly efficient hybrid photovoltaic cells.


The Financial support from the Director Fund of the WNLO, the 973 Program of China (2014CB643506, 2013CB922104, and 2011CBA00703), and the NSFC (21161160445, and 21173091), and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (HUST: CXY12Q022) is acknowledged. The authors thank the Analytical and Testing Centre of Huazhong University of Science & Technology and the Center of Micro-Fabrication and Characterization (CMFC) of WNLO for the measurements of the samples. The authors also thank Professor Junbo Han in Wuhan National High Magnetic Field Center at the HUST for time-resolved luminescence decays characterization.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Photoluminescence, photovoltaic performance, and optical images of different devices. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta01129a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015