 DOI: 10.1039/C7CP02358H
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 15724-15733


Qingqing
Qiu
,

Ping
Wang
,

Lingling
Xu
,

Dejun
Wang
,

Yanhong
Lin
 and 

Tengfeng
Xie
*

College of Chemistry, Jilin University, Changchun 130012, P. R. China

State Key Laboratory of Electroanalytical Chemistry, Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Science, Changchun 130012, P. R. China

Key Laboratory of Photonic and Electric Bandgap Materials, Ministry of Education, School of Physics and Electronic Engineering, Harbin Normal University, Harbin 150025, P. R. China

Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, P. R. China

Received
12th April 2017
, Accepted 23rd May 2017
First published on 23rd May 2017
Anatase TiO2 nanowire (NW) films modified with inverted type-I CdS/CdSe core/shell structure QDs have been successfully prepared by the post synthesis ligand-assisted technique. Surface photovoltage (SPV), transient photovoltage (TPV) and transient photocurrent (TPC) measurements demonstrate that CdS/CdSe core/shell structure QD-sensitized TiO2 NWs electrodes favor photoexicited electron injection and charge transfer due to the special photo-electronic features of CdS/CdSe core/shell structure QDs. With a polysulfide electrolyte, the maximum conversion efficiency was 2.18% for CdS/CdSe QDs with the CdSe shell being 4.4 nanometers thick; a PCE of 0.07% for CdS QDs and a PCE of 0.63% for CdSe QDs were obtained under illumination at 100 mW cm−2. The results reveal that the CdS/CdSe core/shell structure QDs sensitized TiO2 NW electrodes have promising applications in solar cells.

The increasing demand for the development of renewable and clean energy have drawn attention to photoelectron chemistry and photocatalysis. Solar cells are attracting increasing academic and industrial interest as devices to directly convert sunlight into electricity. Great efforts have been focused on the development of quantum dot solar cells (QDSCs) due to the advantages of QDSCs that are demonstrated in the architecture and the unique properties of the QD sensitizers.

Titanium dioxide (TiO2), a significant wide bandgap semiconductor material, has received intensive research due to its prospective applications in solar cells. Among the TiO2 nano-semiconductor materials, one dimensional (1D) nanomaterials, such as nanowires (NWs), nanorods (NRs), and nanotubes (NTs), have attracted much attention due to electron transfer and light scattering. In addition, anatase TiO2 is expected to have a superior photovoltaic performance compared to the rutile structure because of its faster charge transfer rate. Hence, the recent report of a facile method of hydrothermal growth of hierarchical anatase TiO2 nanowires (NWs) on FTO glass has attracted wide attention and research.
However, it is commonly known that the absorption of TiO2 is only in the ultraviolet region because of its wide band gap. Expanding the absorption range is the efficient way by combining TiO2 with semiconductor quantum dot (QD) materials. Among the QDs, CdS and CdSe have been intensively investigated due to their good match of energy levels, good chemical stability and compatibility with electrolyte solutions. CdS QDs based cell devices have high electron injection efficiency. However, absorption of sunlight by CdS is confined to below 550 nm because of its wide band gap (2.25 eV). On the contrary, the absorption spectrum of CdSe can reach 720 nm, but the driving force of electron injection for CdSe QDSCs is below that for CdS QDSCs. One promising strategy is to combine the advantages of both CdS and CdSe QDs.
In recent years, novel inverted type-I CdS/CdSe core/shell structure QDs based QDSCs have attracted wide spread attention due to their special photo-electronic features; they are prepared by a post synthesis deposition technique. As shown in Fig. 1, the CdSe semiconductor is grown epitaxially around the core material of the CdS semiconductor, which favors the separation of photoexcited charge and increases the electron injection efficiency. The approaches adopted to deposit QDs include the direct growth method and the post synthesis deposition method. The direct growth method mainly refers to successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR) and chemical bath deposition (CBD). Although high coverage of QDs has been obtained by the direct growth technique, more accurate particle size and size distribution can be obtained by the post synthesis deposition approach in comparison to the direct growth approach. Utilizing the post synthesis ligand-assisted technique, CdSxSe1−x QDs based solar cells show good performance, such as better coverage of the solar spectrum, long photoexcited charge lifetimes and high quantum efficiency.
Hence, it will be interesting to study the photoexcited charge transfer dynamics of CdS/CdSe core/shell QD-sensitized anatase TiO2 nanowire (NW) electrodes and compare them with those of CdS and CdSe QDs after measuring the SPV, TPV and TPC; this has never been discussed in literature. In our present study, we focus on investigating the photoexcited charge transfer dynamics of CdSCdSe QDs-sensitized TiO2 NW electrodes using SPV, TPV and TPC techniques. A comparison of these properties between CdS QDs and CdSe QDs-sensitized TiO2 electrodes and CdS/CdSe core/shell QDs-sensitized TiO2 electrodes has been made, and their performance in QDSCs has also been investigated. The experimental results indicate that CdS/CdSe core/shell QDs exhibit higher photoexcited charge separation efficiency and better photoelectric performance compared with CdSe QDs and CdS QDs, which implies that CdS/CdSe core/shell QDs is a good candidate for significantly enhancing the efficiency of QD-sensitized solar cells.

Anatase TiO2 NWs were directly grown on transparent FTO substrates using a facile solution-processed method. In a typical experiment, 0.35 g of titanium oxalate potassium (98+%, Aladdin) was added to a solution containing 5 mL of water and 15 mL of diethylene glycol (98+%, Tianjin East China Chemical Reagent Factory). The solution was stirred under normal conditions for 30 min. Then, the above solution was transferred to a Teflon-lined stainless steel autoclave (30 mL), where two pieces of clean, transparent FTO were placed at an angle against the wall of the Teflon reactor with the conductive side face down. The hydrothermal reaction was maintained at 180 °C for 9 h in a regular wind drying oven. Afterward, the autoclave was cooled to room temperature, and the FTO with anatase TiO2 NWs was rinsed with doubled-distilled water and analytical ethanol and was dried at room temperature. Then, the dried anatase TiO2 NWs were immersed in a 40 mM titanium tetrachloride aqueous solution at 70 °C for 35 min, rinsed with doubled-distilled water and analytical ethanol, dried at room temperature, and annealed at 500 °C for 40 min.


The synthesis was performed according to a previously reported approach. In brief, a mixture of cadmium oxide (CdO, 99.998%), oleic acid (OA, tech. 90%) and 1-octadecene (ODE, tech. 90%) was heated in a three-neck flask to obtain a clear and colorless solution. The above solution was heated to 260 °C under N2 flow. Then, the sulfur 1-octadecene solution was injected to obtain the CdS NCs.


A mixture of cadmium oxide, oleic acid and 1-octadecene in a three-neck flask was heated to obtain a clear and colorless solution. Subsequently, the solution was cooled to 160 °C, and then octadecylamine (ODA, 90%) was added to the three-neck flask. The above solution was heated to 240 °C under N2 flow, and then a selenium 1-octadecene solution was injected to obtain the CdSe NCs.


For CdS/CdSe core/shell NCs, the CdS core NCs hexane solution was added to a flask containing octadecylamine and 1-octadecene. After the hexane and residual air were removed, the mixture was heated to 230 °C under N2 flow, and then the cadmium and selenium solutions were injected. The system was heated to 260 °C to obtain the CdS/CdSe core/shell NCs. Finally, the purified product was dispersed in chloroform.


Ligand exchange of NCs by 3-MPA was performed using a reported method. In a typical method, 0.1 mL of 3-MPA was added to 5 mL of doubled-distilled water, and hot, concentrated, aqueous NaOH solution was added to adjust the pH to 10. Then, 5 mL of oleic acid capped NCs in chloroform solution was injected, and the mixture was stirred overnight at room temperature. The product obtained was centrifuged and washed with acetone to remove oleic acid. Then, the 3-mercaptopropionic acid (3-MPA, 99+%) capped NCs were dispersed in water. Hot, concentrated, aqueous NaOH solution was added to adjust the pH of the aqueous 3-mercaptopropionic acid capped NCs solution to 12 for further use.


The anatase TiO2 NWs photoelectrodes were sensitized with the above NC QDs by the post synthesis ligand-assisted method. In brief, the above anatase TiO2 NWs film was dipped into the aqueous 3-MPA capped QDs solution for 2 h at room temperature. Then, the composite film was rinsed with water and air dried. The electrode obtained was then sintered in a tube furnace under N2 flow at 300 °C for 3 min. After that, the QDs sensitized anatase TiO2 NWs electrode was coated with a ZnS layer by dipping it alternately into 0.1 M Zn(OAc)2 and Na2S aqueous solutions for 1 min per dip for four cycles and with a SiO2 layer by immersing it in an analytical ethanol solution containing 0.01 M tetraethyl orthosilicate and 0.1 M NH4OH at room temperature for 1 h.


The Cu2S counter electrode was obtained through a bath deposition method. In brief, 0.24 g of copper sulfate pentahydrate (Cu2SO4, 99%, Beijing Chemical Works) was added to 60 mL of doubled-distilled water, and N2 was bubbled into the solution for 20 min. Then, 0.37 g of sodium thiosulfate pentahydrate (Na2S2O3, 99+%, Beijing Chemical Works) was dissolved in the solution. After that, clean, transparent FTO was dipped in the solution with the conductive side face down, and the mixture was kept in a 90 °C water bath for 1 h. Finally, the FTO with a Cu2S film was rinsed with doubled-distilled water and dried at room temperature.


The QDs sensitized anatase TiO2 NWs photoelectrodes and the Cu2S counter electrode were assembled into a typical sandwich structure using epoxy resin. The polysulfide electrolyte consisted of 2 M sodium sulfide nonahydrate (Na2S, 98+%, Xilong Chemical Co. Ltd), 2 M sublimed sulfur (S, 99.5+%, Tianjin East China Chemical Reagent Factory) and 0.2 M potassium hydroxide (KOH, 85+%, Beijing Chemical Works) in an analytical methanol and doubled-distilled water solution (7:3 by volume).


The morphology of the samples was characterized by Quanta 400 FEG field emission scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Navo NanoSEM FEI). Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) were performed with a transmission electron microscope (TEM, TECNAIG2, FEI Company) and a TEM equipped with an energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectrometer. The adsorption spectra were obtained using a UV-vis spectrophotometer (UV3600, Shimadzu).

The SPV was recorded using a surface photovoltage measurement system, which consisted of a monochromator (Omni-λ5006, Zolix) and a lock-in amplifier (model SR830-DSP) with an optical chopper (model SR540) running at a frequency of 24 Hz. The TPV and TPC were tested using a home-built measurement system, which consisted of a Nd:YAG laser (Q-smart 450, Quantl, Inc.). The intensity of the pulse was controlled with a neutral grey filter and confirmed with a Joule meter (Starlite, Ophir, Inc.). The TPV and TPC signals were recorded using a 500 MHz digital phosphor oscilloscope (TDS 5054, Tektronix). All the SPV, TPV and TPC measurements were carried out under air atmosphere at room temperature.
Current–voltage (J–V) curves and open-circuit photovoltage decay (OCVD) measurements were performed using an electrochemistry workstation (CHI 630B, made in China) under illumination. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was performed with an electrochemistry workstation (CHI 630E, made in China) under illumination. A 500 W xenon lamp (CHFXQ500 W, Global Xenon Lamp Power) served as the light source for the J–V curves, OCVD technique and EIS. The intensity of the excitation light was 100 mW cm−2, which was tested by a radiometer (Photo-electronic Instrument Co., attached to Beijing Normal University, China). The active area of the solar cell was 0.19625 cm2.

The CdS QDs and the inverted type-I CdS/CdSe core/shell structure QDs were prepared according to a previously reported method (the detailed procedure is given in the Experimental section).Fig. 2 presents the typical transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) results of the different OA-capped QDs. As shown in Fig. 2(a–e), these QDs are nearly monodisperse with a mean size of 3.6 nm, 4.2 nm, 6.3 nm, 4.3 nm and 8.0 nm, respectively (for simplicity, hereafter denoted as CdS3.6 QDs, CdS/CdSe4.2 QDs, CdS/CdSe6.3 QDs, CdS/CdSe8 QDs, CdSe4.3 QDs). Furthermore, HRTEM characterization (Fig. 2(f–i)) reveals the good crystallinity of these QDs, which is considered to be significant for photoelectric properties. Crystal defects could act as centers of recombination with photoexcited charge, which would reduce the photoexcited charge separation efficiency, and thus ultimately lead to poor photoelectric properties.


Fig. 3 shows the selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern of CdS/CdSe6.3 core/shell structure QDs. Fig. 3 indicates that lattice spacings of 0.341 nm and 0.212 nm correspond to the values for the (111) and (220) lattice planes of zinc blende structure CdSe (JCPDS card no. 65-2891), and the observed 0.324 nm and 0.175 nm lattice spacing can be assigned to the (111) and (311) planes of the zinc blende structure CdS (JCPDS card no. 65-2887). The results confirm that the CdS/CdSe6.3 core/shell structure QDs exist with both zinc blende structure CdSe and zinc blende structure CdS. Because the CdS core was prepared previously, the CdSe shell was directly grown on the CdS core, and CdS/CdSe core/shell structure QDs were obtained. The detailed procedure is given in the Experimental section.
In order to investigate the change in energy bands for these nanocrystal (NC) QDs, the absorption spectra of different NCs QDs in aqueous solution were obtained. Plots calculated by a transformation based on the Kubelka–Munk function versus the energy of the NCs QDs are shown in Fig. 4. As shown, the band gap of NCs QDs is narrower compared with that of bulk CdS (2.25 eV) and CdSe (1.72 eV). According a previous report, the electron energy levels of QDs are adjustable. The smaller the size of the QDs is, the higher the conduction band energy level of the QDs is, and the band gap is increased due to the quantum size effect. Thus, the band gaps of these QDs decrease in the order CdS3.6 QDs > CdS/CdSe4.2 QDs > CdSe4.3 QDs > CdS/CdSe6.3 QDs > CdS/CdSe8 QDs, as shown in Fig. 4(f–i). Moreover, the absorption edge of CdS/CdSe core/shell structure QDs exhibits a blue shift with decreasing thickness of the CdSe shell.

Even though high-quality nanocrystals (NC) QD were prepared, it is still a tremendous challenge to assemble NCs QDs onto oxide electrodes because of low loading amounts and poor photoelectric properties of the solar cells. To improve the surface coverage of the NCs QDs on the oxide electrodes, 3-mercaptopropionic acid (3-MPA) was used to successfully obtain a relatively high surface coverage. The OA-capped QDs were transferred into an aqueous solution through the use of 3-MPA. Then, the 3-MPA-capped QDs were deposited on the anatase TiO2 NW electrodes by dipping the electrodes in the 3-MPA capped QDs aqueous solution. The detailed procedure is given in the Experimental section.


Fig. 5(a and b) show typical SEM images of the anatase pure TiO2 NWs and the anatase TiO2 NWs with deposited CdSCdSe6.3 QDs. Fig. 6 shows typical TEM images of the anatase TiO2 NWs with deposited CdSCdSe6.3 QDs. Fig. 5(a) shows that the anatase TiO2 NWs consist of nanowire branches and that the nanowire surfaces are relatively smooth. In addition, the anatase TiO2 nanowire branches are about 10–20 nm in diameter, but the growth of the nanowires is disordered as shown in Fig. 6(a). As shown in Fig. 5(b), the CdSCdSe6.3 QDs were successfully deposited on the surfaces of the anatase TiO2 NW film.

Fig. 6(a–d) also indicate that a large amount of NC QDs have been deposited on the anatase TiO2 NWs (see Fig. 6(a)), and the observed diameter of the CdSCdSe6.3 QDs is about 6.3 nm. Fig. 6(c and d) indicate that the lattice spacing of 0.352 nm is in agreement with the values for (101) lattice planes of anatase TiO2, and the observed 0.341 nm lattice spacing can be assigned to the (111) planes of sphalerite structure CdSe (JCPDS card no. 65-2891). This is the same as the OA-capped CdSCdSe6.3 QDs and CdSe4.3 QDs, as shown in Fig. 6(e and f). Fig. 6(c) illustrates that the overlapping of the lattice may exist for anatase TiO2, CdS and CdSe. The TEM images indicate that the previously prepared CdSCdSe6.3 QDs deposited on the anatase TiO2 NWs maintain the original crystal structure.
To reveal further composition information about the CdSCdSe6.3 QDs sensitized anatase TiO2 NWs, energy dispersive X-ray analysis was also performed and is shown in Fig. 7 (the inset of Fig. 7 is a graph of quantification results). The observed peaks for Cd, S and Se further confirm that the CdSCdSe6.3 QDs have been successfully deposited on the anatase TiO2 NWs and that the stoichiometric proportion mismatch between S, Se and Cd is 1%.


Fig. 8(a) shows the absorption spectra of pure anatase TiO2 NWs and anatase TiO2 NWs sensitized with different nanocrystal (NCs) QDs. After QDs deposition, it was found that the absorption edge exhibits a red shift and the absorption intensity increases compared with that of the pure anatase TiO2 NWs. The absorption intensity of CdS/CdSe4.2 and CdSe4.3 QDs dramatically increases, compared with that of the CdS3.6 QDs due to the narrower bandgap of CdSe (the band gaps of CdSe for CdSCdSe4.2, CdSe4.3 QDs, CdSCdSe6.3 and CdSCdSe8 are 2.2 eV, 2.0 eV, 1.95 eV, and 1.81 eV, respectively). With increasing CdSe shell thickness around the CdS cores, the absorption intensity increases more prominently. Undoubtedly, this observed wide absorption range is beneficial for absorbing sunlight in solar cells.

Although UV-vis absorption spectra can reflect information about the absorption edge and absorption intensity, information about the photoexcited charge separation and transfer process in the absorption edge cannot be obtained. The SPV technique is a useful way to research the process of photoexcited charge separation and transfer. SPV data for pure anatase TiO2 NWs and anatase TiO2 NWs sensitized with different NCs QDs are shown in Fig. 8(b). The inset of Fig. 8(b) is a sketch of the method of sample loading. The top electrode is bare, clean FTO, which is linked to the amplifier, and a negative spike indicates that photoexcited electrons move to the top electrode.
For the pure anatase TiO2 NWs, the SPV response is at the wavelength of 300–400 nm due to band–band transitions of anatase TiO2 under ultraviolet light. After QDs deposition, the SPV intensity of CdS3.6 QDs-sensitized anatase TiO2 NWs electrodes greatly increases and the response range expands to 500 nm. For the CdSCdSe4.2, CdSCdSe6.3, CdSCdSe8 and CdSe4.3 QDs, the SPV responses of the QDs-sensitized anatase TiO2 NWs films extended to 700 nm. This wide range is due to the narrower bandgap of CdSe. The observed positive SPV signal implies that photoexcited holes transfer to top electrode, and photoexcited electrons from the QDs are quickly injected into anatase TiO2 NWs and transferred to the FTO substrate. In addition, we can see that the SPV intensity of CdSCdSe4.2, CdSCdSe6.3 and CdSCdSe8 is stronger than that of CdSe4.3 QDs. Moreover, as the thickness of the CdSe shell increases, the SPV intensity increases. This phenomenon may be attributed to the special photo-electronic features of the CdS/CdSe core/shell QDs that favor the extraction of photoexcited electrons and increase the electron injection efficiency. Thus, the separation efficiency of photoexcited charge and the SPV intensity increase correspondingly.
In order to further explore the dynamic properties of photoexcited charge separation and transfer processes, TPV was carried out for the anatase TiO2 NWs electrodes sensitized with different NCs QDs. The TPV curves of anatase TiO2 NWs sensitized with different NC QDs are shown in Fig. 9(a). The method of sample loading for TPV is the same as that for SPV, as seen in the inset of Fig. 9(a). A positive transient signal was found for anatase TiO2 NWs sensitized with different NCs QDs. This implies that photoexcited electrons from QDs are quickly injected into anatase TiO2 NWs and transferred to the FTO substrate, which is consistent with the observations in the SPV spectra.
In addition, the fast photoexcited charge separation process takes place within one nanoparticle, and the TPV spectra are normalized to the range of the fast TPV response. Thus, the first peaks (5 × 10−8–1 × 10−5 s) of the TPV curves show the separation and injection process of photoexcited electrons, which is a fast process (see P1 in Fig. 9(a)). Fig. 9(a) shows that the first speaks in the TPV spectra of all photoelectrodes appear to have pronounced shoulders during the fast process. The shoulder of the TPV spectrum for CdS3.6 QDs is lower than with CdSe4.3 and CdS/CdSe QDs because of the narrower band gap of CdSe. However, the time for the shoulder region of CdS3.6 QDs is shorter, which indicates that the separation rate of photoexcited electrons with CdSe4.3 and CdS/CdSe QDs is slower than with CdS3.6 QDs. Because the conduction band energy levels of CdS are higher than those of CdSe, there is a greater driving force for the injection of photoexcited electrons out of CdS3.6 QDs in comparison with CdSe4.3 and CdS/CdSe QDs, as shown in Fig. 10. The second peak (1 × 10−5–0.04 s) shows the transfer process of the photoexcited electron, which is a slow process (see P2 in Fig. 9(a)). The time of the TPV maximum (tmax) for the second peak represents the recombination time of a photoexcited charge. For this slow process, the tmax varies for these electrodes. The tmax of CdS3.6 QDs and CdSe4.3 QDs is significantly shorter than that of CdSCdSe QDs (the tmax of CdS3.6 QDs, CdSe4.3 QDs, CdSCdSe4.2, CdSCdSe6.3 and CdSCdSe8 are 1 × 10−4 s, 9 × 10−5 s, 3 × 10−4 s, 9 × 10−4 s, 9 × 10−4 s, respectively). This indicates that the CdS/CdSe core/shell structure QDs can reduce the recombination of photoexcited charge. The intensity of the TPV maximum for CdS3.6 QDs is still weaker in comparison to CdSe4.3 QDs and CdS/CdSe QDs. The intensity of the TPV maxima for CdSCdSe4.2, CdSCdSe6.3 and CdSCdSe8 QDs is stronger than that of CdSe4.3 QDs. As the thickness of the CdSe shell increases, the TPV intensity increases accordingly. This phenomenon corresponds to the SPV curves because the conduction band levels of the three semiconductors decrease in turn as CdS > CdSe > TiO2, see Fig. 10. Thus, the CdS/CdSe core/shell QDs give a larger driving force for the injection of photoexcited electrons in comparison with pure CdSe QDs, which favors the transfer of photoexcited electrons from CdS/CdSe core/shell QDs to the TiO2 substrate. This results in improved separation efficiency and reduced charge recombination, correspondingly.
In order to further examine the properties of photoexcited charge separation and transfer dynamics, the films were measured by TPC in the presence of a polysulfide electrolyte and a Cu2S counter electrode, as shown in Fig. 9(b). The inset of Fig. 9(b) is a sketch of the method of sample loading. The first peaks in the TPC spectra (4 × 10−8–3.5 × 10−5 s) are caused by charge exchange of a photoexcited charge with the electrolyte (see P1 in Fig. 9(b)). Fig. 9(b) shows that the first spikes in the TPC spectra are small peaks, and the differences in the peak values are significant and due to the different QDs. The second peak in the TPC spectra (3.5 × 10−5–0.05 s) is caused by photoexcited electron transfer in forming a circuit (see P2 in Fig. 9(b)). The time of the TPC maximum (tmax) for the second peak indicates the recombination time of photoexcited charge. The transfer process includes photoexcited electrons transferring to the anatase TiO2 NWs film and forming a circuit from the external circuit back to the Cu2S counter electrode. Thus, differences in the response intensity of the second spike are mainly caused by the separation efficiency and recombination of photoexcited charge. For the second spike, the tmax of CdSCdSe6.3 and CdSCdSe8 is significantly longer than that of CdS3.6 QDs and CdSe4.3 QDs (the tmax of CdS3.6 QDs, CdSe4.3 QDs, CdSCdSe6.3 QDs and CdSCdSe8 QDs are 3.6 × 10−3 s, 4.3 × 10−3 s, 6.3 × 10−3 s, 6.3 × 10−3 s, respectively). This indicates that the CdS/CdSe core/shell structure QDs can reduce the recombination of photoexcited charge. The intensity of the TPC maxima for CdSCdSe4.2, CdSCdSe6.3 and CdSCdSe8 are significantly enhanced compared with those of CdS3.6 QDs and CdSe4.3 QDs, which indicates that the CdS/CdSe core/shell structure QDs benefit from improved separation efficiency and transfer processes of photoexcited charge. As the thickness of the CdSe shell increases, the TPC intensity increases. These results reflect the special electronic properties of the CdS/CdSe core/shell structure QDs, indicating that core/shell structure QDs can be promising solar cells.
In order to further investigate the photoelectric performance of typical QDSCs fabricated from anatase TiO2 NWs with different NCs QDs, photocurrent–voltage characteristic (J–V) graphs for these QDSCs were produced. Fig. 11(a and b) show the current density–voltage (J–V) and power output graphs of typical QDSCs fabricated from anatase TiO2 NWs with different NCs QDs under illumination. Table 1 shows the detailed parameters of photoelectric performance for typical QDSCs fabricated from anatase TiO2 NWs with different NCs QDs. The photoelectric properties of QDSCs based on bare TiO2 were investigated for comparison. The PCE and Jsc values of QDSCs based on bare CdS QDs are close to those of QDSCs based on bare TiO2, which indicates that sensitization from CdS QDs is not evident because the CdS QDs exhibit absorption at around 450 nm (see Fig. 4). The significantly enhanced device performance of QDSCs fabricated with CdS/CdSe core/shell structure QDs is clearly seen. An improved power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 1.23% was achieved using CdSCdSe4.2 QDs, in comparison to PCE = 0.07% using bare CdS3.6 QDs and PCE = 0.63% using bare CdSe4.3 QDs. As the thickness of the CdSe shell increases, the PCE is further enhanced and the highest PCE is obtained from CdSCdSe8 QDs with a CdSe shell that is 4.4 nanometers thick.
Photoelectrode

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF
PCE (%)
Bare TiO2
0.73
0.295
0.316
0.068 (±0.02)
CdS3.6
0.61
0.270
0.425
0.07 (±0.01)
CdS/CdSe4.2
7.84
0.540
0.291
1.23 (±0.02)
CdS/CdSe6.3
13.0
0.548
0.285
2.03 (±0.05)
CdS/CdSe
17.36
0.515
0.244
2.18 (±0.03)
CdSe4.3
3.68
0.455
0.376
0.63 (±0.03)
The key to high performance QDSCs is sunlight utilization and separation efficiency. First, the absorption range of TiO2 NWs sensitized with CdS/CdSe QDs extended to 700 nm due to the narrow band gap of CdSe (the band gaps of CdSe for CdSCdSe4.2, CdSe4.3 QDs, CdSCdSe6.3 and CdSCdSe8 are 2.2 eV, 2.0 eV, 1.95 eV, and 1.81 eV, respectively). This improves sunlight utilization and short circuit current (Jsc). Second, the special photo-electronic features of CdS/CdSe core/shell QDs favor injection and separation efficiency of photoexcited electrons, which has been confirmed by the results of SPV and TPV. The improvement in the separation efficiency leads to the reduction of charge recombination and corresponding improvements in photoelectric properties.
However, as the thickness of the CdSe shell increases continuously, the Voc and fill factor (FF) decrease according to the detailed parameters of QDSCs based on CdSCdSe8 QDs. The Voc corresponds to the quasi-Fermi level of the semiconductor (EFn) with respect to the electrolyte redox energy (Eredox). Therefore, the Voc is given by
Voc = (EFn − EFo)/e = (KBT/e)ln(n/n0)
where,
KBT is the thermal energy, e is the positive elementary charge, n is the free electron density in the semiconductor nanostructure, and n0 is the free electron density in the dark. The value of n is affected by two main processes, which are photoexcited electrons and the recombination of photoexcited electrons. Thus, the thicker the CdSe shell is, the more photoexcited electrons there are, and the higher the Voc is. Thus, the higher Voc of QDSCs based on CdSCdSe4.2 and CdSCdSe6.3 is obtained. However, the thicker the CdSe shell is, the lower the conduction band energy level of the QDs is, the smaller the driving force for injection of photoexcited electrons is, and the more the recombination of photoexcited charge is. Thus, a smaller Voc is obtained for QDSCs based on CdSCdSe8, and the increase in the PCE is not as significant compared with the PCE of QDSCs based on CdSCdSe6.3, which indicates that the CdSe shell has a serious effect on the recombination of photoexcited electrons as the thickness of the CdSe shell increases continuously.

In order to further investigate the charge recombination of QDSCs based on different NCs QDs, the J–V curves of QDSCs fabricated from anatase TiO2 NWs with different NCs QDs in the dark was tested. The J–V curve of QDSCs based on bare TiO2 in the dark was also tested for comparison. Fig. 11(c) shows that the dark current of QDSCs based on NCs QDs increases compared with that of QDSCs based on bare TiO2. This illustrates that sulfide and selenide anodes have higher dark currents than oxides and that the charge recombination in QDSCs based on NCs QDs increases compared with that of QDSCs based on bare TiO2. Moreover, sensitization from CdS QDs is not evident. Thus, the Voc of QDSCs based on bare TiO2 is higher than that of QDSCs based on CdS QDs. In addition, the dark current of QDSCs based on CdSCdSe4.2 is lower than that of QDSCs based on CdS3.6. This phenomenon may be attributed to the special photo-electronic features of CdS/CdSe core/shell QDs. However, as the thickness of the CdSe shell increases, the dark current increases. In addition, the dark currents of QDSCs based on CdSCdSe6.3 and QDSCs based on CdSCdSe8 are higher than that of QDSCs based on CdS3.6, which indicates that charge recombination for QDSCs based on CdSCdSe6.3 and QDSCs based on CdSCdSe8 is greater than that for QDSCs based on CdS3.6. For the previously mentioned reasons, the highest dark current is obtained with QDSCs based on CdSe4.3.
The incidental photo-to-current efficiency (IPCE) spectra of QDSCs fabricated from anatase TiO2 NWs with different NCs QDs were collected. Fig. 11(d) shows that the IPCE spectra of QDSCs based on CdSCdSe QDs have a higher IPCE value compared with those of QDSCs based on CdS3.6 and CdSe4.3 QDs. Moreover, the IPCE spectra of QDSCs based on CdSCdSe6.3 QDs and CdSCdSe8 QDs have wider response wavelength ranges compared with those of QDSCs based on CdS3.6 and CdSe4.3 QDs. The IPCE is determined by the light harvesting efficiency of the photoanode (LHE), electron injection efficiency of the photoexcited electron into the TiO2 (ΦINJ), and the collection efficiency of the injected electron (ΦCOLL):
IPCE = LHE × ΦINJ × ΦCOLL

ΦCOLL is related to the ratio of electron transport through TiO2 and charge recombination:
ΦCOLL = Kt/(Kt + Kr)
where, the
Kt and Kr are the rate constants for transport and recombination, respectively. The higher IPCE response for the QDSCs based on the CdSCdSe4.2 QDs is due to the strong absorptivity of CdS in the short-wavelength area and the light harvesting efficiency of CdSe in the long-wavelength area. As the thickness of the CdSe shell decreases, the absorption edge and the IPCE response range exhibit a blue shift, and there is a light harvesting efficiency and electron injection efficiency boost for QDSCs based on CdSCdSe6.3 QDs and CdSCdSe8 QDs. In addition, charge recombination in QDSCs based on CdSCdSe QDs is reduced due to the special photo-electronic features of CdS/CdSe core/shell QDs. Thus, the IPCE value of QDSCs based on CdSCdSe4.2 QDs is higher compared with that of QDSCs based on CdSe4.3 QDs. The wider response range and the higher IPCE values are also observed for QDSCs based on CdSCdSe6.3 QDs and CdSCdSe8 QDs. Therefore, the photocurrent and PCE of QDSCs based on CdSCdSe QDs are enhanced. However, the IPCE value of QDSCs based on CdSCdSe8 QDs does not increase as expected compared with that of QDSCs based on CdSCdSe6.3 QDs, which may be due to the decline of the conduction band levels in the CdSe shell. Thus, the CdSCdSe8 QDs give a smaller driving force for injection of photoexcited electrons in comparison with CdSCdSe6.3 QDs, which increases charge recombination, correspondingly. The Voc of QDSCs based on CdSCdSe8 QDs also decreases, and the increase in PCE is not as expected compared to the PCE of QDSCs based on CdSCdSe6.3.

In order to explore the interfacial recombination kinetics of photoexcited charge in the QDSCs, the open-circuit voltage-decay (OCVD) technique was used. The OCVD technique is an effective way to explore the kinetics of recombination for cells from the illuminated quasi-equilibrium to the dark equilibrium. The electron lifetime is given by τn = −(KT/e)(dVoc/dt), where dVoc/dt is the first time derivative of Voc. Fig. 12(a) illustrates the electron lifetime versus voltage graph of typical QDSCs fabricated from anatase TiO2 NWs with different NCs QDs. It was found that τn of QDSCs fabricated from anatase TiO2 NWs with CdS/CdSe core/shell QDs is significantly larger than that with CdS3.6 and CdSe4.3 QDs. The reduced recombination of photoexcited charge may be due to the special photo-electronic features of CdS/CdSe core/shell QDs, which result in the extension of the electron lifetime.
Nyquist plots were generated to investigate the interfacial resistance to further illustrate the interfacial dynamics of charge transfer in the QDSCs (see Fig. 12(b)). The evident semicircles in the figure relate to mid frequency region resistance (R2) at the photoanode|electrolyte interface.Fig. 12(b) shows the photoanode|electrolyte interface resistance (R2) of anatase TiO2 NWs with CdS/CdSe core/shell QDs is evidently smaller than that of anatase TiO2 NWs with CdS3.6 and CdSe4.3 QDs. These results illustrate that anatase TiO2 NWs with CdS/CdSe core/shell QDs favor the transfer process of injecting photoexicited electrons from the QDs into the anatase TiO2 NWs film. It is clear that the smaller interface resistance leads to faster interfacial charge transfer, which is favorable for improving PCE.

In summary, the inverted type-I CdS/CdSe core/shell structure QDs sensitized TiO2 nanowires films (NWs) have successfully been prepared by the ligand-assisted post synthesis technique. The photoexcited charge transfer dynamics of CdS/CdSe core/shell QD-sensitized TiO2 NWs electrodes were systematically investigated by SPV, TPV and TPC techniques. The CdS/CdSe core/shell QD-sensitized TiO2 NWs electrodes exhibit higher separation efficiency of photoexcited charge, short-circuit current density (Jsc) and power conversion efficiency (PCE) compared with those of CdSe QDs and CdS QDs, which is considered to be mainly attributable to the unique inverted core/shell structure that enhances the electron injection and charge transfer properties. Our results confirm that inverted type-I CdS/CdSe core/shell structure QDs can be used as effective sensitizers to significantly improve the efficiency of QDs sensitized solar cells.


We are grateful to the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51572106 and 51502286), the National Basic Research Program of China (973 Program) (2013CB632403), the Science and Technology Developing Funding of Jilin Province (No. 20150203009GX), and the Open Project from Key Laboratory for Photonic and Electronic Bandgap materials (PEBM201504).


This journal is © the Owner Societies 2017