 DOI: 10.1039/C5CP02041G
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 21694-21701


Natalia
Yantara
,

Thi Thu Trang
Pham
,

Pablo P.
Boix
 and 

Nripan
Mathews
*

School of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, 50 Nanyang Avenue, Singapore 639798. E-mail: Nripan@ntu.edu.sg

Energy Research Institute@NTU (ERI@N), Research TechnoPlaza, X-Frontier Block, Level 5, 50 Nanyang Drive, Singapore 637553

Received
8th April 2015
, Accepted 3rd July 2015
First published on 3rd July 2015
The advantages of employing an interconnected periodic ZnO morphology, i.e. an inverse opal structure, in electrodeposited ZnO/Cu2O devices are presented. The solar cells are fabricated using low cost solution based methods such as spin coating and electrodeposition. The impact of inverse opal geometry, mainly the diameter and thickness, is scrutinized. By employing 3 layers of an inverse opal structure with a 300 nm pore diameter, higher short circuit photocurrents (∼84% improvement) are observed; however the open circuit voltages decrease with increasing interfacial area. Optical simulation using a finite difference time domain method shows that the inverse opal structure modulates light propagation within the devices such that more photons are absorbed close to the ZnO/Cu2O junction. This increases the collection probability resulting in improved short circuit currents.

Air stable solar cells that employ abundant, non-toxic, and low cost materials are attractive in the field of photovoltaic devices (e.g. all oxide semiconductor solar cells). Various semiconducting metal oxides such as TiO2, ZnO, and Cu2O have been widely studied for photovoltaic applications. Cuprous oxide (Cu2O), which possesses intrinsic p-type semiconducting properties, is of interest as its theoretical maximum power conversion efficiency (PCE) based on the Shockley–Queisser limit reaches 20%. Despite the high theoretical PCE limit, the PCE record for photovoltaic devices that employ Cu2O is only 6.1%. In this case, Na doped thermally oxidized Cu2O (at ∼1010 °C) and a pulsed laser deposited (Ga0.975Al0.025)2O3 film were used as p-type and n-type layers, respectively. Na doping increases the carrier concentration while maintaining high mobility (>100 cm2 V−1 s−1). Substituting (Ga0.975Al0.025)2O3 with ZnO reduced the efficiency to 4.13% accompanied by a loss of open circuit voltage due to more defect levels at the interface. In spite of the superior performance of the thermally oxidized Cu2O, the high thermal budget considerably boosts the fabrication cost and reduces the attractiveness of the solar cell configuration.

Alternatively, other low temperature deposition methods such as electrodeposition have also been explored, with a record efficiency of 2.65%. Room temperature electrodeposited Cu2O and atomic layer deposited ZnO were employed as the p-type and n-type semiconducting materials. Although electrodeposited Cu2O devices have a wide depletion region (approximately 2.7 μm), recombination within the depletion layer plays a significant role in governing the device efficiency. The electron drift length within the depletion region (Ldrift) of Cu2O varies with the quality of the Cu2O film. Electrodeposited Cu2O devices give lower efficiency in comparison to thermally oxidised layers due to their shorter Ldrift. As the drift length of the photo-generated electrons and holes (∼110 nm) is shorter than the Cu2O optical absorption depth (∼500 nm at λ = 500 nm), there is a reduction of the incident photon to current efficiency (IPCE) of electrodeposited Cu2O devices for wavelengths above 500 nm. To address this problem, extending the electron collection material into the Cu2O film by using nanorods has been previously explored. Other techniques to confine long wavelength photon inside the Cu2O film, such as using a high haze ZnO film and incorporating an organic buffer layer, have also been proven to enhance the photocurrent.
One such possibility is using the inverse opal (IO) architecture to confine the photon inside the absorber material. IO structures could be fabricated by electrodeposition within the polystyrene photonic crystal (PC) template. Higher short circuit current which leads to better performances in was observed when a larger In2O3 IO pore size was used as a photoanode in dye sensitized solar cells. TiO2 IO structures with pore diameters of 309 nm and 394 nm have also been successfully employed for quantum dot sensitized CdSe solar cells where their open and interconnected ordered porous structure provide a better infiltration for Cd and Se precursors during the chemical bath deposition which results in a uniform coverage of CdSe quantum dot clusters throughout the entire inverse opal layer. In addition, the periodic change in the dielectric constant of the material could also change the photon density distribution and increase the optical path due to interfacial scattering. These kinds of interfacial scattering methods could provide a solution to the mismatch of the optical absorption depth and the charge drift lengths. Though IO structures have been employed on the ZnO/Cu2O film before, however the effect of the ZnO IO structure on the solar cell performances was not explored. Thus it would be interesting to pursue the inverse opal structure in the context of a Cu2O/ZnO solar cell where a ZnO IO can act as a host for Cu2O infiltration and study the impact of IO structure geometry on the solar cell performance.
This paper will elaborate the consequences of incorporating the ZnO IO structure in the Cu2O/ZnO solar cells. ZnO IO structures were fabricated by electrodeposition of ZnO inside a spin coated polystyrene sphere template. After the removal of polystyrene spheres, Cu2O was electrodeposited inside the ZnO IO matrix to form nanostructured solar cells. The effect of the ZnO IO structure diameter and thickness on device performance was studied in-depth by comparing optical simulations performed using finite difference time domain (FDTD) protocols against experimental data. The IO structure could change the photon propagation direction such that more photon absorption occurs at the interface. Finally, this approach could be applied to other thin film solar cells where there is a mismatch between the charge collection length and the optical depth.

ZnO planar films (∼200 nm) was grown on fluorine doped tin oxide coated glass (FTO, TEC 15) by electrodeposition in 0.05 M Zn(NO3)2·6H2O at −0.8 V vs. Ag/AgCl for 10 minutes. A potentiostat was used to supply a constant potential during deposition at 70 °C. To fabricate a face centered cubic (FCC) colloidal PC template, an aqueous suspension of polystyrene spheres (diameter of 300 nm and 100 nm) was spin coated on the ZnO planar film. The template was dried at 70 °C for 15 minutes and then filled with ZnO which was grown by electrodeposition in 0.05 M Zn(NO3)2·6H2O at −0.9 V versus Ag/AgCl for 5, 7.5, and 10 minutes. The PC template was removed by firing at 500 °C for 1 hour. The Cu2O layer was deposited by electrodeposition in 0.4 M CuSO4 and 3 M lactic acid bath solution at 30 °C. The pH of the solution was adjusted to 12.5 with NaOH. The depositions were done at −0.45 V vs. Ag/AgCl for a total charge of 1 C cm−2. Top electrodes were deposited by thermal evaporation of gold (approximately 100 nm).

Current density–voltage (J–V) curves were measured using a SourceMeter with a solar simulator (AM 1.5G, XEC-301S) while IPCE was measured in the DC mode using PVE300 (Bentham). To minimize the contribution from the edges, black mask was used during J–V measurement. Diffuse transmittance measurements were performed with an integrating sphere (ISR-3100) using a Shimadzu UV-3600 spectrophotometer. Cross-sectional and morphological imaging was done using field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM, JEOL JSM-7600F). Electrochemical impedance measurements were performed using an AutoLab PGSTAT302N instrument in combination with the FRA2 module under AM1.5G illumination under open circuit conditions, single sine 10 mV AC voltage waves were applied with frequency ranges from 1 MHz to 1000 Hz.

The morphological images (Fig. 1A) show that there is a successful self-assembly of the 3D FCC polystyrene PC template and the subsequent infiltration with ZnO via electrodeposition. After firing, the PC templates are completely removed and the IO structures are revealed. ZnO IO structures grown from 300 nm to 100 nm polystyrene beads were called P300 and P100, respectively. From cross-section of images (Fig. 1B), it can be concluded that the IO layer thickness can be controlled by adjusting the ZnO electrodeposition time. Deposition time of 5, 7.5, and 10 minutes inside 300 nm polystyrene PC templates resulted in about 280 nm, 770 nm, and 1100 nm thick P300 – corresponding to approximately 1, 3, and 5 IO layers, respectively. Adjusting the ZnO electrodeposition time to 10 minutes inside 100 nm polystyrene PC templates gave about 750 nm thick P100, which corresponded to approximately 9 IO layers. Devices made with 1, 3, and 5 layers of P300 were called 300IO1, 300IO3, and 300IO5 respectively while devices with 9 layers of P100 were called 100IO9. The crystallinity of ZnO IO structures characterized and revealed a similar crystal structure (i.e. P63mc space group with hexagonal crystal structure) with the planar ZnO (Fig. S1 in ESI). As similar deposition methods were employed, a relatively comparable crystal structure of ZnO was explained. Fig. 1B also shows spherical Cu2O structures indicating successful Cu2O infiltration within the IO layer despite the high pH of Cu2O deposition conditions which could damage the ZnO IO structure. The IO pore diameters and the distances between the centers of the pores were in agreement with the polystyrene bead size used. A continuous Cu2O overlayer was grown on the IO structure to prevent electrical shunting between ZnO and gold electrodes.


J–V characteristics of various devices under AM1.5G illumination are reported in Fig. 2A and the device performances are presented in Table 1. Planar ZnO–Cu2O devices reach a PCE of 0.24%. Introduction of IO increases the Jsc of the devices. Among devices that employed P300, the Jsc of IO structured devices is enhanced with increasing number of IO layers until it saturates at 3 IO layers, leading to higher PCEs. However, additional IO layers reduce its open circuit voltage (Voc) and fill factor (FF). The best performing device was 300IO3 with an efficiency of 0.29%. Due to similarity in the ZnO nanostructured thickness used, 300IO3 was compared against 100IO9 to gain knowledge on the effect of the IO pore diameter on overall device performances, which showed that 300IO3 has superior Jsc than 100IO9.
PCE (%)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
Integrated Jsc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF
P
0.24
2
1.9
0.25
0.47
300IO1
0.25
2.53
2.8
0.22
0.44
300IO3
0.29
3.69
4
0.19
0.41
300IO5
0.18
3.41
3.5
0.15
0.35
100IO9
0.24
3.38
3.1
0.18
0.41
The origin of the reduction in Voc and FF can be gleaned by the examination of the dark J–V characteristics. Dark J–V characteristics of devices (Fig. 2A) show that the current at positive voltage bias where electrons flow from ZnO to Cu2O (dark cathodic recombination currents) is higher for IO devices against the planar one. These dark cathodic recombination currents are indicative of high recombination at the heterojunction interface which may cause reduction in both Voc and FF. As the inverse opal did not prevent the formation of full depletion thickness within the 300 nm sphere (see ESI), the Voc reduction could be attributed to the other factors such as shifting at the ZnO Fermi energy level due to higher Cu2O injection level or interfacial recombination increase caused by the interfacial area expansion. The photo-voltage decay measurement was performed and carrier lifetime was extracted from the following equation and reported in Fig. 2D.
where
k, T, and e, t, and τ are Boltzmann's constant, absolute temperature, electron charge, time, and minority carrier lifetime respectively. Similar carrier lifetime was observed throughout the samples regardless of its interfacial area, suggesting that the recombination kinetics is dominated by the same process.

To further characterize the electrical processes in the devices, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy was performed under AM1.5G illumination under open circuit conditions. The Nyquist plots of all the devices with the IO template (Fig. 2F) consist of a straight 45° line at higher frequencies and a single arc at lower ones. The former represents the characteristic impedance fingerprint of a charge transport (Rt) process, whereas the latter corresponds to the chemical capacitance (CPE) in parallel to the recombination resistance (Rrec). The transmission line model adopted to estimate the Rt and Rrec inside the devices is represented in Fig. 2E. From the analysis of the results (Fig. 2F), significantly smaller Rt is obtained when reducing the ZnO IO thickness for devices with 300 nm IO pore size, with the minimum one observed when 100 nm IO pore size is used. Remarkably, the transport resistance feature is not present in the planar devices spectrum, in agreement with the shorter path for the charge extraction. Hence, nanostructuring with IO geometry increases the transport resistance of the whole devices. The Rrec under open circuit conditions decreases with the introduction of the IO geometry. This signifies higher interfacial recombination on the devices with the IO geometry, which is in agreement with the result from the dark J–V characteristic analysis. The Voc of 300IO5 is smaller than Voc of 300IO1, 300IO3, and 100IO9 due to its lowest Rrec and highest dark cathodic recombination currents. In addition, this device also presents the highest Rt. Therefore, due to higher recombination at the ZnO/Cu2O interface as well as higher charge transport resistance, 300IO5 has the lowest performance compared to 300IO1, 300IO3, and 100IO9.
IPCE spectra (Fig. 2B) reveal that the introduction of IO layers results in changes in IPCE. The integrated Jsc from IPCE was within 10% error of the Jsc obtained from the J–V characteristic. When P300 was used, IPCE for λ > 475 nm was enhanced prominently as compared to devices with P100. Increasing the IO layer thickness increases the IPCE for λ > 475 nm until it saturates at the 3 IO layer for devices that employed P300. The Jsc enhancement brought on by nanostructuring is often related to interfacial area, and improvement of the charge carrier collection as the electron transporting material (ZnO) penetrates inside the light absorbing Cu2O layer allowing the collection of photoelectrons excited deep within the Cu2O. However, 300IO5 devices, which have a higher interfacial area and a more extended ZnO layer than 300IO3 devices, display comparable IPCE with 300IO3 devices. It can be noted that for the same Cu2O amount, the 300IO3 cell would have a thicker Cu2O overlayer compared to 300IO5. To eliminate the effect of varying overlayer thicknesses, devices with similar overlayer thicknesses (∼800 nm) were prepared. These devices also yielded the same trend (Fig. S3 in ESI). Additionally, 300IO3 have a superior Jsc than 100IO9 though 100IO9 were expected to have higher Jsc than 300IO3 from interfacial area point of view. To understand these anomalies, both experimental and simulated optical measurements were carried out. Diffuse transmittance (which measures the intensity of light transmitted and scattered) of the ZnO layer alone (Fig. 2C) reveal that IO structures increase the diffuse transmittances for λ > 375 nm. In the P300 case, increasing P300 thickness enhances the diffuse transmittance with a similar plateau being observed. In spite of similar ZnO nanostructure thickness, 9 layers of P100 have inferior diffuse transmittance than 3 layers of P300.
When a photon encounters spheres with different refractive index materials, it can be refracted and scattered. If the sphere is built from a good absorber material, the refracted photon would be absorbed immediately. However, when a weak absorbing material is used, the refracted photon could undergo an internal reflection or scattering. This phenomenon is governed by the photon energy, refractive index and extinction coefficient of the material, as well as the sphere diameters. To predict the photon density distribution within the ZnO/Cu2O devices, optical absorption simulation was performed using FDTD (Lumerical, Inc.) in the device. The device is modeled as a 3-D geometry of FTO (500 nm)/ZnO (200 nm)/Cu2O infiltrated ZnO IO layer/Cu2O overlayer/Au (100 nm). The IO pore diameter, distance between the centers of the pores, IO layer thickness, and Cu2O overlayer thickness were adjusted according to Fig. 1B. The IO structures are assumed to be in a perfect FCC configuration. To predict the effect of pore diameter on photon propagation within the film, the Cu2O sphere diameter was varied from 100 nm to 400 nm while the number of IO layers was fixed to 5. The influence of the ZnO IO thickness was studied by tuning the number of IO layers while fixing the pore diameter at 300 nm. The absorption enhancement was calculated by normalizing the absorption from the FTO/ZnO/Cu2O infiltrated ZnO IO layer against an FTO/ZnO/Cu2O structure where the Cu2O thickness is the same as the infiltrated thickness. This accounts for the total Cu2O thickness increase with increasing IO layers or diameter. Increasing the absorption enhancement here represents an increase of photocarrier generation close to the electron collector (i.e. ZnO).
The absorption enhancement for 5 IO layers for different IO pore diameters is calculated and reported in Fig. 3A. As the optical depth of Cu2O for λ ≤ 475 nm is less than 100 nm, Cu2O acts as an efficient absorber (the IO pore diameter used was ≥100 nm). Due to the weak absorption coefficient of Cu2O at λ > 475 nm, the optical absorption enhancement for λ > 475 nm is critically dependent on the IO diameter. Only IO structures with a pore diameter of 200 nm and more demonstrate a significant enhancement of the film absorption for λ > 475 nm. However, there is no significant improvement observed within the pore diameter range of 200–400 nm. Fig. 3B shows that employing 3 layers of the IO film and above increases the photon absorption throughout the entire spectrum. For 1 layer of IO, negative absorption enhancement is observed probably due to the smaller Cu2O volume as compared to the Cu2O thin film. The absorption enhancement is saturated at 3 IO layers with no significant absorption enhancement observed with increasing IO layers. In summary, only IO structures with a diameter of >200 nm and a thickness of ≥3 IO layers are projected to increase the photo-carrier generation near ZnO at λ > 475 nm.
To understand the photon propagation behavior inside the films, the absorption cross sections were simulated by calculating the power absorption per unit volume (Pabs). From the simulated absorption cross sections (Fig. 4), it was shown that Cu2O infiltrated IO layers were indeed successfully acting as a scattering center. For 100IO9, photons at λ ≤ 475 nm are strongly scattered while no significant scattering is observed for photons at λ > 475 nm. Increasing the IO diameter to 300 nm changes the absorption cross section tremendously. Cu2O infiltrated P300 is a strong scattering center for photons with λ ≤ 475 nm while a relatively weak scattering is observed at λ > 475 nm. Due to differences in the dimension and the refractive between ZnO and Cu2O, the curvature of the 1st Cu2O infiltrated IO layer acts as a photon concentrator for the region where the photon is strongly scattered (at λ ≤ 475 nm). According to Snell's law, a critical angle of 36° was observed at ZnO/Cu2O interface at λ = 500 nm. In the weak scattering region, the curvature of the 2nd Cu2O infiltrated IO layer and above could act as a back reflector for the photons, resulting in the occurrence of internal reflection. Due to photon scattering and Cu2O absorption, a majority of the photons are completely absorbed by the end of the 3rd Cu2O infiltrated IO layers. Therefore, additional IO thickness beyond 3 layers does not significantly enhance its absorption, confirming the calculated absorption enhancement results.
For devices that employ P300, due to strong scattering at λ ≤ 475 nm, the photo-carrier generation is closer to the electron collector region than planar devices. The electron collection efficiency is foreseen to be higher when photo-generated electron–hole pairs are located near the interface, as the distance for electrons to drift before they are collected by ZnO is smaller. This explains the superior IPCE of devices that employ P300 at λ ≤ 475 nm. Due to the weak scattering effect at λ > 475 nm, the photo-carrier generation region is wider. A longer wavelength creates a wider carrier-generation region. Hence, the IPCE degrades significantly at λ > 475 nm due to a longer distance for electron drift before they are collected by ZnO.
Though 300IO5 had more extended junction, higher diffuse transmittance, and at least 2.5 times higher interfacial area than 300IO3, 300IO5 had a slightly smaller Jsc value than 300IO3. This behavior matches well with the simulated absorption enhancement and absorption cross section profile of both 3 and 5 layers of Cu2O incorporated P300. As almost all photons that pass through the Cu2O infiltrated P300 would be absorbed by the first 3 IO layers, increasing the IO layer above 3 layers does not increase the Jsc. Additionally, the 2 layers above the first 3 IO layers would act as an additional interfacial area that could lead to additional interfacial recombination. Furthermore, larger Rt could be observed from the impedance measurement due to a thicker ZnO film without significant absorption enhancement. Therefore, 300IO3 has the highest Jsc because its structure provides the highest absorption enhancement with minimum Rt. Hence, a slight reduction in the Jsc is expected from the 5 layer Cu2O incorporated P300 structures due to the increased interfacial recombination (and no improved optical absorption). In conclusion, fine tuning the IO layer thickness that could maximize absorption enhancement while minimizing the interfacial area enhancement would be ideal for the ZnO/Cu2O system. It was found that 3 layers of IO layers were adequate to fully enhance absorption from both theoretical and experimental points of view.
The superior Jsc value of 300IO3 against 100IO9 despite its lower interfacial area could be explained by the strong scattering effect of Cu2O incorporated P300 at λ > 475 nm. It was simulated previously that only IOs with a diameter greater than 200 nm was able to scatter photons at λ > 475 nm. In addition, from the diffuse transmittance, it was shown that P300 had a higher scattering efficiency than P100. Hence, the results were in agreement with the simulation data that IO >200 nm could scatter light at λ > 475 nm which could not be done by IO with a diameter of <200 nm.

This study elaborated the significance of photon management on improving the photocurrent of ZnO/Cu2O solar cells. By amplifying the photon absorption at the interface, the IPCE of the devices can be enhanced resulting in the increase of Jsc. As IO structures introduce more interfacial area, a decrease of Voc and FF occurs due to higher interfacial recombination. Although the increased interfacial area could increase the electron collection efficiency, employing a suitable IO geometry is crucial to amplify photon absorption near the interface. From the experimental data correlated with FDTD simulation, it is clear that the introduction of IO structures with a pore diameter of >200 nm and a thickness of ≥3 layers inside ZnO/Cu2O solar cells could enhance the IPCE value especially at λ > 475 nm. The simulation supports the hypothesis that IO not only increases the IPCE due to the extension of ZnO into the Cu2O films, but also the magnification of photon absorption near the interface. Although more effort should be devoted to improve the overall device performances, this study explores an approach to device architectures that would improve the photocurrent densities by focusing photon absorption near the ZnO/Cu2O junction to increase the charge collection efficiency. This study opens the possibility of applying IO structures on other thin film solar cells that suffer from a mismatch between the optical depth and the carrier collection length.


The authors gratefully acknowledge Prof. Subodh Mhaisalkar for fruitful discussions. The authors also thank the Singapore-Berkeley Research Initiative for Sustainable Energy (SinBeRISE) CREATE programme and NTU-A*STAR Silicon Technologies Centre of Excellence under the program grant No. 112 3510 0003 for funding.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5cp02041g
This journal is © the Owner Societies 2015