 DOI: 10.1039/C3TA15055K
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 3978-3985


Minwoo
Nam
,

Joongpil
Park
,

Sang-Wook
Kim
 and 

Keekeun
Lee
*

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Ajou University, Suwon, 443-749, Republic of Korea. E-mail: keekeun@ajou.ac.kr

Department of Molecular Science and Technology, Ajou University, Suwon, 443-749, Republic of Korea

Received
6th December 2013
, Accepted 3rd January 2014
First published on 8th January 2014
Currently existing common conjugated polymer:PbS quantum dot (QD)-based hybrid bulk heterojunction (BHJ) solar cells show efficiencies of less than 1% owing to improper bandgap alignment and poor coupling at the hybrid material interfaces. However, herein we report that PbS QD-based hybrid BHJ solar cells provide greatly increased efficiencies of more than 3%, which is attributed to the employment of a new kind of donor polymer poly[2,6-(4,4′-bis(2-ethylhexyl)dithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]silole)-alt-4,7(2,1,3-benzothiadiazole) (PSBTBT), the optimization of donor–acceptor (D–A) band-offsets by strategically changing the diameter of PbS QDs in the donor matrix, and the modification of hybrid material interfaces via a chemical treatment of ligands around the QD surface. The optimized hybrid nanocomposite device performs well in good combination between the low-bandgap polymer and near-infrared (NIR)-absorbing PbS QDs, and it enables a broad spectral response from UV to NIR under an energetically favorable type-II heterojunction system, leading to high efficiencies of up to 3.48% under an air mass 1.5G illumination. The efficiency is higher than 3.39%, which corresponds to the efficiency value for the purely organic device fabricated in this study by utilizing [6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM), which is the most widely studied electron acceptor in BHJ systems. These findings suggest that our hybrid BHJ blends are very promising, not only for use as energy conversion platforms to substitute all-organic or all-inorganic systems, but also for optoelectronic devices that require a broad spectral reaction.

Solution-processed hybrid bulk heterojunction (BHJ) solar cells based on organic conjugated polymers and inorganic semiconductor nanocrystals (NCs) have recently attracted a great deal of interest owing to their low fabrication cost and feasibility for use in flexible, large-scale devices. This type of solar cell possesses several advantages over purely organic BHJ systems owing to the properties of NCs; these include size-tunable bandgap manipulation, multiple-exciton generation, strong and broad absorption profiles, high dielectric constants, and high electron mobilities. Various research approaches have contributed to a considerable growth in the power conversion efficiency (PCE) to over 4% in polymer:Cd-chalcogenide NC BHJ solar cells; for example, a PCE of 4.1% for CdS quantum dots (QDs) bound onto poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) nanowires and 4.7% for interface-engineered composites of CdSe nanorods and poly[2,6-(4,4-bis-(2-ethylhexyl)-4H-cyclopenta [2,1-b:3,4-b′]dithiophene)-alt-4,7(2,1,3-benzothiadiazole)] (PCPDTBT) have been reported. However, one of the critical hindrances toward further increases in the efficiency in such Cd-based BHJ systems is that the Cd-chalcogenide NCs absorb only visible light, leaving half of the Sun's power in the infrared region unused. In addition, for a multi-junction tandem solar cell with an ultrahigh efficiency, more than two layers should be sensitive to the infrared light; therefore, the Cd-chalcogenide NCs are not thought to be optimum materials. As an alternative approach, low-bandgap semiconductor NCs have received much attention in the field of hybrid BHJ solar cells, and various semiconductor compositions have been assessed such as PbS, PbSe, PbSxSe1−x, HgTe, FeS2, and Bi2S3. These semiconductor materials cover a broad spectral range of UV to near-infrared (NIR), thereby allowing better absorption and more effective exploitation of the solar spectrum. Among these, PbS is greatly attractive and the most widely studied NIR-absorbing NC material because of its unique properties, i.e., a high dielectric constant (ca. 18), a large exciton Bohr radius (18 nm), and a low bulk energy bandgap (0.4 eV). Combined with these attributes, PbS QD-based inorganic depleted heterojunction solar cells have shown continuous, rapid growth in PCE in the past decade reaching the value of ∼8.5%, which is significantly higher than that of the other NC materials.

However, the PCE in polymer:PbS NC hybrid BHJ solar cells remains around 1% or lower. This is mainly attributed to the poor nanoscale segregation and imperfect type-II band-offset between polymers and the PbS NCs, as shown in Fig. 1, which illustrates the energy levels of several conjugated polymers and PbS QDs with respect to the diameter of the QDs. Unfortunately, most of the polymers and PbS QDs form undesirable type-I heterojunctions, although type-II is appropriate for solar cell applications, which is mainly due to the low highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) level of PbS QDs. Even if P3HT constitutes a type-II heterojunction when the diameter of PbS QDs is smaller than ∼4 nm, the HOMO-offset between PbS QDs and P3HT is as small as 0.1 eV or so, which is ineffective to separate and then transfer photo-generated holes from the QDs to the polymer. This is interesting because promising results have been reported in recent PbS QD-based hybrid BHJ solar cells that are based on an energetically favorable type-II heterojunction system. Noone et al. demonstrated that a hybrid blend of poly(2,3-didecyl-quinoxaline-5,8-diyl-alt-N-octyldithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]pyrrole) (PDTPQx) and PbS QDs offered a higher efficiency than the blend using conventional P3HT. Seo et al. reported that a good combination of poly(2,6-(N-(1-octylnonyl)dithieno[3,2-b:20,30-d]pyrrole)-alt-4,7-(2,1,3-benzothiadiazole)) (PDTPBT) and PbS QDs formed an energetically favorable type-II heterojunction with a broad-range spectral response, leading to a high efficiency of 3.78%. These promising results not only emphasize the importance of adopting a proper polymer for efficient hybrid donor–acceptor (D–A) interactions but also suggest the possibility of achieving high efficiency in the PbS QD-based hybrid BHJ solar cells. In previous studies, we introduced that poly[2,6-(4,4′-bis(2-ethylhexyl)dithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]silole)-alt-4,7(2,1,3-benzothiadiazole) (PSBTBT) is a highly effective polymer material for the formation of an efficient type-II heterojunction with PbS (and also PbSxSe1−x) QDs, and it gave rise to ultrafast exciton dissociation and subsequent charge transfer kinetics in the hybrid BHJ blends. Furthermore, several unique properties of PSBTBT such as high crystallinity, optimal optical bandgap of 1.4 eV, and high hole transport efficiency make it highly attractive for use in BHJ photovoltaic systems.
To build on the previous work, herein, we present efficient hybrid BHJ solar cells based on nanocomposites of PSBTBT and PbS QDs for broadband absorption and high photovoltaic efficiency. Photovoltaic performances depending on the diameter of PbS QDs were evaluated to find an optimal type-II heterojunction system, in which the QD size-dependent quantum confinement effect has a large influence on the short-circuit current (JSC) and open-circuit voltage (VOC). We also performed a chemical exchange process of ligands around the QD surface for manipulating the complex hybrid material interfaces, which is one of the most important issues in hybrid BHJ solar cells. The proper deployment of D–A heterojunctions and the chemical modification of the QD surface give rise to a high PCE of up to ∼3.48% under the air mass (AM) 1.5G solar illumination. This study envisions a path toward high efficiency in NIR-absorbing hybrid solar cells as well as outlining design guidelines for multi-junction tandem hybrid cells.

Colloidal PbS QDs were synthesized according to the methodology reported by Choi et al. The first excitonic peak of QDs was tuned by controlling the reaction temperature between 90 °C and 230 °C. For example, to synthesize PbS QDs with a first excitonic peak at 1040 nm, 1.25 mmol (473 mg) of lead(II) acetate trihydrate (Pb(Ac)2·3H2O), 5 mmol (1.412 g) of oleic acid (OA), and 8 ml of 1-octadecene (ODE) were mixed in a 25 ml three-neck flask. The mixed solution was degassed under vacuum at 110 °C for 1 h, and then kept at 110 °C under a nitrogen atmosphere. The precursor solution was prepared by adding 0.1 ml of bis(trimethylsilyl)sulfide (TMS-S) to 2 ml of ODE, and the temperature of the flask was set to 100 °C under a nitrogen atmosphere. Then, the precursor solution was rapidly injected into the Pb–oleate reaction mixture, and the color of the reaction solution changed from colorless to dark red. The three-neck flask was put in an ice bath and then kept until the temperature dropped to room temperature. As-grown PbS QDs were isolated from the growth mixture by precipitation with 15 ml of isopropyl alcohol and 20 ml of ethanol, followed by two or three cycles of centrifugation at 3500 rpm for 5 min. Pb(Ac)2·3H2O (99.999% metal basis, Aldrich), OA (97%, TCI), ODE (99%, Sigma Aldrich) and TMS-S (95%, Acros) were used as purchased without any purification.


A schematic diagram for the fabrication process of the hybrid BHJ solar cells is depicted in Fig. 2. Prior to device fabrication, PSBTBT dissolved in chlorobenzene was directly injected into a chlorobenzene solution containing the prepared PbS QDs with a total polymer-to-QD ratio of 1.5:8.5 (wt/wt), which was then ultrasonicated for complete intermixing of the components. Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) as a hole-transporting layer was spin-coated onto a glass substrate with pre-patterned indium tin oxide (ITO) electrodes, followed by drying at 120 °C for 10 min. A hybrid photoactive layer (90 nm) was spin-coated on top of the PEDOT:PSS layer. The sample was dipped in a solution of 1,2-ethanedithiol (EDT) in acetonitrile (1% v/v) for 1 min for chemical ligand exchange to substitute the initial long chains of OA with short EDT molecules, followed by washing using pure acetonitrile. Then, the sample was moved to a glove box filled with nitrogen and annealed at 150 °C for 10 min. A morphological change in the hybrid blends after ligand exchange was observed using the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) technique. A 10 nm hole-blocking layer (bathocuproine, BCP) was evaporated on the hybrid photoactive layer. Finally, the top metal was evaporated under a high vacuum condition with a pressure of ∼10−6 Torr. For the top electrode materials, a Mg (30 nm)/Ag (70 nm) layer was used for devices comprising relatively small PbS QDs (e.g., first excitonic peaks at 730 or 870 nm), whereas an Al (35 nm)/Ag (65 nm) layer was used for the relatively large PbS QD devices (e.g., 1040 or 1400 nm). The final devices consist of ITO (150 nm)/PEDOT:PSS (40 nm)/hybrid nanocomposite (90 nm)/BCP (10 nm)/Mg (or Al)/Ag. The active area of the final devices was 0.09 cm2, defined as the overlap between the top and bottom electrodes.


Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of the synthesized PbS QDs were acquired using a Tecnai G2 F30 S-Twin FE-TEM (FEI) with an accelerating voltage of 300 kV. Optical absorbance spectra of the QDs dispersed in trichloroethylene (TCE) were observed using a V-670 UV-vis-NIR spectrophotometer (JASCO). Photoluminescence (PL) intensity spectra of pure PSBTBT, pure QDs, and PSBTBT:PbS QD blends were detected using a USB-4000 spectrofluorometer (Ocean Optics) or an NIRQuest NIR-spectrofluorometer (Ocean Optics). To analyse the surface chemistry of PbS QDs in response to the ligand treatment, Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) and X-ray photoelectron spectra (XPS) measurements were carried out using a Spectrum 100 (PerkinElmer) and K-Alpha (Thermo Scientific), respectively. For the analysis, QD film samples were prepared via the following steps under ambient air conditions: (i) drop-casting of 20 mg ml−1 PbS chlorobenzene solution on a bare glass slide, (ii) dipping of the sample in an EDT–acetonitrile (1% v/v) solution for 1 min, and (iii) washing of the sample using pure acetonitrile. The current-to-voltage (J–V) characteristics of the final devices were measured using a source-meter (Keithley 2400) under the AM 1.5G illumination. The white light was provided by a 450 W Xe lamp (Oriel) equipped with an AM 1.5G filter as a solar simulator, and the intensity of 100 mW cm−2 was calibrated using a reference Si diode. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra were analyzed using a 300 W Xe light source and a monochromator provided by a Polaronix K3100 IPCE measurement system (McScience). The photovoltaic performance measurements were performed immediately after fabrication in ambient air, and averaged values of three respective measurements were considered in order to minimize experimental errors.


The diameter change in PbS QDs, which was dependent on the reaction temperature, was observed by microscopic investigation. Fig. 3a and b are representative TEM images of the as-synthesized PbS QDs with mean diameters of 2.8 nm and 5.8 nm, respectively. The crystalline structure of the monodisperse spherical QD is shown in the inset of Fig. 3b. The use of uniformly sized QDs that have a standard deviation of less than 5% from their mean size assures the successful preparation of high-quality QDs. The most important phenomenon expected by changing the size of QDs is the quantum confinement effect. Fig. 3c compares the first excitonic peaks of PbS QDs as a function of their diameter. The first excitonic peaks were observed at 730 nm for QDs with a diameter of 2.8 nm, 870 nm for 3.4 nm QDs, 1040 nm for 4.1 nm QDs, and 1400 nm for 5.8 nm QDs, showing a clear red-shift in the peak with the increasing QD diameter. The optical bandgaps of the QDs, which are based on their first absorption onsets, are 1.7 eV for 2.8 nm QDs, 1.4 eV for 3.4 nm QDs, 1.2 eV for 4.1 nm QDs, and 0.9 eV for 5.8 nm QDs. As the QD diameter increases, the HOMO values are expected to change from 5.2 to 5 eV, whereas the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) values range from 3.5 to 4.1 eV. Because the QD diameter-dependent quantum confinement effect alters the bandgap of the inorganic semiconductor, explicit changes in both VOC and JSC can be expected depending on the diameter of PbS QDs in the hybrid blends.


Fig. 3d shows the absorption spectrum and chemical structure of PSBTBT, which was used as an electron donor in this study. PSBTBT is a silole-containing copolymer and has a similar molecular structure to that of PCPDTBT except that PSBTBT has a silicon atom as a bridge point on the dithiophene unit, whereas PCPDTBT comprises a carbon atom. The conjugated backbone of PSBTBT is tighter than that of PCPDTBT resulting in improved hole transport. In the absorption test, the spectral range of the PSBTBT with an optimal bandgap of ∼1.4 eV covers the region from UV to NIR. This not only allows a better match with the solar spectrum, but also allows the exploitation of a large portion of the solar spectrum. This contributes to a higher photocurrent compared with other conventional polymer materials (e.g., P3HT).
The as-prepared PbS QDs are shielded by long alkyl chains of OA ligands that serve as insulating layers. The substitution of the initial ligands with short, functional molecules such as EDT is essential and an effective way to improve the photovoltaic performance. The chemical structures of the OA- or EDT-capped PbS QDs are shown in Fig. 4a. We employed a post-deposition ligand exchange method and evaluated the surface chemistry of PbS QDs using FTIR and XPS techniques.

Fig. 4b shows the FTIR spectra of PbS QDs before and after the EDT treatment. The strong peaks at 2924 cm−1, 2854 cm−1 and at 1524 cm−1, 1404 cm−1 are originated from C–H bending and stretching mode of OA on the PbS QD surface. However, significant decreases in the intensities of these peaks are observed in the EDT-treated sample, which indicates a successful substitution of OA with EDT molecules. In particular, a diminished number of C–H bonds from 33 to 4 can be expected, considering that OA consists of C18H34O2 whereas EDT consists of C2H6S2. During the chemical ligand exchange process, bulky OA ligands are replaced by small EDT molecules; this occurs via dissociative adsorption of EDT on the QD surface, because Pb cation strongly interacts with S anion of EDT rather than carboxylate anion of OA.Fig. 4c and d, respectively, show XPS C 1s and S 2p spectra, both of which confirm the FTIR result that indicates a shortened ligand length for EDT-treated QDs. The significantly decreased intensity of the C–C peak for the EDT-treated QDs in the C 1s spectrum was attributed to the reduced number of C–C bonds from 18 in OA to 2 in EDT as a result of the shortened chain length. Furthermore, in the S 2p spectrum of the EDT-treated QDs, the appearance of metal-bound thiols and unbound thiols is a good indication of the degree of adsorption of EDT molecules onto the QD surface in place of the initial OA ligands. Increased intensities of the PbS peaks were also observed in the EDT-treated sample, signifying that the S–H bond group was newly bound on the QD surface in place of the carboxylate group that was attached on the surface of the as-synthesized QDs.
As a result of ligand exchange, several beneficial effects can be expected at the hybrid material interfaces between the polymer and QDs to facilitate efficient charge dissociation and transfer kinetics. This includes better passivation of surface defects on QDs to give increased electron mobility, shortened distance and improved charge coupling between QDs and the polymer, increased QD networks assembled in a close pack to form efficient charge transport, and enhanced absorption of QDs as a result of the increase in the dielectric constant at the surface of the QDs. The post-deposition EDT treatment does not have any impact on either the morphological change or chemical doping of the polymer. Neither does the treatment affect the bulk properties of the hybrid nanocomposites such as structural ordering.

Fig. 5a shows the energy band diagrams of the hybrid BHJ solar cells with respect to the size (and accordingly the changed energy levels) of PbS QDs, where the LUMO/HOMO values of PSBTBT and PbS QDs are extracted from the literature. The top electrode material was chosen carefully and was dependent on the LUMO of PbS QDs; this is because it is very important to align the energy levels between the LUMO of the acceptor and the work function of the top metal in order to facilitate electron extraction from the photoactive film to the electrode. For example, Mg with a work function of 3.7 eV was used for PbS-730 and PbS-870 devices, whereas Al with a work function of 4.3 eV was adopted for PbS-1040 and PbS-1400 devices. The photo-excited electrons generated from both the organic and inorganic components are transported toward the top metal side, whereas the holes are transported toward the ITO side after passing through PEDOT:PSS; however, their migration toward the top metal is restrained by the BCP hole-blocking layer.
The J–V characteristics of the solar cells developed as a function of the first excitonic peak of PbS QDs are presented in Fig. 5b, and the averaged photovoltaic parameters out of more than 10 devices are summarized in Table 1. There were noticeable changes in VOC and JSC depending on the diameter of QDs in the hybrid BHJ blends. For example, VOC decreased from 0.66 V, to 0.61 V, to 0.49 V, and then to 0.24 V with the increasing QD diameter from 2.8 nm, to 3.4 nm, to 4.1 nm, and then to 5.8 nm. This is mainly due to the LUMO level change in the PbS QDs that occurs through the quantum confinement effect. In D–A BHJ systems, VOC mainly stems from the difference between the HOMO of the electron donor and the LUMO of the electron acceptor. Furthermore, the decrease in bandgap of QDs (with increase in their size) mostly results from the descent of the LUMO level rather than the ascent of the HOMO level, as shown in Fig. 5a. Therefore, for the PbS-730 device, the high-lying LUMO edge of 3.5 eV and the consequently large energy offset approaching 1.4 eV contributed to the high VOC, whereas the LUMO descent to 4.1 eV in the 5.8 nm QDs reduced the VOC to 0.24 V. In contrast, the JSC increased from 9.27 mA cm−2, to 10.22 mA cm−2, and then to 10.48 mA cm−2 with the increasing diameter of QDs from 2.8 nm, to 3.4 nm, and then to 4.1 nm. The reduced potential of the carrier-hops through large QDs and the consequently increased carrier mobility presumably contribute to the higher JSC in the blend that comprises relatively large QDs, compared with the blend comprising smaller QDs. Greater photon absorption from the larger QDs due to their lower bandgap can also contribute to the high JSC, as depicted in Fig. 3c. The highest JSC in the PbS-1040 device is primarily ascribed to these beneficial features under the proper type-II band alignment condition with PSBTBT. Owing to the trade-off between JSC and VOC, depending on the diameter of QDs, the optimal efficiency was obtained from the PbS-870 devices with a VOC of 0.61 V, JSC of 10.22 mA cm−2, fill factor (FF) of 0.5, and PCE of 3.12%. This value is considerably higher than the common efficiencies of hybrid BHJ solar cells based on PbS QDs used with a conventional polymer owing to the several advantages of our hybrid blends, such as the broad spectral responses between the UV and the NIR region, favorable type-II heterojunctions at hybrid interfaces, and energetic interactions between their organic and inorganic components that are facilitated by post-deposition ligand exchange.
First excitonic peak (diameter) of PbS QDs

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)
730 nm (2.8 nm)
0.66
9.27
0.45
2.75
870 nm (3.4 nm)
0.61
10.22
0.50
3.12
870 nm (3.4 nm) – best
0.63
10.82
0.51
3.48
1040 nm (4.1 nm)
0.49
10.48
0.47
2.41
1400 nm (5.8 nm)
0.24
7.81
0.36
0.68
However, the JSC and PCE were significantly lowered to 7.81 mA cm−2 and 0.68%, respectively, when the 5.8 nm PbS QDs were employed. We could ascribe the low performance to inefficient photo-induced charge transfer kinetics at the hybrid interfacial areas of the 1400 nm QDs and the polymer, based on a less effective band alignment condition as shown in Fig. 5a. To investigate this assumption, we performed a PL intensity measurement on the hybrid blends in the visible and NIR regions, which is a highly useful tool for understanding charge separation and transfer dynamics between the blend components. The data presented in Fig. 6a indicate that the electron transfer from the photo-excited state of the polymer to the PbS LUMO via Forster energy transfer is highly efficient in the case of the PbS-870 blend. Although the PbS-1400 blend showed a considerable PL quenching effect compared to that of the pure PSBTBT sample, the degree of quenching was significantly less than that of the PbS-870 blend. More importantly, as shown by PL quenching in the NIR region (where Forster energy transfer is energetically inhibited), the photo-induced hole transfer kinetics from the 1400 nm QDs to the PSBTBT were significantly poorer compared to the case of the 870 nm QDs (see Fig. 6b). Thus, we believe that the dynamics of exciton dissociation and the subsequent charge transport efficiency are excellent at hybrid interfacial areas of the 3.4 nm PbS QDs and the PSBTBT under the energetically proper type-II heterojunction condition, whereas the low JSC in the PbS-1400 device is mainly imputed to its weak type-II band-offsets. For example, the LUMO-edge offset of 0.94 eV in the PbS-1400 blend seems to be too high compared with the corresponding value of 0.5 eV in the PbS-870 blend. In addition, the HOMO-edge offset of 0.1 eV might be too weak to dissociate and transfer photo-excited holes from the QDs to the PSBTBT. Thus, if one wants to design hybrid solar cells based on PbS QDs as large as 6 nm or so, a different polymer material with proper HOMO/LUMO levels should be considered.
Next, to evaluate the efficacy of PbS QDs as electron acceptors, we fabricated purely organic solar cells comprising PSBTBT (an electron donor) and [6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM, the most widely used electron acceptor in polymer BHJ systems). The organic device is composed of sequential layers of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PSBTBT:PCBM/BCP/Al. The blending ratio of PSBTBT:PCBM was 1:1.5, and the fabrication procedure was the same as that for the hybrid devices, except that the EDT treatment was omitted because EDT does not have any effects on polymer blends. The J–V characteristic of the organic device shown in Fig. 7a gave a VOC of 0.57 V, a JSC of 11.43 mA cm−2, a FF of 0.52, and a PCE of 3.39%, as averaged values from eight devices. The efficiency of the organic solar cell is in a similar range to that of the PCE of the hybrid solar cell, but it is smaller than those of some high-performing hybrid solar cells. It is important to note that the best-performing PbS-870 device (of more than 30 devices) presented a VOC of 0.63 V, JSC of 10.82 mA cm−2, FF of 0.51, and PCE of 3.48%. This indicates the high efficacy of PbS QDs as good electron acceptors in BHJ systems and as promising substitutes for conventional fullerene derivatives that are, to date, the most effective electron acceptors known.
A difference in spectral response between the organic device and the hybrid PbS-870 device is evident from the normalized EQE spectra, as shown in Fig. 7b. The organic cell showed successful conversion of the incident photon to current, mostly in the visible region, but there was no response beyond a wavelength of around 900 nm, which is consistent with previous reports published elsewhere. Our hybrid solar cells boasted a broader EQE spectrum covering the UV to NIR wavelength regions with a peak in the visible region. This indicates the conversion of broad-range photon energies into electricity under the favorable type-II heterojunction system with hybrid components of PSBTBT and PbS QDs. The photogeneration of charge carriers can be achieved by excitons absorbed by the polymer as well as by the NCs, whereas PCBM contributes very little to the spectral response. Nevertheless, the higher JSC value of the organic solar cell compared with that of the hybrid device signifies better nanomorphology and D–A interactive networks between PSBTBT and PCBM than the case for PSBTBT and PbS QDs. A further increase in the PCE of hybrid BHJ solar cells demands better understanding and engineering of the chemistry and physics of the QD surface and, accordingly, of the QD:polymer interface. The use of an advanced hybrid nanocomposite synthesis process, for example, direct grafting of a polymer onto the functionalized QD surface in the chemical synthesis procedure, can enhance intimate contact and electronic coupling between the two components without the need for the ligand exchange process, because the ligand exchange process often suffers from some issues like incomplete surface coverage. Alternatively, a D–D:A–A structure with self-assembled vertical phase segregation or a tandem architecture comprising sequential nanocomposite layers of PSBTBT:‘small’ PbS QDs/specially designed polymer:‘large’ PbS QDs' can be considered as an effective way to improve the photovoltaic efficiency.

We have demonstrated the NIR-sensitive hybrid solar cells with efficiencies greater than 3%. They are based on nanocomposites of PbS QDs and a new kind of low-bandgap polymer PSBTBT, instead of conventional P3HT. The photovoltaic parameters of the hybrid solar cells were significantly dependent on the mean diameter of PbS QDs owing to their large influence on the energy level of QDs through the quantum confinement effect and consequent band-alignment at QD–polymer hybrid interfaces. This indicated the importance of the favorable type-II heterojunction in achieving high photovoltaic efficiency. Several important attributes in the optimal hybrid device such as an efficient combination between the PbS QDs and the low-bandgap polymer, improved hybrid material interfaces via the effective chemical ligand exchange, and broad-range exploitation of the solar spectrum contributed to a high efficiency approaching 3.48% under the AM 1.5G illumination. This value is comparable to the value of 3.39% obtained from the device employing PCBM as an electron acceptor, instead of PbS QDs. There is still scope to further improve the efficiency of the hybrid BHJ solar cells, for example, through deploying better control techniques over the surface chemistry of QDs and advanced device architecture such as tandem configuration. These strategies offer great potential to enable PbS QDs as effective substitutes for organic acceptors in solution-processable, cost-effective energy conversion platforms.


This work was supported by the Priority Research Centers Program (2012-0006687), Republic of Korea.


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014