 DOI: 10.1039/C0JM01471K
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 8521-8530

Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical Terms


Jung Tae
Park
,

Dong Kyu
Roh
,

Rajkumar
Patel
,

Eunhye
Kim
,

Du Yeol
Ryu
 and 

Jong Hak
Kim
*

Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Yonsei University, 262 Seongsanno, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul, 120-749, South Korea. E-mail: jonghak@yonsei.ac.kr; Fax: +82-2-312-6401; Tel: +82-2-2123-5757

Received
17th May 2010
, Accepted 22nd June 2010
First published on
3rd September 2010

Titania (TiO2) nanoparticles were surface-modified via atom transfer radical polymerization (ATRP) with hydrophilic poly(oxyethylene) methacrylate (POEM), which can coordinate to the TiO2 precursor, titanium(IV) isopropoxide (TTIP). Following application of a sol–gel process and calcination at 450 °C, TiO2 nanospheres with hierarchical pores were generated, as confirmed by the shifting of conduction bands in TiO2 using UV-visible spectroscopy and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). The particle size and morphology of TiO2 were characterized using wide angle X-ray scattering (WAXS), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and atomic force microscopy (AFM). Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) analysis revealed bimodal distribution of TiO2 pore sizes with peaks at 6 nm and 50 nm to afford better penetration of polymer electrolyte, as confirmed by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSC) made from TiO2 nanospheres with hierarchical pores exhibited improved photovoltaic efficiency (3.3% for low molecular weight (Mw) and 2.5% for high Mw polymer electrolytes), as compared to those from neat TiO2 nanoparticles (2.4% for low Mw and 1.3% for high Mw) at 100 mW/cm2, owing to the increased surface areas and light scattering.

Sunlight is one of the most attractive, clean, and renewable energy sources available, especially compared to the limited supply of fossil fuels. Common solar cell types include crystalline silicon cells, amorphous silicon cells, thin film cells, and others. However, silicon solar cells have some disadvantages, notably high fabrication cost and emission of environmentally unfriendly chemicals. Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSC) represent a credible alternative to conventional crystalline silicon solar cells. Due to reports of high-power conversion efficiency (>10%) and low production costs, based on photosensitization of dye adsorbed onto nanocrystalline titania (TiO2), DSSC is considered a next-generation photovoltaic device technology.

DSSC consists of a transparent conducting oxide glass covered with nanocrystalline TiO2 photoelectrode, a sensitizing dye attached to the surface of the TiO2, a counter electrode coated with platinum, and a redox-coupled electrolyte containing iodide and triiodide ions (I−/I3−). Development of TiO2 photoelectrodes with high crystallization and large surface area is essential for enhancing the solar energy conversion efficiency of DSSC. Thus, much prior research has focused on the relation between nanocrystalline TiO2 structure and power conversion efficiency. Desirable characteristics for DSSC include high open circuit voltage (Voc), short circuit current (Jsc), fill factor (FF), and solar energy conversion efficiency (η). The overall performance of DSSC strongly depends on the surface area of the TiO2 photoelectrode, which is directly correlated to the amount of dye loading. In order to obtain high Jsc values, the TiO2 photoelectrode should have large surface area, high crystallinity, and good connectivity. Recently, it was also reported that electron diffusion length in nanocrystalline TiO2 electrodes plays a decisive role in Jsc and eventually conversion efficiency.
However, the efficiency of DSSC made from photoelectrodes consisting of commercial TiO2 (e.g. P25) is limited to some degree by small surface area and low connectivity, due to the material's strong tendency to agglomerate and the propensity for crack formation. Many attempts have been made to rectify this problem by using a surfactant or sol–gel process to control the size and morphology of the TiO2 nanoparticles. Other approaches for overcoming this problem and enhancing the interaction at the interface are chemical adsorption or grafting and physical wrapping methods. Among these, surface modification of nanoparticles by polymer grafting is an especially effective way to improve the particles' dispersion in a solvent or a polymer matrix. More recently, living radical polymerization initiated from particle surfaces has received significant attention for modification of nanoparticles.
In this report, we modified the surface of TiO2 nanoparticles via atom transfer radical polymerization (ATRP) using hydrophilic poly(oxyethylene) methacrylate (POEM) chains containing ether groups that can coordinate to the Ti precursor titanium(IV) isopropoxide (TTIP). The TiO2-POEM/TTIP system exhibits two types of TiO2 sources, which may produce a bimodal distribution of nanoparticle sizes upon calcination. The resultant nanoparticles were used in DSSC and characterized in detail by UV-visible spectroscopy, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), wide angle X-ray scattering (WAXS), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), atomic force microscopy (AFM), and Brunauer–Emmett–Teller analysis (BET). Interfacial properties between electrodes and electrolyte were characterized using electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). Particular attention was paid to two kinds of polymer electrolytes for the fabrication of DSSC: (1) high-molecular weight (Mw) systems consisting of poly(vinylchloride)-graft-poly(oxyethylene) methacrylate, i.e. PVC-g-POEM, and (2) low-Mw systems consisting of poly(ethylene glycol dimethyl ether) (PEGDME) and fumed silica nanoparticles (SiO2).

Fumed silica nanoparticles (SiO2, 14 nm), poly(ethylene glycol dimethyl ether) (PEGDME, Mn = 500 g/mol), iodine (I2), titanium(IV) bis(ethyl acetoacetato) diisopropoxide, chloroplatinic acid hexahydrate (H2PtCl6), titanium(IV) isopropoxide (TTIP, 97%), hydrogen chloride solution (HCl, 35 wt%), and sodium hydroxide solution (NaOH, 0.1 N) were purchased from Aldrich. Distilled water was obtained with a water purification system made by Millipore Corporation. Commercial TiO2 powder (P25) was provided by Degussa, Germany. TiO2 nanoparticles were surface-modified via ATRP to produce TiO2-POEM, according to the two-step synthetic method. PVC-g-POEM graft copolymer with 40:60 weight ratio was synthesized via ATRP using secondary chlorine as an initiating site. 1-Methyl-3-propyl imidazolium iodide (MPII, C7H13N2I) and ruthenium dye (535-bisTBA, N719) were purchased from Solaronix, Switzerland. Acetonitrile (CH3CN, 99.9%), butanol (C4H10O, 99.9%), 2-propanol (C3H7OH, 99.9%), chloroform (CHCl3, 99.9%), and ethanol (C2H6O, 99.9%) were purchased from J.T. Baker. Fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) conducting glass substrate (TEC8, 8 ohms/sq, 2.3 mm thick) was purchased from Pilkington, France. All solvents and chemicals were reagent grade and were used as received without further purification.


Two types of polymer electrolytes were used for DSSC fabrication. A low Mw polymer electrolyte solution was prepared by dissolving fumed silica nanoparticles (SiO2), PEGDME, MPII, and I2 in acetonitrile. A high-Mw polymer electrolyte solution was prepared by dissolving PVC-g-POEM in THF, followed by adding MPII and I2 solution in acetonitrile. The mole ratio of ether oxygen to iodide salt was fixed at 20, and the iodine content was fixed at 10 wt% with respect to the salt.


Transparent glass, coated with conductive FTO, was used for the photoelectrode. The neat glass was cleaned by sonication in isopropanol and then in chloroform. The clean conducting surface of the FTO glass was blocked by a layer of titanium(IV) bis (ethyl acetoacetato) diisopropoxide using spin coating, followed by heating to 450 °C for 2 h, holding for 30 min, and cooling to 30 °C for 4 h. Three types of nanocrystalline TiO2 solution were deposited onto the FTO glass, using the doctor blade technique. The pristine TiO2 (P25) solution was prepared by dispersing 0.039 g of P25 powder in 1.08 ml 2-propanol, followed by sonication for 1 h to ensure clarity of the solution. The TiO2-POEM solution was prepared by the same method. The TiO2-POEM/TTIP solution was prepared by a sol–gel process: First, 0.18 ml TTIP was dissolved and stabilized in 0.2 ml HCl solution containing 0.04 ml water with vigorous stirring. After aging for 15 min, the TTIP solution was added to 0.039 g TiO2-POEM solution in 1.08 ml 2-propanol, followed by mild stirring for 3 h at room temperature. After casting the TiO2 solution onto FTO glass, the electrodes were aged at room temperature under 80% relative humidity for 30 h. These coated FTO glasses were sintered at 450 °C for 30 min, and cooled to 30 °C over 8 h. The nanocrystalline TiO2 layers were then sensitized with a 10−4 mol dm−3 alcoholic ruthenium solution at 50 °C for 2 h in darkness. Finally, the dye-sensitized photoelectrodes were rinsed with absolute ethanol and dried in a vacuum oven. The fabrication steps for the three types of nanocrystalline TiO2 porous films are shown in Scheme 1.


Transparent glasses coated with a conductive FTO were used for counter electrodes. These glasses were cleaned by sonication in isopropanol and then in chloroform. The counter electrodes were prepared by spin coating 4 wt% H2PtCl6 2-propanol solution onto the conductive FTO glass and sintering at 450 °C for 2 h, holding for 30 min, and cooling to 30 °C over 8 h.


DSSCs with an active area of 0.4 cm2 were constructed by drop-casting of electrolyte solution onto the photoelectrode and covering with the counter electrode, according to previous reported procedure. The cells were placed in a vacuum oven for a day to permit complete evaporation of solvent and were then sealed with an epoxy resin. Photoelectrochemical performance characteristics, including short-circuit current (Jsc, mA/cm2), open-circuit voltage (Voc, V), fill factor (ff), and overall energy conversion efficiency (η) were measured using a Keithley Model 2400 and a 1000 W xenon lamp (Oriel, 91193). The light was homogeneous over an 8 × 8 in2 area, and its intensity was calibrated with a Si solar cell (Fraunhofer Institute for Solar Energy System, Mono-Si + KG filter, Certificate No. C-ISE269) for a sun light intensity of 1 (100 mW/cm2). This calibration was double-checked with a NREL-calibrated Si solar cell (PV Measurements Inc.).


UV-visible spectroscopy was measured with a spectrophotometer (Hewlett Packard) in the range 200 to 800 nm. Surface compositions of the TiO2 films were investigated by XPS using a VG Scientific ESCALAB 220 spectrometer equipped with a hemispherical energy analyzer. A nonmonochromatized Al K X-ray source (h = 1486.6 eV) was operated at 12.5 kV and 16 mA under analyzer chamber pressure less than 10−6 Pa. The C1s binding energy of 285.0 eV was used as a reference. The WAXS experiment was performed on a Rigaku 18 kw rotating anode X-ray generator, with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.5406 Å), operated at 40 kV and 300 mA. The 2θ range was from 5° to 60°, with a scanning speed of 3°/min, and the distance from the sample to the detector was 185 mm. Energy-filtering transmission electron microscopy (EF-TEM) pictures were obtained in order to observe the morphology of TiO2 photoelectrodes using a Philips CM30 microscope operating at 300 kV. For EF-TEM measurements, the dried films were dispersed in ethanol; then, a drop of this solution was placed onto a standard copper grid, followed by evaporation of the solvent in air. The surface structures of the electrodes were characterized by field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) (SUPRA 55VP, Carl Zeiss). Tapping mode atomic force microscopy (TM-AFM) (Nanoscope IV, Digital Instruments) was used to examine the morphologies of TiO2 films. The specific surface area, average pore diameter, specific pore volume, and average particle diameter of TiO2 films were measured at the N2 adsorption–desorption isotherm by the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET, for specific surface area) and Barrett–Joyner–Halenda (BJH, for specific pore volume and average pore diameter) methods using a Belsorp-mini II after drying the sample at room temperature for one day in a vacuum oven. Prior to taking of these measurements, the TiO2 films were additionally degassed at 70 °C under dynamic vacuum (10−2 Torr) for 1 h.



Fig. 1 shows the UV-visible spectra of pristine TiO2, TiO2-POEM and TiO2 POEM/TTIP after calcination at 450 °C at wavelengths between 200 and 800 nm. The pristine TiO2 and TiO2-POEM films after calcination exhibited photoabsorption at 330 nm and 300–330 nm, respectively. It is well known that photoabsorption depends on the structure and grain size of TiO2. The broad peak at 330 nm indicates the presence of polytitanium (Ti–O–Ti)n clusters in TiO2 bulk nanoparticles, arising from the charge transfer from the valence band (mainly formed by 2p orbitals of oxide anions) to the conduction band (mainly formed by 3d t2g orbitals of Ti4+ cations). The TiO2-POEM after calcination showed absorption in shorter wavelength regions than did pristine TiO2. This is presumably due to the decrease in particle size resulting from steric repulsive forces between TiO2 nanoparticles at the interfaces of each nanoparticle, leading to an increase in the bandgap energy (Eg).

The Eg values for TiO2 nanoparticles were calculated using Planck's equation, as follows,
(1)
where
Eg is the band gap energy (eV), h is Planck's constant, c is the velocity of light (m/s), and λ is the wavelength (nm). From the Planck equation, Eg values for the pristine TiO2 and TiO2-POEM after calcination were calculated to be 3.14 and 3.26 eV, respectively. The TiO2-POEM/TTIP films after calcination exhibited a blue-shift of the TiO2 characteristic absorption peaks centered at 210 nm and 265 nm, which is attributable to the size quantization effect caused by the small particle size overall and the narrower distribution of particle sizes. This blue shift of the two absorbance peaks for TiO2-POEM/TTIP may be responsible for the dominant growth mechanism of the TiO2 sol–gel quantization effect. The Eg values of TiO2-POEM/TTIP after calcination were calculated to be 3.88 eV and 4.96 eV, which are much higher than those of pristine TiO2 and TiO2-POEM. The Eg values of TiO2 films are, therefore, ordered TiO2-POEM/TTIP > TiO2-POEM > TiO2. With decreasing size of TiO2 nanoparticles, an increase in Eg and a corresponding blue shift in the absorption edge have been encountered in previous research, since the size quantization effect of TiO2 particles is very small (d < 5 nm). The change of Eg affected the conduction band energy of TiO2 in DSSCs, as seen in the following discussion of XPS valence band spectra. The inference of the size and structure of TiO2 nanoparticles based on UV-visible spectroscopy will be supported by XRD, EF-TEM, and FE-SEM results.

XPS data were obtained from samples in order to investigate the change in Eg of TiO2, as shown in Fig. 2. The valence band edges of pristine TiO2, TiO2-POEM and TiO2-POEM/TTIP nanoparticles were located at 2.8, 2.9, and 2.9 eV, respectively. The observed binding energy (2.8 eV) in pristine TiO2 is consistent with the reported value in the literature. The valence bands of TiO2-POEM and TiO2-POEM/TTIP nanoparticles were slightly shifted in the positive direction, relative to those of pristine TiO2. By using Eg values determined from UV-visible spectroscopy and valence band edges from XPS, the conduction bands of nanoparticles were calculated. The conduction bands of pristine TiO2, TiO2-POEM, and TiO2-POEM/TTIP nanoparticles were −0.34 eV, −0.36 eV, and (−0.98 eV, −2.06 eV), respectively, as shown in Scheme 2. These results show that the conduction band of the TiO2-POEM/TTIP nanoparticles exists at lower binding energies than those of pristine TiO2 and TiO2-POEM. A negative shift in the conduction band edge of TiO2 for TiO2-POEM/TTIP may increase the energy gap between the Fermi level and the potential of the redox species in the electrolyte, resulting in higher photovoltage. However, the increase of Eg in the TiO2 photoelectrode may also decrease Jsc due to smaller driving force for electron injection but this effect can be easily overcome by the increase of Voc, surface area and light scattering.
Changes in the crystal structure and size of TiO2 nanoparticles were investigated by XRD analysis in the 2θ range of 5° to 60°; the results presented in Fig. 3. Several sharp peaks appeared for each sample = 25.5, 38.0, 48.2, 54.3, and 55.2°, corresponding respectively to (101), (004), (200), (105) and (211) reflections in the anatase TiO2 phase. In TiO2-POEM nanoparticles before calcination, two broad halos with weak intensity appeared at 7.2° and 17.6°, indicating the amorphous state of POEM. The presence of two amorphous peaks is attributable to POEM's molecular structure, which contains pendant side chains. It is well known that the first peak, at low 2θ, reflects the interchain distance, i.e. the distance between main chains, while the second peak, at high 2θ, reflects the distance between inter-pendant chains. These amorphous peaks of POEM completely disappeared after calcination at 450 °C, which may produce additional pores in TiO2 films. The positions of full width at half-maximum (FWHM) for pristine TiO2 and TiO2-POEM were similar to one another, but the latter showed a broader diffraction peak, indicating a smaller average size of crystalline TiO2 nanoparticles. The crystallite size of nanoparticles can be deduced from the Scherer equation, as follows,
(2)
where
D is the crystallite size of TiO2 nanoparticles, k is a constant (= 0.89), λ is the X-ray wavelength (λ = 1.5406 Å), β is FWHM of the diffraction peak, and θ is half the Bragg's diffraction angle of the peak centroid in degrees. The average particle sizes of pristine TiO2 and TiO2-POEM were determined to be 27.9 nm and 19.5 nm, respectively. Bulky POEM groups attached to the TiO2 nanoparticles induced steric repulsive forces among the nanoparticles, resulting in better dispersion and size reduction in the TiO2-POEM nanoparticles. XRD of TiO2-POEM/TTIP nanoparticles showed that the FWHM of the anatase phase (101) increased and, thus, was broader than that for the other two systems; this is presumably due to the small size of nanoparticles resulting from size quantization. The average size of nanoparticles, 16.2 nm as calculated by the Scherer equation, is presumably due to the formation of small nanoparticles on the TiO2-POEM surface by TTIP during the sol–gel process. This interpretation will be supported by FE-SEM, EF-TEM, and BET analysis. Consequently, photoelectrodes formed from TiO2-POEM/TTIP nanoparticles are expected to exhibit higher efficiency, which is, indeed, the case, as presented in the last section of this article.

Since the surface area of photoelectrodes is an important factor affecting the photovoltaic behavior of DSSC, the surface structures of TiO2 nanoparticles were investigated. The size and morphology of the pristine TiO2, TiO2-POEM (before and after calcinations) and TiO2-POEM/TTIP films were investigated by FE-SEM, as shown in Fig. 4. It is evident that the variation in surface morphology of TiO2 nanoparticles largely results from surface modification of particles via grafting with POEM or the sol–gel process. Pristine TiO2, in Fig. 4(a), showed a relatively large particle size of about 30 nm. TiO2-POEM, in Fig. 4(b), showed surface modified nanoparticles with core–shell interconnection structures owing to the grafting of long polymeric chains of POEM. Pristine TiO2 nanoparticles possessed a smooth spherical shape, but TiO2-POEM after calcination (Fig. 4(c)) exhibited a relatively sharp, rough morphology. Interestingly, the morphology of TiO2 nanoparticles produced from TiO2-POEM/TTIP was significantly different from those of pristine TiO2 and TiO2-POEM, as shown in Fig. 4(d). The TiO2-POEM/TTIP system exhibited TiO2 films with bimodal particle size distribution consisting of small particles aggregated into large clusters of 200 nm, which may produce TiO2 films with large surface area (Fig. 4d, e). This nanostructure comprising large and small TiO2 nanoparticles affects the pore diameter and volume of films, as discussed later in the BET analysis. The increase in surface area may result in increased dye loading and enhanced performance in DSSCs.

Fig. 5 shows EF-TEM images of pristine TiO2, TiO2-POEM before and after calcinations, and TiO2-POEM/TTIP after calcination at 450 °C. In Fig. 5(a), the pristine TiO2 shows a crystal network with relatively large nanoparticles of about 30 nm agglomerated with each TiO2 nanoparticle. In Fig. 4(b), the TiO2-POEM nanoparticles before calcination appeared to be larger in size than particles of pristine TiO2, presumably because of grafting of long polymeric chains. After removal of the organic component by the calcination process, TiO2-POEM showed an even smaller crystalline size of about 20 nm, as shown in Fig. 5(c). It is believed that bulky POEM groups attached to the TiO2 nanoparticles induced steric repulsive forces among the nanoparticles, resulting in better dispersion and size reduction in the TiO2-POEM nanoparticles. The TiO2-POEM/TTIP after calcination consisted of small nanoparticles of size 5 nm due to size quantization, as well as large nanoparticles of size 100 nm, as shown in Fig. 5(d). It has been reported that the presence of larger nanoparticles is advantageous for light reflection, which can lead to enhancement in red light harvesting, while small nanoparticles can provide large specific surface area for the adsorption of large amounts of dye. As a result, the TiO2-POEM/TTIP films will have enhanced performance in DSSCs.
Following the casting of dispersed TiO2 nanoparticle solutions of varying concentrations, the morphology was studied in detail by surface imaging with tapping mode AFM. Fig. 6 shows a three-dimensional representation of pristine TiO2, TiO2-POEM before and after calcination, and TiO2-POEM/TTIP after calcination, prepared from concentrated solution (ca. 1 wt%) and dilute solution (ca. 10−5 wt%), respectively. The pristine TiO2 nanoparticles prepared from concentrated solution (Fig. 6(a)) exhibited highly textured and nanostructured topography, consisting of a network of interconnected relatively aggregated TiO2 nanoparticles. Fig. 6(b) shows the morphology of TiO2 prepared from dilute solution, which exhibited less aggregation of particles. The morphology of TiO2 modified with hydrophilic water-soluble polymer POEM showed less aggregation and greater roughness (Fig. 6(c)). The surface modified structure of TiO2 was clearly observed using the dilute solution method, as shown in Fig. 6(d), indicating hybrid morphology consisting of TiO2 nanoparticles surrounded by POEM polymeric chains. Fig. 6(e) shows an AFM image of TiO2-POEM nanoparticles after calcination; these had high roughness, as compared to that of pristine TiO2. An AFM image in Fig. 6(f), showing TiO2-POEM nanoparticles prepared by the dilute solution method after calcinations, confirms the removal of inorganic POEM chains. The high roughness structure of TiO2-POEM/TTIP nanoparticles is reflected in Fig. 6(g); this structure is due to TiO2 nanoparticles of varying size and morphology resulting from the combination of sol–gel and surface modification processes. An individual large TiO2 nanoparticle with deformed structure was observed in Fig. 6(h), obtained by the dilute solution method. Thus, pristine TiO2, TiO2-POEM before and after calcination, and TiO2-POEM/TTIP after calcination present differences in surface texture, with mean roughness values (Rms) of 1.727, 1.832, 1.968, and 1.992 nm respectively. Rms represents the standard deviation of the Z values, with Z being the total height range analyzed. These roughness results are in agreement with levels of dye adsorption, as presented in a later section. As a result, TiO2 films made from the TiO2-POEM/TTIP system are expected to possess high dye adsorption, leading to better solar cell efficiency.
The efficiency of DSSC depends strongly on the amount of dye adsorption, which is related, in turn, to the surface area and porosity of the TiO2 photoelectrode. The adsorption–desorption curves of pristine TiO2, TiO2-POEM, and TiO2-POEM/TTIP films are presented in Fig. 7 and summarized in Table 1. Specific surface area was calculated from nitrogen isotherms using the BET method, while specific pore volume and average pore diameter were determined from nitrogen isotherms using the BJH method. The porosity of TiO2 films was calculated by eqn (3),
(3)
where (
P) is porosity, Vp is the specific pore volume (cm3/g), and ρ−1 is the reciprocal of the density of anatase TiO2 (ρ−1 = 0.257 cm3/g). The roughness factor per unit of film thickness was calculated using eqn (4),

(R) = ρ (1 − P) S
(4)
where
ρ is the density of anatase TiO2 (ρ = 3.89 cm3/g), P is the porosity of the sample, and S is the specific surface area (m2/g). The roughness factor is expressed in units of surface area per micrometer of film thickness.

Specific surface area (m2/g)
Specific pore volume (m3/g)
Average pore diameter (nm)
Porosity
Roughness factor (μm−1)
Pristine TiO2
36.2
0.177
23.2
0.41
83.3
TiO2-POEM
53.8
0.332
33.9
0.56
91.4
TiO2-POEM/TTIP
72.6
0.392
42.5
0.60
111.8

Fig. 7(a) shows the isotherms of pristine TiO2, TiO2-POEM, and TiO2-POEM/TTIP films with calcination. These exhibited a combination of types I and IV, which is characteristic of microporous and mesoporous materials. At lower pressures (below 0.2 unit), the isotherm showed high adsorption, indicating that all three types of TiO2 nanoparticles contain type I micropores. However, at higher pressures (between 0.8 and 1.0 unit), the curve exhibited a hysteresis loop, indicating the presence of type IV mesopores. The TiO2-POEM/TTIP film showed a remarkable change in textural structure at low relative pressures (below 0.2), which suggests that the addition of TTIP induces a change from mesoporous to microporous structure during the sol–gel process. In addition, the hysteresis loop exhibited by the isotherm of the TiO2-POEM/TTIP film at high relative pressures (between 0.8 and 1.0) indicates a bimodal pore size distribution in the microporous and mesoporous regions. Moreover, the observed hysteresis loop approaches a relative pressure of 1.0, suggesting the presence of macropores (>50 nm). The hysteresis loop of TiO2-POEM/TTIP shifted from a lower relative pressure region (0.8–0.95) to a higher relative pressure region (0.85–1.0) compared to pristine TiO2. This suggests that the combined processes of sol–gel and surface modification can lead to the formation of additional larger pores, consistent with the pore size distribution results shown in Fig. 7(b). The specific surface areas of pristine TiO2, TiO2-POEM, and TiO2-POEM/TTIP films were found to be 36.2, 53.8, 72.6 m2/g, respectively, at a relative pressure (P/P0) of 0.201. In particular, the position of the hysteresis loop in TiO2-POEM/TTIP gradually increased with respect to the others, suggesting an increase in specific surface area. This increase results from the physical interaction between the incorporated TTIP and the hydrophilic POEM polymeric chains. Desorption isotherms were also used to determine the pore size distribution using the BJH method. The nitrogen adsorption volume at a relative pressure (P/P0) of 0.991 was used to determine the specific pore volume and average pore diameter. The specific pore volumes of pristine TiO2, TiO2-POEM, and TiO2-POEM/TTIP films were found to be 0.117, 0.332, and 0.392 cm3/g, respectively, while the respective average pore diameters were 23.2, 33.9, and 42.5 nm. Compared to pristine TiO2, TiO2-POEM nanoparticles after calcination showed broader pore size distribution, larger average pore diameter, and higher specific pore volume. This indicates that the grafting of hydrophilic POEM chains from TiO2 generates uneven pores in the TiO2-POEM film. Following the sol–gel process applied to TTIP with TiO2-POEM at high temperature, the film showed a bimodal distribution of pore size consisting of 6 nm micropores and 50 nm mesopores. This is due to the formation of small TiO2 nanoparticles on the surface of large TiO2 aggregations as a result of the combined graft polymerization and sol–gel processes. The porosities of pristine TiO2, TiO2-POEM, and TiO2-POEM/TTIP films were found to be 0.41, 0.56, and 0.60, respectively; the respective roughness factors were 83.3, 91.4, and 111.8 μm−1, as calculated from eqn (3) and 4. The TiO2-POEM/TTIP film showed higher specific surface area, specific pore volume, average pore diameter, porosity, and roughness factor than pristine TiO2 and TiO2-POEM. Thus, it can be inferred that TiO2-POEM/TTIP film possesses a well-interconnected and porous crystalline network. It has been reported that the presence of smaller nanoparticles can provide large specific surface area for high levels of dye adsorption. In addition, the nanostructure of TiO2 photoelectrodes with high porosity is beneficial for electrolyte transportation and electron diffusion. Based on these results, TiO2-POEM/TTIP film, with larger and smaller particles in a bimodal size distribution, is expected to exhibit high solar energy conversion efficiency.
The different surface structures of TiO2 photoelectrodes resulted in different surface areas, determining a different level of dye adsorption for each of three photoelectrodes. The quantity of N719 dye adsorbed to TiO2 photoelectrodes was measured by adsorption–desorption experiments, in which the cell area was fixed at 0.40 cm2 and the thickness of the TiO2 photoelectrode was fixed at approximately 10 μm. Following N719 dye adsorption, the photoelectrodes were dipped into 10 mL 10−2 M aqueous ethanolic NaOH solution until complete desorption of the N719 dye occurred. The alkaline solution containing the fully desorbed dye was carefully measured by UV-visible spectra, and the absorption value at 515 nm was used to calculate the number of adsorbed N719 dye molecules, according to the Beer–Lambert law. The amounts of N719 dye absorption on three kinds of TiO2 photoelectrodes are summarized in Table 2. The amount of dye adsorption onto the TiO2-POEM/TTIP photoelectrode was the highest, indicating that its surface area, the highest of the three, permits the greatest level of N719 dye adsorption. As a result, the TiO2-POEM/TTIP photoelectrode may generate more photoelectrons and enhanced performance in DSSC.
Dye adsorbed (nmol/cm2)
Dye adsorbed (mg/cm2)
Efficiency (%)
Efficiency (%)

a Low Mw polymer electrolytes (PEGDME/SiO2/MPII/I2).
b High Mw polymer electrolytes (PVC-g-POEM/MPII/I2).

Pristine TiO2
99.7
0.12
2.4
1.3
TiO2-POEM
113.9
0.15
2.7
1.8
TiO2-POEM/TTIP
145.4
0.17
3.3
2.5
The photovoltaic performance of three DSSCs, fabricated using photoelectrodes consisting of pristine TiO2, TiO2-POEM, and TiO2-POEM/TTIP, was measured at 100 mW/cm2. The J–V curves of DSSC employing two types of polymer electrolyte are presented in Fig. 8, and their performance parameters are summarized in Table 2. When low-Mw polymer electrolytes, consisting of PEGDME, SiO2, MPII, and I2 were used, the DSSC made from TiO2-POEM exhibited 2.7%, which is 11% higher than pristine TiO2 (2.4%). The TiO2-POEM/TTIP photoelectrode showed the highest performance, i.e. 3.3% at 100 mW/cm2. Humidity control was carefully done because agglomeration of nanoparticles in pristine TiO2 and TiO2-POEM, as well as crack formation occurring during the drying process resulted in decreased cell efficiency. Control of humidity during the drying step helps to change the surface energy, and, consequently, to enhance surface wetting properties. As a result, adhesion of TiO2 films onto the FTO surface is greatly facilitated, as is apparent from the higher photocurrent densities obtained. When humidity is better controlled, electrical contact is improved, as surfaces of interconnection between nanoparticles are maintained and the resistance for charge transfer is smaller. The conduction band edge of TiO2 underwent a negative shift when the photoelectrode was synthesized from TiO2-POEM/TTIP, and the energy gap between the Fermi level and the potential of the redox species in the electrolyte increased, resulting in higher photovoltage. In addition, the high Voc is attributable to an optimized number of charge carriers. The redox reaction in the electrolyte is critical because of the contribution of I− and I3− to the charge transfer process.
To understand the reasons underlying the better performance of the TiO2-POEM/TTIP photoelectrode, it is important to consider not just the low-Mw electrolyte, but also the high-Mw electrolyte in terms of penetration of the TiO2 photoelectrode, as shown in Fig. 7(b). The coil size of a polymer is commonly represented by the radius of gyration (Rg) and calculated by the following eqn (5),
(5)
where
Mw (g/mol) is the molecular weight of the polymer, and C is a constant depending on the properties of the solvent. With the use of high-Mw polymer electrolyte, the DSSC performance of TiO2-POEM/TTIP photoelectrode was 1.8 times higher than that of pristine TiO2. There are several possible reasons for this increased performance. The most important reason is the easier penetration of the redox I−/I3− couple to the TiO2 interface, owing to the formation of meso- and micropores. The PEGDME/SiO2 polymer electrolyte-based low Mw solvent (Mw = 500 g/mol) has a small gyration radius (Rg), leading to the better penetration of electrolyte into TiO2 photoelectrode. However, the large gyration radius (Rg) of high-Mw PVC-g-POEM electrolyte (Mw = 97,000 g/mol) precludes easy penetration into the nanopores of the pristine TiO2 photoelectrode. The reason is that the average pore size of pristine TiO2 film is about 23 nm, which is smaller than the average size radius of gyration, approximately 100 nm, of high-Mw PVC-g-POEM electrolyte. For this reason, the addition of plasticizers, such as low-molar mass organic molecules to high-Mw polymer electrolyte can increase cell performance. However, the TiO2-POEM/TTIP photoelectrode reveals good penetration properties of high Mw electrolyte into the TiO2 structure without plasticizer. This phenomenon can be ascribed to the hierarchical formation of mesopores and micropores by the combined processes of sol–gel and surface modification and the sufficient filling of all the pores with high-Mw polymer electrolyte.

EIS analysis was used to investigate internal resistance and charge-transfer kinetics of nanocrystalline TiO2 layers in DSSCs. An applied bias of Voc at a frequency range from 0.01 Hz to 0.1 MHz was used, with AC amplitude of 0.2 V and light intensity of 100 mW/cm2. Fig. 9 shows the Nyquist plots, Bode phase plots, and equivalent circuits of DSSC for different types of TiO2 photoelectrode. Electrochemical parameters determined from EIS analysis, namely resistance values (Rs, R1, R2, and Ws), minimum angular frequency (ωmin), and lifetime of electrons for recombination (τr), are presented in Table 3. The impedance spectra can be interpreted and modeled using equivalent circuits, with each component explained below. Each equivalent circuit consisted of several components: ohmic resistance (Rs), charge transfer resistance at counter electrode/electrolyte (R1), charge transfer resistance at photoelectrode/electrolyte (R2), resistance at the Warburg diffusion of redox I−/I3− couple in electrolyte (Ws), constant phase element of capacitance corresponding to R1 (CPE1), and constant phase element of capacitance corresponding to R2 (CPE2). In Fig. 9(b), the Nyquist spectra of the DSSCs showed three semicircles: the first semicircle, in the high-frequency region, represents R1; the second semicircle, in the middle-frequency region, represents R2; the third semicircle, in the low-frequency region, represents Ws, and the curve from the origin to first semicircle starting point on the left represents Rs. These four internal impedances have a direct bearing on electron transport in the mechanism of the DSSCs. As a consequence, the cell performance of the DSSCs becomes high when the sum of the resistance components (Rs, R1, R2, and Ws) is small. As was seen above, the three difference DSSCs exhibited nearly identical values of Rs, R1, and Ws, indicating that modified TiO2 photoelectrode treatment has little effect on FTO glass resistance, on charge transfer at the counter electrode/electrolyte, or at Warburg diffusion of the redox I−/I3− couple in the electrolyte. However, the second semicircle values, in the middle-frequency region, exhibited substantial differences, corresponding to charge transfer resistance at the photoelectrode/electrolyte. In particular, a reduced charge transfer resistance value (R2) was observed, from 110 Ω for the pristine TiO2 photoelectrode to 75 Ω for the TiO2-POEM/TTIP electrode. These results can be explained by the fact that the FTO glass, counter electrode, and electrolyte used in each of the DSSCs was the same, and only the TiO2 photoelectrode was modified. This indicates that the specific surface area of the TiO2-POEM/TTIP electrode is larger than that of the pristine TiO2 photoelectrode. Increased specific surface area in the case of TiO2-POEM/TTIP electrode leads to better penetration of the redox I−/I3− couple in the TiO2 interface through more efficient electron transfer, thereby reducing the corresponding resistance at the interface. According to the EIS model, the lifetime of electrons for recombination (τr) in the TiO2 photoelectode can be estimated from the minimum angular frequency (ωmin) value of the impedance semicircle at middle frequencies in the Bode spectrum, according to the following relation,
(6)
where f
min is the characteristic frequency minimum of the imaginary component of the IMVS (intensity-modulated photovoltage spectroscopy) response in the complex plane. The middle frequencies in Bode spectra of pristine TiO2, TiO2-POEM, and TiO2-POEM/TTIP shifted to lower frequencies sequentially; the corresponding minimum angular frequency (ωmin) was 65 Hz for pristine TiO2, 63 Hz for TiO2-POEM with a calcination process, and 39 Hz for TiO2-POEM/TTIP. The electron recombination lifetime values (τr) for DSSCs with pristine TiO2, TiO2-POEM, and TiO2-POEM/TTIP photoelectrodes were 15.38, 15.87, and 25.64 ms respectively. From the Bode spectra, it was found that the lifetime of electrons for recombination (τr) for the TiO2-POEM/TTIP photoelectrode had the highest value, 25.64 ms, implying the longest electron lifetime. This could effectively decrease electron recombination, leading to significantly enhanced electron transfer. Modification of TiO2 photoelectrodes indeed has been suggested to increase the lifetime of electrons for recombination (τr), and further enhance cell performance. Based on this result, TiO2-POEM/TTIP photoelectrodes might be suitable for DSSC applications even with high-Mw polymer electrolytes.

Rs (Ω)
R1 (Ω)
R2 (Ω)
Ws (Ω)
ωmin (Hz)
τr (ms)
Pristine TiO2
36
64
110
118
65
15.38
TiO2-POEM
37
65
101
112
63
15.87
TiO2POEM/TTIP
34
56
75
110
39
25.64

This study presents a novel method for the preparation of bimodal pore electrodes, with large surface area and small size TiO2 nanoparticles adsorbed onto large particles, for DSSC applications. TiO2 nanoparticles were surface-modified with hydrophilic POEM long chains, which can coordinate to Ti precursors via the ATRP process. Using a combination of sol–gel and graft copolymerization processes, TiO2 photoelectrodes were prepared and characterized in detail by UV-visible spectroscopy, XPS, and WAXS. The particle size and morphology of the TiO2 electrodes were also characterized using TEM, SEM, AFM, BET, and EIS analysis. The performance of the photoelectrodes was investigated through fabrication of DSSC using both high-Mw and low-Mw polymer electrolytes. The DSSC made from TiO2-POEM/TTIP film outperformed the other photoelectrodes owing to its large surface area and light scattering, which yielded higher Voc, and bimodal porous structure (with peaks at 6 nm and 50 nm), affording better penetration of the polymer electrolyte. This cell produced overall solar energy conversion efficiency (η) of 3.3% and 2.5% for low-Mw (PEGDME/SiO2/MPII/I2) and high-Mw (PVC-g-POEM/MPII/I2) polymer electrolytes, respectively, under light power of 100 mW/cm2.


This work was supported by a National Research Foundation (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (MEST) through the Korea Center for Artificial Photosynthesis (KCAP) at Sogang University (NRF-2009-C1AAA001-2009-0093879), the Active Polymer Center for Pattern Integration (R11-2007-050-00000-0) and the Pioneer Research Center Program (2008-05103).


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010