 DOI: 10.1039/C4TA05988C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 3500-3510


Eun Joo
Lee
,

Inho
Nam
,

Jongheop
Yi
* and 

Jin Ho
Bang
*

Department of Bionanotechnology, Hanyang University, 55 Hanyangdaehak-ro, Sangnok-gu, Ansan, Kyeonggi-do 426-791, Republic of Korea. E-mail: jbang@hanyang.ac.kr; Fax: +82-31-400-5457; Tel: +82-31-400-5505

WCU Program of Chemical Convergence for Energy & Environment, School of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Institute of Chemical Processes, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742, South Korea. E-mail: jyi@snu.ac.kr; Tel: +82-2-880-7438

Department of Chemistry and Applied Chemistry, Hanyang University, South Korea

Received
6th November 2014
, Accepted 16th December 2014
First published on 16th December 2014
Tremendous efforts have been devoted for the development of rationally designed titanium dioxide (TiO2) nanostructures, because structural characteristics such as morphology, porosity, size, and crystal phase significantly affect the physical properties of TiO2. Despite the significant advances made in synthesis strategies over the past few decades, designing an innovative TiO2 nanostructure that overcomes the limitations that TiO2 encounters in various applications remains a great challenge. In this study, we demonstrate the synthesis of a hierarchically nanostructured TiO2 having a higher symmetry (hexagonal structure) than its own constituent tectons. Anatase TiO2 possesses only a primitive tetragonal unit cell, and there is no hexagonal symmetry axis. Thus, a hexagonal TiO2 superstructure is hardly obtainable without the multiple twinning of primitive units, which rarely occurs under conventional reaction conditions. Our exotic TiO2 nanostructure is synthesized by the calcination of a novel TiO2 precursor that is formed by a simple precipitation reaction and is utilized as an electrode material in energy conversion and storage devices. Due to the unique physical properties offered by this morphology, nanoporous hexagonal TiO2 is superior to conventionally used TiO2 in these applications, highlighting the benefits as an advanced, multifunctional electrode material.

With rapid, worldwide growth in the concern regarding renewable energy, the development of high-efficiency, low-cost, and environmentally friendly energy conversion and storage systems has become a major challenge. In particular, there is an exceptionally high demand for advanced materials with a novel design and function that can overcome the current limitations of energy devices. TiO2 has received a great deal of attention as a key building block for energy conversion and storage systems because of its outstanding physicochemical properties and versatility, which can be used for various energy applications. For the application of TiO2, precise control of the morphology, porosity, size, and crystal phase of TiO2 is of great importance, as these structural characteristics determine the properties of TiO2. In this regard, a great deal of effort has been devoted for the synthesis of various TiO2 nanostructures. Anatase TiO2, which is the most studied TiO2 phase, is mainly dominated by thermodynamically stable (101) facets with a surface free energy of 0.52 J m−2, and hence the shape of the anatase TiO2 crystal in an equilibrium state is typically a truncated octahedral bipyramid. For TiO2 shape control, most of the synthesis strategies have relied on subtle control over the hydrolysis and condensation rates of TiO2 precursors or the utilization of anions and organic additives that are selectively adsorbed to specific TiO2 facets. While these synthetic approaches proved to be somewhat successful, the design and manipulation of an innovative TiO2 morphology to tackle the current limitations of TiO2 remain highly desirable.

Thus, we report the synthesis of a hierarchically structured TiO2 with primary nanoparticles assembled into a hexagonal secondary structure. A hexagonal-shaped TiO2 superstructure (HTS) with nanopores was prepared via the calcination of a newly designed TiO2 precursor and was evaluated as an advanced, multifunctional electrode material for dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) and lithium-ion batteries (LIBs). A wide variety of TiO2 nanostructures, such as nanospheres, hollow spheres, nanotubes, nanorods and nanosheets, have been reported. These nanostructured TiO2 materials offer several advantages compared to their conventional counterparts: trivial size effects (i.e., high active surface and strong interface reaction) and true size effects (i.e., photochemical stability, high catalytic efficiency, and strong oxidation ability). However, they have often been optimized for only a specific application, such as photocatalysis, DSSCs, or LIBs. Unlike the previously reported TiO2 nanostructures, the unique morphology of HTS, i.e., the hexagonal superstructure (orthorhombic, Cmca) and local tetragonal structure (I41/amd), offers new collective properties arising from the superstructure, which could provide exclusive advantages for both energy conversion and storage systems. The hexagonal secondary architecture enables a high backscattering efficiency for DSSCs due to the flat surfaces of the HTS. When utilized as the anode material for LIBs, HTS was more closely packed compared to their spherical counterparts because of a larger interparticle contact area, leading to improved LIB performance. To the best of our knowledge, such versatility of TiO2 in diverse energy applications caused by its structural uniqueness has been rarely reported.

To produce HTS, we first devised a novel TiO2 precursor by a simple reaction of tetrabutyl titanate (TBT) and oxalic acid (OA) in the presence of an organic additive, i.e. sodium dodecyl benzene sulfonate (SDBS). OA possesses a strong chelating power for titanium ions, thus yielding hydroxyl titanium oxalate ([Ti2O3(H2O)2](C2O4)·H2O, HTO). This was also capable of substantially suppressing the hydrolysis rate of TBT, which allowed sufficient growth times to tailor the morphology of HTO via colloidal crystallization. Fig. 1a shows a scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of HTO obtained after 4 h of reaction, which exhibits the formation of a hexagonal-shaped TiO2 precursor (see further electron microscopy analyses in Fig. S1 in ESI). X-ray diffraction (XRD) results in Fig. 1b revealed that the formed TiO2 precursor was HTO with an orthorhombic crystal structure, in which inorganic corrugated layers of corner-sharing TiO6 octahedra were linked together by oxalate anions (inset in Fig. 1b). The N2 adsorption/desorption isotherms of HTO (Fig. 1c) show a type III-like isotherm with reversible curvature, arising from the nonporous nature of HTO. Our control experiments revealed that OA played a critical role in the creation of this exotic nanostructure because only nano sized agglomerates were produced when the reaction proceeded without OA (Fig. S2). In the absence of SDBS, however, we were able to obtain a similar hexagonal-shaped product, suggesting that oxalate formation was responsible for the unprecedented hexagonal nano-ensemble. It is evident from SEM images that HTO was not uniform in size. We tried in vain to yield more monodisperse particles using different concentrations and reaction times.

To gain more insight about the formation of HTO, time-resolved SEM analysis was performed (Fig. 1d). The SEM image taken after 5 min of reaction shows that the primary seeds of HTO immediately grew into nanoparticles right after the reaction began. The nanoparticles, presumably coated by SDBS, then started to self-assemble via controlled aggregation (e.g., oriented attachment), and a hexagonal superstructure became pronounced with time, eventually resulting in hexagonally shaped HTO after 4 h of reaction. Given the SEM analysis, we speculated that the mechanism of this superstructure formation may be attributed to multi-crystalline colloidal grain growth, which is schematically presented in Fig. 1e. The orthorhombic crystal of HTO (space group Cmca) is known to possess high surface anisotropy. According to the phase-field model of crystallization morphology, the grain growth of seeds with such high anisotropy in general proceeds to a hexagonal morphology. In addition, the formation of a hexagonal superstructure can be partly explained by the von Neumann–Mullins (VN–M) theorem, which provides a basis for the formation of two-dimensional (2D) polycrystals in the course of grain growth. According to this theorem, aggregates with elongated grain structure are characterized by a close-packed 2D plane formed on a and b vector planes with laminated layers in the direction of the c vector (Fig. 1e). The theoretical derivation of the VN–M relation that yields the rate of change in the grain area is given by the following equation:
(1)
where d
S/dt is the rate of change in the grain area, Ab is the value of mobility of the grain boundary multiplied by surface tension, and n is the number of triple junctions existing in the vicinity of a single grain. This equation suggests that the grain area inevitably evolves into a hexagonal structure (n = 6) in an equilibrium state. Moreover, according to Wulff construction, which is a theoretical background for determining the equilibrium shape of a crystal, the growth of an orthorhombic crystal results in an elongated rod shape. Therefore, anisotropic growth governed by Wulff construction and VN–M relation led to the formation of submicron-sized hexagonal rod structures in the last stage of grain growth. It should be noted that HTO in general had irregular hexagons with some variations in the size of the hexagons. More investigations are necessary to elucidate the reasons for this formation, but we speculate that it may be partly because n is only a variable in the VN–M relation, and is irrelevant to the size and height of hexagonal rods.

Since oxalate complexes are thermally unstable, HTO can decompose into TiO2 upon calcination in air. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) and differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) in Fig. 2a show a gradual weight loss up to 450 °C, suggesting that this temperature is sufficient to decompose all organic components of HTO. When gradually annealed from room temperature to 450 °C for 5 h, HTO was completely converted into HTS, as confirmed by XRD analysis (Fig. 2b), in which all the diffraction peaks were assigned to anatase TiO2 (JCPDS 21-1272). The strong diffraction peaks indicates good crystallinity of HTS, whereas significant broadening of the peaks suggests a small grain size. The average grain size determined using Scherrer's equation was ∼30 nm, which was substantially smaller than the whole size of HTS (width: ∼300 nm, length: ∼1 μm), signifying the polycrystalline nature of HTS. Interestingly, we observed that anatase/brookite TiO2 was obtained when HTO was directly transferred to a furnace held at 450 °C and annealed for 5 h, and HTO converted itself to anatase/rutile TiO2 when subjected to annealing at 900 °C for 5 h (Fig. S3). This observation opens up the possibility of manipulating TiO2 crystal structure using simple thermal control.
As HTO was formed even without the use of SDBS, we were curious about the role of SDBS in the TiO2 synthesis. During calcination, the deposition of OA would leave many nanopores behind in the HTS. Thus, we speculated that SDBS could serve as a porogen, because SDBS was likely to provide a soft template during the HTO formation. The building block of HTS was a nanoparticulated core and organic ligand (SDBS) shell that prevented complete aggregation and Ostwald ripening of nano-seeds during the HTO construction (Fig. 1e). Upon calcination, SDBS would decompose along with OA and, as a result, the interstitial space occupied by SDBS could endow HTS with additional nanopores. Our hypothesis was supported by the N2 adsorption/desorption isotherm measurement of the TiO2 powders obtained by calcining HTO synthesized with/without SDBS (Fig. 2c). Both the isotherms exhibit a typical type IV isotherm with a type H2 hysteretic loop, which is a characteristic of randomly distributed nanoporous or mesoporous structure. However, Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface areas of both the samples were substantially different, i.e., 71.2 (with SDBS) and 29.1 (without SDBS) m2 g−1. This disparity was also reflected in the pore size distribution (inset of Fig. 2c), where majority of pores in the TiO2 obtained without SDBS were smaller than 10 nm, whereas those in TiO2 with SDBS extended up to 30 nm. Fig. 2c and d display electron micrographs of as-synthesized HTS, showing that the original hexagonal rod structure remained intact after calcination (see further electron microscopy analyses of HTS in Fig. S4 and S5). Not only did the HTS possess a hexagonal macrostructure, but it also featured a three-dimensional porous structure. The nanopores generated by the removal of OA and SDBS were clearly visible in the transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images (Fig. 2d and e), which is consistent with the N2 isotherm measurement. The indexed diffraction rings in the selected-area electron diffraction (SAED) patterns correspond to those from polycrystalline, anatase TiO2. High crystallinity was also verified by the well-defined lattice fringes in the high-resolution TEM image (Fig. S4). It is worth noting that anatase TiO2 possesses only a primitive tetragonal unit cell and has no hexagonal symmetry axis. Therefore, the hexagonal TiO2 superstructure could not be achieved without multiple twinning of primitive units (a typical formation mechanism for exotic mesocrystals), which occur only under special conditions. Therefore, our synthetic strategy for this novel TiO2 superstructure (i.e., calcination of superstructured TiO2 precursor) stands out among various TiO2 synthesis routes because it enabled the creation of a new TiO2 nanostructure featuring higher symmetry than its own constituent tectons.
To evaluate the versatility of HTS as an advanced energy material, we explored the potential of HTS in DSSC and LIB applications, which are representative of energy conversion and storage systems. For DSSC thin film applications, a large specific surface area, fast electron transport, and superior light scattering abilities are the major requirements. TiO2 nanoparticles (15–40 nm) commonly used in these TiO2 films allow high dye-loading; however, the scattering of light by the nanoparticles is ineffective because the nanoparticles in this size regime induce only Rayleigh scattering. Therefore, TiO2 films with a bi-layer structure (dye adsorption and light scattering layers) have been widely adapted in state-of-the-art DSSCs. Light scattering by submicron-sized particles is mostly governed by Mie scattering. According to Mie's theory, Mie scattering is greater in the forward direction than in the reverse direction, and such uneven scattering characteristics becomes more pronounced with increase in particle size. Interestingly, several simulation studies that account for light scattering by nonspherical particles revealed that the backscattering cross-section of hexagonal columns can be more than an order of magnitude, which is greater than that for spheres with the same volume. This claim was consistent with our simulation study, in which we calculated the amplitude of a z-directional electric field (E) of the surroundings of HTS and of spherical TiO2 with the equivalent volume by the three-dimensional finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) method. Since light intensity is proportional to the amplitude of the square of electric field (E2), the FDTD simulation represents polarized light scattering along the z-vector. According to the simulation (Fig. 3a), HTS showed a slightly lower extinction efficiency than its spherical counterpart. However, HTS shows significantly enhanced backscattered light as compared to the sphere, which is ascribed to the reflection on flat HTS surfaces. Thus, as illustrated in Fig. 3a, uneven scattering events can be much less prominent with our HTS; as a result, greater number of back-scattered photons could be recaptured by the dyes in the nanoporous TiO2 layer. This suggests that our HTS could be more beneficial for light harvesting as a scattering layer material than conventional, submicron-sized spherical particles.
This hypothesis was verified by comparing the diffuse reflectance UV-Vis spectra of TiO2 films. Fig. 3b shows that the reflectance of the TiO2 film composed of only TiO2 nanoparticles (NT only), which was considerably lower than those of TiO2 films with TiO2 bilayers due to the lack of a scattering layer. Notably, TiO2 films with double layers of NT/HTS exhibited higher diffuse reflectance over the entire visible light region with respect to the bi-layered TiO2 film (NT/DSL) with are the commercially available scattering particles (18NR-AO, Dyesol), which highlights the excellent scattering ability of HTS. To investigate the effect of scattering on DSSC performance, the photocurrent density–photovoltage (J–V) curves of the three DSSCs was compared (Fig. 3c). The solar cell parameters, such as short-circuit current (Jsc), open-circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (FF), and power conversion efficiency (η), are summarized in Table S1. The performance of DSSC with a NT/HTS film (7.6%) exceeded those of DSSCs with two counterparts (6.4% and 6.8% for NT only and NT/DSL, respectively), which was primarily attributed to the enhanced Jsc. The improved Jsc in the DSSC with a NT/HTS-based photoanode resulted from the higher scattering efficiency of HTS, which permitted the dyes to enhance their light harvesting capability. The better light harvesting efficiency of the DSSC with NT/HTS film was also confirmed by incident-photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) spectra, where higher IPCE values for the DSSC with a NT/HTS film appeared over the entire spectral range (Fig. 3d). Note that multiple cells were fabricated and measured to ensure the reproducibility of our results (see multiple measurement results in Tables S2–S4 and Fig. S6).
Since Jsc is proportional not only to light harvesting efficiency, but also to charge-collection efficiency, one could speculate that the enhanced Jsc may result partly from the difference in electron transport and charge recombination dynamics in each TiO2 film. To elucidate the influence of the charge-collection efficiency, intensity-modulated photovoltage spectroscopy (IMVS) and intensity-modulated photocurrent spectroscopy (IMPS) were performed. These techniques have proved to be useful in providing quantitative information on electron transport and charge recombination dynamics. The electron transport time and the electron lifetime estimated from IMPS and IMVS measurements suggest that DSSCs with NT/HTS films have the fastest electron transport time and the longest electron lifetime (Fig. S7). Given that these properties depend on TiO2 film thickness, the electron diffusion coefficient (Dn) and diffusion length (Ln), which reflects the intrinsic charge transfer and recombination kinetics in each TiO2 film, were compared to obtain more accurate information. Fig. 3e and f display Dn and Ln as a function of light intensity. As can be seen in Fig. 3, larger Dn and Ln values for DSSC with NT/HTS film were obtained, indicating that significantly less charge recombination loss occurred in the NT/HTS film. This suppressed recombination was also confirmed by the electron lifetimes determined from the photovoltage decay measurement (Fig. S8). The charge-collection efficiency (ηcc) of each DSSC at a light intensity of 71 W m−2 was found to follow the order of NT/HTS (96.2%), NT only (82.2%) and NT/DSL (78.9%), proving that the enhanced Jsc was also influenced by the improved charge-collection efficiency. We attributed this improvement to faster electron transport throughout the well-interconnected TiO2 network developed within HTS, highlighting the merit of the hierarchically structured HTS.
As an anode material for LIBs, TiO2 has unique advantages such as a large volumetric/gravimetric storage capacity caused by its relatively low molar mass and environmentally benign and nontoxic nature. In particular, it can show excellent stability and safety during Li+ insertion/extraction because of higher operating voltage (1.8–2.0 V) compared to that of conventional anode materials (i.e., graphite and transition metal oxides). In TiO2, Li+ migrates as an interstitial cation and electrons are transported by small polaron hopping along the metal sublattice. Therefore, the diffusive properties of Li+ and electrons are heavily governed by the crystal structure of TiO2. The energy barriers for the collective Li+ transport in TiO2 were calculated earlier by an ab initio method. The barrier for anatase phase TiO2 was determined to be 0.2 eV, which is relatively smaller than that of rutile phase counterpart (0.8 eV). This suggests that our HTS featured with pure anatase phase could be a good candidate for the anode material. Note that anatase/brookite TiO2 was also found to be inferior to pure anatase TiO2 for LIB electrode material (Fig. S9).
To take advantage of the benefits of TiO2 in practical uses, a high diffusivity of Li+ in TiO2 is required, because it often determines the rate of the Li+ insertion/extraction. In addition, a high packing density is desirable to achieve a high energy density. Unfortunately, commercially available TiO2 nano-powders (e.g., Degussa, P-25) severely suffer from a large contact resistance, grain boundary, and a low packing density, which causes several problems such as low energy density and capacity fading during operation (Fig. S10). Unlike such nano-powders, our newly designed HTS possesses excellent advantages that can facilitate the Li+ insertion/extraction process. From the viewpoint of electrode fabrication, the hexagonal superstructure of HTS could be beneficial for decreasing contact resistance, as the symmetric morphology with large contact area can allow for more compact packing when HTS was applied on the current collector. This higher packing density was indeed observed in the film composed of HTS as compared to the film of conventional anatase TiO2 particles (C–TiO2, see SEM image in Fig. S11 and S12). Note that such a high packing density can also be beneficial to achieve a high volumetric capacity. In addition, the mesoporous structure of HTS provides a greater surface contact between the material and the electrolyte, which reduces the ion diffusion length of materials. Moreover, according to the adsorptive mechanism (i.e., reversible interfacial reaction), the large surface area developed in HTS can serve as an additional Li storage site via the charge separation of a Li+ accepting and an electron accepting phase on the solid-liquid interface. This may allow HTS to have a higher capacity than the theoretical capacity limit (168 mA h g−1 for bulk anatase TiO2).
The Li+ insertion/extraction mechanism in the anatase TiO2 anode can be described by eqn (2):
TiO2 + xLi+ + xe− ↔ LixTiO2 (0 < x ≤ 0.5)
(2)
The Li+ insertion/extraction resulting from the biphasic transition between tetragonal anatase TiO2 and orthorhombic Li0.5TiO2 appeared as characteristic voltage plateaus at ∼1.75 and ∼2.0 V in the voltage profiles, respectively (Fig. 4a and b). The Li+ insertion profiles of HTS can be divided into two regions: a voltage plateau region at ∼1.75 V and a gentle slope region below 1.75 V. The voltage plateau region arises from Li+ insertion into the vacant octahedral interstitial sites in the HTO framework as a faradaic process. The gentle slope region, on the other hand, is associated with the pseudocapacitive Li+ insertion process into the solid–liquid and solid–solid interface of HTO by the adsorptive mechanism. Fig. 4a and b show that the relative contribution to the total capacity from the voltage plateau region in HTS is substantially less than that in C–TiO2, which is attributed to the larger surface area and small diffusion length in HTS. These characteristics also lead to excellent rate performance for HTS, because surface reaction proceeds much faster than diffusion-controlled bulk reaction. In the case of HTS, the representative specific capacity at 0.5 C was 193.4 mA h g−1 and the capacities can remain as high as 136.8 and 122.8 mA h g−1 even at higher charging/discharging rates of 3 C and 5 C, respectively (Fig. 4c). On the contrary, C–TiO2 shows a specific capacity of only ∼60 mA h g−1 at 0.5 C, and the capacity quickly deteriorated as charging/discharging rates increased. The LIB performance with HTS electrode is similar or even superior to those of nano-sized or film-type TiO2 materials as has been reported in some recent studies. For instance, specific capacities of TiO2 have been reported for nanospheres (200 mA h g−1), hollow spheres (140–200 mA h g−1 during cycles), nanodisks and nanoflakes (180 mA h g−1), nanofibers (170 mA h g−1), nanotube arrays (150 mA h g−1), and nanosheets (140 mA h g−1). Especially, the rate performance and the cyclability of HTS is superior to those of the nanomaterials because of the exclusive physical properties of HTS. The difference of reversibility in the Li+ insertion process was more quantitatively confirmed by differential capacity analysis (Fig. S13), where the dynamic range of phase changing potential at various current densities (i.e., ohmic behavior), was notably less in HTS (∼0.09 V) than in C–TiO2 (∼0.27 V). Diffusion-controlled Li+ insertion in the voltage plateau region generally induces gradual structural collapse, and hence inevitably leads to irreversible capacity. Therefore, the capacity fading in the region is estimated to be more significant than the capacitive decline in the slope region as the number of charge/discharge cycles increases. C–TiO2 showed a capacity lower than 50 mA h g−1 after only 10 cycles, while the reversible capacity of HTS at a rate of 0.5 C was about 200 mA h g−1, which was preserved until the 100th cycle with little capacity fading (Fig. 4d).
To obtain more insight about the main causes of improvement in the HTS electrode, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) analysis was conducted at 1.85 V after 100 Li+ insertion/extraction cycles (Fig. 4e). This measurement was also performed with C–TiO2 as a control experiment. To analyze the EIS data, an equivalent circuit (Fig. 4f) was used, where Rs is the bulk resistance of the electrolyte and electrode, Rct is the charge-transfer resistance, Zw is the Warburg element related to solid-state diffusion of Li into the electrode, and CPE is the constant phase element. Based on the results obtained, we correlated each kinetic parameter with the experimental data (Table S5). Rs (3.29 Ω) and Rct (119.1 Ω) of HTS are significantly lesser than those of C–TiO2 (4.19 and 246.4 Ω, respectively), indicating the high conductance of the HTS electrode. This is presumably caused by the high packing density because of the unique hexagonal structure of HTS. The Warburg coefficient (Aw) of HTS is 0.4 mΩ s−0.5, whereas that of C–TiO2 is 28.7 mΩ s−0.5, which suggests that Li diffusion occurs more efficiently in the HTS electrode than in the C–TiO2 electrode. Another disparity to note in the Nyquist plots is a tilted phase in the middle frequency region, which appears only in the HTS electrode. The phenomenon is explained by the model of de Levie, which indicates that the pseudo-capacitive reaction of Li+ occurred at the interface of the porous structured electrode with large surface area (Fig. 4g for more details of de Levie model). The capacitance of HTS was found to be 42.6 mF, whereas that of C–TiO2 was only 0.9 mF, indicating that the interfacial capacitive reaction is only dominant in the HTS electrode by the adsorptive mechanism. The additional Li+ storage step shows not only improved storage capacity over the theoretical value but also improved rate capability.

We developed a new synthesis route to a HTS with nanopores and studied its utilization in energy devices. Our synthesis approach using a coordination polymer (HTO) allowed for the formation of a TiO2 nanostructure featuring a higher symmetry than its own constituting tectons, which would not have otherwise been synthesized. When utilized in DSSC and LIB as an electrode material, this exotic TiO2 proved superior than its commercially available counterpart, which was attributed to the unique structural characteristics of the superstructured hexagonal TiO2.


The preparation of TiO2 precursor (HTO) was achieved using the sol–gel method of tetrabutyl titanate (TBT). In a typical experiment, 5 mL of TBT and 0.3 mL oxalic acid (OA) were dispersed in 60 mL of ethanol using ultrasonication for 30 min. The solution was then quickly poured into 30 mL of ethanol and 90 mL of deionized water containing 2.0 g of OA and 0.2 g of sodium dodecyl benzene sulfonate (SDBS). The mixture was heated to 90 °C under reflux and was continuously stirred. After 4 h, a white precipitate was collected by centrifugation, washed with deionized water and ethanol, and dried at 70 °C overnight. Subsequently, the HTO powder was placed in a furnace, slowly heated to 450 °C in air, and then annealed at 450 °C for 5 h to yield anatase TiO2 powder. When the HTO powder was directly transferred to a furnace maintained at 450 °C and annealed for 5 h, anatase/brookite TiO2 was obtained.


XRD patterns of HTS and TiO2 were obtained using an X-ray diffractometer (Rigaku D/Max-2500/PC). Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was carried out using a field-emission scanning electron microscope (Hitachi S-4800 FESEM), and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was performed with a JEOL 2010F at an acceleration voltage of 200 kV for the acquisition of images and selected-area electron diffraction (SAED) patterns. Nitrogen adsorption and desorption isotherms were measured with a BELSORP MINI II (BEL JAPAN) at 77.4 K, and the specific surface area was determined according to the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) method. The pore size distribution was analyzed using the Barrett–Joyner–Halenda (BJH) method with a desorption branch. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) and differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) were carried out using a thermal analyzer (Bruker, TG-DTA 2000SA) with a temperature ramp of 10 °C min−1 under air flow. Diffuse reflectance UV-Vis absorption spectra were recorded using a UV-Vis spectrophotometer (SCINCO S-3100) equipped with a diffuse reflector (SCINCO).


The FDTD calculation was performed based on the discrete Curl–Maxwell equations by iteration over time. The electric field distribution was calculated for the surrounding HTS and spherical TiO2 in air (refractive index of TiO2: 2.614). A plane wave with polarized light along the x-axis was considered in our model, and the wave passed from left to right; moreover, the wavelength of the wave was set to 700 nm. To obtain reasonable field enhancement resolution, the mesh override region was set to 8 nm. The simulation time step size was 13 as and the number of time steps was 2262.


HTS paste was prepared according to the following procedure: HTS powder (6 g) was dispersed in a solution containing acetic acid (1 mL) and ethanol (50 mL) and was stirred vigorously for 1 h. Two kinds of ethylcellulose (#46070 and #46080 from Fluka, 1.5 g each) and terpineol (20 mL) were dissolved in ethanol (60 mL) and stirred vigorously for 1 h. Two dispersions were mixed together and stirred for an additional 1 h. The extra solvents were then evaporated using a rotary evaporator to obtain a viscous paste. For DSSC fabrication, F-doped SnO2 (FTO, Pilkington TEC 15, Hartford Glass, Inc.) glass substrates were thoroughly cleaned with HCl, acetone, ethanol, and deionized water with sonication of 30 min for each washing. The cleaned FTO was treated with 40 mM TiCl4 at 70 °C for 30 min for the deposition of a compact TiO2 layer. TiO2 pastes were screen-printed 6 times on FTO glass and annealed at 550 °C for 1 h. For the TiO2 pastes, Ti-Nanoxide T/SP (Solaronix, referred to as NT), commercially available DSL 18NR-AO (Dyesol, referred to as DSL), and the HTS paste were used. Three kinds of photoanodes were prepared: one composed of only a single TiO2 layer with the NT paste and the other two consisted double TiO2 layers, in which a dye adsorption layer (NT paste) and a light scattering layer (DSL or HTS) were employed. Each TiO2 film was again immersed into 40 mM TiCl4 at 70 °C for 30 min and annealed at 450 °C for 30 min. The B2 (N719) dye (Dyesol) was subsequently adsorbed on these TiO2 films, and the photoanodes were assembled into sandwich-type cells with Pt counter electrodes and an EL-HPE (Dyesol) electrolyte. The photocurrent–photovoltage (J–V) curves were recorded using a Keithley 2400 source meter under illumination of air mass (AM) 1.5 G simulated solar light (100 mW cm−2, HAL-320, Asahi Spectra). The incident-photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) of the DSSCs was measured using QEX7 (PV Measurements, Inc.). The electron transport and charge recombination properties were investigated using intensity-modulated photovoltage spectroscopy (IMVS) and intensity-modulated photocurrent spectroscopy (IMPS) using an electrochemical workstation equipped with a frequency response analyzer (CIMPS-abs, Zahner). The electron transport time (τd) and electron lifetime (τr) in the TiO2 film of each DSSC were derived using the following relationship:
where
fdmin and frmin are the characteristic frequency minima of IMPS and IMVS imaginary components, respectively. The electron diffusion coefficient (Dn) and diffusion length (Ln) were estimated using the following equations:
The charge collection efficiency (
ηcc) was calculated using the following equation:
Electron lifetimes (τ) at different potentials were also determined from the photovoltage decay using the following equation: 
where
kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature, e is the elementary charge, Voc is the photovoltage, and t is the time.


Electrochemical measurements were carried out using CR2032-type coin cells at room temperature. The working electrode was prepared by mixing 70 wt% HTS or commercially available anatase TiO2 with diameters of 150–500 nm (Sigma-Aldrich, referred to as C–TiO2) as the active material, 15 wt% Super P as a conductive additive, and 15 wt% poly(vinylidene difluoride) (PVDF) as a binder. These three components were mixed with N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) as a solvent to produce slurry. The slurry was uniformly loaded on a Cu foil using doctor-blade technique and was compressed to prepare a film-type electrode. After drying for 12 h under vacuum at 120 °C, the electrode was assembled with lithium foil and a solution of 1.0 M LiPF6 dissolved in 1:1 (v/v) ethylene carbonate/diethyl carbonate (EC/DEC) as the electrolyte in an Ar-filled glove box. Galvanostatic Li+ charge/discharge analysis was carried out with an automatic battery cycler (WBCS3000, Wonatech) in the potential range of 1.0–3.0 V vs. Li/Li+. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were performed at E = 1.85 V after 100 charge/discharge cycles. The frequency range was 0.01–105 Hz under AC stimulus with 10 mV amplitude using a ZIVE SP2 potentiostat (Wonatech), and the parameters of the equivalent circuit were fitted using ZMAN software.


This research was supported by a grant from the Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT and Future Planning (NRF-2013R1A1A1008762). It was also supported by the Global Frontier R&D Program of the Center for Multiscale Energy Systems through the NRF funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT and Future Planning (NRF-2011-0031571). We also acknowledge Prof Y. S. Kang and Dr D. Song for helpful discussion on the IPCE and IMVS/IMPS measurements.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Additional electron micrographs of HTO and TiO2; solar cell parameters; solar cell performance results from multiple cell measurements; electron lifetime and electron transport time as a function of light intensity; battery performance data of anatase/brookite TiO2 and commercially available TiO2; fitted impedance parameters of Nyquist plots. See DOI: 10.1039/c4ta05988c
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015