 DOI: 10.1039/C3RA41384E
(Paper)
RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 14037-14043

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Yibo
Zhang
,

Kun
Cao
,

Xiaoguang
Zhu
,

Xian
Li
,

Xianfeng
Qiao
,

Guoli
Tu
*,

Bingyan
Zhang
,

Dekang
Huang
,

Yan
Shen
* and 

Mingkui
Wang
*

Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, HuaZhong University of Science and Technology, Luoyu Road 1037, Wuhan, 430074, P. R. China. E-mail: tgl@mail.hust.eud.cn; ciac_sheny@mail.hust.edu.cn; Fax: +86 2787792225; Tel: +86 2787793867

Michael Grätzel Center for Mesoscopic Solar Cells, Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, School of Optical and Electronic Information, HuaZhong University of Science and Technology, Luoyu Road 1037, Wuhan, 430074, P. R. China. E-mail: mingkui.wang@mail.hust.edu.cn

Received
21st March 2013
, Accepted 9th May 2013
First published on 10th May 2013
Conductive polymers have become one of the most promising alternatives to liquid electrolytes in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) in order to avoid solvent evaporation and leakage problems. Herein the performance of solid-state DSCs based on poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) of different molecular weights (MWs) as a hole transport material has been investigated. The DSC devices using the heteroleptic Ru complex Z907Na as a sensitizer in combination with P3HT of MW 30 kDa reach power conversion efficiencies of 1.0%. The mechanism of the photocurrent generation and the role of P3HT in the solid-state DSC devices has been discussed, showing that there is a non-uniform filtration of P3HT with a high MW into the TiO2 mesoporous film, and thus resulting in an acceleration of the charge recombination close to the TiO2/Z907Na/P3HT heterojunction interface.

In modern society, it is becoming ever important to find alternative sources of energy that are cheap, sustainable, and efficient. Photovoltaics (or solar cells) is one of the most widely-researched methods of obtaining energy in ‘greener’ ways than burning fossil fuels. Solar cells based on dye-sensitized mesoporous films of TiO2 is one of the most promising photovoltaic technologies due to their characteristic low-cost and high power conversion efficiencies, which was invented by Grätzel and O'Regan in 1991. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of liquid-based dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) has increased largely and can reach as high as 12.3%. However, they often suffer from potential leakage and corrosion problems, sparking research into solid-state DSCs (ss-DSCs). Inorganic p-type semiconductors and organic materials such as 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis-(N,N-di-p-methoxy phenylamine)9,9′-spirobifluorene) (spiro-OMeTAD), poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT), and poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) have been used in solid-state DSCs as hole transport materials (HTMs). P3HT has been widely used in polymer solar cells as the donor material for its superior hole mobility (>10−8 cm2 V−1 s−1) and excellent absorption ability in the spectral region of 450–600 nm. The molecular weight (MW) has an important influence on the P3HT properties, including charge mobility, aggregate formation, etc. It is noted that P3HT with a high molecular weight has a higher carrier (hole) mobility and better interconnections within the bicontinuous network, but a lower solubility that causes processing difficulties. Several studies have been done to investigate the influence of P3HT with different MWs on the polymer bulk heterojunction solar cells or hybrid solar cells, however, to the best of our knowledge, there is no such detailed investigation of P3HT-based solid-state DSCs. The properties of hole mobility and different pore filling fraction as well as the extent of interconnections within the bicontinuous network caused by P3HT may have an effect on the performance of solid-state DSCs.

In this study we report a detailed investigation of the effect of molecular weight of P3HT on solid-state DSCs photovoltaic performance. The solid-state devices with three different P3HT weights (high MW 60 kDa, medium MW 30 kDa, and low MW 10 kDa) were fabricated by following standard procedures using 600 nm thick TiO2 films sensitized with Z907Na, an amphiphilic heteroleptic ruthenium complex commonly used in DSCs. Light-assisted dielectric response (LADR), photovoltage transient decay experiments and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were performed to investigate the information of the molecular weight dependent photovoltaic performances of the solid-state DSCs, as well as the mechanism behind its impact on device efficiency.

200 nm compact TiO2 layer was deposited at 450 °C by spray pyrolysis on an F-doped SnO2 (FTO) glass substrate (7 Ω/square). An additional mesoporous TiO2 layer (600 nm thickness) was deposited on top of the compact TiO2 layer by spin coating a diluted TiO2 nanocrystal paste (20 nm diameter). The electrode was then annealed at 500 °C for 30 min in air, followed by treatment in a 0.02 M TiCl4 aqueous solution for 12 h at room temperature. It was re-annealed at 500 °C in air for 30 min and cooled before immersing it into a Z907Na dye solution in a mixture of acetonitrile and tert-butyl alcohol (volume ratio, 1:1) at room temperature for 14 h. Under an inert atmosphere, 80 μL of 3 mg mL−1 P3HT in anhydrous o-dichlorobenzene was deposited onto the film for 60 s before spinning the substrate at 2000 rpm for 30 s. This step was repeated twice to improve pore filling of a 30 mg mL−1 P3HT solution. A 5 nm MoO3 layer and a 100 nm Al layer were subsequently evaporated through a shadow mask to define the active area of the devices (∼4 × 3 mm2) and form a counter electrode. The Z907Na and P3HT of different molecular weights (10 kDa, 30 kDa and 60 kDa) were synthesized according to the reported procedures. The polydispersity of different P3HT from low MW to high MW were evaluated to be 1.22, 1.30 and 1.47, respectively.


A 450 W xenon light source solar simulator (Oriel, model 9119) with AM 1.5 G filter (Oriel, model 91192) was used to give an irradiance of 100 mW cm−2 at the surface of the solar cell. The current–voltage characteristics of the cell under these conditions were obtained by applying an external potential bias to the cell and measuring the generated photocurrent with a Keithley model 2400 digital source meter (Keithley, USA). A similar data acquisition system was used to control the incident photon to charge carrier efficiency (IPCE) measurement. A white light bias (1% sunlight intensity) was applied onto the sample during the IPCE measurements with an ac model (10 Hz). The solar cells were masked with a metal aperture defining the active area (0.07 cm2).


LADR was measured by using a dielectric spectrometer (Agilent, E4980A) with an alternating voltage of 50 mV at 0.1 KHz under light illumination from a sunlight simulator when a solid-state DSC device was operated under short-circuit conditions. In the LADR measurement, the dielectric spectrometer essentially measures the impedance of the organic solar cell as a function of light illumination intensity.


Impedance measurements of the solid-state DSCs were carried out with an Autolab Frequency Analyzer set-up, which consists of an Autolab PGSTAT 30 (Eco Chemie B. V., Utrecht, the Netherlands) producing a small-amplitude harmonic voltage, and a frequency response analyzer module. The determination of the recombination rate constant was performed by transient photovoltage decay measurements and charge extraction experiments.



Fig. 1 shows a cross-section scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of a 600 nm thick TiO2 film coated with P3HT of the high molecular weight (60 kDa). The layers from top to bottom are the over-layer of P3HT (around 100 nm thick), the mesoporous TiO2 infiltrated with P3HT (around 600 nm thick), the compact layer of TiO2 (around 200 nm thick) and fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) transparent conducting electrode, respectively. Fig. 2a shows the current–voltage characteristic curves of the solar cells measured under AM 1.5 illumination (100 mW cm−2). The open circuit voltages (Voc), short circuit current density (Jsc), fill factors (FF) and PCE of the solar cells obtained from the J–V characteristic curves for the solid-state DSCs with P3HT of various molecular weights are listed in Table 1. The device A (P3HT with MW = 10 kDa) exhibits a Voc of 0.66 V, a Jsc of 2.70 mA cm−2, and a FF of 55%, giving an overall PCE of 0.97%. The device B (P3HT with MW = 30 kDa) shows a PCE of 0.99%, exhibiting a higher Jsc (4.11 mA cm−2) and a lower FF (39%) compared with device A. Continuous increase the molecular weight of P3HT obviously decreases the Jsc (3.09 mA cm−2) of device C (P3HT MW = 60 kDa), giving an overall PCE of 0.72%. Under similar conditions, Bradley et al. reported a 0.57% overall PCE. The augmented photovoltaic performance in our study could be principally attributed to the interface modification with MoO3 between P3HT and the Al counter electrode. Instead of a 50 nm thick PEDOT:PSS layer, a 5 nm thick vacuum evaporation coated MoO3 as a buffer layer was used, which can effectively keep the roughness of the P3HT surface, providing a nanoscaled texture that further enhances the internal light scattering and light absorption. This structure effectively reduces the charge-transport distance to the Al counter electrode, and thus, eventually increases the Jsc.

MW

V
oc [V]

J
sc [mA cm−2]

FF [%]
PCE [%]
Device A
10 kDa
0.66
2.70
55
0.97
Device B
30 kDa
0.61
4.11
39
0.99
Device C
60 kDa
0.59
3.09
39
0.72

Fig. 2b displays the IPCE as a function of excitation wavelength of the three devices, which shows spectral response in the range from 400 to 660 nm. The IPCE response in this range is mainly caused by the Z907Na sensitizer, indicating that the sensitizer works well in the solid-state devices and contributes the main part of the short circuit currents. Fig. 3 (left ordinate) shows the absorption spectra of a Z907Na stained TiO2 film (20 nm particles) compared to a P3HT (MW = 30 kDa) infiltrated TiO2 film with dye sensitization. The absorption band of the Z907Na dye in the range of 400–600 nm was broadened by the addition of P3HT into a spectral range of 400–660 nm. The peaks of the dye cannot be resolved in the TiO2/Z907Na/P3HT film due to an overpowering absorption of the P3HT. There are two types of energy that can occur at the dye/polymer interface: (1) direct electron transfer from P3HT to Z907Na by exciton dissociation and (2) exciton transfer by Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET). The spectral overlap between the absorption of Z907Na and the emission of the P3HT is negligible as presented in Fig. 3 (right ordinate). Thus, in our hybrid solid-state device configuration, the excited dye injects an electron into the TiO2 and transfers a hole to the P3HT. P3HT has negligible contribution to the charge generation as electron injection from the polymer to the TiO2 is inefficient.
The dye regeneration is one of the key parameters that determines the photocurrent generated from a dye. The oxidation potentials for P3HT with different molecular weights were evaluated to be −5.02, −4.99, −5.22 eV (vs. vacuum, Fig. S1, ESI), respectively. The small offset of the oxidation potential of P3HT relative to that of Z907Na (−5.09 eV) indicated an insufficient driving force for the dye regeneration process in this type of solid-state device. This is a likely reason to explain the low IPCE spectral response of the three devices compared to those of spiro-OMeTAD based devices. Meanwhile due to the lower LUMO level of Z907Na (−3.41 eV) compared with that of P3HT (∼3.16 eV), a charge transfer process can take place between the excited P3HT and dye by an electron-mediating mechanism in the TiO2/Z907Na/P3HT (N-i-P) system. P3HT can be excited by the incident light, leading to formation of excitons. This is observed in that there is an obvious photoluminescence (PL) quenching when the TiO2/P3HT interface was modified by Z907Na (Fig. S2, ESI). This could be attributed to the modification of the interface of TiO2/P3HT by Z907Na, which results in maximizing the number of excitons reaching the interface and undergoing dissociation. When the excitons dissociate into free electrons and holes at the TiO2/P3HT interface, the free electrons and holes may increase the recombination rate at the interface due to the enhanced concentration of carriers. This may be one of the reasons for a lower FF observed in the P3HT-based solid-state DSC cells in comparison to the spiro-OMeTAD-based devices.
Now we discuss the charge transport and collection through the N-i-P interpenetrating networks in the TiO2/Z907Na/P3HT solar cells. Here we use light-assisted dielectric response: LADR, where the capacitance is measured at the frequency of 0.1 KHz under photoexcitation, to characterize the charge transport through P3HT and the dye sensitized TiO2 interpenetrating networks in the solid-state devices. It should be noted that this frequency of 0.1 KHz is largely below the RC response of our solar cells. As illustrated in Fig. 4, the capacitance of the three devices increases with light intensity. At a given light intensity, the device A (P3HT MW = 10 kDa) has the highest capacitance, indicating that the TiO2/Z907Na/P3HT(10 kDa) has the highest dielectric constants among the three devices. This result suggests that the photoexcitation leads to more charge collected at the respective electrode in the low molecular weight P3HT based solid-state DSC device relative to those of devices with high molecular weight P3HT. Devices A and B have a larger increase-rate in the capacitance-photoexcitation characteristics compared to device C. This indicates that low molecular weight P3HT can form more effective charge transport channels for the transport dissociated charge carriers to the respective electrodes through the TiO2/Z907Na/P3HT interpenetration networks.
Transient photovoltage decay measurements and charge extraction measurements were performed to understand the effect of molecular weight of P3HT on the solid-state DSCs photovoltaic performance. Fig. 5a displays the effect of different MW P3HT on the open-circuit voltage as a function of the photo-induced charge density accumulated in the TiO2 nanoparticles at open circuit. The value of the photo-induced charge was extracted from experimental measurements by turning off the illumination source in <1 μs and collecting the generated electrons by simultaneously switching the device from open to short circuit. It can be found that the Voc increases linearly with the logarithm of charge density for all devices. At a given photo-induced charge density, the photovoltage of device B (P3HT MW = 30 kDa) is approximately 100 mV lower than that of device A (P3HT MW = 10 kDa). A further negative shift (140 mV), relative to device A, was seen for the device C (P3HT MW = 60 kDa). In solid-state DSCs, the potential difference between the quasi Fermi energy level of the TiO2 (EF,electron) and that of the HTM (EF,hole) determines the open circuit voltage Voc. In this study, the photoanode (dye-sensitized TiO2) is similar among the three devices. Thus, the change of Voc can be explained qualitatively by a shift of the HOMO energy levels of P3HT with respect to the conduction band edge (Ec) of TiO2. The electron lifetime as a function of charge density for various solid-state devices is plotted in Fig. 5b. The photovoltage decay measurement was performed under the conditions of open circuit, thus, the voltage decay comes from the electron–hole recombination in solid-state DSC devices. Obviously, the recombination rate (∼τ−1) between the electrons in the conduction band of TiO2 and the holes in P3HT at the TiO2/Z907Na/P3HT interface in device B is bigger than device A, in other words P3HT with a medium molecular weight leads to a faster charge recombination rate at the TiO2/P3HT interface. This result agrees well with the photovoltaic data in Table 1, showing that the device B has a lower Voc than that of device A. The electron lifetime is longer for device C (P3HT with MW = 60 kDa) relative to devices A and B, which is strongly contrary to the photovoltaic performance, showing that the device C has the lowest Voc among the three devices. This result could be caused by a non-uniform filtration of P3HT with high molecular weight (60 kDa in this case) into the TiO2 mesoporous film (about 600 nm thick) as discussed below.
EIS measurements in the dark were further performed to understand the differences in photovoltaic behavior of devices with P3HT of different molecular weights. The impedance spectra for each of the solid-state DSC devices (A, B, and C) studied reveal comparable characteristic information about the various kinetic processes. Using the transmission line model, the important elements, including the electron transfer resistance in the TiO2 film (Rt), photoanode/P3HT interfacial charge recombination resistance (Rct), and chemical capacitance (Cμ) were derived by fitting the impedance data. The difference in the HOMO energy level of P3HT (that is the quasi Fermi level of the HTM) can be inferred by tracing the electron transporting resistance Rt. As presented in Fig. 6a, the logarithm of the Rt shows parallel behaviour for the three devices. The transport resistance Rt for electrons in the TiO2 film with thickness d and the cross section area A, can be described by eqn (1), which depends on the density of electrons (nc) in the conduction band and the mobility μe (related to the free electron diffusion coefficient according to the Einstein relation on diffusion of charged particles De = μekBT/q where q is the elementary).
(1)
where
R0 (R0 = (d/A)·((kBT/(q2DeNcb))) is the film resistance at an applied bias (U = EF,electron − EF,hole) where the electron Fermi level (EF,electron) matches the conduction band edge (Ec), and EF,hole is the HOMO energy level of the HTM. In this study, the photoanodes are similar among the three devices. The identical conduction band edge positions for these cells permits direct comparison of Rt between the three P3HTs with different molecular weights at a constant cell voltage. Presuming that electron mobility is the same among various devices, the Fermi energy level (EF,hole) of the P3HT relative to the TiO2 conduction band edge energy level (Ec) can be determined by linear extrapolation of the experimental points in Fig. 6a to their intersection with the abscissa. The Rt data from device B (P3HT with MW = 30 kDa) were shifted upward (∼40 mV) from those of the device A (P3HT with MW = 10 kDa), which could be caused by a HOMO energy level difference (about 30 mV) between the two HTMs (see Fig. S1, ESI). A further 200 mV downward shift of Ec (relative to device B) was observed for the device C (P3HT with MW = 60 kDa). The computed Fermi levels of the different HTMs with respect to the conduction band energy level of TiO2 are in close agreement with the electrochemical measurement results of the three P3HTs (Fig. S1, ESI). Fig. 6b shows the recombination resistance (Rct) as a function of dark current density (Jdark) for the three devices. The Rct shows an exponential decrease going towards higher dark current. As illustrated in Fig. 6b, the Rct ∼ Jdark plots are nearly identical for devices A and B, which are lower than that of device C at identical dark current densities. This has been further confirmed by electron lifetime τ (τ = Rct ×Cμ, Cμ being the chemical capacitance obtained with impedance measurements) as shown in Fig. 6c. Recombination of electrons injected into the semiconductor with holes in P3HT at the interface (assuming that a first electron-transfer is the rate limiting step and the overall process is first order in electron concentration (nt)) corresponding to dark current (Jdark ∝ knt[h+] ∝ nt/τo, k being the rate constant, τ0 (∼(k[h+])−1) being the electron lifetime) is one of the primary loss processes in a solid-state DSC, which contributes to the diminishing of the device photovoltaic performance. The enlarged electron lifetime for device C could be caused by a reduced hole concentration, indicating a non-uniform filtration of P3HT with high molecular weight (60 kDa in this case) into the TiO2 mesoporous film (about 600 nm thick). The effective diffusion length Ln (, d being the TiO2 film thickness) is presented in Fig. 6d. Ln is much longer than the film thickness d (∼600 nm). At identical current density, the electron diffusion length is significantly larger for device B than for A and C, indicating that the increase in Jsc is caused by a higher charge collection yield. The plausible reason, as discussed above, could be the accumulation of holes in P3HT with high molecular weight close to the sensitizer, which accelerates charge recombination at the TiO2/P3HT interface and leads to a drop of Ln.


In summary, the effect of the molecular weight of P3HT on the performance of solid-state DSCs was systematically investigated. Though SEM images shows that there is no significant difficulty for P3HT with a high molecular weight (60 kDa) to penetrate the 600 nm thick mesoporous TiO2 films with a pore size of about 20 nm to form a bicontinuous interpenetrating network P-i-N heterojunction, photovoltaic characterization of the solid-state DSC devices illustrates that the photovoltage decreases with the P3HT molecular weight increasing, while the photocurrent reached a maximum for the P3HT with a molecular weight of 30 kDa. Transient photovoltage decay measurements and charge extraction measurements together with impedance spectroscopy measurements were performed to study the effect of the P3HT with different molecular weights, showing that there is a non-uniform filtration of P3HT with a high molecular weight into the TiO2 mesoporous film. Moreover, the charge accumulation close to the P-i-N heterojunction accelerates the interfacial charge recombination process. Furthermore, light-assisted dielectric response indicates that the charge transport is more effective for the HTM with a low molecular weight through the TiO2/Z907Na/P3HT interpenetrating networks.


Financial support from the Director Fund of the WNLO, the 973 Program of China (2013CB922104, 2011CBA00703), the NSFC (21103057, 21161160445, 20903030, 21173091), the Natural Science Foundation of Hubei Province (No. 2011CDB04), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (HUST: 2011TS021, 2011QN040, 2012YQ027), the CME with the Program of New Century Excellent Talents in University (NCET-10-0416) and Scientific Research Foundation for the Returned Overseas Chinese Scholars, is gratefully acknowledged. The authors thank the Analytical and Testing Centre at the HUST for performing characterization of various samples.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Electrochemical measurements of P3HT and photoluminescence spectra of the hybrid films. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ra41384e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013