 DOI: 10.1039/C9TC06964J
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 4294-4302


Chia-Hsin
Li
,

Ming-Yun
Liao
,

Chiung-Han
Chen
 and 

Chu-Chen
Chueh
*

Department of Chemical Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan. E-mail: cchueh@ntu.edu.tw

Advanced Research Center for Green Materials Science and Technology, National Taiwan University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan

Received
21st December 2019
, Accepted 24th February 2020
First published on 24th February 2020
Low-dimensional perovskites have been regarded as the heir of traditional perovskites because of their tailorable structures and the resultant optoelectronic properties as well as the higher stability under ambient conditions, giving them better potential in optoelectronic devices with long term stability. To date, most 2D perovskites are constructed from large organic cations as a spacer, sandwiched between the inorganic octahedron layers to form layered structures. Other than A-site constituent engineering, in recent years, it was reported that the perovskite layers can be divided by suitable X-site components, increasing the possibility of many different 2D perovskite structures and possibly leading to a bright future. In this review, we first digest the latest developments in low dimensional perovskites, including the different phases and the unique optoelectronic properties of 2D perovskites. Subsequently, different approaches to constructing 2D perovskites will be discussed in detail, involving the traditional way of altering A-site cations and the latest way of varying X-site anions. The basic principle of partioning 2D perovskite layers from the X-site constituents will be particularly focused on. The review is aimed at providing readers with an innovative viewpoint for fashioning 2D perovskites and possible future research directions for next generation 2D perovskites. Finally, a conclusion and outlook for future prospects in 2D perovskite structures will also be delivered.

Chia-Hsin Li

Chia-Hsin Li received her MS degree in Chemical Engineering at National Taiwan University (NTU) in 2020. Her research interests lie primarily in 2D pseudohalide-based perovskites and their application in optoelectronic devices, such as transistors and photodetectors. Her Master's thesis was related to the development of 2D pseudohalide-based perovskites with decent stability by suitable halide substitution.

Ming-Yun Liao

Ming-Yun Liao has been a MS candidate at the department of Chemical Engineering in National Taiwan University (NTU) since she received her BS degree at the same department in NTU, in 2019. Her current research focuses on organic/inorganic hybrid perovskites and their applications in optoelectronic devices such as transistors, optical memories, and artificial synaptic devices.

Chiung-Han Chen

Mr Chiung-Han Chen received his bachelor degree in the department of Chemical Engineering from the National Taiwan University (NTU) in 2019 and now he is a MS candidate in NTU. His research is focused on organic/inorganic hybrid perovskites with different dimensionality and their applications in optoelectronic devices such as LED or solar cell devices.

Chu-Chen Chueh

Dr Chu-Chen Chueh received his PhD in Chemical Engineering from the National Taiwan University (NTU) in 2010 and then conducted his postdoctoral research at the University of Washington from 2011 to 2016. He joined NTU as an Assistant Professor of the Department of Chemical Engineering in 2017. His research is focused on organic/hybrid semiconductors and applications in memory, light-emitting diode, transistors, and solar cells. He has coauthored over 140 papers in the area of organic/hybrid optoelectronics with citations >11500 and an H-index of 54 (recorded by Google scholar). Dr Chueh has been recently recognized by Clarivate Analytics as a 2018 & 2019 Highly Cited Researcher (https://hcr.clarivate.com/).

In recent years, organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites have dominated the field of photovoltaics with their outstanding photoelectrical properties, such as panchromatic absorption, efficient exciton generation, and long carrier diffusion length and liftetime. Endowed with these exceptional properties, three-dimensional (3D) perovskites are able to achieve a high power conversion efficiency (PCE) of >25% in solar cells, which is almost on par with current commercially available photovoltaic devices. Nevertheless, the instability to moisture, heat, and light is detrimental for perovskites to attain long-term power delivery. Thus, various measures are taken to enhance the overall stability of 3D perovskites, such as compositional engineering, interfacial modification, passivation treatment, or encapsulating procedures for devices. Apart from these techniques, another promising approach is to develop low-dimensional perovskites.

In general, low-dimensional perovskites, or two-dimensional (2D) perovskites, are layered structures with long alkylammonium cations intercalated between inorganic octahedron sheets. Owing to the hydrophobic nature of alkyl amines, 2D perovskites show extraordinary stability against humidity and oxygen with respect to their 3D counterparts. The dimensional transition from 3D to 2D not only retards the degradation of the structure but also induces the increase of the exciton binding energy and enlarges the optical bandgap as well. According to the structural difference caused by the interlayer cations, 2D perovskites can be divided into two categories: Ruddlesden–Popper phase (RP phase) and Dion–Jacobson phase (DJ phase). RP phases have two sheets of interdigitating cations with van der Waals gaps in between while DJ phases only have one sheet of interlayer cations, and the respective general formulae are A′2An−1BnX3n+1 and A′′An−1BnX3n+1 (n = 1, 2, 3, 4,…), where A′ and A′′ generally represent the organic monoamine and diamine cation inserted between the perovskite sheets, and A, B and X represent the small cation residing in the cavity between octahedrons, central metal cation in the octahedron, and halide, respectively. By adjusting the stoichiometry of the precursor material, the layer number (n) of octahedron sheets can be facilely tunable to achieve the expected performance with different targeted devices. For example, the active material for high efficiency light-emitting diodes (LED) requires larger exciton binding energy and a shorter exciton diffusion length to obtain high photoluminescence quantum yields (PLQYs) at room temperature. Therefore, 2D perovskites with n ≤ 3 would be preferred owing to their large exciton binding energy benefitting from inherent quantum confinement effects resulting from the varied dielectric constant between the organic cation and inorganic perovskite sheets. In contrast, lower exciton binding energy that favors free carrier separation is required for the active material in solar cells, for which quasi 2D perovskites (n ≥ 3) are more favorable. To find a candidate that meets all the requisites – outstanding durability to moisture and heat, great light-harvesting capability, suitable bandgap, and decent carrier mobility – for active materials in optoelectronic devices and structure engineering for 2D perovskites is significant and worth exploring.
To date, most studies about 2D perovskites are performed using large organic cations sandwiched between the inorganic sheets, investigating the influence of different cation substitution. Nevertheless, Hillebrecht et al. reported MA2Pb(SCN)2I2 (MA = CH3NH3+), the first 2D perovskite whose layers are divided by X-site anions. It was shown that SCN-containing perovskites producing varying electrochemical performances possess stability against hydrolysis. This opens a promising avenue for X-site constituent engineering, enabling a new perspective for 2D perovskite construction. Although extensive efforts have been invested into crystal engineering for structural stability, superior photoelectricity properties, and broad applications of 2D perovskites, exploring the essence of 2D perovskites by X-site engineering is limited and, to the best of our knowledge, this is the first review summarizing the progress of partitioning 2D perovskites sheets by various X-site anions. In this review, we first briefly introduce the two main categories of 2D perovskites – RP phase and DJ phase. Then, from the viewpoint of X-site anions, we present the structures, preparation methods, and unique optoelectronic behaviors of several of the latest 2D perovskites formed using various size halides and pseudohalides. Finally, we discuss the perspectives and outlook for next generation 2D perovskites as ideal candidates in optoelectronic devices.

Owing to the restraint of the Goldschmidt tolerance factor (t), which defines the suitable A-site cation size in perovskites, only a limited number of cations such as CH3NH3+ (MA), HC(NH2)2+ (FA), or Cs+ are permitted in 3D perovskite structures without causing any structural perturbation. However, tolerance factor for large organic cations leading to lower-dimensional perovskites, which imposes a more stable structure instead of disintegration. When it comes to 2D perovskites, specific crystallographic planes with a slab thickness of atomic or molecular size were first reported by intercalating large cations between the sheets of inorganic octahedrons. Organic cation spacers are in charge of holding together two single perovskite nanosheets via the formation of hydrogen bonds and that is the reason why organic cation spacers with amino end groups are common choices. Due to the intrinsic flexibility in structural design, there are various choices of cations and even amines with long alkyl chains can be applied to form lower-dimensional perovskites. In addition, lower-dimensional perovskites offer variable structures with different layer numbers other than n = 1, resulting in so called quasi-2D perovskites. Both tailorable structural diversity and better resistibility in ambient conditions make 2D perovskites promising alternative candidates in optoelectronic devices.

Generally, these large cations imparting 2D perovskites consist of amino groups either on one terminal or both, known as monoamines and diamines, respectively. Alkyl amines as organic cations not only critically determine the size and shape of the crystallographic structure but also allow stronger resistance toward humidity and oxygen due to their hydrophobic nature. According to the number of cations inserted between inorganic layers, which fatefully affects the existence of van der Waals gaps or not, the following formed 2D perovskites can be categorized into two types: RP phase and DJ phase.
RP phase perovskites with the formula of A′2An−1BnX3n+1 are by far the most common structural type of 2D perovskite. RP phase perovskites are composed of a pair of head to head organic cations sandwiched between the inorganic perovskite layers, while amino groups orientate towards the cavity between octahedrons as illustrated in Scheme 1 (left). Typically, the organic cations utilized in RP phase perovskites have amino groups only at one end, such as benzylammonium (PMA), phenethylammonium (PEA), and decylammonium (C10). The electronic bandgap and the stability and sheet-to-sheet distance of 2D perovskites and quasi-2D perovskites directly depend on the interlayer organic cation. From the viewpoint of natural quantum wells (QWs), we can depict the inorganic and organic layers behaving correspondingly as a “well” and a “barrier”. Therefore, the binding energy and band gap will become larger as the perovskite dimensionality decreases as a general rule.
DJ phase perovskites following the structure of A′′An−1BnX3n+1 consisting of monolayer cations with amino groups at both ends connecting top and bottom inorganic layers. Unlike RP phase perovskites, there is no van der Waals gap between the interdigitating organic cations, which sets up a better defensive wall to prevent the invasion of moisture or heat and thus increases the rigidity and stability of DJ phase perovskites. Some cations such as 1,3-propanediamine (PDA), 2,2′-(ethylenedioxy)bis(ethylammonium) (EDBE), and 3-(aminomethyl)piperidinium (3AMP) have been applied as organic cations of DJ phase perovskites in optoelectronic applications. Recently, Li et al. showed that DJ phase quasi-2D perovskites could provide further efficiency and stability enhancement in solar cell devices compared to the RP phase quasi-2D counterparts. They compare two different kinds of quasi-2D perovskites: one is RP phase, (PA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 (PA = propylamine), and the other is a DJ phase perovskite, (PDA)(MA)3Pb4I13. The perovskite solar cell (PVSC) based on (PDA)(MA)3Pb4I13 showed a higher PCE of 13.3% compared to the value (8.80%) of the (PA)2(MA)3Pb4I13-based device. In addition, the PDA-based perovskite showed better thermal/humidity stability than the PA-based one. A few examples of using DJ phase perovskites to fabricate LEDs with different light emission wavelength have also been recently reported. For example, Chueh et al. employed quasi-2D (EDBE)(MA)4Pb5Br16 to prepare a green light emitting LED showing a luminescence of ∼2000 cd m−2, while Huang et al. used quasi-2D (EDBE)(FA)3Pb4I13 to realize an near-infrared LED showing a performance of 60 W sr−1 m−2.
Recently, another new homologous series of 2D perovskites with alternating cations in the interlayer space (ACI) have been proven to be promising candidates for optoelectronic applications. With two different alternating cations in the interlayer space, ACI adopts an unprecedented structure, which can be viewed as blending the chemical formula of RP perovskites with the structural features of DJ perovskites. For example, Kanatzidis et al. prepared a new type of ACI with the formula of (C(NH2)3)(CH3NH3)nPbnI3n+1 (n = 1, 2, 3), which is structurally stabilized by the cation-ordering of two spacer cations (guanidinium (C(NH2)3, GA)+ and methylammonium (CH3NH3, MA)+) between the octahedron sheets. Compared to the common RP 2D perovskites, ACI perovskites have a different stacking motif and adopt a higher crystal symmetry with a slightly narrower bandgap compared to their RP perovskite counterparts. While characterized as direct bandgap semiconductors with wide valence and conduction bandwidths, ACI perovskites show promising potential for photovoltaic applications. The studied (C(NH2)3)(CH3NH3)3Pb3I10 (n = 3)-based solar cell can deliver a decent PCE of 7.26% with a high open circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.974 V and an impressive fill factor (FF) of ∼80%.

Apart from the well-reported hybrid organic–inorganic 2D RP perovskites, all-inorganic ones arouse research interest owing to their robust nature against external forces. The engineering of X-site constituent is the latest strategy. These kinds of 2D perovskites are distinct from the ones discussed in Section 2.1, since there is no typical low 2θ diffraction peak in the XRD pattern originating from the large distance between octahedron sheets caused by interdigitating large organic cations. However, the exciton-like absorption peak is still an attainable characteristic for assuring the formation of such 2D perovskites.

The first all-inorganic 2D perovskite Cs2PbCl2I2 was recently reported by Kanatzidis et al. They thoroughly investigated Cs2PbX4 (X = I, Br, Cl) with the largest inorganic cation Cs+ serving as the spacer. By tuning the halide composition, the mixed-halide arrangement yielded Cs2PbCl2I2 with the best stability from both experimental and calculation efforts. The structure of Cs2PbCl2I2 is illustrated in Fig. 1a (left), which adopts a K2NiF4-type structure belonging to the RP phase perovskite family. The outstanding stability of Cs2PbCl2I2 was first confirmed by powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD) and thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) as shown in Fig. 1b and c. The PXRD pattern of the prepared perovskite after 4 month storage in ambient conditions showed no obvious change compared to the fresh one, whereas the TGA results showed that the sample started to decompose at ∼520 °C. Moreover, the decomposition enthalpies are also calculated to prove that the iodides occupy the axial direction while the chlorides inhabit the octahedral plane to achieve the optimal crystal structure. These results assure the ambient and thermal stability of the prepared mixed-halide 2D perovskite.
In addition to the stability investigation, Manna et al. further delve into the microscopic structure of Cs2PbCl2I2 with both transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and quantitative high-resolution high-angle annular scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) imaging to analyze and affirm the position of I− in the crystal lattice. Cs2PbCl2I2 nanocrystals (NCs) present a uniform size of 21 ± 3 nm width in the TEM images, as shown in Fig. 1d. The HAADF-STEM image (Fig. 1e) clearly identifies that iodide resides in the axial halide position and the frontier of the perovskite layers. Although further effort is still needed to prepare single-layer Cs2PbCl2I2 NCs without the mixed bilayer phase Cs3Pb2I2Cl5, the distinct size difference of iodide and chloride renders the successful structure of Cs2PbCl2I2. To better support this viewpoint, the authors also delve into the alloy halide NC structure, CsPb(Cl:Br:I)3, to study the influence of the halide size on the resulting 2D perovskite structures. The absorption spectra, photoluminescence (PL) emission, and XRD pattern provide evidence that the prepared NC is actually 3D CsPbBr2Cl with similar absorption at ∼460 nm, PL emission at ∼470 nm, and a d-spacing of ∼5.8 Å. Further examined by HAADF-STEM imaging (Fig. 1g), CsPb(Cl:Br:I)3 displayed several RP phase planes, which is later confirmed to be iodide segregation at the RP phase by HAADF-STEM analysis and StatSTEM. These results again elucidate that using two different halides with distinct size can successfully trigger the formation of 2D perovskites, and instead two similar-sized halides only lead to 3D mixed-halide perovskites, which demonstrated a brand new way to construct 2D perovskites, especially all-inorganic ones with enhanced robustness.
In these kinds of perovskites, it is possible to conduct B-site doping for the sake of diversified functional properties, better stability, and induced crystal phases, as well-demonstrated before in either 3D or 2D perovskites. Aside from these advantages, long life optical emission can be specifically achieved by introducing Mn(II) into Cs2PbCl2I2 (Fig. 1a, right). The Mn(II)-doped Cs2PbCl2I2, Mn:Cs2PbCl2I2, presents an equivalent ratio of both Pb(II) and Mn(II) in the perovskite platelet with the crystal structure shown in Fig. 1h. Compared to the undoped Cs2PbCl2I2, Mn:Cs2PbCl2I2 shows bright PL emission upon being illuminated at 365 nm, whereas the emission of the original perovskite is hardly visible (Fig. 1i). It is noticeable that there are two PL emission bands for Mn:Cs2PbCl2I2, the minor emission from Cs2PbCl2I2 itself and the dominant one originating from Mn d–d emission confirmed by the photoluminescence excitation (PLE) spectra in Fig. 1j. The blending of Mn(II) not only enhanced the PL intensity but also the absolute photoluminescence quantum yield (PLQY) at ∼16% (for Mn emission).
It is noteworthy that these state-of-the-art 2D perovskites partitioned by distinct halides are all inorganic; thus, the fabrication by a simple precursor method is problematic. Instead, two main synthesis protocols are adopted – (1) the solid state method and (2) the hot plate synthesis method. For the solid state method, stoichiometric mixtures of precursor materials are loaded in a Pyrex tube in a nitrogen-filled glovebox. The tube was evacuated to 1 μbar, flame-sealed, and then transferred to a tube furnace for heating at a specific temperature for 1 day. The polycrystalline perovskites are obtained as pale white ingots with a few black impurities. For the hot plate synthesis method, a metal halide precursor is prepared by dissolving PbX2 salts (or the equivalent quantity of PbX2, X = I, Br, or Cl, for mixed-halide system perovskites) in a composition of octadecene (ODE), oleylamine (OLAM), and oleic acid (OA) on a hotplate set at a specific temperature. Then, Cs–OA hot solution (a solution prepared by dissolving Cs2CO3 in OA and ODE) is swiftly injected into the metal-halide precursor solution and it reached the reaction temperature. The whole solution is then intensely cooled down with a cold water bath, accompanied by the formation of high quality inorganic perovskite NCs. Both the solid state method and hot plate synthesis method provide simple protocols to obtain high quality inorganic perovskites favorable for further material analysis and device applications.

As 2D perovskites were established by proper X-site anion selection, pseudohalides, which possess similar properties and spatial size to halides, were involved in the options. Pseudohalides, such as the thiocyanate ion (SCN−), tetrafluoroborate ion (BF4−), and hexafluorophosphate ion (PF6−), were regarded as additives in 3D perovskites to enhance both the long-time stability and device performance. SCN− was first introduced into the perovskite structure to form MA2Pb(SCN)2I2, with presumed better ambient stability. Viewed as a rising material in optoelectronic fields, MA2Pb(SCN)2I2 possesses outstanding light absorbing ability and its thermodynamic structure stability is also confirmed by several articles from a computational viewpoint. However, it later proved to be vulnerable to moisture and decomposes straightforwardly to PbI2 after MASCN evaporates. Also, its large bandgap and constricted carriers in 2D layers limit further development in high efficiency optoelectronic application.

To find a better A2Pb(SCN)2I2-type candidate for active materials in optoelectronic devices, it is an urgent task to enhance the overall stability of these perovskites. Hence, various cation (MA+, FA+, Cs+ and their mixture) compositions were investigated to estimate the properties of subsequent perovskites by Miyasaka et al. The results reveal that only Cs2Pb(SCN)2I2 possesses better dry-air- and thermo-stability among all the prepared 2D A2Pb(SCN)2I2-type perovskites, albeit vulnerable to the ambient environment (relative humidity >30%). Cs2Pb(SCN)2I2 with improved stability is then utilized in the active layer of conventional PVSCs to achieve an average PCE of 1.69 ± 0.28%. The optimized PCE is 2.04% with a short-circuit current (Jsc) of 4.55 mA cm−2 and a Voc of 0.94 V measured under a reverse scan. Generally, the photovoltaic performance of 2D perovskites is limited owing to their inferior interlayer carrier transport properties. Compared with the 3D counterparts, the larger inter-sheet distance and organic cation insulating interlayer confine the hopping of carriers, which leads to poor external quantum efficiency (EQE) and Jsc. However, it is noticeable that the performance of 2D SCN-based PVSCs is better than previous 2D A2PbI4-type PVSCs. The authors attribute this to the tinier distance of the SCN-based perovskite between sheets, which establishes the significance of 2D SCN-based perovskites in further application fields.
To understand the factors impacting stability, the degradation mechanism of Cs2Pb(SCN)2I2 is then explored using infrared (IR) spectra, the XRD pattern, and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). From the IR spectra, the NCS− stretching peak disappears in the aged perovskite thin film, indicating the thiocyanate moiety to be decomposed. Meanwhile, there is no obvious peak in the XRD patterns, which suggests that no crystal phase is in the degraded perovskite film. Moreover, from the XPS spectra for composite elements, several low-energy peaks appear in the Pb XPS spectrum of the aged film, and the intensity of I notably increases. These results suggest the formation of lead aqua complexes such as Pb(SCN)2(H2O)n and Csx[Pb(μ-I)x(SCN)2(H2O)y]n, and that I− is detached from the Pb atom to become I2, which accounts for the increased intensity. The degradation mechanism is summed up in Fig. 2a. Upon interacting with air, H2O molecules are interposed in the Cs2Pb(SCN)2I2 thin film, which partially replace iodine. Then, the 2D perovskite sheets are chopped into oligometric elements, with Pb(SCN)2 moieties partly becoming Pb(SCN)2(H2O)n. In the meantime, free CsI drains to the film surface as revealed in the XPS results.
The establishment of a degradation mechanism for Cs2Pb(SCN)2I2 helps with the understanding of preventing film again, yet the best stability of SCN-based perovskites is not attained. Hence, the overall structure engineering of A2Pb(SCN)2X2 (A = FA+, MA+, and Cs+, X = I, Br, and their combination) was carried out by Chueh et al. The authors intercalate FA, MA, and Cs into the [PbI4(SCN)2] framework to determine the optimized structure. Based on the previous result showing that MA is vulnerable (forming MA2Pb(SCN)2X2), changing the A-site cation to smaller Cs helps improve the overall stability significantly; in contrast, substituting with larger FA shows the least stability. Owing to the rod-like geometry of SCN, the alternatives for A-site cations are limited. Only cations that are suitable for the cage size determined by the lead octahedrons lead to the optimized perovskite structure. Given that Cs is the smallest cation among the attempted ones, the lifetime of the subsequent Cs2Pb(SCN)2I2 film in ambient conditions is ∼15 min until transparent pinholes appear as seen in Fig. 2d.
This adequate result triggers further investigation of the [PbBr4(SCN)2] framework. Compared with I−, the reduced size of Br− leads to smaller cage dimensions between Pb octahedrons of the [PbBr4(SCN)2] framework. In this case, MA is no longer suitable in the structure, since the resultant perovskite thin film presents an absorption spectrum similar to 3D MAPbBr3 and weak PL emission, indicating the failure of forming 2D MA2Pb(SCN)2Br2 or an extremely unstable perovskite structure. In contrast, the intercalation of smaller Cs in [PbBr4(SCN)2] enables the best stability; the subsequent yellow Cs2Pb(SCN)2Br2 could keep film vividness even after 72 h with nearly unchanged UV spectra (Fig. 2b–d). In addition, Cs2Pb(SCN)2Br2 displays decent light harvesting capability, which indicates the potential in further photoelectric applications. The thorough structure engineering of 2D SCN-based perovskites offers a clue for choosing proper A-site cations with the conclusion depicted in Fig. 2e. As seen, owing to the critical influence of the SCN anion, the increase of the A-site cation size enlarges the crystallization energy, leading to an unstable structure or even failure of forming perovskites. In contrast, smaller cations, such as Cs, residing in the cage between octahedrons allow facile substitution of I with Br without causing serious structure torsion. The above results establish the future development of 2D perovskites towards pseudohalide-based perovskites.
As can be seen, the structures of 2D perovskites can be easily tuned not only by adjusting the composition of the perovskite layers (X-site tailoring) but also by molecular design of the spacer cations, such as the alkyl chain length and orientation, and substitution by inorganic cations. The versatility in the composition design thus gives 2D/quasi-2D perovskites the opportunity to be used in a wider range of device applications with respect to the 3D counterparts. Although X-site-based 2D perovskites have not been widely explored in device applications, (CH3NH3)2PbI2(SCN)2 has been shown to have ternary switching potential and realized a high-performance ternary resistive memory with long retention over 10000 s and good endurance properties as reported by Lu et al. This result paves the way for the development of stable 2D perovskite multilevel RRAMs. In addition to the wholly X-site substitution, partial introduction of pseudohalides might be another promising option. In view of composition engineering in 3D perovskites, Xie et al. recently reported that with the incorporation of SCN− in the precursor solution, the resulting PVSCs based on MA0.9Cs0.1PbI2Br(SCN)0.08 could demonstrate improved performance and stability. Based on these reported encouraging results, we can foresee the potential of X-site-based 2D perovskites in optoelectronic applications.

Benefitting from the tunable optoelectronic properties regarding structural diversity as well as intrinsic stability toward air moisture and oxygen, 2D perovskites are considered to be an attractive alternative for solar cell applications. Thus far, the performance of 2D perovskite solar cells still lags behind 3D perovskites. The reason is mainly attributed to the insulating organic spacers inserted between the octahedron sheets, which largely hinder the charge transport/separation and result in inferior photovoltaic performance. Interestingly, this issue might be relieved in 2D perovskites based on halide substitution because they do not require the use of large-size insulating organic spacers. However, all the reported 2D perovskites based on halide substitution to date exhibit unsatisfactory semiconducting properties. It thus suggests that proper adjusting of the chemical structure of such 2D perovskites is still highly desired. The search for more effective X-site anions for further improvement in the crystallization and electronic properties of this class of materials is necessary to realize high-performance optoelectronic devices.

To date, 2D pseudohalide-based perovskites are still limited to the SCN-based ones; nevertheless, utilizing other pseudohalides to form 2D perovskites may be a reasonable option. In our opinion, the elementary success of the SCN anion in constructing 2D perovskites manifests the availability of pseudohalides occupying the axial position in 2D perovskites. Ganose et al. once conducted a stability assessment of the analogues of MA2Pb(SCN)2I2. Two linear structure anions, the cyanate ion (OCN−) and selenocyanate ion (SeCN−), are considered with a combination of halides and Sn/Pb cations to evaluate the 2D perovskite structural feasibility. All the analogues are confirmed to be stable regarding phase separation through fundamental analysis. Other than linear-structured pseudohalides, BF4− and PF6− are also partially substituted for halides in 3D perovskite structures for the purpose of incorporating F into perovskite structures to enhance the hole conductivity. Their similar sizes to halides allow them to integrate with the perovskite facilely, and thus yield decent performance in both photo-sensors and PVSCs. Proper selection of pseudohalides benefits the optoelectronic properties of 2D perovskites; given the successful incorporation of pseudohalides as additives, these polyatomic analogues of halides could be possible X-site constituents with full integration in the following research.
Apart from genuine 2D perovskites, it is valuable to develop ideal materials that can be utilized in optoelectronic devices. As mentioned, the charge transport capability of 2D perovskites is constrained by the organic insulating layer, which demolishes their device applications. Referring to the above-mentioned statement, the charge transportability of 2D pseudohalide-based perovskites is superior to other common RP phase perovskites owing to the smaller displacement between the sheets, yet the performance of 2D pseudohalide-based perovskites is still incomparable with the 3D counterparts. The common approach to address this issue is to develop higher class 2D perovskites (n > 1), or quasi-2D perovskites, which integrate the advantage of both 2D and 3D perovskites with balanced ambient stability and charge transport. It is worthwhile emulating this strategy to not only further enhance the carrier transport but also achieve ideal bandgaps of 2D pseudohalide-based perovskites for optoelectronic applications, especially in solar cell devices.
Extending previous work, we have recently attempted to construct multi-layered SCN-based perovskites Csn+1Pbn(SCN)2Br2n+1 (n = 2 and 3) by a simple spin-coating process. Preliminary results are presented in Fig. 3. The prepared multi-layered perovskites (n = 2 and 3) showed a similar pattern in both UV and PL spectra as shown in Fig. 3a and b. As shown, one of the peaks overlaps the monolayer Cs2Pb(SCN)2Br2 while the other locates close to that of the 3D counterpart CsPbBr3. Moreover, as shown in Fig. 3c, compared to the XRD pattern of monolayer Cs2Pb(SCN)2Br2 and 3D CsPbBr3, the multilayer perovskites displayed high similarity with each other and are merely the combination of single-layer 2D and 3D perovskite analogues. From the obtained data, n = 2 and 3 Csn+1Pbn(SCN)2Br2n+1 fail to be prepared by the solution processing method. Nevertheless, it is still an attempt-worthy direction to enhance the overall charge transport characteristics by selecting pseudohalides as X-site constituents in future 2D multi-layer perovskites. On the other hand, mixed 2D/3D perovskites have recently attracted great attention due to their enhancement in stability without much compromise in the photovoltaic properties. Although a solid theoretical framework has not been developed for 2D/3D perovskites, some preliminary experimental and theoretical findings have shed light on the potential breakthrough of such mixed-phase perovskites for device applications.

There are no conflicts to declare.


The authors are thankful for the financial support from the Featured Area Research Center Program within the framework of the Higher Education Sprout Project by the Ministry of Education (108L9006) and the Ministry of Science and Technology in Taiwan (MOST 108-3017-F-002-002, 108-2221-E-002-026-MY3 and 108-2638-E-002-003-MY2), and Top University Project from National Taiwan University (108L7846).


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020