 DOI: 10.1039/C0CC01787F
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 6596-6598

Show Chemical TermsShow Biomedical Terms


Satoshi
Honda
,

Hideo
Ohkita
*,

Hiroaki
Benten
 and 

Shinzaburo
Ito


Department of Polymer Chemistry, Graduate School of Engineering, Kyoto University, Katsura, Nishikyo, Kyoto 615-8510, Japan. E-mail: ohkita@photo.polym.kyoto-u.ac.jp; Fax: +81-75-383-2617; Tel: +81-75-383-2613

PRESTO, Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST), 4-1-8 Honcho Kawaguchi, Saitama 332-0012, Japan

Received
8th June 2010
, Accepted 21st July 2010
First published on
11th August 2010

Multi-colored dye-sensitized polymer/fullerene solar cells with two different near-IR dyes, silicon phthalocyanine bis(trihexylsilyl oxide) (SiPc) and silicon naphthalocyanine bis(trihexylsilyl oxide) (SiNc), enhanced power conversion efficiency up to 4.3%, compared to that of the individual ternary blend solar cells with a single dye under AM1.5G illumination.

Bulk heterojunction (BHJ) solar cells based on polymer/fullerene blends have attracted much attention because of their potential advantages such as light weight, flexibility, low cost, large area and high-throughput productivity. Among them, the most thoroughly studied materials for the active layer are blends of regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT, Fig. 1a) and 1-(3-methoxycarbonyl)propyl-1-phenyl[6,6]methanofullerene (PCBM, Fig. 1a). The P3HT/PCBM solar cells exhibit reproducible power conversion efficiency (PCE) of around 4–5% with high fill factor (FF) and external quantum efficiency (EQE). Such device parameters are still the highest in organic solar cells. However, P3HT can absorb only a quarter of the total photons in the solar light. Consequently, a variety of low band-gap polymers have been developed to absorb a broad range of the solar light. On the other hand, dye sensitization based on ternary blends of polymer/fullerene/dye has been recently reported as another approach to improve the light-harvesting efficiency in BHJ polymer solar cells by several groups including ours.

In ternary blend solar cells, dye molecules are simply blended into the polymer/fullerene matrix as the third component to harvest solar photons at wavelengths longer than the original donor and acceptor materials can collect. This is a simple and versatile method and therefore various dye molecules are applicable. We previously demonstrated that silicon phthalocyanine bis(trihexylsilyl oxide) (SiPc, Fig. 1a) can effectively harvest the longer wavelength light that P3HT/PCBM cannot absorb. Considering the large photocurrent due to dye molecules and the cascaded energy levels of P3HT, PCBM, and SiPc, as shown in Fig. 1b, we speculated that a majority of dye molecules are located at the donor/acceptor interface by the crystallization of both P3HT and PCBM domains. For further improvement, multiple dye loading would expand the light-harvesting window and hence boost the photocurrent effectively. Such multi-colored dye sensitization has been reported for TiO2-based solar cells. In most cases, however, unfavorable interactions between different dye molecules often cause degradation in the device performance. Limited successful reports have demonstrated that this problem can be avoided by constructing a dye-bilayer structure stained with two different dyes or by selecting a suitable co-adsorbing material to inhibit dye aggregation. However, such strategy would be difficult and inappropriate for polymer solar cells because they are typically fabricated by simple spin-coating method. Herein we report multi-colored dye sensitization of P3HT/PCBM solar cells fabricated by simple spin-coating. In addition to SiPc, silicon naphthalocyanine bis(trihexylsilyl oxide) (SiNc, Fig. 1a) is employed as the fourth component, which has complementary spectral absorption at longer wavelengths than SiPc and meets an energetic requirement of the cascaded energy levels of P3HT, SiNc, and PCBM as shown in Fig. 1b. Owing to the wide light-harvesting range up to 800 nm, the quaternary blend solar cell of P3HT/PCBM/SiPc/SiNc exhibits higher PCE (4.3%) than the individual ternary blend solar cells of P3HT/PCBM/SiPc and P3HT/PCBM/SiNc. This is mainly due to the increase in the photocurrent, which is in good agreement with a sum of the increase in the photocurrent of the individual ternary blend solar cells. This suggests that there are no unfavorable interactions between SiPc and SiNc molecules even in the quaternary blend.

Fig. 2a shows the device configuration of ITO|PEDOT:PSS|P3HT/PCBM/SiPc/SiNc|Ca|Al solar cell. Devices were fabricated as follows. A thin layer (ca. 40 nm) of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) oxidized with poly(4-styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS, H.C.Starck, PH500) was spin-coated onto the cleaned indium tin oxide (ITO) glass substrates at a spin rate of 3000 rpm and dried at 140 °C for 10 min in air. A blend layer of P3HT/PCBM/SiPc/SiNc (ca. 200 nm) was spin-coated from an o-dichlorobenzene solution (1:1:0.1:0.03) on the PEDOT:PSS film at 600 rpm for 60 s. Then, the wet film was dried in covered glass petri dishes for 60 min. Finally, the Ca/Al electrode (20/80 nm) was thermally deposited on top of the active layer at 2.5 × 10−4 Pa. The dye concentrations were 4.8 wt% for SiPc and 1.5 wt% for SiNc, which were optimized for the P3HT/PCBM/dye ternary blend solar cells with SiPc or SiNc. The absorption spectra of the active layers are shown in Fig. 2b. The quaternary blend films exhibited sharp and intense absorption bands at around 670 and 780 nm, which are ascribable to SiPc and SiNc absorption, respectively, in addition to the absorption of P3HT/PCBM at around 400–600 nm (Fig. 1c). Interestingly, the vibrational band at around 600 nm, which is indicative of the crystallization of P3HT, was clearly observed even in the presence of SiPc and SiNc molecules, suggesting that the crystallization of P3HT is not disturbed by the addition of dyes.

Fig. 2c shows the J–V characteristics of the P3HT/PCBM/SiPc/SiNc quaternary blend solar cells and the corresponding P3HT/PCBM binary blend control solar cells under AM1.5G illumination from a calibrated solar simulator with an intensity of 100 mW cm−2. The P3HT/PCBM/SiPc/SiNc quaternary blend solar cells exhibited a substantially improved performance compared to the binary blend control cells: a short-circuit current density of JSC = 10.9 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage of VOC = 0.57 V, a fill factor of FF = 0.69, and PCE = 4.3% (Table 1). Compared to the binary blend control solar cells, as shown in Fig. 2d, the quaternary blend solar cells exhibited an improved external quantum efficiency (EQE) peak at 400–600 nm and two sharp EQE peaks at 670 and 780 nm, corresponding to the absorption of SiPc and SiNc (Fig. 1c), respectively. The EQE peaks at 670 and 780 nm indicate that both SiPc and SiNc act as sensitizers in the P3HT/PCBM matrix. The EQE at 400–600 nm suggests that the charge separation is as efficient at the interface of P3HT/dye/PCBM as at the interface of P3HT/PCBM. Furthermore, as reported previously, the improved EQE is ascribed to the efficient P3HT exciton harvesting to the interface of P3HT/PCBM by the energy transfer from P3HT to dye molecules located at the interface. Such efficient light harvesting based on energy transfer has also been reported for organic/inorganic hybrid solar cells and dye-sensitized TiO2 solar cells. To evaluate the dye contribution efficiency, which is the probability that dye molecules can contribute to the photocurrent generation, we calculated the absorption efficiency of dye molecules in the quaternary blend solar cells with 4.8 wt% SiPc and 1.5 wt% SiNc molecules by the transfer matrix method. As a result, the absorption efficiency was estimated to be 62% at 670 nm and 33% at 780 nm. From the ratio of the EQE to the absorption efficiency, the dye contribution efficiency is estimated to be 63% at 670 nm (SiPc) and 52% at 780 nm (SiNc). As we have discussed in ref. 6, only dye molecules located at the interface of P3HT/PCBM can contribute to the photocurrent generation. We therefore conclude that a majority of both dye molecules are selectively located at the interface of P3HT/PCBM and thus effectively contribute to the photocurrent generation.
SiPc/wt%
SiNc/wt%

J
SC/mA cm−2

V
OC/V
FF
PCE/%
0
0
8.96
0.55
0.71
3.5
4.8
0
10.3
0.57
0.69
4.1
0
1.5
9.94
0.55
0.68
3.7
4.8
1.5
10.9
0.57
0.69
4.3
Furthermore, as summarized in Table 1, the PCE of the quaternary blend solar cells is higher than that of the individual ternary blend solar cells with a single dye. This is mainly due to the increase in JSC. For the individual ternary blend solar cells, the addition of SiPc or SiNc increased JSC from ∼9 to ∼10 mA cm−2 by ∼1 mA cm−2. For the quaternary blend solar cells, the addition of SiPc and SiNc increased JSC from ∼9 to ∼11 mA cm−2 by ∼2 mA cm−2. In other words, the increase of JSC in the quaternary blend solar cells is equal to a simple sum of that in the individual ternary blend solar cells. This result indicates that both SiPc and SiNc molecules are located at the interface in the quaternary blends and can contribute to the photocurrent generation effectively without unfavorable interactions between the two dye molecules. Indeed, as mentioned above, SiPc and SiNc contributed as efficiently in the quaternary blend solar cells as in the ternary blend solar cells.
Our multi-colored dye-sensitized blend solar cells based on quaternary blends of polymer and fullerene with two different dyes having complementary spectral absorption in the near-IR region are highly efficient. The photocurrent is increased ∼10% in the individual ternary blend solar cells and is simply doubled to ∼20% in the quaternary blend solar cells. This is probably because both dye molecules are located at the interface without unfavorable aggregation. In other words, the device performance of polymer solar cells can be easily improved by multi-colored dye-sensitization with suitable selection of near-IR dyes and concentration of dyes. An appropriate combination of more than two dyes with different absorption bands or dyes with wider absorption bands compared to phthalocyanines and naphthalocyanines employed in this study could increase PCE to more than 5%. Moreover, this method is simple and versatile and therefore can be easily applied not only to various material combinations but also directly in the existing industrial processes. Thus, this approach could boost the photocurrent generation even for highly efficient polymer solar cells based on low-bandgap polymer and fullerene with PCE > 7%.
This work was partly supported by the Integrative Industry–Academia Partnership (IIAP) project including Kyoto University and Mitsubishi Chemical Corporation, the JST PRESTO program, and the Global COE program (International Center for Integrated Research and Advanced Education in Materials Science) from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science, and Technology, Japan.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010