 DOI: 10.1039/C7CC03122J
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 7080-7083


Doli
Srivani
,

Akhil
Gupta
*,

Sidhanath V.
Bhosale
*,

Avinash L.
Puyad
,

Wanchun
Xiang
,

Jingliang
Li
,

Richard A.
Evans
 and 

Sheshanath V.
Bhosale
*

Polymers and Functional Materials Division, CSIR-Indian Institute of Chemical Technology, Hyderabad 500007, Telangana, India. E-mail: bhosale@iict.res.in

Academy Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), CSIR-IICT, Hyderabad-500007, Telangana, India

Institute for Frontier Materials, Deakin University, Waurn Ponds, Victoria 3216, Australia. E-mail: akhil.gupta@deakin.edu.au; Tel: +61 3 5247 9542

School of Chemical Sciences, Swami Ramanand Teerth Marathwada University, Nanded 431606, Maharashtra, India

State Key Laboratory of Silicate Materials for Architectures, Wuhan University of Technology, 122 Luoshi Rd, Wuhan 430070, Hubei, P. R. China

CSIRO Manufacturing, Bayview Avenue, Clayton South, Victoria 3169, Australia

School of Science, RMIT University, GPO Box 2476, Melbourne, Victoria 3001, Australia. E-mail: sheshanath.bhosale@rmit.edu.au

Received
24th April 2017
, Accepted 13th June 2017
First published on 13th June 2017
Through the combination of central naphthalene diimide and terminal rhodanine or 1,3-indanedione functionalities, two new non-fullerene electron acceptors, coded as N3 and N4, were designed, synthesized and characterized. Both of the materials exhibited good solubility, thermal stability, and displayed energy levels matching those of the conventional and routinely used donor polymer poly(3-hexyl thiophene) (P3HT). A high power conversion efficiency of 4.76% was obtained in simple, solution-processable bulk-heterojunction devices (P3HT:N3 1:1.2) which is the best result for central NDI-based small molecular non-fullerene acceptors.

Over the past twenty years, bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) devices have been thoroughly examined. The promise of lightweight, flexibility and cost effectiveness has attracted researchers from around the globe. BHJ devices comprised of polymeric donors together with soluble fullerene acceptors, such as [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PC61BM) and its C71 analogue (PC71BM), have demonstrated record device efficiencies. Such reports indicate that fullerene derivatives are the best possible electron acceptors for organic solar cell applications. In addition, these fullerene derivatives exhibit excellent solubility, good electron mobility (typically ranging 10−3–10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1) and a strong ability to form favourable nanoscale network with versatile donor semiconducting components. However, these fullerene derivatives are afflicted with a number of potential drawbacks such as no absorption at wavelength greater than 600 nm, and restricted electronic tuning to modify energy levels to match with a variety of donating counterparts. Moreover, a large electron affinity can results in low open-circuit voltage. Furthermore, fullerene acceptors are expensive, thereby making their use on a commercial scale challenging. These circumstances and limitations associated with fullerene acceptors provide a strong incentive to researchers to investigate alternative structural formats which can serve as non-fullerene acceptor materials.

Several structural types including small molecules and conjugated polymers comprising strong electron-withdrawing groups have been recently reported as efficient non-fullerene electron acceptors. Among the reported non-fullerene acceptors, target structures based on central naphthalene diimide (NDI) flanked by terminal acceptor units have not been substantially explored to date, though they are very promising targets given the overall design (acceptor–acceptor′–acceptor (A–A′–A)) and the capacity of such targets to accept electrons. The advantages of using NDI in a given target can be realised in terms of its interesting physical and electronic properties, strong electron-withdrawing strength, and the capacity to tune its solubility via incorporating lipophilic chains on nitrogen atoms. These alkyl chains not only enhance solubility, but are helpful for generating excellent thin-films without crystallization. Taking into account of (1) advantages exhibited by NDI moiety and (2) the literature precedence where NDI unit has been used as a central unit, herein we report the design, synthesis and characterisation of two novel non-fullerene acceptors, 4,9-bis(5-((Z)-(3-ethyl-4-oxo-2-thioxothiazolidin-5-ylidene)methyl)thiophen-2-yl)-2,7-dioctylbenzo[lmn][3,8]phenanthroline-1,3,6,8(2H,7H)-tetraone (N3) and 4,9-bis(5-((1,3-dioxo-1,3-dihydro-2H-inden-2-ylidene)methyl)thiophen-2-yl)-2,7-dioctylbenzo[lmn][3,8]phenanthroline-1,3,6,8(2H,7H)-tetraone (N4), where we have used two different terminal accepting functionalities, rhodanine and 1,3-indanedione, respectively, along with the central NDI block (Fig. 1). Fig. 1 also demonstrates key literature examples where the central NDI unit was flanked by a variety of terminal accepting units. N3 and N4 are both new materials that are highly conjugated chromophores and were synthesized and purified in an efficient manner. This is the first report of their use as non-fullerene acceptors with the device outcomes reported of 4.76% (P3HT:N3 (1:1.2 w/w)) and 3.52% (P3HT:N4 (1:1.2 w/w)), which compare highly favourably with the literature reports for P3HT-based non-fullerene BHJ devices. These results strongly suggest that the utilisation of terminal acceptors along with the strong central accepting unit, for instance NDI in the present study, is an effective strategy for developing efficient non-fullerene acceptors. The present work is a continuation of our efforts made in the design and development of small molecular chromophores for organic photovoltaic applications.
Compounds N3 and N4 were prepared in moderate to high yields (N3 = 83% and N4 = 65%) (see ESI), characterized spectrally and their optoelectronic properties were investigated. Both materials exerted good solubility in a variety of common organic solvents, such as chlorobenzene, chloroform and toluene. The solubility of organic semiconducting materials is important for fabricating solution-processable BHJ devices and both the materials fulfil this criterion. In fact, the solubility of N3 was found to be higher by 30% w/v when compared with N4.
The optical properties of N3 and N4 were investigated by measuring their ultraviolet-visible (UV-Vis) absorption spectra in chloroform solution and in pristine as-cast films (Fig. 2). The longest wavelength absorption maximum (λmax) exhibited by N3 (540 nm; molar extinction coefficient (MEC) = 19610 L mol−1 cm−1) was red-shifted when compared with the solution λmax of N4 (504 nm; MEC = 13927 L mol−1 cm−1). Two sets of absorption bands (<420 nm and >450 nm) can be assigned to π–π* transition and intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) transition, respectively. With the insertion of rhodanine unit in N3, we found enhancement to the peak molar absorptivity of >40% when compared with N4. Similarly, thin-film spectrum of N3 indicated better light harvesting properties than N4 which is consistent with the strong accepting strength of rhodanine unit. According to the spectra shown in Fig. 2, the main absorption peaks of N3 (417 nm; MEC = 78941 L mol−1 cm−1) and N4 (404 nm; MEC = 62834 L mol−1 cm−1) complements well with the absorption range of P3HT (380–610 nm), thus indicating that blend films can have more favourable optical absorption throughout the entire visible spectrum. The latter was particularly true as the blend absorption extended from 350 to around 800 nm (for blend absorption spectra see Fig S1, ESI).
In order to observe theoretical density distributions of the new materials reported herein, the Gaussian 09 ab initio/DFT quantum chemical stimulation package was used. Density functional theory (DFT) at the B3LYP/6-31G(d) level was performed for geometry optimization of N3 and N4. The alkyl chains were replaced by a methyl group for simplification. To ensure the optimized geometries to be real, frequency analyses were carried out. Furthermore, time-dependent DFT (TD-DFT) studies were employed to investigate absorption properties of optimized geometries of N3 and N4, obtained by B3LYP/6-31G(d). TD-DFT calculation results obtained at the CAM-B3LYP/6-31G(d) level of theory for N3 and N4 are reported in Table S1 (ESI). As shown in Table S1 (ESI), absorption bands at 353 nm and 457 nm correspond to N3 whereas bands at 344 nm and 432 nm correspond to N4. This suggests that rhodanine indeed is a strong acceptor unit which can be helpful for tuning absorption profile, hence energy levels, and presumably enhancing BHJ performance. The frontier molecular orbitals (FMOs) shown in Fig. S2 (ESI) were calculated at the CAM-B3LYP/6-31G(d) level of theory and were generated using Avogadro. As shown in Fig. S2 (ESI), the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) densities were mainly located on the central NDI unit, indicating that NDI possesses much stronger accepting strength than the terminal rhodanine and 1,3-indanedione. The highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) densities were populated over terminal rhodanine and 1,3-indanedione units with significant contribution from thiophene linker. Such type of segregation is considered ideal for ICT transition (Fig. S3 and S4 (ESI) for theoretical optical absorptions). Consequently, the subsequent analysis of the transition density matrix via natural transition orbitals (NTOs) produced a pair of NTOs with a very similar character as the corresponding HOMO/LUMO pair (see Fig. S5 and Table S2, ESI).
The experimental estimation of the HOMO energies was carried out using photo electron spectroscopy in air (PESA) and the LUMO energies were calculated by adding the optical band gap (film spectra) to the HOMO values (see Fig. S6 for energy level diagram and Fig. S7 and S8 for PESA curves, ESI). The estimated HOMO energy levels of N3 and N4 were −5.76 eV and −5.54 eV, respectively. The calculated LUMO level of N3 was more negative than N4 (−3.97 eV vs. −3.67 eV), which in fact is in agreement with DFT calculations (−2.79 eV vs. −2.67 eV), thus suggesting that the use of a stronger terminal acceptor unit in a given A–A′–A format can be helpful to bring the LUMO down while maintaining density segregation. The energy level diagram advised that the band gaps of these materials are all in the range required of acceptor materials for BHJ devices. Electrochemistry experiments revealed that both N3 and N4 undergo reversible reduction processes, thus confirming their potential suitability as n-type materials in BHJ devices (Fig. S9, S10 and Table S3, ESI). Thermal properties of N3 and N4 were also investigated via thermogravimetric and differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) analyses. The 2% weight loss temperatures (Td) of N3 and N4 were 381.80 °C and 370.43 °C, respectively (Fig. S11 and S12, ESI), indicating that both the materials are thermally stable and exhibit almost same weight-loss. The DSC traces of N3 and N4 shown in Fig. S13 and S14 (ESI) indicate the crystalline melting temperatures (Tm) of 318.08 °C and 336.69 °C, respectively, thus confirming excellent thermal stability and corroborating TGA.
Because of their appropriate optoelectronic properties, solubility and good film forming capabilities, N3 and N4 were incorporated as n-type semiconducting components with the conventional donor polymer P3HT in solution-processable BHJ devices. In consideration of the importance of the practical applicability of any newly developed non-fullerene acceptor, we used a cheap and commercially available donor polymer (P3HT) in order to test the compatibility and performance of these new acceptors, N3 and N4. A simple device architecture chosen was ITO/PEDOT:PSS (38 nm)/active layer/Ca (20 nm)/Al (100 nm) where the active layer was a solution-processed blend of either N3 or N4, and the donor polymer P3HT. This was done by spin coating the blend solution of appropriate dye with P3HT in o-dichlorobenzene (donor:acceptor 1:1.2 (w/w)) without subsequent annealing. The optimum active layer thickness was found to be around 60 nm. The choice of o-dichlorobenzene was made entirely based on the fact that the use of a high boiling solvent can be beneficial in terms of device processing and results in smooth and consistent films as is demonstrated by us and others. The 1:1.2 combination was found superior than other combinations, such as 1:2, as it provided best blend film characteristics and device parameters. The blend films using an optimal ratio of 1:1.2 (P3HT:acceptor) with N3 gave a Voc of 0.87 V, short circuit current density (Jsc) of 8.97 mA cm−2, fill factor (FF) of 0.61 and a PCE of 4.76%, respectively. Device outcome from the P3HT:N4 combination was encouraging too, and a PCE of 3.52% was achieved. Lower Voc and higher Jsc values observed for the blend of P3HT:N3 are in good agreement with the measured energy levels and optical absorption when compared with P3HT:N4 blend. The respective current–voltage (J–V) curves for the best devices are represented in Fig. 3 and Table S4 (ESI) displays overall J–V characteristics.
The incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) curves of the best BHJ devices based on these acceptors under monochromatic light are shown in Fig. S15 (ESI). For N4, the IPCE shows a maximum of ∼26% at 420 nm whereas for N3, the IPCE spectrum shows a much broader response covering most of the visible region (400–750 nm) with a maximum value of ∼42% at 460 nm. These IPCEs are comparable to thin-film absorption spectra indicating efficient photon harvesting and charge collection. Better BHJ performance and the higher peak IPCE in case of N3 may be due to the combination of better light-harvesting and stronger acceptor (rhodanine) as compared to the weaker acceptor 1,3-indanedione.
The physical microstructure of the blend surfaces was examined using atomic force microscopy (AFM) in tapping mode. The surface morphology of the blend films of P3HT:N3/N4 (1:1.2 w/w) is shown in Fig. 4. Though both the blends appeared to be well interweaved, an observation of rigorous mixing of donor and acceptor domains, the P3HT:N3 blend in particular demonstrated superior morphology with better phase separation, which is usually considered crucial for better device outcome, when compared with P3HT:N4 blend. Initially we thought the N3 blend morphology to be granular but the X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis of the blend surface indicated it to be amorphous, thus ruling out the consideration of granular surface (for XRD spectra, see Fig S16, ESI). The root-mean-square (RMS) roughnesses of ∼2 nm were observed for both the blends. It was evident that the AFM analyses supported our physical observation of blend surfaces which were found to be even and regular, and free from perceptible lumps and indentations. To gain an insight into the effective charge carrier mobilities, the space charge limited current (SCLC) method was applied to get information about charge transportation in the photovoltaic devices. The electron-only devices, consisting of active layer sandwiched between a ZnO coated ITO electrode and LiF/Al counter-electrode as the hole-blocking contact, were fabricated as per the sketch depicted in Fig. S17, ESI. From the current density as a function of voltage data (Fig. S18, ESI), the electron mobility in the trap-free SCLC region can be estimated using the Mott–Gurney equation, [(J = 9(εμ)/8 × (V2/d3)); where ε is the dielectric constant, μ is the charge-carrier mobility, d is the sample thickness, and V is the applied voltage]. Using this expression, excellent electron mobilities of the order of 10−3 (2.98 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1) and 10−4 (1.83 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1) were observed for N3 and N4 blends, respectively. Higher electron mobility in case of N3 blend does account for higher Jsc and FF values of the resulting photovoltaic devices.
In summary, we developed two novel, small molecular non-fullerene acceptors N3 and N4 based on an A–A′–A architecture where the A′ core was NDI and A was either rhodanine (N3) or 1,3-indandione (N4). Both materials displayed good solubility and thermal stability, and energy levels matching those of the conventional donor polymer P3HT. The modular nature of the A–A′–A design allows greater flexibility in optimizing energy levels to match a specific donor material simply via the choice of the A group. The current research advocates that the studied A–A′–A design has a strong potential to generate a series of high-performing non-fullerene acceptors. Examination of other aromatizable acceptor groups is underway in our laboratories.
S. V. B. (IICT) acknowledges the TAPSUN program (project NWP0054) and S. V. B. (RMIT) acknowledges the Australian Research Council under a Future Fellowship Scheme (FT110100152). A. G. is thankful to the Alfred Deakin Fellowship Scheme at the IFM, Deakin University, Waurn Ponds, Victoria Australia and acknowledges various testing facilities at Deakin, RMIT, Wuhan and Melbourne universities. L. P. procured Gaussian 09 under the DST-FIST Scheme (Sanction No. FS/FST/PSI-018/2009). We thank Duong Duc La for XRD analyses.
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details, synthetic procedures, theoretical and blend film absorption, PESA, CV, TGA, DSC, IPCE, XRD and experimental spectra. See DOI: 10.1039/c7cc03122j
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017