 DOI: 10.1039/C4RA01918K
(Paper)
RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 24914-24921

Sungho Nam,
Soohyeong Park,
Hwajeong Kim,
Joon-Hyung Lee and 
Youngkyoo Kim*

Organic Nanoelectronics Laboratory, Department of Chemical Engineering, Kyungpook National University, Daegu 702-701, Republic of Korea. E-mail: ykimm@knu.ac.kr; Tel: +82-53-950-5616

Composite Material Development 1 Group, Advanced Composite Materials Technical Centre, Toray Advanced Materials Korea Inc, Gumi 730-410, Republic of Korea

Research Institute of Advanced Energy Technology, Kyungpook National University, Daegu 702-701, Republic of Korea

Department of Advanced Materials Engineering, Kyungpook National University, Daegu 702-701, Republic of Korea

Received
5th March 2014
, Accepted 30th April 2014
First published on 11th June 2014
We report a strong influence of charge-bridging polymer addition on the performance of polymer:fullerene solar cells with a low fullerene content, which were fabricated with the bulk heterojunction (BHJ) films of poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PC61BM). Poly[(4,8-bis-(2-ethylhexyloxy)-benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene)-2,6-diyl-alt-(N-2-ethylhexylthieno[3,4-c]pyrrole-4,6-dione)-2,6-diyl]] (PBDTTPD) was employed as a charge-bridging polymer by considering its energy band structure, while the PC61BM content was fixed at 33.3 wt.% (P3HT:PC61BM = 1:0.5 by weight). Results showed that the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of solar cells was significantly improved by more than 7-fold by adding 20 wt.% PBDTTPD; however, it slightly decreased with further addition of PBDTTPD. This huge PCE enhancement has been assigned to the charge-bridging role of PBDTTPD between P3HT and PC61BM domains, which is closely related to the pronounced nanostructure changes in the BHJ films, including the increased size of PC61BM aggregates (∼8.5 nm).

The performance of polymer:fullerene solar cells has been significantly improved by employing new conjugated polymers and optimizing device structures since the early breakthroughs with bulk heterojunction (BHJ) solar cells. To date, the highest power conversion efficiency (PCE) achieved has been ∼9.2% for single stack polymer:fullerene solar cells and ∼10.6% for tandem polymer:fullerene solar cells. The improved performance can be attributed primarily to the enhanced open circuit voltage (VOC) because of the high-lying highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) energy levels of the new conjugated polymers, while the enhanced light harvesting effect can be additionally counted because of their extended optical absorption ranges toward near-infrared wavelengths.

However, the stability (lifetime) of polymer:fullerene solar cells is still a big challenge even though new conjugated polymers can deliver high PCEs. Several reasons have been suggested for the low stability of polymer:fullerene solar cells, including the corrosion effect caused by the acidity of hole-collecting buffer layers, the interfacial degradation between active layers and metal electrodes, the light-induced degradation of conjugated polymers (excited states), the gradual demixing between conjugated polymers and soluble fullerenes, etc. Among these reasons, both the degradation of conjugated polymers and the demixing between conjugated polymers and fullerenes (morphological instability) under continuous solar light illumination may be the most challenging to overcome in order to secure the stability of polymer-based solar cells.
The demixing phenomenon between conjugated polymers and fullerenes can be assigned to the intrinsic nature of fullerenes that are basically small molecules with a tendency to undergo crystallization once an activation energy, such as solar light, is provided. Hence, to minimize the influence of the morphological instability because of the phase demixing in the polymer:fullerene BHJ films, reducing the fullerene content may be one of the realistic approaches when considering the probability of the demixing events. However, a low fullerene content leads to poor device performance because of the insufficient charge (electron) percolation paths generated in the BHJ films (active layers). For example, the fullerene content should be higher than 0.7 parts (ca. 41 wt.%) for poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PC61BM) (i.e., P3HT:PC61BM = 1:0.7 by weight) in order to achieve a reasonable PCE (>2.5%).
Hence, in this work, we attempted to improve the performance of polymer:fullerene solar cells with a low fullerene content by adding a charge-bridging polymer to the polymer:fullerene BHJ films. Note that no attempt has been made to add charge-bridging polymers to the polymer:fullerene films with low fullerene contents, although various ternary blend approaches have been tried for typically high fullerene contents. Here, as a model system, the P3HT:PC61BM (1:0.5 by weight, 33.3 wt.%) film was selected because the PCE of corresponding solar cells is as low as <0.5% compared to a high PCE for typical P3HT:PC61BM solar cells with high PC61BM contents (>2.5% PCE depending on the supplier batches of P3HT materials). As a charge-bridging polymer, poly[(4,8-bis-(2-ethylhexyloxy)-benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene)-2,6-diyl-alt-(N-2-ethylhexylthieno[3,4-c]pyrrole-4,6-dione)-2,6-diyl]] (PBDTTPD) was chosen because its band gap (1.8 eV) is close to that of the P3HT film (1.9 eV) so that we can minimize the influence of exciton (Förster) energy transfer from P3HT to the charge-bridging polymer in order to exactly investigate the charge separation and transport effects inside the BHJ films.

The P3HT polymer was purchased from Rieke Metal (regioregularity = 91%, weight-average molecular weight = 6.2 × 104 Da, polydispersity index = 2.32), and the PBDTTPD polymer (weight-average molecular weight = 13 × 104 Da, polydispersity index = 2.49) was supplied from Solarmer Materials, Inc. Note that the weight-average molecular weight and polydispersity index of PBDTTPD was measured by employing a gel permeation chromatography (GPC). PC61BM and PEDOT:PSS (solution, PH500) were purchased from Nano-C and H. C. Starck, respectively. The binary and ternary blend solutions were prepared using chlorobenzene as a solvent at a solid concentration of 15 mg ml−1. The PC61BM content was fixed at 33.3 wt.%, while the weight ratio of P3HT and PBDTTPD was varied (the overall PBDTTPD content = 0, 1, 5, 10, 20, 40, 60 wt.%). The prepared binary and ternary blend solutions were subjected to vigorous stirring on a hot plate (60 °C) for 24 h before spin-coating.


Prior to device fabrication, patterned indium–tin oxide (ITO)-coated glass substrates were cleaned using acetone and isopropyl alcohol in an ultrasonic cleaner, followed by drying with a nitrogen flow. The dried ITO-glass substrates were further cleaned inside a UV-ozone chamber for 20 min in order to remove any remnant organic residues on the ITO surfaces. On the top of the cleaned ITO-glass substrates, a PEDOT:PSS layer (thickness = 40 nm) was spin-coated and annealed at 200 °C for 15 min. Next, the binary and ternary blend layers were spin-coated on the PEDOT:PSS layer and soft-baked at 60 °C for 15 min, which led to the formation of active layers (thickness = 60 nm). Then, the film samples were transferred into a vacuum chamber equipped with an argon-filled glove-box. After pumping down the pressure of vacuum chamber to ∼1 × 10−6 Torr, lithium fluoride (LiF, thickness = ∼1 nm) and aluminium (Al, thickness = 80 nm) were deposited on the top of the active layers through a shadow mask. The device active area was 0.09 mm2. All the devices were subjected to thermal annealing at 150 °C for 10 min and stored inside the same glove-box before measurement. The same film samples as prepared for the device fabrication were used for the AFM and GIXD measurements, whereas polymeric films were spin-coated on quartz substrates for the optical and photoelectron (PE) yield measurements. For the measurement of the electron mobility of the pristine PBDTTPD film, electron-only devices (ITO/PBDTTPD/Ca/Al) were fabricated by varying the thickness of the PBDTTPD layers. The thickness of calcium (Ca) and aluminium (Al) electrodes was 20 nm and 80 nm, respectively. The resulting electron mobility of the PBDTTPD films was 6.2 × 10−8 cm2 V−1 s−1, which was obtained by applying a space charge limited current (SCLC) model for the current–voltage characteristics of electron-only devices.


The film thickness was measured using a thickness profiler (Alpha Step 200, Tencor Instruments). The optical absorption spectra of the films were measured using a UV-visible spectrophotometer (Optizen 2120, MECASYS), and the photoluminescence (PL) spectra of the films were measured with a fluorescence spectrometer (FS-2, SCINCO). The highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) energy level of the pristine P3HT and PBDTTPD films was calculated from the ionization potential measured using a photoelectron yield spectrometer (AC2, Riken-Keiki). The nanostructure of the film samples was measured using a synchrotron radiation grazing incidence X-ray diffraction (GIXD) system (9A U-SAXS beamline, Pohang Accelerator laboratory, South Korea) (X-ray wavelength = 0.11 nm, incidence angle = 0.14°) and field-emission transmission electron microscope (FE-TEM) (Titan G2 ChemiSTEM Cs Probe, FEI). The surface morphology of the film samples was measured using an atomic force microscope (AFM, Nanoscope IIIa, Digital Instruments). The performance of solar cells was measured under 1 sun condition (100 mW cm−2) using a specialized solar cell measurement system equipped with a solar simulator (92250A-1000, Newport-Oriel) and an electrometer (Model 2400, Keithley).


As shown in Fig. 1a, a normal type solar cell structure was employed for this work. Looking at the optical absorption spectra in Fig. 1b, the absorption edge is almost similar for the two polymers in the presence of a considerably lower absorption coefficient (peak) for the PBDTTPD film than the P3HT film. Thus, we can expect a relatively small light-harvesting contribution of the PBDTTPD component compared to the P3HT component when the PBDTTPD content is low. Considering the flat energy band diagram in Fig. 1c (see also Fig. S1), the PBDTTPD component is likely to first take electrons from the P3HT component by a charge separation process and then to deliver electrons to the PC61BM component by a charge transport process (At the same time the hole transport may follow in the counter direction of the electron transport). In other words, the PBDTTPD component is expected to play a bridge role for charge transfer/transport between the P3HT component and the PC61BM component. We note that the PBDTTPD component itself can also absorb solar light, and the photogenerated electrons can be transferred to the PC61BM component though the number of electrons is dependent on the PBDTTPD content (similarly, the photogenerated holes in the PBDTTPD component can be transferred to the P3HT component).

To investigate the influence of the PBDTTPD addition, the PDBTTPD content was varied up to 60 wt.% by fixing the weight ratio of P3HT and PC61BM (PC61BM = 33.3 wt.%). As observed from the current density–voltage (J–V) curves under solar light illumination (Fig. 2a), the P3HT:PC61BM solar cell without the PBDTTPD polymer resulted in a very low short circuit current density (JSC = 1.6 mA cm−2) and VOC (0.4 V) (see Table S1 and Fig. S2 for details). When a small amount of the PBDTTPD polymer (1 and 5 wt.%) was added, the light J–V curves became even worse leading to a much lower JSC and VOC. However, interestingly, adding 10 wt.% PBDTTPD significantly increased the JSC (3.6 mA cm−2) and VOC (0.49 V) values. In particular, the JSC and VOC values reached ∼7.6 mA cm−2 and 0.66 V when the PBDTTPD content was 20 wt.%. Taking into account an almost 5-fold increase in JSC (from 1.6 mA cm−2 to 7.6 mA cm−2), we can briefly consider that the PBDTTPD component played an efficient bridging role in transferring electrons from the P3HT component to the PC61BM component because only 20 wt.% PBDTTPD is very small to generate such a high photocurrent when considering its low absorption coefficient, as discussed in Fig. 1b. However, we need to pay special attention to the VOC value (0.66 V), which is higher than the typical VOC (∼0.62 V) for the best optimized P3HT:PC61BM solar cells using the present batch of P3HT (see Fig. S3a). This indicates that the addition of PBDTTPD additionally contributed to the increased VOC, which is theoretically possible if the electrons in the PBDTTPD component are directly collected on the Al electrode (see Fig. 2b). However, as shown in Fig. S3, the performance of the P3HT:PBDTTPD solar cells is very poor; therefore, the PBDTTPD component, as an electron acceptor, alone cannot deliver such a high photocurrent. Hence, we can expect a harmonic effect by both PBDTTPD and PC61BM, which may result in an enhanced electron transport for the PBDTTPD and PC61BM phases as evidenced from the noticeably (3-fold) reduced series resistance (RS) from ∼0.6 kΩ cm2 to ∼0.2 kΩ cm2 (see Table S1). However, further increasing the PBDTTPD content reduced both JSC and VOC but the device performances of all the ternary solar cells (P3HT:PBDTTPD:PC61BM) fabricated here were still much better than the binary solar cells (P3HT:PC61BM).
The detailed trend of device performances is shown in Fig. 3. Here, we find that the JSC value reached a maximum at 20 wt.% PBDTTPD and then noticeably decreased on further increase in the PBDTTPD content, whereas the VOC drop was relatively milder than the JSC. This result implies that the number of photogenerated charges was decreased by increasing the PBDTTPD content because of the low optical absorption coefficient of PBDTTPD (see Fig. 1b). The fill factor (FF) was not strikingly changed on the addition of PBTTTPD but huge changes were observed for RS and shunt resistance (RSH). Here, the poor PCE on the addition of a small amount of PBDTTPD (<10 wt.%) can be ascribed to the increased RS. From the present PBDTTPD addition experiments, we achieved more than 7-fold improved PCE by adding 20 wt.% PBDTTPD.
To understand the significantly improved device performance in detail, we first investigated the optical absorption and photoluminescence (PL) spectra. As shown in Fig. 4a, the P3HT absorption decreased but the PBDTTPD absorption increased on increasing the PBDTTPD content. Considering that the solar light intensity is stronger at 500 nm (wavelength) than at 620 nm, the number of photons absorbed by the binary blend film (P3HT:PC61BM) is slightly higher than or similar to that of the ternary blend films (P3HT:PBDTTPD:PC61BM) when considering the absorption area, depending on the PBDTTPD content. This result suggests that the light harvesting is not the reason for such huge increase in the JSC value on the addition of the PBDTTPD polymer. Next, from the PL spectra (Fig. 4b), we find that the PL intensity was significantly reduced on the addition of the PBDTTPD polymer, regardless of the excitation wavelengths (we note that the thickness-normalized PL intensity was higher for the PBDTTPD polymer than the P3HT polymer, as shown in Fig. S5). This result implied that there was an additional charge separation event between the P3HT and the PBDTTPD component in addition to that between the P3HT component and the PC61BM component. In particular, the higher the PBDTTPD content, the lower the PL intensity. This result reflects that the charge separation (charge transfer from the P3HT component to the PBDTTPD component) became more efficient as the PBDTTPD content increased but it is opposite to the JSC trend, which decreased as the PBDTTPD content increased from 20 wt.% up to 60 wt.%. Therefore, we can conclude that the charge (electron) transport may be a limiting factor at higher PBDTTPD contents as observed from the increased RS values (see Fig. 3).
Next, we tried to examine the nanomorphology of the BHJ films according to the PBDTTPD content. As shown from the atomic force microscope (AFM) images (Fig. 5) the surface morphology became relatively coarser as the PBDTTPD content increased; the surface roughness significantly increased from 0.57 nm (P3HT:PC61BM) to 6.39 nm (P3HT:PBDTTPD:PC61BM at 20 wt.% PBDTTPD). This morphology change might contribute to making better charge percolation paths in the BHJ films, in regards to the greatly enhanced JSC by adding the PBDTTPD polymer. Interestingly, as shown from the transmission electron microscope (TEM) images in Fig. 6, the PBDTTPD addition changed not only the surface morphology but also the PC61BM segregation morphology inside the BHJ films, as seen in the dark areas in the TEM images.
As observed from the low magnification TEM images (left side) in Fig. 6, the apparent density (amount) of PC61BM molecules increased as the PBDTTPD content increased. From the high magnification TEM images (right side), we find that the size of the PC61BM aggregates became bigger for the ternary films (8.5–9 nm) compared with the binary films (∼5 nm) (see also Fig. S6). These results indicate that the PC61BM molecules were slightly enriched toward the surface of films by the addition of PBDTTPD, leading to the formation of bigger PC61BM aggregates, which are partly responsible for the coarse morphology observed from the AFM images. Hence, we think that the surface enrichment of PC61BM had a positive influence on the performance of the present normal type solar cells and the relatively bigger PC61BM aggregates by the presence of PBDTTPD also helped in better electron transport.
Considering the surface and internal segregation morphology changes in Fig. 5 and 6, we can expect that the molecular chain stacking in the BHJ films might be affected by the addition of PBDTTPD. To examine this, we performed synchrotron radiation grazing incidence X-ray diffraction (GIXD) measurements for the binary and ternary blend films. As observed from the 2D GIXD images (Fig. 7a), the P3HT film showed typical Debye rings with high order diffractions up to (300), which are pronounced in the out-of-plane (OOP) direction. However, the PBDTTPD film showed only a (100) diffraction ring but no clear higher order diffractions, which is clearly observed from the 1D profiles in Fig. 7b. This result indicates that the PBDTTPD polymer is less crystalline than the P3HT polymer. As expected, the high order diffraction feature of the P3HT component in the BHJ films was weakened as the PBDTTPD content increased. In addition, we found that the (100) peak position was obviously moved toward lower diffraction angles (from 2θ = 3.78° to 2θ = 3.40°) by adding only 20 wt.% PBDTTPD. This result implies that only 20 wt.% PBDTTPD addition significantly changed the P3HT chain stacking, which is again closely related with the huge change in the surface and internal segregation morphology as discussed in Fig. 5 and 6. As a result, the d-spacing for molecular chain stacking became larger for the ternary blend films (∼1.85 nm) than the binary blend film (∼1.65 nm) (see Table S2). However, interestingly, the bigger d-spacing positively affected the device performance. This result indicates that the devices with low fullerene contents are strongly influenced by the proper functioning of the electron-accepting components (PBDTTPD and PC61BM) rather than the electron-donating (p-type) component (P3HT), from the viewpoint of the relative energy band levels.
Finally, we briefly examined the stability of the presented solar cells before and after the PBDTTPD addition. First, the initial performance change was investigated by exposing devices under 1 sun (100 mW cm−2) condition for 10 h. As shown from the J–V curves in Fig. 8a, all the devices showed a gradual decrease in JSC but the VOC reduction was relatively small. Interestingly, the VOC change was relatively stable for the ternary solar cells compared to the binary solar cell (note that the binary solar cell showed an on-going VOC decreasing trend whereas the VOC value appeared to be levelled off for the ternary solar cells). Although the JSC drop was relatively larger for the ternary solar cell with 20 wt.% PBDTTPD, the PCE was still much higher for the ternary solar cell with 20 wt.% PBDTTPD than the binary solar cell even after the 10 h test. In addition, the ternary solar cell with 40 wt.% PBDTTPD exhibited quite stable PCE (only 0.14% PCE decrease after 10 h). Next, we tried to thermally treat the devices, which were exposed to 1 sun condition for 10 h, at 100 °C for 1 h. As shown in Fig. 9, the performance of all the devices was improved by thermal annealing. However, the extent of performance recovery was more pronounced for the ternary solar cells (20 wt.% PBDTTPD: from PCE = 1.75% to 1.95%; 40 wt.% PBDTTPD: from PCE = 1.40% to 1.50%) than the binary solar cell (from PCE = 0.56% to 0.61%). Considering the initial stability change and the recovery trend by thermal treatment, the PBDTTPD addition is considered as an effective approach to improve both the stability and efficiency in polymer:fullerene solar cells with low fullerene contents.

The charge-bridging polymer, PBDTTPD, was added to the P3HT:PC61BM films with low PC61BM content (33.3 wt.%) in which solar cells show only ∼0.3% PCE. At low PBDTTPD contents of less than 10 wt.%, the device performance became slightly worse than the control device (P3HT:PC61BM) but it was noticeably improved on further addition of PBDTTPD. When 20 wt.% PBDTTPD was added, the PCE reached ∼2.4% which is more than the 7-fold enhanced PCE. Further additions of PBDTTPD (40 wt.% and 60 wt.%) slightly degraded the device performances but the resulting PCE values were still higher than the binary solar cell (P3HT:PC61BM). This remarkably enhanced performance has been assigned to the bridging role of PBDTTPD for efficient charge transfer/transport between P3HT and PC61BM domains. The morphology measurements showed that the addition of PBDTTPD induced the enrichment of PC61BM molecules toward the film surfaces (the PC61BM aggregates became bigger), leading to the better vertical alignment of the p–n junctions. In particular, interestingly, the device performance was significantly enhanced even though the P3HT stacking was considerably destroyed by adding 20 wt.% PBDTTPD, as evidenced from the GIXD measurement. The initial stability test showed that the PCE of the ternary solar cells with the PBDTTPD polymer was still higher than the binary solar cell, even after 10 h illumination of simulated solar light. In addition, the performance of the ternary solar cell with 20 wt.% PBDTTPD, which was exposed to 1 sun condition for 10 h, was relatively well recovered by thermal treatment. However, other devices have also shown similar recovery trends.


This work was financially supported by the Korean Government grants (Basic Research Laboratory Program_2011-0020264, Pioneer Research Center Program_2012-0001262, Basic Science Research Program_2009-0093819, NRF_2012R1A1B3000523, NRF_2012K1A3A1A09027883).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Solar cell performance, d-spacings for pristine and BHJ films, PE yield spectra of P3HT and PBDTTPD films, semi-logarithmic J–V curves of devices, dark J–V curves of devices, light J–V curves of two binary BHJ devices, PL spectra of P3HT and PBDTTPD films, and enlarged TEM images. See DOI: 10.1039/c4ra01918k
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014