 DOI: 10.1039/C6TA08140A
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 8280-8286


Linyi
Bai
,

Liqun
Sun
,

Yang
Wang
,

Zhizhou
Liu
,

Qiang
Gao
,

Huijing
Xiang
,

Haiming
Xie
* and 

Yanli
Zhao
*

Division of Chemistry and Biological Chemistry, School of Physical and Mathematical Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, 21 Nanyang Link, Singapore 637371. E-mail: zhaoyanli@ntu.edu.sg

Department of Chemistry, Northeast Normal University, Changchun, Jilin 130024, PR China. E-mail: xiehm136@nenu.edu.cn

School of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, 50 Nanyang Avenue, Singapore 639798

Received
20th September 2016
, Accepted 14th November 2016
First published on 14th November 2016
Inorganic–organic hybrid structures are promising candidates for the fabrication of solar cells owing to their easy preparation and the integrated advantages of both components. Black phosphorus (BP), an emerging two dimensional inorganic material, has recently attracted attention, particularly in the field of semiconducting devices, because of its intrinsic characteristics including a tunable bandgap, efficient charge transport and superior conducting property. However, its poor stability, uncontrollable morphology and high-density charge traps have largely limited its further development and engineering for efficient photovoltaic devices. Herein, we present two sheet-shape hybrid heterojunctions using BP/PCBM (PCBM = phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester) prepared in a solution process and their performance in solar cells. The well-prepared hybrid heterojunctions (a layered stacking structure and a doping-weaving structure) with a uniform hexagonal shape exhibited favorable optical and thermal stabilities. More importantly, the average power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the solar cells reached 6.4% using the hybrid with the layered stacking structure and 8.0% for the hybrid with the doping-weaving structure. The present study is the first example of combining BP and PCBM to form heterojunctions for highly efficient solar cells, which may open up a promising route for photovoltaic research.

In order to meet increasing energy demands, energy technology has become an urgent and challenging subject and achieving high sustainability requires the exploration of new energy sources, promotion of energy conversion and optimization and utilization of energy sources. Solar power, one of the most abundant and ceaseless natural sources, has attracted a lot of attention in the scientific community. In addition, the environmental friendly virtue of solar power gives it a brighter prospect when compared to fossil fuels and nuclear power. In the past few years, various types of solar cell devices have been developed, such as dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSC), pure organic heterojunction photovoltaic devices and inorganic–organic hybrid heterojunction solar cells. Moreover, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) has continuously increased, reaching 13% and 10% for DSSC and organic solar cells, respectively.

The inorganic–organic hybrid heterojunction architecture has emerged as a promising candidate for the fabrication of solar cells, and it circumvents a complicated material synthesis and exhibits decent performance in practical application when compared with a conventional organic heterojunction. A well-known case of using an inorganic–organic hybrid heterojunction is the perovskite semiconductor, which features low cost production and a high energy conversion rate (PCE from an initial 4% to over 20% currently). This rapid development resulted in it being evaluated as one of the ten breakthroughs in science in 2013. Very recently, a novel type of layered inorganic material, black phosphorus (BP), has attracted increasing attention. Its tunable bandgap and high carrier mobility (μh = 350 cm2 V−1 s−1 and μe = 220 cm2 V−1 s−1) led to the discovery of new properties and functions that may impact future electronic technologies. However, its amorphous morphology and fast degradation in water and air severely impede its further development. While BP has been employed in high-mobility field-effect transistors, lithium ion batteries and linear polarization-dependent optical absorption, its application in photovoltaic devices has not been well studied.
In this study, we report for the first time two distinct BP-based hybrid heterojunctions using [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) as the growth template for solar cell fabrication (Fig. 1). One heterojunction was made by directly doping BP onto the surface of the PCBM sheets to form a hexagon layered stacking architecture, which is a planar heterojunction. The other one was prepared by doping BP onto the surface of PCBM nanowires to subsequently assemble them into hexagon knitted sheets, which was named as bulk heterojunction. When they were utilized for the construction of solar cell devices, both hybrid heterojunctions exhibited superior performances. The average PCE values of ten devices made from planar and bulk heterojunctions were 6.4% and 8.0%, respectively, clearly indicating their reliable and reproducible properties. Furthermore, the integration was very stable, and no evident degradation of the PCE was observed after three consecutive days of annealing.
To the best of our knowledge, the present study is the first example of integrating BP and PCBM to form different shape-defined hybrid heterojunctions. Although the current PCE value of the BP/PCBM solar cells is lower than that of perovskite solar cells, their performance indicates a promising application potential for photovoltaic conversion. From a materials point of view, the BP/PCBM solar cells are free from toxic heavy metals, and the commercial availability of their starting materials also provides a convenient support for continuous studies. Moreover, BP with a tunable bandgap could be integrated with other semiconducting materials for further improvements in photovoltaic conversion.
Inspired by the morphology-controlled fullerene (C60), two distinct hybrid heterojunctions were designed based on the shape-controlled construction of PCBM. PCBM is a well-known acceptor and has been widely applied in various photovoltaic devices. If shape-defined heterojunctions can be realized, they will be significant in the fabrication of the proposed photovoltaic devices. Thus, we carried out a crystallization/precipitation method to achieve shape-controlled PCBM. PCBM could form aligned hexagon sheets in carbon tetrachloride (CCl4). In aromatic solvents such as toluene, m-xylene and chlorobenzene, PCBM tended to form nanowires first and then gradually weaved into aligned hexagon sheets at 60 °C.
It is noteworthy to mention that the assembly process for PCBM is different from the reported processes. A reasonable formation mechanism was proposed for fabricating a cubic network using C70 in various solvents based on a recent study. PCBM tends to assemble in one dimension in solution, and the size and growth direction depend on the diffusion kinetics of the solvent. When the solvent diffusion is very fast (such as that under hand shaking or sonication), the supersaturation of the solution occurs instantaneously, causing recrystallization into random nanorods. On the other hand, when the powder is immersed in solution and undisturbed for a long time, the nanorods are mainly oriented in a sheet shape, giving a net-like structure.
BP shows unique electronic and optical properties such as a tunable direct bandgap, excellent current saturation characteristics, high carrier mobility, and in-plane anisotropic properties. In previous reports, mechanical exfoliation was the main method to obtain layered BP. In addition, Zhang et al. reported the synthesis of BP quantum dots using super power sonication. In our study, we combined grinding and sonication to afford BP dots dispersed in N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone. Then, powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD) studies were carried out to characterize the pattern of the obtained BP dots. As shown in Fig. 2a and S1 in the ESI, several remarkable PXRD peaks were observed at 2θ = 16.9°, 34.2°, and 52.3° that correspond to the reflective patterned peaks of d (020) = 5.2 Å, d (040) = 2.6 Å, and d (060) = 1.7 Å, which are indicative of crystalline BP with an orthorhombic structure. High resolution transition electron microscopy (HRTEM) images of the BP dots show lattice fringes of 0.26 nm and 0.34 nm (Fig. S1 in the ESI), which can be assigned to the (040) and (021) planes of the BP crystal, respectively.
Based on the interesting PCBM morphology, integrating BP (donor) with PCBM (acceptor) to form hybrid heterojunctions can be significant for applications. Interestingly, BP can be doped on the surface of PCBM nanosheets and nanowires, and the thickness of the obtained BP/PCBM heterojunctions is uniform in nature. The doping progress was monitored by the field-emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM) and TEM. As shown in Fig. 3a–c and S2 and S3 in the ESI, several particles are grown on the PCBM surface, and the surface becomes rough after the doping process. Importantly, the interaction between BP and PCBM is stable since the BP dots still remain on the PCBM surface even with slight sonication and washing with solvents. Thus, we further investigated this specific interaction between them.
Based on the different roles in the charge transportation, the charge transfer effect is first considered among the various physical interactions. In addition, the distinct carrier transport ability enables BP and PCBM to combine well. In order to confirm the charge transfer effect, the UV absorbance was measured (Fig. S4 in the ESI), and an evident red-shift to the range of 400–600 nm was observed for the BP/PCBM hybrid heterojunctions compared to the bare BP and PCBM. Since both BP and PCBM do not have notable absorption peaks in the range of 400–600 nm, this red-shifted broad absorption peak can be ascribed to the charge transfer effect between BP as the electron donor and PCBM as the electron acceptor. The solid-state fluorescence spectra (Fig. S5 in the ESI) also support this conclusion. Then, PXRD studies were carried out to obtain further evidence. As shown in Fig. 2a, the PXRD patterns of the two BP/PCBM heterojunctions basically matched that of the bare BP and PCBM except for a slight peak shift possibly caused by several factors such as the structure relaxation and charge transfer interaction. The PXRD patterns not only suggest that the BP doping does not alter the PCBM crystalline structure, but also confirm the specific interaction between BP and PCBM. In addition, variations in the relative PXRD intensity between the patterns of the two hybrid heterojunctions reveal that their exposed crystalline lattice is different. Based on these observations, a charge transfer interaction was rationally proposed.
With the successful fabrication of BP-doped PCBM, we then explored whether the BP-doped PCBM nanowires could weave into nanosheets. To achieve this goal, the as-prepared BP-doped PCBM was transferred to CCl4, and a solvothermal reaction was carried out for 24 h until knitted sheets were observed. Upon increasing the reaction time (from 24 h to one week), we observed that the degree of weaving increased and the sheets stacked together to create polyhedron structures (Fig. 3d–f). Subsequently, atomic force microscopy (AFM) was utilized to measure the thickness of the hybrid sheets (Fig. S6 in the ESI). The widths of the two hybrid sheets are similar to each other (around 12–14 μm), but the thickness is significantly different. The height of the planar heterojunction is 213 nm and that of the bulk heterojunction is 3.2 μm, suggesting that two different architectures are obtained based on the distinct stacking modes.
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was utilized for further characterization of the two different hybrid heterojunctions by analyzing their chemical composition. As seen in Fig. 2b, the XPS survey shows a predominant P-2p peak at around 134.3 eV for the two hybrids, indicating the expected combination of BP and PCBM. An O-1s peak at 535.7 eV was also observed, which could be ascribed to the oxidation of BP due to the exposure of the BP samples to the atmosphere before the XPS measurement. The minor degradation of BP may give rise to a question of whether it is suitable for solar cell fabrication. Fortunately, this defect can be avoided by changing the fabrication conditions. As previously mentioned, this defect is because BP is sensitive to oxygen and moisture in the air. If a dry and oxygen-free atmosphere is provided, this problem can be overcome. Thus, in the fabrication of solar cell devices, the substrate was transferred into a glove box before spin-casting the active layer of the BP/PCBM heterojunctions. This process can reduce the risk of BP contact with oxygen or moisture and effectively ensure that the heterojunctions are in good condition. Please note that the device transfer process may result in exposure to oxygen and moisture, influencing the device performance.
To characterize the photovoltaic properties of the two hybrid heterojunctions, solution-processed solar cell devices (Fig. 4a) were fabricated on a conventional configuration of ITO-coated glass (substrate)/ZnO/hybrid heterojunction/PEDOT:PSS/Ag and tested under an AM 1.5G simulated solar light at 100 mW cm−2 (AAA grade), where ITO and PEDOT:PSS represent indium tin oxide and poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) polystyrene sulfonate, respectively. Detailed device fabrication and testing conditions are described in the ESI (Fig. S8). The proposed charge generation and transport mechanism of the integrated devices are shown in Fig. 4b. The design of the integrated heterojunction devices is based on the following principles: (1) the BP/PCBM hybrid heterojunction as an active layer is used for the photocurrent production, and BP with an energy level matching that of PCBM is helpful for charge transportation upon photocurrent production; (2) PEDOT:PSS and ZnO are used as the hole transport layer (HTL) and electron transportation layer (ETL), respectively, which enable the exciton to be easily separated upon photocurrent production; (3) Ag was chosen as the electrode due to its low resistance and increased efficiency. Another important point is the BP energy gap, which has a direct relationship to its thickness. The energy gap varies from 1.51 eV to 0.59 eV upon the thickness changing from 1 layer to 5 layers. In order to accurately characterize the BP energy level, a statistical analysis of the diameter and height of the BP dots was performed. As shown in Fig. S9, the average diameter of the BP dots was evaluated to be ∼4.5 ± 1.1 nm and the height was ∼1.8 ± 0.4 nm. This thickness is equivalent to 3 layers, and the corresponding energy level is 0.75–0.80 eV, which was calculated based on previous reports.
We also tested the efficiency of the solar cell devices using two hybrid heterojunctions as the active layers fabricated through the homogeneous process. During the fabrication process, we chose chlorobenzene as the solvent because it provides an appropriate viscosity and a high dispersion for the two hybrid heterojunctions. The performance based on the two hybrid heterojunction solar cell devices is shown in Fig. 5a. The device based on the planar heterojunction shows a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 14.3 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.78 V, and a fill factor (FF) of 0.61, yielding a PCE of 6.80%. This performance should be ascribed to the enhanced optical properties and superior carrier mobility of the BP/PCBM hybrid heterojunction. Comparing it with conventional organic solar cells, quantum dot solar cells and perovskite solar cells, the BP/PCBM hybrid heterojunction presents its own advantages, including the absence of heavy metals for reduced toxicity, good stability in liquid electrolytes, and tunable energy levels to match electrodes. As the first sample of combining BP and PCBM for hybrid heterojunctions, the obtained promising result can be used as an important reference to promote further development of novel photovoltaic heterojunctions with high energy conversion efficiency.
A similar conclusion was also obtained using another BP/PCBM hybrid heterojunction. The device based on the bulk heterojunction presents a Jsc of 16.0 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.81 V, and an FF of 0.64, giving a PCE of 8.30%. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) as a function of the wavelength of the incident light for the two devices is shown in Fig. 5b. Certainly, the bulk heterojunction-based device exhibits a broader response to sunlight in comparison to the planar heterojunction, and the significantly improved Jsc value could be attributed to the light absorption. Associated with the carrier mobility of BP, mentioned previously (μh = 350 cm2 V−1 s−1 and μe = 220 cm2 V−1 s−1), the relatively low ratio of the hole and electron mobility (μh/μe = 1.59) with the assistance of PCBM suggests a fairly balanced charge transport in the hybrid film, thus contributing to the high Jsc and FF.
Conventional blend films often suffer from low stability issues and may form large aggregates at high temperatures. In order to fully evaluate the photovoltaic performance of the prepared devices, the long-term thermal stability of the two BP/PCBM heterojunctions was characterized. We fabricated 35 devices and divided them into 7 groups according to different annealing times (from 0 h to 3 days). Then, the average value of the PCE was calculated (Table S1). As shown in Fig. 5c, the two heterojunction-based devices show excellent thermal stabilities. The planar heterojunction-based device gave a PCE of 6.61% when the active layer was annealed under 150 °C for 6 h. Upon prolonging the annealing time to 3 days, the PCE of the corresponding device decreased slightly to 6.09%. For the bulk heterojunction-based device also, the PCE exhibited a decreasing tendency and finally dropped to 7.55% at 150 °C on annealing for 3 days.
Moreover, the photovoltaic performance of the solar cell devices based on the two BP/PCBM heterojunctions is reproducible in nature. For each batch of the devices fabricated, 10 cells on 10 pieces of glass/ITO substrates were obtained. The PCE value distribution of the devices fabricated from five batches under the optimized conditions is shown in Fig. S10 and Table S2. The photovoltaic parameters of these devices based on the planar heterojunction show narrow standard deviations, i.e., Jsc = 14.26 ± 0.02 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.77 ± 0.01 V, FF = 0.58 ± 0.02, and PCE = 6.40 ± 0.23%. The photovoltaic parameters of the devices based on the bulk heterojunction also exhibit narrow standard deviations, i.e., Jsc = 15.96 ± 0.09 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.81 ± 0.01 V, FF = 0.62 ± 0.02, and PCE = 7.96 ± 0.23%. A recent theoretical prediction demonstrated that the PCE of BP could reach 20%. We believe that further improvements based on our system will present a great potential for achieving the desired effectiveness in the future.
In summary, we have developed two distinct BP/PCBM hybrid heterojunctions and explored their favorable performance in hybrid heterojunction-based solar cells. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first example of combining BP and PCBM to form heterojunctions for solar cells. These two types of hybrids show broader absorption bands and more appropriate molecular energy level alignment, leading to high performances in solar cells. The best PCE of the device obtained in this study was 8.30% with excellent thermal stability and reproducibility for future photovoltaic applications. This study provides a valuable reference for achieving high-performance hybrid heterojunctions, opening up a new route for further development of hybrid heterojunction materials in solar cells.

This article replaces the version published on 14 November 2016, to correct SEM results and related discussion of the structures of the assembled BP/PCBM heterojunctions.

Following acceptance of the manuscript, the authors found that, after storage in a fume hood, the prepared BP/PCBM heterojunction materials had degraded over time, determined by SEM studies. Subsequently, XPS results showed that the slight degradation occurred before device fabrication, and this degradation may have affected the performance of the final solar cell devices.
In the current manuscript, Fig. 3 has been replaced with corrected SEM images demonstrating the actual morphologies of the assembled BP/PCBM heterojunctions, and additional discussion of the possible effects of this degradation has been added on page 4 in the sentence beginning “Please note that the device…”.
In the Electronic Supplementary Information, Fig. S1, S2 and S4 have been removed and the remaining figures have been renumbered, and related discussion has been removed from the main article, as due to the identified degradation the conclusions drawn from these SEM studies are no longer valid. Fig. S3 (S6 in the original version) has been updated to show SEM images of the degraded PCBM and BP/PCBM heterojunctions.

This research is supported by the Singapore Academic Research Fund (AcFR) Tier 1 (RG112/15). We thank Dr Purnandhu Bose for help in the manuscript preparation.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Additional synthesis and characterization data. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta08140a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017