 DOI: 10.1039/C8TA11945G
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 4960-4970


Bingbing
Cao
,

Longkai
Yang
,

Shusen
Jiang
,

Hong
Lin
*,

Ning
Wang
* and 

Xin
Li
*

Pen-Tung Sah Institute of Micro-Nano Science and Technology, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005, China. E-mail: lixin01@xmu.edu.cn

State Key Laboratory of New Ceramics & Fine Processing, School of Material Science and Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China. E-mail: hong-lin@tsinghua.edu.cn

State Key Laboratory of Marine Resource Utilization in South China Sea, Hainan University, Haikou 570228, China. E-mail: wangninguestc@gmail.com

Received
11th December 2018
, Accepted 30th January 2019
First published on 30th January 2019
Flexible perovskite solar cells (PSCs) present the most promising photovoltaic technologies due to their flexibility, light weight, and low temperature processing. However, their power conversion efficiency (PCE) is still far behind those of rigid PSCs. The enhancement of the PCE of flexible devices remains challenging. Here, two strategies are developed to improve the PCE of flexible PSCs. One strategy is to use quintile monovalent cations to obtain high-quality perovskite films. Rubidium (Rb) and potassium (K) cations are added to a basic perovskite film containing cesium, methylammonium, and formamidinium cations to improve film quality for efficient PSCs. It is revealed that the coexistence of Rb+ and K+ cations can effectively reduce the recombination within PSCs and thus improve the photovoltaic performance. The second strategy is to insert an ultrathin HfO2 layer between indium tin oxide (ITO) and the tin oxide layer by atomic layer deposition at low temperature. The recombination between ITO and perovskite films is found to be effectively suppressed after the introduction of an optimized HfO2 layer. As a result, a record PCE for the PSC devices based on polyethylene naphthalate (PEN)/ITO substrates is obtained as high as 19.11%, which is the highest reported PCE for flexible PSCs to date.

Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have attracted tremendous attention recently and their PCEs have exceeded 23%. The outstanding photovoltaic performance is attributed to the perovskite's extraordinary properties, including high absorption coefficients, high charge carrier mobility, long diffusion lengths, and small exciton binding energy. One of the intensive research topics in PSCs is the low-temperature processed flexible PSCs, which allow new opportunities in areas such as smart electronics, wearable devices, bike sharing and buildings. In recent years, flexible PSCs have shown a dramatic increase in power conversion efficiency (PCE), exceeding 18%. However, these efficiencies are still far behind those of other photovoltaic technologies. For example, the record PCE exceeded 20% using flexible Cu(In, Ga)Se2 solar cells.

The processing of highly efficient, rigid PSCs cannot be fully utilized to enhance the PCE of flexible PSCs because the former require high-processing temperatures exceeding 150 °C. In a typical flexible-type PSC, flexible plastic substrates, such as polyethylene naphthalate (PEN) and polyethylene terephthalate (PET), are commonly used, which are only stable at temperatures below 150 °C. Hence, in order to successfully fabricate highly efficient, flexible perovskite solar cells, beyond the usual considerations of charge transport layers, such as modified tin oxide (SnO2) films and C60-poly(allylamine), several methods, including reducing defect traps within perovskite films and interfacial engineering need to be tried.
In particular, the reduction of defects within the perovskite film should be carefully carried out due to the unique role of the perovskite as a light absorber in PSCs. The initial organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites for PSCs have the general AMX3 formula that comprises an organic monovalent cation (methylammonium (MA+), or/and formamidinium (FA+)), a divalent metal, M (Pb2+ or Sn2+), and a halide anion (Br−, or I−) or combinations of them. Cesium cations (Cs+) were found to be able to effectively suppress yellow phase impurities and produce more pure, defect-free perovskite films containing MAFA cations. Furthermore, the incorporation of rubidium cations (Rb+) into CsMAFA-based solar cells showed less loss in potential and superior performance relative to CsMAFA-only devices. This suggests that the charge transport within the RbCsMAFA perovskite layer is substantially faster than that in CsMAFA due to the reduced defects and the suppressed nonradiative recombination. However, a small hysteresis can still be observed from the optimized samples, which might be caused by many factors, such as ion migration or defect traps. Recently, it was reported that the incorporation of potassium cations (K+) can help to reduce defects in perovskite films and then reduce hysteresis. However, some reports showed that further incorporation of K+ into quadruple-cation RbCsMAFA-based perovskites to form quintuple-cation perovskite absorbers is not beneficial for improving PCE. In consideration of the different roles of Cs+, Rb+, and K+, within perovskite films, it is strongly believed that the compositional space of the quintuple-cation perovskite could be extended to obtain much more defect-free, novel perovskite absorbers.
On the other hand, suppression of charge recombination at the surface of transparent conductive oxide (TCO) is also beneficial for efficient solar cells. Surface passivation with dielectric materials, such as silicon oxide (SiO2), aluminum oxide (Al2O3), and silicon nitride (SiNx), has been applied at the silicon surface in non-concentrating solar cells to improve cell efficiencies for several decades. Then, such surface passivation was applied at the TCO surface in dye-sensitized solar cells with a variety of insulating metal oxides, including Al2O3, MgO, and ZrO2, effectively improving cell efficiencies by suppressing electron recombination. Thus far, surface passivation in PSCs has been scantly reported. Some reports focused on engineering the interface between ITO and its adjacent layer or tuning the work function of indium tin oxide (ITO) to improve cell efficiencies. Until very recently, magnesium oxide (MgO) was added between the electron transport layer (ETL) and the TCO layer to enable efficient electron transport and recombination suppression. However, the MgO thin layer formed by the sol–gel method required high annealing temperature, which is not acceptable for flexible PSCs. The passivation of the ITO films on polymer substrates for flexible solar cells has been barely tried. Atomic layer deposition (ALD) is a powerful method that can circumvent the drawbacks of high-temperature processing, such as the sol–gel method and is able to deposit uniform thin films with accurate control over coating thickness at low temperature. There are many reports utilizing the ALD method to passivate TCO surfaces on silicon devices or dye-sensitized solar cells, but they have not been investigated in flexible PSCs, to date.
In this work, two strategies were developed to fabricate efficient flexible PSCs with a planar heterojunction structure on ITO/PEN substrates. First, a K RbCsMAFA-based quintuple-cation perovskite was used as a light absorber in flexible PSCs, and its composition was carefully tuned. Here, Cs+, MA+ and FA+ cations were used to maintain the high-quality mixed cation perovskite films with better thermal properties and good phase stability. Rb+ cations were added to minimize the defects within the mixed ion perovskite film by tuning the crystal structure. K+ cations were adopted to reduce the iodide-Frenkel-defect number by entering the Oh interstitial site of the perovskite. Second, an ultrathin hafnium oxide (HfO2), with sub 1 nm thickness, was introduced between ITO and the ETL to serve as an interfacial layer to suppress the recombination of electrons and holes using ALD at a temperature of 90 °C. HfO2 was used as the passivating layer material since it has a large band gap (5.8 eV) and performed well in previous silicon-based devices. By optimizing the composition of the quintuple-cation perovskite and the thickness of the HfO2 layer, a high efficiency of 19.11% was achieved, which is the highest reported value among flexible PSCs to date. The quintuple-cation strategy is shown to further reduce recombination within perovskite films, which is hopeful for further boosting the photovoltaic device efficiency or the performance of some other potential applications, such as light-emitting devices. Moreover, our results present a new direction to passivate polymer-based electrodes at low temperature to suppress recombination and thus to improve the performance of flexible electronic devices.

NH2CHNH2I (FAI) and CH3NH3Br (MABr) were synthesized according to previous reports. SnO2 colloidal solution (15% in water) and lead(II) iodide (99.9985%) were purchased from Alfa Aesar. Lead(II) bromide (99.999%), cesium iodide (99.9%), rubidium iodide (99.9%), potassium iodide (99.998%) and all the organic solvents were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (America) without further purification. Spiro-OMeTAD was purchased from Lumtec (Taiwan). All reagents and chemicals were used as received without further purification.


Planar heterojunction rigid PSCs were fabricated with a configuration of glass/FTO/SnO2/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Au. The glass/FTO substrates were etched with Zn powder and 3 M HCl solution. Then, the etched substrates were cleaned by sonication in 0.3 M HCl, deionized water and isopropanol in that order. After the washing process, the substrates were dried in an oven for 2 h and then were pretreated in a UV/ozone cleaner for 20 min. The SnO2 colloidal solution was diluted (2.5% in water) before use and then spin-coated on the substrates at 4000 rpm for 30 s. Afterwards, spin-coated SnO2 films were annealed at 120 °C for 30 min before the deposition of perovskite films.

The MA/FA perovskite precursor solution was obtained by dissolving FAI (1.08 M), MABr (0.22 M), PbI2 (1.18 M) and PbBr2 (0.22 M) in a mixed solvent of DMF:DMSO = 4:1 (v/v). Then, 1.5 M CsI, RbI, and KI in DMSO stock solutions were respectively added to the mixed MA/FA precursor solution to achieve the perovskite precursor solutions with desired compositions. After stirring overnight and filtering, the precursor solutions were spin-coated on the SnO2 substrates in a two-step program at 800 rpm for 10 s and 6000 rpm for 25 s, respectively. Then, 150 μl of chlorobenzene was dripped on the substrates at 3 s before the end of the program. The substrates were sequentially annealed at 100 °C for 1 h. The spiro-OMeTAD solution was achieved by dissolving 72.3 mg of spiro-OMeTAD in 1 ml chlorobenzene containing Li-bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (Li-TFSI) and 4-tert-butylpyridine (tBP). The molar ratio was 1:0.5:3.3 for spiro-OMeTAD, Li-TFSI and tBP. The spiro-OMeTAD precursor solution was spin-coated onto the substrates at 2000 rpm for 30 s. Finally, 80 nm of Au electrode was deposited on the substrates by thermal evaporation. All the preparative work to deposit perovskite and spiro-OMeTAD was done inside a N2-filled glovebox.
For the fabrication of flexible PSCs, ITO/PEN (Peccell, Japan) was used as the substrate. The etching and cleaning process was similar to that for the rigid devices. After the cleaning treatment, an ultrathin layer of different thicknesses (up to 11 cycles) was deposited onto the PEN/ITO surface with the atomic layer deposition (ALD) method with a TFS 200 system (Beneq, Finland) at 90 °C using tetrakis-ethylmethylamino hafnium (TEMAHf) and water as precursors. During a cycle, the TEMAHf precursor was pulsed for 0.5 ms and first carried by N2 airflow. Then, N2 was purged for 3 s to remove extra TEMAHf. Subsequently, water was pulsed and carried by N2 for 0.5 s. Finally, N2 was purged again for 1.5 s. Every cycle contributed to the growth of HfO2 of approximately 0.1 nm. The preparation of SnO2/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Au was similar to that of the rigid PSCs.

The perovskite films were observed using a field-emission scanning electron microscope (Zeiss Sigma). X-ray diffraction patterns of the perovskite films were obtained using an X-ray diffractometer (Rigaku Ultima-IV, Japan). The surface morphology of SnO2 was observed with an atomic force microscope (Veeco DI Multimode V, USA). The absorption curves of the perovskite films were obtained using a UV-vis spectrophotometer (Cary 5000). The J–V measurement was carried out using a solar simulator (Newport Oriel, USA) with a light intensity of 100 mW cm−2 calibrated by a standard silicon solar cell (Newport Oriel, USA). The J–V curves were recorded with a digital source monitoring unit (Keithley 2420, USA). A metal mask of 9 mm2 was used to determine the active area during the measurement. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) was measured using a solar cell quantum efficiency measurement system (QEX10, USA). The electrochemical impedance spectra and cyclic voltammetry curves were recorded using an electrochemical workstation (Chenhua, CHI 660D, China) in the dark at different bias voltages. The steady-state and time-resolved photoluminescence spectra were acquired using an FLS980 spectrometer at an excitation wavelength of 510 nm.


The difference in monovalent cation composition gives rise to a large variety of phase compositions of the deposited quintuple-cation films, which may significantly change device efficiency. In this work, Cs0.05(FA0.83MA0.17)0.95(I0.83Br0.17)3 (denoted as CsFAMA) perovskite is used as the basic perovskite film due to its phase stability, thermal stability and good photovoltaic performance in PSCs. Rb and/or K cations, with a total molar percentage of 5% of the sum of Cs, FA and MA cations, were added to the basic film according to a reported protocol. Hereinafter, we denote the samples as Rb5CsFAMA, Rb5−xKxCsFAMA (x = 1–4), and K5CsFAMA, with x being the molar percentage of K. All the perovskite films were obtained by a one-step solution process with chlorobenzene as the antisolvent, and the detailed procedure is described in the Experimental section.

X-ray diffraction (XRD) was performed on all seven compositions to study the evolution of the crystal phase with the varied monovalent-cation compositions. As shown in Fig. 1, feature peaks can be observed for all samples, belonging to the trigonal perovskite phase (P3m1). A peak at approximately 12.7° corresponding to the PbI2 (001) reflection is observed for the CsFAMA perovskite film, which was due to the excess PbI2 in the precursor solution. A previous report demonstrated that an appropriate amount of excess PbI2 within perovskite films is beneficial for device efficiency. Upon adding Rb to the CsFAMA perovskite film, the characteristic peak of PbI2 is missing, and the main peak intensity of the perovskite film at 14.1° is increased. The missing peak of unreacted PbI2 may be attributed to a newly formed RbPb(I1−xBrx)3 side phase as shown in Fig. S1. However, the peak of the new phase cannot be seen from the XRD patterns due to its low intensity. Furthermore, with the addition of Rb+ cations, the diffraction peak intensity of the sample, belonging to (101)/(202), is stronger than that of the control sample, suggesting increased orientation of the perovskite crystal-line domains. It has been shown that Rb+ cations are beneficial for the crystallization of the perovskite by being settled down at the A site, which is good for device performance. While replacing Rb+ cations with K+ cations, the (101)/(202) peak intensity decreases with increasing K+/Rb+ ratio. When Rb+ cations are completely replaced by K+ cations, the sample pattern is similar to that of the control sample. This finding hints that K+ cations barely affect the crystal growth process due to their smaller ionic radii. To confirm this, we have doped different amounts of K+ cations into CsFAMA perovskite, of which the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images and XRD patterns are shown in Fig. S2. It can be seen that the amount of K+ cations barely affects the phase component of perovskite films, as well as the size of perovskite grains. A previous study indicated that K+ cations stay in the interstitial sites rather than in A sites.
To understand the morphological evolution and crystallite features of perovskite films, a SEM study was performed as shown in Fig. 2. The cross-section SEM images of all the perovskite films are shown in Fig. S3. Basically, all the films are highly dense and composed of crystallites with grain sizes of several hundred nanometers. However, there are obvious differences in morphology between these samples. As seen in Fig. 2a, some bright and small crystallites are observed from the control sample. According to the XRD results, those crystallites belong to the PbI2 phase and are beneficial for achieving highly efficient PSCs. Upon the addition of Rb+ cations, the small crystallites disappear completely while some larger second phase is observed as shown in Fig. 2b. The bright second phase may be ascribed to a RbPb(I1−xBrx)3 side phase. The RbPb(I1−yBry)3 phase decreases gradually when K+ cations are introduced to replace Rb+ cations, as shown in Fig. 2c–f. When Rb+ cations are completely replaced by K+ cations, the RbPb(I1−yBry)3 phase disappears and the PbI2 phase appears again.
On the other hand, the K+/Rb+ ratio also affects the grain size. As can be seen in Fig. 2, the grain size of the Rb5CsFAMA sample is the largest among all the samples, suggesting the enhancement of crystallization with the help of Rb+ cations. Larger grain size means fewer defects in the perovskite film, which is good for the PSC performance. On further decreasing the Rb+ amount, the grain size decreases. The dependence of the grain size on the varied K+/Rb+ ratio is shown in Fig. S4. It can be concluded that K+ cations barely affect the grain size owing to their position in perovskite films. The SEM results are in line with the XRD results. However, the existing K+ cations in the perovskite films can effectively reduce the I_Frenkel defect, which is hoped to solve the hysteresis problem in PSCs. Considering the different roles of Rb+ cations and K+ cations in the perovskite film, PSC performance can be reasonably enhanced by optimizing the K+/Rb+ ratio.

To probe the effect of different ratios of Rb+ to K+ cations on the device's photovoltaic performance, planar-structured devices were fabricated with a configuration of glass/FTO/SnO2/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Au. The detailed preparations are described in the Experimental section. Fig. 3 shows the statistic photovoltaic parameters of PSCs with varied monovalent cation compositions. The detailed average values of open-circuit voltage (Voc), short-circuit current (Jsc), fill factor (FF), and the PCE of the devices are shown in Table S1. It is obvious that PCE is enhanced in Rb+- or K+-containing perovskite solar cells. These results are consistent with previous reports where PCE increased upon incorporation of Rb+ or K+ only due to the improved charge transport and reduced recombination, phase purity, larger grain size, and other factors. More interestingly, it is observed that the PCE is improved distinctly when Rb+ and K+ are doped accumulatively. When the ratio of Rb+/K+ is 1/4, an average PCE of 20.13% is obtained for these cells. The highest PCE of 20.52% is presented in Fig. S5. Our results are different from previous reports where the compositional recipes of quintuple cations are different. Furthermore, devices with Rb+ and K+ cations show better long-term stability up to two months under controlled ambient conditions at approximately 10% relative humidity compared with control devices, as shown in Fig. S6.

The superiority of the proposed quintuple-cation recipe is found not only in the enhanced PCE but also in the reduced hysteresis. Hysteresis can be caused by ion movements or defects within the perovskite film. Previously, Saliba et al. found that the combination of Rb+ and Cs+ doping can effectively reduce the hysteresis of PSCs by reducing the nonradiative recombination. Tang et al. and Park et al. found that doping of K+ can reduce or remove hysteresis. Hence, in this work, the cation cascade doping of Rb+, Cs+, and K+ is expected to reduce hysteresis as much as possible. The hysteresis of different perovskite PSCs was evaluated by a hysteresis index (HEI) as shown in Fig. 4. Apart from meso-porous-structured PSCs, planar PSCs with the doping of Cs+ only at A sites, noted as the control sample, show large hysteresis. Upon adding Rb+ or K+ to the perovskite films, HEI decreases due to the reduced nonradiative recombination. The results are in line with previous reports. In the cases of Rb+ and K+ codoped films, HEI is surprisingly inhibited owing to the synergistic effects of Rb+ and K+ cations. Based on previous reports, it can be deduced that the incorporation of some Rb+ cations at the A sites and the occupancy of some K+ cations at interstitial sites would happen simultaneously within the perovskite films. Hence, the bulk defects would be reduced and the ion movement will be restrained to some extent. Both of the changes are beneficial for eliminating hysteresis. HEI results are in compliance with the IV results. A minimum average HEI was observed in Rb1K4CsFAMA PSCs, which is an optimized compositional recipe for efficient planar PSCs.

The original purpose of this work was to dope the perovskite with Rb+ and K+ to reduce film defects, acting as carrier traps, to improve perovskite film quality. To further determine trap densities within the different quintuple-cation perovskite films, space charge limited current (SCLC) measurements were employed. Fig. 5a shows the dark current–voltage (C–V) curves of the devices with a configuration of FTO/SnO2/perovskite/PCBM/Au. It is found that a linear correlation at low bias voltage can be obtained revealing an ohmic-type response. At the end of the ohmic response, a kink point can be seen that represents the trap-filled limit voltage (VTFL). The trap density (Nt) can be calculated based on the following equation (eqn (1))

Nt = 2ε0εVTFL/eL2
(1)
where
ε0, ε, e, and L represent the vacuum permittivity, the relative dielectric constant of the perovskite, the electron charge and the thickness of the perovskite film, respectively. A ε of 46.9 for single-crystal FAMA was adopted. The trap densities of the samples CsFAMA, Rb5CsFAMA, Rb1K4CsFAMA, and K5CsFAMA were calculated to be 2.725 × 1016 cm−3, 2.271 × 1016 cm−3, 1.654 × 1016 cm−3, and 1.330 × 1016 cm−3, respectively. Obviously, doping with Rb+ and K+ can effectively reduce the trap density of perovskite films. More K-cation doping means lower trap density, which might be due to the occupancy of K+ cations at interstitial sites. The reduced trap density is responsible for the improved photovoltaic performance shown in Fig. 3 and 4.


Fig. 5b shows the normalized time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) for perovskites with different monovalent cations coated on bare glass substrates to inspect the recombination of photon-induced carriers within perovskite films. The decay lifetimes extracted from the data with exponential components are shown in Table S2. Longer decay lifetimes indicate higher film quality and fewer recombination centers. The CsFAMA perovskite film has the shortest decay time of 27.98 ns, which indicates a fast recombination process compared with those of decay lifetimes of 38.01 ns, 333.25 ns and 180.48 ns in Rb5CsFAMA, Rb1K4CsFAMA, and K5CsFAMA perovskite films, respectively. The increased decay lifetimes in the Rb+ and/or K+ containing samples are attributed to the decreased defects in perovskite films, which agrees with the SCLC results. The dependence of decay lifetime on the ratio of Rb+/K+ is shown in Fig. S7, where the longest decay lifetime can be observed in the Rb1K4CsFAMA sample. Hence, it can be deduced that Rb+ cations and K+ cations can reduce the recombination in perovskite films synergistically, which is responsible for the improved photovoltaic performance in Fig. 3 and 4.
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was employed to compare the carrier recombination of different perovskite films in PSCs. Fig. 5c shows the Nyquist plots obtained at a bias of −0.85 V, all of which have two semicircles. The first one in the high-frequency region in a Nyquist plot is assigned to the selective contacts (SC) or the interface of these contacts with the perovskite layer, and the second one in the middle-frequency region is associated with the charge recombination within the perovskite film. With the addition of Rb+ and/or K+ cations, all devices show reduced charge transport resistance, Rct, due to the varied band structure of perovskite layers. In particular, the Rb1K4CsFAMA-based device has the smallest Rct, which indicates that the energetic structure of the perovskite film matches the two neighboring selective contacts the best. Moreover, the devices with the addition of Rb+ and/or K+ cations show larger arcs for the recombination of perovskite layers, indicating reduced charge recombination. Furthermore, the charge recombination resistance, Rre, of all devices as a function of bias is given in Fig. 5d, which was extracted from the second semicircle in the Nyquist diagram. The Rb1K4CsFAMA-based device shows the largest Rre among the four devices. These results explain the positive role of Rb+ and/or K+ cations in mixed-ion perovskite films to improve the device photovoltaic performance by accelerating charge transport and retarding charge recombination.

To further reduce the recombination within quintuple-cation-based PSCs to improve the PSC photovoltaic performance, an ultrathin HfO2 layer is deposited on the ITO surface by ALD in this study. PEN/ITO is used as the substrate, and the growth temperature is fixed at 90 °C to avoid the destruction of the PEN substrate. The layer thickness of HfO2 underneath the SnO2 electron-transport layer is varied between zero and eleven ALD cycles. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) graphs show that the insertion of an ultrathin HfO2 layer barely affects the morphology of the SnO2 layer, as shown in Fig. S8. The insertion of HfO2 clearly has no effect on the crystallization of the quintuple-cation perovskite layer, as shown in Fig. S9.


Fig. 6a shows the cross-section image of an HfO2-containing flexible PSC. The ultrathin HfO2 layer is too thin to be observed. The morphology of the perovskite film on the PEN-based substrate is shown in Fig. S10, which is similar to that of the perovskite film on the rigid substrate. The inserted ultra-thin HfO2 layer has no effect on the crystallization of the perovskite. To confirm the presence of the HfO2 layer, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was performed. The XPS peaks corresponding to the Hf 4p and 4d orbitals, indium (In) 3p and 3d orbitals, tin (Sn) 3d orbital, and oxygen (O) 1s orbital indicate the successful growth of the HfO2 ultrathin layer on an ITO-coated PEN with the ALD method as shown in Fig. 6b.
To understand the effect of introducing an HfO2 nanolayer on the PCE of flexible PSCs, the optimized thickness of the HfO2 film was first determined. Rb1K4CsFAMA-based perovskite is used as a light absorber, and flexible PSCs are fabricated. The histograms of Voc, Jsc, FF and PCE of the resulting devices are summarized in Fig. 7a–d, and the detailed values are given in Table S2. The Voc and Jsc of these devices increase gradually with increasing ALD cycles first and then decrease upon further increasing the ALD cycles, while the FF shows no change with the varied ALD cycles. The devices with the best photovoltaic performance are based on 5 optimized ALD cycles. A champion PCE of 19.11% with Jsc = 21.24 mA cm−2, Voc = 1.135 V, and FF = 0.792 is obtained, which is the highest reported efficiency for flexible PSCs to date. The inset of Fig. 7e shows the corresponding steady-state efficiencies. The integrated current density from the IPCE measurement shown in Fig. 7f is 20.80 mA cm−2, which is in good agreement with the measured Jsc. We deduced that such improvement is attributed to the retarded recombination between ITO and the perovskite layer near the SnO2 ETL. Moreover, the flexible device shows good bending resistance. The device retained 93% of its original PCE after 2000 bending cycles with a curvature radius of 10 mm, as shown in Fig. S11. Moreover, our flexible device showed good thermal stability due to the existence of Rb+ in the perovskite layer. The device retained 68% of its original PCE at 85 °C in a N2 environment after 1000 hours, as shown in Fig. S12.

Based on the above data, the HfO2 ultrathin layer can effectively improve photovoltaic performance. To further clarify why the flexible PSCs with HfO2 perform better, the effect of HfO2 on the interfacial charge transport was first checked. From the current–voltage (I–V) curves obtained in the dark shown in Fig. 8a, the conductivity of SnO2 on PEN/ITO/HfO2 decreases obviously compared with that of the control sample due to the isolated nature of the HfO2 layer. However, under light conditions, the carriers can tunnel easily through the ultrathin HfO2 layer, which is a good tunnel oxide and widely used in the semiconductor field.

TRPL and steady-state photoluminescence (PL) characterization measurements were carried out to further investigate the charge-collection properties after the insertion of the HfO2 layer between the SnO2 layer and the ITO. TRPL spectra of the perovskite films on SnO2 and HfO2/SnO2 substrates are shown in Fig. 8b, which can be fitted with a biexponential decay function containing a fast decay and a slow decay process. The former process is considered to be the result of the quenching of free electrons in the perovskite domain through the ETL (SnO2 in this work) to ITO, while the slow decay process is the result of the recombination component. The control sample has a fast decay lifetime of τ1 = 2.4 ns and a slow decay lifetime of τ2 = 243.3 ns. In contrast, the perovskite film on the ITO/HfO2/SnO2 substrate has τ1 = 28.2 ns and τ2 = 1259.0 ns, respectively. Obviously, both the fast and slow PL lifetimes increase with the introduction of the HfO2 layer. The increased fast decay lifetime is ascribed to the insulating nature of the HfO2 layer, which partly hinders the charge transport. However, the longer slow decay lifetime indicates that HfO2 can effectively reduce the interfacial recombination by passivating the ITO surface and reducing the interfacial recombination, which is beneficial to photovoltaic performance. The PL results in the inset of Fig. 8b also support the TRPL results. Overall, the HfO2 layer plays a positive role in enhancing the charge collection by reducing the interfacial recombination according to the results in Fig. 8.
EIS was also performed with flexible devices with and without the ultrathin HfO2 layer. The obtained Nyquist plots are shown in Fig. S13. The charge transport resistance, Rct, and the charge recombination resistance, Rre, are fitted based on the equivalent circuit model shown in Fig. 5c. As shown in Fig. 8c and d, the Rct of the HfO2-containing device is larger than that of the control device due to the existence of the isolated HfO2 film. The Rre of the HfO2-containing device is also larger than that of the control device, indicating the suppression of charge recombination between the perovskite and ITO films. The EIS results agree with the transient measurement results.
To sum up, incorporating the HfO2 extra-thin layer can be an effective way to enhance the PSC performance by blocking the holes and enabling the tunnelling of electrons. MgO and Al2O3 (ref. 63) have been demonstrated to effectively enhance the PSC performance with a similar mechanism. Hence, it can be inferred that the ultra-thin interfacial layer needs to have an appropriate energetic structure to block holes and to be thin enough to allow electron tunnelling. Considering the negative effect of the HfO2 layer on the conductivity shown in Fig. 8a, doping might be a good way to increase the underlayer conductivity. Previous studies indicated that the tunnelling current can be improved by the creation of defects within doped tunnelling layers. Tuning the ultrathin interfacial layer between the conductive substrates and carrier selective contacts is an exciting and barely explored topic for future research to achieve highly efficient PSCs.

In summary, two strategies were developed to reduce the recombination within perovskite solar cells to improve the PCE. First, a quintuple-cation perovskite film containing Rb+, K+, Cs+, FA+, and MA+ was successfully optimized to achieve highly efficient PSCs. The PCE of the optimized PSCs on ITO/glass reached 20.52% with less hysteresis. SCLC, TRPL spectra and EIS analysis showed that the synergistic effect of the coexistence of Rb+ and K+ cations can greatly reduce the trap density and then the recombination within PSCs. Second, the suppression of the recombination between PEN/ITO and perovskite is important to obtain efficient, flexible PSCs. An ultrathin HfO2 layer was introduced by the ALD method at low temperature between the PEN/ITO and SnO2 layer to improve the photovoltaic performance. The improved photovoltaic performance is due to the restricted recombination between the perovskite and PEN/ITO substrates according to the TRPL and EIS results. Finally, a champion PCE for flexible devices of 19.11% was achieved. Our findings are very promising for developing efficient, high performance PSCs, especially flexible PSCs for practical applications.


There are no conflicts to declare.


We gratefully acknowledge the support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (U1505243), the funding from the Fujian Province of China (2016H0036 and JZ160404), and the funding from the Qinghai Province of China (2017-ZJ-750).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta11945g
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019