 DOI: 10.1039/C8NR06586A
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 20587-20598


Jae-Ho
Kim
,

Hae-Jun
Seok
,

Hyeong-Jin
Seo
,

Tae-Yeon
Seong
,

Jin Hyuck
Heo
,

Sang-Hyuk
Lim
,

Kyung-Jun
Ahn
 and 

Han-Ki
Kim
*

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Korea University, Seoul 02841, Republic of Korea

School of Advanced Materials Science and Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, Gyeonggi-do 16419, Korea. E-mail: hankikim@skku.edu; Fax: +82-31-201-2462; Tel: +82-31-205-2462

Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Korea University, 145 Anam-ro, Seongbuk-gu, Seoul 136-713, Republic of Korea

SNTEK Co., Ltd, 1433-100, Seobu-Ro, Gwonseongu, Suwon-Si, Gyeonggi-do 16648, Republic of Korea

Received
15th August 2018
, Accepted 24th September 2018
First published on 24th September 2018
We report high performance flexible Sn-doped In2O3 (ITO) films prepared by in-line type vertical plasma arc ion plating for high performance flexible perovskite solar cells. Even at room temperature deposition, the ion-plated ITO film showed a low sheet resistance of 15.75 Ohm per square, a high average optical transmittance of 85.88% and a small outer bending radius of 5 mm because energetic ITO ions accelerated to the substrate led to better crystallinity and adhesion than sputtered ITO films. In addition, the ion-plated ITO films showed atomically flat and smooth surfaces due to different growth mechanisms and the absence of resputtering effects during the ion plating process. Flexible perovskite solar cells fabricated on the ion-plated ITO electrodes showed a higher power conversion efficiency of 16.8% than the sputtered ITO-based perovskite solar cell, indicating the potential of ion plated ITO films as promising flexible and transparent electrodes for perovskite solar cells.

Lead halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have been extensively investigated as next generation photovoltaics following Si-based thin film solar cells because they have high power conversion efficiencies above 20% caused by strong solar absorption, long charge lifetime and solution-based easy/low cost fabrication processes. These emerging photovoltaic technologies led to massive research over the last 15 years on organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite materials, interfacial layer materials, and PSC device structures to increase the power conversion efficiency. In particular, the use of a thin absorption layer (organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites) and planar structured PSCs provide high performance flexible thin film PSCs that can replace current inorganic photovoltaics such as Si, CdTe, and CuInGaSe. Recently, Yoon et al., reported the highest power conversion efficiency of 17.3% in flexible PSCs by introducing graphene as a transparent and flexible electrode. Among several materials consisting of flexible PSCs, oxide or metal electrodes for hole or electron extraction play an important role in the performance and fabrication of flexible PSCs. In particular, the transparent electrode helps extract holes in a p–i–n structure or extract electrons in a n–i–p structure. The optical and electrical properties of the electrode mainly affect the short circuit current (Jsc) and fill factor (FF) of PSCs because the light reaches the perovskite active layer by passing through the transparent electrode. The total series resistance is closely related to the sheet resistance of transparent electrodes. F-Doped SnO2 (FTO) films grown by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) on glass substrates have mainly been employed as transparent electrodes in the fabrication of rigid PSCs due to their thermal stability, which is required for the high temperature annealing process. However, the high process temperature of CVD required to deposit FTO films cannot be used in flexible PET substrates. Therefore, Sn-doped In2O3 (ITO) films prepared by DC sputtering at room temperature have been used as flexible transparent electrodes for flexible PSCs even though they have fairly low optical transmittance and high sheet resistance caused by the amorphous structure of room temperature processed ITO films In addition, the rough surface of the ITO films (caused by the resputtering effect) could result in current leakage and poor flexibility or delamination of the ITO film when the flexible PSCs bend. Although several alternative electrode materials such as Ag nanowires, graphene, and conducting polymers have been suggested, ITO electrodes have still been mainly employed as flexible and transparent electrodes due to their mature mass production process, easy scalability, well-matched band structure with the buffer layer, and chemical stability against active perovskite materials. However, to overcome the limit of the a-ITO electrode and realize high performance flexible PSCs, the development of a room temperature coating technique to obtain high-quality ITO films is imperative. In particular, a room temperature ITO coating technique should be adopted for large area and roll to roll coatings like typical sputtering processes.

In this work, we report on high-quality flexible ITO films with atomically flat surfaces prepared on PET substrates by in-line type vertical plasma arc ion plating at room temperature for use as flexible and transparent electrodes for high performance flexible PSCs. The effect of thickness on the electrical, optical, and morphological properties of ion-plated ITO films was investigated to determine the optimum thickness. In addition, the flexibility of the ion-plated ITO films was compared to the sputtered ITO films. Furthermore, the performance of flexible PSCs fabricated on ion-plated and sputtered ITO films was compared to show the potential of ion plated ITO films as flexible transparent electrodes. We comprehensively studied the microstructures of ion-plated ITO films and interfaces in flexible PSCs including ITO and the hole transport layer using transmission electron microscopy (TEM).

Flexible ITO films were deposited on the PET substrates using an in-line type vertical plasma arc ion plating system at room temperature. The vertical ion plating system (5 generation) consisted of the tray loader, load lock chamber, process chamber, and return chamber. Two sets of electron guns were vertically oriented inside the process chamber (Fig. S1). Unlike a typical plasma arc ion plating system, where the plasma beam irradiated on the tablet is located at the bottom of a vacuum chamber, the plasma beam in the in-line arc plasma ion plating system is irradiated from the side to the vertically located ITO tablet (10 wt% Sn-doped In2O3), which directly faces the PET substrate as shown in Fig. 1(a). Using an ITO tablet revolver system (Fig. S1(d)), the ITO tablet was supplied in the process chamber without breaking vacuum for continuous coating. The much higher electron density of the arc-discharge plasma compared to the electron density in the sputtering process led to the formation of a high-density plasma beam for sublimation of the ITO tablet. The 10 wt% Sn-doped In2O3 tablet was used to deposit ITO films under a base pressure of less than 1 × 10−7 Torr. We employed same composition ITO tablet with typical ITO target used in sputtering process. The PET substrate attached on the in-line tray was supplied to the process chamber through the load-lock chamber. Then, flexible ITO films were deposited on the PET substrates at a constant direct current (DC) power of 3 kW, an Ar/O2 flow rate of 300/90 sccm and a working pressure of 3 mTorr, in increasing processing cycles to handle the thickness of the ITO films. In the vertical ion plating system, the PET substrates could be moved repeatedly between the process chamber and return chamber to control the films thickness.


The electrical and optical properties of the ion-plated ITO films were investigated using the Hall effect measurement (HL5500PC, Accent Optical Technology, HL5500PC) and a UV/Visible spectrometer (UV 540, Unicam) as a function of ITO film thickness. The surface morphology and structure of ion-plated ITO and sputtered ITO films were compared using field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM, Carl Zeiss, MERLIN), high resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM, JEOL, JEM-2100F) and atomic force microscope (AFM, SII, SPA-300HV). In addition, the work function of the ion-plated ITO and sputtered ITO films were compared using ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS, Thermo, ESCALAB250). The mechanical flexibility of ion-plated and sputtered ITO films was examined using a lab-made inner and outer bending test system as a function of the radius and bending cycles. The change in resistance of the ion-plated and sputtered ITO films can be expressed as ΔR = (R − R0)/R0, where R0 is the initial measured resistance, and R is the resistance measured under ITO bending.


To fabricate the flexible ITO-based planar type MAPbI3 perovskite hybrid solar cells, we cleaned the flexible ITO substrate by ultrasonication in 5% Helmanex soap in de-ionized water, ethanol and then isopropyl alcohol. After solvent cleaning, we conducted an Ar plasma treatment on the flexible ITO substrate to remove the organic residues. We prepared ZnO nano-sol as a ZnO electron conductor by a reported method. Briefly, 1.64 g zinc acetate dehydrate (Aldrich) and 0.5 g ethanolamine (Aldrich) were dissolved with vigorous stirring in 10 g 2-methoxyethanol (Aldrich) at 60 °C for 30 min. To form the ZnO electron conducting layer on the flexible ITO substrate, we fixed the PET/ITO substrate on a glass substrate with double-sided adhesive film for spin-coating process of ZnO nano-sol and spin-coated the ZnO nano-sol solution at 2000 rpm for 60 seconds and then dried it at 150 °C for 10 min. We prepared the 40 wt% of MAPbI3 perovskite solution by mixing MAI (DSLogics. Co., Ltd) and PbI2 (Aldrich) (1:1 mole ratio) in N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF, Aldrich) at 60 °C for 30 min. We then added hydriodic acid to the MAPbI3 perovskite solution. To prepare the MAPbI3 thin film on the ZnO/flexible ITO substrate, we spin-coated the 40 wt% of MAPbI3 perovskite solution with hydriodic acid (40 wt% MAPbI3 in DMF solution/hydriodic acid = 1 mL/100 μL) at 3000 rpm for 200 seconds and dried it on a hot plate at 100 °C for 2 min. Afterwards, we deposited the poly-triarylamine (PTAA, EM index) hole conductor with additives on the MAPbI3/ZnO/flexible ITO substrate by spin-coating PTAA/toluene (15 mg/1 mL) with 7.5 μL Li-bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (Li-TFSI, Aldrich)/acetonitrile (170 mg/1 mL) and 7.5 μL tert-butylpyridine (t-BP, Aldrich)/acetonitrile (1 mL/1 mL) additives at 3000 rpm for 30 seconds. Finally, we deposited an Au counter electrode by thermal evaporation. The active area was fixed at 0.16 cm2. All device fabrications were conducted below 25% relative humidity.


The current density–voltage (J–V) curves were measured using a solar simulator (Peccell, PEC-L01) with a potentiostat (IVIUM, IviumStat) under illumination of 1 sun (100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5G), which was calibrated using a Si-reference cell certificated by JIS (Japanese Industrial Standards). The J–V curves of all devices were measured by masking the active area with a metal mask of 0.096 cm2. The forward and reverse scan speed of J–V measurement was fixed to 10 mV per 200 ms (50 mV s−1). The external quantum efficiency (EQE) was measured using a power source (ABET 150 W Xenon lamp, 13014) with a monochromator (DONGWOO OPTORN Co., Ltd, MonoRa-500i) and a potentiostat (IVIUM, IviumStat).



Fig. 1(a) and (b) compare the different ITO deposition mechanisms in plasma arc ion plating and conventional DC sputtering. Sublimation phenomena occur at the surface of the ITO tablets by irradiation of high density electrons and plasma during the plasma arc ion plating process. Then, sublimated ITO atoms were effectively ionized while passing the plasma beam region, and then ionized atoms were accelerated by applying a floating potential to the substrates. The accelerated ions with a narrow energy distribution (3–33 eV) may be responsible for generating crystallized ITO films even at room temperature. However, in the sputtering process, the sputtered ITO atoms showed wide energy distribution (0–80 eV) because the sputtered atoms were obtained from momentum transfer of bombarded Ar+ ions. Therefore, even though some sputtered atoms had high energy, the sputtered ITO film at room temperature showed an amorphous structure due to the wide energy distribution of all sputtered atoms. The ion plating process is divided into standby mode and sublimation mode, respectively, as shown in Fig. 1(c) and (d). In stand-by mode, the plasma beam is bent by merely using permanent magnetic fields around the ITO tablet in the tablet revolver (Fig. S1). In sublimation mode, the plasma beam was focused on the center of the ITO tablets by controlling the electromagnetic fields around the ITO tablet. As the arc-discharge plasma was irradiated on the ITO tablets, sublimation of the ITO tablet occurred. When sublimated In and Sn passed through the high density plasma region, they were ionized into In+ and Sn+, then they were accelerated to the PET substrate. The electrical potential and the bias voltage are shown in Fig. 1(e). First, the ions were repelled from the ITO tablet by the positive potential applied to the anode. Second, they were accelerated and attracted to the PET substrates by the self-bias voltage. Thus, the main energy of the ions formed in the high density plasma region is much higher than that of the sputtered atom. Accelerated ions could result in improved adhesion, density, and stability of the ITO films. Fig. 1(f) shows photographs of the curved ion-plated ITO films. The mechanical properties of the ion-plated ITO films and the perovskite solar cell with the ion-plated ITO electrode will be discussed in detail with Fig. 4 and 6, respectively.


Fig. 2(a) and (b) show the Hall measurement results obtained from the ion-plated ITO films with increasing films thickness from 10 nm to 100 nm as well as 100 nm thick sputtered ITO films (reference sample). The sheet resistance of the ion-plated ITO films gradually decreased from 829.8 Ohm per square to 15.75 Ohm per square with increasing films thickness. The resistivity of the ion-plated ITO films also decreased from 8.3 × 10−4 Ohm cm to 1.58 × 10−4 Ohm cm with increasing films thickness. Compared to the fairly high sheet resistance (47.4 Ohm per square) and resistivity (4.74 × 10−4 Ohm cm) of the 100 nm thick sputtered ITO film at room temperature, the 100 nm thick ion-plated ITO films showed much lower sheet resistance and resistivity even they were prepared at room temperature. The thickness dependency of ion-plated ITO films could be attributed to an increase in carrier concentration and carrier mobility as shown in Fig. 2(b). At thicknesses less than 80 nm, the ion-plated ITO films showed an increased carrier constant, whereas the carrier concentration was almost constant with increasing film thickness due to improved crystallinity. The 100 nm thick ion-plated ITO showed the highest carrier concentration 1.193 × 1021 cm−3, which is responsible for the lowest resistivity of the ion-plated ITO film. Fig. 2(c) shows the optical transmittance of the ion plated ITO films with increasing thickness. The modulation of the optical transmittance increased with increasing thickness due to interference phenomena. All ion-plated ITO films showed high optical transmittance at a wavelength of 550 nm and average optical transmittance, which is suitable for flexible and transparent anodes in flexible PSCs. Table 1 summarizes the detailed optical properties of ion-plated ITO films and 100 nm thick sputtered ITO films. The 100 nm thick ion-plated ITO film exhibited an optical transmittance of 83.07% at a wavelength of 550 nm, whereas the transmittance of the sputtered ITO films was 76.21% at a wavelength of 550 nm. The different optical transmittance between sputtered and ion-plated ITO films could be contributed to difference structure and surface morphology. The sputtered ITO films deposited at the room temperature without intentional heat-treatment showed a low transmittance due to the poor crystallinity and light reflection on the rough surface. In case of the ion-plated ITO, however, the accelerated ions with high energy and narrow energy distribution (3–33 eV) led to crystallization of the ion-plated ITO film with a flat surface, as shown in the Fig. S2. Different crystallinity and surface morphology resulted in higher optical transmittance of ion-plated ITO films than that of sputtered ITO films. The ion-plated ITO film showed decreased average optical transmittance with increasing film thickness up to 50 nm, as shown in Fig. 2(d). However, above 50 nm they showed similar average optical transmittance values that are acceptable for fabrication of high performance flexible perovskite solar cells. At 100 nm thickness, the ion-plated ITO films showed 85.88% transmission, which is much higher than the 100 nm thick sputtered ITO film (76.42%). Also, Fig. 2(d) shows the calculated figures of merit (ΦTC) of the ion-plated ITO films as a function of the film thickness to determine the optimum thickness. The ΦTC was calculated using the formula (ΦTC = Tav10/Rs) as suggested by Haacke, where Tav is the average optical transmittance (400–800 nm), and Rs is the sheet resistance (Rs). The ΦTC of the ion-plated ITO films increased from 4.2 × 10−4 Ohm−1 to 9.94 × 10−3 Ohm−1 with increasing films thickness. This indicates that the sheet resistance of the ion-plated ITO films primarily affected the ΦTC value. Compared to the sputtered ITO film with a ΦTC of 1.43 × 10−3 Ohm−1, the 100 nm thick ion-plated ITO film showed a much higher ΦTC value, indicating the better quality of the ITO film as a transparent and flexible electrode. Fig. 2(e) and (f) compare the work-function of the 100 nm thick ion-plated and sputtered ITO films measured using ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS). The work-function was calculated using eqn (1).
Work-function = hv − Ecut off
(1)

hv is the energy of the irradiated light source, and Ecut off is the cut off energy. We used HeI (21.22 eV) as the irradiated light source. Ecut off was determined by extrapolation as shown in Fig. 2(e) and (f). UPS analysis showed that the work function (3.86 eV) of the ion-plated ITO films was similar to that (3.84 eV) of the sputtered ITO film, even though they were deposited using different coating methods. Similar work functions indicate that the ion-plated ITO film could replace a sputtered ITO film as a transparent and flexible anode for extraction of hole carriers from an active perovskite layer.

Ion-plated
Sputtered ITO
10 nm
20 nm
50 nm
80 nm
100 nm
100 nm
Transmittance [%] (@550 nm)
90.03
87.37
82.85
81.95
83.07
76.21
TransAve [%] (400–800 nm)
89.91
88.11
84.02
84.21
85.88
76.42
FESEM analysis was performed to compare the surface morphologies and growth mechanisms of sputtered and ion-plated ITO films with increasing thickness, as shown in Fig. 3(a). For the ion-plated ITO films in Fig. 3(a), the grains or subgrains were not clearly observed below a thickness of 50 nm. However, the 80 and 100 nm thick ITO films showed well-developed grains and subgrains with very smooth surface morphologies. The 100 nm thick ion-plated ITO film showed a flat and smooth surface without special shaped morphologies found in typical sputtered ITO films due to the absence of resputtering effects during the ion plating process. The surface morphology of the sputtered ITO films (also in Fig. 3(a)) was similar to ion plated ITO films below a thickness of 50 nm. They showed a featureless surface morphology. However, with increasing thickness, the sputtered ITO films showed a typical surface morphology and subgrains with a preferred orientation. As we described in our previous work, the sputtered ITO films exhibited triangular-shaped, square-shaped and rectangular-shaped subgrain structures depending on the preferred orientation of (222), (400), and (440) planes of the ITO subgrains. They showed specific surface morphologies due to different surface energies and resputtering rates at specific planes exposed to high energy plasma, as can be seen in the FESEM images. Therefore, the surfaces of the ion-plated ITO films are smooth and featureless, while the surfaces of the sputtered ITO films were rough due to the re-sputtering effect. The atomically flat ITO surface is beneficial to improve the uniformity of buffer layer or perovskite active layer on the ITO electrode. Because typical buffer layer and perovskite active layer were coated by printing process, the atomically flat ITO film could improve the coating uniformity in fabrication of large-area perovskite solar cells. XRD plots (Fig. S2) were obtained from ion-plated ITO films with increasing thickness. The diffraction peaks appear at 2θ = 30.39°, 35.41°, 50.88° and 60.46°, which correspond to the (222), (400), (440) and (622) planes of the polycrystalline ion-plated ITO films. With increasing thickness, the (222) intensity also increased due to the preferred orientation of crystallized ion-plated ITO films. During the ion plating process, the accelerated energetic ions arriving at the surface of substrate led to crystallization without intentional substrate heating. In addition, there was no re-sputtering effect in the ion plating process because the plasma beam is located out of the substrate region as shown in Fig. 1(d). Therefore, the combined effect of high energy of accelerated ions and absence of the re-sputtering effect resulted in ion-plated ITO films prepared at room temperature that showed well-developed polycrystalline structure with an atomically flat surface. Cross-sectional bright field (BF) TEM analysis was employed to compare the microstructure of the ion-plated grown ITO films and sputtered ITO films, as shown in Fig. 3(b). From the results of the HRTEM images, we observed distinct differences in microstructures and surface morphologies between ion-plated and sputtered ITO films. In the case of sputtered ITO films shown in Fig. 3(b), the cross-sectional TEM image showed vertically well-developed columnar structures. In addition, a fairly rough surface morphology was observed due to resputtering effects on the surface of the ITO films during the DC sputtering process. However, the cross-sectional TEM image of ion-plated grown ITO films showed uniform contrast in all film regions and atomically smooth surfaces due to the absence of the resputtering effect. It was clear that dense ITO films formed on the PET substrate as high energy ions accelerated to the PET substrate. Therefore, we did not observe a columnar structure in the ion-plated ITO films, unlike the sputtered ITO films. Fig. 3(c) shows enlarged cross-sectional TEM images and fast Fourier transform (FFT) patterns obtained from ion plated ITO films to investigate the microstructures of the bottom, middle and top regions of the ion plated ITO film. The cross-sectional TEM image shows that the ion-plated ITO film PET substrate had a dense crystalline structure with a smooth surface morphology. It was noteworthy that there were no fibrous grains or columnar structures observed in typical sputtered ITO films even though the films were grown at room temperature. Based on the structure-zone-models (SZMs), the film grown in the zone 1 region (Ts/Tm < 0.3) has a columnar structure consisting of inverted cone-like units capped by domes and separated by voided boundaries. However, the ion-plated ITO film prepared at room temperature showed a dense polycrystalline structure due to the high energy flux of ions from the plasma region to the PET substrate region. The room mean square (RMS) roughness and surface morphology of the ion-plated ITO film and sputtered ITO film were measured by means of AFM as shown in the Fig. S3. As we expected from TEM and SEM images, the RMS roughness (0.8 nm) of the ion plated ITO film is much lower than that (2.0 nm) of the sputtered ITO films as observed in Fig. S3(a) and (b).
The enlarged TEM image obtained from the bottom, middle and top regions showed a typical bixbyite structure with a preferred orientation, as confirmed by XRD plots. The top region of the ion-plated ITO film had an interplanar spacing of 2.568 Å as shown in Fig. 3(c). This interplanar spacing corresponds to the (400) planes, and the lattice constant was calculated to be 10.272 Å from the interplanar spacing. In addition, strong dots in FFT patterns (inset of Fig. 3(c)) indicated the well-developed polycrystalline structure of the ITO film. Interplanar spacings of 2.9727 Å and 2.9739 Å were observed in the enlarged TEM images obtained from the middle region and bottom regions of the ion-plated ITO film, respectively. These correspond to the (222) plane of the ITO film. The FFT pattern in the inset also shows a well-developed crystalline structure. The cross-sectional TEM images and FFT patterns show that the plasma arc ion plating process is a desirable room temperature process to prepare high quality crystalline ITO films on PET substrates at room temperature. From XRD patterns and HRTEM images, we can compare the interplanar spacing and the lattice constants of the 100 nm thick ion-plated ITO films. As shown in the Fig. 3c, the (222) planes were strongly developed at the middle and bottom of the ion-plated ITO films. The interplanar spacing of the middle and bottom of the ion-plated ITO film is 2.9727 and 2.9739 Å, respectively. From the interplanar spacing, the lattice constant of the ion-plated ITO films can be calculated. The lattice constant (a222) of the middle and bottom of ion-plated ITO films is 10.30 and 10.30 Å, respectively. The interplanar spacing of the top of the ion-plated ITO films is 2.568 Å. The (400) planes were strongly developed at the top of the ion-plated ITO films. From the equation, the lattice constant (a400) of the top of the ion-plated ITO films is 10.27 Å. The interplanar spacing and the lattice constants of the 100 nm thick ion-plated ITO films also can be calculated by using XRD patterns. Based on Bragg's law, the d222 and d400 are 2.9412 and 2.5474 Å, respectively. The measured and calculated lattice constants and interplanar spacing are summarized in the Table 2.
Interplanar spacing [Å]
Lattice constant [Å]
XRD patterns

d
222: 2.941

a
222: 10.19

d
400: 2.547

a
400: 10.19
HRTEM images

d
222: 2.973

a
222: 10.30

d
400: 2.568

a
400: 10.27
To compare the mechanical properties of the ion-plated and sputtered ITO films, we measured the resistance change in the ITO films during inner and outer bending. The inset photographs of the Fig. 4(a) show the outer and inner bending test, where ITO films were bent by pressing vertical plates. Fig. 4(a) and (b) show outer and inner bending tests of the ion plated and sputtered ITO films with decreasing bending radius. The ITO films experienced tensile stress when the substrate flexed in the outer direction during the outer bending tests as shown in Fig. 4(a). The ion-plated ITO film showed a constant resistance change until the bending radius reached 5 mm, whereas the resistance of the DC sputtered ITO films changed at a bending radius of 8 mm. Further decreasing the outer bending radius lead to an abrupt increase in the resistance change due to disconnections in the current flow path. Formation and propagation of cracks perpendicular to the bending direction could separate the cracked ITO films and disconnect the current flow path. Comparing the critical bending radius (5 mm) of the ion-plated ITO films, the sputtered ITO films showed a larger critical bending radius of 8 mm. Fig. 4(b) shows the results of the inner bending test of the ion-plated and sputtered ITO films as a function of inner bending radius. The ion-plated ITO film showed almost constant resistance change until the bending radius reached 2 mm, whereas the resistance of the sputtered ITO films changed at a bending radius of 4 mm. Results of the outer and inner bending tests for the ion-plated and sputtered ITO films confirmed that the ion-plated ITO film had better flexibility than the sputtered ITO film. The better flexibility of the ion-plated ITO film on PET substrate was attributed to the better adhesion of the ion-plated ITO film than the sputtered ITO film. As shown in Fig. 1(a), the acceleration of ions to the PET substrate led to better adhesion of the ion-plated ITO films than the sputtered ITO film. In the case of the sputtering process, the sputtered atoms showed fairly wide energy distribution (0–80 eV) because they are obtained from momentum transfer of the bombarded Ar+ ions. However, the ion-plated ions showed the narrow energy distribution (3–33 eV), which enhanced the better adhesion between ITO film and PET substrates. The inset photographs of the Fig. 4(c) show the dynamic fatigue tests steps. Fig. 4(c) and (d) show the results of the repeated outer and inner bending fatigue tests obtained from the ion-plated and sputtered ITO films as a function of the bending cycles at a fixed bending radius of 6 mm. The sputtered ITO film showed a gradually increase in the resistance change under repeated outer bending cycles due to the propagation of cracks and delamination of the cracked ITO films from the PET substrates. On the other hand, the ion-plated ITO film showed a constant resistance change during repeated outer bending cycles for 10000 times. However, both ITO films showed constant resistance change during repeated inner bending tests, even at a small inner bending radius of 6 mm. The cracked ITO films experienced compressive stress during inner bending, and therefore the cracked film can overlap or remain physically connected. Therefore, there is no resistance change in repeated inner bending tests. The inner and outer bending tests showed that the ion-plated ITO film has better flexibility than the sputtered ITO film.

Fig. 5(a) and (b) shows photographs of the flexible perovskite solar cell with the ion-plated ITO electrodes and the band energy diagram of the flexible (CH3NH3PbI3) MAPbI3 perovskite solar cell. Fig. 5(c) and (d) show the cross-sectional BF HRTEM image of flexible MAPbI3 perovskite solar cells composed of PET/ion-plated ITO/ZnO/MAPbI3/PTAA (poly-triarylamine)/Au. Many researchers try to substitute the ITO for other transparent conducting electrodes such as Ag nanowires or metal grids. However, Ag nanowires have a major obstacle as transparent electrodes in optoelectronic devices because the rough surface of the Ag nanowires can lead to short circuits in the optoelectronic devices. When the Ag nanowires are stacked, the surface roughness increased to 2–3 times the diameter of the wires. Lee et al., applied high mechanical pressure to flatten the deposited Ag nanowires. Jin et al. reduced the surface roughness of the Ag nanowires by transfer techniques. Yu et al. and Zeng et al. embedded the Ag nanowires into organic matrices to reduce the surface roughness. Also, Chen et al. embedded a metal mesh for reducing the surface roughness. All the efforts for reducing the surface roughness of the transparent conductive electrodes require a lot of time and cost, which increases the price of the electrodes. However, as can be seen in Fig. 5(c) and (d), the cross sectional TEM image clearly shows a dense ITO anode with an atomically flat surface morphology without any interfacial layers. The enlarged interface region in Fig. 5(d) shows a well-defined interface between crystalline ITO and a ZnO buffer layer. In particular, the interface between ion-plated ITO and ZnO was very clean, and no interfacial reactions occurred. Consequently, the ion-plated ITO films with low sheet resistance, high optical transmittance, flat surface morphologies, similar work functions and better flexibility are promising flexible electrode materials for high performance flexible perovskite solar cells. Upon illumination of light, the MAPbI3 light absorber generates loosely bonded electron–hole pairs or free charge carriers due to the small exciton binding energy below 2kT ≈ 25 meV, where k is the Boltzmann constant and T is absolute temperature. As shown in the Fig. 5(b), the electrons and holes are then transported into a ZnO electron conductor and PTAA hole conductor, respectively. Here, it should be noted that the incident light passes through the flexible ion-plated ITO/PET substrates, and (at the same time) the electrons coming from the ZnO electron conducting layer are also collected into ITO electrodes. Therefore, the performance of flexible MAPbI3 perovskite solar cells will improve as higher transparency and better conductivity are achieved in the ion-plated ITO/PET substrates. The transmittance spectra of the 100 nm thick sputtered ITO/PET substrate, the 100 nm thick ion-plated ITO/PET substrate and the difference in transmittance between the sputtered ITO/PET substrate and the ion-plated ITO/PET substrate (ΔT) were obtained for comparison (Fig. S4). The ion-plated ITO/PET substrate exhibited a higher transmittance than the sputtered ITO/PET substrate over the entire wavelength. The ion-plated ITO/PET film showed ∼30%, ∼6%, and ∼10% more transparency in the UV region (<400 nm-wavelength), visible region (400 nm–700 nm wavelength), and near infrared region (>700 nm-wavelength), respectively, than the sputtered ITO/PET films.

Fig. 6(a) shows calculated JSC and the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra of flexible MAPbI3 perovskite solar cells, indicating that the ion-plated ITO/PET substrate based flexible MAPbI3 perovskite solar cell has better EQE values than the sputtered ITO/PET substrate-based flexible solar cell. The difference in the shapes of the EQE spectrum for the ion-plated ITO/PET substrate-based device and the sputtered ITO/PET substrate-based one (ΔEQE) was similar to the ΔT spectrum (Fig. S4) because the EQE value is a product of light harvesting efficiency (ηlhe), charge separation efficiency (ηcs), and charge collection efficiency (ηcc). The calculated JSC of the sputtered ITO films and ion-plated ITO films are 17.59 and 19.05 mA cm−2, respectively. Fig. 6(b) and (c) are the current density–voltage (J–V) curves of flexible MAPbI3 perovskite solar cells fabricated on the sputtered ITO/PET substrate (Fig. 6(b)) and the ion-plated ITO/PET substrate (Fig. 6(c)) with respect to the forward and reverse scan direction. The sputtered ITO/PET film-based flexible MAPbI3 perovskite solar cell exhibited a 1.1 V open circuit voltage (Voc), 17.7 mA cm−2 short circuit current density (Jsc), 76.9% fill factor (FF), and 15.0% power conversion efficiency (η) for the forward scan condition and a 1.1 V Voc, 17.8 mA cm−2Jsc, 78.8% FF, and 15.4% η for the reverse scan condition, whereas the ion-plated grown ITO/PET film based flexible solar cell had a 1.1 V Voc, 19.3 mA cm−2Jsc, 77.8% FF, and 16.5% η for the forward scan condition and 1.1 V Voc, 19.3 mA cm−2Jsc, 79.0% FF, and 16.8% η for the reverse scan condition. A summary of the photovoltaic properties of flexible MAPbI3 perovskite solar cells are listed in Table 3. The improved device efficiency was attributed to the improved Jsc and FF because the ion-plated ITO/PET substrate has better transparency and conductivity than the sputtered ITO/PET substrate; thereby, the ion-plated ITO/PET based cell exhibited a 6.99 Ω cm2 series resistance (RS) and 4.00 kΩ cm2 shunt resistance (RSH), whereas the conventional ITO/PET based cell had a 7.94 Ω cm2RS and a 1.43 kΩ cm2RSH. Bending tests were performed to compare the stability of the flexible solar cells fabricated on the sputtered ITO/PET substrate and ion-plated ITO/PET substrate against the bending curvature radius (Fig. 6(d)) and bending cycles (Fig. 6(e) and (f)). The power conversion efficiencies of both flexible perovskite solar cells were measured after bending the devices to different curvatures as shown in Fig. 6(d). Overall, the ion-plated ITO/PET film based flexible solar cells exhibited better efficiency against the bending radius than the sputtered ITO/PET based cells. The ion-plated ITO/PET based flexible MAPbI3 solar cells also exhibited better stability of efficiency with repeated bending cycles than the sputtered ITO/PET substrate based solar cells as shown in Fig. 6(e) and (f).
Device type
Scan direction

V
oc [V]

J
sc [mA cm−2]
FF [%]

η [%]

R
S [Ω cm2]

R
SH [kΩ cm2]
Sputtered ITO/PET
Forward
1.1
17.7
76.9
15.0
7.94
1.43
Reverse
1.1
17.8
78.8
15.4
Ion-plated ITO/PET
Forward
1.1
19.3
77.8
16.5
6.99
4.00
Reverse
1.1
19.3
79.0
16.8
Better performances of the perovskite solar cells with ion-plated ITO films also can be expected from the series resistance of transparent conducting electrodes. Fig. 7(a) showed the three-dimensional view of the perovskite solar cells. The generated currents flow perpendicular to the perovskite active layer along the ITO electrodes to be extracted from the perovskite solar cells. The series resistance from the ITO electrodes could be calculated with some assumptions. First, the currents flow uniformly over the active area of the perovskite solar cells. Second, the lateral currents in the ITO electrodes a distance (x) away from the collecting contact was obtained by integrating the current density (J) from the distance (x) to the edge of the perovskite solar cells (a), as follows;
(2)

J is the current density from the active layer of the perovskite solar cells and the a is the length of the Au electrodes of the perovskite solar cells. The voltage drops (VITO) introduced by the currents collected through the ITO layer can be calculated from the product of the current distribution (IITO) and the incremental resistance (dV = IdR), as follows;

(3)

ρITO is the electrical resistivity of the ITO electrodes and t is the thickness of the ITO electrodes thickness. Also, a is larger than b/2 (a > b/2). Finally, the series resistance can be expressed by following equation;

(4)
The equation showed that the series resistance of the perovskite solar cells is directly proportional to the electrical resistivity of the films. Therefore, better performance of the flexible perovskite solar cells with ion plated ITO film could be attributed to the lower resistivity of the ion plated ITO film than that of sputtered ITO films.

In summary, we demonstrated the feasibility of using an ion-plated ITO film as a high quality flexible electrode for flexible perovskite solar cells to replace conventional sputtered ITO film. The 100 nm thick ion plated ITO film prepared at room temperature showed a sheet resistance of 15.75 Ohm per square, a high average optical transmittance of 85.88% and an inner and outer bending radius of 2 and 5 mm, which are better than sputtered ITO films. Energetic ITO ions accelerated to the substrate led to better crystallinity and adhesion than sputtered ITO films. In addition, the different growth mechanism and absence of resputtering effects during ion plating process resulted in ion-plated ITO films that showed atomically flat and smooth surfaces. Flexible perovskite solar cells fabricated on the ion-plated ITO electrodes showed a higher power conversion efficiency of 16.8% than sputtered ITO-based perovskite solar cells due to the low sheet resistance and high optical transmittance. This demonstrated that plasma arc ion plating is a promising low temperature and large area coating technique to prepare high quality flexible and transparent ITO electrodes for high performance flexible perovskite solar cells.


The authors declare no competing financial and nonfinancial interests.


This work was supported by the Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning (KETEP) and the Ministry of Trade, Industry & Energy (MOTIE) of the Republic of Korea (No. 20163010012200) and Korea Electric Power Corporation (KEPCO) Research Institute. This study also received partial support from a National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korean government (MSIP) (No. 2018R1A2B2003826).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8nr06586a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018