 DOI: 10.1039/C3NR03165A
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 11649-11656


Han
Yan
,

Denghua
Li
,

Chang
He
,

Zhixiang
Wei
*,

Yanlian
Yang
* and 

Yongfang
Li


National Center for Nanoscience and Technology, Beijing 100190, P. R. China. E-mail: weizx@nanoctr.cn; yangyl@nanoctr.cn; Fax: +86-10-62656765; Tel: +86-10-82545565

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100039, P. R. China

Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, P. R. China

Received
20th June 2013
, Accepted 9th September 2013
First published on 11th September 2013
Organic solar cells have become a promising energy conversion candidate because of their unique advantages. Novel fullerene derivatives, as a common acceptor, can increase power conversion efficiency (PCE) by increasing the open-circuit voltage. As a representative acceptor, Indene-C60 bisadduct (ICBA) can reach high efficiency with poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT). On the other hand, the novel synthesized polymers mainly aimed to broaden the optical absorption range have steadily promoted efficiency to higher than 9%. However, it is challenging to obtain the desired result by simply combining ICBA with other high-efficiency donors. Thus, P3HT or a high-efficiency polymer PBDTTT-C-T (copolymer of thienyl-substituted BDT with substituted TT) is used as donor and PCBM or ICBA as acceptor in this article to clarify the mechanism behind these materials. The optical and photovoltaic properties of the materials are studied for pair-wise combination. Among these four material groups, the highest PCE of 6.2% is obtained for the PBDTTT-C-T/PCBM combination while the lowest PCE of 3.5% is obtained for the PBDTTT-C-T/ICBA combination. The impact of the mesoscopic heterogeneity on the local mesoscopic photoelectric properties is identified by photo-conductive AFM (pc-AFM), and the consistence between the mesoscopic properties and the macroscopic device performances is also observed. Based on these results, an interface combined model is proposed based on the mesoscopic phase heterogeneity. This study provides a new view on the rational selection of photovoltaic materials, where, aside from the traditional energy level and absorption spectrum matching, the matching of mesoscopic heterogeneity must also be considered.

Polymer solar cells (PSCs) have attracted increasing interest from both the academic and industrial fields because of their unique advantages. The scalable methods both for fast manufacturing and proper implementation into a larger system are key factors to fill the gaps between these two fields, which require a deeper understanding of the principle of material design and the control of mesoscopic phase heterogeneity. The most efficient PSC devices contain two blend components: an electron donor polymer and a fullerene derivative acceptor. In the past decade, the novel synthesized donor polymers from homopolymer to donor–acceptor architecture copolymer have steadily promoted the power conversion efficiency (PCE) because of their efficient light harvesting capabilities, which increases the photocurrent density. The semiconducting copolymers comprising benzodithiophene (BDT) and thieno [3,4-b] thiophene (TT) alternating repeat units are the most promising candidates, with a PCE record of more than 9%. At the same time, Li's group has successfully reported that the Indene-C60 bisadduct (ICBA) acceptor improved the PCE of PSCs based on poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) from 4% to 6.5% due to the enhancement of the open-circuit voltage (Voc). It seems that combining these novel donor and acceptor materials would further increase the overall PCE values. Unfortunately, this idea does not work well and cannot be explained by the aspects of the material design.

Aside from the material design, the improvement of PSC performance can also be attributed to the formation of a well-defined bulk heterojunction (BHJ) structure of the active layers. The ideal BHJ structure forms a bi-continuous network, with a domain size within twice the exciton diffusion length, which guarantees a high donor–acceptor interfacial area to support the exciton dissociation and efficient transport of separated charges to the respective electrodes. The photoactive layer is deposited from a donor–acceptor mixed solution; thus, both thermodynamic and kinetic factors significantly influence the BHJ structures. The thermodynamic parameters are determined by the structures of the donor and the acceptor, whereas the kinetic parameters are utilized to optimize the film morphology using thermal annealing, solvent annealing or adding solvent additives. Controlling the thermodynamic and kinetic parameters is a complex process, thus, no general rule exists to optimize BHJ structures. Understanding the relationship between the phase behavior of molecular aggregations and the macroscopic device performance may provide a rational rule to construct high performance PSCs via the rational combination of donor and acceptor materials.
In this study, high performance polymers, namely, P3HT and PBDTTT-C-T (thienyl-substituted BDT with substituted TT), were used as electron donors, and fullerene derivatives, namely, PCBM ([6,6]-phenyl C61-butyric acid methyl ester) and ICBA, were used as electron acceptors to systematically study the phase behavior, mesoscopic heterogeneity, and their effects on macroscopic device performance. The in situ mesoscopic photoelectric properties, especially the charge separation and transport of different mesoscopic heterojunctions have also been investigated using Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM) and photo-conductive atomic force microscopy (pc-AFM). Based on these, a phase interface related model has been proposed in this study. The interpenetrating networks of the polymer have two roles, namely, stream guidance and space confinement, which can increase the miscibility and control the phase separation extent between polymer and fullerene derivative. These processes can explain the phase behavior and mesoscopic heterogeneity of the blend film, and further illustrate the structure–property relationships in polymer solar cells. This study may effectively supplement the material combining principles and further lead to a higher conversion efficiency.

P3HT (Sigma-Aldrich, Mn ∼ 64000, 98.5% regioregular), PBDTTT-C-T and ICBA (Solarmer Energy. Inc.), and PCBM (American Dye Source, Inc., 99.5%) were used as received. Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxy thiophene):poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) (Baytron PVP Al 4083) was purchased from H. C. Stark.


Indium-tin oxide (ITO)-coated glass (15 Ω sq−1) was cleaned successively with deionized water, ethanol, acetone, and isopropyl alcohol thrice for 15 min, and then dried at 150 °C for 30 min. After completely drying, the ITO glass was exposed to UV-ozone for 15 min. The PEDOT:PSS was filtered through a 0.45 μm syringe filter, spin coated for 40 nm thickness, and then annealed at 140 °C for 10 min in an ambient atmosphere. P3HT was blended with PCBM or ICBA in o-dichlorobenzene (oDCB) at a weight ratio of 1:1 and concentration of 17 mg mL−1. PBDTTT-C-T was blended with PCBM or ICBA at a weight ratio of 1:1.5 and concentration of 10 mg mL−1 in oDCB. The solutions were first stirred at 70 °C for more than 3 h, and then at room temperature for over 10 h. 3% 1,8-diiodideoctane (DIO) was added to PBDTTT-C-T solutions before being used. The PSCs were processed in a N2-filled glove box. The spin-coated PSCs were fabricated using the different solutions. To improve the device performance, thermal annealing was performed prior to electrode deposition for P3HT-based blend films at 150 °C for 10 min. While the PBDTTT-C-T-based blend films were not thermally annealed. After the whole film-forming process, Al (80 nm)/Ca (20 nm) was thermally evaporated on top of the active layer under vacuum lower than 2 × 10−6 mbar. The effective area of the standard PSC device was 0.04 cm2.


For in situ measurement and characterization, the samples were processed using the same method as the PSC production. Optical absorption spectra of the samples were recorded on a UV-vis-IR spectrometer (Lambda 650/850/950 UV-vis spectrometer, PerkinElmer). The corresponding photoluminescence (PL) spectra of samples were measured on a PL spectrometer (LS-45/55 fluorescence spectrometer, PerkinElmer) with a Xe lamp. The morphology of the active layer on PEDOT:PSS coated ITO surface was observed by using tapping-mode AFM (Dimension icon, Bruker Nano). KPFM and pc-AFM investigation was performed in the dark and under continuous wave laser illumination at 532 nm and 650 nm using a commercial diode-pumped solid state laser at 50 mW. These wavelengths have been selected because they separately fit well with the peak of the absorption band of the polymers. The photovoltaic performance was measured using a Keithley 2400 sourcemeter under AM1.5G (100 mW cm−2) simulated by a solar simulator (Newport Oriel). The light intensity was calibrated using a photodiode and light intensity meter prior to measurements.


The molecular chemical structures in this study are shown in Fig. 1a. Four groups, namely, P3HT/PCBM, P3HT/ICBA, PBDTTT-C-T/PCBM, and PBDTTT-C-T/ICBA, were used for pair-wise combination. P3HT/PCBM is the model system for PSCs, whereas ICBA can further increase the Voc of the device with P3HT. PBDTTT-C-T is one of the best donor materials with PCBM according to the published result. The corresponding absorption spectroscopy of the blend films is shown in Fig. 1b. For P3HT-based absorption spectra, shoulder peaks were observed at about 550 and 610 nm, representing the ordered inter-chain π–π stacking. For PBDTTT-C-T-based films, the profiles of absorption spectra were similar to the molecules in the solution, indicating no regular intermolecular stacking. For the fullerene-derivatives, PCBM showed a sharp absorption peak at about 345 nm, indicating ordered aggregation in the blend films with both P3HT and PBDTTT-C-T. However, no clear absorption peak was observed for ICBA, which was consistent with previous reports. The absorption spectra of the binary-phase blend films were almost the same for polymer combined with different fullerene derivatives indicating no obvious molecular packing differences within the blend films. The main photoelectrical process for traditional binary-phase blend films is the charge transfer (CT) process at the D–A interface. The CT process can be simply proven by photoluminescence quenching in the blend film. Fig. 1c shows that the quenching extent varied for different combinations, although the absorption intensities of the two blend films containing one polymer were the same. The quenching extent was smaller for polymers combined with ICBA than that of with PCBM, especially for the PBDTTT-C-T blend film. Here we suggest that the different quenching extents for polymers combined with ICBA and PCBM might come from a varied phase separation scale in blend films. To compare the performances of the binary-phase device fabricated with different material combinations, standard sandwich-type PSCs were fabricated. All PSCs were tested under AM1.5G, 100 mW cm−2.


Fig. 1d shows the current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the PSCs under optimized conditions. The photovoltaic performance data, including the Voc, short circuit current density (Jsc), fill factor (FF), and PCE values are summarized in Table 1. When combined with ICBA, the Voc was enhanced significantly, whereas the Jsc decreased. The enhancement of Voc for the PBDTTT-C-T/ICBA system could not compensate the decrease of Jsc, thereby leading to lower overall PCE. Considering the differences in the extent of photoluminescence quenching, the decrease of Jsc may be attributed to the non-ideal morphology in the photoactive layer.
Material system

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
P3HT/PCBM
0.63
10.38
69
4.6
P3HT/ICBA
0.87
9.6
67
5.6
PBDTTT-C-T/PCBM
0.81
13.2
59
6.2
PBDTTT-C-T/ICBA
0.97
7.8
46
3.5

The morphology of the active layers was further characterized by AFM phase images, which could distinguish chemical compositions between different domains according to the mechanical properties. AFM images were obtained with a silicon cantilever with a spring constant of 0.2 N mm−1 and the images are shown in Fig. 2 (corresponding topographic images are listed in Fig. S1). From the images we could clearly identify the phase separation with domain boundaries. Comparing with the topographic images, we cannot find any correlation between topographic and phase images. This indicates the negligible impact of the topographic profiles on the phase separation in phase images. The images exhibited bright and dark regions, wherein, the bright regions were assigned as the polymer-rich regions, and dark regions were fullerene derivative-rich. Uniform polymer nanowire networks were clearly visualized all over the P3HT blend films (Fig. 2a and b), whereas small nanoparticles were observed for the PBDTTT-C-T blend films (Fig. 2c and d). The small nanoparticles in the PBDTTT-C-T/PCBM system showed a tendency to form nanowires with elliptical shapes; whereas the uncontinuous polymer networks in the PBDTTT-C-T/ICBA system. Moreover, over-aggregated fullerene domains were observed in the PBDTTT-C-T blend films, especially those combined with ICBA. This result may be attributed to the different self-assembly abilities ascribed to their molecular structures. Compared with P3HT, the larger conjugated structure of PBDTTT-C-T increased its intermolecular stacking interactions, whereas its molecular complexity limited its ability to assemble into a one-dimensional ordered structure. This phenomenon can be confirmed by the XRD results shown in Fig. S2. Moreover, the alkyl-chains of PCBM increased their miscibility with the polymer matrix. However, simply observing the morphology aspect cannot accurately clarify the relationship between mesoscopic morphology and macroscopic device performance. For example, although there exist large scale of fullerene derivative aggregations in PBDTTT-C-T blend films, we can also observe a smaller scale of polymer phase compared to P3HT. Combining these, it is hard to judge the charge separation extent of the P3HT and PBDTTT-C-T blend films. Thus we use scanning probe microscopy (SPM) to in situ characterize the quantitative optoelectronic properties that are related to specific morphology.


The macroscopic performance of a cell is the sum of local contributions, thus, quantitative information and relevance between photovoltaic performance and local morphology are important. KPFM allowed the direct measurement of the spatial surface potential of the devices and provided information on the mesoscopic charge separation. The surface potential is the offset of the tip–sample work function. The schematics of the material-tip electronic structure are shown in Fig. 3a and b. These offset values of the Fermi levels for donor and acceptor provide the contrast of surface potential in the dark (Fig. 3a). Charge separation occurs at the donor–acceptor interface when light is applied; the lack of a circuit leads to accumulation of positive charges on the donor and negative charges on the acceptor. The charge accumulation decreases the deviation of the Fermi level between the organics (Fig. 3b); thus a decreased contrast should exist for surface potential under optical illumination.

Based on this knowledge, the surface potential of all samples was characterized in the dark (Fig. 3c–f; the corresponding height images are shown in Fig. S3). The bright spots represent polymer-rich regions, whereas the dark spots represent fullerene-rich regions based on the difference in contact potential. Because the KPFM images could only probe surface information with relatively low resolution, we cannot simply conclude the phase separation extent according to these results. Based on the different absorption bands of P3HT and PBDTTT-C-T blend films (Fig. 1c), different illumination lights (532 and 650 nm) were chosen for the KPFM investigations. When illumination was separately applied on the P3HT and PBDTTT-C-T blend films, the images became blurred because of the decreased potential contrast. To obtain quantitative information, the statistical method for counting the distribution of surface potential was introduced. The peak positions were 3.35, 3.05, 5.79, and 5.19 mV for P3HT/PCBM, P3HT/ICBA, PBDTTT-C-T/PCBM, and PBDTTT-C-T/ICBA blend films in the dark, respectively; whereas the peak points were 2.13, 2.45, 3.96, and 4.27 mV under illumination. The corresponding offset values were 1.22, 0.60, 1.83, and 0.92 mV, which can be correlated with the amount of separated charges under illumination. Thus, the separated charges can be sorted at the donor–acceptor interface. The polymer combined with PCBM showed larger charge separation ability, which was consistent with the PL spectrum results, and partly explain the high Jsc in macro-devices. Further, the offset values of the surface potential are always larger for the PBDTTT-C-T blend films than those of the P3HT-based films. This result may be ascribed to the different self-assembled structure of polymers in blend films. The nanoparticle-like PBDTTT-C-T phases certainly have a larger area of interfaces than the nanowire-like P3HT phases, which is benificial for charge separation. However the charge separation is only one aspect that affects Jsc, we should systematically consider both factors before clarifying the morphology–property relationship.


J
sc is mainly determined by two factors, namely, charge separation and charge transport. High-resolution electrical characterization using pc-AFM was performed to fully understand the morphology-correlated Jsc at the nanoscale level. Pc-AFM is widely used for characterizing the in situ electrical properties of organic semiconductors. In addition, it can measure the current flowing between a conductive probe and a sample upon DC bias, with sensitivity down to 1 pA. Different from the KPFM method, contact-mode is utilized for the pc-AFM when tips scan the samples; thus, the spatial resolution of pc-AFM is as small as the tip-sample contact area, which can be less than 20 nm for the tip radius around 10 nm. As an active layer of the photovoltaic device, the photocurrent images can provide more information about the charge transport mechanism in real devices. In this study, a sufficiently positive sample bias of +2 V was used considering the work function of the tip (Pt/Ir, 80/20) and substrate, indicating that pc-AFM images provided a map of the hole-only transport properties of the films (Fig. 4a–d). 532 or 650 nm laser was separately applied on P3HT or PBDTTT-C-T blend films. The color code was set as red for the positive current values (positive DC tip bias). Therefore, the distinct dark spots in the current images correspond to the fullerene-rich phases with inefficient hole injection, whereas the bright spots represent the polymer-rich regions. Uniform and continuous hole transporting pathways in P3HT-based blend films with higher hole current (average currents are 68.6 pA for combining with PCBM and 59.3 pA for combining with ICBA) (Fig. 4a and b) were observed, while lower hole current was obtained for PBDTTT-C-T-based blend films (average currents are 4.5 pA for combining with PCBM and 3.9 pA for combining with ICBA) (Fig. 4c and d). This phenomenon is in agreement with the morphology observed from AFM phase images. The connected nanowires can act as the hole transporting high-way in the blend matrix. Although the PBDTTT-C-T/PCBM blend film showed nanoparticle-like morphology, good mesoscopic heterogeneity can still be observed due to the connection of elliptical nanoparticles. However, large scale stripe-like hole transporting pathways and low hole current were observed in the PBDTTT-C-T/ICBA blend film due to its uncontinuous nanoparticle networks.

At the same location, the images at an applied bias of −2 V were obtained to illustrate the electron collection pathways (Fig. 4e–h). These images show that the electron transport pathways were extremely spatially heterogeneous in the blend films, similar to the hole transport. One-dimensional electron transporting pathways were observed all over the P3HT/PCBM and P3HT/ICBA films (Fig. 4e and f), whereas the PBDTTT-C-T-based blend films showed disordered electron pathways. The statistic average values of the electron-current were 117.7 pA for P3HT/PCBM, 128.6 pA for P3HT/ICBA, 46.7 pA for PBDTTT-C-T/PCBM, and 24.8 pA for PBDTTT-C-T/ICBA. The electron current densities greatly increased compared with the hole current increase. The ease of electron collection at the top surface could be well understood by the relative energy level alignment of the materials and scanning tip. We noticed that the average currents were lower for the PBDTTT-C-T-based films compared with those of the P3HT-based films. This result is attributed to the different polymer–fullerene morphology in blend films. P3HT can assemble into long nanowires, thereby forming the continuous hole transporting networks. These networks act as templates for fullerene derivative infiltration, accompanying the high electron transporting ability. Meanwhile, the uncontinuous PBDTTT-C-T nanoparticles introduced more un-continuous bolts for hole transport and cannot guide the fullerene derivative to form one-dimensional pathways, thereby negatively affecting the PBDTTT-C-T based films. Combining the pc-AFM results, clear information on the morphology–property relationship in polymer solar cells can be obtained. The PBDTTT-C-T based blend films showed a larger extent of charge separation, but worse charge transporting ability; whereas the P3HT based films exhibited the opposite properties. Jsc was determined by both factors, and the overall analyses were consistent with the macroscopic devices.
From the above images, bright and dark spots were observed in one image, in which these two regions were different for charge transportation. In this study, the charge transport of these regions can be revealed in greater details through the mesoscopic current–voltage (I–V) curves. Different from the current mapping, the in situ I–V curves reflected more information on the bulk heterojunction. The I–V curves were extracted from Fig. 4a–d, and plotted for the two spots with different charge transporting abilities. The voltages for all the curves recorded under illumination were swept from −4 V to +4 V (Fig. 4i–l). From these curves, the difference of Isc for the distinct regions can be obtained: 25.2 pA for P3HT/PCBM and 22.5 pA for P3HT/ICBA. However, based on the low signal to noise ratio, the Isc for the PBDTTT-C-T based films cannot be read. We also noticed that there exist large differences in I–V curves for PBDTTT-C-T blend films; whereas only small differences in P3HT blend films. And this phenomenon indicated that the material composition is not uniform in PBDTTT-C-T blend films compared to P3HT. The average rectification ratio, defined as the ratio of the current at −4 V divided by the positive current at +4 V, was 15.0 and 18.8 for P3HT/PCBM; 11.1 and 9.8 for P3HT/ICBA; 6.9 and 6.8 for PBDTTT-C-T/PCBM; and 5.9 and 3.8 for PBDTTT-C-T/ICBA at the bright and dark spots, respectively. The larger value indicated better rectifying behavior in nanoscale regions, and this is detrimental for decreasing recombination while charges are transported in the blend matrix. Thus, the smaller rectification ratio resulted in more significant bi-molecular recombination and reduced the fill factor. Based on this analysis, the charge transport mechanism under different heterogeneity conditions can be better understood. Jsc is the sum of the generating and recombining currents, and the highest value was a fine balance between the morphology-related transporting and recombining.

A series of specific evolution models were proposed to depict the active layer based on different pair-wise combined materials. In addition, the polymer–fullerene interfaces were highlighted because of its important role in charge separation and transportation (Fig. 5). First, the P3HT-based active layers show the existence of P3HT nanowires (Fig. 5a and d). The continuous nanowire networks have two roles: stream guidance and space confinement. According to previous reports, the polymers first form the frameworks, and then the capillary force induces the dissolved fullerenes to infiltrate into the frameworks during the active layer formation process. Meanwhile, the frameworks can also confine the fullerene size, preventing the over-aggregation of the fullerene domains. With the best miscibility, PCBM could be uniformly covered on P3HT networks showing coaxial cable-like features as shown in Fig. 5b. When irradiating the active layer, charge separation would occur at the interface and further transfer along the outer PCBM layers and the inner P3HT layers (Fig. 5c). Considering the lack of soluble alkyl chains on ICBA, lower miscibility with polymers of ICBA compared to PCBM would lead to a larger scale of phase separation. The different phase separation also affects the effective interfacial area, which can be represented by the thinner interface between P3HT and ICBA, as shown in Fig. 5d. This phenomenon slightly decreases the charge separation extent, similar to that of the KPFM images and the macroscopic device performances. For P3HT-based blend films, effective interfaces always exist in the matrix originating from the continuous P3HT networks. However, for the PBDTTT-C-T based blend films, the polymer cannot assemble into long nanowires, only nanoparticles are formed (Fig. 5e and f). Thus, the role of the framework stream guidance and space confinement becomes less important. PBDTTT-C-T can form integrated frameworks by connecting head to tail with each other, which is beneficial for the miscibility of PCBM. Under the guidance role, PCBM can still form continuous pathways, although no long polymer nanowires were observed. When combined with ICBA, the over aggregated ICBA cuts off the polymer frameworks, and the broken frameworks inversely cannot complete the stream guidance and space confinement role, thus a large extent of phase separation appeared. This result is not conductive to the charge transport in the blend matrix. The heterogeneity effect on the charge separation and transporting provides new insight into the rational choosing of material combination in polymer solar cells.


In conclusion, highly efficient polymers – P3HT and PBDTTT-C-T – blending with PCBM and ICBA were used as typical systems for the study of mesoscopic heterogeneity effects on the morphology-related charge separation and transporting properties. The experimental results showed that the mesoscopic morphologies are closely related to the polymer assembly behavior and polymer–fullerene miscibility. Based on these we proposed an interface-based mode which pointed out that the better assembled polymer nanowires could act as templates to guide fullerene infiltration and effectively confine the domain size, thereby forming a good mesoscopic heterojunction. These mesoscopic heterojunctions can be further correlated with macroscopic device performance, especially Jsc. In our study, mesoscopic heterogeneity is an important variable that affects device properties, which explains why simply combining highly efficient polymer and fullerenes cannot always give better performance. Our results emphasize the need to take into account phase behavior induced material miscibility when designing materials for BHJ solar cells. This work provides new insight into the rational combination of photovoltaic materials by taking into account the mesoscopic heterogeneity besides the traditional energy level and absorption spectrum matching, which would further guide the material design and device fabrication of high-performance polymer solar cells.


The work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grants 20974029 and 91027031), The Ministry of Science and Technology of China (2009CB930400, 2010DFB63530, 2011CB932300), and Chinese Academy of Sciences.


† Electronic Supplementary Information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c3nr03165a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013