 DOI: 10.1039/C8TA07134A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 18125-18132


Deyu
Liu
,

Kaili
Zhang
,

Yaqian
Zhong
,

Chunyang
Gu
,

Yonghai
Li
 and 

Renqiang
Yang
*

CAS Key Laboratory of Bio-based Materials, Qingdao Institute of Bioenergy and Bioprocess Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Qingdao 266101, China. E-mail: yangrq@qibebt.ac.cn

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China

Received
24th July 2018
, Accepted 29th August 2018
First published on 29th August 2018
Almost all high-performance non-fullerene polymer solar cells (NF-PSCs) require the optimization of the morphologies of active layers using additional complicated treatments, such as solvent additive processing and thermal annealing. There are still no guidelines currently available regarding controlling the morphologies of polymer donor and fused-ring acceptor blends from a structural point of view to avoid additional post-treatments. Here, we propose an efficient strategy to design polymers that can generate preferred morphologies and then be used to fabricate as-cast high-performance NF-PSCs. New asymmetric benzodithiophene (BDT) building blocks are employed to construct these polymers. The thienylthiol group with a long alkyl chain as one side substituent on BDT can modulate energy levels, broaden absorption spectra and improve solubility. For the key other side chain, bare rigid aryl rings (benzene, naphthalene and biphenyl) are used as lever arms to stir well the elongated acceptor (ITIC) phase and weaken entanglements among polymer chains during the spin-coating process, which enables favorable morphologies without any post-treatments. Finally, the polymer PBDTTAZ-NaPh yielded a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 11.56%, which is a rare high value for as-cast NF-PSCs. Thus, it would be feasible to employ this proposed strategy to design high-performance NF-PSCs without post-treatment that meet the requirements for future industry-scale production.

Non-fullerene polymer solar cells (NF-PSCs) have attracted great attention and made significant progress in the past two years, owing to the advantages of stronger absorption in the visible spectral region and more facile energy level modulation in comparison with conventional fullerene PSCs. Among several small molecule acceptors (SMAs), fused-ring electron acceptors (FREAs), such as ITIC, ITIC-Th and IEIC, have been shown to be a promising class of acceptor material. To date, power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of over 13% are common for bulk heterojunction (BHJ) devices based on FREA systems.

In the design and synthesis of new active materials (polymer donors and FREAs), complementary absorption and matching of energy levels are usually taken into account. By designing wide bandgap polymer donors and acceptors with strong visible-near infrared absorption, more photons can be captured and the short-circuit current density (JSC) can be improved. Meanwhile, by changing the end-capping electron-deficient groups of the acceptor, the appropriate frontier molecular orbital levels of acceptors can match well with those of polymer donors and guarantee a high open circuit voltage (VOC). Besides the above two factors, the morphology of the active layer also plays a critical role in the rapidly improved performances of NF-PSCs. However, there are no definite guidelines for the design of molecular structures to modify the morphology of the active layer. Instead, most high-performance NF-PSCs still need to have their morphologies optimized using additional complicated treatments on their active layers, such as solvent additive processing and thermal/solvent annealing. These complicated treatments go against the simple, low-cost industry-scale production of large area solar cells. Therefore, it is highly urgent and desirable to clarify the relationship between structural and morphological properties in high-performance NF-PSCs, without the additional optimization of device morphology.
Side-chain engineering plays a very important role in molecular design. The solubility, energy levels and packing of polymer donors can be tuned via side-chain engineering. Recently, we proposed a symmetry-breaking strategy to optimize side chains and design new benzodithiophene (BDT) moieties. Based on asymmetric BDT molecules with alkoxyl (one-dimensional, 1D) and aryl (two-dimensional, 2D) substituted groups, conventional fullerene PSCs achieved a PCE of around 10%. However, it was found that such strong aggregation structures could not blend well with elongated FREAs, such as ITIC, compared with a spherical fullerene acceptor (PC71BM). As a result, the poor morphologies led to low PCEs. Subsequently, we introduced an additional benzene ring into the aryl side chains. When blending with an ITIC acceptor, these rigid aryl side chains could function as a lever to stir the acceptor phase well to produce micro-phase separation, which increased the PCE from ∼7.0% to ∼10.5%. According to our exploration, it has been confirmed that the inclusion of a rigid aryl side chain in the polymer donor is one key factor to improve the intrinsic morphologic miscibility between the polymer donor and fused-ring acceptor (ITIC) in the active layer. More specifically, weakening polymeric self-aggregation via introducing twisted aryl side chains (two aryl rings) can offer some room to allow elongated ITIC molecules to embed in, and then they are also stirred well via the appropriate rigid aryl side chains acting as lever arms to form a favourable homogeneous morphology. Unfortunately, high-performance NF-PSC devices still need additional thermal annealing treatments. As is known, alkyl chains have good flexibility and can rotate at random by virtue of their intrinsic rotational degrees-of-freedom, and they can largely be influenced by external conditions, such as temperature. With reference to this, it is speculated that flexible alkyl chains may offer an explanation for why the morphologies of NF-PSCs with multiple alkyl side chains usually need additional optimization. In general, multiple alkyl side chains can make polymer chains mutually entangle and generate undesirable clusters after being spin-coated on substrates, which is not favourable for mixing with elongated ITIC. In addition, these alkyl chains on polymers are not likely to exhibit the preferred conformations. Finally, there is no choice but to employ additional processing methods to improve this.
In this regard, we designed a series of new wide bandgap polymers based on the symmetry-breaking BDT building blocks proposed by us. In the asymmetric structure, the thienylthiol group was employed as one side chain on the BDT monomer, which could lower the highest occupied molecular orbit (HOMO) energy level for high VOC values and broaden the absorption spectra for high JSC values. For the other side chain, we replaced the relatively strongly aggregating and easily tangled alkoxyl side chain with three types of rigid aryl rings (benzene, naphthalene and biphenyl), to destroy the self-aggregation of polymers in various degrees. Meanwhile, the effects of the lengths of the rigid aryl rings on the miscibility with the acceptor phase were investigated. It should be noted that there were no alkyl substituents on the three rigid aryl rings, which was expected to minimize the influence of flexible alkyl chains on morphology and remove additional optimization in device fabrication. Of course, the solubility of the polymers could be improved via alkyl groups on the thienylthiol side chain. On the other hand, in contrast, we introduced different 1D chains (alkyl, alkoxyl and alkylthiol) at the para-position of the bare benzene ring to confirm the speculation that multiple 1D side chains were not beneficial to the control of morphology and that additional optimization (additive processing and thermal annealing) may be needed. Based on six asymmetric BDT monomers (ThsBDTPh-Sn, ThsBDTNaPh-Sn, ThsBDTPhPh-Sn, ThsBDTPhR-Sn, ThsBDTPhOR-Sn and ThsBDTPhSR-Sn) and the well-known acceptor unit 4,7-bis(5-bromothiophen-2-yl)-5,6-difluoro-2-(2-hexyldodecyl)-2H-benzo[d][1,2,3]triazole (TAZ), we synthesized six new wide bandgap polymers (PBDTTAZ-Ph, PBDTTAZ-NaPh, PBDTTAZ-PhPh, PBDTTAZPh-R, PBDTTAZPh-OR and PBDTTAZPh-SR), as shown in Fig. 1. The photovoltaic devices were fabricated with the wide bandgap polymers as the donor, ITIC as the acceptor and PFN-Br as the interlayer. As a result, it was found that three polymer (PBDTTAZ-Ph, PBDTTAZ-NaPh and PBDTTAZ-PhPh with bare aryl rings) based devices showed excellent PCEs without any additive processing or thermal annealing treatment. In particular, the PBDTTAZ-NaPh polymer based device achieved a superior PCE of 11.56%. This should be the first report of an efficiency of over 11% for as-cast NF-PSCs based on a BDT and TAZ backbone. Meanwhile, as we speculated, the other three polymers (PBDTTAZPh-R, PBDTTAZPh-OR and PBDTTAZPh-SR) with different flexible alkyl chains on the benzene rings showed improved PCEs via additive (1-chloronaphthalene, CN) processing or thermal annealing treatment. However, these three polymers still didn't work well (PCE < 8.5%). The results clearly demonstrated that the lengths of rigid aryl side chains and the flexible 1D chains on them played a crucial role in photovoltaic performance, which would be instructive for developing highly efficient light-harvesting polymers for as-cast non-fullerene PSCs.

The synthetic routes to the polymer donors are outlined in Scheme S1, and the synthetic procedures are described in the ESI. The polymers were obtained through Stille polymerization using Pd(PPh3)4 as the catalyst. All polymers could be dissolved in common solvents, such as chloroform, chlorobenzene (CB) and o-dichlorobenzene (DCB). The number-average molecular weight (Mn) and polydispersity index (PDI) were measured via gel permeation chromatography (GPC), using THF as the eluant and polystyrene as the internal standard. The Mn values for PBDTTAZ-Ph, PBDTTAZ-NaPh, PBDTTAZ-PhPh, PBDTTAZPh-R, PBDTTAZPh-OR and PBDTTAZPh-SR were 43.5, 48.7, 50.2, 34.5, 53.6 and 58.1 KDa, respectively (Table S1). The thermal properties of the polymers were determined via thermogravimetric analysis (TGA), as shown in Fig. S1. The TGA results reveal that the onset temperatures with 5% weight-loss (Td) for all polymers are around 340 °C (Table S1), indicating that the thermal stabilities of the polymers are good enough for NF-PSC applications.


The UV-vis absorption spectra of the six polymers in thin film and in CB solution at room temperature are shown in Fig. 2a, b and S2, respectively, and the corresponding absorption properties are summarized in Table S1. It can be seen that the six polymers display similar hump-shaped absorption profiles. The film absorption edges (λonset) of the six polymers are located at around 635 nm and their Eoptg values are estimated to be 1.95 eV, according to Eoptg = 1240/λonset. From film to solution, the six polymers exhibit a slight blue-shift (∼10 nm) in the absorption onset (Table S1), indicating that there is no strong aggregation among the polymer chains. It is worth noting that all the absorption profiles are complementary with ITIC. This suggests that the blending of the polymers and ITIC has good light-harvesting potential.

The redox properties of the polymers were investigated via electrochemical cyclic voltammetry (CV) studies. The CV curves are shown in Fig. S3, and the results are summarized in Table S1. An energy level diagram of the materials used for the photovoltaic devices is illustrated in Fig. 2c. It can be seen that PBDTTAZ-Ph, PBDTTAZ-NaPh and PBDTTAZ-PhPh hold the same HOMO and lowest unoccupied molecular orbit (LUMO) energy levels. However, due to the weak electron-donating ability of the 1D side chains (alkyl, alkoxyl and alkylthiol) on the benzene rings, the energy levels of PBDTTAZPh-R, PBDTTAZPh-OR and PBDTTAZPh-SR are slightly higher lying. Among these, PBDTTAZPh-OR exhibits the highest HOMO energy level, which is probably due to the alkoxyl group showing the strongest electron-donating ability. In a word, the energy levels of all polymers match well with the acceptor ITIC and form a good energy cascade in the device, which would be favorable for charge transfer.

Density functional theory (DFT) calculations using the Gaussian 09 program at the B3LYP/6-31G(d,p) level were performed to gain insight into the chemical geometries and molecular energy levels of the six polymers with simplified side chains, as shown in Fig. 3 and S4. Three polymers (PBDTTAZ-Ph, PBDTTAZ-NaPh and PBDTTAZ-PhPh) show similar twisted backbone conformations and dihedral angles (from 57° to 59°) between the aryl side chains and BDT backbones (Fig. 3a). As we expected, large dihedral angles can weaken polymeric self-aggregation and offer some room to allow elongated ITIC molecules to embed in and blend well. In particular, it is noted that the extra benzene ring in PBDTTAZ-PhPh results in almost vertical twisting with the polymer backbone, further weakening the polymeric self-packing. As shown in Fig. 3b, the other three polymers (PBDTTAZPh-R, PBDTTAZPh-OR and PBDTTAZPh-SR) with different 1D chains (alkyl, alkoxyl and alkylthiol) on benzene rings show similar molecular geometries to the polymer PBDTTAZ-Ph with a bare phenyl group. From the distributions of electron density (Fig. S4), all polymers can be seen to exhibit a delocalized HOMO that is evenly distributed over both the donor and acceptor parts of the molecule. However, the LUMO is significantly localized on the acceptor units. The calculated HOMO and LUMO energy levels (Table S1) of the six polymers exhibit a consistency with the results from CV measurements.


The photovoltaic properties of the polymers were investigated using a conventional configuration of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/polymer:ITIC/PFN-Br/Al. For the devices based on the six polymers blended with ITIC, different D/A ratios were used to optimize the photovoltaic performance and the corresponding data are shown in Table S2. In addition, other effective methods for non-fullerene device fabrication, such as thermal annealing and additive processing, were systematically investigated (Tables S3 and S4). The optimized device parameters are summarized in Table 1. The current density versus voltage (J–V) curves are shown in Fig. 4a. The PCE values versus the thermal annealing temperature and the CN additive amount at optimized polymer/ITIC ratios are shown in Fig. 4b and c, respectively. The two polymers with bare aryl rings, PBDTTAZ-Ph and PBDTTAZ-NaPh based devices, showed very decent PCEs. In particular, the PBDTTAZ-NaPh:ITIC solar cell gave an impressive PCE of 11.56%, with a VOC value of 0.936 V, a JSC value of 18.21 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 0.678. However, the PBDTTAZ-PhPh based device showed a lower PCE of 9.32%, with a reduced JSC value of 16.67 mA cm−2 and a FF of 0.604. This demonstrated that more twisted and longer aryl side chains were not beneficial for the photovoltaic properties. Note that the three devices exhibit different VOC values, although the polymers show the same HOMO levels. The explanation for this phenomenon should be linked to other factors that can influence the VOC value of PSCs, such as the saturation dark current density, recombination dynamics, shunt resistance, different donor–acceptor ratios and distances, and the morphologies of the active layers. In addition, it is worth noting that the three optimized devices with high PCEs did not need any additive processing or thermal annealing treatment, which is very rare for high-performance non-fullerene PSCs. In comparison, the other three polymers with different 1D chains on benzene rings, PBDTTAZPh-R, PBDTTAZPh-OR and PBDTTAZPh-SR based devices, showed very poor PCEs without any post-treatment (Table S2). After thermal annealing and the addition of a CN additive, their photovoltaic properties improved significantly. Among these, PBDTTAZPh-OR based devices showed the highest PCE of 8.34%, with a VOC value of 0.888 V, a JSC value of 16.31 mA cm−2, and a FF of 0.576. However, the PCE was still much lower than that of the corresponding polymer PBDTTAZ-Ph with a bare benzene ring. As shown in Fig. 4b, it was concluded that the PCE values of PBDTTAZ-Ph, PBDTTAZ-NaPh and PBDTTAZ-PhPh didn't fluctuate with thermal annealing temperature, but for the other three polymers, PBDTTAZPh-R, PBDTTAZPh-OR and PBDTTAZPh-SR, this was the opposite. In addition, as shown in Fig. 4c, CN addition didn't work for PBDTTAZ-Ph, PBDTTAZ-NaPh and PBDTTAZ-PhPh based devices. These results indicate that 1D side chain on aryl rings could be the key reason for the necessity of post-treatment for these devices. What's more, the 1D side chain on the asymmetric building block is also not favourable for achieving good photovoltaic performance.

Materials
Additive CN (v%)
Thermal annealing (°C)

V
OC
 (V)

J
SC
 (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)

μ
h, 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1

μ
e, 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1

a The optimized polymer:ITIC ratio was 1:1.3.
b The blend films were thermally annealed for 10 min.
c Values are provided from optimal (statistical) results based on 15 devices in each case.

PBDTTAZ-Ph:ITIC
—
—
0.919 (0.915 ± 0.006)
17.86 (17.46 ± 0.43)
0.649 (0.638 ± 0.011)
10.65 (10.34 ± 0.26)
13.78
28.55
PBDTTAZ-NaPh:ITIC
—
—
0.936 (0.928 ± 0.009)
18.21 (18.06 ± 0.21)
0.678 (0.673 ± 0.007)
11.56 (11.36 ± 0.16)
21.32
33.97
PBDTTAZ-PhPh:ITIC
—
—
0.926 (0.921 ± 0.007)
16.67 (16.32 ± 0.36)
0.604 (0.588 ± 0.015)
9.32 (9.03 ± 0.23)
7.362
3.232
PBDTTAZPh-R:ITIC
—
120
0.921 (0.914 ± 0.008)
10.43 (10.25 ± 0.23)
0.398 (0.390 ± 0.009)
3.83 (3.61 ± 0.13)
1.385
0.145
PBDTTAZPh-OR:ITIC
—
100
0.888 (0.874 ± 0.014)
16.31 (15.98 ± 0.39)
0.576 (0.568 ± 0.013)
8.34 (7.94 ± 0.26)
4.037
2.105
PBDTTAZPh-SR:ITIC
1
—
0.915 (0.908 ± 0.010)
15.24 (14.96 ± 0.28)
0.439 (0.429 ± 0.011)
6.12 (5.76 ± 0.31)
2.114
0.322
The corresponding external quantum efficiencies (EQEs) of the optimized devices were measured and are shown in Fig. 4d. These polymer/ITIC blends exhibit broad absorption from 320–800 nm. In particular, the EQE values of PBDTTAZ-Ph and PBDTTAZ-NaPh are very high over the whole spectra and the maximum values reach ∼83%, indicating that the devices exhibit an excellent photo-response over the absorption range. The calculated current density values from the EQE measurements are 17.62, 18.02, 16.15, 10.19, 15.99 and 14.76 mA cm−2, respectively, for PBDTTAZ-Ph, PBDTTAZ-NaPh, PBDTTAZ-PhPh, PBDTTAZPh-R, PBDTTAZPh-OR and PBDTTAZPh-SR, which are slightly smaller than the JSC values obtained from the J–V measurements, with a small deviation of less than 4%.
Charge carrier mobility is another crucial factor that influences device performance. The hole and electron mobilities (μh and μe) were measured via the space charge limited current (SCLC) method (Fig. S5 and S6). The calculated μh and μe values are listed in Table 1. It can be seen that the PBDTTAZ-Ph and PBDTTAZ-NaPh based devices exhibit obviously higher μh and μe values, which are beneficial for obtaining a higher JSC value. In addition, the PBDTTAZ-NaPh based device shows more balanced carrier transport (μe/μh = 1.59), which can lead to a higher FF.

The morphology of the active layer greatly influences the photovoltaic properties. To further understand why different long rigid aryl rings and 1D side chains on asymmetric building blocks caused a dramatic difference in NF-PSC performance, transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was performed to investigate the bulk morphologies of the blend films. As shown in Fig. 5a-1 and b-1, the as-cast PBDTTAZ-Ph:ITIC and PBDTTAZ-NaPh:ITIC blend films exhibit homogeneous morphologies with finely divided domains, which is beneficial for charge separation and transfer and therefore results in high JSC and FF values. However, the PBDTTAZ-PhPh:ITIC blend film shows some obvious ITIC aggregations, as shown in Fig. 5c-1 (dark regions marked with red circles), which are attributed to the large amounts of room among the polymer chains, caused by the longer and more twisted rigid biphenyl side chains. As a result, the device showed relatively lower JSC and FF values. This demonstrates that only the use of appropriate rigid rings (not too long and twisted) as lever arms can stir up the ITIC phase well and produce a preferable morphology. In comparison, the as-cast PBDTTAZPh-R:ITIC, PBDTTAZPh-OR:ITIC and PBDTTAZPh-SR:ITIC blend films show clear phase separation and large aggregations of polymer and ITIC phases (Fig. 5d-1, e-1 and f-1). In particular, the PBDTTAZPh-R:ITIC blend film (Fig. 5d-1) has a thick and cloudy texture across the entire area, which reduces its photovoltaic properties severely. As shown in Fig. 5a-2, b-2 and c-2, after thermal annealing, the three blend films retain almost the same morphologies as the corresponding as-cast ones, which can explain well why thermal annealing method does not impact their photovoltaic performances. Conversely, the morphologies of the other three blend films are improved and the obvious aggregations of donor and acceptor phases are diminished after thermal annealing (Fig. 5d-2, e-2 and f-2), which results in enhanced photovoltaic properties. Similarly, after adding the appropriate amount of CN additive, the morphologies of the PBDTTAZ-Ph:ITIC, PBDTTAZ-NaPh:ITIC and PBDTTAZ-PhPh:ITIC blend films show no obvious change (Fig. 5a-3, b-3 and c-3), while those of the PBDTTAZPh-R:ITIC, PBDTTAZPh-OR:ITIC and PBDTTAZPh-SR:ITIC blend films are improved (Fig. 5d-3, e-3 and f-3). To illustrate these morphology results clearly, we propose schematic diagrams of the morphology evolution of the polymer donor and ITIC acceptor phases under three conditions (thermal annealing, an additive process and as-cast), as shown in Fig. 6. In general, these asymmetric polymers are mixed well with ITIC and disperse homogeneously in solution, due to the effects of the rigid phenyl lever arms. However, for three polymers (PBDTTAZPh-R, PBDTTAZPh-OR and PBDTTAZPh-SR), when the solutions are spin-coated on the substrates, the polymer chains can aggregate together again, as a result of their tangled 1D side chains. Consequently, the elongated ITIC can't be well embedded in the polymer chains, and hence it forms a relatively large-sized polymer phase domain (Fig. 6a-1, blue circular area), which is detrimental for the JSC and FF values. When heating the blend films (Fig. 6a-2), the 1D side chains in the relatively unconsolidated region (green area) can wriggle rapidly and stretch easily by virtue of the applied heat, and then the polymer chains untangle to make the nearby ITIC migrate into the generated large space. Subsequently, during the cooling process, the stretched 1D side chains also can rearrange to form a preferred conformation (Fig. 6a-3). Finally, small-sized ITIC phases (Fig. 6a-3, green area) emerge and partition the large-sized polymer phase into several small domains (blue area), which results in high photovoltaic properties. For an additive process, when the solutions are spin-coated on the substrates, the high-boiling CN additive can volatilize slowly for a long time. After the low-boiling solvent volatilizes, the polymer chains can aggregate with each other and take hold (Fig. 6b-1, blue circular area) due to the tangled 1D side chains in low concentration CN regions, while some polymer segments (Fig. 6b-1, blue rectangular areas) and ITIC molecules (Fig. 6b-1, yellow area) still can keep moving in regions with relatively rich amounts of CN due to the good compatibility. As a result, in the yellow regions, large amounts of space can emerge among polymer chains where ITIC can shift easily. As shown in Fig. 6b-2, when CN molecules volatilize completely, stretched 1D side chains curl and narrow the polymer chain interspaces. Meanwhile, ITIC molecules rearrange (yellow area). Finally, small-sized phase-separated domains (blue and yellow rectangular areas) are formed, which is beneficial for the photovoltaic properties. Although it is found that thermal annealing and the addition of CN additive can improve the morphologies of blend films efficiently, large-sized polymer phase domains still exist (Fig. 5d-2, d-3, e-2, e-3, f-2 and f-3, as illustrated by Fig. 6a-3 and b-2, blue circular areas), which decrease the efficiencies. Conversely, for the other three polymers (PBDTTAZ-Ph, PBDTTAZ-NaPh and PBDTTAZ-PhPh), when their solutions are spin-coated on the substrates, the entanglements among polymer chains can be significantly weakened due to the lack of 1D chains substituted on one side of the asymmetric BDT monomer. As a result, ITIC can disperse well among the polymer chains. Finally, as illustrated in Fig. 6c, the ITIC phase (red area) and polymer phase (blue area) can mix well and form the preferred phase separation in the as-cast BHJ film, which is favourable for obtaining high PCEs. In other words, the weakened entanglement among polymer chains is the key reason why thermal annealing and the addition of a CN additive don't work for these blends.


In summary, we have successfully designed and synthesized a series of new 2D–2D asymmetric BDT monomers. Compared to conventional 2D symmetric BDT units, an asymmetric structure shows unique advantages. The thienylthiol group with a long alkyl chain as one side chain on the BDT unit can lower the HOMO level, broaden the absorption spectra, and improve the solubility. As the other side chain, the bare rigid aryl rings (benzene, naphthalene and biphenyl) can be regarded as lever arms, stirring up well the elongated ITIC and weakening the entanglements among polymer chains during the spin-coating process, which enables the creation of a favorable morphology without post-treatments. As a result, the polymer PBDTTAZ-NaPh, based on the 2D–2D asymmetric structure, yielded over 11% PCE in an as-cast NF-PSC. Subsequently, three analogous polymers with different 1D chains (alkyl, alkoxyl and alkylthiol) at the para-position of the bare aryl ring were constructed for comparison. The results confirm our speculation that the 1D side chains on the aryl rings are the key reason for the necessary post-treatments of devices, and they are important in decreasing entanglements among the polymer chains for obtaining good photovoltaic performance. Thus, this work not only shows the advantages of the naphthalene ring in controlling morphology, but also provides an effective strategy to design high-performance NF-PSCs without post-treatment, which can meet the requirements for future industry-scale production.


There are no conflicts to declare.


The authors are deeply grateful to the Natural Science Foundation of China (51573205, 51773220, and 21502205) and the Ministry of Science and Technology of China (2014CB643501), DICP & QIBEBT (DICP & QIBEBT UN201709), and the Dalian National Laboratory for Clean Energy (DNL), CAS.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta07134a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018