 DOI: 10.1039/D2TA00681B
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 8966-8974


Sanghun
Han
,

Jigeon
Kim
,

Dong Eon
Kim
,

Min Jae
Ko
,

Jongmin
Choi
*,

Se-Woong
Baek
* and 

Younghoon
Kim
*

Department of Energy Science and Engineering, Daegu Gyeongbuk Institute of Science and Technology (DGIST), Daegu 42988, Republic of Korea. E-mail: whdals1062@dgist.ac.kr

Department of Chemical Engineering, Hanyang University, Seoul 04763, Republic of Korea

Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Korea University, Seoul 02481, Republic of Korea. E-mail: sewoongbaek@korea.ac.kr

Department of Chemistry, Kookmin University, Seoul 02707, Republic of Korea. E-mail: younghoon.kim@kookmin.ac.kr

Received
25th January 2022
, Accepted 12th March 2022
First published on 17th March 2022
Advances in the surface ligand exchange process of all-inorganic CsPbI3 perovskite colloidal quantum dots (PQDs) have enabled the fabrication of conductive PQD solids and their utilization as photovoltaic (PV) absorbers in next-generation solution-processed thin-film solar cells. However, PQD absorbers fabricated using the ligand exchange approach for application in high-efficiency PQD solar cells do not absorb, but transmit, a significant amount of the incident solar light. In addition, PQD absorbers are not suitable for fabricating thick films because of their short carrier diffusion length. Herein, we demonstrate that the introduction of nanophotonic structures in CsPbI3-PQD solar cells increases their light absorption via the light scattering effect, thereby improving their PV performance while maintaining the PQD absorber film thickness. We fabricate nanostructures on a spiro-OMeTAD hole-transport layer with sufficient film thickness and flexibility using nanoimprint lithography. We also find that a short spin-coating time is required to fabricate well-defined nanostructures on spiro-OMeTAD because of its high glass transition temperature. Thus, the nanostructured CsPbI3-PQD solar cells with a power conversion efficiency of up to 15.0% and a current density of 16.5 mA cm−2 show improved PV performance as compared to the flat control device with the same PQD absorber film thickness.

Organic–inorganic hybrid lead halide perovskites have been widely employed as photovoltaic (PV) absorbers in solution-processed thin-film solar cells owing to their outstanding optical and electrical properties, such as a high absorption coefficient, long carrier diffusion length, and high carrier mobility. High-quality lead halide perovskite thin films have been fabricated via thermal annealing crystallization using various chemical synthesis approaches, such as composition control and solvent engineering. In addition, the long carrier diffusion length of lead halide perovskites enables the fabrication of PV absorbers with thicknesses beyond 1 μm, which can absorb most of the incident solar light, and thus maximize the photocurrent of the solar cell. Owing to these outstanding features of PV absorbers and the advancements in processing techniques, the PV performance of lead halide perovskite thin-film solar cells has been significantly improved up to a certified power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 25.7%.

Unfortunately, organic–inorganic hybrid lead halide perovskites, which are composed of volatile and hydroscopic organic cations, such as methylammonium (MA+) and formamidinium (FA+), easily dissociate into PbI2 and other organic compounds when exposed to environmental stress (e.g., heat, humidity, etc.), and hence show low stability. All-inorganic CsPbI3 perovskites can overcome the stability limitation of organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites. In particular, cubic-phase-stabilized CsPbI3 perovskite colloidal quantum dots (PQDs), which are pre-crystallized via colloidal synthesis routes, enable the fabrication of PV absorbers without thermal annealing crystallization. Thus, all-inorganic CsPbI3-PQDs, which show a PCE of over 16%, are promising candidates for application as room temperature-processed PV absorbers in next-generation thin-film solar cells.
High-quality monodisperse CsPbI3-PQDs are prepared using long-chain hydrocarbon ligands, such as oleic acid and oleylamine. However, long-chain ligands should be replaced with short organic/inorganic ligands via the ligand exchange process to enhance the charge transport within the PQD solids. The developments in the ligand exchange process have enabled the fabrication of conductive PQD solids with a film thickness of ∼300 nm, thus improving the PV performance of PQD solar cells to achieve a PCE of over 16.0%. The PV performance of PQD solar cells can be improved by increasing their photocurrent by enhancing their light absorption capacity and efficiently extracting the charge carriers. However, there is a limit to improving the PV performance of thin-film solar cells by increasing the PV absorber film thickness because of their absorption-extraction limitation. In contrast to bulk perovskites with large crystal sizes, conductive PQD solids prepared using the ligand exchange approach are not suitable for fabricating thick films because of their short carrier diffusion length. In addition, PQD absorbers, which are employed in high-efficiency PQD solar cells, do not absorb, but transmit a significant amount of the incident solar light.
Nanophotonic structures, such as microcavities, plasmonic nanoparticles, and metal gratings, are used in solar cells to increase their light absorption capacity while maintaining the PV absorber film thickness. For example, the introduction of nanostructures on a specific layer in solar cells can increase their light absorption capacity owing to the light scattering effect. In particular, it has been reported that nanostructuring on the back-side of solar cells, including metal electrodes, can maximize the light trapping effect by minimizing the optical loss of the incident light. However, back-side nanostructured solar cells are difficult to implement because of the non-conformal coating of the specific layer on the nanostructured layer, which results in a decrease in the open-circuit voltage (VOC) and fill factor (FF). Therefore, it is challenging to improve the PV performance of back-side nanostructured solar cells without electrical deterioration.
In this study, we demonstrate for the first time that the introduction of nanophotonic structures in CsPbI3-PQD solar cells increases their light absorption capacity by enhancing the light trapping effect and improving their PV performance, especially the short-circuit current density (JSC). We fabricated nanophotonic structures in a CsPbI3-PQD solar cell using nanoimprint soft lithography and found that the spiro-OMeTAD hole-transporting layer (HTL) inserted between the PQD absorber and back electrodes is the most appropriate because of its sufficient film thickness and flexibility. In addition, unlike the case of conventional semiconducting polymers, a short spin-coating time is required to fabricate well-defined nanophotonic structures on the small-molecule spiro-OMeTAD HTL because of its high glass transition temperature (Tg). MoOx/Ag electrodes are deposited onto the nanostructured spiro-OMeTAD HTL to complete the device fabrication, and thus we realize the back-side nanostructured PQD solar cells. Furthermore, to find the optimum nanostructure conditions which can enhance light absorption and prevent electrical deterioration simultaneously, we fabricated various back-side nanostructured PQD solar cells with different heights, periods, and dimensions. PQD solids absorb a large amount of light and increase the photocurrent in nanostructured solar cells with various nanostructure conditions while maintaining the optimum film thickness for charge carrier extraction. In particular, the nanostructured CsPbI3-PQD solar cells having a one-dimensional (1D) line-grating nanostructure with a height of ∼40 nm and a period of ∼420 nm show improved PV performance with a PCE of 15.0% and a JSC of 16.5 mA cm−2 as compared to the flat control device for the same PQD absorber film thickness.

CsPbI3-PQDs with a size of ∼10 nm were synthesized via a hot injection method using long chain hydrocarbon ligands and dispersed in a non-polar solvent after the purification step (Fig. S1). To fabricate the conductive CsPbI3-PQD solids, the native long-chain ligands were replaced with short-chain ligands via solid-state ligand exchange based on layer-by-layer (LbL) assembly. In addition, the film thickness of the CsPbI3-PQD solids could be increased by repeating the LbL process. The cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and ultraviolet-visible (UV-Vis) spectroscopy results confirmed that the film thickness and absorption spectra of the PQD solids increased with an increase in the number of layers during the LbL process (Fig. 1a and b). With an increase in the number of layers from 1 to 7, the PQD film thickness increased gradually from ∼80 to ∼450 nm, and the overall light absorption within the wavelength range of 400–700 nm increased. These results indicate that the PV performance of the solar cells could be improved by increasing their photocurrent and light absorption capacity as the film thickness of the CsPbI3-PQD solids increases.

We then fabricated CsPbI3-PQD solar cells with different PQD film thicknesses and obtained their current density–voltage (J–V) curves under AM 1.5 illumination to investigate the changes in their PV performance (Fig. 1c and Table 1). The JSC and PCE of the CsPbI3-PQD solar cells increased gradually with an increase in the number of layers from 1 to 5; however, the JSC and PCE decreased simultaneously with an increase in the number of layers beyond 6. To improve the PV performance of solar cells by increasing the film thickness of the PV absorber layer, it is important to consider not only the increase in their photocurrent by the enhancement in their light absorption capacity, but also the efficient extraction of charge carriers from the electrode. From this point of view, although the light absorption capacity of the solar cells increased with an increase in the number of layers to 6 and 7, the PV performance decreased because of the short diffusion length of the PQD solids. PQDs with a crystal size of a few nanometers have more surface defects than bulk perovskites because of their large surface-to-volume ratio, which leads to their short diffusion length. When the film thickness of the absorber is larger than the diffusion length, the recombination of the photogenerated charge carriers occurs, which deteriorates the PV performance of the solar cell. Therefore, it might be difficult to improve the PV performance of solar cells by increasing the film thickness of the PQD solids prepared using the ligand exchange approach reported to date.
Number of PQD layers

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
1
1.10
9.9
66.2
7.3
3
1.16
14.1
71.6
11.7
5
1.23
15.3
73.4
13.9
6
1.23
15.2
63.2
11.8
7
1.21
14.5
59.0
10.4
The transmittance of the CsPbI3-PQD solids also decreased with an increase in the film thickness. However, the PQD solids with 5 layers showed the best PV performance and transmitted a significant amount of the incident light within the wavelength range of 500–700 nm (Fig. 1d). This indicates that the PQD solids could not absorb 100% of the incident light even with an increase in their film thickness, and most of the incident light was wasted. Therefore, the incident light that PQD solids do not absorb, but transmit, should be used to generate more photocurrent to improve the PV performance of PQD solar cells.
It is well-known that the PV performance of solar cells can be improved by recycling the light transmitted from the PV absorber by introducing nanostructures into the back-side electrodes. Thus, we carried out nanoimprint lithography on the small-molecule spiro-OMeTAD HTL using a nanostructured poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS) mold to fabricate back-side nanostructured CsPbI3-PQD solar cells (see details in the Experimental section). We first used a PDMS mold having a 1D line-grating nanostructure with a height of ∼40 nm and a period of ∼420 nm (P4) and performed nanoimprint lithography on the spiro-OMeTAD layers, which were spin-coated for various durations (Fig. 2a).
The photographs of the nanoimprinted spiro-OMeTAD films revealed that optical interference was observed for the films with the spin-coating times of 0.5 and 1.2 s, but not for those with the spin-coating times of 2.0 and 3.0 s. To characterize the interference patterns in detail, we carried out atomic force microscopy (AFM) measurements. The spiro-OMeTAD film obtained by nanoimprint lithography after spin-coating for 0.5 s exhibited 1D line-grating nanostructure morphology, which is consistent with the feature size of the P4 PDMS mold. However, the spiro-OMeTAD film obtained after spin-coating for 3.0 s exhibited a smooth and flat surface morphology without the regular period and height of the grating structure (Fig. 2a). These results indicate that nanostructures could be formed on the spiro-OMeTAD layer fabricated by spin-coating for a short duration of up to 1.2 s.
Unlike small-molecule and oligomeric spiro-OMeTAD, semiconducting polymeric materials such as poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) have been extensively used to fabricate nanostructures using nanoimprint lithography. To investigate whether the patterning tendency of small-molecule spiro-OMeTAD appears even in conventional semiconducting polymers, we performed nanoimprint lithography on the P3HT layers, which were spin-coated for different durations using the same solution concentration and experimental conditions as those used for spiro-OMeTAD. All the P3HT films fabricated by nanoimprint lithography using the P4 PDMS mold with different spin-coating times showed interference patterns and 1D line-grating nanostructures, as observed by the naked eye and from the AFM results (Fig. 2b).
The side chain length, molecular weight, and functional groups of organic materials affect their Tg, which is related to the fluidity. In general, the Tg of an organic material increases with a decrease in its side chain length and molecular weight. At temperatures higher than Tg, organic materials show fluidity, which enables the formation of nanostructures on them using nanoimprint lithography. It is well-known that spiro-OMeTAD has a high Tg of ∼125 °C, which is higher than the device fabrication temperature (i.e., room temperature), because of its small molecules and oligomeric nature with a short-side chain methoxy group. On the other hand, the semiconducting polymer P3HT has a Tg lower than room temperature (∼9 °C) because of its polymerized thiophene compound (Fig. 2c). Thus, spiro-OMeTAD has significantly lower fluidity than P3HT at room temperature, and the spin-coating time of spiro-OMeTAD for nanoimprint lithography is quite short. In other words, nanoimprint lithography should be performed before small-molecule and oligomeric spiro-OMeTAD is completely solidified as the solvent dries during spin-coating.
To confirm the effects of the Tg of organic molecules on the spin-coating time for the nanoimprint soft lithography process in more detail, we performed nanoimprint soft lithography according to different spin-coating times on a series of organic molecules that have Tg values between those of spiro-OMeTAD and P3HT. We employed [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) with a Tg of 118.3 °C, polystyrene (PS) with a Tg of 100 °C, and poly[2-methoxy-5-(2-ethylhexyloxy)-1,4-phenylenevinylene] (MEH-PPV) with a Tg of 70 °C. As shown in the photographs of each nanoimprinted organic film (Fig. S2), an optical interference pattern was observed on the nanoimprinted PCBM, PS, and MEH-PPV films up to a spin-coating time of 1.4, 1.8, and 2.4 s, respectively. In other words, as the Tg value decreases, the spin-coating time of each organic molecule for nanoimprint soft lithography increases, as shown in Fig. 2 and S2.
We also performed nanoimprint lithography on the spiro-OMeTAD layers using PDMS molds with different periods, heights, and dimensions to investigate whether the other types of patterns affected the spin-coating time. For this, we used several different PDMS molds: a two-dimensional (2D) cylindrical-grating nanostructure with a period of ∼500 nm and a height of ∼300 nm (P1), 1D line-grating nanostructure with a period of ∼830 nm and a height of ∼200 nm (P2), and 1D line-grating nanostructure with a period of ∼560 nm and a height of ∼80 nm (P3). As shown in Fig. 2a, the spiro-OMeTAD films subjected to nanoimprint lithography after spin-coating for 0.5 s showed the nanostructured surface morphology corresponding to each mold (Fig. S3). In other words, to fabricate nanostructured spiro-OMeTAD, a short spin-coating time of ∼1.0 s is necessary regardless of the feature size and dimensions of the PDMS molds because spiro-OMeTAD has a short fluidity retention time. Therefore, it can be concluded that a short spin-coating time is required for the fabrication of well-defined spiro-OMeTAD nanostructures using nanoimprint lithography as the Tg of spiro-OMeTAD is much higher than room temperature.
Thus, we fixed the spin-coating time of spiro-OMeTAD at 1.2 s to spread it completely on the substrate and maintain its fluidity for nanoimprint lithography. The film thickness of the spiro-OMeTAD HTL spin-coated for 1.2 s was measured to be ∼200 nm, which is slightly higher than that of the spiro-OMeTAD HTL (∼180 nm) spin-coated for 30 s (Fig. S4). The J–V characteristics of the flat CsPbI3-PQD solar cells composed of the spiro-OMeTAD HTLs with different spin-coating times were obtained under AM 1.5 illumination to investigate the changes in the PV performance of the solar cells. The CsPbI3-PQD solar cells composed of the spiro-OMeTAD HTL spin-coated for 1.2 s showed an increased JSC and decreased FF as compared to the device composed of the spiro-OMeTAD HTL spin-coated for 30 s. However, the VOC values of the two solar cells were the same. Thus, there was no difference in the PCE of the solar cells (Fig. S5 and Table S1). Therefore, the spin-coating time of spiro-OMeTAD did not affect the overall PV performance of the CsPbI3-PQD solar cells.
Back-side nanostructured CsPbI3-PQD solar cells with different heights, periods, and dimensions were fabricated using P1, P2, P3, and P4 PDMS molds (see details in the Experimental section and Fig. S6), and their light absorption capacity was compared with that of a flat control device (Fig. 3a). The UV-Vis spectra revealed that the nanostructured CsPbI3-PQD solar cells showed significantly improved total absorption as compared to the flat control device. In particular, the nanostructured CsPbI3-PQD solar cells showed significantly improved absorption at wavelengths greater than 600 nm with an increase in the height of the grating molds. To investigate the mechanism for the improvement in the light absorption of the nanostructured solar cells, we performed optical calculations via Lumerical finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) simulations and obtained the calculated absorption of the flat and nanostructured CsPbI3-PQD solar cells (Fig. 3b). For the FDTD simulations, we used previously reported refractive index and absorption coefficient values and built a device with the structure fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO)/c-TiO2/CsPbI3-PQDs/spiro-OMeTAD/MoOx/Ag.
All nanostructured CsPbI3-PQD solar cells showed an improved calculated absorption as compared to the flat control device. This trend is similar to that shown by the measured total absorption of the solar cells. However, the calculated results showed more prominent peaks than the measured results because the FDTD simulation models the ideal structures. For example, in an actual nanostructured device, the feature size and angles can be changed during the nanoimprinting process, and the high roughness of FTO causes random scattering and an imperfect periodic structure, hindering the optical effects of the nanostructure. We speculated that the absorption enhancement originated from plasmon resonance coupling and the back-scattered light effect of metal nanostructures because the enhanced peak shifts varied depending on the period of the nanostructure. In particular, the P2 nanostructured CsPbI3-PQD solar cell showed an absorption trend different from those shown by the other nanostructured devices because of its grating period of ∼830 nm, which is significantly larger than those of the other nanostructures.
We measured the J–V curves of the flat and nanostructured CsPbI3-PQD solar cells under simulated AM 1.5 illumination to investigate whether the improvement in their light absorption affected the PV performance (Fig. 3c). The PV parameters of each solar cell are presented in Table 2. We expected that the JSC and PCE of all the nanostructured PQD solar cells would increase as compared to those of the flat control device owing to the improvement in their light absorption, which was confirmed by the experimental measurements and optical calculations. However, contrary to our expectation, all the PV parameters of the P1 and P2 nanostructured PQD solar cells were lower than those of the flat control device. Although the JSC (15.9 mA cm−2) of the P3 nanostructured PQD solar cell was higher than that (15.6 mA cm−2) of the flat control device, its VOC and FF were lower. These JSC values were also confirmed by the integrated JSC values obtained from the external quantum efficiency (EQE) measurements (Fig. 3d). As a result, the PCEs of the P1, P2, and P3 nanostructured PQD solar cells were lower than that of the flat control device.
Device (depth/pitch)

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Flat control
1.23
15.6
73.3
14.1
P1 (300 nm/500 nm)
1.17
13.3
57.8
9.0
P2 (200 nm/830 nm)
1.19
15.5
67.4
12.5
P3 (80 nm/560 nm)
1.21
15.9
68.3
13.1
P4 (40 nm/420 nm)
1.22
16.5
74.7
15.0
However, the P4 nanostructured CsPbI3-PQD solar cell showed a higher PCE (15.0%) than the flat control device, which can be attributed to its improved JSC (16.5 mA cm−2) (Fig. 3c and Table 2). The EQE values of the P4 nanostructured PQD solar cell also increased significantly within the entire wavelength range with an integrated JSC of 16.3 mA cm−2, which is consistent with the JSC (to within 1%) obtained from the J–V measurements under simulated AM 1.5 illumination (Fig. 3d). The improvement in the PV performance of the P4 nanostructured PQD solar cell and its reproducibility were also supported by the device histogram and corresponding statistics shown in Fig. S7 and Table S2, respectively. These results indicate that the light absorption enhancement led to an improvement in the PV performance only in the case of the P4 device, although all the nanostructured devices showed enhanced light absorption in the experimental and calculated absorption spectra. In addition, the ambient storage stability of the flat and P4 nanostructured CsPbI3-PQD solar cells was measured for 7 days under ambient conditions with a relative humidity of ∼20%. The initial PV performance of both the flat and P4 nanostructured CsPbI3-PQD solar cells was retained at over ∼80% for 7 days and exhibited a similar device stability despite the introduction of the nanostructure in the solar cell (Fig. S8).
To further investigate the decrease in the PV performance of the P1, P2, and P3 nanostructured CsPbI3-PQD solar cells, we carried out their cross-sectional SEM measurements (Fig. 3e). It is well-known that physical vapor deposition methods, such as thermal evaporation, lead to nonconformal coatings containing voids during the deposition of thin layers onto the nanostructures with large grating heights. Although the nanostructures on the spiro-OMeTAD HTLs were formed using nanoimprint lithography, after the device completion, the P1, P2, and P3 nanostructured PQD solar cells showed the non-conformal deposition of the thin MoOx/Ag electrode layers, leading to an incomplete electrical contact in the device. Only the P4 nanostructured CsPbI3-PQD solar cell with a grating height of ∼40 nm showed a conformal deposition of the MoOx/Ag electrodes with no voids after the device completion.
The non-conformal deposition of the MoOx (15 nm)/Ag (120 nm) electrodes resulted in a decrease in the hole extraction ability of the solar cells. In particular, the MoOx layer in CsPbI3-PQD solar cells plays the key role in improving their hole transport ability and reducing the contact resistance. Therefore, the non-conformal deposition of the MoOx layer on the nanostructured spiro-OMeTAD HTL resulted in the deterioration of the PV performance of the back-side nanostructured PQD solar cells. We fabricated flat PQD solar cells with and without the MoOx layer to confirm the importance of the electrical contact between MoOx and the spiro-OMeTAD HTL. We found that the device without the MoOx layer showed a significantly reduced PV performance (0.8% PCE), as compared to the device with the MoOx layer (13.8% PCE) (Fig. S9 and Table S3).
In this study, the large grating height of the nanostructures increased their light absorption by enhancing the light-trapping effect; however, it led to a non-conformal deposition of the MoOx layer on the nanostructured spiro-OMeTAD HTL. As a result, the PV performance of the P1, P2, and P3 nanostructured CsPbI3-PQD solar cells deteriorated owing to their incomplete electrical contact. However, it has been reported that 2D nanostructures (i.e., P1 in this study) exhibit improved light scattering properties as compared to 1D nanostructures (i.e., P2, P3, and P4 in this study). Thus, we sought to improve the PV performance of the P1 nanostructured PQD solar cell.
To improve the PV performance of the P1 nanostructure, it was essential to conformally deposit the MoOx/Ag layer on it. For device completion using the MoOx/Ag electrodes, we varied the thicknesses of the MoOx and Ag layers from 15 to 45 nm and from 120 to 400 nm, respectively. For the MoOx and Ag layer thicknesses of 45 and 400 nm, respectively, the PCE of the P1 nanostructured PQD solar cell improved up to 9.0%, while that of the flat device decreased to 10.6% (Fig. S10 and Table S4). These results indicate that excessively thick MoOx/Ag electrodes deteriorated the PV performance of the devices. In addition, the cross-sectional SEM images of the P1 nanostructured PQD solar cells fabricated under various deposition conditions revealed the existence of a non-conformal contact between the MoOx/Ag and P1 nanostructures (Fig. S11). Therefore, it can be concluded that the PV performance of the CsPbI3-PQD solar cells with the conformally coated thin MoOx/Ag electrode layers could be improved by using an optically designed 1D nanostructure with an appropriate grating height.

Fig. 4a shows the schematic cross-sections of the flat and P4 nanostructured CsPbI3-PQD solar cells. We also performed FDTD simulations to investigate the origin of the enhancement in the light absorption of the P4 nanostructured PQD solar cells. The calculated absorption spectrum of the P4 nanostructured device (Fig. 3b) showed absorption peaks at approximately 450, 570, and 675 nm. Therefore, we calculated the electric-field distributions of the flat and P4 nanostructured devices to verify the light scattering effect at the wavelengths of 570 and 675 nm. We excluded the calculations at approximately 450 nm, because the measured total light absorption did not increase at 450 nm, as shown in Fig. 3a. The electric field distributions of the flat device at 570 and 675 nm indicated that the electric field existed in the form of a standing wave because of its flat metal electrode, whereas the P4 nanostructured device exhibited concentrated electric field intensity at the given wavelengths (Fig. 4b and c). The nanostructured back-side metal electrode was coupled with light at a specific wavelength (at 675 nm), generating surface plasmon polaritons. This concentrated the electric field in the photoactive region near the nanostructures, thereby increasing the light absorption capacity. As a result, the overall light absorption of the P4 nanostructured PQD solar cells could be increased.

We demonstrated that the PV performance of back-side nanostructured CsPbI3-PQD solar cells can be improved by enhancing their light absorption capacity via the light-trapping effect while maintaining the optimized film thickness of the PQD absorber. In this study, we performed nanoimprint soft lithography on a small-molecule spiro-OMeTAD HTL and found that a short spin-coating time was required to fabricate well-defined nanophotonic structures on the HTL because of its high Tg. We also revealed that although the light absorption was enhanced, the PV performance of the nanostructured PQD solar cells with a high-grating height decreased because of the electrical deterioration resulting from the non-conformal contact between the nanostructured spiro-OMeTAD HTL and the MoOx/Ag back electrodes. We found that the optimum nanostructure with a grating height of ∼40 nm enabled the conformal contact of the MoOx/Ag electrodes on the nanostructured spiro-OMeTAD HTL, leading to the prevention of the electrical deterioration. As a result, the P4 nanostructured CsPbI3-PQD solar cell exhibited the best PV performance with a PCE of 15% and a JSC of 16.5 mA cm−2 owing to its enhanced light absorption capacity resulting from the increased light trapping effect, which was confirmed by carrying out experimental studies and FDTD simulations.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIT) of the Republic of Korea (no. 2020R1C1C1003214). This work was also supported by the DGIST R&D Program of the Ministry of Science and ICT (21-CoE-ET-01).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d2ta00681b
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022