 DOI: 10.1039/C7TC00337D
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 3495-3502


Chunyu
Liu
,

Guochun
Yang
*,

Yanling
Si
,

Youjun
Liu
 and 

Xiumei
Pan
*

Institute of Functional Material Chemistry, National & Local United Engineering Lab for Power Battery, Faculty of Chemistry, Northeast Normal University, Changchun, 130024 Jilin, China. E-mail: panxm460@nenu.edu.cn

Centre for Advanced Optoelectronic Functional Materials Research and Key Laboratory for UV Light-Emitting Materials and Technology of Ministry of Education, Northeast Normal University, Changchun, 130024 Jilin, China. E-mail: yanggc468@nenu.edu.cn

College of Resource and Environmental Science, Jilin Agricultural University, Changchun, 130118 Jilin, China

Aviation University Air Force, 130022 Jilin, China

Received
20th January 2017
, Accepted 9th March 2017
First published on 10th March 2017
Recently, a chiral conjugated macrocyclic compound containing alternately arranged donor and acceptor motifs exhibited unique advantages (i.e. high absorption coefficient, broad absorption range, and high electron mobility) in organic photovoltaics (OPVs). Understanding the structure–property relationship at the microscopic level is a prerequisite for further performance optimization or improvement. Here, we employed time-dependent density functional theory (TDDFT) to investigate the electronic circular dichroism (CD), UV-vis absorption, charge transport, and second-order nonlinear optical (NLO) properties of the four chiral compounds. The experimental UV-vis/CD spectra of compound 1 were well reproduced by our calculations and could be used to assign the electron transition properties and absolute configuration (AC) with high confidence. The electronic absorption spectra, charge transport properties, and open circuit voltage of compound 1 in OPVs have been rationalized by comparing cyclic and acyclic structures. The designed compounds 2–3 are expected to exhibit excellent performances in OPVs in view of their small energy gaps, large oscillator strengths, and smaller electron reorganization energies. Moreover, the first hyperpolarizability (βtot) of compound 4 is 27 times larger than that of P-nitroaniline. Thus, our studied compounds are also excellent candidates for second-order NLO materials.

Organic photovoltaics (OPVs), which convert light energy directly into electricity, have been proposed as the next-generation photovoltaics due to their advantages of low manufacturing cost, high throughput production, lightness, and flexibility. However, their low power conversion efficiency (PCE) has become one of the key factors limiting their large-scale commercialization. PCE correlates closely with the open circuit voltage (Voc), the short-circuit current density (Jsc), and the fill factor (FF) of the OPVs. To solve this, great effort has been devoted to designing and discovering materials with high absorption coefficients, broad absorption bands, high carrier mobility, and suitable HOMO/LUMO levels.

Organic small molecules and polymers are typical OPV materials. Recently, conjugated macrocyclic molecules also exhibited several advantages (i.e. facilitating intermolecular contacts, possessing altered electronic structures, and accommodating guest molecules in their cavities). In addition, macrocyclic molecules are more easily reduced than acyclic ones. Based on the constituent structural units, macrocyclic compounds can be classified into two types. One contains a single repeat unit, such as cycloparaphenylenes and cycloporphyrins, whereas the other has two different subunits arranged in an alternating pattern (e.g. -A-B-A-B-). Compared with the former, the latter exhibits a better performance in OPVs.
Very recently, a chiral conjugated macrocyclic compound, named as compound 1, was reported, in which diphenyl perylene diimide (PDI) and bithiophene (BT) are the basic structural units and alternately arranged, as shown in Fig. 1. Its absorption spectrum covers the visible region of sunlight. Notably, its PCE is twice that of the corresponding acyclic molecule. In this device, compound 1 also acts as an n-type electron transporting material. PDI is a typical electron acceptor material, exhibiting excellent electron transport ability and good robustness. Besides, PDI and its derivatives also have good self-assembling ability. Thiophene and its derivatives are the most promising electron donor materials. They have been widely applied in solar cells, light-emitting diodes, and organic field-effect transistors. Alternation of electron donor and acceptor subunits has proven to be an effective strategy in engineering the electronic properties of linear oligomers and polymers. How does this affect a conjugated macrocyclic compound? This is worth exploring.
In past decades, significant progress has been made in developing donor materials. However, the acceptor materials have lagged far behind the donor materials. In general, excellent acceptors should have high absorption coefficients, broad absorption bands, suitable HOMO/LUMO energy levels relative to the donor, high electron mobility, and good air stability. Notably, rigid guidelines for designing acceptor materials have not been determined.
Up to now, density functional theory (DFT) calculations have been a powerful tool to rationalize the observed properties and design of new materials with outstanding properties. The absorption wavelength of trithiophene is red-shifted compared to that of bithiophene. Thus, we replaced the bithiophenes in compound 1 with trithiophenes (TTs) to produce compound 2. Based on compound 2, compound 3 was designed by introducing an NH2 group into the TTs. For compound 4, NH2 and NO2 groups were located at different TTs (Fig. 1). It is expected that the designed compounds might have high absorption coefficients and broad absorption ranges. To better understand the differences in the photophysical properties of the cyclic and acyclic compounds, an acyclic fragment of compound 1, named as AF-1, was also introduced. Notably, the intramolecular charge transfer and intrinsic non-centrosymmetric structure, arising from the chirality in the cyclic compound, can meet the basic requirements of a second-order NLO material. Accordingly, these compounds are expected to offer new opportunities with respect to second-order NLO materials. In this paper, our goal is to shed light on the photophysical properties, explore the origin of second-order NLO properties, and assign the ACs of the considered compounds.

The ground state geometries of the studied compounds (Fig. 1) have been fully optimized with no symmetry constraints using the B3LYP functional, which is a combination of Becke's three-parameter hybrid exchange functional and the Lee–Yang–Parr correlation functional. Basis sets of 6-31G(d,p) were used. Based on the optimized geometries, harmonic vibrational calculations were performed to confirm that the optimized structures represented the local minima.

The electron excitation energies, oscillator strengths, and rotational strengths for the studied compounds were calculated at the TD-B3LYP/6-31G(d,p) level of theory. Gaussian band shapes with a bandwidth of 0.14 eV were used to simulate the UV-vis/CD spectra. To consider the solvent effect of dichloromethane, the integral equation formalism version of the polarized continuum model (PCM) was utilized.
Here, we mainly focus on the electron reorganization energy (λ(e)), which can be expressed as:
λe = (E0− − E0) + (E−0 − E−)
(1)
where
E0− is the energy of the neutral configuration with optimized anion geometry; E0 is the energy of the optimized geometry of the neutral molecule; E−0 is the energy of the anion configuration of the optimized neutral geometry; E− is the energy of the optimized geometry of the anion molecule. The λ(e) was calculated at the B3LYP/6-31G(d,p) level.

The static first hyperpolarizability (βtot) has been calculated by using the following equation:
βtot = (βx2 + βy2 + βz2)1/2
(2)
where
βi is defined as:

(3)
The Voc is proportional to the energy difference between the HOMO of the donor and the LUMO of the acceptor and can be defined as:
Voc = (1/e) (|EdonorHOMO| − |EacceptorLUMO|) − 0.3 V
(4)
where
e is the elementary charge and 0.3 V denotes an empirical value.

All of the calculations were carried out with the Gaussian 09 computational program package. The electron density difference maps (EDDM) were obtained by employing the Multiwfn software version 3.3.

The geometrical structures of all the studied compounds were fully optimized at the B3LYP/6-31G(d,p) level (Fig. 1). The absence of any imaginary frequencies confirms that our optimized structures are dynamically stable (Table S1, ESI). Among the considered compounds, compound 1 has been synthesized and characterized. There are two PDIs and two BTs in compound 1. Alternating links of PDIs and BTs form a four-cornered flat macrocycle. The twist of the PDI core (22.8°) is a key factor in the formation of compound 1. The distance from PDI to PDI is 1.54 nm. For the designed compounds 2–4, the twist of the PDI core is slightly smaller than that of compound 1. Moreover, the distance from PDI to PDI is longer than that of compound 1. This observation mainly originates from the different lengths between bithiophene and trithiophene.

In general, the HOMO/LUMO energy levels, the HOMO–LUMO gap (energy gap), and the distribution of the frontier molecular orbitals (FMOs) are the key parameters in determining the electronic and optical properties. In OPVs, the lower the LUMO energy level of the acceptor material, the larger is the electron-harvesting ability. The variations in the HOMO/LUMO energy levels, energy gaps, and HOMO/LUMO orbitals for the studied compounds are shown in Fig. 2 and 3.
The energy gaps for the studied compounds range from 1.59 to 2.09 eV (Fig. 2). Among them, compound AF-1 has the largest energy gap of 2.09 eV, whereas the energy gap of compound 1 is only 1.85 eV. This indicates that alternating electron donor and electron acceptor units in a macrocycle provide an effective way to decrease the energy gap. Comparing compounds 1 and 2, the involvement of TTs mainly increases the HOMO energy level, while the LUMO energy level is almost unchanged. Thus, the energy gap of compound 2 is smaller than that of compound 1. The HOMO energy level of compound 3 is further increased in comparison with compound 2, which leads to the smallest energy gap (1.59 eV). This indicates that the introduction of an electron donor (NH2) into the TTs mainly tunes the HOMO energy level, which is consistent with previous findings, where the electron donor group increases the HOMO energy level more than it does the LUMO. Further comparison with compound 3 indicates that the HOMO and LUMO levels of compound 4 are decreased by the same degree. Thus, the energy gap of compound 4 is almost identical to that of compound 3. Moreover, the LUMO energy levels of the studied compounds follow the sequence: AF-1 > 3 > 2 > 1 > 4. This indicates that macrocyclic compounds have higher electron-harvesting ability than acyclic ones. Compound 4 has the highest electron-harvesting ability of the considered compounds.
The LUMOs of the studied compounds have a common characteristic in that they are primarily located on the PDI fragments (Fig. 3). The same is true for the HOMOs, which are mainly distributed on the bithiophene or trithiophene moieties. These results indicate that alternating PDI and BT in a macrocycle does not change the original electron acceptor (PDI) and electron donor (BT) properties. Notably, the introduction of extra electron donor (NH2) or electron acceptor (NO2) groups breaks the symmetric distribution of the FMOs. For example, the LUMO of compound 3 localizes on one PDI fragment, which is in sharp contrast with the LUMO on the two PDIs in compound 2.
Based on the above discussion, both the HOMO/LUMO energy levels and the distribution of FMOs are tuned effectively. Generally, the energy gap has a significant effect on the absorption spectra and the first hyperpolarizability (βtot). The order of the energy gaps of these compounds decrease in the following order: AF-1 > 1 > 2 > 3 ≈ 4 (Fig. 2), which indicates that the absorption spectral range becomes broader, and βtot gradually increases from compounds 1 to 4, as will be discussed later.

The TDDFT method has become a powerful tool for investigating the electronic transition properties and chiroptical properties at an affordable computational cost. In general, the electronic transition properties depend strongly on DFT functionals, especially for ECD calculations. TDB3LYP/6-31G(d,p) has been used to study the electron transition properties of compound 1; however, only low-lying excited states (S1–S15, ESI) were included. The simulation of its UV-vis/CD spectra, covering the experimental spectral range (250–750 nm), has not been performed. To reliably determine the electronic transition properties, four different functionals (B3LYP, M05-2X, CAM-B3LYP, and LC-BLYP) were used. Their calculated results are shown in Fig. S1 and Table S2 (ESI), along with a discussion (ESI). It is found that the UV-vis/CD spectra computed with the B3LYP functional (Fig. 4) are in reasonably good agreement with the experimental ones, not only with respect to the band positions but also the relative peak intensities, which allows us to assign the AC of compound 1 with high confidence. Moreover, the rotational strengths calculated using the length and velocity gauge representations of the electric dipole operator are nearly equal (Table S3, ESI), again validating the suitability of the method used for the CD calculations. Thus, the TDB3LYP/6-31G(d,p) method was used in the following calculations.

To further understand the chiral origins of compound 1, the molecular orbitals involved in the main transitions are shown in Fig. S2 (ESI). The observed CD bands mainly result from exciton-coupling between the BTs and PDIs. Besides, the CD spectra are generally sensitive to solvent. Thus, the geometrical structure of compound 1 was re-optimized under the PCM. The UV-vis/CD spectra in the dichloromethane phase were also recalculated (Fig. S3, ESI). It was found that the UV-vis/CD spectra in dichloromethane were similar to those in the gas phase. This indicates that the effect of the solvent on the UV-vis/CD spectra is negligible.
To obtain a more intuitive description of the UV-vis absorption spectra of the studied compounds, the simulated UV-vis spectra along with the EDDMs for the crucial electronic transitions were calculated at the B3LYP/6-31G(d,p) level and are shown in Fig. 5. The calculated transition energies, absorption wavelengths, oscillator strengths, and major contributions are summarized in Table 1 and Table S4 (ESI).
Compound
ΔEge

λ


f

Major contribution

AF-1

1.79
693.32
0.120
H → L (99%)
3.27
378.69
0.830
H → L+2 (72%)

1

2.06
602.87(614)
0.232
H−2 → L+1 (97%)
2.83
437.40(397)
1.255
H → L+2 (95%)

2

2.05
604.86
0.250
H−2 → L+1 (95%)
2.72
455.21
1.863
H → L+2 (87%)

3

1.95
637.45
0.109
H−2 → L (97%)
2.71
457.15
1.530
H → L+2 (70%)
H−1 → L+3 (13%)

4

1.97
629.23
0.132
H−1 → L (79%)
2.69
461.22
0.866
H → L+5 (45%)
H → L+4 (40%)
Comparing the cyclic (compound 1) and acyclic (AF-1) compounds, the absorption coefficient of a cyclic compound is higher than that of an acyclic one (Fig. 5). In addition, the absorption ranges of the cyclic compounds are also broader. For the designed compounds 2–4, their absorption ranges are nearly identical to those of compound 1; however, the absorption coefficients of compounds 2 and 3 are higher than that of compound 1. Moreover, the maximum absorption wavelength, from compound 1 to compound 4, is gradually red-shifted, which is consistent with the energy gaps. To increase the PCE of OPVs, one of the basic requirements is to find materials with high absorption coefficients and broad absorption bands. A strong and wide optical absorption yields a high Jsc. Based on the above discussion, a cyclic compound as an OPV material is more efficient than an acyclic one, and the designed compounds 2 and 3 are expected to exhibit good performances in OPV devices.
Subsequently, we mainly discussed the electron transition properties. For AF-1, the most intense absorption at 378.69 nm has π → π* character (Fig. 5). The low-energy band at 693.32 nm can be assigned as charge transfer (CT) from BT to PDI. For compound 1, the four calculated absorption bands (350.98, 437.40, 534.54, and 602.87 nm) are in good agreement with the experimental ones (Table 1 and Table S4, ESI). The most intense band at 437.40 nm mainly arises from the HOMO → LUMO+2 transition, which can be assigned as π → π* in BTs (Fig. S4 (ESI) and Fig. 5). The low-energy band at 602.87 nm is described by the HOMO−2 → LUMO+1 transition, which is assigned as π → π* excitation within the PDIs. Moreover, there is another low-energy absorption at 704.10 nm. According to the EDDM (Fig. 5), BT → PDI CT is obvious. For compound 2, the maximum absorption peak at 455.21 nm mainly results from HOMO → LUMO+2 excitation with π → π* character within the TTs (Fig. 5). The low-energy absorption at 604.86 nm originates from the HOMO−2 → LUMO+1 transition. With regard to compound 3, the most intense absorption band arises from HOMO → LUMO+2 and HOMO−1 → LUMO+3 with π → π* character of TTs–NH2. The less intense low-energy band at 637.45 nm is ascribed to HOMO−2 → LUMO excitation, which originates from TTs–NH2 → PDI, and minor CT between the two PDI units. The absorption band of compound 4 at about 461.22 nm mainly arises from HOMO → LUMO+5 and HOMO → LUMO+4 excitations, which are mainly localized on the TT–NH2 moiety. Its low-energy absorption band at 629.23 nm mainly originates from TT–NH2 to PDI.

Reorganization energy is an inherent property of the compound and is an important parameter in determining carrier mobility. In general, the smaller the reorganization energy, the larger is the carrier mobility. The reorganization energy is the sum of geometrical relaxation energies from the neutral-state geometry to the charged-state geometry and vice versa. Here, we are mainly concerned with the electron reorganization energy, since compound 1 acts as an electron transport material in an OPV device. Here, the adiabatic potential energy surface method was employed to calculate the electron reorganization energy at the B3LYP/6-31G(d,p) level (Table 2). The calculation process can be found in the ESI (Fig. S5). As expected, λ(e) of compound 1 is much smaller than that of AF-1, indicating that a cyclic structure can effectively reduce λ(e). Interestingly, the λ(e) values of the other three designed cyclic compounds 2–4 are closer to that of compound 1. Notably, the λ(e) values of compounds 1–4 are smaller than those of 0.276 eV for tris(8-hydroxyquinolinato)aluminium and 0.230 eV for perfluoropentacene, which are typical electron transport materials. In addition, the determination of the electron transport moiety is very useful for further structural modification or performance improvement. There is a close relationship between bond-length alternation (BLA) and λ(e). Specifically, the smaller the BLA, the smaller is the reorganization energy. The geometrical modifications of these compounds, from the neutral to the anion state, are shown in Table S5 (ESI). It is found that the BLAs in the reduction process mainly occur on the PDI, which indicates that electron transport mainly localizes on the PDI moieties. This is also in agreement with the LUMO distribution (Fig. 3). Moreover, the BLA values of the cyclic compounds 1–4 are smaller than those of AF-1.

Compound

λ(e)

AF-1

0.259

1

0.125

2

0.124

3

0.131

4

0.127

It is well known that the open circuit voltage (Voc) is an important parameter reflecting the performance of OPVs. To obtain the Voc, we need a donor material as reference. PTB7-Th was used as the donor in an OPV device. Our calculated HOMO energy level of PTB7-Th is −5.18 eV, which is consistent with the experimental value of −5.22 eV. According to eqn (4), the calculated Voc of the acyclic fragment (AF-1) is 1.54 V. Compared with AF-1, the Voc (1.42 V) of compound 1 is lower. This result indicates that the acyclic compound shows a higher Voc as compared to the cyclic one, which is also in agreement with the experimental trend. The Voc values of compounds 2–4 are 1.47, 1.51, and 1.36 V, respectively. Thus, the designed compounds 2 and 3 are expected to exhibit good performances in OPVs.


The obvious intramolecular CT and intrinsic asymmetrical electronic structures of the studied compounds are associated with an excellent second-order NLO response. As a consequence, we investigated their second-order NLO properties. The calculated first hyperpolarizability (βtot) is very sensitive to the DFT functional used. Thus, three popular DFT functionals (i.e. B3LYP, CAM-B3LYP, and BH&HLYP) were selected. Detailed discussion can be found in the ESI. Among the considered functionals, B3LYP gives the largest βtot, whereas CAM-B3LYP and BH&HLYP show nearly identical βtot values (Table 3). Thus, the βtot values obtained from CAM-B3LYP were used in the following discussion.

Compound
B3LYP
BHandHLYP
CAM-B3LYP

μ
tot


1

360
100
150
0.008

2

21900
8780
7140
0.048

3

69610
16300
12300
1.891

4

675360
173380
142170
11.187
The calculated βtot values of the studied compounds range from 150 to 142170 × 10−33 esu, indicating that subtle structural modifications can substantially enhance the second-order NLO response. Specifically, the βtot of compound 2 is about 48 times that of compound 1. This indicates that replacement of BTs with TTs effectively increases the NLO response. Based on compound 2, the βtot values of the designed compounds 3 and 4 are greatly enhanced. Amazingly, compound 4 has the largest βtot. Thus, asymmetric substitution (the introduction of both TT–NH2 and TT–NO2) is an effective way to enhance the NLO response, which is also consistent with its electron transition properties. Moreover, the calculated βtot values are comparable to those of representative molecules. For example, the βtot of compound 4 is about 27 times that (5300 × 10−33 esu) of the typical organic D–A molecule P-nitroaniline. Therefore, the studied compounds have excellent second-order NLO responses. In general, there is a close relationship between the dipole moment (μtot) and βtot. For compounds 1–4, their dipole moments (Table 3) increase as μ1tot < μ2tot < μ3tot < μ4tot, which is consistent with the variable trend of the βtot values.

In this paper, the electronic structures, UV-vis/CD spectra, charge transport, and second-order NLO properties of four chiral conjugated compounds were investigated by employing DFT/TDDFT methods. The experimental UV-vis/CD spectra of compound 1 were well reproduced. The electronic structures of cyclic and acyclic structures are compared and analysed. The electron reorganization energies of the studied compounds are much smaller than those of tris(8-hydroxyquinolinato)aluminium and perfluoropentacene. Electron transport mainly occurs on the PDI parts. The designed compounds 2–3 are expected to exhibit excellent performances in OPVs in view of their small band gaps, large oscillator strengths, smaller electron reorganization energies, and large open circuit voltages. For our studied compounds, subtle structural modifications can substantially enhance the first hyperpolarizability. They are also excellent candidates for second-order NLO materials in view of their first hyperpolarizability values and intrinsic asymmetrical electronic structures. Our work is very important with respect to performance optimization of conjugated macrocyclic compounds.


The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21503091, 21573037 and 21377021) and the Natural Science Foundation of Jilin Province (20170101089JC and 20150101042JC).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: The simulated UV-vis spectra and CD spectra for the different functionals; the calculated excitation energies, oscillator and rotational strengths of the 200 lowest energy electronic excitations; molecular orbitals involved into the main electronic transition. See DOI: 10.1039/c7tc00337d
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017