 DOI: 10.1039/C0JM03899G
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 4457-4464

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Hye-Yun
Park
,

Kyungkon
Kim
,

Dong Young
Kim
,

Si-Kyung
Choi
,

Seong Mu
Jo
 and 

Sung-Yeon
Jang
*

Polymer Hybrids Center, Korea Institute of Science and Technology, Seoul, 136-791, Republic of Korea. E-mail: syjang@kist.re.kr; Fax: +82-2-958-5309; Tel: +82-2-958-5324

Department of Material Science and Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejon, 305-701, Republic of Korea

Solar Cell Center, Korea Institute of Science and Technology, Seoul, Republic of Korea

Received
12th November 2010
, Accepted 6th January 2011
First published on 2nd February 2011
A facile and effective treatment method for controlling the morphology of bulk heterojunction (BHJ) structured polymer-based solar cells (PSCs) using a gas-assisted spray (g-spray) technique was demonstrated. High-efficiency BHJ-PSCs were fabricated using a g-spray method that can be adapted to large-scale high-throughput continuous production, and the bulk film morphology and internal nanomorphology of the active layers were well manipulated using a sprayed solvent overlayer (SSO) treatment. The efficient nanomorphology evolution, which is a prerequisite for obtaining high performance BHJ-PSCs, was confirmed by X-ray diffraction, UV-Vis, photoluminescence, and transmission electron microscopy analysis. The SSO treatment was a simple and rapid process that could be carried out at room temperature, unlike conventional external treatment (ET) methods such as solvent- or thermal-assisted treatment, which typically require a prolonged time (>1 h) or relatively high temperature (>110 °C). After SSO treatment, the PSC performance was enhanced remarkably. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the g-sprayed PSCs after SSO treatment was 2.99%, which is higher than that of a solvent vapor treated device (2.42%) and thermally annealed devices (2.61%). Further optimization of the nanomorphology was achieved by sequentially developing P3HT and PCBM. By combining thermal annealing with the SSO treatment, the P3HT/PCBM interfacial area could be enhanced; this enhancement was induced by the PCBM diffusion into the space among pre-assembled P3HT nanofibrils, which in turn promoted their bi-continuity. This means of sequential nanomorphology development further enhanced the PCE (3.35%), which was higher than the other reported values for PSCs using spray methods. Considering that the SSO treatment is a facile room temperature process that requires a short time, these results suggest that the g-spray method can be successfully applied to the continuous production of PSCs.

While silicon-based solar cells have dominated the commercial market, polymer-based solar cells (PSCs) have been considered as a promising candidate for the next generation solar cells, which can open new niches, including ultra low-cost disposable devices and flexible renewable energy devices. Because of the relatively low performance, the main theme of many research efforts has been the enhancement of efficiency through the design of new semiconducting materials such as low band-gap polymers and fullerene derivatives and the optimization of the morphology of the photoactive layers, though the development of efficient device processing techniques is vital to the realization of niches for PSCs. There has been a continuous growth of the researches into new device fabrication methods that can be adapted to low-cost continuous production. Recently, a solution based on roll-to-roll processes for bulk heterojunction (BHJ) structured PSCs with reasonable performance has also been demonstrated.


BHJ structure that is formed by nanoscale blend of donor/acceptor materials has been almost exclusively adopted as the morphology for the active layers of high-efficiency PSCs. The optimization of the internal nanomorphology of the BHJ active layers has been a crucial element in the enhancement of device performance because the diffusion length of the electron–hole pairs generated by light harvesting is limited to a range of only a few tens of nanometres. The appropriate segregation of donor and acceptor semiconductors on a scale of tens of nanometres in a bi-continuous fashion has offered effective charge separation and transport. The initial blend morphology is determined by the history of the processing method and conditions and is typically produced in the form of a random mixture. Therefore, the application of external treatments (ETs) to rearrange the components into more segregated forms has been a prerequisite for the optimization of device efficiency. ETs for the rearrangement of nanomorphology that have been attempted using solvent-assisted methods and thermal heating have demonstrated successful improvements in efficiency. Thus far, the majority of studies on nanomorphology control by ETs have been performed using spin-coated films, though the change in processing methods can alter the initial morphology and the choice of optimal ET conditions.
The spray-coating technique, which is more popular in painting and graphic arts, has been one of the emerging candidates for PSC fabrication because it is high-throughput, easily scalable for large-area deposition on various substrates, and can be adapted to a continuous process. The fabrication of PSCs using gas-assisted spray (g-spray) methods was reported previously by several groups. In these reports, satisfactory device performance was achieved using a conventional ET, thermal annealing (TA) treatment. Although TA has been the most popular and efficient ET used for spin-coated PSCs, the change in the film preparation method alters the initial morphology of the active layers, and the ETs that take into account the issues regarding such changes are essential to improve the nanomorphology and device efficiency. Recently, our group reported that the manipulation of the macroscopic film morphology can remarkably reduce the internal series resistance (Rs), thus improving the performance of PSCs prepared by the electrostatic spray (e-spray) method. In that study, solvent vapor soaking (SVS) treatment, in which the active layers are exposed under a solvent vapor for a long time (∼1 h), was used as the ET, and SVS could enhance the film continuity by re-welding the inter-droplet boundaries that are inevitably formed in typical spray-coated films, resulting in a significant reduction in Rs. The PSCs optimized with SVS treatment exhibited a >2-fold increase in PCE than PSCs without SVS, attaining the level of performance of spin-coated PSCs fabricated under identical conditions. Although the film morphology and, to some degree, the nanomorphology of the sprayed active layers were well controlled, the SVS treatment used in our earlier work took a prolonged time (∼1 h) that was similar to the time consumed by other reported solvent-assisted treatments. A more facile method of controlling film morphology and the internal nanomorphology of the sprayed active layers will enable us to capitalize on the practical advantages of spray-coating techniques for PSC fabrication.
In this work, we demonstrated a facile near insitu treatment, sprayed solvent overlayer (SSO) method, which can produce droplet-free continuous films while simultaneously developing the internal nanomorphology of the BHJ active layers deposited by a g-spray technique. The g-sprayed BHJ-PSCs were fabricated using a blend solution of poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) as the donor and acceptor, respectively. In the SSO method, 1,2-dichlorobenzene (DCB), which is a good solvent for both the donor and acceptor, was briefly sprayed (∼5 s) onto the as-prepared blended films, which were then dried for a few minutes in the ambient atmosphere. This simple solvent-assisted ET was able to effectively re-build the macroscopic film morphology and simultaneously develop its internal nanomorphology, remarkably enhancing the device performance. The reconstruction of film morphology was verified by optical microscopy (OM) images and atomic force microscopy (AFM) topographic images, and the effective rearrangement of the nanomorphology was confirmed using transmission electron microscopy (TEM), UV-Vis spectroscopy, X-ray diffraction (XRD), and photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy analyses. The effects of conventional ET methods (SVS and TA) were investigated concomitantly for comparison. After SSO treatment, an ∼6-fold PCE enhancement (2.99%) was achieved, which was indeed a higher value than that achieved by conventional ETs (SVS: 2.42%, TA: 2.61%). Furthermore, nanomorphology optimization was achieved by sequentially developing PCBM among the pre-assembled P3HT nanofibrils by means of additional TA treatment. This sequential development concept enhanced the P3HT/PCBM interfacial area and bi-continuity, raising the device PCE up to 3.35% under AM 1.5 G one-sun condition. This result can leverage the application of the g-spray method to the continuous production of PSCs.

To prepare the blend solution, 1 mg of P3HT (Sepiolid P100, Reike Metals) and 1 mg of PCBM (Nano C) were dissolved in 1 ml of chlorobenzene (CB). The solutions were stirred for more than 5 h at room temperature before use. Indium doped tin oxide coated glass (ITO/glass) substrates (sheet resistance < 20 Ω □−1) were treated with UV/ozone for 20 min before use. Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) that was doped with polystyrene sulfonic acid, PEDOT/PSS (Baytron AI 4083, Bayer), was diluted using the same volume of CH3OH. The PEDOT/PSS solution was spin-coated at 4000 rpm for 35 s under an N2 gas environment to produce a 50 nm thick layer on the ITO/glass and dried at 110 °C for 10 min. A commercial spray gun assembly (Lumina automatic spray gun, nozzle size: 1.0 mm) was used for the deposition of active materials and SSO treatment. In a typical spraying, the P3HT/PCBM blend solution was loaded into a fluid cup and injected on the PEDOT/PSS coated ITO/glass at a rate of 0.18 ml min−1 through the air-spray gun, which was powered by N2 gas at 0.8 kgf cm−2. The photoactive film thickness was ∼250 nm. The spray nozzle tip was kept 25–30 cm from the substrate for the deposition of active layers.


For the SSO treatment, DCB was sprayed onto the active layers for 2–30 s at a rate of about 2 ml min−1 through the g-spray nozzle. The distance between the substrates and the air-spray nozzle was 30 cm. After spraying DCB on the photoactive films, the wet films were left to slowly evaporate for ∼10 min. It is noted that g-spraying of the active layers and SSO treatment were performed in ambient air conditions. In the case of SVS, the photoactive layers of deposited substrates were transferred into a Petri dish filled with CB, where it was held for more than 1 h. The films were isolated from the liquid phase CB solvent in order to be treated with saturated CB vapor. For TA treatment, the devices were thermally annealed at 135 °C for 15 min in an N2 atmosphere before deposition of the cathode.


The active layers of coated samples were transferred to a vacuum thermal evaporation chamber for deposition of the LiF/Al top electrodes. The LiF/Al layer was deposited using a shadow mask at a high vacuum (10−7 Torr). The active area for the devices was 0.099 cm2.


The J–V characteristic measurements were measured with a Keithley 2400 source unit. A class-A solar simulator with a 150 W Xenon lamp (Newport) served as the light source, and the light intensity was adjusted using a KG-5 filter covered monosilicon detector calibrated by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) to minimize the spectral mismatch for a light intensity of approximately AM 1.5 G 1-sun light intensity.


The bulk film morphology of the sprayed active layers was characterized by an optical microscope (Nikon Eclipse TE2000-U) and the film topology was measured by an atomic force microscope (Nanoscope III Multimode AFM and SPA 300 HV, Seiko Instrument Inc.). For the TEM (JEM 3010 JEOL at 300 kV) analysis, the P3HT/PCBM films (∼100 nm) sprayed on the PEDOT/PSS coated ITO/glass were floated by dissolving the PEDOT/PSS layers and transferring them to 200-mesh copper grids. A surface profilometer (Alpha-Step IQ Profilers) was applied to measure the film thicknesses of both the active layer and the PEDOT/PSS layer. UV-Vis absorption spectra of the active films were obtained using a Lambda 35 spectrophotometer. XRD results were obtained using a high resolution X-ray diffractometer (Rigaku, Cu anode, 60 kV,300 mA). PL spectra were taken using a Fluorescence Spectrophotometer (Hitachi, F7000) with 480 nm excitation.



Fig. 1 presents a schematic description of the g-spray technique for the preparation of P3HT/PCBM blend photoactive layers and the SSO treatment, which is the ET method used in this study. In the g-spray method, the spray gun contained three distinct inlets for (i) N2 gas, which is used to atomize the solution, (ii) air gas, which is used to open and lift the nozzle of the spray gun, and (iii) the injection of the blend solution (Fig. 1A). 2 mg ml−1 of P3HT/PCBM (1/1 ratio) solution in chlorobenzene (CB) was atomized onto a PEDOT–PSS coated ITO/glass by the pressure of the injected N2 gas. The atomizing pressure and the nozzle-to-substrate distance were the factors most crucial to successful deposition. When the atomized droplets were completely dried before colliding with the substrate, film deposition failed because of poor droplet–substrate adhesion, while the films began to de-wet if the solvent remained for a prolonged time. The de-wetting process could be particularly facilitated by the continuous pressure of the atomizing gas when the nozzle-to-substrate distance was too short. Therefore, a balance between the drying kinetics and deposition rate of the atomized droplets was essential. In general, stable film formation was achieved when the droplets collided with the substrate just before they became completely dry.

The as-sprayed films had an inherent and characteristic film morphology that was formed by the sequential pile-up of the sprayed droplets (refer to the OM image in Fig. 1C).Fig. 2 shows the topographic AFM images (80 µm × 80 µm) of g-sprayed P3HT/PCBM blend films (∼250 nm thick). The size of the droplets on the as-sprayed films as determined by the AFM images were in the range of 20–30 µm (Fig. 2A), and the root mean square (RMS) surface roughness of the films was ca. 120 nm. This type of film morphology that is formed by the accumulation of dried droplets holds poor film continuity with rough surface. It is not favorable for the PSC's active layers because the high droplet–droplet interface density resists the charge flow, and the large free volume inside the films can induce high capacitance, increasing the Rs of the PSCs. As shown in our earlier investigation, the improvement of film continuity through re-welding of the droplet–droplet interfaces, which eliminates the free volumes using SVS treatment, can drastically enhance the device efficiency by reducing the internal Rs. In the SSO treatment, which is depicted in Fig. 1B, the as g-sprayed blend films were passed through another g-spray gun to receive an additional brief solvent (DCB) shower. The effect of SSO treatment on the film morphology was indicated in the OM images in Fig. 1D. The signature of the droplet accumulation was completely eliminated by insitu SSO treatment. Concurrently, the film surface became much smoother, as indicated in the AFM topographic images (Fig. 2E). The RMS roughness of the as-sprayed films (∼120 nm) was drastically reduced to ∼8 nm. The SVS treatment was also applied for comparison by placing the as-sprayed films in a CB saturated container (Fig. S1 in the ESI). The topographic AFM image in Fig. 2C show that the SVS treatment could also yield smooth films (RMS roughness of ∼3 nm) with improved continuity, a result that corresponds to a result in our earlier report (refer also to the OM image in Fig. S1C in the ESI). It should be noted that the SVS typically took a relatively extended time (>1 h) to produce continuous films through the elimination of the droplet–droplet interfaces, while the SSO treatment could produce continuous films on a much shorter time scale (less than several minutes), thus offering a facile shortcut to the control of the film morphology of g-sprayed films.

Solvent-assisted ETs have previously been used as efficient methods to control the internal nanomorphology of conventional spin-coated PSCs. The nanomorphology of blend films is crucial to determine the device efficiency, influencing its light absorption and charge transporting properties. A few different ETs have been reported, including the slow evaporation of high boiling point solvents, soaking under solvent vapor, and a combination of both of these approaches. In these solvent-assisted ETs, the solvent molecules can swell the blend films, whose morphologies are determined by the coating conditions, and can afford a mobility that can rearrange them into more segregated forms that are thermodynamically more favorable. However, these methods require a quite delicate control of the solvent evaporation rate and/or a prolonged time for completion (1–2 h). The effects of SSO treatment on the internal nanomorphology of P3HT/PCBM blend films and the appropriate SSO conditions to achieve a favorable nanomorphology were investigated, and the results are discussed in the following section.
The changes in nanomorphology produced by SSO treatment were investigated. Fig. 3A shows XRD spectra of g-sprayed P3HT/PCBM blend films subjected to a range of ETs. A portion of self-assembled crystalline P3HT can be evaluated from the relative (100) plane peak intensities of P3HT at a specific position (2θ ≈ 5.4°) of the out-of-plane XRD spectra. The (100) plane peak of P3HT was considerably developed after a very brief SSO treatment as compared to the as-sprayed films. Notably, the (100) peak intensity of the SSO treated samples was higher than those produced by conventional ETs, with 1 h of SVS and 15 min of TA respectively. There was also a correspondence between the UV-Vis spectroscopy analysis results and the XRD results. As indicated in Fig. 3B, an enhanced red-shifted absorption and the development of vibronic shoulders near the wavelengths of 550 and 610 nm were observed after SSO treatment, which represent the significant development of inter-chain stacked P3HT crystals. Along with the XRD results, the UV-Vis spectra revealed that the SSO treatment could self-assemble the P3HT far more efficiently than the other conventional ETs (SVS and TA). The nanomorphology development upon SSO treatment was further investigated by TEM analysis (Fig. 4). In general, properly nano-segregated P3HT crystals form nanofibrils with a width of approximately 15 nm. In the bright-field TEM (BF-TEM) images of SSO treated films shown in Fig. 4E, ∼15 nm thick P3HT continuous fibrils could be clearly detected because of the difference between the density of P3HT (1.10 g cm−3) and PCBM (1.50 g cm−3). The enhanced crystallinity of P3HT was further confirmed by the Debye–Scherrer rings of the selected area electron diffraction (SAED) patterns, which are shown in the inset of the corresponding BF-TEM images in Fig. 4. In the SAED patterns, the outer ring is attributed to the (010) reflection of P3HT nanofibrils and the inner ring corresponds to PCBM clusters. The UV-Vis, XRD, and TEM results demonstrate that SSO treatment can self-assemble nanofibrillar P3HT crystals more effectively than the other conventional ETs (SVS and TA).
It is noteworthy that superior P3HT nanofibril development was achieved by a very brief SSO treatment (a few seconds), while a conventional solvent-assisted ET counterpart, SVS, took a significantly longer time (>1 h). In the SSO treatment, the solvent liquid partially dissolves the active layers that serve as a carrier for the rearrangement, while the solvent vapor is responsible for this function in SVS. The greater portion of the solvent that is involved during SSO treatment enables this method to rearrange the nanomorphology more effectively than SVS. We believe that the “dissolution” by the solvent liquid functioned much more effectively than the “swelling” by the solvent vapor, providing prompt P3HT assembly and segregation of the two components. A similar approach using a solvent liquid to rearrange the nanomorphology of various polythiophene-based active layers in organic field effect transistors (OFETs) has recently been discovered by Di et al. In their study, a small amount of common solvent was introduced into the polymer active layers by the spin-coating method, followed by re-annealing treatment in an oven. Introducing a controlled amount of solvent could significantly improve the packing order of the polythiophenes while maintaining the film integrity, contributing to a 2–4 fold increase in the charge mobility. This was a considerably enhanced level of performance as compared to the performance of OFETs after conventional solvent or thermal assisted annealing. Employing a similar partial dissolution concept, our SSO method demonstrated, for the first time, the effective nanophase segregation of bi-component blend films. Indeed, the controlled introduction of solvent liquid by spraying can be achieved instantly, reconstructing both the macro- and nano-phase morphologies.
Effective nanomorphology control achieved by SSO treatment was reflected in the performance enhancement of PSCs. Fig. 5A shows the J–V characteristics of the PSCs for a range of ET conditions. The as-sprayed devices exhibited a relatively low PCE (0.52%) because of the as-formed random nanomorphology of the blend films. After a brief SSO treatment (2 s), the PSC performance was enhanced remarkably. The resulting PCE of SSO treated PSCs (PSC-SSO) was 2.99% with an open circuit voltage (VOC) of 600 mV, short circuit current (JSC) of 8.27 mA cm−2, and fill factor (FF) of 60.3%. Notably, the performance enhancement by SSO was much more significant than that achieved by the conventional ETs (SVS and TA). The PCEs of our PSCs after SVS (PSC-SVS) and TA (PSC-TA) were 2.42% and 2.61%, respectively, which correspond well with other values that can be found in the literature. The results of J–V curve analysis are summarized in table, Table 1. It is widely known that the excessive direct use of common solvents on the polymer layers can destroy the film; thus, choosing appropriate SSO conditions, which includes the selection of solvents and the deposition quantity, is important. An insufficient quantity of the solvent may develop neither continuous films nor a favorable nanomorphology, while an excessive amount of the solvent can de-wet the films. The use of solvents with a low volatility did not provide reproducible results because the relatively fast kinetics of the solvent drying during atomization did not allow for the introduction of sufficient solvent to control the morphology. Using DCB, the control of the solvent quantity that reaches the active films was readily achieved by a combination of the atomizing gas pressure, the nozzle-to-substrate distance, and the spraying time, which resulted in reproducible SSO treatment results. In this sense, the PSC performance was significantly diminished by a prolonged SSO time (>10 s) at an identical atomizing pressure (PCE of <1.5%, Fig. 5B and Table 1). A similar amount of solvent might be introduced during a longer time of SSO treatment at a reduced solvent spray rate, though an excessive spray time often produced a coarse film quality. Keeping all these factors in mind, we see that the SSO treatment is a complex process. The sprayed solvent mists must penetrate through the blend film, dismantling the kinetically trapped nanomorphology of the P3HT/PCBM blends while simultaneously rearranging them to a more thermodynamically favorable assembly. During this process, the film continuity can be re-built, though the macroscopic film integrity is kept intact. If excess sprayed solvent is left on the substrate, the atomizing gas can easily demolish the layer, de-wetting the films. Optimum results were obtained in a brief treatment time using a sufficient amount of solvent. We attributed the remarkable performance enhancement after SSO to the re-welding of the droplet–droplet interfaces and the nanophase segregated morphology which contains highly self-assembled P3HT.
PSCs

V
OC/V

J
SC/mA cm−2
FF
PCE (%)
As g-sprayed
0.677
2.010
38.14
0.52
As TA
0.626
7.756
53.64
2.61
SVS
0.603
7.216
55.72
2.42
SVS/TA
0.616
7.988
58.23
2.87

SSO (2 s)
0.600
8.270
60.34
2.99

SSO (10 s)
0.631
6.377
36.74
1.48

SSO (30 s)
0.643
6.145
34.28
1.36

SSO/TA
0.607
8.717
63.22
3.35
The fact that the PSC-SSO achieved a higher PCE than PSC-TA was extraordinary because the great prevalence of TA causes it to be considered the most efficient ET method. It should be noted that the PCE of our PSC-TA was very similar to that of other reported values for efficient PSCs achieved by spray methods. Thus far, all the reported sprayed PSCs adopted TA as a regular ET and the resulting PCEs corresponded with one another (2.35–2.83%). Meanwhile, in spin-coated PSCs, higher PSC performance has been reported for solvent-assisted treatments than for TA. In these reports, the active layer films were prepared by the spin-coating method, and the solvent evaporation rate was precisely controlled for an extended time (>2 h) to achieve a well-developed nanomorphology. However, the control of the evaporation rate is not viable for sprayed PSCs because of the very short drying time during the film deposition step. Therefore, the SSO treatment offers an effective “shortcut” for the manipulation of the nanomorphology of g-sprayed PSCs.
Motivated by the efficient morphology control achieved by means of SSO treatment, further performance optimization of g-sprayed PSCs was attempted by combining additional TA treatment. The further improvement in PCE achieved by combining solvent-assisted treatment with TA had been previously reported by Zhao et al. In their study, additional TA on the SVS treated spin-coated PSCs enhanced the PCE significantly (>2-fold) because the additional TA could effectively diffuse PCBM to further cluster which can promote electron transport. The condition for the additional TA on our SSO treated samples prior to cathode deposition was 135 °C for 15 min. The PCE of the SSO/TA treated PSCs (PSC-SSO-TA) was further improved to 3.35% with a VOC of 607 mV, JSC of 8.72 mA cm−2, and FF of 63.2%. In the P3HT/PCBM blends, the self-assembly of P3HT to the nanofibrillar domain occurs more readily than PCBM clustering, which requires more kinetic energy. Recently, Kim's group reported that the sequential aggregation of P3HT and PCBM can achieve a more desirable nanomorphology that enhances the corresponding PSC performance. Pre-assembly of the P3HT nanofibrillar domain could retard and resist the excessive growth of the PCBM domain, facilitating finer control of the nanomorphology of active films. The SSO treatment used in this study was exceptionally effective for P3HT assembly to nanofibrils, as indicated by TEM, and the additional TA could sequentially develop the PCBM. Additional crystallization of P3HT upon TA was also observed in the XRD and UV-Vis spectra, as shown in Fig. 3. As a result, the PSC performance was improved more in PSC-SSO-TA than in their counterparts, PSC-SSO (Table 1).
In order to further understand the effect of additional TA on nanomorphology, the changes in PL spectra of g-sprayed P3HT/PCBM blend films with respect to ET conditions were compared (Fig. 6). PL of organic semiconductors occurs due to the radioactive recombination of electron–hole pairs. In P3HT/PCBM blends, PL can be quenched at the interface of the two components by the photo-induced charge transfer from P3HT to PCBM. Effective PL quenching indicates the efficient dissociation of electrons and holes, and the degree of PL quenching is strongly related to the interfacial area of the blends.Fig. 6 exhibits the PL spectra of g-sprayed films with 480 nm excitation for a range of ET conditions. In the as-sprayed samples, the PL was quenched almost completely, which indicates efficient charge transfer from P3HT to PCBM due to a large donor/acceptor interfacial area. After SSO treatment, the PL was augmented. This was caused by the reduction in the donor/acceptor interfacial area due to the development of nanofibrillar P3HT crystals that facilitated nanophase segregation with PCBM, as well as to the enhanced crystallinity of P3HT, which can diminish the defect-induced non-radioactive decay channels. Similar PL growth due to phase segregation was observed for other ETs: TA (Fig. 6) and SVS (Fig. S4, ESI). Upon additional TA (SSO/TA), the PL was diminished (Fig. 6). This reduction in PL was contrary to our expectation, because the enhanced P3HT crystallinity upon additional TA was confirmed by the XRD and UV-Vis analysis results (Fig. 3) which were correspondent to other reported results. Since the improved P3HT crystallinity in SSO/TA treated samples would reduce the non-radioactive decay channel, the suppressed PL could be attributed to the increase in the P3HT/PCBM interfacial area.
It is known that the typical TA condition possesses a stronger driving force for P3HT/PCBM phase segregation than solvent-assisted ETs, especially in facilitating the mobility of PCBM for diffusion. The clustering behavior of PCBM upon TA has been investigated using the randomly ordered as-spin-coated P3HT/PCBM blend films. In our SSO treated blend film, the P3HT nanofibrils are pre-occupied, and this excluded volume can largely constrain PCBM clustering upon TA (refer the OM images in Fig. S3 in the ESI). During the additional TA, the PCBM can diffuse in the confined space, where the pre-occupied P3HT nanofibrils act as a template for clustering while the further crystallization of P3HT also occurs. As a result, a more bi-continuous nanophase of the two components could be formed. The schematic description of the sequential nanomorphology development upon SSO and additional TA is displayed in Fig. 6B1–B3. In the TEM images in Fig. 4 (also refer to Fig. S2 in the ESI), the dark phase that represents PCBM is more diffused among the nanofibrillar bright phase after additional TA, which indicates the formation of more bi-continuous phase (compare the TEM images in Fig. S2E and F, ESI, and Fig. 4E and F). This sequential formation of bi-continuous nanophase enhanced the interfacial area, which resulted in the diminishing of PL. The improved nanomorphology that contained an enhanced interfacial density could dissociate the electron–hole pairs more efficiently and improve the charge transport, resulting in the additional boosting of JSC and FF. Finally, the optimized nanomorphology was reflected in the performance of PSC-SSO-TA with a PCE of 3.35%, which is the highest value to date among reported sprayed PSCs.

Efficient nanomorphology control of g-sprayed PSCs was achieved using a novel SSO method. The SSO was a near insitu treatment that employed partial dissolution of the P3HT/PCBM blends using a solvent liquid that could simultaneously rearrange its macrophase film morphology and nanoscale internal morphology with great efficiency. This was the first demonstration of effective nanomorphology manipulation of bi-component systems using a solvent liquid, though solvent vapor has often been used. The morphology reconstruction by SSO treatment was exceptionally fast and efficient, and can be completed in a very short period of time (∼5 s) followed by simple drying for a few minutes, unlike conventional solvent-assisted ETs that require a prolonged time (1–2 h). As a result of its efficient morphology development, the device performance of PSC-SSO was higher than that of PSC-SVS and PSC-TA. Further optimization of the nanomorphology was achieved by combining additional TA with PSC-SSO. The additional TA afforded effective diffusion of PCBM through the P3HT nanofibril-templated space, promoting the bi-continuity and interfacial area of the two components. This sequential development of the nanomorphology resulted in a further boost of PCE to 3.35%. This value was the highest PCE value thus far reported in PSCs produced using the spray method. If we consider that SSO treatment is a simple room temperature process that requires just a short time, this result enables us to envisage that this facile SSO treatment can leverage the realization of the g-spray method toward a practical high-throughput web coating processing technique for PSC fabrication.


The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of the KIST Program, the Korea Research Council of Fundamental Science & Technology (KRCF) and KIST for “National Agenda Project (NAP)” program, the Pioneer Research Center Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea funded by the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology (2009-0081500), and the Fundamental R&D Program for Core Technology of Materials funded by the Ministry of Knowledge Economy, Republic of Korea. SYJ would like to thank Dr Sung Cheol Yoon for his help with the device fabrication.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c0jm03899g
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011