 DOI: 10.1039/C9TA03336J
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 19008-19016


Yuxiao
Guo
,

Xingtian
Yin
*,

Jie
Liu
 and 

Wenxiu
Que
*

Electronic Materials Research Laboratory, Key Laboratory of the Ministry of Education, International Center for Dielectric Research, Shaanxi Engineering Research Center of Advanced Energy Materials and Devices, School of Electronic & Information Engineering, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710049, Shaanxi, People's Republic of China. E-mail: xt_yin@mail.xjtu.edu.cn; wxque@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Received
28th March 2019
, Accepted 17th July 2019
First published on 17th July 2019
Considering both the features of bandgap and stability, CsPbIBr2 presents a promising potential among the inorganic perovskite photovoltaic materials. Nevertheless, the poor quality films derived from the precursor solution acutely hinders the performance improvement of cells. Herein, high-quality CsPbIBr2 perovskite films are effectively fabricated through a facile one-step spin-coating method assisted by a preheating process. During spin coating, the reserved substrate heat accelerates solvent molecule volatilization, resulting in the complete coverage and enhanced crystallinity of the CsPbIBr2 films. Upon optimizing the substrate-preheating temperature precisely, perovskite solar cells (PSCs) with a configuration of ITO/SnO2/CsPbIBr2/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag exhibit a superior power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 9.86% with a stabilized output of 8.78% and an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.267 V, all of which represent the excellent properties of the pure CsPbIBr2-based cells. Moreover, this work provides a promising route for the fabrication of inorganic perovskites.

Organic–inorganic hybrid halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have gained great attention owing to their amazing optoelectronic features coupled with the low-cost fabrication procedure. Up to now, the certified power conversion efficiency (PCE) of PSCs has surged from 3.8% to 23.7%. However, the multiple stresses from light soaking, moisture and heat are inevitable obstacles to the commercialization of organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite materials, such as the mainly studied methylammonium lead iodide (MAPbI3) and formamidinium lead iodide (FAPbI3). Due to the volatile and hygroscopic organic cations, including (MA+) CH3NH3+ and (FA+) CH3(NH2)2+, the innate instability of hybrid perovskites becomes a huge barrier to its development. Therefore, inorganic perovskites, in which the organic cations are substituted by inorganic cations (e.g. Cs+, Rb+, etc.), are being developed with great interest. Among them, Cs+ is a promising substitute due to its appropriate ionic radius among the possible A site candidates in an ABX3 structure [A = MA+, FA+, Cs+, Rb+; B = Pb2+, Sn2+, Mn2+, Ge2+, Bi3+, Cu2+; X = I−, Br−, Cl−, BF4−, PF6−, SCN−.].

Among the CsPbX3 group, CsPbBr3, a widely studied inorganic perovskite, shows excellent stability even under environmental stress without any encapsulation. However, the light absorption of CsPbBr3 is only up to ∼540 nm due to its large material bandgap of ∼2.3 eV, leading to inadequate light harvest. On the other hand, CsPbI3 has a narrower bandgap of ∼1.73 eV to harvest more solar energy, but unluckily needs a high temperature (>300 °C) to maintain the desired black perovskite α-phase and avoid turning into the abhorrent yellow δ-phase (non-perovskite). Fortunately, after fully balancing the features of bandgap and stability, CsPbIBr2, with a bandgap of 2.05 eV, turns out to be a good choice, which can remain stable up to its melting point above 460 °C. Initially, Ma et al. adopted the method of dual source thermal evaporation to obtain CsPbIBr2 films, but obtained a poor PCE of 4.7% owing to large energy loss. Till 2017, there was significant performance improvement in the devices (up to 8.25%) based on CsPbIBr2 films fabricated by a conventional two-step method. Recently, as reported by Zhu's group, the highest PCE of 9.16% was obtained using a facile intermolecular exchange strategy, highly improving the quality of the one-step spin-coated CsPbIBr2 films. Diverse methods have been adopted to prepare CsPbIBr2 films so far, among which one-step spin-coating CsPbIBr2 precursor solution is the most facile method. However, preparation by this method unluckily results in poor film quality and needs further assistance for improvement. Thus, new attempts for the fabrication of high-quality films are extremely urgent for the performance enhancement of the cells.
Herein, an efficient and facile route, namely, preheating-assisted one-step spin-coating method, was adopted for the desired CsPbIBr2 films. A substrate-preheating process before spin coating accelerates solvent molecule volatilization and crystal growth speed in the precursor films. The resulting CsPbIBr2 films were composed of highly crystalline, full-coverage and micrometer-sized grains with greatly reduced defects. As a result, PSCs based on the inorganic CsPbIBr2 film fabricated by this facile route delivered a remarkable PCE of 9.86%, which is among the superior PCEs reported so far.

All materials and reagents, including tin(IV) oxide (SnO2, 15 wt% in H2O colloidal dispersion, Alfa-Aesar), cesium iodide (CsI, Xi'an Polymer Light Technology Corp.), lead bromide (PbBr2, Xi'an Polymer Light Technology Corp.), 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis (N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD, Xi'an Polymer Light Technology Corp.), phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM, American Dye Sources), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO, Alfa-Aesar) and chlorobenzene (CB, Alfa-Aesar), were used as received without purification.


The CsPbIBr2 precursor solution was prepared by completely dissolving CsI (260 mg) and PbBr2 (370 mg) in DMSO (1 mL) at room temperature. The perovskite films were obtained by spin-coating the precursor solution on preheated SnO2/ITO substrates at a speed of 5000 rpm for 60 s, followed by a two-step annealing process at 35 °C for 2 min and 280 °C for 10 min. As the control for substrate preheating, the SnO2/ITO substrates were placed on a hot plate (40 °C, 60 °C or 80 °C) for 10 min beforehand, and then, the spin-coating procedure was completed as above. Moreover, one sample without undergoing the preheating process was rationally set as the control sample (RT sample). The other essential procedures for a complete device were accomplished by referring to our previous work.


The morphology was characterized by a field emission scanning electron microscope (SEM, Quanta 250FEG, FEI, USA). The crystal structure was examined by an X-ray diffractometer (XRD, SmartLab, Rigaku, Japan). UV-vis-NIR diffuse reflectance spectroscopy (DRS) was performed on a PE Lambda 950 spectrometer (PerkinElmer, USA). A transient steady-state fluorescence spectrometer (Edinburgh FLS980, EI, UK) was adopted to determine the steady photoluminescence (PL) and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) spectra. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) were measured on an ESCALAB Xi+ system (Thermo Fisher, USA).

The steady-state surface photovoltage spectrum (SPV, PL-SPV/IPCE1000, China) was used to obtain the surface potentials of the perovskite films. The current–voltage (J–V) curves of the as-fabricated devices were measured by a PVIV-201V J-V Station (Newport Oriel). All the J–V curves were scanned at a rate of 100 mV s−1 from −0.1 V to 1.3 V or vice versa. A Qtest Station 1000ADX system (Growntech. Inc) was used to record the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra. Electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) and stabilized PCE outputs were recorded by a CHI660E electrochemical workstation (Chenhua, China).

The procedure for the formation of CsPbIBr2 films via the preheating-assisted one-step spin-coating method is concisely presented in Fig. 1a. Before spin-coating the CsPbIBr2 precursor solution prepared by dissolving equivalent molar quantities of CsI and PbBr2 in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), the SnO2/ITO substrates were first preheated on a hotplate for 10 min. Next, the substrates were quickly moved to a spin-coater, and then, ample perovskite precursor was dropped onto the SnO2 film for spin coating. After that, a two-step annealing process was used for film crystallization. Besides, a CsPbIBr2 film prepared by the conventional spin-coating process was also prepared as a reference. The optical images of the films fabricated at different substrate temperatures (room temperature (noted as “RT”), 40 °C, 60 °C and 80 °C) are shown in Fig. S1 (ESI), in which there is no apparent color change. As reported, CsPbIBr2 films fabricated by the conventional spin-coating process presented poor surface coverage, and the corresponding SEM image is shown in Fig. 1b. It can be clearly seen that there were numerous irregular voids in the film, thus decreasing the surface coverage significantly. The formation of voids probably resulted from the extremely slow crystallization of CsPbIBr2 in the conventional spin-coating route, where the CsPbIBr2 species crystallized from the precursor film includes plenty of DMSO molecules (a common solvent for its high solubility of bromide ions) and then shrinks quickly to leave isolated voids behind. The removal of DMSO molecules from the precursor film becomes a priority for a compact and homogeneous film. As expected, the suitable substrate-preheating process could achieve better film coverage (Fig. 1c), and exhibits almost no visible void in the film. It clearly presents that the compact and uniform film consists of crystals with a grain size of ∼0.5–2 μm. As desired, the SEM images (Fig. S2, ESI) of the CsPbIBr2 films proved that the detestable voids decreased with an increase in the temperature from RT to 60 °C. This results from the gradually strengthened volatilization of the DMSO molecules in the precursor films. However, a higher temperature of 80 °C led to a frosted film with coherent grains due to the disordering of Cs–PbBr2+ arrays during the initial formation, which would largely affect the device performance. Meanwhile, the corresponding EDS elemental mapping results of Cs, Pb, I and Br in the optimized CsPbIBr2 film is displayed in Fig. 1d. Due to this preheating-assisted method, the elements Cs, Pb, I and Br were homogeneously distributed without apparent absence in the final film.

The crystal structure of CsPbIBr2 films was examined by X-ray diffraction (XRD). As shown in Fig. 2a and Fig. S3 (ESI), the obvious diffraction peaks at 15.5°, 21.8°, 30.8° and 37.8° could be indexed to the (100), (110), (200) and (211) planes of α-phase perovskite CsPbIBr2, respectively. Meanwhile, crystallinity enhancement could be achieved by increasing the substrate preheating temperature, and no other impurity phase was generated via this preheating-assisted method. As shown in Fig. 2b, it could be reinforced that the high-quality perovskite film was conducive to harvesting more light for power conversion. The absorption edge of ∼600 nm, corresponding to a bandgap of ∼2.07 eV, was also in great agreement with the reported values for solution-derived CsPbIBr2 films. Besides, XPS measurements of both the CsPbIBr2 films were performed for elemental analysis, as shown in Fig. S4 (ESI). The signature peaks of Cs, Pb, I and Br could be detected obviously, while no other peak appeared. Both these results can be identified as indicators of pure composition. Meanwhile, the high-resolution XPS spectra for various elements (Cs 3d, Pb 4f, I 3d and Br 3p) are shown in Fig. S5 (ESI). All peaks were mainly consistent with the reported binding energies of the constituent elements of the CsPbIBr2 material. Luckily, there was no certified peak for the metallic Pb species or halide composition change, as reported by Zhu's group. No obvious peak shift of the elements could be observed for both films, indicating similar binding environments, which manifests that the preheating-assisted process has little effect on the natural phase and crystal lattice.
Photoluminescence (PL) measurement was employed to further study the internal charge transport and recombination mechanism of the perovskite films. Fig. 3a illustrates the steady-state PL results of the perovskites coated on glass. It is notable that four emission peaks, located at around 587, 618, 650, and 682 nm, respectively, appeared in the PL spectra (excitation at 470 nm). Meanwhile, none of them was consistent with the absorption spectra of the CsPbIBr2 films. According to Beal's work, phase separation occurs under light illumination in CsPb(I1−xBrx)3 materials when x is >0.4. This phenomenon is also in agreement with the previous reports. However, more complicated phase segregation of CsPbIBr2 perovskites occurred in our work, which still needs further research for the analysis of its internal mechanism. Moreover, Li's group has verified the phase segregation into an iodide-rich phase both at the grain boundaries on the film surface and in the film bulk. These ion migration “highways” can lead to serious phase segregation and J–V hysteresis (discussed later). Briefly, the higher PL intensity of the CsPbIBr2 films fabricated by the preheating-assisted method represents substantially reduced defects compared to that produced by the conventional method. Likewise, the corresponding TRPL result, which is exhibited in Fig. 3b, shows that the preheating-assisted CsPbIBr2 films exhibited a lower PL decay rate in parallel with a longer electron lifetime. Both prove that the crystal defect formation during film fabrication is effectively suppressed by this promising assist.
Besides, UPS measurement is used to investigate the electronic structure of the CsPbIBr2 films. Fig. 3c and d present the UPS spectra of the cut-off region and valence band edge region, respectively. According to the equation of valence band maximum (VBM) = 21.22 − (Ecutoff − Eonset), VBM energies were calculated to be 5.72 and 5.62 eV for the films formed at RT and the substrate preheating temperature of 60 °C, respectively. Similarly, the work function values, φ = 21.22 − Ecutoff, were confirmed to be 4.07 and 3.97 eV, respectively. Furthermore, such phenomena can be supported by the steady-state SPV measurement. As shown in Fig. S6 (ESI), the relative surface potential of the perovskite film fabricated by the preheating-assisted method was much higher than that produced by the conventional method. The remarkable increase in the surface potential corresponded well to the reduced work function, in line with the UPS results. Using the same bandgap of 2.07 eV, the energy level diagrams are plotted in Fig. S7 (ESI). The results indicated that the lower work function of the CsPbIBr2 film formed by the preheating-assisted method was accompanied by the formation of a higher built-in potential between the film and SnO2 ETM. Meanwhile, the conduction band minimum (CBM) difference of the CsPbIBr2/SnO2 heterojunction also increased from 0.65 eV to 0.75 eV. Both contributed to a higher driving force for charge separation and electron extraction, in spite of a slightly increased energy loss from the electrons, which successfully provided a higher device Voc. On the other hand, the origin of Voc in perovskite solar cells can also be certified by the difference between the higher energy level of the perovskites and the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) level of the hole transporting materials (HTMs). Hence, the devices based on the preheating-assisted CsPbIBr2 perovskites possessed larger Voc values than those based on the conventional one due to the absolute shift of energy levels to vacuum.
To further evaluate the perovskite quality, trap state density (ntrap) was investigated based on the dark J–V curves of the electron-only devices with a structure of ITO/SnO2/CsPbIBr2/PCBM/Ag, as shown in Fig. 3e and f. It is obvious that the dark J–V curves could be divided into three parts. The current exhibited a linear correlation (n = 1) in the low bias voltage region, indicating an ohmic response. Then, it showed a sharp nonlinear increase (n > 3) when the bias voltage exceeded a certain value (trap-filled limit voltage, VTFL), which represented the trap state filling process. In principle, the trap state density can be determined from the trap-filled limit voltage, according to the following equation.
(1)
where
ε is the relative dielectric constant of CsPbIBr2, which is approximately equal to 8,ε0 is the constant of vacuum permittivity in free space, d is the thickness of the perovskite film, and e is electron charge. The approximate VTFL values of the perovskites were acquired to be 0.52 V and 0.32 V, as well as their corresponding densities were 7.4 × 1015 cm−3 and 4.5 × 1015 cm−3, respectively. Therefore, the perovskite material prepared by the preheating-assisted method had a preferable film quality with reduced trap density, mainly benefiting from its full coverage and higher crystallinity.

A schematic model with the structure of ITO/SnO2/CsPbIBr2/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag is shown in Fig. 4a, in which CsPbIBr2 films produced with and without the substrate-preheating procedure were employed as the light absorbers. Fig. 4b exhibits a false color cross-sectional SEM image of the as-fabricated cell based on the CsPbIBr2 film formed at a substrate preheating temperature of 60 °C, while the real SEM image without color is shown in Fig. S8 (ESI). It can be seen that the CsPbIBr2 film was pinhole-free and no additional void existed, as expected. Meanwhile, the perovskite film had an average thickness of ∼250 nm. Fig. 4c and S9 (ESI) show the device performance distribution for 15 devices measured under AM 1.5 simulated sunlight. All of them had narrow distribution, indicating a superior reproducibility of the one-step spin-coating method. Corresponding to the previous results, the devices based on CsPbIBr2 formed at the preheating temperature of 60 °C showed great advantages. The average PCE of the cells based on the CsPbIBr2 film fabricated at 60 °C was 9.07%, which is 38% higher than that of the conventional devices (shown in Table 1). The J–V curves of the champion cells in the reverse scan (RS) direction are shown in Fig. 4d and S10 (ESI). Details on parameters, including Voc, short-circuit current density (Jsc), fill factor (FF) and PCE, are listed in Tables 1 and S1 (ESI). In contrast, the conventional device achieved a lower PCE of 7.29% with Jsc = 9.88 mA cm−2, Voc = 1.165 V and FF = 0.63. With the help of the preheating-assisted process, the Jsc, Voc and FF drastically increased to 10.69 mA cm−2, 1.267 V and 0.71, respectively, yielding an excellent PCE of 9.86%. We have also summarized and compared the performance of previously reported devices based on pure CsPbIBr2 in Table S2 (ESI). It can be seen that both PCE and Voc obtained in our work are superior.
Substrate preheating temperature
Scan

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF
Max. PCE (%)
Avg. PCE (%)
HI (%)
RT
FS
9.89
1.073
0.56
5.91
—
RS
9.88
1.165
0.63
7.29
6.57
18.9
60 °C
FS
10.69
1.102
0.62
7.26
—
RS
10.69
1.267
0.71
9.86
9.07
26.4
The steady state PCE measured by biasing the device at its maximum power point (MPPT) is very useful to estimate the reliability of the J–V scans. It has been reported that the cell PCE adversely depends on the measurement conditions because of the well-known hysteresis effect, as shown in Fig. S11 (ESI). In this work, the hysteresis index (HI) was applied to assess the hysteresis effect of the devices, which can be well defined according to the following equation.
(2)
Although there was an obvious PCE promotion after optimization, the preheating-assisted method led to an unexpected HI increase from 18.9% to 26.4%. The excessive ion migration and accumulation at the interfaces of perovskite/carrier transporting layers (CTLs), mainly resulting from the phase segregation of halide ions, could be the core reason for the significant hysteresis. At the same time, the internal mechanism has also been put forward by many researchers. It has been proven that a promising method to reduce J–V hysteresis is by restraining the phase segregation of perovskites. As reported by Wang's group, the halide phase segregation was completely suppressed by CsXth additive, thus leading to a sharply reduced hysteresis from 22% to 7%. However, referring to our PL results in Fig. 3a, there was no improvement in the film phase stability because of the preheating-assisted process. Both the amount and relative intensity of the visual emission peaks were still constant in the spectra. Furthermore, the full-coverage films produced by the preheating-assisted method would certainly produce more grain boundaries, I/Br -rich phases, ion migration and accumulation. Both might jointly lead to more serious hysteresis of the devices, as mentioned. Hence, Fig. 4e displays a detailed record of the current densities of our best cells and their corresponding PCEs as a function of time, in which the stabilized PCE value rises from 6.15% for the control device to 8.78% for the devices prepared by the preheating-assisted method. Fig. 4f provides the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra of the best-performing cells, where the integral current densities as a function of wavelength are also presented. Photocurrent generation in both the cells starts at ∼600 nm, which agrees well with the measured absorption onset of the films. Evidently, higher EQE values across the whole absorption range with a maximum value of up to 82% could be observed in the cells with films achieved by the preheating-assisted method than those formed by the conventional route. Meanwhile, the integrated Jsc values from EQE curves were also roughly consistent with the results from J–V measurements (9.54 vs. 10.69 mA cm−2 and 7.93 vs. 9.88 mA cm−2).
We further employed electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) measurement of the devices to obtain a deeper insight into the charge transfer, using the simplified equivalent circuit model (see the inset image in Fig. 4g). The first semicircle representing the high frequency region is assigned to the charge transfer resistance (Rtr), while the second incomplete one representing the low frequency region is mainly dominated by the charge recombination resistance (Rrec). The fitting results are presented in Table S3 (ESI). The device with the conventional CsPbIBr2 film had a comparatively lower Rtr (1140 vs. 1835 Ω), which might have resulted from the incomplete coverage of the perovskite film and direct contact between the CTLs. However, its Rrec was drastically lower (260 vs. 3250 Ω) than that of the one fabricated by the preheating-assisted method. The sharply increased Rrec resulted likely from the defect-free physical contact between the CTLs and high-quality CsPbIBr2, leading to carrier recombination suppression. Fig. 4h shows the linear-scale dark J–V curves of the cells. Obviously, the optimized cell fabricated by the preheating-assisted method exhibited a smaller leak current under low bias voltage and dark current under high bias voltage, similarly revealing the formation of a strongly depleted electric field leading to enhanced Voc and Jsc.
Finally, the humidity stability and heat endurance of the champion cells were examined in this work. Fig. 5a shows the time-dependent variation of normalized PCEs of the cells stored without encapsulation in an ambient atmosphere of ∼25 °C and ∼35% RH. It is clear that the cell with the film produced by the preheating-assisted method could retain ∼85% (vs. 60%) of its initial efficiency after being stored for 30 days, proving its superior long-term stability against humidity. Likewise, on testing the heat endurance of the devices, the normalized PCE was nearly retained at ∼80% of its initial efficiency over 72 hours, as displayed in Fig. 5b. Besides, as ESI, the morphological evolution of the CsPbIBr2 films over time is also shown in Fig. S12 (ESI). Both SEM and optical images demonstrated the great phase stability of the CsPbIBr2 material. In short, CsPbIBr2-based PSCs produced by the preheating-assisted method possess superior humidity and thermal stability, which endows them with a great prospect in practical applications in the future.

In summary, high-quality CsPbIBr2 films were obtained by a facile one-step spin-coating method assisted by a preheating process. On controlling the substrate-preheating temperature, the remaining substrate heat could speed up the volatilization rate of the solvent molecules, which played a core role in film quality enhancement. After optimization, better coverage and higher crystallinity contributed to the production of more photo-induced carriers and less recombination in the CsPbIBr2 films. Gratifyingly, a superior PCE value of 9.86% was achieved by the champion device with the structure of ITO/SnO2/CsPbIBr2/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag. This work provides a facile method for the fabrication of high-quality CsPbIBr2 perovskite films, which have enormous potential in practical applications.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was funded by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (61774122), China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2019M653639), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (xjj2018021) and the 111 Project of China (B14040). SEM and TEM were conducted at the International Center for Dielectric Research. We thank Ms Liu at the Instrument Analysis Center of Xi'an Jiaotong University for her assistance with XPS analysis.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta03336j
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019