 DOI: 10.1039/C9CC01266D
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 5343-5346


Mustafa
Haider
,

Chao
Zhen
,

Tingting
Wu
,

Jinbo
Wu
,

Chunxu
Jia
,

Gang
Liu
* and 

Hui-Ming
Cheng


Shenyang National Laboratory for Materials Science, Institute of Metal Research, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 72 Wenhua Road, Shenyang 110016, China. E-mail: gangliu@imr.ac.cn

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, 19(A) Yuquan Road, Beijing, 100049, China

School of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Science and Technology of China, 72 Wenhua Road, Shenyang 110016, China

Low-Dimensional Material and Device Laboratory, Tsinghua-Berkeley Shenzhen Institute, Tsinghua University, 1001 Xueyuan Road, Shenzhen 518055, China

Received
13th February 2019
, Accepted 9th April 2019
First published on 17th April 2019
Pristine nickel phthalocyanine (NiPc) was introduced as a hole transporting material (HTM) in inverted planar perovskite solar cells (PSCs) for the first time. A power conversion efficiency of 14.3% was achieved, outperforming the values obtained in the solar cells based on the CuPc HTM, which is a typical representative of metal phthalocyanine based HTMs. Moreover, inverted planar PSCs based on NiPc HTMs show a very weak hysteresis behavior.

Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have been attracting increasing attention due to the unique properties of metal halide perovskite active materials such as low manufacturing cost, strong and wide-spectrum light absorption, and fast carrier ambipolar transport, and their power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) have rapidly increased to >23% in a few years of intensive investigation. This outstanding progress was achieved by improving the film quality of the perovskite layer and tuning their compositions, along with the exploitation of diverse device layouts and of suitable partner materials to manage photo-charging carriers within the devices. Depending on the role of the bottom transparent electrode in extracting the carriers, PSCs, architectured with a perovskite active layer sandwiched between electron- and hole-transporting layers (ETLs and HTLs), have been categorized into the regular (n–i–p) and inverted (p–i–n) configurations. Inverted planar PSCs, holding the merits of easy fabrication, compatibility with flexible substrates, versatility of energy-band engineering and feasibility of constructing multi-junction cells, have been paid much attention. Fullerene derivatives are commonly used as top ETL components in inverted PSCs to prevent the formation of deep anti-site defects and ion migration along the boundaries so that the hysteresis behavior can be effectively suppressed. And the hydrophobic nature of the fullerene derivatives further enables the top ETL to act as an effective waterproof shell for the underneath moisture-labile perovskite active layer. So far, PCEs exceeding 20% have been achieved in inverted planar PSCs.

The HTLs coated on the bottom transparent electrode play an important role in determining the performance of inverted planar PSCs because they perform the tasks of driving the growth of the perovskite materials and extracting photo-holes from them. Effective strategies aimed at improving the performance of the inverted devices include the exploitation and modification of HTMs to achieve higher optical transparencies, faster photo-hole transportation and more favorable interfacial band alignments. Metal phthalocyanines (MPcs) as a kind of attractive organic semiconductor have been frequently used as HTMs in organic electronics such as organic field-effect transistors and diodes. Their highest occupied molecular orbitals (HOMOs) and lowest unoccupied molecular orbitals (LUMOs) match well with the band alignments of perovskite absorbers. Pristine CuPc was first explored as an alternative HTM in regular PSCs by Kumar and coworkers, and a maximum PCE of 5.0% has been achieved. To realize a full solution process, a soluble modified CuPc (copper(II) 2,9,16,23-tetra-tert-butyl-29H,31H-phthalocyanine) along with a mixed-ion perovskite light harvester produces regular devices showing a PCE of 18.8%. By doping CuPc (copper phthalocyanine-3,4′,4′′,4′′′-tetra-sulfonated acid tetra sodium salt) with tetrafluoro-tetracyano-quinodimethane (F4-TCNQ), the PCE of regular devices was improved from 8.71% to 16.14%. As these doped MPcs are soluble in the perovskite precursor solution, they were rarely used as HTL components in inverted PSCs.
Pristine MPcs are usually both chemically and thermally stable. They can be deposited on the substrates by a vacuum thermal evaporation method to produce high quality films with good surface coverage. Moreover, their insoluble nature makes these films stable in the subsequent solution casting process of a perovskite material, which is highly desirable for the construction of inverted devices. Our recent study showed that commercially available nickel phthalocyanine (NiPc) can act as a new efficient HTL in regular PSCs and enables a better performance than CuPc. In this work, inverted planar PSCs with the vacuum thermally deposited NiPc film as the HTL were fabricated along with PCBM as the ETL and silver as the counter electrode. A PCE of 14.3% along with the short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 19.45 mA cm−2, open circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.0 V, and fill factor (FF) of 73.6% has been achieved in the NiPc based devices under the forward scan. Moreover, the fabricated inverted planar PSCs show a very weak hysteresis phenomenon.

Fig. 1a gives UV-vis transmittance and absorption spectra of a NiPc thin film with a thickness of ∼30 nm deposited on the ITO substrate by a thermal vacuum evaporation method. There are four feature peaks in the absorption spectrum. Two of them located in the UV region (λpeak = 294 and 344 nm) correspond to the weaker B-band transition, and the other two in the visible light region (λpeak = 624 and 676 nm) are attributed to the strong π → π* transitions of the Q-band. The band gap of NiPc is estimated to be around 1.6 eV according to the Kubelka-Munk function transformed from the absorption spectrum (Fig. S1, ESI). Although NiPc has the ability of absorbing visible light, its ∼30 nm thick film still shows a high transmittance of over 70% in the whole visible light range (Fig. 1a). The 10 nm and 50 nm thick films (Fig. S2, ESI) also have similar transmittances. This facilitates the light absorption of the adjacent perovskite active layer. In order to evaluate the quality of the deposited NiPc film on the ITO substrate, atomic force microscopy (AFM) was used to record the surface images of bare and NiPc coated ITO. The root-mean-square (rms) roughness values of the bare and NiPc coated ITO are close (2.91 nm versus 3.03 nm) (Fig. 1b and c), suggesting a conformal deposition of NiPc on the ITO substrate. The uniform and flat surface is beneficial for the subsequent deposition and growth of a high-quality perovskite active layer. The architecture of the inverted planar PSC with NiPc is schematically shown in Fig. 1d. PCBM was spun atop the perovskite active layer as the ETL and silver were thermally evaporated at the top as the counter electrode. Since the HOMO and LOMO levels of NiPc were determined to be −5.0 eV and −3.4 eV, respectively, the photo-holes generated in the perovskite layer can transfer to the NiPc HTL and then to the ITO electrode owing to the proper HOMO position of NiPc (a little higher than that of the perovskite). Meanwhile, the NiPc HTL can effectively block the photo-electrons away from the ITO electrode as its LUMO level (−3.4 eV) is higher than that of the perovskite (−3.75 eV), so a highly selective collection of photo-holes can be realized (Fig. 1e). To improve the selective collection efficiency of photo-electrons, an ultrathin insulator bathocuproine (BCP) is generally introduced at the PCBM/Ag interface to both block photo-holes away from the Ag counter electrode and avoid the contact of Ag with the perovskite layer during its thermal vacuum deposition process.
UV-vis absorption spectrum of the perovskite MA0.21FA0.78Pb(I0.78Br0.21)3 film deposited on the NiPc coated ITO substrate shows a slightly higher absorption intensity than that coated on the bare ITO substrate (Fig. 2a). X-ray diffraction patterns of the perovskite film on the NiPc coated substrate (Fig. 2b) show the characteristic diffraction peaks (13.9° and 28.1°) of the perovskite material. The high crystallinity of the perovskite film can be evidenced by the sharp and strong peaks. However, an additional weak diffraction peak at 2θ ≈ 12.6° was recorded from the bare ITO supported perovskite film due to the presence of the cubic PbI2 phase. This undesirable peak was not detected in the perovskite film deposited on the NiPc coated ITO substrate, indicating the formation of pure MA0.21FA0.78Pb(I0.78Br0.21)3 perovskite. The absence of the residual PbI2 phase may cause a little stronger absorbance of the film on the NiPc coated ITO as evidenced in Fig. 2a. The morphologies of the perovskite films deposited on two different substrates were compared by recording their scanning electron microscope (SEM) images (Fig. 2c and Fig. S3, ESI). Both films show a good coverage, smooth and dense surface consisting of particles with a grain size of a few hundred nm. The difference in the morphology of the two films is that some bright particles appear in some grains of the perovskite film deposited on the bare ITO substrate (Fig. S3, ESI). These bright particles may be assigned to the cubic PbI2 phase in the film as indicated by the XRD results. The cross-sectional SEM image of a complete device based on the NiPc HTL was recorded to recognize different layouts and their thicknesses (Fig. 2d). The thickness of the perovskite active layer is about 500 nm.
The thickness of the NiPc HTL is a crucial factor in fabricating high performance PSC devices. A too thin NiPc HTL cannot cover the whole ITO surface so that undesirable direct contact between the ITO and the perovskite layer in some regions may form. A too thick HTL can not only reduce the incident-light transmittance but also increase the series resistance. Therefore, a series of inverted planar PSCs with different NiPc HTL thicknesses (10 nm, 30 nm and 50 nm) were fabricated to investigate the dependence of the PCE on the HTL thickness. 15 devices were fabricated for each thickness to increase the reliability of the results. J–V curves of these devices were recorded under AM 1.5 G sunlight irradiation with a power density of 100 mW cm−2. The J–V curves of the champion devices with different NiPc HTL thicknesses are compared in Fig. 3a. Their corresponding photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table S1 (ESI), where all parameters were obtained from the forward J–V scan. The device with a 10 nm thick NiPc HTL shows a champion efficiency of 13.7% with Jsc of 18.24 mA cm−2, Voc of 1 V and FF of 75.6%. When the thickness increases up to 30 nm, a maximum efficiency of 14.31% was achieved with a Jsc of 19.45 mA cm−2, Voc of 1 V and FF of 73.6%. While further increasing the thickness to 50 nm leads to a decreased efficiency of 11.64% with a Jsc of 16.50 mA cm−2, Voc of 0.98 V and FF of 72%. The statistical histograms of the photovoltaic parameters of each group of 15 devices with different NiPc HTL thicknesses were also summarized (Fig. S4, ESI). The devices with a 30 nm NiPc HTL also show larger average values of the photovoltaic parameters than the devices with 10 nm and 50 nm thick HTLs. Thus, 30 nm is the optimal thickness of the NiPc HTL for fabricating high performance devices by fully covering the ITO surface to prevent the direct contact of ITO with perovskite and thus the recombination of the photogenerated carriers. Meanwhile this thickness can enable a good transmittance of the incident sunlight and allow the transportation of holes from the perovskite to ITO.
It is also important that the devices based on the NiPc HTL show very weak hysteresis upon forward and reverse scanning, indicating good device interfaces with few charge trapping states. The J–V curves obtained at different voltage scanning rates (10 mV s−1vs. 200 mV s−1) were recorded on the champion device with the 30 nm thick NiPc HTL and they almost overlap (Fig. 3b). The photovoltaic parameters derived from the J–V curves of different voltage scanning rates are summarized (Fig. S5 and Table S2, ESI) and they show similar values, further demonstrating the formation of good interfaces with negligible capacitive charges. Reproducibility of the NiPc based devices has been illustrated in Fig. 3c, where the histogram of 30 devices gives their PCE distribution range from 12.5% to 14.5% with an average value of ∼13.5% and over 90% the devices show a PCE of over 13%. The incident photo-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra of the champion devices with different NiPc film thicknesses were obtained over a wide range of the solar spectrum (Fig. 3d). The integrated Jsc values from the IPCE spectra for the films of 10, 30 and 50 nm are 18.1, 19.3 and 16.4 mA cm−2, respectively, which are basically consistent with the values extracted from the J–V curves (Fig. 3a). The IPCE values of the champion device with a 30 nm thick NiPc film in the whole visible light range are over 65% and larger than that of the devices with 10 and 50 nm thick NiPc films.
To figure out the advantage of NiPc as the HTL component in PSCs, CuPc as a typical representative of the reported MPcs was also used as the HTL component to fabricate control reverse planar PSCs under identical conditions. The J–V curves of PSCs with different HTMs were recorded under AM 1.5 G illumination with a power density of 100 mW cm−2. 25 devices were fabricated for each MPc HTL to increase the reliability of the results. The J–V curves of the champion devices with different MPc HTLs were compared (Fig. 4a). The champion cell with the NiPc HTL has a PCE of 14.31% with a Jsc of 19.45 mA cm−2, Voc of 1 V, and FF of 73.6%, outperforming the champion one with the CuPc HTL having a PCE of 14.1% with a Jsc of 18.94 mA cm−2, Voc of 0.99 V and FF of 75.1% (Table S3, ESI). It should be noted that the device based on the NiPc HTL shows a smaller hysteresis behavior compared to that with the CuPc HTL (Fig. 4a). Moreover, the 25 devices with the NiPc HTL give larger average values of Jsc, FF and PCE as compared to the ones with the CuPc HTL (Fig. S6, ESI), indicating the superiority of NiPc to CuPc as the HTL component. Fig. 4(b) represents the photocurrent densities and PCEs of the NiPc and CuPc based champion devices as a function of light irradiation time at 0.77 V. They remain stable during a 300 s operation and even last a longer duration. A stable output PCE of ∼13.7% has been demonstrated for the NiPc based device and ∼13.4% for the CuPc based device. Furthermore, the comparison of the long-term stability tests of the devices based on NiPc and PEDOT:PSS {Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)/poly(styrenesulfonate)} shows the advantage of NiPc in enabling stable devices (Fig. S7, ESI). The efficiency of the NiPc based device remains nearly constant in a 1 h continuous test, while the PEDOT:PSS based device shows an obvious decay during the test.
The steady-state and time-resolved photoluminescence (PL & TRPL) spectra of perovskite films on different HTLs and glass substrates were recorded to compare the HTL's ability in extracting photo-holes (Fig. 4c and d). Both NiPc and CuPc show remarkable PL quenching efficiency, indicating their good charge extraction ability. The PL quenching efficiency for the NiPc HTL case is higher than that for the CuPc case, suggesting the stronger ability of NiPc in extracting photo-holes than CuPc (Fig. 4c). The superior performance of NiPc as a HTL material can be further confirmed by comparing the TRPL decay spectra of NiPc and CuPc based films. The faster PL decay in the NiPc HTL than that in the CuPc HTL indicates that the NiPc film is more effective in extracting photo-holes from the perovskite active layer.
In summary, commercial NiPc was used as the HTL material in inverted planar PSCs for the first time. Owing to its proper band alignment with the perovskite active material, excellent transparency of the optimized 30 nm thick film and good hole transport mobility, the devices based on the NiPc show a champion PCE of ∼14.3% with a Jsc of 19.45 mA cm−2, Voc of 1.0 V and FF of 73.6% under the forward scan, and a stable output PCE of ∼13.7% at the work point of 0.77 V. The advantages of NiPc as the HTM in inverted planar PSCs are demonstrated by comparing with CuPc as a representative of the reported MPc HTL material based devices fabricated under the same conditions. These results show a great potential of using NiPc as the HTL in inverted planar PSCs.
The authors thank the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51825204), and the Key Research Program of Frontier Sciences CAS (QYZDB-SSW-JSC039) for the financial support.

There are no conflicts to declare.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9cc01266d
‡ These two authors contributed equally.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019