 DOI: 10.1039/C7NJ04547F
(Paper)
New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 4843-4853


Babu
Pejjai
,

Vasudeva Reddy
Minnam Reddy
,

Kondaiah
Seku
,

Mohan Reddy
Pallavolu
 and 

Chinho
Park
*

School of Chemical Engineering, Yeungnam University, 280 Daehak-ro, Gyeongsan 38541, Republic of Korea. E-mail: chpark@ynu.ac.kr; Fax: +82-538104631

Department of Chemistry, Vignan Institute of Technology and Science, Vignan Hills, Telangana, India

Received
22nd November 2017
, Accepted 6th February 2018
First published on 6th February 2018
Tin monoselenide (SnSe) nanoparticles (NPs) have great potential to replace the conventional absorbers used in the fabrication of thin film solar cells. However, studies pertaining to the synthesis and fabrication of SnSe NPs-based solar cells are still lacking. This study presents an eco-friendly synthesis of SnSe NPs by a chemical precipitation method in a short reaction time of 10 min. The effect of different reducing agents (such as NaOH, ethylenediamine, Na2SO3, and NaBH4) on the reactivity of a Se-precursor and phase formation of SnSe NPs was investigated in detail. Our study indicated that the reaction between Sn2+ ions complexed by ascorbic acid and Se2− ions provided by the reduction with NaBH4 resulted in the formation of single phase SnSe NPs. For the first time, a SnSe NPs thin film inorganic solar cell with the device structure of SLG/Mo/SnSe NPs/CdS/i-ZnO/Al:ZnO/Ni/Ag was fabricated and tested, which showed an efficiency of 0.43%.

Recently, SnSe NPs have gained significant interest in a variety of applications such as in photovoltaics, infra-red (IR) detectors, phase change recording technology, thermoelectric devices, and Li-ion battery electrodes. SnSe belongs to the IV–VI group layered semiconductor compounds. SnSe crystallizes in an orthorhombic structure, but it undergoes transformation into tetragonal or cubic structures at high temperatures below its melting point of 860 °C. However, the cubic structure of SnSe has been reported by a few groups both in a nanocrystalline and thin film form even at low temperatures. It exhibits favorable optoelectrical properties such as optimal band gap energy, high absorption coefficient (∼105 cm−1), and p-type conductivity. Theoretical calculations have shown a maximum power conversion efficiency of 33% for single-junction SnSe solar cells. Moreover, SnSe is relatively earth-abundant and less toxic as compared to the binary analogs of II–VI and IV–VI compound semiconductors such as CdTe, PbTe, and PbSe NPs. The growth of SnSe by both physical and chemical methods has been reported extensively. The optical band gap energy (Eg) of SnSe has been reported in the range of 0.9–1.5 eV for the bulk and thin film forms. In the nanocrystalline form of SnSe, a wide range of Eg values (i.e. from 0.9 eV to 3.89 eV) has been reported. The reported wide range of Eg values for SnSe NPs is mainly due to the quantum size effects as well as variations in the methods of synthesis followed therein.

Despite the favorable optoelectronic properties of SnSe, only a few researchers have attempted the fabrication of SnSe-based solar cells. An efficiency of ∼1% has been reported by the physical methods. Surprisingly, no studies have been reported to date on the photovoltaic performance of nanoparticle-based SnSe inorganic thin film solar cells. However, a few researchers have tested the potential of SnSe NPs in the photovoltaic applications using photoresponse devices and hybrid solar cells. Although the vacuum-deposited SnSe-based thin film devices can show good electrical properties as compared to those prepared by solution methods, the vacuum methods need large capitalization due to the requirement of high vacuum and high temperatures. Alternatively, the solution synthesis of SnSe NPs significantly reduces the cost of SnSe devices owing to high throughput and low temperature requirements. Therefore, the solution synthesis of SnSe NPs and their wider use in the fabrication of thin film photovoltaic devices are highly suggestible for future energy demands.
On the other hand, the growth of single phase SnSe NPs is challenging due to the dual valency of tin (Sn2+ and Sn4+). The dual valency of tin enables SnSe to form various phases depending on the composition of selenium. The phase diagram of the Sn–Se system indicates the existence of two main compounds SnSe and SnSe2 in the bulk. However, the recent investigations suggest the co-existence of the metastable Sn2Se3 phase along with SnSe and SnSe2 in thin films. In the solution synthesis, often the elemental selenium is reduced by Sn2+, and this causes the oxidation of Sn2+ to Sn4+ state. As the +4 oxidation state of tin is more stable than +2, there is a large scope for the formation of SnSe2 in the synthesis of SnSe NPs. The formation of the n-type SnSe2 secondary phase is one of the main reasons for the reported low efficiencies of SnSe-based solar cells. Therefore, significant attention should be paid to avoid the formation of SnSe2 during the growth of SnSe. A precise control over the reaction protocol can definitely arrest the formation of SnSe2 and lead the growth of single phase SnSe NPs.
Synthesis of SnSe NPs using different solution methods, such as hot-injection, heat-up, solvothermal, hydrothermal, microwave, and chemical precipitation, has been reported. However, in most of the aforesaid methods, the synthesis of SnSe NPs has been reported either by a high toxic, time consuming, and complicated process or by a high cost and low throughput technique. Among the reported solution methods for synthesis of SnSe NPs, chemical precipitation method is unique owing to its simplicity in the equipment, good reproducibility, lower reaction temperature, relatively short time, low cost, and high throughput. In this regard, the present study describes the gram-scale production of SnSe NPs with a precise control over the phase and particle size by a facile chemical precipitation method. The key of the present synthesis is the tuning of reactivity of Se by employing different reducing agents such as NaOH, ethylenediamine (En), NaBH4, and Na2SO3. Similarly, the oxidation of Sn2+ to Sn4+ is controlled by adding an antioxidizing agent such as L-ascorbic acid. L-Ascorbic acid is a non-toxic, mild reducing, and antioxidizing agent often used in the green synthesis of metal and semiconductor NPs. Therefore, the synthesis method employed herein has a number of advantages such as low temperature requirements, ambient processing, less toxicity, and ease of scalability. In the present synthesis, only greener solvents/chemicals, such as ascorbic acid, ethylene glycol, and deionized (D.I.) water, have been used. Furthermore, the as-synthesized SnSe NPs were found to well disperse in many less toxic solvents such as ethylene glycol (EG), ethylenediamine, 2-methoxyethanol, 2-propanol, and 2-aminoethanol (MEA). In the present study, the ink of SnSe NPs dispersed in a mixed solvent of EG:MEA (5:1) or En:MEA (5:5) was used for coating the SnSe absorber layers. After a short annealing time of 5 min by rapid thermal processing (RTP), the SnSe NPs absorber layers were obtained and employed in the fabrication of photovoltaic devices. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report on the fabrication and characterization of SnSe NPs-based inorganic thin film solar cells.

In a typical procedure, 1 mmol of SnCl2·2H2O was dissolved in 25 ml of D.I. water. To this solution, 10 mmol of L-ascorbic acid (C6H8O6, H2Asc) was added. A clear and transparent solution was obtained upon vigorous stirring for 10 min at 70 °C under an ambient atmosphere. Acquisition of clear and transparent solution indicated the formation of H2Asc–Sn2+ ion complexes (this solution was labeled as solution-A). Moreover, 0.99 mmol of elemental Se-powder was dissolved in 25 ml of D.I. water in the presence of a strong reducing agent such as 1.2 mmol of NaBH4. A clear and transparent solution was obtained upon vigorous stirring of this solution for 10 min at 70 °C under an ambient atmosphere (this solution was labeled as solution-B). Next, the solution-B was mixed with solution-A, and then, the mixed solution was heated to 90 °C. After a reaction time of 10 min, the reaction mixture was allowed to cool naturally. A black precipitate was obtained, which was acquired by filtration and then dried under vacuum for 5 h.

To test the effect of different reducing agents on the growth of SnSe NPs, the aforementioned procedure was repeated using different Se-reducing agents such as NaOH, ethylenediamine, and Na2SO3. In each case, the molar ratio of the reducing agent to Se-powder was kept at a fixed value of 1.1. Fig. 1 depicts the synthetic routes of SnSe NPs using four different Se-reducing agents. These four different synthetic routes were labeled as R1–R4.
To check the feasibility of gram scale production of SnSe NPs through the present synthesis method, the aforementioned reaction procedure was repeated after increasing the weights of all the precursors/chemicals by 5 times with respect to the mole ratios given in the abovementioned steps. Through this reaction process, nearly 2.3 g of the SnSe NPs powder was obtained.

To test the photovoltaic ability of the as-synthesized SnSe NPs, solar cells with a device architecture of soda-lime glass (SLG)/Mo/SnSe-NPs/CdS/i-ZnO/Al:ZnO/Ni/Ag were fabricated as follows: at first, the SnSe NPs absorber layers were deposited onto molybdenum-coated soda-lime glass substrates by spin coating or brush painting methods (see the ESI for details). Next, an n-type CdS layer with a thickness of ∼70 nm was deposited using the chemical bath deposition (CBD) technique (see the ESI for details) onto the p-type SnSe NPs absorber layer. Electron transport layers, such as 50 nm i-ZnO and Al-doped ZnO (350 nm), were deposited onto the CdS layer using radio-frequency (RF) and DC-magnetron sputtering, respectively. Finally, the bilayer Ni(50 nm)/Al(500 nm) top contacts were deposited using the electron beam evaporation technique. The solar cell devices with an active area of ∼0.16 cm2 were fabricated.


The crystalline structure of SnSe NPs was analyzed by X-ray diffraction (PANalytical X’Pert-PRO MPD) using Cu Kα line (λ = 1.056 nm). Morphology and composition of the SnSe NPs were studied by scanning electron microscopy (SEM; Hitachi S-4800) and energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS), respectively. The transmission electron microscopy observation was performed using Tecnai G2 F20 S-TWIN (TEM; operated at 200 kV) to obtain in-depth information about SnSe NPs. Thermal stability of the as-synthesized SnSe NPs was examined by thermogravimetric-differential thermal analysis (TG-DTA) combined with simultaneous differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) (Model: SDT Q600). In the TG-DTA analysis, samples were heated at a ramp rate of 10 °C min−1 under a N2 flow. Raman analysis was performed at room temperature by the HORIBA Raman spectrometer (Model: Xplora Plus) using a 532 nm laser as the excitation light source. The optical reflectance was measured using a Cary 5000 UV-Vis-NIR double beam spectrophotometer in the wavelength (λ) range of 200–2000 nm. To identify the functional groups and their interactions with SnSe NPs, a Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectrophotometer (model: Perkin Elmer) was used without KBr. The FTIR spectra were obtained in the wavenumber range of 400–4000 cm−1 in the transmittance mode using 16 scans with 4 cm−1 resolution. The obtained FTIR spectra were baseline corrected followed by normalization to compensate for the differences in the sample quantities. The illuminated current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the SnSe NPs-based solar cells were measured by a Keithley 2400 source meter (a class AAA solar simulator (WXS-155S-L2)). A xenon flash lamp (USHIO, flash type, UA-DF1, 1000 W, 400 V) with an AM 1.5 filter was used as the light source for J–V measurements.


When SnCl2·2H2O is dissolved in D.I. water, it forms tin hydroxide or oxide clusters very easily. To prevent this, the dissociation of SnCl2·2H2O was executed in the presence of an antioxidizing agent such as ascorbic acid. In general, the use of metal ion-complexes effectively avoids the formation of metal oxides or hydroxides in the final product rather than the formation of free metal ions. Therefore, L-ascorbic acid was used as a ligand to prevent the oxidation of tin. Ascorbic acid is a greener and mild reducing agent, which is commonly employed in the preparation of metal nanoparticles. In addition, it can act as a capping agent. It is a weak acid in water and forms both mono-anionic and di-anionic species (see Fig. 2(a)) depending on the pH. The formation of mono-anion (HAsc) is favorable in the pH range of 4–5, whereas the formation of di-anion (Asc) is ensured in the pH range of 11–12.Fig. 2(a) depicts the schematic of ascorbic acid and its mono- and di-anionic structures in an aqueous solution. The complexation of metal ions (Mn+) occurred through O-3 atom (monodentately) or by O-3 and O-2 atoms (bidentately) of the ascorbate anion, as shown in Fig. 2(a).

In the present synthesis, the experimental pH was maintained in the range of 3–5. Therefore, when ascorbic acid was added to the aqueous solution of SnCl2, it coordinated with Sn2+ ions mono-dentately through O-3 atoms and formed [Sn(HAsc)4]2− complexes in the solution. In this case, Sn2+ ion was coordinated with HAsc anions in tetrahedral geometry (see Fig. 2(b)) through sp3-hybradization of 5s and 5p orbitals. The constituted [Sn(HAsc)4]2− complexes were further dissociated to release the required Sn2+ ions. Moreover, Se2− ions were provided through the reduction of elemental Se. A typical reduction of Se by NaBH4 is shown in eqn (2). The released Sn2+ ions reacted with Se2− ions to form SnSe NPs as a precipitate (eqn (3)).
[Sn(HAsc)4]2− ↔ Sn2+ + 4(HAsc)2−
(1)
(BH4)− + Se ↔ Se2− + BH3 + H+
Se2− + (n − 1)Se ↔ (Sen)2−
(2)
[Sn(HAsc)4]2− + (Sen)2− ↔ SnSe↓ + (n − 1)Se + 4(HAsc)2−
[Sn(HAsc)4]2− + (Sen)2− ↔ SnSe↓ + 4(HAsc)2−
(3)
As shown in Fig. 1, different reducing agents, such as NaOH, ethylenediamine, NaBH4, and Na2SO3, were used in each case for complete reduction of the elemental Se-powder. Since the strength of each reducing agent was different for the given conditions of synthesis, they yielded different products, as shown in Fig. 1. Our results indicated that when NaBH4 was used, single phase SnSe NPs were obtained, whereas when NaOH, En, or Na2SO3 was used, single phase SnSe NPs were not obtained owing to their intermediate reducing strengths as compared to that of NaBH4. Furthermore, it is quite interesting to note that when Na2SO3 was used as the reducing agent, both the SnSe and SnSe2 phases were obtained with amorphous nature; this indicated the partial reduction of elemental selenium by Sn2+ ion as well. This situation led to the oxidation of Sn2+ to Sn4+ in the reaction. Therefore, a mixed phase of SnSe and SnSe2 was observed in the presence of Na2SO3 under the same conditions of the reaction.


Fig. 3(a) shows the XRD patterns of SnSe NPs synthesized using different Se-reducing agents. As no precipitation was obtained from route-1 (R1), the corresponding XRD pattern is not shown in Fig. 3(a). The basic reason for no precipitation is as follows: when an aqueous solution of NaOH is used to dissolve the elemental selenium, Se is not activated under the present synthesis conditions. Usually, when an aqueous solution of NaOH is used to dissolve the elemental selenium, a strong alkaline condition is necessary to maintain the stable Se2− ions. Otherwise, elemental Se is not activated. Therefore, when NaOH was used as the reducing agent, the ionic product of Sn2+ and Se2− did not exceed the solubility product of SnSe (Ksp = 5 × 10−34), and no precipitate was formed eventually. However, when ethylenediamine was used as the reducing agent in route-2 (R2), the XRD pattern indicated the unreacted selenium as a main impurity phase in the sample. The bulk precipitation of elemental Se was due to the incomplete reduction by En under the present synthesis conditions. In fact, there are a few studies in which En has been used as a successful reducing agent for elemental Se, but in these studies, the experimental conditions and synthesis procedures are different. For a phase selective synthesis, in addition to reactants, the synthesis conditions such as the reaction time, temperature, and the amount and nature of the solvent are crucial. Therefore, when En was used as the reducing agent, the elemental Se was partially reduced. This led to the formation of SnSe NPs along with the unreacted Se phase.

On the other hand, the XRD pattern of NPs grown via route-3 (R3) revealed the single phase SnSe with an orthorhombic structure (Pnma). In this reaction, NaBH4 completely reduced the elemental Se to Se2−; hence, Se2− ions reacted with Sn2+ ions and yielded the SnSe NPs precipitate. Fig. 3(b) shows the XRD pattern (with magnified and assigned peaks) of SnSe NPs grown via the route-3. All the peaks indexed correspond to the reflections of the orthorhombic SnSe structure (JCPDS 48-1224), which also well matches the reported data. The presence of (112) characteristic peak confirmed the orthorhombic Pnma structure of SnSe NPs. It could also be seen from Fig. 3(b) that all the diffraction peaks were broad and strong with the dominant (111) orientation. Interestingly, the peak corresponding to (400) was merged with (111) peak, such that it appeared as a single peak in the XRD pattern. The obtained broad X-ray diffraction peaks indicated the nanocrystalline nature of the as-synthesized SnSe NPs. Furthermore, no evidence of secondary phases such as SnO, SnO2, SnSe2, and Se were identified in the XRD pattern of SnSe NPs grown via route-3; this indicated the high phase-purity of the present sample. The lattice parameters (a = 1.17 nm, b = 0.38 nm, and c = 0.45 nm) were calculated from the XRD pattern of SnSe NPs, and they were consistent with the reported values. The average grain size, which was about 17 nm, was calculated using the Scherrer's formula. The calculated average grain size of SnSe NPs from the Scherrer's formula was in good agreement with the mean diameter (18.42 ± 4.4 nm) of the SnSe NPs obtained from the TEM observations.
However, the XRD pattern of SnSe NPs synthesized via route-4 (R4) revealed a mixed phase of SnSe and SnSe2. In this process also, the elemental selenium could not be fully activated by Na2SO3 owing to its mild basicity. In addition, the use of Na2SO3 promoted the oxidation of Sn2+. Therefore, in the case of R4, the free Sn2+ ions reduced the elemental selenium (in this process, Sn2+ was oxidized to Sn4+) and led to the formation of SnSe2 along with SnSe.
As abovementioned in the introduction, the formation of single phase SnSe NPs is highly desired for its absorber layer utility in thin film solar cells. Since the XRD results indicated the formation of single phase SnSe NPs by route-3, only these particles were further analyzed to confirm the phase purity and physical properties.

As SnSe and SnSe2 exhibit more or less similar Bragg reflections, it is difficult to differentiate these two phases by XRD analysis alone. Therefore, to further confirm the phase purity, Raman analysis was carried out on the SnSe NPs grown via route-3, and the spectrum is shown in Fig. 3(c). The Raman spectrum of SnSe NPs indicated four Ag modes at 34, 72, 129, and 151 cm−1 as well as a broad and high intense B3g mode at 102 cm−1. All the observed modes were consistent with previous reports. Both Ag and B3g are the characteristic planar vibrational modes of SnSe. Furthermore, the broad peaks in the Raman spectrum represented the nanocrystalline nature of SnSe NPs. No peaks corresponding to impurity phases were detected in the Raman spectrum; this confirmed the high quality of SnSe NPs.



Fig. 4(a) shows the EDS spectrum of SnSe NPs grown via route-3. The EDS spectrum of SnSe NPs showed sharp peaks related to Sn (∼52 at%) and Se (∼48 at%). For the exact estimation of tin and selenium, other trace elements, such as adsorbed carbon and oxygen, were excluded from the EDS spectra. The EDS analysis (inset of Fig. 4(a)) indicated an atomic ratio of Sn/Se = 1.1, which was nearly stoichiometric and in good agreement with the standard value. It can be also seen from Fig. 4(a) that the EDS spectrum of SnSe NPs shows tiny peaks corresponding to adsorbed carbon and oxygen on the surface of SnSe NPs. As the intensity of these peaks is very small, it can be understood that only a trace amount of carbon and oxygen is adsorbed on the surface of SnSe NPs. A detailed investigation and description on the adsorbed carbon and oxygen is given in the section FTIR analysis.



Fig. 4(b) shows the SEM image of SnSe NPs grown via route-3. The SEM analysis indicated agglomeration and a narrow size distribution of SnSe NPs with a round shape. It is reported that EDS spot analysis is not suitable to precisely quantify the homogeneity of the distributed elements. Therefore, EDS elemental mapping was also carried out, and the results are shown in Fig. S1(a and b) (see the ESI). The elemental mapping demonstrated the uniform distribution of Sn and Se elements in the SnSe NPs.


The transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image of SnSe NPs is shown in Fig. 5(a). Basically, the as-synthesized SnSe NPs were irregular in shape, but most of them appeared in cubic/rectangular or round shapes (see Fig. 5(b)). Few of them seemed to be truncated and agglomerated as the reaction was not aided with any capping agents. This may be one of the main reasons for the irregularity in their shapes. The irregularity in the shape of SnSe NPs suggested that the ligands used in the reaction did not show any steric effects; instead, they only played the specified roles, as presumed in Section 3.1. The size distribution of SnSe NPs is shown in Fig. 5(c). The TEM analysis indicated a mean diameter of 18.42 nm with a standard deviation of 4.4 for SnSe NPs.


The optical properties of SnSe NPs were studied by a UV-vis diffuse reflection spectrum, which was converted into the absorption mode using the Kubelka–Munk function (F(R)). The UV-visible diffuse reflection spectrum of SnSe NPs is shown in Fig. 6(a). The SnSe NPs showed one set of absorption near 1175 nm. The band gap energy of SnSe NPs was calculated using Kubelka–Munk transformations. As the absorption coefficient (α) is proportional to F(R), the function F(R) is used directly for estimating the band gap energy (Eg). The plot of (αhν)2versus hν is shown in Fig. 6(b). The band gap energy of SnSe NPs was estimated by extrapolating the linear part of (αhν)2versus hν curve to (αhν)2 = 0. The SnSe NPs showed a direct band gap of 1.1 eV. The estimated band gap energy of SnSe NPs is in good agreement with the values reported in literature.

Furthermore, when the amount of ascorbic acid was increased from 10 mmol to 15 mmol in the synthesis of SnSe NPs, a change in the particle size was observed for the same synthesis conditions given in Section 2.1. Consequently, the band gap energy of SnSe NPs was altered from ∼1.1 eV to 1.35 eV depending upon the size of the particle. The particle size-dependent band gap energy variation suggests the quantum confinement effects in the as-synthesized SnSe NPs.

The as-synthesized SnSe NPs were found to well disperse in the mixed solvent of EG:MEA (5:1) (see inset of Fig. 7). The ink of SnSe NPs was dried and then used in the TG-DTA analysis. TG-DTA combined with simultaneous DSC was performed to test the stability of the as-synthesized SnSe NPs and find the temperature needed for the evaporation of solvents used in the dispersion. Fig. 7 shows the TG-DTA/DSC curves of SnSe NPs. Only a 15.74% weight loss was observed over a temperature range of 50–600 °C. This indicated the good stability of the synthesized SnSe NPs up to 600 °C. As can be seen from Fig. 7, there were three regions of weight loss. The weight losses in these regions are explained as follows.

In region-I, a small weight loss of 3.76% was noted between 26 and 150 °C. This weight loss was due to the evaporation of adsorbed water, ethanol or moisture from the surface of SnSe NPs. In region-II, a weight loss of 6.45% was observed between 150 and 350 °C. This weight loss was attributed to the evaporation of different species, such as solvents, used in the dispersion and thermal decomposition of ascorbic acid adsorbed on the surface of SnSe NPs. As the boiling point (B.P.) of EG and MEA are 197.3 °C and 170 °C, respectively, the evaporation of these solvents can be expected in region-II. Similarly, the evaporation of selenium also commences from 220 °C onwards, whereas the thermal decomposition of ascorbic acid has been reported in the temperature range of 190–400 °C. In the thermal decomposition of ascorbic acid, five different gas species, namely, H2O, CO2, CO, CH4, and HCOOH, were released. Especially, as per the study of Jingyan et al., a maximum weight loss can be observed around 242 °C due to the thermal decomposition of ascorbic acid. Therefore, keeping all the abovementioned observations in mind, the major weight loss between 150 and 350 °C was ascribed to (1) the evaporation of solvents used in the dispersion of SnSe NPs, (2) a little evaporation of selenium, and (3) decomposition of adsorbed ascorbic acid attached to the surface of SnSe NPs.
In region-III, a weight loss of 5.53% was observed between 350 and 600 °C. This weight loss was mainly attributed to the evaporation of NaBH4 along with adsorbed ascorbic acid decomposition. According to the reported literature, the decomposition of NaBH4 is more active after 330 °C onwards, and a complete decomposition of it can occur at around 530 °C. The decomposition of NaBH4 involves the release of elemental (Na and B) and binary compounds (Na–H and Na–B). However, in the present case, the weight loss after 450 °C was negligible (Fig. 7); this indicated the complete evaporation of all the solvents/chemicals used in the synthesis as well as in the dispersion of SnSe NPs.
Therefore, based on the TG-DTA/DSC analysis, the SnSe NPs precursor films were sintered at a temperature of 500 °C for 5 min under an inert atmosphere and then used in the fabrication of SnSe NPs-based photovoltaic devices. To further confirm the decomposition/interaction of chemicals, FTIR analysis was carried out and discussed in the following section.

To further confirm the purity and TG-DTA analysis of the as-synthesized SnSe NPs, FTIR measurements were carried out in the wavenumber range of 400–4000 cm−1. Fig. 8(a–c) show the FTIR analysis of different samples such as the as-synthesized SnSe NPs, ink of SnSe NPs (dispersed in the mixed solvent of EG:MEA), and annealed SnSe NPs thin film (coated with the ink of SnSe NPs). In the case of as-synthesized SnSe NPs (Fig. 8(a)), the observed FTIR modes could also indicate the types of interactions between the reactants and solvents during the growth. As the synthesis of SnSe NPs has been carried out in the presence of L-ascorbic acid, NaBH4, and D.I. water, the residues of these species may be adsorbed on the surface of SnSe NPs. The infrared spectrum of NaBH4 has been well documented. It has been reported that the isolated (BH4)− ion shows IR active modes at 450–620 cm−1, 1000–1100 cm−1, and 2300–2400 cm−1 due to B–H stretching and bending vibrations. Therefore, in the present case also, the observed broad IR modes at 513 cm−1 and 1023 cm−1 were attributed to the traces of NaBH4 attached to the surface of SnSe NPs. The broad and weak IR modes at 1462 cm−1 and 1626 cm−1 were related to the traces of adsorbed L-ascorbic acid. Similarly, the broad and featureless IR modes at 2892 cm−1 and 3330 cm−1 were due to the presence of O–H group from the solvents species used in the synthesis.

In the case of the SnSe NPs ink, the FTIR modes at 636 cm−1, 1023 cm−1, 1211 cm−1, 1361 cm−1, 1462 cm−1, 1626 cm−1, 2892 cm−1, and 3330 cm−1 were observed. The observed FTIR modes corresponded to the solvents and chemicals used in the synthesis as well as in the dispersion of SnSe NPs. A broad and featureless mode at 636 cm−1 was mainly due to NaBH4, whereas a sharp mode at 1023 cm−1 was mainly due to EG. The modes observed in the range of 1200–1600 cm−1 were due to traces of L-ascorbic acid and EG, whereas the modes observed in the range of 2500–3500 cm−1 were due to the combination of EG, MEA, and O–H vibrations.
On the other hand, in the case of the annealed SnSe NPs thin film, only three featureless modes at 1211 cm−1, 1361 cm−1, and 1739 cm−1 were observed. As abovementioned in Section 2.2, for the preparation of SnSe absorber layers, the precursor films were brush painted, dried, and then rapidly thermally annealed at 500 °C for 5 min under an inert Se atmosphere. During the preparation of the SnSe absorber layer, the solvents/chemicals used for the synthesis and dispersion were evaporated at different stages, as abovementioned in the TG-DTA analysis. Therefore, the FTIR spectrum of the annealed SnSe NPs thin film (Fig. 8(a)) showed only three featureless IR modes. The observed modes at 1211 cm−1, 1361 cm−1, and 1739 cm−1 might be due to the carbon residues in the film obtained after sintering. These modes at 1211 cm−1, 1361 cm−1, and 1739 cm−1 were tentatively assigned to the C–O, CC, and CO functional groups from the L-ascorbic acid, respectively. It is argued that a certain amount of carbon residues in the absorber layers can limit the grain growth and lead to lower efficiencies in the fabricated solar cells. In the present case, the observed carbon-related modes showed very low intensities in the IR spectrum. This means that the amount of carbon content in the films is minimal. Therefore, the present annealed thin films of SnSe NPs qualified the minimum requirement of the absorber layer to be used in thin film solar cell fabrication.

To test the potential of the SnSe NPs absorber layer, heterojunction solar cells were fabricated for the first time. Although few researchers have tested the potential of SnSe NPs in the photovoltaic applications using the photoresponse devices and hybrid solar cells (see the Table S1 in the ESI), none of these studies have been fully focused on the fabrication of inorganic heterojunction SnSe NPs-based solar cells.

In the first attempt, we used the brush painting method for the deposition of the SnSe NPs absorber layer due to its simplicity, less material wastage, and lower cost. A device with a simple structure, SLG/Mo/SnSe NPs/CdS/Ag, was fabricated to test the photovoltaic ability of SnSe NPs. The illuminated current density–voltage (J–V) characteristic of SnSe NPs solar cell is shown in Fig. S2 of ESI. A maximum short circuit current density (Jsc) of 2.12 mA cm−2, an open circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.091 V, fill factor (FF) of 28.05%, and a power conversion efficiency (η) of 0.054% were obtained. Despite the single phase and suitable band gap energy of the SnSe NPs, both Jsc and Voc values were found to be quite low. The low Voc was mainly due to the type of device structure (SLG/Mo/SnSe NPs/CdS/Ag). On the other hand, a 70 nm thick CdS layer was deposited on the top of the SnSe NPs absorber layer, which might produce high series resistance. In addition, the SnSe NPs absorber layer had less compactness, and its grain size was also found to be quite small (see Fig. S3(a), ESI) due to the use of a high viscous solvent in the brush painting method. These small grains with porous nature produce a larger number of grain boundaries. These grain boundaries act as trapping centers to the light-generated minority carriers. Consequently, the fabricated SnSe NPs solar cell by brush painting showed a lower power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 0.054%.
For the improvement of PCE of the SnSe NPs solar cell, we adopted the following strategy. Usually, high viscous solvents have higher boiling points (B.P.), which restrict the grain growth upon their usage in the film coating process. In addition, the reproducibility of a uniform absorber layer with good morphology is difficult to achieve via the brush painting method. Therefore, we adopted the spin coating method for the deposition of SnSe NPs absorber layers using moderately viscous solvents (see the ESI for more details). As the spin coating method has well controllability over the film thickness with good reproducibility, a relatively good SnSe NPs absorber layer was obtained as compared to the case of the brush painting method (see Fig. S3(a and b), ESI). In addition, the device structure was changed to (SLG)/Mo/SnSe NPs/CdS/i-ZnO/Al:ZnO/Ni/Ag. Fig. 9(a) shows the schematic of the SnSe NPs solar cell. The illuminated current density–voltage (J–V) characteristic of the SnSe NPs solar cell is shown Fig. 9(b). A maximum short circuit current density (Jsc) of 3.63 mA cm−2, an open circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.35 V, FF of 34%, and a PCE of 0.43% were obtained.
Compared to the parameters of the former device cell (i.e. SnSe NPs solar cells obtained via the brush painting method), the values of both Jsc and Voc were found to be increased. This can be due to change in the device structure as well as due to the relatively good quality absorber layer obtained by the spin coating method. Furthermore, the addition of electron transport layers, such as ZnO and Al-doped ZnO, reduced the influence of shunts, thereby increased the Jsc and Voc values. In addition, the compactness and uniformity of the SnSe NPs absorber layer was improved when it was casted by the spin coating method as compared to the case of brush painting (see Fig. S3(a and b), ESI). Consequently, the PCE of these devices was increased from 0.054% to 0.43%. Although we have observed a slight improvement in the PCE of the spin-coated SnSe NPs solar cell, the grain growth and other related issues are still needed to be revoked completely for further improvement of PCE. The observed low PCE of these devices is due to the following reasons. The losses due to the recombination of electron–hole pairs at the grain boundaries and at the point defects play a major role in killing the device efficiency. As can be seen from Fig. 9(c), the size of the grains in the SnSe NPs absorber layer is small. These small grains could produce a larger number of grain boundaries. These grain boundaries could act as trapping centers to the light-generated minority carriers. Consequently, the fabricated SnSe NPs solar cells showed a low PCE. In the present case, the main reasons for the observed small grain size are (1) carbon residues in the sample, as evidenced from the FTIR and EDS analysis, and/or (2) insufficient annealing time. The effect of these issues (1 and 2) on the device efficiency of SnSe NPs-based solar cells has been discussed in detail in our previous articles.
It is well documented that the removal of carbon residues present in the NPs-based solar cell is a great bottleneck. Certainly, a large amount of carbon residues limit the grain growth in the NPs-based absorber layers. However, it has been reported in literature that an intermediate amount of carbon residues is benign in improving the device performance. According to literature, the NPs-based solar cells fabricated with a precursor film containing an intermediate amount of carbon residues showed a high conversion efficiency as compared to those having a lower or higher amount of carbon residues. Therefore, it is believed that the low PCE of the present SnSe NPs devices is mainly attributed to the limited grain growth due to insufficient annealing time rather than carbon impurities. This was anticipated based on the FTIR analysis. As can be seen from the FTIR analysis (Fig. 8(c)), the tiny bumps (at 1211 cm−1, 1361 cm−1, and 1739 cm−1) of carbon residues suggest that carbon is present in a very little amount. As can be seen from the Table S1 (see the ESI), the improved Jsc value of the spin-coated SnSe NPs absorber solar cell in the present study also indicated the benign effect of carbon residues. Therefore, the optimization of the annealing profile can certainly improve the grain size of the SnSe NPs absorber layer. Consequently, we have a large scope to further improve the PCE of the SnSe NPs solar cells. These experiments are underway.
Although the fabricated SnSe NPs-based solar cells show a low PCE, the present article describes some important features such as (1) gram-scale green synthesis of single phase SnSe NPs with suitable optoelectrical properties by a scalable, low-cost, chemical precipitation method, (2) tuning the reactivity of the Se-precursor and complexation of Sn2+ ions, (3) analysis of the interaction of solvents and stability of SnSe NPs using reliable techniques such as TG-DTA and FTIR, and (4) fabrication of SnSe NPs heterojunction solar cell with J–V characteristics. Future studies will be focused on the optimization of annealing time and temperature of the SnSe NPs absorber layer to increase the grain size and reduce the defects encountered during the growth.

SnSe NPs were synthesized by a facile chemical precipitation method at a relatively low temperature of 90 °C in a short reaction time of 10 min using greener solvents/chemicals. The experimental results revealed the formation of single phase SnSe NPs from the reaction of SnCl2·2H2O dissolved in an ascorbic acid solution and Se-powder dissolved in an aqueous NaBH4 solution. The present study indicated that the balance between Se-reactivity and Sn2+ ion complexation was a key to synthesize single phase SnSe NPs. The XRD results showed an orthorhombic Pnma structure to SnSe NPs. Raman analysis indicated the characteristic Ag and B3g vibrational modes of SnSe. EDX analysis indicated an atomic ratio of Sn/Se = 1.09. TEM analysis revealed a mean diameter of 18.42 nm of SnSe NPs. The SnSe NPs showed a direct band gap of 1.1 eV. The TG-DTA analysis showed a good stability of SnSe NPs up to 600 °C. The as-synthesized SnSe NPs were well dispersed in less toxic solvents, such as EG and MEA, and used in the fabrication of SnSe NPs-based solar cells. The heterojunction SnSe NPs solar cell fabricated by the brush-painted absorber layer showed an efficiency of 0.054%, whereas the spin-coated SnSe NPs solar cell showed an improvement of PCE to 0.43%. The low PCE of the SnSe NPs solar cells was mainly due to the small grain size.


There are no conflicts of interest to declare.


This work was supported by the 2017 Yeungnam University research grant and also supported by “The Human Resources Program in Energy Technology” of the Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning (KETEP), granted financial resource from the Ministry of Trade, Industry & Energy, Republic of Korea (No. 20154030200760).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7nj04547f
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2018