 DOI: 10.1039/C8TA06557H
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 21143-21148


Long
Luo
,

Yulong
Zhang
,

Nianyao
Chai
,

Xi
Deng
,

Jie
Zhong
,

Fuzhi
Huang
,

Yong
Peng
*,

Zhiliang
Ku
* and 

Yi-Bing
Cheng


State Key Laboratory of Advanced Technologies for Materials Synthesis and Processing, International School of Materials Science and Engineering, Wuhan University of Technology, 122 Luoshi Road, Wuhan, Hubei, P. R. China. E-mail: zhiliang.ku@whut.edu.cn

Hubei Key Laboratory of Low Dimensional Optoelectronic Material and Devices, Hubei University of Arts and Science, 296 Longzhong Road, Xiangyang, Hubei Province, P. R. China

Received
9th July 2018
, Accepted 30th September 2018
First published on 1st October 2018
Large-area, highly uniform CsxFA1−xPbI3−yBry mixed cation perovskite films were prepared by a facile vapor–solid reaction method. In this method, CsBr and PbI2 were first deposited via thermal evaporation, and then exposed to FAI/FACl vapor to form the CsxFA1−xPbI3−yBry perovskite. With the incorporation of CsBr, the crystallinity of the FAPbI3 perovskite could be significantly improved. Meanwhile, the FACl vapor could accelerate the growth rate of the CsxFA1−xPbI3−yBry perovskite in the vapor–solid reaction process. By optimizing the content of Cs and the ratio of FACl/FAI, we obtained high quality, pin-hole free Cs0.24FA0.76PbI3−yBry films. Based on these films, the small sized perovskite solar cells (PSCs) reached a champion power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 17.29%. Without encapsulation, the device with the Cs0.24FA0.76PbI3−yBry perovskite showed much better moisture and thermal stability in comparison to that with the pristine FAPbI3 perovskite. Furthermore, we also fabricated PSC modules with a size of 8 × 8 cm2 and achieved a PCE of 12.24%, indicating that such a vapor–solid reaction method has a certain superiority in the manufacture of large-scale PSCs.

In recent years, organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite materials have gained wide attention in the area of solar cells, due to their attractive optoelectronic properties and easy, low-cost synthesis. To date, the world champion power conversion efficiency (PCE) of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) has reached 22.7%, far exceeding that of the other emerging photovoltaic technologies such as dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) and organic photovoltaics (OPV). Although this has been obtained in a lab-scale device, the high PCE value offers PSCs the basic prerequisite for competing with traditional silicon solar cells in the future photovoltaic market. The question, then, is how to increase the size of PSCs using certain techniques which are suitable for industrial production. Since organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite materials could easily be deposited by a solution process, several scalable printing methods including spray-coating, slot-die coating, doctor-blade coating and soft-cover deposition have been developed to prepare large area perovksite films. All of these methods showed great potential for achieving in a real sense next generation “printable solar cells”. However, printing is not yet a mature technology for optoelectronics. More importantly, to date, only pure methylammonium lead iodide (MAPbI3) perovskite films have been reported that can be deposited with a large size by these printing techniques. But, as we all know, MAPbI3 perovskites are not conducive to the long-term stability of PSCs because of their intrinsic stability issues. As a result, developing new methods, which are suitable for industrial production, to prepare large-area MA-free perovskite films would be of great significance for pushing PSC industrialization forward.

As a widely used thin-film deposition technique, thermal evaporation has been successfully adopted in organic electronics. And fortunately, this technique is also available for the deposition of organic/inorganic hybrid perovskite materials. Since the first report using a dual source vacuum deposition method to prepare a highly uniform MAPbI3−xClx perovskite, more and more researchers have begun to express an interest in thermal evaporation technology. Meanwhile, various vapor–solid reaction methods in the form of chemical vapour deposition (CVD) have been explored to obtain high quality perovskite films. Obviously, in comparison with solution-processing methods, these vapour-based techniques offer extra advantages such as the non-use of toxic organic solvents, good thickness controllability and the ease of combining with silicon solar cells in the form of tandem devices. What’s more, stable perovskites such as formamidinium lead triiodide (FAPbI3) and Cs0.5FA0.4MA0.1PbI3−xBrx mixed-cation perovskites can also be easily obtained through these scalable techniques. To date, by using vapor-based techniques, a high PCE exceeding 20% (ref. 24) has been achieved on Cs0.23MA0.77PbI3-based PSCs with an active area of 0.09 cm2. Unfortunately, the PCE of large-area devices still remains at a low level. The main reason is that, in the case of a vapour–solid reaction, the growth rate of the perovskite is pretty low and sensitive to a small variation in the vapor density and the reaction temperature. As a result, a slightly uneven vapour density or temperature distribution would cause poor crystallinity of the perovskite film. Hence, how to realize the homogenous growth of the perovskite film in a vapour–solid reacting process is the critical issue for high performance, large-area PSCs.
In this work, we employed a facile vapor–solid reaction method to prepare a large-area, high quality CsxFA1−xPbI3−yBry mixed-cation perovskite film. By controlling the content of Cs+, we obtained pinhole-free, uniform CsxFA1−xPbI3−yBry films. The champion CsxFA1−xPbI3−yBry-based PSC achieved a PCE of 17.29%. Meanwhile, we found that FACl vapor could speed up the vapor–solid reaction rate and at the same time suppress the formation of oversaturated CsxFA1−xPbI3−yBry perovskite. Thus, the CsBr/PbI2 composite film could rapidly and completely transform into the CsxFA1−xPbI3−yBry perovksite with a large-size. Eventually, we fabricated PSC modules with a size of 8 × 8 cm2, and the champion PCE reached 12.24%. Without an MA ion, the CsxFA1−xPbI3−yBry perovskite showed remarkable thermal and moisture stability. To the best of our knowledge, this work is the first demonstration of fabricating high performance, large-area CsxFA1−xPbI3−yBry-based PSC modules using a vapor–solid reaction method.

Unless stated otherwise, all reagents and solvents were purchased from Aladdin or Sigma-Aldrich and were used as received. SnCl2·2H2O and PbI2 were purchased from Aladdin. FAI was purchased from Lumtec, Taiwan. CsBr was purchased from Alfa Aesar. FACl was purchased from Xi’an p-OLED Corp.


FTO glasses (Universal Laser Systems, VLS2.30) were patterned by etching with a femtosecond laser. Then the glass substrates were cleaned by sequential ultrasonication in a detergent solution, deionized water, and anhydrous ethanol. 5 g urea was dissolved into 400 mL deionized water, followed by the addition of 100 μL mercaptoacetic acid and 5 mL HCl (37 wt%). Finally, SnCl2·2H2O was dissolved in the solution at 0.012 M. The cleaned FTO glass was soaked in the SnCl2 solution for 3 h at 70 °C and then dried using a gas gun.

CsBr and PbI2 were deposited on the compact SnO2 film by thermal evaporation. The CsBr film deposition rate was maintained at 0.3 Å s−1. After the crucible cooled down, the PbI2 films were deposited successively at a rate of 3 Å s−1. Then, the as-prepared composite films were transferred into a tube furnace facing another glass substrate with FAI/FACl film sprayed on it. The distance between the two substrates was about 2.5 cm. After that, the tube furnace was cleaned by N2 and then pumped down to a pressure of about 100 Pa. Subsequently, the tube furnace was heated up to 160 °C for 30 min and the CsBr/PbI2 composite film gradually transformed into the CsxFA1−xPbI3−yBry perovskite. After cooling down, a hole-transporting layer (73 mg spiro-MeOTAD, 9.36 mg Li-TFSI salt and 30 μL 4-tert-butylpyridine in 1 mL chlorobenzene) was deposited on the perovskite film by spin coating. Finally, 80 nm of Au was evaporated on the hole-transporting layer as the top contact.

The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the samples were recorded using an X-ray diffractometer (XRD, D8 Advance). The UV measurements were carried out using UV-Vis (lambda 750S, PerkinElmer). The steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra and the time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) were obtained by using a PL microscopic spectrometer (Flex One, Zolix, China) and a Delta Flex Fluorescence Lifetime System (Horiba Scientific Com., Japan), respectively. The morphology and composition were observed using field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM, Zeiss Ultra Plus). The current density–voltage (J–V) curves were measured using a solar simulator (Oriel 94023A, 300 W) with a source meter (Keithley 2400) under 100 mW cm−2 illumination (AM 1.5G) with a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. The active areas of the small sized PSCs and PSC modules are 0.16 cm2 and 41 cm2, respectively.


The vapor–solid reaction method could be considered as a combination of physical vapor deposition (PVD) and low-pressure chemical vapor deposition (LP-CVD). As shown in Fig. 1, CsBr and PbI2 were first deposited by thermal evaporation in sequence. And then, the CsBr/PbI2 composite film reacted with the FAI/FACl vapor in a tube furnace at 160 °C. To ensure the evenness of the vapor–solid reaction, the FAI/FACl composite film was loaded, with a uniform thickness, onto a substrate by ultrasonic spray coating and the distance between the two substrates was about 2.5 cm.

By evaporating different amounts of CsBr, we obtained CsxFA1−xPbI3−yBry perovskites with x = 0, 0.14, 0.24 and 0.33. X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements were performed on these films to identify their crystal structure. Without Cs+ (x = 0), the FAPbI3 perovskite exhibited an obvious diffraction peak at 2θ = 11.8°, indicating the existence of δ phase FAPbI3. And by introducing Cs+, all of the CsxFA1−xPbI3−yBry perovskites showed a stable black phase at room temperature (Fig. 2a). With an increasing amount of Cs+, the peak of the (110) plane at 2θ = 14° shifted towards higher angles (Fig. 2b), indicating a decrease in the lattice parameter and the formation of CsxFA1−xPbI3−yBry crystals. To further confirm the incorporation of Cs and Br into the FAPbI3 perovskite, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was also carried out as the shrinkage of the cubo-octahedral volume could lead to a change of the chemical bonding nature between Pb and I. As shown in Fig. S1a and b there are no Cs 3d and Br 3d peaks detected in the pristine FAPbI3 perovskite, but these peaks appeared with the addition of CsBr. Moreover, the two dominant peaks at 136.7 eV and 141.5 eV in Fig. S1c, corresponding to the Pb 4f7/2 and Pb 4f5/2 levels, shifted towards higher binding energies. The same shift trend could also be observed in the I 3d peaks in Fig. S1d, suggesting that the lattice parameter is slightly decreased with CsBr doping.
The surface morphologies of the CsxFA1−xPbI3−yBry perovskite films were observed by scanning-electron microscopy (SEM). There were a lot of pin holes (red circles) on the surface of the pristine FAPbI3 perovskite (Fig. 3a), which should be ascribed to its phase transformation from α-phase to σ-phase at room temperature. In fact, the α-phase (black) of the FAPbI3 perovskite is only stable at high temperature. And as the temperature cools down to room temperature, the α-phase is prone to transformation into the σ-phase, accompanied by fast decomposition in air. Thus, plenty of voids or pin holes would be generated, causing poor coverage of the film. However, all of the CsxFA1−xPbI3−xBrx perovskite films with different amounts of CsBr exhibited compact and pin hole-free surface morphologies (Fig. 3b and c), indicating that the α-phase of the FAPbI3 crystal could be easily stabilised at room temperature by the introduction of CsBr. The element distribution of the perovskite film was verified by energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS). As shown in Fig. S2, both Cs and Br elements have a homogenous distribution in the perovskite layer. And more notably, though Br was introduced into the film by evaporating the CsBr layer, the content of Br in the as-prepared CsxFA1−xPbI3−yBry perovskite films was significantly lower than that of the Cs (see Fig. S3). We deduced that in the vapor–solid reaction, most of the Br was exchanged by the Cl and released in the form of FABr. To confirm this, we also used pure FACl to react with the CsBr/PbI2 composite film and the film changed its color gradually from pale yellow to pale white, indicating the total release of Br (see Fig. S4).
Based on these uniform and pin hole-free CsxFA1−xPbI3−yBry perovskite films, we fabricated PSCs with a traditional SnOx/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Au multilayered planar structure. The current–voltage (J–V) curves of the devices were recorded under standard AM 1.5 illumination and are shown in Fig. 4. The pure FAPbI3 device gave a PCE of 11.33%, with an open circuit voltage (Voc) of 997 mV, a short circuit current density (Jsc) of 17.35 mA cm−2 and a fill factor (FF) of 0.65. With increasing amount of CsBr, the PCE value of the device exhibited an upward trend. And when the ratio of Cs/FA came to 0.24/0.76, the device showed a champion PCE of 17.29%, with a Voc of 1065 mV, a Jsc of 22.88 mA cm−2 and a FF of 0.71. As shown in Fig. S5, the stabilized power output of the champion device maintained a Jsc value of approximately 18.86 mA cm−2 and a PCE of 15.84% for 100 s.
The significant growth of Jsc was further verified by the incident-photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectrum (Fig. 4b). Without CsBr, the IPCE spectrum showed the highest value of 70% at around 500 nm, which gradually decreased to ∼60% for wavelengths between 500 nm and the FAPbI3 band-edge. This downtrend of IPCE value in the longer wavelength region can also be observed in the CsxFA1−xPbI3−yBry-device with x = 0.14. We attribute this feature to the high trap density of the perovskite film. Meanwhile, when x increased to 0.24, the CsxFA1−xPbI3−yBry-device kept a high IPCE value of ∼80% over the whole wavelength range of 450–800 nm, indicating the better quality of the perovskite crystal. The integrated current densities of the CsxFA1−xPbI3−yBry devices with x = 0, 0.14, 0.24, 0.33 were 16.83 mA cm−2, 19.05 mA cm−2, 21.02 mA cm−2 and 20.35 mA cm−2, respectively, which is in agreement with the Jsc derived from the J–V curves.
To further certify the positive effect of CsBr on the crystal quality of the FAPbI3 perovskite, steady-state photo-luminescence (PL) and time-resolved PL (TRPL) measurements were carried out with an excitation wavelength of 470 nm. As shown in Fig. 5a, the PL intensity of the glass/CsxFA1−xPbI3−yBry samples was remarkably enhanced with the increase of CsBr from 0 to 0.24, indicating the reduction of the trap-state density in the CsxFA1−xPbI3−yBry samples. When the content of CsBr was 0.33, the PL intensity had a slight drop, due to the lattice mismatch caused by the excess Cs. TRPL measurements were also carried out on the glass/CsxFA1−xPbI3−yBry samples to compare their electron life time (Fig. 5b). This showed that the PL decay time of the pristine FAPbI3 sample was much shorter than that of the other samples. And the CsxFA1−xPbI3−yBry perovskite with x = 0.24 exhibited the longest PL decay time, which was quite in accordance with the steady-state PL results (the detailed fitting parameters are shown in Table S1).
Besides the CsBr, we found that FACl vapor also played an important role in the growth of the perovskite crystal. In pure FAI vapor, it would take 30 min for the PbI2 film to transform into the perovskite completely. And the phase transition of the perovskite from α-phase to σ-phase was promoted by continuously exposing the film to FAI vapor (see Fig. 5a). However, for FAI/FACl composite vapor, no distinct PbI2 peak can be found in the XRD pattern of the sample with 20 min reaction time, indicating a faster growth rate of the perovskite crystal. And more importantly, after further extending the reaction time to 40 min, no phase transition was detected. Obviously, the faster growth rate and better phase stability of the perovskite crystal would favour highly uniform, large sized films and improve the device reproducibility. Two batches of PSCs (each one consisting of 20 devices) were fabricated in FAI and FAI/FACl vapor, respectively. PCE values of these devices are compared in Fig. 6c. Without FACl in the vapor, the device PCE was distributed over a wide range of values from 13% to 16.89%. However when introducing FACl into the vapor, the as-prepared devices exhibited a much narrower distribution range of PCE values. Ultimately, we fabricated PSC modules with an active area of 41.25 cm2 and the champion module possessed a high PCE of 12.24% (Fig. 6d). To the best of our knowledge, this is the highest module efficiency for vapor-based techniques. The long-term stability of the modules without encapsulation was tested under ambient conditions (RH = ∼30%, 25 °C) and under heating conditions (N2 atmosphere, 60 °C). As shown in Fig. 6e, after storage for ∼200 h without encapsulation under ambient conditions, the CsxFA1−xPbI3−yBry device maintained 83% of its initial PCE, while the pristine FAPbI3 device lost most of its performance. Similarly, the CsxFA1−xPbI3−yBry device exhibited much better thermal stability than that of the pristine one (Fig. 6f). Such large-area, high performance and stable PSC modules fabricated by a facile vapor–solid reaction may pave the way for accelerating the industrialization of PSC technology.

In summary, we fabricated CsxFA1−xPbI3−yBry mixed-cation films by a facile vapor–solid reaction method, which can easily be adapted to industry requirements. By optimizing the content of CsBr, we obtained uniform and pin hole-free CsxFA1−xPbI3−yBry perovskite films with low trap density. The champion PSCs based on these CsxFA1−xPbI3−yBry perovskite films achieved a high PCE of up to 17.29%. Furthermore, the slow growth rate of the perovskite crystal, which is the main issue for the vapor–solid reaction technique, was addressed by introducing FACl into the FAI vapor. In comparison with pure FAI, the perovskite crystal prepared in FAI/FACl mixed vapor showed faster growth rate and better phase stability, resulting in high device reproducibility. On the basis of these improvements, large sized PSC modules were fabricated with an active area of 41.25 cm2. The PSC modules exhibited a champion PCE of 12.24%, and showed outstanding long-term stability under ambient air conditions and under heating conditions (N2 atmosphere, 60 °C). These results suggest that our facile vapor-based method could provide a new approach for fabricating high-performance, large-area and stable PSC modules.


There are no conflicts to declare.


The authors acknowledge financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC 51702243, 51402115, 51672202), Hubei Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China (2016CFB464), The Technological Innovation Key Project of Hubei Province (2016AAA041), The Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (WUT: 2016IVA093, 2016IVA089, 2016IVA085, 2016III030, 2017III022) and Hubei Key Laboratory of Low Dimensional Optoelectronic Material and Devices (HLOM151001).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: XPS spectra of the perovskite films; EDS results of the device; steady-state output of the champion device; PL decay fitting parameters. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta06557h
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018