 DOI: 10.1039/C3NR04709A
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 1537-1544


Abd Rashid bin
Mohd Yusoff
,

Hyeong Pil
Kim
 and 

Jin
Jang
*

Department of Information Display and Advanced Display Research Center, Kyung Hee University, Dongdaemun-ku, Seoul 130-171, Republic of Korea. E-mail: jjang@khu.ac.kr; Fax: +82 2 961 0270; Tel: +82 2 961 0270

Received
3rd September 2013
, Accepted 9th November 2013
First published on 14th November 2013
We report air stable inverted organic photovoltaics (OPVs) incorporating graphene oxide (GO) and solution processed zinc oxide (ZnO) as hole transport and electron transport layers, respectively. Both the hole transport layer and the electron transport layer (HTL and ETL) are of advantage in high transparency and environmental stability. The use of GO and ZnO in poly(2,7-carbazole) derivative (PCDTBT):fullerene derivative (PC70BM)-based inverted OPVs leads to an improved device stability and enhanced high open circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.81 V, a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 14.10 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 54.44 along with a power conversion efficiency of 6.20%.

The past two years have witnessed a rapid increase in power conversion efficiency in organic photovoltaics (OPVs). OPVs have attracted much attention due to their various advantages including inexpensive fabrication procedures, mechanical flexibility, compatibility with roll-to-roll manufacturing, and light weight. Mostly, in conventional OPVs, the anode electrode is usually indium tin oxide (ITO) together with a hole transport material, a highly conducting p-type polymer poly(3,4-ethylene dioxythiophene):(polystyrene sulfonic acid) (PEDOT:PSS), and the cathode electrode usually consists of electron injecting and collecting materials, lithium fluoride (LiF) and aluminum (Al), respectively. Today, many studies have been devoted to replacing the PEDOT:PSS since the stability and lifetime utilizing ITO/PEDOT:PSS remains one of the main issues despite a relatively high efficiency. Norrman and co-workers demonstrated that PEDOT:PSS contributes to some degradation paths which are related to the photoactive layer and PEDOT:PSS. This basically contributes to the poor performance of the device since the degradation process can be visualized through tiny pinholes, grain boundaries and ITO/PEDOT:PSS, on the cathode and anode sides, respectively. One of the alternatives to overcome this problem is to make use of inverted device architecture. In the inverted structure, the charge collection is opposite to that of the conventional OPVs, and we can easily avoid one big issue namely the interface of ITO/PEDOT:PSS, by using a metal with a low work function. Hence, high performance OPVs are possible once the organic–metal interfaces are controlled.

Recently, graphene oxide has attracted significant attention and has been demonstrated to be not only an efficient hole extraction material for OPVs but also have enhanced stability. Recently, we have also demonstrated the utilization of GO as both hole and electron extraction materials for both inverted and conventional architecture of OPVs. In our previous study, the highest PCE of about 5.46% was obtained when we employed GO as the anode buffer layer and PCDTBT:PC70BM as the active material. Herein, we demonstrate the high performance of inverted organic solar cells with a sol–gel-derived ZnO acting as an electron transport layer (ETL) and GO as a hole transport layer (HTL). This inverted structure exhibits a short-circuit current density, Jsc, of 14.10 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage, Voc, of 0.81 V, filling factor, FF, of 54.44%, and the PCE of 6.20% under the illumination intensity of 100 mW cm−2 (AM 1.5G). Moreover, the thickness variation of ETL between 20 and 50 nm has also been investigated, and we found optimal device performance at around 40 nm. Our fabricated solar cells offer a few advantages such as (i) all solution processing, low temperature depositions, and low annealing temperatures; (ii) no ITO/PEDOT:PSS interfaces since PEDOT:PSS is acidic in nature; (iii) a new device structure employing GO as an anode buffer layer; and (iv) air-stable materials as cathode and anode buffer layers, which are suitable for slowing down the degradation process.

The energy levels of all materials used in this study, and the photo of our sixteen identical devices are shown in Fig. 1. The experimental details of ZnO sol–gel preparation are described in the Experimental section. In order to get a better understanding on the influence of ZnO in our inverted solar cell, the thickness of GO is fixed at ∼7.5 nm, while varying the thickness of ZnO from 20 to 50 nm. Inverted solar cells were designed, constructed, and characterized to evaluate the properties of polymer:fullerene; PCDTBT:PC70BM as donor and acceptor, respectively. Fig. 1a shows the energy alignments proposed in this work and we anticipate that the energy level of PCDTBT is well matched to ZnO for electron transport, which has a relatively small energy difference of about 0.80 eV, and gives excellent electron extraction through a thin layer of a highly conductive and transparent metal oxide semiconductor; ZnO toward a cathode electrode. On the other hand, the hole extraction is efficiently expected via a highly transparent layer; GO to another side of the electrode. Therefore, when the light is projected on the device, electrons will be easily transferred to the LUMO level of PC70BM. The electrons transport to the conduction level of ZnO can be visualized as barrier-less since the LUMO of PC70BM is 0.3 eV higher than that of the conduction band of ZnO. Ultimately, the electrons experience no barrier as they are collected at the ITO bottom electrode. In this work, we chose four different ZnO thicknesses; 20, 30, 40, and 50 nm. To guarantee a high reproducibility and reliability of our experimental data, for each selected thickness, sixteen identical inverted solar cells are constructed as shown in Fig. 1b. Therefore, in total we have constructed more than 60 inverted solar cells.


Fig. 2 depicts the transmittance spectra for the thin films between 250 and 1100 nm wavelengths. The ZnO thin film (40 nm) was highly transparent in the UV-Vis region from 400 nm to 960 nm. Along with this, an insubstantial fall in transmittance was detected below 400 nm due to band-gap absorption. The decrement of the transparency as we coated a thin layer of GO thin film from 400–750 nm appears to be due to the low reflection at the interface of ITO/ZnO/PCDTBT:PCBM/GO and GO/Air. Note that the GO refractive index is 2.4 at room temperature. The back reflection due to the presence of GO also contributed to the overall efficiency because it will certainly improve the Jsc in the device. Therefore, the fall in transmittance will definitely affect the overall performance of organic photovoltaic. As we compare the transmittance intensity of the ZnO thin film to the ZnO/PCDTBT:PC70BM and ZnO/PCDTBT:PC70BM/GO films, we observed that transmittance intensities of the ZnO/PCDTBT:PC70BM and ZnO/PCDTBT:PC70BM/GO thin films decreased especially at wavelengths from 240 to 650 nm. As depicted in Fig. 2, the average transmittances over the entire wavelength for ITO/ZnO, ITO/ZnO/PCDTBT:PC70BM and ITO/ZnO/PCDTBT:PC70BM/GO are 85.00, 66.99, and 64.39%, respectively. Additionally, the average transmittances in the visible region (400–650 nm) for ITO/ZnO, ITO/ZnO/PCDTBT:PC70BM and ITO/ZnO/PCDTBT:PC70BM/GO are 87.81%, 54.71%, and 49.77%, respectively.

Fig. 3 shows the non-contact tapping mode atomic force microscopy (AFM) images of ZnO thin films deposited on ITO-coated glass substrates. A homogenous, even, and smooth surface is desirable in obtaining the high performance of OPVs. As we can see from this figure, as we increase the thickness of ZnO, there is a decrement in root-mean-square (RMS) roughness. The RMS roughness for 50 nm ZnO is 0.56 nm. The morphology of ZnO thin films becomes smoother as we decrease the thickness to 40 nm with the RMS roughness of about 0.86 nm. The increment in RMS value continues, and reaches the highest value with the thickness of about 20 nm, where the RMS is approximately 1.13 nm. Fig. 3e demonstrates a thin layer of GO coated on an ITO-glass substrate. The RMS value obtained for GO is around 2.60 nm while Fig. 3f represents the GO with a thickness of about 7.5 nm coated on a photoactive material. GO/PCDTBT:PCBM has the RMS roughness of approximately 0.58 nm.
We use the XPS method to determine the surface composition of PCDTBT:PC70BM/GO and Fig. 4 shows the representative XPS spectra of PCDTBT:PC70BM. The XPS profile of PCDTBT:PC70BM shows the representative spectra of S 2p, C 1s, and O 1s peaks. The condition of scan width of a narrow scan spectrum at 0.05 eV, scan width of a wide scan spectrum at 1 eV, and a binding energy of S 2p ∼163.25 eV is estimated (Fig. 4b), and the presence of this peak could be explained by the small amount of sulphur atoms in the sample possibly from the PCDTBT polymer. The C 1s core level main peak at 283.88 eV (Fig. 4c) is assigned to sp2-hybridized graphite-like carbon atoms, and to sp2 carbon atoms bound to hydrogen, while the peak at 285.38 eV corresponds to C70. The O 1s peak appeared at 531.75 eV (Fig. 4d) corresponds to oxygen atoms bound to carbon atoms in functions like alcohol (C–OH), ketone (C–O–C), and carboxylic acid (COOH and/or –OC–O–CO–).

Fig. 4a shows the XPS profile using C60 ion sputtering, and the observed 76.44% C concentration. Despite that the implanted C also yields Cn species upon primary ion bombardment, C60 sputtering does not hamper the analysis of GO and PC70BM distribution although the C2 species is used to identify the concentration of GO and PC70BM, and as can be seen from Fig. 4a, it is possible to differentiate the GO and PCBM from deposited C. Instead of a C60 ion beam, this work used Cs ion sputtering for ToF-SIMS profiling. It is well known and generally accepted that single atomic ion species such as Ar can influence the chemical structure although the scan is carried out at low energy, thus, lead to inaccurate and undesirable results. Therefore, the possibility of Cs ion-induced chemical transformations in the remaining surface needs to be ruled out.

Table 1 represents the atomic concentration of PCDTBT:PC70BM/GO obtained from XPS profiles (Fig. 4a). The atomic concentrations of C 1s, and S 2p in PCDTBT:PC70BM/GO are slightly higher than those of the C 1s, and S 2p atomic concentrations in GO due to the presence of a fullerene derivative, PC70BM, on the surface. For GO, the atomic concentrations of C 1s and S 2p are 23.79% and 0%, respectively. However, the atomic concentration of O 1s is significantly lower than that of O 1s in GO, which is 49.16 eV.
Atomic
C 1s
O 1s
S 2p
Concentration (%)
76.44
22.64
0.59
To identify where all the signal intensities are constant or parallel by taking into account without any interference from other species/elements, we used in situ ion sputtering. It has been shown that C60 cluster ion beams do not alter the remaining GO and PCDTBT:PC70BM surface significantly, so we conclude that C60 sputtering is ideal for profiling inorganic GO and organic PCDTBT:PC70BM blends, hence, the observed C concentration is higher than expected.
A comparison of the XPS method (Fig. 4) with the ToF-SIMS profile employing Cs ion sputtering (Fig. 5) reveals little similarity. Prior to sample preparation, the Si substrates undergo pre-cleaning processes, therefore, due to the less contamination the S/C ratio is expected to be low, where in our case the S/C ratio is not detected. As demonstrated in Fig. 5, the Si-related signal indicates that the bottom Si interface has been reached. In the bulk of the polymer blend, both profiles show relatively low S concentrations (characteristic of PCDTBT), and this concentration slowly decreases. The successfulness of the coated PCDTBT:PC70BM thin film is further confirmed with higher C concentration compared to the C concentration in a pure GO film. The similarities in the depth profiles obtained from different methods corroborate that the Cs ion sputtering employed in this study preserved the chemical structure in the remaining surface, and can be used to produce reliable depth profiles. This success in Cs profiling could be attributed to the implantation of Cs enhanced ionization; hence the damage in the newly exposed surface is masked.
The typical X-ray diffraction (XRD) intensities of ZnO thin films and ZnO/PCDTBT:PC70BM composite films on the ITO coated substrates are portrayed in Fig. 6 using Cu Kα (1.54 Å) as the incident radiation. The XRD intensity measurement of θ–2θ was performed on ZnO thin films over a wide range of diffraction angles (from 20° to 60°). As can be seen from these intensities, although diffused scattering peaks at 22° are clearly observed, in which they arise from the substrate confirming that the ZnO thin film is amorphous in nature, we can also identify that there is no significant diffraction peak throughout the entire diffraction angle.
As tabulated in Table 2, we document all important inverted solar cell parameters extracted from the performance of the inverted solar cells such as the open-circuit voltage (Voc), short-circuit current density (Jsc), filling factor (FF), power conversion efficiency (η), and series resistance (Rs). All parameters were averaged over sixteen inverted solar cells for each thickness. It is worth noting that all measurements were conducted without using a non-transparent optical masking procedure.
ZnO thickness

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)

R
s (Ω)
20 nm
11.07
0.82
58.01
5.40
15
30 nm
14.00
0.81
54.11
6.00
12
40 nm
14.10
0.81
54.44
6.20
10
50 nm
9.64
0.81
50.58
3.97
9

Fig. 7 illustrates typical J-V plots of the inverted solar cells integrating various ZnO thicknesses under an illumination intensity of 100 mW cm−2 (AM 1.5G). One can find that there is momentous diversity in the performance of the inverted solar cells when the thickness of the ZnO layer increases from 20 nm to 30 nm, where the averaged power conversion efficiencies for 20 and 30 nm of ZnO were 5.40% and 6.00%, respectively. The Voc and FF experienced a relatively small loss, where the Voc and FF declined by 1.22 and 6.72% as the thickness increases to 30 nm along with moderate increments in Jsc of about 26.47% from its initial value.
Based on the theoretical calculations suggested by Scharber and co-workers, the theoretical efficiency from the optical band gap and the LUMO level of PCDTBT is in the range of 6%. Based on our experimental data, the averaged efficiency of inverted solar cells was 6.20%. As the thickness of the ZnO layer was further increased to 40 nm, the inverted solar cells experienced considerably small enhancements in Jsc and FF; increased by 0.71% and 0.61%, respectively. In contrast, the Voc remained stable. As a consequence, the averaged efficiency for the inverted solar cells with a 40 nm ZnO thin film was enhanced by 3.23%. In addition, a small increment in FF was evidenced by the reduction of Rs. Though, decisive deteriorations in the performance of inverted organic solar cells were observed when the thickness of the ZnO thin film increases from 40 to 50 nm. Huge and tiny losses in Jsc and FF of about 31.63% and 7.09%, respectively, result in a remarkable crumbling in the power conversion efficiency of almost 35.97%. From this figure we can also see the variations in Jsc, and we attribute this trend to the light absorption which is related to an optical effect and also could be due to the fact that RMS values influence the Jsc values. It is also worth noting that the Jsc values in our device are slightly higher compared to other published studies probably due to the light piping during the measurement or due to the back reflection because the refractive index of GO is about 2.4. Currently, these are the possible explanations for the high Jsc observed in our devices. Although many have proposed to use the masking procedure, sweeping voltage as well as the correct calibration of solar simulators, detailed investigations about this high current density are being undertaken and will not be treated here. On the other hand, the behavior of Voc is almost stable although the thickness of ZnO is varied, and it is expected since it is known that it depends on the energy level of the donor and acceptor of the photoactive layer. The fabricated reference device which consists of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PCDTBT:PCBM/ZnO/LiF:Al exhibits Jsc = 10.37 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.81 V, FF = 57.81% along with the PCE of approximately 5.05%.
The external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra are depicted in Fig. 8. As we can see from these spectra, the inverted organic solar cells with 40 nm of ZnO exhibited the maximum EQE of 72.5%, which corresponds to efficient photon-to-electron conversion. However, the lowest EQE comes from the inverted organic solar cells with 50 nm of ZnO, where the maximum EQE is 66.5%. The integrated Jsc values obtained from the EQE measurements are 10.51, 13.22, 13.26, and 8.96 mA cm−2 for 20, 30, 40, and 50 nm, respectively. We can see that EQE data for inverted solar cells are significantly higher than those of the conventional devices over the entire wavelength. We attribute this high EQE value of our inverted organic solar cells to unbalanced mobilities of holes and electrons in the device. According to Mihailetchi the unbalanced mobilities may possibly influence the conventional solar cell performance yet the inverted solar cells may benefit from this behavior. It is worth noting that the integration results from EQE results are in good agreement with our experimentally recorded Jsc values within a few percent.
As the efficiency of polymer solar cells is now approaching 11%, the stability of the polymer solar cells becomes important. Thus, in order to get a better understanding of the stability of the device without the presence of PEDOT:PSS, we extended our study of this inverted device over 1440 h of storage. During the interval time of each measurement, all devices were stored in air under ambient conditions.

Fig. 9 compares the normalized PCE of the fabricated, inverted, conventional, and control devices as a function of storage time. Although the control device based on PEDOT:PSS shows a comparable performance with the conventional device, the stability of the PEDOT:PSS based device significantly decreases after 720 h of storage. The PCE of the control device using PEDOT:PSS as the anode buffer layer decreases almost 20% from initial value. This is due to its nature of absorbing water molecules, and this might be one of the reasons that PEDOT:PSS-based solar cells show moderate stability, and can also be one of the reasons that, although serious pre-cautions have been taken into account during the encapsulation process, water and oxygen can still manage to penetrate inside the cells. Additionally, the efficiency of the inverted device decreases about 2.78% from its original value. However, the efficiency of the conventional-based device decreases to 8.56%.
As the storage time increases, the efficiencies keep on deteriorating, where after 1440 h of storage the efficiency of the conventional-based device plunges to 82.31% from its initial efficiency. It is worth noting that the efficiency of the inverted-based device drops by only by 7.17% from its original value. On the other hand, the control device deteriorated almost 40% after 1440 h of storage. We can see from Fig. 9 that, except for the control device, the efficiencies of both devices (inverted and conventional) remain above 80% after 1440 h of storage. We attribute the long lifetime of our devices as follows: (i) the use of PCDTBT:PC70BM. As we can see from the energy diagram (Fig. 1a), the HOMO level of the selected polymer, PCDTBT, is 5.5 eV below the vacuum level. This makes the fabricated devices stable against oxidation under ambient conditions and (ii) the use of air-stable materials as a hole transport layer (GO) and an electron transport layer (ZnO). It has been accepted that PEDOT:PSS contributes to a rapid degradation since PSS is hygroscopic in nature.

In summary, air-stable and efficient OPVs in the inverted architecture based on a PCDTBT:PC70BM photoactive layer, ZnO as the electron transport layer, and GO as the hole transport layer, were fabricated. The utilization of the ZnO and GO enhanced the current density resulting in 6.20% PCE. In particular, drastic improvement in stability was also demonstrated, and the fabricated inverted OPVs demonstrated better device characteristics and stability compared with those of PEDOT:PSS-based devices. These results suggest that GO is a promising hole transport material in the search for a practical replacement of the commonly used PEDOT:PSS.


The preparation steps of sol–gel-derived ZnO have been reported elsewhere.


The inverted solar cells were fabricated on pre-cleaned indium tin oxide (ITO) coated glass substrates, with a sheet resistance of 10–15 Ω cm−1. The thickness of the ZnO layer varied from 20 to 50 nm by changing the spin speed, and then annealed at 200 °C for 1 h. The PCDTBT:PC70BM at a 1:4 weight ratio in 1.25 wt% 1,2dichlorobenzene was then spin-coated on the ITO substrates at 700 rpm for 25 s on top of the ZnO layer and baked at 70 °C for 1 h. The GO aqueous solution was obtained from Graphene Supermarket and used as purchased without any purification. A thin layer of GO (7.5 nm) was spin-coated from the aqueous solution at 1000 rpm for 25 s. The films were again annealed at 200 °C for 20 min. Next, the thermal evaporation of 100 nm of Al as the top electrode was carried out under vacuum (base pressure of ∼1 × 10−8 Torr). The active areas of our constructed inverted solar cells were 0.2 cm in length and width, respectively. After being transferred into the glove-box, the fabricated inverted solar cells were encapsulated with a transparent encapsulation glass, glued with UV-curable resin, followed by 1 min exposure to ultraviolet light. The performances of the inverted solar cells were obtained from J-V characteristics measured using a Keithley 2400 LV source meter. The solar cell performance was measured using a solar simulator with Air Mass 1.5 Global (AM 1.5G) with an irradiation intensity of 100 mW cm−2. All measurements were carried out at room temperature, under a relative humidity of 60%. The stability measurements were carried out according to the ISOS-L-1 procedures. The EQE measurements were performed using an EQE system (Model 74000) obtained from Newport Oriel Instruments USA and the HAMAMATSU calibrated silicon cell photodiode was used as a reference diode. The wavelength was controlled with a monochromator 200–1600 nm. For the control device, the PEDOT:PSS was coated at 4000 rpm for 25 s. Later the PEDOT:PSS layer was annealed at 120 °C for 20 min. The LiF (0.5 nm) was thermally evaporated at ∼1 × 10−8 Torr.


The transmittances of ZnO, ZnO/PCDTBT:PC70BM, and ZnO/PCDTBT:PC70BM/GO films coated on ITO-glass substrates were recorded at room temperature with a SCINCO S4100 spectrophotometer. AFM imaging was carried out in air using a Digital Instrument Multimode equipped with a nanoscope IIIa controller. XRD measurements were carried out using an X'PERT PRO PANalytical Diffractometer with a Cu Kα source (wavelength of 1.5405 Å). XPS measurements were performed in a PHI 5000 VersaProbe (Ulvac-PHI) with a background pressure of 6.7 × 10−8 Pa using monochromatized Al Kα (hv – 1486.6 eV) anode (25 W, 15 kV). The spot size for XPS measurements was 100 μm × 100 μm. TOF-SIMS measurements were performed using a TOF-SIMS V instrument (ION-TOF GmBH, Germany) with 25 keV C60 primary ions (average current of 1 pA, pulse width of 16.8 ns, and repetition rate of 5 kHz). The analysis area of 100 μm × 100 μm was randomly rastered by primary ions for the spectrum analysis. FESEM measurements were carried out with a Hitachi S-4800.


This work was supported by the Industrial Strategic Technology Development (10045269, Development of Soluble TFT and Pixel Formation Materials/Process Technologies for AMOLED TV) funded by MOTIE/KEIT.


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014