 DOI: 10.1039/C8CP02730G
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 17304-17312


Mihirsinh
Chauhan
,

Abhishek
Sharma
,

Jessica
Patel
,

M.
Aatif
,

Suresh
Chand
,

Manoj Kumar
Pandey
,

Manoj
Kumar
,

J. P.
Tiwari
* and 

Brijesh
Tripathi
*

Department of Solar Energy, School of Technology, Pandit Deendayal Petroleum University, Gandhinagar – 382007, India

Advanced Materials and Devices Division (FOED Group), CSIR-National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi 110012, India

Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), CSIR-National Physical Laboratory, Dr. K. S. Krishnan Marg, New Delhi 110012, India. E-mail: jai_ti2002@yahoo.com; tiwarijp@mail.nplindia.org; Fax: +91 79 2327 5030; Fax: +91-11-45609310; Tel: +91 79 2327 5455 Tel: +91-11-45608640

Department of Science, School of Technology, Pandit Deendayal Petroleum University, Gandhinagar – 382007, India. E-mail: brijesh.tripathi@sse.pdpu.ac.in

Received
29th April 2018
, Accepted 1st June 2018
First published on 4th June 2018
A key challenge for researchers in the field of organic solar cells (OSCs) is to develop a physical model for a device that correctly describes the charge carrier transport phenomenon. In this article, an analytical study on the charge carrier transport phenomenon in an OSC is reported, which expresses a balance between free charge carrier generation and recombination in low mobility PTB7:PC71BM blend layers. First, the current density–voltage (J–V) data for the fabricated OSC were extracted from experiments by varying the incident power light intensity (IPL) and then analysis through theoretical simulation was used to quantify the dominant interface recombination parameters limiting the device’s performance. It was found that although the generation of free charge carriers increased at higher IPL values, the performance of the device remained low due to poor electrical transport properties which resulted in a considerable accumulation of generated charge carriers in the active layer. Therefore, it has become important to work out the complex relation between charge carrier mobility, exciton-recombination dynamics and the overall electrical performance parameters in a single framework. This article explains the influence of incident power light intensity and charge carrier mobility on performance parameters, which limits the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the OSC. The presented analysis could be helpful in optimizing the architecture of future devices to increase the PCE of OSCs.

Organic solar cells (OSCs) grab headlines with their enormous advantages including being light-weight, flexible and easy-to-fabricate. Therefore, researchers have been putting significant R & D effort into the development of this technology in order to increase both the power conversion efficiency (PCE) and the stability of OSCs. The ultimate PCE of an OSC is estimated to be about 29% using the Shockley–Queisser (SQ) theory. Yet the assumptions of the SQ theory are not applicable to OSCs due to their complex structure. In OSCs, organic polymeric electron donor and electron acceptor materials are used to develop a nanoscale network known as a bulk heterojunction (BHJ) with the goal of simultaneously optimizing photon absorption, exciton generation, exciton dissociation and charge carrier collection. The morphology of the donor/acceptor blends critically affects the photovoltaic processes in BHJ OSCs.

A detailed physical understanding of organic semiconducting devices is required for the further development of efficient OSCs. Devices made from the newly developed donor and acceptor materials have achieved a PCE exceeding 14%. A PCE of up to 20% is possible if an appropriate electronic structure of materials in a suitable device design can be developed. Accordingly, several theoretical frameworks have been put forward which mainly consider the losses caused by geminate recombination which limits the short-circuit current density (JSC) or reduces the fill factor (FF) and the open-circuit voltage (VOC) due to non-radiative recombination pathways. However, recent experimental and theoretical work concludes that the performance of different polymer:fullerene blends is largely affected by inefficient charge extraction caused by low mobility, in particular for systems with effective charge generation and/or a large active layer thickness. In most of the better performing OSCs, the influence of geminate recombination is less dominant compared to bimolecular recombination, where the latter plays a vital role. The recombination and extraction of charge carriers are balanced by the optical generation rate for a given illumination intensity. The net photocurrent is the difference between the extraction and recombination of charge carriers through which the FF of the device can be estimated. Several studies have been reported which combine charge transport and recombination in terms of a mobility-lifetime product. In this direction of work, an analytical model has been developed which utilizes the effect of drift, diffusion and trapping of photo-induced charge carriers. The model explains the electrical performance of OSCs which fits well with experimental J–V curves assuming a constant lifetime of electrons and holes in the photoactive layer. Also, the 1-dimensional (1D) drift-diffusion model developed by Set et al. includes the effect of second order recombination on the performance parameters. Understanding these models, Ibrahim et al. established a detailed mathematical relationship to describe the role of bimolecular recombination rates on the performance of OSCs. These expressions include three empirical parameters for optimizing the bimolecular recombination rate which provides the best fits for experimental J–V curves. However, to gain a deep insight into achieving high FFs as well as PCE values, there is a need to develop a systematic theoretical model which explains the strong dependence of the generation and transportation of free charge carriers on the incident power light intensity (IPL) and the effective charge carrier mobility.
Therefore, this analysis mainly aims to evaluate the charge transport limited performance of OSCs by realizing the dependence of the generation and transportation of free charge carriers on the IPL, as well as the effective charge carrier mobility. The empirical relationship derived for J–V curves includes the effects of charge carrier mobility, IPL, and exciton and recombination dynamics in a single framework to achieve a maximum photovoltaic performance. Firstly, the dependence of the electrical performance parameters (JSC, VOC and FF) on a broad range of IPL (10 to 220 mW cm−2) for a fabricated device has been studied by incorporating the dimensionless parameter α, which allows quantification of the recombination and extraction rates of the charge carriers. Furthermore, the relationship between electrical performance parameters, effective charge carrier mobility and recombination parameters has been worked out. The impact of the charge carrier mobility and the recombination factor on the PCE of the OSC has been clearly demonstrated. This study can help the research community simulate device performance more accurately depending on the opto-electronic properties of organic semiconductors. The approach presented here establishes device physics, which not only applies to the obtained experimental results of the fabricated OSCs in our laboratory but also to other OSCs and novel thin film technologies like perovskite solar cells used elsewhere.

To investigate the photovoltaic performance with a charge transport limited current, the conventional device structure (ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PTB7:PC71BM/Al) was fabricated using a blend of PTB7:PC71BM with a blend ratio of 1:1.5.


The materials for the device fabrication were purchased and used as received from the following companies; poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS; Clevios PH), poly[[4,8-bis[(2-ethylhexyl)oxy]benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl][3-fluoro-2-[(2-ethylhexyl)carbonyl]thieno[3,4-b]thiophenediyl]] (PTB7; 1-materials, Canada), [6,6]-phenyl C71 butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM; 1-materials, Canada), chlorobenzene (Sigma-Aldrich), and 1,8-diiodooctane (DIO; Sigma-Aldrich).


As usual for device fabrication, the ITO glass substrates (sheet resistance = 15 Ω □−1) were initially cleaned in soap solution, acetone, isopropanol, and exposed to ultraviolet-ozone irradiation for 20 min. PEDOT:PSS was spin-coated over the ITO glass at 3500 rpm for 60 s and annealed at 140 °C for 10 min. Then, a 1:1.5 blend ratio of PTB7:PC71BM was spin-coated in a mixed solvent of chlorobenzene/DIO (97%:3% by volume) solution (with a total concentration of 25 mg ml−1) at 1500 RPM for 40 s. Finally, an Al electrode was thermally deposited on the active layer under high vacuum (∼5 × 10−6 mbar). The active area of the devices was ∼4.5 mm2 in every case. The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the fabricated devices were measured under a solar simulator (class AAA) with a Keithley2420 source meter unit to vary the IPL (9 to 220 mW cm−2). To measure the current density under illumination, the device was illuminated from the transparent ITO electrode side.


The architecture of the device with an active PTB7:PC71BM cell layer and the corresponding energy levels is depicted schematically in Fig. 1(a and b). Fig. 1(c) shows the J–V curve of a PTB7:PC71BM solar cell in the dark and at 100 mW cm−2 IPL. The device shows a PCE of 5.14% with performance parameters VOC, JSC and FF of 0.725 V, 12.52 mA cm−2 and 56.7%, respectively. The crossover between the dark and light J–V curve occurs around 0.82 V. This non-linear superposition occurs due to a carrier collection loss and can be described in terms of the dimensionless ideality parameter α which will be discussed in a later section. The parameters used for the simulation are listed in Table 1.

Parameter
Symbol
Value
Unit
Effective band gap

E
g

1.15
eV
Active layer thickness

L

100
nm
Incident power light intensity
IPL
9–220
mW cm−2
Recombination factor

γ

0.001–1
Effective charge carrier mobility

μ
eff

10−10–1
m2 V−1 s−1
Effective density of states

N
CV

5 × 1020
cm−3
The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristic of a photovoltaic solar cell is usually described by the Shockley diode equation:
(1)
where
J0 is the dark generated current density, q represents the elementary charge, RS represents the series resistance, kB represents Boltzmann's constant, and T is the temperature. JG denotes the photogenerated current density and n is the ideality factor. The value of n depends on the type of recombination mechanism: n (= 1) for direct bimolecular (Langevin) recombination and n (= 2) for trap-mediated (Shockley–Read–Hall) recombination. Under open-circuit conditions, the net current density is zero due to an identical generation and recombination rate. The generation rate is also proportional to IPL, and a useful relation  is derived for the ideality factor under illumination.


Fig. 2(a) shows the experimental J–V characteristics of the fabricated OSC under various IPL values (symbols) from which the VOC can be found (Table 2). The extracted VOC value is plotted with respect to IPL in Fig. S1 (ESI) and the slope results in n = 1.1 (see Fig. S1 in the ESI). This value of n indicates strong bimolecular recombination in the fabricated OSC. However, a plot of J–V using eqn (1) with n = 1.1 for varying IPL by including the effect of RS results in a very poor fit with the experimental data (Fig. S2 in the ESI). In particular, it is difficult to explain the interception of the J–V curves and the strong illumination dependence of the forward current density using the Shockley equation. Here, JG is only the current density under IPL, which includes all generation and recombination processes and depends on the electronic properties of the semiconductor materials. However, materials used for OSC application have a low mobility. Because of this low mobility the extraction of free charge carriers remains insufficient and space charge regions build-up at the contacts or in the bulk. As a result, the free charge concentration at the donor/acceptor interface increases and hence recombination increases, which leads to a lower FF. Therefore, there is a need to include the effect of mobility on the low-mobility semiconductor material-based OSC, while analyzing the J–V curve under illumination. The analysis of the J–V curve fitted using eqn (1) does not provide information about the true ideality factor (except near VOC). In order to explore the possibility of space charge limited transport, a graph was plotted between J and the compensation voltage (VOC − V) on a double-logarithmic scale (symbols) as shown in Fig. 2(b). A linear dependence of J has been observed at a low VOC − V value due to competition between the drift and diffusion of free charge carriers and it shows a clear smooth transition to the saturation regime at higher voltages, where it becomes limited by the field and IPL dependence of the generation rate (G). Furthermore, as shown in Fig. 2(c), the experimental JSC (V = 0 V) value taken from Fig. 2a as a function of IPL has been plotted in a double logarithmic scale to check the space charge limited transport. The slope S (= 0.99) calculated by a linear fitting (shown in lines) of the experimental data confirms the absence of space charge limited transport in our fabricated PTB7:PC71BM system. However, the population of free charge carriers within the active layer is related to the difference between the internal voltage (Vinternal) and the applied external voltage between the two electrodes under varying IPL. The Shockley diode eqn (1) is only valid when Vinternal is equal to the applied voltage. For this condition, the applied external bias defines the density of the free charge carriers and the recombination rate in the active layer. This condition is realized for inorganic semiconductors with a high mobility, where charge collection is mainly by diffusion. However, an effective charge collection in the active layer materials with low mobility is driven by the gradient of quasi-Fermi levels. Hence, in this condition Vinternal does not remain the same as the applied external voltage (Fig. 2(d)). The space-charge limited transport (as discussed earlier) and the dependence of the free charge carriers on the quasi-Fermi levels within the active layer are well differentiated from each other. All of these issues have to be considered in more detail in order to analyze the performance of OSCs. It is thus inappropriate to employ Shockley's model, as it does not account for the impact of charge transport (it assumes infinitely large conductivities for electrons and holes).
IPL (mW cm−2)

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)

α

9
1.14
0.670
66.4
5.64
2.2
28
3.43
0.705
62.8
5.61
3.4
45
5.74
0.710
62.0
5.59
3.5
76
9.80
0.720
58.5
5.46
4.5
100
12.52
0.725
56.7
5.14
5.5
128
15.59
0.742
54.0
5.02
7.0
220
26.30
0.766
50.3
4.58
8.5
In order to obtain a better understanding of J–V characteristics an approach given by Würfel et al. explaining the impact of internal voltage on the charge transport under illumination is given as:
(2)
where the term
qVinternal represents the difference between split quasi-Fermi levels, which determines the strength of non-geminate interlayer recombination and is correlated to the applied voltage as explained in the ESI (eqn (S1)). Neher et al. extended this work by deriving a closed form approximation of the J–V curves under transport limited photocurrent conditions. A dimensionless ideality parameter α is introduced, which explains the electrical performance parameters including the impact of the charge carrier mobility, the active layer thickness and the bimolecular recombination coefficient and is expressed as:

(3)
where
μeff represents the effective carrier mobility of charge carriers, L represents the active layer thickness and Ni represents the intrinsic charge carrier density. Using α, the J–V relationship can be expressed as (the full derivation is given in the ESI):

(4)
In order to explore the role of
α, experimental data of the fabricated OSC have been fitted using eqn (4) as shown in Fig. 2(a and b) (solid line). An excellent agreement is observed for all of the J–V curves under various IPL values which is not explained by the one diode model as the ideality factor value does not include a mobility dependent carrier recombination mechanism and leads to a wrong estimate of the reverse saturation current (see the comparison between the two models at IPL = 100 mW cm−2 in Table S1 in the ESI). Herein, it is observed that the value of the ideality parameter increases linearly from 2.2 to 8.5 when the IPL changes from 9 to 220 mW cm−2 as listed in Table 2. The term (1 + α) in eqn (4) provides a better fit for the transport-limited photocurrent compared to the Shockley equation. This term (1 + α) can be understood as an apparent ideality factor and can be used to measure the non-ideal behavior of the fabricated OSC under varying IPL. Also, it is observed from eqn (3) that α is proportional to JG which is directly proportional to IPL. Therefore, the expression of α can be simplified as a function of IPL (detailed explanation in the ESI):

(5)
where
kL represents the Langevin recombination coefficient and X is a physical constant (refer to the ESI). Eqn (5) predicts a square root dependence of α on the IPL, which is in good agreement with the experimental α value determined by fitting the experimental J–V data as shown in Fig. 3(a). The increasing value of α shows an insufficient charge extraction due to high carrier densities and consequently relates to a large quasi-Fermi level splitting at higher IPL. In order to understand the interlayer recombination further, Vinternal is plotted with respect to an external applied voltage under varying IPL (Fig. S3 in the ESI). It is apparent that Vinternal is strongly dependent not only on the IPL, but also on the external applied voltage. The change in Vinternal is also responsible for the variation in electrical conductivity of the active layer. Fig. 3(b) shows the calculated electrical conductivity of the active layer of the fabricated OSC with respect to the applied external voltage under varying IPL. It is to be noted here that the conductivity is comparatively low for 9 mW cm−2 due to considerably small quasi-Fermi level splitting in the bulk, which means that the value of Vinternal remains low for zero externally applied voltage. In contrast, with an increasing value of the IPL, quasi-Fermi level splitting in the bulk increases progressively. This proves that Vinternal is significantly larger than the external applied voltage in the voltage range 0 ≤ V ≤ VOC under a higher IPL. As a result, the accumulation of free charge carriers enhances and this results in an increase in interlayer recombination. It is also observed that the internal voltage (Vinternal) has an influence on both the generated average charge carrier density (nP) and the recombination rate (kR). The analysis of nP and kR in PTB7:PC71BM can be done by understanding the behavior of VOC which has a direct relationship with α and Vinternal (refer to the ESI). The nP and corresponding kR values are plotted in Fig. 4(a and b) as a function of an externally applied voltage for various IPL values. At 220 mW cm−2 IPL, nP in the active layer is high (6.43 × 1021 m−3) but the extraction of free charge carriers is low due to increased kR (1.4 × 106 s−1). To explain the charge extraction and recombination phenomenon, Bartesaghi et al. recently introduced the new dimensionless parameter θ which is also derived in terms of α as explained in the ESI. So, it is clearly observed that with a reduction in IPL, higher FFs and PCEs are achieved with better α values and higher extraction of free charge carriers at low Vinternal and low nP values. A correlation between the measured J–V performance and the transport model is thus clearly useful in analyzing the internal mechanisms of the charge carrier transport within the OSC.

For the study presented in previous paragraphs, the rate of recombination is assumed to be independent of the mobility. However, several studies have shown that the probability of charge carrier recombination is related to the effective mobility (μeff) of the device. In addition, the induced recombination factor γ is introduced to explain the effect of morphology on the recombination in a phase separated blend. The γ parameter varies between 1 and 10−3 in OSCs. By considering these two parameters (μeff and γ), this study is extended to analyze the ultimate feasible PCE of the fabricated PTB7:PC71BM OSC with a better understanding of the recombination process as explained below. In order to visualize how μeff and γ affect the device performance, JSC and VOC are plotted for a wide range of mobility with respect to the induced recombination factor (γ) (Fig. 5(a and b)). Here, the value of JG is taken as 15 mA cm−2 from the experimental data (Fig. 2(a)). At high μeff (=10−4 to 100 m2 V−1 s−1) close to those of inorganic semiconductors (Si) or strong absorber material such as perovskites, the value of JSC reaches its maximum as shown in Fig. 5(a). In other words, all photogenerated charge carriers reach the electrodes and contribute to the photocurrent. These results show that at the higher μeff values transport current loss is negligible due to the very low values of α (Fig. S4 in the ESI). For instance, although the JSC reaches its maximum value at the higher μeff values and isn’t influenced by the high γ values, the FF and PCE of the device are limited due to the recombination process (Fig. S5a and S5b in the ESI). The reduction of the FF and PCE can also be explained on the basis of the reduction in VOC (Fig. 5(b)). Under open circuit conditions, the photocurrent density is zero due to the equal charge carrier generation and recombination rates. Recombination can occur either in the active layer bulk or at the active layer electrode interface. In this condition, VOC is derived through the splitting of quasi-Fermi levels, which is well explained by kR as a function of γ for a variation of μeff. The plotted kR data (Fig. S6 in the ESI) reflect the dependence of the JSC, VOC, FF and PCE on the μeff and γ as explained above. An increase in kr with increasing effective mobility leads to a steady decrease in VOC (Fig. 5(b)). As per this analysis, transport losses start to play an important role for a wide range of charge carrier mobility as reported in the literature for OSCs (from 10−10 to 10−6 m2 V−1 s−1). As shown in Fig. S5b (ESI), if γ is equal to 10−3, the PCE of the cell drops only to 8.5% from 9.4% with a variation of μeff from 100 to 10−10 m2 V−1 s−1. It can be concluded that the deviation in FF and PCE of the J–V curve for a PTB7:PC71BM OSC from a high value primarily results from the direct competition between the generation of excitons and the charge carrier dissociation and recombination during transport.
The physical origin of the above results can be investigated by analyzing the mobility dependent dissociation probability of the free charge carriers P, and the non-geminate pair recombination yield, RY, can be determined. In order to understand the mechanism of charge carrier dissociation, P is derived as a function of α (detailed derivation of eqn (6) is given in the ESI):
(6)
The non-geminate pair recombination yield can be expressed as:


(7)
where
UG = PG − (1 − P)RG represents the net generation rate. Herein, RG(= krecn) is the Langevin recombination rate,G is the total generation rate and n is the electron concentration. Fig. 6 shows the variation of P and RY as a function of α for different μeff values (as defined in eqn (6) and (7)). The results for P and RY indicate that a moderate μeff value (10−8 m2 V−1 s−1) leads to the efficient separation of free charge carriers as P increases continuously. It appears that for a μeff value lower than 10−8 m2 V−1 s−1, the dissociation probability of free charge carriers starts decreasing due to increased recombination, which enhances the RY. Here, it is also noticed that for a very low value of γ (= 0.001) the lower mobility does not have any significant impact on the dissociation of the excitons. However, by increasing the value of γ, P decreases. Overall, for low μeff values many of the photogenerated excitons will not dissociate into free charge carriers and hence the performance of the solar cells remains low. These results indicate that for better performance in OSCs an active layer material with a higher mobility is beneficial. For the next step, evaluation of the behavior of P at higher μeff values (>10−8 m2 V−1 s−1) indicates that 100% P can be achieved for a μeff value of 10−7 m2 V−1 s−1 for a given γ value (0.001–1). So, it should be noted here that a mobility greater than 10−7 m2 V−1 s−1 will not help to further enhance the dissociation of charge carriers. However, as shown before, μeff is responsible for a build-up of charge carriers in the OSC. Having a high μeff value helps in the efficient extraction of free charge carriers which leads to a depletion of charge carriers in the solar cell. Thus, the resultant efficient sweeping of charge carriers out of the device can lead to a reduction in VOC with increasing mobility as explained before, as shown in Fig. 5(b).

As a final result in Fig. 7 the calculated FF and PCE values are shown as a function of μeff for different γ values. The plotted FFs and PCEs originate from the behavior of the JSC, VOC, P and RY as a function of μeff and γ. It can be observed that for a given γ value, there is an optimum μeff responsible for achieving a peak PCE. At lower γ values, a higher value of JSC and VOC with an efficient dissociation of charge carriers leads to higher FFs and PCEs. For example, decreasing γ from 1 to 0.001 increases the peak PCE from around 3% to 9.5%. By looking at Fig. 5(a) and 6, it is clear that a lower γ causes JSC and P to increase more rapidly with μeff and provides a maximum value of PCE when the μeff is around 10−8 m2 V−1 s−1 (see Fig. 5(b) and FF (Fig. 7(a))). Furthermore, our calculation matches well with the experimental highest efficiency achieved for the PTB7:PC71BM solar cell system at an effective carrier mobility of around 10−8 m2 V−1 s−1. Also, the impact of a mobility imbalance (between electrons and holes) on the performance of PTB7:PC71BM solar cells has been calculated and plotted as shown in Fig. S7 (ESI). The derived results clearly explain that an increase in electron mobility (μe) by two orders of magnitude (10−10 to 10−8 m2 V−1 s−1) with a constant hole mobility (μh = 10−10 m2 V−1 s−1) leads to an enhancement in the PCE with a higher FF, JSC and moderate VOC. But a further increase in the μe leads to a greater imbalance between the extracted hole and electrons which ultimately increases the recombination and leads to a low PCE. As a result, not much improvement in PCE is expected when the effective mobility of charge carriers is further enhanced.
The results shown herein were obtained from a single PTB7:PC71BM device fabricated with a conventional structure, and experimental J–V curves were analyzed using a charge transport model at varying incident power light intensity. Moreover, we extended these studies to include the effect of mobility and recombination factor on the performance of the fabricated device. The systematic simulation presented here explains the role of mobility and the recombination factor. As per the above discussed results, even one order of magnitude higher mobility as reported for PTB7:PC71BM systems is not going to enhance the device performance significantly due to the morphology dependent recombination mechanism. Thus, it is important to develop, synthesize and optimize the process of an organic blend which can enhance the performance with reduced recombination.

In essence, we have demonstrated an analytical approach to analyze the performance of an organic solar cell. The developed model explains the impact of charge transport on the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics as a function of incident power light intensity (IPL) and the effective charge carrier mobility. The developed relationship between the performance parameters (JSC, VOC and FF) with IPL and the effective charge carrier mobility provides new insights for enhancing the performance of OSCs. The results discussed in this work offer an approach for targeted improvements in the performance of OSCs by indicating the right donor–acceptor combinations with a suitable mobility range and a lower possibility of recombination.


There are no conflicts to declare.


The work was supported by the TAPSUN project funded by the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR, NWP-54). This work was also supported by Indo-UK project “Advancing the effectiveness and production potential of excitonic solar cells (APEX)”. The authors are also thankful to the Department of Science & Technology (DST), New Delhi for grant no. DST/FT/CS-120/2010 and for the INSPIRE fellowship to Jessica Patel. The authors acknowledge the Director of CSIR National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi and Head of Solar Research and Development Centre, PDPU, Gandhinagar for providing the facilities used for this research work.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Description of the derived equations and related results are discussed. See DOI: 10.1039/c8cp02730g
‡ Authors contributed equally.
This journal is © the Owner Societies 2018