 DOI: 10.1039/C4CC09433F
(Feature Article)
Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 5572-5585


Zhicheng
Hu
,

Kai
Zhang
,

Fei
Huang
* and 

Yong
Cao


State Key Laboratory of Luminescent Materials and Devices, Institute of Polymer Optoelectronic Materials and Devices, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510640, P. R. China. E-mail: msfhuang@scut.edu.cn

Received
25th November 2014
, Accepted 15th January 2015
First published on 15th January 2015
Water/alcohol soluble conjugated polymers (WSCPs), which can be processed from water/alcohol and other polar solvents, are suitable for the solution processing of multi-layer organic electronic devices. By using a thin layer WSCP as the cathode interfacial material, the resulting polymer light-emitting diodes (PLEDs) and polymer solar cells (PSCs) exhibited significant enhancements in their device performances. In this Feature Article, the authors aim to introduce a brief review of the recent developments and applications of WSCPs in highly efficient multi-layer solution processed PLEDs and PSCs.

Zhicheng Hu

Zhicheng Hu received his BS degree in Polymer Materials and Engineering from the South China University of Technology in 2012, and started his research under the supervision of Prof. Fei Huang in the same year. His current research focuses on the design and synthesis of water/alcohol soluble conjugated polymers for high performance polymer solar cells.

Kai Zhang

Kai Zhang received his BS degree in Polymer Materials and Engineering from Sichuan University in 2010, and was recommended for admission to the South China University of Technology in the same year. He is currently pursuing his PhD degree under the supervision of Prof. Yong Cao and Prof. Fei Huang. His current research focuses on high efficiency polymer light-emitting diodes and polymer solar cells.

Fei Huang

Fei Huang received his BS degree in Chemistry from Peking University in 2000 and gained his PhD degree in Materials Science from the South China University of Technology in 2005 under the supervision of Prof. Yong Cao. After postdoctoral work at the University of Washington with Prof. Alex K.-Y. Jen, he began his academic career in 2009 as a professor at the South China University of Technology. His main interests are in the fields of organic functional materials and devices for optoelectronics.

Yong Cao

Yong Cao, physical chemist, Professor at the South China University of Technology since 1999. BS from the Department of Chemistry, Leningrad (now Saint Petersburg) University, PhD degree from Tokyo University, Japan. He was a visiting senior researcher at the University of California, Santa Barbara in 1988–1990 and a senior scientist at the UNIAX Corporation in 1990–1998. Current research interests: polymer optoelectronic materials and devices.

Organic semiconductors have aroused general interest in the physics and chemistry fields in the past decades due to their easily modifiable chemical structures which provide numerous properties and applications. Up to the present, organic semiconductors have been successfully used in organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs), organic solar cells (OSCs), organic field transistors (OFETs) and sensors. Among these, OLEDs have been commercialized into mobile phones and televisions, while for OSCs, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of both the multi-junction and the single-junction devices has exceeded 10%, indicating that OSCs are a promising technology for the future solar cell market.

OLEDs possess a sandwich structure where an emission layer is clipped between the cathode and anode. A relatively more complicated and efficient structure (Fig. 1) involves an anode/cathode interfacial layer (AIL/CIL) inserted between the emission layer and the electrodes. The AIL/CIL can facilitate holes and electrons entering into the emission layer from their corresponding electrodes, hence leading to an increase in light output by maintaining more balanced charge injection and transport. Therefore, lots of research efforts have been spent on the exploration of AIL/CIL materials and on maximizing their brightness and power efficiency, while lowering their drive voltage. AIL materials containing triarylamines, carbazoles, oligothiophenes or other low solid-state ionization potential moieties, and CIL materials with electron-withdrawing moieties, have been widely studied in OLEDs. OSCs are very similar to OLEDs in structure, except for an essential difference where the holes and electrons are extracted from the active layer and delivered to their corresponding electrodes. The performance of OSCs is also highly dependent on the AIL/CIL, which can enhance charge extraction, alter energy levels, protect the active layer and create other positive effects. The AIL/CIL materials employed in OSCs can be inorganic semiconductors (such as MoO3, NiOx, V2O5, ZnO, TiOx), graphene derivatives or organic conjugated/non-conjugated small molecules and polymers. Organic conjugated polymers are an important type of interfacial materials for organic electronics, which are advantageous for their flexibility and low-temperature processing. Besides, organic conjugated polymers also have adjustable properties which are applicable for various requirements.
Water/alcohol soluble conjugated polymers (WSCPs) can perform well both in polymer light-emitting diodes (PLEDs) and polymer solar cells (PSCs) by acting as AIL/CIL materials. WSCPs possess both a conjugated backbone, which ensures their semiconductivity, and highly polar side chains which endow them with good water/alcohol solubility. In general, the water/alcohol solubility can be tailored by modifying the side chains of the conjugated backbone with highly polar groups (such as ionized groups), and by retaining the conjugated backbone to ensure its semiconductor properties. Since most of the active layer materials in PLEDs and PSCs are soluble in nonpolar solvents (such as chloroform and chlorobenzene etc.), the top interfacial materials in these devices are often fabricated using vacuum deposition or processed from orthogonal solvents (such as alcohol and water). Water/alcohol soluble inorganic semiconductors prepared using sol–gel methods often require a high temperature post-annealing treatment, which is not economic in its power consumption, and incompatible with the organic layer beneath. The orthogonal solubility of WSCPs provides the opportunity to prepare multi-layered PLED and PSC structures using low temperature solution processing, which is feasible for large-scale manufacture. Besides, the water/alcohol solvent used in the processing of WSCP films is environmentally friendly compared to halogen-/benzene-type solvents. Moreover, the WSCPs can effectively improve the charge injection/extraction in PLEDs and PSCs. Up to now, WSCPs have been successfully applied both in PLEDs and in PSCs as CILs, and the resulting devices showed significantly improved performances.
In this Feature Article, we aim to provide a summary about WSCPs and their application in PLEDs and PSCs. Recently reported references show that the chemical structure of WSCPs is critical to the resulting device performance. Hence, WSCPs with different types of polar side chains and backbones will be systematically summarized in this review, as well as their structure–performance relationships in PLEDs and PSCs, followed by their possible working mechanism both in PLEDs and PSCs. In the field of the interface engineering of organic electronics, there have been several reviews about WSCPs which provided us with an in-depth analysis. Considering the general interest and rapid growth of this field, we feel that a state-of-the-art summary with a detailed review would be necessary. It should be noted that WSCPs can also perform well in other fields like biosensors, transistors, photodetectors, electrochromic devices and hybrid solar cells. Recently, water/alcohol soluble polymers were also selected to boost the performance of planar perovskite solar cells as the CIL. Readers who feel interested in these fields can consult these reviews and articles for further understanding.

As early as 2004, the amino-functionalized WSCP poly[9,9-bis(3′-(N,N-dimethylamino)propyl)-2,7-fluorene)-alt-2,7-(9,9-dioctylfluorene)] (PFN, Fig. 2a) and its quaternizated derivatives poly[(9,9-bis(3′-((N,N-dimethyl)-N-ethylammonium)-propyl)-2,7-fluorene)-alt-2,7-(9,9-dioctylfluorene)] dibromide (PFN-Br, Fig. 2a), and poly[(9,9-bis(3′-((N,N-dimethyl)-N-ethylammonium)-propyl)-2,7-fluorene)-alt-2,7-(9,9-dioctylfluorene)]diiodide (PFN-I, Fig. 2a) were found to be good cathode interfacial materials in multi-layer solution processed PLEDs. PFN was obtained in a high yield via a simple Suzuki polymerization from monomers, and its quaternizated derivatives PFN-Br and PFN-I were obtained by post-polymerization treatment with bromoethane and iodomethane. PFN-Br and PFN-I are soluble in methanol due to their strong polar ionic pendant groups, while PFN can dissolve in non-polar solvents (such as chloroform, chlorobenzene etc.). However, PFN can be readily solubilised in alcohol solutions in the presence of a small amount of acetic acid due to the weak interaction between the nitrogen atoms of the amino groups in the PFN side chain and the acetic acid. The solubility of PFN, PFN-Br and PFN-I in alcohols, provides an opportunity for the multi-layer processing of organic electronic devices. Both PFN and its quaternizated derivatives can be used as CIL materials in PLEDs, leading to much improved luminance and external quantum efficiency (EQE) in comparison with those of a bare Al cathode device. Devices with a PFN/Al cathode and poly[2-methoxy-5-(2-ethylhexyloxy)-1,4-phenylene-vinylene] (MEH-PPV) emission layer showed a good performance similar to that of a reference device with a Ba/Al cathode, while a PFN-I/Al cathode device showed an even better performance. It was found that a strong interface dipole formed between the WSCP and a metal electrode can lower the work function of high work-function metals and facilitate electron injection from the cathode.

Later on, PFN and PFN-Br also proved to be good CILs in PSCs, which can greatly improve the device performance. By inserting a very thin layer (∼5 nm) of PFN between the active layer and the Al cathode in the conventional device (Fig. 1), the resulting devices exhibited a significantly enhanced short-circuit current density (JSC), open circuit voltage (VOC), and fill factor (FF) compared to the reference device with a bare Al cathode. Devices with PFN as the CIL and different active materials have been intensively investigated. PCEs of 6.79% and 8.37% were firstly achieved in PSCs based on devices with poly[N-9′-heptadecanyl-2,7-carbazole-alt-5,5-(4′,7′-di-2-thienyl-2′,1′,3′-benzothiadiazole)] (PCDTBT, Scheme 1) and poly[4,8-bis(2-ethylhexyloxyl)benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl-alt-ethylhexyl-3-fluorothithieno[3,4-b]thiophene-2-carboxylate-4,6-diyl] (PTB7, Scheme 1) as donor polymers, respectively. Later, a higher efficiency of 9.2% was achieved in an inverted device (Fig. 1) with a blend of PTB7–PC71BM as the active layer and PFN as the CIL. Substantially enhanced JSC and EQE values were observed for the inverted PSCs (Fig. 2(c) and (d)) with respect to the reference conventional devices, and it was found that these improvements might originate from the greater incident photon flux density harvested in the inverted devices.
Yang et al. found that WSCPs can also work very well with ZnO, and enhance the resulting PSCs' performance. They used PFN-Br as a ZnO modifier and employed the resulting bilayered ZnO/PFN-Br interfacial layer in the inverted PSCs with a device structure of ITO/ZnO/PFN-Br/PBDT-DTNT:PC71BM/MoO3/Ag, where a conjugated polymer donor (PBDT-DTNT) and PC71BM acceptor (Scheme 1) were used as active materials. The resulting device showed excellent performance with a PCE of 8.4%, while without the thin PFN-Br interfacial layer, the resulting device only showed a moderate efficiency of 6.1%. It was found that better contact could be achieved when a very thin layer of PFN-Br was sandwiched between ZnO and the active layer, and this led to an overall enhancement in the JSC, VOC and FF values. Among these, the increase in the VOC value was attributed to the different band alignments in the inverted PSCs with and without the PFN-Br interfacial layer, and this disclosed that the bimolecular recombination at the interface was greatly suppressed by the PFN-Br layer. Other quaternary ammonium salt functionalized WSCPs with different backbones were also used as the CIL or ZnO/TiOx modifier, and the resulting PSCs exhibited improved performances. Chen et al. developed a conjugated polyelectrolyte–ionic liquid crystal PFN–CbpSO complex, for use as the CIL in PSCs, and a high device performance was realized. Zilberberg et al. reported a conjugated polyelectrolyte poly(3-[6-(N-methylimidazolium)hexyl]thiophene) bromide (P3ImHT), which can reduce the work-function of ITO for improved electron selectivity in inverted PSCs.
It should be noted that amine and quaternary ammonium salt functionalized fullerene derivatives also work well in PSCs as the CIL. Li et al. synthesized two fullerene derivatives PCBDAN and PCBDANI, and applied them as CILs in PSCs. The device based on both of them showed an excellent photovoltaic performance. Page et al. reported an amine functionalized fullerene derivative (C60–N) which can reduce the effective work function of Ag, Cu, and Au electrodes, and high performance PSCs were also obtained, independent of the cathode selection.

It has been proposed that the interfacial dipole caused by the WSCPs between the electrode and the active layer can lower the work function of electrodes, resulting in a lowering of the injection/extraction barrier heights at the interface and a better device performance for both PLEDs and PSCs. The WSCP counterions may play important roles in the interface dipole formation of the WSCPs. Yang et al. found that WSCPs with different counterions can substantially affect the resulting PLEDs' performance and that the devices' luminous efficiencies (LEs) showed a high dependence on the chemical nature of the counterions. Later, Hoven et al. found that the response time of PLEDs with WSCPs as the CIL was highly related to the counterions due to ion motion inside the device. Moreover, it was reported by Hodgkiss et al. that the photoluminescence quantum efficiency (∼6%) of a polyelectrolyte was somewhat lower than its neutral precursor polymer in thin films. Considering the possibility that the WSCP counterions in PLED devices may migrate into the emission layer and quench the luminescence, which is detrimental to the long-term emission and stability of the devices, many efforts have been put into the development of new WSCPs without mobile counterions. Consequently, a series of neutral, amino N-oxides, phosphonate and zwitterionic type WSCPs with no mobile ions were developed and successfully applied in PLEDs as well as PSCs.

Poly[9,9-bis(6′-(diethanolamino)hexyl)fluorene] (PFN-OH,Scheme 2) is a neutral WSCP without any ions and can be processed from alcohol due to its highly polar diethanolamine functionalized side chains. Like PFN, PFN-OH also exhibited a good electron-injection ability from high work function metal cathodes and effectively improved the resulting devices' performances. Moreover, the oxygen atoms on the hydroxyl groups of PFN-OH can coordinate with Al atoms and cause n-type doping to the emissive polymer near the CIL film, which might also reduce the barrier height and lead to better electron injection as well as the formation of an interfacial dipole. The device with the configuration of ITO/PEDOT/PF3B:PHF 1:5/PFN-OH/Al, where a blend of polyfluorene derivatives, PF3B:PHF, was used as the emission layer, showed a lower turn-on voltage (Von) and a much higher brightness at the same voltage than that of the reference device using bare Al as the cathode. It was also found that PFN-OH also works very well in phosphorescent PLEDs, and the resulting devices based on Ir(ppy)3 and FIr6 exhibited LEs as high as 43.0 cd A−1 and 14.2 cd A−1, respectively.
Amphiphilic phosphonate group functionalized polyfluorenes were also developed as a type of neutral WSCP with good alcohol solubility and have been successfully used in chemosensors. Zhou et al. fabricated efficient blue PLEDs with poly[9,9-bis(6′-diethoxylphosphorylhexyl)fluorene] (PF-EP, Scheme 2) as the emitting material with bare Al as the cathode. It was found that PF-EP can act as both a light-emitting material and an electron injection material due to the interaction between its phosphonate groups and the Al cathode. Later, Niu et al. reported an efficient multi-layer white PLED where the double emission layers were constructed from poly[9,9-di-n-octylfluorene-co-4,7-bis(4-[N-phenyl-N-(4-methylphenyl)amino]phenyl)-2,1,3-benzothiadiazole] (PF-BT05) and PF-EP, which were spin-coated in toluene and alcohol solutions, respectively. In this type of device, PF-EP can not only emit blue light, but can also facilitate electron injection from the Al cathode.
It was also found that WSCPs with phosphonate group functionalized side chains can modify the work function of ITO and shift it to ∼−4.3 eV, which can match the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) level of PC71BM, thus facilitating electron extractions from the active layer to ITO in PSCs. Sun et al. reported a phosphonate functionalized WSCP PC-P with a polycarbazole backbone (Scheme 2) and employed it as the CIL in inverted PSCs. The resulting device exhibited a PCE of 6.04% by using poly[N-9′-heptadecanyl-2,7-carbazole-alt-5,5-(4,7-di-2-thienyl-5,6-bis(dodecyloxy)-2,1,3-benzothiadiazole] (PCDTBT12) as the donor polymer, while the reference device with ZnO as the CIL showed a PCE of 5.53%. Phosphonate group functionalized WSCPs can also improve the performance of many other polymer donor based devices. Meng et al. developed a novel polymer poly{N-9-[1,17-bis-(diethylphosphonate)heptadecanyl]-2,7-carbazole-alt-5,5-(4,7-di-2-thienyl-2,1,3-benzothiadiazole)} (PCDTBTPho) with polar phosphonate moieties attached to the side chain of PCDTBT, which can be used as an underlying layer to improve the morphology of the PCDTBT:PC71BM active layer for a better PSC device performance. It was also found that fullerene derivatives and small molecules with phosphonate groups can dramatically improve the performance of PSCs. Duan et al. synthesized a phosphate group-containing bisadduct fullerene derivative B-PCPO, which can increase the resulting device efficiency from 4.83% to 6.20% when used as the CIL for a PCDTBT based inverted device. Chen et al. reported a series of alcohol soluble small molecule materials with fluorene featuring phosphonate side chains and a triphenylamine core, which all showed excellent performances when utilized as the CIL both in PLEDs and PSCs.
Amino N-oxides, a class of amine-based amphoteric surfactants, which possess both large dipole moments and outstanding solubility in highly polar solvents, are promising functional groups to build WSCPs without mobile counterions. Guan et al. developed a series of amino N-oxide based conjugated polymers (PF6NO, PF6NO25Py, PF6NO35Py and PF6NO26Py, Scheme 2) from their amino-functionalized neutral precursor polymers and all of the resulting materials were successfully applied as the CIL both in PLEDs and PSCs. For comparison, both the amino-functionalized precursor polymers and the N-oxide functionalized WSCPs were used as the CIL in PLEDs with a configuration of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P-PPV/CIL/Al. For the neutral precursor polymers, both the LEs and luminances of the resulting devices were greatly improved compared to those of the bare Al cathode device. This can also be attributed to the dipole interaction between the amino groups and the metal cathode. The devices based on amino N-oxide functionalized WSCPs showed even better performances and lower Von values than those devices based on the neutral precursor polymers, and some of the resulting devices even exhibited a much better performance than the CsF/Al and Ba/Al cathode devices (Fig. 3a). The excellent properties of these amino-oxide functionalized WSCPs may be attributed to the large polar amino N-oxide side chains and the incorporation of electron-withdrawing pyridinyl moieties onto the polymer backbone, which may enhance the electron affinity of the resulting polymers. Among all the amino-oxide functionalized WSCPs, PF6NO25Py exhibited the best device performance due to its enhanced conjugation length compared to the others. Photovoltaic measurements were conducted to illustrate why the resulting polymers with different backbones exhibited big differences in device performance (Fig. 3b). The VOC values estimated from the devices with the WSCP interlayers were all higher than that of the bare Al device, and showed a progressive decrease from the PF6NO25Py/Al, PF6NO26Py/Al cathode devices to the PF6NO35Py/Al cathode device, indicating that the main chains of the resulting polymers also play important roles in their electron injection capabilities. It was also found that devices with amino N-oxide functionalized WSCPs exhibited higher VOC values than those of the neutral precursor polymers, which indicated that the amino N-oxide groups lead to lower energetic barriers for electron injection than those of the amino groups.
Besides its impressive performance in PLEDs, PF6NO25Py can also greatly improve the performance of PSCs as the CIL. With a conventional device configuration, with PCDTBT and PC71BM as the donor and acceptor materials, the resulting device with PF6NO25Py as the CIL showed a PCE of 6.9% which is more than 70% higher than that of the bare Al cathode device (6.9% vs. 4.0%). Compared to the bare Al cathode device, the device with the PF6N25Py/Al cathode also showed a moderate improvement in its PCE (5.7% vs. 4.0%), with a VOC value comparable to that of the PF6NO25Py/Al cathode device and an inferior FF value of 56%. It was also found that amino-oxide based small molecules can also act as the CIL and largely improve PSC device performance.
Zwitterionic WSCPs, which contain both anionic and cationic groups in their side chains, exhibit good water/alcohol solubility and are exempt from the mobile counterions issue. It was also found that zwitterionic groups can enhance the electron injection from high work-function metals. Therefore, many efforts have been devoted to the research of zwitterionic WSCPs. Fang et al. reported a zwitterionic WSCP F(NSO3)2 (Scheme 3), and successfully applied it as the CIL in a PLED. The resulting device showed a considerably improved efficiency and maximum brightness in comparison with the reference Ca cathode devices. Duan et al. developed two zwitterionic WSCPs (PF6NSO and PF6NSO65, Scheme 3) with different quaternization degrees, and their interface modification capabilities were investigated in a device with the structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P-PPV/CIL/Al. The traditional conjugated polyelectrolyte WSCPs PF6N-Br and PFSO3Na (Scheme 3) which contain mobile counterions were also used as the CIL for comparison. Fig. 4a shows the J–L–V characteristics. Devices with zwitterionic WSCPs exhibited much better performances than those with PFSO3Na and PF6N-Br as the CIL. LEs around 20 cd A−1 with luminances of over 6000 cd m−2 were achieved for the PF6NSO/Al and PF6NSO65/Al cathode devices, which were two times higher than those of the PFSO3Na/Al and PF6N-Br/Al cathode devices at a current density of around 35 mA cm−2. It was found that the PF6NSO/Al and PF6NSO65/Al cathode devices showed maximum brightnesses of 21 920 cd m−2 and 24 790 cd m−2, respectively. It can also be observed that the fully substituted zwitterionic WSCP PF6NSO delivered a significantly higher LE value (Fig. 4b) and a slightly lower turn-on voltage than those of PF6NSO65.
Zwitterionic WSCPs can also dramatically improve the performance of PSCs through interfacial modification. Liu et al. reported a series of zwitterionic WSCPs which use polythiophene (PTSB-1, PTSB-2, Scheme 3) or polythiophene-alt-benzothiadiazole (PTBTSB-1, PTBTSB-2, Scheme 3) as backbones. A greatly enhanced performance was achieved for the device with the four zwitterionic WSCPs as the CIL in comparison with the devices with no interlayers. An ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) study results revealed that substantial interfacial dipoles formed at the WSCP/Ag interface, which significantly reduced the effective work function of the cathode. Duan et al. reported a series of zwitterionic WSCPs with different backbones and the devices based on them all showed improved performances relative to the ones without interlayers.

Polymer solar cells with an inverted structure (Fig. 1) have also received increasing attention for their better air stability. Although PFN has shown promising interface modification capability in inverted devices, the solvent erosion of PFN in inverted PSCs and PLEDs is not a negligible problem, since PFN is soluble in non-polar solvents (chloroform, toluene, chlorobenzene etc.). Developing cross-linkable WSCPs is an effective way to solve this problem. PFN-OX and PFN-S are two WSCPs which can be thermal or photo crosslinked due to their oxetane and styrene functionalized groups, respectively. After cross-linking, PFN-OX and PFN-S can form interpenetrated polymer networks with good solvent resistance. This implies that cross-linkable WSCPs (PFN-OX, PFN-S) are promising candidates for application in inverted PLEDs and PSCs. The ITO/cross-linkable WSCP interface was studied using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and Kelvin probe. It was found that the amino groups among WSCPs can effectively lower the work function of ITO, which will greatly enhance electron injection in the resulting devices.

The interface modification properties of PFN-OX and PFN-S in PLEDs were investigated in an inverted structure with the structure ITO/CIL/P-PPV/MoO3/Al, where P-PPV was used as the emission material. PLEDs with the conventional device structure ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P-PPV/CIL/Al were also fabricated for comparison. The devices based on PFN-OX and PFN-S CIL show a significant improvement in LE and QE compared to the devices based on the alkyl-substituted analogue CIL, demonstrating that the amino groups on the side chain are crucial to the electron injection property of the resulting materials. The inverted device with the PFN-OX interlayer showed a LE of 14.8 cd A−1 and a maximum luminance of 14741 cd m−2, while the reference conventional device exhibited a LE of 13.5 cd A−1 and a maximum luminance of 6973 cd m−2. It should be noted that PFN-OX can also serve as a CIL in highly efficient inverted white organic light emitting diodes.
Similarly, cross-linkable WSCPs perform well in inverted PSCs for many kinds of active layer materials. Hu et al. used a blend of PBDT-DTNT–PC71BM with a thickness of 280 nm as the active layer, and the resulting device exhibited an efficiency of 8.62% by using PFN-OX as the CIL. Guo et al. reported a device efficiency as high as 9.13% based on a PBDTTT-C-T/PC71BM active layer by using PFN-OX as the CIL. For the popular donor polymer PTB7, an optimized inverted PSC device based on a PFN-OX CIL delivered a high PCE of over 9%.

As described above, the interface dipole between the pendent polar groups and the metal electrode plays an important role in the excellent interface modification of WSCPs in organic electronic devices. WSCPs with different kinds of side chains have been extensively developed and the influences of the side chains on the optoelectronic properties of the resulting WSCPs have been fully investigated. However, there is still a lack of systematic knowledge of how the conjugated backbone of WSCPs influences the interface modification properties of the resulting materials. Considering that the energy levels, band gaps and transporting properties of WSCPs are mainly determined by their conjugated backbones, a thorough study on the backbone effects of WSCPs is necessary.

The first issue to be discussed is whether a conjugated main chain is necessary for an water/alcohol soluble CIL, since non-conjugated electrolytes, PEO and PEI have also been proved to be good CILs for PLEDs and PSCs. Zhang et al. systematically compared the cathode interface modification capabilities of non-conjugated PEI and PEO and conjugated WSCPs both in PLEDs and PSCs. PLED studies indicated that devices based on non-conjugated PEO and PEI exhibited dramatically decreased efficiencies when the interlayers' thicknesses were more than 20 nm, while the devices based on conjugated WSCPs maintained good performances. For example, with a device configuration of ITO/PEDOT/P-PPV/CIL/Al, devices with ∼10 nm of PF6NO and PEO delivered maximum LEs of 18.07 and 12.91 cd A−1, respectively. When the thicknesses of the CILs were increased to ∼20 nm, the maximum LE of the devices with PEO decreased to 3.19 cd A−1, while the devices with PF6NO maintained a maximum LE of 15.34 cd A−1. In addition to this, the PLEDs results showed that non-conjugated PEO only exhibited a cathode modification function on the Al cathode, while the conjugated CIL showed an excellent cathode modification function on both the Al and Au cathodes. In PSC devices using conjugated WSCPs, superior photovoltaic performances were shown compared to the performances of those with PEO and PEI CILs, especially when a high work function Au was used as the cathode. Devices with PCDTBT:PC71BM as the active layer and Al as the cathode showed PCEs of 6.07% and 4.95% for PF6NO CIL and PEO CIL, respectively. When high work function Au was used as the cathode, the performance of the device with a PF6NO CIL was much higher than that of the device with a PEO CIL (4.77% vs. 1.83%). These results indicated that the conjugated CIL shows better electron injection/extraction ability both in PLEDs and PSCs than the non-conjugated type.

A series of neutral WSCPs (PF-OH, PFPE-OH and PFBT-OH, Scheme 4) with different main chains and the same side chain have been designed and synthesized as highly efficient CILs for PLEDs by Huang et al. The resulting WSCPs showed very different electronic and electrochemical properties such as absorption, photoluminescence, energy levels and band gaps etc. PF-OH and PFPE-OH are electron-rich conjugated polymers with relatively large band gaps, while PFBT-OH has a relatively smaller band gap and good electron affinity due to the electron withdrawing benzothiadiazole moieties on its main chain, which results in a strong intramolecular charge transfer. PLED devices with a configuration of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PVK/PFDBT02/CIL/Al were fabricated, where a red-emitting polyfluorene derivative PFDBT02 was used as the emission layer. The LE–J characteristics of the resulting devices were shown in Fig. 5. It was found that the devices based on the PF-OH and PFPE-OH CILs showed much better performances than the device with the PFBT-OH CIL. A further study on the photovoltaic characteristics of the devices with different CILs showed that the VOC values of the PF-OH and PFPE-OH based devices were much higher than that of the device with the PFBT-OH CIL (2.1 V and 2.2 V vs. 1.3 V) (Fig. 5). Moreover, the VOC value of the PFBT-OH CIL based device was only slightly higher than that of the bare Al device, which showed a VOC value of 1.1 V. The much smaller VOC value obtained from the device with the PFBT-BT CIL indicated no effect of decreasing the electron injection barrier from the Al cathode when PFBT-OH was used as the CIL. All of these results indicated that the main chains of the WSCPs also play an important role in the dipole formation at the interface, which directly affects the resulting devices' performances.


Similarly to the neutral WSCPs with different backbones, zwitterionic WSCPs with different backbones (PFNSO, PFNSO-TPA and PFNSO-BT, Scheme 4) were also developed. PFNSO-TPA and PFNSO have electron-rich main chains and low electron affinities, while PFNSO-BT has an electron-deficient conjugated main chain and a high electron affinity due to the electron-deficient benzothiadiazole groups among its main chain. The band gaps of PFNSO, FNSO-TPA and PFNSO-BT were calculated to be 2.78 eV, 2.88 eV and 2.38 eV, respectively, from the onsets of their absorption spectra. The highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) energy levels of PFNSO, FNSO-TPA and PFNSO-BT were calculated to be −5.37, −5.29 and −5.44 eV from the onset voltages of the oxidation processes in the cyclic voltammetry curves, while their LUMO energy levels were −2.59, −2.41 and −3.06 eV, respectively.

The application of the three WSCPs in PLEDs as CILs produced completely different results. P-PPV was used as the emission material and the device configuration was ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P-PPV/CIL/Al. The PFNSO/Al and PFNSO-TPA/Al cathode devices showed excellent performances with LEs of 10.8 cd A−1 and 6.1 cd A−1, respectively (Fig. 6a). However, the PFNSO-BT/Al cathode device showed a poor LE which was just slightly higher than that of the bare Al device. The luminance and EQE values of the PFNSO-BT/Al cathode device were also far below those of the PFNSO/Al and PFNSO-TPA/Al cathode devices. However, when a green-emitting polymer F8BT (Scheme 1) with a deeper LUMO level (−3.2 eV) was used as the emission material, the resulting devices with the three WSCP CILs all showed significantly improved performances compared to the bare Al cathode device and the methanol-treated control device (Fig. 6b). The much different performance of the same WSCPs on different emission materials may be due to the energy level difference between the WSCP interlayers and the emission layers. The LUMO level of PFNSO-BT is deeper than that of P-PPV (LUMO = −2.8 eV), which indicates that a 0.26 eV energy barrier existed when electrons were injected from PFNSO-BT to P-PPV. When adopting F8BT (LUMO = −3.2 eV) as the emission material, which possesses a similar LUMO energy level to that of PFNSO-BT, there was no energy barrier for electron injecting from PFNSO-BT to F8BT, resulting in a much improved device performance. These results also indicated the importance of the backbone design of WSCPs according to the emission materials used in PLEDs.
Besides the PLEDs, all three of the WSCPs were also used as the CILs in PSCs. With a conventional configuration of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PTB7:PC71BM/CIL/Al, the resulting devices with the three WSCPs as CILs all showed significant enhancements in their VOC and FF values with respect to those of the bare Al cathode device (Fig. 7a). The device with a PFNSO-BT CIL demonstrated a VOC value of 0.65 V, which is significantly lower than those of the devices with the other two WSCP CILs (0.71–0.73 V). According to the J–V characteristics of the devices acquired in the dark (Fig. 7b), the device with the PFNSO-BT CIL showed a turn-on voltage of about 0.7 V, while it is about 0.9 V for the devices with the PFNSO-TPA and PFNSO CILs. This suggests that for the built-in potential across the device, which is the upper limit of the attainable VOC value, the device with the PFNSO-BT CIL has a lower value than those of the devices with PFNSO-TPA and PFNSO CILs. It was also found that all of the WSCPs can enhance apparent hole mobilities across the PSC devices, but had little influence on the electron mobilities of the devices. The increased apparent hole mobilities upon the incorporation of WSCPs may contribute to an improvement in the FF values of the devices.

Due to the relative low conductivities of most of the WSCPs, the corresponding solar cells' performance strongly depends on the thickness of the WSCP CIL and efficient devices can only be achieved when a very thin film of the interlayer is applied. Consequently, WSCPs can afford to be used with a wider range of thicknesses that are required for the future industrial roll-to-roll coating process of PSCs. Liu et al. developed a metallopolymer PFEN-Hg (Scheme 5), which is a Hg-containing derivative of an amino-alkyl functionalized conjugated polymer, which showed a good feasibility to achieve a good device performance with a wider range of film thickness. The charge transportability of PFEN-Hg is substantially improved due to the metal–metal interactions in PFEN-Hg which can promote a stronger stacking of the polymer. PSCs devices with the inverted configuration of ITO/CIL/PTB7:PC71BM/MoO3/Al were fabricated to investigate the interfacial modification capability of PFEN-Hg. For comparison, devices with the analogous polymers PFEO-Hg, PFEN (Scheme 5) and PFN-OX interlayers were also fabricated. The PFEN-Hg/ITO, PFN-OX/ITO and PFEN/ITO cathode devices showed high efficiencies of 9.11%, 9.03% and 8.80%, respectively, while the PFEO-Hg/ITO and bare ITO devices only showed PCEs of 5.98% and 3.18%, respectively. A reduced dark current under reversed bias was observed for the aminoalkyl-functionalized polymer based devices, which indicated that the aminoalkyl-functionalized interlayers possess good hole-blocking properties and prevent hole current leakage through the cathode interface at reversed bias.

Inverted devices with different thicknesses of PFN-OX and PFEN-Hg CILs were also prepared and the J–V characteristics of the resulting devices are presented in Fig. 8. The PCEs of the PFN-OX/ITO cathode devices decreased from over 9% to about 1% when the PFN-OX film thicknesses were increased from 4 nm to 7 nm. In contrast to the PFN-OX/Al devices, the PFEN-Hg/Al devices are relatively insensitive to the thickness of PFEN-Hg. The resulting devices' PCEs were even increased when PFEN-Hg CILs' thicknesses were increased from 4 nm to 13 nm, and a high PCE of 8.6% was still achieved by the device with a relatively thicker (19 nm) PFEN-Hg CIL film. Further increases in the thickness of the PFEN-Hg CIL resulted in a gradual decrease in the device performance due to the resistance loss in the interlayer.

Chemical doping has been proved to be an efficient method to improve the conductivity of organic semiconductors, and it has been adopted in OLEDs to enhance the charge transport of the interlayers and hence lower the operating voltages. Considering the water/alcohol soluble feature of WSCPs, WSCPs are ideal hosts for most of the widely used n-type dopants in OLEDs (such as water soluble alkali or alkaline earth metal salts). Huang et al. reported highly efficient blue and white-emitting PLEDs based on lithium salt doped WSCPs. It was found that lithium salt doped WSCPs possess an enhanced electron transporting/hole-blocking ability compared to that of undoped WSCPs, resulting in a much improved device performance. Besides, inorganic–organic hybrid CILs have also been developed by doping inorganic semiconductor CILs with organic molecules, polymers or WSCPs and have been successfully used in PSCs. For example, Liu et al. used a phosphonate functionalized WSCP (PFEP) to dope ZnO nanocrystals (NCs), yielding a high performance hybrid CIL with a high conductivity due to charge transfer from PFEP to ZnO. Moreover, a more uniform and smooth film was obtained compared to the pristine ZnO NC film, due to the phosphonate group side chains of the PFEP that can effectively block the aggregation of ZnO NCs. It was found that the conductivity of the resulting hybrid CIL can be even more pronounced under light illumination because of the light excitation of the PFEP sensitizer. As a result, PSCs with a hybrid CIL showed a significantly improved performance compared to those with the pristine ZnO or PFEP CILs. More interestingly, it was found that the resulting devices' performances are less sensitive to the hybrid CILs' thicknesses and the hybrid CILs can work well in devices with various polymer donors. All these results reveal that the doping strategy is a promising method to develop high performance CIL for highly efficient PLEDs and PSCs.


The working mechanisms responsible for the great improvement in PLED and PSC device performances after incorporating a thin layer of WSCPs were explored since their application in organic electronics. It was firstly explained that the interface dipole formed at the metal–polymer interface played a key role in the favoring of electron injection in PLEDs. Seo et al. observed strong band bending and interfacial dipoles on Au surfaces through studying the electronic properties of the polymer/metal interface using XPS and UPS. Similar band bending or vacuum level shift induced by interfacial dipoles were often used to annotate the working mechanism of WSCPs in PSCs. Besides the metal electrode, it was found that the interfacial dipoles of WSCPs can also significantly decrease the work function of metal oxides, such as ITO. The UPS and Kelvin probe studies showed that the work function of ITO can be decreased by 0.3–0.6 eV by covering different thickness thin WSCPs onto the surface of ITO. However, the dipole theory alone appears insufficient to explain the function of the WSCP materials in the devices, since the dipole direction of the WSCP CILs in PLED and PSC devices should be opposite in principle to improve electron injection and extraction. In PLEDs, electrons are injected from the cathode to the light emitting layer, while in PSCs, electrons are extracted from the light absorption layer to the cathode. Consequently, several other possible effects of WSCPs on the improved performance of the resulting devices were proposed. Zhong et al. found that there is a significant electron transfer from a PFN modified ITO electrode to the acceptor material C60 through electron tunneling, as revealed by in situ UPS measurements. Thereby, the Fermi level of the substrate is pinned very close to the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital of C60 and there is an additional electric field formed at the cathode/acceptor interface. Li et al. demonstrated that PCBM can be doped by fulleropyrrolidinium ions via electron transfer, thus leading to highly conductive fullerenes. Further to this, Duan et al. observed the formation of an electron transfer complex between a neutral tertiary amine and a fullerene core and the consequent electronic structure changes and Fermi level shifts were also confirmed by UPS. This electron transfer complex at the interface may be responsible for the excellent electron extraction capability of WSCPs, since it can simultaneously lower the transport loss and lead to an ohmic contact at the interface of a BHJ organic layer and CILs. It was also found, from numerical simulations, that the tertiary amine groups near the metal electrode were hole traps, which can lead to a higher electric field across the active layer.

The polar solvent effect was also believed to be another contributor to the significant performance enhancement, in addition to the WSCPs themselves, both in PLEDs and PSCs. An interfacial dipole was also used to interpret the device enhancement in PLEDs with methanol treatment on top of the organic active layer. In PSCs, Zhou et al. demonstrated that methanol treatment of the active layer before cathode evaporation can also improve device performance by an increase in the built-in voltage across the device due to the passivation of surface traps and a corresponding increase of the surface charge density. Besides, a decreased series resistance and an increased mobility also lead to accelerated charge extraction and reduced charge recombination, which result in an improvement in the JSC and FF values of the device performance after methanol treatment. Liu et al. observed obvious minor changes in the surface topography after methanol treatment, indicating a possible modification of the top metal contact. Gopalan et al. demonstrated an isopropyl alcohol (IPA) treatment carried out on the top surface of a spin-cast P3HT and PCBM blend film. It was found that the use of pre-heated IPA treatment improves the crystallinity and self-organization of the blend layer, resulting in improved device performance. It was also found that methanol might change the underneath interface between PEDOT:PSS and the active layer. To systematically explore the methanol effect on the interface in PSC devices, Zhang et al. fabricated devices with PEDOT:PSS or MoO3 as the hole transport layer under different methanol post-treatment conditions. The results show that methanol is more effective for the devices using PEDOT:PSS as the HTL than for those using MoO3 as the HTL, and the improved performance can be attributed to the modification of the interface between the PEDOT:PSS and the active layer rather than the interface between the active layer and the metal cathode. Further investigation of depositing PFN on top of the active layer shows that both PFN and methanol contribute to the improvement of PCE because of the potential modification of the interface between PEDOT:PSS and the active layer by methanol and the interface modification function of PFN, among which PFN plays a dominant role.

This review provides a brief summary of the recent progress on water/alcohol soluble conjugated polymers (WSCPs) as the CIL for highly efficient PLEDs and PSCs. Due to their excellent interface modification ability and unique processability from environmentally friendly polar solvents, WSCPs were successfully applied as CILs in both PLEDs and PSCs. In most of the PLED devices, the charge injection was spectacularly improved, and overall the luminous efficiencies (LEs), quantum efficiencies (QEs) and luminances were effectively improved for the devices with WSCPs as the CILs. Besides this, state of the art PSCs were also realized by using WSCPs as CILs. In addition to the extensive efforts on the development of new WSCP materials with various main chain and side chain structures, systematic studies on the structure–performance relationship and the working mechanism of WSCPs were also performed. This corresponding understanding will lead to the rational design of new high performance WSCP materials and their related devices. It should be noted that small molecules can also be excellent cathode interfacial materials. The device performance of PLEDs and PSCs is not strongly dependent on the molecular weight of WSCPs, but the higher molecular weight WSCPs might be more advantageous due to their stability, film-forming ability and mechanical behavior, which are more favorable for the roll-to-roll fabrication of organic electronics. Some of the issues for WSCPs in organic electronics still need to be addressed, though WSCPs have shown obvious advantages and potential for the interface engineering of PLEDs and PSCs. The stability of PLEDs and PSCs with WSCPs as CILs is an issue which remains unexplored. In addition to this, the design of WSCPs for use as active materials in PSCs is another big challenge in the development of solution processing technology with completely environmental friendly solvents.

The unique properties of WSCPs also provide good opportunities for high performance solution processed large-scale PLEDs and PSCs, which is meaningful to realize the industrialization of PLEDs and PSCs. Zheng et al. reported all-solution processed (ink-jet printed) PLED displays by solution-depositing the cathode and utilizing a WSCP-doped epoxy buffer layer between the cathode and the organic layers (Fig. 9). The WSCP-doped epoxy buffer layer not only protects the organic layer beneath but also retains the necessary electron-injection functions. Their work paves the way towards the industrial roll-to-roll manufacturing of PLEDs. Andersen et al. reported large area (52.2 cm2) roll-to-roll processed flexible polymer tandem solar cell modules with a PCE of 1.76%, where a WSCP (PFN-Br, named PFN in ref. 44) was used as one of the components of the intermediate layer (Fig. 10). These two successful examples present a promising future for the use of WSCPs in large area solution processed PLEDs and PSCs.

The work was financially supported by the Ministry of Science and Technology (No. 2014CB643501), the Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21125419 and 51361165301) and Guangdong Natural Science Foundation (Grant No. S2012030006232).


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015