 DOI: 10.1039/C9TA00114J
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 4847-4854


Bin
Huang
,

Lin
Hu
,

Lie
Chen
*,

Shanshan
Chen
,

Ming
Hu
,

Yinhua
Zhou
*,

Youdi
Zhang
,

Changduk
Yang
 and 

Yiwang
Chen


College of Chemistry, Institute of Polymers and Energy Chemistry (IPEC), Nanchang University, Nanchang 330031, People's Republic of China. E-mail: chenlie@ncu.edu.cn; Fax: +86 791 83969561; Tel: +86 791 83968703

Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, School of Optical and Electronic Information, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China. E-mail: yh_zhou@hust.edu.cn

Department of Energy Engineering, School of Energy and Chemical Engineering, Perovtronics Research Center, Low Dimensional Carbon Materials Center, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), 50 UNIST-gil, Ulju-gun, Ulsan 44919, South Korea

Received
4th January 2019
, Accepted 23rd January 2019
First published on 24th January 2019
With the development of non-fullerene organic solar cells, more and more conductive materials are available for bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) active layers. Matching of the two materials in all aspects, including energy alignment, absorption complementation, BHJ morphology etc., is very critical to obtain a high performance device. In this work, three analogues of ITIC, ITIC-F and ITIC-Th1 with different end-capping groups or side-chains were selected as non-fullerene acceptors (NFAs) for an alkylsilyl functionalized copolymer donor (PBDS-T), to reveal the basic matching principle of the donor and acceptor for optimizing the active layer morphology. We found that the interaction between the donor and acceptor, the crystallinity of each component and the difference in the surface tensions greatly impact the morphology of blend films and device performance. Such a significant change can be realized by a subtle variation of the NFA structure. As a result, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) is boosted from 10.72% to 12.04%, together with a dramatically improved fill factor (FF) of 60% for PBDS-T:ITIC, 66% for PBDS-T:ITIC-F and 70% for PBDS-T:ITIC-Th1, respectively. Note that the PCE of 12.04% is one of the best values for the devices based on alkylsilyl functionalized copolymers reported so far.

Organic bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) solar cells based on polymer donors and non-fullerene acceptors (NFAs) as the photoactive layer have received progressive attention in recent years. This is attributed to non-fullerene acceptors, such as ITIC (3,9-bis(2-methylene-(3-(1,1-dicyanomethylene)-indanone))-5,5,11,11-tetrakis(4-hexylphenyl)-dithieno[2,3-d:2′,3′-d′]-s-indaceno[1,2-b:5,6-b′]dithiophene) and its derivatives, with merits of readily tunable energy levels and stronger absorptions of visible light relative to the traditional fullerene acceptor. The field of NFA-based organic solar cells has dramatically increased and new efficiency records were frequently reported. Recently, the state-of-the-art single-junction polymer donor: NFA solar cells have yielded a record power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 15.7%.

Despite the contribution of NFAs, considerable progress in wide bandgap copolymer donors is also the key fact to accelerate the development of polymer solar cells (PSCs). Among the various wide bandgap copolymer donors, alkylsilyl functionalized copolymers have emerged as promising candidates and attracted more and more attention as donor materials for high performance PSCs. The outstanding advantage of alkylsilyl functionalized copolymers was demonstrated by the fact that silicon (Si)-containing fused rings in the copolymer can not only facilitate a planar geometry of the backbones to improve the crystallinity of the copolymers, but also downshift the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energy level to increase the open-circuit voltage (VOC). Besides, alkylsilyl functionalized copolymers possess a high absorption coefficient and promote the short circuit current density (JSC). Li and Zhang first reported an alkylsilyl functionalized copolymer J71, showing a PCE of over 11% with a notable VOC of ∼0.94 V when blended with ITIC. But the fill factor (FF) (∼68%) still lagged far behind that of most high performance non-fullerene PSCs. Recently, our group also reported an alkylsilyl functionalized copolymer PBDS-T (poly[(2,6-trialkylsilylthiophen-2-yl)-benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene))-alt-(5,5-(1′,3′-di-2-thienyl-5′,7′-bis(2-ethylhexyl)benzo[1′,2′-c:4′,5′-c′]dithiophene-4,8-dione))]) as a donor for PSCs. When the typical ITIC was employed as the acceptor, a synergistically improved VOC and JSC as well as a small Eloss boosted the PCE to over 11%. The limited FF of only 60% frustrated the further improvement of the device performance. The main reason for the low FF is ascribed to the poor miscibility and unsuitable domain size between the donor and acceptor resulting in an unfavorable morphology of the active layer.
In fact, an ideal donor–acceptor system should not only allow good flexibility in realizing complementary absorption, but also possess an optimized energy band diagram and bicontinuous network film for efficient exciton split and charge carrier transport. Matching of the two materials in all aspects, including energy alignment, absorption complementation, BHJ morphology etc., is very critical to obtain a high performance device. Among so many efficient conductive materials, how to carefully choose the best matching pair of donor and acceptor to realize the best device performance is worth addressing. In this work, to further optimize the device with PBDS-T and deeply understand the morphology control of the alkylsilyl functionalized copolymer by the structure of the NFAs, two analogues of ITIC, ITIC-F and ITIC-Th1 with different end-capping groups or side-chains were selected as acceptors for PBDS-T. It's expected that the F end-capping group in ITIC-F and ITIC-Th1 would enhance inter/intramolecular interactions between the donor and acceptor, because of the non-covalent interactions of F⋯H, S⋯F, and so on. In addition, the effect of the side chain of NFAs on the absorption as well as morphology has also been given special attention. Actually, subtle variation of the NFAs caused a big different in the morphology of alkylsilyl functionalized copolymer-based blend films, as revealed by the dramatically improved FF of 60% for PBDS-T:ITIC, 66% for PBDS-T:ITIC-F and 70% for PBDS-T:ITIC-Th1. As a result, a notable PCE of 12.04% has been obtained for PBDS-T:ITIC-Th1. Note that the PCE of 12.04% is one of the best values for the PSCs based on alkylsilyl functionalized copolymers reported so far.

PBDS-T was prepared according to the literature. ITIC-F and ITIC-Th1 were chosen as the acceptors to replace the ITIC acceptor (shown Fig. 1). The properties of the pristine ITIC film and corresponding devices were also characterized for comparison under the same conditions as ITIC-F and ITIC-Th1. Fig. 2a and b show the UV-vis absorption spectra of the pristine donor/acceptor films and their blend films. In Fig. 2a, all the acceptors exhibit similar absorption bands complementary to the PBDS-T film, due to their similar molecular skeletons. Compared with ITIC, fluorinated ITIC-F and ITIC-Th1 show a slightly redshifted absorption, implying their better packing arrangement and narrower band-gaps caused by the F atom induced non-covalent interactions, in accordance with the observations from the literature. The maximum absorption coefficient (see Fig. S1) of ITIC-F (1.57 × 105 M−1 cm−1, at 672 nm) is higher than that of ITIC (1.40 × 105 M−1 cm−1, at 660 nm). ITIC-Th1 has the highest value of 1.68 × 105 M−1 cm−1, ascribed to the hyperchromic effect from the thienyl side-chain. When blending PBDS-T with each acceptor, the absorptions of the three blend films covered the whole visible light from 400 to 800 nm. Intriguingly, an obviously enhanced absorption at the short wavelength can be detected for the PBDS-T:ITIC-Th1 film, indicating that blending ITIC-Th1 with PBDS-T can promote the molecular packing of PBDS-T. In addition, the peak intensity of ITIC-F in the PBDS-T:ITIC-F film is even lower than that of ITIC in the PBDS-T:ITIC film, inferring the reduced crystallinity of ITIC-F and good miscibility between PBDS-T and ITIC-F. Fig. S2 displays the crystalline properties of ITIC, ITIC-F and ITIC-Th1 neat films, which were investigated by X-ray diffraction (XRD). F-endcapped ITIC-F and ITIC-Th1 show much sharper diffraction peaks than ITIC, confirming that the F atom induced non-covalent interactions favor a more ordering arrangement in the molecules. In addition, the strongest signal is observed for the neat ITIC-Th1 film, which reveals that the thienyl side-chain can further assist such compact packing and improve the crystallinity. The highest crystallinity of the ITIC-Th1 thin film with thienyl side-chains from XRD is consistent with the UV observation. The energy level schematic diagram of PBDS-T, ITIC, ITIC-F and ITIC-Th1 is presented in Fig. 2c. Both of the fluorinated ITIC-F and ITIC-Th1 show deeper energy levels than ITIC, especially for ITIC-Th1 with F and thienyl substituents (Fig. S3a and b). The downshifted energy levels would provide a stronger driving force for exciton dissociation at the donor/acceptor interface. Besides, the lowered LUMO of ITIC-F and ITIC-Th1 would also induce a considerable difference in VOC.

Solar cells with an inverted structure of indium tin oxide (ITO)/ZnO/active layer/MoO3/Ag were fabricated to investigate the photovoltaic performance (as shown in Fig. 2d). The optimization of devices was performed mainly through changing the ratio of donor/acceptor, solvents, additives and annealing temperatures (see Table S1). The optimized J–V curves of the devices are shown in Fig. 3a and corresponding photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table 1. The control device based on PBDS-T:ITIC yields a PCE of 10.72% with a VOC of 0.98 V, a JSC of 18.23 mA cm−2 and a FF of 60.0%. When replacing ITIC with ITIC-F, the PBDS-T:ITIC-F-based device displays a higher PCE of 11.19% with a VOC of 0.90 V, a JSC of 18.64 mA cm−2 and a FF of 66.7%. Delightfully, a notable PCE of 12.04% with a VOC of 0.88 V, a JSC of 19.55 mA cm−2 and a FF of 70% was achieved by the device based on PBDS-T:ITIC-Th1. Note that the PCE of 12.04% is one of the best values for the PSCs based on alkylsilyl functionalized copolymers reported so far. The remarkably improved FF and JSC account for the outstanding performance of the PBDS-T:ITIC-Th1-based device. The VOC gradually decreased in the sequence of ITIC > ITIC-F > ITIC-Th1, consistent with their gradually downshifted LUMO levels. Fig. 3b shows the external quantum efficiency (EQE) curves of the three devices. Compared with the PBDS-T:ITIC-based device, the PBDS-T:ITIC-F and PBDS-T:ITIC-Th1-based devices exhibit a narrower light response range, because the F atom could enhance intramolecular charge transfer. Notably, the device based on PBDS-T:ITIC-Th1 shows much stronger absorption in the short wavelength range than the other devices, which is in good agreement with UV observation. The enhanced EQEs imply more photoelectron conversion in PBDS-T:ITIC-Th1 than in PBDS-T:ITIC and PBDS-T:ITIC-F. The integrated current densities are 18.25 mA cm−2, 18.67 mA cm−2 and 19.42 mA cm−2 for ITIC, ITIC-F and ITIC-Th1-based devices, respectively. These values are consistent with those obtained from the J–V measurements with deviations of less than 5%.
Active layer

J
SC (mA cm−2)

J
calc
 (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)

a Integrated JSC calculated from EQE curves.
b Average values obtained from 15 devices.

PBDS-T:ITIC
18.23 (18.07 ± 0.15)
18.25
0.98 (0.98 ± 0.004)
60.0 (59 ± 0.23)
10.72 (10.41 ± 0.3)
PBDS-T:ITIC-F
18.64 (18.37 ± 0.24)
18.67
0.90 (0.90 ± 0.001)
66.7 (65 ± 0.17)
11.19 (11.01 ± 0.14)
PBDS-T:ITIC-Th1
19.55 (19.31 ± 0.16)
19.42
0.88 (0.87 ± 0.002)
70.0 (69 ± 0.09)
12.04 (11.93 ± 0.1)
In addition, we employed the space charge-limited current (SCLC) method to investigate the charge carrier mobility of the blend films (Fig. S4 and Table S2). The electron mobility of the ITIC, ITIC-F and ITIC-Th1 blend films is 3.6 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, 7.5 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 9.8 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1, while the corresponding hole mobility is 1.26 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, 8.6 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1and 8.9 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively. The gradually improved electron and hole mobility from ITIC to ITIC-F and then to ITIC-Th1 is due to the gradually optimized morphology of the blend films (discussed later). The ratio of hole mobility and electron mobility (μh/μe) is 0.35 for PBDS-T:ITIC, 1.14 for PBDS-T:ITIC-F and 0.91 for PBDS-T:ITIC-Th1. The improved charge mobility and more balanced μh/μe in fluorinated acceptor blend films can reduce the charge recombination effectively, which is beneficial to the improvement of JSC and FF.
We further performed steady-state photoluminescence (PL) and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) measurements to investigate the exciton dissociation and charge transfer behavior in the blend films (Fig. 4). According to the UV-vis absorption spectra in Fig. 2a, the PL emission spectrum of PBDS-T was measured with an excitation wavelength of 580 nm and the NFAs with an excitation wavelength of 650 nm to probe hole and electron transfer. From Fig. 4a–b and Table S3, when the PBDS-T:ITIC blend film was excited at a wavelength of 580 or 650 nm, the PL quenching of PBDS-T and ITIC is not completed, because the limited energy level offset (ΔEHOMO of 0.15 eV and ΔELUMO of 0.22 eV) is less than the typical required value of 0.3–0.5 eV for exciton separation. From Fig. 2b, we can see that the driving force for PBDS-T:ITIC-F (ΔEHOMO of 0.25 eV and ΔELUMO of 0.34 eV) and PBDS-T:ITIC-Th1 (ΔEHOMO of 0.35 eV and ΔELUMO of 0.45 eV) are obviously improved. Thus, the PL quenching efficiency (ΔPLD) is almost 95% for both PBDS-T:ITIC-Th1 and PBDS-T:ITIC-F. The remarkably quenched PL indicates the efficient electron/hole transfer from the donor/acceptor to acceptor/donor. The efficient transfer of both electrons and holes between the donor and acceptor guaranteed the efficient generation and transport of photoexcited charge carriers. The TRPL spectra were further employed to quantitatively analyze the carrier lifetime of the blend films (Fig. 4c–d). PBDS-T:ITIC-Th1 shows the longest PL lifetime compared to those of PBDS-T:ITIC and PBDS-T:ITIC-F . The longer PL lifetime can effectively suppress the probability of exciton recombination.
To understand the enhancement of FF, we investigated the charge-recombination mechanism through measuring the JSC values of the optimized PSC under different illumination intensities (Plight). It is known that the JSC follows a power-law dependence with respect to Plight, which could be described as JSC ∝ Plightα. In the formula, α represents the exponential factor related to bimolecular recombination. As shown in Fig. 3c, the α value of the PBDS-T:ITIC-Th1-based device is 0.98, while the PBDS-T:ITIC-F and PBDS-T:ITIC-based devices show relatively lower α values of 0.94 and 0.91, respectively. Furthermore, the VOC dependence on Plight could be expressed by the natural logarithmic formula of VOC ∝ n(κT/q)lnPlight, where κ is the Boltzmann constant, T is the absolute temperature, and q is the elementary charge. As displayed in Fig. S5, the fitted n for the PBDS-T:ITIC-Th1, PBDS-T:ITIC-F and PBDS-T:ITIC-based OSCs is 1.03, 1.06, and 1.06, respectively. The n value approaches 1, indicating that the bimolecular and trap-assisted recombination could be effectively suppressed for efficient charge transport and collection in the optimized device, which could be further conformed by the superior FF of 70% for the PBDS-T:ITIC-Th1-based PSCs.
Charge generation, transport and extraction were studied by analyzing the dependence of photocurrent density (Jph) on the effective voltage (Veff). Jph is defined as Jph = JL–JD, where JL and JD represent the values of JSC under light (100 mW cm−2 illumination) and dark conditions, respectively. Veff is defined as Veff = V0–Va, where V0 and Va can be obtained during test JL and JD. Jsat is defined as the saturation photocurrent density at a sufficiently high Veff (i.e., 3–4 V). As shown in Fig. 3d, under short-circuit conditions, the exciton dissociation efficiency (Pdiss = Jph/Jsat) is 95.6% for the PBDS-T:ITIC-Th1-based device, which is higher than that of PBDS-T:ITIC and PBDS-T:ITIC-F, implying that the exciton dissociation is more efficient for the PBDS-T:ITIC-Th1-based device. Under maximum power output conditions, the Pdiss values of the PBDS-T:ITIC, PBDS-T:ITIC-F and PBDS-T:ITIC-Th1-based devices are 83%, 76% and 75%, respectively. It is demonstrated that the PBDS-T:ITIC-Th1-based devices have less bimolecular recombination and higher charge collection efficiency, which contribute to improving FF and JSC. Therefore, subtle structural optimization of the NFA structure has a great influence on exciton separation and charge collection.
The structural details of the BHJ thin films were studied by grazing incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) measurements. GIWAXS with diffraction patterns and line-cut profiles of the neat PBDS-T film and the blend films are shown in Fig. 5. A strong diffraction (100) peak and (010) peak can be observed in the in-plane and out-of-plane directions of the neat PBDS-T film, as shown in Fig. 5a, revealing that PBDS-T possesses a well-defined lamellar and π–π stacking structure. For the blend films, a strong diffraction (100) peak and (010) peak can also be observed in the in-plane and out-of-plane directions, respectively. For the PBDS-T:ITIC blend film, two distinct (100) peaks at 0.304 Å−1 and 0.475 Å−1 assigned to PBDS-T and ITIC respectively are observed in the in-plane direction, suggesting that the independent aggregations of the donor and acceptor exist in the BHJ film. Such serious phase separation partly contributed to the insufficient charge transfer between PBDS-T and ITIC (Fig. 4). By blending with ITIC-F instead of ITIC, independent aggregations of the donor and acceptor do not occur, although the crystallinity of ITIC-F is better than that of ITIC (see XRD in Fig. S2). In contrast, the F-induced non-covalent interactions remarkably promote the miscibility of the donor and acceptor, and thus, the (100) diffraction peaks of PBDS-T and ITIC-F fuse together, as revealed by only one (100) diffraction peak appeared at 0.302 Å−1. The improved miscibility of PBDS-T with ITIC-F compared to that with ITIC results in the improved FF of the corresponding device. Intriguingly, when blending ITIC-Th1 with PBDS-T, the tiny (100) diffraction peak of the acceptor appears again at 0.418 Å−1. Despite the F-induced non-covalent interactions also existing in PBDS-T:ITIC-Th1, the highest crystallinity of the ITIC-Th1 (Fig. S2) among these three acceptors is still the main reason to ensure a high ordered packing of ITIC-Th1. As a result, a desirable bi-continuous interpenetrating nano-scale network is formed in the PBDS-T:ITIC-Th1 film (discussed later), which could facilitate the charge transfer and transport and suppress the charge combination. More importantly, PBDS-T:ITIC-Th1 displays the sharpest π–π stacking peak with the largest crystallite coherence lengths (CCL) in the (010) direction (CCL values for PBDS-T:ITIC = 11.061 Å, PBDS-T:ITIC-F = 14.773 Å and PBDS-T:ITIC-Th1 = 15.697 Å). The formation of the bi-continuous interpenetrating nano-scale network and enhanced π–π stacking account for the highest FF of the PBDS-T:ITIC-Th1-based device.
To further investigated the surface and bulk morphologies of the active layers, we conducted atomic force microscopy (AFM). As illustrated in Fig. 6, all of the blend films show smooth and uniform surfaces with some fibrillar textures. The root-mean-square (RMS) roughness is 2.25 nm for PBDS-T:ITIC-Th1, 2.81 nm for PBDS-T:ITIC-F and 5.56 nm for PBDS-T:ITIC, respectively. Compared with PBDS-T:ITIC, PBDS-T:ITIC-F and PBDS-T:ITIC-Th1 show a more homogenous morphology. Note that the PBDS-T:ITIC-Th1 blend film even exhibits an obviously fibrous feature with a more distinct bi-continuous interpenetrating nano-scale network (see the inset in Fig. 6f), which is very desirable for PSCs. The optimized morphology of PBDS-T:ITIC-F and PBDS-T:ITIC-Th1 could also be detected by transmission electron microscopy (TEM), as shown in Fig. S6. From the morphology evolution caused by NFA variation, we can conclude that subtle variation of the NFAs also can induce a big difference in the morphology of the blend film, consequently leading to a remarkable improvement in FF.
Vertical phase separation of the donor and receptor in the active layer would contribute to hole and electron transport toward their corresponding electrodes, which could reduce surface and bimolecular recombination and improve the charge mobility in the photovoltaic devices. To probe the vertical phase segregation of the active layers, film-depth-dependent light absorption spectroscopy is performed. Fig. 7 shows the light absorption spectra of PBDS-T:ITIC, PBDS-T:ITIC-F and PBDS-T:ITIC-Th1 films at different film depths obtained by surface-selective etching with low-pressure oxygen plasma. All of the blend films show obvious gradient changes as the etching depth increases, due to the much lower surface tension (γ) of PBDS-T than NFAS, as verified by the contact angle measurements (Fig. S8 and Table5). Such a difference in the surface tensions will lead to a typically vertical phase separation, where PBDS-T tends to accumulate toward MoO3 while NFAS tends to deposit near ZnO. Intriguingly, both PBDS-T:ITIC-F and PBDS-T:ITIC-Th1 films exhibit more distinct vertical phase separation, as revealed by an almost neat acceptor film detected near the bottom of the active layer. The occurrence of the vertical phase separation is very favorable for charge transport and charge selectivity at the interlayer, leading to improved device performance.

In conclusion, we have carefully selected three representative NFAs (ITIC, ITIC-F and ITIC-Th1) as acceptors for an alkylsilyl functionalized copolymer PBDS-T donor to reveal the basic principle of how to select the donor and acceptor to optimize the morphology of the active layer and realize the best device performance. We found that the interactions between the donor and acceptor, the crystallinity of each component and difference in the surface tensions greatly impact the morphology of blend films and eventually their device performance. Such a significant change can also be realized by a subtle variation of the NFA structure. Therefore, without precise design and synthesis of new acceptors or tedious decorating on the donor, only rational selection of a suitable acceptor with different end-capping groups and side chains can also ensure that alkylsilyl functionalized copolymer PBDS-T achieves an outstanding PCE of 12.04%, together with a dramatically improved FF from 60% to 70%.


The authors declare no competing financial interest.


L. C. thanks the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) (51673092 and 21762029) for financial support. Y. C. thanks the National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars (51425304) for financial support. The authors thank the Graduate Innovation Fund Projects of Jiangxi Province (YC2018-B014) for support.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta00114j
‡ Author contributions: B. Huang and L. Hu contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019